B5362A 16263642 105162
ITINERARIVM TOTIUS Sacrae Scripturae: OR, THE TRAVELS OF THE Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges, Kings, Our Saviour CHRIST and his Apostles, as they are related in the OLD and NEW TESTAMENTS. WITH A Description of the Towns and Places to which they travelled, and how many English miles they stood from Ierusalem. Also, a short Treatise of the Weights, Monies, and Measures mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced to our English Valuations, Quantity, and Weight. Collected out of the Works of HENRY BVNTING, and done into English by R. B. LONDON, Printed by I. Harefinch, for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet-street, near St. Dunstan's Church, MDCLXXXII.
To the Right Honourable Sr. Hen. Mountague KNIGHT, Lord Chief Justice of the KINGS Majesties BENCH. IT is a true Saying of the Philosopher (Right Honourable, and my very good Lord) That there is nothing wherein there is Life, but it hath either Motion or Action; and such is the condition of Man, that a greater measure of both is imposed upon him, to humble him, than upon many other Creatures: The whole course of his Life being compared unto a Pil∣grimage, in which state a man can presume up∣on no certain Continuance. For, as a Tra∣veller that intendeth to finish his Journey, stays
not in his Inn, but desires more to be upon his Way than in his Bed; so it is with Man, who cannot possess himself in rest, from the time of his Birth until his Death, and often∣times is troubled with needless and unprofitable Labours, to attain unto his Ends; which got, both they and he perish. Let Alexander, that great Emperour, be a president of this; who with much Labour, having got a great E∣state, enjoyed it but a short time: and you may read in this Treatise, with what intolera∣ble pains Antigonus Epiphanes endeavoured to establish his Kingdom to him; and yet in the end purchased little but a lamentable Death. There is none of the Patriarchs, Princes, Judges, Kings, Prophets, Apostles, or others mentioned in the Scriptures, that could make evident in the whole course of their Life, any better than a laborious and tedious Pilgrimage. With what pains did Abraham wander from Chaldea into the Land of Canaan? How was Moses tor∣mented in the Wilderness, almost to the
loss of his Soul? but absolutely never to come into the promised Land. And for David, how miserably lived he, when he could not trust his own Friends? This is the state of man; and to say truth, he differs in little (beside Reason) from other Creatures; and that either lock'd up in si∣lence, or not express'd in some memorable Action, makes him so much the more ca∣pable of Misery; being only able to distin∣guish of Joy and Fear. Now that these things may be the more apparent, I have endeavoured to collect, out of the Works of others, this Treatise; where∣in is briefly described the Travels of all the Patriarchs, Iudges, Kings, Prophets, Princes, &c. together with the condition of Cities, Coun∣treys, Islands, and other memorable places, as they are mentioned in the Old and New Testaments. All which, that I might express that Duty which hath a long time lain con∣cealed, I have wholly dedicated to your Lord∣ships Service; humbly intreating your fa∣vourable
Acceptance of my Pains; that so being shrouded under your Honour's Prote∣ction, they may the better withstand the ad∣verse Opinions of such as please to censure them. At your Honour's Service, R. B.
The Preface to the Reader. IT hath always been held a matter worth note (gentle Reader) even to the best Divines, to have the Typographical descripti∣on of the Towns and Places, as they are mentioned in the Scrip∣tures; and so much the rather, because by comparing the Acti∣ons of Men with the beginnings and endings of Cities, they might the better understand the Prophets, and perceive the wonderful Providence of God; who by his Omnipotency so disposeth of Estates, that such Cities and Nations which have been mighty, and ruled upon the Earth with great Power, notwithstanding on a sudden, and by unexpected Events, have been utterly subverted and overthrown. Now, that these things might be more apparent, I have, in as good and brief a method as I can, gathered out of sundry Authors, the particular Description of the Cities, Towns, and places, as they are mentioned in the Scriptures, where they stood, under whose command, at what time they grew mighty, and how lost and decayed. To this also I have added a particular Narration of the Travels of all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Princes, Iudges, Kings, Emperours, our blessed Saviour and his Apostles: to what Towns they travelled, what memorable Actions they did in those places; with a short Chrono∣logy of the times: that so by comparing this discourse with any Text of Scripture, you may perceive the time when those Accidents happened. All which things (I am perswaded) will prove no less pleasant than profitable, and will give a great light to the understanding of the Bible. But if you question with me, How it is possible that I should come to the knowledge of those things, considering that Babylon, Niniveh, Jerusalem, and most of the Cities of the Holy-Land, are long since wasted and de∣cayed? To this I answer; therein consists the greatness of the Travel, be∣cause I have been constrained to use the help of many Authors, who, amongst other long and learned discourses, have here and there glanced at the Actions that were done in the Land of Judaea: amongst which are Strabo, Jerom, de Locis Hebraicis, Plinie, Livie, Plutarch, and ma∣ny
others, who have described in the Actions of the Persians, Chaldeans, Graecians and Romans, the State of the Jews as it stood in those times, with the Description of the Cities and Towns. And Saint Jerom, who lived in that Country, took a great deal of pains to rectifie these im∣perfect discourses, which more obscure Authors have laboured in, and left to future ages; that so those which would, might by their diligence and care, make them useful to inform their understanding, both concerning the State of the. Jews, and of the obscure meaning of some of the Pro∣phecies. Also the scituation and Destruction of Jerusalem, a thing pleasant and profitable to know, and no whit unworthy your consideration. How all or the most part of the Towns, Cities, Countries, Nations, Islands, Seas, Desarts, Mountaines, and most memorable places, are scituated from it; how many miles English they stand distant, what memorable actions have been done in them, and for the most part where they stood, and how they are at this day. Besides (to make this a perfect work) you will find after the end of the Old Testament, and before the beginning of the New; the Discourse con∣cerning the Weights, Measures, and Monies which are mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced unto our Valuation, how they were Current among the Jews, how with other People, Nations, and Countries: by which means that necessity of commutative Iustice, for which Monies were principally invented, will be apparent; and by this meanes you shall perceive what equality there is and hath been used amongst Nations, for the ordaining of Measures and Monies; by which you may perceive, that this Vniverse being compared together, seemeth but one large and spacious Empire, howsoever under divers Governments. Again, the Peregrination of our Saviour, the manner of his wonder∣ful Nativity, his long and Tedious Iourneys, the condition of his estate whiles he was upon the Earth, and (as near as can be guest) at what time he did most of his Miracles; how he behaved himself when he was betrayed, with a description of the manner of his death: and the Travels of Peter, Paul, and many other of his Apostles after his death. All which things I have with much labour compiled together for your profit, and expect nothing in recompence for my pains, but your Love. And so I commit you to God. Yours, R. B.
A BRIEF DECLARATION OF GEOMETRICAL MEASVRES. A Degree of the Heavens is fifteen German or Dutch miles; one minute is one quarter of a Dutch mile: so that four minutes make a Dutch mile. Diversity of miles. A Dutch mile is four thousand paces: the Spanish miles be very near so long as the Dutch. A French mile is two thousand paces: a Walloon, or Ita∣lian mile is a thousand paces; so that four Walloon miles make a Dutch mile. The word Mile is derived from the Latine word Mille; for one thousand paces make a Walloon mile, as Gualtherus H. Revius writeth. Of Stades or Furlongs. THE word Stadium in Latin, in English a Furlong, is a measure of ground, whereof there be three sorts, Italicum, Olympicum, Pythcum: That of Italy contained 625 Feet, which is 125 Paces, half a quarter of an Italian mile. The second sort was of the Hill Olympus in Greece, where was a Game or Prize kept by the Princes and Cities of Greece every fifth year, in the Ho∣nour of Hercules, who first began it. This measure of ground, Stadium Olympicum, contained 600 Feet, that is, 120 paces. The third kind of Stade or Furlong contained 1000 Feet, which is 200 Paces; whereof haply arose the difference of Pliny and Diodorus Siculus in describing Sicily. What a Furlong is. Fifteen Dutch miles make a Degree, and a Degree of the Heavens an∣swereth to 480 Furlongs upon Earth; whereby it is manifest, that 32 Fur∣longs is a German, or common Dutch mile. One Minute equalleth eight Furlongs, which make an Italian or Walloon mile, the fourth part of a Dutch mile. Two Minutes of the Heavens, or six∣teen Furlongs, make a Dutch mile. Four, half of a Dutch mile. Three minutes equal 24 Stades or Furlongs, which make three quarters of a Dutch mile. Four minutes equal 32 Furlongs, that is to say, a German or Dutch mile. The Holy Evangelists, S. Luke, cap. 24 ver. 13. and S. Iohn, c. 11. ver. 8. reckon the way by Furlongs. S. Luke saith, the Town Emaus was distant from
Ierusalem sixty Furlongs: and St. Iohn saith, Bethania was fifteen Furlongs distant from Ierusalem. Whence it appeareth, that Emaus was distant from Ierusalem almost two Dutch miles, seven Walloon miles and a half; and Be∣thania almost half a Dutch mile, which is a mile, a half, and half a quarter. Iosephus writeth, That Mount Olivet was distant from Ierusalem five Fur∣longs, that is a little more than half a quarter of a Dutch mile, which is half an Italian mile and half a quarter. The same Iosephus saith, That the circuit of the City of Ierusalem was thirty three Furlongs, a Dutch mile and half a quarter. Others say it was four miles in Compass, which being understood of Italian or Walloon miles, make little or no difference, eeing it is but the half of a half quarter of a Dutch mile. Strabo writeth, That the City of Babylon was 380 Furlongs in Circuit, that is twelve Dutch miles. The Circuit of Samaria was twenty Furlongs, that is half a Dutch and half a quarter, which is two Italian miles and a half. How the Romans measured their Miles. THE Romans measured their miles by Paces, which they call Passus, and that kind of measuring is done after this manner; Four Barley-corns laid long-ways, one by the other, make the breadth of a Finger, four Fingers broad make the breadth of an Hand, four Hands broad make the length of a Foot, which measure is now extant; five feet make a Geometrical or great Pace; one hundred twenty five such Paces are a Furlong; eight Fur∣longs are one thousand Paces or Walloon mile; two thousand Paces are a French mile. Ex granis quatuor formabitur unus. Est quater in palmo digitus, quater in pede palmus. Quinque pedes passum faciunt, passus quoque centum Viginti quinque stadium dant: Sed milliare Octo dabunt stadia; duplicatum sit tibi Leuca. Four thousand Paces are a Dutch mile, I mean a common Dutch mile, whereof fifteen are reckoned to a Degree of the Heavens; for the Switzer miles are commonly a quarter of a Dutch mile longer than common Dutch miles. But through this Book, by miles we understand common Dutch miles, whereof four thousand Paces make a mile. Whosoever will understand St. Ierom. well, de locis Hebraicis, must mark whether he reckons by Miles or by Stones: The miles specified by him are Walloon miles, whereof four make a Dutch mile as aforesaid: the Stone whereof he writeth (whereby also they did measure and divide the way) are reckoned six to a Dutch mile. To the end that all men that have any little Understanding in Geome∣try and Cosmography may make the Tables, and cast them, and at their Pleasure inlarge or diminish them; I have here for their direction set down the Longitude and Latitude of the most principal Towns: the former Num∣bers shew the degrees and minutes of the Longitude, the later Numbers de∣clare the degrees and minutes of the Latitude.
  Long. Latit. SIdon 67.51 33.30 Tyrus 67.00 33.20 Zarepta 67.10 33.28 Kedes 67.14 33.00 Chabul 67.04 33.04 Rechob 67.13 33.14 Abela Betha macha 67.20 32.59 Senim Vallis 97.01 32.58 Carmel 66.35 32.50 Cana major 67.13 33.24 Cana minor 67.52 32.48 Nazareth 66.56 32.42 Tabor 66.45 32.38 Capernaum 66.53 32.29 Bethsaida 66.51 32.29 Corazim 66.53 32.29 Tiberias 66.44 32.27 Magdalum 66.48 32.28 Dora 66.25 32.08 Caesarea Stratonis 66.19 32.25 Lydda 65.43 32.06 Joppen 65.40 32.05 Messada castellum 66.21 31.47 Maerum lacus 66.36 32.25 Sunem 66.33 32.33 Naim 66.35 32.33 Napthalis 67.06 32.57 Bethoron superior 66.00 32.14 Bethoron inferior 65.54 32.00 Gazar 66.10 32.20 Bethan 66.41 32.23 Endor 66.26 32.27 Megiddo 66.02 32.32 Thebez 66.30 32.25 Aphec 66.28 32.32 Gilim 66.25 32.22 Alexandrium 66.23 32.11 Thirzo 66.20 32.13 Zilo 65.58 31.58 Beseck 66.34 32.24 Mchmas 66.06 32.04 Samaria 66.22 32.19 Nobe 65.45 32.03 Gazeron 65.45 31.59 Emmahus 65.54 32.01 Jericho 66.10 31.56 Aialon 65.56 31.57 Anathot 66.01 31.55 Gibea Saulis 66.57 31.55 Kiriath-jearim 65.58 31.55 Jerusalem 66.00 31.55 Bahurim 66.03 31.56 Ephraim 66.08 32.00 Gilgal 66.12 32.01 Esthaol 65.36 31.54 Timnah 65.48 32.03 Zarea 65.51 31.55 Gedor 65.14 31.59 Modin 65.45 32.01 Bethana 66.01 31.54 Bethlehem 65.55 31.51 Debir 66.10 31.58 Jarmouth 65.37 31.51 Azecha 65.51 31.54 Lachis 65.51 31.49 Eglon 65.50 31.48 Makeda 65.49 31.52 Libna 95.49 31.50 Debir 65.32 31.46 Bethsur 65.47 31.48 Kchila 65.38 31.47 Marea 65.42 31.54 Maon 65.38 31.41 Carmel 65.40 31.44 Ziph 65.38 31.43 Arah 65.45 31.37 Hebron 65.33 31.45 Gerer 65.37 31.42 Kades barnea 65.22 31.29 Adar 65.12 31.32 Carcaha 65.06 31.30 Hasmona 65.00 31.30 Bethsemes 65.55 31.55 Beersabah 65.31 31.40 Siclag 65.15 31.37 Ecron 65.40 31.58 Azotus 65.35 31.00 Astalon 65.24 31.52 Gath 65.23 31.48 Gaza 65.11 31.40 The Towns lying on this side of the River Jordan. Dan 67.25 33.08 Jor sons 67.31 33.07 Caesarea Philippi 67.30 32.05 Seleucia 67.17 33.50 Eruptio fluvii ex Samacho∣niride palude. 67.11 32.44 Capernaum 66.53 31.29 Eruptio fluvii è mare Ge∣nezareth 66.43 32.21 Ephion 66.42 32.20 Ennon 66.40 32.16 Gamala 66.55 32.25 Salem 66.37 32.18 Chrit torrens 66.16 31.57 Ostia Jordanis 66.17 31.54 Engedi 66.22 31.43 Zoar vel Sagor 66.17 31.38 Eruptio Zered 66.19 31.34
Towns standing beyond Jordan. Mirba 66.50 32.20 Astharoth 67.00 32.26 Astaroth 66.57 32.23 Gadara 66.48 32.23 Machanaim 66.44 32.19 Jaezar 66.39 32.12 Hesbon 66.28 32.05 Jabes 66.55 32.21 Ramah 66.51 32.20 Nobach 66.38 32.16 Jachsa 66.28 32.02 Aroer 66.30 32.00 Macherus 66.23 31.56 Minith 66.36 32.66 Midian 66.30 31.55 Didon 66.32 32.06 Punuel 66.39 31.18 Edrei 66.15 32.21 Abela Vinearum 67.00 32.23 Philadelphia 67.10 32.22 Pella 67.03 32.20 Phiala fons 67.43 33.05 Betharan 67.30 32.08 Pisgamons 66.26 32.01 Abarim montes 66.29 31.58 Towns in Aegypt. Memphis 61.50 29.50 Heliopolis 62.15 29.59 Tanis 63.30 29.50 Taphnis 62.30 31.00 Ony 60.30 30.10 Alexandria 60.30 31.00 Mercurii civitas magna 61.40 28.55 Mercurii civitas parva 61.00 30.50 Delta magnum 62.00 30.00 Xois 62.30 30.45 Busitis 62.30 30.15 Hesoe 63.20 29.10 Solis ons 58.15 28.00 Iourneys out of Aegypt. Raemses 63.00 30.05 Pihachiroth 62.50 29.40 Mara 63.35 29.50 Elim 63.45 29.50 Juxt mare 63.55 29.45 Paran Promontorium 65.00 29.00 Daphea 64.14 29.46 Alus 64.30 29.46 Raphiddim 64.40 29.53 Sinai mons 65.00 30.00 Hazeroth 65.50 30.14 Zephor mons 65.54 30.50 Mozeroth 64.18 39.04 Hasmona 65.09 31.30 Gidgad mons 65.30 30.20 Jothabatha 65.30 26.40 Habrona 65.30 29.40 Hesion Gaber 65.30 29.20 Sin 66.00 29.56 Hor mons 66.00 30.25 Salmona 66.25 30.40 Phunon 66.30 30.54 Oboth 66.50 31.04 Jeabarim 67.00 31.18 Zered torrens & vallis 66.44 21.20 Didon Gad 66.48 31.32 Almon diblathaim 66.48 31.24 Chedemoth solitudo 66.56 32.00 Beer puteus 66.50 23.00 Marthana Solitudo 66.49 23.00 Nathaleel 66.40 00.23 Bamoth vallis 66.30 32.00 Towns in Arabia Petraea. Petra 65.40 31.18 Paran 94.30 30.04 Midian 65.30 29.15 Hesion gebar 65.35 29.0 Elana villa harla vel elath 95.35 29.15 Ostia Nili. Canopicum 66.50 31.05 Bolbithinum 61.30 31.05 Sibenniticum 61.45 31.05 Pathmiticum 92.35 31.10 Mendesium 62.45 31.10 Pelusiacum 63.15 31.15 Thou 63.00 31.30 Sirbonis lacus eruptio 65.45 31.50 Sirbonis lacus 63.30 31.10 Idem 63.45 31.10 Civitas Pelusium 36.25 31.20 Rhinocorura 94.40 31.10 Some other great Towns. Babilon 76.00 35.00 Antiochia 60.30 33.35 Damasus 68.5 33.00 Palmira 72.40 35.10 Ur chaldeorum 78.00 39.40 Ebathana 88.00 37.47 Rages in Media 93.40 36.04 Sula in Pera 83.00 34.15 Persepolis 91.00 33.20 Heccatompilon in Parthia 96.00 37.50 Zaba in Arabia foelix 97.00 13.00 Meroe 61.30 16.25 Haram in Mesopotania 75.15 36.10 Hircania 98.30 40.00 Ciraenae 50.00 31.20
The Description of the City of Ierusalem, as it was before Titus Vespasian destroyed it. THE most holy and beautiful City of Ierusalem was twice destroyed; first by Nebuchadnezzar the most puissant King of Babylon, who did utterly beat down and overthrow the City, burning the costly Temple which King Soloon had built. After that, Zorobabel and the High Priest Ioshua, when they returned from the Captivity of Babylon, re-edified and built again both the City and the Temple, in the Year before the Birth of Christ, 535. But the second Temple, which was built after their Return, was neither so fair nor so great as the first; for it was twentyCubitus is a Foot and an half, six Hand breadths, four and twenty Fingers broad, being in former times the fourth part of the heght of a Man: Cu∣bitus a cubando, the Arm that men use to lean up∣on, from the Elbow to the Hand, Victru. lib. 3. Col. Lexicon. Cubits lowe than the former. After that, King Herod, seventeen years before the Birth of Christ caused the said Tple to be broken down again (as Iosephus saith) and ected another new Temple in Place thereof, which nevrtheless, was not like the first Temple that Slomon built, as touching the Greatness; but it was exceeding fairly decked and ador  Gold and Silver; so that in regard of the Beautifulness reof, it was a Wonder unto all that came to Ierusalem. Which Temple (forty Years af∣ter Christ's Death and ) was also utterly destroyed by Ttus, the Son of  the mperour. I will  form of the City Ierusalem, as it was before it was de∣faced by  of Vespan; and therewithall, I will shew how the costly  Solomon placed therein, stood: for, seeing that the two  great Molten Sea were not therein, when our Lord  Earth, being broken down by Nebuchadnez∣zar's necessary and very requisite to be known how they  that the Reader may be fully satisfied, I will al∣so first  of Ierusalem as it was in those Days, with the chief∣est Places  Towers, Gates, Houses, Castles, Fountains, Hills, Val∣lies, things therein. How the City Ierusalem is scituate,  from Germany. TH  is scituate in the middle of thereabouts, and Ierusalem is five hundredWhich make  miles: but if you will tra∣vel to  from thence to Ierusalem, it is five hun∣dred and iftyWhich make 2200. Miles. Miles.
The Scituation of Jerusalem, and the Mountains whereon it stood. JErusalem was four square, and scituated upon four Mountains, viz. Mount Sion, Mount Moriah, Mount Acra, and Mount Bezetha. Mount Sion was the highest of all, and lay within the City of Ierusalem towards the South, whereon stood King David's House, or the Castle of Sion, and the uppermost Town. Mount Moriah, whereon the Temple stood, with other excellent Build∣ings and Towers, was on the East side of the City, within the Walls. Mount Acra, whereon the lower Town was built, stood Westward in the City, where Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, Herod, Agripa, Bernice, Helena, and other Kings and great Princes dwelt. The holy City of Jerusalem may in this manner be briefly described. THE most holy and beautiful City of Ierusalem (if any would consider the three principal parts of the World, Europe, Asia, and Africa) stood in the midst of the World, upon most high Mountains and Rocks, like an earthly Paradise, a lively Figure of the everlasting City of God. This City being the Metropolitan or principallest City of the Jews, stood in the Tribe of Benjamin; at the first it was called Salem, that is, Peaceable: when Mel∣chisedech, the Priest of God, reigned therein, which he also built after the Deluge (as Iosephus and Egisippus write.) But at that time it was not very great; for it stood only upon Mount Sion. Mount Moriah, where Abraham would have offered his Son Isaac, stood without the City, and after that they took it into the City, as when time serveth it shall be declared. After the Death of Melchisedech, unto whom Abraham paid the Tythes of all his Goods, the Iebusites dwelt in the City of Ierusalem, and had the dominion of it, and all the Land thereabouts in their Subjection, called the City Iebus after their Name; which Name was held a long time, as we read in Iosh. 10. Iud. 10. and 2 Sam. 1. But at last Ioab, King David's General of his Army, won it, and drave the Jebusites out of it, and called it Ierusalem, that is, A Sight or Vision of Peace. It hath also other Names in the holy Scripture; for, in Esay 29. it is called Ariel, that is, God's yon, and Mount LibanusBecause it was made of the Cedar Trees which came out of Mount Libanus.. The Pro∣phet, Ezechiel 23. calleth it Ahaliba, my fixed Pavillion or Tent, that is, a City wherein God had placed his own Habitation. The Circuit and Bigness of the City Jerusalem. THE City of Ierusalem was four-square, and in circumference three and thirtyWhich make four English Miles, and a Furlong. Furlongs, as Iosephus writeth, which three and thirty Furlongs, make somewhat more than a Dutch mile. Some write, that it was four miles Compass
about, yet these were not Dutch miles, but Walloon or Italian miles: for four such Italian miles are a Dutch mile. Of Mount Sion, the higher City. MOunt Sion stood Northwards in the City Ierusalem, and was much higher than all the other Hills that were therein; therefore it was called Sion, that is, a watch Tower; because from thence one might see the Holy Land, and all the Countries thereabout: upon this Hill, the upper City was built, which in the Scripture is called the City of David, because David won it from the Iebusites, and beautified it with many goodly Houses and fair and costly buildings: but especially with his house of Cedar-wood, which he termed the Castle of Sion, which stood Westwards at the corner of the Hill, looking into Bethlehem Southwards. In that house David dwelt, and therein committed Adultery with Berseba the Wife of Vriah the Hittite; whose House also with the place of divers Privy Councellors and Officers, stood upon the Hill, not far from the King's Palace, as Iosephus writeth. Beneath King David's House, upon Mount Sion, within a Rock, there was to be seen the Sepulchre or Vault, wherein King David, Solomon his Son, and other succeeding Kings of Iuda, were entombed and buried. Upon Mount Sion also (towards the East) King Herod had a Garden of Pleasure, not far from the Fountain called Silo, Nehemiah 3. and there also stood the Tower of Silo, whereof Luke in the 13 chapter maketh mention. Iosephus (in the Wars of the Jews, his first Book, and sixteenth Chap∣ter) saith, That King Herod, under whom Christ Jesus was born, had two fair and strong Houses or Towers, which he set and made in the upper part of the City Ierusalem, upon Mount Sion, which were in a manner comparable with the Temple for Beautifulness, which he called after the Name of his Friends; the one Caesarea, for Caesar the Emperor's sake, and the other Agrippa, acording to the name of the noble Roman Marcus Agrippa, that marryed the Daughter of Augustus Caesar. This may suffice to declare the Scituation of the upper City, which stood upon mount Sion, and contained in Circuit fifteen Furlongs, which is about half a mile. This uppermost City, in the sacred Scripture is called the City of David; it was also called Millo, that is, Fullness or Plenty, for in it there was no Want, but Abundance of all things. Of the Steps which descended down from the City of David▪ unto the lower City. MOunt Sion, whereon the upper City of Ierusalem did stand, was such a high hard Hill, and so steep, that no man could climb or ascend unto it by any way or means but only one, that is, by steps; for in the middle thereof there was a great pair of stairs made, which descended from David's City un∣to
the lower City, into the Valley or Dale of Gates, called Thyroreion, which stairs were 780 FootThat is 206 yards in height. high, as Iohannes Heydonius writeth; and beneath, in the Valley of Thyroreion, over against the Valley of Cedron, at the foot of the stairs stood a Gate, which was called the Gate of Sion; and they which went up to Mount Sion must pass through that Gate, and so up those Stairs: but it is thought, nevertheless, that in some other part of the Hill there was some winding or other oblique way made, by which, Horses and Chariots, by little and little might ascend. Allegorical or Spiritual Significations of Mount Sion. SIon in Hebrew signifieth a sure hold or goodly Aspect; for that from the top thereof a man might have seen all the Land lying thereabouts; and was a type of the highest Heavens, or Habitation of Almighty God, from whence he beholdeth all things upon Earth; from which Throne and Heavenly Habitation he descended into this lower Ierusalem, and became our Re∣deemer and Saviour, that so we being purged by his Blood, from all our Sins and Imperfections, he might bring us into that heavenly Ierusalem which is eternall Glory. Of Mount Moriah on which the Temple stood. MOunt Moriah stood Eastward within Ierusalem, which was a most hard stoney Hill, from whence, towards the rising of the Sun, men by stairs might easily descend; but round about on the other three sides it was steep and unapprochable, like a Stone wall: yet it was not so high as Mount Sion, howbeit it was exceeding high, extending and reaching 600 Foot in height: and on the top thereof was a very fair Plain, like unto that of Mount Sion, whereon in times past Abraham built an Altar and would have offered his Son Isaac for a Sacrifice, Gen. 22. At which time, when Abraham obeyed the Commandment of God, in∣tending to have offered his Son Isaac upon the Hill, and thereon had made an Altar, then the said Hill lay without the City: but long time after, about the space of 850 Years, when King David had conquered Ierusalem, and dri∣ven thence the Iebusites; to enlarge the City, he compassed in Mount Moriah and Mount Acr with a Wall, upon which there stood many goodly Build∣ings. And amongst other things worthy Observation, upon this Mount stood the Barn or Threshing floor ofOr Araa. Arafa the Iebusite, wherein King David built an Altar, offered burnt Offerings, and be∣sought the Lord that the Angel of God (whose hand was stretched over Ieru∣salem, holding a bloody Sword, and had smitten the City with the Pesti∣lence) might cease from punishing the same, and the Plague ceased. On the same place where the Barn of Arafa the Jebusite stood, King Solo∣mon also did build the Temple, 1 Paral. 23. 24. Ioseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 23. 24.
An Allegorical or Spiritual Interpretation of Mount Moriah. MOriah is as much as to say, the Lord's Mirrh, and signifieth our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the true Mirrh and sweet smelling Sacrifice unto God; a stedfast Rock, an immoveable Foundation, whereon God's Church, and the Members thereof are built, Esay 28. Matth. 16. Vpon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Moriah is also expounded to be Cultus & timr Domini, the worship and fear of God; and that in the same place the figurative Service of God should begin, and continue until the coming of Christ. The Description of the Temple of Jerusalem. THE Temple stood upon Mount Moriah, was fairly built, and arti∣ficially contrived, of white Marble Stones, which were so well con∣joyned or closed together, that a man could not see or perceive the Jun∣ctures or Crests of them: and the inner Walls of it were made all of Ce∣dar wood, carved with the similitude of Angels, Cherubims, roots of Palm∣trees, and with flowers of divers kinds, gilt all over with pure Gold, and set with precious Stones; insomuch, that all parts of the upper Roof with∣in the Temple, did shine with the lustre of it. The pavement thereof also was plated all over with fine Gold; so that all the Temple within, both above, under foot, and on every side and corner thereof, was gilt clean over: but without, it was of smooth polish'd white Marble Stone, ex∣cellently beautiful and fair to the Eye, much resemblingThat is, an 100 Cubits, which make 50 yards English; so that the Temple was 50 yards long, 50 broad, and 60 high. the colour of any Pearl, Unit, or Margaret. It was in length an hundred Ells, in breadth an hundred Ells, and in height an hundred and twenty Ells, as Iosephus wri∣teth, in the old Acts and Wars of the Iews, in his fif∣teenth Book and fourteenth Chapter. The Roof thereof was made of thin planks of Olive-wood, all cover∣ed over with Plates of Gold: it was adorned with sharp and plain spikes of Gold, left Birds should defile it with their Dung. When any man travel∣led to Ierusalem, and saw the Temple far off when the Sun shined there∣on, the white marble Stones and the golden Roof thereof, did cast such a Light and reflexing Brightness from them, that it did make the Behold∣ers Eyes dark and blind with looking upon it. Within the Temple there was the most sacrd Quire, which stood at the West end thereof, the which Quire, was formed four square, that is, twenty Ells broad, long, and high. This Quire was called the Holy of Ho∣lies, wherein it was lawful for no man to enter but the High Priest, and he also but once in a year, which was on the Feast day of the Propitiato∣ry Sacrifice, to appease God's wrath. In the middle part of the Quire
there stood two Cherubims, made of Olive-wood, covered all over with fine Gold, whose Faces and Forms were like unto young Children; the height of them was ten Ells; each of them had two Wings, which were five Ells broad; they stood one right against the other, so that with the innermost Wings they touched together, and the uttermost sides of the Wings touched the sides of the Quire: their Faces looked towards the East: in the middle, under the Wings of the Cherubims, was placed the Ark of the Covenant; but after the Babylonian Captivity, the Ark of the Covenant stood no more there; for then the Holy of Holies was empty, and nothing seen in the second Temple but the two Cherubims, as is aforesaid. The Wall of this Quire was of pure Gold, excellent fair and curiously graven: In this Wall of the most holy Quire there was a Gate made all of Gold, which had two Leaves or little dores that opened and shut, very curiously embossed; through which dores men went into the most holy Quire, where the Lord did answer by Vrim and Thummim; there the Cherubims stood, and before that Gate there did hang a rich Vail or Curtain, which was made of fine Silk, woven very artificially, wherein there was wrought the picture of the Cherubims, with Needle-work of diverse colours. This was the same Vail which at the Passion of Christ did rent in sunder from the top to the bottom, to shew that then Aaron's Levitical Sacrifices were abo∣lished, and now every man may freely approach (thorough the mercy of his dearly beloved Son) unto the Presence of God's heavenly Throne. Before the most sacred Quire there was builded towards the East, a place within the Temple containing forty Ells in length, twenty in breadth, and thirty in height, closed up on both sides with golden Walls, which was called the holy place or Sanctuary of the Temple, wherein no man might enter but only the Priest, when he offered Incense, and prayed un∣to God. In the middle of that holy place there stood an Altar, covered with plates of Gold; near unto which, the Angel Gabriel appeared unto Zacharias, and brought him the glad Tidings, That Elizabeth his Wife should bear him a Son whose Name should be Iohn, who should prepare the way of Christ. At the South end of this Altar, upon the one side stood the holy Candle-sticks, and at the other end on the other side, stood a golden Table, whereupon the Shew-bread was set. And in this holy place there stood ten Tables more for the meat Offerings, and ten golden Candle-sticks more, which were beautified with Lamps, Lillies, and other fair Flowers. The opening doors whereby men went into the holy place, were also very rich and costly, made of Gold, with carved Cherubims, Palm-trees, and broad Flowers thereupon. And before those doors also there were hanging Vails or Curtains, very curiously wrought. On both sides of the Temple there were certain Walks or Galleries, which were three Stories high one above another, and on the right side there stood a
pair of turning Stairs, by the which, men went up to the Chamber of the Temple, and there all the small Vessels, and other things belonging to the Temple, were kept. The Roofs of these Galleries were all plated over with Gold, but that part was somewhat lower than the principal part of the Temple. The Windows of the Temple were wide within and narrow without. The Gates of the Temple were made of pure Gold, five and twenty Ells high, and sixteen Ells broad; but especially the Gate that stood Eastward in the Temple, was exceeding high, which in the second Book of Kings, chap. 25. is called the high Gate: and as Iosephus saith, the said Gate was ninety Ells high, the Doors whereof, were forty Ells long and twenty Ells broad, gilt all over, and richly embossed, beautified with Che∣rubims and precious Stones. The Wall before this Gate, towards the East, was pure Gold, embossed and curiously engraven in manner of Vines, with great golden Leaves as big as the stature of a Man, whereon there did hang the picture and form of Grapes, which were made of fine Chrystal. With∣in that high Gate also there did hang a Vail or Curtain as long and broad as the Gate within: This Vail was made of a piece of Babylonian Tapistry, wonderfully wrought, and made of Silk, beautified with divers Colours, of Scarlet, Purple, and Velvet; and as Iosephus writeth, the Sphere of the Heavens was wrought therein, but the twelve Signs were not; and when the Wind blew, the Vail did move like a Vane. Of the Porches or open Courts of the Temple. BEfore the high Gate of the Temple, towards the East, there were three Porches or Courts open, without Roofs, which were made all of po∣lish'd Stone, with fair marble Pillars, beautified with all kind of Colours, in which Porches, men praised and served God. The first was called the upper Porch, where none but the Priest might enter when he offered and served God; which Porch stood next unto the high Quire. The second was called Solomon's Hall or Porch; there the People used to pray, and in that Court our Saviour Christ preached, Ioh. 10. The third Porch King Herod built, adding that thereto for the Heathen People, which also came unto Ierusalem to pray. These three Porches went four square round about the Temple, as the Temple it self was, and between these Porches there were also spaces left, sup∣ported with pillars of Marble, and close above the head, for men to walk under when it rained, which were all made of Cedar and Cypress-wood, and of marble stone, beautified with Gold. But towards the East, right over against the high Quire of the Temple, there the Porches were broadest and greatest. Here gentle Reader you may note, that as often as in the Description of the Temple I speak of certain Ells, you must not understand such Ells as
we use here in our Country, but only of the Geometrical Ells or Elbows, which are called Cubits, being the length of one foot and a half, or six hands in breadth, and two such Ells or Cubits do contain three foot, which make a yard of our measure. The first Temple, which King Solomon built, had but two Porches, as also the second Temple which Zrbabel and Iosuah, or Iesu the Son of Iozedeck made after the Captivity in Babylon; but that was twenty cubits lower, and in∣closed about with two Porches also. But King Herod Ascalonita, the great King of the Jews, Son of  Idum, sixteen years before the Birth of Christ, pulled down that Temple, and built a new Temple up from the ground, which was like to Solomn's Temple, but that it had three Porches: for Herod built the third Porch, to the intent that the Heathen People might pray therein, as a Sanctuary for Pilgrims and Strangers, as Iosephus writeth, An∣iq. 21. ca. 14. & de Bello Iudeo, lib. 6. ca. 6. Item Egisipus, lib. 1. cap. 35, 36. But some do think, which is more likely, that the said Herod did but repair and add Buildings to the second Temple. And where Iosephus, lib. 2 contra Appionem, writeth of four Porches whereas principally there were but three; it is to be understood, that Solomo▪ Porch was made with a Wall in the middle thereof, wherein, on the Northside, the Jewish Women that were unspotted and undefiled, used to pray; and on the other side (being South) the Jewish Women, who also according to the Law, were unspotted, prayed; as Iosephus saith, lib. 6. cap. 6. de Bello Iudaeo. A particular description of the three several Porches or Courts belonging to the Temple. IN the upper Porch, which stood right over against the high Quire in the Temple, there was an Altar of Brass proportioned four square, consist∣ing of 20 Cubits in length, and 20 Cubits in breadth, extending to ten Cu∣bits in height, beautified with golden horns, whereon they used to offer burnt Sacrifices of Oxen, Sheep, Turtle Doves, Calves, and other things. Also, in times past, there stood the great molten Sea, made by King Solomon, and the two brazen Pillars which were made with Knobs, Pomegranates, and Lillies, very costly, and most artificially done; and ten Kettles upon Tre∣; but those Kettles and Pillars with Knobs and Pomgranates, and the great molten Sea made by King Solomon, were carried away by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and broken in pieces: after which Captivity, they were ne∣ver seen more in the Temple, for there were no more made. But the Altar of rass with the great horns, whereon they offered Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, was made again and stood there, as I said before, by which there stood divers Ta∣bles, whereon they killed their Offerings. In this Court also there was a good∣ly Fountain, with the Water whereof, they used to wash the Blood of the Beasts out of the Temple. For there were certain holes and gutters between
the marble Stones, whereby the Water ran under the Earth, and through the Earth was conveyed in a Pipe into the Lake Kidron. In this Court, Za∣charias the Son of Barachias was killed, between the Temple and the Altar, Mat. 23. And Zacharias the High Priest, the Son of Ioiadah, was stoned to death, 2 Chron. 24. It was compassed about with a great Wall, made of mar∣ble stone of divers colours, wherein there were divers doors to go out and in, decked with lofty Towers and pleasant Walks made of Cedar-wood, resem∣bling our ancient Cloisters. But principally toward the East it had a great Gate of 70 Ells or Cubits high, and 25 broad, all covered over with gold, (as Iosephus writeth) standing always open, without any dores to shut, that every man might look into it when the Priest served God. If any man of∣fered any thing, he brought it to the Priest before the Gate, but might not go in himself. Ierey, cha. 26. and 36. calleth it the New Gate. Here also was the Chappel of Gemaria the Son of Saphan, in which Chappel, Bruh read the book of the Prophet Ieremy to the People, Ier. 36. And when the Sun was in Capricorn, it shone right in at that Gate, and through the high Quire of the Temple to the Holy of Holies (as Iosephus writeth.) Of the second or middle Court, called Solomon's Porch. THis Court was something lower than the other; for from it to the u∣permost, they went by certain steps, and in Iohn 10. is called Slo∣mon's Porch; which (as Iosephus writeth) was parted in the middle with a Wall, wherein on the North side, the Jewish Women that were clean and undefiled used to pray, and on the South the Men, according to the LawMasuli enin ab  one dominm in∣ocarunt.: But no unclean person, or Stranger, or Heathen, might enter therein; for, on the East side thereof, before the steps whereon men ascended into the said Porch, there stood a Portal curiously made of marble stone, and between it stood Pillars of Marble, whereon was ingraven in Hebrew, Greek, La∣tine, and Idumaean Tongues, this Sentence, Onis aliemnigena accides ad ha∣bitaculum Domini moriatur; That is, If any Stranger go into the House of God, he shall surely die. And Herod also caused to be hanged over the East∣ern Gate, by which they came into this Court, a golden Sword, with this In∣scription, Peregrinus si fuerit ingressus moriatur; that is, If a Stranger be so bold to enter, let him die. So as no Stranger or Heathen might go into Solomon's Porch under danger of his Life. Here Simeon took the Child Jesus in his Arms, and said, Lord, let now thy Servant depart in Peace according to thy Word, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, &c. At the same time also the Prophetess Ann the Daughter of Phanuel, of the Tribe of Ashur, made a notable Prophesie of the Child Jesus to all the People of Israel, Luk. 2. and after Jesus was bapti∣zed, in this place he taught, wrought Miracles, and did many worthy and me∣morable Actions. The Apostles also commonly met together in this
Court, and here the Holy Ghost descended upon them. Here stood the Treasury which Heliodorus thought to have robbed, but was prevented by the Angel of God, 2 Mac. 3. This was the same Treasury wherein the poor Widow cast the two Mites, whom Christ commended for the same, as ap∣pears, Mark 12. Upon which, St. Ambrose saith, Deny not to cast two Mites into this Treasury, that is, Faith and Grace, since by them thou shalt be made capable of a ceestial Kingdom; neither flatter thy self with thy Riches, because thou canst give more than the Poor, for God respects not how much, but with what Devotion thou givest thy Reward, Amb. li. de Viduo, & Epist. li. 9. Ep. 76. And here Christ absolved the Adulteress that was accused to him, being sorry for her offence; saying, I came not to con∣demn, but to save Sinners that repent. Upon which, St. Chrysostom saith, Al∣though thou art a Publican, yet thou mayst be made an Evangelist; though a Persecuter of the Church, yet an Apostle; though a Thief, yet of the City of Paradise; though a Magician, yet thou may'st worship God; for there is no Sin so dangerous, but Repentance may obtain Pardon. Not far from this Treasury there stood certain Galleries, curiously adorned with marble Pillars, the root whereof was plated with Silver and Gold, and was close above the Head, that when it rained, men might walk under them dry, and indeed, did much resemble our ancient Monasteries. The dores of these Walks were covered over with Gold and Silver; so also was that high Gate whereby men went Eastward into Solomon's Porch, and was fifty Cubits high, and the dores forty, as Iosephus writeth. Of the third Court or Porch, wherein the Heathens used to pray, commonly called the Hall of the Gentiles, or outward Court. THis Court was not built by the Kings of Israel, but by Herod, when the rest of the Temple was re-edified, some sixteen years before the Birth of Christ, and about six and forty before he began to preach, Iohn 4. It was so spatious, and sumptuously built, that it amazed the Beholders, contain∣ing an hundred Cubits in breath, and seven hundred and twenty Cubits in length, lying Eastward towards the Brook Kidron: the Pavement was of Marble of divers colours, like the other Courts; the Walls, with the marble Pillars, were five and twenty Cubits high; and the Walks about it very curiously made, were thirty Cubits broad. This was called Vestabulum Gentium, where the Heathens as well as the Jews, might enter and pray. Out of this place Christ drave the Buyers and Sellers, overthrew the Tables of the Money-Changers, and the seats of those that sold Doves, Io. 2. Mat. 21. And it stood something lower than Solomon's Porch. All these three Courts were inclosed within high Walls and Walks re∣sembling our Cloisters, where round about the Temple, at every corner of which, stood very high Towers, whereon, when the Sabbath day came,
one of the Priests over night went and sounded a Trumpet, to signifie that the next day was the Sabbath (for then there were no Bells.) The Wall of this uttermost Court (as Iosephus writeth) was in height (reckoning from the bottom to the Valley of Kidron) four hundred Cubits, and adorn∣ed with goodly Towers, upon the Pinnacles of which, were built Sum∣mer houses and fair Walks, from whence we might see into the Temple, and clean over the Town. These were called the Pinnacles of the Temple, and were so high, that when one looked down from them into the Valley, their eyes dazled in such manner, that they could not see; as Iosephus wri∣teth li. Antiq. 15. ca 14. Upon one of these Pinnacles the Devil carried our Saviour Christ saying, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, &c. Mat. 14. And Iames the son of Alphaeus, by the Commandment of Annas the High Priest, was from thence thrown into the Valley of Cedron, and fall∣ing upon a Fullers instrument died, Ios. Ant. 20. ca. 8. &c. The Gate to∣wards the East was thirty cubits high, and had dores opening two wayes 15 cubits broad (as Ios. writeth) made of pure brass that shone like pure gold and silver, artificially made and cunningly embossed, insomuch as it was called the beautiful Gate of the Temple: as Peter and Iohn was going into the Temple by this Gate, they healed a man that had been born lame from his Mothers Womb, Acts. 3. When a man went Eastward, the Gates were one higher than another. The first Gate, or the Gate of the Heathens Court, was thirty Cubits high. The second that entred into Solomon's Porch, was fifty cubits: the third which went into the highest and last Court was seventy cubits, and the great high Gate of the Temple was ninety Cubits high, so that every Gate of the Temple was twenty Cubits one higher than another: And in in these Gates there were benches made for men to sit on. There were many other Gates and dores on both sides, some 60 some 20 Cubits broad, all almost made of pure Gold, and of such weightiness, that (as Iosephus writeth in his second book to Appius) two hundred men could scarce open and shut them. Egippus writeth, That Vespasian coming before the Temple to assault it, commanded his Souldiers to burn one of the golden Gates (which then was shut) that so he might overcome the same, and with a strong hand car∣ry away a most glorious Victory: for it was wonderfully fortified both by Nature and Art; it had deep Ditches, lofty Towers like unto Castles of defence; and moreover, compassed about with Bulwarks and strong Walls, insomuch that it was not possible to be won but with extream difficulty and great labour. When the Gate was fired, the gold that ran from it was in great abundance: and by this means the Conquest was made easie. This shall suffice to have spoken of the Buildings of the Temple.
The Allegorical or Spiritual meaning of the Temle. THE terrestial Temple built by Solomon was pattly a figure of our Saviour Christ, and partly of his Church. For when the Son of God suffered the Temple of his holy Body to be destroyed, and was risen again from the dead, Iohn 2. then he raised up to us the Christian Church, which is the true Spiritual House and Temple wherein God dwelleth, 1 Cor. 6. The Mystery of the white Marble. CHrist is the right white Marble Stone which is without spot, And there is no deceit found in his Mouth, Esay 53. Iohn. 8. This Stone the Builders refused, but God chose it out as a most pretious, and made it the head of the corner, that we like living stones might be built upon it, Esay 21. 8. 1 Pet. 2. The Mystery of the Gold. THE Gold and pretious Stones in the Temple signified the Deity of Christ; for in him dwelt the fulness of the Deity; , wholly and absolutely; and in him was contained the Fountain and Treasure of all Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2. The Mystery of the Cedar-wood. AS the Cedar, Cypress, and Olive-wood was neither subject to putre∣faction nor possible to be devoured with Worms, so the Humane Na∣ture of Christ was subject to no corruption, no putrefaction, Psal. 16. The Mystery of the Cherubims. THE Temple also is a figure of the heavenly Glory, and of everlasting Life to come, where the Angels and Cherubims being ingraven and pictured to the image of Man, do represent the Congregation of the blessed Angels and Saints, who in the presence of the Lord sing a continual Te demn laudamus, Apoc. 4. The two Cherubims placed upon the Mercy seat in the holy Quire, signifie the Old and New Testament, which contains the Do∣ctrine of Christ; and as their wings touched one another, so the old and new Testament were joyned together, the end of the one and the beginning of the other, the one continued to the end of the first World, the other shall continue to the end of the second; both had relation unto Christ, to whom the Ministry of God was committed. The mystery of the golden Door of the Temple. CHrist is the door of Life, by which we must enter into eternal Happiness, Iohn 10. 14. The two doors signifie a two-fold knowledge before we can enter into this Gate? that is, of his Person and Office.
What the Vail of the Temple sgnified. THE Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, hanging upon the Altar of the Cross, is the true Vail that is put between God and us, shadowing with his Wounds and precious Blood, the multitude of our offences, that so we may be made acceptable to his Father, Heb. 10. The Mytery of the Ark of the Covenam. THE Ark of God made of Sittim-wood, wherein was kept the pot of Manna, Aarons Rod, and the Tables of the Commandments, Exod. 25. Heb. 9. represent as well our Saviour Christ as the hearts of the Faithful; for as in Christ's Breast was contained the Doctrine both of the Law and Gospel, so likewise is it in the Faithful, though not in that measure. He was the true Manna that descended from Heaven, to give light unto the World, Iohn. 6. The Tables of the Law move us to mutual love and new obedience. Aarons Rod flourishing with blossoms signifies the sweetness of the Gospel, and the Glory of our High Priest Jesus Christ, of whom Aaron was a Type. The Mystery of the Golden Altar. THE sacrificing Altar in the Sanctuary of the Temple, whereon were four Golden horns, being made partly of Sittim-wood, and partly of Gold, compassed about with a Crown of Gold, represent the unity of the Humanity and Deity in our Saviour. For as the wood, naturally incor∣ruptible, was beautified with refulgent Gold; so the Humanity of Christ, not capable of any putrefaction, Psalm. 16. being adorned with Celestial glory of the Deity, personally united to the Divine Nature, ascended up into the Heavens, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Father, crowned with a Crown of majesty in Eternal happiness, Psal. 8. The Mystery of the golden Candlesticks THE golden Candlestick with six Branches and seven Lights, signifies Christ and the Ministers of the Church. Christ the foundation is the chief Priest and the Light of the World, illuminating us to eternal life, Iohn. 1. The Doctors and Teachers of the Church are the Branches, by whom Christ inlighteneth his Church, with the sound and uncorruptible Doctrine of the Gospel, Apoc. 1. Neither ought they to be separated from Christ, but by the light of their Doctrine and sincere Conversation be a lanthorn unto our feet, Psal. 119. that so their works may return to his glory and the good of his Church. And as all the branches were united into the body of the Candlestick, so every Minister and faithful Child of God ought to be united into the Bo∣dy of Christ, without any Schismatical dissention or seperation. The Flow∣ers and Lillies denote the Ornament and Graces of the holy Spirit, which Christ hath bountifully bestowed upon his Ministers. The Lights and Lamps do admonish all godly Ministers to a diligent care, lest the light of Gods di∣vine
Word should either by mens Traditions, or carnal and philosophical Opinions, be either diminished, or by little and little abolished: but as often as such things happen, with the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel to be purged and preserved. The Mystery of the golden Table. THE golden Table whereon the Shew-bread stood, being compassed about with a pretious Crown, signifies the Ministry of the Gos∣pel. For the Bread that is set before us, is Christ, that Bread of Life which descended out of Heaven, Iohn. 6. and he by the Ministry of the twelve A∣postles is mystically offered unto us in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that whosoever eateth thereof as they ought, might have eternal Life. The Frankincense that stood by the Bread, admonishes us, that earnest Prayers and Godly actions are to be used in the time of the administring of the Lords Supper. For as Macarius saith, if the Devil was as strong as Moun∣tains, yet at the Prayers of the Saints, he melteth as Wax before the fire. And St. Cyril saith, That Christ is the Table upon which the Bread of Life is set, whereby all the Faithful are nourished unto eternal Life. And the Crown about this Table is the goodness and mercy of God, whereby we are crown∣ed, and brought to Eternal happiness. St. Ierom saith, That this Table was a figure of the Table and the Supper in the Kingdom of God, Luk. 2. The Shew-bread upon the Table is the Son of God, which giveth Life unto the World, Iohn 6. The Mystery of the golden Vine and the Chrystal Grapes. THE Vine in the East part of the Temple, made of shining Gold, fitly resembles our Saviour Christ, who compared himself unto a Vine, and the Faithful unto the Branches, saying, I am the true Vine, and whosoe∣ver is ingraffed into me shall have eternal life, Ioh. 15. The Chrystall Grapes▪ do denote the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the works of the Faithful, which are Faith, Love, Hope, Charity, Patience, Prayer, and works of Grace, all which do inhere unto such as lieve. The Mystyery of the Oblations and Sacrifices. ALL the Oblations and Sacrifices of the Old Testament, were Types and figures of our Saviour, That as they were slain for the performance of the Ceremonial Law; so Christ, for the Salvation of Man was Slain, and made a free-will Offering, by whose Blood and Mediation the sin of Man is pardoned, and he made capable of eternal Life, Esay 53. Ioh. 10. Heb. 9. &c. The Mystery of the upper Court. THE upper Court was a figure of the Spiritual Priesthood of Jesus Christ, who hath made us all Priests and Kings, and hath beautified us with his guiltless Death, 1 Pet. 2.
The Mystery of the Fountain, and molten Sea standing upon twelve Oxen, in the uppermost Court. THE molten Sea and Fountain was a figure of Baptism, and that living Water issuing from the Wounds of Christ, whereby we are washed from all our Sins; the Laer of Regeneration, whereby we are made capable of Eernal Life; that Well of Water whereof if we drink we shall never thirst. The twelve Oxen represent the twelve Apostles, whose voices have gone through the World (according to that in the Corinthians) and have carried the Sea of Grace through all parts of the Earth. Of which Water (saith St. Augustine) if thou drinkest but one drop, it is more effe∣ctual to quench the thirst of Worldly and insatiable desires, than an Ocean of earthly Waters. The Mystery of the middle Court. SOlomon's Court, wherein Christ taught, and in which the Jews used com∣monly to pray, was a figure of that Church which should be gathered from amongst the Jewes. For from thence he indeavoured first to assemble and gather together a Christian Congregation, according to that which he spake to the Canaanitish Woman, Mat 15. I am sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Of the outward Court of the Gentiles. THis Court signified, That the Gentiles also should partake of the sheep∣fold and Congregation of Christ, and be members of his holy Church; according to that of Iohn 10. I have yet other sheep which I must also bring hither, that sothere might be one sheepfold, one Pastor, &c. Of the rest of the memorable Buildings standing upon mount Moriah. HAving thus described the Temple, together with the several Courts and Ornaments, all which did typically represent Christ and his Church, I will now proceed to the rest of the Buildings standing upon mount Moriah. The first and most memorable was the house of Solomon, which stood just against the Temple upon the South: it shined so with Gold and Silver, and was so stately and sumptuously built, that when Queen Saba came to Ierusalem, she stood amazed to see it. There belonged to it divers Courts and Walks, in one of which the Prophet Ieremy was prisoner, Ier. 37. Over against this he made the Judgment-hall, in which he placed the Ivory Chair, spoken of 1 Kin. 10. He built by that another house for his Queeen, she that was daughter of Pharaoh, 1 Kin. 7. But when Nebuchad∣nezzar conquered Ierusalem, all these, together with the Temple, were burnt and utterly deaced.
Of the Peol of Bethesda. UPon the North lay that sheep-fold, or sequestred place, called Bethesda, Ioh. 5. which had five porches or Xenodochius, as some would have it: here Cattel came to drink, and the Priests used to wash their Sacrifices; be∣cause no unclean Beast might come within the Temple, nor any thing that was foul or spotted be offered upon the Altar. The water was of reddish colour, and ran into that place in great abundance, and therefore it was cal∣led the house of effusion or pouring out. This was the place into which the Angel of God sometimes descended and troubled the Water, after which, whosoever stepped in, was presently cured: and here our Saviour Christ heal∣ed the Man that had been diseased 38 years, Ioh. 5. This place was made by King Hezekiah, who caused the water of the uppermost Pool, which was called Gon not far from mount Calvary, to be conveyed by Pipes and pas∣sages through the Earth into the lower city called Acra, and so fell into this place, for which cause it was called the lower Pool. The Allegorie or my∣stery hereof is, That every one of Christs Sheep ought to be washed in the Pool of his Blood, before, they can be made fit Sacrifices to enter into his Tem∣ple or Church, 1 Ioh. 1. Of the Tower or Castle called Antonia. THis Castle, as Ioseph. hath it, lib. 6. de Bell. cap. 6. stood between two Courts of the Temple, at the North-West corner; at first built by the Machabees, and called by the name of Bris: but after, King Herod, taking affection to that place, bestowed great cost upon it, walled it about, built up sumptuous Towers, and made it very strong; then gave it the name of Antonia, in favour of Antonius that noble Roman; which Augustus a long time sustained after their decease. Of the Hall called Coenaculum Anguli. THis house stood upon an Angle or Cantle of the Hill, and was there∣fore called Coenaculum Anguli: it was very large and spatious, and with∣in had a great Hall, whereof Nehem. cap. 3. maketh mention: and here, as some think, our Saviour Christ ate the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples; but I rather think it was in the Suburbs. Of the Tower Ophel, or the dark Tower. NEar to the Valley of Cedron, towards the East, not far from the Temple, and near the Castle Antonia, there was builded a lofty and strong Tower or Palace called Ophel, that is, a place of darkness: it was a very sumptuous thing.
Of Hamea, or the Tower of the Centurions. IN the Town wall, between the Sheep-gate and the Dung-gate, stood this Ca∣stle Hamea or Centurion, taking the name  Centenario numero, i. The num∣ber of an hundred, and was upon the East side of the City near to the sheep∣fold or Pool Bethesda, Neh. 3. 12. Here the Centurions commonly kept watch. Of Mount Acra, and the buildings upon it. MOunt Acra (as is aforesaid) stood upon the West side of Ierusalem; it was a very high Mountain, and took that name from the Greek word Acra, a sharp or high Hill. It was much higher than mount Moriah in times past, till Simon, Iudas Machabeus's brother, caused it to be cut lower, to make it equal in height with mount Moriah, Between these two Hills lay the Valley Cedron, which was in profundity 400 Cubits. Upon this Mountain another part of the City was builded, being strongly fortified, and richly adorned with sumptuous houses, of which David and Solmon were the principal Founders; and was called the lower City, or the Daughter of Sion. It was so beautiful, that some hold (of which number are and Eusebius) that it it exceeded the rest of the City. Here stood the house of Helena Queen of the Adiabenos, near about the midst of it, as Ioseph. ob∣serveth, Li. Bell. 7. cap. 13. which Queen being converted to the Jewish Religion, built her an house in this City, that she might pray in the Tem∣ple. Here stood the houses of her Sons, Monebasius and Grapta: here stood the houses of the High Priests Annas and Caiphas, not far from the Valley Tyropae: King Herod also, that wicked Man who caused the innocent Children to be put to Death, built him an house here, near about the place where the Machabees in times past had a Castle; (for they built two, one in Mount Moriah, another in this Mount.) That in Mount Moriah was after called the Castle of Antonia, and stood right against the Temple, as is afore∣said. And this being very sumptuously built, and a Royal Seat, was after the death of this Herod a Palace for his Successors, Archilaus and Herod Agrippa. Not far off he caused two fair Theatres to be also built; the one in honour of the Emperour Augustus; and this on the one side joyned to a Tower called Acropolis, (which was built by Antigonus Epiphanes, on pur∣pose to place a Garrison in, to keep the Jews in bondage; which Iudas Ma∣chabeus afterwards made level with the ground) and on the other side, to∣wards his own Palace. It resembled a Semi-circle, made all of white Marble, fairly polished, the Building somewhat low; within, full of high Banks, one rising above another like Scaffolds, so that the whole multitude might easily hear or see whatsoever was said or done. It was curiously beautified with Gold, Silver, and many goodly Pictures; but amongst the rest, the Battels which the Emperour Augustus had won against his People,
were lively pourtrayed. To this place, as well Jews as Gentiles resorted to see Interludes and Plays Acted. The other was an Amphitheatre, and stood upon the South side of the House: it was built round in a whole Circle, compassed bout with high Walls, large and spatious. Here they used to Fence and to Fight both on Horse-back and in Waggons. And in the fifth year, in honour of Augustus, the Circensian Games, according to the Rites of the Gentiles, were very sumptuously performed. On the south side of this Amphitheatre, stood Queen Bernice's house, Sister to Agrippa junior: it was a very fair and sumptuous Building, little inferior to King Herods. This stood in the Market place, and so all along were very sumptuous and stately Pillars▪ Here Agrippa himself had also an House, and over against that, upon the North, stood the Judgment-hall, where the Sanhedrim, or the Councel of the seventy Elders used to meet, to hear and determine of mens causes. To this place Christ was brought when they asked him if he was Christ, Luke 22. Here were the Apostles whipt, Acts 5. And close by this stood the house of Pi∣late the Pretor, fairly glistering with Gold; in which house all the Roman Pre∣tors and Presidents for the most part had their Residence: and here our Savi∣our Christ was whipt, crowned with Thorns, and spit upon. Not far off from this Pretor's house, stood the Chancery, or rather, as we term it, the Treasu∣ry, a stately and magnificent house, curiously built, and appointed onely to lay Records and common Chronologies in. Here also the Officers of the Town gave in their Accounts, and Creditors entred their Debts. This was utterly destroyed by Vesptian. Thus much for the Buildings on this Mount. Next, the Market place was a thing very memorable, and was so large and spatious, that in the time of the Wars many great Battels were fought there, as Iosephus saith. In this Market place, close by Pilates house, stood a high Seat or Tribunal, made of fair stone curiously wrought, and for the Eminence of it, called in the Chaldaean tongue Gabatha; and because it was built of Stone, the Grecians called it , the Latins, La∣pidanium; and with us it might be termed an heap of Stones;Or a well wrought stone. (for so the word signifieth. Here Pilate taking water, washed his hands before the People, and said, I am innocent of this mans blood: At which they cried, His blood be upon us and our Children. And after, by Gods appointment, according to their own wish, fell upon them; for in the same place, and close by this same Seat, it hapned, that Herod wanting money, demanded of the Jews so much out of their Treasury (which they called Corban) as would pay for the making of a Water-course (for he assayed to bring wa∣ter into the City from a Fountain some two hundred furlongs off it) but the Jews supposing it a needless work, not only denied him, but gave him many outragious and spiteful speeches, tumultuously flocked about him, and with great clamors prest upon him, even as he was in his Seat: wherefore per∣ceiving
the danger, and to prevent mischief, he sent to his Souldiers to appa∣rel themselves like Citizens, and under their Gowns to bring with them a Dagger or Ponyard, and mingle themselves among the multitude, which they did, observing who they were that made the greatest uproar; and when Herod gave the sign, fell upon them with their Ponyards, killing a great multitude. The rest, seeing this Massacre, suspecting Treason amongst them∣selves, fell one upon another; and many for fear of loss, or to avoid future danger, killed themselves. In this very place also, Florus, General of the common Souldiers, within few years after, upon a small occasion, made another cruel Massacre, and much more barbarous than the former; for he spared none, the best of them he caused to be whip'd to death, or else crucified and put to the Sword; and for the Vulgar, spared neither Wo∣man nor Child. So that within the compass of one day there died of this obstinate and wicked Nation, above seven hundred and thirty. This outrage was so cruel, that all Strangers which inhabited within the Town pitied their misery; but especially Queen Bernice, who, being partly frighted with their shreeks, partly moved to commiseration through the ex∣tremity of their Affliction, indangered her life to present her self before Florus, and upon her knees besought him to take some mercy and pity of them, and withdraw his hand of vengeance from the blood of the guiltless. But the fury of the Roman Souldiers was so fierce, and the Resolution of Florus so un∣removeable, that neither her Tears, not the present Calamities could per∣swade him. But, as in such uproars it commonly happeneth, she with the rest was in danger of her Safety, and was constrained the next night, for the preservation of her Estate, to keep a strong Watch, lest the Roman Souldiers should have done her some violence. Thus we may see a just revenge of a perjured and stiff-necked People, and that in the place where the Offence was committed, though at least eight and thirty years after. In this Market-place Agrippa had built a Gallery all of Marble, from his own house to the Judgment-hall; it was covered above, and made with di∣vers and sundry Rooms for men to walk in, all burnished with Gold, and cal∣led by the name of Xiston, as Iosephus hath it. Here Agrippa after this cruel Massacre made an Oration to the People (Queen Bernice standing by him) to this effect; That they should forbear to raise any more commotions against the Romans, and to banish the Seditious out of the City, for that they saw their cruelty; Ioseph. lib. de Bell. 2. Egesip. lib▪ 2. cap. 8. To this Gallery there joyn∣ed a Bridge, which pass'd over the Valley of Cedron to the Temple. And amongst many other sair and sumptuous Buildings that were upon this place, there were the Colledges of the Pharisees, Sadduces, and the Synagogues and Schools for the Instruction of Youth, which were dispersed here and there among other stately Buildings; and this was called the lower Town.
Of the Valley of Cedron. BEtween this lower City and the Temple, there was a deep Valley, ex∣tending it self from the Gate of Benjamin through the middle of the City to the Gate of Sion. From this Valley they ascended into ether Mountain, (that is, Mount Ara and Mount Moriah) by certain steps or stairs. These two Hills (as is beforesaid) were joyned together with a Bridge; and this Val∣ley passing between them, was called by Zephaniah, cap. 1. Machten. In which place, above all the rest of the Cities, dwelt Merchants, and such as used Com∣merce and trade, as appeareth in the eleventh verse of his Prophecie; Howl ye Inhabitants of the Low place, for the company of Merchants is destroyed: all they that exchange for Silver are cut off. Upon which place of Scripture, the Chal∣daean Paraphrase reads it thus, Howl ye Inhabitants of the Valley Cedron. Iosephus, in tit. Bell. 6. c. 6. &. lib. 6. c. 7. calleth this Valley by two names; one Machten, from the profundity; the other Cedron, from the obscurity: for so the name signifieth; and whosoever looked down into it from the Temple, Fogs and Mists seemed to lie in the bottom of it, like a cloud of darknes, such was the depth of it. There was another Valley which lay between Mount Sion and these Mountains, called by the name of Tyrexdon. Of the Mountain Bezetha. THis place lay Northward in Ierusalem, and between it and the former Hills were deep Ditches cast; it had two Towns standing upon it, di∣vided with two Walls, and was commonly called the Suburbs; the name of the one, which lay nearest to mount Moriah, was called the second City; the other that lay upon the North, was called Neapolis, or the new Town. In the second dwelt Hulda the Prophetess, and Zacharias the Father of S. Iohn Baptist, 2 Kin. 22. 2 Chr. 34. Nehem. 3. Ioseph. li. 10. c. 5. It was adorned with many fair and sumptuous Buildings, among which was that princely house Of Herod Ascalonites, that great and mighty King of the Iews, in whose time our Saviour Christ was born. This house was sumptuously built, support∣ed and adorned with Pillars of polisht Marble, and so spatious, that in one room thereof there might stand an hundred Tables: the Hall also was very great, and richly gilded with refined gold intermixt with Silver: about it were many pleasant and delectable Walls, goodly Gardens and Fountains for pleasure: it was compass'd with a wall of polisht Marble 30 Cubits high. And (as Valerius writeth) in that house Herod caused Christ to be mocked, put a long white garment upon him in contempt, and so sent him to Pilate. Here also was a Prison, in which Peter was kept when the Angel of the Lord delivered him, Acts 12.
Of the Town Neapolis, or the New City. THis lay without the Walls of the City, and became inhabited by rea∣son of the great concourse of People that flocked thither, (for in times past there were no inhabitants) and stood upon the North side of the Hill. Here dwelt the Christians, and other Laborers and Strangers: and by all likelihood, it seems that the house of Mary the Mother of Iohn, sirnamed Mark, stood here, which, because of the continual resort of the Apostles thither, was called the house of the Church. Hither Peter resorted when he was delivered from the hands of Herod by the Angel: for thus saith the Text, Acts 12. 9. That when Peter had past the first and second Watch, he came to the Iron Gate which led into the City, and loe it opened of it self. And from thence he went to the house of Mary the Mother of John, sirnamed Mark. Here also (in my opinion) Christ celebrated the last Paschal Lamb, because after Supper he went into the Mount of Olives, for this lying un∣walled, lay open for them to go and come at their pleasure. But afterward in Herod Agrippa's time, it was begun to be compassed in with a Wall, and before it could be fully finished, the Angel of the Lord struck him, and he died miserably: Here also stood the Monument of Iohn Hircanus the High Priest, and of Alexander King of the Iewes, as it appeareth in Iosephus, lib. de Bello, 6. cap. 6. The tops of the Houses in the City Ierusalem were flat, and covered with fair and plain Roofs, compassed about with Battlements; upon which they used to Leap, Dance, and Banquet, and such Recreations as they observed upon their Festival days, were there celebrated. And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the Mountains or Hills whereon Ierusalem stood. Of the Walls that compassed the City. THis City of Ierusalem was so strongly fortified by Nature on every side, except the North, (for it stood upon high Rocks and Cliffs) that it seemed to be invincible. And, that that side might be the better strengthen∣ed, they compassed it in with three Walls, and those so strong, that when Vespasian the Emperor and his Army invaded the City, they had much a∣do to conquer them. The first of these Walls was that which Agrippa built, and it compassed in Neapolis, otherwise called the New Town. At the North-west end of which Wall, was built an exceeding high Tower of very fair Marble stone; so high, that standing on the top thereof, a man might see from thence to the Sea, and into Arabia, and the uttermost bounds of Iudaea. This Tower was called Psephina. The second Wall was that which divided the two Suburbs; wherein there stood 14 Towers and Gates. This King Hezekiah built, 2 Chr. 32. in a corner of which, between the West-gate and the Valley-gate, there stood a high Tower, wherein all the night great fire was made, which cast a light
a great way off round about; so that Travellers passing towards Ierusalem were guided by it in their way. Of this light we read in Nehem. cap. 3. The third Wall compassed in the Temple, and all the lower City; in it was sixty Towers, but the chief of them stood in the East Angle, between the Dung-gate and the Gate of the Valley, which was called Hananiel, and signi∣fieth, the Grace and Gift of God. This is much spoken of in the Scripture: up∣on this Wall King Herod the Ascalonite built three fair Towers; one be∣tween the Garden-gate and the Old-gate, which he called Hippicum, in ho∣nour of his Father Hippicus; the other Phaselum, in honour of his Brother Pha∣silus; and the third Mariamne, after his Wives name, who notwithstanding he caused innocently to be put to death. These three Gates were built of polish't Marble. Pliny and Strabo say, that this was the fairest and most spacious City of the East; and for the munition and fortification almost invincible. The Walls of it were all of white polish't Marble, some 25 or 30 Cubits high▪ the stones were 20 Cubits long, 20 broad, and 5 thick, so closely joyned, that the junctures could scarcely be perceived. Many of the Towers also were made of such stones, but those of the Temple exceeded the rest; for they were 25 Cubits long, 12 broad, and 8 thick, as Iosephus witnesseth, lib. Ant. 15. ca. 14. & de Bel. Iud. li. 6. ca. 6. which things being rightly con∣sidered, we may easily perceive that these Walls were very difficult to be de∣stroyed: Neither were the Ditches of less strength that went about the Town; for they were cut out of hard stones, at least forty Cubits deep, and two hundred and fifty Cubits broad, which were impossible to have been won, if God had not help'd and assisted the Romans, filling up those Ditches with the Bodies of those that died of the Plague and Famin within the Town. Of the Gates of Jerusalem. IT had twelve Gates to go out and in: Upon the East side lay five, the first of which was the Fountain Gate, which was so called of the Fountain Siloah. And this stood close by the Gate of mount Sion, in which Fountain the Man that was born blind wash'd himself at the Commandment of our Saviour, and had his sight restored, Ioh. 9. And at this Gate Christ came riding in upon an Ass, when he came from Bethania, on Palm Sunday. 2. The Sheep-gate, which was so called of the multitude of sheep that were driven in by it, to be offered in the Temple (for it stood hard by the Temple.) Right before this Gate stood Mount Olivet, some half an English mile and a furlong from Ierusalem, Eastward; by it stood the Garden cal∣led Gethsemane, where Christ was taken▪ and led into the City through this Gate; to be offered up like an innocent sheep, for the sins of the whole World. 3. The Dung-gate: this took the name from a Dung-hill, because the Rain-water coming with great power though the City, washed away
the filth, and with great violence, carried it through this Gate into the Pool Cedron. Not far from this Gate was the Water-gate, and stood a little within it. 4. The Valley Gate, which took the Name of the Valley Iehosaphat, and lay not far from the other Gate. Hereabouts also stood the Dragon∣gate. 5. The Horse-gate, and stood just in the joyning of the East and North∣part of the City: it took the name from the Kings Horses, as appeareth, Ier. 31. Neh. 3. The Gates upon the North. 6. The Corner Gate, which stood North-west, 2. King. 14. 1 Ch. 26. Ier. 31. Zach. 14. 7. The Benjamin-gate, so called, because Men by this Gate went to the Borders of Benjamin: in this Gate the Prophet Ieremy was Prisoner, Ier. 37. 8. The Ephraim-gate, by which they went to the Borders of Ephraim. The Gates upon the West. 9. The Rain-gate, so called, because the Rain-water cleansing the streets, carried away all the Filth, and so past through this Gate toward the West, and there thrust it out of the City, Neh. 12. 10. The Garden-gate, before which the Garden stood wherein Christ was buried. 11. The Old Gate: before this Mount Calvary stood, whereon Christ was Crucified. 12. The Fish-gate, so called, because of Sea Fish that came in by it: it was also called the Brick-gate. Here the Prophet Ieremy broke an earthen Pitch∣er, Ieremy 19. And out of this Gate they went to Bethlehem. But on the South side there were no Gates, for there Mount Sion stood, which was so high and steep that no Man could go up upon it. Of the Gates within the City. THE Gate of Sion, the Water-gate; of which two I have already spoken. The middle Gate Ieremy speaketh of, cap. 19. and it is thought it stood in the middle of City, in the Valley Cedron, not far from the Tower called Mariamne. The Iron Gate, which opened of it self, when the Angel led Peter out of Prison, Acts 12. this stood in the City Walls, passing from one Suburb into another: all these Gates stood within the City. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the Pourtraiture of it.
Of the Springs, Valleys, Fountains, and other memorable Places, as they were sci∣tuated near to the City, and how to the four parts of the World. IN the next place, it resteth to shew what things worthy memory were a∣bout, and stood near to the City: the first of which was, the Brook Ce∣dron, which sprung out of a Hill not far from it upon the South, and with great swiftness ran through the East part of the City, and so between Ierusa∣lem and the Mount of Olives, to the Valley-gate of Iehosaphat: thence passing through the Cliffs of Mount Olivet, it ran directly East till it came to the Dead Sea; which Brook in the Summer time was most commonly dry. The Water of it was something Black, which colour the Valley Jehosaphat (which was very fertile) gave it; and from thence it was called Nigres∣cens torrens, a blackish stream. This is mystically spoken of, in 2 Sam. and Psa. 100. Where it is said, He (that is our Saviour Christ) shall drink of the Brook in the way: which he fulfilled, when he made satisfaction for our Sins by his Death and Passion, as it appeareth in the 69 Psalm, Save me O God, &c. Into this Brook ran the Water of Silo, and that which came out of the Temple. Of the Mount of Olives and Bethania, which signifies a House of Mourning. THese two, the one lay upon the East, the other South-west, about half an English Mile and a furlong from Jerusalem. Of Bethania you may read in Nehemia. Of the Hill Gihon. GIhon stood before Jerusalem on the West side, right against the Fish-gate, and the Old gate, 2 Chr. 22. Here King Solomon was Crowned, 1. Kin. 1. Not far from this stood the Mount Golgatha, where Christ was Crucified. From whence may be observed, That as Solomon upon that Hill was Crown∣ed King, so Christ upon this was Crucified; our Saviour and the true Solomon, that made everlasting peace between God and us. From this Mount Gihon sprung the Fountain Gihon, and thereabouts also was the Fullers Field, 2 King. 18. 2 Chron. 33. In which place Senacha∣rib and other the Princes and Embassadors of the King of Assyria, spake Blasphemous words against the Lord, wherefore he slew 185 thousand of them, as appeareth in the 2 King. 19. Of the Valley of the Son of Hinnon. THis Valley lyeth behind the City of Ierusalem Southward, on the left hand as they went from Jerusalem to Bethlehem. In this Valley the Jews set up an Idol of Copper like a King, which they called Moloch, that is, a King of Idols. This Copper Idolstood with the Arms stretching out, and
under it there was a great Fire, whereby the Image shewed fire-red: and be∣sides that, the more to honour it, they made a great Fire between two Walls, which burnt for his sake: and through this Fire the Idolatrous Priests cast living Children into Moloch's burning Arms, which he with his Arms red hot burnt to Death. And in this manner the Jews offered up their own Children to the Idol Moloch: and when they did it, they made a great noise and cry, and beat upon a Drum, that the Fathers when their Children were offered, should not hear them cry, by reason of the great noise of the Drums. This Valley was called the Valley of Tophet; for Tophet signifies a Drum. This was a most gross and fearful Idolatry, and therefore Christ likened this Valley of Hinnon to Hell-fire; for he called it Gehenna, Mat. 5. That the Iewes should keep themselves from this Monstrous Idolatry, God made a Law, That if any Man were taken committing this kind of Idolatry, he should forthwith be stoned to death, and not suffered to live, Levit. 18. and 20. The Valley of Gehennon is often times named in the Holy Scripture, Iosh. 15. Nehem. 11. 2. Paral. 28. 33. Ier. 7. Jerom writeth, that here, by this Idol Moloch, in the Valley of Hinnon, there was a Wood; for the Water ran out of the Fountain Siloah along by it, and made the Valley Moist. Of the field of Blood, called Hakeldama. THis Field of Blood, which was bought for thirty silver Pence, for the which Judas betrayed our Saviour Christ, lay not far from the Valley of Hinnon, Southward, by the City of Jerusalem, as Jerom writeth. Of the Hill Hameskita, or Offence and Slander. THis Hill lay South-east, not far from Jerusalem, something wide of Mount Olivet, so that there was but one Valley between them, and was not altogether so high as it. Also upon this Hill King Solomon in his old age suffered his Wives or Concubines to make Idolatrous Temples, wherein he and his Wives worshipped Idols. Of the Destruction of this famous City of Jerusalem by TITUS VESPASIAN. THus have have I briefly set forth the Dignity, Scituation and Curi∣osity of the Buildings of Ierusalem: together with the Richness of the Temple and sumptuousness of the Houses; now it rests to de∣scribe unto you, the manner and means how this Famous City was destroyed; surely a thing worthy Wonder (according to that in Ieremy) Whosoever shall hear of it his Ears shall tingle. And that it might be the more famous, and the Christians within it might take notice of the near
approaching Desolation, there were divers strange Accidents happened, and Visions seen. As first, about some four years before, the River Iordan was turn'd out of her course, and was brought into the City Pella: A while after that, for a Year together, there hung a Comet like a flaming Sword over the City▪ and in the Night there was seen a Light in the Temple: And in the Day when they were at Sacrifice, a Calf brought forth a Lamb. Then about the middle of the Night, the Eastern Gates of the Temple opened of their own accord. In the Skies were seen Armies of Men Fighting, and Horses and Chariots running to and again. And at last there was heard a terrible Voice in the Temple, uttering these Words, Migremus Hinc; that is, Let us go ence. And that there might be a general Proclamation of this sad and cruel Desolation through the whole City, one Ananis the Son of Jesus, a Man poor and Impotent, upon the Feast of the Tabernacles, ran through all the streets of the City, and crying, O, a Voice from the East, and a Voice from the West, a Vice from the four Wid, a Voice over Jerusalem and the Temple, a Voice over the Bridegroom and the Bride, and a Voice over the whole multitude of this City. And although he was Whipt and Imprisoned, and cruelly handled, yet so long as he lived he would not cease to utter these words, which by somewere judg'd to foretell the horrible Desolation which after hapned. For Tius Caesar, Son of Flvius the Emperour, about seventy years after the Nativity of our Lord, and about eight and thirty after his Ascension, utterly overthrew it, even to the ground, about the first day of the Month of April, and within a year after these signs. For he, taking advantage of the three Factions which at this time swayed in Ierusalem: One of Eleazar the the Priest, the Son of Simon; the other of Zilotus the chief Prince which held the Temple; and the third of Iohannes Giscalenus, a cruel fellow, which had the command of the inferior. City; besieged it, and made this a fit opportunity to further his Enterprises, while the Seditious and factious People little regarding their own Safety, gave way by their evil and intestine Wars, to what he intended, weakning themselves much more by their continued slaughters, than the Enemy by his Invasion. Insomuch as the whole City, and Temple was filled with dead Bodies; common Insolencies and publick Rapines were ordinarily amongst them: some set fire of the City, others despoiling the Temple, a third for killing the Priests, even as they were at Sacrifice; all places full of dead Bodies; and to this, to add a greater mea∣sure of misery (without any regard at all to their future defence) set fire of the store-house wherein the Corn lay for the sustentation of the City, and consu∣med that in one day which had been long a gathering: by this means it came to pass, that they were sorely afflicted with the Pestilence through the corruption of the Air, and with Famin for want of Corn. All these things not∣withstanding (such was the cruelty, obstinancy, and perverseness of this People) could not restrain them from violating the most Sacred and holy things
of the Temple: insomuch as Iohannes Giscalenus had a full determination to have destroyed it, but that he was prevented by the Romans. About this time was the Feast of the Passeover, and it fell upon the four∣teenth day of April, being the Sabbath; to the Celebration whereof, there resorted to Ierusalem about three hundred thousand Iewes. These the Ene∣my gave way to enter into the City; but considering their present necessity for want of Victuals, upon a suddain drew up their Forces, and so straitly beleaguered them, that all this huge multitude was (as it were) within the Walls, where partaking of the former misery, they either did by the Plague or Famin. Whence may be perceived the marvellous Providenc of God, that even on the same day, and in the very same place, where but eight and thirty years before, our Saviour Christ suffered, the Authors of such cruelty suffered a most just and severe revenge. Now as the Army of the Romans lay upon the North of the City, Titus drew out a Band of six hundred Horse to ride about, to behold and view the Walls of the Town: but as he was in this manner wondring at the sumptuouses of the City, the Jewes in great multitudes slipt out at a Postern-gate, and set upon him so fiercely, that they endangered his Person, being without Armour; and had he not with great difficulty broke through them, and recovered the Tower of the Romans, he had bin there slain. But presently upon this, seng the danger, he besieged the City in three parts; himself, a the Emperour of the Army, built a Castle about some two Furlongs from the City▪  against the Tower Psehina, the other part of the Army was the Tower Hiieus, not far from the Garden of the Resurrection, and the third part had their Castle in the Mount of Olives, some five Furlns or thereabouts from the City. Then did he build Bulrks, make Engis, and wonderful Devices, for the battering of the Walls; and combining himself with some of the Iews, upon the seventh day of the second Month, which answereth to the Month of May, with great difficulty and much labour entred the first Wall, which lay upon the North, and won Mount Bzeth and Neapolis. Upon the twelfth of the same Month (which was the Saath day) he entred the second Wall, which divided the Suburbs▪ but this was again the same day recovered by the virtue of the Jews, so that the Jewes were constrained to fight upon the Sabbath day, according to the Propy of our Saviour Christ, Matt. 24. But after, upon the sixteenth of this Moth of May, the Romans again recovered this Wall, and kept it in their own custody. Within a while after, in the Month of June, (about this time the Famin growing intolerable within the Town) Titus, in the space of three day, compassed in the whole City of Jerusalem with a Wall, and Towers and Castles, lest any of the Jewes should fly to sav temselves. Thus was the Prophecy of our Saviour Christ fulfilled, Thy  shall com∣pass.
thee about and hem thee in on every side. Iosephus was now in the City, and walking upon the Walls, earnestly intreated the Jewes to desist, and no longer to oppose the Romans, but this was so hateful a speech to many, that they began to fling Darts at him. And although at this time the extremity of the Famin was so sore, that many died for want of sustenance, yet all perswasions were in vain; and such was the Calamity, that as well those as went out, as those that continued in the City, were in like danger of their lives; for they were either slain by the Enemy, or else by the Pestilence and Famin; common Injuries, and unmerciful Outrages still attending upon War. Their Misery did rather increase than at all lesson it self; for the jealousie of Treason, the hope of Riches and the madness of the Seditious, distracted the minds of the Citizens with continual fears, and filled the Streets full of Murther and daily spectacles of lamentable Tragedies: The Markets were unfrequented with Corn, the Victuals with Violnce consumed and taken from the true owners. And if it chanced that some one had more than would serve his turn, though he dwelt in a fair and stately Building, yet the remotest Room and most unfrequented he made his Tabernacle, and that little which was left, with great parcimony he consumed, together with his life, till both were ended. Those that were Fathers and Senators of the People (though before served and attended with reverence and great state) in this confusion were glad of a small morsel, though with much contention. The Wife was not ashamed to take away the Meat from her Husband, nor the Children from their Parents, nor the Mothers from their Infants: and if it hapned that in any house the Seditious seemed to smell food, with violence they took it, ransack'd the rooms round about, whilest the Master thereof was made a laughing-stock and mournful Spectator of those mischiefs. But according to the condition of Souldiers, whose natural disposition is to be violent, without any regard either of Sex or Kindred, committed daily out∣rages. So that here you might have seen the Mothers weeping over their dying Infants, whilst their husbands were massacred in the streets by the Seditious. The increase of days were the increase of Torments, and the daily wants of such as were in Power, being unaccustomed to such evils, caused them to in∣vent new means to satisfie their desire, and practice unusual Torments, for no other purpose but to find out Sustenance: yea, such was their insatiable irst of blood, that they spared not him whom but now gave them all he had, and lest he should live to cumber the City, either hang him up by the heels till he died, or else pulled out his Entrails with a sharp Iron. Those that went out in the Night-time when the Romans were asleep, to gather herbs, the Se∣ditious would meet, and with violence take what they had got from them: And though with tears and lamentations, and prayers upon their knees, they
intreated but for one part, a small moiety of that which a little before they had got with danger of their Lives, yet they would not give it them, and scap't fairly if they went away with Life. These Insolencies were com∣mitted by the common Souldiers, upon such as were the meaner sort of People. But for the rest that were either Honourable or Rich, they be∣came a Prey to the Captains and Commanders, some accused as Traitors, and that they would have betrayed the City to the Romans; others as Fugi∣tives, that they would forsake the City; most under pretence of one crime or other, despoiled of that they had. And they whom Iohn had thus oppres∣sed, were entertained of Simon, and whom Simon had injured, they were en∣tertained, by Iohn; both drunk the blood of the miserable Citizens like Wa∣ter, so that the desire of Rule was the cause of their dissention, the concord of their evil and cruel actions. There was an infinite number that perished in this City by Famin, inso∣much as houses were filled with the bodies of Infants and Children. The Angle-gate was thrust full of dead corps. The young Men that remained walked up and down the City like Images of Death. The old Men were destroyed by the Pestilence, the contagion of which disease taking away their Senses they became Mad. And of such as died among the Seditious, their Wives or kindred had not room nor time to bury them, but as they were putting them into the Grave, they also dyed. Yet for all this, amongst this Miserable Society, there was no Weeping, no complaining, no deplo∣ring of their necessities; for the violence of the Famin having dryed up their radical moisture, the fear of grief was taken from them: and such as had most cause to lament, and were most pricked with the sting of sorrow, before they could utter their grief died, the beholders not shedding a Tear: so that through the whole City there was a still silence, and a thick mist of Death and Destruction didfully possess the same. But the Seditious were much more cruel than these were oppressed with Calamity and Sorrow; for some opened the graves of the Dead, and taking out their Bodies thrust them thorow with their Swords; others to try the sharpness of the Edge of their Weapons, would fall upon those that were yet alive, and when they had slain them, go away laughing at their pleasure. So that, as Iosephus saith, there was scarce any mischief under the Sun, but was both practised and tollerated in this City. To conclude, by Sedition the Romans conquered the City, and Sedition conquered the Romans, All love and modesty, through this extream and intolerable Famin, be∣came utterly extinct, and the dearest Friends would kill one another for a crust of bread; the fairest Lady commit open Adultery for a little sustenance. Their food was extraordinary, and such as men did loath and hate; some would feed upon Snails and Worms, others of old hay chop'd small; many eat Corn either unground or made into Bread: some pluckt the Meat from the spit
raw, others with their teeth gnaw'd off the leather off their Shields; and that very mouth which cried, Crucifie him, Crucifie him, let his Blood be upon us and our Children, was constrained to feed upon three sorts of Dung, that is to say, Doves dung, Oxe dung, and Mans dung. Moreover, many were constrained, for meer necessity, to feed upon the dead Bodies of such, as a little before Died, partly by Famin, partly by the Pestilence. And to con∣clude, for very madness eat up their Gold: for some of them being taken as they were flying for their safety, by the Romans, in their Excrement was found Gold, of which the Souldiers hearing, and supposing that all the Iews had been full of Gold, thorow covetousness of that gain, in one night killed 2000 of them, and ript up their Bellies; and had not Titus Caesar, by a severe Edict, forbidden these cruel and unheard of slaughters, there had been many more slain. To make an end of this unheard of Famin, I will repeat one memorable Example out of Josephus, of an Outrage which a Mother committed even upon her own Son. There was a Woman of the Inhabitants beyond Jordan, whose name was Mary, of the stock of Eleazar, and of the Town Bethezor, which signifies, the House of Hysop; she was of a Noble and rich Family, and amongst others, went to Jerusalem, in hopes of Safety, where she was like∣wise oppressed with the misery of this Siege; for as soon as she had brought all her Riches and Substance into the City, which she had before beyond Jordan, this Famin growing greater and greater upon the Inhabitants, the Seditious perceiving that this Woman was well furnished both with Riches and Sustenance, on a suddain set upon her house, despoiled her of her Substance, took away her Sustenance, and utterly deprived her of all means to live. She being pricked with the misery and calamity of the Times, saw it little prevailed to strive, wherefore with Tears, upon her knees, she intreated that she might have but some small part of that they had taken from her, to main∣tain her self and her Son with life; but the Seditious gave little ear to her intreaties: wherefore, being moved to extream anger, she daily cursed, with contumelious words, those barbarous Villains, that had thus rob'd her of all her means: but when she saw that neither Anger nor Intreaty could pro∣cure Mercy, and through the Town not one morsel of food was to be found, partly prest with an extream necessity, partly with a furious rage, beyond all nature and compassion, laid violent hands upon her own Son, and ac∣counted an untimely Death more honorable, than that he should live to be a Prey to the Seditious, or a Slave to the Romans. The Body of this Infant she Rosted and Eat: the Soldiers of the Town being prest with hunger, smelling the Meat, supposing, that as in former times, they should have found plenty, with violence broke in upon her, and look what she had provided, greedily consumed, and compelled her to fetch the rest; which she did, and when they were well satisfied, she shewed them
the Head and Feet of her Son: which they perceiving, loathing the in∣humanity of the fact, with dejected countenance departed. This Famin was so extream, that one measure of grain was worth a Talent, that is 600 Crowns. But the Romans all this while did abound with plenty of all things, and to vex the Iewes, they shewed them the great abundance of their store, for the neighbouring Provinces sent them supplies. After this Famin, there followed an extreme Plague, procured partly through the stench of the Bodies that lay unburied, partly by the multitude of Massacres which daily happned, that (as Egisus writeth) within the com∣pass of eleven Weeks, there were carried out by one Gate of the City, 111000 dead Bodies; yet could they not empty the City, but that they were constrained either to bury them at the Publick charge, or else cast them over the Walls into the Ditches of the City: which when Titus saw, and that the putrefaction of the Bodies swam upon the brim of the Ditch, (for it was full with dead carcasses) fetching a deep sigh, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, he said, God is my witness, this is not my fault, but the punishment of God upon them. The City being thus pestered with Sedition, Famin, Pestilence, and War, was made now a ready prey to the Enemy: and that they might make a fnal end of their miseries, Titus caused the Engins of Battery to be brought against the Walls; and upon the first day of the fourth Month (which an∣swers to our Iune) he took the third Wall, which lay upon the North. Upon the fourth of Iune after, though with great labour, he took the Tower of Antonia, and in it placed a Garison. Upon the seventeenth day of the fourth Month, which was a Fast to the Iewes, Iosephus going up to the top of that Tower, made an Oration to Giscalinus and the rest, to disswade them from their Rebellion, and cease to oppose the Romans, but this little prevailed. Up∣on the twentieth day of Iuly, the Iewes burnt a part of the Porch of the Tem∣ple, towards the North, not far from the Tower of Antonia, lest that the Ro∣mans, having got that Hold, should with the greater facility have conquered the Temple also. Two days after, the Romans destroyed the whole Porch with Fire, and the Jewes helpt to pull it down with their hands: this was none of the three Porches, but a Bulwark of the Temple. Upon the 25 of July, the Jews filled the Porch towards the West with Pitch and Bittume, and then made as though they meant to fly and leave the City, which some of the Romans perceiving, without any command of their Captains, put Scaling Ladders to the Tower, and began to Assault it, but when they were most busie, the Jewes on a suddain put fire to the Pitch, and burnt them most mi∣serably; insomuch as Titus pittied them to see their Extremity, although they were such as did contrary to his command. Upon the last day of this Month they took the North Gate, which lay towards the rising of the Sun, and close by the brook Cedron; this they burnt down with fire.
Upon the third of August, Titus commanded to fire the Gate of the Tem∣ple, that was all covered over with Gold and Silver; by this Gate the Romans made a breach into the Temple, which e're this had been prophaned by the Iews: while this gate was a burning▪ the Iews stood astonished, and not one of them resisted the Romans. Caesar and all his Army laboured three days to quench this Fire, after which he called a Council to determine wha he should do with the Temple, it was so rich and sumptuous, that he would fain have left it as an Ornament for the Roman Empire. But the Iewes ha∣ving got a little breathing, made new incursions upon the Romans, by which means they could not determine thereof. The 6th of August, the Souldiers of Titus, without command of their Captains, fired the Temple, just upon that day which Nebuchadnezzar before time had destroyed it, as Iosephus wit∣nesseth, li. de. Bell. 6. c. 26. 27. Caesar would fain have saved this Temple for the sumptuousness of it, and beckoned to his Souldiers to have quencht the fire, but they, partly prest on with desire of wealth, partly being prickt on with fury and madness, gave no ear to his speeches, but com∣mitted most cruel Massacres, without either regard of age or sex: So that the cries of the Slaughtered, the sound of the Roman Trumpets, the fierce resist∣ance of the Seditious, and the Fire furiously burning, represented a most horri∣ble spectacle: The ground below was covered with dead bodies, many in des∣peration threw themselves into the fire, 6000 were burnt in the same Gate, whither they fled for refuge, and the Priests most cruelly massacred as they were in the Temple of Ierusalem, the mirror of the World being consumed and spoiled with Fire and Sword. After these things, upon the Bridge that passeth from the Temple over the Valley into the lower Town, Titus made a Speech by an Interpreter, to the two Seditious Captains, gently intreating them to leave off their Rebel∣lion, and he would spare the City, and commit no more outrages, and such further requests as they desired should according to reason be granted them; but if they would not embrace mercy, and cease their violent resistance, they must expect no manner of compassion, but the very Law of Arms, This they contemned, and made but a mock of Caesar for all his offers; whereupon, in a great rage, he gave the signal to his Souldiers, and they went through all the City and set it one fire. The next day they won the lower City, and with fire and sword consumed the place where the Records lay, the Court and all the Princely buildings until they came to that state∣ly house of Helena, which stood in the midst of Acra, all the houses near being filled with the Bodies of the Dead, and the streets horribly defiled with the blood of those that were Slain. Within a short while after Iohan∣nes Giscalinus was taken alive and committed to prison. The inferior City being thus taken and destroyed, about the 16 day of August, Caesar began to build his Engines, and to batter the Walls of the up∣per
City, which within the space of 18 days after, with extream labour and skill, he laid flat with the Ground, (as Iosephus saith.) And upon the 7th of September, with great facility he conquered the City, the Iewes of their own accord descending from the Towers: and the Romns set upon the Walls their Ensigns, with a great Acclamation, and wasted all the City with Fire and Sword, sparing neither Men, Women, nor Children. The eighth day of the Month of September, the whole City was destroyed, and not a stone left upon a stone, but laid level with the Ground, only the three Towers that were built by Herod, which were of shining Marble (viz. Hippicus, Phaselus, and Mariamne) that future Ages, seeing the excellency of those Buildings, they might judge of the stateliness of the rest. But these also were after destroyed by Adrianus Caesar. There died by the Famin and Pestilence an innumerable number, by Fire and Sword ten hundred thousand: 2000 were found that either killed themselves, or one killed another; 7900 were taken Captives; of these, all the seditious Thieves that accused one another, were slain by Frontonius Cae∣sar. Titus freed many, 7000 were sent into Aegypt, with extreme labour to consume and dye; the Properest and most able were reserved for Tri∣umph; many were distributed through the Provinces, some were slain by the Sword, and by Beasts, for publick Spectacles; and those that were six∣teen years of Age and under, together with many other, Caesar sold, under the Crown, at thirty for a silver Penny; that as Christ was sold for thirty Pence, so thirty of them should be sold for a Penny. With the Riches of this Town Caesar triumphed, rode into Rome with two golden Chariots, built the Temple of Peace, and there put all the Plate which he found in the Tem∣ple of Ierusalem. After all this, for a full determination of those Evils, the two seditious Captians, Iohannes Giscalinus and Simon the Son of Giora, were put to most cruel deaths. Thus may we see the grievous punishment of the obstinate and ambitious, which God permitted to fall upon them for their Unthankfulness and cruel Tyranny. How the City of Jerusalem, after this Destruction by Titus Vespasian, was utterly beaten down, and defaced by Aelius Adr. Caesar, which he re-edifying, called it after his own Name, Aelia. THE City of Ierusalem being thus laid level with the ground, for the space of sixty Years lay desolate, a receptacle for Thieves and Mur∣therers, a fit place for Wolves and wild Beasts, which resorted thi∣ther to feed upon the dead Bodies. And now Time consuming their Flesh, left their Bones and Skulls to lye upon the Earth, as in a Charnel-house. Thus it continued until one Benchochab (which signifies the Son of the
Stars) born in the Town of Bethcoron, not far from Emaus, professed him∣self to be the Messiah, or Christ. The Jewes supposing this to be true, be∣cause of that saying of Numb. 24. There shall a Star rise up out of Jacob, as∣sembled themselves, to the number of many thousands, and followed him, with great Tyranny and Cruelty spoiling the Holy Land, and through all the Countrey of Judaea, committing many Outrages and Massacres. Thus they continued for the space of eighteen years, at the end of which time, Adrianus Aelianus the Emperour, hearing of those Insolencies, levied an Ar∣my, and sent them into Judaea, under the Government of Julius Severus, who, in a pitch'd field near to Bethcoron, and not far from Emaus, conquer∣ed this Benchochab or Pseudo-Messiah, and with him slew five hundred thou∣sand Jews, that were deceived by his persuasion. Now when they went to seek for the Body of this Deceiver amongst the Dead (as saith Talmudista) he was found lying with an horrible Serpent about his neck; intimating how God rejected him that would seem to imitate his Son; for even as the Serpent deceived our first Parents, so this Benchochab deceived the Jews, and for this cause they called him Becozba, that is, The Son of Lying. The num∣ber of the Jews which in the time of this War were slain, amounted to 500000 men, besides many others that perished by Pestilence and Famin. This War happened 64 years after the destruction of Jerusalem. After this second Desolation of the Jews, at the command of the Empe∣rour, (that there might be a final extirpation of the Antient City of Jerusa∣lem, and that the words of our Saviour might be fulfilled, Loe, there shall not be a stone left upon a stone, Mat. 24.) the Ruins and Foundations thereof were digged up, the Stones broken in pieces, the Ground left desolate, and the Mountains are now become barren, and overgrown with Brambles: And, that the Name thereof might utterly be forgotten, and as it were root∣ed out of the Earth, he set up a new Town, not far from the Hill Gihon, and Golgotha, where Christ was crucified; which, after he had adorned with many goodly Buildings, he called it by his own Name, Aelia. In the place of the Temple, he set up a Church, in the honour of Jupiter and Venus. Just in the place where the Holy Altar stood, he erected his own Image, up∣on a Marble Pillar, which continued until St. Hierom's time. At Bethlehem he erected the Image of Adonis, and to that he consecrated a Church. Up∣on the Gates of the City he cut Hogs in Marble, in contempt of the Jews. Then did he abjure them, That they should not come within the Walls of the City, not set Foot upon the ground near Jerusalem. This being done, (as Dion saith) he dedicated it to the honour of Jupiter Capitolinus; and only made it free for Christians and such like to be in it. This Town at this day we call Jerusalem, although it be scituated in another place, and called by another name.
Future Ages calling the Actions of precedent Times into question, pull'd a great Contempt upon this Town, and so much the rather, because Infi∣delity and other Heathenish profaneness was cherish'd within this City. So that that which a little before was set up in honour of the Emperour. Aelia∣nus, is now grown into Contempt. Wherefore Helena the Mother of Con∣stantine the Great, having command of that Empire, to give some satisfacti∣on to the Universality, caused those prophane Temples and Idols to be abo∣lished, and in their places erected others. Upon Mount Golgotha, the Church called Golgothanus: upon the Mount of Olives one, in the place of the Ascension of Christ: and Constantine her Son richly adorned the Sepul∣chre, and over it built a stately Temple, all of Polish't Marble, richly gilt with Gold, so that to this day it remains as the chief Ornament of the Town. In this mans time, the Jews with great boldness endeavoured to rebuild the Temple, just in the place where it stood before; at the commandment of the Emperour they were repelled, and in recompence of their presumption, had their Eares cut off and their Noses slit, because they had Ears and would not hear, neither obey the Commandment of our Saviour. But as the Emperour was Religious, and endeavoured to support Chri∣stianity, so his Successor Iulianus was as full of Impiety and Prophaneness; who, that he might frustrate the Prophecy of our Saviour, that Ierusalem should never be built again, in contempt caused the Iews to assemble to∣gether, and with all expedition restore it to its former glory, giving the ut∣termost of his help to their endeavours. But as they were seriously la∣bouring in this Work, of a sudden there came a great Earthquake, and look what they had built was by that quite overturned; then Fire came out of the Earth and from Heaven, which destroyed both the Matter and the Work∣men. And that the Iews nor any Philosphers might impute it to a Na∣tural Cause, there was seen in the Heavens a Bloody Cross, and pon their clothes Crosses shining like Stars, which the Iews could by no means wipe off, yet this little prevailed: A second time they attempted, and as before, a second Earthquake hapned, with a storm of Wind, which came with such extream violence, that all the stuff which they had heaped together for this purpose was utterly blown away and destroyed. So that of force they were constrained to leave off, and acknowledge▪ that Christ, whom their Forefathers had Crucified, was the true Messiah. Greg. Nazianzen and Hierom report, That nevertheless the Iews, even to this day, although it cost them much money, come yearly to the place where Ierusale stood, and upon the day of the Destruction thereof, weep over it. Such was their affection unto this City. But these evils were purged with a sudden Invasion (for no crying In∣juries nor prophane Insolencies against God pass unpunished, but that then or soon after, a just revenge falls upon them) for Cosro▪ Emperour of the
Persians, whose Impudency and Impiety was so great, that he would be worshipped as a God, about the year of our Lord 615, besieged this Town, took it, and put to death 90000 Christians, carried the Patriarch thereof, together with many others, away Captive. But Heraclius the Emperor, to punish him for his Pride and Cruelty, set upon Persia, and with Fire and Sword destroyed the Country not far from Nineveh, and went away with an honourable Victory. Seroes also, the only begotten Son of Cosroes, but a little before Invading the Kingdom, kill'd his own Father in Prison, restored the Patriarch, and the rest of the Captives which his Father had taken, to Heraclius: and about the seventh year after he had Warred up∣on Persia, he returned to Aelia▪ with great Pomp. Not long after, in the year 637, Haumar the Chief Prince of the Saracens, which was the third from Mahomet, with a great Army afflicted Syria and Iudaea, conquered their Countries, and in his Victories used great Tyranny and cruelty. Within two years after he won Aelia, which had maintained a long and sharp Siege; neither would Zacharias the Patriarch give it up, till he was compelled thereto by extream Famin, and soon after died with Grief. Thus the Town continued for the space of 450 years in the hands of the Saracens. Then in the year 1012, Caliphas Sultan of Egypt, won it, beat down the Walls, destroyed the Temple which the Emperor Constantine had built, and made havock of all things. Presently upon this, the Turks, which came out of Sythia by the Caspian Mountains, won the City, and drave thence the Saracens. Thus we may see that the Saracens and Turks, though they were both of one Religion, yet for the Country of the Iews fought one against another, and compelled the Christians to pay them Tribute for the fourth part of the City, wherein the Sepulchre of our Lord stood, being again restored by the Emperor Constantine after the Destruction of Caliphas. The Christians being weary of this Tribute, and of the oppression of these Infidels, became sutors to Pope Vrban, the second of that name, for their de∣livery; who in the year 1094 assembled a councel at Clearemont in France, and by the instigation of one Peter the Hermit, stirred up the hearts of divers Christian Princes and Lords to make a Croysado; so that 10000 brave and well mounted Souldiers went into the Holy Land, and for a token of their War, bore red Crosses upon their Arms. In the same year there was a great blazing Star seen in the West, and after that followed a great Plague for the space of two years through the World: this nevertheless hindred them not in their Design, but that they went their intended Journey, won the City of Aelia from the Saracens, delivered the Christians from their Bondage and Tax, and chose Godfrey of Lorrain Earl of Bulloin, King thereof, whom they anointed in the Temple of the Holy Se∣pulchre; but he refused to be Crowned with a Crown of Gold, saying, That it ill beseemed him to be called King of Ierusalem (the true King where∣of
was Christ) or to sit crowned with Gold, in the place where he was crowned with Thorns that was the Son of the ever-living God: and then chose Arnolphus of Rhodes Patriarch. In the Month of October, the same year, a blazing Star of a marvellous bigness appeared towards the South: it seemed to be like a waving Sword, foreshewing, no doubt, the Destruction of all those that went about to re∣establish this Earthly Ierusalem. Immediatly after the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, all the Christians of the East Countries, upon Candlemas-day, came out of Syria, but especially out of Antiochia, to Ierusalem, and in the Temple of the holy Sepulchre consecrated their Bishops and Choristers, and with one consent sung Illuminare Ierusalem. They took also all the Cities, Castles, and Villages, and over them set Bishops; created four Principalities, one at Ieru∣salem, another at Antiochia, a third at Edissa, a fourth at Tripoly. Also cer∣tain Earldoms and Baronies, as at Brio, Zidon, Caesaria,, Galilee, Ioppa, and Ascalon. All these were appointed to pay Tribute to the King of Jeru∣salem. All this was done in the year of our Lord, 1099. No sooner were these News published to the World, but there was an uni∣versal Croysado through all Christendom, for the conquering and winning of the rest of the Holy Land, but before they could get thither, they were either slain by the Grecians, and other Nations, or else died through Famin and Thirst: so that in them was fulfilled the Prophecy of Zacharias, cap. 12. 3▪ where it is said, It shall happen that I will make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all People: all they that lift it up shall be torn, though all the People of the Earth be gathered together against it. And verse 9. And in that day will I seek to destroy all Nations that come against Jerusalem. This year 1100 died Godfrey King of Jerusalem, of a Fever, upon the Eighteenth day of July, when he had reigned scarce a year, and was buried in the Temple of Mount Calvary. After him succeeded his Brother Baldwin, the first of that name, and the se∣cond King of Jerusalem. This Man reigned Eighteen years in Jerusalem, and being overcom by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt, after the loss of thirteen thousand Christians, he had much ado to escape with life. Within a short time after he died without Issue. Baldwin the second succeded his Uncle, and was the third King of Jerusalem. He began his reign Anno 1118. This man overcame the Turks: and the King of Damascus had Issue only one daughter named Milesent, whom he married to the Earl of Angiers, and gave with her the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and died without heir Male, in the year 1131. Fulco, in right of his Wife, succeeded his Father in Law, and was the fourth King of Jerusalem. This Fulco was Brother to the King of England, he Reigned thirteen years, fought many worthy Battels against the Turks, put 3000 of their men to the Sword, took many of them Prisoners, and carried
them to Jerusalem. After that, as he was hunting the Hare in Acon, riding speedily, he fell from his Horse, and was sorely bruised, whereof he died, and left two Sons called Baldwin and Almerick. Baldwin the third was the fifth King of Jerusalem, and succeeded his Father, he won the City of Ascalon, he rebuilt the Town of Boza, (which had been destroyed) placed there certain Knights Templers; he lost the City of Edissa to the Saracens, where many Christians were cruely slain. And having reigned nineteen years, he died without Issue. After him succeeded his Brother Almerick, who was the sixth King of Jerusalem. In the time of this King, the Sultan of Egypt gave a great over∣throw to the Knights Templers; which he seeking to revenge, invaded Egypt with a great Army, besieged the great City of Alcair, but to small purpose; wherefore returning back to Jerusalem, he shortly after died, when he had reigned twelve years: he left behind him three children, a Son called Baldwin, and two daughters, Sibella and Isabella. Baldwin the fourth succeeded his Father, and was the seventh King of Jerusa∣lem; who abusing his government, was struck with a Leprosie, with the contagion of which disease he died miserably in the twenty fifth year of his Age, having reigned thirteen years. Baldwin, the fifth of that name, the on∣ly begotten Son of his Sister Sibil, by his consent was chosen his Successor, a youth of nine years old, his Fathers name was William Mountferrat, Earl of March, who dying, his Mother married one Guy Earl of Lusignan, to whom Baldwin committed the protection of the Kingdom, and of his young Kins∣man till he came to mans estate. But this young man, within seven years after the Death of his Uncle, died sitting at his Table, not without sus∣picion of Poyson. Guy his Protector, by the perswasion of his Wife, and at the Instigation of the Jerosolimits, took upon him the Government; But Raimond Earl of Tripoly was his great adversary, for that Baldwin the 4th for his exceeding pride, at the Instigation of that Guy, had displaced him of all his Offices and Titles in the Commonwealth. These two striving for the Kingdom, it hapned that Guy was charged with his Kinsmans death, un∣der which pretence Raymond made War against him. During these troubles, Saladine Sultan of Egypt, taking advantage of this opportunity, made War upon them both, and with great facility conquered the Kingdom, and de∣stroyed Jerusalem. In this year 1187, there hapned so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that at Noon day the Stars were plainly to be seen. Soon after this, Raimond and Guy were both taken Prisoners, and thirty thousand Christians cruelly put to the Sword. After this, the Saracens sacked the Town, threw the Bells out of the Steeples, made Stables of the Churches; only the Temple on Mount Golgotha stood untouch'd: for the Turks and Saracens honour Christ as a great Prophet.
And thus the new Kingdom of the Christians in Jerusalem ended, which was upon the second day of October, in the year 1187, after it had continued in their possession 88 years. During the continuance of this Kingdom, there were many horrible Visions, and strange Signs and Wonders seen both in Heaven, on Earth, and in the Air; foreshewing (no doubt) that God was not well pleased with their actions, which sought to restore that Kingdom of Jerusalem. For, My Kingdom (saith Christ) is not of this World. And although after that, there were many Kings that by all possible means endeavoured to recover and restore the same, and for that purpose have leavied many great Armies, and undertaken many tedious Journies; yet all their councels and determinations came to nothing, so that God, so often as they undertook any such Expedition, either stayed their Armies, oppressed them with War, or else plagued them with Famin, in such an ex∣tream measure, that with very hunger they have been constrained to eat their Horses. Frederick Barbarossus may be an Example of these Calamities; who with a great Army making an Expedition to Jerusalem, as he was travel∣ling through Asia minor, his Horse started, and flung him into the River, where he died miserably e're he could be saved. Many other Princes besides, in the like enterprise came to the like ends; for they were either destroy∣ed by the Barbarians, with the loss of thousands of their men cruely slain, or utterly destroyed with unnatural Diseases or untimely Deaths. Now when the Emperor Frederick, the second of that name, had besieged and brought to great misery the Sultan of Egypt, and the Knights Templers had done the like to Damieta; Corderio the Sultans Son beat down the Walls of Jerusalem, and had it not been for the great lamentations and earnest Entreaties of the Christians, he would have destroyed the City; but for their sakes he left standing Solomon's Temple, and the Temple of the ho∣ly Sepulchre; for at this time Christians inhabit in them. Within a while after, about the Year 1228. Frederick, the second of that Name, Emperour of Rome, went to the Holy Land with a great Army, and came to Ptolomais, otherwise called Acon, where staying a while, he made a League with the Sultan of Aegypt for ten years, regained Ierusalem without drawing Sword, and was there crowned in the Year 1229. keeping at that time in Ierusalem a Royal Easter. This man fortified the Christi∣ans with a Garrison, rebuilt Nazareth and Ioppa, and so returned into Italy. In the Year 1246, Cassanus King of the Tartars, being persuaded by the Sultan, with a great Army invaded Iudaea, won Ierusalem, caused the Christians to be cruelly slain, beat down the Holy Sepulchre even to small pieces, and left but little standing. It was after this destroyed by Tamer∣lain King of the Tartars, and by Mahomet, the second of that Name, Em∣perour
of the Turks. But the Monks had leave to build up the holy Sepul∣chre again, for the which, they payed to the Sultan or his Deputy a yearly Tribute. In the year of our Lord 1516, Selymus Emperour of the Turks, about the twenty fourth day of August, near to Damascus, overcame Campson Gaurus Sultan of Aegypt, in a cruel War, and put to death many thousands of his Men; and the Sultan himself seeking to save his Life by Flight, was mise∣rably slain. This Selymus conquered the Holy Land, Syria, Damascus, and all the Countries thereabouts; and as he went through Iudaea, leaving his Army at Gaza, with a few of his Souldiers he went to Ierusalem, that he might see with his Eyes that place which was made so famous by the an∣cient Writers, and was so often mentioned in the Old and New Testa∣ment. But when he came, he found nothing but a ruinate and waste place, barren and rude to look upon, inhabited by a few poor Christians, and they also held in great Contempt and Bondage, paying a great Tribute to the Sultan of Aegypt, for their Liberty and holy Sepulchre, as P. Iovius writeth. But after that Selymus in that place had done his Offerings and Sacrifices to his God Mahomet, seeing the Priests and Christians press'd with extream Poverty, out of his singular Mercy and Compassion, gave them a large and sumptuous Gift, when he had stayed but one day and one night in the Town. The next morning before day he went with all expedition to his Army at Gaza, and from thence into Aegypt, where he besieged the great and famous City Alcaire, and in the year 1517. took it, conquered all the Country, utterly extirpated the Sultan, and went away with an honourable Victory and rich Booty. From this year even till now, the Town of Aelia or Ierusalem is under the Jurisdiction of the Turks. Thus may we see how often, and with what miserable Calamities this City hath been afflicted, even since the first Destruction by Vespasian; which makes evident the great Judgment of God not only upon the Iews, but also upon the Earth where they inhabited, for their Infidelity and un∣merciful Cruelty. The Description of Jerusalem and the Scituation thereof as it is now in these times. THE former Incursions and common Desolations leaving this Town ruined and spoiled for want of Inhabitants, it became a Desart and forsaken place; only some few Christians, either out of the zeal of Religion, or for vulgar Ostentation, to shew that there had been a Town, dwelt there: and thus it continued until the year 1542. at which time, Solyman the Great Turk, either in respect of the strength of the place,
or in hope of profit, or else to get himself a Name, with great Cost and Labour re-edified it, set up many stately Buildings and sumptuous Houses, beautified it with two costly Temples, the one the Temple of Solo∣mon, and the other the holy Sepulchre; enlarged the extent thereof, and seated it upon high Hills. After all this, compass'd it about with a spaci∣ous and thick Wall, and upon that placed many strong and stately Towers, wherein there stands eight Gates, viz. the Fish Gate, the old Gate, S. Stephens Gate, (so called, because they say S. Stephen went out by that Gate when he was stoned) the Angle Gate, the Dung Gate, the Sheep Gate, the Golden and Fountain Gates. Thus the ancient City, and that which the Emperour Adrian built, being both destroyed, in another place is set up again. So that between both, this new City standeth, and the first City begins to be again in∣habited. Of the Temple of the Holy Sepulchre. THIS Temple lieth upon the West within this new Town, at first fair∣ly built by the Emperour Constantine, but destroyed by Caliphas Sul∣tan of Egypt: then by the Emperours of Constantinople rebuilt, which con∣tinueth to this day. It is round in the proportion, adorned with seventy nine Pillars thirty foot long; the Wideness, by the Diameter (besides the Pillars) is seventy three Feet, leaded above, and upon the top of the Roof standeth a Lanthorn, by which the Light cometh in: This Lanthorn is very curiously glazed. In the middle standeth the holy Sepulchre. To this joyneth the Church in Mount Golgotha, and serveth instead of a Quire. It standeth something lower, but all under one Roof. The place where the holy Sepulchre standeth is four square, eight foot long, and eight broad, hewn out of a Rock, and covered with Marble; there is a little door in the East part of it very low, by which men go into it, and within that the Sepulchre it self standeth upon the North side, made of gray Marble, 3 hand∣fuls high, and 8 foot long. There are no Windows for light to come to it, but over there hangeth continually nine Lamps burning, whereby it recei∣veth Light. The Vault of this Sepulchre is divided with a Wall; the outward is both of the same Proportion and Length as the inward, but that which is without seemeth to be an Entry to the inner Cave where Christ was buried: and there (as some say) even to this day is found a piece of the Stone which the Angel rolled from the Grave before the Resurrection; the other part of the Stone (howsoever it came there) lyes upon Mount Sion. But some think that the Armenians carried it thither, because upon it they have built an Altar. In this inner Cave there hangs nine Lamps to give light unto them that enter in by the East; so that in the inner and outer Vault there standeth eighteen Lamps. The Mount whereon Christ was crucified seemeth to stand upon a Rock of Stone, whitish and something blushing.
It is distant from the Holy Sepulchre a hundred and thirty foot. The place where the Cross stood was an hard Rock, eighteen steps in the As∣cent, and answereth to nine and twenty feet. The hole where the Cross stood is about the roundness of a mans head in Latitude; and if a man might believe the Monks thereabouts, they say also, that in that place is to be seen the colour of our Saviours Blood even to this day. Upon the left hand of this there stands an Altar made of Marble, and over that a sumptuous Chappel, paved, and covered with polish'd Marble, gilt and adorned with refulgent Gold, the Walls whereof are very curiously wrought and gilded. In the Church, upon Mount Golgotha, they also shew part of a Pillar naturally black, speck'd with red Spots, where they say Christ was whip'd, and make the Vulgar believe that these Specks are the drops of Blood that fell from him. The other part of this Column was carried to Constantinople, as it was thought. In this Church, Godfrey, first Christian King of Ierusalem, and the rest of his Successors lie buried. Of the Temple of Solomon, as it is at this day. THIS Temple lieth towards the East, and was built by the Christians just in the same place where the former Temple stood, at the time when the City was rebuilt and enlarged. The body thereof is very high and spatious, and built of polish'd Marble, adorned with most exquisite and curious Workmanship, very artificial and glorious both within and without, insomuch that the polished Stones cast a singular beautiful and resplendent Lustre. Above it is covered with Lead, and was built up at the cost and labour of the Grecians; in the Roof whereof, the Turks place an half Moon, as they usually do in all such Churches wherein they come and have Authority. The Turks and Saracens have this Temple in great Reverence and Devotion, they adorn it (according to their Custom) with divers artificial Pictures and Emblems. They will suffer no Christians to enter into it, nor any Jews, upon pain of Death. And if it happens that at any time they go into it, they first wash themselves with Water very clean, then put off their Hose and Shoos, and so go bare-foot. This Temple they call the holy Rock, and in the body thereof there hangeth seven hundred Lamps, which burn Night and Day. In the midst hereof there standeth a certain little Rock, every where indented with Iron, near to which, not any of the Saracens or Infidels dare to approach or touch, although there come many very far to visit it: for they believe that there were many memorable and worthy things done in that Rock: they think that Melchisedeck the first Priest of the great God, offered Bread and Wine upon it, Genes. 14. and that here the Patriarch Iacob saw the Ladder which reached from Heaven to Earth, Gen. 28. which indeed hapned not in Ie∣rusalem, but in Bethel, as the Scriptures witness. Further they believe, that
upon this Stone David saw the Angel of the Lord standing with a shaken Sword when he struck the City with the Pestilence, 2 Sam. 24. and that the Priests of the old Testament offered upon this stone their Sacrifices to the Lord, which were devoured with Fire from Heaven. All which things do utterly differ from holy Scripture. The Jews also are of Opinion, That the Prophet Ieremy, about the time of the Captivity of Babylon, in this Stone hid the Ark of the Covenant, until such time as the Lord brought the People back again from the Cap∣tivity: which is contrary also to the Books of the holy Scripture; for, 2 Mach. 2. it is said, it was hid in the Mount Nebo, where Moses stood when he saw the whole Land of Canaan. Also the Turks say, that Christ sate upon this stone when Simeon took him in his arms and blessed him. Here also he sate in the midst of the Doctors when he was but twelve years of Age, Luk. 2. which also differeth from the Scripture; for this was not the Body of the Temple, but in the middle Court, or Solomons Porch, which sometimes was taken for the Temple, because it joyned to it. And divers Circumstances of the Scripture do seem to make this evident, because here Christ taught, and here the People usually met together, as appear∣eth, Iosh. 10. and Psal. 72. About the Temple of Ierusalem there is a fair Plain, much resembling our Church-yards, all paved with marble stone. To this there is adjoyning a fair Church covered with Lead, and was somtimes called Solomons Porch; but after the Christians had won Ierusalem, they gave it the Name of St. Maries. The Turk keeps burning in this daily eight hundred Lamps, and it is much greater than that of Solomons Temple. The Sultan of Aegypt also about an hundred years before, built a little Church or Moscho close by Solomons Temple, wherein are continually burning eighty eight Lamps. There is a Vault under the Temple of the blessed Virgin Mary, of such an extraordinary Greatness, that six hundred Horse may easily be placed in it. And thus we may see the Temple of Solomon and City of Ierusalem not only to be in the power of the Turks, but also prophaned with the blasphemous Doctrine of Mahomet. And also we may here behold the Abomination of Desolation standing in the holy place, where sometime was the Ark of the Covenant, Dan. 9. Mat. 24. and the Prophecy of Iere∣my is fully finished, cap. 19. This place shall be unclean like unto the place of Tophet, where they did sacrifice to the Host of Heaven, and unto other strange Gods. Of other Buildings within the City of Aelia, which is now called Jerusalem. MOunt Sion is placed toward the South of Ierusalem, where even at this day the Monks undertake to shew the Ruines of David's Tow∣er,
the Sepulchres of the Kings of Israel, and many other holy places. But P. Orosius, and other Historians write, How in the time of Adrian Caesar there happened a great Earthquake, in such a terrible manner, that the Moun∣tain of Sion, with the Sepulchre of David, fell down, and were utterly de∣faced. Further, all true Historians do write, That Adrian the Emperour did so much deface the City, that he left not a stone standing upon a stone; nay, not a whole stone, but all were broken into small pieces; and yet notwith∣standing Pilgrims are so mad and blind, that they go thither with great pains to seek those holy Places, where, when they come, with the expence of a great deal of time, in recompence of their pains, are made a laughing∣stock to the Kings of Ierusalem, and find nothing but feigned and suppo∣sed holy Places and Buildings: since the words of our Saviour manifest, That there shall not be a stone left upon a stone, which shall not be broken to pieces. And Borchardus the Monk saith, That the Romans caused the Temple and other Princely Buildings, together with the Mountains, to be thrown down, and cast into the Vallies, with which being filled, there remaineth not so much as an Emblem of the old City. From whence may evidently ap∣pear, That those Places which are now shewn to Pilgrims by the Monks of Ierusalem, are merely suborned and feigned, on purpose to deceive them, and get their money. They are very simple therefore that go to Ierusalem, to seek their Salvation in such places. And as for the Sepulchre (as is afore∣said) the Tartars beat it all in pieces; so that this Monument of our Lord is not to be found upon the Earth. Wherefore our Saviour Christ is no more to be sought among the dead, but in the Sacred Monument of his ho∣ly Word, for there he hath promised to make evident his Divine Pre∣sence, &c. Of the Sects that are in and about the Temple of the Holy Sepulchre. IN and about the Church which is built over the holy Sepulchre, upon Mount Calvary, there are at this day many of divers Nations and Countreys which inhabit, of divers Opinions and Religions. And al∣though they differ in material Points of their Faith, yet would they be all Christians: of which number, there are some Latines, Greeks, Abissines, Ar∣menians, Gregorians, Nestorians, Surians, and Iacobins. The Latines for the most part are such as we call Franciscan Monks, Ob∣servants, or Friars. These have the keeping of the holy Sepulchre, and look to it very diligently; where sometimes they make a certain number of Knights of the Noble Order of St. Iohns Templers, with many Ceremonies and great Solemnities. These Knights are girt with a Sword all gilt, hang∣ing in a red Velvet girdle; a Chain of gold is put upon them worth about an hundred Hungarian Duckats, at the end whereof hangs a Ierusalem
Cross of gold. This kind of Cross also they are permitted to wear upon their Arms and Cloaths; then have they a pair of gilt Spurs with Velvet tyings. But before they are admitted into this Order, they must swear up∣on the holy Sepulchre to maintain and defend the Doctrine of the Pope. The Graecians that are there be also Monks, and do inhabit within the Temple of the holy Sepulchre; but they have the keeping of the place where our Saviour Christ was crucified, and differ from the Romanists. For they believe first, That the holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father and not the Son. Secondly, they give the Sacraments in both kinds. Thirdly, they hold not the Pope to be Head of the Church. Fourthly, they deny Purgatory and Prayer for the dead. Fifthly, they sing Mass in their own Language, that every man may understand it, but they observe seven Sa∣craments as the Romanists do. They teach men to pray to, and call upon Saints; they yearly observe two strict fasting days, and eat no Flesh upon Saturdays. The rest of the Graecians that are through the East parts, leave Marriage free, as well for the Clergy as Laity, and condemn the Latin Priests be∣cause they marry not. They allow no graven Images in their Churches, but in some places of the Churches they have fair painted Pictures hanging. They approve not the Pope, but have a Patriarch for their high Bishop, which Patriarch is greatly reverenced, and much honoured in Constan∣tinople. The Abissins be such as are of Prester Iohn's Government: their Com∣plexion is brown, their Habitation is in the Temple upon Mount Calvary, on the East side of the Church door: They also approve not the Pope, but allow Priests to marry, and give the Sacrament in both kinds; yet there are many Sects and Opinions among them, forbearing those Meats forbid∣den in the Old Testament; they circumcise both Male and Female, which the Jews do not; they observe our Saturday for their Sabbath; they bap∣tise their Children with Fire, of which I will speak more hereafter, in the description of the Town of Saba. The Armenians are Christians, and come out of Armenia; their Dwel∣ling is in a Chappel upon Mount Sion, near to St. Iames his Church; they deny the Pope to be Head of the Church; they minister the Sacraments in both kinds; their Priests marry; they forbear the meats forbidden in the Old Testament. They have a kind of Custom to whine and cry by the Graves of the dead; upon Twelfth day they keep a great Feast, and the next day begins their Lent, which they keep strictly, and eat neither Eggs nor Fish, nor any living thing during that time: they observe Wed∣nesdays and Fridays; they preach, sing, and say their Service in their own Tongue; they deny Prayer for the dead, and Purgatory; they all wear Hats with blew Hat-bands.
The Gregorians are Christians that dwell by the great City of Trapezun∣ta upon the Euxinian Sea. Their Priests marry, but if their Wives dye they must not marry again. They dwell in Ierusalem, in the Church up∣on Mount Calvary, where Christ, after his Resurrection, shewed himself like a Gardner unto Mary Magdalen. The Nestorian Hereticks, who now are found in great numbers in Nine∣vie, which at this day is called Mossell, and in other places thereabout, do yet hold the Heresie of Nestorias their Master, and teach, That Christ had two Natures, and that he hath two Persons, and that Mary was not the Mother of God, but that she bare Christ who was man only: about their Hats they wear flesh-coloured Hat-bands. Some of their Priests are found to dwell in the Temple of Mount Calvary. The Surians follow the Graecian Christians, touching the most of their Opinions; they respect not much their Religion; for in regard of their Poverty they are forced to work for day Wages under the Turks. Some of them also dwell in Ierusalem in a Church called S. Marks, which stand∣eth in the place of the house where Iohn Mark dwelt, where the Apostle Peter knock'd when the Angel led him out of Prison. The Sect of the Iacobins are resident in a Chappel which standeth be∣hind the Sepulchre. They take that name of Iacob the Heretick, who was a Disciple of the Patriarch of Alexandria; they are wavering and un∣constant among themselves, and are here and there found in Iudaea, Aegypt, and Barbary, divided into many Sects; for some of them hold with Eutichus and Macharus, who ascribe one Nature to Christ, which is the God-head, and deny the Man-hood. Some of them circumcise their Children, some baptise them with Fire, and make a Cross upon their Fa∣ces. Of this fiery Baptism you shall read more hereafter in the descripti∣on of the City of Saba. Hereby you may note, how the Temple of the holy Sepulchre in Ieru∣salem is filled with many Sects, who altogether give and pay Tribute to the Emperour of the Turks; whereby you may see, that Christ will be no more sought in the holy Sepulchre, but rather in the holy Evangelists, where he suffereth himself to be found by all those that seek him with a pure Heart. Of the Sects of the Jews. IN these our times the Jews do inhabit in Ierusalem, and are divided in∣to many Sects, that is to say, Pharisees, Saducees, Essaes, Genisteis, Mor∣boneis, and Meristeis. The Pharisees took that name from the Interpre∣tation of the Law, and is derived from the Hebrew word Parasch, which signifies to expound: so that Pharasei is as much as to say Doctor, or Ex∣pounder of the Law: they approve of Moses and the Prophets; they hold
the Immortality of the Soul: but of Christ and the principal parts of his Doctrine, of the Law, of Sin, and of Ceremonies, they have many un∣godly Opinions and Expositions. They feign that the Law was instituted by God for outward Discipline; that sin is only outward Transgression and the violating of mens Traditions: they hold there is no Original Sin, but that men may perform the Law, and merit everlasting Life; besides many other things, as Washings, Fastings, offering gifts in the Temple, and such like Ceremonies; of which there is no Commandment extant in the Scri∣pture. Read Mat. 3, 59. 12, 5. &c. Mar. 2, 3. 7. &c. Ioh. 3. 7, 8. &c. Acts 15. 23. &c. The Sadducees give themselves an honourable Title, being derived from Zedukim or Zeddikim, calling themselves just, from the word Zadock, he was just, and by Amphetresim is not unproperly derived from Dicaio, or Dicaios, signifying justus: and by Prothesn in Latine, Iudex a Judge. So that Zaddik or Zadducaeus signifies a just Judge, which would judge all others, but they themselves were without offence: thus the worst men got the best Names. They only allow the five Books of Moses; they dream the Messias should be an earthly King; they believe the Souls of men to be mortal, and to perish with their Bodies; they do not believe the Resurre∣ction, nor that there are either Angels, Spirits, or Divels. The Essaes had rather be called Students, taking their Name from Asa, under which Title, they would seem to reprehend, and amongst other things, avoid the profane Liberty of the Sadducees, and approve not the ar∣rogant dissimulation of the Pharisees; but that they tech more Divine and profitable Precepts. These live a Monastical Life, unmarried; their Goods are common; for the most part they practise Physick: in their Assemblies, the ancientest of them read some part of Moses's Law, or some of the Pro∣phets; all of them, both young and old, at certain times of the day, say Prayers. They have no new kind of Doctrine, but imbrace the Priest∣hood of Moses: They dwell in the Desarts and utmost parts of Iudaea near to the Lake Asphaltites, and in the garden of Balm near Iericho, where the ancient Prophets Elias and Eliseus had their Schools, whose Disciples were called the Children of the Prophets. These three Sects began in Iu∣das Maccabaeus's time, Ioseph. l. 3. c. 18. The Genisteis are said to be those that do certainly affirm, that they are of the Posterity of Abraham, although they have lost their Genealogies, and cannot prove it. These call themselves Great and Noble, and are of the stock of those that in the Captivity of Babylon married the Wives of other Nations; of which you may read in Nehem. So that they are half Gentiles, half Jews, and account themselves to be of the Nobility. The Morboneis very solemnly observe the Sabbath, which many others, that are Flatterers of the Turks and Saracens, do not: there are a great com∣pany
of these; for almost all the Iews do very superstitiously celebrate the Sabbath: and therefore they take their name partly from a Multitude, and partly from Usury; for Merebech in Hebrew signifies a Multitude, and T∣rebah Usury. Meriteis are those Jews that divide the Scripture, and say the Prophets spoke not all with one Spirit; and what they list they make Scripture, and what they list they leave out: and therefore the Graecians call them Meri∣stein, which signifies to divide. There are also others in these our times that are Jews too, but they are called Samaritans, which only approve of the Mosaical Law, and reject the rest of the Scriptures and Prophets. These are so called from Keeping; for this word Schamar properly signifies to preserve or keep a Speech in heart, and hath therefore a certain Congruity and Consonance with the Latin word Sermo: so that Schamar in Hebrew, and Sermo in Latin, are much what of one signification. But all the Jews, except the Sadducees, have one Faith; they think they may fulfill the Commandments, and by their own works be justified and purchase eternal Life. They deny the Trinity and Christ, and do believe that their Messias is yet to come, and shall bring them back again into the Land of Promise. Of the Saracens and Turks which inhabit in Jerusalem: of their Faith and Religion. THE Saracens are a People of Arabia the Stony; of the Posterity of Ishmael the Son of Abraham, which he begat of Hagar: from whence they are rightly called Agarins, notwithstanding they had rather be called Saracens. Others call them Saracens, à Saraca, which is a part of Arabi the Stony; It seemeth therefore that these People took their name from a Principality; for Sarar in Hebrew is the same that Principatum gessit is in Latin, or if you will, Principatum obtinuit, which signifies (to obtain Princi∣pality.) And therefore the Saracens, or Sarazens, may be said Princes or Captains, whose Principality extends it self far and near: but Agarins signi∣fies Perigrinators; for Gor or Gar is as much as to say a Pilgrim. These People combined themselves with Mahomet that false Prophet, born of obscure Parentage: his Fathers Name was Abdiminech, of his Wife that was of the Family of Ishmael, or of the Saracens, born in Arabia the Stony, (and as it is express'd in their Alcoran) upon the 21 day of Septem∣ber, according to our Account, about the year of Christ 570. He took his name from a tumultuous Confusion: for Hamah signifies tumultuatus est; he hath been tumultuous; and Hamam, tumultuando disturbavit, he divided by Conten∣tion. From hence Maimo signifies tumultuor, a Contender, and Maiomai, concitor, a Rebel. From whence may be gathered, that Mahomet is an omi∣nous and seditious name. Whilst he was in his Infancy he lived with his
Father: after, being of a prompt Wit, he served one Abdomoneplis a Merchant, in whose Service, conversing with Christians and Jews, he got a smattering knowledge of the Old and New Testament, and many Acquaintance; a∣mongst which, was one Sergius an Arian Monk, a man very well affected of this Abdomoneplis. Abdomoneplis died, and by the Peruasion of this Monk, Mahomet married Cadican his Wife, although she was fifty years of Age, and by her had great Riches: she soon after also died, and left Mahomet all that she had. He on a sudden, being lift up to this height of substance, grew ve∣ry ambitious (for he was naturally proud, wrathful, a Thief, a Whore-ma∣ster, a most impudent Adulterer; and wheresoever he came made havock of all things.) This man, by the help of the Saracens and others, affected the Kingdom of Arabia, which within short time after he obtained, entring Mecha the chief City thereof, upon Thursday the 15th of Iuly, Anno Dom. 622. and by the help of two Jews, and this Sergius, wrote that blasphemous Law of the Alcoran, falsly professing himself to be a Prophet; and began cruelly to oppose himself against all neighbouring Nations and Cities. The Alcoran taketh the name from Splendour or Brightness; for, Al in the Arabick, is as much as Karan in the Hebrew, and that signifies to sine or cast forth a brightness. This Alcoran contains a blasphemous and detestable Law, written in the Arabian Tongue, without any order or colour of Knowledge, teaching manifest Lies and execrable Blasphemis against God; and for the most part, the Pleasures and Delights of this World: for he doth deny that there is one eternal Essence of the Deity, and the holy Trinity; our Savi∣our Christ they one while call the Son of God, and another while, the Soul or Spirit of God. They deny his Deity, but say that he was a holy man, born without a Father, of the chaste and incorruptible Virgin Mary. And al∣though he was before all beginning, yet they believe that he was not begot∣ten, but created before all other essential Creatures, by the Eternal God. Also they say he was not crucified, but some other in his place; and there∣fore the Salvation of man not to consist in the merits of Christ, but in our own proper Works. And that the Jews might embrace the Alcoran, they retain Circumcision, which is commonly done when the Children are thir∣teen years of Age; about which time, Ishmael was circumcised. They for∣bear the meats forbidden in the Law; they have many Wives at one time, they tollerate a Bill of Divorce, and affirm, that after the Resurrection men may have many Wives, and with them banquet, surft, and use pleasant Recreations, with divers such Errors and vain Trifles, which for brevities sake I omit. That he might the better persuade men to embrace and believe these his Lies and blasphemous Doctrines, he very cunningly seemed to confirm them with many false and feigned Miracles: and amongst the rest this was one: Having taught a white Dove to put Corn in his Ear, whilst he was
preaching to the People, it chanced she came and sat upon his Shoulder, and putting her Bill into his Ear, according to her accustomed manner, he persuaded the People that it was the Spirit of God, which delivered him the words of the Law. A Bull also, taught after the same manner, at his Voice came before him, and kneeling down did him reverence, with the Alcoran tied upon his horns; which he affirmed was come from Heaven and brought that new Law. Then did he make divers horns of gold and silver, and filling them full of Milk hid them in the Earth; after which, in a great assembly he caused the same places to be opened, and told the peo∣ple that these signified plenty and abundance to all such as kept and ob∣served that Law; but the Violaters thereof should be punished with Death: together with many other such like idle and foolish Miracles, (which would be too tedious to recite) that he might make the People believe that it came from God. And being afflicted with the Falling Sickness, gave it out, that then the Angel Gabriel told him the Law, making this likewise a means to further his designs; but after, viz. upon the eighth of Iune, Anno Dom. 632. and in the 61 year of his Age, he died miserably of this Disease, after he had reigned in Mecha ten years; and Enbubizer or Abudchar his Father-in-law, succeeded him in the Government, who built in his honour a Church, and in that put his Sepulchre, both stately and sumptuous. The Turks also embrace this Doctrine, and joyned their forces with the Saracens: they extended their Empire under Mahomet the third, into Asia, Europe, and Africa. They derive their Name (as I suppose) from Cruelty; for Turca signifieth a cruel Destroyer, or an armed Enemy, being derived from the Hebrew word Tarach, that is, to effect his purpose. From whence, they are not improperly called of the Grcins  to vex and make weary; or else from the Hebrew word Tachaera, which signifies a shield; and from the Greek word  and , to put on a Shield, and to arm them∣selves: for the Turks are armed Enemies, and Destroyers of the whole World: and by Ezekiel are called Gog and Magog, cap. 38. & 39. of Magog which was the Son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. and as some think, inhabited the North parts of the World. Pliny places them in Bospherus, Cimmerius, Scy∣thia, &c. which lyeth toward the East. But indeed they have often changed their Residence, and have come into Persia, Armenia, Syria, Palestina, Arabia, and cruelly destroyed them, until they had conquered Constanti∣nople, and got a great part of Europe; and have infeted the minds of all the Inhabitants of those parts, with their Manners, Slaughters, and Ra∣pines, according to that blasphemous Law of the Alcoran. They first af∣flicted those Parts about the year of our Lord 760. Constantius Copronius being then the Emperour of Rome; since which time, they have conquer∣ed a great part of the World.
A Relation of the Travels and Peregrinations of the Saints and holy Patriarchs, as they are severally mentioned in the first Book of MOSES. And first, of the first Man, Adam. ADAM the first man, took his name from Adamah, which signifies red Earth, because he was made of the red slime of the Earth: therefore the Latins derive Homo from Humo; also the Graecians from , which signifies the Earth. But, when Man was laid open to all Calamities, Miseries, yea and Death, the Hebrews called him Enosh, which signifies, a mortal and miserable Man: for this Attribute to Man agreeth with the word Nosch, which signifies to be sick of a deadly dis∣ease. There are some that think that Man was made in Syria near to Da∣mascus, because there is found much red Earth. Others say near to Hebron, a City in the Tribe of Iuda, and there also lies buried; for in a Cave near that place, lies much red Earth, which the Inhabitants, even to this day, shew unto Pilgrims: but this is nothing to the purpose, since we know that Man was first created, and then brought into Paradise, Gen. 1. and 2. Of Paradise. PAradise, which in Greek is , and in Hebrew Pardes, signifies a pleasant Garden plentifully furnished with fruitful trees, but princi∣pally Myrtle-trees, which beareth a kind of Berry of a very delectable taste: for this Hebrew word seemeth to be a compound, that is, of Parah, which signifies to fructifie, and Hadas, a Mirtle; of the fruit of which tree, there is made a certain Wine called Mirtle, or Mulberry Wine: the mystery hereof is, that Christ is that Tree of Life, that fruitful and pleasant Mirtle, whereby we are raisd up unto Eternal Life, Gen. 2. Apoc. 22. Mat. 11. Lu∣ther calleth Paradise, in his discourse of Germany, a pleasant Garden, Eccl. 2. Munster, an Orchard: and in the Bible it is called Eden, a place plentifully furnished with all things necessary for the procuring of Pleasure and Delight. The Grecians call it Hedone, which signifies an extraordinary delectable and pleasant place; for in it there was great Abundance of all things, as well of Trees, Fruits, Herbs, and sweet-smelling Flowers, as of Beasts and Fowls of the Heaven. Into this place God put man, to dress it and keep
it: But where it stood, and whether it be now upon the Earth, there are di∣vers Opinions: The Romanits hold, that it is placed in the East, without the Tropicks; others would have it under the Aequator, because it is a very Tem∣perate Region: but Experience tells us, that there it is very hot and scorch∣ing: Others think it stands upon the top of a high mountain, free from all the violent motions and impresions of the Air, in which place, they hold Enoch and Eliah are yet living. There are others that assign the whole East part to be Paradise, and that there were some peculiar places most fruitful, of which they think was Syria, Damascus, Arabia Foelix, Aegypt and Iudaea, in which Part man was put. They also say, that the Tree of Knowledge stood upon Mount Calvary, near about that place where Christ was crucified, so that he made satisfaction for sin in the same place where sin was first com∣mitted: And this I hold to be the better Opinion, and that it remained till the Deluge, kept in the custody of Angels, at Gods appointment, and by the Flood, together with other Creatures, was abolished. And for that Saying of our Saviour to the Thief upon the Cross, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, is not to be understood of the Earthly Pa∣radise, but of the Heavenly, the Place of the blessed Angels and Saints, where God with his Divine Majesty filleth them with the Light of Righteousness, and quickeneth them with Eternal Life. This place St. Paul calls the third Heaven, and that Heavenly Paradise of which the Earthly Paradise is a type, 2 Cor. 12. Of the four Rivers that watered Paradise. THE four Flouds of Paradise were, Pison, Gihon, Hidekel, and Euphrates, Gen. 2. There was but one Fountain of all these Floods, and this was in Paradise it self, which in those times was divided into four Streams. But as by the Flood all the face of the Earth was changed, so likewise were these Ri∣vers and their Fountains and Channels altered from the places where at first they were; notwithstanding in memory of them, there remains some Re∣liques, tho' perhaps not in the same place, nor springing out of one and the same Fountain, as they did before. And as the Mediterranean Sea, the Gulph of Arabia, and many other Meers and Lakes, before the Flood were not, but (by the general consent of all Learned men) happened by that huge Inun∣dation; the same may be said of these Rivers. The head, or beginning of the River Pischon or Pison, is 4800 miles East∣ward from Ierusalem, and is like unto an Arm of the Sea, some twelve or six∣teen miles over, and for that cause it taketh the name from Posch, that is, in∣creasing, or, of an extraordinary greatness: from hence the Grecians call it Phu∣son, because it divides it self into divers Rivulets or Streams. It compasseth in Havilah, it divideth that part of the World which we call India, into the outward and inward: and there is called Ganges, taking that name from an
Aethioian King called Gange, as Suidas saith. Some say, it is unknown where it first riseth; others say it riseth in Scythia, and watereth all the Neighbour-Countreys as it passeth along, as Nilus doth, and so being dispersed into thirty Channels, divideth India with one of them: the narrowest place of Ganges is eight miles over, and the shallowest an hundred foot deep, it bring∣eth forth Dolphins, Crocodiles, and divers other Creatures. Solinus and Strabo say, That the River Tigris riseth in Armenia, a very fair and clear Fountain; it is distant from Ierusalem six hundred miles to∣wards the North: it runneth with such an exceeding swiftness that Fishes can∣not swim against it, and passeth through the Lake of Arthusia, without once mingling it self with the Water: and for this cause it is called Tigris, which signifies a dart, and a Beast of extraordinary swiftness and cruelty. This River running from towards the North and the rising of the Sun, it compasseth in Mesopotamia, and passeth by the Borders of Media and Assyria, and after that, of Chaldaea and Arabia, it there receiveth in the River Hydasis, and so joyning with Euphrates, falls into the Lake of Persia. The Hebrews called this River Chidikill from Chadad, which signifies acute, and Kalal, light, for it is a swift running Stream: from hence the Graecians call it ; the La∣tines, Celer; the Germans, Ein Zelter, which signifies with us a Horse swiftly running; for it passeth away swifter than an Arrow out of a Bow. Going towards the East, some thirty six miles from the antient Babylon, it runneth through a Town called Bagedeth, bordering upon Turkey and Persia, and from thence towards the Latitude, to a Town called Argentaratus, where it changeth the name to Tigris; in that place it runneth so extreme swift, that it will make a mans head dizzy to look upon it. Strabo saith, the River Euphrates riseth out of a Mountain in Armeia, called Nipha, some 300 miles from the City of Ierusalem towards the North, watering Mesopotamia and Chaldaea, and passing through the midst of that flourishing City Babylon, divides it into two parts; and after passing through, and fructifying Arabia, it joyneth with the Flood Tigris, and falls into the Persian Gulf. Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians, and of Babylon, built a Bridge over the narrowest place of this River, being some three quarters of a mile over. The Hebrews call this River Parah, because it fructifieth; and from thence the Graecians call it , or , to bear fruit, the Germans, Fruchter, which in English is, fruitful or pleasant. And therefore St. Ambrose saith, it is derived from Euhranein, that is, from rejoycing; for that over∣flowing the Fields, it causeth them the next year to flourish with all kind of Fruit and pleasant Flowers. The Water of this River is very foul and dirty, so that it is unfit to drink; according to that of Ieremy, chap. 2. What avail∣eth it thee to go into Assyria, that thou mightest drink of the Water of Euphra∣ters? If a man takes this Water in a Vessel, and let it stand but two hours, the Dirt and Sand will lye at the bottom thereof two inches thick. Therefore the
Inhabitants near about it are wont to take a great Pot that holdeth a good quantity, whereinto putting Water, they let it stand till all the filth be sunk to the bottom, and so they clear Water to drink. Nilus taketh the beginning from a certain Mountain in Maitania the Lower, not far from the Ocean, and isses from a Lake which they call Nidiles, and partly from other Lakes, and is increased with the Snow Wa∣ters falling from the Mountains of the Moon in Africa, 3200 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Some think it took the name from Nileus a certain King thereabouts; others, from the Soil which is yearly brought down in the Stream, whereby all Aegypt is made fruitful; from whence some think it was called Servious Nilus, for that it bringeth down new Mud with . The Hebrews call it Gihon, because it breaketh out of the Earth with great Violence. This River comes through the Desarts of Aethiopia, and so with great Violence comes into Egypt, where it is divided into seven Streams, and in times past had seven Gates, the names of which were Ca∣nopius, or Heracliticus, Bolbitinus, Sebiniticus, Pharmiticus, Mendsius, Ta∣niticus, and Palusiacus; the two outward Gates of which, viz. Canoicus and Palusiacus, were 160 miles asunder. Appianus saith, there are two ote Gates called Tineptimius and Diolcus: this ninth Gate is divided at a City and place called Delta, taking the Name from the likeness that it hath to the Greek Letter so called. So that Nilus is divided into nine Gates, by which nine Gates it falls into the Mediterranean Sea. There are many that think that Paradise was only in Egypt, and that then it had only but four streams, and that at the Flood it was confused into nine, and they would seem to prove their Opinions out of the 31 Chapter of Ezekiel, where he calleth Egypt a Garden of Pleasure. But this differeth from the description of Moses, for it is not sciate in the East, but rather the South from Ieruslem, and far distant from the two Eastern Rivers, Euphrates and Hiddikel, by which the holy Scriptures do principally denote Paradise. Wherefore it may be concluded, that Egypt was only a part of Paradise, not Paradise it self; and that this River was one of the Rivers, not all, the Streams of which River, at some times of the year, viz. in the Sum∣mer Solstice, when the Sun is near the Dog-star, begins to swell and over∣flow the Banks, by reason of the melting of the Snow which lies upon the Mountains of the Moon, and so drown all the places near unto it, through the Land of Egypt, leaving behind it certain Slime and Mud, by which it comes to pass that the Country is very fruitful, and serves them instead of Rain, at which time of the Year (for this happens once every year) the People and Inhabitants of the Country retire themselves to their Towns, Ciies, and Castles, sciuated upon Rocks, Mountains, and high Grounds, from whence it happeneth that they sustain very little discommodity or loss by any such Inudation. They also keep little Boats, whereby they pass
from one place to another, because all their Passages and Foot-paths are then drowned with Waters. There are many pretty Observations which the People of Egypt were wont to take notice of in the rising of this Water, for they had certain Staves whereby they measured the depth of it; if it rose but to twelve Cubits (which is six yards in height, they then stood in fear of great Famine, so also if it was but thirteen, for then the Water was not deep enough to make the ground fertile; but if it rose to fourteen or fifteen, then they were in great hope, and did not doubt of a fruitful Year; and if to sixteen, they then greatly rejoyced at their Prosperity, and kept Ban∣quets and Feasts, and were assured that the succeeding year would be very plentiful; but if it rose above, they laid aside all signs of Joy, and lived very sparingly, and with great Sorrow; this great Inundation of Waters fore-shewing Scarcity, and Want, and Famine, and Pestilence, and Death. And thus Nilus yearly, every year is to them instead of Rain, for Egypt is without Rain. In Autumn, at such time as the Sun going out of the last face of Libra, entreth into Scorpio, the Waters of Nilus, by little and little, retire them∣selves into their Banks, and the Earth becomes quite uncovered of Wa∣ter: about which time, the Country being exceeding hot, the Earth is presently made dry in all those places, so that in the Month of October they may both till and sow their Land. In this River the Crocodile and the Ichneumo breed, of the nature of which two, you may sufficiently read in Gesner. There also breeds the Pelican, of which St. Ierom saith, there are two kinds, one that lives upon the Water, another that lives upon the Land: these Birds, as some affirm, kill their young ones upon their Beak, and then leave them lying in their Nest for three days; at the end of which time, the Female grievously wounds her self upon the Breast, and pouring her Blood upon her young ones, revives them again. This Bird may very well be a type and figure of our Blessed Saviour, who shedding his precious Blood upon the Cross for our Sins, after the third day rose again, and that he might restore us to Life that be dead in Sin, poureth out his Blood upon us, whereby we are made capable of Eternal Life. Of the Place where Adam and Eva dwelt after the breaking of the Commandment. Gen. 3. ADAM and Eva, being driven out of Pradise, dwelt at Damascus, 160 miles from Ierusalem, as Munster and others write: the Towns∣men of Damascus, at this day shew the place where Cain slew his Brother Abel; and it is well to be believed that this City receives her Name there∣by, for Damascus signifies blood-shedding, or a place which hath drunk up Blood.
Of the Place where Cain dwelt. CAIN, after he had slain his Brother Abel, dwelt in the Land of Nod, a Land of Fear and Disquiet, in the Town of Hanoch, and, as some think, it was the same place where Babylon (after Noah's Flood) was built, being four hundred and eighty miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Of the Place where Noah dwelt. NOAH, signifying quiet and rest, dwelt in Armenia, six hundred miles from Ierusalem Northward, hard by Mount Ararat, upon which Mount, the Ark, (after the Flood) stayed it self, Gen. 8. Ptolomaeus nameth these high Hills in Armenia, Gordes, which are alwayes covered with Snow, and no man may get upon them. Sem. SEM who in the Holy Scriptures is called Melchisedech, that is, a King of Righteousness, dwelt in the City of Ierusalem, which as then was called Salem, that is, a City of Peace. Nimroth. NImroth was the first Prince and Regent upon Earth, and built Babylon, which is six hundred and eighty miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Stra∣bo writeth, That in Babylon there was an old four-square Tow∣er built of Brick, four hundred and sixteen Ells highThat is 200 yards high., and each side thereof four hundred and sixteen Ells broad: This without doubt was a piece of the Tower of Babylon, the top whereof should have reached up to Heaven, Gen. 22. Babel or Babylon signifieth a Confusion, because in that place God con∣founded the Work-mens Tongues, when they built the Tower of Babylon. The Travels of Abraham. 1. ABraham went out of his own Countrey of Vr in Chaldaea, to the City of Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 376 miles. 2. From Haran, by Gods commandment he went to Sichem, which is four hundred miles. 3. From Sichem he went to the Plain and Wood of Mame, to the Hill be∣tween Bethel and Hay, which is 28 Miles. 4. From thence he went into Egypt, travelling Southward 240 miles. 5. Out of Egypt he went again into Canaan, to the Hill that lyeth between Behel and Hay which is 240 miles, Gen. 13.
6. From thence he went to the Plain of Mamre near Hebron, 32 miles. 7. From the Plain of Mamre, he went to Dan, which is 124 miles, and there overthrew the four Kings which had taken Lot Prisoner, Gen. 14. 8. Then he pursued the Enem for the space of 80 miles to Hobam in Phoenicia, which lieth in the left side of Damasco, Gen. 14. 9. From Phoenicia, he went to Sodom, where Melchisedeck met him, which are 160 miles, Gen. 14. 10. From Sodom, he went back again to the Plain of Mamre, which are 40 miles. 11. From the Plain of Mamre, he went to Gerer, which is six miles, where his Son Isaac was born, Gen. 20. 21. 12. From Gerar, he went to Beersaba, which is 12 miles, where he took an Oath of King Abimilech. 13. From Beersaba, he went to Mount Moriah, which is 40 miles, where he would have offered his Son Isaac, Gen. 22. 14. From Mount Moriah, he returned again to Beersaba, which is 40 miles. 15. From Beersaba, he and his Wife went to the Plain of Mamre by He∣bron, which is 16 miles, and there they died and were buried, Gen. 23. and 25. So that all the Travels of the Patriarch Abraham were 1794 miles. Now followeth the description of the Towns and Places. THE Town of Vr in Chaldaea where Abraham was born, at this day is called Orchae, (as Petrus Apianus writeth) and is distant from Ie∣rusalem 624 miles Eastward. It seemeth it either took that Name from Light or Fire, or else from Divine Worship, for there they used to offer many burnt Offerings, but at that time they committed Idolatry, for which cause Abraham went from thence, perceiving tha the Chaldaeans took the Fire for their God, because Fire came down from Heaven and consumed their Of∣ferings. Learned men therefore are of Opinion, that the Chalaeans in the Town of Vr, worshipped the Fire for their God. Haran or Charan, that is, Wrath. HAran is the chief City in Mesopotamia, where Abraham for a time dwelt with his Father Thara. There the rich Roman Crassus with his Ar∣my was overthrown by the Parthians, and is distant from Ierusalem 440 miles North-Eastward, taking its Name from the Water Charan which runneth through it. But at this day the City is called Ophra, lying eleven days Journey from Mossel or Nineveh, as D. Leonard Ronwolfe writeth, who in anno 1575, upon the thirtieth of Ianuary was in that Town. Ophra or Haran is a fair City well inhabited, and indifferent great, compassed about
with Walls and Towers, richly furnished with Merchandize, but especial∣ly with fair Coverles of divers colours, that are made therein. There is likewise great Trade and Traffick for divers kinds of Wares brought thither by Caravans, which are great Numbers of Camels, Hor∣ses, and other Beasts, that carry great Burdens, with many men to conduct them, which traffick and travel from one City to another. This City in times past belonged to the Parthians, even then when Cras∣sus the rich Roman, fifty three years before the Birth of Christ, robbed the Temple of Ierusalem, and of those holy Relicks bare away to the value of six Tuns of Gold: for which, God punished him openly; for upon the sixth of Iune, after he was by the Parthians overthrown hard by Haran in Mesopotamia, and there taken and slain; the Parthians pouring molten Gold into his Mouth, said, Drink now thy fill (thou greedy Wretch) of that which thou so long hast thirsted after, for with this thou mayst fill thy greedy Throat. In this overthrow were slain thirty thousand Romans, and by that means the City of Haran returned again under the Parthians. After that, the Persians took it; but now it is under the Turk. In this City of Haran at this day there is to be seen a Well of very clear Water, at which Rebecca gave drink to Eleazer Abraham's Servant, and to his Camels, Genes. 24. 19. This Well by the Towns-men is called Abraham's Well: there also Rachel, Laban's Daughter, first spake with the holy Pa∣triarch Iacob, who turning the stone off from the Well, gave her Sheep of the Water to drink. This Water hath a very pleasant Taste, and is a notable Type of holy Baptism; for like as the holy Fathers took their Wives by this Well, so Christ receiveth his holy Congregation by the Well of Baptism, in his Word and holy Sacrament. This is the right Well of Israel, which flow∣eth into Everlasting Life. The City of Haran (now called Ophra) lieth from Nineveh 232 miles Westward. Sichem, a Shoulder. SIchem is a Town in Samaria, on the borders of Ephraim, lying on Mount Garizim, 36 miles from Ierusalem North-ward. It takes the Name (as Phil. Melancthon writeth) from the place whereon it standeth, like a Shoul∣der; for Sichem signifies a Shoulder. Of this Town I will speak more at large in the New Testament, for that by it Christ spake with the Samaritan Woman, Joh. 4. In this Town, Dina, Jacob's Daughter was ravished, Gen. 34. and there te Bones of the Patriarch Joseph were buried, Josh. 24.
Abimelech for spight, and upon no occasion, utterly destroyed the Town, and having razed it to the ground, sowed it with Salt, Iudg. 9. But Ierobo∣am King of Ierusalem built it up again, and dwelt therein, 1 Kin. 12. It was a free Town, whither a Man-slayer might resort that had killed any man by chance, and save himself, Iosh. 20. Mount Garizim, whereon the Town of Sichem stood, was a piece of Mount Ehraim. Tanais, in Hebrew Zoan, an Inn, or House of Harbour. TANAIS or Zon, was the chief City in Egypt, where Pharaoh in Abraham's time kept his Court, as we read in the thirteenth Chapter of the fourth Book of Moses, and Psil. 58. and lieth 232 miles from Ierusalem, South-east∣ward. Four miles from Tanais stood the Kingly Town of Memphis, which was likewise built before Abraham's time; but at that time it was not so fa∣mous as Tanais, for there is not one word spoken of Memhis in the Books of Moses. But when time serves I will speak more of these two places. Of the Mount between Bethel and Hay. THIS Hill is four miles from Ierusalem, upon the North, lying between the two Towns of Bethel and Hay, and is called Mount Ephraim; where Abraham at his return out of Egypt the second time, set up his Tabernacle, of purpose to be conversant with Melhisedeck, who dwelt in Ieruslem; and with him gave thanks to God for the singular favours that he had shew∣ed toward him, in delivering his Wife Sara from the hands of Abimelech King of Egypt, who woul have ravished her, and, as he feared, indanger∣d his Life. In this place Lot separated himself from Abraham, and went to dwell in Sodom. Of the Plain or Ok of Mamre. THE Plain of Mamre stood a mile from Hebron, towards the East, and distant from Ierusalem twenty two miles South-eastward. In this Val∣ly there was a fair and pleasant Wood, where a certain young man called Mamre dwelt. This man was Brother to Escal and Aner, mentioned by Moses, Genes. 14▪ who, according to the custom of Gentlemen with us in these times, built up his house nea  pleasant Wood or Bottom, which, as some think, was called after his name, Mamre. Others, (of which Opi∣nion is Ierom) of Aelon, which signifies a Valley or Tree (an Oak-tree, saith he.) But Ioseph and Aegesppus call it a Terebinth tree, which both Sum∣mer and Winter beareth green Leaves like a Palm-tree, the Sap or Juyce whereof is very good for Medicine. Abraham dwelling near to this Tree, being entertained by the three Brothers as a Stranger, grew into such favour and familiarity with them, that he converted them from Paganism, and
taught them to know the true and ever-living God. To gratifie which great favour, they aided him in his War against the four Kings that had taken Lot Prisoner, and gave him free liberty to inhabit in, and use the Plain thereabouts for his Cattel: before whose door (as some Authors affirm) this Terebinth or Oak-tree stood, and so continued from the beginning of the World, till the time of Constantine the Great, it being lawful for none to cut a bough of it, or touch it wit a Hatchet, because it was in those days accounted a holy Tree, and visited by divers Strangers: and then Helena caused a fair Church to be built in that place; and so much the rather, for that Abraham sitting under that Tree, the three Angels appeared unto him in the Similitude or Likeness of men, Gen. 8. , 2. And some are of Opini∣on, That because of this, the Jews offered Incense to their Gods, and com∣mitted Idolatry upon high Mountains and under green Trees, Ezek. 16. There was also a double Cave made of white Marble, which as Iosephus saith, was very fair and beautiful to the eye, and curiously wrought and polished; wherein Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, with their Wives Sarah, Rebecca, and Leh were buried; and as some think, was that Cave which he purchased of the Hittites, Gen. 23. 34. But that Adam and Evah lye buried in the same place, seeing there is no warrant for it in the holy Scriptures, I let it pass; because, whatsoever hath not Authority of Scripture to prove it, may as ea∣sily be contemned as allowed. But, Abraham's Spulchre in Ierom's time was to be seen, being old and decayed. Of Hebron. THIS City was not only a Kings Seat, but a Priests also, being built not long after the Flood, and some seven years before that City of the Aegyptians called Zoan or Tanis, Numb. 13. and was placed upon a goodly high Mountain very pleasant and delectable. It taketh the name from Cha∣bar, which signifieth to accompany; and from thence, Chebron or Hebron, a pleasant and delectable Society. It was a metropolitan City in the Tribe of Iuda, and after called Kiriatharba, as it appeareth in Iosh. 14. taking that Name from Arba the Chief Governour of that City. This man was one of the Anakims, and a very mighty Prince. Others there are that say, the City being divided into four parts was thereof called  for Arba signifies a Quaternion, from the Rote Raba four square. It was first built by Heth, the Son of that cursed Canaan, whose Posterity (the Hittites) inha∣bited in it; and such was their Hospitality, that they entertained Abraham, being a Stranger and Traveller. These People dweltHere also dwelt Sisai, Abiman, and Thalmas the sons of Anak. there until Joshua's time; and then one Hoham was King thereof, who with other Kings, opposing the Children of Israel, was by them slain, and had their Country wasted and destroyed. This Town was after made a Town of Refuge, and belonged to the
Inheritance of Caleb, and was together with Mamre in the Tribe of Iuda, Ios. 20. Here David was first anointed King, and reigned therein for the space of seven years, 2 Sam. 5. But this Town, by the injury of Time, and oppression of the Enemy is now become desolate, only some few old Relicks are to be seen, to shew there had been a Town there. Nevertheless there is a Town not far from it which retaineth the name, placed in a very fruit∣ful Valley called Mamre to this day. Here, while it was under the Juris∣diction of the Christians, stood a Cathedral Church, and a Bishops See; but the Turks have turned it into a Mosko, or one of their Churches. Into this place they will not suffer any Christian to enter. The Inhabitants take upon them to shew unto Strangers many things, as the Vault or Cave where∣in Abraham was buried, the place where Cain killed Abel, the Well where Adam and Evah wept seven years for the death of their Son; with many such like Fables which are to no purpose, seeing they are not warrantable by Scripture. Some Bows-shot Eastward from this place is the Field of Damascus, where the red Earth lieth whereof they feign Man to be made. It is naturally tough, and may be wrought like Wax or Pitch. There is also that is white of the same kind, and this is conveyed to many places by the Saracens, and sold at dear Rates. They use it either for the teering of Sepulchres, or to mingle with Salves and Unguents. Of Gerar. GErar is the uttermost Town in the Land of Canaan, and lieth between the Desarts of Sur and Cades. Gen. 20. Here King Abimelech kept his Court at such time as Abraham came thither; and here Isaac was born, Gen. 21. It takes the name from Gor, which signifies a Pilgrim or Travel∣ler, and did well agree with the Condition of the ancient Patriarchs that sometimes lived there, because for the most part they were like Pilgrims and wayfaring men, Gen. 47. It lay six miles from Hebron South-west, and from Ierusalem 30, upon the Territories of the Tribe of Iuda. Of Beerazaba. BEerazaba is a Town scituated upon the utmost Bounds of the Holy Land, forty miles from Ieruslem South-westward, and is derived from Beer and Shebuah, and sigifieth the Well of Covenant: for Abraham having digged a Well near to this place, Abimelech King of Gerar entred into League with him, and his Posterity. Isac also renewed this League in this place, as appears, Gen 21. It is now called Gallim or Giblin by the Jews. In S. Hierom's time it was a great Town.
Of Moriah. UPON this Mount Abraham would have offered his Son Isaac, and stood not far from Salem or Mount Sion, where Melhisedech dwelt. They were so near, that Melchisedech upon the Tower of Sion might easily see the Angel that spake with Abraham, when he renewed the Covenant with him concerning his Seed and Posterity; and is derived from Mor or Mrar, which signifies bitter Myrrh, because, as Gregorius saith, the Church is ever subject to Affliction; For all they that will serve God and live religiously, must suffer Persecution, Mat. 16. 2 Tim. 3. and Iarr, which signifies to fear. How Abraham may be typically apprehended. ABraham signifies the Father of a Multitude, from Ab, pater, a Father; Ram, excelsus, Mighty; and Hamon, multitudinis, Of a Multitude. Not in regard of the Jews only, but all those that in succeeding times shall be ingraffed into the Church, and partake of everlasting Life through the Mediation of Christ Jesus, the promised Seed, Gal. 3. Ephes. 1. Acts 3. and is a Type and Figure of God the Father; for, that as Abraham was the Fa∣ther of many, yet had but only one Son: so although God be the Father of all Nations, yet had but one only Son, Jesus Christ, begotten of his own Essence from before the beginning of the World. And as Abraham so lo∣ved God, that for his sake he would not have spared his only Son; so God so loved Abraham and the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to die for the Salvation of their Souls. The Travels of Lot. LOT travelled with Abraham from Vr in Chaldaea, to Haran in Meso∣potamia, which is 336 miles, Gen. 12. 2. From Haran they travelled to Sichem in the land of Canaan, b∣ing 400 miles. 3. From Sichem they travelled through Morae, to the Hill lying between Bethel and Hay, which is 24 miles. 4. From the Hill between Bethel and Hay, they went into Aegypt, which is 240 miles, Gen. 13. 5. From Aegypt they went into the Land of Canaan, to the Hill lying be∣tween Bethel and Hay, where Abraham had dwelt before, which is 240 miles, Gen. 13.
6. From the Hill between Bethel and Hay Lot separated himself from Abraham, and went to the Town of Sodom Eastward, which is 28 miles, Gen 13. 7. In the Town of Sodom Lot was taken Prisoner, he and all his houshold, and led away to the Town of Dan, which is 32 miles, Gen. 14. 8. And when Abraham had delivered him out of the hands of his Ene∣mies, a pursued them, he returned with him from Dan to Hobam in Phoe∣nicia, lying on the left side of Damascus, being 80 miles. 9. From Phoenicia, Abraham came again with Lot to Sodom, which is 160 miles. 10. Lastly, when the Lord had determined to rain Fire and Brimstome on Sodom, Lot, according to his Commandment, went thence to Zoar a lit∣tle Town near adjoyning, where being drunk with Wine, he committed Incest with both his Daughters; but after, coming to the knowledge of his Offence, he was so sore afflicted in his Conscience, that with extream Grief he died. Luther saith, that Abraham took him to Hebron with him to comfort him, and that there he died. Hebron is 36 miles from Sodom. So all the Travels of the Patriarch Lot were 1652 miles. The Description of the Towns and Places where he travelled: and first of Sodom. THE Cities that were destroyed with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, were four in number, that is, Sodom, Gomorrah, Adama, and Zeboim, lying 24 miles from Ierusalem South-eastward, where now the Dead Sea runs. The fifth was the City Bela, called also Zoar, which was spared for Lot's sake, and distant from Sodom two miles. This, Lot accounted but a little City; but there are that say it was a very spacious and Princely place, near to which his Wife for her Disobedience was turned into a Pillar of Salt, and not far off he committed Incest with his two Daughters, And although Lu∣ther be of opinion, that that also within a while after was burnt, yet this cannot be certainly proved, especially because it remaineth even to this day, scituated both in the ancient place, and called by the ancient Name; un∣less some new City hath been lately built in the same place, and is now cal∣led after that name, which I cannot think to be true. Sodamah signifieth a Mystery; Gomorrah, a Faggot of Thorns; Adamah, Red Earth; Zeboim, Fertile and Pleasant; Zoar, the burning of Bla; for in ancient times it was called Baela. It is the received Opinion, that the Country wherein these five rich and opulent Cities stood was called Pentapolis. Of the Lake or Dead Sea, called Asphaltides. IN the very same place where these Cities were burnt and destroyed, there is at this day to be seen a Lake about 36 Miles long, and in some pla∣ces
six, in others eight, and twelve miles over. It boileth with Pitch and Brimstone, and in some places passeth by the name of the Salt Sea, and in others, the dead Sea, because of the noisome and venomous Air that riseth out of it, insomuch as the very Birds that fly over it fall down dead; and if a Beast do but drink of it mix'd with Water, it makes him incurably sick. It is of a wonderful nature, for whatsoever heavy thing you fling into it will not sink, but swim upon the top, be it either Iron, Lead, Copper, or any other weighty matter: of which Vespasian the Emperour having notice, to make experience of what he had heard, made a Journey of purpose to see it, and with him took certain condemned men, who for their Offences had deserved Death; these he manacled, and where he thought it to be deep∣est caused them to be thrown in; but they rose up again with such violence as if some Storm or Tempest had sent them up. The Water thereof chang∣eth three times a day, and shineth against the Sun with divers colours, cast∣ing out Fire and great Cakes of Pitch much resembling Bulls without heads, and of that quantity. This Pitch is good for divers things, as to calk Ships, to lay upon Cables, and to use in Medicines; wherefore such as come to this Sea and know the nature of it, have certain Skifs and Instruments wherewith they draw these Cakes of Pitch to their Ships, to which it clea∣veth so fast, it being naturally tough, that being brought to Land they cannot get it off again but by the help of Urine. Upon the Banks thereof grow Trees that bear fruit of divers kinds, as Apples, and such like; which are fair and pleasant to the Eye, but if you either touch or open them you shall find nothing but Dust. Brittenbacchus saith, In this place the Serpent Tyrus (whereof they use to make Treacle) is found. It is a little Serpent about half a Cubit long, and a Finger thick, being of divers colours, and is so venomous, that where it biteth there is no remedy, unless by cutting off the Member: the Head of it is rough and hairy, and there seemeth to lye upon the Tongue of it, if it be angry, a fiery flame. The same Author saith, that a little from Zoar, between this Lake and the Mountains of Engedi, the Pillar whereinto Lot's Wife was turned, is yet to be seen shining like Salt. The furthest part of this Sea Northward lies 14 miles from Ierusalem: toward the East the Ri∣ver Iordan runneth into it. The Travels of the two Angels that led Lot out of Sodom. THese two Angels having spoken with Abraham in the Valley of Mamre near Hebron, forthwith went to Sodom some 40 miles distant from that place, where Lot having entertained them into his House, by their help was delivered, together with his Wife and two Daughters, from that mise∣rable Desolation of the Sodomites.
Of Lot's two Daughters. LOT escaping  is Desolation, and seeing a President of God's Judg∣ment fallen upon his Wife for her disobedience, fearing that he should not continue safe in Zoar, left that, and turned aside into the Wilderness, and continued there among the Mountains, although the Lord had pro∣mised him safety in this Town: wherefore continuing in a Cave in the Wilderness, the eldest of his Daughters losing her Husband in this Destru∣ction, supposing that all men had been destroyed, counselled her Sister to commit Incest with her Father. Lot being now oppressed with Care, by reason of the former Calamities, gave himself, at the Inticement of his Daughters, to drink Wine, insomuch as with the Excess he became drunk: at which time, not being himself, he begat by his two Daughters two Sons; the eldest had a Son whom she called Moab, which signifies, the begotten of his Father; whereby the Impudency of this Woman is laid open to the World, in that she was not ashamed of her Sin. Of him came the Moabites and dwelt upon the North-side of the Lake Asphaltides, some 32 miles from Ierusalem. The youngest Daughter had a Son, which she called Ben-ammy, that is, The Son of my People; for although she bare him with great shame, yet she dwelt among the People of God. Of him came the Ammonites that dwelt beyond Mount Giead, threescore miles from Ierusalem North-east∣ward. Of the four Kings that took Lot Prisoner. THE first of them was called Amraphel King of Shinear or Babylon, the Son of Ninus and Semiramis, as some think, and is called sometime by the name of Berosus, sometime Ninus. He kept his Court at Babylon in Chal∣daea, which is 680 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. This Ninus is called Amraphel, because of the notable Victories that he won, and the number of Countries and Provinces he conquered. The second was Arioch, or Arrius, his Son. He was thus called because of his Courage and Cruelty in War; for Arioch signifies a mighty roaring Lion; Arius, Mars. This man, during the life of his Father, was created King of Lassir, that is, Assyria, for so it is called in the Chaldaean Tongue; the chief City whereof is Nineveh, and lies from Ierusalem North-eastward six hundred eighty four Miles. The third was Keder-laomer King of the Elamites in Persia, 1200 miles from Ierusalem toward the East. This Prince had a great command in that Country. Kedar signifies an Ornament or Crown; Laomer, well deser∣ving. The fourth was Thideal King of the Nations. He kept his Court in Da∣mascus, the Metropolis of Assyria, some 160 miles from Ierusalem North∣ward.
Thideal signifieth an exalted Lord; of Alah, that is, to be lifted up. These four Kings were Confederates, and bent their Expedition princi∣pally against Atoroh and Kirithaim, which they took, and spoiled all the Country round about with Fire and Sword: and their Armies being reti∣red from the Spoil, met in the Valley of Siddim (where now the Dead Sea runneth) and there pitched their Tents. In this place, after a cruel and sharp War, they conquered the five Kings of that beautiful and pleasant Soil of Pentapolis, (for so it was called because of those five Cities that were in it) where, among others, they took Lot Captive, with all his Substance. Of Astoroth. AStoroth seems to be the City of Venus, because the Citizens thereof worshipped her: for Astoroth is a Goddess of the Sidonians, and is compounded of Ash, which signifies a company of Stars, and Tor, placed in order. The Srians call Venus Ashtoroth. This Town lay in the Land of Gilead, and belonged to the half Tribe of Manasses beyond Iordan, 56 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. In this City the four Kings of the East conquered the Gyants of Karnaim, that were mighty Princes and Commanders there, when they made War against that and Kiriathaim. Not far from hence also in the Land of Ham, there dwelt certain Gyants called Zusim, of Zus and Hamah, which signifies to stir up Commotion. These were very great, strong, and stately People, and had the Command of all the Countries thereabouts, which they held in great fear, and were conquered by the four Kings. Of Kiriathaim. KIriathaim was a City in the Tribe of Reuben beyond Iordan, Josh. 13. twenty two miles from Ierusalem towards the East, and so called be∣cause it was divided into many Parts and Divisions. The Heathens corrupt∣ly call it Carthage. The Hebrews derive it from Kiriath, which signifies a City, and Emah, Terror. Here dwelt the Emims, a grave and farful peo∣ple; for so their name signifies. Of Hazezon Thamar. THIS City took the name from a Palm-tree, or a Palm bank. Of this kind of Wood the Israelites made their Arrows, and therefore derive it from Charar, which signifieth to shoot; and Thamar, a Palm-tree. This City standeth upon the Bank of the Dead Sea, twenty miles from Ierusalem North-east, upon a very fruitful Soil, where was found plen∣ty of Palm-trees and precious Balsam; and by some called Engedi, or the Lambs Well, being derived from Ein and Gedi, which signifieth Fontem
haeduli lactantis, that is, The Well of a sucking Lamb or Goat. Not far from hence stood the Cave where David cut off the outward lap of King Saul's Garment,  Sam. 24. Of the plentiful Valley Siddim. THIS Valley stood there where now the Dead Sea runneth, and took that name from the fertility of the Soil, and seems to have some affini∣ty with the Hebrew word Sdel, which signifies a Field, partly arable, part∣ly Pasture and Medow, furnished with Trees, Herbs, and Orchards. In this place stood divers Wells of Bitume, from whence the Inhabitants fetch'd Caement to build their Houses with; but after, for their Wickedness (which was so great, as it appeareth in Gen. 18. that the Cry thereof asnded into Heaven) the Lord did grievously punish them, first with War, by which the Inhabitants were destroyed; and after that, with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; so that (as is aforesaid) this goodly Valley is nothing but a stinking Lake. The Travels of the Aegyptian Maid Hagar. AFter Sara had preferred Hagar to that high Grace as to make her equal with her self, she growing proud thereof, contemned her Mi∣stress, and in recompence of that Favour, carried her slf very presumptu∣ously towards her; which Sara seeking to restrain, offered to her Son hard Measure; which Abraham (upon her Complaint) winked at: whereupon, Hagar, partly oppress'd with Grief, partly with Envy, privily stole away from her Mistress, and went from the Valley of Mmre near Hebron, to the Well of Life, sixteen Miles Southward, Genesis 16. and it is to be thought, that her Journey tended towards Aegypt, which was her native Country; for this Well lay directly in the way as they went down into Egypt. This flight of Hagar without doubt did greatly trouble Abraham's House, and put him and his Wife into a great sorrow and fear, lest she should destroy her self and the Infant, or fall into some other Danger. Wherefore, that God might make evident the exceeding Care he had of them, he sent an Angel unto Hagar, and willed her to return unto her Master: which Angel, some think was the Son of God, for he was called by the name of Ieho∣vah, Gen. 16. which name was not communicated to any created Angel. Whereupon, Hagar, according to his Command, went back again to her Mistress Sarah into the Valley of Mamre, 16 miles, Gen. 16. From Hebron, Hagar went with her Mistress to that Kingly City Gerar, six miles, Gen. 20.
At Gerar she and her Son Ismael were put out of her Masters house, and going in the way that leadeth into Egypt, they lost themselves in the Wilder∣ness of Beersaba, after they had travelled twelve miles from Gerar: where, oppress'd with want both of Water and other necessaries, she fainted and her Son also; wherefore she laid him under a Tree, and about a Bows shoot off sate down and wept, expecting nothing but death. As she was in this misery, God heard the voice of the Child, and sent an Angel unto her, say∣ing, Fear not, for I will make of thy child a great Nation. And God opened her eyes, and lo, close by her there was a Well, so she went and filled her bottle, and gave her Boy drink. At this time Ismael was fifteen years of age; So God blessed the Child, and he became an Archer, and lived in the Wilderness. From thence she and her Son went into the Wilderness of Pharan, eighty miles, where Ismael married an Egyptian, Gen. 21. So all the Travels of Hagar the Egyptian Maid were 132 miles. Of the Fountain of Hagar, which is also called the Well of Life. THIS Well lieth between ared and Kades-Bernea, ten miles from Ierusa∣lem towards the South. Some call it the Well of the Living and Seeing, because God did there look mercifully upon Hagar, when she fled from her Mistriss. Here Isaac dwelt, and had his two Sons, Esau and Iacob, Genes. 26. Afterwards it was called the Well of the Living God, and seemeth mystical∣ly to represent Baptism, the Lavor of Grace and Regeneration by the opera∣tion and special working of the Spirit: for the Church (like Hagar with her Son Ismael) travelling through the Wilderness of this World, is press'd with a multitude of Sins; and seeing her own misery, finds no remedy but by Faith in Christ Jesus, to be delivered from so heavy a Burthen; wherefore they joyning together in Prayer, crave the merciful audience and gracious assistance of God, That it would please him of his goodness to refresh them with the Water of Life, the Doctrine of Grace, that so they may be made capable of eternal Glory. For Hagar signifies a Pilgrim, and Ismael, a godly and good man whom the Lord heareth: who travelling together with his Mother the Church in this World, fighteth against the Enemies thereof, and shooteth the Arrows of Faith against all infernal and cruel Beasts. For Scha∣mah signifies, He hath heard; and El, The Almighty God, who mercifully heareth the fervent Prayers and Petitions of the Just; according to that of St. Iames, ch. 5. 15. Ismael was born Ann. Mundi 2035. Abraham being then 86 years of age. He was circumcised at thirteen, he went from his Father at fifteen; he was at Abraham's Funeral, being 89 years of age; he died when he was 137 years of age, fifty years after the death of Abraham, and left behind him twelve Sons, as Iacob did, which were the Princes of their Families, as was his. Of which the Apostle Paul hath an excellent Allegory; Abraham had two Sons,
one by the Bond-woman, another by the Free-woman: he that was of the Bond-woman was according to the Flesh, but he that was of the Free-wo∣man was by Promise. By which things another thing is meant: for the one, which is Agar of Mount Sinai, gendereth unto Bondage; for Agar or Sinai is a Mountain in Arabia, and answereth to Ierusalem that now is; and she is in Bondage with her Children: but Ierusalem which is above is free, fr it is written, Rejoyce thou Barren, &c. Wherefore we are no more of the Bond-woman, (which is the Law) but of the Free; no by our own Works or Righteousness, but by Faith in Christ, who maketh us Heirs of that Hea∣venly Ierusalem. Where Ishmael dwelt. PAran a City of Arabia the Stony, stood an 104 miles from Ierusalem South-ward, and taketh the name from fertility; for Parah with the Hebrews signifies a fruitful root. From this Metropolitan Town, the Desart of Arabia the Stony, near Cades, taketh name: of which mention is made, Num. 13. and 14. Deut. 1. Gen. 14. 21. Habac. 3. and is called the Desart of Pharan. Here Ishmael, that excellent Archer and Hunter dwelt, after that with great power and strength he had conquered all the Neighbouring Princes and People thereabout. His Posterity also inhabited these Parts, and after his name were called Ishmaelites, some eighty miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the South. These People were excellent Souldiers, and of noble cou∣rage; their principal delight was shooting, and therein they exceeded others, living for the most part by Hunting and Pillage, and so they continue to this day. The Saracens, who likewise had their abiding in those Parts, were derived from that Family, though they had rather take their name from Sa∣ra, and from thence Saracens: These are of the Opinion of the Turks. The Travels of Eleazar the Servant of Abraham. AFter Eleazar had sworn to his Master to take a Wife for his Son Isaac of the Generation of his Fathers, he went from the Valley of Mamre near Hebron, to Haran a City of Mesopotamia, 468 miles off, and there made a Contract with Rebecca the Daughter of Bethuel, and Sister of Laban, whom he took along with him, and returned to his Ma∣ster. So that his Journey to and again was 944 miles. These things happen∣ed in the Year of the World 2089, and before Christ, 1879, Isaac then be∣ing forty years of age. This Eleazar was Steward of Abraham's house, and born at Damascus, the chief City of Syria. He was so called, because God was his help; Eleazar being a compound word of El and Ezaer, which signifies Almighty God the
helper. From whence we may perceive, that God is the Keeper of the Poor, and a ready helper in time of Tribulation; according to that in the Psals, All they that know thee trust in thee; because thou, O Lord, hearest their Pray∣ers, and bringest them out of trouble. Rebecca, as it should seem, took her name from the expectation of Eternal Life; for Rebechan in Hebrew doth denote such a Woman, which expect∣eth a free delivery frm all Calamity, and an inheritance of eternal Life. There∣fore Rebecca is a notable Type of the Church of God, which is the Spouse of Chit, shadowed in Isaac; as shall hereafter be more plainly manifested. The Travels of the Patriarch Isaac. ISaac being young, went with his Father Abraham from Berzeba to Mount Moriah, where his Father would have offered him unto God, as the Lord commanded him, which is forty miles, Genes. 22. 2. From thence with his Father he returned again to Berzeba, which is forty miles. 3. From Berzeba he travelled with his Father to Hebron, by the Plain of Mamre, which is 16 miles. 4. From the Plain of Mamre, Isaac travelled Southward, to the Fountain of Life, which is 16 miles, and there he dwelt, Gen. 24. 5. From thence he returned back again to his Fathers Burial, who was laid in that double Cave in Mamre, which is 16 miles. 6. From thence he returned back again to the Well of Life, where he dwelt; 16 miles. 7. From the Fountain of Life, he went to Gerar, which is eight miles; where Abimelech seeing the Beauty of his Wife Rebecca, would have ra∣vish'd her, and for fear, she told him that she was his Sister, Gen. 26. 8. From Gerar, Isaac went Westward to the Valley of Gerar, which is eight miles, and there he caused the Well to be digged up again, which the Inhabitants had stopped up, Gen. 26. 9. From thence he went to Beersaba, which is four miles; where the same Night the Lord appeared unto him, and said, I am the God of thy Father Abraham, fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless and multiply thy seed for my Servant Abraham's sake, Gen. 26. 10. From Beersaba he returned again to Hebron by the Plain of Mamre, which is 16 miles: here Abraham, Sarah and Rebecca died, and were bu∣ried, Gen. 35. So all the Travels of the Patriarch Isaac were one hundred orty eight miles.
The typical signification of Isaac. THE Name of Isaac is derived from Laughter; for Zakah in Hebrew is as much as quod risit is in Latin, which signifieth that he laughed; and from hence Zechock signifies a Laughter, and Isaac, Mirth, or one that re∣joyceth with Mirth. This Name was given to him by God before his Na∣tivity, Gen. 17. 18. There were seven that were named by God before their Nativity, viz. Ishmael, Gen. 16. Isaac, Gen. 17. Cores or Cyrus King of the Persians, Esa. 44. Sampson, Iudg. 13. Iosia King of Iuda, 1 King. 13. Iohn Bap∣tist, and Iesus Christ the Son of God, Luke. 1. of whom Isaac was a notable Type. For Christ is our true rejoycing, the Laughter, Mirth, and Delight of the whole Church of God. Abraham upon the day of the Nativity of Isaac made a great Feast, to which, no doubt, he called many godly men, and perhaps some of the Patriarchs: for there was then living Sarag, Arpha∣xad, Salah, Heber, Thamar, and Sem, the Son of Noah, who also had a certain knowledge of Gods promise to Abraham, and that of the seed of Isa∣ac should come the Saviour of the World. And as Abraham when he would have offered his Son unto the Lord, carried the Fire and the Sword, but Isaac the Wood upon which he should be slain and burned, (O miserable sight, especially to a Father, to see his only Son and Heir, which was miraculously begotten, even then when he was without hope of Issue, burnt to Ashes before his Face! This was on Mount Moriah, a little from Salem or Ierusalem) even so our Saviour Christ, for the sins that man commits and carries about him, bore upon his Shoulders the wooden Cross, whereupon he was offered an acceptable Sacri∣fice to his Father, that so by his Mediation and Satisfaction we might re∣ceive Pardon for them: and this was likewise done upon Mount Calvary, a little from Ierusalem. And as the Lord provided another Sacrifice for Abraham, that so he might save his Son, which was a Ram tied and in∣tangled in Thorns; so God provided a Sacrifice for the Salvation of the World, even Jesus Christ our Mediator, who is that immaculate and pre∣cious Lamb of God; whose Head being crowned with Thorns, and hang∣ing upon the Cross, by his precious Death opened unto us the door of eter∣nal Life, and made us capable of everlasting Happiness, Iohn 19. 1 Peter 1. Such was the love of Abraham, a Father, unto God, such the love of God, a Father, unto man, that they spared not their only Sons, the one typically to represent the other. The other, that is, the only begotten Son of God, to dye effectually for Abraham, Isaac, and all Mankind, Ioh. 3. Gen. 22.
The Travels of the Patriarch Jacob. FRom Bersaba Iacob went to Bethel, which is 48 miles, and there he saw a Ladder that reached down from Heaven, whereby the An∣gels ascended and descended. Genes. 28. 2. From Bethel he went to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 432 miles; where he marryed Leah and Rachel, Gen. 28. 3. From Haran in Mesopotamia he went to Mount Gilead, which is 380 miles: and when Laban pursued him (at the Commandment of the Lord) he made a League with him, Gen. 31. 4. From Mount Gilead he went to Mahanaim, which is 16 miles, and there he met with the Angels of God, Gen. 31. 5. From Mahanaim he passed the Water and went to Penuel, which is four miles, and there wrestled with the Angel of God, Gen. 32. 6. From Penuel he went to Succoth, where he pitched his Tents, two miles, Gen. 33. 7. From Succoth he passed the River of Iordan, and went to Sichem, not far from Salem (about eight miles) where his Daughter Dinah was ravished, Gen. 33. 8. From thence he went to Bethel, which is eight and twenty miles, Gen. 31. 9. From Bethel he went to Bethlehen Euphrata, which is twelve Miles; in which way Rachel died, and was buried not far from Bethlehem; then Iacob went forward, and set up his Tents near to the Tower of Eder, a mile from Bethlehem towards the South, Gen. 35. 10. From Bethlehem Euphrata and the Tower of Eder, he returned again to the Valley of Mamre near Hebron, to his Father Isaac, which is 20 miles, Gen. 35. 11. From Hebron he went to Beersaba, which is 16 miles, Gen. 38. 12. From Beersaba he went to the Town of Ony a little off Aegypt in the land of Gossen, which is 168 miles, where Ioseph his Son gave him honou∣rable Entertainment, Gen. 46. 13. From Ony he went to the CityThis was the Chief City of Aegypt. Zoan, which is also call∣ed Tanis, twenty eight miles, where he was presented to King Pharaoh, Gen. 47. 14. From Tanis he returned to Ony, which is 28 miles, and there he dwelt and dyed in the Land of Gossen, Gen. 49. The Description of the Towns and Places to which Jacob travelled. Of Bethel. BEthel was a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, eight miles from Jerusa∣lem towards the North, and signifies The house of God. In times past
it was called Luz; but Jacob seeing in that place the Vision of the Ladder, with the Angels ascending and decending upon it, and because there the Lord renewed the Covenant with him concerning his Seed, and the coming of Christ; he therefore called it Bethel. Afterward, Jeroboam having unlawfully usurp'd the Kingdom of Rehobo∣ham, caused a Calf to be set up there; for which cause, it was then called Bethaven, which signifieth the house of Sin and abominable Offence. Vatablus is of opinion, that there are two Bethels, one in the Tribe of Benjamin, the other in the Tribe of Ephraim, both not far from Hay: but if this should be granted, then these two Towns should stand within two miles one of the other, which seemeth very absurd; therefore I dare boldly affirm, that there was but one Bethel, which stood upon the borders of Benjamin and Ephraim, both Tribes bordering upon the South-side of the Town of Luz, Josh. 16. and 18. This Town of Bethel was at first in the Suburbs of Luz, until the Divisi∣on of the Tribes; for then both these Tribes of Ephraim and Benjamin, end∣ing in that place, so much increased this Town, that they became both one City, and so were called Bethel, Ie. 28. and 25. Iosh. 7. and 18. From hence there is a two-fold Mystery to be apprehended: the first, of Jacob, whose sleeping in this place upon a Stone, caused this City or Town to be built, and to retain the name of Bethel, that is, The house of God. So whosoever seeks to have eternal Life, must rest upon that corner stone Christ Jesus, the Son of the everliving God, and by faith be incorporated into the Church, which is the House of God, of which Christ (the anoint∣ed of the Lord) is both King and Priest for ever. Secondly, as Jacob rest∣ing upon this corner Stone, saw the Angels ascending and descending from Heaven unto Earth, so by this Incorporation into the body of the Church (of which Christ is the Head) by Faith and Baptism, our Souls are made capable to ascend into that heavenly Tabernacle, which he hath prepared for all those that believe: according to that in John 14. I am the way, the truth, and the life, no Man cometh unto the Father but by me only. And who∣soever is assured of this Ladder (that reacheth from Heaven unto Earth) may well say with Iacob, Surely the Lord Jesus Christ is in this place; here is nothing but the House of God, and here is the Gate of Heaven; as Christ himself testifieth in the tenth of Iohn, I am the door, and whosoever entreth not by me, &c. So that Christ is the Head of his Church, the Lad∣der that ascendeth into Heaven, and the door whereby we may enter in∣to eternal Life. Of Gilead. THIS Land of Gilead was a Country that lay between Iordan and the Mountain of Gilead, or rather between the Sea of Galilee and the
ilead, sixty miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east: for the beginning at Mount Gilead, extended thence unto , and separated the Countrey of Israel beyond Iordan, from of the Ammonites. But that part which lieth between the Sa Ammon, is properly called Gilead; for when Iacob and Labn either with other, in the Mount Gilead, they gathered a Stones, and making a Banquet, eat together upon it, Gen. 13. and thence that Mountain, and all the Countrey thereabouts, took the ; For Laban in the Syrian Tongue is called JEGAR SAHADUTA, ep of covenant. But Iacob in the Hebrew Language, called that , together with all the Countrey thereabouts, Galed, or Galaad; the heap f tetimony: for Gal signifieth a heap or grave, and Galal, he rolled, or he thrust into a round heap. From whence the Greek word , to roul, and , a circle, is derived: Also Edah signifies testimony with the Hebrews, being derived from Id, which signifies testatus e, that is, he beareth witness; and from hence , amongst the Grecians is derived, which signifieth a witness. This Land of Gilead was very fertile and pleasant, being adorned with many Castles and strong Cities: and in this Countrey the Prophet Eliah was taken up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot, 1 Reg. 17. 2 Reg. 2. The Grecians call this Decapolin, from ten Cities that are strongly built in that Countrey, Marc. 7. Of Machanaim. MAchanaim was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Gd, near to the floud of Iordn and Iaboch, forty four miles from Ierusalem toward the South-east, and scituate in the Land of Gilead beyond Iordan; being so called of the Patriarch Iacob, because there he saw the Tents and Army of Angels, which he understood to be his assistants against his Brother Esau, whom he feared, Gen. 31. For Chana signifieth Castrametatus est, that is, the Tents are measured out; from whence Machanaim is the proper name of a place, being derived from two Tents of Angels which appeared to Iacob, that they might defend him in his Journey; For the Angels of God compass them about that fear him, Psalm 33. and therefore Iacob with great Joy brake out and said, The Tents of God are here, and called it Machanaim. This was as∣signed to the Levites, Iosh. 21. and here David was received, when he fled from his Son Absalom, 2 Sam. 17. Here Iacob wrestled with the Angel, Gen. 32. Of Pnuel, or Penuel. THIS Town was upon the East-side of Iordan, close by the mouth of the River Iaboch, in the Tribe of Gad, forty miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the South-east; and is derived from Panah and El, which signifies, He
beheld the Almighty God face to face: and for that cause he called it, Penuel, or Pnuel, which is, the face of God, Gen. 32. The Tower of this Town was de∣stroyed in Gideons time, Iudg. 8. Of Succoth. THIS is a Town beyond Iordan, not far from Penuel, in the Tribe of Gad, 40 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east. Here Iacob set up his Tabernacles, and continued for a while; from whence it borrows the name. For Sachach signifies a covering, and from thence it is called Succha, and  with the Greeks, which signifies, a shield, covering, defence, or tabernacle: Of this Town there is mention in Iosh. 13. 2 Chr. 4. Gideon caused the Inhabitants of this Town of Succoth to be torn to pieces with thorns, Iudg. 8. Of Salem. SAlem is a Town of the Sichamites, lying towards the East side of the Ri∣ver Iordan, and in the midst of the Tribe of Manasses, forty miles from Ierusalem towards the North, not far from Sichem, where Dinah, Iacob's Daughter, was ravished, Gen. 33. and 34. In Aenon near to this place Iohn Baptist baptized, and signifies a City of Peace and Integrity. Of Bethlem Euphrata. THIS Town was distant from Ierusalem towards the South, six miles; it was scituated in a pleasant and fruitful Countrey, and from thence took the Name: for Bethlachem is called The house of Bread; Euphrata signifies fruitful, being derived from Parah, that is, to fructifie; and Baith signifieth a house, from the affinity that it hath to Banah, that is, to build: so that Baithlachem doth denote unto us the house of bread, and other fruits and meats that are fit to be eaten. Here was Christ the Son of God born, that Bread of Life, of which whosoever eateth shall live eternally, Ioh. 6. And here David was the second time anointed King, 1 Sam. 16. Of this Town you may read more Luke 2. Of Rachels Grave. ABout a mile from Bethlem towards the North, Rachel the Wife of Ia∣cob was buried, over whom he set a stately Sepulchre, made of Marble stones, or Pyramides; these Stones are seen to this day right hand of the way, as you go from Bethlem to Ierusale: thence all the Land thereabouts is called the Land of Rachel. or Herod killed the innocent Children, all the Inhabitants thereabouts and would not be comforted, Matth. 2. Ierem. 31.
Of the Town of Aeder. THis was a Watch Tower of the Bethlemites, about a mile from Beth∣lem, towards the South, and was so called from the flocks of Sheep that resorted thither: for Migdal signifies a Tower, and Aeder, a flock or Herd; for thereabouts were very fertile Pastures. Here the Angels told the Shepherds of the Nativity of Christ, lying at Bethlem in a Manger: and in the place of that Tower there was a Church built, which in Ieroms time was called Angelus ad Pastores, because the Angels there appeared to the Shepherds. Here Iacob dwelt for a time, and in this place Reuben lay with Billah his Wife, Gen. 36. Of Gosen and Ony. GOsen was a very delectable and fruitful Countrey in the Land of Egypt, the Metropolitan whereof was Ony, two hundred miles from Ierusalem, towards the South-west: In this City Iacob dwelt. The typical signification of the Patriarch Jacob. JAcob signifies a Supplanter, and was a Type of Christ, who is that Supplan∣ter of Sathan, and by his death hath broken his head in pieces. Again, he is the type of a Christian man: for as he, wrestling with the Angel, ob∣tained a Blessing; so every good man continually striving with Perseve∣rance in Prayer, shall at length obtain an everlasting blessing: for, for this cause was Iacob called Israel, that is, the Prince of God, in that he prevailed with God: so all those that belive in Christ, are called Princes of the King∣dom of Heaven; because by his Mediation they have prevailed with God, and are made partakers of Eternal Life. Iacob had two Wives, Leah and Rachel; Lea signifies wearied, and was a type of the old Mosaical Church: for that was oppressed and wearied with the Laws of Moses, and brought forth Priests, Levites, Kings, and Warlike Princes, by which the People of the Jews became oppressed and wearied by extream Labours, and at length were miserably extinguished: for as it is in the fifteenth of the Acts of the Apostles, The Law of Moses was an intol∣lerable and troublesom Burthen. But Rachel signifies a Sheep, and is a Type and Sign of the Church of God in the New Testament, as Christ himself speaketh in the tenth of John, My sheep hear my voice and follow me, and I will give them eternal Life. Sheep are naturally patient and peaceable; so all such as are of Christs Church, seek after Patience and Peace. Leah was nothing so fair, but much more fruitful; Rachel was nothing so fruitful, but a great deal fairer. Leah was the Mother of Benjamin, which signifies Sorrow; Rachel of Ioseph, who was a Type of Christ.
Of the Travels of Esau. ESAV travelled from Mount Sier in Mesopotamia, to the Town of Pnuel or Penuel, eighty miles, to meet his Brother Iacob: where the singu∣lar civility and humility of Iacob towards him, is worthy observation. For he first sent to meet him, then he did him obedience to the ground seven several times, and so saluted him, saying, Lo, these are the Children which God of his Grace hath given thy Servant. From whence it may be gathered, That it becometh every man (if it be possible) to win his Ene∣my to Peace and Concord rather by Humanity and Humility, than by force: for Esau, seeing this kind of Reverence, though before he had a full determination to do him violence, yet now he comes to meet him, embraces him, takes him about the neck, begins to weep, and kisses him, yea, such was their love, that they both wept with joy, Gen. 33. After, Esau returning, went home to Sier back again, eighty miles: these things hapned in the year of the World 2206; when both Brethren were about 89 years of Age, and in the year before Christ 1762. Of Mount Sier. MOUNT Sier, where Esau and his Posterity dwelt, is forty miles from Ierusalem towards the South; and was so called of Sier, the King or Lord thereof, of whom came the Horrites, who being driven thence by the fourteen Sons of Esau, into Arabia the Stony, where they continued, Gen. 36. It was called Edom of Esau, and then Idumaea, Gen. 25. and the Inhabitants thereof Edomites, or Idumaeans. The typical meaning of Esau. ESAV signifies a Factor, and was so called from Redness: The Enemies of the Church colouring themselves red with the blood of the Godly: For as Rebecca had in her Womb two Sons, that is, Esau and Iacob, one elect∣ed the other reprobated: so in the Church there are found two sorts of People, good and evil; some are wicked and impious, contemners of Gods word, and persecuters of the Church; as after, the posterity of Esau: was. But there are others that are the faithful Children of God, that hope through the mediation of our blessed Saviour, to be made heirs of everlasting hap∣piness, and be crowned with him in his Kingdom with the Crown of Glo∣ry. So that here the saying of our Saviour may be verified; the first shall be last, d the last shall be first; for Esau was the eldest, yet lost his Birth-right; and Iacob was the youngest, yet got the Blessing.
Of the Travels of the Patriarch Juda. JVDA travelled from Sichem, where Jacob dwelt, and went to the Town of Odulla, some forty and four miles, where he was married to the daughter of one Chananei, whose name was Schuah, which signifies, a happy Saviour, by her he had two Children in that place, Viz. Ger and Onan. From thence he went to Timnah to shear his Sheep, six miles: and as he tur∣ned aside out of the way, he committed incest with his daughter-in-law Tha∣mar, when she was about 26 years of Age. Afterwards he went twice with his Brethren into Egypt, to buy Corn at Zoan, where Joseph at that time was; for the Famine was very great round a∣bout. So that reckoning his Journey twice two and again, it amounted to 822 miles; for Zoan was 208 miles from Hebron, where Jacob and his Sons dwelt. Lastly, he returned again with his Father and his Brother into Aegypt, 208 miles. These things happened in the year of the World 1239. and before Christ 1729. The Description of the Towns and places to which the Patriarch Juda travelled. Of Odullam. THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Juda, eight miles from Jerusalem to∣wards the South-west, and signifies The Testimony of the Poor: being derived of Ed, which signifies a Testimony, and Dallimo, such as are called Poor. Here David hid himself from the fury of Saul in a Cave, 1 Sam. 22. Jerom knew this Town, and saith that it was a Village. This was a Type of the Faithful, who being still subject to the calamities and miseries of this World, and persecuted for Righteousness sake, are glad with David to seek Holes and Caves to defend them from their wicked Persecuters. Of Thimnah. THimnah is a City in the borders of the Tribe of Judah and Dan, scituated in Mount Ephraim, six miles from Jerusalem towards the North-west, and signifies a perfect and fully finished City; being derived from Thamam, that is, fully and absolutely finished; for it was adorned with many very fair and spa∣cious Buildings, set up by Joshua: for in his time it was a fair and large City, and at such time as the Children of Israel invaded Canaan, he had much ado to win it: Therefore the Children of Israel, for his great Valour, and to ma∣nifest their thankfulness towards him, they gave it to him and to his Po∣sterity for ever; and here he lyeth buried, Ioshua 24. Here Sampson mar∣ried his wife, and by the way killed the Lyon mentioned in the fourteenth of
Iudges. This is a Type of the Church, wherein Christ Jesus the true Ioshuah is the Head, illuminating the same by the bright shining beams of his Gospel, the lustre whereof hath gone throughout the whole World. Of the Travels of the Patriarch Joseph. WHEN Ioseph was sent from Hebron by his father Jacob, he went to Sichem to seek his brothers, 60 miles, Gen. 37. 2. From thence he went to Dothan, four miles, where by his Brothers, he was thrown into a Pit, and after sold to the Ishmaelites, Gen. 37. 3. From Dothan he was carried to Tanis in Egypt, and there sold to Poti∣pher, Pharaohs chief Steward, 272 miles. 4. From Tanis he went to meet his Father in the Land of Gosen, which is 28 miles, Gen. 46. 5. From thence he turned back again to Tanis, and presented his Father and Brethren unto Pharaoh, Gen. 47. which is 28 miles. 6. From thence he went back to Ony to see his Father, who now was sick unto death, there receiving his Blesing, he closed his eyes: which was 28 miles. 7. From thence he returned back again to Tanis, which is 28 miles. 8. From Tanis he went back to Ony with a great company of Horses and Chariots, preparing an honourable Funeral for his Father, Gen. 15. being 28 miles. 9. From Ony he went to Atad, which lies upon the further side of Jordan toward the East; which is 240 miles, where he made a great lamentation for the Death of his Father seven days, Gen 50. The reason why Joseph went thus far about, was because he went with such a company towards Hebron, that the Idumaeans, through whose Country he should have gone, would not suffer him to pass that way, standing in fear of his power. 10. From Atad he went to Hebron, the Metropolis of the Tribe of Judah, near to which stood the double Cave in the Vale of Mamre, where Jacob was buried, which was 40 miles, Gen. 50. 11. From thence to Heliopolis, a City of the Aegyptians, where Joseph set up a stately Academy for all Aegpyt, which was accounted 200 miles. 12. From thence he went to Tanis, or Zoan, which was the chief defence and Metropolitan City of all Aegyt, being accounted 6 miles. So all the Travels of the Patriarch Ioseph was 1962 miles.
A Description of the Places and Cities through which Ioseph travelled. Of Dothan. DOTHAN was a City in the Tribe of Manasseh, forty and four miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and distant six miles from Tiberias towards the West, and signifies a commandment, being derived of Dothor Da∣thath, that is, he commandeth or ordaineth, Here Joseph was thrust into an empty Ditch, and sold to the Ishmaelites, Gen. 37. Here Elias the Prophet, being besieged by the Syrians, shewed to his Servant the Host of Angels that defended him with the Chariots of Fire, &c. 2 King. 6. Here Holophernes was slain, who had pitched his Tents against Bethulia; for Dothan is a City which at this day remaineth at the foot of the Mount of Bethuel, being scitu∣ated in a fertile and pleasant place, compassed about with fair Vines, Olives, and pleasant Medows, where the Inhabitants do shew that ancient Ditch wherein Ioseph was cast, when his brothers sold him to the Ishmaelites; accor∣ding to that of Solomon, One Generation passeth, and another cometh, but the Earth indureth for ever. Of Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun. THIS City is called by the Prophet Esay, chap. 19. Irheri, which signi∣fies The City of the Sun, and is derived of Ir and Cheres, which sig∣nifies The brightness of the Sun, and distant from Ierusalem 224 miles, to∣wards the South-west, six miles and a half from Zoan, or Tanis. This was a goodly City, and in times past the Kings of Aegypt have in that place kept their Courts and places of residence. Here was a flourishing Academy, wherein was taught Astronomy, Cosmography, and many other Liberal: Arts and Scienecs, with great care and diligence, but principally Divinity (as Mun∣ster saith) being adorned with many benefits and priviledges; for it was thought that the Patriarch Ioseph was the first Founder of it, and taught there, Gen. 47. Here dwelt Dionisius the Areopagit, a Student of Athens, who at such time as our Saviour Christ was crucified, at Noon day (the Moon then being in the full) seeing the Sun totally darkened, said to his Master Apollophan, Either the God of Nature suffereth, or the Fabrick of the World is dissolved. The said Dionisius was afterwards converted by the Apostle Paul, in the City of Athens. Of Goraen Atad. THIS Town, or Corn-floor, was beyond Iordan, not far from Bethabara, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east, (Here Ioseph and therest of the Aegyptians bewailed the Death of Iacob) and took the name from Thorns and Briers that compassed it every where about.
The Interpretation or Allegory of the Patriarch Joseph, and of his Life. JOSEPH was a type of Christ divers ways: for as Iosephs Coat, being of divers colours, was dipped in the Blood of Goats, so Christ, being very God, taking upon him the Humane Nature, and sprinkled with the Blood of his stripes and wounds, (being the Lamb of God slain for the sins of the World) was also made changeable and of divers Colours. Again, as Ioseph was sent by Iacob to seek his Brethren, so Christ was sent by God, his Father, to seek the lost sheep of Israel, which, according to the flesh, were his brethren, Mat. 15. And as the Brethren of Ioseph were so great Enemies to him that it was impossible for them to dissemble their hatred towards him, but that both in words and deeds, they must needs express their bitterness, (En∣vy being the common companion of Virtue) the Iews, the brethren of Christ, to whom the knees of all things both in Heaven, in Hell, and in Earth bow, persecuting him with Taunts, Mocks, and Stripes, yea, unto death, because he professed himself to be a good man, and the Son of the Ever-living God. And as the Ismaelites and Midianites, to whom Ioseph was sold by Iudah, was of the stock of Ioseph, the one being derived from Ishmael the Son of A∣braham by his maid Hagar, the other of Midian the Son of his second wife Keturah: so Christ was sold by Iudas, his Disciple, to the Jews, his kindred ac∣cording to the flesh, if you respect the Nation. The difference was in the price; Joseph, the Type, being sold but for twenty pieces of Silver, Christ, the Sub∣stance, sold at thirty. The End of the Book of Genesis. Of the Travels of the Prophet Moses, and the Children of Israel out of Aegypt. IN the year of the World, 2412, and before Christ, 1554, Moses (being then about forty years old) fled out of Aegypt into the Land of Midian, 180 miles, where he married Ziporah, the daughter of Rivel, Exod. 3. 2. From thence he went to Mount Sinai, or Horeb, 64 miles, Exod. 3. 7. 3. From Mount Horeb, he returned to Midian to his brother, 65 miles Ex. 4. 4. From Midian he went to Thanis in Aegypt, 180 miles, Ex. 12. 13. 5. From thence he went with the Children of Israel to Raemses, 48 miles, Ex. 12. 6. From Raemses he went to Succoth, 8 miles, Ex. 13. Num. 33. 7. From Succoth he went to the Wilderness of Etham, eight miles.
8. From Etham he went to Hahiroth, which lyeth right against Baal-zephon 16 miles, Num. 3. 9. From Hahiroth, they passed through the middle of the Red Sea, and travelled three days though the Wilderness of Etham, resting themselves at Marah, which is forty miles: There Moses threw a piece of Wood into the Water, being bitter, and presently it became Sweet as soon as the Wood was thrown in. Exod. 15. Num. 33. 10. From Marah he went to Elim, where there stood 12 Wells of Water and 70 Palm Trees, which is eight miles, Ex. 16. Nu. 33. 11. From Elim they went toward the South, 6 miles, and rested themselves by the Red Sea; Num. 33. 12. From the Red Sea they went to the Wilderness of Zin, where it rained Manna from Heaven, which is 16 miles, Num. 32. 13. From the Wilderness of Zin they went to Daphca, which is 12 miles. Num. 33. 14. From Daphca they went to Alus, which is twelve miles, Num. 33. 15. From Alus they went to Raphidim, being 8 miles: there Moses strook the Rock, and presently Water issued forth, Ex. 27. 16. From Raphidim they went to mount Sina, which is eight miles: there God gave the Commandments, Ex. 19. & 20. 17. From Sina they went to the Graves of Concupiscence, because there the Children of Israel murmured against God for Flesh, and lo it rained Quails into the Camp: which is 8 miles, Num. 11. 18. From the Graves of Concupiscence they went to Hazeroth, which is 8 miles, there Miriam (Moses sister) was strook with Leprosie, Num. 12. 19. From thence they went to Rithma, which is 8 miles, Num. 33. 20. From Rithma they went to Rimon-Parets, which is six miles, Num. 33. 21. From Rimon-Parets they went to Libanon, which is six miles. 22. From Libanon they went to Rissa, which is six miles, Num. 33. 23. From Rissa they went to Kehelatha, six miles, Num. 33. 24. From Kehelatha they went to the Hill of Sephar, which is four miles. 25. From the Hill of Sephar they went to Harada, four miles and a half, Num. 33. 26. From Harada they went to Maceheloth, four miles. Num. 33. 27. From Maceheloth they went to Thahath, four miles, Num. 33. 28. From Thahath they went to Thara, four miles, Nu. 33. 29. From Thara they went to Mithka, four miles, Num. 33. 30. From Mithka they went to Casmona, eight miles, Num. 33. 31. From Casmona they went to Moseroth, 32 miles, Num. 33. 32. From Moseroth they went to Bneiaecon, 24 miles. 33. From Beiaecon they went to Mount Gidgad, 20 miles. 34. From Mount Gidgad they went to Iotbatha, 24 miles, Num. 33.
35. From Iotbatha they went to Ebrona, 20 miles, Num. 33. 36. From Ebroa they went to Eziongaber, 28 miles. 37. From Eziongaber they went to the Wilderness of Zin-Kades, 48 miles. 38. From Zin-Kades they went to Mount Hor, as God commanded, 48 miles, where Aaron died. 39. From Mount Hor they went to Salmona, 28 miles. 40. From Salmona they went to the Town of Phunon, 20 miles. 41. From Phunon they went to Oboth, 24 miles. 42. From Oboth they went to Igin upon the Hill Abarim, 16 miles. 43. From Igim they went to Dibon Gad, 16 miles, there is the Water Sarum, Num. 31. 33. 44. From Dibon Gad they went to Almon Diblathaim, 16 miles, Num. 33. 45. From Almon Diblathaim they went to the Hill Abarim, 16 miles. 46. From the Hill Abarim they went downward over the River Arnon, to the Field of the Moabites, to the Town of Iachra, 16 miles, where Mo∣ses overcame Sehon King of the Ammorites, with all his Camp. Numb. 21. Deut. 2. 47. From Iachra they went to Hesbon, four miles, which Town Moses won from the King of the Ammorites, Num. 21. Deut. 2. 48. From Hesbon they went to the Town of Iaezer, which Moses won, eight miles, Numb. 21. Deut. 2. 49. From Iaezer they went to Edrei, twelve miles: there Moses overthrew King Og with all his Army at Basan, Num. 21. Deut. 3. 50. From Edrei they went to Mount Libanus, 56 miles, which Moses won. Num. 21. Deut. 3. 51. From Mount Libanus they returned back again to the Field of the Moabites, forty miles, by which Field lyeth the high Hill Pisga, where Moses died, Deut. 34. So all the Travels of the Patriarch Moses were 1424 miles. The Description of the Towns and Places by which Moses travelled with the Children of Israel. Of Midian. MIdian was a metropolitan City of the Midianites, near to the Red Sea, some 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and signifies a Measure, being derived of Madad, which signifies, He hath measured. Here Jethro (Moses Father-in -law) dwelt. In this Town the Kings of Idu∣maea kept their Court, 1 Reg. 11. There was also another City of the same Name, that stood near to Arnon, some twenty four miles from Ierusalem towards the East; so that the Midianites had their seat partly near the Red
Sea, in Arabia Petraea, and partly upon the Confines of the Moabites, ta∣king their beginning from Midian the Son of Abraham, which he had by his Wife Kethura, Gen. 25. Of Horeb. HOREB is a Mount of the Midianites, and is sometimes called by the name of Sina. It lieth 420 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. In this place God appeared to Moses in a flame of Fire, Exod. 3. And as Bernard Britenbach saith, in this place there is a Chappel built, called the Church of S. Mary in the Bush. In this Chappel there is a place shewed where God spake with Moses, Ex. 3. but how true, that I leave, because there are many Churches built by Monks for no other purpose but to deceive Travellers and Pilgrims of their Mony. Of Raemsis. THIS is one of the strong Cities which the Israelites built for Pharaoh, and is a Metropolitan City in the Land of Gossen, 174 miles from Jerusalem towards the South-west, and signifies Joy and Delight, being derived of Ra∣am and Sus, that is, to leap for joy. Of Pihachiroth. THIS was a certain Plain lying between two Hills neer to the Red Sea, and was called Pinaehiroth, which signifies a Mouth cut, or carved out; where the children of Israel pitched their Tents. Here Pharaoh invaded them when they went out of Aegypt, taking opportunity of the place: for they having on either side of them a high Mountain, before them the Red Sea, and behind them a cruel and mighty Tyrant, to the judgment of man, had no means to escape. But the Lord, to express the mightiness of his Power, and that the children of Israel might know who it was that delivered them, made them a Passage, and led them under the conduct of Moses through the Red Sea; in that very place drowning their Enemies which had thought to make a prey of them. A little from this place the Temple of the Idol Baal-zephon is to be seen. Of the Red Sea. THE Red Sea is 160 miles from Jerusalem Southward, betwixt, Arabia and Aegypt, and, as some are of opinion, it taketh the name of the red Scales that grow therein, wherefore in Scripture it is also called the Scaly Sea. Some say it taketh the name from red Sand that lies upon the shore, cast up by the Sea. Others say, that the redness thereof hapneth because of the shadow cast into the Water by the Mountains thereabout. The Vulgar are of opinion, that it is naturally red by reason of the Water; but it is not so
because it is like the water of of the Ocean, clear and salt. Strabo, lib. 16. ob∣serveth that this Sea was so called from Erithraea, and thence Mare Arithraeum; because the word Erithraeum in Greek signifieth red or purple: the Latines call it Mare rubrum, and we, the red Sea. This Erithrae was Son to Perseus and Andromeda, who sometimes dwelt in the Island of that Sea. It is also called the Arabian Gulf, running from the South to the West; and by the Hebrews, I am suph, a Scaly Sea, all which names are at this day used: at the utmost bounds hereof are seen the admirable works of Pharaoh Meco, who would have brought this Sea to the River Nilus, that so he might have sailed thence into the Mediterranean Sea: but this work he could not finish, being opposed by the wise men of Egypt. Here also grows certain Trees that are as red as Brasil wood. Of the mystery of the Red Sea. AS Moses led the Children of Israel through the Red Sea, and deli∣vered them from the Bondage and Captivity of the Kings of Aegypt; so Jesus Christ, the Son of God, by his precious Blood, has deliver∣d us from the house of Bondage, and the tyranny of Sathan: and as Phara∣oh and all his Host was there drowned; so the Sin of Adam, Death, and the De∣vil, in that Sea of Christs blood is utterly drowned, and we delivered from the Pit of Hell. Of Baal-Zephon. THIS was an Idol erected by the Aegyptians near to the shore of the Red Sea, and is called Baal-zephon, that is, the Lord of defence and watchful∣ness, because, as they thought, he resisted Fugitive Servants, as Fagius and other Hebrews observe: being derived from Baal, which signifies a Lord, and Za∣pha, that is, that hath seen, or to behold and see. The Temple of this Idol stood close by the shoar of the Red Sea upon a high hill, very curiously wrought, so that the Children of Israel going through the same could not chuse but see it, yet nevertheless they went securely, when Pharaoh and all his Host were drowned, notwithstanding that their God of Defence was so near them. Of Marah. THIS is a place in the Desart, which took the name of bitterness, distant from Ierusalem 160 miles, towards the South-west. Here Moses made the Water sweet by throwing in Wood: The mystery whereof is, when Adam and Evah had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, they brought bitterness through all the World, yea, the bitterness of Sin and Death: but God shewed unto Moses another Tree, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, who being thrown into the Waters of bitterness, Afflictions, Calamities, Miseries, yea, and the Death of the Cross, for our sakes and sins underwent the curse of the Law; that so taking away the bitterness, we might be made capable of that sweet and delectable place of Eternal Life.
Of Elim. THIS was the sixth resting-place of the Israelites in the Desart, 120 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-west; and is derived from Aial, which signifies a Hart, a strong and swift Creature, of which it seems there were great multitudes which resorted to this place to drink: and from thence it is called Elim. Here stood 12 Fountains and 70 Palm-trees. Of Sin. THIS was a thorny place in the Desart, 156 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the South-west. Here it rained down Quails and Manna from Heaven; being a Type of our Saviour Jesus Christ, that Heavenly Manna which raiseth us up unto Eternal Life, Ioh. 6. and is derived of Manah, which signifies to distribute; and therefore Man or Mannah signifies a distri∣butive Gift, or Meat fallen from Heaven distributively. Sin signifieth a thor∣ny place, from Zemeh, which signifies a Bush: for Christ flourisheth in the midst of his Enemies, as a Lilly amongst thorns, Can. 2. Psal. 10. Of Raphadim. RAphadim was a place where the Children of Israel pitched their Tents in the Desart, not far from Mount Sinai, 132 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west, and signifieth a Grass bench strewed with sweet herbs and flowers; being derived from Raphad, which is as much as to say in our Language, To make a Bed or place for one to lye down on. Here Moses struck the Rock, out of which Water issued, Exod. 17. which was a Type of that Spiritual Rock Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 10. who being struck with the staff of the curse of the Law, out of his precious wounds and side sent forth that Water of Life which runneth into Eternal happiness. In this place the Chil∣dren of Israel fought against the Amalekites, and overcame them, Ex. 17. and here Iethro came unto Moses, where, according to his counsel, there were seventy Elders chosen over the People, Ex. 18. This was a fruitful and pleasant place. Of Mount Sinai. SInai is 120 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and because in that place there are many Bushes and Thorns, it is called Sinai; for Senaeh signifies a Bush. Here the Law (which we call the Ten Commandments) was given; and not unfitly, because like Thorns they prick and vex the Hearts and Consciences of wicked men. It is also called Horeb, or Chareb, which signifies a place made dry. Bernard Britenbach, and many others, in the Month of September 1483, went purposely to see this Mountain, and with great Labour ascended to the top thereof; for (as he saith) it is a great Mountain, and of an extraordinary height; in the lower part round, in the
upper part divided into two tops or mountains, one standing toward the West, the other toward the East. That toward the West is called Horeb, that to the East, Sinai. And from these two it is sometimes called Horeb, sometimes Sinai, being both one Hill of the Base. Between these there lies a fair and spacious Plain, in the middle whereof (and, as it may be thought, in the midst of the Mountain) there stands a Monastery, near to which there is adjoyning a very pleasant Garden and Orchard, plentifully furnished with Date-trees, Fig-trees, and many others, very profitable and pleasant; where in antient times there were many Monks that continued there. But it hap∣pened, that a certain number of Pagans, in hope to find some Booty, came from a Haven of the Red Sea, called Thor, and upon a sudden broke in up∣on them, and put forty of them to the Sword; from whence it was ever after called the Abbey of the forty Martyrs. Now it remains desolate, few or none inhabiting there, only two Monks of St. Katharines Order, and these are also grievously troubled with the incursions of the Arabians. The Or∣chard also is destroyed with Locusts, and the ground become barren. In this Orchard there stands a little Chappel, in which there is a Cave where S. Onu∣phrius the Anchorist lived. At the foot of Mount Sinai, upon the North, standeth the Monastery of St. Katharine, of which the Emperour Iustinian was the first Founder: it is compassed about with a Wall; close by it standeth a goodly Orchard, fur∣nished with divers Trees of Fruit, pleasant and delightful; in that there stand∣eth a goodly Fountain, which watereth all about it. In this place there are a great number of poor Monks, which get their Living by their hands, in the Desart thereabouts. They say that here stood the golden Calf, spoken of Exodus 32. And they shew a round stone lying there, where they say Moses broke the two Tables that were given him by God. To Pilgrims al∣so they shew the Tomb of St. Katharine, standing upon the right side of the Quire, with certain other Relicks of hers. Upon the left side of the Quire, there stands a little door by which you enter into a place called the Chappel of St. Mary of the Bush, where they shew the place of the Bush in which God appeared unto Moses: And, to give grace to their Superstitions, there may none enter into that place but he must put off his hose and shoes. There is another place, where, they say, God commanded Moses to bring up Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu with him, and the seventy Elders; with many other Superstitious Chappels, which would be too tedious and frivolous to recite. Not far from this, there standeth also a Mosko of the Saracens, full as fair and spacious as that of St. Katharines, to which there is adjoyned a certain Turret; hither the Arabians and Saracens do also often come to vi∣sit St. Katharine. At the Ascent of the Mount Horeb, near to the Monastery of St. Katharine, there standeth a Fountain of very clear Water, in the likeness of a Bow,
made of Stone, reaching from the one side of it to the other; and standeth like unto an Arch or Gate. A little above that, at the foot of Mount Horeb, is to be seen the Cave where Eliah rested when the Lord spake un∣to him, 1 Reg. 19. Something above that, is the Cliff of the Rock where Mo∣ses stood by Gods appointment, when he past by, and he saw his back parts, Ex. 33. A little beyond that, is the top of Mount Horeb, where is built a little Chappel that hath an Iron Door, the Keys of which are in the Monks Custody of the Abby of Saint Katherine. In this place they say Moses received the two Tables of Stone; wherein the ten Commandments were written by the Finger of God. Ex. 34. There is none that enters in∣to this Chappel but with great Reverence, bare-foot and bare-legged, and casting themselves upon the Earth, kiss it. About fifteen paces from this, they shew the Cave wherein Moses fasted forty days and forty nights, Ex. 24. 34. A little above that there is a Mosk, to which there daily resorts Arabians and Saracens, in honour of Moses, whom they reverence as a Prophet. Be∣tween these there lieth a Well of cold wholsom Water, which is called Mo∣ses Well. Here seemeth in times past to have been some Monastery; for there are divers Ruins of Walks and Buildings to be seen. This Moun∣tain is round, and difficult to Ascend: it is 7000 steps to the top, and from thence the Red Sea and the Arm thereof (where Pharaoh was drowned when he followed the Children of Israel) may easily be discerned. Mount Sina is much higher than this, and lyeth two days Journey from the Red Sea: Upon the top whereof are many Rocks and great Stones. From thence you may see sundry places, as, a Mountain lying in Thebai∣daes, the great Haven of the Red Sea, the Desart of Elim and Sur, with ma∣ny others. The Desarts round about take the name from the height thereof; and are called the Desarts of Sina. Of the Graves of Concuiscence. THese Graves are 112 miles towards the South from Ierusalem, where the Children of Israel, lusting after Meat, were fed by the Lord with Quails; and for their disobedience died miserably. It was also called abara, which signifies an inflammation, being derived from Baar, to Burn, because here the Wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and he struck the uttermost parts of their Tents with Fire from Heaven, and consumed them, Numb. 11. Of Hazeroth. THis is a place in the Desart, some 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, the name thereof being derived from Chazer, which signifieth a Cave, about the Mouth whereof there groweth long Grass; And therefore from hence Chazer is also taken for Grass. Here Miriam the Sister of Moses and Aaron was strook with Leprosie.
Of Rithmah. RIthmah takes name from Iunier; for Rothaem in Hebrew signifies Ju∣niper. It is distant from Ierusalem 112 miles toward the South-eas. Here the Children of Israel pitched their Tents, Num. 33. and here it is very likely the Angel of the Lord appeared to the Prophet Eliah, and brought him meat and drink. Of Rimmon Parez. IN this place the Children of Israel, the sixteenth remove, made their abi∣ding, being an hundred and eight miles from Ierusalem, towards the South-east. Here, it is thought, the Children of Israel found great store of Pomegranates, whereof division was made amongst them. For Rimmon is as much as a grained Apple, or a Pomegranate; and Parez, He hath di∣vided. Of Libnah. LIbnh is the seventeenth place where the Children of Israel stayed, and was so called from the abundance of Frankincense that was found there; for Libnah signifies white Frankincense. This is an 104 miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the South-west. Of Rissa. HEre the Children of Israel pitcht their Tents, being about an 100 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-east; it took the name from the fruit∣fulness and abundance of Flowers and Herbs that grow there; and is derived from Rasa, which signifies to make moist, for there were usually exceeding pleasant and sweet dews. Of Chehelah. CHehelah was the nineteenth place where the Children of Israel made their abiding in the Desart, being 92 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-west, Num. 33. and signifies a Congregation, or Church, being derived from Rahal, that is, He hath assembled. This was a type of the Church, where all the Elect and Faithful People of God travel through the Wilderness of this wicked world. Of Saphar. SAphar is a mountain in the Desart of Arabia Petraea, 88 miles from Ieru∣salem toward the South-west. This was the twentieth Remove; the name of the place being so called, partly of their Tents, partly of the roundness of the mountains. Of Harada. HArada was full of wild Beasts, which struck the People into a mighty fear; so called, as being derived from Charada, which signifies Terror or trembling. Here the Children of Israel stayed the one and twentieth time, it being 80 miles from Ierusalem, toward the South-west.
Of Thahath. THIS is a certain Valley 68 miles from Ierusalem, towards the South∣west, and is derived from Tachath, which signifieth a certain Plain, or low place. Of Maceheloth. THIS was the two and twentieth abiding of the Israelites, being 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest. Here a Congregation of the Tribes of Israel was called; for Maccheloth signifieth a Congregation or meeting together. Sometimes it is taken for the Church, being derived from Rahal, i. He assembleth together. Of Tharah. THIS was a memorable place in the Wilderness, where the Israelites had a breathing time; for now growing near to the Borders of the Land of Canaan, after so many Journeys, they began to rest themselves, be∣cause of the Wars they were shortly to undertake. And it is derived of Ro∣ah and Tarah, which signifieth a breathing-time. Here was the 24th Mansi∣on of the Israelites. Of Mithca. HERE was the twenty fifth Mansion of the Israelites, being but 56 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-west, in the utmost Borders of the Land of Canaan, and no doubt took the name from the delightful and plea∣sant taste of Grapes: For Mitka signifies the same that Mithetk, that is to say, sweetness and pleasantness. Of Cades Barnea. CAdes Barnea, a City of the Idumaeans, (being derived of Kadas and Ba∣rah, that is, a holy place) is forty miles from Ierusalem towards the South; from this place Moses sent Spies into the Land of Canaan, who brought of the Fruit of the Land, but all of them discouraged the People, only Caleb: wherefore they murmured, and the Lord was angry, and would not suffer them to enter into the Land of Promise: So turning their Journey, they went to Ezeongaber, 148 miles, so that they travelled in the Desart forty years, be∣fore they could enter into the Land of Promise. Of this you may read, Gen. 14, 16, 20. Num. 13. 27, 33, 34. Deut. 1. Psal. 29. Ezek. 47. Of Chasmona. IN this place the Children of Israel set up their Tents, a little before they sent Spies into the Land of Canaan: it is not far from Cades Barnea to∣wards the South. For the twelve Spies were not sent from the City of Cades Barnea, but from their Tents; and of this still distribution or sending, (for one out of every Tribe was chosen) it took the name. For Casmona signi∣fies,
a still distribution, being derived of Chasca and Manah, he stilly di∣stributed. Of Moseroth. MOseroth was the twenty seventh Mansion of the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, and distant from Ierusalem 72 miles towards the South, where the Lord caused them to return back for their murmuring, towards the South, that so they might live just forty years in the Wilderness, Num. 14. 33. This place seemeth to take the name thereof from Traditions, for there Moses repeated to the Israelites the Law of the Lord; and for this cause their Tents were called Moseroth, which signifies Traditions, and is derived of Masar, that is, to Preach. Of Benei Iaacon. THIS was the twenty eighth Mansion of the Israelites, so called because there their Tents were fairly set up, with pleasant Walks and places about them; for Benei Iaacon signifieth a Building or fair Walk; being de∣rived of Bana and Akah, that is, He hath set up an House; and was 96 miles from Ierusalem Southward, Num. 33. Of Hor Gidgad. AT this Mountain the Children of Israel stayed a while, because it was a fertile and pleasant place, as Moses himself witnesseth. It is an hun∣dred and twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the South; being derived of Harar, a Mountain, and Glebam a Plow, Plin. l. 20. ep. 20. Of Iotbatha. THIS was the thirtieth Mansion of the Israelites in the Wilderness, being 132 miles from Ierusalem toward the South, and took the name from the pleasantness and fertility of the Wilderness; being derived of Iatab and Batha, a certain good and pleasant waste or wilderness. Of Arbona. THIS place being very discommodious and no whit profitable, the Chil∣dren of Israel were constrained to remove their Tents with great weep∣ing and lamentation; for Arbona, being derived from Abar and Naha, signi∣fies partly to remove, and partly to weep. Of Aezion Gaber. THIS was a Town of the Idumaeans, near the Red Sea, 148 miles from Kades-Barnea, and 174 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Here the Israelites set up their Tents, and here Solomon made his Navy, which he sent to Ophir to fetch Gold, 1 Kin. 9. This City no doubt took the name of the strength and multitude of Trees, whereof these Ships were built; for
they were very fair Ships, and of excellent Workmanship. Aezion Gaber sig∣nifieth a strong tree; being derived of Ez and Gaber, that is a Tree of strength. Of Zin-Kades. THIS was a great Wilderness lying between Aezion-Gaber and Kades-Barnea, being 184 miles in length, abounding with thorns and high mountains. Upon the North-side thereof lay Mount Seir, and Kades-Bar∣nea, and towards the South the Red Sea. It was called Paran and Zin, of the abundance of Thorns that grew there; for Zin, of Zanan, signifies a sharp thorn; Zinnim, full of Thorns; and Kadesh Sanctity or Holiness. Here Mo∣ses and Aaron having struck the Rock twice, at length it brought forth Wa∣ter; but for their murmuring and incredulity God would not suffer them to go into the Land of Canaan. This lay an 120 miles from Ierusalem toward the South. Of the Mountain Hor. HOR is a Mountain of the Idumaeans, eighty eight miles from Ierusalem toward the South-east, and is derived of Harar, which signifieth a great Mountain: here Aaron died. The King of the Canaanites which dwelt toward the South, in a Town called Arad, upon the Borders of Iudaea and Arabia Petraea, hearing that Aaron was dead, invaded the Iews with a great Army, discomfited them, and took some of them Captives. But after, the Israelites, to revenge this injury, took and destroyed divers Cities which belonged to the Canaanites, and put the Citizens to the Sword. This Coun∣trey is called Chormah, which signifieth a curse or desolation. Of Zalmona. THIS was a place in the Desart of Zin-Kades, where the Israelites pitch't their Tents, being 80 miles from Ierusalem to the South-east; and took the name from shades, or little sheds under which the Israelites dwelt: for Zalmona seems a compound of Zel and Mun, which signifies a shady place, and seems to have affinity with Manah, to distribute here and there. Of Phunon. THIS was a City of the Idumaeans, scituated in the Wilderness of Arabia Petraea, 64 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east; and takes the name from a fair and flourishing City. For Panan in Hebrew signifies an high Pinacle, from whence one might see all Parts of the World. Here Moses set up the brasen Serpent. Of Oboth. THIS was the thirty seventh Mansion of the Israelites in the Wilderness, and was fifty six miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east, and sig∣nifies a Serpent called Python. Here the Arabians received an answer from the Devil by way of Conjuration.
Of Igim. THIS was the thirty eighth Mansion of the Israelites; so called, because of the multitude which were assembled near to a Mountain called Abari, 52 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-east; for Igim signifies a Congre∣gation. Of Dibn Gad. THIS was the thirty ninth Station of the Israelites in the Desart, being fif∣ty two miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east, neer to the Floud Zared, bordering upon the Idumaeans and Moabites, running from thence into the Red Sea, and, as it seems, taketh name from descending into a strong place. Of Almon Diblathaim. THis place stands beyond the Red Sea, some forty miles from Ierusalem towards the East; and taketh name from a Frail of dried Figs; for Alam signifieth, he hath hidden; and Debeleth, A Frail of dried Figs. Here was the fortieth Mansion of the Israelites, and lay close by the River Arnon, Num. 21. and 23. Of the Mountaines Abarim. THese Mountaines lay 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, and taketh the name from Passing along; for Abr▪ is as much as to say, he went along. Between these Mountains and the Lake Asphaltites, near to the Eastern River of the Dead Sea, the Moabites inhabited. Of Jahza. THis was a City of the Levites, the Sons of Merar, in the Tribe of Ben∣jamin, 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, Ies. 21. Here Moses over∣came the King of the Ammonites, and put them to death, Num. 21. Of Chezbon. THis was the Metropolis of Sehon King of the Ammorites, who held the Country beyond Iordan; and because he would not suffer the Children of Israel to pass through his Dominions, therefore Moses made War upon him, put him to death, and gave all his Countrey to the Tribes of Reuben and Gad. This was a Fair Town, and after fell to the Levites, Num. 21. 33. Deut. 1, 2, &c. and took its name from Cheschebon, which signifies an Arti∣ficial understanding: for Chaschaf is as much as excogitavit, that is, he hath found out; and Cheschaef is, an Artificial and ingenious Work. Of Jaezir. Jaezir was a City of the Priests in the Tribe of Gad, 36 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the East, and in Ieroms time was a small Village, and sgni∣fies,
the Lord is my help; being derived of Iah, that is, the Lord God; and Ezer, the helper. Of Edrie. THIS is a City in the Countrey of Gilead, beyond Iordan and the Gali∣lean Sea, thirty two miles from Ierusalem, South-eastward, near the Lake of Gaderin, where Og the King of Bsan was overcome by Moses; and after fell to the Tribe of Mnsses, Num. 21. Iosh. 13. Deut. 13. S. Ierom saith, that in his time this Town was called Adar. Og signifieth a Cook, or one that baketh Bread upon coals. Adriae signifies an heap of bright Clouds; being derived of Adar and Hi, that is, a clear heap. Of Astoroth. THIS was a Metropolitan City of Basan, four miles distant from Edrei, and 56 from Ierusalem toward the South-east. It stood beyond Iordan, and belonged to the half Tribe of Manasses: of which you may read before in the Travels of Lot. Of Pisgah. THIS was an high Mountain in the Plain of the Mobites, against Ieri∣cho, 240 miles from Ierusalem, East-ward. It took the name from the Cities Pisgh and Nebo, and therefore is called sometimes Pisgah, sometimes Nebo▪ Here Moses died. Nebo signifies a City of the Prophets: Pisgah, the top of a Hill. The Travels of the Prophet Balaam. THERE are many which think that this Prophet Balaam was of the Posterity of Nahor the Brother of Abraham, and an Inhabitant o Charan in Mesootamia, Gen. 11. Iosehus saith, he dwelt near to Euphrates: and St. Ierom, in a City called Phatura, of which there is mention, Num. 22. and signifies an obscure Prophet, or Oracle which in∣terpreteth. For Pathar with the Hebrews, is the same that, He hath inter∣preted, is with us. Wherefore this Prophet travelled from Pithora or Phatura in Mesoota∣mia, to Abel, or the Plain of Vines, where his Ass spake, Num. 22. which is 400 miles. From thence he went to the Land of the Moabites, 40 miles, where, in the Mount of Peor, he blessed the Children of Israel. So all the Travels of this Prophet were 440 miles. Of the Plain of the Vines. THere is often mention of this place in the Scripture; and for the fertility of the Countrey, and plenty of sweet Wines, there was a beautiful Ci∣ty
built, called Abel, of the Vines, some 56 miles from Ierusalem, South-Eastward, and was placed just in the way as they went from Mesopotamia into the Countrey of the Moabites. Whereby it appeareth, that near to this place the Ass spake to Balaam, Numb. 22. In St. Ierom's time there was found a little Village so called, where there was great plenty of Vines. Here Iep∣tha overcame the Ammorites, and made a great slaughter, Iudg. 11. The Travels of that Noble Captain Joshuah. JOSHVAH and Caleb travelled with Moses from Raemsis out of Aegyt through the Red Sea, and came to Kades-Barnea, 268 miles. From Kades-Barnea they were sent forth with other Spies to the Land of Canaan, Num. 13. and went out of the wilderness of Zin and Paran, and came to the Town of Rechob in Galilee, 140 miles. From thence they went to the Town of Hamath in Syria, which was af∣ter called Antiochia, 188 miles. From Hamath or Antiochia they returned again to Hebron, 304 miles, where, upon the side of the River Escol, they cut off a Bunch of Grapes, with the stalk, which was as much as both they could bear upon their shoul∣ders, Num. 13. From Hebron they returned again to Kades-Barnea, twenty miles. There all the People murmured against Moses, Num. 14. Hereby it is to be seen, that the Spies, in forty dayes, travelled 648 miles in the Land of Cnaa, that is, every day 16 miles and a little more. After that, Ioshuah and Caleb travelled with Mses and the Children of Israel to Ezeon-Gabir, and from thence to the Town of Iahza, 464 miles. From Iahza they pass'd through two Kingdoms to Mount Libanus, eigh∣ty miles. From Mount Libanus they returned again into the Land of Sittim, that lay by the hill Pisgah, in the field of the Moabites, 80 miles. From the Land of Sittim they pass'd through the River of Iordan, and came to Gilgal, six miles, where Ioshuah pitched his Camp, Numb. 21. Iosh. 4. 5. From Gilgal he went to Iericho, two miles: there he assailed the Town with the sound of Basons, and won it, Iosh. 6. From Iericho he went to Ai, being four miles, and took and burnt the whole Town, Iosh. 7. 8. From Ai he returned to Gilgal, four miles, and there upon the Hill of Ebal, he built an Altar unto the Lord, and there were the Blessings and Cursings pronounced, Iosh. 8. Deut. 27.
From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles. There the Sun stood still du∣ring the Battel against the three Kings, Iosh. 10. From Gibeon he went to Ajlon, two miles; here the Moon stood still, Ios. 10. From Ajlon he went to Aseka, four miles: there it hailed upon the Ene∣mies that fled before Israel, Iosh. 10. From Aska Ioshua returned again into the Camp at Gilgal, twenty miles, Iosh. 10. From Gilgal he went to Makeda, where he hanged the five Kings, Ios. 10. From Makeda he went to Libna, two miles, and took the Town, Iosh. 10. From Libna he went to Lachis, eight miles. From Lachis he went to Eglon, eight miles. From Eglon he went to Hebron, which is sixteen miles, Iosh. 10. From Hebron he went to Debir, one mile, Iosh. 10. After that, Ioshuah, with one continued War, won all that part of Iudaea which lay towards the South, bordering Eastward upon the Dead Sea, South∣ward upon Cades-Barne, Westward upon Asdod and Gaza, and North∣ward upon Gibeon and Gilgal: This circuit of Land containeth about an hundred fifty and six miles. From Gilgal Ioshua went out with his Army about twenty two miles, to the River of Merom, where he slew the rest of the Kings of the Canaanites in a memorable Battel, Iosh. 11. From the River of Merom Ioshua chased his Enemies, and followed them to Sidon, which was 612 miles, Iosh. 11. From Sidon he went again to Hazor, 32 miles, which Town he burnt, Iosh 11. After that, Ioshuah at one time won all the Towns in the Holy Land, which lay Northward in the Lands of Samaria and Galilea, from Gibeon to Mount Libanus, and from the River of Iordan to the great Sea, called Mare Mediter∣raneum; which Countreys in circuit contain 280 miles. After that Ioshuah returned again to his Camp at Gilgal, which lay 72 miles from the Town of Hazor, where he made a division of the Land a∣mongst the Children of Israel, Iosh. 14, 15. From Gilgal he went to Shilo, twelve miles, where he made an end of dividing the Land, Iosh. 18. From Shilo he went to Timnah Sera, eight miles, and there he dwelt; for the Children of Israel gave him that Town for his own Inheritance, Iosh. 19. From Timnah Sera, Ioshua, not long before he died, came to Sichem, forty miles. There he assembled all the Tribes of Israel, Iosh. 24. From Sichem he returned again to Timnah Sera, forty miles, where he di∣ed and was buried, Iosh. 24. So all the Travels of Prince Ioshuah were 2392 miles.
The Description of the several Towns and Places to which Ioshua tra∣velled. Of Rechob. THIS was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Ahur, an hundred miles from Ierusalem toward the North, Nu. 13. and signifieth a broad Street, being derived from Radhab, that is, to extend out in length. Of Haemah, or Chaemah. THIS was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Nephtali, and was an hundred miles from Ierusalem, upon the utmost bounds of the Holy Land, at the foot of Antilibanus, Num. 11. 34. Iosh. 19. derived from Chamah, that is furious, or burning with anger. Of Gilgal. THIS was a Town between Iordan and the City Iericho, twelve miles from Ierusalem South-eastward; where the Children of Israel having past the River of Iordan, first made War upon all the Nations of the Land of Canaan. Here they solemnized the first Paschal Lamb. After they came into this Land, Manna ceased, because they then did eat the Fruits of the Countrey. Here Ioshua taking twelve stones out of Iordan, pitch'd them up for a memorial. Here the Tabernacle of God stayed for a time, which was the reason that afterward the Israelites committed Idolatry in this place, Iosh. 4. 5. Hos. 2. 4, 9. Amos 5. Near to this place, Ehud the third Judge of the Children of Israel received gifts of them to carry to Eglon King of the Moabites dwelling at Iericho, where he killed him with a knife. Here Saul was the second time confirmed King of Israel, 2 Sam. 10. and, as it seems, taketh name of Roundness, Ioshuah at this time building his Tent in a circular fashion: for Galal signifies a round Wheel or Tent, compassed about with Ditches and Bulwarks. Of Iericho. THIS is a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, two miles from Iordan and six from Ierusalem, South-eastward. Ioshuah overcame this with the sound of Horns or Trumpets, Iosh. 26. Heb. 11. Here Christ restored the blind man to sight, Mat. 6. converted Zachaeus, Luke 19. and was called the City of Palms, by reason of the great plenty of Palms that grew there. You may read more of this hereafter. Of Hai, or Ai. HAI is a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, near to Bethel, toward the East, where Abraham dwelt, Gen. 12. Ioshuah won this Town, Ios. 7. 8. It was so called of a Prophet that dwelt there, and signifieth, to be placed upon a
heap: for Ai signifies a heap, lying partly equally, partly unequally. The Ruines of this Town were scarce to be found in St. Ierom's time. Of Gibeon. THIS was a Metropolitan City in th Tribe of Benjamin, the Inhabi∣tants whereof became Petitioners to Iohuah for Peace, Is. 9. 10, 18. 2 Sam. 21. Afterward it was given to the Priests. It is derived of Gibeah or Gibeon, which signifies a curled Hill. It was scituated on a Mountain four miles from Ierusalem, toward the North. Here stood the Tabernacle of the Covenant, and the brazen Altar. Here Saul was first made King of Israel. Here he put the Sons of Abimelch the Priest to death, 1 Sam. 12. Here Iosuah overcame the five Kings of the Ammorites. Here the Sun stood still. Of this you may read more hereafter. Of Ajlon. THIS was a City of the Priests in the Tribe of Dan, four miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the South-east, and taketh the name from an Hind; for Aala signifieth an Hind, a Beast very strong and swift. Here the Moon stood still. Here Ionathan tasted Hony, contrary to his Fathers command, for which he was judged to dye, 1 Sam. 14. Of Azeka. AZeka was a City of the Ammorites in the Tribe of Iuda, eight miles from Ierusalem toward the West, near to Odullam, where David killed Goah; and, as it seems, takes the name from Munition, or a place com∣passed about with an hedge; being derived from Itsek, he hedged about. This was a fair City in St. Ierom's time. Of the Valley of Achor. THIS Valley is distant from Ierusalem twelve miles, and not far from Iericho and Gilgal, towards the North, taking name (as it seemeth) of Achon, that Thief mentioned in Ioshuah, who was stoned there; from whence it is called Achor, which signifies Trouble, because of the terrible words that Ioshua spake unto him there. You may read of this, Hos. 2. Esay 25. Iosh. 11. 15. Of Makedah. BEtween Eleutheroolin and Bethlehem this Town stood, being in the Tribe of Iudah, some eight miles from Ierusalem, towards the West, and taketh the name of a Flower that hangs down the head, being derived of adad, which signifieth to hang down. Here Ioshua hanged the five Kings of the Ammorites, which he had formerly conquered, Ios. 10.
Of Libna. LIbna is a City belonging to the Levites in the Tribe of Iudah, and is scituated between Eglon and Makeda, ten miles from Ierusalem toward the North-west, where the fourteenth King that Iohua conquered kept his Court; and taketh the name from the abundance of Frankincense that is found there. For Libnah signifieth white Frankincense. Zenacharib besieged this City. Some say it taketh the name from the Hebrew Lab, which sig∣nifieth white Bricks; because there is found much matter whereof such kind of Bricks are made. Of Lacis. LAchis is a City in the Tribe of Iudah, and lieth between Eleutheropolin and Hebron, twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west, and two miles from Rechila toward the North, Iosh. 15. 2 Chr. 11. and taketh the name from Walking; being derived from Ialach, which signifieth, He hath walked. Ioshuah took the King of this City and put him to death: and Zenacharib King of the Assyrians besieged it, but to little purpose. Of Eglon. EGlon, was a City in the Tribe of Iudah, twelve miles from Ieruslem Southward. Ioshuah took the King of this City and hanged him. It taketh the name from Aecel, signifying a Calf. Of Debir. DEbir was a City of the Levites, twenty two miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and almost half a mile from Hebron towards the North-west. Athniel the Brother of Caleb won this Town, wherefore he gave him his Daughter Archsa to Wife. Formerly it was called Kiriath-Sepher, i. a City of Scribes and Students; for it was consecrated to Learning. From hence it was called Debir, which signifies an Oracle, or an holy Altar; because the Lord there by his Priests that were assigned for that purpose, did fore∣tell and prophecy of things to come: being derived from Debar, that is, He hath spoken. Of Asdod, or Azotes. THIS was a City of the Philistims, scituated upon the shore of the Mei∣terranean Sea, in the Tribe of Dan, and twenty two miles from Ieru∣salem towards the West. This Town was conquered by Ioshua, Iosh. 11. 1 Reg. 5. It was also taken by Psamnitius King of Egypt, in Mnasses time, as Herodotus saith, it is now a little Town, and is called Azotus. In times past it was a fair City, and took name from the fire of Love; being derived of Esh which signifies a fire, and Dod beloved.
Of Gaza. GAza was a fair City of the Philistims, upon the shore of the Red Sea, some 24 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west, and signifieth a strong Town, being derived from Gazez, to confirm. Samson being in∣closed within this Town, took away the Gates and Bars thereof, and lad them at the foot of Mount Hebron, Iudg. 16. Of the River Merom. THIS was a Lake not far from Dothan, some four miles from Tiberias, Westward, and forty four miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and is so called from the deepness of it, being derived of Rom, which signi∣fies it was high, and Marab, bitter; whence Merom, a high bitter Water. Here Ioshuah over-threw the Kings of the Canaanites, Josh. 11. Of Sidon. SIdon takes the Name of Zod, which signifies, He hath hunted, and was a famous Mart Town in Phoenicea, being a place scituated at the foot of that high Hill Antelibanus, near to the shore of the Medierranean, six∣teen miles from Ierusalem North-ward. Of Libanus. THIS is a Mountain of an extraordinary height, some 104 miles from Ierusalem North-ward, looking into Syria and Phoenicia. From thence the River Iordan taketh the beginning, being so called of two Springs or Wells, that is, Ior and Dan, rising from the bottom of this Hill. It seems to take the Name from the abundance of flowers and variety of sweet Smells or Dews that are there; and also of Frankincense or Gum Olibanum found upon it: it is a very fruitful Place, full of Springs and wholsome Herbs, so that no Serpent will abide in it: it is divided into two parts, the one lieth near Sidon West-ward, called Antelibanus; the other towards Damascus, upon the East, and is only called Libanus. It is so high that it serves for a Sea mark, and so much the more remarkable, for that (as some say) Snow lieth continually upon the top of it, so that a far off it seemeth white. Of the River Jordan. JOrdan is a pleasant sweet River watering the Holy Land (whereof you may read before.) It is named Iordan at Caesarea Philippi, a little from the foot of Antelibanus, 104 miles from Ierusalem, North-ward: it passeth through the Lake Samachoniten, and divideth it into two equal Parts; from thence, running thorow a great part of Galilee, it falls into the Sea
Tyberis, and there as it were divideth it into two parts, it watereth that part of Iudaea called Samaria; and about Easter, which is the beginning of that Harvest, it floweth over the Banks, and fructifies many Countries lying near it: at length it falleth into the Lake Asphalties and there endeth, about fourteen miles from Ierusalem, Eastward. So that from the first be∣ginning of this River, to the end of it, is ninety two miles. It is called Palah by the Hebrews, which signifieth swift and hidden; because it riseth from a certain Well or Pit called Phiala, which is always full of Water, but from whence it springeth is unknown. Ioshua about Easter passed upon dry ground through this River, even then when it was fullest of Water, Ios. 3. So did Eliah and Elisha, 2 Reg. Here Naaman the Leper wash'd him∣self, 2 Reg. 5. Here Christ was baptised by S. Iohn Baptist, Mat. 3. Luke 3. Of Hazor. THIS was a Town in the upper Galilee, belonging to the Tribe of Nep∣thali: it was the chief Hold and City of the King of the Canaanites, being distant from Ierusalem eighty miles towards the North. This Ioshu∣ah destroyed with Fire and Sword. Deborah also the Prophetess, besieged it, took it, and put Iabin the King thereof to Death. In times past it was a very strong City, as the Ruines thereof testifie. Of Siloh. SIloh the City and House of God, was scituate on a high Mountain in the Tribe of Ephraim, four miles and somewhat better from Ierusalem towards the North. Here the Ark of the Covenant continued from the time that the Israelites first entred into the Land of Canaan, till Eli the Priest fetch'd it thence; in whose time it was taken by the Philistims, and he for very Grief therefore fell down and brake his Neck against a Stone, 1. Sam. 4. The Inhabitants hereabouts shew the Ruines of a certain Sepul∣chre standing upon the top of this Mount, where they say Samuel was bu∣ried: but that cannot be true, for he was buried at Ramath, which now is called Arimathea. Therefore it seems to be either the Ruines of Eli's Se∣pulchre, who died miserably in that place; or else of the House of the Lord, which many years past stood there. Schiloh signifies happy and peaceable, being derived from Schalah, that is, to live at ease and in peace. Of Timnah. Of this you may read in the Travels of Iudah. The Type and Mystery of Joshuah. JOshuah and Iesus is all one in Signification, that is, Saviour, or a De∣fender; and did typically represent our Saviour Christ; that as this Io∣shuah
brought the Children of Israel through Iordan into the Land of Cana∣an, so Jesus Christ, the true Ioshuah, and Saviour of the World, through that Iordan of Baptism, bringeth us into that place of Promise, Eternal Life. Wherae the one and thirty Kings dwelt, overcome and slain by Joshuah, Josh. 10. AS the Prophet Moses won all the Land upon the one side of Iordan, so Ioshuah won all the Countrey on the other, from the Town of Baal∣gadan, beginning at Mount Libanus, not far from Mount Hebron, till you come to the Town of Caesarea Philippi, and to the Hill Seir, where some∣time Esau dwelt: all which is 160 miles long, and 28 or 32 miles broad. The first King that Ioshuah overcame, dwelt in Iericho. The second King held his Court in Ai. The third King dwelt in Ierusalem, and was called Adoni-bezec, that is, a Lord of Righteousness. This King Ioshuah hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10. The fourth King called Hoham, dwelt at Hebron, and was likewise hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10. The fifth King called Percam, dwelt at Iarmouth in the Tribe of Iuda, twenty miles from Jerusalem Westward. The sixth King, called Japhia dwelt at Lachis, two miles from Iarmouth Southward; he was also hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10. The seventh King dwelt at Eglon, called Debir, and was also hanged at Makeda. The eighth King was called Horam, and held his Princely Seat in the Tribe of Dan, in the Town of Gezer, 16 miles from Jerusalem Westward: whom Ioshuah slew with all his men, Ios. 10. The ninth King dwelt at Debir. The tenth King held his Court at Gerar in the Tribe of Iudah, 14 miles from Jerusalem Westward. The eleventh King dwelt at Harma in the Tribe of Judah, which is upon the borders of Arabia deserta, not far from Ziclag, forty miles from Ierusalem South-westward: this Town in times past was called Zephal, that is a Watch∣tower, because it stood upon a Hill. But when the Children of Iudah had overthrown the whole Army of the Canaanites, they called it Haram, a Curse, Iudg. 1. The twelfth King dwelt at Arat, 22 miles from Ierusalem Southward, which was a Town of the Ammorites, and took the name from the Asses that were in great troops within the Woods thereabout. It lay in the Tribe of Iudah. The thirteenth King dwelt at Libnah in the Tribe of Iudah. The fourteenth King dwelt at Odullam. The fifteenth King dwelt at Makeda. In this Town Ioshuah hanged five Kings, Ios. 10.
The sixteenth King dwelt at Bethel. The seventeenth King dwelt at Tapnah, not far from Iordan and Iericho, twelve miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. The eighteenth King dwelt at Hepher, six miles from Ierusalem North-ward; part of this Town was allotted to the Tribe of Zabulon. Ionas the Pro∣phet was born in this Town, 2 Reg. 14. and is four miles distant from the Town of Nazareth, Southward. The nineteenth King dwelt at Apheck; forty four miles from Ierusalem North-ward, and two miles from Iezreel. There also the Ark of the Lord was taken, and there also the Sons of Eli the High Priest were slain, 1 Sam. 4. This Town was in the half Tribe of Manasses. The twentieth King dwelt at Lazaron, eighteen miles and half from Ieru∣salem North-westward, not far from Ioppen and Lidda. The one and twentieth King dwelt at Nadan, fourteen miles from Ieru∣salem North-westward. The two and twentieth King dwelt at Hazor. The twenty third King dwelt at Simron, which Town was allotted to the Tribe of Zabulon, Iosh. 14. It lieth sixty eight miles from Ierusalem North-ward, not far from the Town of Nazareth in Galilee. The twenty fourth King dwelt at Achsap, eighty eight miles from Ierusa∣lem Northward, which Town was allotted to the Tribe of Aser. The twenty fifth King dwelt at Tanaach, forty four miles from Ierusalem: this Town belonged to the Levites, and stood in the Tribe of Manasses, six miles from Iezreel Southward, Iosh. 21. The twenty sixth King dwelt at Megiddo, forty four miles from Ierusalem Northward, scarce four miles from Tanaach. By this Town of Megiddo Io∣sias King of Iuda was overthrown by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, 2 Reg. 23. In the Travels of Iosiah King of Iudah I will speak of this Town more at large. The twenty seventh King dwelt at Kades, Ios. 19. 21. The twenty eighth King dwelt at Iaknedam, twenty seven miles from Ie∣rusalem Northward, being upon the Mediterranean Sea. This Town was allot∣ted to the Tribe of Zabulon, and given to the Levites, Iosh. 21. The twenty ninth King dwelt at Naphet Dor, which Town lay upon the Sea-Coast, between the Hill Carmel and the Town of Cesarea Stratonis, for∣ty eight miles from Ierusalem Northward. The thirtieth King dwelt at Gilgal, between Iericho and the River Ior∣dan, and was the first King that Ioshuah overcame, and slew all his host. The one and thirtieth King dwelt at Thirtza, in the Tribe of Manasses, twenty four miles from Ierusalem. In this Town Ieroboam, and after him, all the Kings of Israel kept their Courts, before Samaria was built.
The Book of Iudges. The Travels of Caleb and Athniel. CALEB and Athniel, with all the Children of Iudah, went from Iu∣dah to Besek, forty four miles, where they took King Adoni-Bezek Prisoner, and cut off his Fingers and Toes, Iudg. 1. From Beseck they went to Ierusalem, forty four miles, which they took by force, and burnt it, Iudg. 1. From Ierusalem they went to Hebron, 22 miles, which they took, and slew the Gyants that inhabited therein, Iudg. 1. Not far from Hebron lay the Town of Debir, which Athniel won, and therefore Caleb gave him his Daughter Achsa for his Wife, Iudg. 1. From Debir they went to Zephat, sixteen miles, vvhich Tovvn they vvon, Iudg. 1. From Zephat they went to Gaza, four miles. From Gaza they went to Ascalon, six miles, Iudg. 1. From Ascalon they went to Hebron, fourteen miles. From Hebron they went back again to Debir, where Athniel dwelt, twelve miles. So all the Travels of Caleb and Athniel were 132 miles. The Description of the Towns and Places to which they travelled. Of Beseck. BEseck was a Metropolitan City of the Canaanites, near to the Water Merom, where Adoni-Beseck kept his Court, forty four miles from Ieru∣salem toward the North, and took the name of Desaeck, or Bezeck which sig∣nifies Lightning. Of this King you may read, Iudg. 1. Of Zephah. THIS was a Town upon the Borders of the Tribes of Iudah and Simeon; not far from Siclag, Iosh. 15. It takes the name from Zaphah, which signifies a Watch-Tower: and was also called by the Sons of Iudah, (who destroyed all the Countrey) Chorma, which signifies a Curse, or a desolate place. To the Citizens hereof David sent gifts, 1 Sam. 36. Of Gaza. OF this Town you may read more hereafter, in the Travels of the Ark of the Covenant.
The Typical Signification of Caleb. CALEB signifieth An hearty man, or a man after Gods own heart, loving his Neighbour with all his heart. For Col is as much as Omnius which signifies all; and Cala, He forgiveth all; and Leb or Lebbah signifieth an Heart the seat and fountain of all Life. So that Caleb seems to take his name from a singular hearty affection, whereby he forgiveth his Neighbour. For as this man being of a noble Resolution and Courage, in the 29 year of his age won Hebron a strong City, and put to death the three Sons of Anak, ter∣rible Gyants: so Christ the Son of God, that so loved the World that he gave himself for it, with more than humane resolution conquered Hell, and those three mighty Gyants incident unto it, the Sons of Sathan, Sin, the World, and Death. Of Athniel. IN the year of the World 1503, and before Christ, 2565, Ioshuah died: after whose Death, Caleb and Athniel Judged Israel; about which time the Israelites committed Idolatry, and worshipped Baal and Asteroth: where∣fore the Lord suffered them to fall into the hands of Cushan Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia. But because of their Oppression they cryed unto the Lord, and he stirred up Othniel the younger Brother of Caleb, who in the year of the World 2512 conquered Cushan, delivered the People, and governed Isra∣el forty years, Iudg. 3. Athniel or Othniel signifies the God of Time, being de∣rived of Aeth; that is, an Age: and is a Type of Christ, who is the God of Time; and in his due time conquered the World, and Sathan the Prince thereof, thereby delivering the poor afflicted members of his Church out of his mise∣rable Servitude and Bondage: for which cause God hath made him Judge over it, and given him full power and authority to Rule and Govern it. Of Ehud the third Iudge of Israel. EHVD was the Son of Gira of the Tribe of Iudah, and dwelt in the City of Iericho, or of the Palms. He was a valiant and resolute man, lame of his right Hand, Iug. 3. and to the Judgment of man, not fit to be a Captain, being so infirm. Yet it happened that this man growing in favour with Eglon King of the Moabites, who at this time kept his Court in Iericho, (which Town he had but eighteen years before conquered) took opportunity by the Children of Israel's coming to Gilgal (for they came thither to offer unto the Idol, and to bring gifts of the King) to present these Presents unto him; and because of his former fami∣liarity,
was admitted to speak in private with him in his Summer Parlour; where, as he was talking with him, he thrust him into the Belly with a short Knife: and locking the door, he fled back to Seirah, and told the Chil∣dren of Israel what he had done. From thence they presently went to E∣phraim, there blew the Trumpet, and set upon the Moabites, and put them to the Sword, Iudg. 3. The Travels of Ehud. EHVD went from Iericho to Gilgal, two miles. From Gilgal he went to Iericho, two miles. From Iericho he went to Mount Ephraim, six miles. From Mount Ephraim he went to Iordan, four miles, where he overthrew ten thousand Moabites. So all the Travels of Ehud were fourteen miles. Of Mount Ephraim. THIS Mountain is about eight miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and extends it self in Longitude to the City, near the Mediterranean Sea, called Ioppa, which is distant from Ierusalem twenty miles toward the North-west. The Travels of the Sons of Hobab the Kenite. THE Sons of Hobab the Kenite (Moses Brother-in-law) went from Ie∣richo to Arad, a City in the Tribe of Iudah, scituated in the De∣sart, toward the South, 44 miles. Num. 10. Iudg. 1. Of Arad. ARAD is a City in the Tribe of Iudah, 22 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, taking the name of a multitude of Asses that were found thereabouts in the Desart, and is derived from Arod, which signifies a wild Ass, a rude Creature. The Travels of Jael, the Wife of Heber the Kenite, who killed Sisera the Captain. FROM Arad she and her Husband went to the Plain of Zaaenaim, and dwelt there, near to a Town called Kades, a Town of Refuge of the Levites, in the Tribe of Naphtali, 166 miles, there she killed Sisera. This Town lieth 92 miles from Ierusalem towards the North.
Of Deborah and Barak. DEBORAH was the Wife of Lapidoth, and dwelt under a Palm-tree between Bethel and Ramath, in Mount Ephraim, eight miles from Ierusalem, towards the North: the Inhabitants thereabouts shew this Tree even to this day. Barak the Son of Abineam, a Noble Captain, lived in her time at Kades, a City of Refuge belonging to the Levites. She succeeded Ehud, in An. Mun. 2632. and before Christ, 1336 years. The Travels of Deborah and Barak. BARAK went first from Kades Naphtali to the Palm-tree, where Deborah dwelt, being 84 miles. From thence he went with Deborah back again to Kades, being eighty four miles. From Kades, with 10000 men, they went to the Hill Thabor, thirty six miles. Here (as Iosephus writeth, lib. Antiq. 4.) there fell such a shower of Rain and Hail upon the Enemies of the Israelites, that through the extream violence thereof, they were dispersed, and Sisera their Captain constrained to leave his Chariot, and to save himself by flight, never staying till he came to the Tabernacle of Iael, the Wife of Hebar the Kenite, scituated in the Valley of Zaaenaim, thirty six miles from the foot of the Mountain Tha∣bor; where being asleep, by reason of his great Journey, Iael struck a Nail into the temple of his Head, so he died. From thence Barak pursued the Enemies with great slaughter, to Haraseth of the Gentiles, a City in the upper Galilee, near to the Lake of Samachoni∣ten, 28 miles. This City is eighty miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Ioseph. Ant. lib. 5. From Haraseth he went to the Plain of Zaaenaim, where he found Sisera slain in the Tabernacle of Iael, as Deborah the Prophetess had told him. From thence Barak with all his Army went to Hazor, where Iabin King of the Cananites kept his Court, and of a sudden conquered the City, and put to death all the Inhabitants, Ioseph. Ant. lib. 5. Of Thabor. THABOR is a round and high Hill, scituated upon the Borders of the Tribes of Issachar and Zabulon, fifty six miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and extendeth it self to the River Kison, towards the South, and taketh the Name of Light, or a pure air, being derived of Bo, to go and come; Tebuah, to bring forth fruit, and to give light. For this Mountain Thabor, by reason of the Purity of the Air, is wonderful fertile and fruitful:
There was also a Town at the foot of it called by the same name. Here the Kings of the Midianites, Zeba and Zalmuna were slain by Gideon. Of Hazor. THIS is a great City in the Tribe of Nepthali, eighty miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North, which Ioshuah destroyed with Fire and Sword; So did Barak also▪ The Ruines of this City is to be seen to this day. The Mytery of Deborah. THE word Deborah signifies a Bee, and is a memorable Type of the Church. For as a Bee in all her actions soundeth pleasantly; so the Members of Gods Church in all their actions sing and sound forth the praises of God, or by continual Prayers implore his aid and assistance; with the Bee sucking from the Flowers of the Holy Scriptures, the sweet and ac∣ceptable Doctrine of Faith, by which the hope of everlasting Life is strength∣ned in us, with the sting of Gods Word repulsing all vain delusions and idle imaginations, (the Temptations of the Devil) and those waspish affe∣ctions of cruel and wicked men; according to that of Ecclesiasticus, the Bee is but small, yet bringeth forth most pleasant fruit, and presenteth unto man ma∣ny memorable instructions. And as Plato saith, The King of Bees, although with∣out a sting, yet Ruleth and Governeth his Commonwealth with great Severity and Iustice. So Christ the head of the Church, though he be a delectable Savi∣our of Souls, and without any Sting of Bitterness, yet doth he Rule and Govern it with singular Justice and Sincerity. Of Barak. AFter Deborah was appointed Judge of Israel she ordained Barak for her chief Commander or Captain. He taketh his name from Thunder and Lightning typically representing the Glory of Christ Jesus, as chief Cap∣tain of the Church, who with the Thunder of the Law, and the Bright shining Glory of the Gospel, destroyed the Enemies thereof; and by the Hosts of An∣gels and Saints at the end of the World, will cast them down with thunder and lightning into that Bottomless Pit, there to remain for ever. Of the Travels of Gideon. DEBORAH being Dead, Zaeba and Zalmuna (Kings of the Medeanites) cruelly invaded the Land of Iudaea; but the Lord taking compassion upon his People, sent them a helper▪ one Gideon the Son of Ioas, of the family of Abiezer, who was born at Ophra or Ephron, a City in the Tribe of Manasses, not far from Mahanaim on the East side of Iordan,
some 44 miles from Ierusalem, towards the North-East; and signifieth, a Rooter out; from Gada, that is, He hath rooted out. This man, at the appointment of the Lord, took upon him the charge of the People, and at Ophra, which signifies, Dust, he destroyed the Idol Baal, pitching up in that place an Altar to the Lord: wherefore he was after called Ieru-Baal, taking that name from Revenge, because he had destroyed the Idol. He began to Rule in Israel in the year of the World, 2672, and before Christ 1296. From Ophra, Gideon went to Harad, which standeth in the half Tribe of Manasseh, where he blew the Trumpet. From this place he sent back 22000 of his Army, because the Lord had so appointed. But the Midianites hearing of this preparation, provided a great Host, and pitched in the Valley of the Hill Moreh: so Gideon taking only 300 with him, went over Iordan, and came to the Town of Iesreel, (for Iosephus saith) sixteen miles from Harad, where he gave the Midianites a wonderful Overthrow, Iudg. 7. he also took there two Princes, Oreb and Zeb, and returned to the River▪ Ior∣dan, where he put them to death. From thence he went to Succoth with his Army, in expectation to have refreshed themselves, but the Inhabitants shut him out of the Town, and gave him many despightful Words. This Town lay close by Iordan, and here Iacob sometime pitched his Tent. From thence he went to Penuel, which is two miles; there also they used him unkindly and gave him bad Language. From thence he went to Nobach with his Army, which is two miles. From thence he went to Iagbetha, which is four miles, where he conquer∣e Zaeba and Zalmuna, Kings of the Midianites, who thinking themselves secure, made no preparation for War till they were besieged. This was a memorable Battel, and here the two Kings were put to Death. From thence he followed the Enemy with a great Slaughter to Karkor, which is four miles. From thence he vvent back to Succoth, vvhich is eight miles: here he put the Inhabitants of this Town to the Sword, and all the Elders and Princes he tore to pieces vvith Thorns, because they had formerly denied him Entrance into the City. From thence he vvent to the Castle of Penuel, which is two miles, and utterly destroyed it, even to the ground, and put all the Inhabitants to death because of their mocks. From thence he went to Ophra, four miles, where, gathering together all the Gold which he had taken from the Midianites, he made a rich Ephod, Iudg. 8. From Ophra he went to Sichem, where his Son Abimelech was born, which is ten miles.
From thence he returned back to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there he died, after he had judged Israel ten years. So all the Travels of Gideon were eighty two miles. The Description of the Towns and Places to which Gideon travelled. Of Iezreel. JEzreel was a fair City scituated upon a hill near to the Flood Kison, bor∣dering upon the Tribe of Issachar, 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and signifieth the Seed of God, being derived from El and Dara, the Seed of the Almighty God. There was another of this name in the Tribe of Iudah, Iosh. 15. In times past this was onely the Seat and chief abiding-place of the Kings of Israel. For Ahab and Iezabel kept their Court there, and Ioram their Son, whom Iehu overcame: and here Iezabel was eaten up of Dogs. At this day this fair City hath in it but thirty Houses; and is cal∣led by the Inhabitants of the Holy Land Sanatham, being scituated at the foot of the Mountain Gilboah Westward: in it there is a Watch Tower, up∣on the top whereof you may see through all Galilee to Carmel, and the Moun∣tains of Phoenicia, also to Mount Thabor, and the Mountains beyond Iordan, called Gilead. Of this Town you may read Ios. 17, 19. 2 Sam. 2. Of Nobach. THis was a City beyond Iordan, and stood in the half Tribe of Manasses, thirty eight miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward. In times past it was called Kenah, but after Nobach Prince of the half Tribe of Manasseh had conquered it, he called it Nobach, Num. 23. and signifieth a Prophet, being de∣rived of Nabah, or Nabach, he hath prophesied, or cryed out. Of Jogbeha. THis Town was built by the Children of Gad, and lies beyond Iordan, thirty four miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward, and taketh the name from the height of the place where it standeth; being derived from Gabah, which signifieth, it excelleth in height. Of this you may read, Iudg. 8. Numb. 32. Of Karkor. KArkor is a City in the half Tribe of Manasseh, and is scituated beyond Ior∣dan, fome 40 miles distant from Ierusalem North-Eastward, and taketh the name from Kir, which signifies he hath destroyed, or subverted the Walls, for here the two Kings Zeba and Zalmuna were taken. St. Ierom faith, in his Book de locis Hebraicis, That in his Time it was a fair Town.
The Typical signification of Gideon. THis Gideon (whose name signifies to root out) destroyed and subverted the Enemies of the Iews: so Christ hath destroyed the Kingdom of Sa∣than, and daily rooted out all his impious and wicked members, which are E∣nemies to his Church. The Travels of Abimelech, the sixth Iudge of Israel. GIDEON being dead, Abimelech his Son went from Ophra to Sichem, which is ten miles, and there was chosen by the Citizens to succeed his father in the Government. From thence he went back to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there put to death his seventy Brethren, all Sons of Gideon, but by divers Concubines; for God permitted Bigamie, but did not command it. From Ophra he went ten miles into the Land of Sichem, and there was cho∣sen King, about the Year of the World 2712. From Sichem (which was the Seat of the Kingdom) he went to Ophra, being ten miles, there he judged Israel three Years. After that he went the third time back to the Sichemites, which is ten miles, but they breaking promise with him, for very madness he caused the City to be destroyed, and Salt to be Sown in the place, that so ever after it might be∣come Barren, accursed, and unhabitable. From Sichem, he went with his Host to Thebets or Thebez, which is two miles, where he was mortally wounded by a woman that flung a stone upon him at the Siege of that Town, whereof he died, Iudg. 9. So all the Travels of Abimelech were 52 miles. Of Thebez. THis was distant from Sichem two miles Northward, and from Ierusa∣lem thirty eight miles; it took the name from Bitzah, which signifieth a deep Pond. Abimelech took his name from an hereditary Kingdom, or rather because he obtained the Kingdom over Israel after his Father; and is as much as to say, My father is a King; because good Princes differ little from good Fathers: for Maelaech with the Hebrews signifieth a King, Malechah, a Queen, and Malchech, a Kingdom. So that this name Abimelech properly signifieth a King, or one that is a Father of his People. Of the flight of Jotham, which was the Brother of Abimelech. JOtham signifieth a perfect and swift man, being derived from Iatham, that is, perfect and swift. This Man, at such time as Abimelech put to death
the rest of his Brethren, to save his Life fled to Mount Gerizim, where he propounded the Riddle mentioned, Iudg. 9. And after, from thence he went to Beerah, where he hid himself from the fury of Abimelech. All this was forty four miles. Of Mount Gerizim. GErizim or Garizim was a Mountain in the Kingdom of the Samaritans, and extended it self in the Longitude as far as Iericho, near to Mount Hebal. In these two Mountains the Blessings and the Cursings were recited, of which, more shall be said hereafter; and it taketh the name from the felling down of Trees, being derived from Garaz, which signifieth, to cut or to fell down: here Christ spoke with the Samaritan, Iohn 4. Of Beerah. BEerah was a Town in the Tribe of Iudah, ten miles from Ierusalem, Westward. Near to this City Iudas Macchabeus fought a memorable Battel against Bacchides and others, whom he conquered. It taketh the name from a clear Well, being derived of Beer, that is, he hath made clear. Of Thola the seventh Iudge of Israel. THola takes his Name from a Red Worm,In the third Year of this man's Rule, Her∣cules, King of the Ar∣gives, (famous for his twelve Labours) be∣gan to reign. Macrob. lib. 1. or purple Colour, which colour is proper to Princes. He suc∣ceeded Abimelech in the Government of the Iews, and began to rule An. Mun. 2715. and 1253 Years before Christ. His Father's name was Puah, of the Tribe of Issachar. He dwelt in Samir, a City of Mount Ephraim, not far from Iericho, twelve miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North, and there he was buried, as you may see, Iosh. 15. Of Jair the eighth Iudge of Israel. JAir succeeded Thola,In the tenth Year of this Judge, An. Mun. 2747. and before Christ 1221, Hercules died, and Priamus, King of Troy, began his Reign, which he lost forty Years after. and began his Government in the Year of the World, 2738, and 1230 Years before Christ. He took his Name from the singular Worth and noble Disposition that was in him. This Iair was one of the Tribe of Manasseh, he was lame of both his Feet, and was a man of great Estimation among the Iews, for there were thirty Castles and Towns that were called after his Name, Iudg. 10. Num. 32. Deut. 3. Ios. 13.
1 Chr. 1. He dwelt at Kamon, a Town in the Tribe of Gilead, some forty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East. The Travels of Jephthah. JEphtha was born at Mizpah in the Land of Gilead, and being driven into Exile by his Brothers, he fled into the Land of Tob, 48 miles from Ierusalem, Iudg. 11. From thence he returned to Mizpah, 48 miles, and there was chosen Prince, and began his Government Anno Mundi, 2760. and before Christ, 1208 Years, Iudg. 11. From Mizpah he went with his Army against the Ammonites to the Ci∣ty of Aroer, where he put them to flight, which is twenty six miles, Iudg. 11. From Aroer he pursued the Enemies to Minneth, which is eight miles, Iudg. 11. From Minneth he went to the Plain of the Vines, which is twenty four miles, Iudg. 11. From Abel, or the Plain of the Vines, he went to Mizpah, where he of∣fered his Daughter for a Sacrifice to the Lord, Iudg. 11. At that time he and the Ephramites got a memorable Battel, in which were slain 22000, Iudg. 12. So all the Travels of Iephthah were 322 miles. Of the Cities and Places mentioned in his Travels. Of Thob or Tob. THob or Tob to which Iephthah fled, is in the half Tribe of Manasses, be∣yond Iordan, not far from the Mountain of Antilibanus, a hundred and four miles from Ierusalem North-eastward: this was a very fair and plentiful Country, and therefore called Thob, being derived from Thobah, which signifieth, Good and Rate. Of Mizpah. MIzpah was a City in the Land of Gilead, in the half Tribe of Manasses, eighteen miles from Ierusalem North-eastward, and signifieth a Watch-tower, of Zaphah, to look out. In this Town Gideon dwelt, and after him, Samuel. It was afterward destroyed by Iudas Macchabeus: you may read more of it, 1 Sam. 7. 10. Ier. 40, 41. Iosh. 8. 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 6. Nehem 3.
Of Aroer. THIS was a City of the Moabites, beyond Iordan, near the River Arnon, and sell to the Tribe of Gad, Iosh. 12. 13. Deut. 2. and takes the name from Turpentine, being derived from Arar, that is, He hath destroyed and rooted out; and was so called, because Iephthah won a memorable Battel near to this place, Iud. 11. This is often mentioned in the Scriptures. There was another Town of this Name close by Damascus. Of Minueth. IN S. Ierom's time (forty years after Christ) this Town was called Menneth, of Mercury, which the Syrians call Meni, from Manah, to distribute; be∣ing a Town of Merchants, which disperse their Commodities here and there; and stood beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Reuben, thirty two miles from Ierusalem toward the East. Of the Plain of Vines. Of this you may read more in the Travels of Balaam. Of the Death of Jephthah. THIS Iephthah was a famous Captain, and from thence took his Name; for Iepthack signifieth, To make him an open way with the Sword, being derived of Patach, to open; and after he had judged Israel six years died: the manner of whose Death is diversly reported; some say, that because he performed not his Vow effectually, therefore God struck him with a grievous Ulcer, so that as he was passing from City to City, in every place he left a Member. Others say, that he died in the City of the Gilea∣dites, and that in memory of his singular Actions and noble Exploits, which by God's special Aid he atchieved, his Body was cut into pieces, and into every City of Gilead a Member sent, and there buried; which, as I take it, is the better Opinion. Of Ebzan. EBzan was the tenth Judge of Israel, and succeeded Iephthah; he began his Government in Anno Mundi 2666, and before Christ 1402. He was a Bethlemite of the Tribe of Iudah; and as the Hebrews think, Boez, the Grand-father of King David: he had thirty Sons and thirty Daughters, and lived to see them all married, and took them home unto him into his own Family, (which doubtless was a great Blessing of God) and from thence took his Name; for Ibsan, or Abezan, signifieth, The Father of a
Flock, or Multitude. He lived, dwelt, and was buried in Bethlem Iuda, Iudg. 12. Of Elom. IN the Year of the World 2773,In the fifth Year of this man's Rule, the Trojan War be∣gan, Ann. Mun. 2777, before Christ, 1190. and before Christ 1195. Elom the eleventh Judge of Israel, began to rule, and dwelt in Ajalon in the Tribe of Zabulon, who after he had governed ten Years, died, and was buried in the same Town. There was another City of the same Name in the Tribe of Dan, some four miles from Ierusalem, towards the West; where, at the Prayer of Ioshua, the Sun stood still. Of Abdon. ABdon, the twelfth Judge of Israel,In the fifth Year of this Man's Rule Troy was ta∣ken. succeeded Elom; and began to rule, Anno Mundi 2782, and before Christ 1185. He dwelt in the Tribe of Ephraim, in a Mountain of the Amalekites, sixteen miles from Ierusalem, Northwards. He ruled full eight Years, and then died, and was buried in Pirithon. Abdon signifieth a Servant: for he was a good Prince, but that in obeying others he lost himself. This Abdon was a great man, had forty Sons, thirty of which he saw married; and for his greater honour, had his Chariot drawn with seventy Asses; for they used them as we do Horses. The Travels of Sampson. SAmpson was born in the City of Zarea, and brought up in the Tents of Dan and Estahol, Iud. 13. From thence he went to Timnah, which is twelve miles; there he fell in love with Iudah the Daughter of a Philistine, Iudg. 14. From Timnah he went back to his Father to Zarea, and revealed his Af∣fection; which is twelve miles. He and his Father went back again to Timnah, to see the Maid, and by the way as he went he killed a Lyon; which is twelve miles, Iudg. 14. From thence he returned back again, which is twelve miles, Iudg. 14. Within a while after, Sampson and his Friends went again to Timnah, and by the way he found Honey in the Lyon that he had slain, and gave it to his Friends to eat; and when he came to the Philistines House he pro∣pounded
the Riddle, whereof you may read, Iudg. 14. These things hapned in Anno Mundi 2791, and before Christ 1176, at which time, he succeeded Abdon in the Rule of the Iews. From thence he went to Ascalon, a City of the Philistines, and killed thirty of their men, and took away their Garments; which is 24 miles. From thence he returned back again to Timnah, and delivered the Phi∣listines which had unfolded the Riddle, those change of Garments, Iudg. 14. From thence (being angry that his Wife had disclosed the Riddle) he returned to Zarea to his Friends; which is twelve miles, Iudg. 14. Within a while after, when his Anger was over, he returned back to his Wife to Timnah, which is twelve miles, it being then Wheat Harvest, and carried with him a Goat, that so he might be merry, and be reconci∣led to her: but her Father shut him out of doors, (because he had married his Wife to another Man) wherefore he took a Company of Foxes, and tying them Tail to Tail, put Fire-brands to their Tails, and turned them into the Wheat of the Philistines, and they set fire of all the Wheat and Vines, and Olives thereabout, Iudg. 15. From thence he went to a Cave in the Rock Eta, and there dwelt, which is twelve miles, Iudg. 15. At the Rock Eta Sampson was bound with two new Cords by the Israelites, and from thence led to Ramah Lehi, which is six miles, where he killed 1000 Philistines with the Jaw-bone of an Ass, that he found in the way. From thence he went to Gaza, a City of the Philistines, which is forty two miles: here he carried away the Gates of the City. From Gaza he carried these Gates, with the Posts, to the top of a Hill near Hebron, which is twenty miles, Iudg. 16. From Hebron he went to the River Soreck, where he dwelt with Dalilah the Harlot, and by her was deceived and taken of the Philistines, which are twelve miles. Being taken of the Philistines, they put out both his Eyes, and bound him in Chains, and led him from thence to Gaza, which is thirty two miles: there they brought him into the House of their God Dagon, to make them sport; but he pulled down the House, and a multitude of them were slain, where he also died, and was buried in the Sepulchre of Manoah his Father, between Zerea and Esthaol, twenty eight miles from Gaza, and almost twenty from Ierusalem towards the West. This was in the Year of the World 1811, and before Christ, 1157. So all the Travels of Sampson were 240 miles.
The Description of the several Towns and Places to which Sampson travelled. Of Zarea. THIS is a City in the Tribes of Iuda and Dan, near the River Soreck, and taketh the Name from a Cole, or Leprosie; being derived of Sa∣rag, that is, He was Leprous; it stood eighteen miles from Ierusalem Westward. Of Esthaol. THis was a Town in the Tribe of Dan, two miles from Zarea, and stood near the River Soreck, some twenty miles from Ierusalem, towards the West, and taketh the name from a Woman, and Fortitude; for Isca sig∣nifieth a Woman, and El, or Ol, strong and powerful. Here Sampsen was brought up. In St. Ierom's time this was called Asto, not far from whence Sampson lieth buried. Of Timnah. You may read of this in the Travels of Iudah. Of Ascalon. THis was a City of the Philistines, scituated upon the shore of the Medi∣terranean Sea, some thirty miles from Ierusalem Westward, and to this day retaineth the figure of half a Circle: it taketh the name from an ignominious Fire, being derived of Esh and Kalon, an ignominious light. Of Gaza. Of this Town you may read in the Travels of Ioshuah. Of the River Soreck. THis was a very pleasant River, upon the Bank whereof, grew great plenty of Vines and Palms, from whence it seemeth to have taken the Name; for Soreck in Hebrew signifieth a Myrtle Branch, which bringeth forth a pleasant Berry whereof excellent Wine is made. It takes the be∣ginning at a Fountain in the Tribe of Iuda, some twelve miles from Ieru∣salem, towards the West, where there is a very fertile Valley, in which, Dalilah, that betrayed Sampson dwelt: and from thence it runneth through the Land of the Philistines, and falleth into the Mediterranean Sea. Of the Rock Eta. IN this Rock there was a Cave wherein Sampson dwelt, as in a strong Tower: it stood in the Tribe of Iuda, near to the River Soreck, twelve miles from Ierusalem, toward the West, and seemeth to take the Name
from Fowls; for before that Sampson inhabited there, a multitude of Fowls bred upon it, and therefore it was called Eta; for Aith signifies a Fowl. This Rock growing to decay was repaired again by Ieroboam, that Idola∣trous King of Israel. Of Sampson. SAmpson or Schimpson, according to the Hebrew Text, taking his Name from the Sun: for Schaemas in Hebrew signifieth the Sun, and seemeth to have some Affinity with Hercules, which ignifieth, The glory of the Air, for what can be said to be the glory of the Air but the Light of the Sun, without which it would become exceeding dark? Wherefore, as some think, this Sampson was the true Hercules; and those noble Exploits that he did the Graecians attributed to their Hercules. The typical Signification of Sampson. HE typically representeth Christ divers ways; first, in his Person, he was a mighty Man; secondly, in his Profession, he was a Nazarite; third∣ly, in his Calling, he was a Prince and Judge; fourthly, in his manner of living, for he went from place to place, to revenge himself upon the Ene∣mies of God's People, the Children of Israel; and in his Death: even so our Saviour Christ is that strong man, who being mightier than the Devil, hath dispossest him of his tyrannical Jurisdiction over the Souls of Man∣kind; hath taken away those gates of Death, by his Mercy opening unto us the door of Life, that so being set at Liberty from that hellish Imprison∣ment, we may be made Partakers of everlasting Happiness: he was also a Nazarite even from his Mothers Womb, born and bred there, tying him∣self to a Vow of Bondage, that we might be made free: he is a Prince for ever, and a Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck: during the continuance of his Life in this Vail of Misery, his chiefest Actions were to go from place to place, to teach, to do good, and to rescue and relieve the poor distres∣sed Members of the Church, who lay miserably afflicted under the hands of Satan; healing some, relieving others, and bringing a third sort into the state of Grace: so that as Sampson delivered the Israelites from the Bondage of the Philistines, Christ, our Prince and Judge, delivereth his from the Sla∣very of Satan; by his Death saving more Souls than in his Life. And there∣by pulling down the strong Buildings (the Temptations of Satan) hath laid them level with the Ground, that they shall never be restored again. And lastly, after this Life ended, he shall be our Prince and Judge, and bring us to that place of Promise prepared for us in his everlasting Kingdom.
The Travels of the Spies of the Danites. SHortly after the Death of Sampson, the Spies of the Danites went from Zarea and Esthaol to Mount Ephraim, to the House of Michah, which is twenty four miles, Iudg. 18. From thence they went to Lais, which is a hundred and four miles, Iudg. 18. From thence they returned to Zarea and Esthaol, which is 126 miles, Iudg. 18. So all their Travels were 244 miles. Of Lais. LAIS was a City scituated at the Foot of Mount Libanus, some 104 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and was sometimes called Belenus: this, because it stood so far from Aid, was quickly conquered by the Danites, and by them utterly destroyed: it signifieth, a roaring or devouring Lyon. But after, being rebuilt by the Danites, they called it Dan, and the Ca∣naanites, Lesem Dan; being derived of Laeschaem, which signifieth a Lyon. The Travels of the Danites. THE Army of the Danites went from Zarea and Esthaol to Kiijath-jearim, and there pitched their Tents; which is sixteen miles, Iud. 15. From thence they went to Mount Ephraim, to the house of Mi∣cha, and took his carved Image and his Levite from him, which was eight miles, Iudg. 15. From thence they went to Lais, 104 miles. So all the Travels were 128 miles. Of Kirjath-jearim. KIrjath-jearim was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Iuda, upon the Borders of the Tribe of Benjamin, about a mile from Ierusalem, Westward. It sometime belonged to the Gibeonites, Iosh. 9. and signifies a City of the Desart or Woods; being derived from Kiriath, which signifies a City, and Iaar, a Wood or Forrest. Here stood the Ark of the Covenant, after it had been in the Land of the Philistines seven months, and stood in the house of Abinadab, whose Son, Eleazer, (because he was of the Family of the Levites) by consent of the Children of Israel was consecrated Priest thereof, to attend and keep it: here it remained forty eight Years, till Da∣vid
fetched it thence with great Joy, 1 Sam. 7. & 2 Sam. 6. 1 Chr. 14. Here Saul was anointed King by Samuel; here the Company of the Prophets (that is, the Scholers of the Wise) came down from the more eminent pla∣ces where the Ark of God was, with holy Songs and Instruments of Musick, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and he sung and praised God with them. They called this the Hill of God, because the Ark of the Co∣venant stood in it, 1 Sam. 10. Here Ionathan the Son of Saul thrust out a Garrison of the Philistims, which held this Town in Subjection, 1 Sam. 14. Near to this place was the Valley ephaim or of the Gyants; where David won a memorable Battel against the Philistims, and pursued them with great Saughter even to the Plain of Perizim, 2 Sam. 15. The Travels of the Levite, whose Concubine the Inhabitants of Gibeon most wickedly abused. THIS Levite dwelt in Ramath in Mount Ephraim, from whence he went to Bethlehem Iuda, which is sixteen miles, to fetch back his Concubine, or rather his Wife, which was the Daughter of a cer∣tain Citizen in Bethlehem, but a Bond-servant, not free; such they called Concubines, because they had neither the honour to be Mistress of the House, neither could their Posterity inherit the Lands or Goods of their Fathers, although before God they were lawful Wives, Iudg. 19. From Bethlehem they returned back again on foot to Ierusalem, which then was called Iebus, because the Iebusites inhabited there; which is six miles, Iudg. 19. From thence they went to Gibeah, not far distant from the City Gibeon, where after Saul kept his Royal Seat. 1 Sam. 22. Here the Gibeonites abused the Levite's Concubine: which was almost four miles. From thence he went home to his own City Ramath in Mount Ephraim, and there cut the dead Body of his Wife in twelve parts, and sent them throughout all the Tribes of Israel: which is eight miles. So all his Travels were thirty four miles. Of Ramath. THIS was a City in Mount Ephraim, some eight miles from Ierusalem toward the North, and signifieth a high and lofty City, being deri∣ved of Rom, that is, It was high. This Town Baesa King of Israel would have fortified and repaired, after it had been decayed; but he was hindred by Benhadad King of the Syrians, that he could not finish what he had be∣gun. There were many Towns and Cities of this Name, as Ramoth where Ahob dwelt, 1 Reg. 22. Ramathaim Sophim, or Arimathea, where the Pro∣phet
Samuel dwelt, 1 Sam. 1. and there where the Ark of God stood, not far from Gibeah, was called Ramah also, Iudg. 19. There was another Ramath in the Tribe of Naphtali, Ios. 19. all of them being so called be∣cause they stood upon very high Mountains. The Travels of the Children of Israel when they fought against the Benjamites. FRom Mizpah in the Land of Gilead, where they appointed to meet, (for in the Enemies Land they could not assemble themselves) the whole Army of the Israelites went to the Ark of God in Shilo, which was about 48 miles. From thence they went with their Army to Gibeah, where they lost 22000 of their men, which is two miles. From thence they returned to Shilo, and entreated God for Aid, which was two miles, Iudg. 20. From thence they went a second time to Gibeah, and entred Battel again with the Enemy; but because they trusted in their own Strength, therefore in this second Expedition there were slain 18000 of their men; which was two miles, Iudg. 20. From thence the whole Army of the Israelites returned back again, and before the Lord in Shilo lamented the Overthrow they had twice sustain∣ed, and with earnest Prayers implored his Aid, that they might obtain the Victory; which was two miles, Iudg. 20. From thence they returned the third time to Gibeah, and there with great Expedition renewed the War; and because they trusted in God, and not to their own Strength, they put to the Sword 25000 of the Benjamites, and won a notable Victory, Iudg. 20. which was two miles. Having taken and burnt the City of Gibeah with Fire, they returned back unto the Town of Shilo, which is two miles; and there before the Lord they began to lament the Calamity of the Tribe of Benjamin, saying, Wherefore hath this thing happened, that one of the Tribes should be rooted out before thee, Judg. 21. From thence they went to Iabes in Gilead, and besieged and took it, and destroyed it to the Ground, which is fifty two miles. From thence they returned back again to Shilo, and with them brought 400 Maids, which they gave to the Benjamites to be their Wives, Iudg. 21. which was fifty two miles. So all the Travels of the Children of Israel were 164 miles.
Of Jabes. THis was a City in the Land of Gilead, fifty two miles from Ierusalem toward the North-east; the Inhabitants whereof buried the Bones of Soul and Ionathan his Son, 1 Sam. 31. it is derived of Iabesh, which signifi∣eth a dry City. Here endeth the Book of Judges. The Travels of Elimelech, and his Wife Naomi. ELimelech and his Wife went from Bethlehem Iuda, into the Land of the Moabites, where he died, which is forty miles. From thence she returned with her Daughter-in-Law Ruth to Beth∣lehem Iuda, where Boaz married Ruth; which is forty miles. So their Travels were eighty miles. The first Book of SAMVEL. The Travels of Hannah, the Mother of the Prophet Samuel. HER Husband Elkana and she went from Ramathaim Sophim in Mount Ephraim to Shilo, the House of the Lord, which was twelve miles; where, by earnest Prayers, she obtained of the Lord a Son, 1 Sam. 1. From thence she returned back again to Ramathaim Sophim, and there Samuel was born, 1 Sam. 1. which was twelve miles. From thence she went to Shilo, to present her Son before the Lord, and he remained there with Eli to serve God all his Life, 1 Sam. 1. which is twelve miles. From Shilo she returned back again to her house, and bare Elkana a Son, and two Daughters more; which is twelve miles. So all her Travels were forty eight miles. Of Ramathaim Sophim. THis City stood in Mount Ephraim, not far from Lidda and Ioppa, some sixteen miles distant from Ierusalem North-eastward; and was some∣times called Ramah. Here Ioseph (whose Addition was Arimathea) dwelt, that demanded the Body of our Saviour to bury in his own Sepulchre. It seemeth to be called Ramathaim Sophim (which signifies, the high places of
the Prophets) because there was an Academy or publick School of Prophets, which served for the whole Land, in this City. At this day it is called by the Name of Ramath, having some Affinity to the ancient name Ramah. How the Ark of God was borne from place to place, after it was won from the Children of Israel by the Philistines, 1 Sam. 4. 5, 6. THE two Sons of Eli the Priest, Hophni and Phineas, carried the Ark of the Lord to Ebenezer, which signifies, the stone of my help; which was forty two miles, and is not far from Apheck, some forty eight miles from Ierusalem Northward. Here the Ark of God was taken, and Hophni and Phineas died: old Eli also broke his Neck at this time, about the ninety eighth Year of his Age, and the fortieth of his Rule; for he ruled from the time of Sampson until then, 1 Sam. 4. This happened Anno Mundi, 2850. and before Christ 1117. The Prophet Samuel succeeded him in the Go∣vernment of the Church, and ruled 40 Years. From Apheck the Philistines carried it to Asdod, or Azotus, and set it in the Temple of their God Dagon, but the Idol fell down in the Night, and was broken to pieces before the Ark of the Lord, 1 Sam. 4. which was 160 miles. From thence to the City Gath, which was four miles. From Gath to the Sea-town Gaza, twelve miles. From Gaza to Ekron, thirty two miles. From Ekron, they placing it upon a new Cart drawn with two new milch Kine, it was brought back again to Bethsemes, which was twelve miles. From thence it was carried to Kirjath-jearim, and placed in the house of Abinadab, where it was kept until David's time, who fetched it thence to Ierusalem with great Joy, about the Year of the World 2900, and before Christ 1068, which was two miles. So all the while the Ark was from Shilo, it was carried hither and thither some 276 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which the Ark of the Lord was carried. Of Apheck. THis was a City of Samaria, alotted to the half Tribe of Manasses, some half a mile from Israel toward the South, and forty four miles from Ierusalem Northward. It signifieth an impetuous or violent Act; being de∣rived of Aphak, which is as much as, He worketh violently, or offereth Violence. In this City, Benhadad King of the Syrians, going from one place to another to hide himself, was at length constrained to fly to Ahab King of Israel, to save his Life, and crave his Aid, 1 Reg. 20.
Of Asdod, Ascalon, and Gaza, you may read before. Of Gath. THIS was a Haven Town scituated upon the Banks of the Mediterranean Sea, distant from Ierusalem thirty four miles toward the West. It seemeth to take the name of the Abundance of Vines that grow thereabouts; for Gath signifieth a Press; or such an Instrument wherewith Grapes are pressed. This was Goliah's Country. Here Achis, to whom David fled, governed, 1 Sam. 21, 27. and it is very like that all the Kings of this City were called Achis, as sometime the Emperours of Rome were called Caesars. There were other Kings of the Philistines that were also called by this Name. Of Ekron. THIS also was a City of the Philistines not far from the Mediterranean Sea, and near to Asdod, some sixteen miles from Ierusalem Westward. At this day it is but a small Town, and called by the Name of Accaron, ha∣ving some Affinity with the ancient Name Ekron. The Inhabitants of this Town worshipped Baal-zebub for their God. It taketh the Name from Ex∣tirpation, or such a Town as Penitus distruit, hath rooted out even the Foun∣dation; being derived of Akar, which signifieth, to extirpate. Of Bethsemes. THIS was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Iuda, Ios. 15. 21. four miles from Ierusalem Westward; and signifies, the House of the Sun. Of this you may read more before. The Travels of the Prophet Samuel. SAmuel's Mother brought him from Arimathea to Shilo, being twelve miles, where he was to serve the Lord God all his Life. From Shilo Samuel went to Mizpa in the Land of Gilead; forty eight miles. Here Samuel called a Congregation, and made a solemn Sacrifice unto the Lord of a sucking Lamb; and the Lord at the same time thun∣dred from Heaven, and dispersed the Army of the Philistines, so that they fled, 1 Sam. 7. From Mizpa he went to Arimathea, 56 miles; there he dwelt, and built an Altar unto the Lord, 1 Sam. 7. From thence he went yearly to Bethel, sixteen miles, 1 Sam. 7. From Bethel he went to Gilgal, tvvo miles, 1 Sam. 7. From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the Land of Gilead, thirty six miles, 1 Sam. 7.
From Mizpah he went again to Arimathea, 56 miles. Thither came unto him the Elders of the Children of Israel, desiring him to chuse them a King, 1 Sam. 8. Therefore he went out of the Town of Arimathea, about sixteen miles, to Ramath, which lieth in the Land of Ziph, not far from Bethlehem Eu∣phrata, and there Samuel anointed Saul the Son of Kish to be their King, 1 Sam. 10. From Ramath he went to Gilgal, sixteen miles. There he offered, and shewed Saul what he should do, 1 Sam. 10. From Gilgal he went to Mizpah in the Land of Gilead, thirty six miles: there Saul, by casting of Lots, was chosen King, 1 Sam. 10. From Mizpah he returned to Arimathea, fifty six miles, 1 Sam. 10. From Arimathea he went to Bezeck, 44 miles, where Adoni-Bezeck was ta∣ken, whose Fingers and Toes the Children of Israel cut off. There Samuel and Saul caused an Army of Men to issue out against the Children of Ammon, 1 Sam. 11. From Beseck Samuel and Saul passed over Iordan to Iabes in Gilead, six∣teen miles, and there overthrew Nahaz King of the Ammonites, and all his Host, which done, Samuel said unto the Souldiers, Let us now go unto Gilgal, and there renew the Kingdom. From Iabes in Gilead he went to Gilgal, thirty six miles. There Saul was placed in his throne Royal, 1 Sam. 11. From Gilgal Samuel went to Arimathea, which is twenty miles. From Arimathea he went again to Gilgal, twenty miles, and there he sharp∣ly rebuked King Saul, because he had offered a Sacrifice contrary to his command, 1 Sam 13. From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles, 1 Sam. 13. From Gibeon he went to Arimathea, twelve miles. From Arimathea he went to Gilgal, twenty miles; there he rebuked King Saul, because he did not wholly destroy the Amalekites, and Samuel himself hewed the Body of Agag King of the Amalekites in pieces, 1 Sam. 16. From Gilgal he went to Arimathea, twenty miles. From Arimathea he went to Bethlehem, sixteen miles, and there he anoin∣ted David King, 1 Sam. 16. Then he returned again to Arimathea, sixteen miles, where he died, and was buried, 1 Sam. 28. So all the Travels of the Prophet Samuel were 364 miles. Of Arimathea, Mizpah, Ramath, and the rest of the Towns mentioned in his Travels, you may read before.
The typical signification of Samuel. SAmuel is derived of Shemuel, that is, desired of God: and was a Type of God the Father: For as Samuel anointed David, so God anointed his beloved Son with the Oil of Gladness, and of the Spirit, Psal. 45. Esa. 61. The Travels of King Saul. SAVL went from the Town of Gibeon to Mount Ephraim, four miles, to seek his Father's Asses, in An. Mund. 2870, and before Christ, 1908. From Mount Ephraim he passed through the Land of Salisa, to the Borders of the Town of Salem, 12 miles. From Salem he went to the Land of Gemini in the Tribe of Benjamin, six∣teen miles. From the Land of Gemini he went to Rama, four miles; there by Samuel he was anointed King, 1 Sam. 10. This Town lay not far from Bethlehem, and close by it lay Rachels Grave. There certain men met with Saul in the Borders of Benjamin at Zelach, and shewed him that his Fathers Asses were found; which was about a mile from Ierusalem. From thence Saul went about two miles to Zilzah; there three men met him (that travelled to Bethel) and gave him two Loaves of Bread, 1 Sam. 10. Then he came to the Mount of God, which is the Town of Kirjath-jearim; there a company of Prophets met him, and prophecied; then the Spirit of God came upon Saul, and he began to prophecy: which was about six miles from Bethlehem. From Kirjath-jearim he went again to Gibeon, which is four miles, 1 Sam. 10. Then he went again from Gibeon to Gilgal, and there he offered, and Sa∣muel shewed him what he should do: which is 12 miles, 1 Sam. 10. From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the Land of Gilead, thirty six miles, where he was chosen King. From Mizpa he went again to Gibeon, forty eight miles. From Gibeon he went to Beseck, forty miles; there he gathered certain Souldiers, and led them against Nahas King of the Ammonites, 1 Sam. 11. From Beseck he went with his Army to Iabes, sixteen miles; there he overthrew Nahas with all his Host. From Iabes in Gilead he went to Gilgal, thirty six miles. There he was placed in his Princely Seat, 1 Sam. 11. From Gilgal he went to Michmas, four miles: there he sent 3000 men out of Israel, to his Son Ionathan to Gibeon.
From Michmas he went to Gilgal with his Army, four miles. There he offered, for which Samuel rebuked him, 1 Sam. 13. From Gilgal he went to Mount Benjamin, about twelve miles, not far from Gibeon. From Gibeon he went to Michmas, eight miles. There Ionathan overcame the Army of the Philistines, 1 Sam. 14. From Michmas Saul followed the Enemy to Ajalon, twelve miles. There he would have slain his Son Ionathan, because he had eaten a little Honey, 1 Sam. 14. From Ajalon he went to Gibeon, four miles, where he kept Court. From Gibeon he went to the Land of the Moabites, 28 miles; which he overcame. 1 Sam. 14. From the Land of the Moabites he went into the Countrey of the Ammo∣nites, 40 miles; which Countrey he overcame, and took in all their Towns. From the Land of the Ammonites he went to Gibeon, 60 miles, 1 Sam. 15. From Gibeon he went into the Land of Edom, or Idumaea (as it is com∣monly called) forty miles, and overcame all the Countrey. From Idumaea he returned again to Gibeon, forty miles. From Gibeon he went with an Army about 600 miles, to Zoba in Armenia, which he overcame, 1 Sam. 14. From the Kingdom of Zoba he returned to Gibeon, 600 miles. After that, he went out against the Philistines, 12 miles, and as the Histo∣ry sheweth, Saul had Wars with the Philistines during his life, 1 Sam. 14. From the Philistines he returned again to Gibeon, unto his Palace, twelve miles. From Gibeon he went into the Wilderness of Sur, 160 miles; there he overcame the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 15. Also he overcame the whole Countrey, from the Town of Peluso to the Red Sea, which is 92 miles. From thence he went again into Iury, to the Town of Carmel, 140 miles, 1 Sam. 15. And from thence he went unto Gilgal, 32 miles. There the Prophet Samuel rebuked him, because he did not wholly destroy and consume the Amalekites: and there Samuel hewed the Body of Agag King of the Amale∣kites into small pieces, 1 Sam. 15. From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles. In the eleventh year of Saul, An. Mun. 2881, and before Christ, 1807, Da∣vid being then about twenty years of age, was anointed King by Samuel. Within a while after, Saul was vexed with an evil Spirit: then David played unto him upon the Harp, by which he was eased. Soon after he went forth with his Army towards Socho and Asekah, which was some eight miles distant from Gibeah. There David killed that famous Champion Goliah, 1 Sam. 15.
From thence the Israelites followed the chase of the Philistines to the Val∣ley and River Soreck, four miles; and thence unto the Gates of their Cities, that is, to Ekron, which is eight miles; to Ascalon twenty miles; and toFrom the place where David kil∣led Goliah Gath, which was twenty four miles, all the way put∣ting the Philistines to the Sword. So that there died in this Fight 30000 of them, 1 Sam. 17. Then they returned back again, and spoiled and burnt the Philistines Tents, where they found great Riches, twenty four miles. From Socho and Aseka he returned again to Gibeon, eight miles: there the Women came out of all places in the Town dancing, and with loud voices singing, Saul hath slain a thousand, but David ten thousand, 1 Sam. 18. From Gibeon he went to Arimathea, two miles, minding to kill David, and came to Naioth in Ramoth, where Samuel and David were: but the Spirit of God came upon Saul, and he prophecied, falling down upon the ground be∣fore Samuel and David, all that day, and the night ensuing, 1 Sam. 19. From thence he returned again to Gibeon, twelve miles: there he thought to have killed his Son Ionathan with a Spear, because he excused David. There also he caused eighty five Priests to be put to death, because the High Priest Abimelech at Nob had given David of the Shew-bread to eat, and had delivered him Goliah's Sword, 1 Sam. 21, 22. From Gibeon he went to the Levitical Town Nob, twelve miles, where he spared neither man nor woman, young, nor old, no not the inno∣cent Children, but put them all to the Sword, and wholly destroyed the Town, 1 Sam. 12. From the Town of Nob he returned to Gibeon, twelve miles. From Gibeon he went to the Wilderness of Moan, South-ward, 20 miles. From the Wilderness of Moan he returned again to Gibeon, 1 Sam. 23. twenty four miles. From Gibeon he went to Engedi, where David in a Cave cut off a piece of his Garment, which was twenty four miles, 1 Sam. 24. From thence he returned again to Gibeon, twenty four miles. From Gibeon he went to Ziph, twenty two miles, and as he lay asleep upon the Hill Hachila, David came secretly into the Camp, and took his Cup and his Spear from his Head, and would not kill him, 1 Sam. 26. From the Hill Hachila he returned unto Gibeah, 22 miles. From thence he went to fight with the Philistines at Mount Gilboa, forty miles. From Mount Gilboa, having changed his Apparel, he went to Endor, which was four miles: There he asked counsel of a Witch, and the Devil appear∣ed unto him in the likeness of Samuel, 1 Sam. 28. From thence he returned again to Mount Gilboa, to the Camp, four miles, and the next day he fought against the Enemy, in which Battel his
three Sons were slain, and he himself put to flight, 1 Samuel 31. 1 Chroni∣cles 11. From Mount Gilboa he fled eight miles to Bethsan, where he kill'd him∣self, 1 Sam. 31. 1 Chr. 11. From thence the Body of Saul was brought to Iabes in Gilead, where it was buried, 2 Sam. 31. 1 Chr. 11. So all the Travels of Saul were 2428 miles. The Description of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. OF Gibea, Salem, Ramath, and Iabes, you may read before being me∣morable places to which Abraham, Ioshuah, and the Children of Is∣rael travelled. Of Bethsaliza. THE Land of Salisa, with the City Bethsaliza, was scituated in Mount Ephraim, eight miles from Ierusalem toward the North-west. This was also called Baalsaliza, 2 King 4. and signifieth the Trinity, being de∣rived of Schillesch, to make three-fold. Of Michmas. THIS was a City in Mount Ephraim, in the Borders of the Tribes of Benjamin and Manasses, not far from Iericho, some ten miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Near to this City, Ionathan and his Armor-bearer put the Army of the Philistines to flight, 1 Sam. 14. You may read of this Town in Esd. 2. Isa. 10. This was a strong City of the Moabites, and seemeth to take the Name of Kemosch or Chamos, which was a God which they worshipped in their Banquets and Meetings for Mirth: as Bacchus some∣time was amongst the Romans. To this Idol Solomon built a Temple, 1 Reg. 11. Ier. 48. Of Zoba. THE Kingdom of Zoba, which Iosephus calleth Sophenam, was in Ar∣menia, near to the Mountains Antitaurus and Masius, 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, extending it self on both sides of the River Euphrates. It was a very large, fruitful, and pleasant Country, wherein inhabited many Kings. This place Saul conquered, and David retained it, 1 Sam. 14. 2 Sam. 8. and signifies an aspiring Kingdom; being derived of Zabah, He hath aspired. Of Carmel. CArmel was a City in the Tribe of Iudah, scituated in a fertile Moun∣tain, some eight miles from Hebron toward the East, but twelve
miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west, in the Wilderness of Moan, where that foolish and covetous Fellow Nabal dwelt. There is likewise an∣other Town called by the same Name, in the Tribe of Issachar, not far from Ptolomais, which is upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, sixty four miles from Ierusalem toward the North, standing upon a Promontory which extendeth it self into the Ocean; of which you may read, Ios. 19. Ier. 46. In this City the Prophets Elias and Elizeus dwelt, who put the Priests of Baal to Death in that place, 1 Reg. 18. 2 Reg. 4. Carmel signifieth Spike, or a fertile Field bringing forth Vines, Herbs, and divers kinds of Flowers and Fruits; and is oft-times used for a pleasant place, Esay 29. 32, 37. Ier. 24. There are a Sect of Monks, that of this Mountain are called Car∣melites, who built for themselves an Abbey there close by the Church of St. Maries, about the Year of the World 5170, and in the Year of our Lord 1170. Of Azekah. AZekah and Socho were two Towns in the Tribe of Iudah, eight miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west, Of these you may read be∣fore. Of Nobe or Nob. THIS was a City of the Priests, in the Tribe of Benjamin, where Abime∣lech, High-Priest of the Israelites, dwelt; who at such time as David fled from Saul, he gave him of the Shew-bread, and the Sword that he took from Goliah: for the which cause, Saul commanded fourscore and five Priests to be slain, and the City, with all the Inhabitants thereof, to be put to the Sword, 1 Sam. cap. 22. At this day (as Bernard Brittenbaccus saith) it is called Bethenopolis, and is in the way between Ierusalem (from whence it is distant some sixteen miles towards the North-east) and Dyospolim. It taketh the Name from Naba, which signifieth, He hath prophesied. Of this you may read, 1 Sam. 20. 21, 22. and Esay 10. Of Maon. THIS was a Town in the Wilderness of Iudaea, some 24 miles from Ie∣rusalem Southward, near Ziph and Carmel, where Saul had besieged David and all his men, and would have either put them to the Sword, or taken them Captives. But the Philistines on a sudden invaded the Land, so that Saul was constrained to leave the Siege to oppose their Incursions. It taketh the Name from a fruitful Habitation, and a firm and safe Mansi∣on, 2 Sam. 23. Ios. 15. Of Engedi. THIS was a Castle or Town scituated in a Mountain near to the shore of the Dead Sea, a little beyond Sodom, six miles from Ierusalem toward
the North-east, and in the Tribe of Iudah, Ios. 15. In times past it was a fruitful place both of Vines and other Fruits: there also grew a kind of Bal∣sam. But Cleopatra, in the time of Mark Anthony, brought the Roots of it into AEgypt, and there made a pleasant Garden, where now Christians in∣habit. There are yet some small Stalks here and there of this Balsam to be found upon this Hill Engedi, but the Saracens do not regard it, neither dwell any Christians near to dress it, so that it groweth to decay. Engedi signifieth the Fountain or Well of a Goat or Lamb. These Mountains are very high, and of a wonderful Nature; in some places great ragged Rocks appearing, in others, plain and fruitful Vallies; insomuch, as they are fear∣ful and horrible to Strangers that behold them. Of Ziph. THIS was a Town in the Desart of Ziph, placed in a certain Mountain not far from Hebron, in the Tribe of Iudah, some twenty two miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east, Iosh. 15. Unto this Desart (near to this City) David oft times resorted, and at last was betrayed by the Inha∣bitants of this Town. It seemeth that the Town and Wilderness took that Name of the abundance of Pitch that was found in it; for Zaephaeth in He∣brew signifieth Pitch. Of Gilboa. THIS was a Mountain in the Tribe of Manasseh, near to Sichem and Apheck, forty miles from Ierusalem towards the North; it extendeth eight miles to the City Bethsan, and two miles towards the North to Mount Hermon. It seems to take the name from the bubling forth, or springing up of Water; for the River Kison begins at the foot of this Mountain, and divides it self into divers parts until it cometh to the Hill Hermon, and then it runs into two principal Streams, the one passeth toward the East in∣to the Sea of Galilee, the other to the West, towards Carmel, and so into the Mediterranean Sea. There be some that are of Opinion, that neither Rain nor Dew falls upon this Hill, because when Saul was slain David cur∣sed these Mountains, saying, Let neither Rain nor Dew fall upon you, O ye Mountains of Gilboa, because the strong men of Israel were slain there, 2 Sam. 1. But this was but a figurative Speech, whereby David would express the greatness of his Sorrow; for Borchardus, the Monk, speaking of this Moun∣tain, saith, That as he was ascending upon it, there was such a violent shower fell, that he was wet through his Cloaths, and the Waters in great abundance ran into the Vallies. And in the Year of our Lord 1283, sleep∣ing upon this Hill on the Eve of All Saints, there was a great dew fell upon his Cloaths; only some parts of it were very stony and barren, as are many other Mountains in that Country.
Of Endor. THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Manasses, near the River Kison, Ios. 17. where Saul asked Counsel of a Witch, 1 Sam. 28. It seems to take the name from a Fountain of Durance; for Dr signifies, He hath made sure. It is distant from Ierusalem forty four miles toward the North. In S. Ierom's time this was but a small Village. Of Bethsan. THIS was a City in the Tribe of Mnasses, between Bethlia and the Sea of Glilee, some forty four miles from Ierusalem towards the North, Io. 17. It taketh the name from a Church-yard, or a place of Rest: for Bth signifieth a House, and Iaschan, he hath slept. Here Saul killed him∣self, and the Philiines cut off his Head and set it upon the Wall of this City. Afterward, about St. Ierom's time, Ptolomy called this Scythooli. You may read in the Second Book of the Macchabees, how it was the Town of the Sthians; for the Scythians which dwelt some 800 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the North, came with a great Army into the Holy Land, and by force won this City, and dwelt there; of whom it was called the Scythian Town. Iosph. in lib. 2. de Bell. Iud. cap. 18. remembreth a strange Accident that hapned near this Town; for the Iews besieging it, there were of their own Nation that dwelt within the City, who (that they might make a private Gain) took wages of the Scythians to oppose their Brethren and Country-men: by which means, the Scythians got the better. But after a while, the Scythians considering that the number of the Iews was great, and fearing some sudden Insurrection or Innovation, gave them warning to depart and leave the Town: they, though with great Grief, as being prest with a two-fold necessity, (their own Wants and the hatred of their Kindred) did so, relying merely upon the Courtesie of Strangers. But, about some two days after, in the night time, the Inhabitants of Scythopo∣lis breaking out of the City unawares, fell upon them, and in recompence of their Kindness, put to the Sword some thirteen thousand: many slain unawares, some as they were eating, and most in their Sleep. After they had committed this Massacre, they compassed about the Wood where they were, took away all their Substance, and suffered not a Man to depart alive. Wherefore, one Simon the Son of a certain ancient and noble Citi∣zen, called Saul, perceiving their present Misery, and that there was no hope to escape imminent Dath and utter Ruine, in a cruel and desperate manner breaks out into these Words: O miserable Wretch that I am, that against my own Conscience have lift up these Impious Hands against my Country, committing daily Massacres to pleasure them, who at this day lay violent hands upon all we have; die therefore, thou that art thus pro∣phane,
and with thine own hands make an end of thy wretched Life, since thou dost not deserve to die honourably in the face of the Enemy, but wretchedly in a corner, and for thine own offence. So soon as he had end∣ed these words, he turned him about with a fierce countenance, and falling upon his Father, Mother, Wife, and Children, put them all to the Sword; after, burnt his Goods; and to make an end of the Tragedy, ran himself upon his own Weapon. These things happened but a little before Vespasian came into the Land of Iudaea. At this day this City Scythoolis is called after the ancient name Bethsan. The typical representation of Saul. SAVL, if it be properly taken, doth sometime signifie a Grave or Sepul∣chre, and sometimes Hell; being derived from Scheuol, which may be taken for both. As therefore Saul persecuted innocent David with an inve∣terate malice, even unto the death; so the Sons of Sathan (evil and wicked men) persecute Christ and his Members, with an immoveable malice, spa∣ring neither Prophets nor Apostles, neither such as are Religious, no nor Christ himself; but with cruel torments put them to lingring deaths, till they be utterly extirpate (as they think:) and then wanting objects to satisfie their Savage minds, they follow their own devillish councels, till with Saul they come to desperate ends. Schul, or Saul, if it be taken in the better part, sig∣nfieth, He hath desired, or called. The Philistines Travels from their Camp to Michmas. THE Philistines incamped themselves at Michmas, upon Mount E∣phraim, some ten miles from Ierusalem Northward: and out of the Philistines Camp there issued three Armies to spoil the Coun∣trey. The one marched towards Ophra, and went from Michmas to Salem, twenty eight miles. From thence they went to Ophra, four miles. The second went from Michmas to Bethoron, eight miles. The third went from Michmas to the Valley of Zeboim, eight miles. So all the Travels of the Philistines were fifty eight miles. Of Zeboim. THis Valley is not far from Ierusalem, in the Tribe of Benjamin, Ne∣hem. 11.
The Travels of Jonathan Saul's Son. JONATHAN went from Gibeah to Kirjath-jearim, which was two miles, where he drave the Philistines out of their Camp, 1 Sam. 13. From thence he went back again, two miles. From thence he went to Michmas, which is eight miles, and there, by the help of his Armor-bearer, he gave the Philistines a great overthrow, 1. Sam. 14. From thence he followed the Enemy to Ajalon, which is twelve miles; there his Father would have put him to death because he had tasted a little Honey, 1. Sam. 14. From Ajalon, Saul and his Son Ionathan returned to Gibeah, his own City, which was two miles. From Gibeah he went with his Father to Socho and Asekah, which was eight miles; where, after David had slain Goliah (for that singular Virtue and Heroical Spirit which Ionathan saw in him) he loved him as he did his own Soul, and preferred him before his own Life and Honour, 1 Sam. 18. From thence he went with his Father to Gibeah, some eight miles, where Women with great mirth and joy met him, saying, Saul hath slain his thou∣sand, and David his ten thousand: for which cause Saul, out of meer envy, (for then he did not know that he had been anointed by Samuel) would have slain him, and his Son Ionathan also for excusing him, 1 Sam. 18, 19. From Gibeah Ionathan went into the Desart of Ziph, some 22 miles, to comfort David: there they swore a solemn Oath of mutual friendship, to continue as long as they lived, 1 Sam. 23. From thence Ionathan returned, which was 22 miles, 1 Sam. 23. At last he went to the Wars with his Father to Mount Gilboah, forty miles: there he, his Father, his Brothers Abinadab and Melchisuah were slain. So all the Travels of Ionathan were 126 miles. The Travels of Abiathar, Abimelech's Son. WHEN Doeg the Idumaean, at the command of Saul, had slain the Priests of the Lord, this Abiathar, the Son of Abimelech the High Priest, fled to the Wood Hareth, not far from Kegilah, some twenty miles, and came and told David of all that had happen∣ed, 1 Sam. 22, 23. Of Kegilah. THis was a City in the Tribe of Iudah, four miles Hebron, towards the East, and twenty from Ierusalem toward the South-west. From
which Town David drove away the Philistines that had besieged it, 1 Sam. 23. You may read of it Iosh. 23. Nehem. 3. In St. Ierom's time it was but a small Town, where the Inhabitants shew to Strangers the Sepulchre of Habak∣kk the Prophet. Not far off, toward the West, lieth Hareth, that Wood where David was when Abiathar came to him. Kegila in Hebrew signifieth a Tent. The Travels of King David. DAVID was anointed King by Samuel, when he was twenty years old, Anno Mundi 2881, and before Christ, 1807. Within a while after, he was sent by his Father Isay, or Iesse, to Gibeah of Saul, which was eight miles; there he played to Saul upon the Harp, 1 Sam. 16. When Saul went out with his Army against the Philistines, David return∣ed back to Bethlehem, his own Countrey, which was about eight miles. There he fed his Father's sheep, 1 Sam. 17. From thence he went to Socho and Asekah, and killed Goliah, which was four miles. From thence he carried the Head of Goliah to Ierusalem, which was eight miles. From thence he went with King Saul to Gibeah, which was four miles. From Gibeah he went twelve miles into the Land of the Philistines, and to perform the promise which he had made, put to the Sword 200 of them. From thence he returned, and brought their fore-skins unto Saul; in re∣compence of which noble Exploit, he was married to Saul's Daughter: which was twelve miles. A while after, he made an incursion upon the Land of the Philistines, and in a sharp and cruel War got a famous Victory, and returned with glo∣ry to Gibeah, which was at the lest twenty four miles. But when David perceived that Saul went about to take away his Life, and that (he was so narrowly pursued) he had no way to escape, but to be let down by a cord through a window; he made haste and went from Gibe∣ah to Arimathea, where he complained unto Samuel of the Injuries of Saul, and laid before him in what a miserable condition he was, and to what straights brought. Wherefore Samuel, to comfort him, brought him to Naioth; which seemeth to be so called, of the fair scituation and pleasantness of the place: for Mabah signifies, a laudable and comely place: this was a Colledge of such as were Professors of that sacred study of Divinity. Now Saul hearing that David was in this place, came with some of his Servants on purpose to make him captive. But at the sight of Sa∣muel
he began to sing Psalmes and Hymns after the manner of the Pro∣phets. From thence David returned back unto Gibeah, some twelve miles, where, at the Stone of Ezel (not far from Gibeah, toward the South) Ionathan went to David, and counselled him to depart with all speed, for that his Father meant evil towards him. So they took leave either of other with Tears, 1 Sam. 20. Ezel signifies an Angle, as was a Stone full of Angles or corners. From thence he went to Nob, which was twelve miles. From thence he went to Gath, a City of the Philistines, where he eigned himself mad, because of Achis whom he feared, 1 Sam. 21. being twenty four miles. From thence he went to the Cave of Odullam, twenty four miles, and thither resorted unto him many of his Kindred, and such as were indebted and in danger, to the number of forty Persons. In this place he wrote the 57 and 142 Psalms, as may appear by their Titles. From thence he went to Mizpah in the Land of the Moabites, where, at this time, the King kept his Court, and there he carefully commanded his Friends and followers to his safe Protection, till such time as the fury of Saul was asswaged, 1 Sam. 22. From thence, by the counsel of the Prophet Gad, he returned by the Wilderness of Hareth to Kegila, and rescued it; forty miles. Here Abiathar the Priest came to him, 1 Sam. 23. From thence, fearing the coming of Saul, he went into the Wilderness of Ziph, whither Ionathan came to him, 1 Sam. 22. which was four miles. From thence he went to the Town of Moan; four miles. From thence he went to the Hold of Engedi, thirty six miles. From thence he went six miles to Carmel in Iudaea, where he determined to have destroyed Nabal for his churlishness, 1 Sam. 25. From thence he went to Hackilah, two miles. From Hackilah he went to Gath, where Achis King of the Philistines kept his Court, sixteen miles. This Achis was very courteous, and bountiful∣minded; he entertained David, and gave him freely the City of Zicklag to inhabit in, 1 Sam. 27. Wherefore David went thence to the Town of Ziclag, which was twelve miles, 1 Sam. 27. and there inhabited one year and seven months. From thence David went often towards the South, and made incursions upon the Amalekites, wasting and destroying their Land which lay in the Desart of Sur, about eighty miles distant from Ziclag, and a hundred and twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west.
From the Desart of Sur he returned back again unto Ziclag, which was eighty miles, and sent part of the Prey which he had gotten to the King of the Philistines; Of which you may read more, 1 Sam. 27. From Ziclag David went with the Army of the Philistines to fight against Saul, eighty eight miles, even to Sunem: for the Philistines pitched between Iesreel and Sunem, 1 Sam. 28, 29. But because the Princes of the Philistines durst not trust him, therefore, by the consent of Achis their King, he returned back to Zicklag, eighty eight miles, 1 Sam. 29. Whilst David was gone with the Philistines to fight against Israel, the A∣malekites invaded Ziclag, took it, and burnt it with fire, and carried away Ahinoam and Abigal (David's Wives) Captives. Wherefore, when David came to Ziclag, and perceived what had happened, with all speed he pur∣sued the Enemy; and in the way as he went he found an Egyptian, who, a little before, the Amalekites had left there, because he was unable to follow them. This Egyptian guided David to the Tents of the Amalekites, who, suspecting no such evil, were making merry with the Booty that they had taken. But David with the rest of his Company so manfully behaved them∣selves, they gave the Amalekites a sudden overthrow: and, as it often hap∣peneth to such as are negligent and careless, he took away from them their former Booty, and put most of them to the Sword. This Battel was fought some eight or twelve miles from Zicklag, as by the circumstance of the Hi∣story may appear. From this slaughter he returned back to Ziclag, being twelve miles, and repaired it; to every neighbouring City sending a part of the prey. Here he had certain intelligence of the Success of the Israelites in their Wars against the Philistines, and of the death of Saul and Ionathan, which he bit∣terly lamented, 1 Sam. 30. 2 Sam. 1. These things happened in the tenth year after Samuel had anointed David King. From Ziclag he went to Hebron, a Metropolitan City of the Tribe of Iudah, being a Town of Refuge belonging to the Levites, which was sixteen miles. At this time David was about the age of thirty years, and was anointed King by the Tribe of Iudah, in the year of the World 2891, and before Christ 1077. Here he kept his Court seven years and six months. From hence also he sent Messengers to Iabes in Gilead, forty four miles, to signi∣fie his gracious acceptance of that favour which they shewed unto Saul, in burying of his Body there, 2 Sam. 1. 1 Chr. 12. From Hebron David went to Ierusalem, twenty two miles, which then was called Iebus, being possessed of the Iebusites; but he won it with strong hand, and thrust them out of it; and in Mount Sion set up the City Millo, which was afterward called the City of David, and signifies a place of Plenty. He
began his Reign in Ierusalem in the thirty eighth year of his Age, and se∣venth of his Reign. In this place also he set up his House made of Cedar-wood, of which, Hram, King of Tyrus, sent him great Plenty from Mount Libanus, distant from thence, 104 miles, 2 Sam. 5. 1 Ch. 12. From thence he went to the Valley of Rephaim, some three miles from Ierusalem, in the way that leadeth to the City of Bethlem, where he fought a memorable Fight against the Philistines, and overcame them; for which cause, it was also called Baal-Perizim, because, by the Help and Assistance of God, he had conquered the Army of the Philistines, 1 Sam. 5. After he had dispersed the Enemies, he returned to Ierusalem, which is our miles. The Philistines came the same Year into the Valley of Rephaim again, and pitched their Tents within three miles and a half of Ierusalem: and the Lord gave David a sign, that when he heard a noise in the Mulberry-trees he should set upon the Enemy; so David went forth, and close by the Town of Gaeba and Kirjath-jearim, about two miles from Ierusalem West-ward, he set upon the Enemy, and gave them the second Overthrow, 2 Samuel 5. 1 Chr. 15. From thence David followed the Enemy to Gaza, which was eighteen miles, 2 Sam. 5. in the tenth Year of his Reign from his first beginning in Hebron. David assembled all the Princes, Priests, and chief men of Israel, to the number of 30000, which inhabited from Sechor till you come to Chaemah, a City of Naphtali, at the foot of Mount Libanus, even 163 miles off. These men assembled themselves in the City of Ierusalem, and from thence, they with David, went to Kirjath-jearim, which was about a mile, to fetch the Ark of the Covenant from thence into the City of David, 1 Sam. 6. 1 Chr. 14. From Kirjath-jearim, David and all his Train returned back again to Ie∣rusalem, which was about a mile; and they placed the Ark of the Lord in a new Cart, and caused it to be drawn with Oxen, which turned out of the way to the threshing-floor of Nachon, where Vzza rashly and inconsi∣derately touching the Ark of God, contrary to the Divine Law, was pre∣sently slain by the Lord in the way, and that place was called Paeri-Vza, that is, The Breach of Uza: for he was not of the Tribe of Aaron, to whom it was only lawful to touch the Ark, and therefore the Lord struck him that he died miserably: wherefore David being terrified by this example of God's Severity, would not that day bring the Ark of the Lord into Ieru∣salem, but carried it to the House of a certain Noble-man called Obed Aedom a Gittite, who dwelt not far from Ierusalem; but, when it was told David that the Lord blessed the House of Obed Aedom, and all his Family, because the Ark was there, David went from Ierusalem with a great multitude of People, to the House of Obed Aedom, who (as is said before) dwelt not far
from Ierusalem, (yet there are some that say he was an excellent Musician in Ierusalem, and dwelt in Mount Acra, that is in the lower City) and from thence David fetch'd the Ark of the Lord into the upper City, which stood upon Mount Sion; but I hold the other Opinion to be the more pro∣bable. When the Ark was carried by the Priests, David girt himself with a lin∣nen Ephod, (which kind of Garment the Priests of the inferiour Order used to wear) and danced before it, singing Psalms and Hymns to the praise and glory of God, and with great State brought it to the City of Ie∣rusalem, with the sound of Trumpets and Instruments of Musick, and pla∣ced it in the middle of the Tabernacle, which they had curiously erected in Mount Sion, in the upper City, which was also called the City of David. This hapned in the tenth year of his Reign; at which time, Michal, Saul's Daughter, despised him in her Heart, and laughed at him: but God gave her a due Recompence, as you may read, 2 Sam. 6. and him a just Re∣ward; for, he promised by the Prophet Nathan, That of his Posterity and Blood the King of Kings and Saviour of the World should be born. In the Year following, David invaded the Land of the Philistines, and the City of Gath, which with strong hand he won: this was thirty four miles from Ierusalem. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, 34 miles. In the twelfth Year of his Reign he afflicted the Moabites with cruel War, and destroyed two of their Armies with the Sword, and the rest of the mul∣titude he made Tributary; which was 24 miles, 2 Sam. 8. 1 Chr. 9. He returned thence to Ierusalem with great Triumph and Joy, twenty four miles. In the thirteenth year of his Reign, Anno Mundi, 2903. and before Christ 1065, he made an Expedition unto Zoba, which Iosephus calleth Sophenam, and is in Armenia, near to Masia or Mount Taurus, 600 miles from Ieru∣salem toward the North; of which you may read before. David in this place won a memorable Battel against Hadad Ezer the King thereof, near to the River Euphrates: he took 700 Horse and 20000 Foot, burnt their Chariots, took 100 Castles, conquered all the Towns and Country round about, and went away with a great Booty, as well of Gold as Silver, Brass, and other things; which Brass, for the Excellency thereof, was like unto Gold, and (as Iosephus saith) afterwards Solomon made the Molten Sea of it. When Gadarezer, King of the Syrians, (he that built that famous Ci∣ty of Damascus) heard of the overthrow of Hadad-Ezer, he sent a great Army to his Aid; which King David, near to the River Euphrates, smote with the Sword, so that 20000 of them were slain, and he carryed away a glorious Victory, extending his Government from Ierusalem, 600 miles towards the North, that is, into Armenia, and beyond the River Euphra∣tes,
and made these two Nations tributary unto him, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chr. 19. After David had won these two memorable Victories near Euphrates, he went thence with all his Army towards the South, and invaded the Land of Syria; in which Journey, Ioram the Son of Tohi, King of Antiochia, (which City at this time was called Hemath) met David with Gifts and Pre∣sents in the Name of his Father, returning him many Thanks because he had destroyed the common Enemy Hadad-Ezer, and by strong hand sub∣dued and quelled the Fury of that mighty Tyrant, who was also a trouble and vexation to the Kingdom of Antiochia. David entertained this Message kindly, and thankfully received his Gifts, (which was of Gold, Silver, and fine Brass) and so gave Ioram an acceptable Dispatch, and from thence with his Army went to Damascus, the Metropolitan City of Syria, where, in the Valley of Salt, he got a great Victory, in which 18000 Syrians were slain, and soon after, the City of Damascus taken; in which, David placed a Garrison, and compelled them to pay Tribute, 2 Sam. 8. This was distant from the Kingdom of Soba 520 miles. From Damascus he went with his Army into the Land of the Ammonites, 100 miles, in the way that leadeth out of Syria to Ierusalem, all which he conquered, and all the Cities and Towns thereabouts, and compelled them to pay Tribute, 2 Sam. 8. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was sixty miles, and all the Booty that he had gotten in his Journey he dedicated unto the Lord, 2 Sam. 8. A while after, he, with his Army, made an Incursion into the Land of Idumaea, and compelled the Inhabitants to pay Tribute. Moreover, he de∣stroyed the City of Midian, the Metropolitan of that Country; of which, you may read before: it was distant from Ierusalem 160 miles towards the South. So that the extent of David's Kingdom, from the North to the South, was 800 miles, even from the Kingdom of Soba to the Red Sea; and from the East to the West 120 miles; from Tyrus and Sydon reaching to Damascus. Thus by the singular Blessing of God he obtained a spacious and powerful Empire, 1 Sam. 8. 1 Reg. 11. 1 Chr. 19. He made his Expe∣dition into Idumaea about the fourteenth year of his Reign. From Midian in Idumaea, he returned with great Glory and Praise to Ie∣rusalem, which was 160 miles. In the fourteenth year of his Reign, and in the year of the World 2904, and before Christ 1064, Nahas, King of the Ammonites, died, and Haron his Son succeeded him: this Man contemptuously abused the Messengers of David, 2 Sam. 10. and to justifie that Injury, he gathered an Army out of Soba, Syria, and Mesopotamia, even a mighty Host, to oppose David; who in the fifteenth year of his Government met him with his Army at Helam,
some twenty miles from Ierusalem, where he obtained a notable Victory, and destroyed 700 Chariots, and 40000 Horse, 1 Chr. 20. David after this, with great applause of the People, was entertained into Ie∣rusalem, which was 20 miles distant; where, being puft up with Prosperity, he forgat his former Piety and Sanctity, and by degrees fell into unlawful Acti∣ons and unjust desires: whence it happened, that soon after he committed A∣dultery with Bathseba: and after that, to hide his Fault, caused her Husband to be slain. This was kept secret, till the Lord, by Nathan sharply repre∣hends him, lays before him what he was, and what his present estate is, from whence that came, and then concludes, that he is most unthankful, care∣less, and negligent towards God and Man, in committing those Insolencies; neither left he there, but told him that God would severely punish him for his Offence, which after happened as you may read, 1 Sa. 11, 12. 14, 17. Da∣vid being nipt in his Conscience with this sharp reprehension, fell into great La∣mentation, the extremity of whose Passions may very well appear in the Pe∣nitential Psalms, which at this time and soon after he wrote, and left to future Ages. After this, about the end of Summer, he gathered an Army, and went into the Land of the Ammonites, some sixty four miles, where he took the Metro∣politan City, (which at that time was called Rabba, because of the Multitude of Citizens that were in it; but after being restored by Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Aegypt, he called it after his own name, Philadelphia) and there took the Crown from the Head of the King of the Ammonites, which weighed aHow much this was, you may read hereafter in the quantity of weights Talent of Gold, being (as Iosephus saith) richly adorned with fair Sardonick Stones; of which you may read, 2 Sam. 12. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, which is sixty four miles, where he married Bathseba, and by her had four Sons, Simeon, Sobab, Nathan and Solomon, 1 Chr. 3. Soon after this, Amnon defloured his Sister Thamar: Not long after that, his Son Absalom killed his Brother Amnon, being then about eighteen years of age; which David took so hei∣nously, that he would not suffer him to come into his sight for three years, 2 Sam. 13. Then Ioab, by the subtilty of the Woman of Tekoa, reconciled him to the King his Father: yet nevertheless, he came not to his Court of two years after; This Absalom was a goodly man, affable, for which cause, even at that time, the People began to affect him. Afterward, in the year of the World 2950, and before Christ 1408, Ab∣salom being then about twenty five years of Age, moved Sedition against his Father. A matter remarkable, that although he had slain his own Brother, being disgraced and absent from the Court almost five years, yet within short time after, he so strongly united the Affection of the People to him, that he constrained David (standing in fear of his greatness) all his former Acts and worthy Victories notwithstanding) to forsake his own City, and
for safety to fly to the Mount of Olives, being three quarters of a mile from the City. There he stayed a while to see the condition of the Tumult, but Neces∣sity constrained him to take his way to Bahuzim. And as he was going, Zimri the Son of Gesa of the house of Saul, cursed him, every mans Enemy then making himself apparent when he is in Adversity, and his best friends commonly forsake him. From thence he went to Iordan, fourteen miles, where the Priests Iona∣than and Ahinaaz brought him certain Intelligence of that wicked and per∣verse Counsel of Achitophel, a man in those times famous for his Wisdom, but perfidious in his Actions, as commonly such are that hope after Ho∣nours, or seek to benefit themselves by Innovation and Change. After he had Intelligence hereof, he went over Iordan with those few men that he had, and with all possible speed went to Bethabara, some 16 miles from Ierusalem toward the North-east. At this place Ioshuah led the Chil∣dren of Israel through Iordan on dry ground, Ios. 3. 4. and here Iohn the Baptist taught, and baptized Christ. Mat. 1. and Luke 3. From thence he went to Makanaim, which is 28 miles, where he sent forth his Army by bands against Absalom, who at this time had assembled a great Host near the Wood Ephraim, not far from that place where Io∣shua won a memorable Battel against the Canaanites; and that the place might be made more famous, David's men, though few in number, gave Absalom and his Host as great. Thus Absalom being left in danger, to save himself, fled; but in his flight the Hair of his Head being long, and blown with the Wind, took hold of the branch of a Tree, by which, he hanged between Heaven and Earth, as unworthy of either: and Ioab, who but a little before was his Friend, in that very place, with three Darts, put him to death, a just end for so unjust a Man. 1 Sam. 18. David, notwithstanding, took the Death of Absalom marvellous heavily, till by Ioab he was recalled from that Grief; and then in the Company of Barzillai, and of his Son Chimea, of Mephiboseth the Son of Ionathan, and Zeba his Servant, Shimei also that before curst him, (who to leave a me∣morable Token of a base Sicophant) after this Victory, came first down to crave Pardon for his Offence, with many others, went along with him from Makanaim to Bethabara, which was 28 miles. To this place there came a great Multitude of People to meet David, 2 Sam. 19. This Barzillai was one of the eighteen that held the Principality of the City of the Gilia∣dites, and had a Son called Chimea, whom David took with him to Ieru∣salem, that he might make evident his Thankfulness towards him for that Courtesie which he had received of his Father. From Bethabara David passed Iordan, and went back to Gilgal, which was four miles, 2 Sam. 19.
From thence he went to Ierusalem, being twelve miles, in the same year that he was exiled by his Son, which was about the thirteenth year of his reign. The next year, Saeba the Son of Bicri, taking example of Absalom, and observing the mutability of the Peoples Affections, moved a Sedition against David, but Ioab his Captain, overcame him, 2 Sam. 20. After this there follow∣ed three years of Famine. About the end of the third year of Famine, and in the thirty fourth year of his Reign, David went to Iabes Gilead, which was fifty two miles, to fetch the bones of Saul and Ionathan, to bury them in the Sepulchre of his Fathers, 2 Sam. 21. From Iabes in Gilead, David brought the Bones and Relicks of King Saul, and Ionathan his Son, to Gibeah of Saul, which was 52 miles, and there he honourably buried them in the Sepulchre of his Father Kish, 2 Sam. 21. From thence David returned to Ierusalem, which was four miles. In the thirty fifth year of his Reign, he went forth to fight against the Phi∣listines, near to the Levitical Town of Nob, or Nobe, which is twelve miles from Ierusalem, upon the Borders of the Countreys of the Philistines, in the Tribe of Dan. From thence he returned back again to Ierusalem, twelve miles. So all the Travels of David were 2904 miles. The Description of the Places to which David travelled. OF the Cities of Socho, Asekah, Gibeon, Gibeah of Saul, Nob, Ziph, Moan, Engedi, Arimathea, Gath, the Cave of Odullam, Kegila, Paran, Apheck, and Makanaim, you may read before in the Travels of Saul, and the Judges of Israel. Of Ziclag. ZIclag, was a Town in the Kingdom of Iuda, near to the River Besor, forty miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west; not far from Ga∣za, a City of the Philistines. In St. Ierom's time, it was but a small Town, 1 Sam. 27. Of Sur. SVR is a Desart in the Wilderness of Arabia Petraea, extending it self from the utmost Borders of Iudaea, to the Red Sea, even unto Egypt; and signifieth a Bulwark, or place of Defence; and is derived of Schor, which signi∣to see, or contemplate: because from Bulwarks men may see into Neigh∣bouring Countreys. This was a place of Defence of the Egyptians, Gen. 16. 20, 25. Exod. 15. 1 Sam. 15. 17. Of Sunem. THis was a City in the Tribe of Issachar, orty eight miles from Ierusa∣salem towards the North, not far from Naim, where Christ raised the
Widows Son to life, Luke 7. So did Elizaeus the Prophet also, 2 King. 4. And seemeth to take the name of a Purple or Scarlet colour; being derived of Schanah, which signifies, He hath changed and interated a colour. Of Gazer. GAzer is a Town lying upon the Borders of the Philistines, not far from Ekron, sixteen miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Of this you may read before. Of Sichor. THe River of Sichor was in the Desart of Sur, not far from Rhinocura, (of which it took the name) and runneth thence into the Mediterra∣nean Sea: from whence also it is called the River of Egypt, 1 Chron. 13. It is seventy two miles from Ierusalem South-west-ward. Of the Hebrews it is called Schichor, or Sichor, because of the blackness of the Water. Of Bahurim. BAhurim was a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, a mile and something more from Ierusalem, towards the North-east. To this place Phaltiel followed his Wife Michael, 2 Sam. 3. Here also Shimei cursed David, 2 Sam. 16. At this time it is a fair Castle, strongly fortified, standing in a high place. Near unto it, in the Valley, just in the Kings way, there is a stone called Bohen, taking that name of Bohen the Son of Reuben, and is of an ex∣traordinary greatness, shining like unto Marble. Of this you may read in the 15th of Ioshuah. Bahurim or Bachurim, signifies, a City of Electors, being derived of Bahar, to elect or chuse. Of Davids name. DAvid is as much as to say, my dear, my beloved, my chosen one: being derived of Dod, which signifies, a friend or beloved. For which cause, he was said to be a man after Gods own Heart. How David was a Type of Christ. DAvid represented Christ divers ways; First in his Name, (he was beloved) So God testifies of Christ, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Secondly, in the place of his Birth, he was born at Bethlehem, so was Christ. Thirdly, in his imployment, he was a Shepheard; so was Christ: I am the true Shepheard, for a good Shepheard giveth his Life for his Sheep, &c. Fourthly, in his Musick; David was cunning upon the Harp, and by that com∣forted the afflicted Spirit of Saul: so Christ, by the Musick and Harmony of his Doctrine (the glad tidings of Salvation) comforteth the afflicted Members of his Church. Fifthly, David got his Glory and preferment by the death of Goliah: so Christ was glorified by conquering Death and the Devil. Sixthly, David was persecuted by Saul, and pursued from one place to another, so that
he had not where to hide his head with safety; so Christ was persecuted by his own Country-men the Iews, shut out from the Society of Man; and, as he said, Mat. 8. The Foxes have Holes, and the Birds have Nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to hide his head. Seventhly, in the dangers that David sustain∣ed, by Gods providence he was mercifully delivered: so Christ was inclosed and in danger of the Iews at Nazareth, Luke 4. in Ierusalem; in the Temple also, Ioh. 8. but he escaped them all, because then his time was not come, Io. 7. 8. Eighthly, as Absalom rebelled against David, being his Father; so the Iews re∣belled against Christ, although he was their Creator: according to that of Esa. 61. I have fed and brought up Children, but they have forsaken me. Ninthly, as David fled to Mount Olivet for refuge, being brought to a streight; so Christ upon Mount Olivet (his Heart being prest with an intolerable Agony) fled to his Father by Prayer, for comfort in that extremity. Tenthly, as all the Friends and Familiars of David forsook him at such time as Absalom re∣belled against him, and followed him with Persecutions, Mocks and Taunts; so Christ, at such time as Iudas betrayed him into the hands of the Iews, was forsaken of all his Followers, and many of those which a little before he had done good unto, mocked and derided him as he was upon the Cross. Last∣ly, as David was restored, notwithstanding the former miseries and troubles, to his ancient Glory and Eminency; so Christ, after he had suffered the due punishment for Sin, Death, and (before that) extream Misery, yet at length conquered both, and by his Divine Power restored himself to his former estate, Eternal Glory. The Travels of Abner, one of Sauls Captains. HE went with King Saul from Gibeah to the Wilderness of Ziph, which was twenty two miles. Here he was rebuked by David for his negligence. From thence he returned to Gibeah; twenty two miles, 1 Sam 31. From thence he travelled to the Hill Gilboa, where Saul killed himself; for∣ty miles. From thence he went to Machanaim, where he made Ishbosheth (Sauls Son) King, who kept his Court there seven Years; sixteen miles, 2 Sam. 2. From thence he went to Gibeon, where he slew Asahel, Ioabs Brother, in Battel; which was forty four miles, 2 Sam. 2. From thence he went over Iordan to Bythron; twenty eight miles. From thence he went back to Machanaim, sixteen miles, 2 Sam. 2. astly, he went thence to Hebron to David, and made a Covenant with him; where he was treacherously Slain by Ioab: and was sixty eight miles. So all the Travels of Abner were 256 miles.
Of Bithron. BIthron or Betharan was a Town beyond Iordan, in the Tribe of Gad, some 28 miles from Ierusalem, North-eastward, lying between Dibon and Iordan. It taketh the name from a House of singing, being derived of Baith, which signifies a House, and Ron, He sung joyfully. The Travels of Joab. JOAB, David's Captain, was the Son of Zerviah David's Sister, for he had two, Zerviah and Abigal; Zerviah had Ioab, Abishai, and Asael; Abi∣gal had only Amasa, all which were great men in King David's time. Now when Ioab heard that Abner had brought down his Army to Gibeon, he went from Hebron thither, which was 24 miles; and there his Brother Asahel was slain, 2 Sam. 2. From thence he went to Bethlehem, 16 miles, where he buried his Bro∣ther, 2 Sam. 2. From thence he returned to Hebron, 20 miles. Here under the Gates of the City he traiterously killed Abner, 2 Sam. 3. From thence he went with David to Ierusalem, where he won Sion, and drave thence the blind and the lame, being 82 miles. From thence he went with his Army against the Ammonites and Syrians, whom he conquered in a cruel Fight, 60 miles, 1 Sam. 20. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, 60 miles. From thence he went with David into Idumaea, 160 miles from Ierusalem Southward; there he won the Town of Midian, and conquered the Idumae∣ans or Edomites, 2 Sam. 8. From thence he returned to Ierusalem with his Army, being 160 miles. From thence he went and besieged Rabba, the Metropolitan City of the Ammonites, being sixty four miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Here Vriah was slain, 2 Sam. 11. From thence he returned to Ierusalem with King David, 64 miles. From thence he went into the Kingdom of Gesur, which lieth beyond Iordan upon Mount Libanus, by the Town of Caesarea Philippi, some eigh∣ty miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. This Country was called Tracho∣nites. From this Land Ioab brought Absalom again to Ierusalem, 2 Sam. 14. From thence he returned back again with Absalom to Ierusalem, eighty eight miles. From thence he went with David (when he fled from his Son Absalom) to Machanaim, being forty four miles. Not far from hence he slew Absalom, 2 Sam. 18.
From thence he came again with King David to Ierusalem, 44 miles, 2 Sam. 10. From thence he went to Gibeah, where he killed Amasa, which was four miles. From thence he went to the Town of Abel-Bethmaacha in the Tribe of Naphtali, being about 88 miles. This Town he straightly besieged. From thence he went again to Ierusalem, 88 miles. Afterward he went, as David commanded him, to number the People at Aroer, a Town beyond Iordan, which was 24 miles, 2 Sam. 24. From thence he went to Iaezer, which is sixteen miles. From thence going through the Land of Gilead, and passing by the Ter∣ritories of the lovver Country of Hadsi, he came to the Town of Dan, near to the place vvhere the Fountains of Iordan are, which is accounted 116 miles. From thence he went to that famous Mart Town Sidon, which was 24 miles. From that great Tovvn Sidon he went to the Walls of Tyre, to which place, great multitudes of Ships resorted; which was 16 miles. From thence he went toward the South till he came to the City Beersaba, which was the utmost Bounds of the Holy Land South-vvestvvard, and vvas reckoned 132 miles. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, where he delivered to Da∣vid the number of those that were chosen Souldiers, 2 Sam. 24. but the Lord struck the Country and City of Ierusalem with a great Plague, because he did contrary to his Command, 2 Sam. 24. So all the Travels of Ioab were 1348 miles. The Description of the places to which he travelled. MAny of those Cities mentioned in the Travels of Ioab, are already described and set forth; therefore I account it needless in this place again to repeat them, but only such Towns as yet have not been menti∣oned. Of Gesur. GEsur was a Country near to Caesarea Philippi, in the Land of Basan be∣yond Iordan, near Libanus, in the Tetrarchy Trachonitides, 88 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. With the King of this Country, Absa∣lom remained in Banishment for three years space, after he had slain his Brother Ammon; and with us may be termed the Valley of Oxen, 2 Sam. 13. Of Hadsi. THE lower Country of Hadsi stood near to the City Corazin in the half Tribe of Manasses, fifty two miles from Ierusalem toward the
North-east, and signifies a new Land; being derived of Chadasch, that is, New. Of the Fountain Rogel. THIS was near Ierusalem Eastward; to which place, Ionathan and Ahi∣maaz (David's Intelligencers) brought him News of Absalom's Coun∣sels and Intentions, 2. Sam. 17. It seemeth that Travellers usually washed their Feet in it, from whence it was called the Well of Feet, being derived from Raegael, signifying a Foot. Near to this place was the Stone Zochaeleth, where Adonijah (at such time as he affected the Kingdom, contrary to his Fathers liking) called an Assembly and made a great Feast, 1 Reg. 1. The Travels of Baena and Rechab. THese two went out of the Tribe of Beniamin over Iordon to Macha∣naim, 40 miles. There they murthered their Master, King Ishbosheth, in his Chamber, as he lay upon his Bed, and after cut off his Head. The Head they brought to King David to Hebron, 68 miles. But David was not pleased with their Treachery, wherefore he caused them both to be put to Death. So their Travels were 108 miles. The Travels of Absalom. ABsalom was born in Hebron, and went with his Father to Ierusalem, 22 miles, 2 Sam. 13. From thence he went to Baal-hazor, eight miles, where he caused his Brother Amnon to be slain. From thence, for fear of his Father, he fled into the Land of Gesur, 88 miles, 2 Sam, 14. From thence he came back with Ioab to Ierusalem, which was 88 miles, 2 Sam. 14. From thence he went to Hebron, 22 miles, and made himself King, and rebelled against his Father. From thence he went back again to Ierusalem, which is 22 miles. There he lay with his Fathers Concubines, 2 Sam. 16. From thence he pursued his Father to Machanaim, 40 miles, and there was hanged by the Hair in an Oak tree, where Ioab put him to death, 2 Sam. 18. So all the Travels of Absalom were 290 miles. Of Baal-hazor. IN this City Absalom made a great Feast for his Sheep-shearers, and invi∣ted all his Brothers to it, where he caused Amnon to be slain, because
he had abused his Sister Thamar. It lieth in the way some eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east, as you go to Iericho, near to Mount E∣praim, 2 Sam. 13. and is derived to Baal, which signifies a Lord or Hus∣band; and Chazir, a Den or Cave. Of the Name Absalom. ABsalom signifieth a Father of Peace, although he was the Author of all Discord and Sedition against his Father. The Travels of the wise Woman of Thecoa. THis woman went from Thecoa to Ierusalem, eight miles; and spake with King David; and with her sweet words she persuaded him that he would recall his Son out of Exile, who then remained in Gesur, 2 Sam. 14. Of Thecoa. THecoa was a City in the Tribe of Iuda, some eight miles from Ierusalem toward the South-east: near this City Iosaphat by Prayers and the sound of Trumpets, without drawing Sword, got a memorable Victory; and for that cause it signifieth the sound of a Trumpet. In this place the Prophet Amos dwelt, and there lyeth buried; whose Sepulchre was to be seen four hundred Years after Christ, as S. Ierom observeth. It was from Bethlem-Iuda six miles. Near to Thecoa was the Lake Aspher, where Ionathan and Simon (Iudas Machabeus's brothers) pitch'd their Tents, 1 Mach. 9. Of this City you may read, Ier. 6. Am. 1. 2 Chr. 11. Of Achitophel. THis perfidious and wicked Man was born in the Town of Gilo, not far from Hebron and Debir, in the Tribe of Iudah, Ios. 15. 2. Sam. 15. twenty miles from Ierusalem South-Eastward; who when his Coun∣sel would not take place, he went home to his won House, and there desperately hanged himself. The Travels of wicked Shimei. SHimei went from Bahurim (where he cursed King David) to Bathabara upon the River Iordan, which was eighteen miles; where he got Par∣don of David, 2 Sam. 9. From thence he went back with King David unto Gilgal, four miles 2 Sam. 19.
From thence he went with King David to Ierusalem, twelve miles, 2. Sam. 19. From thence he went to Bahurim, three miles. From Bahurim King Solomon sent for him again to Ierusalem, three miles. There he was constrained to build him an House, and not to depart thence upon pain of Death, 1 Reg. 2. But Shimei transgressing the commandment of the King, went to Gath, a City of the Philistines, twelve miles. From thence he returned back again to Ierusalem, twelve miles, where he was slain by the command of King Solomon, in the third year of his Reign, 1 Reg. 2. So all the Travels of Shimei were 104 miles. The Books of KINGS and CHRONICLES. Of Abishag, the Virgin that lay with David. THIS Maid was accounted the fairest in all Israel, for which cause, she was brought to Ierusalem for King David, that she might lye with him in his old Age to procure Heat: she was born at Sunem, a Town some forty four miles from Ierusalem, 1 Reg. 1. Of Sunem you may read before in the Travels of David and Saul. The Travels of King Solomon. SOlomon the Son of David King of Israel, entred upon the full Govern∣ment of the Kingdom of Israel, Anmundi 2931. and before Christ, 1037. when he was about twenty years old. After, he went from Ierusalem to Gilgal, four miles, and there offered upon the Altar which Moses had made, 1000 burnt offerings, 1 Reg. 2. 2 Chr. 1. From thence he went back to Ierusalem, four miles, and built a Temple to the Lord, in Mount Moriah, I Reg. 6. This was begun about the fourth year of his Reign, and 480 years after the Children of Israel came out of Aegypt, in the Month Ziph, which answereth to our May. So that the Temple began to be built in An. Mundi 2934. and before Christ, 1034. To the building whereof, Hiram King of Tyre sent Cedar Trees from Mount Libanus, 120 miles to Ie∣rusalem, 1 Reg. 5. 2. Chr. 2. This Temple Solomon within plaited over with Gold and set with precious Stones, and finished it in the Month of November, about the eleventh year of his Reign, 1 Reg. 6. The Dedication whereof, was about the twelfth year of his Reign, and in the thirty second year of his Age, Anno Mundi, 2942, and before Christ, 1026. The Temple being finished, he began to build his own house, which was thirteen years a building, and
was finished about the 44 year of his Age, and in the 24 of his Reign, 1 Rg. 7. 8. After 20 Years, in which time he had finished the House of the Lord, and his own House in Mount Sion; that he might manifest his Thankful∣ness to the King of Tyre, he went to Cabul, a City in the Tribe of Ashur, some 80 miles Northward, where he gave to the aforesaid Hiram 20 Towns or Cities, with all the Country round about; wherefore King Hiram called this Cabul, that is, Displeasant and Dirty, 2 Reg. 9. You may read of Cabul, Ios. 19. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, 88 miles. From thence he went to Hazor, and restored the City, which was 44 miles. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles. From thence he went to Megiddo, which is not far from Iesreel in the Tribe of Manasses, 44 miles from Ierusalem toward the North. This City Solomon fortified, 1 Reg. 9. and Iosiah King of Iuda, a long time after, was there wounded to Death, 2 Reg. 9. From Megiddo he returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles. After that Pharaoh King of Egypt had conquered Gaser, and destroyed it with Fire, he gave it to his Daughter the Wife of Solomon, who rebuilt it. This Town was scituated in the Tribe of Ephraim, 28 miles from Ierusalem Northward, 1 Reg. 9. From Gaser Solomon returned back again to Ierusalem, being 28 miles. From thence he went to the higher Bethoron, which he fortified; and stood 28 miles from Ierusalem Northward, 2 Chr. 8. From thence he went to the lower Bethoron, 16 miles from the upper, to∣ward the South, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8. From the lower Bethoron he went to Ierusalem, which was eight miles. After, Solomon built the City Belath, which was 12 miles from Ierusalem North-vvestvvard, 1 Reg. 9. 2. Chr. 8. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, 12 miles, and it is very like that Solomon often visited those Towns that he built and restored. From Ierusalem he went to Hemath (afterward called Antiochia) which was 320 miles, and compassed it about with a Wall, fortified it, and after∣ward constrained all the Kingdoms thereabout to be obedient to his Go∣vernment, 2 Chr. 8. From thence he went with great State into the Kingdom of Zoba, which is 600 miles, and fortified all the great Cities and Castles of that Country, that with the greater Facility they might oppose the Invasions of neigh∣bouring Countries. From thence he returned to that famous City Thamar, which was also called the City of the Palmes, 400 miles: this he rebuilt and fortified, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8.
From thence he went to Ierusalem, which is 388 miles. From thence he went to Ezeongber, near to the Red Sea, in the Country of Idumaea, where he built a company of stately Ships, and sent them to In∣dia to fetch Gold, which was 176 miles from Ierusalem Southward, 1 Reg. 9. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which is 176 miles. But of his Riches and great Prosperity he grew Proud, (for he excelled all the Kings near him) and gave himself to unlawful Pleasures; he took unto him 300 Concubines and 700 Wives, by whose perswasions he began to wor∣ship the Gods of the Gentiles, which Idolatry was evil in the sight of the Lord. After he had reigned forty years (which was about the sixtieth of his Age) he died, and was buried by his Father David in Mount Sion, the City of David, An. Mundi 2770, and before Christ 998. So all the Travels of Solomon were 2544 miles. The description of the places to which he travelled. Of Gazer you may read before in the Travels of David. Of Bethoron. THe upper and the lower Bethoron were two Cities in the Tribe of Ephraim, built by Saaerah the Daughter of Ephraim, 1 Chron. 7. The inferiour Bethoron was not far from the Castle of Emmaus, eight miles from Ierusalem toward the North-West. The Superiour was twenty miles distant towards the North. These Towns Solomon repaired. Near to the lower Bethoron the Lord put the Enemies of Ioshuah to flight with Thunder and Hail, Ios. 10. Here also Iudas Macchabeus overcame the Army of Antiochus, 1 Mac. 3. Here also he put Nianor to death, 1 Mac. 7. and signifieth, A white house; being de∣rived of Beth, which signifies an house; and Chor, he hath made white. Of Baaelath. THis is a City twelve miles from Ierusalem North-westward, in the Tribe of Dan. This City Solomon repaired at such time as he fell in Love with many Women: from whence it seemeth to take his name: for Baaeleth signifieth, his beloved Lady. Of Thamar. THamar, Tadmor, or Palmira, stood partly in the Desart of Syria, and part∣ly in a fruitful Soyl; being compassed about on the one side with a Wood, on the other with fair and pleasant Fields. It was the Metropolitan City of all Syria, not far from Euphrates, some 388 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward; and, as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 25. although it lay betwixt two mighty Empires, Rome and Parthia, yet it was subject to neither; fairly scituated, a Free City, adorned with fair and sumptuous Buildings, and con∣tented with their own Government. The Wildernesses called after this Towns
name, Palarnae, or the Desarts of the Palms, extend themselves to Petra, the Metropolitan City of Arabia-Petraea, and to the borders of Arabia-Foelix, one days journey from Euphrates, two from the upper part of Syria, and six from Babylon, as Iosephus observeth, Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 5. This City Solomon made Tributary to him, and fortified it with strong Walls, 1 Reg. 9. Of Ezeongaber you may read before. The Typical Signification of Solomon. SOlmon is as much as FREDERICK in High-Dutch, which signifies a Peace-maker; being derived of the Hebrew word Schelmoh, or Scha∣lom, to bring glad tidings of Peace. Typically representing Christ the Prince of Peace, who hath reconciled us with his Heavenly Father, and merited an eternal place of Peace and Happiness for all such as trust in him, Esay. 9. And as Solomon built up the Temple of the Lord with great majesty and glory; so Christ hath built up that heavenly Temple, the Church of God, and a∣dorned it with the Gifts and Graces of his holy Spirit, in this World, that so it might be capable of eternal Glory in the World to come, 2 Cor. 6. The Travels of Solomon's Ships. THis Navy of Solomon's went unto Ophir, that is, India, which was ac∣counted from the Mart Town 4800 miles. From India they returned back again, 4800 miles: so all their Travels were 9600 miles. This Journey was finished in three years to and again; so that every year they went 3200 miles, and brought home plenty of Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Ebony, &c. Of India. MOses called this Country Havilah, Gen. 2. and Ios. li. Antiq. 8. c. 7. Ophir: which name (saith he) it took of two Brothers so called, which inha∣bited and governed the Country all along the River Ganges. But more Modern Writers derive it from Indus, a River passing through it. It is a spa∣cious and fruitful Country, pleasant to inhabit; and as Pomponius saith, hath in it 5000 Cities, being divided into two parts; the outward and inward. The Travels of the Queen of Saba. FRom Saba in Ethiopia she came to Ierusalem, 964 miles. From Ierusalem she returned back again, which was 964 miles. So all her Travels were 1928 miles.
Of Aethiopia. THIS Country, by the Hebrews, is called Chus, of Chus the Son of Cham, who was the Son of Noah: and after, Aethiopia, (ab aestu torrida) be∣cause of the great heat wherewith oftentimes the habitable Land and Peo∣ple, as also the Wilderness, were sorely scorched and burned; for it is sci∣tuated in the third part of the World called Africa, lying under the torrid Zone, and the Aequator, which two, by common Experience, are found to be extream hot. Of Saba. SAba is a metropolitan City in Aethiopia, lying beyond Egypt, 846 miles from Ierusalem towards the South; and took the name from a certain precious Stone called Achates, wherein might plainly be discerned in cer∣tain distinct Colours, the rising of Fountains, the Chanels of Rivers, high Mountains, and sometimes of Chariots and Horses drawing them. It is reported, That Pyrrhus King of the Epirots had one of them, wherein was lively represented the Nine Muses, and Apollo playing on the Viol, por∣trayed by natural Stains and Colours, so artificially, as if they had been done by some curious Work-man. Of this Stone you may read more in Pliny, li. 37. ca. 1. 10. It was first found in Achates a River of Sicilia, whence it took the Name. Afterward in India or Phrygia, and of the Hebrews was called Schaeba or Saba. In this City that Queen dwelt who came to hear Solomon's Wisdom, and gave him for a Present 120 Talents of pure Gold, which at three pounds at ounce comes to 270000 pounds Sterling. After∣wards Cambyses King of Persia over-came it and all the Country round about it, and after his Sisters Name called it Meroes. It is a stately City to this day, scituated in a plain Country, and compassed about with the River Nilus, like an Island, being now called Elsaba, having some affinity to the ancient Name Saba. The Inhabitants of this Town go naked, all but their privy Parts, which they cover either with Silk, Cotton, or some more costly matter; and are of a black Colour, which as some think, hapneth by reason of the extream Heat. The Land also is marvellously scorched, and turned in many pla∣ces to Sand and Dust: so that the Country is thereby wonderful barren. About Meroes or Saba, which is made fruitful by the Inundation of Nilus, there is ound plenty of Salt, Brass, Iron, and some precious Stones. Their Sheep, Goats, Oxen, and other Cattel, are of less Stature than in other Countries. Their Dogs are very fierce and cruel. In times past there were mighty Princes that had the Government and Command of it, and the Country round about it. But after (as Pliny saith, lib. 6. cap. 29.) it was in the Jurisdiction and Government of Queens, who for their noble Resolutions and Courage were called Candaces. One of
which name in Tiberius the Emperours time was famous, both for the extent of her Dominions (in which she exceeded all the rest of her predecessors) as also in regard of her manly presence and noble Spirit. The Eunuch which Philip baptized, Acts 8. was Treasurer or Chamberlain to this Queen: and it is to be thought, by him the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ was first made known in Saba, and in the Country of Aethiopia; which afterwards was more largely propagated and dispersed by the Evangelist St. Matthew, who taught there. This City lyeth to the longitude of 61 degrees and 30 scruples, and in the elevation of the Pole Artick to the Latitude sixteen Degrees and twenty five Scruples. So that it seems, the Inhabitants have two Winters and two Sum∣mers, or rather a continual Summer, because their Winter is much hotter than our Summer. But when the Sun attaineth to the fifteenth Degree of Taurus and Leo, and in the Dog-days, it then lyes perpendicular over that Country, and neither their Bodies nor Houses give any shadows. In the sixty first of Esay it is said, They shall come from Saba, and bring Gold and Frankincence to praise the Lord. From whence some have concluded, that those Wise men which came unto the Child Jesus, and brought Gold, Frankincence, and Myrrh, were Aethiopians, and came thence. But this agreeth not well with the words of Matthew, ca. 2. where it is written, that the wise men came out of the East, that is, from the rising of the Sun, to Ierusa∣lem. For Saba, according to our Saviours words, Mat. 12. lieth towards the South; for he saith, The Queen of the South (that is, of Saba) shall come forth in the day of Iudgment against this Generation, and condemn it, for she came from the end of the World to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, &c. But if Saba lye upon the South, as here it plainly appeareth, then it must needs follow they came not thence, but rather from Persia, which from Ierusalem lyes East∣ward. For at Susa, the Metropolis of that Country, there was an Academy for the whole Kingdom; in which were chiefly studied Divinity, the Ma∣thematicks, and History. So that it is likely, by their Art they might attain to the knowledge of this Divine Mystery, and from thence come to Ieru∣salem, which was 520 miles Eastward. Therefore this place of the Prophet Esay is rather to be referred to the propagation of the Church through the whole World, where some of every Nation shall bring Presents unto the Lord. There is also another Saba in Arabia-Foelix, so called from Zaeba the Son of Chus, the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah; and it is distant from Ierusalem 1248 miles towards the South-East. In Hebrew it signifies the City of Drunk∣enness, or of Mirth; but with the Syrians, Antiquity. Some would have it in the Arabian Tongue to signifie a Mystery. But St. Ierom interprets it, to sound their Conversion. It is the Metropolitan City of Arabia-Foelix, and by Strabo, lib. 6. called Meriaba, being scituated in a high and pleasant Mountain full of fruitful Trees.
There inhabiteth in it the King of that Country (a mighty Prince) his Governours, and most of such as have Authority under him. The Land is called the Kingdom of the Sabaeans, but generally Arabia-Foelix, because of the Fertility of the place; for it yieldeth twice every year great plenty of Frank∣incence, Myrrh, Cinamon, Balsams, and other odoriferous Herbs. The Tree out of which this Myrrh cometh, is five Cubits high, hairy, and full of prickles, and when you cut the Bark, there cometh forth a bitter Gum, wherewith if you anoint a dead Body, it will continue long without rotting. The Frankincence also that is found there droppeth from the Cedar-trees, like a glewy substance, and so congealeth into a Gum. This happeneth twice every year, and according unto the season it changeth colour: in the Spring it is red, in the Summer white. This is the best Frankincence in all Arabia-Foelix. Through the whole Country there is a very delectable smell, by reason of the Myrrh, Frankincence and Cinnamon, that is found in it; insomuch, that if the Wind blows amongst the trees, it carrieth the smell un∣to the Red Sea, and they that sail can easily discern the sweetness of the Air. There is Gold also found there, very fine and pure, insomuch as for the good∣ness of it, it is called Arabian Gold. The Phoenix is found there, of which there is but one in the World. Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 35. describes her to be as big as an Eagle, with a list of Feathers like Gold about her Neck, the rest are of a Purple colour; therefore from Phoenicia and the purple colour of her Wings she is called Phoenix. She hath a tuft of Feathers upon her head like unto a Crown. She liveth 660 years; at the end of which time she build∣eth her a Nest of Cassia, Cinnamon, Calamus, and other precious Gums and Herbs, which the Sun, by the extremity of the heat, and the waving of her wings, fires; and she taking delight in the sweetness of the savour, hovers so long over it, that she burneth her self in her own Nest. Within a while after, out of the Marrow of her Bones, and the Ashes of her Body, there grow∣eth a Worm, which by little and little increaseth to some bigness, and after to a purple bird. Then her wings extend themselves to a full greatness, till such time as she cometh to a perfect Phoenix. This bird doth lively represent our Saviour Christ, who only and alone is the true Messiah, and through whom we must expect everlasting life, who in the fulness of time offered himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross, sustain∣ing the punishment of Sin at the time of his Passion, putting on a purple Robe, being all be sprinkled with his own bloud, Ioh. 19. And as the Phoenix is burnt in her own Nest, so likewise was he consumed in the fire of Gods wrath, according to that in Psal. 22. My heart is become like melting wax in the midst of my body. And as the Phoenix of it self begetteth another of the same kind; so Christ by the power of his Deity raised up his Body from the dust of the Earth, and ascended up into Heaven a glorious Body, to sit at the right hand of his Father in that everlasting Kingdom of Glory.
Thus (gentle Reader) I thought fit to describe unto you these two Towns, that when you shall read of them in the holy Scripture (the one being in Ae∣thiopia towards the South, the other in Arabia-Foelix, and called Seba) you might discern the one from the other: of both which there is mention in the 72 Psalm, The Kings of the Seas and of the Isles, shall bring presents; the Kings of Saba and Seba, shall give Gifts. The Travels of King Pharaoh out of Aegypt, when he overcame the Town of Gazer, 1 Reg. 9. IN the sixteenth year of King David, Anno mundi, 2906, and before Christ, 1602, Chabreus King of Aegypt began to reign, and reigned fifty six years, Diod. lib. 2. cap. 2. Herodotus calleth this man Chephrines, in his second book; and Eusebius, Nepher Cherres. He went from Memphis, the chief City of Aegypt, with a great Army, 268 miles, even unto the Tribe of Ephraim, and there took Gazer, a City of the Levites, and burned it with fire, I Reg. 8. Ios. 21. After he came to Ierusalem, twenty eight miles. And this City which he had thus destroyed he gave to his Daughter, the Wife of Solomon, 1 Reg. 9. From thence he returned to Memphis in Aegypt, 244 miles. So all the Tra∣vels of King Pharaoh were 244 miles. Of Memphis. MEmphis is a great City in Aegypt, where commonly the Kings of that Countrey keep their Courts; and lyeth from Ierusalem 244 miles Soh-west-ward. This City was built a little before the Flood, but repaired and enlarged by a King called Ogdoo, who in love of his Daughter, after her Name, called it Memphis. You may read of it in the ninth of Hosea, called there by the name of Moph; for thus he saith, The people of Israel are gone out of the land of Ephraim, because of their Idolatry, into Aegypt: but Aegypt shall gather them up, and Moph (that is Memphis) shall bury them. Moph, or Ma∣pheth in this place signifieth, a prodigious Wonder: but the rest of the Pro∣phets call it Noph, for the fertility and pleasantness of the Country, as you may read, Esay. 19. The Princes of Zoan are become foolish, and the Princes of Noph (or of Memphis) are deceived. See also Ierom, 2. 44. 46. Ezech. 30. in which places you may find it called after this name. Zoan is the City Tanis, where Moses wrought all his Miracles: But Noph, or Moph, is this Memphis; a beautiful Town, large and spacious, scituated in the strongest and profitablest place in Aegypt; divided into two parts by the River Nilus, so that any kind of commodities or merchandize might with ease be brought thither by Water: for which cause the Kings of that Country (for the most
part) kept their abiding there. Strabo saith, lib. 17. that upon the East part of this City, there standeth a Tower or Castle called Babylon, built by certain Babylonians, who leaving their own Country, by the permission of the Kings of Aegypt, dwelt there: in after times there was placed a Garrison in it, one of the three which were for the defence of Aegypt, and by Ptolomy was called Babylon, through both which, viz. Memphis and Babylon, Nilus passed; the one standing upon the East side, the other upon the West. Zoan, or Tanis, stood about some four miles from this Town, and was a fair and spacious City also, scituated towards the South, upon the East side of Nilus, to which the Kings of that Country often resorted; and Heliopolis, another fair City, stood some six miles off that, towards the North-East. All these four Towns were so wonderfully inhabited (by reason of their pleasant and profitable scituation) that in process of time they became all one City; and in this Age is called Alcaire, containing in Circuit sixty miles: so that it seemeth to Spe∣ctators to be like a Country replenished with nothing but fair Houses, good∣ly Churches, and strong Towers; exceeding all the rest of the Cities of Ae∣gypt, as well for the beautifulness of the place, as the extent and largeness of it. It is reported, that in the year of our Lord 1476, there was such an ex∣treme Pestilence in it, that there dyed 20000 a day, from whence may be gathered, how infinitely it is peopled. Near to this Town stood the Py∣ramides, which are held to be one of the Wonders of the World (as Strabo saith, lib. 17.) the height of one of them was 625 foot, and square on each side 883 foot; it was twenty years a building, a hundred thousand Work∣men employed about it: whence it may be easily gathered, how hard and difficult it was in those times to get Stone (it being for the most part brought from Arabia) and at what an excessive charge they were that set them up. Of Gazar. This City is described in the Travels of Solomon. The Travels of Hadad King of Idumaea▪ WHen David conquered Idumaea, Hadad the King of that Country, with some few of his Courtiers, being then but young, fled from Midian to Paran, the Metropolitan City of Arabia Petraea, which was 84 miles, 1 Reg. 11. But because he thought himself scarce safe in that place, he fled thence to Cheopes, that impious and Tyrannical King of Aegypt, that built the greatest of the three Pyramides at Memphis. He (hating King David) gave him kind entertainment, assigned him a part of the Kingdom of Aegypt to dwell in, and after married him with his Sister Tahpenes, by whom he had a Son called
Genubath, who was brought up in Pharaohs, or King Chopes Court, where he continued all the Life of David, being twenty seven years; 120 miles. David being dead, he returned into his own Kingdom of Idumaea, which was 200 miles. From thence he went back to Damascus, which was 240 miles, where he was created King of the Syrians, by Reson and other fugitives, which had con∣spired against Solomon, by which means he grievously troubled that Kingdom, and became an utter Enemy to the Israelites all the Life of Solomon. And of him is the original and stock of the Kings of Syria. So all the Travels of Hadad were 644 miles. Of Midian and Paran, you may read before: in the one dwelt Iethro, Moses Father-in-law; in the other Ishmael, that being the chief City of his Dominions, as you may read, Gen. 21. Ex. 2. Of Reson, Solomon's Adversary. AFter David had conquered Hadad-Ezer King of Zoba, Reson, his chief Captain, gathered up his dispersed Souldiers of his Army, and fled from him to Damascus, which was 120 miles, and besieged it: the Citizens whereof (when neither David nor Solomon could sup∣press his Rebellion) entertained him for their King, which Principality he held. The Travels of the Kings of Israel; and first, of Jeroboam. THis man was the Son of Nebat, and born at a Town called Zared, not far from Bethlehem-Euphrata, some eight miles from Ierusalem: from whence he came to Solomon, who made him Captain, that he might collect the Tribute of Manasses and Ephraim, 1 Reg. 11. which was eight miles. From Ierusalem, as he went to Shilo (which was four miles) he met the Prophet Ahijah the Shilomite, who told him that he should be King of Israel, 1 Reg. 11. From thence he went to Memphis in Aegypt, which was 224 miles, (because Solomon sought his life) where he remained with Sesak King of Aegypt, all the Life of Solomon. Eusebius calleth this King Osochores, who that same year succeeded Maerenius (Solomon's Father-in-law) in that Government. From thence he returned to the Town of Sichem in Israel, which was 280 miles, where the Israelites made him chief Captain against Rehoboam, Solo∣mon's Son. Wherefore Ieroboam the Son of Nebat, began to Raign over Is∣rael,
An. mundi, 2971, and before Christ, 997, and raigned twenty two years, 1 Reg. 12. His first Seat was at Sichem, which he repaired and enlarged. From Sichem (in the first year of his reign) he went to Penuel, and there set up many fair Buildings, which was twelve miles, 1 Reg. 12. From Penuel he went twenty four miles, to the Town of Bethel, where he caused a Golden Calf to be set up for the People to worship. From thence he went to Thirza, which is sixteen miles. This City he built and there kept his Court, 1 Reg. 14. From thence he went to the Mount Zemaraim, which is Mount Ephraim, eighteen miles; where he had a great Battel with Abia King of Iuda, and lost 500000 of his Souldiers, all chosen men of Israel, 2 Chr. 13. ver. 17. Having lost this Battel, with all possible speed that he could went thence to Thirza, which is eighteen miles: there the Lord struck him with a grievous Disease that he died miserably, 1 Reg. 14. 2 Chr. 13. So all the Travels of Iero∣boam, first King of Israel, were 623 miles. The Description of the Towns and places to which Jeroboam travelled. Of Zemaraim. THis was a certain Plain in Mount Ephraim, eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North, near to the Town of Bethel, in the Tribe of Manas∣ses: for Mount Ephraim is divided into divers parts and Tribes. It seemeth to take the name of certain Trees that abound near that place, whereon Cot∣ton-wooll groweth, for Zaemaer signifieth Wooll, which by little and little, upon such Trees doth increase and grow to perfection. Of Thirza. THis was a fair and beautiful City, scituated in a high and pleasant Mountain, in the Tribe of Manasses, some twenty four miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the North. In this place the Kings of Israel us'd to keep their Courts, until Samaria was built: it was so called because of the Excellency and delectableness of the place: for Thirza doth denote, An acceptable and thankful City; being derived of Razah, he received thankfully. Of the Years of the Iniquity of Israel. THe years of the Iniquity of Israel (mentioned in Ezek. 4.) is to be ac∣counted from that day wherein Ieroboam first erected the Golden Calves: wherefore the greatest part of the first year of the Iniquity, agreeth with the second year of Ieroboams Reign. From whence may be gathered, that from that time, till the destruction of Ierusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, were 390 years full ended.
Of Jeroboam's Wife, Queen of Israel. SHE went from Thirza to Zilo, which was about twenty four miles; there she asked counsel of Ahijam the Prophet concerning her Son Abia, for he was sick: but he told her heavy tidings, 1 Reg. 14. 7. Wherefore being pensive, and troubled in her mind, she returned back again to her Husband to Thirza, 24 miles 1 Reg. 14. So these two Journeys were 48 miles. The Iourney of the Man of God which came out of Juda. THis man of God (as Iosephus writeth, l. Ant. 8.) came from Ierusalem to Bethel, which was eight miles; and was called by the name of Iadon, which signifieth, The Judge of the Lord. When he came thither, he reproved Ieroboam with an extraordinary Spirit: Of whom you may read more, 1 Reg. 13. But being deceived, as he was returning, a Lyon met him in the way, where he was slain, and after buried in a Sepulchre in Bethel. The Travels of Nadab, the second King of Israel. NAdab, or Bonifacias, succeeded his Father Ieroboam in the Kingdom of Israel, and was anointed while he was yet living; a liberal and free-hearted Prince. He began to reign in the second year of Asa King of Iuda, Anno Mundi 2992, and before Christ, 977. He reign∣ed during the Life of his Father, a year and somewhat more: but when he had reigned two years, he went from Thirza with a great Army, to the City of Gibithon, which was thirty six miles: this Town he besieged very straitly, but at length was slain by one of his Captains called Baesa; so he lost both his Life and Kingdom in that place, 1 Reg. 15. Of Gibithon. THis was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Dan, not far from Ekron in the Land of the Philistines, sixteen miles from Ierusalem towards the West, and signifieth, a Royal or lofty Gift. The Travels of Baesa King of Israel. BAesa is as much as to say, An industrious and prompt man in doing any thing. This man having slain his Master near unto Gibithon, usurped upon the Kingdom of Israel about the end of
the third year of Asa King of Iuda, and began his Reign, An. Mund. 2992, before Christ, 974, and reigned over Israel almost twenty four years; two of which he reigned with his Son, 1 Reg. 15. He went from Gibithon to Thir∣za, thirty six miles, where he utterly rooted out the whole stock and Family of Ieroboam. After, falling into Idolatry, he was sharply reprehended for it by Iehu the Prophet, the Son of Hanani; of whom you may read more, 1 Reg. 15. From Thirza he went to Ramah, which is sixteen miles: this Town he built, and fortified it very strongly, 2 Chr. 29. But when he heard that Benhadad King of Syria had invaded Israel, he left his Building at Ramah, and with all possible speed that he could went to Thirza, where he died, and was buried, 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 16. So all the Travels of Baesa were 68 miles. Of Ramah. Of this City you may read before. Of Ella, or Elah King of Israel. ELAH signifies, a cruel man. This was the Son of Baasha King of Is∣rael, who was crowned King (his Father yet living) about the be∣ginning of the twenty sixth year of Asa King of Iuda, at such time as Benhadad King of Syria invaded and wasted Galilee. He reigned two years, one of them during the Life of his Father, the other alone in Thirza; at the end of which he was slain by Simri his Servant, 1 Reg. 15, 16. Of Zimri King of Israel. ZImri signifieth a Singer, and was a Captain over King Elah's Chariots; he reigned seven dayes in Thirza, in which time he put to death, and utterly rooted out all the Posterity of Baasha; and then Omri besieged the City so straitly, that he had no hope to escape, wherefore he set the City and Palace on fire, in which he also perished, 1 Reg. 15, 16. The Travels of Omri King of Israel. OMRI signifieth a Souldier, or one that deserveth his Pay. He was made King by the Israelites in his Tent, while he was at Wars near to Gibithon: from whence he went to Thirza, which was thir∣ty six miles, and besieged the same upon the very day that Zimri
had put the Posterity of Baasha to the Sword, and took it. He began to reign in Thirza, Ann. Mund. 3017, and before Christ, 951. and reigned over Israel twelve years, the first six in Thirza, that latter six in Samaria, 1 Reg. 16. From Thirza he went to Mount Semer, six miles; there Omri built Sama∣ria, and made it the Seat of his Kingdom. He went thither about the seventh year of his Reign, 1 Reg. 16. So these two Journeys were forty two miles. Of Samaria. SAmaria, the chief Seat and Metropolis of Israel, was built by Omri, in Mount Semer, 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and took that name of Semer, who was Lord of that Mountain, of whom King Omri bought it for two Talents of Silver, which amounteth to 1200 Crowns. In this City, four∣teen Kings of Israel kept their Courts, viz. Omri, who was the first Founder of it, Ahab, Ahazia, Iehoram, Iehu, Ioachas, Ioas, Ieroboam, Zacharias, Sallum, Me∣nahem, Pekahia, Pekah, and Hosea, who was the last of the Kings of Israel that reigned in this City, and lost it, together with his Liberty. Of all these Kings there were but five that died naturally, for, the Lord being moved to wrath by reason of their Impiety and Idolatry, either gave them up into the hands of Foreign Enemies, or by Civil War amongst themselves they cruelly mur∣thered one another, until such time as the Assyrians destroyed the Land, and and led the People captive. Thus the Lord punished with a sharp and severe punishment this obstinate Nation, because they contemned the Admonitions and Doctrines of the Prophets, amongst which, Elias and Elizeus were the chief. So that although Samaria was a fair and beautiful City, and the Coun∣trey for that cause was called the Province of Samaria; yet notwithstanding, that great God, the Judge of all things, for the Iniquity of the People, caused this fair City to be left desolate, the Inhabitants of the Land to be dispersed, and the Earth, for want of due usage, to lye as a Wilderness, 2 Reg. 17. This City, in the Old Testament (according to the Hebrew Phrase) is called Shae∣maer, of Schomron, which signifies to keep, or a Tower of strength. You may read of this, 1 Reg. 2. 2 Reg. 1, 7. The Greeks and Latines call it Samaria, which signifies the Castle of Iehovah, or of God. You may read more of this in the second Volume. Of Hiel that built Jericho again. AFter the death of Omri King of Israel, when Ahab his Son began to reign, Hiel, a very rich man in the Town of Bethel, (that he might leave behind him an eternal memory of his Name, went to Iericho, which had been formerly destroyed by Ioshuah, the Son of Nun, and had lain waste for the space of 536 years, where, contrary to the Commandment of the Lord, and curse of Ioshuah, he caused the said City to be rebuilt, (such was the impious Security and Incredulity of this man) but the Lord was angry with him,
and he struck all his Children that they dyed. The eldest Son, called Abi∣ram, at the laying of the Foundation, and his youngest Son, called Segub, at the hanging on of the Gates, Ios. 6. 1 Reg. 16. The Travels of King Ahab. AHab went from Samaria to the Hill Carmel, where Elias put to death the Priests of Baal, which was about thirty two miles 1 Reg. 18. From thence he went to Iezreel, which is sixteen miles, there he told his Wife how Elias had put the Priests of Baal to the Sword, 1 Reg. 18. From Iezreel he went again to Samaria, eighteen miles, where being prest with a hard Siege by Benhadad King of Syria, he broke out of the City for his better safety, and by Gods great providence and assistance, he assailed the Syrians, put a great multitude of them to the Sword, the rest fled, and he went away with a noble Victory, as the Prophet of the Lord had former∣ly told him, 1 Reg. 20. From Samaria he went with his Army to Apheck, which was fourteen miles, where he renewed a second Battel, and therein had good success, so that he took Benhadad alive, and put to the Sword 100000 Syrians. In this place the Prophet of the Lord reproved him for his ingratitude and obstinacy; wherefore Ahab being angry, he went from Apheck to Sa∣maria, which was eight miles, 1 Reg. 20. From Samaria he went to Iezreel, sixteen miles, where that perfidious Queen Iesabel caused Naboth to be put to death, and took possession of his Vineyard, 1 Reg. 21. From Iezreel he went to Ramoth-Gilead, twenty four miles; and there, in a fight that he had against the Syrians, was so sore wounded with an Arrow, that he was constrained to leave the Battel. 1 Reg. 22. And as he went back again to Samaria, which was twenty four miles, he dyed of his wound. Of this man you may read more, 1 Reg. 21, 22. So all the Travels of Ahab were 152 miles. The Description of Carmel, Apheck and Ramoth, you may read before. Of Iezreel. JEzreel is a City in the Tribe of Issachar, scituated upon a rising ground, some forty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North, where Ahab sometimes kept his Court. Here Naboth the Iezreelite dwelt; an honest and Religious man, one of good Esteem and Authority, that feared God, and would not suffer the Inheritance of one Tribe to be transferred to another; because God had commanded the contrary, Num. ult. For which cause he
would not sell his Vine-yard to Ahab, wherefore Iezabel (that wicked Wo∣man) to satisfie the Kings desire, caused him to be stoned. Iezreel signi∣fies, the Seed of God, being derived of Sera, Seed, and El, the Almighty God. Though in former times this hath been a fair Town, yet at this day, there is no past thirty houses in it, and is called Charity; standing at the foot of Mount Gilboah: they shew at this day the field of Naboth the Iezreelite, lying towards the West, as you go into the City, a little before you come at it. This Town standeth upon a fair prospect; for you may see from thence through all Galilee to Carmel, the Mountains of Phoenicia and Mount Thabor; also from Mount Gilead by Iordan and Mount Salem [where Iohn baptized] near by Mount Hermon, upon the North side of Mount Gilboah, there lies a fair and plain way to the City Iezreel; by which Iehu came, when he made Wars upon Ieroboam King of Israel; of which you may read more, 2 Reg. 9. It stood not far from the River Kison, as you may read, Ios. 17. 19. 1 Sam. 2. 1 Reg. 4. 18. Of Ahaziah the Son of Ahab. AHaziah was crowned King of Israel during the Life of his Father; a cruel and wicked man: he began his Reign in the 17th year of Iosaphat King of Iudah, Anno Mundi, 3049, and before Christ, 919. about such time as Ahab went down to Ramoth Gilead to recover it from the Syrians. Within a while after the death of his Father, he fell through the Lattice-window in his upper Chamber, which was in Samaria, of which hurt he died. Of this you may read more, 1 King. 1. The Travels of Jehoram King of Israel. JEhoram succeeded his Brother Ahaziah in the Kingdom of Israel; who began his Reign in the eighteenth year of Iosaphat King of Iudah, and as Iosephus saith, lib. Ant. 9. about the fifth year of his Reign, went from Samaria to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles. There he told Iosaphat how the King of Moab had rebelled against him, therefore desired him to go along with him to the War, 2 Reg. 3. Then Iehoram and Iosaphat, and the King of Edom, went from Ierusalem, and compassed about through the Wil∣derness of Idumaea, by the space of seven dayes, so that they and their Ar∣my for want of Water had almost perished; but, at the Prayers of the Pro∣phet Elisha, they were miraculously preserved. At length they came to Pe∣tra, the Metropolitan City of the Moabites, and is distant from Ierusalem an hundred seventy two miles, which they took, and consumed it with Fire and Sword. 2 Reg. 3.
From the City of Petra, Iehoram King of Israel returned back to Sama∣ria, which was 104 miles; where, within a while after, he was so sorely besieged by Benhadad, King of Syria, that the Famine grew very great within the Town, insomuch as a certain Woman eat her own Child, 2 Reg. 6. From Samaria he went to Ramoth in Gilead, with his Army, which is 24 miles, where he was overcome by Asahel King of the Syrians, and wound∣ed even to the death, 2 Reg. 8. From the Fight of Ramoth Gilead, he was carried in his Chariot back to Iezreel, which was 24 miles, where he lay to be cured of his Hurts. But Iehu, one of his chief Captains, rebelled against him, and as he was in his Chariot, shot an Arrow, and wounded him the second time, whereof he died in the Field of Naboth the Iezreelite, 2 Reg. 9. So all the Travels of Ie∣horam were 356 miles. The Travels of Jehu, King of Israel. JEHV signifies a constant man in himself, and was the Son of Iosaphat, the Son of Nimschi, he was anointed King of Israel in the Castle at Ramoth in Gilead, by Elisha, Anno Mun. 3063. and before Christ, 905. he reigned 28 years, 2 Reg. 9. From Ramoth in Gilead, in his Chariot he went to Iezreel, which was 24 miles; where, in the Field of Naboth the Iezreelite, he killed Iehoram with an Arrow. And when he came to the Gates of the City, he caused Iezabel to be thrown from a Tower, whom he trampled under his Horse feet; and after, in that same place, she was eaten up with Dogs. Then he sent Messengers to Samaria, commanding the Samaritans that they should put to death the 70 Sons of Ahab, which they immediately did, and sent their Heads unto him in Baskets. 2 Reg. 10. From Iezreel he went to Samaria, which is sixteen miles. In that Jour∣ney he caused to be slain by his Ministers, the 42 Brothers of Ahaziah King of Iuda, near to the Well which was beside the House where Sheep were shorn. And when he came to Samaria, he caused all the Posterity of Ahab to be utterly destroyed and rooted out. And to conclude the Tra∣gedy, by a cunning Policy, put to death all the Priests of Baal, 2 Reg. 10. So all the Travels of Iehu were 40 miles. Of Jehoahas, King of Israel. JEhoahas was the Son of Iehu, and succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Israel; he began his Reign in the 33 year of Ioas King of Iudah, in the Year of the World 3091, and before Christ 876. He reigned over Is∣rael
seventeen Years. God stirred up against this wicked King, Asahel King of the Syrians, who with 10000 Foot, and five hundred Horse be∣sieged Samaria very strongly; put to the Sword many of his Subjects, and got many Cities and Towns from him, as the Prophet Elisha had before told him, 2 Reg. 8. 13. The Travels of Joas, King of Israel. JOAS succeeded his Father Iehoahas, and while he was yet living, was anointed King of Israel, in the thirty seventh year of Ioas King of Iudah, and reigned two years with his Father; after his Death fifteen; so all the Reign of Ioas was seventeen Years. This Man was a great Souldier, and went from Samaria with an Army against the City of Apheck, which was fourteen miles: there he smote the Syrians, and in three several Battels carried away the Victory; recovering the Cities which his Father Iehoahas had lost, according to the Prophecy of Elisha, 2 Reg. 17. From Apheck he returned to Samaria, being 14 miles. From thence he went with his Army to Bethsemes, in the Land of Iuda, where, in a sharp and cruel War, he conquered Amasia, and took him alive, 2 Reg. 14. which was 32 miles. From Bethsemes he went to Ierusalem, and carried the King thereof with him Captive, being four miles. He won the City, and broke down the Walls of it, from the Gate of Ephraim till you come to the Angle-Gate, four hundred Cubits in length, 2 Reg. 14. From the City of Ierusalem, Ioas the Conquerour returned to Samaria, with the spoil of the Temple, and of the King's House, with many Cap∣tives, and a great Prey, being thirty two miles; where, at the end of the seventeenth year of his Reign, he died, and was buried. In this man's time Elisha the Prophet died, 2 Reg. 13. 14. So all the Travels of Ioas were ninety six miles. Of Bethsemes. Of this City you may read before. The Travels of Jeroboam, the second of that Name, King of Israel. THIS Ieroboam succeeded his Father Ioas in the Kingdom of Israel, and began his Reign, Anno Mundi, 3123. and before Christ, 845. which, according to the Text of the Bible, happened about the 15th Year of Amasia King of Iuda, and he reigned 41 Years, 2 Reg. 14. He kept his Court at Samaria, where the Prophet Ionas told him, that he
should recover not only the Towns and Cities of the Land of Israel that had been lost, but also the Cities of Hemeth and Damascus: wherefore he gather∣ed a great Army out of the City of Samaria, and went thence unto Hemeth, or Antiochia in Syria, which was 248 miles. This City he conquered, and all the Country thereabout; so that he recovered all the ancient Towns and Cities that belonged to David and Saul, even to Hemeth in Syria, to Soba in Armenia, with all the Cities, Towns, Castles and Countries near adjoyning to them, 2 Reg. 14. From Hemeth or Antiochia, he went to Damascus, which is 140 miles This City he also took, and all the Country of Syria round about, he made tri∣butary to him, 2 Reg. 14. From Damascus he went to the Red Sea, even 320 miles: and also recover∣ed all the South part, which in times past belonged unto the Kingdom of Is∣rael, 2 Reg. 14. After this, he returned to Samaria, his own Country, which was 192 miles: where, in the one and fortieth year of his Reign, he dyed, and was there buried. After his death, the Kingdom of Israel was oppressed with Tyranny, until it was destroyed by Foreign Nations: and for the space of twelve years there was no King that succeeded him. In the Reign of this King (a little be∣fore his death) there happened a horrible Earth-quake; of which you may read, Amos 1. which without doubt did fore-shew some eminent changes that should happen in that Kingdom, as did afterward, Zac. 41. So all the Travels of Ieroboam, (the second of that name) were 900 miles. Of Zachariah King of Israel. TWelve years after the death of Ieroboam, Zachariah his Son began his Reign in Israel, in the thirty eighth year of Azariah King of Iuda, which was An. mundi, 3975, and before Christ, 723: he reign∣ed six months, and then was miserably slain by Sallum his Friend, 2 Reg. 15. Ioseph. lib. Antiq. 9. Of Sallum King of Israel. SAllum began to reign after he had slain Zachariah, in the thirty ninth year of Azariah King of Iuda: and when he had reigned scarce a Month, he was slain by Menahem, losing his Life and Kingdom together, 2 Reg. 15. The Travels of Menahem. MEnahem was born in Thirza in the Tribe of Iuda; who began to reign in the same year that he slew Sallum: he reigned ten years 2 Reg. 10.
From Thirza he went to Samaria with his Army, which was six miles; (where, having slain Sallum his Lord and King) he usurp'd upon the King∣dom, 2 Reg. 15. From thence he went to Thipsa; which is six miles. This Town he cruel∣ly destroyed with Fire and Sword, and all the Towns thereabout, because they refused to open their Gates unto him. From Thypsa this cruel Tyrant went back again to Samaria, six miles, where he grievously afflicted the Children of Israel ten years. Wherefore the Lord being offended with him for his exceeding Cruelty, stirred up Phul Belochus King of Assyria, who came from Babylon to Samaria, being 624 miles, and put King Menahem to such an exceeding great streight, that he was constrained to buy and procure his peace withWhat this was in our Mo∣ny, you may read after in the quantity of Monies. 1000 Talents; which money being received, he suffered him to enjoy his Kingdom, and returned back to Babylon with all his Army, 2 Reg. 15. So all the Travels of King Menahem were 18 miles. Of Thypsa. THIS was a Town near to that Kingly Seat Thirza, scituated in the Tribe of Manasses, twenty four miles from Ierusalem Northward. But be∣cause the inhabitants thereof denied to open their Gates to this cruel Tyrant Menahem, therefore he utterly destroyed it even to the Ground. Thypsa sig∣nifieth, The Paschal Lamb, or a Passover; being derived of Pasach, he pas∣sed over. Of Pekahia King of Israel. PEkahia reigned two years after his Fathers Death; at the end of which term, he was slain by Pekah the Son of Remalia, who succeeded him in the Government. Ioseph. lib. Antiq. 9. saith, that this Murther was done at a Banquet. The Travels of Pekah King of Israel. PEkah the Son of Remalia began to reign in Samaria, Anno mundi 3189, and before Christ 779. in the two and fiftieth year of Azariah King of Iudah, and reigned over Israel twenty years, 2 Reg. 15. 16. From the City of Samaria he went with Resin King of Syria to Ie∣rusalem, which was 32 miles, and besieged it, but could not take it: neverthe∣less he overcame Ahaz King of Iuda in a great Battel, and put to the Sword in one day above 12000 Souldiers that bare Armour. In this War there were
taken 200000 Women, Children and Maids; all which, he carried Cap∣tives to Samaria, 2 Reg. 16. 2. Chr. 28. From Ierusalem he returned to Samaria, with a great Booty, being 32 miles; and at the Command of Obed the Prophet set at liberty all his Cap∣tives. After, about the end of the twentieth year of his Reign, he was slain by Hosea, his chief Captain, who succeeded him in the Government. 2 Reg. 15. So all the Travels of Pekah were 64 miles. Of Hosea, the last King of Israel. HOSEA began to reign in the fourth Year of Ahas King of Iuda, An∣no Mundi, 3209, and before Christ 759. He kept Court at Samaria, and was a cruel and wicked King. Wherefore God stirred up Sal∣manasser, Emperour of the Assyrians, who about the end of the se∣venth Year of his Reign came to Samaria, and besieged it for the space of three Years; at the end of the third Year, with great Labour, he won it, and all the Country round about; so that he took King Hosea Prisoner, and led him, together with a great Multitude of the Iews (amongst which were Gabriel and Raphael the Friends of Toby the Elder) thence to Nineveh Captives, being 652 miles. From Nineveh he sent them to a place called Rages in Media, being 752 miles, and in that Country peopled many Towns and Cities with them; so that there were many of the Israelites led into Captivity above 1396 miles, for so many miles is Rages and the Ci∣ties of the Medes from Ierusalem North-eastward. This Captivity of the ten Tribes hapned Anno Mundi, 3227. and be∣fore Christ, 741. Of the Cities of Rages and Nineveh you may read in the Travels of Toby and the Angel Gabriel. The Travels of the People which Salmanasser, Emperour of the Assyrians, sent to dwell in the Land of Israel. SALMANASSER, after he had carried the Children of Israel away captive into Assyria, sent (as it is said) part of them into Media, and part of them into Persia, and so dipersed them here and there about the Country. But because the Land of Israel, by reason of this Captivity, became desolate and without Inhabitants, therefore he caused those People which dwelt about the River Cutha, in Persia, to go thence, and dwell in Samaria, and in all the Country round about, to till the Land, and dress the Vines, lest some other People, that were strangers to his Government, should
usurp upon that Kingdom, it being thus without Inhabitants, Ios. li. Ant. 9. You may read of this also, 2 Reg. 7. In whose place, and near to the said River of Cutha, a multitude of Iews, with great shame and grief were constrained to dwell. He also gathered a great multitude of other People out of Babylon, Hamath, or Antiochia, some out of his own Dominions of Assyria, al∣so out of Media, and the People of Ava and Sepharvaiim, which People are mentioned, Esay 37. and sent them to inhabit in Samaria, and all the Cities and Countries round about, because it was a Fertile and pleasant Country, and to defend it against the incursions of strangers. From whence may be gathered, that in this behalf, the Policy of this Emperour was much great∣er than that of the Romans, for the retaining of this Kingdom; but especial∣ly than that of Titus Vespasian; for he, having conquered the Land, wasted it and destroyed it with Fire and Sword, put thence the Inhabitants, and dispersed them here and there, left the Country bare and naked, only a few Garrisons were placed in the strongest Cities, to keep it to their use. Which not being able enough to oppose the incursions of the Saracens, that in great Troops brake out of the Desarts of Arabia-Petraea, they soon lost all that they had gotten; and the Turks joyning with them, they have now gained into their possession that pleasant and fruitful Land of Iudaea, and inhabit therein even to this day, to the great detriment and scandal of the Christians. But to return to the People sent to inhabit this Kingdom, who, as they were of divers Nations, so were they of divers Religions, and every Family had his particular God. Wherefore the Lord sent a Multitude of Lyons among them; which daily vexed them: from whence it happened that Salmanasser was constrained to send back unto them a Levite (one of the Priests that had been carried away Captive) to shew them the true Worship of God. He came to Bethel, and there taught them the Doctrine of the Lord, and the Customs and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law: whereby it happened that they began to worship God and their Idols, in neither obser∣ving their Ancient custom. For which cause they became so abominable unto the Iews, that they refused their company and familiarity, (as that Samaritan woman confessed to Christ at Iacobs Well, Ioh. 4.) so that when the Iews could call a man by any ignominious or odious name, they would term him a Samaritan, Ioh. 8. Do we not say rightly that thou art a Samaritan and est a Devil. But of all the People which Salmanasser sent into the Holy-Land, those that came out of the East part of Persia from Cutha (called Cu∣theis) dwelt in Samaria, and got the chief command and Government over the rest.
The Travels of the Kings of Syria, that made Wars upon the Kings of Israel. And first of the Travels or Incursions of Benhadad. BEnhadad King of Syria, went from Damascus, the chief City of his King∣dom, and came to Samaria, and straitly besieged it in the time of Ahab King of Israel, 1 Reg. 24. being 132 miles. From thence (being overcome and put to flight by Ahab) he return∣ed back to Damascus, which was 132 miles. The second time he came from thence, and invaded the Land of Israel, even unto the City of Apheck, 124 miles, which he besieged. But Ahab King of Israel overcame him in a great Battel, and put 100000 Syrians to the Sword; and when the rest of the multitude would have fled into the City, the ruins of a Wall fell down upon them, so that there dyed 27000. This put Benhadad in such a fear, that he was constrained to fly from one chamber to another to hide himself; but at last was taken, and (not without the great wrath and indignation of God) by that wicked King Ahab pardoned and set at liberty, 2 Reg. 20. Wherefore he went thence back to Damascus, which was 124 miles. Within three years after he brought a great Army against Ramoth in Gilead, which is 104 miles from Damascus South-Eastward. Here he won of Ahab a great Battel, in which Ahab was slain with an Arrow, 1 Reg. 22. From thence he returned back to Damascus, which was about 104 miles. After that, he came again from Damascus into the land of Israel, with a great Army, 120 miles; where he counselled with his Captains and men of War, saying, Here and there will we incamp our selves. But the Prophet Elisha discoered their purposes, 2 Reg. 6. Out of the Land of Isrel he returned to Damascus, which was 120 miles. From thence he returned again with his Army to Samaria, being 132 miles; which the second time he besieged so straitly, that an Asses head was worth eighty pieces of Silver. But yet the Lord, at the fervent Prayers of Elizeus the Prophet, struck such a fear and anguish among the Enemies, that Ben∣hadad and his Army were constrained to fly, 2 Reg. 6. Being sore troubled because he was thus put to flight, he went to Dama∣scus, which was 132 miles, and there, within a while after, died of grief, 2 Reg. 9. So all the Travels of King Benhadad were 1224 miles. The Travels of the Captains which Benhadad King of Syria sent to waste and destroy the Land of Baesa King of Israel. THIS Army went from Damascus, and came to the Town of Hion, seventy two miles. From thence they went to Dan, which is four miles.
From Dan they went to the City of Abel-Bethmaacha, twelve miles. From thence they went to the land of Chineroth, which was accounted eight miles: there they took certain Cities of Fruit, and spoiled and destroyed them. From Chineroth in the Tribe of Nephtaly (when they had cruelly wasted and destroyed that Country) they returned with a great booty to Damascus, being eighty eight miles, 1 Reg. 15. So all their Travels were 184 miles. The Description of the Towns and Places to which they travelled. Hion and Dan. HIon and Dan are two Towns near to Mount Libanus, and the Fountains of Iordan, some 104 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward. Hion signi∣fies a Town of the Fountain, because it standeth near to the Town or Foun∣tains from whence Iordan issueth. Of Abel-Bethmaacha you may read before. Of Chineroth. THIS Chineroth or Cineroth was the Metropolitan City of the Tribe of Nephtaly, seventy two miles from Ierusalem Northward. It was scitua∣ted in a very fruitful and pleasant place, and for that cause was so called; for Kinroth, being derived of Kinnor, signifieth Musick or Mirth. The Travels of Naaman the Syrian. NAaman came from Damascus to Samaria, which was 132 miles, to be cured of his Leprosie by Elizeus; who commanded him to go to the River Iordan, and wash himself therein seven times, and he should be cleansed. Wherefore from Samaria he went to Iordan, twenty six miles, and there, ac∣cording to the commandment of the Prophet, he washed himself seven times, and was cleansed, 2 Reg. 5. From the River Iordan he returned back again to Elizeus the Prophet, to give him thanks for that benefit, which was about sixteen miles. From Samaria he returned to Damascus, 132 miles. So all the Travels of Naaman the Syrian were 296 miles. The Travels of Hasael King of Syria. HE went from Damascus (where Elizeus told him that he should suc∣ceed his Lord and Master Benhadad in the Kingdom) to amth Gilead, with his Army, which was 104 miles. There he overcame Iehoram King of Israel in a great battel, 2 Reg. cap. 8.
From thence he returned to Damascus, 104 miles. After, he went to Damascus to the City Aroer, which was 132 miles. From thence he went through the land of Gilead into the Kingdom of Basn, until he came to Mount Libanus, which is accounted eighty miles, and conquered all that part, 2 Reg. 10. After, he returned into his own Kingdom, to Damascus, which is 320 miles. Within a while after, he went again from Damascus with his Army to Gath, which is reckoned 188 miles. This City he won From Gath he went to Ierusalem, thirty two miles, which he besieged so streightly, that Ioas King of Iudah was constrained to give him great abun∣dance of Gold to raise his Siege and be gone, 2 Reg. 12. From Ierusalem he went to Damascus, which was about 160 miles. The last Journey that he went against the Israelites, was, when he besieged Samaria, at which time he won many Cities and Towns round about in the Country, and made them Tributaries unto him, 2 Reg 13. which was 132 iles. Having finished this Expedition, he returned back to Damascus, 132 miles, and there dyed and was buried. So all the Travels of Hasael King of Syria, were 1384 miles. The Cities of Aroer and Gath are described before; therefore I shall not need to speak of them again in this place. The Travels of Benhadad, the second of that name, King of Syria. THis Benhadad was the Son of Hasael, and succeeded him in the Govern∣ment. He went from the City Damascus with a great Army, to Apheck, which was 104 miles. This King was three times one after another over∣thrown by Ioab King of Israel, and lost all those Cities which Hasael his Fa∣ther had formerly conquered, 2 Reg. 13. From Apheck he returned to Damascus, 104 miles, and there died. So both Journeys were 208 miles. The Travels of Resin King of Syria. RESIN King of Syria went from Damascus, and joyning his Army with that of Pekah King of Israel, they went to Ierusalem and streight∣ly besieged Ahab king of Iudah, 2 Reg. 16. which was 160 miles. At this time (which was in the year of the World 3206, and be∣fore Christ 762.) the Prophet Esay, ca. 7. foretold of the Birth of our Saviour Christ, saying, Behold a Virgin being great shall bring forth a Child, and shall call his name Emanuel.
From thence he brought his Army through Idumaea, to Elth, a City of the Red Sea, some 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and sixteen miles from Ezeongaber Northward. This City Resin won, and thrust from thence the Iews out of it. From lath he went to Damascus, 280 miles, where he was slain by Tiglath Phulasser, that mighty King of the Assyrians, who carried a great multitude of the Inhabitants of Damascus into the Country of Syrene, where they endured a miserable Exile, 2 Reg. 16. So all the Travels of King Resin were 600 miles. The Travels of the Kings of Judah, which reigned in the City of Jerusalem: and first of the Travels of Rehoboam. REhoboam the Son of Solomon succeded his Father in the Kingdom, and began his Reign Anno mundi 2971, and before Christ 977▪ who by reason of his extream cruelty and threats (following the counsel of his young Courtiers, rather than of his grave Senators) the same year lost ten of the Tribes, that fell from him and rebelled against him; so that he reigned over Iudah and Benjamin seventeen years, 1 Reg. 11. 14. A little after the death of Solomon, he went to Sichem, thirty two miles, where he was anointed and crowned King. But the People perceiving that he carried himself very proudly and arrogantly, desired him that he would ease them of the burden formerly imposed upon them by his Father: (for Solomon had set a certain Tax on every man, because he was at extraordi∣nary charges as long as the Temple was building) but he, little regarding their request, told them, That his little finger should be heavier than the whole burthen of his Father: wherefore they, disliking his Speech, fell all from him, except Benjamin and Iudah. Wherefore the King, shunning the fury of the People, with all possible speed went from Sichem to Jerusalem back again, being thirty two miles. Then he fortified all the chief Cities of Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chr. 11. So all the Travels of Rehoboam were sixty four miles. But he principally fortified fourteen Cities in the Tribe of Judah, that with the more safety he might oppose his Enemy Jeroboam King of Israel; viz. Bethlehem, Etam, Thecoa, Bethzura, Adullam, Gath, Maesa, Ziph, Adorai∣im, Lachis, Aseca, Zarea, Ajalon and Hebron▪ most of which Towns, and the memorable Actions done in them, are described in the former part of this Treatise. I will therefore speak only of such Towns as have not as yet been mentioned.
Of Maresa. THIS was a City in the Tribe of Iuda, 16 miles from Ierusalem West-ward, which Rehoboam repaired and fortified, 2 Chr. 11. where King Asa overcame the Ethopians in a cruel Battel, 2 Chr. 14. Here Michaias and Eleazer the Prophets were born, 2 Chr. 20 Mich. 1, 2 Ios. 15 Georgias also fled into this City when he was overcome by Iudas Macchabeus, 2 Mac. 12, It was scituated on the Borders of the Tribes of Iuda and Dan, as S. Ierom saith, in whose time the Ruines thereof were to be seen. Maresca signifies an Inheritance, being derived of Moraschah, that is, a Possession. Of Bethzura. THIS is a strong Castle (often mentioned in the History of the Maccha∣bees) scituated on a Mountain some five Furlongs from Ierusalem Southward, and felll by lot unto the Tribe of Iuda. This Tower was as it were a Bulwark for the City of Ierusalem, and stood in the way s you go thence to Bethlem, and so to Gaza. Of Zareah. THIS was a City in the Tribe of Iuda, eight miles from Ierusalem, to∣ward the West, which Rehoboam did also repair and fortifie, 2 Ch. 11. There was another City of this name, scituated upon the Border of the Tribes of Iuda and Dan, 18 miles from Ierusalem Westward: of which you may read in the Travels of Sampson. Of Adoraiim. ADoraiim or Adarah was a City in the Tribe of Iuda, 44 miles from Ierusalem South-westward; which Rehoboam the Son of Solomon also fortified, 2 Chr. 11. It is scituated upon the Borders of Iudah and Arabia-Petraea, between Cades and Casmona. It signifies a glorious City, being de∣rived of Adar, he was glorious. The Travels of King Abia. ABijah or Abia signifies, The Father of the Sea. He began to reign in the eighteenth year of Ieroboam his Adversary, An. Mundi 2988, before Christ 980, and reigned over Israel three years, 1 Reg. 15▪ 2 Chr. 17. He went from Ierusalem to the Mount Zemeraim, eight miles. After that he went to Bethel, and conquered all the Country from thence to Ephron, which was 36 miles.
From Ephron he returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles: there he took unto him fourteen Wives, and begat 20 Sons and 16 Daughters, 2 Chr. 13. The Travels of Asa, King of Judah. AS A signifies a Physician. He began to reign about the end of the 21th year of Ieroboam King of Israel, An. Mn. 2990. before Christ 978. He governed Iudah with great commendation 41 years. He went from Ierusalem to Maresa, 16 miles; where, in the Valley of Zephatha he overcame the Ethiopians in a memorable Battel, 2 Chr. 14. From thence he pursued the Ethiopians to Gerar, being 22 miles, and re∣covered many Cities which the Ethiopians dwelt in, 2 Chr. cap. 14. From Gerar he went to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles, and offered to the Lord of the Spoils that he had taken, 700 Oxen, and 7000 Sheep, 2 Chr. 15. These Travels of King Asa make 70 miles. The Iourney and Expedition of Saerah, King of Ethiopia, whom Asa King of Judah overcame in the Valley of Zephatha. SAerah or Saerach signifieth, A noble and puissant Lord. This was a mighty and warlike Prince, who governed Lybia and Aethiopia; the King of which Country at this day we call Presbyter Iohn, or rather, etro Iohannes; who holdeth his Court in a fair and goodly City called Hamarich, the Metropolitan of all Ethiopia, and extendeth his Go∣vernment beyond Meroes in Africa, Many (though ignorantly) suppose he is a Priest, because he is called Presbyter, though indeed he is not so, but rather a puissant and mighty Emperour. But to return to Saerah, or Saerach, who in hope to extend his Empire into these parts, went with a great Ar∣my out of Ethiopia to the Valley of Zephatha in Iuda, to fight with Asa King of Iudah, 1200 miles; but lost the day, and returned with great shame, 2 Chr. 15. It seemeth, that this King was the mightiest of all his Predecessors, and a Prince of no vulgar Estimation, because of the multitude and great a∣bundance of Souldiers which he brought in his Army; for it is reported, that there were 1000000 that bore Armor, and 300 Chariots; but this great Army was dispersed, and most of them died miserably; as did that great Army of Xerxes, which consisted of 1700000. From whence it may e concluded, That it is not the Strength of Man which delivereth him, bu the Lord.
The Travels of Jehosaphat King of Judah. JEhosaphat signifies, The Judge of the Lord. He began his Reign in the fourth year of Ahab, 1 Reg. 22. The greatest part therefore of the first year of this King, happened in the Year of the World, 3033, and be∣fore Christ, 935. He reigned over Israel twenty five years, that is, from the 35th of his Age, to the sixtieth. In the seventh year of his Reign, he went from Ierusalem to Samaria, which was 32 miles, to visit his Kinsman, Ahab King of Israel: for Ioram his Son, some ten years before, had married Athaliah, King Ahab's Sister, 2 Reg. 8. From Samaria he went with Ahab to the War at Ramoth in Gilead, being twenty four miles, where Ahab was slain, 2 Reg, 22. 2 Chr. 18. From Ramoth he went safe from the Wars to Ierusalem, vvhich vvas for∣ty eight miles. From Ierusalem he vvent to the City of Beersaba, the utmost bounds of his Kingdom, tovvards the South, to instruct his People in the Lavv of the Lord: forty tvvo miles from Ierusalem, South-ward. From Beersaba, passing through all his Kingdom, he came to Mount E∣phraim, being forty eight miles, and the utmost bounds of his Kingdom North-ward, being some eight miles from Ierusalem, 2 Chr. 19. From Mount Ehraim he went to Ierusalem, which was eight miles. Thus Iehosaphat went through all his Dominions, to instruct his Subjects in Piety, and the true Worship of God: in every City ordaining Judges and Gover∣nours, Magistrates, Procurators and Assessors, committing to their Discretion the deciding of all Controversies; saying to them, Take heed what you do, for the Office you have taken upon you is not Humane, but Divine: and as you judge, so shall you be judged; for the Lord is with you in judgment. Wherefore do all things with diligence, and in the fear of the Lord; for with the Lord there is no iniquity, nor respect of Persons, neither taketh he any bribes. And he himself remained chief Judge in Ierusalem, to whom any might appeal from the inferiour Judges, that so there might be a just end of Controversies, 2 Chr. 16. Afterward, Iehosaphat went forth with his Army to Tecoa, six miles from Ierusalem, where, by fervent Prayers, the sounding of Trumpets, and other musical Instruments, in obtained a memorable Battel against the Moabites, Ammonites, and Idumaeans; for the Lord turned the Weapons of them one against another, and they wounded one another to the death. This fight hap∣pened in a fair Valley between Tecoa and Engedi. So Iehosaphat pursued the Enemy for three days with great slaughter, and returned with a mighty spoil. This was called the Valley of Blessing, because of this great Victory at Tecoa, and began eight miles from Ierusalem South-eastward, and extended it self to the Tower of Engedi, near to the Bank of the Red Sea, twenty miles.
From Engedi (out of the Valley of Blessing) Iehosaph at and his Army re∣turned to Ierusalem, twenty miles, and went into the Temple, with Shalms, Harps, Timbrels, and great Joy, thankfull acknowledging Gods merciful Favour toward him, in giving him so great a Victory, 2 Chr. 20. But as there is nothing in this Life that can be said permanent, so likewise the felicity of Iehosahat changed on a sudden, the froward and adverse frown of Adver∣sity seising upon his Prosperity; for, joyning with that wicked and impious King of Israel, Ahaziah, upon condition to build a certain Navy of Ships at Ezeongaber, to fetch gold from Tharshish, and other places in India, he displeased the Lord: for the which cause there arose a great Tempest, which brake down the Works, and destroyed the Navy. From Ierusalem he went with Iehoram King of Israel to war against the Moabites, and with them went the King of Idumaea; so passing through the Desarts of Edom, they came to Mount Seir, and so went to Petra, the chief City of the King of the Moabites, distant from Ierusalem seventy two miles, 2 Reg. 3. From Petra, Iehosaphat returned to Ierusalem, seventy two miles, where he died, and was buried, 2 Reg. 22. 2 Chr. 21. So all the Travels of Iehosaphat King of Iuda were three hundred seventy two miles. The typical signification of Jehosaphat. AS Iehosaphat by Prayer, and the sound of Trumpets, and other Instru∣ments of Musick, overcame and dispersed his Enemies without draw∣ing his Sword; so Christ also, by the sound of his Word and Doctrine, without drawing Weapon, overcame the Enemies of the Church. The Travels of Joram King of Judah. JORAM signifies, The exalted of the Lord. He was crowned King, (his Father yet living) at such time as he made his Expedition against Mesa King of the Moabites, which happened about the fifth year of Iehoram King of Israel, An. Mundi, 3055, and before Christ, 913. He reigned with his Father Iehosaphat two years, and after his Decease, six. So Ioram reigned eight years over Iudah, and when he was forty years old, died mi∣serably, 2 Reg. 8, 9. About the beginning of the second year of this King's Reign, (which was the sixth of Iehoram King of Israel) Elias the Prophet was taken up into Hea∣ven. About the beginning of his Reign, he went from Ierusalem to Mount Seir, being twenty eight miles South-ward; where he used such extreme cru∣elty toward the Edomites, which at this time were his Subjects, that of a sud∣den they fell from him, and chose them a King of their own, 2 Reg. 8.
From the Mountain of Seir he returned to Ierusalem, which is twenty eight miles, and there cruelly put to death his own Brothers. But God stir∣red up against him the Philistines and Arabians, who broke into Iuda, and destroyed it with Fire and Sword. They also went to Ierusalem, and took thence all his Substance and Riches, put his Children to the Sword, all but Ioa∣chas, which was also called Ahaziah, or Ochorias; and carried away his Wives captive into Arabia Foelix, which is near unto Ethiopia 1200 miles. Then the Lord struck him with an extream pain in his Bowels, of which, after two years, he died, and was buried without any Funeral-pomp, or honourable Respect, near to the King's Tower. A man unworthy to be buried in the Sepulchre of the rest of the Kings, because he so much degenerated from Da∣vid his Predecessor, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 28. So all the Travels of Ioram were fifty six miles. The Travels of Ahaziah King of Judah. AHaziah (which also was called Iehoachas) succeeded his Father Io∣ram in the Government of Iudah, and began his Reign in the twelfth year of Iehoram King of Israel, Ann. Mund. 3062. and be∣fore Christ, 906, and reigned one year, 1 Reg. 8. He went from Ierusalem to Ramoth in Gilead, which is accounted forty eight miles: There he went to Battel with Iehoram King of Israel against the Syrians, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 22. From Ramoth in Gilead he returned to Ierusalem, forty eight miles. Within a while after, he went back again to visit his Kinsman, Iehoram King of Israel, to Iezteel, for he was wounded in the Battel against Hasael, and lay there to be cured: which was forty eight miles. With Iehoram he went to meet Iehu, the Captain of the Host, who shot an Arrow, and wounded Iehoram, that he died in the Field of Naboth the Iezreelite. Wherefore Ahaziah, to save his Life, fled with all possible speed, taking his way to the King's Garden, that stood close by the Vineyard of Naboth the Iezreelite, not far from teh City and Tower of Iezreel. But Ie∣hu followed him so close, that he wounded him as he ascended up to a place called GVR, which signifieth a Lions Whelp; near unto the Town which is called Iiblea. Wherefore Ahaziah feeling himself hurt, went to Megiddo, four miles from Iezreel, and near to Apheck upon the West. There (as Iosephus saith, lib. Antiq. 9.) he caused his wounds to be searched and bound up. This City of Megiddo is forty eight miles from Ierusalem North∣ward. From Megiddo he went to Samaria, which was fourteen miles; there he lay hid for a while, flying from one place to another, to save himself. 2 Chr. 22.
But being found out, he was carried back to the City of Megiddo, which was fourteen miles; and at the commandment of Iehu, was there slain, 1 Reg. 8. From Megiddo his Carcasa was carried to Ierusalem, which was forty eight miles, and there buried, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chron. 22. So all the Travels of Ahaziah King of Iudah, were 224 miles. Of that Idolatrous and wicked Queen Athalia. AThalia was Sister to Ahab and Daughter to Omri, married to Ioram Son of that good King Iehosaphat, when he was but seventeen years of age; and after the death of Azahiah (who was slain about the twenty third year of his age) she usurped upon the Kingdom of Israel (Anno Mundi, 3063, before Christ, 905,) and reigned with great Ty∣ranny almost seven years: So soon as she had obtained the Government, she cruelly and miserably put to death the children of Ahaziah, and all those that were next Heirs to the kingdom; only Ioas who was saved by the poli∣cy of Iehoshabeath Sister to Ahasiah, that stole him from among the rest of the King's Sons, and put him to Nurse in her Bed-Chamber: and he was with them in the House of God six years; all which time Athalia, raigned over the land. And in the seventh year, Iehojada waxed bold, and proclaimed Ioas King, as being next Heir to the Crown, and anointed him in the Temple; who after Athalia was slain, succeeded in the Government, 2 Reg. 11. 2 Chron. 23. Of Joas King of Judah. JOas began to reign over Iudah when he was almost seven years of age and about the middle of the seventh year of Iehu King of Israel, Anno Mundi, 3069, and before Christ, 899, and raigned over Iudah forty years. He did that which was acceptable in the ight of the Lord all the days of Iehojada the Priest, who crowned him King: but after his death he fell into evil courses, and caused that good Priest Zachariah (the Son of Iehojada, who was the Author of all his preferment) to be stoned to death in the upper Court of the Temple; which act, argued that he was very un∣thankful and tyrannical. But the Lord (displeased with his cruelty) within a year after the death of Zachariah, stirred up the Syrians, who invaded Iudaea and spoiled the City of Ierusalem: in which War, all those that stirred up the King to Idolatry were cruelly slain. To conclude, within a while after some of his Courtiers conspired against him, and as he lay sick of a grievous disease in his bed, put him to death; and buried him in Milo, the City of David. Thus God justly punished this Tyrant for his Unthankfulness, Apostasie, and Cruelty, when he had lived 47 years, 2 Reg. 12.
The Travels of Amasiah King of Judah. AMasias, or Amasiah, signifies, the strength of Iehovah. This man was twenty five years of Age when he was enthronised by his Father, a∣bout the second year of Ioas King of Israel, Anno mundi, 3108, and before Christ 806. He ruled the Kingdom while his Father was sick, one year, and after his decease twenty eight: so all the years of his Reign were twenty nine. He went with an Army from Ierusalem to Saelag, that is to the Tower or Rock of Mount Seir, forty miles towards the South: here, in the Valley of Salt, he put to death a multitude of the Idumaeans. And although this Town was very strongly scituated, yet he won it, and called it Ioctiel, that is, the Year of the Lord; because God in that place heard his Prayers; being derived of Iakah and El, which is, God hath heard. Near to this Town Amasiah com∣manded 10000 Idumaeans, which he had taken in War, to be cast down head∣long from the top of an high Rock into a deep Valley, in which fall their bones were shattered all to pieces, and they died miserably, 2 Reg. 14. From Selag-Ioctiel he returned to Ierusalem, being forty miles; where he began to worship the Gods of the Idumaeans that he brought along with him, 2 Chron. 24. From Ierusalem he went to Bethsemes, and there was overcome by Joas King of Israel, which was four miles, 2 Chron. 25. From Bethsemes, Ioas led Amasiah back again to Ierusalem captive, being four miles, 2 Reg. 14. From Ierusalem he fled to the City of Lachis, which was twenty miles, and there was slain by his own Servants, 2 Chron. 25. From Lachis his carkass was carried back again to Ierusalem, twenty miles▪ where it was buried in the City of David, 2 Reg. 14. 2 Chron. 25. So all his Travels were 128 miles. The Travels of Azariah, or Uzziah, King of Judah. THIS man succeeded his Father Amasia (in the year of the World 3138, and before Christ, 830) when he was but sixteen years of age, and reigned fifty two years; his Mothers name was Iecoliah of Ierusalem. He did those things which were upright in the sight of the Lord, therefore the Lord blessed him. And after the death of his Father, built Elah, and restored it to Iudah. He therefore went from Ierusalem to Elah, 160 miles towards the South, and rebuilt that Town (it being a famous Mart-Town, scituated upon the
Red Sea) and fortified it, because Resin, King of the Syrians, in times past, for want of due fortification, won it, and destroyed it, 2 Chron. 26. From Elah he returned to Ierusalem, 160 miles. After he went from Ierusalem to Gath, a City of the Philistines, which was accounted thirty four miles; this Town he won, beat down the Walls, and de∣stroyed the Bulwarks thereof. From thence he went to Iabnia, which is twenty four miles, and broke down the Walls thereof, 2 Chron. 26. From thence he went to Azotus or Asdod, which was eight miles, 2 Chron. 26. From Asdod he went again to Ierusalem, being twenty two miles. Within a while after, he gathered an Army, and went from Ierusalem to Gur-Baal, that is, Gerar; where he overcame the Arabians in a great Battel, which was thirty two miles, 2 Chron. 26. From Gerar he returned to Ierusalem, being thirty two miles. He went from Ierusalem that third time into the Land of the Ammonites, six∣ty miles; which People he conquered, and made Tributary to him▪ so that he was made Famous through all the Countries thereabout, even to the ut∣most part of Aegypt, because of his often Victories and Triumphs, 2 Chron 26. Out of the land of the Ammonites he returned to Ierusalem, being sixty miles. But now, being lift up with the Prosperity of Fortune, and not con∣tent with his Regal Dignity, he endeavoured to have chief Authority over the Priests also▪ for which cause he went into that part of the Temple where the Altar of sweet Incense stood (where it was lawful for none to go but the Priests) and there took upon him to offer sweet Incense; but as he was offering, the Lord struck him with Leprosie, so that he was constrained to dwell in a house by himself separated from the Congregation; and his Son Iotham governed in his stead all the days of his Life. But within a while after, he died of this disease, and was buried in the Kings Garden at Ierusa∣lem, and not in the Sepulchre of the Kings, 2 Reg. 15. 2 Chron. 26. So all the Travels of Azariah King of Iudah, were 592 miles. Of the Places to which he travelled. Of Elah. THIS was a City scituated upon the Red Sea, 160 miles from Ierusa∣lem towards the South; between Ezion-Gaber and Midian. This City Resin King of the Syrians conquered; but Azariah King of Iudah drove thence the Syrians, and made it so strong, that it seemed impossible to be conquered. It took the name of abundance of Oaks, which (as it seemeth) grew about that place; for Elah or Ilix, signifies, a kind of Oak Tree, (of which there is great plenty in the Holy Land) so called because of their strength and hardness.
Of Jobnia. THIS was a City near to Ioppa and Libba, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-West. This City taketh the name of Wisdom and Pru∣dence, being derived of Bin, to understand. Of Gur-Baal. THIS Town is also called Gerar, where Abraham and Isaac sometimes travelled; it is distant from Ierusalem thirty two miles towards the South-West, and six miles from Hebron. Here the Iews and neighbouring Arabians afterwards worshipped the Idol Baa▪ and therefore this City, which in the times of the Patriarchs, was called Gerar, a Perigrination, was after called Gur-Baal, that is, the Perigrination of the Idol Baal, being derived of Gor, which signifies, He hath travelled. The Travels of Jotham King of Judah. JOtham signifies, Whole and Perfect. He succeeded his Father Azariah, when he was about twenty five years of age, Anno Mundi 3190, and before Christ, 778. He raigned over Iudah seventeen years, until the one and fortieth year of his age. His Mothers name was Ichruscha, so called from an Inheritance or Possession. He began his Reign in the second year of Pekah King of Israel, and continued it unitl the seventeenth year of his Government, 2 Reg. 15. 17. When this noble Prince had rebuilded and richly adorned the House of the Lord, he went from Ierusalem and invaded the Country of the Ammonites, (which was sixty miles,) conquered their King, and made the whole Land pay him Tribute, even a hundred Talents of Silver of the common weight, 10000 measures of Wheat, and 10000 of Barley yearly. This Tribute continued three years. From the Land of the Ammonites he went back to Ierusalem, which was sixty miles; where, after he had adorned the Temple with many princely buildings, he dyed; about the one and fortieth year of his age, 2 Reg. 15. So all his Travels were 120 miles. Of Ahaz King of Judah. AHAZ signifies Apprehending, or a Possessor. He began to reign after the death of his Father Iotham, about the end of the seventeenth year of Pekah King of Israel, Anno Mundi, 3205, before Christ, 762.
He reigned wickedly 16 years, 2 Reg. 16. 2 Chr. 28. For he was a notorious Hypocrite, who out of a perverse Zeal, worshipped many Idols, and burnt his Son in the Valley of Gehinnon, as an Offering unto Moloch; wherefore he was unhappy in his Government; for God stirred up mighty enemies against, even Rein▪ King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, who wasted and destroyed his Kingdom and (streightly besieging Ierusalem) conquer∣ed Ahaz in a great Battel, and put to the Sword 120000 of his men. After that Resin, returned to Elath, and took it: so that he lost more then his Father had gotten. Where being struck into a great fear by reason of these adversities, he sent to crave the Aid of Tiglasse▪ Phulasser King of the Assyrians, who at his request sent a great Army from Niniveh to Damascus, 520 miles, and there overcame Resin, and put him to death, and took captive 242000 of the people of Damascus, and sent them into Cyren a Country of Africa, 2 Reg. 16. The Travels of Ahaz. KING Ahaz went from Ierusalem to Damascus, which was 160 miles, to meet Tiglath-Phulasser King of the Assyrians, to rejoyce with him for his happy Victory, and give him thanks for his aid and assistance: where, when he saw the Altar at Damascus to be very glorious, he sent for Vrijah the chief Priest, who took a patern thereof, and carried it with him to Ierusalem, where he made an Altar like unto it, 2 Reg. 16. From Dmascus he returned back again 160 miles. So his Travels were 320 miles. But yet Ahaz continued in his perverse Impiety and Idolatry, without any regard or fear of God, therefore he stirred up other Enemies against him, viz. the Idumeans, who took a great multitude of them captive; and the Phi∣listines, who with their Army broke into the South part of the Tribe of Iudah, and took these Cities following, viz, Bethsemes, Ajalon, Timnath, Socho, Gede∣rth, and Gimso, with their Villages. These Cities for the most part are men∣tioned in the precedent Treatise, except Gederoth and Gimso. Gederoth, com∣monly called Gederothaim, is distant from Ierusalem eight miles towards the South-West, and stands near to the Castle of Emaus, being compassed about with a Hedge, from whence it seemeth to take the name; for Gadar is as much as to say, he hath hedged about. Giso was also in the Tribe of Iudah, but in what place is not certainly known. Thus King Ahaz all the days of his Life did evil in the sight of the Lord; for which, God punished him and all the Land; and in the sixteenth year of his Reign he died, and was buried with his Fathers in the City of David.
The Travel of Ezekias King of Judah. EZkias (which signifies the Champion of Iehovah) was born when his Father was but thirteen years of age, which made many Questions whether he should succeed him as his lawful Heir in his Kingdom, be∣cause they doubted whether he was lawfully begotten. For if you do observe the order and course of the years and Chronologie in the Scripture, you shall find, that from the beginning of the thirteenth year of the age of Ahaz, to the first year of the Reign of this King Ezekias, make just twenty five years: Ezekias therefore began to reign after the death of his Father Ahaz, about the end of the third year of Hosea King of Israel, 2 Reg. 19. Anno mun, 3222, be∣fore Christ, 746, being then about twenty five years of age, a little before Easter, as it appeareth, 2 Chron. 29. He governed that Kingdom with great Commendations twenty nine years. The first Journey that he ook was from Ierusalem to Gaza, which was forty four miles, there he overcame the Army of the Philistines, and recovered all those Cities which his Father Ahaz had lost, according to that in the Prophet Esay, cap. 15. 2 Reg. 18. From Gaza he returned to Ierusalem, which was forty four miles; there he broke down the places for Idolatry, and the brazen Serpent made by Moses in the Wilderness, and called it Nehustan, a Brazen thing that hath nothing in it self of a Divine nature, and could neither profit nor hurt, therefore ought not to be worshipped. This Brazen Serpent was kept in memory of that Sign that God shewed unto the Children of Israel in the Desart, when they were bitten and stung to death by fiery Serpents, for looking upon this Brazen Serpent they were healed. But now because of the abuse thereof by the Iews, which turned it into Idolatry, it was broken to pieces, Num. 21. 2 Reg. 18. So all the Travels of Ezechias were eighty eight miles. In the fourteenth year of the Reign of Ezekias, and in the thirty eighth year of his age, Senacharib (that mighty Emperour of the Assyrians) having taken many Towns and Cities in the holy-Land, would have also besieged Ierusa∣lem, and for that purpose sent from Lachis (which was twenty miles distant from Ierusalem) Thartan, Rabsarim, and Rabsacha, three mighty Princes, Embassadors, with a great Train to attend them. These men went about the City, to see in what part it was most subject to battery, and might ea∣siest be got: so when they came to the Conduit of the upper Pool, which is by the path of the Fullers Field, between the Fish-Gate and the Old-Gate, in that place where they might easiliest be heard, they called to the King: but Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah (which was Hezekia's Steward) Shebna the Chan∣cellor, and Ioah the Son of Asaph, the Recorder, went upon the Wall: then Rabsacha uttered blasphemous words against the Lord: but Ezekias when he had heard what the Enemy had said, called all the Elders of Ierusalem toge∣ther,
and sent for Isaiah the Prophet, the Son of Amos, and they went into the Temple of the Lord and prayed. Wherefore the Lord heard their Prayers, and sent his Angel into the Camp of the Assyrians, and lo, in one night there were slain 185000 men as they lay in their Tents before Gibeah (which at this time they besieged) being distant from Ierusalem, some ten miles towards the South-West. This great deliverance happen'd in the year of the World 3253, and before Christ, 733. About the end of the thirty eighth year of the age of Ezekiah, he fell into a dangerous disease, which so far forth as could be gathered by all likelihoods was the Plague; (for God doth oftentimes try the Patience of his Saints with sundry afflictions) but yet at his servent Prayers he was restored to Health, and his days were lengthened fifteen years: at which time the Sun went back ten Degrees, according to the variation of the shadow in the Dyal of Ierusalem, 2 Reg. 20. Isa 38. 2 Chr. 32. But at the end of the fifteen years, which was about the fifty fourth year of his age, he dyed, and was buried with his Fathers. The Travels of Manasses. MAnasses, or Manasseh, signifieth forgetting, or he hath forgotten. This man was twelve years old when he succeeded his Father Ezekiah in the Kingdom of Iudah: he began to reign Anno mundi, 3251, and before Christ, 717. This King was a great Idolater, and one that put the Prophets of the Lord to death, so that it was wonderful to see what Tyranny and mischief he wrought in Israel: wherefore the Lord stirred up the Assyrians against him, who overcame him in a great Battel, and took him Captive, carrying him bound in Chains from Ierusalem to Babylon, even 680 miles. But after, being humbled by his afflictions, he came to a knowledge of him∣self, and repenting for his former evil, humbling himself with prayer and fasting under the hand of God: wherefore the Lord took compassion of him, and stirred up the mind of the King of Babylon to mercy, so that he loosed his bands, and sent him back again to Ierusalem, 680 miles. From that time forward he left Idolatry, and worshipped the true God: adorned the Temple of the Lord with many fair and beautiful Buildings, and in the five and fiftieth year of his age he died, and was buried in the Kings Garden, 2 Reg. 21. 2 Chron. 33. So all the Travels of Manasses were 1360 miles. Of Amon King of Judah. AMon signifieth, True and Faithful: he succeeded his Father Manasses when he was twenty two years of age, Anno mundi, 3307, before
Christ, 661. He reigned two years, and then, because of his exceeding Ido∣latry, the Lord cast him off, when he was about twenty four years of age; near which time, some of his Servants conspired against him, and put him to death. The Travels of King Josiah. JOSIAH signifies, A Sacrifice of the Lord: he succeeded his Father Ma∣nasses in the Government, when he was but eight years of age, Anno Mundi 3309, before Christ, 659. He governed Israel with great com∣mendations thirty two years, 2 Reg. 22. his Mothers name was Iedidah, and dwelt in a Town called Bzath; but how far this Town stood from Ie∣rusalem, is not set down by any Author. This good King went from Ierusalem, to Bethel, which was eight miles; there he burnt upon the Altar which Ieroboam built, the bones of the Priests of Baal, as the man of God which came from Iudah had told Ieroboam 350 years before, 1 Reg. 13. 2 Chr. 35. From Bethel he returned back to Ierusalem, which was eight miles; there he celebrated the Passover with a solemn Feast and great Attendance, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chr. 35. In the last year of his Reign he went with his Army from Ierusalem to Megiddo, being forty four miles, against Pharaoh Necho King of Aegypt; in which Battel, he was slain with an Arrow, about the thirty ninth year of his age, 2 Chron. 3 5. From Megiddo his Body was carried in a Chariot back again to Ierusalem which was forty four miles, and there with great Lamentations honourably buried, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chr. 35. So all his Travels were 104 miles. The Travels of Jehoahas King of Judah. JEhoahas signifies, the knowledge of God: he succeeded his Father Iosiah in the twenty third year of his age, Anno Mundi, 3340, which was 628 years before Christ; and reigned only three Months, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chron. 36. Ieremy (cap. 22.) calleth this man Schallum, that is, a Recompence. He went from Ierusalem to Riblah, a City in the Tibe of Nepthaly, which is accounted eighty miles; where he was taken Prisoner by Pharaoh Necho, 2 Reg. 23. From Riblah, Pharaoh Necho led him Captive bound in Chains back again to Ierusalem, being eighty miles; and there appointed Iehojakim, his elder Brother, to reign in his place, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chron. 36.
From Ierusalem he carried Iehoahas to Memphis, the Metropolitan City of Aegypt, which was 244 miles, 2 Reg. 23. So all the Travels of Iehoahas were 404 miles. Of Jehoiakim King of Judah. JEhoiakim was the eldest Son of Iosiah, that Good King, and succeeded his Brother Iehoahas in the Kingdom, Anno Mundi, 3341, before Christ, 627: he governed Iudah eleven years: Pharaoh Necho made him King when he was twenty five years of age, to whom he was constrained to pay 100 Talents ofWhat this is in our Money, you may read after in the quantity of Mo∣neys. Silver, and a Talent of Gold. This Mo∣ney being payed, he obtained the Kingdom, and continued in great Impiety and Idolatry; for which cause he was sharply re∣prehended by Ieremiah the Prophet: but he being offended at his words, sought to put him to death; wherefore the Lord stirred up Nebuchadnezzar, the second of that name, Emperour of the Assyrians and Babylonians, who in the eleventh year of this King's Reign came to Ierusalem, and took him captive, tyed him in two chains, and would have carried him to Babylon; but his mind changed, wherefore he caused him to be put to death, and cast out into the Fields of Ierusalem for a prey to wild Beasts, Ier. 22. 2 Reg. 23. Of Jehoiachin King of Judah. Jehoiachin signifies, the preparation of Iehovah. This man succeeded his Brother Iehoiakim, and began his Reign about the end of the 3351 year of the World, and reigned only three Months and ten days, which was about the eighth year of Nabuchadonozor the Great; at which time he was led captive from Ierusalem to Babylon, together with Mordochae and many other Nobles; which was 680 miles. This Captivity happened 617 years be∣fore Christ, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chron. 36. Ester 2. Ier. 52. The Travels of Zedekiah, the last King of Judah. AFter Iehoiachin succeeded Zedekiah, which signifies, the just man of God. This was the Son of the good King Iosiah, (yet an impious Tyrant:) who, by the permission of Nabuchadonozor the Great, was suffered to be King of Iudah after his Brother, when he was one and twenty years of age. He began to reign about the beginning of the 3352 year of the World, and before Christ 616: he governed tyranically eleven years, 2 Reg. 24.
In the eleventh year of this King, Ierusalem was taken by Nabuchadonezar, the great Emperour of the Babylonians: wherefore Zedekiah, to escape the brunt of War, fled from Ierusalem with all possible speed to Iericho, which was twelve miles, Ier. 39. 5. From the plain near the City Iericho, where he was overcome by the Princes of the Chaldeans, he was led to Riblah to Nebuchadonezar, which was sixty eight miles. From Riblah (after the Emperour Nabuchadonezar, had caused all his Children to be put to death before his face, and had put out both his eyes) he led him captive to Babylon, which was 600 miles, where he died miserably, 2 Reg. 25. So all the Travels of Zedekiah King of Iudah were 680 miles. Of the Destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchadonezar. IN the ninth year of this Zedekiah (which was the last King of Iudah) Nabuchadonezar began to besiege Ierusalem, it being then Winter, Anno Mundi 3860, upon the tenth day of the tenth Month Tebeth, which answereth to the seven and twentieth day of December, which day the Iews till now observed as a fasting day. The Siege continued even till the eleventh year of this King, Ierem. 39. 5. 2 Reg. 25. and upon the ninth day of the fourth Month Thamus, (which agreeth with the tenth day of Iuly) the City was taken, and Zedekiah was put to flight. Upon the seventh day of the fifth Month Ab, Nabuzaradan chief Captain of the Army, was sent back by Nabuchadonezar into Iudaea, where he destroyed and burned the houses and buildings of the City of Ierusalem, Ierem. 52. upon the tenth day of the fifth Month, Ab, which answereth to the ninth day of August, being the Sabbath day, the Temple of Ierusalem was set on fire, Ier. 52. de bello Iudei, lib. 6. cap. 26. 27. This first Captivity and Destruction of the City Ierusalem by Nabuchadonezar that great Emperour happened Anno Mundi, 3362, and be∣fore Christ, 606▪ three hundred and ninety years being then fully com∣pleat and ended, from the first year of Ieroboam King of Israel, who set up the Golden Calves, and caused them to be worshipped. For, after the end of these years, according to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, ca. 4. the Sins of Ieroboam should be grievously punished upon the People of Iudah. In the like manner, from the end of the thirteenth year of Iosiah, wherein Ieremie first began to Prophecy, until this year, in which the Children of Israel were carried away Captive into Babylon, are numbred forty years: which by Ezek. cap. 4. are called the years of the Iniquity of Iudah, because so long the Iews did contemn and despise the admonition of the Prophet Ieremie.
Of Babylon. HOw far this City stood from Ierusalem, you may read before; which by the Chaldaeans is called Shinear, or Sinear, and signifies, To strike up∣on the Teeth, being derived of Schen, A tooth, and Naer, to strike. It may also be taken for that, when a man endeavoured with all speed to execute a thing; which seems to resemble the condition of Nimrod: for that in this place he endeavoured to overcome and conquer all his Neighbours: from whence this Land was called Casdius, that is, The Country of the Destroyer. So changing S into L, it is called Chaldeus or Chaldaea. The Chief and Metropolitan City of which Country was this Babylon, built some thirty years after the Floud by Nimrod, or the Babylonian Saturn, the first great Command∣er of the World, according to Berosus, lib. 4. who writeth after this manner: Nimrod, which was accounted the Son of Iupiter Belus, being angry with the Holy Priests of that great God Iehovah, came with his Colony and People into the Field of Sinear, where he built a City, and laid the Foundation of a great Tower, 131 years after the Flood; and raised this Tower to such a height, and withal of such a hugeness, that it seemed as if it had been some great Mountain; because he would have the Babylonian People accounted the chiefest and greatest in the World; also their Governour, the King of Kings. A little after he saith, he built this Tower, but before he could finish it, dyed, in the fifty sixth year after he began it: wherefore the City and Tower of Babylon, according to the Opinion of Berosus, was begun in Anno Mundi, 1788, which was 131 years after the Flood, and before Christ, 2180. There were two causes wherefore the Children of Men built up this Tower; first, that they might get them a name: secondly, that they might be safe in case there came another Flood to drown the World. It was made of Brick and Bittum, lest the Water should loosen it. But the Lord turned their Enterprises into evil, and divided their Language, so that they could not understand one ano∣ther [whereby they were constrained to leave off their building:] from whence it happened that their Minds, Manners, Understandings, Studies, and prin∣cipal Actions were utterly changed, and is the Foundation of all discord and sedition, where the fear of God, and the true knowledge of Christ doth not prevent it. From this division of Tongues, it is called the City of Baby∣lon, this is the City of Division; being derived of the word Balal, he hath confounded or mingled together. Of this City you may read in Ios. lib. I. cap. 9. where he bringeth in a saying of the Sibyls, which was, That when all Nations were of one Language, they built an exceeding high Tower, as though they would have ascended by it into Heaven; but the Lord with great tempest and di∣viding their Tongues, subverted their enterprize, from whence it was called Babylon. This City was the fairest in those times of all others, scituated in a spacious Plain, upon every side whereof there stood pleasant Orchards and Gardens: it was built four square, conpassed about with Walls of incredible
strength and greatness, being fifty Cubits thick, and 200 high, beautified within with goodly Buildings, fair Temples richly gilt with Gold, and won∣derful to look upon. It was in compass 380 Furlongs, as Strabo saith, which make forty eight miles. Through it ran the River Euphrates, by which all things necessary were conveyed to the City; without, it was compassed with fair Ditches, fill'd with water like Rivers, and in the Wall there stood a hun∣dred Gates. Herodotus saith, that it was 480 Furlongs about, which make sixty miles English, but that is not so credible. The first Founder of this City was Nimrod, who in those times was the chief Commander of the World. It is thought that he was the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah; whose name signifies, a cruel Governour, or an unmerciful Tyrant. And that his Actions might be according to the signification of his name, he is branded with most perspicious notes of Cruelty, omitting no violent action whereby he might inlarge his Dominions; incroaching upon other mens Governments, through a thirsty and ambitious desire of Renown, without respect of Equity or Humanity. And to add evil to evil, committed many outrages upon such as were accounted good men, and the Priests of the great God Iehovah, from whence there grew in him a more than humane resolution, accounting himself in this World a God, and thorough this opinion grew into contempt of all good things; compelling such as were his Subjects and Vassals to do him Worship and Reverence as to a Divine Power; which, being ingrafed into the hearts of such as followed in succeeding Ages, they countenanced it with Authority: from whence it came to pass, that he was inrolled into the number of their principal Gods, giving him the name of Sa∣turn, whom the Hebrews called Sudormin, which elegantly implyeth Saturn. Berosus saith, that the Babylonian Iupiter succeeded this Nimrod, whose Au∣thority I am willing to follow, to avoid prolixity. This man so much inlarged the City, that many in succeeding ages have attributed the foundation there∣of unto him. He ruled over it sixty one years. After him succeeded Ninus, or, as some would have it, Nimrod the second; who began his Reign Anno Mundi, 1909, before Christ, 2061: he did many worthy Acts during his life, and added to the Empire of Babylon many Pro∣vinces; and after he had reigned fifty years, dyed, and was buried in Babylon. After him succeeded Semiramis, his Wife, who took upon her the Govern∣ment of the Assyrian Empire, her Son Ninus being then within age, and she began her Government, Anno Mundi, 1959 before Christ, 2009. She was one of the manliest and resolute Women that we read of, and performed as many worthy and memorable Actions. This Queen built her Sepulchre over the most eminent Gate of Babylon, in a publick and perspicious place, upon which she caused to be written in Golden letters, If there be any King of Babylon that shall come after me, and stand in need of Money, let him open this Sepulchre, and what soever he wanteth he shall find: but before, it will not be good
for him to touch it. This notwithstanding, it continued till the Reign of Darius, who opened this Monument in hope to find what the Superscription imported; but no Mony was there to be had, only within might plainly be seen ingraven other Letters to this effect: Vnless thou hadst been untiably Co∣vetous, thou wouldst never have opened the Graves of the Dead in hope of gain. This Woman beautified Babylon with many goodly Buildings, built up the Walls thereof, set a Bridge over Euphrates, made a beautiful Orchard and a Garden in it, beautified it with many goodly Towers and Fortifications, added unto it many Provinces and Governments: and after all, because of her own lascivious Appetite (as Sallust saith) was murthered by her Son Ninus, who succeeded her in the Government. There were many other memorable things within this City, that were built before and after her time (as Herodotus saith) as that great and mighty Tower before remembred, in which stood the Temple of Baelus, and his Se∣pulchre. Not far from that stood a Chappel, wherein was the Statue of Iupiter▪ all of pure Gold, worthWhat this was in our Mony, you may see after. 800 Talents of Gold. Without that Chappel there stood an Altar of pure Gold, upon which they yearly offered 100000 Talents of Frankincense. There was another also somewhat less, upon which they used to offer their Sacrifices; for it was not lawful for them to offer any thing that had life upon the greater Altar: there stood also in that place another Statue twelve cubits high, all of pure Gold. This City was after taken by Cyrus, the first Emperour of the Persians, An. Mundi, 3432. before Christ, 536, in the seventieth year after the Captivity of Israel and Iudah, according to the Prophecy of Ieremy; at which time the City was so great, that they which dwelt in the middle of it did not know that the Enemy had entered within the Walls at the farther end: which might happen, because upon that day when it was taken the Babylonians celebrated a Feast unto Venus, in which using extraordinary diligence, they were less mindful of such things as hapned unto them. Thus this City, that with great Tyranny had triumphed over the Nati∣ons of the earth for the space of 1600 years (being so plentifully furnished with all things necessary for the maintenance of life, that the Inhabitants there∣of contemned all other People) was by God's permission, for their pride and presumption, wasted and consumed by Cyrus, as you have heard: and short∣ly after utterly destroyed by Xerxes, the fourth Emperour of the Persians, and so continueth to this day, as Strabo saith. Where then, O World, is thy Prosperity? or Riches, thy glory? since in the one thou art consumed, in the other lest desolate. Of the Ruines of old Babylon that are extant at this day. BAbylon (which as you have heard reigned over the Nations of the Earth like a Queen) at this day hath nothing to present you withall but an
heap of stones; out of the Ruins whereof there was built a little Town, close by where it stood, called Elugo, or Felugo, scituated upon the Bank of the River Euphrates. Not far from which, it seems there is a profitable Harbour for Ships, where Merchants often times go a shore, and travel thence through many Woods and desart places, unto Seleucia, which at this day is called by the Turks, Bagdeth, distant thence some thirty six miles, and is the utmost Town of the Turkish and Persian Empires towards the East, being divided in the midst by the River Tygris. Some Merchants have reported, That the place where Babylon stood is become stony, unfruitful, and unpleasant, be∣cause of the Ruins of the destroyed buildings which lye in the Earth. Also, That there is found a Tower built of a black stone, which to outward appear∣ance seems to have been a very goodly house, high and eminent; so that upon the top thereof a man might have seen through the whole City. This Tower the Inhabitants of Felugo call the Tower of Daniel, in which was the Chamber where he used to pray to the Lord three times a day, the Windows whereof looked towards Ierusalem, Dan. 6. There is also to be seen divers Arches of the Bridge which Semiramis built, standing upon the River Euphra∣tes, and the foundation of the great Tower whose top should have reached to Heaven; being in compass two miles, but not very high. Within the Ruins whereof are found certain Serpents very noisom and venemous, about the bigness of a Lizard, having three heads, and spect with divers colours, which the Inhabitants call Eglones. There are such a multitude of them, that no man dares approach within half a mile of it any time but in the Winter season, nor then neither but for the space of a Month; in which time these Serpents for the extremity of the cold are constrained to keep their holes. Thus, as this Tower was hateful to God in the beginning, so likewise hath he made it hurtful unto man even to this day. The Travels of the Babylonian and Assyrian Kings and Emerours that fought against Israel and Judah. And first of Phul Belochus, King of Assria. PHul Belochus (that is he returned wasting) began to reign among the Babylonians, Anno Mundi 3149. before Christ 819, and governed forty eight years. This King or Emperour came from Babylon to Samaria, which was 660 miles. There he so streightly besieged Menahem King of Israel, that he was constrained to give himWhat this was in our Mo∣ney, you may see after. 1000 talents of Silver to raise his Siege and depart, 2 Reg. 15. From Samaria he returned back again to Babylon, 660 miles. So all Travels of Phul Belochus were 1320 miles.
The Travels of Tiglat Phulasser King of the Assyrians. TIglat Phulasser signifies, the Assyrian Conquerour. He was also called Tiglath Philasser, 2 Reg. 15. which name is attributed to him, either be∣cause he carried away the Children of Israel captives, or else because of the Conquest that he had of all Galilee, and over the Tribe of Naph∣taly, which he carried into Assyria. He succeeded his father Phul Belochus in the Government of the Assyrians, An. Mundi 3197. before Christ 771. and reign∣ed twenty five years. When Ren King of the Assyrians (joyning his Army with Pekah Son of Remalia King of Israel,) had streightly besieged Ierusalem, Ahaz was constrain∣ed to crave aid of this Tiglath Phulasser, and sent him great Presents, which he accepted kindly, and brought his Army from Niniveh to Damascus, 520 miles; where he put Ren, and the whole City to the Sword, 2 Reg. 16. From Damascus he came with his Army into the land of Israel, which was 120 miles, where he overcame Pekh in a great Battel (conquered all the land of Gilead and the tribe of Naphtaly, and put a great multitude of the Israelites into perpetual Exile; 2 Reg. 15. From thence he went back to Niniveh, 640 miles. A little after this, King Tiglath Phulasser went from Niniveh to Ierusalem, 680 miles, where he so streightly besieged that wicked King Ahaz, that he was constrained to give him great abundance of Gold and Silver to raise his Siege and be gone, 2 Chr. 28. From Ierusalem he returned back to Niniveh, being 680 miles. So all his Travels were 6640 miles. Of the City Niniveh you may read after, in the Travels of Ionas the Prophet. Of Kyr, which is commonly called Cyrene. KYR or Cyrene is scituated in Africa, 816 miles from Ierusalem West∣ward. In which Country Simon that bore the Cross of Christ was born, Mat. 27. Luke 23. It signifies in Hebrew, a strong Wall: and in Latine a Heart The Travels of King Salmanasser. SAlmanasser signifieth, the Assyrian Peace-maker. This man Ptolomaeus (that excellent Mathematician) calleth Nabonasarus, that is, the Pro∣phet of the Assyrians. He began to reign upon the 26 of February, An. Mundi 3221, before Christ 747, and reigned ten years or thereabout. This man went with his Army from Niniveh to Samaria, being 652
miles, where he compelled Hosea, the last King of Israel, to pay him tri∣bute, 2 Reg. 16. From thence he returned back again with his Army to Nineveh, 652 miles. After, when Hosea King of Israel (conspiring with So King of Egypt) de∣nied to pay him Tribute, he returned back again the second time to Sama∣ria, being 652 miles, and after three years siege, he took and destroyed it with Fire and Sword, and conquered all the Countrey round about. From Samaria he returned back again to Nineveh, 652 miles. So all the Travels of Salmanasser King of the Assyrians were 2608 miles. The Travels of Senacharib King of the Assyrians. SEncharib, as Melanthon expounds it, signifieth a two-edged Sword. He succeeded his Father Salmanasser, An. Mund. 3231. before Christ, 737. He reigned seven years. This man, imitating his Father, endea∣voured to carry away the rest of Gods People into Captivity: for which purpose he brought an Army from Nineveh to Lachis, which was 700 miles, which Town he besieged, and sent his Princes to Ierusalem, being twenty miles, where he blasphemed the Lord: of which you may read more in the History of King Hezekiah. From Lachis he went to Libnah, eight miles. This was a strong Hold, but he besieged it so narrowly, that within a while after he had begun the Siege, he took it. While he was before this Town, there came News, that Taracha King of the Ethiopians had invaded his Countrey. Wherefore he sent the second time Messengers to Ierusalem. But the Lord was offended with their blasphemy, wherefore he sent his Angel, who in one Night destroyed 185000 of his Army. This sudden and unexpected evil falling upon him, in a great fear he re∣turned to Niniveh, 692 miles, where he was slain by his Sons in the Temple. The fame of these things was so divulged abroad, that Herodotus, lib. 2. makes mention of them. So these three Journeys make 1400 miles. Of Lachis and Libnah you may read before. Of Assarhaddon King of the Assyrians. ASsarhaddon (his father Senacharib being slain) succeeded in the Go∣vernment, Anno Mundi 3238, which agreeth with the 730 year be∣fore Christ, and reigned ten years in Niniveh, the chief City of the Assyrians. Here again the mutation and change of Kingdoms may
be observed; for Merodach, a Chaldaean, rebelling against Senacharib, continu∣ed his Government in Babylon eleven years, that is, during a part of the Reign of Senacharib, and all the Reign of Assarhaddon his Son; in which time he conquered the Assyrians, and made them subject to the Empire of the Babylonians. Of Merodach, the first Emperour of the Babylonians. MErodach signifieth, a bitter repentance. He was the Son of Baladan, Prince of Babylon, who ruled at such time as Senacharib had that grievous overthrow in Iudah. Wherefore taking advantage of the time, and the necessity of that Prince, he rebelled against him and his Son Assarhaddon taking upon him the absolute command of the City and whole Empire. The beginning of whose Reign happened in the year of the World 3236, and before Christ 732. This Merodach sent to Ierusa∣lem wise and learned men with Gifts and Presents to King Ezekiah, just in that year when the Sun went back ten Degrees, to know the truth of this Miracle. For it was a custom amongst the Nations round about Ierusalem, (if any thing happened beyond the expectation of man) to send thither to inquire the truth thereof. Such and so Wise a People were the Iews esteem∣ed in those times, as may appear by divers places of the Holy Scripture. In the beginning of the twelfth year of this King, Assahaddon Emperour of the Assyrians died; after whose death he became Emperour of all Assyria and Chaldea. He began to reign over that spatious Kingdom, Anno Mundi, 3247, before Christ 721, and reigned after that forty years. Of Ben-Merodach, Emperour of Babylon. BEn-Merodach, that is, the Son of Merodach, succeeded his Father, Anno Mundi, 3287, before Christ 681. He reigned twenty one years. Of Nebuchadnezzar, first of that name, Emperour of Babylon. NEbuchadonezar or Nebuchadnezzar, signifieth a Divine Judge. He was the most potent King of all the Babylonian. This man obtained the chief command over the Babylonians. Empire, Anno Mundi, 3309, before Christ 659. He reigned thirty five years, and held his Court sometime in Babylon, sometimes in Niniveh, Iud. 1. He made War with Pha∣raoh Necho King of Aegypt, of which Battel you may read, 2 Reg. 25. 2 Chr. 35. in the Valley of Megiddo, where Iosias was slain. Herod. lib. 2. doth also make mention of this Battel, and calls the place by the name of Magdalum. Of which
Ieremy also speaketh. But they were Towns in the Tribe of Manasses, scitua∣ted near to the Plain where this Battel was fought: in which Country Mary Magdalen was born. The Travels of Nebuchadnezzar, the second of that name, Emperour of Babylon NEbuchadnezzar, or Nebuchadonozor the Great, which Ptolomaeus calleth Nebupollasser, about the end of the third year of Ioachim King of Iudah (being a little before created Emperour, his Father yet living) came unto Ierusalem, which he besieged so streightly, that he con∣strained Ioachim to pay him Tribute for thirty seven years. Berosus saith, Lib. 3. A little after, that is, Anno Mundi 3344. before Christ, 624, he was sent against the Syrians, Phoenicians, and Aegyptians that rebelled. So he went with his Army from Babylon to Carchemis, a City of Syria, scituated near the River Euphrates, which was 280 miles. Here he overcame Pharaoh-Necho King of Aegypt in a great Battel, Ier. 46. Herod. lib. 2. From Carchemis, he went to Ierusalem, which was 400 miles; here he took Daniel and his companions captive, and brought them to Babylon. After, he went with his Army to Pelusio, being 132 miles, which he took, conquered all the Land of Aegypt, put to death Pharaoh-Necho, and made Psammeticus his Son King in his place. Ieremy the Prophet told of this War, cap. 25. 26. From Pelusio he returned to Babylon, 800 miles. Within a while after, his Father died, and he succeeded in the Government, and reigned forty three years. In the eleventh year of Ioachim King of Iudah, he went again from Ba∣bylon to Ierusalem, which was 680 miles, and by policy took that City, and put Ioachim the King thereof to death, according to the Prophecy of Ieremy, cap. 22. 2 Kin. 24. From thence (after he had made Iechonias his Son King) he returned back again to Babylon, 680 miles. About three Months after, he went the third time back to Ierusalem, 680 miles; for he feared Iechonias would rebell and revenge the death of his Father Ioachim. 2 Kin. 24. In the eighth year of his Reign he took Iechonias, Mardoche, and 3000 other Iews of the Nobility, and carried them captive to Babylon, which was 680 miles, 2 Kin. 2. Chr. 36. Est. 2. Nine years after, he came the fourth time to Ierusalem, being 680 miles, and besieged the City, because of the Impiety and Rebellion of Zedekiah King thereof. During this Siege he took divers Towns, but chiefly Lachis and Aseka, Ier. 34.
But when he understood that Pharaoh was coming with an Army out of Egypt, to rescue Zedekiah, he raised his Camp, and went about eighty miles into the Countrey of Egypt; which Pharaoh hearing, was abashed, and turned back again. In the absence of this Emperour, Ieremy the Prophet being then within the City, having foretold the Destruction thereof, would have fled thence for his better safety, into the Tribe of Benjamin: but by the way he was taken in the Gate of Benjamin, and cast into Prison, Ier. 7. Within a while after, according to the Prophecy of Ieremy, Nebuchadnezzar returned out of the Desart of Sur, whither he went to meet the Aegyptians, be∣ing eighty miles, and utterly destroyed the City of Ierusalem, carrying thence the Vessels and Ornaments of the Temple to Babylon, 2 Kin. 25. 2 Chr. 36. From Ierusalem he went to Riblah, in the Tribe of Naphtaly, eighty miles, where he put out Zedekia's eyes, and kill'd his Children, 2 Kin. 25. From Riblah he carried Zedekiah to Babylon, which was 600 miles; where he died miserably in Prison, 2 Kin. 25. Afterward Nebuchadnezzar went with his Army from Babylon to Tyrus, which he won, and pittifully wasted with Fire and Sword, according to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, cap. 26. being 600 miles. From Tyrus he went to Aegypt, and passed 480 miles through that King∣dom, conquering all the Countries and Provinces as he went along, even the Ammonites, the Moabites, Philistines, Idumaeans, and Aegypt it self, all which Countries he made Tributary to him, Isa. 15, 16, 19. Ier. 46, 47, 48, 49. Ez. 25. 29. From Aegypt he returned to Babel, 960 miles. From that time, till his death, he was Emperour of all those Kingdoms. In the second year of his Empire, Daniel expounded unto him his wonder∣ful Dream, under the similitude of an Image, setting forth the condition of the four Monarchies of the World, Dan. 2. Not long after, he caused Sidrack, Misack, and Abednego to be cast in a Fiery Furnace, because they refused to worship the golden Image which he had set up; Dan. 3. Also this Nebuchad∣nezzar, for his great Pride and Arrogancy, was by God strucken mad, and into a deep melancholy, in which disease he continued for the space of seven years, tied in Bonds and Chains, running up and down like a Beast, and seeding upon Grass and Roots; until he came to understand, that God the Governour of Heaven and Earth, had the disposing of Kingdoms and Go∣vernments, giving them to whom he list, and again taking them away. At the end of which time he was restored again to his understanding and Em∣pire: and after beautified the City of Babylon with many goodly Buildings, fair Orchards, and pleasant places, as Iosep. lib. Ant. 10. aith. And when he had reigned forty three years died, and was buried by his Father in Babylon, An. Mundi 3387. and before Christ 581. So all the Travels of Nebuchadono∣zor, or Nebuchadnezzar, were 7892 miles.
The Description of the Cities and Places that have not as yet been mentioned. Of Carchemis. THIS was a City in the Country of Syria near Euphrates, 400 miles from Ierusalem North-ward, and signifies, A sacrificed Lamb; being de∣rived of Car, which signifies a Ram or Lamb, and Mosch, He hath cut in pieces. It may also be taken in the third Conjugation, for a Lamb sacrifi∣ced to the Idol Chemosch or Chamos, the God of Meetings, or nightly Salu∣tations. Of Pelusio. THIS City Peluso was built by Peleus the Father of Achilles, from whence it took the name. It stands in Egypt, some 172 miles from Ierusalem South-westward, near to the Gate of Nilus called Pelusiachus, where it fall∣eth into the Mediterranean Sea. Not far from this City, in the Mountain Casius, upon the Borders of Arabia-Petraea (where the Temple of Iupiter Ca∣sius stood) is to be seen the Tomb of Pompey the Great, beautified and adorned by Adrianus Caesar, as Capitolinus saith. At this day this City is called by the name of Damiata. You may read of it, Ezek. cap. 30. Of Tyrus, or Zor. TYrus signifieth Cheese, or to congeal together, as Cheese doth of milk; something alluding to the Hebrew word Zor, signifying to make strait, or a Rock having a strait and sharp Edge. It was the Metropolitan City of Phoenicia, now the Haven or Passage of Sur: but in ancient time it was called Sarra, Aul. Gel. lib, 14. cap. 6. It was scituated upon a very high Rock, compassed about with the Mediterranean Sea, 100 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and a famous Mart Town for all the Holy Land. By the description of Ezekiel it seems to have been like unto Venice, both in Scituation and Dignity, Ez. 27. Ierem. 28. Esay 27. 28. and many other Prophets prophesied against this Town, saying, Out of the Land of Kithim (that is, from Macedonia) the Destroyer of Tyrus should come. As after hapned: for, Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, besieged that Town, and in the seventh Month after took it; for the obtaining whereof, he was constrained to fill up the Sea which compassed it about, containing 700 Paces, and made it firm Land for his Army to pass upon to the Walls of the City. In this Country that famous Civilian Vlpian was born, as he writeth, lib. 1. ff. de Censibus. And upon the Borders of Tyrus and Sidon Christ cured the Daughter of a Canaanitish Woman, of a Devil, Mat. 15. Wherefore you shall read more of it in the second Tomb.
Of Evil Merodach, Emperour of the Babylonians and Assyrians. AMilinus Evil-Merodach, Son of Nebuchadonosor the Great, succeeded his Father, An. Mun. 3388. before Christ, 580. In the first year of his Reign he set at liberty Iechonias King of Iuda, and attributed to him the Title, Dignity, and Maintenance of a King, Iechonias being then fifty five years of age, and thirty seven after he had been in Cap∣tivity, 2 King. ult. Ier. ult. Whence it is concluded by most, That this Em∣perour did also embrace the Doctrine of Daniel, concerning the true God, as did Nebuchadonosor his Father; who had before by publick Edict professed it to the whole State, and caused it to be published through his Dominions, and therefore shewed favour and mercy toward King Iechonias. And from thence it is thought, that those which were impious Princes about him, cal∣led him Amelinus, that is, the Circumcised; being derived of Mol, which sig∣nifies to circumcise, and Evil, simple and foolish Merodach. His Wife's name was Nitocris, according to Herod. lib. 1. She was a very magnificent and wise Woman, set up many fair and goodly Buildings in Babylon, and was the Mother of Balthasar, the last Emperour of the Assyrians, Dan. 5. Of Niriglissoroor Emperour of Babylon. NIriglissoroor (whose Syrname was Regassa) Son-in-law to Nebuchad∣nezzar the Great, having slain Evil-Merodach, his Wifes Brother, reigned over the Babylonians and Assyrians four years, as Berosus saith. Of Labassardach, the last Emperour of the Babylnians. LAbassardach, the Son of Niriglissoroor, succeeded his Father▪ He reiged only nine months, and died without Heir male. Of Balthazar Nabonidus, the last Emperour of the Babylonians and Assyrians. ANno Mundi, 3415, and before Christ, 553, Balthazar Nabonidus, whose Sirname was Labynitus, the Son of Evil-Merodach and Nitocris, ob∣tained the Empire, and reigned seventeen years, according to Bero∣sus; with Ioseph. cont. App. Alexand. Polyb. apud Eusebium, Praep. lib, 9. l. 4. Alphae. Hist. with Euseb. calleth this King Nabinidochus. This is that Balthazar (saith
Iosephus, lib. Ant. 10. cap. 13.) which Daniel, cap. 5. calleth the Son of Ne∣buchadonosor, though indeed he was but his Son's Son, as may be gathered from that of Ier. cap. 25. All Nations shall serve Nebuchadonosor, and his Son, and his Son's Son. Blthasar signifies, The Host of the Lord destroying his Enemies. Laby∣nitus signifies, a shaken Sword. This man, as he was celebrating a great Feast unto Venus, (whom they call in the Assyrian Tongue Myleta) amongst a great multitude of his Nobility, and in that using extraordinary Excess and Blasphemy against the Lord; in the midst of his Feast and all his Mer∣riments, he saw a hand writing upon the Wall, which left these Words, Mene, Mene, Tekel Vpharsin, of which you may read more, Dan. 5. Some say, That at this very time the City was taken by Cyrus, Emperour of the Persians, and he put to the Sword in those Sports and Pastimes. But certain it is, that he was slain at a Banquet, lost his Empire, and was the last of the Assyrian Emperours: but whether at that time, I refer it to the opinion of the Reader. The Travels of the Kings of Aegypt that fought against the Kings of Judah. And first of Sisack, who made War upon Rehoboam the Son of Solomon. THAT proud and presumptuous Prince Sisack (which signifies a Gar∣ment of Silk) in the last year of his Reign (which was the first of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon) came with 1200 Chariots and 60000 Horse, from Memphis to Ierusalem, which was 244 miles; bring∣ing in his Army a great Multitude of People of divers Nations, as Lybians, Ethiopians, &c. With this Company he besieged Ierusalem, and took it, wasted the City, spoiled the Temple, and took thence the golden Shields which Solomon had made, and destroyed that fair and beautiful house which Solomon had built. From whence that Saying of his own was verified, Eccles. That it is a great Evil upon the Earth, for a man to take care to lay up Riches and Treasures in this World, yet knoweth not who shall inherit it. For those things which a little before he had with great Labour and Pains builded and beautified, within less than twenty Years after, were destroyed and made desolate by this King. From Ierusalem, Sisack returned with the Spoils of the Temple and City, to Memphis in Aegypt, which was 244 miles, and in the Year following he was stricken by the Lord with a grievous Disease, of which he died mise∣rably. So these two Journeys were 488 miles.
The Travels of Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, who made War upon Josiah King of Judah. NECHO signifies an Enemy or Invader. This man was one of the greatest of all the Egyptian Kings, who, in the thirteenth year of his Reign made War upon Nebuchadnezzar the first, and in the Val∣ley of Megiddo, near to Magdala, 244 miles from Memphis, fought a great Battel, wherein Iosiah King of Iudah was wounded to death. From the Valley of Megiddo, Pharaoh Necho went to the River Euphrates, 360 miles, where he fought a second Battel with Nebuchadnezzar, upon a Plain near to Carchemis, where he lost the day, and was put to flight. From Carchemis he fled to Riblah, in the Land of Israel, being 320 miles; where, in the Land of Chaemath, near to the Lake Samachonites, he overcame King of Iudah, and took him Prisoner. From Riblah, Pharaoh Necho led Ioachas bound to Ierusalem, 80 miles, and made Ioachim his Brother King in his place. From Ierusalem he returned to Memphis, 240 miles. Within four years after, he went the second time with a great Army from Memphis to the River Euphrates, 640 miles. But there he was the second time overcome by Nebuchadnezzar, and con∣strained to fly thence back again to Memphis in Egypt, being 640 miles. But Nebuchadnezzar followed him with an Army of chosen men, and conquer∣ed all Egypt, took Pharaoh Necho, and made his Son Psammeticus King in his place, who was the second of that name. Of this Battel there is mention, Ier. ca. 25. 26. So all the Travels of Pharaoh Necho were 1524 miles. The Travels of the Holy Prophets: and first, of the Prophet Eliah. ELIAH the Prophet went from Thisbe (which was in the Land of Gi∣lead) to Samaria, twenty four miles, where he told the wicked King Ahab, that there should be neither Rain nor Dew for the space of se∣ven years, 1 Reg. 17. From Samaria he went to the River erith, twenty four miles, where he was fed by a Raven. From Kerith he went to Sarepta, being an hundred miles, where he so∣journed with a poor Widow that found him Necessaries, whose Son he resto∣red to Life, 1 Reg. 17. From Sarepta he went to Mount Carmel in the Land of Israel, being six∣ty miles; and by the way as he went he met Obadiah (which signifieth, the
Servant of the Lord) and King Ahab, whom he rebuked sharply because of his Idolatry. Also upon this Mountain he put all Bal's Priests to death, and prayed unto the Lord, who sent Rain upon the Earth in great abun∣dance, 1 Reg. 18. From Mount Carmel he ran by King Ahab's Chariot to Iezreel, which was accounted 16 miles. After, when Queen Iesabel threatned his Death, he departed thence, and went to Beersaba, eighty four miles, 1 Reg. 19. From Beersaba he went one dayes Jouney into the Wilderness of Paran, because he thought to remain there safe from the mischief of Iesabel, which vvas tvventy miles from Beersaba, Southvvard. Here the Angel of the Lord brought him meat as he vvas sitting under a Juniper-tree, 1 Reg. 19. By vertue of this meat, Eliah travelled from thence to Mount Horeb, or Sinai, eighty miles; and continued there forty dayes and forty nights, vvith∣out meat or drink. There the Lord spake to Eliah, as he stood in the n∣trance of a Cave, his Face being covered vvith his Mantle, 1 Reg. 19. From the Mount Sinai or Horeb, he returned to Abel-Mehola, being 156 miles, vvhere he called Elizeus the Son of Saphas to the Ministerial Functi∣on, and Office of a Prophet, 1 Reg. 18. From thence he vvent to Damascus, 124 miles, vvhere he anointed Hazael King of Syria, 1 Reg. 19. From Damscus, Elias vvent to Mount Carmel, vvhere he dvvelt, vvhich vvas accounted 120 miles. From Mount Carmel he vvent to Iezreel, sixteen miles; there, in the Vineyard of Naboth, (whom Iezabel caused to be stoned to death) he sharp∣ly reprehended Ahab for his Impiety and Idolatry, 1 Reg. 21. From Iezreel he returned back again to his own House to Carmel, six∣teen miles. From thence he went to Samaria, which was thirty two miles, where he answered the Servants of King Ahaziah, whom he had sent to enquire of Balzebub, the Idol of Ekron, concerning his health, saying, Go and tell your Master that sent you, That the God of Israel saith, Because thou hast sent to ask counsel of Baalzebub, the Idol of Ekron, and thinkest there is no God in Israel, therefore thou shalt not rise off the Bed whereon thou liest, but shalt surely dye, 2 Reg. 1. Soon after, Elias returned to Mount Carmel, being 32 miles; where the two Captains with their Companies of fifty that were sent to take him, were consumed with fire from Heaven, 1 Reg. 1. From Mount Carmel he went to Samaria with the third Captain, thirty two miles, where he prophecied of the death of King Ahaziah, 2 Reg. 1. From Samaria he returned back again to Mount Carmel, thirty two miles. From thence he went to Gilgal, fifty two miles.
From Gilgal he went with Elizeus to the Town of Bethel, being six miles, 2 Reg. 2. From thence to Iericho, four miles, 2 Reg. 2. From Iericho he and Elizeus went to Iordan, which was six miles, through which River they went upon dry ground. Now as they were speaking one to another, upon the East-side of the River, behold a fiery Chariot came with fiery Horses, and took Elias up alive into Heaven, after he had go∣verned the Church thirty years, An. Mundi, 3056, and before Christ, 912. 2 Reg. 2. So all the Travels of Eliah the Prophet were 1033 miles. Of the Cities and Places to which he travelled. Of Thisbe. IN this Town the Prophet Eliah was born, it being scituated in the Land of Gilead beyond Iordan, 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. It taketh the Name from Captivity; being derived of Chabah, he hath led into Captivity. Of Kerith. THE River Kerith (where the Ravens fed Elias runneth from Mount Ehraim between Bethel and Iericho, eight miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North, and so passing along towards the East, falleth into the River Iordan, 1 Reg. 17. The Kerethites were such as guarded the Person of the King, which in the Prophet David's time were called mighty men; taking their name from striking and cutting, being derived of Charath, he hath smitten, or cut in sunder. Of Zarpath, or Sarepta. THIS was a City of the Sidonians, where they found much Metal of di∣vers kinds; lying between Tyrus and Sidon, 112 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and taketh the name from Zoraph, which signifies, To try, or burn with Fire. There is at this time but eight Houses in all the Town, although by the Ruines it seemeth to have been in times past a ve∣ry fair City. The Inhabitants thereof take upon them to shew the Cham∣ber wherein Elias the Prophet sometimes lived, when he raised the Wi∣dows Child to Life. Before the Gate of the City also there is shewed a cer∣tain Chappel, where (they say) Elias first spake with the Widow, 1 Reg. 17. Of Abelmehola. THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Manasses, on this side Iordan in the mid-way between Sichem and Salem, some 38 miles from Ierusalem
Northward. At this day it is called Abisena; where there are found certain ruines of Marble Pillars, by which may be gathered, that in times past it hath been a very beautiful City. It seemeth to have taken the name from a great lamentation or mourning: for Abel signifieth to lament and bewail; and Machol, a company. The Typical Signification of Elias. Elias, according to the Interpretation of St. Ierome, signifies, the Minister of Iehovah: but as others would have it, Eliah, is as much as, my God Iehovah. He was a Type of St. Iohn Baptist, who was sent before to prepare the way of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Of this you may read more Malach. 4. Matt. 11, 17. Isa. 40. &c. The Travels of the Prophet Elisaeus, or Elisha. ELisha followed Elias through divers Countries, and became as it were his Servant, pouring Water upon his hands, and ministring to him, 1 Reg. 19. 2 Reg. 3. Elisha went with Eliah from Gilgal to Bethel, which was six miles, 1 Reg. 19. From Bethel they both went to Iericho, which was four miles. From Iericho he went beyond Iordan, six miles; where his Master was ta∣ken from him up into Heaven, and his Spirit was doubled upon him, 2 Reg. 2. From thence he returned back again to Iericho, which was six miles, passing through the River Iordan upon dry ground; by which Miracle the Children of the Prophets (viz. such as studied Divinity at Iericho) did certainly know that the Spirit of his Master Elias rested upon him. Near to this Town, he lung Salt into a River, by which the Water was made sweet, 2 Reg. 2. From Iericho, Elisha returned to Bethel, which was four miles: here the Children that mock'd him, saying, Come up thou Bald-pate, &c. in contempt of his Age and Office, were devoured by two Bears, 2 Reg. 2. From Bethel he walked to Mount Carmel, which was fifty six miles. From thence he went to Samaria, which was about thirty two miles. From thence he went to the three Kings, viz. Ioram King of Israel, Iehosa∣phat King of Ierusalem, and the King of the Idumaeans, into the Desart of Ara∣bia-Petraea, which was 104 miles: here he prayed unto the Lord, and he sent them Water, lest they should have perished with thirst, 2 Reg. 3.
From the Desart of Arabia-Petraea he returned back to Samaria, which was 104 miles, where he relieved a certain Widow-woman that was affli∣cted with Poverty and Want, miraculously, by a Cruse of Oyl, 2 Reg. 4. Iosephus lib. Antiq. 9. supposeth this Woman to be the Widow of Obediah the King's Steward; of whom you may read before, who did hide and maintain a certain number of the Prophets of the Lord in a Cave, 2 Reg. 18. From Samaria, Elisha went otentimes to a Town called Sunem, as he returned to Samaria to Carmel, which was 16 miles distant. Here a certain rich Woman observing his often Passage to and fro by that Town, built him a little Chamber wherein he might rest himself after his Journey; to which place he often resorted, and in recompence of this benefit (al∣though she had been long barren) he prophecied, that within a Year she should have a Son, which accordingly she had, to her great Joy and Com∣fort, 2 Reg. 4. From Sunem he went to Carmel, being 16 miles. From thence he returned back again to Sunem, to the Woman where he used to lie, which was 16 miles: here he restored her Son to Life, 2 Reg. 4. From thence he went to Gilgal, which is distant from Sunem thirty six miles towards the South: here he fed 100 men with twenty Barley loaves, 2 Reg. 4. From Gilgal he went to Samaria, which is accounted twenty miles: to this place Naaman the Syrian came to him to be healed of his Leprosie, 2 Reg. 5. From Samaria he went to Iordan, which was eight miles; Here he made a Hatchet of Iron that fell into the Water, to swim, 2 Reg. 6. From Iordan he went to Dothan, where the Children of Iacob sold their Brother Ioseph to the Midianites, which was eight miles; here the Angels of the Lord compassed him and his Servant about, lest they should have been taken by the Army of the Syrians, and God struck the Syrians with Blindness, 2 Reg. 6. From thence he led the Army of the Syrians (being thus made blind) to Samaria, being twelve miles, and delivered them to the King of Israel, upon condition that he should give them Meat and Drink to refresh them∣selves and suffer them to depart in Peace, which he did, 2 Reg. 6. From Samaria he went to Sunem, which was sixteen miles; here he ad∣vised the Woman where he used to lye, to travel thence to some other Place, because of the Famine that should follow, and continue for seven years, 2 Reg. 8. From Sunem he went Damascus, being 132 miles: there he told Hazael, that he should succeed his Master Benhadad in the Government of the Sy∣rians, 2 Reg. 8.
From Damascus he returned to Samaria, which was 132 miles, where soon after he fell sick and died; his body was buried near to Samaria, where the Lord a long time after his Death shewed a wonderful Miracle; for a dead man being thrown into his Sepulchre, was restored again to life by touching of his Bones, 2 Reg. 13. This man governed the Church of God amongst the Children of Israel sixty years after the death of Elias. So all the Travels of Elisha were 730 miles. Concerning the Towns and places mentioned in his Travels, you may read before. The Typical Signification of Elisha. ELisha or Elischa signifieth, the Salvation of God; being derived of El, that is, God; and Iaschag, he hath saved: from hence Jesus, a Saviour; be∣cause this Prophet was a notable Type of our Saviour Jesus Christ: for as Elisha was anointed Priest by the Prophet Eliah; so Christ was the anointed Priest of the Father: and as Elisha did many works of Mercy and Miracles, to make evident Gods Power and Providence; so our Saviour Christ went from place to place, shewing mercy to the blind, lame, and impotent, upon them working wonderful Miracles, that thereby his doctrine might be made e∣vident to the World, and all such as trust in him, be made capable of eternal happiness. The Travels of the Shunamite, whose Son, Elisha had raised from Death to Life. FRom Sunem she went to Mount Carmel, and besought Elisha to come and raise her Son from Death to Life; which was sixteen miles, 2 Reg. 4. From thence she and Elisha returned back again to Sunem, which was sixteen miles; and there he delivered her Son unto her alive, 2 Reg. 4. From Sunem (having buried her Husband) she travelled into the Land of the Philistines, because of the Famine that was to come suddenly after, being fifty six miles, 2 Reg. 8. From the Land of the Philistines, she returned to Samaria, which was forty miles, 2 Reg. 8. From Samaria she returned to Sunem, which was sixteen miles. So all her Travels were 144 miles. Of the Prophet Isaiah or Jesaia. JEsaia, or Ieschaia, is all one in signification with Elisha, that is, a Saviour. He was the Son of Amos (which signifieth, strength) and by con∣sequence,
Ozia King of Iudah was his Cousin-German, as may appear by this Genealogy following. Iosas King ofIuda. Amasiah King of Iuda. Ozias King of Iuda. Iotham King of Iuda. Ahas King of Iuda. Ezekias King of Iuda. Manasses King of Iuda, who caused Isaiah to be slain. Amos, Isaias Father. Isaias had two Daughters, Sear Iasub, that is, the rest remai∣ning: and was a sign of the rest of the Po∣sterity of Iuda that should re∣main and dwell there, Isa. 7. Mahez Schatal, that is, a sudden Destru∣ction: for this second Daughter of Isay did denote the im∣mediate Desolation of the Kingdoms of Syria and Sa∣maria. From whence it plainly appeareth, that the Prophet Esaias was of the stock of David, and lineage of Christ; for which cause, in the fifth Chapter of his Prophecy, he calleth him his beloved. He began to teach publick∣ly in the year of the World, 3167▪ and before Christ 800. and governed the Church eighty years and more, until the time of Manasses, who caused him to be cut in pieces with a Saw. In Anno Mundi 3190. before Christ 778. Isay saw the Lord sitting upon a high Throne in great Majesty, the lower part whereof filled the Temple, and the Seraphins compassed him round about, Esa. 6. Cherubins are glo∣rious and bright shining Angels, of a fiery nature: for Saraph signifieth, He hath turned to Fire. His Doctrine was twofold, that is, partly concerning the Law, partly the Gospel, as may appear by his Prophesie; in the first forty Chapters whereof, the Doctrine of the Law is set orth, with sharp Reprehensions for Sin: in the first four of which, are grievous Accusations of Sinners for breach of the first Commandment; the other, for the most part, prophecy of hor∣rible Punishments, Mutations, and Change of Government; but principal∣ly, of the Iews, Babylonians, Assyrians, Syrians, and Aegyptians. From the ortieth to the end of the Book, is contained the Doctrine of the Gospel, and of the Kingdom of our Saviour Jesus Christ; which he hath set forth with such excellent Eloquence, Figures, and Amplifications, that he may be compared with the best Orator that ever wrote.
The Travels of the Prophet Jeremias. or eremiah, signifieth, The exalted of the Lord: he was born in the Tribe of Benjamin, in a City of the Priests called Anathoth, and from thence came to Ierusalem, being two miles, and continued there for forty years, teaching and prophecying. From Ierusalem he was sent to Euphrates, where, in the cliff of a Rock, he hid his Girdle, Ier. 13. being 400 miles. From the River Euphrates he returned back again to Ierusalem, 400 miles. A little after, the Lord sent him back again to Euphrates,(400 miles) to fetch his Girdle, and le it was putrefied. From thence he returned back again the second time to Ierusalem, 400 miles. From Ierusalem he was led captive bound in Chains, with other Prison∣ers, to Ramath, a City in Mount Ephraim, being eight miles; there Nabu∣zaradan, the chief Captain, caused him to be set at Liberty. From Ramath he went to Mispah, which is eight miles; where he conti∣nued a while with Gediliah Prince of the Iews, which man had the chief command of certain Cities of Iudaea under Nabuchadnezzar. But in the seventh Year of the Captivity of the people of Israel, Ishmael that was of the Stock and Progeny of David, (hoping to obtain the Go∣vernment of Iuda) made War upon Gediliah, and put him to Death; wherefore Ieremy went from thence with Iohn the Son of Kareach, Prince of the Iews, to Bethlem Euphrata, eight miles, Ier. 41. Now when he had stayed a while in a Village near Bethlem, called Geruth Chimeham, where sometime Chimeham the Son of Barzilla lived, 2 Sam. 19. he prophesied, saying, If you stay in this Land you shall do well, neither shall any Evil happen unto you; but if you depart hence into Aegypt, they shall devour you with Famine and with the Sword, Jer. 42. But Iohn and the rest of the Princes would give no credit to the words of Ieremy, but went into Aegypt, and compelled the Prophet to go along with them: so they went from Bethlehem to Tachpanes, which was 172 miles. Here the second time Ieremy prophesied unto them, saying, Behold, Nebu∣chadnezzar shall come hither and wast and destroy all the Country of Aegypt, beat down the Images of Bethsemes, (or Heliopolis) and carry away the Aegy∣ptians into perpetual Captivity, Jer. 43. But the People of Israel being moved to Anger because of his Words, stoned him to death. So the Travels of the Prophet Ieremiah were 1786 miles. Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in the Travels of this Prophet, you may read of them before, except Geruth-Chimeham, which
stood close by Bethlehem. It taketh the name from a Stranger or Traveller being derived of Gor, which signifieth, He hath travelled; and Tachpanes which was a City of Egypt, some 180 miles from Ierusalem; where the Pro∣phet Ieremy was stoned to death; it is oftentimes called the name of Taphniis. The Travels of Urijah the Prophet. URIAS, or Vriah, signifies, Illuminated, or inlightned of the Lord. He was born at Kirjath-jearim, a mile from Ierusalem towards the West: from thence he came to Ierusalem, and there prophesied of the Destruction of the City. After, when King Ioachim went about to take away his Life, he fled thence into Egypt, 160 miles. But the King sent Messengers into Egypt, and fetch'd Vrijah back again to Ierusalem, and hundred and sixty miles, and there cut off his head, and caused his Body to be thrown into the Sepulchre of a poor despised man, that it might not be known that he had been a Prophet of the Lord. So all his Travels were 321 miles. Of Hananias the false Prophet. HAnanias, or Chanania signifieth, the Grace of God. This false Pro∣phet was a Gibeonite, and came from Gibeon to Ierusalem, which was four miles; where he took the woodden yoaks from the neck of Ieremiah the Prophet: but Ieremiah caused Iron Yoaks to be made in their places, and told Hananias, that for his falshood, that year he should surely dye, as after he did. Of the Prophet Ezekiel. EZekiel or Iechezkel, signifies the Strength or Fortitude of God. He was carried captive, with 3000 others of the Nobility of the Iews, from Ierusalem to Babylon, which was 680 miles, the same year that Nebuchadnezzar put King Ioachim to death: Within five years af∣ter, (a little before Easter) the Book of the Law was found, 2 Chron. 3. He began to prophesie in Babylon, Anno Mundi 3356, before Christ, 612; at which time he saw his first Visions, near to the River Chebar.
Of the River Chebar. THE River Chebar was near Babylon in Chaldaea (upon the borders of Me∣sopotamia, falling into Euphrates; and was often times called Aborras, according to the opinion of many learned men. Strabo in the sevententh Book of his Geography saith, that there is another River between Tygris and Euphrates, called Basilius: Aborras passeth along by the City of Athemusia, and is a very fair stream, from whence it is called Chebar, which signifies, a swift and spacious River. Near to this River the Prophet Ezekiel saw the Glory and Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ, in a bright shining Cloud. In this place also dwelt many Iews, to whom he prophecied and foretold the Destruction of Ierusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and the captivity of Zedekiah. The Travels of the Prophet Daniel. DAniel signifies, the Judge of God. In the reign of Ioachim King of Iudh, he was carried away captive from Ierusalem to Babylon, by Nabuchadonozor, which was 680 miles, and there with his fellows learned the Arts and Language of the Chaldeans, for three years. He was then but young, about some nineteen or twenty years of age, and lived in Exile ninety one years, until the third year of Cyrus Emperour of the Persians, about which time he saw his last Vision, and a little after died, when he was about 110 years of age, as may be gathered by the Circumstan∣ces of Histories and Times. From Babylon he went to Susan in Persia, Anno Mundi, 3418, and before Christ, 540, being then ninety four years of age, which was 252 miles, where, near to the Flood Eulaeus, he had a Vision of a Ram and a Goat; which set forth the state of the second Monarchy (which was that of the Graecians.) In this Vision Gabriel the Arch-Angel, appeared to Daniel, Dan. 8. This was in the third year of King Balthasar. From Susan, Daniel returned to Babylon, which was 252 miles; here he in∣terpreted to Balthasar the meaning of these words, Mene, Mene, Tekel Euphar sin, Dan. 5. From Babylon he went to the River Tygris or Hidekel, which was thirty six miles: here, in the third year of Cyrus King of Persia, he saw his last Vision, which is described in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Chapters of his Prophecy. From Tygris, he returned to his own house at Babylon, which was thirty six miles. Sometimes also in his three last years of his life, he used to goe to Egbatan, the Metropolitan City of the Medes, which was accounted 464 miles from Babylon, towards the North-East: Here Daniel built a fair and and artificial Temple, so strongly, that it remained unperished, and retain∣ed
the ancient beauty many Ages, to the great admiration of all the Spe∣ctators: In it the Kings of the Medes, Persians, and Parthians, were for the most part honourably buried: the Government whereof was committed to a Priest of the Iews, as Iosephus saith, lib. Antiq. 10. cap. 4. From Egbatan, he returned back again to Babylon, which was. 464 miles, and there died, Anno Mundi, 3445, and before Christ, 533. So all the Tra∣vels of the Prophet Daniel were 2184 miles. Of the Places to which he travelled. Of Susan. SVsa, or Susan, is so called from a sweet smelling Flower; but chiefly a Rose, or a Lilly, because it is scituated in a fair and pleasant place. It was a goodly City, lying on both sides the River Eulaeus, some 200 furlongs (that is twenty five miles English) about, as Polycletus saith. And of this City all the Country round about is called Susana: bordering towards the North upon Assyria, towards the West upon Babylon, towards the South upon the Gulph of Persia, and joyneth upon the East part of Persia towards the East. There are but two Cities that are eminent in it, that is this, and another called Tariana. The Air in the Winter season is very temperate, at which time the Earth bringeth forth many pleasant Flowers and Fruits; but in the Summer it is extream hot; by which heat all things are scorched and burned away, and by reason of the Putrefaction of the Air (as some think) in that Season, there do breed Toads, Lyzards, and other Noysome Serpents in great abundance: so that the Inhabitants are constrained (partly because of the heat, partly because of the loathsome and dangerous Creatures) to build their Houses all of Earth, long and narrow, the Walls and Roofs being at least a yard thick, that so the heat might not pierce through them, or Serpents breed in them, Strabo, lib. Geograph. 5. saith, that one Tython (the Brother of Laomedon King of Troy.) did first build this City, about such time as Thol judged Israel. After him his Son Memnon beautified it with a fair and good∣ly Castle, calling it after his own name, Memnon.(Of this man Homer speaketh.) This Castle was such a goodly thing, that a long time after his death, the Town was called Memnon, as Strabo observeth: but in Hester and Daniels's times, it was called Susa, and the Inhabitants Susans. The Persian Empe∣rors in those times keeping their Courts there for the most part, and did greatly beautifie the City with many fair Buildings. The first of these Emperours that dwelt there was Cyrus, who, after he had con∣quered Babylon, Assyria, and many other Kingdoms and Countries lying near to the City Susa; that he might with more ease and better safe∣ty retain them in his Government, removed his Court from Persepo∣lis, which lay up in the East part of Persia) to this Town, where all
the Winter season, for the most part, he lived, and in the Summer went to gbatan, the chief City of Media, because there, at that season, the Air was very temperate: His Successors after him observing the same course for their bet∣ter conveniency, and to make evident their greater magnificence, repaired the Castle of Memnon, joyned to it many fair and goodly Buildings, and close by it planted a pleasant Orchard of diverse and sundry sorts of Trees and Herbs. It is reported, that the Gate whereby they entred into this Orchard, was very curiously built, supported with Pillars of polished Marble, imbossed with Silver and Gold, very rare to look upon: over it was a banquetting-house, beautified with lively pictures, costly furniture, and Beds of Gold and Silver, covered with rich Tapestry, wrought with Silk, Silver, and Gold; upon these they used to eat their Banquets: it was paved with Porphire, Mar∣ble and Hyacinths, in such ort, as it greatly delighted such as beheld it. The Queen had a private Garden to her self; in which were great abundance of Trees of divers kinds, and many sweet Flowers and Herbs: In which Gar∣den Ahashuerus walked to qualifie the heat of his wrath that he had conceived against that wicked and perfidious Haman, who through envy and ambition sought the destruction of the whole Nation of the Iews; let by giving place un∣to anger, he should transgress the bounds of Clemency and Justice: where∣fore it becometh every King, Prince, and Judge, to imitate the example of this Emperour, who, in the heat of his anger, would determine nothing of so wicked a man: for long and often deliberation becometh every wise man before he doth any thing, Est. 7. Not far from the Emperour's Palace, in a fair and pleasant Garden, there stood a Colledge of the Magi, that is, such as the Persians accounted wise and learned men: these were of such account for their knowledge and understand∣ing amongst that People, that some of them in succeeding ages were chosen for Kings and Governours in that Country. They studied for the most part the Mathematicks, History, Philosophy, and Divinity, and, as many have thought, the Prophecies of Daniel, Ezekiel, and others: wherefore, as is said before, many are of opinion, that the Wise men which came into Iudaea to see Christ, were of this Colledge and Town, because it stood East from Ieru∣salem. It is at this day called Cusistane, as Ortelius and Sebastian Munster wit∣ness, and in their times was under the Government of one Caliphus, Empe∣rour of the Saracens. This Caliphus was strongly besieged by one Allan the great, King of Tartaria, in this Town, Anno. Dom. 1250. But because of his exceeding Covetousness and Parcimony, he lost the City and was fa∣mished to death. Of the River Eulaeo. ULai, which Stra. li. 15. calleth Eulaea, passed through the City, of Susa, and, as Pliny saith, lib. 6. cap. 27. took the beginning at Media, and so fell into a hole or Cavern of the Earth, and passed under the ground, till
it came near to the City Susa, where it brake forth again, and compassed about the Tower of Susa, and a Temple in the City dedicated to Diana. The Inhabitants hold this River in great estimation, insomuch as the Kings drink of no other Water, and for that purpose carry it a great way. Strabo, according to the Testimony of Polycletus, saith, That there are two other Ri∣vers of good account, which pass through Persia, viz. Choases and Ty∣gris, but neither of them are in like estimation as this is. Of Elam. PErsia in antient times was called after this name, from Elam the Son of Sem. But after Perseus had obtained a large and spacious Government in that Country, it was after his name called Persia. Elam signifieth, a Youth, or a young man. Of Egbatana, or Egbatan. THIS is the Metropolitan City of the Medes, and is distant from Ierusalem 1136 miles towards the North-West, built by Deioce King of the Medes, as Herod. l. 2. saith. Here Daniel built a fair Temple, of which you may read more in his Travels. Of this Town you may read more in the Travels of Iudith. The Typical Signification of Daniel. DAniel signifies, the Iudge of God: typically representing Christ who is appointed by that eternal Iehovah to be Judge of all things both quick and dead, and rescueth his Church, which is (as a Rose compassed about with Thorns) oppressed with the Tyranny and cruelty of Evil and wicked men, casting those false Judges and merciless Governours into eternal Exile and the Pit Destruction. And, as the Prophet was innocently condemned, cast into the Lions den, and had the door sealed upon him, and, to the judg∣ment of man, no hope of life, or means to escape was left him, yet, by the Pro∣vidence of God was delivered out of this danger, and came thence safe and untouch'd, Dan. 6. so our Saviour was innocently condemned, cast into the Grave, sealed up among the dead, and to common judgment, left as a man out of mind; yet early in the morning, at the appointed time, by the Power of his Deity, he raised himself up from this Pit of Hell (the Grave) and glo∣riously triumphed over it and death. Of the Prophet Hosea. THIS Prophet Hosea was born in a Town called Bemeloth, or Beth∣meloth, (as Dorothes sometime Bishop of Tyre saith) which was a Town in the Tribe of Issachar, not far from Bethulia, some fifty two miles from Ierusalem toward the North, near to which place Holo∣fernes
afterward pitched his Tents, extending thence to the Field of Esdre∣lon, and the Town Chelmon, from whence it seemeth this Town taketh the Name. He prophesied in Israel eight hundred years before Christ; his name ignifieth, a Saviour, being derived of Hoschiag, the third Conjuga∣tion of Iaschag, that is, He hath saved, Mat. 2. Of the Prophet Joel. JOEL signifies God's own, as St. Ierom expoundeth it. He prophesied eight hundred Years before Christ, both in Israel and in Iudah. He was born in a Village which was called Bahomeron, not far from Sichem, in the Tribe of Manasses, as Dorotheus the Bishop of Tyre, saith. Of the Prophet Amos. THIS Man's Father dwelt at Tekoa, a poor man, one that kept Kine, and used to gather wild Figs, as appeareth in the first and seventh Chap∣ters of Amos. In this Town Amos was born, and followed the Profession of his Father, but the Lord called him to be a Prophet; and then he went to Bethel, which was twelve miles distant. Here he reprehended Ieroboam King of Israel, for Idolatry and worshipping the Golden Calf; after, he was accused by Amasia the Chief Priest of the Idols in Be∣thel, and bound in Chains; and at length, Vria, the Son of this Amasia, struck him upon his Head with a Spear, whereby he was mortally wounded. From Bethel, being sick, he was carried back to Tecoa, which was twelve miles; where, a little after, he died, as St. Ierom witnesseth, in whose time his Monument was to be seen. Amos signifies, A Burthen, as indeed he was to the wicked Israelites, he so sharply reprehended them in his Sermons of the Law. He lived eight hundred years before Christ. So his Travels were 24 miles. Of the Prophet Obediah. OBediah signifies, God's obedient Servant, of Abad, he hath served, or been obedient. He lived six hundred years before Christ, about the time of the Captivity of Babylon. St. Ierom saith, that in his time there were to be seen in the City of Samaria, the Monuments of three Prophets, that is, of Elisha, Obediah, and Iohn Baptist. But some think that Obediah
the Prophet lay not buried in Samaria, but rather it was the Sepulchre of that Obediah which lived in the time of Ahab, that hid a hundred of the Lord's Prophets, fifty in one Cave, and fifty in another, between which there were three hundred years difference. The Travels of the Prophet Jonah. THIS Prophet Ionas was born in Gath Hepher, which was a Town in the Tribe of Zabulon, from whence to Samaria is accounted thir∣ty two miles: here he prophecied to Ieroboam (second of that name) Kng of Israel, that he should recover Hemath and Damascus, and so to the Plain of the Red Sea, 2 Reg. 14. From amaria to Ioppa, or Iapho, a Port Town upon the Sea Shore, (to which Ionas went when he fled from the Lord) was thirty eight miles: but the Lord stirred up a great Wind when Ionas was upon the Sea, that the Mariners cast him out, and he was devoured of a Whale, Ionas 1. That Whale which had devoured Ionas, with a continual course and great violence, in three days and three nights swam to the Euxine Sea, and there cast him up upon the Shore, which was 600 miles, Ios. Antiq. lib. 9. From the shore of the Euxine Sea, Ionas went to Nineveh, which are eight hundred miles: Here Ionas preached Repentance to the Ninevites, Ion. 3. 4. So all the Travels of Ionas were 1470 miles. Of Gath Hepher. IN this Town the Prophet Ionas was born: it was scituated in the Tribe of Zabulon, sixty miles from Ierusalem Northward, and four miles from Nazareth towards the South. It seems to take the name from abundance of Grapes; for Gath Ghepher signifieth a Wine-press. Of Japho. JAPHO, or Ioppa, was a City or Haven-Town scituated upon the Sea, where all such Ships landed as went into Iudaea. At this day the Turks and Saracens call it Iafa, lying upon the Mediterranean Sea, in the Tribe of Dan, Ios. 19. in a certain Mountain twenty miles from Ierusalem North-Westward. Pliny, li. 5. saith, this City was built before the Flood; and in St. Ierom's time there was to be seen the Stone to which Andromeda was bound when she should have been devoured by a Monster of the Sea. The Poets Seign this Woman to be the Daughter of Cepheus, and delivered by Perseus King of the Persians, whom after she married. It is called Iapho, because of the beau∣tiful Scituation. Some say it was so called of Iapheth the Son of Noah, who first caused it to be built.
Of Tharsis. FRom Ioppa, as is said, the Prophet Ionas descended into a Ship, that he might fly upon the Sea. The Latine and Greek Texts read it Thar∣sin; whence it hapned that many have thought that Ionas fled from Tharis a City in Cilia, in which Country St. Paul was born. But Luther, in his Exposition of the Prophecy of Ionas, doth utterly disallow of this as false; for the Hebrew Text reads it not, to Tharsin, but in Tharsin, that is, into the Sea. For the Hebrew Tongue hath two words or Syllables which signifie the Sea, which are Iam and Tharsis. Iam signifieth, not only a great Sea, but the meeting together of Waters, or a Lake. So in Luke. 5. the Sea of Galilee, in which Christ and his Disciples sailed, is called a Lake; yet Ioh. cap. 5. and the rest of the Evangelists call it a Sea. So also Moses, Gen. 1. calleth the meeting together of the Waters, Iam; which may signifie, a Sea, and a Lake; But Tharsis, or Tharschich, denoteth a great Sea, and no Lake; or an high and troublesome Sea, as the Mediteranean Sea is. In this Paul travelled, and there standeth many Islands, as Rhodes, Cyprus, Cicilia, and others; all which are at this day subject to the Turks, Venetians, or Spaniards. It exten∣deth it self from Ioppa and Cilicia, to the Streights between Spain and Mauri∣tania. Into this Sea, Ionas was cast when the Whale devoured him. In like manner, the Red Sea, and all others that are Ocean Seas, are called Tharsis, as appeareth in the 72 Psalm, where it said, The Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall bring Presents. Here, the Kings whose Empires extend them∣selves along the Sea Coast are understood. But the City Tharsis (the Coun∣try of the Apostle Paul) is not a Kingdom, neither ever had a King, much less many Kings. So Solomon sent his Ships by Tharsin(that is, by Sea towards the South-East, into the Red Sea and Eastern Ocean) that they might bring Gold, precious Stones, and sweet Gums from Arabia. But the Ships could not sail by the Red Sea unto the Town of Tharsis, unless they would have sailed over the Land, which is impossible, because Tharsis lieth into the Land from the Red Sea, as all Cosmographers agree. So also the Psalmist saith, Thou breakest with thy strong Winds the Ships of Tharsis, that is, of the Sea; be∣side many such like speeches. From whence St. Ierom concludes, that Tharsis may better signifie the Sea, than the City Tharsis. Of the Euxine Sea. THE Euxine Ocean is that great and troublesome Sea, which, beginning not far from Constantinople, runneth from Bosphorus and Thrace, towards the East and North, containing to the Longitude eight hundred miles, but to the Latitude two hundred and eighty. Towards the South it toucheth upon Asia the less; towards the East, upon Calcos; towards the West, upon Thracia and Valachia: but towards the North it is oyn∣ed
to the Pool of Maeotides. This Sea in times past was called Pontus Axenus, that is, the inhospitable Countrey; because, as Strabo lib. 1. of his Cosmogra∣phy saith, The Inhabitants near about the Sea-shore did usually sacrifice those Strangers they got, or else cast their Bodies unto Dogs to be devoured, making drinking-cups of their Skulls. But after, when the Ionians had built certain Towns upon the Sea-coast, and had restrained the Incursions of cer∣tain Scythian Thieves, which usually preyed upon Merchants that resorted thither; at the command of Pontus their King, who had obtained a large and spatious Kingdom in that Country, they called it Pontus Euxinus, which is as much as to say, the hospitable Country. Ovid testifieth almost the same, concerning the original of the name of this Sea, after this manner; Frigida me cohibent Euxini littora Ponti, Dictus ab antiquis Axinus ille fuit. The chilly shoars of th' Euxine Sea constrains me to abide, In antient time call'd Axinus, as it along did glide. Of Ninus, or Nineveh. NINVS, or Nineveh, was a City of Assyria, where the Emperours of that Country used to keep their Courts. It was first built by Ninus, that great Emperour of the first Monarchy, 300 years after the flood, and 2000 before Christ, about the time when the Patriarch Abraham was born. It continued in great glory for the space of almost 1500 years, and was distant from Ie∣rusalem toward the North-east 684 miles: upon the East side joyning to the River Tygris, on the North to the Caspian Sea. It takes the name from the Beauty of it, being derived of Navah, which signifieth, A comely place, spati∣ous and pleasant. There are many that are of opinion, that in many things it exceeded Babylon; as, for the sumptuousness of the Buildings, the strength of the Walls, and the extent. The Walls were so thick that three Chariots might have met upon them without any danger; and beautified with an hundred and fifty Towers. Ionas being sent of God to this City, was three days going through it, that is (as Luther expounds it) through every Street of it; in which time he converted a hundred and twenty thousand to repen∣tance. Arbaces (who was called Arphaxad) was then Emperour. This Ar∣baces, Iustine lib. 2. calleth Arbactus: he was a Captain of the Medes, who perceiving the effeminate disposition of Sardanapalus, the then Emperour, taking advantage of the times, and this man's weakness, conspired with some of his Companions to usurp upon his Government: and that he might make them hate and loath his looseness, brought them into a Room where they might see him sitting amongst his Harlots, tired in Womans ap∣parel, and carding Wool. This sight greatly displeasing them, and before be∣ing
encouraged by Arbactus, they seized upon the City, and besieged Sar∣danapalus in his Palace. But to prevent the misery of a shameful death, after he had gathered all his Riches together, he set fire on his Palace, where he, his companions, and Treasure perished, this fire continued fifteen days, and happened 823 years before Christ: about which time Arbactus succeeded Sarda∣napalus, began to reign, and continued his Government twenty eight years. But the Medes held not the Assyrian Empire long; for Phul Belochus, who at this time reigned in Babylon, and his Successor Tiglath Philasser, are called Kings of Assyria, between whom there happened many great Wars, 2 Kings, 15. 26. From whence may be gathered, that after the death of Ar∣bactus, these Emperours dwelt in Nineveh, and succeeded in the Empire. Thus was this City greatly defaced with continual evils, the Lord before-hand giving them many admonitions and gentle Corrections (if it had been in them to have conceived it) to win them to repentance; but they continued still in their Sins, therefore, according to their former Prophecies, Cyaxares King of the Medes besieging this Town, took it, and destroyed it even unto the Ground, as Eusebius saith. This desolation happened thirteen years before the destruction of Ierusalem, in the eleventh year of Sadyattis King of the Lydians, who was Grandfather to Croesus, Anno Mundi, 3349, before Christ, 619. After this Destruction it lay a long time desolate, but at length some part of it was restored, though with much trouble; and then, when it was at the best estate, constrained to suffer many changes; and at length utterly destroy∣ed by Tamerlane the Great the second time, Anno Mundi, 3390. After this, the Inhabitants of that Country, upon the East side of the River Tygris, be∣gan the third time to build it. But whether this third restoring of this City was at the command of some Prince that had the Government of the Coun∣try thereabouts, or because of the scituation, or for private profit, it is not set down: nevertheless it is again repaired, standing upon the Borders of Armenia, beautified with goodly Buildings, with fair and spacious Streets, compassed about (as other Cities of the East are) with Walls and Ditches sufficiently strengthened to oppose the Enemy. But in respect of the former Nineveh, it seems a small Village. It hath a Bridge built of Ships, lying upon the East side of it over the River Tygris; and upon that side of the River there stand many fair Gardens or Orchards; and the Land there also is very fer∣tile and pleasant. But upon the West of Tygris the Soyl is nothing so fruit∣tile. At this day it is called by the name of Mossel; so that although it stands in the same place, yet doth it not retain the same name. To this Town there is a great resort of Merchants, who bring up their Commodities from the Ri∣er Tygris hither, and from hence convey them to Bagdeth, and many other parts of the World. The Inhabitants thereof are for the most part Nestorians; of whom you may read before, in the Description of the Sects remaining
in Ierusalem at this day. They are had in great account and estimation among the Turks, because it is imagined that one of this Sect helpt Maho∣met to compose the Alcoran. This Nestorius lived Anno Dom. 429. and taught at Constantinople; but after he was condemned at Ephesus for an Heretick, he was constrained to steal from Constantinople, and to flie to Thebes in Aegypt; where God laid a grievous punishment upon him; for his Tongue began to rot his head, and to consume with Vermin, of which he died miserably. The spiritual signification of the Prophet Jonas. JOnas signifieth a Dove, and typically representeth Christ in his name. For Christ was that gracious and innocent Dove, who hath made evident to Man his singular Mercy and Clemency, without any shew of bitterness or wrath. Then in his Affliction; for as Ionas thrust himself into the Sea of Calamity, and there was swallowed up of a Whale, which might be well resembled to the Grave, so Christ our Saviour was cast into the Sea of Affli∣ction; the misery and calamity of this World; and after that, thrust into the jaws of death, the Grave; where (as Ionas did. in the Whales belly) he lay three daies, and then arose again, the Earth being unable any longer to contain his Body. Of the Prophet Micah. THIS Prophet was born at Maresa a Town of Iudaea, sixteen miles from Ierusalem Westward; it signifieth a bitter Field. In St Ierom's time the Ruins of the Wall of this City was to be seen. Micah, or Micheas, signifieth humble or lowly. This man was held in great estimation, because he was the first that named the Country where our Sa∣viour Christ should be born, viz. in Bethlehem, 800 years before his Nativi∣ty. He lived Anno Mundi 3200. Of the Prophet Nahum. NAhum signifies a Comforter. He was born in a Town of Galilee called Elcosch, as he saith in the beginning of his Prophecy. This Village was shewn unto St. Ierome, by those that travelled with him through the Holy Land: in his time it was but a small Village, cal∣led by the name of Elcos, and scituated (as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre saith) on the further side of Bethabara, sixteen miles and something more from Ieru∣salem towards the North-East. This Prophet lived 750 years before Christ, and Prophesied of the Destruction of Niniveh, which after came to pass.
Of the Prophet Habacuck. HAbacuck, or Chabacuck, signifies, one that embraceth, or a Lover; from Chaback, he hath embraced. For as a Nurse embraceth and kisseth her inant, so also this Prophet embraced and comforted his People with comfortable Doctrine, lest by the destruction of Ierusa∣lem (which he prophecied should after happen by the Chaldaeans,) they should be driven to desperation. Paul took the foundation of his Epistle to the Romans out of this Prophet, reciting a saying of his. viz. The jut shall live by faith. He began to preach a little before the Prophet Ieremy, 650 years before Christ, above 100 years before Daniel was cast into the Lions den. From whence most of the Learned conclude, that this could not be that Habacuck which brought meat to Daniel as he was among the Lions; but they rather think it a fragment of a spiritual Comedy, and therefore worthy to be called Apocrypha. Of the Prophet Zephania. ZEphania signifies the Secretary of the Lord; being derived of Zaphan, he hath kept secret. He lived in Ierusalem and Iudaea in the time of Iosiah King of Iuda. He was born (as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre saith) in a Town called Sabarthaca in the Tribe of Sieon. Of the Prophets Haggai and Zacharia. HAggai or Chaggi signifieth, A Priest celebrating the Feast of the Lord; being derived of Chagag, he hath celebrated a Feast. And Zacha∣rias or Zacharia doth denote, such a man as remembred the Lord; being derived of Zachar, that is, he hath remembred or recorded. These two Prophets prophecied in Ierusalem in the second year of Darius the Son of Histaspis, 519 years before Christ, An. mun. 3449. Haggai began his Prophecy upon the first day of the sixth month Elul, answering to the 28 of August. He sharply reprehended the People because they neglected the house of the Lord, and built up their own houses. In the eighth month Marhusuan (which for the most part answereth to our November) Zacharias the same year began to prophecy, and in his Sermon exhorted the People to repentance, adding the promise of our Saviour, and that he would turn unto them that would turn unto him, Zach. 1. These two Prophets lie buried 20 miles one from the other. For, as Dorothaeus Bishop of Tyre saith, Haggai lies buried in Ierusalem amongst the
Priests, but Zacharias, near to a Town in the field of Bethania, 20 miles from Ierusalem Westward; but in the time of Theodosius the Emperour was removed and preserved as an holy Relique. Concerning that fable and fig∣ment inserted into the History Nicephorus, I utterly disallow. Of the Prophet Malachi THIS Prophet prophesied after the Captivity of Babylon, and dwelt in the Town of Ziph, as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre saith. Malachi sig∣nifies an Angel sent; and in Greek, a Messenger: for this Prophet preached so comfortably as if he had been an Angel of God; but principally of Christ, and Saint Iohn Baptist, who should go before him, to prepare his Way and make his Paths strait. S. Ierom in his Epistle to Paul and Eustochius writes, that some of the Hebrews suppose this Malachi to have been Esdras the Scribe, who was sent by Artaxerxes Longimanus Emperour of the Persians, to restore the Commonwealth of Israel, in the year before Christ 457. An Instruction how the Prophets may rightly be understood. FIRST look into the Cosmographical Table at the beginning of this Book, and diligently observe the Countries and Cities that are there set down, and how they lie scituated from Ierusalem. Toward the South of Ierusalem, the Idumeans, Ismaelites, Arabians and Egyptians dwell. Toward the East, the Moabites, Ammonites, Chaldaeans, Babylonians, and Persians. Toward the North, the Phoenicians, Syrians, Assyrians, and Armenians. Toward the West lieth the Mediterranean Sea, Grcia, Italy, Spain, and the Isles of the Sea. Secondly, this rule is to be observed, that as often as the Prophets speak of the Tribes of Israel, they use these names viz. Israel, Samaria, Ephrain, Ioseth, Iesreel, Bethel, and Bethaven; these are the names of the Kingdom of Israel: but to the Kingdom of Iuda these names are attributed, viz. Iu∣da, Ierusalem, Benjamin, the house of David. But when the Prophets joyn these two Kingdoms together, they call them by the names of Iacob and Israel. Thirdly, when thou readest in the Prophets, the name of any Country or City which is not sufficiently known unto thee, search this Alphabetical Table here following, and thou shalt find the whole matter declared unto thee.
An Alphabetical Table of all the Countries and Cities mentioned in the Prophets. A. ABarim, that is, a Bridge, or Passage over. It was a Mountain of the Moabites, where the Israelites pitched their Tents, Num. 33. Achor, the Valley of Trouble. Here Achan was stoned to death for his Thievery. It stood not far from Gilgal toward the North, twelve miles from Ierusalem, Ios. 7. Isa. 6. Adama, Red Earth. This was one of the Cities that were destroyed with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. Ai, Hilly. This City Ioshua burnt with Fire. It lay eight miles from Ie∣rusalem North-ward, Iosh. 8. Aiath, idem. Isa. 10. Ar, or Ari, a Lion. It was a City of the Moabites, lying beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Benjamin, called Aiopolis, scituated upon the Bank of the River Arnon, 24 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward, Deut. 2. In Esa. 15. It is called Arar, a Destroyer. Aram, Noble or Mighty. Armenia and Syria are so called, of Aram the Son of Sem; the chief City of which Country is Damasus. Pliny, lib. 6. I7. saith, the Scythians were also in ancient times called Aramites. Arnon, a famous River of the Moabites, in the Tribe of Reuben, which falls into the dead Sea, 20 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. In Esa. 16. it is called Ranan, he hath shouted for joy. Aroer, by usurpation, an Ewe Tree. This is a City of the Moabites near to the River Arnon, in the Tribe of Gad, beyond Iordan, 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, Ier. 40. there is another City so called, near to Da∣mascus in Syria, Esa. 7. Arpad, the light of Redemption. This was a City in the Land of Damascus, Ier. 49. There is another flourishing▪ City of that name, which may com∣pare with Antiochia for greatness, Esa. 10. But where it is scituated it is uncertain. Arvad, was a part of the Land of Canaan, so called of Arvad the Son of Canaan, Gen. I0. Ascanes, or Tuiscones, are a People descended of Ascenitz, the Son of Gomer, the Son of Iaphet, which sometimes dwelt in Armenia, but now have their abiding in Germany, 2 Gen. 10. Esa 51. so that of Gomer they are called Germanes, and of Ascanes, Ascanians or Tuiscons. Asseca, fortified round about. Neer to this Town David killed Goliah. It stood eight miles from Ierusalem Westward. Assur or Assyria, a blessed Country; being so called of Assur the Son f em▪
Aven Iniquity. Bethel was so called after Ieroboam had there set up a Golden Calf, Hos. 10. B. BAbel, Confusion. Babylon is the Metropolitan City of Chaldaea, 280 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Bath, Domestical. It was a Town of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, beyond Iordon, Esa. 16. Bazra, a Grape-gathering. It was a City of the Edomites, scituated upon the Bank of Iordan on the farther side, near to Bethabara, twenty miles from Ierusalem North-eastward, Esa. 24. 36. Ier. 48. Note here, that the Country of the Moabites in times past was subject to the Edomites, and then this City was in their jurisdiction; but after the Moabites got it into their hands again, and held it. It was one of the six Towns of Refuge mentioned, Ios. 29. Berothai, a Cypress Tree. This Town stood near Hemath, or Antiochia, 280 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ezek. 49. In this City David King of Israel took Hadadesar King of Zoba or Sophena, and constrained him to give him a great deal of Brass (as it is thought) yearly for Tribute: for near that City were many Brass Mines. Bethavin, the house of Iniquity. Bethel was so called, Hos▪ 6. It stood eight miles from Ierusalem Northward. Beth-Cherem, the house of the Vines. It was a Town not far from Ie∣rusalem Northward. Ier. 6. Beth-Diblathaim, the house of dried Figs. It was a City of the Moabites, Ier. 48. Bethieimoth, the house of Desolations. It was also a City of the Moabites, beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Reuben, Ios. 13. Ezech. 25. twenty miles from Ierusalem. Beth-Gamul, the house of Restitution. This was a City of the Moabites, Ier. 48. Beth-Bealmeon, the house of habitation for the Idol Baal. It was a City of the Moabites, twenty four miles from Ierusalem Eastward, not far from Aroer, Ezek. 25. 1 Chr. 5. Butz, a Castle of Prey. It was a City of the Ismaelites, in Arabia-Petrae, eighty miles from Ierusalem South-Westward, Ier. 25. Bel and Neob, two Idols of the Babylonians, Esa. 45. Bel signifieth, the God of Mixture or Confusion; Neob, the God of Prophecy. C. CAlno, his Perfection. This is Selucia, scituated upon Tygris, beyond Babylon, 316 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. It is now called Bagdeth, Gen. 10. Esy 2.
Canne, a firm foundation. It was a City of the Syrians, Ezek. 27. Caphihor, a little Sphere, or, a round Globe, like unto a Globe or Pome∣granate. Also Capadocia, a Country of Asia the less, 600 miles from Ieru∣salem Northward. Carchemis, a sacrificed Lamb. This was scituated too near Euphrates in Syria, 400 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ierem. 25. D. DEdan, a City of the Idumaeans, so called of Dedan the Son of Esu, Ier. 25. Isa. 21. Dbon, a Mist. This was a City of the Moabites, near Hesbon, in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Diblath, a bunch of Figs. It was a City in the Tribe of Naphtali, near to the Lake of Samachonites, eighty miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ezek. 6. Here Zedekiah had his eyes put out, 2 Kin. 25. Ier. 39. 52. Dimon, Bloudy. This is a City in the Tribe of Reuben, which, as St. Ieron saith, is twenty eight miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Duma, Silence. A City of the Israelites, so called of Duma the Son of Is∣mael. It stood in Arabia Petaea, eighty miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest, Esa. 25. 21. E. EGbathana, the Metropolitian City of the Medes, distant from Ierusalem 1136 miles North-east-ward. Eden, Pleasure. A City of Syria scituated near Euphrates, 400 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward, Esay 7. This is thought to have been a part of Paradice. Eglaim, a round Drop. It was a Town of the Moabites, Esa. 15. 16. Elam, a Young man, so called of Elem the Son of Sem, Esa. 10. 21. After Perseus had got in this Countrey a great Government, he called it after his own name, Persa. Eleale, the Ascension of God. It was a City beyond Iordan, in the Tribe of Reuben, between Iacza and Heshbon, 26 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward, Num. 32. Elim, a Hart. This was a Lake so called, in the Land of the Moabites, Esa. 10. Elisa, the Lamb of God. So were the Aeolians called in Grecia, of Elisa the Son of Iavan, the Son of Iaphet, Ezek. 7. Gen 10. Enaglaim, the Fountain of Calves. It was a Town or Castle near to the Red Sea, Ezek. 10. Epha, the Land of Obscurity. It was a part of Arabia Petraea, so called of Epha, the Son of Midian, the Son of Abraham, Gen. 25. Esa. 60.
G. GEbim, a Ditch. This was a Town in the Tribe of Iuda, Esa. 10. Gebah, a Hill. It was a Hill in the City of Kirjath-jearim: there was a Town also of the same name, standing within a little of it. This was little more than a mile from Ierusalem Westward, Esa. 10. Gebal, a bound or limit. It was the bounds and limits of Syria, bor∣dering upon the Mediterranean Sea. This City Gibal or Gebal was 160 miles from Ierusalem Northward, 1 Reg. 5. Psal. 82. Gibeah, a Hill. It was also called Gibeon, where Saul dwelt, four miles from Ierusalem Northward, Esa. 10. Gilgal, a roundle, or the compass of a hill. Here Ioshuah pitched his Tents: it stood between Iericho and Iordan, twelve miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Gog. The Turks were thus called, because they liv'd in Tents, Ezek. 48. Gosan, a Land and River in Mesopotamia, called after that name, 2 Reg. 17. Esa. 37. H. HAdad Rimmon, a Pomegranat. This was a Town near to Megiddo, where Iosiah King of Iudah was wounded to death, 46 miles from Ie∣rusalem Northward, Zach. 12. Hadrach, the Land of Gladness. So the Prophet Zachary calls Syria, c. 19. Hanes, an Ensign of Grace. This was a City of Egypt, bordering upon Assyria, Esa. 30. Haram, the Syrian liberty. It was the Metropolitan City of Mesopotamia, where Abraham dwelt, Gen. 11. distant from Ierusalem 440 miles North-eastward. Haveran, a Casement. It was a City in Syria not far from Damascus, 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. Hazor Enon, the gate of the Fountain. It was a City in Syria. Hazor-Tichon, the middle Porch. It was a Town in Syria not far from Haveran, Ezek. 47. Hazor, the Land of Hay. So the Ismaelites called their Countrey. Hemath, Anger. So the Prophets called Antiochia, the Metropolitan of Assyria, distant from Ierusalem 280 miles Northward. Hermon, Accurst. It was a Mountain beyond Iordan, near to Libanus, 122 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. There is another Moun∣tain of this name near to Naim, and not far from Mount Tabor, forty four miles from Ierusalem towards the North, of which the Psalmist speaketh, Psal. 89. Tabor and Hermon praise thy name. The Mountain beyond Iordan is oftentimes called by the name of Mount Gilead.
Hesbon, an Ingenious Cogitation. It was a City of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East. Henah and Ievah were two Idols, Esa. 37. Hevilah, Sandy. So India is called, and a certain part of Arabia-Petraea. of Hevilah the Son of Chus, Gen. 10. These Countries are very dry and sandy. Hethlon, he hath rolled together It was a City of Syria near to Antiochia, Ezek. 47. Holon, a Window. It was a Town of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, and is also called Helon, Num. 2. Ier. 47. Horonaim, the Syrian Liberties, two Towns of the Moabites, Esa. 16. I. JAchza, the privity of God. A City of the Moabites, in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty four miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Iaezer, the help of God. A City of Refuge belonging to the Levites, in the Tribe of Gd beyond Iordan, forty miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward. Iavan Grecia, so called of Iavan the Son of Iapheth, which was distant from Ierusalem 800 miles Westward. Iezreel, the Seed of God. This is the City where Queen Iesabel was devou∣red of Dogs. It standeth forty eight miles from Ierusalem Northward. Irheres, or Heliopolis, a City of the Sun. This was a City of Aegypt, 224 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-West. K. KEdar, Blackness. This was a Desart of the Ismaelites, called Sur, eighty miles from Ierusalem South-Westward. Kir Paries, a Wall. This was Cyrene a great City in Africa, which was 816 miles from Ierusalem Westward. There was a Town of this name in the Land of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, Esa. 16. Kir-Hazereth, or Kir-Hares, a Mud-Wall. It was a City of the Moabites in Arabia-Petraea, otherwise called Petra, seventy two miles from Ierusalem towards the South, Esa. 16. Kiriathaim, a-City. This Town was in the Tribe of Reuben, 22 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, Esa. 16. Kiriah, or Kirieth, ibidem. Kithim, a shining Jewel. Macedonia is so called of Kithim the Son of Ia∣van, the Son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Ier. 2. Mac. 1. For if you do diligently ob∣serve the derivation of Names, you shall find that of Kithin comes Maketis, and so by continuance of time, and change of words, Macedonia. It lieth 920 miles from Ierusalem North-Westward.
L. LAchis, a continual walking: or as some will have it, A pleasant Walk. This was a City in the Tribe of Iuda, twenty miles from Ierusalem Westward, Ier. 34. Laisa, a Lioness. So was Caesarea Philippi sometimes called. It was also called Dan, scituated near to the Fountains of the River Iordan, not far from Mount Libanus, 104 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Libna, Frankincense. It was a Town in the Tribe of Iudah, ten miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west. Lud, that is Lydia, a Countrey in Asia Minor, so called of Lud the Son of Sem. Luit, green Grass. It is also a Mountain in the Tribe of Reuben, Esa. 6. M. MAgg, dwelling under a shed or Tent. The Turks are so called, Ezek. 8. Maresa, an inheritance. In this Town the Prophet Micah was born, Mich. 1. It was scituated in the Tribe of Iudah, distant from Ierusalem six∣teen miles towards the West. Medai, a Measure. The Kingdom of Medea was so called, of Medai the Son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Medba, warm Water. It was a City of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reu∣ben, twenty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Esa. 16. Medemena, a Dunghil. It was a Town in the Tribe of Iudah, neer Beer∣seba and Gaza, 44 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-west, Iosh. 15. There was also another Town of the same name in the Tribe of Benjamin, not far from Ierusalem, Iosh. 10. Ier. 48. Megiddo, a wholsome Apple. Here Iosiah King of Iudah was slain in War. It stood 46 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Zach. 12. Mephaath, the splendor of Waters. It was a City belonging to the Priests in the Tribe of Reuben, subject to the Moabites, twenty four miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the East, Ier. 48. Mesech, the tract of sowing. So the Muscovites and Russians are called, of Mesech the Son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Midian, a Measure. A Town lying upon the Red Sea, 160 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the South; so called of Midian the Son of Abraham by e∣turah, Gen. 25. Mispe, a Watch. This City stood in the Land of Gilead, beyond Iordan, forty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. There is another Town of this name also, not far distant from Ierusalem, in the Tribe of Ben∣jamin, Hos. 5. Ier. 40.
Moab, A Father. The Country of the Moabites, scituated between the Red Sea and the Mountains Abarim, Ezech. 9. Meusal, Running swiftly. It was the name of a People that took their beginning from Vsal the Son of Ioktan, Gen. 19. N. NAbaioth, The Country of the Prophets. This Country beginneth in the Tribe of Gad, beyond Iordan, and extendeth to the East part of the Dead Sea, and so by the Land of the Moabites to the Red Sea. It taketh the Name of Nabaioth the Son of Ishmael: for all the Tract of Arabia Pe∣traea, from the Red Sea to the Gulph of Persia, of him is called the Land of Nabathaea. Diodorus Siculus saith as much, and further, That it extend∣eth towards the East unto the Indian Sea, Gen. 25. Nebo, Prophecying. It was a City of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reu∣ben, near to Mount Pisga, twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Ier. 48. Nimrim, A Leopard. This was also a City in the Tribe of Gad beyond Iordan, thirty two miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east, Isa. 16. No, A Hinderance. So was Alexandria, a City in Aegypt, in ancient times called, distant from Ierusalem 288 miles towards the West, Ezek. 30. Noph, A Honey Comb. So the Prophets call Memphis, the Metropolis of Aegypt, being distant from Ierusalem 244 miles towards the South-east, Isa. 18. Ier. 2. Ezek. 30. O. ON, Opulency. So Ezek. c. 30. calleth Heliopolis, a City of Aegypt, which is 224 miles distant from Ierusalem towards the South-west. Oreb, A Crow or Raven. Near to this place, in Mount Ephraim, Prince Oreb was slain; not far from Iericho, twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the North, Iudg. 7. Psal. 83. Ophir, A Palace. It was the proper Name of the Son of Ioktan, the Po∣sterity of Sem, of whom in times past India was called Ophir. You may read of this, Gen. 10. 1 Reg. 9. P. PAthros, or Petra, the Metropolitan City of Arabia Petraea, 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. It is a Country also of Aegypt near Tathnis, 180 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west, Isa. 11. Ezek. 29. Parath, Fruitful. A name of the River Euphrates, Ier. 2. 13. Prazin, A Breach. It is a Valley near Ierusalem, where David overcame the Philistines, 2 Sam. 5. Phut; is Africa, so called of Phuth the Son of Cham, Gen. 10.
R. RAbba, A Multitude. Philadelphia, the Metropolitan of the Ammonites is so called, 96 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. Raema, Thunder. So they called Aethiopia, of Raema the Son of Chs, Gen. 10. Rama, High. This City stood eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North, Isa. 10. There were other Cities also of the same Name and Signi∣fication. Rezeph, A Cole. It was a City in Syria, Isa. 37. Riblath, An inveterate Anger. This was a City in the Tribe of Naphta∣li, near to the Lake of Samoconites, eighty miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Antiochia also was sometimes called Riblah, 2 Reg. 25. Ier. 39. 52. Rimmon, A Pomegranate. This was a City in the Tribe of Judah, not far from Gerar, 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-east. S. SAba, The Stone Achates. This was the Metropolitan City of Ethiopia, called also Meroe, 960 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. The two famous Queens (one that came to see Solomon, the other mentioned Act. 8.) dwelt in this Town. Sanir, A clear Light. So Mount Hermon beyond Jordan was called of the Ammonites: it stood 112 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. Sarion, The Doves Song. So the Edomites called Mount Hermon that stood beyond Jordan. Saron, A fair Plain, or a green Place. So is that Plain between the Sea of Galilee and Mount Ephraim called, Is. 35. There are some that think there is a Mountain so called. Sela, a Rock. This is Petra, a City of Arabia, ante. Sepharuaim, A City of the Scribes. It stood in Assyria, Isa. 37. Sibarim, A City of Syria near to Damascus, Ezek. 47. Sibma, A Possession. A City built by the Sons of Reuben, 24 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Num. 32. Sichor, Black. It is a Brook or River called Rhinocorurus, which falleth into the Mediterranean Sea, near to the Town Rinocorura, scituated upon the utmost Borders of the Holy Land towards the South, 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west. The River Nilus in Aegypt is also cal∣led Sichor, Jer. 2. Simri, Gardians. They were Arabians dwelling upon an Angle of Isthu∣mus of the Red Sea.
Sinear, a blow upon the teeth. Chaldea is so called, Is. 11. Sion, or Scaion, by Schin, not by Zade, Tranquillity and Security. The Mount whereon Ierusalem stood is not so called, but Mount Hermon beyond Iordan, Deut. 4. Sene, or Sevene, illustrious. It was a City in Africa, upon the Borders of Egypt and Ethiopia, 516 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Iovias saith, that the Inhabitants at this day call it Guagheram. T. TAchpanes, or Taphnis, a covered or hidden Ensign. It is a City in Egypt, 180 miles from Ierusalem South-westward, Ier. 2. 43. Thamar, a Plain. This Town was built by Solomon, and stood 360 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east, Thelasser, a Princes Tomb. It was a Countrey upon the Borders of As∣syria, Isa. 37. Themath, Wonderful. A City of Arabia Petraea, Ier. 25. so called of Thama the Son of Ismael, Gen. 25. it stood 40 miles from Ierusalem South∣ward: it is called Theman, a City of the South. Thogarma, Perfection. Tartaria was so called of Thogarma the Son of Gomer, the Son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Ezek. 27. Thubal, a People bordering upon the Muscovites: so called of Thubal the Son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Ezekiel cap. 27. & 38. maketh Mesech, Thubal, Gog and Magog all one People: from whence may be gathered, that these People dwelt towards the North, and were governed by one Prince. In the 38 Chap∣ter he calls them Gog, that is, the Turk, who is Prince and Governour in Me∣sech and Thubal. Therefore, without doubt, the People of Russia in times past were called Thubal, which People dwelt near to Muscovia: and this opi∣nion seems to be more probable than theirs that imagine the Italians and Spaniards, which have their dwellings near unto the River Iberia, to be the Off-spring of Thubal. V. UPhar, the Countrey of Gold. It is called also Ophir and India, 1 Reg. 9. Ier. 10. Dan. 10. Psal. 119. Z. ZEb, a Wolf. The Wine-press of Zeb was in Mount Ephraim, not far from Ioriho, twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the North, where Zeb the Prince of the Midianites was slain. There is another Town of this name, near to the Iaboch beyond Iordan, forty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. Zeboim, Pleasantness. One of the fiv Cities that were burnt with fire from Heaven, Gen. 14. 19. Hos. 11.
Zenan, a Sheep-fold. It was a City in the Tribe of Iudah, Mich. 1. Zoa, moving anis, a City in Egypt, where Moses wrought all his Mi∣racles before Pharaoh, was so called: it stood 232 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the South-west. Zoba, presumptuous. This was also called Sophena. It is the Countrey of Armenia, 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, which David conquered, 2 Sam. 8. 1 Chron. 19. Zor, a Rock. Tyrus is so called; It stood 160 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North. Thus (gentle Reader) for your better ease and understanding, have I col∣lected a short Alphabetical Table, and therein briefly described all those Countreys and Cities mentioned in the Prophets: that so by your diligent care and observation you may the better understand the meaning of such Texts of Scripture wherein they are mentioned. Of Esdras the Lawyer. ESDRAS signifies, a Helper, of Asar, he helped. He is a type of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Helper and Saviour, which hath brought us into that holy Land, eternal Life; and is the Restorer of Religion, and the Christian Common-wealth. This Esdras was sent to Jerusalem, to restore the Common-wealth of the Jews, Anno Mundi 3511, before Christ, 457, in the seventh year of Arta∣xerxes Longimanus, that good Emperour of the Persians. So he went from Babylon to Ahaeva, a certain River near Babylon; to which place he assem∣bled a great Multitude of the Jews, and from thence sent to Caspia to fetch a certain number of Levites, (this Land was in Chaldaea not far from Babylon.) These being here met together, celebrated a Fast unto the Lord, and with o∣lemn Prayers besought his aid and furtherance in their Enterprise: then they went thence to Jeruslem, which was 680 miles, and there restored the Judaical Government, instituting Ecclesiastical Officers, chief Priests, Prnces, and other Governours. Of the Land of Caspia. THE Land of Caspia signifieth, the Land of Silver, being derived of Kesaeph, that is, Silver. It was so called, because they used to dig Silver in that place; (see Lyra) it was a Country near Babylon, where the Priests and Levites were in Captivity; and stood 680 miles from Jerusalem towards the East.
Of Nehemia. IN the twentieth Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was Anno Mun. 3524, and before Christ, 444. Nehemias went from Susan to Jerusalem, which was 920 miles, there he repaired the Walls and Gates in 52 days, Neh. 1. 2. 6. When he had governed Judaea 12 years, he returned back again to Susan to Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was 920 miles, Neh. 3. Afterward Artaxerxes about the end of his Reign suffered Nehemia to re∣turn back again to Ierusalem, which was 920 miles, Neh. 17. So these Journeys of Nehemia make 2760 miles. Of this City Susan you may read be∣fore. Of the Name and typical Signification of Nehemiah. NEhemiah signifies, The Consolation of God, being derived of Nicham, He hath comforted. This Man was a Type of our Lord Jesus Christ; for, as Nehemias was a Comfort unto the dispersed Jews, in that he was sent to restore them into their own Country, and to rebuild Ierusalem, so Christ our Comforter was sent by his Father from that everlasting Throne of Hea∣ven, to refresh and comfort us by his Doctrine, and gather the dispersed Members of his Church into one Communion, that he might bring them into that heavenly Ierusalem which he hath built, and where he hath pre∣pared a place for us. The Travels of Serubbabel. SErubbabel carried the People of Israel from Babylon to Ierusalem, which was 680 miles, in the first Year of Cyrus Emperour of Persia, Anno Mundi, 3433. before Christ, 535. In the seventeenth year of his Government he went from Ierusalem to Susan, 920 miles, 3 Esd. 3. 4. From Susan he went to Babylon, which was 242 miles, 3 Esd. 4. From Babylon in the same Year he returned to Ierusalem, 680 miles, where the next Year after, in the beginning of the second Month, which answers to the 21 of May, in the third year of Darius Ahasuerus, Zerubbabel and Jo∣sua, the chief Priests of the Jews, began to build the Temple, and finish'd it in the sixth year of the same King, 1 Esd. 6. So all the Travels of Zerub∣babel were 2280 miles.
The Book of ESTHER. MORDOCHIVS was led Prisoner with Jechoniah to Babylon, which was 680 miles. From Babylon he went to Susan, which was 252 miles; there he brought up Esther, his Brothers Daughter, and taught her honest Discipline and the fear of God. This Maid was very beautiful and comely, wherefore at such time as Darius Ahasuerus (the Son of Hystaspis) had caused all the beautiful Virgins of his Empire to be brought before him, that from amongst them he might chuse him a Wife; Mordochius adorned this Vir∣gin with goodly Apparel, and she also went with them: in whose Presence (by his Instruction) she behaved her self so well, that the Emperour chose her from among the rest, and made her his Queen, she being at that time but a poor Maid, and of small Ability. They were married in Susan in the second year of his Empire, An. Mun. 3454, and before Christ, 514. From whence it is evident, That Preferment cometh neither from the East, nor from the West, but from the Lord. So these two Journeys make nine hun∣dred thirty two miles. The Types and Allegories collected out of the Book of Esther. MORDOCHIVS, or Mordochai, signifies bitter and contrite, being deri∣ved of Marah, He was bitter, and Dachah, sorrowful and contrite. A fit resemblance of that true Mordochius, Christ Jesus, who for our Sins and Offences was constrained to drink of that bitter Cup of Afflictions, the Ne∣cessities of this World, suffering in his Body more than tolerable Tor∣ments, as you may read in his Passion; therefore justly called Mordochius, that is, bitter and contrite. Ester and Ala have both one signification, that is, a Virgin, or one kept from the Bed of Man. Therefore she was a notable Image of the Church, who keepeth her self chaste and undefiled, avoiding the Society of evil Men; and although she seem to be desolate and forsaken in this World, in respect of the wicked (who flourish like a Flower, and glory in Voluptu∣ousness and Pleasure) yet hath she her Mordochius, her Spouse, her dearly beloved, which provides for her, even Jesus Christ, that immaculate Lamb which died for her Salvation, and will cloath her in white, put into her hand a regal Scepter, crown her with Glory, and set her with him in the Throne of eternal Happiness. Ahasuerus signifies, A noble Captain, and typically represents God the Father: for as the Emperour had the Command of 127 Provinces, and in
them did principally Rule; so God our Heavenly Father is the Empe∣rour and Governour of all Kingdoms, and all Creatures both in Heaven and in Earth be obedient to his will; he sitteth in that everlasting Palace of Heaven, that place of Joy, and that eternal Paradice, from whence he looketh down to behold us miserable and distressed Creatures upon Earth; of his merciful Goodness electing and chusing us to be Heirs of that eternal Kingdom, and purifieth us with the Graces of his holy Spirit, so that we might be made capable to sit with him in eternal Felicity. The disdainful Queen Vasthy may be a fit Type and Effigies of this World, not only in respect of her Pride, but her excess in drinking; taking her name from Schatha, which signifies, To Drink: so this World liveth in all manner of Prodigality and Luxury; and contemneth the Lord and King thereof, that Almighty God which sitteth in the Heavens; and therefore is justly thrown down from that eternal Kingdom; whereas on the contrary, humble Esther (that is, the Church) is taken up into Dignity, and crowned in that everlasting Kingdom of Heaven. Haman signifies, a Rebellious and Proud Man: being derived of Haman, He hath stirred up a Tumult: typically representing the Devil, whom God in the beginning made a good Angel, exalted him in the Heavens, and made him much more Glorious than others; yet notwithstanding, glorying in himself, he contemned his Maker, and nothing would content him but to become like unto him, yea he desired to be worshipped of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 4. And as Haman endeavoured to overthrow not only all the People of the Iews, but Queen Esther als; so the Devil doth not only endea¦vour to overthrow the whole Church, but if it were possible the Head of the Church Christ Jesus. Of that holy Man Job. JOB was a holy and good man: he dwelt in the Land of Vz, so called of Vz the Son of Aram the Son of Sem, as St. Jerom upon Genesis observeth. This Vz was that great Man which built (as was thought) Damascus in Syria, and all the Land which extendeth from Damascus to Jordan, after his name was called Vz, that is, the Land of Counsel, for so Vz signifi∣eth. There were two Towns in this Country, where Job is said to have dwelt; that is Astaroth Carnaim and Batzra: Astaroth Carnaim was distant from Jerusalem, fifty two miles towards the North-East, the Inhabitants of which Town worshipped the Goddess Venus, and called her by the name of Astaroth, of which you may read before. St. Jerom saith, That the Sepulchre of Job was to be seen in his time in that Town; and later Writers testifie as much ore their times. This Town at this day is called Carnea.
Batzra is mentioned in the thirty sixth of Genesis; it signifieth a Grape ga∣thering. In this Town it was thought that Iob was born, it lay beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East. All this Country in those times was subject to the King of the Edomites or Idumaeans; but after, it was joyned to the Land of the Moabites, they having conquered the Kings of Edom: you may read more of it in the sixth of Isay; also Ios. 20. where is shewed, that it was one of the six Cities of Refuge, appointed by Ioshuah. Here Iob for the most part con∣tinued, and held this Town in great honour and reputation. He lived about the time of Baela, the first King of the Edomites: and ac∣cording to the opinion of St. Ierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Philo, and Luther, was for his excellent Vertue and singular Piety, chosen King of that Coun∣try, which he greatly inlarged, making all the Countries and neighbouring Princes near adjoyning tributary unto him: wherefore (as Ierom saith, in locus Hebraicis) having obtained so large an Empire, he removed his Seat from Batzra to Astaroth-Carnaim, which was a strong and well-defenced City, where in those times (as Moses witnesseth, Gen. 14.) there inhabited mighty men, and noble Heroes; that so by their Vertue he might with the greater facility suppress and conquer other Provinces. There are many think him to be of the Stock of Abraham, and of the Family of Esau, because he is mentioned in the 36 of Genesis, where it is said, That when Baela died, Iobab the Son of Zerah of Bozra, or Betzrah, reigned in his stead. And St. Ierom, in his Preface upon the Book of Iob, sheweth, that he was but five degrees removed from Abraham: for, Abraham had Ishmael Basmath, who was the Wife of Esau, Mother of Reguel, Grand-mother to Serah, and great Grand-mother to Iob. So that by the Mothers side Iob descended from Ishmael, and by the Fathers side from Esau. Isaac Esau Reguel Serah Iob or Iobab, King of Idumaea, Gen. 36. Notwithstanding, there are some that are of opinion, that he descended from Nahor, Abraham's Brother; and was of the Family of Vz, Nahor's Son: which opinion also St. Ierom mentioneth in his Hebracal Qestions: But most of the Antient Fathers hold this nothing so probable.
Luther, upon the thirty sixth Chapter of Genesis, saith, That he was King long time before Moses caried the Children of Israel out of Egypt. For, Iu∣da and Aser, the Sons of Iacob, had Children before they went into the Land of Egypt, Gen. 46. therefore it is not impossible for Reguel the Son of sau to have Children also, since he was married long before his Brother Iacob. From hence then it may be gathered, that Iob was King of Idumaea bfore Iacob and his Sons went into the Land of Egypt: for, although the fourteen Sons of sau governed the Land of Edom, like so many Princes, (of which number, Reguel the Grand-father of Iob was one) because they held it as their Inheritance; yet, to avoid Sedition and Distractions, which oftentimes happen where there is not a certain Head and principal Com∣mander, therefore they elected Bela the Son of Beor to be their King; after whose death they chose Iob, because he was a holy man of God, and in his Actions just and upright; who, without doubt, reigned amongst the Edo∣mites a long time: for he lived after his Afflictions (which God imposed upon him to try him) 140 Years. Plato saith, he married Dina the Daugh∣ter of Iacob: but St. Ierom, That he married the Daughter of an Arabian, by whom he had Enon. Both these may be true; for his first Wife being dead, he might marry an Arabian. After the death of Iob, the Gyants and Heroes in Asteroth-Carnaim fell again from the Idumaeans; for when Moses brought the Children of Israel out of the Desart of Arabia-Petraea, and that they had conquered the Land beyond Iordan, the City Astaroth-Carnaim had a King called Og, who governed all the Kingdom of Basan. This Gyant was of a mighty Stature; he had a Bed of IronFour Yards and a half long, and two broad. nine Cubits long, and four broad, Deut. 3. Of Eliphaz. ELiphaz the Themanite was the Brother of Reguel, Iob's Grand-father. This Eliphaz had a Son called Theman, who built a City, and after his own Name called it Theman, where Eliphaz his Father dwelt with him. From whence it hapned that he was called Eliphaz the Themanite, Iob. 2. It was distant from Ierusalem forty miles towards the South, and therefore it was called a City of the South: you may read of Eliphaz in Ier. cap. 25. He had a Concubine called Thimnah, because of her Beauty and comely Proportion: by her he had Amaleck, of whom came the Amalekites, between whom, and the Children of Israel, were cruel Wars, Exad. 17.
The Travels of Eliphaz the Themanite. FROM Themen he went to Astaroth-Carnaim, where Iob dwelt, which is accounted ninety two miles, to comfort his Friend Iob, Iob 2. From Astaroth-Carnaim he returned back to his own house, which was ninety two miles. So the Travels of Eliphaz were 184 miles. Of Bildad, Job's Friend. BEyond Iordan and the Sea of Galilee, not far from Astaroth-Carnaim, there is at this day found a Town called Suah, where (as it is thought) Bildad the Friend of Iob dwelt. Near to this Town (as Sebastian Francus observes in his Cosmography) there was yearly, in the Sum∣mer Season, a great Mart kept, in certain Tents and Tabernacles erected for that purpose, of divers colours. Bildad signifies an antient Friend, and Suah taketh the name from Desolation, being derived of Scho, He hath made desolate. Of Zophar, the Friend of Job. ZOPHAR dwelt in the City of Naema, Iosh. 15. but how far it stood from Ierusalem is uncertain. Zophar, of Zaphar, signifieth swift. Nae∣ma signifies, Pleasant and delectable; of Naem, courteous and com∣fortable. Of Job's Daughters. THE Lord gave unto Iob, after his Affliction, and that he had tryed his faithfulness, three Daughters, so fair, that there were none fairer to be found in all the Land. The name of the first was Iemmima, that is, as fair as the day: of Iom, which signifies, a Day. The se∣cond, Kazia, that is such a one as giveth a pleasant savour like unto Gum Cassia. The third, because of the excellency of her Countenance, was called Kaeren Hapuch, that is, casting forth rayes or beams, Iob 42.
APOCRYPHA. The Book of JUDITH. Of Egbatana. AFTER the death of Arbactus, or Arphaxad, which signifies a migh∣ty Lyon, to whom Ionas prophecied, as is said before; there suc∣ceeded in the Empire of the Medes, Mandanes, Sarsomenes, Artecar∣nis, Cardiceas, and Deioces; who being enthronized in that Empire, called himself Arphaxad, or Arbactus, the second. This man built Egbatana, the Metropolitan City of the Medes, and beautified it with very fair Buil∣dings and goodly Walls, made all of four-square Stone, cut and polished, 70 Cubits high, and 30 broad; Towers standing upon it 100 Cubits in height, as well those that were for the Defence of the Town, as those where the Gates were. The Air in that Countrey was temperate, inclining rather to Cold than Heat, because it lay toward the North: it stood 1136 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Here (for the most part) this Emperour kept his Court, till (as Herodotus saith) he was utterly conquered by Nebu∣chadnezzar, Emperour of the Babylonians. This was that Nebuchadnezzar which sent Holofernes with a mighty Army against Iudaea, Bethulia, and ma∣ny other Cities and Countries, and would be worshipped as a God, Iudith 3. Of Hydaspes. HYdaspes is a River that ariseth in Media, which runneth through a part of Parthia, extendeth it self into India; and not far from the City Nisa, falleth into Indus, according to the Opinion of Pliny, and Strabo l. 15. Near this River Nebuchadnezzar overcame Deioces, otherwise called Arbactus, Iudg. 1. The Description of the Countries conquered by Holofernes. Of Kedar. KEdar (the Wilderness of Zur was thus called;) stood in the Land of the Ishmaelites, eighty miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west; and took the name of Kedar the Son of Ishmael, Gen. 25. Of the Mountains of Ange. THE Mountains of Ange lay between Pamphylia and Cicilia, to the Latitude of that famous Countrey of Cilicia in Asia minor, 320 miles from Ierusa∣lem, towards the North; not far from Anchiale, a City of Cilicia, from whence it seemeth to take the name.
Of Cilicia. CIlicia is a Province of Asia minor; so called of Cilice, the King's Son of Syria and Phoenicia: the Metropolitan City of which Country was Tharsus, where the Apostle Paul was born; it was distant from Ierusalem 304 miles towards the North. Of Mallos. MAllos, a City of Cilicia, was so called of Malo, that is, Plenty of all things. Stephanus saith, that it took that Name of Mollo who first built it. It is a City to this day, and of most of the Inhabitants of that Counry called Mallo, as Gesner observeth. Of Gesem. GEsem signifies fruitful. The Land of Gosen in Aegypt was so called, be∣ing derived of Gusch, that is, a Turf: it stood 174 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the South-west. Of Aethiopia. THIS Country stands beyond Aegypt, 800 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, where the Sun is extream hot, that it turneth the Comple∣xion of the Inhabitants to Blackness: here breed great abundance of Dra∣gons and cruel Beasts. Of Esdrelon. ESdrelon was a Plain lying between the Mountains, Thabor, Hermon, and Gilboa, extending it self from the Cities of Megiddo and Apheck, to the Sea of Gennezareth or Galilee. In this great Field, which was called the Plain of Galilee, and the Field of Megiddo and Esdrelon, there were many cruel Battels fought; for here Gideon overcame the Midianites: here Saul was put to flight by the Philistines, from whence, ascending into Mount Gilboa, he killed himself. Iosias also, King of the Iews, was in this place put to flight by Pharaoh Necho, and wounded unto the death. The Camp of Holofernes was so great, that it took up all the Plain, which contained sixteen miles in length. In some parts it was wonderful fruitful, and brought forth Wine, Oyl, and many other Commodities in great Abundance. It stood 52 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and was so called of Cae∣der, that is, A hid order and disposition: for Alam is as much as to say, he hath hid. Of Sobal. SObal was a Country upon the Borders of Syria, where Sophena was sci∣tuated, near to the River Euphrates; which Country, Saul and David,
Kings of Israel sometime conquered: it stood 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and signifies, an ear of Corn. Of Apamea. THIS was a famous City in Tetrapolis of Syria, two hundred and eighty miles from Ierusalem towards the North, built by Seleucus Nicanor King of Syria, and was so called of Apamea his Wife. Of the City Bethulia. BEthulia was scituated within four miles of Dothan, and two of the Galilean Sea, forty four miles from Ierusalem Northward. About four miles from this Town, in a Mountain a little beside Dothan, lay the Tents of Holofernes in the sight of Bethulia, Iudeth, c. 7. between which and Bethulia lay the Plain of Esdrelon, in the midst whereof there ran a pleasant River, which in times past watered it. Here Iudeth (according to the custom of the Iews) washed her self. The place where Bethulia stood is to be seen at this day, the ruins of the Town and many houses still remaining. It was scituated upon a goodly high Mountain, strongly fortified by Nature, and, as it seemeth, by Art also. A man might have seen it thorough the greatest part of Galilee, but above the rest, a certain Castle in the end of the Mountain, made for the defence of the Ciy. They shew at this day, in the Mountain and Field near Dothan, the place where Holoferne's Camp stood, and the Reliques of their Tents; also the Brook where Iudeth washed her self. Bethulia signifieth, The Hand-maid of God; being derived of Bethu∣lah, a Virgin; and Iah, God. Holofernes, a prophane Captain, of which sort are those Tyrants that persecute the Church of God. The BOOK of TOBIAS. The Travels of Tobias the Elder. TOBIAS the elder was carried captive out of the Tribe of Naphtaly, where he was born, to Nineveh, the Metropolitan City of Assyria, being 600 miles: at such time as Salmanasser King of the Assyrians carried away the ten Tribes of Israel into Assyria captive; in the year before Christ 742. 2 Kings, ca. 17. Tob. 1. From that time he continued in Nineveh, being then about twenty seven years old, and numbred amongst the young men that went into Exile; for he was born about such time as Romulus and Remus were born, which was An. Mundi, 3200, and before Christ, 798, Tob. 1. About the thirtieth year of his Age, he went from Nineveh into Media, which was 752 miles, and there came to a City called Rages, in that Country, to
visit the banished Israelites: at which time he lent Gabel by Bond, ten Talents of Silver, which amounts in our Mony, at 5. s 6. d. the Ounce, to 2062 pound and 10 s. or thereabouts. From Rages he returned back again to Nineveh, 752 miles. So all his Tra∣vels were 2104 miles. The Travels of the Angel Raphel and young Tobias. IN the year before Christ 708, the Arch-Angel Raphel went from Nineveh to Rages in Media, with Tobias the younger, being 752 miles. From Rages in Media they returned back again to Nineveh, 752 miles. So these Journeys were 1504 miles. The Description of the places mentioned in their Travels Of Naphtaly. THIS was the chief City of the Tribe of Naphtaly, eighty four miles from Ierusalem toward the North. It stood in Galilee, and in times past was a strong Town: here Tobias the Elder was born. It is to be seen at this day (as some say) but much decayed; and is now called by the name of Sirin, scituated in a Mountain, so steep and strongly fortified by Nature upon the West side, that it is impossible to ascend upon it. In a Valley some two miles from this Town towards the South, Naason, spoken of in the first Chapter of Toby, is scituated. Upon the left side whereof there stood a Town called Sophet: but now there is nothing to be seen but a Castle, where in antient times the Knights Templers kept their abiding, and at this day is in the custo∣dy of the Turks. This Castle is scituated upon a high Mountain, fortified very strongly both by Art and Nature, and standeth within a mile of Naphtaly South-Westward. At such time as Iosephus, that great Historio∣grapher (who was the Son of Matthia or Marathia, a Priest of the Iews) was chosen chief Commander of the Tribe of Naphtaly, he gathered an Army of 100000, and fortified this Castle and Naphtaly, and many other Towns thereabouts, continuing a long and sharp War against the Romans, until Naphtaly was taken, and he constrained to yield himself Captive. In the taking in of which Town, Titus the Son of Vespasian did first ascend the Walls, and there made manifest his noble resolution and valour. Vid. Ios. de bell. Iud. lib. 3. & 4. Of Rages, a City of the Medes. RAges is so called of a great Congregation, being derived of Ragasch, that is, He hath assembled a great company; for it was a very Po∣pulous City. It was also called (as Strab. lib. 11. Cosmograph. saith) Rahga:
but after, being rebuilt and fortified by Nicanor, it was by him called Europus, being distant from Ierusalem 1396. Miles toward the Northeast. The Per∣sians call it Arsacia. S. Ierom. de Trad. Hebr. would have Edissa, a City of Mesopotamia (or rather as Pliny saith, of Coelosyria) to be Rages, which stands but 448. Miles from Ierusalem Northward, and from Nineveh 188 miles West∣ward. There are divers others that have wrote of this Town of Edissa: but that this and Rages should be both one, I cannot see how to agree with Toby; for that he himself hath set it down to stand in Media, and the Cities of the Medes lie distant from Ierusalem 1396 miles. Therefore gentle Reader I refer it to thy better consideration. Of Jesus the Son of Syrach. SYrach signifies an illustrious Prince, being derived of Sarach, he hath shined forth: he was of that noble Family of David, that is, the Son of Syrach the son of Iesu, and Cousen-german to Amos Syrach, who (as Philo saith) was the chief Prince and captain of the Children of Is∣rael in the time of Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, and is inserted into the Genealogy of Christ, Luke 3. He was born 230. years before Christ, in the City of Ierusalem, from whence about the 38. year of his age he went to Alexandria, a City of Egypt, 288 miles (Evergates Ptolomais the Son of Phila∣delphus being then King of that Country) where he gathered out of that flou∣rishing Library (set up at the charge of Ptolomais Philadelphus) his book of Ec∣clesiasticus, as Bees from divers flowers gather sweet hony. Of the great City Alexandria. ALexandria was a City of Egypt, distant from Ierusalem 288 miles West∣ward; in ancient time called No, that is, a Hindrance. But Alexan∣der the Great taking affection to this city, in the year 330. before Christ, be∣gan to build it, (for by continuance of time it was much decayed) and within the space of 17. days made it a goodly city, much greater than that it was before: to which, that he might add the greater grace, he called it after his own name, Alexandria; and there he lieth buried, after he had governed the Empire of the Grecians 7 years. For although he dyed in Babylon, the chief City of the Chaldaeans, yet Ptolomais (one of his chief Princes) removed his Body thence in a golden chariot to Memphis in Egypt, and 20 years after, to Alexandria. The Scituation thereof is very delectable, bordering to the North upon the Mediterranean Sea, and to the South upon the Pool of Mare∣ridis, as Strabo saith, lib. 17. It was ten miles about, strongly fortified with walls, beautified with goodly buildings, scituated in a very fruitful Country. And to give a greater delight unto the inhabitants, without the Walls there
stood many goodly Orchards and Gardens, plentifully furnished with fruits and flowers of divers kinds, as Pomecitrons, Figgs, &c. During the time of Ptolomais Philadelphus, it was a famous and flourishing City; for this Prince being a great lover of Learning, instituted an Academy, as it is thought, in it, and added thereto a stately Library, wherein were 400000 Books. The same whereof being published through the World, many People of divers Nations resorted thither to see it. Then Eleazar also the High-priest of the Iews, at the request of Ptolemais sent 72 Interpreters to translate the Bible out of Hebrew into Greek; which was (as Eusebius observeth) in the third year of his reign, before Christ 268. In recompence whereof, he sent to be dedicated in the Temple of Ierusalem a Table of gold, richly adorned with Carbuncles, Smaragdes, and other precious stones; two stately Cups, and 30 Bowls of pure gold, as appeareth in Ioseph. lib. Antiq. 12. The Academy continued there till after Christs time, as you may read, Acts 6. But the Li∣brary was consumed 47 years before Christ, and the City greatly defaced. For Iulius Caesar at that time making war with Pompey the younger, who con∣tinued with his Sister Cleopatra in this City, caused the Kings Navy to be set on fire, and the Library standing neer it, the flame took hold of it, and burnt it down to the ground, with all that was in it, and defaced also a great part of the City. Upon the Book of Maccabees. The Travels of Antiochus Epiphanes. ANtiochus Epiphanes, that is, An illustrious Adversary, in the year of Christ 380. was sent out of Syria by Antiochus the Great, to Rome, which was 1600. miles, where he remained as an hostage for his Fa∣ther and his Brother Seleucus Philpater seventeen, years, 1 Mac. 1. After the death of his Father, he stole secretly from Rome, and went back again to Antiochia in Syria, which was 1600 miles; and there succeeded his Bro∣ther Zeleucus Philopater in the government. He began to reign 173 years before Christ. In the third year of his Reign he went from Antiochia to Tyrus, 60 miles; in that journey he conquered all the lower part of Syria and Phoenicia. From thence he went about six score miles through Galilee and Iudaea, conquering all the Cities and Countries that lay in his way; and would also have gone down into Egypt; but when he heard that his Nephew Ptolomais Philometor had proclaimed an Assembly and Parliament, and would not ac∣knowledge him for his Protector, he sent Apollonius, one of his Princes, upon
the day of the meeting into Egypt, and he himself returned back again to Iop∣pa, 2 Mac. 4. From Ioppa he went to Ierusalem, which was 20. miles, where Iason the High-priest, and all the people, received him with great honour. At that time Antiochus placed a Guard in the Castle or Tower of Ierusalem, which was the beginning of their intolerable Servitude. But for that year, which was the fourth of his reign, he returned through Phoenicia to Antiochia in Syria, 280 miles. In the fifth year of his reign, he went from Antiochia with a great Army in∣to Cilicia, being 80. miles. There he appeased the Uproars of the Inhabi∣tants of Tharsus▪ and Mallotus, and conquered all Cilicia, 2 Mac. 4. From Cilicia he returned back again to Antiochia, eighty miles. In the sixth year of his reign Antiochus, went with a great Army both by sea and land (wherein were many Elephants) to Pelusio, 400 miles. This City he conquered, and overcame the Alexandrians in a Naval battel, 2 Mac. 4. From Pelusio (having built a bridge over Nilus) he went with his Army to Memphis, conquered all the Countries and strong Cities as he went, about 140. miles, and brought thither a mighty and great prey: where, according to the saying of the Prophet Daniel, cap. 11. he dealt subtilly with Ptolomais Philometor. From Memphis he returned to Alexandria, where the Citizens would not suffer him to enter the gates, wherefore he besieged it, but to small purpose; which was 120 miles. From Alexandria he returned to Pelusio, which was 160. miles, there he left a Garrison to retain what he had gotten in Egypt, 1 Mac. 4. From Pelusio he returned to Antiochia with a great prey, being 400 miles. In the mean time Ptolomais King of Egypt, and his Sister Cleopatra, brought in the aid of the Romans, Livy, Decad. lib. 4, 5. In the next year (that is, in the seventh year of Antiochus Epiphanes) there was seen in the air as if there had been men fighting; a Comet also appeared. This happened in the year before Christ 167. This year, in the Spring▪ Antiochus went the second time from Antiochia with his Army into Alexandria in Egypt, which was 560. miles. So passing through Coelosyria and Iudaea, he came into Egypt, which he invaded with open war, endeavouring to get that by force, which he could not get by entreaty. But the Romans sent P. Popillius with other Embassadours, into Egypt, who hearing that Antiochus was come to Leusia, which was within a mile of Alexandria, the Romans went thither to him. Where, when he had wel∣comed them, and shewed all the courtesie he could to P. Popillius, P. Po∣pillius delivered him certain Tables that he had about him written. And first of all commanded him to read them, which he did. Then he counselled with some of his friends, what was best to be done in
the business. While he was thus in a great Study, P. Popillius, with a wand that he had in his hand, made a Circle about him in the Dust, saying E're thoustir a foot out of this Circle return thy Answer, that I may tell the Senate whe∣ther thou hadst rather have War or Peace. This he uttered with such a firm Countenance, that it amazed the King: wherefore, after he had paused a while, quoth he, I will do what the Senate hath written, or shall think fit. So doing little or nothing in Egypt he returned back again. Iustine, lib. 34. Decad. Lib. 4. cap. 5. Ios. lib. 12. cap. 6. These things hapned ann. urb. Rom. 585. L. Aemilius Paulus aup Cais Licinius Crassus being then Consuls; in which year the Moon was totally ecclipsed, Aemilius overcame Perseus King of Macedon, and reduced Macedonia into a Province, lib. Dec. 4. lib. 5. From Leusia, Antiochus (fearing lest the Iews would forsake his Empire and rebell) went to Ierusalem, which was 288 miles; but the Inhabitants of the Town shut him out of the City, wherefore he besieged it, and by the Treason of Menelaus, Chief Priest, (who for that purpose conspired with the Guard that was in the Castle) quickly got it, and entred the Gates. In every place where he came he put the Citizens to the Sword, and for three days space did little else but cruelly massacre the People. He went also with Menelaus into the Temple, where he polluted the sacred things of the Tem∣ple, and took thence the Vessels of Silver and Gold, or whatsoever he found precious or worthy: so that the Prey he took amounted to 1800 Ta∣lents, which make almost eleven Tun of pure Gold; all which, were partly Gifts dedicated to the Temple, and partly Treasure that was left there as in in a safe and sure place, to the use of poor distressed Widows and Orphans. After that Antiochus had robbed the Temple of all the Silver and Gold that he could find, had banished Iason, had placed a strong Garrison in the Tower of Acropolis, (the Captain of which was one Philip a very cruel man) and made Menelaus High-Priest; with all this booty and some num∣ber of Captives, he returned to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. In the Year following, that is, before Christ 166, Lu. Aemilius Paulus, triumphed for the Wars of Macedonia. Not long after, Antiochus misdoubted the Fi∣delity of the Iews, sent Apollonius with an Army of 22000 to Ierusalem, who entred the City upon the Sabbath day, and committed many Out-rages. Then, Antiochus having spent a great part of the Gold and Silver which he had got from Ierusalem, about the eleventh Year of his Reign made his Expedition from Antiochia to Persepolis, (it was also called Elymaides) in Persia, which was 196 miles. Here he took the Temple of Diana, spoiled all that Country round about, and with strong hand gathered together a great Mass of Gold and Silver to maintain War against Iudas Macchabeu. But a multitude of Citizens disliking his Sacriledge, banded themselves to∣gether, and put Antiochus and his Souldiers to flight before he could take the City of Persepolis. 1 Mach. 6. 2 Mach. 9.
Wherefore being driven from thence, he fled with his Army to Egbata∣na, a City in Media, which was 209 miles. Here, having certain Intelli∣gence by Letters, of the noble Exploits of Iudas Macchabeus, and that he purged the Temple of such things as were prophane, he fell into an extream Grief, and like one distracted, railed against the Iews, and swore to be re∣venged of them, 1 Mac. 9. In this extream Anger he went from Egbatana to Babylon with his Army, which was 464 miles. But as he went, his Chariot was overthrown, in the fall whereof he was so extreamly wounded, that they were constrained to arry him in a Bed to Babylon, where he shortly after died miserably. So all his Travels were 8153 miles. Thus may we see with what Difficulties and Dangers this wicked Prince obtained his Victories, and past away his Life, sometimes in Travel, his Jour∣nies long and troublesom, sometimes in Prosperity, sometimes in Adversity, again sometimes afflicted with troublesom Cogitations, sometimes with ex∣tream Anger, seldom in Peace, and then also his Actions savouring of Violence and Filthiness. From whence it appeareth, That the Wicked, with more Sorrows, Troubles and Vexations, gain eternal Damnation, that the Just, tho they suffer many grievous Afflictions, obtain everlasting Salvation. For amongst all the Patriarchs, good Kings, and Prophets, there is not found any that had so many long and tedious Journies as this Antiochus, who continually oppressed his Mind and Conscience with unprofitable Vanities and wicked Thoughts, and at length had a miserable and terrible end. Of the Cities and Places mentioned in his Travels. Of Antiochia. ANtiochia, where Antiochus Epiphanes kept his Court, was anciently called Chaemath, or Riblah. It was scituated in Syria, 180 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, near to the Cities, Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea, which four Cities (as Strabo saith in the sixteenth Book of his Geogra∣phy) were built by Seleucus Nicanor first King of Syria. This man was a mighty Prince, and obtained the Name of Nicanor (which signifieth Victory) be∣cause he prospered in his Wars, and conquered his Adversaries. For, when (within 13 years after the Death of Alexander the Great) he had got the Kingdom of Syria, he became so great in the 31 year of his Reign, that he obtained the Empire of all the East; and beside (as Strabo saith) re-edified and built up these four Cities, calling one of them Antiochia, after the name of his Father, another Laodicea, after the name of his Mother, a third after his own name Seleucia, and the last Apamea, after the name of his Wife. These four Cities, because they were all built by one man, and at one time, were called Sisters. But Antiochia was much fairer than the other,
and in those times was a greater City than any other called after that name; yea, it was equal to Alexandria in Egypt, for glory and excellency of Building. It was divided into four parts, and those parts separated with four Walls: The first, which was anciently called Hemath (a violent Anger) of Chama∣thai the Son of Canaan; was after Riblath, from the multitude of the Inhabi∣tants; and the third time by Seleucus, after his Father's name, called Antiochia. In this part Seleucus to dignifie the City, kept his Court, it being compassed about with Goodly Walls. In the second part the Citizens of Syria inhabited. In the third, Seleuchus Callimichus (afterward King of the Syrians) kept his Court, and greatly beautified it. But in the fourth (where afterward many Christians inhabited) Antigonus Epiphanes continued, and did greatly adorn it, and set it forth with goodly buildings and sumptuous Houses. Close by the City there stood a pleasant Wood, watered with many clear Fountains and delightful Springs, to which there resorted a great multitude of Fowls of divers sorts, which sung very pleasantly among the Trees, to the great content and delectation of the Citizens. In the midst of this Wood stood the Temple of Apollo and Diana, goodly things, and very curiously built. It was called the Wood of Daphne, because it was full of Laurel Trees. From this Wood all the Country thereabout is called Epidaphne. Not far off standeth the River Orontes, which beginneth in Coelosyria, and passeth under the earth till it comes near to Apamea, where it riseth and watereth all Antio∣chia. So passing thence, it runneth some sixteen miles, and so falls into the Mediterranean Sea. Here Paul preached and kept a Synod, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 24, 25. There was another Synod kept here by the Arrians, Trip. lib. 4. 9. Stephanus reckons up many other Cities of this name: as Antiochia, in Galatia, where Paul preached, Act. 3. and is distant from this 384 miles: Antiochia in Mesopotamia, which is also called Mygdonia, and ; in which Apollophanes the Stoick, and Pharnuchus that wrote the Persian History, are said to be born. Antiochia between Syria and Arabia, built by Semiramis. An∣tiochia in Cilicia, scituated near to the River Pyramus. Antiochia in Pieria, also called by the Syrians, Arados. There is also a City called Antiochia near Mount Taurus in the Country of Comagena. Antiochia scituated upon the Lake of Callichan. Antiochia in Scythia. There was another in Caria, cal∣led also Pithapolis. Antiochia Marigiana, built by Antiochius Soter. And many Authors call Tharsus in Cilicia by the name of Antiochia. Antiochia signifies an Adversary. Of Rome. ROME stands 1528 miles from Ierusalem Westward. Of this City you may read more in the Travels of the Apostle Paul. Tyrus, Ioppa, Memphis, Peluso, Mallo, and Alexandria, are before descri∣bed.
Of Tharsus. TArsus or Tharsus signifieth a Hyacinth stone, so called (as some think) of Tharsis the Son of Iavan, the Son of Iapet, the Son of Noah, Gen. 10. It was distant from Ierusalem 304 miles Northward. Of Persepolis. PErsepolis was the Metropolitan City of Persia, distant from Ierusalem 1240 miles Eastward. So called of Perseus that mighty King of the Persians, who re-edified it and gave it that name; which is as much as to say, the Ci∣ty of the Persians, which also of him were so called. The Astronomers, because he was greatly affected to such as were skilful in that Art, attribu∣ted his name and his Wives name to two Constellations in the Heavens, of which Ovid's Fable is contributed of Pegasus and Andromache. This City of Persepolis was so fair, that it exceeded all the Cities of the East both for Stateliness, and Beauty, and so continued from Perseus time, until Ale∣xander the Great had conquered Darius: at which time, this great Emperour having got into his hand the whole Empire of the Persians, came to Persepolis in the year before Christ, 329, and there celebrated a great feast in triumph of his Victories; to which there resorted a great many Women, not such as were of the better sort, but them that followed the Camp, and lived dis∣solutely: amongst whom was that notable Curtesan Thais; who perceiving the King inclined to Mirth, and full with Wine, began to flatter him in his Cups, and among other things to commend and dignifie his Noble Exploits, with∣al giving him to understand, how acceptable it would be to the Grecians to see the Royal Palace of the Persians fired, which had so often afflicted Gre∣cia. No sooner had she uttered these words, but another seconded her, and then a third. After, the whole assembly cried out, Shall we revenge the Inju∣ry of the Grecians, and burn the City? With that they all rose in great fury, the King himself (being crowned) beginning first to fire the Palace, wherein was great abundance of Cedar, from whence it happened, that suddenly the fire spread it self a great way; which when the Army that lay without the Walls perceived, with all speed came to the City to stay the burning of it, for which purpose many brought Water with them. But when they beheld the King himself busie in this Tragedy, laying aside their Water, they also, in hope of Booty, and to imitate the steps of their Prince, fell to firing the City, and according to the custom of Souldiers in such Massacres, made a Prey of what they could get; increasing the fire with dry stuff and other Combustible matter, whereby it came to pass that the whole City was therewth fired and burnt to the ground. This was the end of that mighty City which ruled over so many Nations, where so many mighty Princes governed, that was the scourge of Grecia and the greatest part of the World, that sent forth
a Navy of 10000 Ships and an Army of an infinite number: there being an infinite number; there being at this day nothing to be seen, unless the Ri∣ver Araxes that ran close by it remaineth. Thus was that consumed in a fury, which the King and all his Army before endeavoured to spare. But after it turned to the great shame of the Macedonians, that their King should fire so famous a City in the midst of his Cups: and Alexander himself, after he had slept, repented what he had done. You shall find in 2 Mac. cap. 6. That Antiochus Epiphanes besieged a cer∣tain City in Persia called Persepolis, from whence, for his exceeding Cove∣tousness and Sacriledge, he was forced by the Inhabitants dwelling about the Town, to raise his Siege and be gone. Therefore some may gather, that this Persepolis before mentioned was rebuilded, because it also stood in Persia: but if you read 1 Mac. cap. 6. you shall find, that this City, so besieged by Antiochus, was also called Elymais, wherein stood the Temple of Diana, beautified with many goodly Ornaments, shining with the splendor of fine Gold wherewith it was gilt. In which Temple, as saith Iosephus, lib. Ant. 12. Alexander the Great left his Armour and other things. From whence may be gathered, that this Town was not the Persepolis which he caused to be burn'd, but rather some other Town built out of the Ruines of that City (according to the opinion of Quintus Curtius) or else some Village standing near to it, which being built up and enlarged, might of some be called new Persepolis, though indeed it was anciently called Elymais, and all the East part of Persia beyond Susa, of that Town called Elematica, having some affinity with Elam the ancient name of Persia, so called of Elam the Son of Sem Gen. 10. Wherefore it may well be concluded, that that Persepolis, burnt down by Alexander, was never restored, but lieth waste to this day. Thus the Empire of the Persians (after they had ruled over the Nations of the Earth 260 years) was conquered by the Grecians, who held it 129 years. At the end of which time, Demetrius Nicanor, the last Emperour of the Grecians in Syria and Asia, going with a great Army out of Syria toward the East, Arsaces King of the Medes and Parthians, being aided by the Citi∣zens of Elymais, the Persians, and Bactrians meeting him in those parts, gave him many sharp and cruel Battels, and in the end (under the pretence of Peace) took him Prisoner, in the year before Christ 137. and from that time the Parthians governed Persia and Grecia, and opposed the Romans in many cruel Battels. Afterward, in the year of our Lord, 226, Artaxerxes that mighty Lord of Persia overcame Artabanus King of the Parthians in a mighty Battel, and took his Crown from his head: the same year entring upon the Goverment of Persia, 548 years after the death of Alexander the Great: from which time, Artaxerxes and his Posterity reigned in Persia for the Space of 314 years;
in the which space there succeeded twenty eight Kings, viz. Artaxerxes 1. Sapores, Ormisdates, Vararanes, Vararanes 2. Vararanes 3. Narses, Misdates, Sa∣pores 2. Artaxerxes 2. Sapores 3. Vararanes 4. Cermazat, sir-named Is∣digertes, Vararanes 5. Vararanes 6. Perozes, Valens, Cavades, Zambades, Cavades 2. Cosroes, Hormisda, Cosroes 2. Siroes, Adhasir, Sarbaras, Borna∣rim, Hormisda 2. who was the last King of the Persians; for being overcome by Humarus, Amiras of the Saracens, and third Emperour of the Mahu∣metans, he was thrown out of his Kingdom, Anno Dom. 640. After which time, it continued long in the Government of the Saracens and Turks. Where that holy▪ Priest Mattathias the Father of Judas Machabes dwelt. MAttathias and Dorotheus, have both one signification, that is, The Gift of God; being derived of Matath, a Gift, and Iah, God. This Mattthias was a Holy Priest, of the Tribe of Levi, the Son of Iohn, the Son of Simon, of whom all that Family was called the Posterity of Simon, of the Stock of Ioarib, of whom you may read, 1 Chr. 15. He dwelt in a Town called Modin, fourteen miles from Ierusalem, toward the North-West, scituated in a Mountain, close by the way as you go to Ioppa, in the Tribe of Dan. Modin signifieth a Measure, being derived of Madad, he hath measured. In this place, seeing the cruelty of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the Insolence of his Souldiers, he killed one of his Captains, and afterward in the Synagogue put to death an Idolatrous Iew, overthrew the Altar set up by Antiochus; after called forth all the Inhabitants of Modin, and other Towns near adjoyning, to withstand the fury of this King. So they brought their Goods out of the City, into the Wilderness, where they incamped themselves, and after, so manfully opposed Antiochus, that he delivered all the Cities and Towns thereabouts out of his Bondage, and from Idolatry. But being now grown old, (after he had admonished his Sons to Constancy in the Service of God, and Courage in Defence of the Country) he died in the year before Christ, 164, and was buried at Modin, where afterward his Sons were buried. Simon, his third Son, high Priest of Ierusalem, did marvellously beautifie this Sepulchre; for he made a Vault of white Marble, compassed about with fair Pillars, which supported an admirable curious Arch, to see to as if it had been one stone. Over this Vault, in convenient places, he built seven Pyramids, in memory of his Father, Mother, his four Bre∣thren, and himself. In the Circumference of this Monument he set up fair Marble Pillars, upon which he caused to be ingraven Ships, so artificially, that they which sailed upon the Sea might see them; and upon these he placed the Arms of his Father, and of his Brethren. You may read more of this, 1 Mach. 13. Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 9.
The Travels of Judas Macchabeus. JVdas Macchabeus succeeded his Father Mattathias in the year before Christ 164, Anno Mundi 3804. and ruled six years. Immediately after his Father's death, who, as is said, was buried in Modin, he led his Army against Apollonius, chief aptain of Antiochus, who at that time was in Samaria; which was thirty miles; here he overcame Apollonius, and killed him with his own Sword, 2 Mac. 2, 3. When Seron (who was also one of Antiochus's chief Captains in Syria the lower) heard that Iudas Macchabeus had overcome Apollonius, and put him to death, he was very angry, and said, I will go and conquer Judas Machabeus and those that are with him, that so I may get my self a name, and be famous through the whole Kingdom: so he came out of Syria, and pitched his Tents near Bethoron the lower, in the Tribe of Iudah, thirty two miles from Sama∣ria. But Iudas went down to him to Bethoron, where he broke into his Camp, overcame his whole Army, and put him to the Sword, with 8000 of his men, but the rest fled into the Land of the Philistines, 1 Mac. 3. These two Victories he obtained in the first year of his Government, by which he made the name of Macchabees famous through that Kingdom. This Battel was fought eight miles from Ierusalem. Antiochus Epiphanes having certain Intelligence of that which had happen∣ed, in the next year made an Expedition into Persia, that he might gather Money in those East parts to make an offensive War against the Iews; and gave Authority to Lysias (whom he made Governour in his absence) to suppress this faction sprung up amongst them. Wherefore Lysias sent 40000 Foot and 7000 Horse into Iury; and appointed Ptolomais, Nicanor, and Gorgias to be Generals of the whole Army. Who, so soon as they had entered Iudaea after Hostile manner, they pitched their Tents near to a Town called Emaus, Iosep. lib. Ant. 13. c. 10. This Town standeth six miles and somwhat more from Ierusalem; but Iudas Macchabeus assembled his Army in Mizpah, scituated in the Tribe of Benjamin, not far from Ierusalem, six miles from Bethoron, 1. Mac. 3. After Iudas Macchabeus had implored Gods assistance in his Wars, and performed many Religious ceremonies, he went with his Army to Emaus, which was four miles: where, coming upon the Enemy in the night and unexpected, he overcame Nicanor, put him to flight, and kill'd 3000 of his men. This Victo∣ry happened in the third year of Iudas Macchabeus his Government, 1. Mac. 4. From Emaus he pursued the Enemy to Gexeron Azotus, Asserimoth and Iamniah, upon the Borders of Idumaea, which was eight miles.
After, he returned back from pursuing the Enemy with his Army to Emaus, which was eight miles, that he might oppose the Army of Gorgias; but Gorgias understanding of the overthrow of Nicanor, and burning of his Tents, fled. Iudas Macchabeus obtained his fourth victory in the third year of his Go∣vernment, which was 62 years before Christ, and in the 148 year of the Go∣vernment of the Graecians in Syria, six miles from Emaus, near to the Castle or Fortress of Bethsura, which signifies, the house of the Rock, being a very strong place, scituated in the top of a high Rock, some half a mile from Ierusalem, in the way which leadeth to Bethlehem. Near to this Castle Iudas Macchabeus overcame Lysias, Antiochus his chief General of Syria, who had 20000 foot, and 5000 horse in his Army, carrying away a great victory, and put to the sword 5000 of his men. Lysias being thus overcome, medi∣ated a Peace with the Iews, which was concluded upon the fourth day of the Month Diosceris, which answereth unto the seventh day of our Month of Iune, 2 Macch. 10. From Bethsura Iudas Macchabeus brought back his Army to Ierusalem▪ which was almost a mile; where he caused the Temple of the Lord to be cleansed of the abomination of the Gentiles, and broke down the Statue of Iupiter Olympus, which had continued there for the space of three years: and on the fifth day of the month Caslew, which is our December, celebrated a solemn Passeover, and built up a new Altar, and dedicated it unto the Lord. In the year after, being the fourth year of his Government, he repaired he Town of Sion, and fortified Bethsura against the Idumeans, which Nation all this year made War upon the Iews: But after, Iudas gathered an army and went 40 miles into Idumaea, and invaded those that were in Arabathnes, and in the Land of the sons of Bean (which people troubled the Israelites with continual Robberies) and put them to flight, so that they were constrained to take their Castle; where he fired them and it together, 1 Macch. 5. 2. Macch. 10. From Idumaea he returned back again with his army to Ierusalem, which was forty miles. Afterward he led his Army against the Ammonites, which lay 60 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast, 1. Macch. 5. From thence, he went to Iaeser in the Tribe of Gad, which was 24 miles; which he took, and all the Castles thereabouts. This Town Moses in times past conquered, as you may read before 1 Macch. 15. From Iaeser he returned to Ierusalem which was 40 miles; From thence he went to Ioppa which was 20 miles; and there he burned their Haven (for Ioppa was a Haven-Town) and those which scaped the fire he kill'd with the sword, 2 Mac. 12. From Ioppa he went to Iamnia, which was accounted four miles; where, in the Night, he fired their Haven, burn'd their Ships, and spoiled their
Town; insomuch as the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, which were sixteen miles off, might easily see the Fire, 2 Macch. 12. From Iamnia, Iudas went with his army against Timotheus, chief Captain of Antiochus Eupater, who continued at the City Caspin, which was some∣thing more than a mile, where he overcame him and 5000 Arabians, which were strengthned with 500 Horse, and took the City, 1 Mac. 12. Afterward Iudas Macchab. with his Brother Ionathan, led an Army to Characa unto the Iews that were called Tubieni, which was 96 miles, against Timotheus Governour of the Ammonites; but he was gone thence and had done nothing, but left a Garrison in a strong hold. Wherefore Dositheus and Sosipater (which were Captains with Macchab.) went forth and slew those that Timotheus had left in the Fortress more than 10000 men: Timotheus himself also fell into their hands; but by reason of his fair Speeches, they suffered him to depart with Life, 2 Mac. 12. 1 Mac. 5. From thence he went to Bozor, a fair City, which was scituated beyond Iordan near to Bethabara, in the Tribe of Reuben, it was also called Bazra, which was 24 miles: this Town he took and burned with Fire, Isa. 64. 1 Mac. 5. From Bozor he went to Mizpa, where Iephtha some ime sacrificed his Daughter, which was 32 miles. In that Journey Iudas Macchabeus rescued the Castle of Datheman, drave thence Timotheus, and put to the Sword 8000 of his Army. After, he went thence to Mizpa, won the Town, burn'd it with Fire, and put to the Sword all the male Children because the Inha∣bitants had vexed the Children of Israel with continual Robbery. After that, he won many other Towns and Cities thereabouts, 1 Mac. 5. From Mizpa, Iudas passed the River, and went to Astaroth-Carnaim, which in the second of Macchabees is called Carnion, which was eight miles: here he destroyed the Temple of Venus, which the Inhabitants call Astaroth, and put 25000 of the Inhabitants to the Sword. He went also to Atargation, a Town not far off, and took it, and delivered all the Israelites, from the greatest to the least, which were in Captivity amongst the Giliadites, 1. Mac. 5. 2 Mac. 22. From Astaroth-Carnaim he went to Ephron, being 16 miles; this City Iudas Macchabeus destroyed because the Inhabitants thereof denied him Passage, and went through it over the dead Bodies, 2 Mac. 5. Here Gideon, Judge of Israel, sometime dwelt; it took the Name from the rising up of the Dust, being derived of Aphar, that is, he hath made a dust. From Ephron, Iudas passed over Iordan into the great Field of Galilee, and so went to Scythopolis, which in ancient time was called Bethsan, which was four miles. From Bethsan or Scythopolis he returned to Ierusalem, which was 44 miles, a little before Pentecost, in the fourth year of his Government, in the Year 161 before Christ, 1 Mac. 5. 2 Mac. 12.
After the Feast of Pentecost he went from Ierusalem to Maresa, which was 16 miles; here he overcame Gorgias, Governour of Idumaea, in a great Battel, 2 Mac. 12. From Maresa he went with his Army to Odullam, which was six miles Here sometime David hid himself. From Odullam he returned to Ierusalem, being eight miles; 2 Mac. 12. From Ierusalem he brought his Army to Hebron, the Metropolitan City of the Idumaeans, which was 22 miles: this Town he won, and all the Towns and Castles near adjoyning, 1 Mac. 5. From thence he went to Samaria, which was fifty six miles, 1 Mac. 5. From Samaria he led his Army against Azotus, being 44 miles. This was a City of the Philistines, which he destroyed, broke their Altars, and burn'd their Idols in the Fire, 1 Mac. 5. After that, he conquered two Castles in Idumaea, 1 Mac. 10. After that, he returned to Ierusalem, which was accounted 22 miles, 1 Mac. 5. From Ierusalem he went to meet Timotheus, chief Captain of the Syrians, who came with a great Army to invade Iudaea. But when the Battel wa∣xed hot, there appeared to the Enemies from Heaven, five comely men upon Horses, with Bridles of Gold, two of which led the Iews, and took Macchabeus between them, and covered him on every side with their Wea∣pons, that none could hurt him; but against their Enemies they shot Darts and Lightnings, so that they were confounded with Blindness, and beaten down; whereby the Iews obtained a great Victory, and put to the Sword 20500 Foot, and 600 Horse; the rest seeing this great Slaughter, fled. So Iudas praised the Lord, and pursued the Enemies to Gazara, be∣ing sixteen miles. Here Timotheus hid himself in a Cave; but the Iews took the City, found him out, and put him to death, together with his Brother Chaerea and Pollophanes, 2 Mac. 10. From Gazara, Iudas Macchabeus returned to Ierusalem, being 16 miles. In the Year following, which was the fifth of his Reign, and 160 before Christ, Iudas Macchab▪ besieged the Tower of Sion in Ierusalem, because those that were in the Garrison had put to the Sword some of the Iews that were sacrificing in the Temple. But Antiochus Eupator, the Son of Antiochus Epiphanes, hearing of it; at the Instigation of Menelaus, Chief Priest of the Iews, brought a great Army to their Rescue; wherefore Iudas Macchabeus hearing of his coming, left the Siege, and went from Ierusalem to Modin to meet him, which was 14 miles: Here he overcame Antiochus, destroyed his Elephants, and put 4000 of his Souldiers to the Sword, 2 Mac. 13. When King Antiochus had felt a taste of the boldness of the Jews, he went with his Army through by-ways, and secret Passages to the Castle of Bethsua, which he besieged, whither Iudas followed him, which was
twelve miles; encamped himself a mile from Bethsura, in a straight place called Bethzachara. Here Antiochus, betimes in the Morning (thinking to take the Army of the Iews at an Advantage) set upon them: But the Iews and their Leaders behaved themselves so manfully, that they put Antiochus the second time to flight, and kill'd 600 of his men. In this Battel Eliazer, the Brother of Iudas Macchabeus, was slain by an Elephant, Ios. lib. Antiq. 12. lib. 16. 1 Macc. 6. From Bethzachara he returned back to Ierusalem, being two miles; and when the King had taken the Town of Bethsura (for they were constrained to yield by reason of Famine) he followed Iudas, with whom he joyned the third time in Battel; but Iudas overcame him, and put to the Sword many of his Army. Wherefore, having certain Intelligence that Philip (whom he had made Over-seer of the Affairs at Antiochia) rebelled, he made a Peace with Iudas Macchabeus, was appeased towards the Iews, did sacrifice, adorned the Temple, and shewed great Gentleness towards the People. So Antiochus departed out of Iudaea, and took Menelaus, that seditious High-Priest, along with him captive, 1 Mac. 6. 2. Mac. 13. After, in the sixth Year of his Government, Iudas went with his Army through all the Borders of Iudaea, and executed Justice upon all such as were Offenders and Contemners of the true Religion. After, when Iudas had certain intelligence that Nicanor (whom Demetrius King of Syria had sent against Ierusalem) went about by fraudulent Cour∣ses, and under pretence of Friendship, to take away his Life, 2 Mac. 14. he went privily from Ierusalem and came to Caphar-Salama, scituated twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Here Nicanor and he joyned Bat∣tel; but Judas discomfited his Army, and put to the Sword about five thou∣sand of his Men, himself not escaping without great danger, 1 Mc. 7. From Caphar-Salama, Judas came to Samaria, which was 28 miles: here he rested himself, and refreshed his Army a while, 2 Mac. 15. In the Year before Christ 128, he went from Samaria to Adrs, which was 28 miles; and there (upon the 13th. day of Adar, which answereth to the 13th. day of February) near to Bethoron the lower, he gave Nicanor a great Overthrow, and put him, with 35000 of his Host, to the Sword, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15. From Adara and Bethoron the lower, he followed the Enemies to Gaza, a City of the Philistines, being 44 miles, 1 Mac. 9. From Gaza he returned to Ierusalem, being 44 miles; there he caused the Arm of Nicanor (whom a little before he had slain at the Battel of Adarsa) to be cut off, and his Tongue to be cut out of his Head, shred small, and given to the Fowls of the Heaven, and his Head to be cut from his Shoul∣ders; because therewith he had blasphemed the Lord, and the Temple, swearing Desolation and Destruction to it and the Iews, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15.
A little after, that is to say, almost at the end of the sixth year of his Government, Iudas Macchabeus went out with 3000 chosen men in his Ar∣my, and pitched his Tents near Laisa, twelve miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the West: but when the Iews perceived the mighty Army of Bac∣chides (for he had 20000 foo, and 2000 Horse in his Host) there were many of them discouraged, so that all left him but 800 men; yet never∣theless, Iudas constrained by necessity, withstood Bacchides, and so manfully behaved himself in the Battel, that he overcame him, and put him to flight, 1 Mac. 2. His Enemies being thus put to flight, he pursued them to the Mountains of Azotus and Gazeron, which was six miles; where, being oppressed with the multitude, and hemmed in amongst them, was slain. He died in the Month Nisan, which answers to our April, Anno Mundi 3810. and before Christ 158. 1 Mac. 9. From the Mountains of Azotus and Gazeron his dead Body was carried back again to Modin, being 6 miles, and there buried. So his Travels were 915 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Mispa, Iamnia, and Laisa, you may read before. Of Caspin. THIS City stood not far from Iamnia, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-west. This Town, though it was strongly fortified, yet Iudas Macchabeus won it, 2 Mac. 12. It is called Caspin, of Keseph, which signifies, Silver. There was another City called Casphor, that is, the Sil∣ver Mountain, this stood in the Land of Gilead near Mispa, which Iudas also won, 1 Mac. 4. Of Asseremoth, otherwise called Gazaron. GAzaron or Gareza was a City of the Philistines near Ekron, sixteen miles from Ierusalem towards the West. It is so called from the Cliff of a Rock; being derived of Gezer, which signifies a Cliff. Here Iudas Mac∣chabeus was slain, 1 Mac. 6. Of the Tubiani. TVbiani are a People that dwelt beyond Iordan, in that part of Arabia-Petraea which is called Nabathea, of Nabaioth the Son of Ishmael, near to a Mountain of the Gileadites, not far distant from Abel of the Vines, where it is thought Balaam's Ass spoke. This Land is called Thubin, and the Inhabitants Tubiani; because all that Country bringeth forth very plea∣sant and excellent Wine; being derived of Zob, which signifies good, and
Iaiin, Wine. In this Country Iudas Macchabeus continued three days with his Army. Of Caphar-Salama. THIS Town stood twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the North: In Herod the Great's time in was enlarged and made a very fair City, which he caused to be called Antipatridis, after the Name of his Father An∣tipater; of which you may read more in the Travels of the Apostle Paul. Of Adarsa. THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Ephraim, between Antipatridis and Bethoron the lower, twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the North-west. It seemeth to be thus called from a noble Gift, for it is derived of Adar, which signifies illustrious, and Schal, a Gift. The Typical Signification of Judas Macchabeus. JVdas Macchabeus is a Type and Figure of our Lord Jesus Christ; and Antiochus of that wicked Antichrist, as the Interpretation of their names do evidently declare; for, Iudas signifies a Confessor, praising God and glorifying his Name for all his Benefits; so Christ the Son of God is the Praise and Glory of his Father, for that in him, and by him, God the Fa∣ther is praised, as is evident in the Song of Simeon. In like manner our Lord Jesus Christ is worthily called Macchabeus, for Macchabeus is a sir-name of the Iews, which is written after this manner,  Machabai, every Letter of which signifieth a several Word, according to the Song of Moses in the fifteenth Chapter of Exodus, where are these Words, Michamocha baelim Ie∣hovah, that is, Who is like unto thee amongst the Gods, O Lord? Thus did the Children of Israel sing with Moses, when God led them out of the Land of Aegypt through the Red Sea: and this Sentence Iudas Macchabeus continu∣ally used as an Adage; and the Letters at the beginning of these Words being joyned together into one Word, make the sir-name Macchabai. Therefore as he had always this golden Sentence in his Mouth, so had he it likewise in his Name, yea, in his Ensigns. Wherefore this name likewise is worthy to be attributed to Christ; for he is that perfect Image and Glo∣ry of his eternal Father, Heb. 1. who is called Michael, that is, Who is like unto God? and Macchabeus, or Machabai, that is, Who is like unto thee a∣mongst the Gods, O Lord. Therefore he saith thus, I am that great God that will deliver you from all evil. Ecce, Deus fortis foelix, de morte resurgo: Tartareosque unguens, Daemona ipse ligo. Behold, I am the God of Might, from death to Life that rose: I bind the Devil to my Will, his Furies I oppose.
But Antiochus signifies an adversary, or an opposer, or one that fighteth a∣gainst God. The same also doth Sathan signifie in Hebrew. He is therefore a fit Type of that great opposer of God and Man, (Antichrist) who fighteth against Christ, that Iudas Machabeus, and true Captain of the Church. For as the one (viz. Antiochus) was an adversary against the Iews, the Chil∣dren of God; so the other, (that is, Antichrist) is an adversary and Enemy against Christ and his Church, &c. The Travels of Jonathan, the brother of Judas Macchabeus. JOnathan, or Jonathas, and Theodous, hath but one signification, that is, The gift of God. This man, the same year that Judas his Brother died, succeeded him in the Principalit, and governed the Jews eighteen years, 1 Mac. 9. Joseph. lib. antiq. 3. But understanding that Bacchides, chief Captain of Demetrius King of Syria, went about to take away his life by craft, he and his Brother Simon went from Modin, and pitched their Tents in the Wilderness of Tecoah, near to the Lake of Asphar, which was twenty miles. From thence they sent their Brother John with certain Riches to the Naba∣thians, which dwelt in Medaba in Arabia (twenty eight miles) desiring them in Friendship to receive their Goods into the Town, and to keep them for their use: but the Sons of Iambri and the Nabathians issued out of Medaba unawares, fell upon John, put him to death, took away all his Wealth, and returned into their City with great joy. But Jonathan and Simon took this injury very heavily, and much bewailed the death of their Brother: Wherefore, that they might be revenged of the inhabitants of Medaba, they went thence twenty eight miles, and hid them∣selves among the Mountains, just in the way that led from Medaba to Canaan; for they had heard that the Sons of Iambri and the Inhabitants of Medaba were gone forth with great Jollity to fetch home a Bride, which was a Princes Daughter of the Land of Canaan; Now as they were merry upon the way, Jonathan, and Simon his Brother, with their Army, went out from among the Mountains, and put a great number of them to the Sword, taking away a mighty Spoyl. From Medaba they went to the River Jordan, which was three miles, where, upon the East side of the River they pitched their Tents; here he was con∣strained to fight a cruel Battel with Bacchides upon the Sabboth-day; but as he was in the fight, he met Bacchides, and lift up his hand to strike at him; but he seeing the danger, retired. Nevertheless he put to the Sword 1000 of his men, and after, he and his Followers leapt into the River and swam over: so they all escaped without Danger. In the fifty sixth year of the Grecians Government in Syria, which was the
fifth year of the Principality of Ionathan, Bacchides returned again with his Ar∣my into Iudaea, and besieged Ionathan and Simon in Bethbesan, otherwise called Bethgalam, some three miles distant from Iordan. Here Ionathan, leaving his Brother Simon in the City, stole out by a Postern, and went to all the Villages near adjoyning, from whence he gathered an Army of Chosen men, and set upon Bacchides: Simon also broke out of the City, and set upon him, so that they greatly oppressed him and burned his Tents, 1 Mac. 1. Where∣fore, when Bacchides understood that Ionathan and Simon had fortified that City, and that the Iews were ready to defend it, he concluded a Peace with Ionathan; the Captives of either part were re-delivered, and the Iews lived in Peace a good while after, 1 Mac. 9. From Bethbesan, Ionathan went to Michmas, being six miles: here he dwelt for a while, and judged the People of Israel, cherishing the good, and rooting out the Evil from amongst them, 1 Mac. 1. From Michmas he went to Ierusalem, which was ten miles. Hither Ale∣xander King of Syria, and Son of Antiochus Epiphanes, sent him a Purple Robe and a Golden Crown, and ordained him High-Priest of the Iews. Wherefore Ionathan, on the day of the Feast of the Tabernacles, which was in the year before Christ, 150, took upon him the Office to be high Priest, 1 Mac. 10. The next year after, which was the tenth of Ionathan's Rule, (after the death of Demetrius King of Syria, who was slain in the Wars against Alexander) there appeared a Comet of an Extraordinary greatness, which was of such an exceeding brightness, that it took away the darkness of the Night; and the Writers of those times affirm it to equal the Sun in greatness. After this Prodigy, the Romans began the third Punick War against the Carthaginians. Vide Camerar. lib. 2. de ostent. Ionathan in the eleventh year of his Reign, went from Ierusalem to Ptole∣mais, being seventy six miles, to the Marriage of Alexander King of Syria, and Cleopatra the Daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Aegypt, where he was entertained very honourably, 1 Mac. 10. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was seventy six miles; 1 Mac. 10. From Ierusalem he went to Ioppa, and won the Town, which was twenty miles. From Ioppa he went to Asdod, which was twelve miles; there he burnt the Temple of Dagon, and all that were in it. From thence he went with his Army to Ascalon, being twelve miles; this Town willingly yielded unto him. From Ascalon he returned to Ierusalem, which was 38 miles, 1 Mac. 10. In the fifteenth year of his Government he went to Iopa, being twenty miles, to meet Ptolomeus Philometor King of Aegypt, and stayed there all that night, 1 Mac. 11.
The next day he went with the King of Aegypt to the River of Eleutherius, which was 200 miles. From thence he returned back again to Ierusalem, which was 200 miles. Here he besieged the Tower of Acropolis, because there were many wicked men got into it. In the sixteenth year of his Government he went from Ierusalem to Ptolo∣mais, to Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria, which was 76 miles. From Ptolomais he returned back to Ierusalem, which was 76 miles. From Ierusalem (in the seventeenth year of his Government) he went beyond the River Euphrates, which was accounted four hundred miles; and there gathered an Army, in Aid of Antiochus the younger, the Son of Alexander, and went against Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was 400 miles. From Ierusalem he went with his Army to Ascalon, which was thirty miles. From thence he came to Gaza, which was eighteen miles: this Town he besieged, and after a sharp Battel won it. From Gaza he went to Damascus in Syria, which was about 200 miles. From thence he returned to the Lake of Genesereth, which was 104 miles. Here he opposed the Army of Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria. From thence (before day) he removed his Camp to Chazor, which was thirty two miles; where, when part of his Army was put to flight by a Strata∣gem, he tore his Garments, put dust upon his head, and prayed earnestly unto the Lord for aid and assistance: so having recovered his strength and former courage, he returned with those few that he had left him to the War, where he put the Army of King Demetrius to flight, and slew 3000 of his men with the Sword. His Enemies being thus dispersed, he pursued them to thier Tents, near Cades in Galilee, being six miles. From thence he returned to Ierusalem with a glorious victory, which was about some ninety two miles. Here he made a League with the Romans and Spartans, 1 Mac. 11. 12. From Ierusalem he went with his Army into the Country of Hemath, that is, Syria, to the River Eleutherius, being 200 miles; here he put his Enemies to flight, after they had burnt and consumed their Tents. From thence he went to Nabathia in Arabia, being 120 miles. Here he conquered the Arabians and Zabadians, and spoiled their Land. From thence he went through all that Country, and wasted it, till he came within eight miles of Damascus From thence he returned home to Ierusalem, which was 160 miles. In the eighteenth and last year of his Reign he caused the Walls of Ierusalem to be built, and began to fortifie many places in Iudaea, 1 Mac. 12. Also the
same year (which was the 160 year of the Government of the Graecians in Syria) the second Book of Macchabees was written, as appeareth, cap. 1. After, from Ierusalem he went to Bethsan to meet Tryphon, being forty four miles: here, being deceived by the fair speeches of Tryphon, he dischar∣ged his Army all but 3000. From thence he took these 3000 with him, and went with Tryphon to Ptolo∣mais, which was thirty two miles; into which Town he was no sooner enter∣ed, but Tryphon caused the Citizens to shut the Gates, where all his men were slain. From Ptolomais, Tryphon brought Ionathan the High-Priest to Addus, upon the Borders of Iudaea, which was sixty eight miles; from whence he sent to Simon, the Brother of Ionathan, whom he kept Captive in a Castle near ad∣joyning; promising to release his Brother, if he would send his two Sons to be Hostages, and let him have a hundred Talents of Silver, that is, 60000 Crowns. So Simon sent his two Sons, together with the Money, to Tryphon; but Tryphon took them and the Mony, and led them captive with Ionathan their Father from Adds to Addor, a Town in Idumaea, which was forty eight miles. From thence he carried them to Baschaman in the Country of the Gilea∣dites, which was ninety six miles; where, in the Winter Season, in the year before Christ, 141, this cruel and perfidious Tyrant put Ionathan and his Sons to death. From Baschamah of the Gileadites Simon removed the Bodies of Ionathan and his Sons to Modin, being sixty miles, where he buried them, 1 Mac. 13. So all his Travels were 3007 miles. The description of the places mentioned in his Travels. Of Michmas and Cades you may read before. Of Medaba. THIS City is scituated beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight miles from Ierusalem towards the East. It seems to take the name from a hot Bath that stood near it; for there were many Baths and wholsom Springs stood beyond Iordan, as Ios. Lib. Ant. 17. c. 9. witnesseth. The same things are also mentioned, Esa. cap. 26. For Medaba is derived of Mai∣im and Doba, which signifies, warm or boyling water. Of Bethbesan. THIS Town was scituated in the Tribe of Benjamin, near Gilgal, twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East. The Castle of this Town Ionathan and Simon fortified and repaired, that it might be a
strong place for them to retire to from the danger of Bacchides, 1 Mac. 9. Ios. li. Ant. 13. c. 1. saith, that this Town was called the House of blushing, being derived of Bosh, to blush, and Bethagla, a round House. Of Ptolomais. IN ancient times this Town was called Acon, scituated upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, between Tyrus and Mount Carmel, in the Tribe of Aser, 76 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. But the Aserites could not cast out the Canaanites out of that City, Ptolomeus King of Egypt con∣quered this Town and rebuilt it, calling it after his own Name, Ptolomais, which signifieth, to make War. In times past it was a goodly City, strong∣ly fortified with Towers, Bulwarks, Ditches, and Walls: it was built in a triangular Proportion, like to a Shield, two parts whereof was compassed in by the Sea, and upon the third there stood a fruitful Plain, wherein were Corn-Grounds, Pastures, Medows, Vine-yards, and Orchards, adorned with divers kinds of Fruits. It had a very fair and spacious Haven for the preserving of Ships: it was beautified with Arcinals, Castles, Temples, and many other Buildings, very stately and curious; but at this day it is utterly desolate, and scarce to be perceived where it stood. Of Eleutherius. ELeutherius was a River upon the Borders of Phoenicia and Syria, near to the City Orthosia, at the foot of Mount Libanus, 200 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North; of which you may read in the History of Iona∣than, 1 Mac. 11. 12. There is also another River of that name, between Tyrus and Sarepta, upon the Borders of Palestina, 108 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Of Genezereth. IT is a Sea in Galilee, so called from the Land of Genesara, which lyeth about it; here sometimes Capernaum stood; it signifies a Princely Gar∣den, being derived of Gen, that is, a Garden, and Sar, a Prince: for the Country round about it was very pleasant. You may read more of this in the Travels of our Saviour Christ. Of the Field Chazor. THIS was a Plain near to the Town Chazor, or Hazor; which is descri∣bed in the Travels of Joshua. It stood in the upper Galilee, 84 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Of Zabadei. ZAbadei were a People inhabiting Arabia Desarta, near to the River Eleutherius, on the North-east side of Syria and Damascus, two hundred
miles from Ierusalem. Arabia is three-fold; the one part thereof is called Deserta, which extendeth it self towards the North, to Syria and Damascus; the other is called Petraea, in which vast Wilderness the Children of Israel travelled; the third is called Arabia Foelix, which is towards the South, extending it self from the East to the Gulph of Persia, and upon the West it is shut in with the Gulf of Arabia. But the Zabadei, they inhabited in Arabia Deserta, and were a People of a liberal and free condition: from whence it seemeth they are so called; for Zabab signifieth, to endow, or bestow. Of Addus. ADDVS is called by Iosephus (lib. antiq. 13. cap. 9.) Iadah: it was a Town near Arimathea in Mount Ephraim, sixteen miles from Ierusa∣salem towards the North-west; and is so called from a Congregation, being derived of Iaad, that is, He hath assembled with Authority; and Edah, a Congregation, or Synagogue. Of Ador. THIS was a City of the Idumaeans, forty eight miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the South-west. Ador signifies, a beautiful City, being derived of Adar, that is, famous and illustrious; and Or, that is, Light. Of Baschamah. BAschamah standeth in the Land of Gilead, beyond Iordan, fifty two miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east; and is so called from sweet Gums, of which there is great Plenty in that place. The Travels of the High Priest Simon, the Brother of Judas Macchabeus. SIMON signifies an Auditor, and one that heareth; being derived of Schamah, He hath heard. This man did many worthy Acts during the Life of Iudas Macchabeus; for, being sent into Gallee, (in which Countrey there were many that rebelled) he suppressed the Insurre∣ction, and pursued the Enemies into the City of Ptolomais, which was seven∣ty six miles. From Ptolomais he brought his Army to Arabath, 36 miles. In this place, after he had assembled all the Religious Israelites thereabouts, and their Wives and Children, he brought them thence to Ierusalem, 44 miles. After, he went with his Brother Iudas to many places, and behaved himself manfully in all his Enterprizes, 2 Mac. 8. 14. He went also with him to the Battel fought between Azotus and Gazeron, where Iudas was slain, being 20 miles from Ierusalem Westward, 1 Mac. 9.
Simon and Ionathan brought the dead body of their Brother Iudas to Modin, six miles, and there buried him by his Father Mattathias, 1 Mac. 9. Afterward, Simon and his Brother Ionathan went from Modin to the Lake Asphar in the Wilderness of Tecoa, which was twenty miles. From the Desart of Tecoa they went to Madaba, which was twenty eight miles. After, they returned thence to the River of Iordan, where, upon the East side of the River, they pitch'd their Tents, twelve miles. Here they fought with Bacchides. After, they went thence to Bethbesan, three miles. From thence they went to Ierusalem, twelve miles, Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 1. From Ierusalem they went to Ioppa, twenty miles, and won the Town, Ios. lib. Ant. 13. c. 6. From Ioppa they went to Asdod, twelve miles, and in the way they put the Enemy to flight. From Asdod they went to Ascalon, twelve miles, 1 Macc. 10. From Ascalon they returned to Ierusalem, being thirty miles, 1 Mac. 10. From thence he went to Bethsura, half a mile; this Town he won, and placed a Garison in it, 1 Mac. 11. Also, in the absence of his Brother Ionathan, Simon went with his Army to Ascalon, which was thirty miles from Ierusalem, 1 Mac. 12. From thence he went to Ioppa, which was twenty miles. This Town the second time he took, and placed a Garison therein, 1 Mac. 12. From Ioppa he returned again to Ierusalem, which was twenty miles, Ios. Ant. lib. 13. cap. 8. From Ierusalem, in the last year of his Brother Ionathan's Government, he went to the Plain of Sephala, about fourteen miles, where he built the Hold of Abida, 1 Mac. 12. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, fourteen miles; There, after the Captivity of his Brother Ionathan, (whom Tryphon by cunning had betray∣ed, as is before-said) he was chosen by the People of the Iews into the Prin∣cipality. From thence he went to Addus, to meet Tryphon, sixteen miles; where he would have ransomed his Brother Ionathan, 1 Mac. 13. From Addus he went to a City of the Idumeans called Ador, or Adaram, forty eight miles. From Ador he returned into Iudea with his Army, forty miles, that he might oppose the Invasion of Tryphon, and his Souldiers, lest they should have destroyed the Country, and got Ierusalem in his absence. Tryphon having put to death his Brother Ionathan, (which was in the year before Christ 140.) Simon entred upon the Office of High-Priest the
same year, and continued in the Government eight years. In the first year of his Government he went from Ierusalem to Modin, fourteen miles. Here he buried the Body of his Brother Ionathan, in his Father's Sepulchre, very honourably, and richly beautified it. From Modin he returned to Ierusalem, fourteen miles, where he executed his Priestly Function diligently, and repaired the Holds and decayed Towns of Iudea, compassing them about with Stone Walls, and fortifying them with Towers and Bulwarks. From thence he went to Gaza, forty four miles from Ierusalem South-westward. This Town he took. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was four and forty miles. There he repaired the Tower of Acropolis, wherein he dwelt. From Ierusalem he went to Ioppa, and won the Town, which was twen∣ty miles. From Ioppa he returned to Ierusalem, which was twenty miles, where, for a time he lived very honourably, and kept a Princely Court, 1 Mac. 14. Lastly, he went with his two Sons, Iudas and Mattathias, and his Wife, to visit his Father-in-law Ptolomeus the Son of Abodus, to the Castle of Doch, which was near to Iericho, some ten miles from Ierusalem towards the North-east. Here he was slain by his Father-in-law at a Banquet, in the year before Christ 132, in the eleventh Month, which answereth to our February, 1 Mac. 16. So all his Travels were 799 miles. The Description of the Places mentioned in his Travels. Of Arabath. ARabath, or Araba, was a City near to the Lake or River Merom, not far from Dothan, forty four miles from Ierusalem towards the North. It seems to take the name from Locusts, whereof there are many kinds, 1 Mac. 5. for there are Locusts that live upon Herbs and Flowers: others that fly in great swarms in the Air; and some also that live in the Waters, not much unlike Crabs, or Cray-fishes, their Tails only excepted. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 12. reckons up another kind of Locusts, whereon Iohn Baptist did feed, and it was lawful for the Iews to eat of them: he describes them to have four Feet, and Wings, so that they can either fly, or leap upon the Earth. They can be resembled to nothing more fitly than to Grashoppers. These the Hebrews call Robae, Levit. 11. Mat. 3. because of the abundance of them; being derived of the Verb Rabah, He hath multiplied, or increased; be∣cause these kinds of Locusts come in mighty great swarms and multitudes into the East part of the World. Of these kinds of Locusts Arabath took the Name, but they are not known to us; nevertheless such there are; and, as it appeareth in Leuit. 11. were permitted to be eaten among the Iews. From
whence may be concluded, that Iohn Baptist lived upon these kind of Lo∣custs, and not upon Crabs, or Cray-fish, or any such kind of Locusts, Mat. 3. Of Sephela. SEphela is a Plain compassed about with Mountains, near the River Sorek. It lieth fourteen miles from Ierusalem Westward. Here Simon built the Castle Adida, and fortified it very strongly. Afterward there was a City built near to this Tower, called Eleutheropolis. It was a free City in the Tribe of Iudah, half way between Ierusalem and Ascalon; of which St. Ierom speak∣eth, lib. de Locis Hebr. Of Doch. THIS was a strong Tower, the Ruines whereof may be seen to this day. It was scituated near Iericho, in the Field of Hiericuntis, ten miles from Ierusalem North-eastward; where Ptolomeus the Son of Abodus persidiously put to death his Son-in-law Simon, High Priest of the Jews. From this Tower you might have seen all the Countrey of the Gileadites, the two Tribes of Gad and Reuben, and the half Tribe of Manasses, with the Moun∣tains of the Moabites, Nebo, Pisgah, and Abarim. Vid. 1 Mac. cap. ult. The Travels of John Hyrcanus. JOHN Hyrcanus was made Captain over all the Men of War, by his Fa∣ther Simon, and went from Ierusalem to Gaza, forty four miles, where he dwelt, 1 Mac. 13. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, forty four miles, in the fifth year of his Father's Government, to let him understand how Cendebius had invaded the holy Land, 1 Mac. 16. From Ierusalem, he and his Brother Iudas went with their Army to Modin, fourteen miles, where they stayed all night. The next morning, before day, they gave Battel to Cendebius, not far from Modin, overcame him, and put him to flight. So he pursued the chase till he came to the Fortress of Cedron, which stood in the Field of Azo∣tus, even eight miles. From the Field of Azotus, he and his Brother Iudas returned to Ierusalem, being twenty two miles, 1 Mac. 16. From Ierusalem he returned to Gaza, 44 miles. Now when Sorius Ptolo∣meus, the Son of Abodus, (who a little before had treacherously slain his Son-in-law Simon at a Banquet) heard of Iohn's coming into the Town, he sent forth certain Traitors and Homicides to put him to death also: but Hyrca∣nus having certain intelligence of the matter, prevented the mischief, and put these Traitors to the Sword, 1 Mac. 16. So all his Travels were 176 miles. Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in these Travels, you may read before.
Of the Kings of Syria that succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, and made War up∣on the Macchabees. And first, of the Travels of Antiochus Eupator. THIS Antiochus the younger succeeded his Father Antiochus Epiphanes, in the 149 year of the Grecians Government in Syria, which was the 161 Year before Christ, and he continued King of Asia and Syria three Years. Lysias the King's Substitute for Syria, called this man by the name of Eupator, that is, a good Father; because Kings ought to be Fathers of their Countries. This Antiochus Eupator in the second year of his Reign, came with a great Army from Antiochia to the Town of Modin, which was 380 miles. From Modin he went to the Hold at Bethsura: this he sharply besieged; being 12 miles. From Bethsura he went to Bethsachara (almost a mile) to meet with Iudas Macchabeus, who put him to flight, and kill'd 600 of his Men, 1 Mac. 6. From Bethsachara he returned to the Hold of Bethsura, and won it, being almost a mile. From Bethsura he came to Ierusalem, which was half a mile. From Ierusalem he went with his Army to Ptolomais, being seventy six miles. From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, two hundred and four miles and a half. Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in his Travels, you may read before. The Travels of Demetrius Soter, the Brother of Antiochus Epiphanes. IN An. Mundi 3809. before Christ 159. Demetrius Soter the Son of Seleucus Philopater, who was sent to Rome, brought a Navy from thence through the Mediterranean Sea, and came to Tripolis in Syria, which Journey was two thousand, six hundred, and eighty miles, and usurped upon the Government of Syria against young Antiochus, the Son of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7. From Tripolis he went to Antiochia, where the King kept his Court, eighty eight miles. Here he caused young Antiochus and Lysias to be slain, and after, reigned in Syria ten years. At length he was slain in a great Bat∣tel, by Alexander the Son of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7. So all his Travels were 1760 miles.
Of Tripolis. THIS was scituated in Phoenicia, a Province of Syria, on the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea, 170 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and was so called because there dwelt in it three sorts of People, viz. Tyrians, Sydonians, and Arabians. It is a very famous City even to this day; the Ocean Sea coming into every street, and principal place of it, and full as Populous as Tyrus. For there inhabit Grecians, Latines, Arme∣nins, Maronites, Nestorians, and People of many other Nations of divers Conditions and Customs in manner of living. It aboundeth also with great abundance of costly Tapestry, which is made so curiously, and with such cost, that it is very delightful to such as look upon it. It is credibly reported, That there are found within the City of Tripolis 4000 men that do little else but Weave and make Tapestry, and such like costly hangings. The Country round about where it standeth is very pleasant, and because of the great abundance of Vines, Olives, Figs, and other Fruits and Flowers (which yieldeth a comfortable smell, and is pro∣fitable for the maintenance of life) it is called Paradice. There is a Field before the City, some two miles in length, and one in breadth, in which there are to be seen very curious Gardens, and artificially contrived. About six miles from the City standeth Mount Libanus, at the foot whereof riseth a goodly Fountain, which with great violence runneth thence, but suddenly falleth into the Vallies, it joyns with other Waters, and becomes a fair and pleasant River, watering all the Gardens of the Plain betwen Tripolis and Libanus, but especially the Mountains of the Leopards, which is not far off. In the Canticles, cap. 4. there is mention of this Hill; Come with me my Spouse, from the Denns of the Lions, and the Mountains of the Leopards. The Water of this Spring is very clear, pleasant, cold and health∣ful; upon the Banks of it there standeth many Churches and Religious Houses; it is called the Fountain of the Gardens, and is divided into three Rivers or principal, Streams, besides many other small Brooks, which run thence and fall into the Sea; so that the Sentence, Est. 9. is verified of this, A small Fountain shall increase to a great River, and shall be poured out against many Waters. The Travels of King Alexander, Son of Epiphanes, and Brother to Antiochus Eupater OF this Alexander, Iustin writes, lib. 35. where he sheweth, that he was not Son to Antiochus Epiphanes, as was supposed, but had to name Prompalus, being a man of the meaner sort of People: but the Antio∣chians,
for the great Tyranny of Demetrius, falling into Rebellion, gave unto him the Name of Alexander, and withal caused it to be published abroad, that he was the Son of Epiphanes, which by reason of his youth was easily believed. And at this time, Demetrius, because of his cruelty, being much hated of all sorts of People; it came to pass that most, and those of the greatest also, combined with this young man, supposing him indeed to be of noble Descent, and the Son of a King, Wherefore Alexander, or Prompatus, being thus encouraged, took upon him to be the Brother of Antiochus Eupator, and called himself the Lawful Heir and Successor to the Crown of Syria, going from thence to Ptolomais, where he kept a Royal Court; and in the year of the World 3818, before Christ 150, by the help of the Antiochians, and others the Inhabitants of Syria, he took upon him the Government of that Country, and reigned five years. This man suffered many varieties and changes of Fortune: at first was put to flight by Deme∣trius; after he put Demetrius to flight, and at length put him to death and usurp'd upon his Government. In the third year of his Reign he married Cleapatra the Daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Aegypt, by whom he had his Son Antiochus. To this Marriage Ionathan was invited. In the last year of his Government, he went from Ptolomais to Antiochia, which was 200 miles, where he opposed himself against Demetrius Nicanor, the Son of Demetrius Soter, 1 Mac. cap. 10. From Antiochia he went to Cilicia, which was 120 miles, to suppress the Rebellion of his Subjects: but when he heard that Ptolomeus Philometor his Father-in-Law had taken up Arms against him, conquered Syria, and given his Wife to Demetrius Nicanor, which had been married unto him two years before, he gathered all his forces he could, and with all expedition made good the War against Ptolomeus: but he was overcome, and fled into that part of Arabia which bordereth upon the Mountain Emanus for refuge, where Zabdiel the Governour of that Country, fearing left he should fall into the displeasure of Ptolomeus, caused his Servants to cut off his head, and sent it to him into Syria; Within three days after which sight, he died, being mor∣tally wounded in the former Battel, Ios. li. Ant. 13. c. 17. So all his Tra∣vels were 320 miles. Of Amanus. AManus was a Mountain between Syria and Cilicia, which extendeth it self to the River Euphrates. Between this Amanus and Euphrates, Arabia Deserta is scituatd, 400 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and signi∣fies the Mountain of Truth; from Aman, True and Faithful.
The Travels of Demetrius Nicanor, the Son of Demetrius Soter. IN the 165 year of the Government of the Grecians in Syria, which was 131 years before Christ, Demetrius, sirnamed Nicanor, which signifies Victory, sailed out of Creet into Cilicia, which was 600 miles, Ios. Ant. 13. c. 6. 1 Mac. 10. Out of Cilicia he came into Syria the lower, 160 miles, where, joyning with Apolonius, he took upon him the Crown and Kingdom of Syria. Afterward Apolonius went into Iudaea with a great Army, and besieged Iamniah. Ptolomeus Philometor also assisted the proceeding of Demetrius, seeing Ale∣xander his Son-in-law beginning to decline; and the better to strengthen their Alliance, matched him to Cleopatra his Daughter, which before had been Wife to Alexander; by which policy, he added to the Kingdom of Egypt all Asia, over which he ruled two years, 1 Mac. 11. After, Demetrius Nicanor came out of Syria the lower, with Ptolomeus Phi∣lometor, to Antiochia, which was eighty miles, 1 Mac. 11. From Antiochia they went with their Army to a Plain near the Mountain Amanus, 120 miles; where in a sharp War they overcame Alexander and put him out of his Kingdom, Ios Ant. li. 3. c. 7. Now after the death of Ptolomeus Philimetor, Demetrius Nicanor returned to Antiochia, 120 miles, where he governed the Kingdom of Syria two years. From Antiochia he went to Ptolomais, which was 200 miles; to which place Ionathan the High-Priest came to meet him, where he gave to him many Presents and great Gifts to win his Favour, 1 Mac. 11. From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, 200 miles. There his Souldiers and the City of Antiochia rebelled against him. For which cause, Ionathan the High-Priest sent him 3000 men, which delivered the King out of dan∣ger, put to the Sword 100000 of the Seditious, and burnt the City of Antio∣chia 1 Mac. 11. But after, Demetrius shewed himself unthankful, he was driven out of his Kingdom by Tryphon and young Antiochus the Son of King Ale∣xander, who was also called Theos, which signifies God. In the 172 year of the Reign of the Grecians in Syria, which was 138 years before Christ, Nicanor having slain Antiochus the Son of Alexander, he would have reigned alone in Syria, wherefore Demetrius who was the law∣ful King of Syria, being three years before driven thence, went 1200 miles, into Media to crave aid against Tryphon; but Arsaces King of the Medes, Parthians and Persians, sent the chief Captain of his Host against Demetrius, who burned his Tents, took him Prisoner, and carried him back to his Master, to Heca∣tompilon the chief City of his Kingdom, distant from Syria 1220 miles toward the East, Iustin. lib. 36. 38.
From Hecatomylon, Arsaces sent him to Hyrcania, the metropolitan Ci∣ty of that Country, which was 176 miles; where, although Arsaces kept him as a Prisoner, yet he allowed him royal Attendance, and after marry∣ed him to his Daughter, Iust. lib. 38. After the Death of Arsaces, with singular Industry and Policy, he got out of Captivity, after he had been twelve years Prisoner in Hyrcania, and came into Syria, which was fourteen miles, where he recovered his King∣dom, and reigned four years. So all his Travels were 4156 miles. Of the Places to which he travelled. Of Creta, now called Candia. THIS is an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, diftant from Ierusalem 600 miles westward, very fruitful and pleasant, in which there grows great plenty of Cypress Trees, and Grapes of divers kinds, but principally such whereof Malmsey and Sack are made. Here Titus, Paul's Disciple, was Bi∣shop; wherefore you shall read more of it after. Of Seleucia. SEleucia is a famous City of Syria, scituated upon the shore of the Medi∣terranean Sea, 280 miles from Ierusalem North-ward, near to which the River Orantes runneth, and the Mountain Casius standeth, which is four miles high, Plin. l. 5. c. 22. You may read more of this in the Tra∣vels of St. Paul. Of Syria. SYria was sometimes called of the Hebrews, Aram, of Aram the Son of Sem, of whom all Armenia took the Name. Aram signifies, A man of great Spirit and Dignity, being derived of Rom, that is, lifted up; for he was a man of an excellent Spirit, Gen. cap. 10. Syria signifieth a great Tract of Land, and is divided into two parts, the upper and the lower. In the upper Syria are these Cities, Antiochia, Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea: in the lower Syria are Sydon, Tyrus, Berytus, Tripolis, and Orthsia. This Country is scituated in a very temperare Zone; from whence it happeneth that it is neither op∣pressed with too much Cold nor Heat. There are that divide Syria into four parts, that is, into Syria, Assyria, Leucosyria, and Coelosyriae. Also Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 12. attributeth Mesopotamia and Babylonia to Syri. But it is evi∣dent, that these were distinct Countries from them, in the which there reign∣ed Emperours and Kings which had large and spacious Dominions. For Sy∣ria is scituated between the Mediterranean Sea and Euphrates; but Mesopota∣mia (which is so called because it is scituated in the middle of Waters) is sepa∣rated from Syria and Assyria, with the Rivers Euphrates and Tygris; and Ara∣bia is separated from Syria and Babylon with many vast Wildernesses. Therefore these Countries cannot properly pass under the denomination of Syria.
Of Parthia. PArthia is a spacious Countrey, full of Mountains and Desarts, lying up∣on the Borders of Media, Westward; the Metropolis whereof his Heca∣tompylon, taking the name of an hundred Gates wherewith it is fortified. It lieth (as Stephanus saith) 1512 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Here Ar∣saces, that mighty King of the Parthians, kept his Court, who had under his Government Media, Parthia, Persia, Hircania, and the greatest part of all the Countreys toward the East. It is called Parthia, because of the fruitfulness of the Soil, being derived of Parah, to fructifie. Of Hyrcania. HYrcania is a fruitful and pleasant Countrey, bordering upon Media, and the Caspian Sea, for the most part plain and champian, beau∣tified with many fair Cities, the chief of which are, Hyrcania, (the Metropo∣lis of the whole Kingdom) Talebrota, Samariana, Carta, and Tape. It was so fat and fruitful, that the Inhabitants use not to till and dress the ground, as they do in other places, but the Seed that falleth from the husk upon the Earth, springeth up, and bringeth forth great Plenty and increase, without farther labour. The Dews also falling upon the Trees, there droppeth from them Oil and Honey in great Plenty. It taketh the name (as it is thought) from a Wood called Hyrcania, In like manner, the Caspian Sea, which bor∣dereth upon it, of this Countrey, is called Hyrcanum. Many cruel Beasts are found therein, as the Panther, the Tyger, and the Leopard. The Panther is of a whitish colour, inclining something to yellow, spotted all over with round shining spots; in like manner are their Eyes. She is a friend almost to all kinds of Creatures, except the Asp and Dragon, and (as Oppianus saith) never taken but when she is drunk, or in her sleep. She is the Female to the Leopard. The Leopard is of the same colour, and of the nature of a Wolf, being full, he hurteth nothing; but if empty, he preyeth upon every thing; yea, even upon men: his Breath is very sweet, with which many other Crea∣tures being delighted, he often preys upon them; but being full, he sleepeth sometimes three days together. The Tyger also is a very swift and cruel Creature, from whence he is so called; his skin is yellow, and full of black Spots, round and shining. If the chance to lose her young, she never leaves seeking till she finds them out. The Travels of Tryphon, that put Antiochus to death. IN An. Mundi 3826, before Christ 142. Tryphon, sometime chief Captain to Alexander King of Syria, who was slain in Arabia, went to Emaluel,
Prince of Arabia Deserta, with whom Antiochus the Son of Alexander was brought up; where he so wrought with him, that he got the Boy from him, and brought him thence into Syria, 160 miles; and within a while after, be∣sieged Antiochia, took the Town, drove thence Demetrius Nicanor, and crowned young Antiochus King of Assyria. This Journey to and again was 320 miles, 1 Mac. 11. In the second year of the Reign of young Antiochus, Tryphon went from Antiochia to Bethsan, where he perfidiously betrayed Ionathan the Brother of Iudas Macchabeus, 1 Mac. 12. being 36 miles. From Bethsan he went to Ptolomais, 32 miles. From Ptolomais he went to Addus, a Town upon the Borders of Iudaea, sixty eight miles, 1 Mac. 13. To Addus, Simon sent his Brother's Children, and his Ransom, which was 60 Talents of Silver: but after he had received the Money, he broke his Word, and went thence with Ionathan and his Sons to Ador, which was forty eight miles. From Ador he went to Baschaman in the Land of Gilead, ninety six miles. Here he put to death Ionathan and his Sons. From the Countrey of the Gileadites he returned to Antiochia, which was 240 miles. Here he put to death young Antiochus, being but a Boy of seven year of age, and usurped upon the Government in his place. He began to reign in the 172 year of the Grecians Government in Syria, and reigned three years, 1 Mac. 14. Ios. lib. ant. 13. About the end of the three years, which was in the 174 year of the Grecians Government in Syria, Antiochus Sedetes (Brother of Demetrius Ni∣canor) made War upon Tryphon, and compelled him to fly from Antiochia to Dora, 240 miles from Antiochia towards the South, 1 Mac. 85. But Antiochus Sedetes followed him thither, and so streightly besieged Do∣ra, that he was constrained to steal thence in a Ship, and ail to Orthoia, which was 160 miles. Lastly, In the way, as he was going thence to Apamea, which was an hundred and twenty miles he was taken and put to death. So all his Travels were 1360 miles. Of the Places mentioned in his Travels, which have been formerly recited. Of Dora. DORA was a Haven-Town scituated upon the shore of the Mediterra∣nean Sea, forty eight miles from Ierusalem Northward, in the mid∣way between Carmel and Caesrea Strato. In Ioseph. cap. 17. it is called Dor, that is,  durans.
Of Orthosia. THIS was a City of Assyria, scituated upon the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea, near to the place where the Eleutherius falleth into it, 200 miles from Ierusalem Northward; being so called of Diana, whom the Grecians called Orthosia, that is, Exalted or lifted up. Hither Tryphon sailed when he fled from Antiochus Sedetes, 1 Mac. 15. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 20. Concerning the Travels of Apolonius, Nicanor, Bacchides, and Cendebius; because they are sufficiently described in the Travels of the Macchabees, I thought it unfit to speak further of them. The Travels of Heliodorus. HEliodorus signifies the House of the Sun. He was Secretary and chief Governour of Antiochi in Syria, for that mighty King Saleuchus Philopator, who was Brother to that cruel Tyrant Antiochus Epipha∣nes, and was sent by his Lord and Master Seleuchus from Antiochia to Ierusalem, which was eighty miles, to spoil the Temple of the Lord: but the Lord sent an Angel richly beautified with Armour of Gold, fitting upon a Horse; who went to Heliodorus, and with his Horse trod him under his feet; and there appeared two other Angels full of Majesty and Power, that strook Heliodorus and beat him with Whips, so that he lay upon the Floor of the Temple as a Man half Dead, and could not go forth until he was carried out, 2 Mac. 3. From Ierusalem he went with that good man Onias chief Priest of the Iews (at whose earnest Prayers and Supplications he was made whole) to Antiochia, 280 miles; where he told Seleuchus Philopator of the wonderful Works of the Lord. So all his Travels were 580 miles. The Travels of the High-Priest of the Jews, that ruled before the Macchabees, as they are severally mentioned in the Books of Mac∣cabees. and first, of the Travels of Onias the High-Priest. ONIAS signifies the Riches of God; from On, Opulency, and Iah, God: for although he was afflicted with Poverty in this World, yet he was rich in God. He succeeded his Father Simon the Just, An. Mun. 3757. before Christ 211. Antiochus the Great being King of Syria. He was High-Priest thirty nine years until the death Seleuchus Philo∣pater; at the end of which time, one Simon the chief of those that kept the
Temple, being ambitious of Rule, fell to words with Onias, and from words to blows; so that there were many outrages committed by the Friends of Simon. Wherefore Onias, to give place to the Fury of his Adversaries, went from Ierusalem to Antiochia, which was to hundred and eighty miles. But Seleucus Philopator being dead, and Antiochus Epiphanes in the Govern∣ment, who was a covetous and cruel Prince; good Onias, partly for fear of him, and partly of his Brother Iason (who had but a little before purchased the Office of High-Priest for three hundred and sixty Talents of Silver, and promised to pay a yearly Tribute of eighty Talents) durst not return home to Ierusalem, but went to a Sanctuary that stood in the Wood of Daphne, which was about one mile from Antiochia, in hope of safety: to which place, one Andronichus, chief Captain to Antiochus, came to him, and with fair Speeches and flattering Words, allured him out of the Sanctuary, and traiterously put him to death. So all his Travels were two hundred eighty one miles. The Travels of the High-Priest Jason. JAson and Iesus have both one signification: he entred upon the Office of High-Priest in the first year of Antiochus Epiphanes, which was one hundred seventy three years before Christ. He went from Ierusalem to Antiochia, which was two hundred eighty miles, where, after the death of Onias, he paid to Antiochus for the Office of High-Priest, almost three Tuns of Gold, with promise to pay a yearly Tribute of 48000 Crowns. From Antiochia he returned to Ierusalem, two hundred eighty miles; where he began to build the Tower of Acropolis in Mount Acra: and that he might please that wicked King, and keep his favour, he built certain Theatres in Ierusalem, and caused Interludes and Plays to be acted in them, at such times and upon such days as the Poeple were wont to meet in the Temple to serve God. Also King Antiochus Epiphanes in the fourth year of his Priesthood coming to Ierusalem, he gave him royal entertainment. The same year Iason was put out of his Office of High-Priest by the policy and cunning of his Brother Menelaus, and was constrained to fly into the Land of the Ammonites beyond Iordan, being forty miles. Two years after, when Antiochus Epiphanes invaded Aegypt, there was a vain rumour that he was slain; wherefore Iason, with a thousand Souldiers, returned to Ierusalem, being forty miles, and broke suddenly into the City, so that Menelaus was constrained for safety of his life, to fly to the Garrison of the Syrians that were in Ierusalem.
But Antiochus hearing what had happened, came out of Aegypt with great Army of Ierusalem, wherefore he fled thence back again to the Ammonites, forty miles; but they fearing that Antiochus would come thither with his Army, he was accused before Areta, King of Arabia, and constrained to fly from one City to another for safety. Wherefore, when he perceived that he could not live there secure, he went thence into Aegypt, 280 miles. From thence he went to the Lacedemonians, six hundred miles, where he died in Exile, being cast out unlamented or buried. So all his Travels were 1560 miles. Of Lacedemonia, the Metropolitan City of Peloponnesus. LAcedemonia, or Sparta, was famous City of Peloponnesus, distant from Ierusalem six hundred miles toward the West; which although it had no Walls, yet was it one of the most fair and most populous Cities in all Grecia; and was called Sparta of Spartus, who was King thereof, and re-built it, adorning it with fair and goodly Buildings. At first it was built by one Lacedemon, who was somtime King thereof, and of him called Lacedemonia: and after, Menelaus, that mighty King of the Grecians (who had to Wife Helena the fairest Woman of all Grecia) kept his Court there. Here also Lycurgus, that famous Philosopher, reigned as King, and prescri∣bed to the Citizens and Inhabitants excellent Laws, by the observance whereof they became famous in after-Ages, and performed many noble Wars and Exploits against their Enemies, Ionathan and Simon held a friendly league with the Lacedemonians. The Travels of the High-Priest Menelaus. THIS Menelaus, called alos Onias, was (as Iosephus saith) the third Son of Simon the Just, and Brother of Iason, although, 2 Mac. 3, 4, he is said to be the Brother of one Simon of the Tribe of Benjamin, who was chief of those that kept the Temple, of whom you may read before. This man, in the fourth year of Antiochus Epiphanes, was sent by Iason his Brother to Antiochia, being two hundred and eighty miles, pon certain business, but principally, to carry the King Money. Where he made a secret Contract with hm, to pay him thirty TalentsThat is, 180000 Crowns. beside all that his Brother Iason had pay'd him, if he would insti∣ute him to be High-Priest. The King in hope of profit, gave to his motion, and under pretence of Injury and Wrong offered by Iason, constrained him to leave his Office, and fly from Ierusalem
into the Land of the Ammonites for his Safety, and so instituted Menelaus to be chief Priest of the Iews; who entred upon his Government in the year before Christ one hundred sixty nine. Wherefore Menelaus returned from Antiochia to Ierusalem, two hun∣dred and eighty miles; where he began to govern, not as chief Priest, but as a cruel and wicked Tyrant, 2 Mac. 4. But, when in the beginning of his Government he could not pay that great sum of mony which he had promised, the King sent for him to Antiochia, being two hundred and eighty miles, where for that time he was removed from his Office, and his Brother Lysimacus ordained chief Priest in his room. Wherefore Menelaus being sore troubled, vexed, and grieved in mind, for that which had hapned in the first year of his Priest-hood, returned back from Antiochia to Ierusalem, being two hundred and eighty miles. But a little after, when Antiochus Epiphanes brought an Army into Cili∣cia, to suppress the Rebellion of the Thasians and Mallotans, Menelaus taking advantage of the Kings absence, went to Andronichus (who was chief Agent for the King in Syria) to Antiochia, two hundred and eighty miles, and there gave him certain golden Vessels and Jewels that he had stollen out of the Temple, ot hire him to be his friend, and help him to his Office of High-priesthood again. But Onias the elder hearing of this Sacriledge, greatly reprehended Menelaus for shameful Fact; but he taking it in ill part, combined with Andronichus, who by fair speeches alluring him out of the Sanctuary in the wood Daphne, put him to death, after he had been five years in exile. But King Antiochus returning from Antiochia, accused Andronichus of Treason, and by the means of a certain Courtier, received Menelaus into favour. From Antiochia, Menelaus returned to Ierusalem, two hundred and eighty miles; where, by the help of his brother Lysimachus, he stole a great mass of mony out of the Temple. Which Sacriledge being known to the People, they fell to uproar, and killed Lysimachus close by the Treasury, They accused Menelaus also before Antiochus; 2 Mac. cap. 4. Antiochus, in the second year of his Priest-hood, went to Tyrus, which is one hundred miles, where he so corrupted certain Courtiers with mony, that he procured the favour of Antiochus, and caused his Accusers (good and just men) to be banished thence, as slanderers, and such as went about to defame Menelaus. From Tyrus be returned back again to Ierusalem, one hundred miles, where he fell into his old cruelty, and in the third year of his Govern∣ment, received Antiochus Epiphanes with his Army into the City of Ierusalem, who cruelly murthered the Citizens, and spoiled the Temple, 2 Mac. 5.
After the death of Antiochus, who as it is said perished of a grievous disease, and was buried at Babylon; his Son Antiochus Eupator came with a great Army into Iudaea in hostile manner. Wherefore Menelaus, in the last year of his Priesthood, went out to meet him. But Lysis accused him unto the king, as one that was the only Author of all the Evils that had hap∣ned to the Iews. Wherefore Antiochus willed Lysias to take him Prisoner; who brought him to Berea a Town in Syria, distant from Ierusalem 360 miles Northward; where, upon the top of a Tower, fifty Cubits high, he was tyed to a Wheel, and had all his Joynts broken, and through the extremity of the pain, died, 2 Mac. 3. So all his Travels were two thousand two hundred forty miles. The Travels of Alcimus, High-Priest of the Posterity of Aaron. THIS Alcimus, after the death of Menelaus, which was the year before Christ one hundred fifty, went with certain impious and wicked men to Demetrius Soter, who lived in Antiochia in Syria, being two hundred eighty miles, and there accused Iudas Macchabeus and all the Godly Iews; using such flattery toward the King, that he obtained the Principality and Office of High-Priest, which he held three years, 1 Mac. 7. From Antiochia, he and Bacchides returned back again of Ierusalem, where he was instituted in the Office of High-Priesthood, which is two hundred eighty miles. But when he saw that he was not able to withstand the power and singular vertue of Iudas Macchabeus, he returued back to Antiochia, two hundred eighty miles; where after he had accused the good men among the Iews, he obtained the Aid of Demetrius, who sent Nicanor with a great Ar∣my into Iudaea against Iudas, to establish Aleimus in the Priesthood. So Alcimus and Nicanor returned into Iudaea, two hundred eighty miles. But Alcimus seeing familiar Conference to pass between Nicanor and Iudas Machabeus, he went back again to Antiochia, two hundred eighty miles, where he told Demetrius of the perfidious dealing of Nicanor, Wherefore Demetrius, being very angry at what had happened, wrote a sharp Letter to Nicanor, giving him to understand, That it was much against his mind that he should make a League with Iudas: and further willed him (the said League notwithstanding) to bring him bound to Antiochia, Upon the receipt of which Letter, he made War upon Iudas; in which
expedition Nicanor was taken, and had his head cut off. All this happened the first year of the Priesthood of Alcimus. But when Demetrius heard of this overthrow, he sent Bacchides and Alcimus with a great Army, who went to Antiochia, and came to Ma∣stoth in the Country of Arbela, one hundred ninty two miles, where they made Incursions upon the Tribe of Naphtaly, and slew a great multitude of the Israelites, 1 Mac. 9. From Masloth they went with their Army to Gilgal, seventy six miles, This happened in the second year of the Priesthood of Alcimus. From Gilgal they came to Ierusalem, which was about twelve miles, 1 Mac. cap. 9. From thence they brought their Army to Berea, being twelve miles: here they were overcome, and put to flight by Iudas Macchabeus, 1 Mac. cap. 9. From Berea tho fled amongst the Mountains which are between Azo∣tus and Gazeron, six miles. Here Iudas Macchabeus was slain. Wherefore Alcimus returned thence back again to Ierusalem twenty miles, and caused the Walls of the inner house of the Temple, and the Monuments of the Priests, to be taken down and destroyed: but before his command was fully executed, the Lord struck him with a dead Palsie, of which he lay a time dumb, but within a while after he died of that disease, in the second year of his Priesthood, An. Mundi, three thousand eight hun∣dred and eleven, and before Christ, one hundred and fifty seven. Alcimus being dead, Bacchides returned back to Demetrius in Syria, 1 Mac. 9. For seven years after there was no High-priest in Ierusalem, till Ionathan the Brother of Iudas Macchabeus took upon him that Office, 1 Mac. 10. So all his Travels were 1717 miles. Of the places to which he travelled. Of Arbela. THIS was a City in the upper Galilee, belonging to the Tribe of Naph∣taly, ninety six miles from Ierusalem Northward▪ of which Town all the Country is called Arbela, being derived of Arab, to lie hid. Of Masloth. THIS also is a Town of Naphtaly, ninety two miles from Ierusalem Northward; and is derived to Maschal, which signifies, he hath governed.
Of Berea. TO this City Iotham sometime fled from the Fury of his Brother Abime∣lech, Judge of Israel, Iudg. 9. It is scituated twelve miles from Ierusa∣lem Westward, and signifies, a clear Well. Thus by God's Providence have I described the Travels and Journeys of the Holy Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets, &c. as they are severally menti∣oned in the Old Testament; that so, gentle Reader, thou might'st under∣stand what difficult and tedious Journeys, and in them what great Labour and Vexation they were constrained to bear in this World, till God of his Mercy took them out of this Vale of Misery, and placed them in everla∣sting Happiness, where now, without doubt, they remain in peace.
The Quantities of the Monies both Silver and Gold, as they are severally mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced to our Weights and English Valuations. EVER since the time that Monies have been allowed as current in Exchange betwixt man and man (which for that purpose, as Aristo∣tle saith, was first ordained) it hath passed according to the valuation of a certain Weight, which for the most part is Universal, accor∣ding to the worth and estimation thereof in the several Countries where it is to be sold and exchanged; or else by Coin, which is current according to the valuation that is imposed upon it by the consent of a State, or com∣mand of a Prince. In both which, there have been used sundry distincti∣ons of greater and less valuations of Weights and Coin, according to the necessity and estimation thereof in several Kingdoms and Governments. As amongst the Iews they used Weights and no Coin, and these distin∣guished in several sorts, and, as is thought, separated with sundry Marks, that they might be known each from other. The Weights that they used were commonly three, viz. the Centiner or Talent, the Mina, and the Sicle; according to the Opinion of Iosephus, Budaeus, Hostius, and many others. Of a Sicle. A Sicle was a kind of Weight, current among the Iews, containing precisely half an ounce of silver or Gold; which, that it might be di∣stinguished, had a particular Effigies or Superscription; viz. upon one side was to be seen the measure wherein they kept Manna in the Sanctuary, with this Superscription, The Sicle of Israel; and on the other the Rod of Aaron flourishing, with this Inscription, Holy Ierusalem, which is ordinarily worth in English money 2 s. 6 d. and Gold 15s. and more or less accor∣ding to the pureness or baseness of either. A Sicle was divided into these parts. 1. Into a Drachma, i. e. 7 d. ob. whereof four make a Sicle, Gen. 13. 15. Ex∣od 21. 32, &c. 2. Half Sicles, mentioned Exod. 30. 13. 15. ca. 38. 26. which was the yearly Tax imposed upon every man toward the building of the Tabernacle, i. 15 d. English.
3. Quadrans Sicli, or the fourth part of a Sicle, which was also in use among the Iewes, 1 Sam. 8. 9. which amounts to a Roman penny, and in our money to 7 d. ob. and by the Grecians were called Drachma. 4. Gheras, Exod. 30. 13. which was the twentieth part of a Sicle, and was worth 1 d. ob. Of Sicles there were three sorts. 1. A common Sicle, which weighed a quarter of an ounce, and was worth 15 d. 2. The Kings Sicle, which weighed three Drachma's, that is in our money 22 d. ob. 3. The Sicle of the Temple, which weighed directly half an ounce, and was worth 2 s. 6d. Of a Mina. A Mina was a pound weight among the Iews, and were of two sorts, one of Gold, which weighed 100 Drachma's, another of Silver, weighing 240 Drachma's. These were called the antient Weights; but there was later, which is said to contain 100 Denaria's or Attick Drachma's, which seem to be so called because of the Traffick the Iews had with the Grecians, among whom it was worth 100 Attick Drachma's, i. 3. l. 2 s. 6. d. English. Of Mina's there were three sorts, as appeareth in Ezech. 45. 1. The common Mina or Pound (weighing twenty five half Ounces or Sicles of the Temple) amounted to sixty Drachma's, i. 37 s. 6 d. 2. The King's Mina or Pound (weighing twenty half Ounces or Sicles of the Temple (amounted to eighty Drachma's, i. 50 s. 3. The Mina, or Pound of the Temple or Sanctuary, (which weighed 25 half Ounces or Sicles) maketh 100 Drachma's, i. 3 l. 2 s. 5 d. Of a Talent. THE Herew Talent ordinarily weigheth 125 Pounds, which being divided, amounteth to 3000 Sicles or half Ounces, as it plainly appear∣eth, Exod. 38. 25, 26. where it is said that 600000 men offered so many half Sicles, which make 300000 Sicles, the 100th part of which make a Talent, from whence it appeareth, that 3000 Sicles make a Talent. Also Epi∣hanes observeth, lib. 1. de Pon. That the Attick Talent is equal in weight with the Hebrew; for, as the Hebrew contains 3000 Sickles, which make 125 l. so the Attick contains 1200 Drachma's, which make the same weight, and is worth 375. l. of English Money. But the Hebrew Talent of Gold, which for the most part is used in every place, is worth 4500 l. in our Money. The Jews had three sorts of Talents. 1. The common Talent (weighing 3000 quarters of an Ounce, or com∣mon Sicles) amounts to 6000 Drachma's, which is 187 l. 10 s.
2. The Kings Talent weighed 3000 of the Kings Sicles, which amounted to 9000 Drachma's, which 281 is l. 5 s. 3. The Talent of the Temple or Sanctuary, weighed 3000 Sicles of the Temple, which are precisely so many half Ounces, which amount to 375 Pounds. From hence then may easily be gathered, that although the Iews had several Weights and denominations of Silver and Gold, yet only one kind was usually observed in traffique with other Nations, and that had corre∣spondency with their Weights, the rest being only for the common sort, or particular uses; for although there were divers Sicles, Mina's and Talents among themselves, yet the common weight (whether it was of Sicle, Mina or Talent) was usually that which they termed the Talent of the Temple, and that had a just correspondency with the Grecian Talent both in weight and in worth; and this not only among them, but also by relation from them to the Italians; and that Nation obtaining an universal Monarchy, made it common with us also. Of other Weights used among the Jews. THEY had also other Weights which they used, passing under several denominations and differing value; as Keseph, a Silverling or Nummus; which name is very often used for a Sicle, as appeareth, Gen. 20. 16. and 23, 16. 43, 21. 2 Sam. 18. 11, 12. The Chaldaeans called this Silga, and the He∣brews, Shekel, being precisely half an Ounce, and worth 2. s. 6 d. For thirty of these Silverlings of the Sanctuary our Saviour Christ was sold, Matth. 26. which amounteth to 3 l. 15 s. English. There was also another kind of Silverling or Nummus used, which was cal∣led Siclus, but it was the common or Vulgar Sicle, which was but a quarter of an Ounce, and was worth but 15 d. There was another kind of Silverling or Nummus used, which was called Keshitah; of which you may read in three several places of Scripture, Gen. 33. 19. Ios. 24. 32. Iob 42. 11. and was signed with the Image of a Lamb upon it, from whence it is so called. The antient Nummus of the Arabians and Chaldeans was like unto this, as may be gathered by many circumstan∣ces out of the places where it is mentioned, and was of the same valuation as the Grecians was amongst the Iews, which was 1 d. ob. But the Silverlings mentioned Act. 1. 9, 19. are intended to be Grecian Silverlings or Nummus, and is worth an Attick Drachma; for the Grecians reckon their Sums of Money by Drachma's, as the Iews and Romans by Sicles and Sestertia's, and is worth of our Money 7 d. ob. You shall read in Mat. 17. 24. of a Didrachma, which is worth in our Money 15. d.
Also Mat. 17. 27. of a Stater, which is a Greek Coin, worth 2 s. 6 d. And Mat. 18. 22. and 22. 19, &c. of a Denarius, which was a Roman Coin, which is evident Mat. 21. because the Image of Caesar was upon it, and was worth 7 d. ob. 1 Sam. 2. of a Scruple, which was worth 1 d. ob. q. O. In Exod. 30. Num. 3. Ezek. 45. of an Obulus, which was 1 d. q. In Mat. 12. o a Minutus, with was, ob. q. And in Mat. 12. Mat. 5. you shall read of a Coin called Quadrans, being something more than half a farthing. These are briefly the Weight, and Monies the Iews used, both foreign and domestick, in their Trade and Commerce. Of the Gold Weight among the Iews. THE Iews also had their particular Weights for their Gold, as they had for their Silver, the least of which were called Zuza, or Drachma, which is worth 7 s. 6. d. and more or less according to the pureness or baseness of it. It was also called Daikemonim, Esd. 2. and Nehem. 7. The Chaldae∣ans call it Edarchonim, Esd. 8. The common Sicle of Gold weighed two Drachma's, and was worth 15 s. The Kings Sicle weighed 3 Drachma's, and was worth 22 s. 6. d. The Sicle of the Temple weighed 4 Drachma's, being precisely half an ounce, and was worth 30 s. The common Mina or pound of Gold weighed 60 Drachma's or Hunga∣rian Ducats, which is worth 22 li. 10 s. The Kings Mina or pound, 80 Drachma's, or Hungarian Ducats, which is 30 li, English. The Mina or pound of the Temple weighed 100 Drachma's or Hungarian Ducats, which was 2250 li. The Common Talent of Gold weighed 6000 Drachma's, or Hungarian Ductas, and was 2250 li. The Kings Talent weighed 9000 Drachma's or Hungarian Ducats, which was 3375 li. The Talent of the Temple weighed 12000 Drachma's, or Hungarian Ducats, which was of our money 45000 li. Of Gold Weights which were not originally the Jews, but borrowed of other Nations, and used amongst them. THere are four kinds of Weights that are mentioned in the Scriptures, which were common amongst the Iews, besides the former, viz. Zahab, of which you may read, 2 King. 5. 5. 2 Chr. 9. 16. and is called by the name of a Nummus. The Sicle of Gold, 1 Chron. 21. 25. which is there
also called Nummus. Both which being so called, seem to signifie a Di∣drachma of Gold: and these two were properly belonging to the Iews. The other that follow belonged not to them, but they received them from other Nations; as the Stater, Drachmon, and Adarchon. The Stater was an ancient piece of Gold, common amongst the Persi∣ans, the Grecians, the Romans, and other great Governments, being di∣stinguished by the Superscription of the Kings or Countreys where they were made or coined; as the Stater Philippici, Stater Darici, Stater Ale∣xandrei, Stater Romani, &c. They were pure fine Gold, some of which were as much in value as a double Ducat, others as four Hungarian Ducats, and some as Portugues. The Drachmon, (of which you may read, Ezra 8. 27, &c.) is a Per∣sian Coin, as it seems, for the Grecian Interpreters call it Drachmen, which is as much more as the Attick Drachma, and in our money is worth 7 s. 6 d. Adarchon also seems to be a Persian Coin, and doth imply the name of a Prince, or Daricum signifies the Gold of the Persians: For Darius the Son of Hystaspis then reigned, when these Nummus of Gold, thus called, were dedicated to the Building of the Temple; and this man, for the most part, coined singular good Gold, as Herodotus in Melpom. saith: where∣fore they were either called Darici, because they wee coined by the Persian Kings, or else, as Plutarch in Artax. observes, because the Image of Da∣rius stood upon one part of it. And was worth of our money seven shil∣lings and six pence. Thus you may perceive what diversities of Weights were used amongst the Iews; being crept in amongst them, partly because of their Captivity, and partly because of their Commerce and Trade with other Nations. It is therefore worthy of observation, that if at any time you read of any weight of Money, Brass, or the like, in the Holy Scripture, to consider of what sort of Weight it is, viz. whether a Weight of the Iews, or some Foreign and strange Weight. If of the Iews, whether it be the common Sicle, the King's Sicle, or the Sicle of the Temple. But if these may be discerned, you shall for the most part find the Addition, which may easily distinguish them. But if there be no addition, that is the King's Sicle, or the Sicle of the Temple, then you may presume that it is the common Sicle. And so for other Weights and Monies.
That these things may appear the plainer unto you, I have here added the principal Sums of Money, reduced to our English Valuations, as they are severaly mentioned in most places of Scripture. And first out of Genesis. GENESIS. ABimelech King of Gerar said to Sara, I have given your Brother an hundred silverlings, which were common Sicles, 62 l. 16 s. cap. 20. Abraham bought a burying-place for his Wife Sara, for 400 Sicles of Sil∣ver, which are common Sicles, that is, 25 l. cap. 24. v. 22. Abraham's Servant gave Rebecca half a Sicle of Gold, and two Bracelets upon her hands, weighing ten Sicles, which are intended to be common Si∣cles, because there is no addition; which was 4 li. 2 s. 6 d. cap. 15. v. 16. Ioseph was sold by his Brothers for 20 silverlings, that is, common Sicles, according to the seventy Interpreters, cap. 27. ver. 28. i. 1 l. 5 s. But the Sil∣verlings our Saviour was sold for were as much again, being Sicles of the Tem∣ple, which were precisely half ounces. Exodus. THe mulct that was prescribed by the Lord to pay by him who had an Ox that gored or hurt another mans Servant, was thirty common Si∣cles, that is, 3 l. 15 s. cap. 31. ver. 32. When the People were numbred, each man was to give half a Sicle of the Temple, i. 1 s. 3 d. cap. 30. v. 31. The seven Lamps in the Temple, with their Snuffers and Snuffing-dishes, were made of a Talent of fine Gold, after the weight of the Temple, and were worth 4500 li. cap. 37. ver. 24. All the Gold that was occupied in all the Work wrought for the holy Place, which was the Gold of the Offering, was 26 Talents, and 370 Sicles, according to the Sicle of the Sanctuary, being 130596 li. 5 s. cap. 38. v. 25. But the Silver of them that were numbred in the Congregation, was 100 Talents, and 1775 Sicles, after the weight of the Temple; amounting to 37721 li. 18 s. 6 d. cap. 38. v. 25. Moreover, there were 100 Talents of Silver to cast the Sockets of the San∣ctuary, and the Sockets of the Vail, 100 Sockets of an hundred Talents, a Talent for a Socket, which was 375 l. a Socket, and in the Whole 37500 l. cap. 38. ver. 27. Leviticus. IF any man shall make a Vow of a Person unto the Lord, by the estima∣then then thy estimation shall be thus; a male from twenty years old unto sixty years old shall be by thy estimation a fifty Sicles of Silver, after the Sicle of the Sanctuary, which is 6 l. 5 s. cap. 17. v. 2, 3. 15. 6, 7.
Ver. 3. But a Female, then but thirty Sicles of Silver, i. e. 3 l. 15 s. Ver. 4. And from five years old to 20 years old, thy valuation shall be for the Male twenty Sicles of Silver, i. e. 50 s. and for the Female ten Sicles of Silver, i. e. twenty five shillings. Ver. 5. But from a Month old to five years old, thy price of the Male shall be five Sicles of Silver, i. e. 12 s. 6 d. and for the Female three Sicles of Silver; which was 37 s. 6 d. Ver. 6. And from 60 years old and above, if he be a Male, then 15 Sicles, i. e. thirty seven shillings six pence. Numbers. FOR the redeeming of the 273, which were more than the Levites of the First-born of the Children of Israel, there shall be taken five Sicles a man, after the Weight of the Temple, cap. 3. 46, 47. i. e. 12 s. 6 d. a man; and for the whole 170 l. 12 s. 6 d. The Princes of Israel, being twelve in number, offered unto God each of them a Silver Charger of 130 Sicles weight, and a Silver Bowl of seventy Sicles, after the Sicle of the Sanctuary, cap. 7. 13. i. e. 25 l. a Prince, and amounted in the whole to 300 l. and an Incence Cup of Gold of ten Sicles, for evry Prince, which was 7 l. 10 s. a man, which in the whole amounted to 90 l. Deuteronomy. IF any man take a Wife, and when he hath layn with her, hate her, and lay slanderous things to her charge, and she prove not guilty of the fact, he shall be condemned in 100 common Sicles of Silver, cap. 22. v. 19. i. e. 6 l. 5 s▪ If a Man lie with a Maid, he shall pay unto her Father 50 Sicles, viz. com∣mon Sicles, cap. 22 v. 29. i. e. 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. Ioshuah. AND Achan answered Ioshuah, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord; for I saw amongst the Spoyls a goodly Babylonish Garment, and 200 Sicles of Silver, cap. 7. v. 20 (i. e. 12 l. 10 s.) and a Wedg of Gold of fifty Sicles, i. e. 37 l. 10 s. English. Iudges. GIDEON gathered of the Spoyls of the Midianites for a present 1700 Sicles of Gold, cap. 8. v. 26. i. e. 1275 l. The Princes of the Philistines promised the Harlot Dalilah, if she could betray Sampson, to give her 1100 Silverlings, i. e. common Sicles, which was 68 l. 15 s. cap. 16. 5. The Body of the Image in the House of Micah in Mount Ephraim, weighed 200 Silverlings, i. e. common Sicles, which is 12 l. 10 s. cap. 17. v. 4. And the sum of Mony which Micah's Mother missed was 1100 common Sicles of Silver, for which she cursed; i. e. 68 l. 15 s.
To the Levite that served Micah, she gave yearly a Suit of Apparel, tenths, and ten silverlings, or Sicles of the Sanctuary, for with that kind of Money the Levites were rewarded, i. 1 l. 5 s. I Samuel. AND all that remain in the house of Eli shall come and bow down to him for a piece of Silver, in Hebrew it is Agorah, which Foretarius and Avenarius interpret Scrupulo Argenti, which was 1d. ob. q. But if you take the antient Interpreters, it was Obulum, that is, 1 d. q. cap. 2. v. 36. When Saul sought his Fathers Asses, his Servant had about him the fourth part of a common Sicle of Silver, that is, 3 d. ob. q. cap. 9. v. 8. The Brigandine of the Great Gyant Coliah weighed 5000 Sicles of Brass, which at sixteen Ounces in the Pound, comes to seventy eight Pounds and two Ounces: and the head of his Spear weighed sixty Sicles, that is, after the same weight, nine pound a quarter and half of Iron. cap. 17. v. 5. II Samuel. AND David won the Town of Rabba, and took the Kings Crown from his head and set it upon his own head; which weighed a Talent of Gold, and was (according to our common Interpreters in these times) a common Talent of the Iews, i. 46 l. 14 Ounces, worth 2250 l. English. cap. 12. v. 30. But other Writers, considering that if it had been so heavy, the King could not have worn it, therefore they think it to be a Talent, according to the Syrian weight, which is not above a quarter of an Hebrew Talent, and was of our weight eleven Pound four Ounces, that is, 551 l. And the reason of their opinion was, because Rabbah and the whole Country of the Children of Ammon lay in the Land of Syria, and therefore it must necessarily fol∣low, that their Weight was Syrian Weight; the King of Rabbah never wear∣ing this Crown but when he made some Solemn Feast or Triumph. There are others that value it according to the worth of the Crown, not of the Weight; and for that it was made of fine Gold, set with pretious Stones and other Jewels, therefore it weighed a Talent, that is, it was worth a Talent; according to that of Zach. ca. 1. So they weighed fro my Wages as much as I am valued, i. e. thirty Silverlings. Thus have I set before you three Interpretations, follow which you like. And Ioab spake unto the man that brought him word that Absalon was hanging upon an Oak-tree, saying, If thou had'st smote him to the ground, I would have given thee ten Sicles of Silver, or ten Silverlings, which was 12 s. 6 d. The man answered him and said, If you had laid 1000 Silverlings (that is 62 l. 10 s.) in my hand, yet I would not have laid my hand upon the Kings Son, cap. 18. v. 11. When the Angel of God stretched forth his hand over Ierusalem, and strook the People with the Pestilence; at the commandment of Gad the Pro∣phet,
David went to Araunah the Iebusite and bought his threshing-floor for fifty Sicles of Silver, of lthe common Weight. Some say that every Tribe gave fifty Sicles, being 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. a Tribe; and in the whole amounted to 37 l. 10s. cap. 25. v. 25. I. Kings. THE Queen of Saba gave unto King Solomon 120 Centiners, or Talents of Gold; being 265000 Pounds English; this was pure Arabia Gold, and therefore, according to the worth of Gold in these days, much more than is set down, cap. 5. v. 28. King Solomon had brought into his Kingdom in one year 666 Talents or Centiners of fine Arabian Gold; which at 4500 Pound the Talent, is 2997000 l. viz. two millions nine hundred ninety seven thousand Pounds English. But the Silver that Solomon had, was not to be numbred. cap. 10▪ v. 14. And King Solomon caused 200 Targets to be made of the finest Gold, each Target weighing 200 Sicles of Gold, that is 600 Hungarian Ducats; and was worth 225 l. a Target; which in the whole amounteth to 4500 l. English. cap. 10. v. 16. There came and went up out of Aegypt a Chariot worth 600 Sicles of Silver, which is 37 l. 10 s. and a Horse worth 150 l. that is 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. cap. 10. v. 29. II. Kings. NAaman General of the King of Syria's Host, when he travelled to Samaria to be healed of his Leprosie, took with him ten Talents of Silver, that were of the common Weight, each Talent worth 187 l. 10 s. being in the whole 1875 l. But if you account it after the Syrians Talent (as some would have it) which is but the fourth part of the Hebrew; then it came to 46 l. 17 s. 6 d. the Talent, and in the whole to 468 l. 15 s. He also brought 1000 Drachma's of Gold, being so many Hungarian Ducates, being worth 375 l. English. cap. 5. v. 5. Being healed of his Leprosie, he gave to Gehazie, two Talents of Silver in two Bags; which if they were according to the Weight of the Iews, amounted to 375 l. and was as much a man could carry. But if according to they Syrian Weight, then it came but to 95 l. which he might well carry and not be discovered. cap. 5. v. 5. Benhadad King of Syria of streightly besieged Samaria, that an Asses head was sold at eighty pieces of Silver, or Silverlings, which is five Pound; and a quarter of a cabe of Doves Dung, at five pieces or Silverlings that is, 5 s. 4 d. But after the Lord strook the Syrians so that they fled from their Siege, and the Citizens opened their Gates, and rifled their Tents; by vvhich means there vvas such Plenty, that tvvo Measures of Barley were sold for a Sicle, that is, fifteen pence, and tvvo Measures of fine Flower, at fifteen pence. When Phul King of Assyria invaded Menahem King of Israel, he vvas
constrained to give him a thousand Talents of Silver, that is, 187500 l. that his help might be with him to establish a Kingdom in his hand, and depart: for the payment of which Money, all the men of Substance in Israel were constrained to pay fifty Sicles of Silver a piece, that is, 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. a man. I. Chronicles. IT was said that David left Solomon towards the building the Temple 10000 Talents of Gold, that is, 450000000 l▪ four hundred and fifty millions of Pounds. cap. 22. v. 14. Also he left him for the finishing of the same work 1000000 Talents of Silver, which amount unto 375000000 l. viz. three hundred seventy five millions of pounds. Also David dedicated to the Temple, of his own Goods, 3000 Talents of Gold, that is, 135000 l. And of Silver 7000 Talents, that is, 2625000 l. viz. 2 millions six hundred twenty five thousand Pound, English. The offering which David gave towards the building of the Temple, was 5000 Talents, and 10000 Adarcons, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, that is, 22507500 l. viz. twenty two millions five hundred seven thousand five hundred Pounds. So all that was given by David towards the building of the Temple was 8 hundred 47 thousand millions, 3 hundred 82 thousand 5 hundred Pounds. II. Chronicles. SOlomon made 300 Shields of fine Gold, every Shield weighing 300 pieces of Gold, that is, 112 l. 10 s. so in the whole they came to 33650 l. Esdras. SOME of the chief of the Iews, when they returned from the Captivity of Babylon unto Ierusalem, gave to the building of the Temple 61000 Drachma's, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, cap. 2. Ver. 69. that is, 21525 l. also five thousand pound of Silver, which at 37 s. 6 d. the pound, cometh to 9375 l. ARTASHAST (who in some places is called Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus, commanded his Treasurer to give unto Esdras towards the building of the Temple of Ierusalem, 100 Centiners or talents of silver cap. 7. v. 21. 22. which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) cometh to 18750 li. according to the Hebrew common weight; for as oft as there is no addition, it is to be intended in every place the common weight. The King of Persa and his Nobles, with all Israel, gave to the building of the Temple in Ierusalem 650 Centiners of silver, of the common weight, cap. 8. v. 16. 26. which (at 187 li. 10 s. the Talent) cometh to 121875 li. also in silver vessels 100 Centiners or Talents which (at 187 li. 20 s. the Talent) cometh to 1875 l. also 100 Centiners or talents of Gold, which (at 2250 l. the Talent)
in the whole cometh to 225000 li. or thereabouts; also 20 cups of Gold, weighing 1000 Drachma's or Hungarian Ducats, that is, 375 li. each of which cups were worth 18 li. 15 s. Nehemiah. THE Tirshatha (or as some have it Nehemiah) gave to the work 1000 Drachma's of Gold, cap. 7. v. 37. which was 275 l. and some of the Fathers gave to the Work 20000 Drachma's, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, which came to 5500000 l. also 2200 pounds of Silver, which was 4125 l. and the rest of lthe People gave 20000 Drachma's or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, Which came to 5500000 l. also 2000 pieces of Silver, which were common pounds, which cometh to 3756 l. Ester. PRoud Hammon offered 10000 Centiners, or Talen ts of Silver, to destroy the Iews; cap. 3. v. 9. which (at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent) cometh to 1875000 li. Ezekiel. chap. 45. v. 43. A Sicle of the Temple shall be twenty Gerahs, that is, 2 s. 6 d. (for in this place he speaketh of that which belongeth ot the Sanctuary) and the Mina (that is the Kings Mina) shall be twenty Sicles: and 25 Sicles shall be the Mina of the Temple; and fifteen Sicles shall be the common Mina; of which you may read before. Tobias chap. 1. v. 10. OLD Tobias willingly lent to the poor man Gabel, in Rages, a Town in Media, ten pounds of Silver, that is, 18 l. 15 s. But if it be according to our translation, that is, ten Talents, at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, is 1963 l. after the common Weight. But if after the Weight of the Temple, it comes to as much more. I Macchabees. chap. 10. v. 40. 42. DEmetrius King of Syria offered to give yearly unto the Iews for the building of the Temple, 15000 Sicles of Silver, of the Temple Weight; that is, 1000 Mina's, which (at 37 s. 6 d. the Mina) comes to 1875 l. And, if they would aid him, he would restore the Money again, which his Officers had kept back of the Revenues of the Temple; which was yearly five thousand Sicles of the Temple, of Silver; that is 2500 Crowns English; which is, 625 l. Ionathan the High-Priest of Ierusalem, wrought so well with Demetrius King of Syria, that he released the Iews of their yearly Tribute, and made them free; for which freedom he gave three hundred Centiners of Gold, or common Talents; cap. 11. v. 28. Which at 2250 l. the Talent, cometh to 6750000 l. Simon to release his Brother, sent to Tryphon, the King of Syria's General
of his Host, one hundred Centiners or Talents of Silver, of the common Weight, cap. 13. v. 16. 19. which at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, amounts to 18750 l. Simon the High-Priest of Ierusalem sent to the Romans a great Shield of Gold, weighing one thousand pounds; cap. 14. v. 14. which is one hundred thou∣sand Hungarian Ducats, thirty seven thousand five hundred Pound English. Antiochus, Demetrius his Son, King of Syria, asked of Simon the High-Priest of Ierusalem, for the Redemption of certain Towns that he had taken, five hundred Centiners, or common Talents of Silver: and for his charges as much more; cap. 15. v. 31, 35. in all, a thousand Centiners or Talents: that is 187500 l. in English Money. But Simon refused the proffer, yet nevertheless, that he might live in Peace, he offered him 100 Talents of Silver, which (at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent) amounteth to 18750 l. II. Macchabees. WHEN Heliodorus would have robbed the Temple, there was in it 400 Centiners of Silver (of the weight of the Temple) which at 375 l. the Talent, cometh in the whole to 150000 pounds English; also two hundred Centiners of Gold, which at 4500 l. the Talent, amounteth to 900000 l. chap. 3. v. 11. Iason, that wicked Priest, deceived his Brother Onias of the Office of High-Priest, and gave to King Antiochus for it, first, 360 Talents of Silver; then 80; after, 150: cap. 4. v. 8. and 19. 2, 4. all the common Weight; which were in the whole 590 Talents, and amounted at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent to 110625 l. The wicked Iason being High-Priest, hearing that Antiochus held a great Feast in Tyrus, sent 300 Drachma's of Silver, that is, 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. for a Sacri∣fice to Hercules. But if you change these into Hungarian Ducats (as there are some think them to be Gold) then they came to 112 l. 10 s. Menelaus, being sent by Iason the High-Priest to the King, he behaved himself in such cunning manner, that he got the High-Priests Office; promising the King 300 Centiners or Talents of Silver more than Iason would give; which at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, cometh to 56250 l. 10 s. But being unable to perform his promise, he was put from his Office of High-Priest. Antiochus payed yearly to the Romans 2000 Talents of Silver, that is, 375000 l. cap. 8. v. 10. Antiochus took 1800 Centiners or Talents of Silver of the Temple of Ierusalem, which at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, cometh to 3375000 l. cap. 5. v. 21. Nicanor caused to be proclaimed, that he would sell the captive Iews, 19 for a Centiner, that is, for every Iew 9 l. 17 s. 4 d. q. c. cap. 8. v. 10.
Iudas Macchabeus sent 2000 Drachma's of Silver to Ierusalem for a Sin∣offering, that is, 62 l. 10 s. cap. 12. 43. Now followeth the Reckonings of the Moneys in the New Testament, And first of Matthew. HE that agreeth not with his Adversary, shall be cast into Prison, and not come forth (so saith our Saviour Christ) until he hath paid the utmost farthing. The Hebrew and Latine Translations have it, Quadrans, or a ourth part, that is, a farthing in our Money: but if you account according to the Roman Coin, it was ob. q. Doe not men buy two Sparrows for a Penny? cap, 10. v. 29. that is, something more than half a farthing. When our Saviour Christ went into Capernaum, the Receivers of Tribute spake to Peter, saying, Doth not your Master pay Tribute? The Tribute Money in the Text is called Didrachma, cap. 17. v. 25. which was 15 d. for so much every man paid for Tribute: from whence may be gathered, that the Penny that Peter took out of the Fishes Mouth, was worth 2 s. 6 d. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a King that would call his Servants to account, and when he began to reckon with them, the one ow'd him 10000 l. in Hebrew Weight; which at 37 s. 6 d. the Pound, cometh in the whole to 18750 l. so much was the wicked Servant in Debt to his Master. And on the contrary, one of his Fellow-servants ow'd him 100 Pence: in the Hebrew Text it is Centum Obulus, and one Obulus was 1 d. q. that is, 10 s. 5 d. so that the bad servant ow'd his Master 30000 times more than his Fellow-servant ow'd him. The Greek Text saith, that this fellow ow'd him Centum Derius; that is, 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. which is yet a great deal of difference; for the wicked Servant ow'd his Master above 6000 times more than his Fellow-servant ow'd him. The Lord of the Vineyard agreed with his Labourers for a Penny a day; cap. 2. v. 9. In the Hebrew Text it is Zuza; and in Greek Denarius; both which are of like value English, that is, 7 d. ob. so much each Labourer had by the Day. When the Pharisees and Herod's Servants, tempting Christ, asked him, whether it was lawful to pay Tribute unto Caesar or not: Christ answered and said, You Hypocrites, why tempt you me? shew me the Tribute Money, and they brought, him a Penny: where it is exprest by the word Zuza, or Denarius, that is 7 d. ob. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that travelling into a far Coun∣try, called his Servants, and delivered unto them his Goods; to one he gave
five Talents; that is, 937 l. 10 s. with which he gained just as much more, that is, 937 l. 10 s. to the second he gave two Talents, of the common weight also, which ws 375 l. and he also gained just as much more, that is, 375 l. and to the third he gave one Talent, that is, 187 l. 10 s. and he gained no∣thing with it, but hid the Talent in the Earth. Iudas Iscariot betrayed our Saviour Christ for thirty Pence, or pieces of Silver, cap. 26. v. 14. which were so many Sicles of the Temple, each Sicle beg half an ounce, which were accounted worth 2 s. 6 d. so the whole came to 3 l. 15 s for which our Saviour Christ was betrayed. And with it they bought a Potters field. Mark. OUR Saviour Christ sate over against the Treasury, and beheld how the People cast into the Treasury; and many rich men cast in much; and there came a certain poor Widdow, and she threw in two mites, cap. 12. v. 41, 42. which is a farthing or Quadrans, which was the fourth part of an Assis, being almost a Penny English. Our Saviour Christ being a Bethanie, in the house of Simon the Le∣per, there came a Woman having a box of Oyntment of costly Oyl, cal∣led Spikenard, and she broke the box, and poured it upon his head; there∣fore some murmured among themselves and said, To what end is this waste of Oyntment? for it might have been sold for more than three hundred Denarios, or pence, cap. 14. v. 15. that is, 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. Luke. OUR Saviour Christ saith, Are not five Sparrows sold for two farthings? cap. 12 v. 6. that is, Assibus duobus, which is 1 d. ob. Or what Woman having ten pieces of Silver, that is, ten Drachma's or Groats, (each being worth seven pence ob.) and lose one, will not  till she find it, &c. cap. 15. v. 8. So these ten were in English Money 5 .  d. A certain Noble-man went into a far Country to receive for himself a Kingdom; and he called his ten Servants and delivered them ten peces of Money, or ten pounds, or Mina's (according to the weight of the Tem∣ple) which came to (at 3 l. 2 s 6 d. the Mina) in the whole 31 l. 5 s. Iohn. WHEN our Saviour Christ would feed 5000 men, besides Women and Children, he said unto Philip, Where might we buy Bread that these People might eat? (which he spake to prove Philip.) Philip answered and said, That 200 penny worth of Bread will not be sufficient for them that every man might take a little. The two hundred penny worth of Bread are called Dnarios, which was worth 7 d. ob. in our Money, and in the whole is worth 6 l. 5 s. From whence may be gathered, that there being 5000 every one of them
should have had no more bread than might have been bought with a Farthing, Mite and half of our Silver. As our Saviour Christ, six days before the Passover, was eating in the house of Lazarus, (whom he had raised from the dead in Bethania,) Mary, Lazarus's Sister took a Box, some say a pound of Oyl of Spikenard, and annointed Jesus Feet, and wiped them with her Hair; and the whole house was filled with the savour of the Ointment. Then said one of his Dis∣ciples, even Iudas Iscariot, Simon's Son, Why was not this Ointment sold for 300 pence; cap. 12. ver. 5. that is, Denarios, every Denarios being worth 7 d. ob. which amounted in the whole to 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. When Christs body was to be buried, Nicodemus came and brought Myrrh and Aloes mingled together, about 100 pound weight, chap. 19. v. 39. according to the common weight, which was 2500 half ounces, and came to 78 pounds and eight ounces English. Acts. IN Asia many Books were burnt, to the value of 50000 pieces of silver, that is, Roman Denarios, every of which vvas 7 d. ob. the whole amounting to 1562 l. 10 s. Thus have I briefly set forth to you the several Weights that were com∣mon amongst the Iews, both as they vvere originally from themselves, and as they received them from other Nations, comparing them with the Scriptures, as they are severally mentioned, and reduced them to our Valua∣tions. In casting up of vvhich, if there shall chance to be any errour, you may vvith the due examination of the vvorth of every piece of Silver or Gold (according as you may find them at the beginning of this Treatise) easily reform them, and bring them to your ovvn understanding. Of the ancient Money and Coin that was used amongst the Grecians and Romans. FROM vvhat hath been said, may be gathered, that the Iews used no Coin, but Weights only, though perhaps, to put a distinction be∣tvveen those Weights, there vvas used some impression: yet that cannot properly be said Coin. But in all other Kingdoms (vvhere Money vvas current) there vvas used Coin; and that valued according to the vvill or command of the Prince or State vvhere it vvas coined; vvhich also because of the captivity of the Iews, came amongst them, and past as cur∣rent according to their vvorth; of which Coins I have already spoken. Yet because there are many other Coins and Weights mentioned in the Epistles of
the Apostles, which were partly of the Grecians, partly of the Romans, into which Governments most of them travelled; I will therefore indeavour to set before you the valuation of the Grecian and Roman Coynes and Weights, reduced to our Valuation and Weights, that so those Monies mentioned in the New Testament, and in this Treatise omitted, may with the more facil∣lity be apprehended and made plain unto you. Of the Grecian Coin; and first of their Silver and Brass Nummus, or Money. The Attick Drachma. AN Attick Drachma, was a proportion for almost all the Greek Monies: for the Grecians numbred their Monies by Drachma's, as the Romans by Sestertia's. [This was the Nummus or Coin amongst the Athenians] and was the eighth part of an Ounce, which is worth in our Money 7 d. ob. The Stater, which was also called Tetradrachma, upon the one side whereof was the Head of Minerva, upon the other the Owl: was worth four Attick Drachma's, as is manifest, Mat. 17. 25. which is in our Money 2 s. 6 d. The Didrachma, which was also amongst the Athenians, called Bos, because it was signed with the similitude of an Ox upon the one side of it (of this Theseus was the first Author) as Plutarch remembreth: it was worth half a Stater, or two Drachma's, that is in our mony 15 d. The Tridrachma, which was three Drachma's, and worth in our Money twenty three pence, ob. The Obulus Atticus, which was the sixth part of an Attick Drachma, was worth in our Money 1 d. q. The Semiobulus, which was the least of the Greek Silver Coin, was worth ob. . There was also a Diobulus, which was the third part of a Drachma, and worth 2 d. ob. Triobulus, which was half a Drachma, and worth 3 d. ob. q. Tetrobulus, which contained two third parts of a Drachma, and was worth 5 d. English. The Aegina Drachma. THE Drachma of Aegina contained ten Attick Obulus's, and was worth, 1 s. ob. English. Obulus Aeginus, was the sixth part of Drachma of Aegina, and was worth 2 d. half farthing and a third part of a farthing. Triobulus Aeginaeus, was half and Aeginus Drachma, and of ours was worth six pence q. Stater Corinthius, was worth ten Obulus's of Aegina, and of ours one shilling eight pence, ob. q.
Stater Macedonius, was worth in ours 2 s. 9 d. q. and three seconds of a far∣thing. Of the Asiatick Silver. THE Asiatick Money was of less Valuations, and other Denominations than the rest of Greece; for the greatest of their Silver Coin that was usually current, was but ten pence: and was called by the name Siglus, which was worth seven Attick Obulus's and an half, as Xenophon saith: but, as Hesychius saith, it was worth eight Attick Obulus's, and four Scruples, which is 10 d. in our Money. Cistophorus was also Asiatick silver, and was so called,Lucian in Carnt. Suid, loc. alleg at Hysich. in. because of the Image that was upon it: and was worth of our money 4 d. ob. c. Danaces, which piece of Money the Grecians usually put into the mouth of the dead, to pay Charon for their passage to Elisium, was worth ob. q. and two third parts of a farthing. Of the Brass Money among the Grecians. THey had but two sorts of Brass money, that is mentioned to continue current among them; and they were Aereolum and Minutum. Aereolum was worth the sixth part of an Attick Obulus, according to the Opinion of Suidas and others, which in our money is q. c. and one third part of a Mite. Minutum, is the seventh part of that, which is little more than half a Mite. Of the Gold Coins among the Grecians. IN the next place, is to be described the quantity and valuation of their Gold Coins, of which there is any mention in ancient Authors: and they were among the Athenians an Attick Stater, which weighed two Drachma's, as Pollux saith, and was worth with us fifteen shillings, and a Daricus, which was worth 15 s. A Stater was divided into these parts, that is, a Semi Stater, which was worth 7 s. 6 d. A Tetrestater, of which Aristotle and Pollux speaketh, lib. 9. which was worth of our Money 3 l. And the Macedonian Golden Stater, coined by Philip, Alexander, Lysimachus, Demetrius, and others which succeeded in Macedonia, Syria, and Asia, which was worth of our Money 18 s. 4. d Of the Asiatick Gold. STater Daricus, which before was called Adarchon, was a Nummus, or a piece of Coin of the Persians, and worth a Didrachma, having upon it the simi∣litude of a Sagittarius, according to Plutarch in the Life of Agesilaus, and was worth with us 15 s.
Semi Daricus, of which there is mention in Xenophon, lib. . was worth half a Darick Stater, and weighed an Attick Drachma, being worth with us 7 s. 6 d. Cizycenus, was a piece of Coin so called, as may be thought, of a Town called Cizycus, of which you may read, Strabo, lib. 14. and was worth 7 s. 6 d. Of the Grecian Mina and Talents. THE Attick Mina's weigh one hundred Drachma's, and was equal to the Mina of the Temple amongst the Iews, according to the opinion of Xenophon and Plutarch, and was worth with us 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. There were dirs kinds of Talents, according to the opinions of Pollux and Varro, most of which weighed sixty Mina's, and a Mina one hundred Drachma's, and for the most part, six thousand Drachma's (of the Countrey where the Talent was) make a Talen. The Attick Talent contained six thousand Attick Drachma's, according to the opinion of Pollux and Festus, and is equal to the common Talent among the Iews, worth in our Money 187 l. 105. But according to the opinion of Livie and Priscianus, there was an Attick Talent worth eight thousand Drachma's, which was 250 l. The Aegyptian Talent, according to the opinion of Plinie and Varro, weighed as much, that is, 250 l. The Syrian Talent contained 1500 Attick Drachma's which was 46 l. 17 s. 6 d. The Eubeian Talent (according to the opinion of Pompey and Festus) weighed four thousand Denarios, that is, Drachma's, and was worth 125 l. The Rhodian Talent contained 4500 Attick Drachma's, and worth 240 l. 12 s. 6 d. The Babylonian Talent was 7000 Attick Drachma's, worth 218 l. fifteen shillings. The Aegina Talent was 1000 Attick Drachma's, that is, 312 l. fifteen shillings. The Alexandrian Talent is 12000 Attick Drachma's, which was as much as the Talent of the Temple, which is 375 l. English. The ancient Talentum Siculum (according to the opinion of Pollux) was six Drachma's, which was 3 s. 9 d. English. The Neapolitan Talent was as much, according to the opinion of Varro, that is, 3 s. 9 d. English. The ancient Talentum Siculum, and the Sicilian Talent (as Varro saith) is all one, and is worth 1. s. 10 d. ob. The Regian Talent was but half a Drachma, and is worth 3 d. ob. q.
Of the Coins and Moneys of the ancient Romans: and first of the Brass Money. AS (as Varro saith) is as much as Aes, that is, Brass: for Aerius was a Coin weighing a pound weight: but after many changes that hapned in the Roman State, it came to be worth the tenth part of a Roman Pen∣ny, which vvith us is worth ob. q. Semissis, is as much as half an As, according to Varro: and was worth q. c. Triens, that is, the third part of an As, which was half a Farthing. Quadrans, was the fourth of an As. Plinie calls it Triuncis; Cicero, Triunus, because it was a diminution of the former pound, containing three Ounces, and with us worth three Mites. Sextans, that is, the sixth part of an Assis, which was worth q. or two Mites. Vncia, the twelfth part of an Assis, worth one Mite, c. Semiuncia, worth half a Mite. Sextula, that is, the sixth part of an Ounce, worth the sixth part of a Mite. These are the ancient Brass Monies usual amongst the Romans; but there were greater used in later Times, according to the opinion of Varro. Of the Silver Money amongst the Romans. DENARIVS was so called because it was worth ten Asses; but it was not always of one worth and estimation amongst the Romans, for the ancient Roman Denarius or penny, which was current in the time of the Consuls, weighed but the seventh part of an Ounce (according to the opinion of Celsus, and many other Authors) and was worth of our Money 8 d. ob. c. and one seventh part of a Mite. Denarius Novus, or the new Penny, was first coined in Claudius the Empe∣ror's time, and was worth (acording to the opinion of Plinie and others) pre∣cisely a Drachma, that is, 7 d. ob. Bigatus and Quadrigatus, is all one with the Roman Penny, and was so called, because these words were stamped upon one side of it, and was worth 7 d. ob. Victoriatus, was a Coin first brought up by the Law of Claudius amongst the Romans, being so called, because the Image of Victory was upon it; and according to Plinie, was half a Denarius, and is worth 3 d. ob. Sestertius is so called of Sesquitertiers, according to Priscian, it was two Asses and a half, and was worth 3 d. ob. q. Obulus, is the sixth part of a Denarius, and worth 1 d. q. Libella, is the tenth part of a Denarius, and worth ob. q. Simbella, so called, because it was half a Libella, and was worth farthing and half.
Teruntius, was the fourth part of a Denarius; and was worth two mites and a half. Of the Gold among the Romans. THere were also gold Denarius's amongst the Romans; either so called because they had the same stamp; or else because they were about the same bigness to see to, coyned in the time of the Consuls; worth in English money 17 s. ob. a piece. The other was coined later, about the beginning of the Emperours, and weighed two Drachma's; being of equal weight with our English Spur∣royals, which are worth 15 s. This was after the first five Emperours much diminished in weight: Nero made it lighter by two or three grains; Galba, Nerva, Trajanus, and Hadrianus, by eight graines: but those that Vespasian and succeeding Emperours coined, were precisely two Drach∣ma's. A Semissis of gold, weighed a just Drachma, and was worth 7 s. 6 d. AT remissis of Gold, which was three parts of an Is, and worth 5 s. Of the Gold after the Seat of the Empire was translated to Byzantium, or Constantinople. COnstantine the Great diminished that Coin which was a Drachma, to a Didrachma, and the seventh part of a Drachma; and was worth of our mony, 8 s. 6 d. ob. And thus they continued till the time of Valentinian the Emperour, who caused six of them to be coined out of an ounce of Gold, and therefore, as Isidore saith, were called amongst the Graecians , that is, Sextuala, because it was the sixth part of an ounce, and was worth 10 s. The Semissis of Valentinian Gold was worth 5 s. The Triens or Tremissis, was worth 3 s. 4 d. The Scruple, which was the fourth part of a golden shilling, 2 s. 6 d. Of the Silver and brass Money of the Empire; after it was transated to Constantinople. MIlliarissimum weighed two Drachma's (according to the opinion of Cedrenus) and was worth 15 d. Ceratus, was a piece of Coin, called also Siliqua Cornuta, because there was stamped upon it the Moon increasing; by which mark it vvas knovvn to be more than the common Ceratio or Siliqua, and vvas vvorth 7 d. ob.
The common Siliqua or Ceratio, vvas so called, because it was worth four grains of Gold (vvhich is the weight of aA Silique is the Fruit of a Charob-tree, which carri∣eth certain sweet Cods or Husks about five inches long, and as broad as a mans Thumb: six Carobs, or Charob-Bean-cods weighed a Drachma, or Carract. Silique) and according to Iustinian vvas vvorth 5 d. Follis, of vvhich there is often mention in the History of Eusebius, vvas a brass, or (as Lampadius saith) an iron coin, so called, because there vvas stamped upon it the similitude of a leaf, and vvas vvorth farthing, half, and one third. Of the Roman sums of Money. A Sestertium (being taken in the neuter Gender) containeth a thousand Sestertius's, and is vvorth 7 li. 16 s. 3 d. A Pound vveight, containing tvvelve ounces of silver, vvhich is vvorth 3 li. A Talent, containing 24 Sestertias, 6000 Denarios; being of equal vveight and vvorth to the Attick Talent, and is vvorth 187 li. 10 s. I vvill also add that vvhich is called Sportula, because it vvas a certain small Sum of 400 Quadrans, vvhich maketh 10 Sestertios; of vvhich you may read in Suetonius, in the Life of Domitian Nero, and contained 1 s. 6 d. ob. q. The Hebrew, Greek, and Latine Measures reduced to ours, whereby you may find the Quantity of all such Measures as are mentioned in the Old and New Testament. BUT now, having briefly, and as exactly as I can, described the Weights and Valuations of the ancient Moneys that were current amongst the Iewes, Graecians and Romans, as well those that are mentioned in the Scripture as others; It resteth (that I might make this a perfect Work) to say something of the Measures mentioned in the Scriptures, which I will (as neer as I can) reduce to the quantity of our Measures which are common amongst us. Of the Corn Measures. A Gomer is a Gallon or thereabouts with us, according to Budaeus, in Mensuris Herb. An Attick Chenix (according to Budaeus) is the third part of a Gomer, or half Modius, which measure is almost three pints.
Stater was a Measure containing three Gomers or Simodio's, and is with us three Gallons and three Pints, or thereabouts. An Epha was as much as Medimnicus Atticus, which, according to the opinion of some Authors, is a Pottle less than our Bushel: but if you follow the proportion of Budaeus, it is ten Gomers or Gallons, or more, which is a Bushel and a Peck and our Measure and more. A Letech is the half of a Corus, and contained five Epha's, or Attick Medimnos, i. according to Budaeus, six Bushels and a Peck. A Cor or Corus, following the same Proportion, was two Letechs, i. ten Attick Medimno's; and of ours twelve Bushels and half. Of the Measures of Wine and Beer. HEmina (according to Georgius Agricola and Budaeus) was three quarters of a Pint. A Sextarius was two Hemina's, i. a Pint and a half. A Lag was as much. A Congius contained six Sextario's, i. nine Pints. A Hin was twelve Sextario's, i. eighteen Pints. A Cad was sixty Sexntario's, i. fifty five Quarts. A Bath was seventy two Sextario's, i. forty four Quarts. A Homer was a great Measure containing 720 Sextario's, that is, sixty seven Gallons and Pottle. An Urna, according to Capulis, contained twenty four Sextario's, that is, thirty six Pints, which make four Gallons and a half of our common Measures. But according to Budaeus's account, it comes but to three Gallons and a half or thereabouts. An Amphora was a Measure common amongst the Graecians, of which there is mention made of three sorts, the one containing three Gallons and a Pottle; the other, eight Congio's or forty eight Sextario's, which was 9 Gallons of our measure; the third (as Pliny saith) was an Amphora, which contained twenty Gallons and a half. A Modius contained sixteen Sextario's, which was twenty four Pints, that is three Gallons or thereabouts; but according to the opinion of some Authors, it is but a Peck and some small matter more. A Semimodius was eight Sextario's, that is, a Gallon and half. A Gomer was somwhat less than a Semimodius: and contained but seven Sextario's and a fifth part of a Sextario, which is some ten Pints and a quarter and three spoonfuls. A Quartarius contained one Sextario and a half, which was a Quart and the fourth part of 2 Pint. A spoonful.
A Cyame is two spoonfuls. A Mystrus and Cyame, according to the Opinion of some, is all one. A Cyathus contains four spoonfuls. An Hemila Cottila is six times so much, which is twenty four Spoon∣fuls, i. three quarters of a wine Pint. The Measures mentioned in the old Testament, And first, Genesis. Cap. 18. v. 6. WHen Abraham received three strange men, he went to his Wife Sera into the Tent, and said, Make ready at once three Measures of fine meal, which, according to some Divines, was three Zata's; according to others, forty four Sextarios, which was of our Measure, at a pint and a half the Sextario, a Bushel and a quart. Exodus, cap. 16. v. 31, 33, 34, 37. MOses said to Aaron, Take a pot, of the quantity of a Gomer, (which was seven Sextario's, and a fifth part, and is of our Measure a Gallon, a Quart, and four Spoonfuls) to keep for your Posterity. In the same Chap∣ter Moses aith, that a Gomer is the tenth part of an Epha, which, as is said, is more than our Bushel. Cap. 29. v. 49. You shall present upon the Altar two Lambs of a year old every day, the one Lamb in the morning, and the other in the evening; and to each Lamb the tenth part of an Ephah (which was five Quarts and and half a pint) of fine flower with the fourth part of an Hin, i. four pints) of Wine for a drink-offering. Cap. 30. 33. The anointing Oil of the Sanctuary was made of the best and sweetest Spices that could be gotten, viz. of Myrrh 500 Sicles, or 250 ounces; of Calamus 125 ounces, of Cinnamon 125 ounces. All this was mixed with an Hin (i. 18 pints) of Oyl Olive, as the Apothecaries make it. Leviticus, cap. 5. v. 11. HE that sinned, and was not able to bring two Turtle Doves, or two young Pidgeons for an offering, he must bring the tenth part of an Ephah of fine flower, that is, ten pints and a half. Cap. 14. 19. When the Leper was visited, and found to be infected with the Leprosie, the eighth day after, he was to take two he-Lambs of a year old without blemish, and an Ewe Lamb of a year old, without blemish, and three tenth parts (that is fifteen quarts as pint and half) of fine flower for a Meat-offering, mingled with a Lag of Oyl, that is, a Pint and half.
Numbers, chap. 15. v. 4. TO a Meat-offering was added the fourth part of an Hin (that is four Pints and a half) of Oyl, and as much Wine, and the third part of an Hin (that is six Pints) of Oyl, and as much Wine. Some say half a Hin, that is nine Pints of Oyl, and as much Wine. Deuteronomy, chap 25. v. 13, 14, 15. THERE shall be two sorts of Epha's within thine house; which concludes there was a greater and a lesser. Iudges, chap 7. v. 16. WHEN Gideon would have set upon the Midianites, he gave each of his Souldiers a Trumpet in one hand, and an empty Pitcher in the other hand, with Lamps therein. These Pitchers were called Cados minores, as some say, that is, Oyl Cans, like Lamps, wherein they used to set Tedae nuptiales, or Bride-candles. For such was the usual custom in those days, that the Bridegroom went to fetch his Bride by Night, and then certain Virgins were appointed to beat the Wedding Candles or Lamps before them. Where∣of our Saviour Christ made that notable similitude of the ten Virgins that went to meet the Bridegroom, Mat. chap. 25. This difference is herein to be noted, that in the Lamps of the Virgins whereof our Saviour Christ speaks, there was Oyl, but in Gideon's Pitchers there was no Oyl, but they were empty Oyl-Pitchers, with thick bellies and narrow necks, wherein stood Lamps or Candles, such might be called Cades Minores, being not very great, but so light that they might easily be carried in one hand without trouble: but what their measure was is not specified. Ruth, chap. 2. v. 31. THE young Widdow Ruth, the Moabite, was not slothful nor yet idle, but went into Boas's Field, where she gleaned so many ears of Corn after the Reapers in one day, that at night when she had threshed the ears, it was an Ephah, i. e. a Bushel, or thereabouts; for there were two kinds of Ephahs, as you may read before. Chap. 3. When Ruth laid her self down at the feet of Boas, and desired him that he would marry her; in the morning when Boas rose, he gave her six measures of Gomers, i. e. six Gallons of Barly or thereabouts. 1 Samuel. chap. 17. v. 17. WHEN Saul was gone out to fight against the Philistines, and that Go∣liah daily mocked the Host of the Israelites, the Lord stirred up Ishai the Father of David, to send him to his Brethren to the Host, with an Ephah of parched Corn, that is, a Bushel or thereabouts,
Chap. 25. v. 18. David being upon the way, meaning to destroy the Fool Nabal, Abigal, Nabal's Wife, a very wise and discreet Woman, went to meet him, and finding David, she appeased his wrath, by a Present of 200 Loaves of Bread, two Bottles of Wine, five Sheep ready dressed, and five Zata's (i. e. fifteen Gomers, which is fifteen Gallons and somwhat more) of fine Flower, 100 Frailes of Raisins, and 100 of Figs; which laded upon an Ass, &c. 1 Kings, chap. 7. v. 23, 25. THE Molten Sea that stood upon the twelve Knops like Cucumbers, was very curiously made of divers sorts of Metals, being ten Cubits wide, and five high: it held 2000 Baths, that is, 27000 Gallons English, or there∣abouts; every Bath containing (according to the opinion of Iosepus) 72 Sextario's, that is, at a pint and a half the Sextarius, thirteen Gallons and a half. Chap. 7. v. 38. King Solomon caused ten Copper Kettles to be made, that stood upon ten Stools, each Kettle containing forty Baths, every Bath 72 Sextario's, which come to 13 Gallons and a half English; so that every Kettle contained 540 Gallons. Chap. 17. v. 12, 13, 14. When the Prophet Eliah desired the Widdow of Sarepta to fetch him a little Water and a bit of Bread, she answered and said, as true as the Lord your God liveth, I have not any Bread, but only a hand∣ful of Flower in a Cabe (which was a kind of Vessel that held eight quarts) and a little Oyl in a Pitcher. And Eliah said unto her, Thy Meal, &c. Chap. 18. v. 32. 34. The Prophet Eliah being upon Mount Carmel about the time of the evening Sacrifice, built up an Altar in the sight of the whole Congregation of the People of Israel, and laid Wood upon it, and upon the Wood an Ox cut in pieces for a Sacrifice, and caused a Ditch to be digged round about it, of such wideness and depth, as might contain two Zata's, that is six Gomers and something more; about six Gallons and a half of our Measure. And there was twelve Cads (that is 175 Gallons) of water cast on the Sacrifice; but when Eliah called upon the name of the Lord, fire fell from Heaven, and devoured the Sacrifice, dried up the Water, and burned the Wood and Stones of the Altar to dust. II. Kings. chap. 6. 25. WHEN Benhadad King of Syria besieged Samaria, there was such a Famine and dearth in the City, that they sold an Asses head for eighty Silverlings (that is, common Sicles, which is, 5 l. English;) but some Texts read it, 8 Silverlings, that is, 10 s. And the fourth part of a Cab, (that is, a Pint and half of Pigeons dung) was sold for five pieces of Silver, that is, 6 s. 3 d.
When the Syrians were striken by the Lord, and fled from the Siege of Samaria, Corn became so cheap (according to the Prophesie of Elisha) that under the Gates of Samaria one Zata (which contained 24 Sextarios, that is, half a Strike and a Pottle of fine Flower) was sold for 15 d. and two Zata's of Barley was sold for 15 d. II. Chronicles. chap. 2. SOlomon gave to the Carpenters, &c. that cut and hewed down Wood in Mount Libanus, for the building of the Temple, 20000 Corus of Wheat, and 20000 of Barley; every Corus containing ten Medimnos Atti∣cos, which, according to Budeus's account, came to twelve Bushels and a half English, and in the whole to 150000 Bushels. But if you account it accor∣ding to the opinion of some of our English Authors, it comes but to nine Bushels and seven Gallons and a Pottle the Medimna, and in the whole to 198750 Bushels. And besides, Solomon gave them 20000 Baths of Wine, and as much Oyl; every Bath containing thirteen Gallons and a Pottle, which amounteth to in the whole, 8437 Barrels and a half. The Measures mentioned in the New Testament. And first of Matthew. chap. 13. 33. THE Kingdom of God is like unto a piece of Leaven, which a Wo∣man taketh and putteth into three Measures, or Zata's of Meal, which make a Bushel. Luke, chap. 16. v. 9. WHEN the unjust Steward called his Masters Debtors to account, the first was Debtor 100 Baths of Oyl, that is fifty one Barrels and eighteen Gallons; and he bid him write down half, that is, twenty five Barrels and a half. The second Debtor ow'd 100 Corus of Wheat, which at nine Bushels and seven Gallons the Corus, comes to 988 Bushels, or thereabouts; and the unjust Steward willed him to set down eighty Corus, that is 790 Bushels, and one Gallon and a half. So the unjust Steward deceived his Master of 25 Barrels and a half of Oyl, and of 198 Bushels and one Gallon of Wheat, and gave to his Masters Cre∣ditors. Iohn, chap. 2. v. 1. 11. AT the Marriage at Cana in Galilee, our Saviour Christ changed the six Pitchers of Water into Wine, every Pitcher containing two or three Cads, every Cad holding 60 Sextario's, that is, 11 Gallons and a Quart, or
thereabouts. Some say, that the first three Pitchers held each three Cads, or Metreta's, which, if it should be so, every of them should hold 33 Gallons and three Quarts: then say the other three held each two Metreta's a piece, that is, twenty two Gallons and a Pottle a piece; then the whole that our Saviour Christ gave unto the Bride and Bridegroom, amounted to 168 Gallons and three Quarts, or thereabouts. Revel. 6. 6. I heard a voice saying, A Chenix (that is, three Pints of Wheat) for a De∣narius (that is, 7 d. ob.) There being eighty five times so much, and a Quart over in a Bushel, it would amount unto 51s. 8 d. the Bushel, or there∣abouts, which would be a great Dearth. Here is to be observed, that the Grecians in times past were very strict in their house-keeping, and for that cause, confined their Servants to certain Measure, that is, to a Chenix, which was three Pints of Meat; and to a Sex∣tarius, which was a pint and half of Wine for every day: and by this means the Master could readily tell what his Servants Meat and Drink would cost him in a year, that is 365 Chenixes; which in our Measure, at three Pints the Chenix, comes to eight Bushels, two Pecks, and a Pint; and 365 Pints of Wine, that is, forty five Gallons, a Pottle, and a Pint: so much did every Ser∣vant eat and drink in a year. But God fed the Israelites forty years in the Wilderness with a greater quantity; for he gave each man daily an Omer (that is, three Chenixes) of Manna, i. e. a Gallon and something more. Cicero, in his eighth Oration for Verres, writes, that a Modius of Wheat (which was a Peck wanting a Pint) was commonly sold in Sicilia for three Sestertio's, about 6 d. sterling, and so much had every Servant in Grecia dai∣ly, and a Pint of Wine to drink. These Customs, howsoever in these Countries they might be tolerable, in regard they lived in a hot Climate; yet to us, where it is much colder, our Bodies require a greater quantity for Nourishment: nevertheless, a mean and spare Diet is both more healthful and profitable for the body, than excess; because the Stomach being surcharged, it cannot duely concoct that which it receiveth, whereby the Body is filled with many Crudities and noisom Dis∣eases. And thus have I, as exactly as I can, reduced the Hebrew, Greek and Latine Measures to ours: but if there be any who in casting up these quantities of Measures mentioned in the Scripture, shall chance to find any errour, or would reduce them to a more near Estimation (because I have in this Treatise principally followed Budaeus) to our Measures, he is then to understand, that there is another course to be taken, namely by Weight; four ordinary Spoonfuls of Water weigh an Ounce, 12 Ounces of Troy weight make a pound, 8 Pounds of Troy weight make a Gallon, and 32 Gallons make a Bar∣rel, &c. The same course may be taken in the account of Corn-measures
there going eight Gallons after the same proportion to a Bushel. So that what I have set down may be rectified by your own industry, and made more capable to your understanding. Examples collected out of Prophane Histories, by which you may perceive the profit that may arise by the due use of this Treatise, to all such as read the Grecian and Roman Histories. IN the time of Claudius, Emerour of Rome, there was so great a Famin (ac∣cording to the Prophecie of Agabus, Act 1.) that a Modius, that is, a Peck wanting a Pint of Wheat, was sold at six Drachma's, which at 7 d. ob. the Drachma, comes to 3 s. 9 d. English. This great Famin is specified by Suetonius and Dion, where they say, that but a little before, the same measure of Wheat was worth but four Sestertia's, which was 7 d. ob. English. Of Pythius King of Lydia. Herodot. 7. PYthius King of Lydia, who entertained that mighty Emperour Xerxes, and all his Army, would have lent him three Millions of Talents of Silver towards the charge of his War; which according to the Attick Talent, (that is, 187 l. 10 s. the Talent,) amounts to 562 millions five hundred pounds. And further, he would add to it four millions of Daricons, which at 15 s. the Daricon, cometh to three millions of Pounds. But Xerxes being greatly pleased with his Hospitality and Liberality, that he might make evi∣dent his Noble Disposition, refused his offer, and gave him by way of Gra∣tuity 7000 Darico's, which was in our Money 5250 l. Of Croesus, the mighty King of Lydia. THIS King Croesus sent an Ambassador to Delphos, to ask the Idol of Apol∣lo if he should prosper in the Wars he took in hand against Cyrus King of Persia; withall sending divers rich Presents, and amongst the rest, a Lion of Gold, most cunningly wrought, weighing 100 Talents, every Talent weighing 4500 l. which in the whole amounted to 450000 l. Moreover, two Cups, wherof one was fine Gold, cunningly wrought, weighing eight Talents and a half, which at 4500 l. the Talent cometh to 36000 pound; the other Cup was made by that noble Workman Theodorus Sanius, of pure Silver, very curiously and artificially wrought, containing forty Gallons; but of what valuation it was, is not set down. For this great and rich present King Croesus received of the Devil a double and deceitful answer, whereby
he was not only provoked to make War against Cyrus, but by that means lost his Kingdom; and being taken Prisoner, he was set upon a pile of wood to be burnt: but crying with a loud voice, O Solon, Solon, (thereby shewing, that wise Solon had foretold him, That no man is to be accounted hap∣py before his end.) King Cyrus granted him his Life. This recompence did the Devil return to Croesus for so great a Present. Such and many other the like Histories by this Book may be understood. The first rule for Drachma's. IF you have any number of Drachma's, divide them by eight, and the production will be English Crowns; according to Budaeus 100 Drach∣ma's make a Mina, which is about 12 Crowns, or 3 l. sterling. The second rule of Mina's. THE Mina multiplied by twelve, the production is Crowns: for twelve Crowns English is a Roman Mina, or a Mina of the Temple; 125 Mi∣na's make a Talent; so that multiply 125 by 12, and the production will be 1500 Crowns, which maketh a Talent. The third rule of Talents. THE Talent multiplied by twelve, the production is Crowns. 125 Mina's being multiplied by twelve, makes 1500 Crowns English, which is a Talent; and 3000 Crowns is two Talents, &c. by which means you may reduce all Drachma's and other less Weights mentioned in the Scriptures to Mina's, and Talents; and these again into Crowns. But con∣cerning the distinction of Talents, you may read before. Notwithstanding observe this, that if you chance to read of any Talent, Mina, or Sicle, in the Scripture, whereto there is not an addition of the Kings Talent; or, the Talent of the Temple (as I have said) you may then presume that it is the Common Talent. And this shall suffice for the Weights, Measures, and Mo∣nies mentioned in the Scriptures.
A Catalogue of the principal Authors out of whom this fore-going Treatise of Weights and Mea∣sures, &c. was gathered. AMbrosius Calapinus. Aulus Gellius. Cassarus Peucerus. Athenaeus. Flavius Ioseph. Galenus. Guilihelmus Budaeus. Hesychius. Saint Ierome. Ioachim Camerarius. Iohannes Avenarius. Iohannes Fosterus. Iulius Pollux. Martin Luther. Matthew Hostius. Paulus Eberus. Philip Melancthon. Priscian Grammaticus. Sebastian Munster. Septuaginta Interpretes. Suidas. Volutius Metianus. The due Proportion of Weights and Measures are also found in Myropolis.
ITINERARIVM Novi Testamenti. Wherein is contained the Travels of the Virgin Mary, and Joseph; also of the Wise men of the East, of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles. BUT since I have briefly related the Travels of the antient Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, and Prophets, (which things I know cannot be un∣profitable unto such as are judicious) mentioned in the Old Testament; that I might make a perfect end of what I have begun, I will pro∣ceed, and shew unto you the Travels of all the holy Men and Women mentioned in the New Testament; where, by due observation of this discourse, you may well understand, that as all the Nations of the World were deri∣ved from one man, that is, Adam; so all the Righteous, and such as are to be saved, are derived from one man, that is, Christ Iesus. For, as by the first Adam Sin came into the World, and by Sin, Death and Damna∣tion; so by the second Adam that Sin is pardoned, and Man made partaker of Eternal happiness. And that these things might be the more apparent unto thee, I have described the Towns, Cities, and Places mentioned in their several Travels; both what they were in former times, and what they are at this present: that so by the due consideration of both, thou might'st observe the mutation and change of Estates; since, through the revolution of Times, those things which seem most permanent, have within the compass of a few years been subverted, and the ruines of those Cities which have been greatest, left to make evident lamentable Examples of vast and unheard of destructions; from whence, such as have any small knowledge of the Spirit, may draw such comfortable resolutions, that neither Poverty can subvert them, nor Riches and Honour exalt them; but, according to S. Iames, ca. 1. they may possess themselves in peace; since neither the Prosperity of the World is permanent, nor the adversity thereof
intolerable. The knowledge of both which, howsoever to some it may seem ridiculous, yet to such as are at all touched with the sense of Worldly Affairs, it cannot chuse but take a deep impression, and draw them thence to the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and of his Doctrine. To which end, and for which purpose, I have principally endeavoured to publish this Treatise, that so comparing the Estate of man in this present World, with the Estate of Grace in the World to come, they might perceive the impotency of the one, and the permanency of the other, and from both draw immoveable Axioms, that there can be no Salvation where there is no Humility, nor no Prosperity where there is not a knowledge of Christ Jesus in his Humanity: and thence gather, that the afflictions of this World, to which he is most subject through the whole course of his Life, is the ready means to honour and immortal Glory. But that these things may the better appear unto thee, I will endeavour to lay before thee the Beginning, and (so far as the holy Scripture leads me) the ending of our Saviour. From whence thou may'st draw such comfortable Resolutions, that in what Estate soever thou art, whether in Prosperity or Adversity, thou may'st therewith rest content, &c. Of Zacharias the Father of John Baptist. ZAcharias or Zachariah, signifies Gods Remembrance. This man was the Father of Iohn the Baptist, being a Priest, of the Tribe of Aaron, and dwelling at a Town called Abia, of which you may read, 1 Chr. 24. There were three famous men of this name, as Basilius saith. One that was a Prophet of the Lord, and lived 520 years before the birth of Christ; Zach. 1. And another, that was the Son of Iehoiada the high Priest, who at the command of that ingrateful King Ioas, was stoned to death in the upper Court of the Temple, 2 Chr. 24. And a third, which was this Zacharias, the Father of Iohn Baptist, and Son of Barachias, that is, the Blessed: who, accor∣ding to the Opinion of Basil, was slain for no other cause but for saying that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. This man had to wise Elizabeth, of the Posterity of the High-Priest Aaron, and by her had a Son called Iohn; so named of the Lord, who was afterward called Iohn the Baptist. Eliza∣beth signifies, the rest of God, being derived of Eli and Scabbath, that is, the Rest and Sabbath of the Lord. The Inhabitants of the holy Land take upon them even to this day to shew the House were Zacharias and Elizabeth dwelt, in a Town that standeth on the right hand of the way as you go from Emmaus to Ierusalem. But Saint Luke, ca. 1. saith, that Zacharias dwelt not in a Town or Field, but in the City of Iudah, which was scituated in the mountain of Iudah. Risnerus and Iohannes Hedenus write, that Zacharias dwelt in Ierusalem, in the part of the City scituated upon Mount Bezetha, as
in the first Book of the description of Ierusalem hath bin declared. And this seemeth to be verified out of Nehemiah, cap. 3. Yet there are some of opinion that he dwelt at Hebron, because that was the chief City of the Tribe of Iuda, and a Town of the Priests. The Travels of the Virgin Mary. MARY, if it be derived of Marah, signifieth such a Person as is op∣pressed with carefulness and grief, one that is laid open to all misery and calamity, press'd with continual vexation and mourning. She was born upon the eighth day of September, 14 years before the birth of Christ; and in the fifteenth of her age brought forth her only begotten Son, according to S. Hierome and others. Her Fathers name was Eliakim, of the House of David. Upon the five and twentieth day of March, in the same year that our Saviour Christ was born, Mary being then fourteen years old, the Angel Gabriel declared unto her the Embassie of the Conception of our Lord Jesus Christ. A little after, about the beginning of April, An. M. 3967, she went from Nazareth in great haste over the Hills to Ierusalem, sixty four miles, to the House of Zacharias, and there saluted her Cousin Elizabeth, Luk. 1. From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was sixty four miles. And when the command came out from Augustus, that all the World should be taxed, then Ioseph and Mary went from Nazareth to Bethlehem, seventy two miles: and there the time of Marys deliverance drew neer, and loe, she bare the Son of the living God, our Lord and Saviour Christ. Luke. 2. From Bethlehem, Ioseph and Mary brought the Child Jesus to Ierusalem, and presented him in the Temple, which was six miles, Luke. 2. And when they had accomplished all things according to the Law, they returned back again to Nazareth, a Town in Galilee, sixty four miles. From Nazareth they went back again to Bethlem, seventy two miles▪ Thither the wise men, coming out of the East, brought the Child Jesus Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, Mat. 2. From Bethlehem (the same night that Herod caused all the Infants of two years old and under to be slain) Ioseph and Mary fled with the Child Jesus to Hermopolis, a City in Egypt, which was 296 miles. Mat. 2. Zozom. lib. 6. From thence they returned back again with the Child Jesus to Naza∣reth, 368 miles: for they were greatly afraid lest Archilaus (who succeeded his father Herod in the Government of the Iews) would seek the Childs life, Mat. 2.
From Nazareth, Ioseph and Mary came every year to Ierusalem, which was sixty four miles, to the feast of the Passover and so many miles back again; which for ten years cotinuance, came to 1280 miles. When Christ was twelve years of age, and at the beginning of the thir∣teenth, he went with his Parents from Nazareth to the Feast of the Passover, being sixty four miles, Luke 2. And when the days of the Feast of the Passover were accomplished, they returned home again. But the Child Iesus stayed at Ierusalem, and his Pa∣rents knew it not, for they thought he had been among the company. Wherefore, when they had travelled a dayes Journey (that is, twenty miles) they missed their Son. After, they search'd through the company, but could not find him: wherefore they returned back to Ierusalem, being twenty miles; where, on the third day after, they found him in the Temple, sitting among the Do∣ctors, and disputing with them. So the next three days he returned back again with his Parents to Nazareth, being sixty four miles, and was obedient to them, Luke. 2. After, Ioseph and Mary went every year, during the life of Ioseph, up to Ierusalem to the Passover, and without all doubt took Iesus along with them. Thus they continued for the space of three years, about which time Ioseph died, Christ being then sixteen years of age: which three years Travel from Nazareth to Ierusalem and back again, cometh to 384 miles. From that time forward he continued with his Mother till he was thirty one years of age, which was the first year of his Ministry. Mary, his Mother, being then forty five years old, was invited to a Marriage in Cana a City of Galilee, which stood eight miles from Galilee towards the North-West, Iohn 2. Here our Saviour Christ wrought his first miracle by changing water into wine. From Cana in Galilee she went with our Saviour to Capernaum, a City of Galilee, a little before the Feast of the Paschal Lamb, which was twenty miles. From Capernaum she returned back to Nazareth, which was accounted twelve miles. In the thirty second year of the age of our Saviour Christ, which was the second of his Ministry, Mary went from Nazareth back again to Capernaum, where our Saviour Christ cast forth a Devil, Mat. 12. Mark 3. which was 12 miles. From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was twelve miles: for in this Town she dwelt, whilst Iesus travelled from place to place, teaching and preaching the Word of God, Mark 6. And although she oftentimes went from Nazareth with him to many places, continuing still in his company; yet then especially, when he was to sustain the wrath of God, and punishment for the Sin of man, which was in the thirty fourth year of his age. In which year she would not forsake him
till his death: for she went from Galilee to Ierusalem with him, which wa sixty four miles; a great Journey for one of her age (being then forty eigh years old.) And when our Saviour was crucified, she stood close by the Cross with a heavy and pensive countenance, bewailing the death of her Son. Then was the Prophecy of old Simeon accomplished, And a Sword shall pass through thy Soul. But after, by his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, she was revived and comforted. From the Passion of Christ to the death of the blessed Virgin Mary, was twelve years: all which time she lived with Iohn the Evangelist in Ierusalem, and then being fifty nine years of age dyed, and was buried (according to the opinion of Nicephorus and others) in the Garden called Gethsamene. So all her Travels were 3506 miles. Now follows the description of the Towns and Places to which she travelled. Of Nazareth. THIS was a Town almost of no estimation; scituated in a certain Mountain in Galilee the lower, sixty four miles and something more from Ierusalem towards the North, in the Tribe of Zabulon. In this Town our Saviour Jesus Christ was brought up, Luke 1. 2. Some say that it was nineteen or twenty miles from Ierusalem, but they mistake themselves; yet I will not dispute thereof, but follow my Authors, Iacobus Ziglerus, and Tilmanus Stella. There is not any mention made of it, that is extant in the Old Testament. It hath a two-fold derivation, the one by Zain, and the other by Zade. If it be written by Zain, it may have a two-fold significa∣tion, since the exposition of this name doth depend upon the Verb Nazar, which signifies, to consecrate and keep; from hence Nezaer, a Garland of Flowers, or a Crown set with pretious Stones, &c. such as Kings and High-Priests are accustomed to wear. Also from the same word Nazar, is derived Nazir, and thence Nazaraeus, which is as much as to say, He is separated from the use of Wine; and suffering his Hair to be un-cut, as being dedicated to the Lord. Therefore our Saviour Christ is justly called a Nazarite, Luke 2. For aezer first signifies a holy man, who hath made a holy Vow unto the Lord: Secondly, it doth denote a Crown or wreath of Sincerity, Exod. 29. 39. Thirdly, a holy Ointment, wherewith Kings and Priests were anointed, Levit. 27. And fourthly, this word Nezaer signifies, a Princely Crown, 2 Sam. 1. 2. Kings 11. Psal. 89. 132. So that Nazareth, being derived of Nazar and Nazir, may signifie both a Crown, and a holy City, Iudg. 13. but if Nazareth be written by Zade, it signifies a flourishing plant or Graff, according to that of Isay, c. 11. But there shall come a rod forth of the stock of Ishai, and a Graff shall grow out of his root, and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. The Inhabitants of this Town at this day shew certain Monuments and Reliques of what had
happened in preceeding Ages: as, two Churches, one built there where the Angel Gabriel saluted the Blessed Virgin, and she conceived by the Spirit; in which there stands three Altars, hew'n out of a Rock: and the other built (as they say) where the house of Ioseph and Mary stood, because there our Saviour Christ was brought up. Also they shew a Well, where the Child Jesus drew Water, and ministred to his Mother; they also shew the vast Ruins of the Synagogue where our Saviour Christ expounded the six∣ty first Chapter of Isay, for which cause they would have thrown him head∣long down the Hill, Luke 4. and many other things, of which you may read in Borchardus the Monk. In Saint Ierom's time, some forty years be∣fore Christ, Nazareth was a small Town called Nazarah. Of the Mountains by which Mary passed when she went to visit her Cousin Elizabeth. BEtween Nazareth and Ierusalem, there standeth many high Hills, as, Mount Gilboa, whereon King Saul killed himself; Mount Gerisim, and Hebal, upon which Hills the Blessings and Cursings were pronounced, Deut. 27. and Mount Ephraim, upon which Ehud kill'd Eglon King of the Moabites, Iudg. 13. Over this Mountain, being very great and steep, Mary travel∣led when she went to visit her Cousin Elizabeth. Of Bethlehem. THERE were two Cities called by this name, the one Bethlem Iudah; the other Bethlem Euphrata, where our Saviour Christ was born, and signi∣fieth fruitful, or the house of Bread: It stood upon a Hill, some six miles from Ierusalem towards the South. The Inhabitants take upon them to shew the place where our Saviour Christ was born, which stood upon the East side of the City, close by the Wall thereof; where, as Eusebius saith, Hellen, the Mother of Constantine the Great, caused to be built a fair and stately Church, three hundred and twenty years afte the Nativity of Christ. This Church was dedicated to St. Mary, and remaineth to this day, being had in great honour, both amongst the Christians, and the Turks, and Saracens. This Church is such a stately building, that it is thought to exceed all the Churches of Christendom, for Beauty and curious Work∣manship: It is two hundred twenty eight Foot long, and eighty seven Foot wide, being built all of Marble of divers colours, and covered with Lead: there are in it four rowes of Marble Pillars, wonderful to look upon, not only in regard of their number but of their greatness, for there is fifty Pillars in every row. The Body of this Church, the Pillars from the bottom to the top, the Walls, and every part of it, is beautified with lively Pictures, adorn∣ed
with divers Colours, Silver, Gold, and curious Workmanship, so as it is wonderful to behold. The Pavement of it is of Marble, polished, and of divers colours, so cunningly set in Works, and with such variety, that it is very delightful to such as look on it. There is painted on the Pillars and Walls, almost all the Stories of the Old Testament, till the Birth of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, with such excellent cunning, and so lively, that it is to be admired. In the Quire of this Church there is found two Altars, one close by the Chappel of St. Katherine, at the East end there∣of; not far distant from which, they shew the place where our Saviour was circumcised: and in the middle of the Quire there standeth another Altar, where they say the Wise men left their Dromedaries, and prepared their Gifts to present unto our Saviour, when they worshipped him. Upon the South side of this Quire, towards the East, they descend by ten stone steps into the Chappel of the Nativity of Christ, richly beautified, and curiously wrought, paved with polished Marble. This Chappel is not very great, but wonderful fair and sumptuous. When the Holy Land was over-run by the Gentiles, this (as many other places were in that Country) was all pol∣luted with Filth and Dirt, that they had much ado to make it clean a great while after. Upon the place where they said our Lady the Blessed Virgin Mary brought forth our Saviour into the World, there is placed a Table of white Marble, after the manner of an Altar: about some four Foot from this they shew the place where the Manger stood, a part of it yet remaining, cut out of a Rock, not of Marble, but of other stone, as many other Mangers are in that Country. Close by that there is an Altar, where they say the Wise men presented their Gifts to our Saviour Christ, and worshipped him. At the entrance into the Church, there standeth a goodly Building, which in times past seemed to have been some Arch-Bishops See, but now is called St. Maries Church. Upon the North side, they descended by certain steps into the Chappel of St. Ierom, who lay a long time buried there, till his Bones were removed thence to St. Maries in Rome. About a mile from Bethlehem, Southward, stood the Tower of Eder, being a Watch-Tower of the Bethlehemites, and so called, because there resorted thither many flocks of sheep: for Aeder ignifieth a Herd. Round about this Tower were fair and fruitful Pastures, to which many Shep∣herds resorted to feed their Flocks; to some of which Shepherds the Angels told the glad tidings of the Birth of our Saviour, and that he was laid in a Manger at Bethlehem. For which cause, in after times there was a Church built just in the place where the Tower stood; and in Saint Ierom's time called by the name of Angelos ad Pastores: the same Luther affirmeth, that it is yet standing. Iacob sometime dwelt in that Place, and buried his wife Rachel thereabouts. The Monument that he set upon her grave remaineth to this day, which was twelve Stones pitch'd an end, standing about a quarter
of a mile from this place, upon the right Hand as they go to Ierusalem: of which Grave, all the Country thereabouts is called by the name of Rachel. Of the Way between Judea and Egypt. BEtween Egypt and Iudea lieth Arabia Petraea: a Land for the most part barren and unfruitful, full of Sands, Rocks, and Mountains, destitute of Water, and subject to many dangers: being in the Summer Solstice scor∣ched with extremity of heat, the Sun being then perpendicular over them (according to Munster) in the day time; and in the night, troubled with extream Winds, which, blowing the Sand with great violence, it casteth it upon great heaps and Mountains, by which dust, both Beasts and sometime men are suffocated and slain. Moreover, there dwelt in this Desart, a rude and dangerous People, cal∣led Saracens; who take their beginning from Ishmael, and are therefore also called Ishmaelites, being given to cruelty and malitiousness. They get their living, for the most part, by Theft and Violence: and as Ishmael was an excellent Archer, so they also are very cunning in shooting and hunting, using to this day their ancient evil custom of robbing and spoiling all that pass that way; insomuch as Merchants are constrained to go in great com∣panies, lest they should be indangered by them, and by reason of the Winds and Sands, are constrained to guide their Journey by the Compass, as men do that sail upon the Sea. Through this Wilderness did Ioseph and Mary pass, when they went with the Child Jesus out of Iudaea into Egypt; where they were in danger of Thieves, subject to be smothered by the Sands, constrained to travel over high Rocks and Mountains, and to rest in Fear, because of Lyons, Bears, and other Beasts which greatly abound in that Place. Besides, divers other discommodities were incident unto them, as want of Meat, Drink, and other necessaries, there being little Water to be found there, insomuch as had not the Lord by an express command charged him in a dream to go down into Egypt, Ioseph durst hardly have ventured upon so difficult and dangerous a Journey. But the Lord so mercifully pro∣vided for him, that he both went and returned safe. Thus may we see to what dangers these good People were exposed, and what miseries they sustain∣ed from the beginning because of their Son Christ Jesus. Of Hermopolis. HErmopolis was called the Town of Mercury, distant from Ierusalem 304 miles towards the South-West: it was one of the chief Cities in Egypt, as Appianus writeth. Nicephorus and Zozemenus affirm, lib. 5. cap. 22. that Ioseph and Mary came and lived in this Town, where they continued all
the days of Herod, that cruel King. But Ziglerius saith, that they lived in the Land of Gosen, where the Patriarch Iacob and his Posterity lived: which agreeth well with the words of S. Matthew, cap. 2. and Hosea 11. Out of Egypt have I called my Son. This Land of Gosen lay 200 miles from Ierusalem, towards the South-West. The Inhabitants of Alcair in Egypt take upon them to shew the place where Ioseph and Mary dwelt, when they went down into that Country; but how true it is I cannot tell, because there is no Author for it. Of Canah in Galilee. THis was a City in Galilee, distant from Ierusalem sixty eight miles to∣wards the North; of which you may read more in the Travels of our Saviour Christ. Of Capernaum. THis Town stood upon the Sea of Galilee, sixty eight miles from Ieru∣salem toward the North; of which you may read more after. The Travls of the Wise Men of the East, which came to Bethlehem to see Jesus. THE Magi were certain wise men of Persia, so called from Meditation, being derived of Hagah, that is, he hath meditated; and taken in the third Conjugation, it signifies, to find or search out a thing, they being such as gave themselves to the knowledge of hard things, and to find out the Secrets and mysteries of Nature. But, according to Vari∣nus, they were not only Philosophers, but Priests also. And Plao upon Al∣cibiades, saith, Magia est Deorum observantia sive ultus divinus; that is, Ma∣gick prescribed the due observance and divine worship of the Gods. Strabo saith, Geogra. lib. 6. That the Magi were such among the Persians, as those whom the Indians call Gimnosophists and Academians; the Babylonians, Chal∣daeans; and the Hebrewes, Prophets, or Priests, which taught the People Di∣vine knowledge. And when the ten Tribes were carried into captivity by Salanasser Emperour of the Assyrians (into Assyria, Media, and Persia) there is no question but they took with them into the East, the holy Books and Volumes of the Law, and of the Prophets, whereby, without doubt, many of the People and Philosophers of the East came to have a taste of the true knowledge and worship of God. Also the Prophet Daniel was brought up in all the Arts of the Caldaeans; whose Writings and Prophecies were not only written and published amongst the Babylnians, but also had in great
account and estimation amongst the Magi: so that they diligently perusing those Books, came not only to the knowledge of God, but also without doubt, to the knowledge of our Saviour Jesus Christ, whom they called the Star of Iacob; from whence may be concluded, that the Wise-Men that came to see our Saviour Christ, were rather of Susa in Persia, than of Zaba in Aethi∣opia. Wherefore these Wise Men came from the Academy of Susa in Persia to Ierusalem, which was 920 miles; saying, Where is he that is born King of the Iews? for we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him. This hapned in the month of January, in the second year after the birth of our Saviour; for Herod in the seventieth year of his age caused all the male Children of the Bethlemites of two years old and under (according to the time that he was told of the Wise Men) to be put to the Sword. From Ierusalem they went to Bethlehem, which was six miles, where, upon the sixth of January they offered their Presents which they brought out of Persia, to our Saviour; viz. Gold, as to a King; Frankincense, as to a Priest; and Myrth, as to a Mortal man, Mat. 2. So let us offer unto Christ our Saviour, the Gold of Faith and heavenly Doctrine; the Fran∣kincense of earnest Prayers, and the Myrrh of Patience in the midst of Cala∣mity. Afterward, the Wise-Men (as they had been warned in a dream) return∣ed another way to Susa in Persia, which was 920 miles. So their Travels were 1846 miles. Of Susa you may read before in the Travels of the Old Testament. Of the Star that appeared to the Wise-Men in the East. SInce this Star appeared in the lower Region of the Air, (as it is apparent it did) from thence it may be concluded, that it neither was any of the fixed Stars, Planet, or a Comet, because they commonly are seen in the upper Region of the Air; but rather, according to the opinion of some, it was an Angel of God, appearing in the form of a bright shining Star, to di∣rect the Wise Men in their way they went to the Town of Bethlem; and so by little and little descending from the sublimity of the Air, pointed out unto them the very house where they might find Mary the Mother of our Lord, and the Child Jesus; almost after the same manner as the Angel of the Lord in the time of Moses appeared to the Children of Israel; that is, in the day like a cloudy Pillar, and in the night like a flaming Fire, to direct them their way, Exod. 13. 14. 34. Wherefore this Star without doubt was no natural Apparition, which happened in the inferiour Region of the Air, sud∣denly vanishing away; but, as I have said, an Angel of the Lord representing the form of a Star. Or else, as Chrysostom saith, a certain miraculous new Star, which, according to the opinion of Augustine, was governed by an Angel of
the Lord; and for the greatness of the Body, and variety of the Aspects, was not seen first in the Land of Iudaea, but in Persia, a Country in the East, where the Magi dwelt, and accompanied thence into Iudaea. And although for a short space it left them in their Journey, yet when they came in the way to Bethlem, it appeared to them again, Mat. 2. As Nicephorus and Chrysostom observe, the Star appeared upon the day of the Conception of Christ, being the twenty fifth day of March; about which time the Arch-Angel Gabriel spoke with the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. and was seen for a whole year and forty one weeks, that is, till the sixth of Ianuary, in the beginning of the second year after the Nativity of Christ. It wanted eleven weeks of two years; and therefore Herod caused all the Male-children of the Bethlehemites of two years old and under, to be slain according to the time declared unto him by the Wise-men. Mat. 2. Wherefore this new Star did first fore-shew the Birth of Christ, that bright shining Star and eternal light of Glory, according to the Prophecy of Billa, Num. 22. Secondly, the Light of God's Word and the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1. Thirdly, Godly and Faithful Ministers and Teachers, who by their Doctrine and godly Life and Conversation, should set before their Auditors and such as observe their actions, the way to Christ and eter∣nal happiness, Dan. ult. The Travels of John Baptist. IN the Month of Thisri, which answereth to our September, Anno Mundi, 3966, the Feast of the Tabernacles being then celebrated, the Arch-Angel Gabriel told Zacharias the Priest, of the Conception of Iohn the Baptist, which should be the voice of a Crier in the Wilderness. And a little after, that is, about the Autumnal Aeqinoctial, Iohn the Baptist was conceived six Months before our Saviour. The next year after, about the Month of Iuly, he was born. Six Months after that, our Saviour Christ was born. In which year, Zacharias, the Father of Iohn Baptist, was slain in the upper Court, be∣tween the Altar and the Temple, for saying, that our Saviour Christ was born, and, that Mary his Mother was a Virgin, Mat. 33. Wherefore Eli∣zabeth, the Wife of Zacharias, fearing the cruelty of Herod and of the Pharisees, about that time when the young Infants of the Bethlehemites were slain, she fled from Ierusalem to Apumim, as Nicephorus saith, which was scituated in the Wilderness between Iericho and Ierusalem, where she privately brought up her Son, being thirty two miles. In the thirty ninth Year of the Nativity of Christ, and upon the twenty fourth day of Iune, Iohn the Baptist being then thirty Years of Age, by the Commandment of the Lord, took upon him the Ministry; for it was not lawful for any to enter into that Function before they were thirty Years of
Age, Numb. 4. Wherefore, upon the eight and twentieth day of September, it being then the Feast of the Tabernacles, and about the middle of the last Week spoken of by Daniel, he went from Adumim to Bethabara, where he took upon him the Ministry of the New Testament: Hannas the chief Priest being then newly entred into that Office, Luke 2. (which was about four miles) and within a short time after, that is, upon the seventh day of October, being then the Feast of Expiation, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was baptised, when he was fully thirty Years of Age, Luke 3. Mat∣thew 3. Iohn 1. In the Year following, which was the one and thirtieth Year of the Na∣tivity of Christ, a little before the Feast of Easter, the Synedrion of Ierusa∣lem sent Messengers unto Iohn, he then remaining at Bethabara, to know whether he was the Christ, or Elias, or some other Prophet, Iohn 1. Upon the eighteenth day of September, the same Year, Iohn entred upon the se∣cond year of his Ministry; about which time, Caiphas began to enter upon the Office of the High Priest, and the Sadducees and Pharisees to persecute Iohn Baptist. Wherefore he departed from Bethabara, and went to Aenon, a City in Galilee, which was twenty four miles. After that Iohn had preached publickly and freely, by the space of a whole year and two months; about the month of December, and the end of the first year of the Ministry of our Saviour, by the Commandment of Herod, he was taken and led Prisoner from Aenon to the Tower of Macheruntes, which was twenty eight miles; where he remained untill his Death. So all his Travels were eighty eight miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Adumim. ADumim, or Adummim, (as it is in Ioshua, cap. 15.) was a Tower twelve miles from Ierusalem towards the East, scituated in the Wilderness that is between Ierusalem and Iericho; so called because of the multitude of Robberies and Murthers that were done in that place: for Dam signifieth Blood. Here the poor man that Christ mentioned, Luke 10. fell amongst Thieves; and here Eliah continued when he was sed by the Raves, and drank the Water of the River Cherith, 1 King 17. which was a notable Type of Iohn the Baptist, who lived in a Cave in this place. This Cave stood close by the Garden of Engedi, where in former times the Academy and School of the Prophets Eliah and Elisha was kept: here the Esseis (which was a Sect amongst the Iews) also continued, who led a Monastical kind of Life, and gave themselves wholly to Prayers and good Works; under whose Discipline and Instruction Iohn was brought up. Mathesius wisely observes, that of all other, the Esseis would never oppose Christ; but were a People
that lived chastly and honestly, according to the Custom of the Nazarites, with all diligence reading the Scriptures, and avoiding idleness as a great temptation of the Devil, giving themselves principally to the Study of Phy∣sick. After this sort was Iohn brought up. Of Bethabara. THIS was a Town scituated upon the East side of the River Iordan, sixteen miles from Ierusalem towards the East, where there was either a Bridge or a Ferry to pass over Iordan: from whence this place was called Bethabara, being derived of Baith, a House; and Abarah, a Passage: where∣fore, at a certain time, there being assembled in this place a great Concourse and Congregation of People, Iohn did first enter upon the Ministry of the New Testament, and taught the People the Doctrine of Repentance and Baptism. Here Elias the Thesbite, who was a Type of Iohn the Baptist, was taken up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot. Here Iohn spake with the Mes∣sengers that came to inquire whether he was Christ or not: to whom he an∣swered, That he was neither Elias, nor a Prophet of the Old Testament, but the Voice of a Cryer in the Wilderness, Io. 4. Is. 40. And in the same place where the Priests stood with the Ark of the Covenant, whilst Ioshua and the Children of Israel passed over Iordan, Iohn baptized Christ, the true Ark of the Covenant of the Throne of Grace, Iosh. 3. 4. Mat. 4. Luke 3. Heb. 9. Of Aenon. THIS Town stood upon the West-side of the River of Iordan, 42 miles from Ierusalem Northward, a little on this side of the Sea of Tiberias, near the mouth of the River Iaboch, where it falleth into Iordan, in which place was great abundance of Waters. Here also Iohn sometimes baptized, Ioh. 3. it being two miles from Salem, where Iacob in times past dwelt, Gen. 33. Of the meeting together of the Waters this Town was called Aenon, of Ain, which signifies an Eye, and a Fountain that springeth as it were from an Eye. Of Macherus, or Macharuntes. MAcherus was a Town of Peraea, beyond Iordan, twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the East, scituated in a high Mountain, being derived of Macherah, that is, a Sword. This was one of the chief Ca∣stles of Herod Antipas, who obtained the chief Command in the City of Ie∣rusalem, Plin. lib. 5. c. 16. In this place Iohn Baptist was beheaded, as Ioseph. saith, lib. Antiq. 80. c. 10. And although his Disciples buried his Body there∣abouts, yet long after the Christians removed his Bones and Relicks to Se∣basten, that is, Samaria, where they were the second time buried with great Honour and Reverence. Afterward (as Nicephorus and Theodorus sa) his Bones were taken up again by Iulian the Apostate, and burn'd. There
are many other things that are written concerning his Reliques, which (be∣cause of the uncertainty of them) I omit to speak of; and will proceed to a further Description of this City. Alexander, King of the Iews, first built and fortified it; and then making War against Aristobulus, it hapned to be destroyed by Gabinus, one of his Captains, and so continued desolate till He∣rod's time, who rebuilt the Town and the Castle, and fortified it with strong Walls and high Towers, even a hundred and sixty Cubits in height, so that a man could scarce see to the top of it. But, that God might revenge the blood of his Saints, at such time as Ierusalem and the Holy Land was left de∣solate, Lucius Bassus (a noble Roman) came to this City, and besieged it; during which Siege, Bassus took a certain young man, which was a Prince of the Iews, called Eleazer, and caused a Cross to be set on purpose to have crucified him; but they which were besieged in the Town, seeing the piti∣ful Lamentations this young man made, promised Bassus, if he would spare his Life, to yield up the Town, which he did; so the Castle being taken, the Gates of the City were set open. But the Romans fell to the Slaughter without Mercy, and put to the Sword 1700 Persons, besides, there were a great multitude of Women and Children carried thence into Captivity, as Iosephus (lib. de Bello Iud. 7. cap. 25.) affirmeth. There were many goodly Wells and stately Buildings within this City: there is cut out in the Castle a Rue Tree of an admirable greatness: and in the Valley, upon the North-side of the City, the Root Baarus is found, presenting both in Colour and Figure a Flame. There are also found ma∣ny hot Baths and Fountains of wholsome Waters: but above the rest, Io∣sephus maketh mention of one in a Cave, where two Streams issueth, as it were out of two Dugs; the one hot, the other cold; which two Waters be∣ing mingled ogether, are very wholsome, and cure many Diseases, but principally the shrinking of the Sinews. And this shall suffice concerning the Travels of Iohn the Baptist. The Travels of our Lord and Saviour Christ in his Infancy. Matth. 3. Luke 2. FRom Bethlehem the Child Jesus was brought to Ierusalem, and there presented in the Temple, Anno Mundi 3967, which was 6 miles. From Ierusalem, Ioseph and Mary, (when they had accomplished all things in the Temple of the Lord) carried the Child Iesus to Nazareth in Galilee, which was sixty four miles. From thence Ioseph and Mary brought Jesus back again to Bethlehem, which was seventy two miles.
Upon the second day of Ianuary, in the second Year after the Nativity of Christ, the wise men of Persia brought Gifts, and worshipped him. A little after, that is, about the Ides of Ianuary, just the Night before the Command came from Herod to kill the innocent Children, Ioseph and Mary went, with the Child Jesus, through the Mountains and Desarts of Iudea into Egypt, to Hermopolis in the Land of Gosen; which was reckoned from Bethlehem 296 miles. From Hermopolis in Egypt (after the death of Herod) Jesus was brought back again by his Parents to Nazareth in Iudea, which was above 368 miles. When Jesus was twelve years of age, he went with his Parents from Nazareth to Ierusalem, to the Feast of the Passeover, which was sixty four miles. And when his Parents had lost him, and found him again in the Temple among the Learned; then he continued in obedience unto them, and went with them from Ierusalem to Nazareth, which was sixty four miles. So his Travels were 934 miles. Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in his Travels, you may read before in the Travels of the Virgin Mary. The Travels of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, from his Baptism till the first year of his Ministry. CHrist, in the thirtieth year of his age, went from Nazareth and came to Bethabara, which stood upon the River Iordan, where Iohn baptized; and upon the seventh day of October, in the middle of the last Week spoken of by Daniel, cap. 9. was there baptized, at whose baptism the testimony of the Spirit descended down upon him in the likeness of a Dove; which was fifty two miles. From Iordan, Jesus was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to be temp∣ted of the Devil, and there fasted forty dayes and forty nights: at the end of which time, the Devil came and tempted him. How this Wilderness was called, the Evangelist doth not specifie; but it is to be thought that it was the Desart of Arabia Petraea, and that our Saviour Christ fasted upon the mountain of Sinai, where Moses and Eliah fasted forty dayes and forty nights, Exod. 24. 1. Reg. 19. For this Desart extendeth it self from the borders of Egypt and the Red Sea, to Iordan, where Iohn baptized: and from thence, by the Country of Trachonites, to the mountain of Libanus. Therefore our Saviour Christ might that present seventh day of October whereon he was baptized come into this Wilderness; and by little and little go thence to Mount Sinai, which was 136 miles. For there was no place more fit for Sathn
to tempt our Saviour in, than where the Law was delivered, which is the power of Sin: for although the Son of God was without Sin, yet he took upon him the Sins of all the World, Levit. 16. Joh. 1. Isa. 53. So then our Saviour Christ (according to this supputation) continued in the Desart from the seventh day of October to the sixteenth of November, which was forty dayes and forty nights. Epiphanius, lib. 2. Tom. 1. Haeres. 51. saith, that our Saviour Christ was baptized upon the eighth day of November, which was the twelfth day of the month Athyr amongst the Egyptians: but this sup∣putation is false, and altogether repugnant to the certain Mathematical cal∣culation. Wherefore, upon the seventeenth day of November, our Saviour Christ hun∣gred, Mat. 4. Mark 1. Luke 4. and then the Devil, with an extraordinary bold∣ness, came unto him, and carried him from Mount Sinai with great violence through the Air, and set him upon the top of a Pinacle of the Temple in Jerusalem, which was 120 miles: this Pinacle was so exceeding high, (as you may read in the description of Ierusalem) that whosoever lookt down from it into the Valley of Cedron, their eyes dazled, and it seemed as though there had been Clouds in the bottom of the Valley; for it was 600 foot from the bottom to the top, From this place the Devil bid our Saviour Christ throw himself down &c. Mat. 4. From the Pinacle of the Temple, the Devil took our Saviour Christ and set him upon a high Mountain; but what Hill it was, or how called, the holy Evangelist doth not set down. The Inhabitants of the holy Land think it was the Hill that stood betwixt Bethel and Ai, upon which Hill in times past Abraham dwelt, Gen. 13. But that Hill is not very high, and there are many higher Hills in the holy Land: wherefore it is to be thought that he was carried upon the top of that high Mountain Nebo, which was also called Pisgah, and stood 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, where God shewed unto Moses all the holy Land beyond Iordan, Deut. 34. And in this place, as God had shewed Moses, so the Devil shewed our Savi∣our the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, saying▪ All these will I give thee, &c. It is to be thought, that all these sharp temptations of the Devil were done in one day. This Hill Pisgah is distant from Bethabara 8 miles, where Iohn Baptist baptised, and bare witness of our Saviour Christ, Ioh. ca. 1. Now after the Devil had left him, and the Angels had comforted him, he came thence un∣to Iohn, which was 8 miles, and Iohn said to his Disciples, Behold, this is the Lamb of God which taketh away the Sins of the World, Ioh. 1. So these Travels were 140 miles.
The Travels of our Saviour Christ, in the first year of his Ministry, which was the 31 of his age. BUT yet our Saviour Christ began not to preach publickly, because it was not lawful for any to be admitted into the Ministry of the Word until they were past thirty years of age. Now our Saviour Christ, in the Months of Ianuary and February, being then past thirty (for he was full thirty upon the 25 day of December) began to preach publickly, but yet he had no Disciples, neither had he wrought any Miracles. In the month of March, Iohn Baptist testifieth of Christ before the Priest and Levites; and within two days after, Christ being then present, Iohn said, Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the Sins of the World, &c. Within a while after, Christ went thence towards Cana in Galilee, in which Journey he took unto him some Disciples, namely, Andrew, and Iohn the Evangelist, and, as some think, Peter, Philip, and Nathaniel; near to the Town of Bethel, where the Patriarch Iacob saw a Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven (for Christ maketh mention of that Vision in his Journey) which was 32 miles, Ioh. 2. where he graced the Marriage with a notable Miracle, turning six pots of Water (containing 168 Gallons and three Quarts or thereabouts) into Wine, Ioh. 2. After he went thence with his Mother and his Disciples to Capernaum, 20 miles: but he stayed there but a while, for the Passover of the Iewes was at hand, Ioh. 2. In the beginning of April, Christ went from Capernaum to Ierusalem, to the Feast of the Passover, which was 56 miles, and there cast out of the Temple the Money-changers, and those that sold Sheep, and Oxen, and Doves in it. This was done about 46 years after Herod Ascalonita, King of the Jewes, had rebuilded and beautified the Temple; of which you may read in Ioseph. lib. Ant. 15. cap. 14. Ioh. 2. The first Passover of the Ministry of Christ. This first Passover of the Ministry of our Saviour Christ, of which you may read, Iohn 2. was celebrated upon the sixth day of April, and continued until the thirteenth day of the same Month. During which time, our Savi∣our Christ did many Miracles, insomuch that many believed in his Name; and amongst the rest, Nicodemus, who came to him by night, and reasoned with him concerning the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus signifies the Victory of the People, Ioh. 3. At this time he continued in Ierusalem till the month of October, and there celebrated the Feast of the Tabernacles, and Preached the acceptable year of the Lord, Esay 61.
The Feast of Tabernacles being ended, Jesus with his Disciples came into Iudea, that is, he went from Ierusalem, and began to teach in Iudea, and his Disciples baptised, Ioh. 3. 4. Iohn also baptised at this time upon the borders of Galilee near Iudea, 42 miles from Ierusalem Northward, upon the East side of the River Iordan, for he was not yet cast into Prison. Therefore Christ chose him a place to teach and baptise in, upon the River of Iordan near Iohn, that they might meet and converse together. A little after, the question was moved concerning Purification, and Iohn began to preach of Christ, and that he was the Son of God, and Spouse of the Church. In this Sermon Iohn in many places called himself the Friend of the Spouse. From whence it is evident, that Christ and Iohnin the month of November, did often meet and converse together. In the month of December, Christ being assured of the captivity of Iohn the Baptist, Mat. 4. Mark 1. and of the Persecution and fallacies of the Pha∣risees, Iohn 4. went from Iordan, and returned into Galilee, by the Province and Country of Samaria: in which Country he came to Iacob's Well, which stood close by Sichar, in former times called Sichem, about some 10 miles from Iordan towards the West; in which place he spake with the Samaritan Woman, (this happened some four months before Harvest) and after went into Sichar, and continued there for the space of two days; and after retur∣ning into Galilee, was very acceptably entertained of the Galileans, because they formerly having seen his miracles done at Ierusalem, were joyful to see him there. When he had travelled from Sichar to Cana (a City in Galilee the lower, which was 32 miles, where he had changed water into wine) there was a certain Ruler came unto him, whose Son lay sick at Capernaum, 20 miles distant, and besought him to heal his Son; our Saviour told him that his Son was made whole: so he believed, and his Son was made whole the same hour. This was the second miracle that our Saviour Christ did, Io. 4. It is thought that this Rulers name was Chuza, of whom there is mention Luk. 8. and was Herod's Procurator; whose Wives name was Iohanna, which signified Gracious. This Woman ministred of all her substance unto Christ, Iohn 4. So these Travels were 192 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Cana in Galilee. THis was a City of the lower Galilee, where our blessed Saviour Christ turned Water into Wine, being distant from Ierusalem 68 miles Northward. The place where our Saviour wrought this Miracle is to be seen at this day; but it is within the Ground, and you must descend by certain steps before you can come at it, because (as it, seems) there have been
many Churches and Buildings set upon it, which being sundry times over∣thrown, the ruins thereof have raised the Earth in such sort, that the anti∣ent Place is as it were hidden and laid under the earth, as is also the place of the Anuntiation of the Nativity of our Saviour Christ, and many other where he wrought Miracles; to which they do descend down under the earth by steps. Upon the North side of this Town stood a round Hill, and upon the South a goodly Plain; being called Cana in Galilee, to put di∣stinction between it and another Town called after the same name, which stood upon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, in the Tribe of Asser; in which the Canaanitish woman, or Syrophoenicean dwelt, which besought Christ to heal her Daughter, who was possessed of a Devil, Mat. 15. Mark 7. Which was called Canah the greater, as this was called Canah the less, and was di∣stant each from the other 44 miles. Canah was so called, because round about it grew Reeds, and there were many moorish and waterish grounds, whereof the Town took the name. For Canah signifies a Reed: which is a fit type of the Church; for, as our Saviour Christ at this Town (which stood in a moorish and Reedy place) graced the marriage with an extraordinary Miracle; so likewise will he grace the marriage of his Church (though troubled with miseries and afflictions in this World, tossed to and fro like a wavering Reed) with the glorious presence of his gracious countenance, and in the World to come crown it with Eternal Glory. Of Caernaum. THis City was so called from the pleasant and comfortable Scituation of it. In the Hebrew Text Mathew calls it Ca harnacu, i. The Town of com∣fort; being derived of Noam, i. Consolation. In this Town our Saviour dwelt after he had left Nazareth, and in it wrought many Miracles, as the healing of the sick, casting out of Devils, and such like, whereof you may read, Mat. 8. Mark 1. Luke 5. 7. Iohn 4. It stood in the Land of Gene∣zareth, upon the West and North side of Iordan, in an angle of Land joyning to the Sea of Galilee, 56 miles from Ierusalem Northward, in the Tribe of Issachar; and, as it is thought by some, just in the midst of the twelve Tribes. Mat. 9. calls it the City of our Saviour. And that Christ was no Stranger, but an Inhabitant of this City, it is manifest, Mat. 17. where Christ, when he gave Tribute to the Magistrates of this City, asked Peter, saying, Of whom do the Kings of the Earth take tribute? Peter said, of strangers: then, quoth he, the Children are free; yet nevertheless, &c. From whence may be gathered, that he was no Stranger, but an Inhabitant in Capernaum. It had upon the North side of it the three Tribes, Nethalim Asser, and Zabulon; upon the South, Benjamin, Iuda, Dan, and Simeon; upon the West Issachar, Epharaim, and the half Tribe of Manasses; and
upon the East, Reuben, Gad, and the other half Tribe of Manasses: so that our Saviour Christ dwelt in the midst of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Fur∣thermore, it was a goodly Market Town, and had as well relation to Tyrus and Sidon (two Towns of the Gentiles, within forty four miles of it) as to Ie∣rusalem from whence may be verified that saying of Esa. ca. 8, 9. The Land of Zebulon and Naphtalim, near the way of the Sea beyond Jordan, and Ga∣lilee of the Gentiles; a People which sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, saw a great Light. This Town is therefore justly called the City of Com∣fort and Consolation; since our Saviour Christ dwelt there, who with his Doctrine and preaching refreshed and comforted all such as were afflicted with the Burthen of their Sins. But the great men that were Inhabitants of this City, had more respect to their private profit, than to the Doctrine and Miracles that Christ wrought among them; from whence it came to pass, that they did as it were neglect and contemn that Good which God had offered to them: which made our Saviour say, And thou Capernaum, which seemest to be exalted up unto Heaven, shall be cast down into Hell: for if the Miracles had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah, which have been done in thee, they had continued until this day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Iudgment, than for thee, Mat. 11. For there was no such benefit offered to any City, neither such Honours and Dignities, as were to Capernaum, our Saviour himself dwelling there. Where∣fore, for their Ingratitude and Impiety, the City hath divers times been wasted and destroyed, as well by the Romans as other Nations; so that at this day, this Glorious City is become so Desolate, that there is scarce eight Houses standing, and they also like small Sheds. Of Sichar. IN antient time this Town was called Sichem, of which you may read more both in the Travels of Iacob and Abimelech. After it came to be called Sichar, according to the opinion of Luther upon Genesis, because the Inhabitants of that Country were given to Pleasure and Voluptuousness, the greatest part of their Delight being in drinking and quaffing: so Sichar be∣ing derived of Schachar, signifieth, to be Drunk, or inordinately to swallow sweet and pleasant Wine, of which there was plenty in that Town, made of the Juice of Apples, the Fruit of Palm-Trees, and Honey, which may very well resemble Hipocras or Metheglin, as some Authors have it. And al∣though by the Incursions of the Romans it was utterly wasted and left De∣solate, yet in succeeding times it was re-built, and called Nicapolis, that is, a New Town. It is scituated very pleasantly, and aboundeth with all manner of Delights; but it is unfortified, neither can it by any means be fortified; neither have the Inhabitants any help, if they be oppressed by the Enemy, but to fly: for it is scituated in the middle of a Valley, between
two high Mountains, so that a man may fling a stone from the top of one of them into the City. About two Bows shot without the South Gate of this Town, is to be seen the Fountain or Well of Iacob, upon the Brim of which our Saviour Christ sate when he was weary, as we may read in the fourth of Iohn. This Well standeth just in the way as Pilgrims travel to Ierusalem. Upon the right hand above this Well, there standeth a Mountain of an ex∣ceeding height, divided into two tops, the one of them being called Geri∣zim, the other Hebal. In Mount Gerizim the Patriarch Ioshuah built an Al∣tar, and the People standing upon Mount Hebal, he caused the whole Book of Deuteronomy to be read over, with the Blessings and Cursings, so that all the People might hear them; for thus we read in Ios. 8. The one half of the People stood close by Mount Gerizim, and the other by Mount Hebal, &c. Deut. chap. 27. These two great Mountains began upon the right side of the City Sichar, and extended themselves in length to the City of Iericho. Upon the left side of this Well is to be seen the Ruins of a great Town, which is thought to be the old Sichem, and by the Reliques that remain there, it may be judged to have been a very goodly City. For there are yet to be seen certain broken Pillars of Marble, as also large and spacious Buildings, which in times past, without Question, have been very goodly things, and standeth wonderful pleasantly; the Soil round about it being very pleasant and fruitful, only there is want of Water. This Town lieth some two Bows shot from Sichar, and the Inhabitants of that place judge this Sichar to be Thebez, where Abimelech died, Iudg. 9. Not far from Iacob's Well, is to be seen that piece of Ground which Iacob gave to Ioseph, more than the rest of his Brethren, Gen. 48. It is a long Valley, very fruitful and pleasant, where there lies butied, in a certain fair Garden, the Bones of Iacob and Ioseph, which were brought out of Aegypt, Iosh. 24. the Reliques of which Sepulchre are yet to be seen. Mount Garizim or Gerizim, is so called from the cutting down of Trees: for Garaz signifies, to cut down. Upon this Mountain is to be seen (even to this day) the place where the Temple stood, that was built by Sanballath, dedicated to Iupiter Olympius, in contempt of the Tem∣ple of Ierusalem. The Chief Priest of this Temple was one Manasses, a Fugitive, of the stock of Levi. This Manasses was Brother to Iaddus, Chief Priest of Ierusalem, of whom you may read, Nehem. 13. But some 200 years after the first Foundation, Iohn Hircanus, High-Priest of Ierusalem, utter∣ly destroyed it to the Ground. The Travels of our Saviour Christ in the second year of his Ministry; which was the two and thirtieth year of his age. IN the Month of Ianuary, Christ went from Cana in Galilee to Nazareth, which was eight miles. Here, upon the Sabbath-day, he went into
the Synagogue, and began to teach, insomuch as the Inhabitants were asto∣nished at his Doctrine: but the Citizens being ingrateful, he went to Caper∣naum, a City which I have chosen to dwell in before all others, Luke 4. Mat. 4. being twelve miles, or thereabouts. In the Month of February, he compassed about all Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, healing the Sick, and those that were diseased amongst the People, Mat. 4. In this Visitation our Saviour went to Caesa∣rea Philippi, which was distant from Capernaum forty eight miles toward the North. Here Matthew was called, as he was at the receipt of Custome; and the Woman was healed of her Bloody Issue, Mat. 9. But that Matthew was called about this time, the circumstances of times make evident; for, a little after the second Passover of our Saviour Christ, the same Matthew was chosen to be an Apostle, Luke 5. 6. Mat. 9. Mark 2. In the Month of March, the Inhabitants of the Towns which Christ visited in Galilee, brought unto him many that were possessed of Devils, and afflicted with other Diseases, all which he healed: insomuch that there followed him a great company out of Galilee and Decapolis, and from Ierusalem and Iudaea, and of all the Countries beyond Iordan, Mat. 3. Thus having finished this Visitation, as it may be thought, he returned back to Capernaum, where he dwelt, as I have told you before, which was forty eight miles; for Caesarea Philippi stood so far from Capernaum. The second Passover of the Ministry of Christ. A little after these things were finished, was the Feast of the Iews, Iohn 4. and Jesus went up to Ierusalem, Iohn 5. to celebrate the Feast of the Passe∣over, which this year happened a little before Harvest, which was 56 miles. This second Passeover of the Ministry of Christ fell upon the six and twen∣tieth day of March, at which time Christ celebrated the Passover with his Disciples, according to the Law of God. Here, upon the Sabbath day, being the last day of March, he healed a certain man that lay by the Pool of Bethesda, which had been diseased eight and thirty years, Ioh. 5. And at the end of the Passover he went with his Disciples from Ierusalem, through the Corn Fields: but his Disciples being hungry began to pluck the ears of Corn, and to eat them; wherefore the Pharisees being offended at them, began to reprehend our Saviour Christ and his Disciples: upon which followed the disputation concerning the Sabbath, Luke 6. Matth 12. Upon the seventh day of April he went on the Sabbath day to Peraea, which Country was in the Command of Herod Antipas, and there he healed a man with a dried hand, Luke 6. Mark 3. The Country of Peraea beyond Iordan, is distant from Ierusalem twenty miles. But when the Herodian Council heard that he had healed a man on the Sabbath day, they sought occasion how they might do to put him to death,
wherefore our Saviour Christ went thence to the Sea of Galilee, which was 40 miles. Here he went up into a mountain not far from Capernaum, and chose the twelve Apostles, Luke 6. Mark 3. And then upon this Mountain he preached unto the People which resorted thither unto him out of the Country round about, whom they heard with great diligence and attendance. This Sermon being ended, he came down from the Mountain and healed the man that was sick of the Leprosie. He also went into Capernaum, and healed the Centurion's Servant, Mat 8. Luke 7. Afterward Christ, in the same Month of April, when the man whom he healed of his Leprosie had pub∣lished the Miracle, he went from Capernaum into the Desart which lay near unto Bethsaida; for there was a certain Desart, Mark 1. Luke 7. In the month of May, our Saviour went out of Galilee towards Ierusalem to keep the Feast of Pentecost; so he came to the gates of the City Naim, which stood on the border of Samaria, and was distant from Capernaum 16 miles. Here he recalled the Widows Son to life, Luke 7. and after he went to Ierusalem, which was 48 miles, that he might celebrate the Feast of Pentecost according to the Law of God, Exo. 23. Thrice every year shall every male Child appear before the Lord thy God. This Feast fell this year upon the fifteenth day of May, for it behoved our Saviour, according to the Law, to go every year to Ierusalem to these three principal Feasts, that is, of the Passover, Pentecost, and of the Tabernacles. A little after the Feast of Pentecost, Iohn Baptist (being then in Prison) having certain intelligence of the Miracle that our Saviour wrought upon the Widdows Son at the gate of Naim; and of other wonderful Miracles that he did in Ierusalem, and in other places in Iudea, sent two of his Disciples from the Castle of Macharuntes, to ask him the question, whether he was the Messia or no? So when they came unto him, and delivered him their Message, at that time he cured many of their sick∣ness and Plagues, and evil Spirits, and to many blind men he gave sight freely. And Jesus said unto them, Go your ways, and tell John what things you have seen and heard, that the blind see, the halt go, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor receive the Gospel: And blessed is he that shall not be offended on me, Mathew 11. Luke 7. At this Sermon it was thought he converted the sinner that washed his feet, and poured a box of pretious Oyl upon his head, Luke 7. In the month of Iune our Saviour Jesus Christ went with the Twelve about six and fifty miles out of Iudea into Galilee, and there, in divers Cities and Towns he began to preach and teach the Kingdom of God. At this time there were divers Women followed him, whom he had healed of evil Spirits and of their Infirmities; but principally Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven Devils; and Ioan the wife of Chuza, Herod's Pro∣curator, and Susanna: all which ministred unto him of their Substance, Luke 8.
Now when he had travelled from place to place some certain time, and visited many Cities and Towns thereabout, he returned back again to the City of Capernaum, where it is said that our Saviour Christ dwelt; and there dispossest the man of a Devil, that was both blind, lame, and dumb, Mat. 12. Mar. 3. Luke 11. And going thence to the Sea, he recited eight Parables, Mat. 13. Mark. 4. Luke 8. In the evening of the same day, he went six miles, into the Country of the Gadarens, Mar. 4. Luke 8. The next day, betimes in the morning, he went out of the Ship into the Country of the Gadarens, and healed two that were possessed of Devils, Mat. 2. Mar. 5. Luke 8. Out of these two he cast a Legion of Devils, and suffered them to enter into the Herd of Swine, which they carried headlong into the Sea. Pre∣sently our Saviour Christ went thence six miles, into the Land of Genesa∣reth, where there was a great multitude upon the Sea shore, not far from the City of Capernaum, that expected his coming, Mar. 5. Luke 8. Within a few daies after, about the beginning of Iune, he entred into Capernaum, and there he healed the man that lay sick upon his Bed of a dead Palsie, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luke 5. After, he went to Sea, and taught the multitude that came to him, Mar. 2. From Capernaum he went to Caesarea Philippi, forty eight miles, where, being invited to a Banquet by Matthew, he eat among Publicans and Sinners, and confuted the Pharisees and Iohn's Disciples. In the same City he re∣stored the Daughter of Iairus to life, Mat. 9. Mark 2. Luke 5. and as he went thence, he restored two men to their sight, and cast out a Devil, Mat. 9. About the end of the Month of Iuly, our Saviour Christ went from Caesa∣rea Philippi to Nazareth, thirty six miles; where, because of the ingratitude and contempt of the Citizens, he did no great Miracles, Mark 6. Mat. 13. In the Month of August, our Saviour Christ went from Nazareth toward Ierusalem, to the Feast of Tabernacles, and as he went, he visited the Towns and Cities near adjoyning. Now when he saw that they wanted Teachers, it being at this time the second Harvest, he said unto his Disciples, Lo, the Harvest is great, but the Labourers are few, &c. and he sent his Disciples out into the Harvest, Mat. 9. Luke 9. Of this second Harvest you may read, Exod. 23. where God commanded the People that they should observe the Feast of the Tabernacles, when in the end of the year they had gathered in all the Fruits of the Fields. Also in Levit. 23. it is thus written, From the fifteenth day of the seventeenth Month, when you have gathered all the Fruits of your Land, you shall celebrate unto the Lord your God seven days, &c. From Galilee, our Saviour Christ came to Ierusalem, sixty four miles; where, from the twentieth to the twenty seventh day of September, he celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles, according to the Law of God.
The rest of the Travels of our Saviour Christ, and the Mi∣racles that he wrought in this three last Months of this year,About the 18 day of October in this year, the Practises of Se∣janus were dis∣covered, and he died miserably, Tac. lib. 5. viz. in October, November, and December, for their great multi∣tude cannot be described. So the Travels of our Saviour Christ in the second year of his Ministry were 912 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Caesarea Philippi. THIS City is scituated not far from the foot of the Mountain Antilibanus, 104 miles from Ierusalem toward the North, close by the two Wells of Iordan, Ior, and Dan. Upon the East side of this City these two Streams meet, and make the River Iordan. Philip, the Tetrarch of Traconitis, called this City after his own name, Philippus; and in honour of the Roman Caesars, he added the name of Cae∣sarea; Tiberias at this time being Emperour of Rome. In times past it was called Laisch, or Lais, which signifies a ravening or roaring Lion. But the Tribe of Dan having conquered it and rebuilt it again, they called it Dan, and the Inhabitants of the Holy Land, Laehem Dan, as you may read in the Travels of the Danites. But the Town (as it is reported by such as have travelled into the Holy Land, and by the Authority of Volateran) notwithstanding these names, is often called Belenas. Here (as Eusebius, Zo∣zomenes, and Nicephorus say in their Ecclesiastical Histories) the Woman that was diseased with the bloudy Issue, was healed by touching the Hem of our Saviour's Garment; which Woman, in token of thankfulness for so great a benefit, and in memory of so notable a Miracle, erected in this City, a little without the Gates of her House, a stone Pillar, on which she caused to be set the Image of Christ made of Brass; and behind that stood the Image of this Woman, who had been diseased twelve years with the bloudy Issue, bowing her self at the feet of our Lord, and touching the Hem of his Gar∣ment. They also say there grew certain Herbs about this Pillar, whereby Miracles were wrought thirty years after it was set up. But Iulian the Apostate having intelligence of these things, caused those Images to be broken down, and erected his own in the same place. But soon after, there happened such an exceeding Thunder, that fire falling from Heaven, strook this Image, thus set up by this cruel Tyrant, upon the Breast, and cast the Head and the Neck thereof with great violence upon the Earth. These things hap∣pened in Caesarea Philippi. Upon the Borders of Caesarea Philippi our Saviour Christ asked his Disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I
am, Mat. 6. Ioseph. At. li. 20. cap. 6. saith, Agrippa King of the Iews did much inlarge Caesarea Philippi, in honour of Nero, and called it after his name Neromia, but it retained not that name long. Of Peraea. PEraea, or Peraia, was the utmost part of the Holy Land, in which were the Tribes Gad and Reuben, separated from the rest of Iudea by the River Iordan, and under the Subjection and Government of Herod Anti∣pas. It was sixteen miles from Ierusalem Eastward, so called of Peran, which signifies beyond, or upon the other side, Plin. li. 4. ca. 1. In the Castle of Macharuntes, standing in this Country, Iohn Baptist was beheaded. Of the Sea of Galilee. THIS Sea lay forty four miles from Ierusalem, Northward, representing upon the Banks a Harp in figure; whence it was called Kinnaereth, that is, the Sea of the Harp, Num. 34. for Kinnor signifieth an Harp. To∣ward the North it extendeth it self into some bredth, but toward the South it drew into a streight Angle, and was called the Sea of Galilee, because it bordered upon Galilee. It was also called the Lake of Genesareth, because of the pleasantness and fruitfulness of the Soil lying upon the North side of it. It is called (Ioh. 6.) the Sea of Tiberias, from the City Tiberias that stood upon the shore of it. It was but four miles and a little more broad, but in length, from the North to the South, twelve miles. Upon the East side it had the Town Chorazin, and upon the West Capernaum; and (as Iose∣phus saith) the Water of this Sea was very sweet and pleasant; from whence it came to pass that Fishes did greatly abound in it, and there were many Fishers that lived thereabouts only by fishing in that Sea. There were ma∣ny other Cities besides those two before mentioned, that stood upon this Sea; as Bethsaida, Migdala, Tiberias, and Trichaea; these stood upon the West. Upon the East stood Iulia and Cadara. Of the holy Mountain near Capernaum in Galilee. ABout a mile from Capernaum, toward the South-west, is to be seen an exceeding high Hill, standing upon the shore of the Sea of Galilee, beautified with many Herbs and Flowers of divers kinds, being very fruitful and pleasant, extending it self in length almost two Bows shoot, and in breadth one. From this Hill one might have seen the whole Sea of Galilee, the Countries of Iura and Trachonitis, even to Mount Libanus, also the Mountains Sanir and Hermon, and a great part of the upper and lower Ga∣lilee. Here also the Inhabitants of the Holy Land shew a certain Stone, on which they say our Saviour Christ did usually sit when he preached to the People; which Stone the Christians call the Table: here was that Sermon
made of the eight Beatitudes, Mat. 5. 6, 7. Luke 6. Here were the twelve Apostles chosen, Luke 6. Mar. 3. And our Saviour Christ descending from this Mountain, in the Suburbs of the City of Capernaum healed a Man that was infected with the Leprosie. About thirty Paces from the foot of this Hill there ariseth a Fountain, which is compassed about with a Wall, and is thought to be a Vein of Nilus, because they find in it such kind of fishes, the like wherof are not to be found in any other place but Nilus, Iosephus calleth this Spring Capernaum, and likewise all the plain (being very pleasant and fruitful for the space of a mile, even unto Iordan) after the same name, because it is subiect to the Jurisdiction of that City. About 20 paces from this wall, on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, there is shewn a place where they say Christ appeared to his seven Disciples after his Resurrection, and asked them whether they had any meat? And about ten paces from that is shewn a place where they say our Saviours Disciples came to Land, and they drew up in their nets a great draught of fishes, &c. John 21. Of Naim. NAim signifies fruitful and pleasant: it stood 48 miles from Jerusalem to∣wards the North; and typically representeth the condition of the World. For the Children of this World live in all manner of Pleasures and Delights, never thinking of any sorrow till Death seiseth on them; but then that overturns all, and those delights become loathsome unto them. Notwith∣standing this one comfort we have left us, Hope in Christ Jesus; who as he raised the Widows Son (at the gates of this City) from Death to Life▪ will by his mighty Power raise us again at the last day, from the Bowels of the Earth and make us partakers with him of an heavenly habitation. It stood in the Land of Samaria; and in the tribe of Issachar, about two miles off it, upon the East side, stood mount Tabor; and a little from it, upon the South side, stood mount Hermon the lesser; and extended it self thence unto the Sea of Galilee, 16 miles. Of these two Hills you may read, Psal. 89. and about two miles from Naim Westward Sunem is to be seen, to which the Prophet Elisaeus sometimes resorted, 2 Reg. 4. Of Gadara. GAdarah or Gederah in Hebrew signifies munition; and sometimes it is taken to compass about, of Gadar, he hath hedged or compassed about. S. Jerom saith, in his time (that is, 400 years after Christ) this was a very fair City, and stood in a very high Mountain, upon the East side of the Sea of Galilee beyond Jordan, in the half tribe of Manasses, some 48 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and is to be seen at this day. Strabo, lib. 6. Georg. saith, that close by Gadara there is a venomous lake, whereof what Beast soever
drinketh, he immediately loseth his Horns, his Hoofs, and his Hair; and there are many that think this Lake became thus venomous, because of the 2000 Swine that were drowned in it, when our Saviour suffered the Devils to enter into them, Mat 8. Mark 5. Luke 8. Close by this Town stood Ge∣rasa, called also Girgesa, Mat. 8. so named (as some think) of Girgasus the Son of Canaan, Gen. 10. Of Genesareth. THIS was a Country bordering upon the North-west side of the Sea of Galilee, from whence this Sea was called the Lake of Genesareth, Luke 5. This Land was very pleasant and fruitful, as if it had been a Princes Garden, bringing forth fair Apples, Pomegranates, Palmes, Olives, Vines, and divers other kinds of pleasant Fruits, fair and goodly to the eye, and therefore, not without cause, was it called the Garden of a Prince; being derived of Gan, which signifies, a Garden; and Sur, a Prince. It is distant from Ierusalem six and fifty miles towards the North, as you may read, Matth. 6. & 14. The chief Cities of this Country were Capernaum and Bethsaida; of which Cities, though in former times they were very fair and large, there are at this day not scarce eight houses to be seen. The Travels of our Saviour Christ in the third year of his Ministry, which was the three and thirtieth year of his age. FROM Ierusalem, our Saviour Christ returned, some six and fifty miles, into Galilee, and in the beginning of this year wintered in that place: so that (as it may be gathered out of the Evangelists) he continued there the most part of Ianuary and February, and now the Spring approching, a little after the death of Saint Iohn the Baptist, (who as it is thought, was put to death between the midst of Winter and the Spring, not long before the Feast of the Passover; so that he lived two years and a half in his Ministry) he wrought many notable Miracles, not far from the City of Bethsaida. The same time, the Feast of the Passover drawing near, (which was the third Passover of his ministry) he went thence over Iordan, and so beyond the Sea of Tiberias, Matth. 14. Mark 6. Luke 9. At this time, the Apostles of Christ being dispersed through all Galilee and Iudaea, teaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, hearing of the mi∣serable death of Iohn the Baptist, about the beginning of the month of April, returned with all possible speed out of every Part to our Saviour Christ, that so they might be secure against the tyranny of Herod, Matth. 14. Mark 6. Luke 9. Also the Disciples of Iohn came unto him, and told him of his Death and Burial, Matth. 14.
Our Saviour Christ therefore having by this means certain intelligence, as he was between Bethsaida and Tiberias, of the death of S. Iohn Baptist, in the month of April he went into a Ship, and passed about four miles to the further side of the Sea of Galilee, where, in a certain Desart, he sed five thousand men with five Barley loaves and two fishes, Ioh. 6. From thence he returned back again to the Sea, and so to Capernaum, which was four miles: here he made that long Sermon of the Spiritual eating of his flesh, Mat. 14. Luke 9. Iohn 6. From thence he went to Ierusalem, which was 56 miles, to the Feast of the Passeover, being the third Passeover of his ministry. The third Passover of the Ministry of Christ. Upon the thirteenth day of April, being Sunday, according to the Ecclesi∣astical computation, Christ (as God commanded) celebrated the third Pass∣over of his ministry for the space of eight days in the City of Ierusalem, that is, till the twentieth day of the same month. After the Feast of the Passeover, the Iews took counsel how they might put him to death, Ioh. 7. wherefore, about the end of April, he departed thence, and went 56 miles into the Land of Galilee. In the month of May, after the controversie that happened concerning the Tradition of the Elders (because of the fallacies and contentions of the Scribes and Pharisees) he departed thence into the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, which was 56 miles, Matth. 15. and there entred into a house, and would fain have been private; but there was a certain Woman that was a Grecian of Syro∣phoenissa, came unto him, and intreated his aid, Mark 7. But our Saviour, having a determination to depart from this place, this Woman was very importunate that he would dispossess her Daughter of a Devil; which (because of her importunity) he did, Mat. 15. And after he went thence into the Country of Trachonitis, beyond Iordan, going through the borders of Decapolis, and coming to the Galilean Sea, and in the way he healed one that was both blind and dumb, Mark 7. and there, ascending up into a Mountain, he cured many that were blind and lame, and the third day after fed four thousand with seven loaves and a few fishes, Mat. 15. So this Journey was 64 miles. Afterward, in the same month of May, he went into a Ship, and passed thence into the parts of Dalmatia, and upon the borders of Magdala, which was four miles, he propounded the sign of the Prophet Ionah to the Pharisees and Sadducees, Mat. 15. & 16. From thence he sailed to Bethsaida, which was four miles, and by the way he admonished his Disciples to take heed of the leaven of the Sadducees and Pharisees, Mat. 16. and as he was entring into a Town, he cured a blind man of his sight, Mark 8.
About the end of the month of May, Christ went to Ierusalem, which was 56 miles, where, upon the second day of Iune, he kept the Feast of Pentecost, according as God had commanded, Exod. 23. The Feast of Pentecost being ended, he returned from Ierusalem into the Country of Galilee to Capernaum, where he dwelt, which was 56 miles. In the same month of Iune, he went the second time unto the borders of the Gentiles, where Peter, in the name of all the Disciples, upon the confines of Caesarea Philippi, made that notable confession, saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Luk. 9. Capernaum is distant from Caesarea Philippi, 48 miles. Six, or (as Luke saith) eight days after, our Saviour in the month of Iune went to the mountain Thabor, which stood 48 miles from Caesarea Philippi to∣wards the Southwest, where he was transfigured; and the next day after he cured the Lunatick, and cast out a Devil, Mat. 7. Mark 9. In the month of Iuly, Christ walked into Galilee, and there confirmed his Doctrine with many wonderful miracles, which did greatly amaze his Disci∣ples, where he put them in mind of the Cross and of his Death, Mat. 17. Luke 9. From thence he returned to Capernaum, which was ten miles from mount Thabor: at this time Peter went to the Lake of Genesareth, and there caught a fish, in whose mouth he found a Stater, which was worth 2 s. 6 d. in our money, Mat. 17. Here also our Saviour Christ made a long Sermon, where∣in he reprehended the pride and arrogancy of his Disciples, and withal taught the doctrine of the Remission of sins, Mat. 12. Mark Luke 9. In the month of August, he had a full determination to make a Journey through Samaria into Iudea, and so by little and little (visiting the Churches as he went) to go to Ierusalem to the feast of the Tabernacles, Iohn 7. but when he came to Samaria, which was ten miles from Capernaum, the Samari∣tans would not receive him, because he made as though he would go to Ie∣rusalem; wherefore he turned aside into Galilee, Luke 9. And as he was there visiting the Churches, there came a certain man unto him, saying, I will fol∣low thee whither soever thou goest. But Christ answered him, saying, The Foxes have holes, and the Fowls of the heavens have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to hide his head, Matth. 8. And to another Jesus said, Follow thou me. But he answered, Let me first go and bury my father. There was ano∣ther also that would have followed Christ, but he would first go take his leave of his friends, Luke 9. In the month of September, about the time of the second harvest, which was next before the feast of the Tabernacles, Lev. 23. Christ began his last visitation throughout all the Land of Iudea; at which time he sent forth seven∣ty of his disciples into Galilee, to prepare the way, and so dispersed Labourers in∣to his harvest; saying, The harvest is great, but the labourers are few, Luk. 10.
This Speech seems to be taken from the present condition of the time: for it was now harvest time, it being a little before the Vernal Aequinoctial. About the beginning of October, when the feast of the Tabernacles drew near, the Disciples and those that were of the kindred of our Saviour accor∣ding to the flesh, went up to the Feast, but he remained in Galilee, notwith∣standing a little after he went privily up: now between Galilee and Ierusalem were accounted 56 miles, Ioh. 7. Upon the ninth day of October was this Feast celebrated in Ierusalem, and being now half past, our Saviour Christ taught publickly in the Temple, Ioh. 7. Upon the fifteenth day of October (it being the last day of the Feast of the Tabernacles, and the Sabbath day) he taught the second time publickly in the Temple, and so continued preaching and do∣ing miracles in Ierusalem until the Feast of the Dedication, which was kept about the middle of Winter, Matth. 4. In the month of November, he preached daily in the Temple, and at night went to the Mount of Olives, where he rested, which was about half a mile from Ierusalem, and every morning returned back to the Temple. At this time there came unto him certain Scribes and Pharisees, who brought a Wo∣man which had been lately taken in Adultery, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do with this Woman, &c. And he answered, He among you that is without sin throw the first stone at her, Iohn 8. About this time also were the Sermons concerning the Power of the Son of God, and a great disputation between our Saviour and the Jews, Ioh. 8. for which cause they would have stoned him. In the month of December, Christ wintered in Ierusalem, and re∣cited the Parable of the Sheep, Ioh. 10. Also upon the Sabbath day, a little be∣fore the Feast of the Dedication, he healed a man that was born blind, Ioh. 9. In this feast the Jews (being angry because he had healed the blind man up∣on the Sabbath day) compassed our Saviour about as he was in Solomon's Porch; and when they heard our Saviour confess openly, that he was the Son of God, they began to grow into a fury, and for very anger would have stoned him to death. Wherefore our Saviour Christ went thence beyond Iordan, and con∣tinued there the rest of the Winter, Iohn 10. But before he went to Ierusa∣lem, there were returned unto him certain of the seventy Disciples, which a little before (in the month of September) he had sent abroad, and there at that time he recited the similitude of the man, who descending from Ierusalem to Iericho, fell amongst Thieves. This similitude seemeth to be taken from the present occasion, because our Saviour Christ going from Ierusalem beyond Iordan, was to pass through great wildernesses just in the way as they go thence to Iericho, Joh. 10. At the same time he went from Ierusalem to Bethania, which was almost two miles, and there visited Mary and Martha, where Martha ministred unto him, but Mary sitting at his feet gave diligent heed to his Doctrine, Luke 10.
At this time he took his leave of these two Sisters, and went thence to Betha∣bara, beyond Iordan, where Iohn baptized, which was sixteen miles, it being now about the midst of Winter, Christ at this time being about thirty three years of age. I am not ignorant that there were many which refer that long Journey of our Saviour Christ, when he went to visit all Iudaea, the sending forth of his Disciples, and divers other Miracles mentioned from the ninth Chapter of Luke to the sixteenth, to the beginning of the following year. But I am of opinion that all those things could not have been done within the com∣pass of four Months, and before the Feast of the Dedication: so that it must needs be that the seventy Disciples were sent forth before the Feast of the Dedication; for after the Feast of the Dedication (which was celebrated in the midst of Winter, Iohn 10.) there were but two Months between it and the raising up of Lazarus, in which short time all those things which are described by Luke, could not possibly be accomplished; especially consider∣ing that our Saviour Christ wintered some time in Bethabara, and there taught the multitude that came unto him, Ioh. 2. So these Travels of our Saviour were five hundred ninety six miles, or thereabouts, besides the divers Visitations and Journeys he went hither and thither: which, because of the great multitude of them, it was not possible for the Evangelist to set them down. Of the Towns and places to which he travelled. Of Bethsaida. BEthsaida, signifies the house of hunting: being derived of Baith, a house, and Zaid, hunting; from Zod, he hath hunted: for from this place went the Fishers and Hunters, which fished and hunted thorough the World, Ierem. 16. In this Town dwelt three Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and Philip, Iohn 1. It was scituated upon the West side of the Galilean Sea; in the Tribe of Issachar, fifty six miles from Ierusalem toward the North. And because of the abundance of Fishes that were in the Sea of Galilee, Peter and Andrew became Fishers, and in that Vocation got their living, till our Lord and Saviour Christ made them Fishers of Men, Mat. 4. Luke 5. Before the Birth of Christ this was but a small Town, and without doubt was so called from hunting; because close by it stood a Wilderness that did greatly abound with wild Beasts. Philip, the Terrarch of Traconitis and Itura, made this a fair City, which, in honour of Iulia, he called Iuliades. This Iulia was the Daughter of Augustus Caesar, and Wife of Tiberias. Philip also brought ma∣ny Inhabitants thither, who dwelt in that City. But when Herod (the Te∣trarch of Galilee, and Brother of this Philip) had builded up Bethabara, (which stood beyond the River Iordan on the East side of the Sea of
Galilee) and called it by the name of Iuliades, in honour of this Iulia. This Town, re-edified and inlarged by Philip, was called again in the time of our blessed Lord and Saviour Christ, after the ancient name Bethsaida, and so con∣tinueth to this day. From hence it is manifest, that the Sea of Galilee was sub∣ject to the Government of both these Tetrarchs, since upon the shore thereof on both sides they had Cities standing. I do think the Wilderness or Wood and and near adjoyning to Bethsaida, is called Itura, of Ietur the Son of Ismael, Gen. 25. or else from the compass and roundness of it; for Tur in Hebrew signifies, a circle. But that Itura stood upon the West side of the Sea of Galilee, those that have been at the Holy Land can testifie. This City of Bethsaida hath an ancient Water-course coming from a River not far from it, which Iosephus calleth little Iordan, which falleth into the Sea of Galilee, just in the mid-way between this Town and Capernaum, the Channel whereof appeareth to this day. Beside the many Sermons which our Saviour Christ preached here, he did many notable miracles, Mark 8. &c. But for the ingratitude and impiety of the Citizens, the curse of our Saviour fell upon them, Wo be to thee Chorazin, wo be to thee Bethsaida: for if the miracles had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, which have been done in thee, they had long e're this repented in sackcloth and ashes: Verily, verily, I say unto you, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon in the day of Iudgment, than for you, Mat. 11. Luk. 10. The prophecie of our Saviour Christ fell upon them accordingly; for, after divers and sundry overthrows and devastations, this Town became utterly unpeopled, and as Britenbacchus saith, there are scarce six houses standing in it at this day. Of Chorazin. THis City also stands upon the further side of Iordan, close by the Sea of Galilee, in the same Country as Capernaum stands: for the City of Cho∣razin standeth upon the East side of the River Iordan, where it falleth into the Sea of Galilee; and Capernaum upon the West, in the half Tribe of Ma∣nasses, some 16 miles from the City of Ierusalem towards the North. This City also neglecting the preachings and miracles of our Saviour Christ, felt the efficacy and force of the curse of the Son of God, Mat. 11. Luc. 10. For there is not at this day a house to be seen, only some ruines where it stood. Chorazin doth denote a Dukedom or Principality, from Coh and Razon, a Prince and Duke; for Rozez signifies, a laborious Prince. Ierom turning this word Rozez into Razi, calls it a secret mystery, or my secret. Of Tiberias. TIberias standeth upon the West side of the Sea of Galilee, 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Before the Birth of Christ it was cal∣called
Kinnereth, that is, the City of the Harp; after which name the Lake of Tiberias, or the Sea of Galilee, is called, Numb 14. But Herod the Terarch of Galilee (at whose command Iohn the Baptist was beheaded) did beautifie this City with many fair Buildings, and compassed it about with strong Walls, and after Tiberias Caesar's name, called it Tiberias. He also gathered thither many Inhabitants, and endowed it with many large Privi∣ledges: for although this place before the restoring of the City was very filthy and impure, by reason of the dead Bodies both of Men and Beasts, which lay in that place, (from whence it happened that the Iewes shunned this place as utterly unlawful, and durst not dwell there) yet notwithstand∣ing, Herod, with singular Industry and Diligence, removed all that filthi∣ness, and in that very place built up this City both fair and spacious; partly with Gifts, partly with fair Speeches, alluring many Iews to inhabit therein. Many poor People also built themselves houses at their own charge, and those that had no Children, gave way unto the liberty of the City; besides, many rich and noble men were constrained to remove their whole Families, and to dwell in this City, so that in short time it became very well peopled, according to Ios. lib. Antiq. 18. cap. 4. & Egisip. lib. 2. cap. 3. Not above two miles from Tiberias, towards the South, upon the shore of the Sea of Galilee, stood Tarachaea, a Town wherein Iosephus dwelt. Now it happened that the Citizens of Tiberias, upon some discontent, and as it was thought, at the instigation of one Clitus, fell into Rebellion; of which Iosephus having certain intelligence, he caused all the Gates of Terachaea to be shut, lest any man going thence should disclose his intentions, or any coming from Tiberias, should move that City also to Rebellion; and then privily sent out a command to assemble all the Ships and other Vessels that were upon the Sea or Lake, even to the number of 230 Ships; all which he caused to be manned only with four men apiece, and of a sudden sailed towards Tiberias. But when he came within view of the City, so that the Citizens from the Wall might discern the Ships, he lest the Body of the Navy a good way remote from Tiberias, and took only one Ship, manned with seven men, and went close to the City of Tiberias, as it seemed, to have had a parly with the Citizens: but they seeing such a multitude of Ships, and the bold resolution of Iosephus, supposing that they had been sufficiently manned, and contained a great Army, were greatly afraid, insomuch that they cast away their Arms, and came out of the City with humble Petitions to Iosephus, intreating him to spare the City, and to take pity on the In∣habitants. Notwithstanding he utterly refused to shew them any mercy, unless they would deliver unto him the Ruler of the City, which they did, so he settled the Affairs of that Town, and took the Ruler thereof with him to Terachaea, where he committed him to Prison.
But after, it being certainly found out that one Clitus was the principal Author of this Rebellion, he sent Leuyn one of his Guard, with command to apprehend him, and cut off both his Hands: of which punishment Clytus being certainly informed, with tears and prayers humbly besought this Leuyn that he would spare one of his hands, and he would willingly lose the other; which with much ado was granted him, upon condition that he would cut off his own Hand: so he took his Sword and cut off his left Hand; which being done, Iosephus returned the Captives to Tiberias, and received the Inhabitants again into favour, and ever after retained it in obedience. Vespasian also invaded this City at such time as he undertook his Expedi∣tion against Ierusalem, as it appeareth in Iosephus lib. de bello Iud. cap. 16. but the Inhabitants fearing his greatness, willingly submitted themselves to his power, and opened him the Gates, going forth of the City to met him with great humility, giving him and his whole Army entertainment into the City, receiving him with Musick and Songs, and with great Accla∣mations and shouts; calling him their Saviour and Protector: which kind of Courtesies the Emperour took very lovingly, and in token of thankfulness for this kindness, he commanded his Souldiers (after they had broken down a great part of the Wall upon the South side) that they should abstain from all manner of Rapin and Violence; so that he continued there peaceably, and went away peaceably. This City to this day (as Borchardus the Monk saith) is a fair Town, scituated to the Longitude, upon the shore of the said Sea, there being upon the South side many wholesom Baths and Springs; and there are to be seen also many great ruins of decayed Buildings. The Land also round about is very pleasant and fertil, abounding with Palm Trees, Vines, Olives, and Figs. This City in antient time was scituated in the Tribe of Issahar. Of Tyrus or Zor. THIS was the chief City of Phoenicia, distant from Ierusalem 100 miles towards the North. It was first built by the Citizens of Zidon, (because of a Sedition that happened in that City) 240 years before the Temple of Solomon, as Iosephus saith, just in the place where at this day the ruins of antient Tyre are to be seen. But after it began to grow famous (which was about such time as Troy was destroyed) King Angenor removed it to a Rock which stood in the heart of the Mediterranean Sea, compassed about therewith like an Island, Ezek. 26. and bestowed great cost in fortifying and building it. It stood round, compassed with strong Walls, beautified with goodly Buildings, and fairly scituated for the entertainment of Ships; for which purpose, on every side there were many sae Havens and Harbours made. It was but a small Town, almost three miles about, and two miles wide:
yet the great Mart Town in those Parts, for Merchants resorted thither from all the three Parts of the World (Europe, Asia, and Africa) as well for the uttering as buying commodities; and was made so much the more famous, because of the scituation and strength: It stood distant from the Land of Phoenicia almost two miles; upon which Continent they had obtained a por∣tion of Land for the maintenance of the City, containing 19000 paces in compass. The Citizens also being greatly inriched, because of their traffick, built up many fair Cities and Towns in more remote parts, which was added to their jurisdiction, as Leptis, Vtica, and Carthage, scituated in Africa. They also built Cades, which at this day is called Caliz, as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 19. being scituated in a very fair Island in the Mediterranean Sea, not far from Hercules Pillars; insomuch as the Citizens of this Town having thus inlarged their command, and increased their substance; in every place they called themselves Princes, and took upon them to wear Scarlet and Purple, which colours in that place above all other colours, were most artificially died: And because of the rarity of them, transported thence into many Countries more remote. But because of their extreme arrogance and pride, it was twice conquered and ruinated: First by Nabuchadonozer Emperour of Baby∣lon; and then by Alexander the Great, as it appeareth in Quint. Curtius, lib. in the Life of Alexander. Now the occasion that Alexander made war upon this City, was, because the Citizens upon a time sending unto him certain Ambassadors with a Crown of Gold, in token of friendship, and to congratulate his Prosperity (which he accepted very kindly, and gave them Royal entertainment, as to his Friends) amongst other things, he told them, that he would come unto their City, and do sacrifice to their god Hercules (for the Kings of the Ma∣cedonians are perswaded that they proceed from the off-spring of that god, and beside he was commanded by an Oracle so to do.) But the Ambassadors of Tyre answered, that the Temple of Hercules stood without the City in Pa∣aetzton, where ancient Tyre stood; so that the King might easily come thither to do sacrifice; but Alexander hearing these words, could not contain him∣self, but in a great anger answered, And do ye proud Citizens put such trust in the strength and scituation of your City, that you think I am not able to come to it with my Army by Land? You shall well perceive within this short space, that you are scituated upon the Continent, and that I will enter it and sack it. With these terrible words the Ambassadors departed, and shortly after Alexander followed them with a great and mighty Army. But when it was known that Alexander had undertaken the sacking of this City, there were many that thought it almost impossible for him to accom∣plish his designs; first, because of the inconstancy of the Winds, and the ve∣hemency of the Water, whereby all such matter as they cast into the Sea to joyn it to the Continent, would be driven away by the violence of the Water;
again, the City was compassed about with such exceeding high Walls, and fortified with such strong Towers, that it was not possible for him to bring any Engines to batter them, or fasten any scaling Ladders to ascend them, unless it were by Ships. Twice Alexander attempted, by flinging into the Sea mighty Trees of Libanus, and heaps of the ruins of ancient Tyre, to have made a Bridge to it, or else joyn it to the Continent, insomuch as the Tyrians mocked the Macedonians, saying, What can your King Alexander con∣quer Neptune the God of the Sea? For the violence of the Sea was so extream, that it carried away all things with it, and oftentimes broke the Ships that were joyned together to make a Bridge, and drowned the Souldiers that besieged and fought against the City. During this Siege, a Citizen of Myrus dreamt that their Idol Apollo would depart from them; whereupon they bound the Image of Apollo with a Chain of Gold, unto the Pillar whereon he stood, that he might not leave them. There happened also a horrible ostent amongst the Macedonians; for a certain Souldier breaking Bread, there fell from it some few drops of Bloud; at the hearing of which accident, Alexander was greatly amazed, until he was resolved by one Ari∣stander, a very skilful Prophet, that if it issued from off the outside of the Bread, it had betokened a heavy event to the Macedonians; but in regard that it issued from the inside of the Bread, it foreshewed that he should forthwith con∣quer the Town he had so long besieged; and so it happened: for when Alex∣ander had besieged the City for the space of seven months, with great diffi∣culty he won it: but before he could win it, he was constrained to use a great multitude of Ships, and fasten them together with iron bands, upon which placing many Engines of battery, and other offensive instruments, what with the moving of the Ships, and the extream Violence of the battery, they overcame the City. This exploit Alexander performed when he was 25 years of age, and about 300 years before Christ. There was one thing that Alexander did during his Siege, that was me∣morable; for before any of his Souldiers would attempt to ascend the Walls, he went in Person, with his Crown upon his head, and Princely Armour, and scaled a high Tower of the City, where he exprest an extraordinary resolution, and by reason of his courage did great hurt to the Enemy, who perceiving him to be the King, resorted to that place in great heaps, and shot at him with all their might; but he manfully defended himself, and com∣pelled the enemy to fly. In this assault there were 6000 of the Inhabitants slain; and after he had entred the Walls and sackt the City, he caused 2000 to be tyed to crosses and thrown into the Sea. From whence may be ga∣thered, that God by this young Prince did accomplish this great Work, that the Prophecies of the Prophets, Esay 23. Ieremy 43. and Ezekiel 25, 26. might be fulfilled. Afterward Alexander (as Pliny and Strabo observe) caused the Sea to
be filled up, that it might be no more an Island, and joyned it to the Continent; upon which place he caused Tyrus to be rebuilded, and compassed it about with a Wall five and twenty foot thick, strengthened with twelve Tow∣ers; that it might be sufficiently fortified to oppose the incursion of any Enemy; so that it continued safe a long time after, and in the time of our Saviour Christ was a fair City, though it never attained to the former dignity and Power that it had before Alexander conquered it. The ancient City of Tyre was distant from this City about four miles towards the South. Our Saviour Christ being in the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, helpt a Woman of Canaan, whose Daughter had been cruelly tormented with a Devil, Matt. 15. In the time of Dioclesian the Emperour, there were many Martyrs put to death in this City: And at this time it is called by the name of El porta del Zur, that is, the Haven of Zur; as it was in the old Testament called by the name of Zor. In the year 1100. when the holy Land was in the hands of the Christians, there was an Archbishop of Tyre, under whose Government were the Bishops of Ptolomais, Sidon, and Beryti, &c. The holy man Origen lieth buried in this City, in the Church of the holy Sepulchre, which is compassed about and fortified with a mighty strong Wall. There also lies buried the Emperour Frederick Barbarosso, who died Anno 1160, after he had done many valiant acts, and sought many great Battels for the Christians against the Turks and Saracens, being overcome by Saphadinus the Sultans Son, and put to flight, was drowned in the River of Suro, to the great grief of his Army; but he left behind him a famous report. Pope Alexander the third, being a great Enemy to this Emperour, in S. Marys Church in the City of Venice, when this Prince submitted himself to his Holiness; set his Foot upon his neck, repeating these Words, Thou shalt tread upon the Aspe and upon the Basilisk, &c. Eusebius, in his Ecclesiastical History saith, that there are yet standing in Tyre certain Marble Pillars, and other precious Stones, of wonderful greatness, that it amazeth such as behold them; neer to which there have been many Christians and Pil∣grims put to death by the Saracens. There are also four Wells of whol∣some and pleasant Water standing not far from it. Of which Wells you may read before. Of Zidon. THIS also was a City of Phoenicia, scituated upon the shore of the Mediterra∣nean Sea, thirty six miles from Ierusalem towad the North, and six∣teen from Tyrus. In times past it was assigned to the Tribe of Ashur, and lay upon the borders of the Philistines neer to Mount Libanus. Being cal∣led Sidon or Zidon, of Zidon the Son of Canaan, who first built it, Gen. 10. and signifies a Hunter. It was a notable Mart Town, wherein much Sattin was made, which kind of stuff was very precious among the Iewes: and it is said that Ioseph of Arimathia wrapped the Body of our Saviour in white Satin▪
for in Matthew 27. it is called Zadin, which in English is Sattin. And as at this day the finest Glass is made at Venice, so the finest Glass in those times was made at Sarepta, a City that belonged to the Sidonians: about which there stood many Mines, of which it is called Sarepta, as you may read before. This Town in times past was one of the chief Cities of Phoenicia, but because of the extraordinary Pride of the Citizens, God afflicted them with divers punishments, and brought in Ocho King of the Persians, who besieged it, and by Treason won it, and burnt it to the ground, as Diodorus Siculus, lib. 16. saith. The Citizens whereof were driven to such streights by the Enemy, that there perished in the fire above forty thousand men. Within a while after, Darius, the last Emperour of the Persians, rebuilt it, but made it nothing so beautiful, neither fortified it in like manner as it was be∣fore: he ordained one Strato to be King thereof, a man proud and arrogant. After, about three hundred and two years before the Nativity of Christ, Ale∣xander being then but twenty four years of age, having overcome Darius, that mighty Emperour of the Persians, at Issa a City of Cilicia, in a cruel and sharp War; he sent Hephestion, one of his Princes, to the Sidonians, with authority to depose Strato, and to let the Citizens understand that they should chuse him for their King, whom they thought most worthy of that honour, as Quintus Curtius sheweth, lib. 4. At this time there was a certain young man among the followers of Hephestion, in whose behalf he moved the Citi∣zens that he might be their King; but they refused, saying, it was not their custom to chuse any to rule over them, but such as were of the King's stock and Progeny. Hephestion hearing this answer, greatly admired their reso∣lution and modesty, especially when they refused to accept him for their King, whom others had sought to obtain with Fire and Sword; saying, tru∣ly there is more required to rule and govern a Kingdom, than to get it; but yet name one unto me of Royal descent, whom you would willingly receive to be your King. So they named unto him one Abdolomius, who had been known to have been of the Kings stock, by many descents; but because of his Poverty he was constrained to dwell in the Suburbs of the Ci∣ty in a Cottage, and had little else but a Garden to live upon. This man howsoever poor, and because of that, of many contemned; yet he was known to be honest, and of an upright life, following with all diligence his Vocation, without any regard of other business; insomuch as he was ut∣terly ignorant of all these stirs and combustions which had so lately vexed Asia. As he was now in his Garden, digging and labouring, purging it of Weeds, and planting of Herbs; Hephestion with the rest of the Citizens went unto him, and brought him the Robes and Habiliments of a King. The poor Gardner stood amazed to see such a Company of Gallants come unto him; but Hephestion told him, that the occasion of their coming was to make a exchange with him of those Royal Ornaments which he had in his hand,
for those poor and foul Garments which he wore; therefore go and wash thy self and return. So he did, where immediately they put upon him those Royal Robes, and saluted him as their Sovereign. After these things were finished, quoth Hephestion, Now remember in what a state thou art, no more Gardener but a King; and therefore take unto thee the mind and resolution of a King, that so thou mayest rule and govern this City as a man worthy of that honour; and remember, that although the Lives and Goods of thy Subjects are at thy command, yet by them thou wast chosen, neither be for∣getful of him that was the Author of thine Honour. No sooner was he enthronized in his Kingdom, but Fame (who is more spee∣dy than a thousand Posts) had dispersed this News through all the neighbou∣ring Cities: some being thereby moved to admiration, and quickned in their Studies; others stirred up to Indignation and Envy. Those that were mighty, and Friends to Alexander, contemned and despised his Humility and Poverty; and no sooner were they come into his presence, but they began to accuse him for his Ignorance; wherefore Alexander commanded that he should come before him, where, after he had well viewed the Lineaments and Proportion of his Person, and could not perceive it any whit repugnant to the fame of his Birth, he demanded of him, how it was possible that he should endure his Poverty with Patience. To which he answered, I pray the Gods I may continue the Government of this Kingdom with the like mind; for these hands were sufficient for me to live by, and as I had nothing, so I wanted nothing. At which answer Alexander was so well pleased, that he not only gave him all the Princely Jewels and Ornaments of the first King called Strato, but also a great part of the Booty which he took from the Emperour of Persia, and added to his command all the neighbouring Countries round about. This History I have inserted, that thereby we might perceive the mighty power of God in all his works; that can exalt the poor, contented with his estate, out of the very dust, and can pull the mighty from their Thrones. So the evil cark and care in this World to gather riches for the Vertuous to inherit. But to return to Sidon: This City did so much in∣crease, and grew so famous in succeeding Ages, that it was the chief Town (Tyrus only excepted) in all Phoenicia, joyning upon the West to the Medi∣terranean Sea, extending it self towards the North and South, lying in a Plain under Antilibanus, which Mountain lay some two miles off it upon the East. It oftentimes, because of the Pride of the Inhabitants, felt the wrath and punishing hand of God, as well by the Invasion of Enemies, as sickness and dearth, according to the Predictions of the Prophets, Esay 28. and Ezek. 28. untill at last in succeeding ages it was utterly destroyed, the Ruins of which City remain to this day, and make evident that it was a fair and spatious Town. There is to be seen yet to this day a City built out of the Ruins of the
former (though nothing so large as it) very strong, and mightily fortified, so that it seemeth almost invincible, if it have men wherewith to defend it. Upon the one side it joyneth to the Sea, and upon the other side of it there standeth two mighty strong Castles, one of them scituated toward the North, upon a very strong Rock, as it were in the heart of the Sea, the which was built by certain Pilgrims that came out of Germany to visit the holy City of Ierusalem. The other of them was scituated upon a Hill toward the South of the City, as well fortified, and no less difficult to be conquered. These two Castles, with the whole City in times past were in the hands of the Knights Templers. The Land round about it is very pleasant and fertile, abounding with all kind of good things necessary for the maintenance of life and delight. There is also found great abundance of Grapes, which are very delicious and pleasant to the taste, whereof the Wine Canamella is made. But because the Turks and Saracens are prohibited by the strict Law of the Al∣coran from drinking of Wine, therefore they suffer no Vineyards to be plant∣ed, neither the Inhabitants to dress those Vines that grow naturally. Before the East Gate of the antient City which now lies destroyed, there is built a Chap∣pel, in which place they say the Woman of Canaan intreated our Saviou Christ to cast a Devil out of her Daughter, Mat. 15. The Mountain Antili∣banus beginneth close by the River Eleutherius, and extends it self beyond Tripolis: and in some places it joyneth so close to the Sea, that for the streight∣ness of the wayes those that travel that way can scarce pass. In this City was the fairest Purple in all those parts: nay, as some Authors affirm, the like was not to be found in the World, &c. Of Cana Syro-Phoenicia. THIS Town, which was called Cana the Great, was scituated upon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, 112 miles from Ierusalem Northward, scituated in the Tribe of Ashur, four miles from Sidon towards the South, and three from Sareta towards the East. In this Town the Syrohoenician dwelt, that besought our Saviour Christ to heal her Daughter that was posses∣sed of a Devil, Mat. 15. Mar. 7. It was called Cana Syro-Phoenicia, to put a diff∣rence between it and another Cana, scituated in Galilee the lower; in which City our Saviour Christ turned Water into Wine. You may read more of this Town before. Of Traconitis. THIS City was so called from the stony hardness of the Mountains of Gilead, which compass it in upon the East side: in which Province the Tribe of Gad and the half Tribe of Manasses inhabited. It was in antient times called Basan; in which Og the mighty Gyant had a great Command: but Moses overcame him, and gave the Land to the Tribe of Gad, and the half Tribe of Mnsses. In Christ's time, the Tetrarch and Governour of it was Philip, who was Son to Herod the
Great, and Brother to Herod Anipas Tetrarch in Galilee and Petraea; which Herod took to Wise Herodia, whom his Brother Philip had formerly married, the said Philip being at that time alive: but because Iohn Baptist repre∣hended him for that fact, therefore at her request he was beheaded in the Castle of Machera. Itura was another Province belonging to the Tetrarchy of Philip, joyning upon the West to the River of Iordan, and called Galilee of the Gentiles, of which you may read before. Of Decapolis. THIS Country is so called of ten Cities that were scituated in it. It stood beyond Iordan and the Sea of Galilee, as may be gathered out of Mark cap. 7. and Mat. 15. So that it is manifest that that Country which in times past was called Gilead, was afterward known and called by the name of Decapolis, because of the en Cities which stood there; as Chorazin which Christ cursed, Mat. 11. Gamala, where Agrippa King of the Iews was hurt in his right arm, Ios. de Bell. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 1. Iuliades, built by Herod Anti∣pas in honour of the Empress Iulia; Gadara, where our Saviour Christ cast out the Legion of Devils, suffering them to enter into the Herd of Swine, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Astoroth, the chief City of that Country in the time of Og King of Basan, Ios. cap. 12. Here also that holy man Iob sometimes had his dwelling; Iabes in Gilead, where Saul King of Israel lieth buried, 1 Sam. 31. Mizpah, where Ieptha offered his Daughter for a Sacrifice to the Lord, Iudg. 11. Ramoth in Gilead, where King Ahab was slain with a Dart, 1 Reg. 22. and Abel of the Vines, where Baalam's Ass spake, Num. 22. These are those ten Cities whereof this Country is called Decapolis; being scituated in the Land of Gilead beyond Iordan, where our Saviour healed the Man that was born blind and deaf, Mark 7. This Opinion exactly agreeth with that of the Holy Scripture. Yet I know there are some (as Plin. lib. 5. cap. 18. and others) who differ from this in the description of this Country, but they er from the truth. Of Magdala. THIS was a City scituated upon the West side of the Galilean Sea, fifty two miles from Ierusalem Northward; in which Country Mary (who of this Town was called Magdalen) was born. At this time this City is cal∣led by the name of Castle Magdala; in which place they shew the House of Mary Magdalen. Upon the West and North-side of the City, there lieth a great and spacious Plain, preserved only for Pasture, which Mark cap. 8. calls Dalmanutha, that is, Drawn dry, or a poor and naked Habitation, being derived of Dalal, He hath made dry; and Maon, a House or dwelling place. It may be a notable figure of the Christian Church, which in this World may rightly be said to have a poor Habitation, but yet is a right Magdala,
that is, a strong and impregnable Tower, against which the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail, Mat. 16. Upon the Borders of Magdala and Dal∣manutha, the Pharisees and Sadducees tempting our blessed Saviour Christ, demanded of him a sign from Heaven, Mat. 15. 16. Mar. 8. This City be∣longed to the Tribe of Issachar. Of Thabor. MOunt Thabor was a round and high Hill, upon which our blessed Sa∣viour Christ was transfigured; scituated upon the borders of the Tribes of Issachar and Zebulon, fifty two miles from the City of Ierusalem towards the North, and extendeth it self towards the South to the River Kison. Here Deborah and Barak discomfited the Host of Sisera King of the Canaanites, and put them to flight, Iudg. 4. Of this Mountain you may read, Psal. 89. Hos. 4. Ier. 45. There was also a Town called after this Name, scituated at the foot of this Mountain, where Ziba and Zalma∣na, Kings of the Midianites, put to death the Brothers of Gideon, Iudges 8. It was a very fruitful and pleasant place. Concerning the signification of the name you may read before. Egesippus saith, That this Mountain is almost four miles in height, and that upon the top thereof there is a round Plain almost three miles over, in which there grows great plenty of Trees of an admirable Pleasantness and Sweetness; amongst which Trees there are many Birds which sing very pleasantly, to the great delight of all such as hear them: and the Air on the top of it is very pure and pleasant. It is the received Opinion, That upon the top of this Mountain our Sa∣viour Christ, in the presence of Peter, Iames, and Iohn, was transfigured, and he spake with the holy Prophets Moses and Elias, Mat. 17. Luke 9. which place at this day is compassed about with a great Wall, within which is a fair and pleasant Orchard, watered with many clear and goodly Springs, but there is no man that dwells in it, (notwithstanding there are many Towns and Inhabitants at the foot of the Mountain) neither do they think any man worthy to dwell in it, they hold it in such estimation, and reverence it as the Hill of God. There are to be seen in it divers great Ruines of Palaces, Towers, and Princely Edifices; in which at this day there harbour many Lions and other wild Beasts. It is very difficult to ascend up to the top of it it is so exceeding high: It is one of the principal hills in the Holy Land, not only because that Christ on it was transfigured, but because it is very fruit∣ful, and plentifully abounds with Vines and other profitable Plants and Herbs. The Air thereof is wholsom and good, and the Dew upon it rising thick and sweet, with indifferent Rain; the Trees high and fair, green both Winter and Summer. At the foot of the Mountain, towards the South near to Endo, in the way that leadeth from Syria into Aegypt, is shewed the place where (as it is said) Melchisedeck met with Abraham, when
he returned from the Battel of the four Kings, Gen. 14. At the foot of the Mountain lying toward the West, just against Nazareth, there is a Chap∣pel built, in the place where they say our Saviour Christ descending from this Mountain, spake to his Disciples, saying, Tell none of this Vision, Mat. 17. Upon the East side of it runs the Brook Kison, where Barak and Deborah overcame the Army of Sisera, Iudg. 4. There is also another Hill in the upper part of Galilee, 92 miles from Ie∣rusalem Northward, which Hill is also called Thabor, and is three miles distant from Caesarea Philippi Eastward: but that was not the place of Christs Transfiguration. The Travels of Christ in the fourth year of his Ministry, being the four and thirtieth of his age. IN the Month of Ianuary Christ the Son of God wintered in Bethabara, 16 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward, where Iohn sometimes baptised, Ioh. 10. And many came unto him, saying, Iohn shwed us no gns, but whatsoever he preached of this Christ are true. And many believed on him. Now as Christ went into the Desart to preach, his Disciples came unto him, saying, Lord teach us to pray, as Iohn taught his Disciples to pray. Whereupon he prescribed to his Disciples a Form of Prayer, which is called the Lords Prayer, Luke 11. At this time there came unto him a great multitude, and thronged about him, where he made that long Sermon which is described Luke 12. & 13. Upon the seventeenth Day of Ianuary, it being then the Sabbath, he cured a certain Woman which had been dis∣eased 18 years, Luke 13. And when there came unto him certain Pharisees, saying, thou art the Son of God, wherefore get the out of this Country, for Herod seeks to kill thee: Jesus answered them, saying, Go and tell that crafty Fox, behold, I cast out Devils to day, and tomorrow, and the third Day I shall be pefected. Presently he departed out of Petraea (where Herod kept his Court in the Castle of Macharuntes) and went into Galilee beyond Iordan, 28 miles, Luke 13. Upon the last Day of Ianuary, being the Sabbath, our Lord and Saviour Christ healed (in the house of a certain Prince of the Pharisees) a man sick of the Dropsie, and recited the Parable of the great Supper, Luke 14. In the Month of February, he went through all Galilee, which was 80 miles long, and 24 broad; in which visitation there followed him a great company. And when there came unto him Publicans and Sinners, he began to speak of Repentance, but the Phrisees and Scribes murmured at him, and opposed his Parables, of the lost sheep, of the Woman that had lost her Groat, and of the prodigal Son, Luke 15. And a little after, he
recited unto his Disciples the Parable of the unjust Steward, and of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. About the latter end of February (as by the circum∣stance of the History and Times may appear) he made that Sermon of the Power of Faith and good Works, &c. Luke 17. And going out of Galilee through the midst of Samaria, he healed the ten Lepers, Luke 17. He recited the Parable of the unjust Judge, and that of the Publican and Pharisee, Luke 18. In the Month of March he finished this general Visitation. Which Journey were so many and divers, that his Disciples could not describe them. Not∣withstanding, in this Month he went into the Borders of Iudaea and Petraea, be∣yond Iordan, and came to Bethabara, where Iohn sometimes baptised, and there followed him a great company, and he healed them, Mat. 19. Mark 10. There the Pharisees moved the disputation of the Divorce, and Christ lo∣vingly imbraced the little Children, Mark 20. In this Month of March Lazarus the Brother of Martha and Mary, who dwelt at Bethania, fell sick of a dead∣ly disease, and they sent messengers to Christ, who at this time was at Betha∣bara, to give him to understand of his Sickness, Iohn 11. this message came unto our Saviour Christ to Bethabara upon the twentieth day of March, being the last day of the twelfth Month Adar, Anno Mundi 4000. and about such time as the seventy Weeks, spoken of by Daniel were fully ended: at the end of which Prophecy it behoved Christ, that he might fulfill the Prophecies of the Old Testament, to suffer, and by his Resurrection and Ascension to enter into the Glory of God, and to be partaker of his eternal Kingdom. Although our Saviour had received this message of the Sickness of Lazarus, he stayed at Bethabara. Two dayes after, and as it may be thought, about the twenty second day of March, which was the second day of the first Month Abib, Lazarus died. But Lazarus being dead and buried, then our Saviour went from Bethabara towards Iericho, Iohn 14. Luke 8. and in the way a man came to him and said, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eter∣nal Life? Christ said unto him, Go and sell all that thou hast, and give it un∣to the Poor, and thou shalt find Treasure in Heaven, and then come and follow me. But because he was very rich he refused, and went his way. After, he recited the Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard, making mention of Predestination. Also in this Journey he reprehended the Sons of Zebe∣deus for their Pride and Arrogancy, and fore-telleth his Disciples of his Death and Passion, and in the way healed the blind man that sate begging, and so entred into Iericho, where he rested all night in the house of Zacheus, Mat. 20. Zacheus signifies Clean. Upon the twenty fourth of March, Christ went from Iericho to Bethania, which was twelve miles. Here he healed Bartimeus the Son of Timeus, Mark 10. (Timeus signifieth Unclean, of Tame, He is defiled) And going a little further, he healed other two, resoring them to sight, Mt. 19. Upon
the twenty fifth of March (being Tuesday) our Saviour Christ came to Be∣thania, where, by the power of his Word he raised Lazarus to life, after he had been buried four dayes, Iohn 11. Lazrus and Eleazer have both one signification, that is, God is my Help. Upon the twenty sixth day of March, the Feast of the Passover of the Iews drawing near, he went from Bethania to the City of Ephraim near to the Desart, that he might avoid the Traps and Deceits of the Iews, who went about to take him, Iohn 11. being ten miles. Upon the twenty seventh day of March he returned back again from Ephraim to Bethania, (being ten miles) coming thither about the evening, six dayes before the Passover, at which time Martha ministred to him, and Mary anointed his feet, whereat Iudas grutched, Iohn 12. Upon the Sab∣bath day, being the twenty eighth of March, he rested in Bethania at the House of Martha. Now as he was at Supper with Lazarus, many of the Iews understanding that he was there, resorted thither, not only to see him, but Lazarus also whom he had raised from the dead, Iohn. 12. Upon the twenty ninth of March, Christ sitting on an Ass went to Ieru∣salem. Now when the multitude heard that he was come unto Ierusalem, they went out to meet him, some laying their Garments in the way, others strowing the boughs of Trees where he should go; and those that went be∣fore cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord At this time our Saviour Christ wept over Ierusalem, and cast out all those that bought and sold in the Temple, Mat. 21. Iohn cap. 17. About the evening he went out of the City again to Bethania, almost two miles, and there rested all night, Mat. 21. So this dayes journey was almost four miles. In the evening of this day the Iews chose their Paschal Lamb, according to the Law, Exod. 12. Upon the thirtieth day of March he went from Bethania to Ierusalem, betimes in the morning; in which Country he cursed the Fig-tree that wanted Fruit, and after entring into the City, he cast out of the Temple the Money-changers and Merchants, Mark 11. About the evening (as may be gathered by circumstance of time) he returned back again to Be∣thania. This daies Journey was four miles. Upon the last day of March in the morning, Christ went back again from Bethania to Ierusalem; and by the way as he went, his Disciples beheld the Fig-tree that he had cursed, and lo it was dried up, Mark 11. After, when he was in the Temple, there came certain Pharisees unto him and disputed with him; at which time he recited the Parable of the Marriage of the Kings Daughter. Also certain Scribes and Pharisees came unto him asking him whether it was lawful to pay Tribute unto Caesar, Mat. 21. 22. He also sharply rebuked the Scribes and Pharisees, and recited the Simile of the Hen and her Chickens, Mat. 23. After that, he went to the Mount of Olives,
almost a mile. And then his Disciples looking upon the goodly building of the Temple, from thence he took occasion to preach of the Destruction of Ierusalem, and the consummation of the World; so he stayd all that night in the Mount of Olives, Mat. 24. Upon the first day of April, being Wednesday, our Saviour Christ rising before day, taught again in the Temple; and after, as he was going to Betha∣nia, he said to his Disciples, Know ye that within the se two daies is the Feast of the Passover, and the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of Sinners, and crucified. At the same time the Chief Priests assembled themselves to∣gether, and took counsel how they might do to take him by deceit, Mat. 26. The same day as our Saviour Christ was in the House of Simon the Leper, (whom he had healed of that Sickness) there came a Woman and brought a box of precious Ointment and poured it upon his head, at which the Dis∣ciples murmured, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 21. The fourth Passover of the Ministry of Christ. Upon Thursday being the second day of April, the dayes of the Feast of the Passover being now at hand, Christ with his Disciples prepared for the eating of the Paschal Lamb; which was the fourth Passover of our Saviour, and when about the evening of this day it was necessary for them to keep the Paschal Lamb, and to prepare the Passover according to God's Law; Christ sent Peter and John to make rea∣dy the Supper, and he with the rest of his Disciples about evening went from Bethania toward Jerusalem, just at the beginning of the fourteenth day of the first Month Abib or Nisan, which began about the evening of this day. Here he celebrated his last Supper among his Disciples, between six and seven of the Clock in the evening; at which time he celebrated the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, concerning the true receiving of his Body and Blood: of which you may read, Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. Afterward, about the eighth hour, he washed his Dicsiples feet, and then leaning upon the Table, he pointed out Judas that should betray him, John cap. 13. From the ninth hour to the tenth hour, about the second Watch of the night, Judas that Traitor went from his Disciples, John. 13. In the mean time Christ made that long Sermon recited only by John, 14, 15, 16. and made that effectual Prayer, John 17. About the tenth hour (after they had sung a Psalm) Christ went over the Brook Cedron, to the Garden of Gethsamene, being some∣what more than half a mile. There, between the hours of eleven and twelve, he sweat Water and Blood, and prayed earnestly. About twelve of the Clock, it being then midnight. Christ was betrayed by Judas, who about three dayes before had sold him for thirty Silverlings, which was about 3 l. 15 s. From Gethsaene the Jews brought him bound to Jerusalem, being more than half a mile: and about one of the Clock in the morning carried him to the house of Annas who was one of the Chief Priests. About two of the Clock
led him from thence to Caihas, Chief Priest. From three a Clock till four (which was about Cocks-crowing) Peter denied Christ. At the same time Caihas and all the Priests of Ierusalem would have condemned the Lord of Glory, the Son of God. At the same time also the Servants and Officers of the Priests beat him and mocked him. About five of the Clock in the morning, Christ was condemned by the whole consent of the Syndrion of the Iews, Luke 22. All these things Christ suffered between Thursday and Friday. And whereas the Iews according to the commandment of God begin their day in the evening, therefore that night wherein our Sa∣viour Christ suffered all these things belonged unto the fourteenth day of the Month Abib. So that just at the same time as the Feast of the Paschal Lamb was celebrated amongst the Iews, Christ, the true Lamb of God▪ was made a living Sacrifice on the Cross for the Sins of man. Thus, as we have observed the hours of the night, so likewise let us observe the hours of the day. Friday being the third day of April (which as I have said began the eve∣ning before) was the fourteenth day of the first Month Abib or Nisan, among the Iews. At six a Clock in the morning, about Sun-rising of the same day, our Saviour Jesus Christ was brought unto Pilat, and Iudas Iscariot hanged himself, because he had betrayed the Innocent Blood. About seven of the Clock in the same morning our Saviour Christ was carried to Herod Antipas, that cruel Tyrant, who the year before had put Iohn Baptist to death: here he was disdainfully handled. At eight of the Clock our Saviour Christ return∣ed to Pilate, who propounded unto the Iews (because they were to have a Capital Offender delivered unto them at the Feast of the Passover) whether they would have Jesus their King, or Barrabbas, who had been a Murtherer, let loose unto them; but they condemned Jesus, and chose Barrabbas, which name signifies, The Son of the multitude, or a Seditious man. About nine of the Clock in the morning (which the Iews commonly called the third hour of the day, because it succeeded the morning, and continued till Noon) our Saviour Christ was Whip'd and crowned with Thorns. About ten of the Clock Pontius Pilate, in the place called Gabbatha, publickly condemned Christ to be crucified, and washed his hands in token of Innocency. Pontius signifies Cruel and Inhumane; Pilate, a man armed with a Roman Dart, Mart. lib. 10. Iohn 19. Between ten and eleven, our Saviour Christ carrying his Cross, was brought to the place called Golgotha. About eleven of the Clock, the third hour of the morning being not yet fully finished) our Saviour Christ was fastned upon the Cross, Mark 13. He therefore hung four hours upon the Cross, that is, from about eleven of the Clock, till about three in the Afternoon. And he spake before that supernatural Eclipse of the Sun three memorable Sayings: First, Father▪ forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 19. Secondly, he said to his Mother, Woman,
behold thy Son: And to Iohn, being converted, behold thy Mother. Thirdly, to the Thief, Verily, I say unto thee, this da thou shalt be with me in Paradise About twelve of the Clock (in that Meridian which the Iews call the sixth hour, that is the sixth hour from the rising of the Sun) that supernatural Eclipse of the Sun happened, of which you may read in Dionysius the Areo∣pagite, and Eusebius. About three of the Clock in the Afternoon, which the Iews call the ninth hour, (the Sun now beginning to receive its light) our Saviour Christ spake these four sayings, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Matth. 27. I thirst, Ioh. 19. When he had taken the Sponge, he said, It is finished, Ioh. 19. And after, crying out with a loud Voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, and so died. At which time there were many wonderful Miracles wrought, as you may read, Mat. 27. Mark 15. Luke. 23. Ioh. 19. About four of the Clock in the Afternoon, our blessed Saviour was pierced through with a Lance, and there issued out of his side Bloud and Water, Ioh. 19. About five of the Clock, which the Iews call the eleventh hour of the day, our Saviour Christ was buried by Ioseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. About the sixth hour, there fell an Eclipse of the Moon, which was natural and not miraculous, neither is it observed by any of the Evangelists. Upon the fifteenth day of the first Month, which answereth to the 4th of April, (being justly called the great and holy Sabbath of the Iews, for that Christ this day rested in the Sepulchre) the Priests and Pharisees being partly joyful, because, as they thought, the disturber of the common Peace, and one that opposed their Authority was dead; and partly careful how they might prevent his Resurrection, went to Pilate, and obtained of him a Band of Souldiers to watch the Sepulchre, and to put his Seal upon the Stone. Upon the fifth day of Aril, early in the morning, our Saviour Christ, having overcome Death and the Devil, by his Divine Power raised himself up from the dead, according as he had foretold his Disciples, and appeared to Mary Magdalen, Iohn 20. and to other Women that touched his Feet, Mat. 28. About Noon he appeared to Simon Peter, Luke 24. 1 Cor. 15. In the Afternoon he travelled with two of his Disciples almost eight miles to the Castle of Eaus, Luke 24. One of these Disciples was Cleophas the Brother of Ioseph, who brought up our Saviour Christ. The other, as may be gathered by the circumstance of the story, was Luke, because he hath set it down so exactly. In the evening of the same day, he returned invisibly from Emaus to Ie∣rusalem, eight miles, where, when the doors were all shut, and his Disciples were assembled together for fear of the Iews, Jesus came and stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be uo you. And he shewed himself to all his Dis∣ciples except Thomas. Mark calleth this the first day of the Sabbath, that is
of the Week, Mark 16. Luke 24. Ioh. 20. for the Sabbath of the Iewes (as Ioseph., witnesseth) is not onely taken for a day of rest, but also for the whole Week: from whence is that saying in the Gospel, Iejunio bis in Sabbato, i. I fast twice in the Week, Luke 18. Upon the 12 day of April, and eight dayes after his Resurrection, he ap∣peared again to his Disciples, Thomas being then present, and the doors shut; that he might make evident that his Omnipotence was not tied to any secondary causes, or hindered by the property of any natural Bodies, which, according to S. Austin, Ser. 160. was so much the more wonderful, because he appeared unto them substantially and effectually, not as Phantas∣ma or Shadow, which vanisheth away, and is without any corporeal substance. In the same month of April our Saviour Christ appeared again to Peter, Thomas, Nathaniel, the Sons of Zebedeus, and other two Disciples, as they were fishing upon the shore of Tiberias, which stood 56 miles from Ierusalem Northward, between Bethsaida and Capernaum, Ioh. 21. The day of this Apparition is not set down. From the Sea of Tiberias near to Caernaum and Bethsaida, to mount Tha∣bor scituated in Galile, is reckoned 10 miles; there, about the end of April our Saviour Christ appeared to above 500 Brethren at once, where many worshipped him, and others doubted, Mat. 28. 1 Cor. 15. In the month of May our Saviour Christ appeared to Iames the Son of Alpheus, for he had been seen before of Iames the Son of Zebedeus: both which were after crown∣ed with martyrdom in the City Ierusalem, the Son of Zebedeus upon the 25 day of Iuly, ten years after the Resurrection; and the Son of Alpheus upon the Feast day of the Passover was thrown from a Pinacle of the Temple, 29 years after the Resurrection of our Saviour. Upon the 40 day after his Resurrection, he returned fifty six miles to Ie∣rusalem, where his Disciples were assembled together: and upon the four∣teenth day of May, in the sight of all the Apostles, with great triumph and joy he ascended up into Heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of his Father in Divine Majesty and Glory, Mar. & Luke. ult. Act. 1. Psal. 28. Ephes. 1. 1. Pet. 3. Heb. 1. So these Travels of our Saviour Christ were 319 miles. But if you reckon his Travels from the time of his infancy to the day of his Ascension, they make 3093 miles; besides his general Visitations and Journeys hither and thither, which were so many, that as Iohn witnesseth, cap. vlt. they could not be described. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Jericho. THIS City stood very pleasantly in the Tribe of Benjamin, ten miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. Ioshuah overcame this Town by sound∣ing
of Trumpets, Ios. 6. Heb. 11. It was rebuilt by Hiel, and was compassed about with a new wall by Herod, that mighty King of the Iewes, who put the In∣nocent Children to death, and called it after his Mothers Name Cyprus, Ios. de Bell. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 16. And although this City was taken and utterly over∣thrown the second time by the Romans, at such time as Vespasian and his Son Titus wasted and destroyed Ierusalem and all the Land of Iudaea; yet afterward it was re-edified, and in St. Ieroms time, which was 400 years after Christ, it was a fair City. There was shewn the House of Zaccheus, and the Sycomore-tree that he went up to see Christ, Luk. 19. But by reason of the often destructions and devastations that hath fallen upon it, there is not to be seen at this day above eight Houses in the Town, and all the Monu∣ments and Reliques of the holy Places are utterly destroyed, the House of Zaccheus and the Sicomore-tree are no more to be seen in that Place: only the Place is to be seen where our Saviour restored the blind man to sight, when he cryed after him, Lord, thou Son of David, have mercy upon me, Luke chap. 18. Also though the Country throughout be very fruitful and pleasant, yet it is nothing so fertile and pleasant, as it was when the Children of Israel did dwell there. For the Roses of Iericho are no more to be found there, but rather in a Village about sixteen miles from Iordan towards the East. And although they stand so far distant off, yet they retain their ancient name. Between Ierusalem and Iericho there is a Desart or Wilderness, which by the Inhabitants of the holy Land is called Quarentena, where the man of which Christ speaketh fell among Thieves, Luke. 10. There is in the same place at this day great thieving, and many Robberies committed, as Brittenbacchus saith. In this Place also is to be seen the River Chereth, where the Ravens fed Eliah, 1 Reg. 17. Near to Iericho also is found the River, the Water whereof Elizeus made sweet by casting in Salt, whereas before it was bitter; and it remains very pleasant and sweet to this day, 2 Reg. 2. Of Ephraim. THIS City is so called from the pleasantness and fruitfulness of the Soil, being derived from Parah, to fructifie. It lieth 8 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward, just in the way as you go from thence to Iericho in the Wilderness of Quarentena, close by the River Chereth in the Tribe of Benjamin. Here our Saviour Christ after he had raised Lazarus from Death to Life, hid himself with his Disciples, because the Iewes sought to take away his Life by deceit. The Passover following he was made a sacrifice for the Sin of man, Ioh. 11. Of Bethania. THIS City was a type of the Church, which is always subject to the Cross, and exposed to every calamity; and therefore is called Bethania,
that is, The House of Sorrow and Affliction: being derived of Baith, a House; and Oni, Affliction. According to the prophecy of our Saviour, who foretold of the Afflictions and Tribulations that should fall upon his Church, You shall mourn, but you shall be comforted, and your grief shall be turned into joy. It was distant from Ierusalem almost two miles towards the South-East. Borchardus the Monk observeth, that close by a Well, about a stones cast out of this Town, there is shewed the place where Martha met our Saviour Christ when he came to Bethania, and a little after called her Sister to meet him, Ioh. cap. 11. There is also shewn in this Town the House of Simon the Leper, where a certain Woman having an Alablaster box of precious Ointment, poured it on our Saviours head, not without the great indignation of his Disciples, Mat. 26. There is also to be seen the house of Martha, to which our Saviour did oftentimes resort, Luke 10. Iohn 11. and 12. and in that place there is at this day a Church built in honour of those two Sisters, which were the Sisters of Lazarus. There is also seen the Sepulchre out of which Lazarus was raised from death to life, Iohn 11. which stands close by the said Church, and over it is built a Chappel of Marble, very decent and comely. The Saracens hold this Chappel in great estimation. You cannot see the City of Ierusalem from Bethania because of the Mount of Olives, but as soon as you ascend a little Hill in the way as you go thence to Ierusalem, you may discern Mount Sion and a part of the City: then when you are descended from that Hill, the City is again hidden. After that, upon the left side of the Mount of Olives, some stones cast from Bethpage, you do leave a small Village standing under the Mountain of Offence, where Solomon in times past com∣mitted Idolatry. From this Village the Ass and the Colt was brought unto Christ. Not far from thence, upon the South side as you go upon the Mount of Olives, you come unto the place where Christ mounted upon the Ass, as we read, Mat. 21. And a little after you may see the whole City of Ierusalem, with Solomon's Temple, and the Church of the holy Sepulchre, with many other holy places. Then as you descend from the top of the Mount of Olives, you may see the place where the multitude cried, Hosan∣na, Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord. And in this descent also our Saviour Christ wept over Ierusalem, saying, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, how often would I have gathered thee under my Wings as a Hen gathereth her Chickens, but thou wouldest not. Of Bethpage. BEthpage standeth upon the right hand of the way towards the East, as you go from Bethania to Ierusalem, and, as St. Ierom saith, was some∣times a Habitation of the Priests, which at their appointed times went up to Ierusalem to minister to the Lord. It was so called because of the mul∣titude of Figs that grow there: for Pagim signifies a Fig, Cant. 2. Bethpage
is a notable type of the Church, for that ought likewise to be fruitful, and to bring forth sweet Figs, that is, good Works, and many other comfor∣table Vertues, that so men in their afflictions might be comforted. As it is thought, the Fig-tree that our Saviour Christ cursed because it wanted Fruit, stood not far from Bethpage, Mat. 21. Mark 11. Wherefore let us take heed that we be not like fruitless Fig-trees, covered only (like our Fore∣fathers Adam and Eve) with Leaves, and bearing no fruit, Gen. 3. lest so God's Curse fall upon us, and we be thrust out of Eternal Happiness, Mat. 3. Of the Castle from whence the Ass and the Colt were brought upon which our Saviour Christ rode to Jerusalem. THIS Castle (as Adamus Risnerus saith) was a certain Hold compassed about with strong Walls, and within beautified with a fair Palace supported with goodly Columns: it stood not far from the Mount of Olives, just in the dividing of the way as you go from Bethania to Ierusalem; for there goes one way to the Fountain-Gate, and another to the Valley of Gehinnon. In the Hebrew Text it is called Tirah, as you may read in Matthew, which signifies not only a Castle, but a firm and sure building, with good decorum and order: for Tor signifies a circular order. It is credible, that this Hold is a resting place, and that the Ass and the Colt were tied in the way, for this cause; that if by chance any Travellers were weary (by reason of the tediousness of their Journey) they might hire them for certain hours to carry them over the Mount of Olives, and so return them back again. The Allegorical meaning of this Ass and the Colt, according to the o∣pinion of many learned men, signifies the People of the Iews, who were burthened with Moses's Laws: and the Asses Colt signifies the rest of the Gen∣tiles, which were not charged with the burthen of Moses's Law, but tied only to the Law of Nature. So we also like Travellers and Strangers in this miserable World, are tied to the Afflictions and Calamities thereof, stand∣ing in two ways, expecting the death of the Body, and liberty of the Soul; then our Saviour Christ cometh in Peace and looseth this Body of death, (as the Apostle saith, Rom. 7.) and bringeth us to that Heavenly Ierusalem, eternal Joy, according to that of St. Paul, in the first of the Philippians, I desire to be loosed and to be with our Lord Iesus Christ. Of the Mount of Olives. ABout half a mile and a Furlong from Jerusalem towards the East, stood the Mount of Olives, very fruitful and pleasant, bringing forth Olives, Palms, Figs, Gossumtine, and many other notable Fruits, but principally, Palms and Olives, of which the Mountain taketh the Name. It is said in Pliny, lib. 16. cap. 19. that these Olive and Palm trees do never lose their
Leaves, and are green both Winter and Summer. St. Austin calleth it, The Mountain of Vnction, because of the Fertility and pleasantness of it: also The Mountain of Health, because it bringeth forth Oyls and many other Plants necessary for Physick: also, The Mountain of Light; first, because it lieth upon the East, so that the Sun shineth in the morning very pleasantly upon it, and in the evening when it setteth, the Beams thereof reflecting upon the Temple of Jerusalem casteth a beautiful light to this Mount: se∣condly, because it bringeth forth Oyl, which is the nourishment and life of light: thirdly, because it was beautified with the gracious presence of our blessed Lord and Saviour Christ, which is the Day-star and Light of the Church, rising up on high to inlighten all those which shall be called unto eternal happiness. For which cause it typically representeth the Church, which is the light of the World, wherein are found many Christians that bring forth pleasant Fruit, (good Works) relieving the necessity of such as are in want, comforting the afflicted, and patiently supporting the Cala∣mity and Misery of this World, that so they might triumphantly rejoyce with Christ in that heavenly City of Jerusalem. What things Zacharias hath spoken of this Mount in his last Chapter, is to be understood of the preaching of the Gospel, and propagation of the Church through all the World. St. Jerom saith in his Epitaph upon St. Paul, That upon this Hill the Jews commonly burnt the red Cow, with the Ashes whereof the People of God being sprinkled, they were purified and sancti∣fied: of which you may read, Num. 19. Heb. 6. Hellen the Empress, Mother to that godly Emperour Constantine the Great, about the year of our Lord 332, caused a fair and beautiful Church to be built upon this Mount, just in the place where our blessed Lord and Saviour Christ ascended up into Heaven. It was built round, all of white polished Marble: upon the top thereof there is no Roof, but a Window, even as Christ should ascend through it, as Eusebius saith, in the Life of the Empe∣rour Constantine the Great, lib. 3. cap. 40. The same St. Jerom affirmeth, in his Book Delocis Hebraicis. He also saith, That the Inhabitants of the Holy Land take upon them to shew in this Church, the Impression of the Feet of our Saviour Christ, which hapned as they say, just at such time as he ascended up into Heaven: out of which Travellers and Pilgrims take Sand to carry with them as an holy Relick, though indeed it is verily to be thought, that they were feet made in stone by antient Monks, thereby to get Money from such as resorted thither upon Devotion; for look how oft Pil∣grims take thence the Sand, they are presently filled again: from whence may be gathered, that there is no Sand naturally there. Every man there∣fore ought to imbrace a nearer way to Salvation, than to follow those Monk∣ish Fables; and to seek Christ in the Holy Scripture, not upon the Mount of Olives, or amongst Sand: for since the Grave could not contain him,
the Mount of Olives cannot hold him, who now sitteth at the right Hand of his Father, in Power and eternal Glory: but rather, if we be desirous to see the Footsteps of Christ, let us seek them in the Church, which is dispers'd through the World; wherein we are sufficiently taught how we should follow him. The Palm is a famous Tree which bringeth forth Dates; and is so cal∣led because upon the top the boughs are thick and round, extending out like fingers; from whence it is called Dactilus, that is, a finger. Of Gethsamene. THIS was a Village scituated at the foot of the Mountain of Olives, in a pleasant and fruitful place. Near unto this Village, as Saint Augustine observeth, there were many pleasant Gardens, which gave forth very sweet and delectable savours; unto which Place Christ and his Disciples did often∣times resort, as the Evangelist Luke, cap 22. observeth. It was so called from the pressing forth of Oyl; for Gath or Geth, signifies a Press, and Schaemen Oyl. In this place the heart of our Saviour Christ was so press'd with affliction that he sweat drops of Blood: By which Blood the Sins of our Souls are washed away, and we that are wounded are made whole, as with a most precious Balsom, Isa. 53. Hellen the Empress, in an Orchard close by this Town, set up a fair and beautiful Church, over the Sepulchre of the Virgin Mary; which she called by the name of the Mother of God, Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 30. It is said, that this Sepulchre remaineth to this day in this Church, made of white polished Marble, standing about eight and forty steps under ground, being some∣thing wider than the Sepulchre of Christ: in it there is two doors, one to go in, another to go out. But whether this be the right Sepulchre of the blessed Virgin, it concerneth us not, since it appertaineth not to our Salvation, neither is mentioned in the holy Scriptures: but if any Man be desirous to be further satisfied in it let him read Nicehorus, who makes mention of that and her Ascension, both, in my Opinion, of like Credit; because, I suppose, that Saint Luke (who wrote the Acts of the Apostles, and lived in those times) would not have omitted so memorable an Action. But to return to the Garden of Gethsamene. About some fifty paces towards the East of this Se∣pulchre of the blessed Virgin, close by the foot of the Mount of Olives, stands a certain Chappel, just in the place where sometimes the Town of Gethsamene stood. Not far from this Chappel is shewn a certain hollow place under a Rock, where, the Inhabitants say our Saviour sweat drops of Blood. They also shew a certain stone whereon the Angels stood which comforted our Saviour. De∣scending thence about a stones cast, they shew unto Pilgrims a place close by the Cave in the Mount of Olives, where Peter, James, and John sat when our Saviour was in his Agony. They also shew the place where Peter cut off Malchus Ear. There is to be seen a memorable Place where Judas betrayed
our Saviour with a kiss, when he delivered him to the Jews. Not far off is to be seen the Place where the Jews fell backward when our Saviour ask'd them, Whom seek ye? Besides many other things (if Borchardus may be cre∣dited) as the Impression of his hair and head upon a stone; and of his finger, as if it had been in Wax, upon a Rock: and in the place where he prayed, of his Hands and Knees, which are so firm in stone that they cannot be de∣faced with any Instrument. But there have been many in this place since these times, which have seen none of these things: from whence may be gathered, that they have been idle delusions used by ancient Monks to get money from Pilgrims and Strangers; and I have here remembred them, that others knowing these, may beware of the like Fallacies and Deceits pur∣posely invented for Lucre's sake. This Garden of Gethsamene is credibly thought to have been planted in former times by the Kings, David and Solomon; but increased and inlarged by other succeeding Princes, that there they might recreate themselves, and receive some content by the Fruits of the Earth. But on the contrary, that great King, the anointed of the Lord, our blessed Saviour, in this place of Pleasure, this Paradice of the Iews, was constrain'd to undergo that almost unsupportable Passion, to make us partakers of that heavenly Paradice and place of Pleasure. Not far from hence is to be seen the place where Iudas hanged himself: and a little from that, the Field of Akeldama, which was bought with the thirty Silverlings for which Iudas betrayed Christ. This Field (by the ap∣pointment of the Empress of Hellen) was compassed about with four Walls in the manner of a Tower, upon the top whereof there are seven distinct doors, like Windows, by which the dead Bodies of Christians are let down into it, it is fifty foot wide, and seventy two long. It standeth not far from the Val∣ley of Hinnon towards the East, and upon the South-side of Mount Sion in Ierusalem, &c. Of Kidron or Cedron. THIS Brook was so called because of the blackness of the Water, being derived of Kadar, to wax black. The Mountain whence it first ri∣seth, stands not far from Ierusalem towards the South; from whence it run∣eth through the Valley of Jehosaphat (which Valley being very fat and fertile, changeth the colour of the Water, and makes it look black) and so through Jerusalem; then passing towards the East, over a cliff of Mount Olivet, it falleth into the Lake Asphaltites. When there falls any store of Rain the Channel is very full, but in Summer it is oftentimes dry with the extremity of Heat. Over this Brook David passed when he was persecuted by his Son Absolon, 2 Sam. 16. and our Saviour Christ when hedrank of the River in the Way, that is, when he suffered upon the Cross for the Sin of
Man, according to that Saying of the Psalmist, Psal. 69. save me, O God, because the Waters are entred even into my Soul. Of Mount Calvary. THIS Mountain, according to the common Opinion, was so called of dead Mens Skulls, or the Skulls of such who were put to death for some capi∣tal Offence. It stood upon the West-side of Jerusalem as you go out of the ancient Gate, and is a part of Mount Gihon. At this day it standeth within the City of Jerusalem together with the Sepulchre of our Saviour: and up∣on it is built a fair Church, which is joyned unto the Church of the holy Sepulchre, being as it were a Quire unto it: But it standeth somewhat lower. It is built all of Marble, and the inside is all polished and wrought very cu∣riously. It is also paved with the same Stone. Within it is seen a piece of the Pillar of Stone, to which they say Christ was tied when he was whip∣ped: in which Stone are to be seen certain red specks, as if they had been drops of Bloud; and these also (they say) were the Blood of Christ when he was scourged; besides many other things, of which you may read at the beginning of this Treatise in the description of Ierusalem as it is at this day. The Description of the holy Sepulchre. THE Sepulchre of Christ stood upon the West side of Ierusalem, close by Mount Golgatha, in the Garden of Ioseph of Arimathea: for it was the custom of the Iews to build their Tombs or Sepulchres in their Orchards and Gardens; and beautifie and adorn them with Lillies, Roses, and other Flow∣ers, on purpose to put them in mind of their Mortality, according to that of David, Psal. 103. The days of Man are like Grass, as a Flower of the Field so flourisheth he: for the Wind goeth over it and is gone, and the Place thereof shall know it no more. And for this cause the Iews, but especially the Kings, would be buried in their Gardens: so Ioseph, a good and just Man, fol∣lowing this custom, had hewed him out of a Rock a new Monument, in which there had been no Man laid; that so when he walked in the Garden to take the Air, he might be put in mind of his Mortality. In this Monu∣ment our Saviour Christ was buried: and from this Place, upon the third Day early in the Morning, he rose; to the terrour and astonishment of such as watched the Sepulchre. From whence may be gathered, that as our first Parents, Adam and Eve, trespassed against God, and lost Felicity in a Gar∣den; so Christ the Son of God in a Garden made satisfaction for that Sin; restored us again to Grace, and make us capable of heavenly felicity. This Sepulchre (as it is described by S. Iohn, when he went with S. Peter to see if that notable Miracle of the Resurrection were true) was like a little Chap∣pel, the door thereof being upon the outside, and was but one Room with∣out any division, so that a Man might see all that was within it: for he saith,
Joh. 20. That he did not go in, but look'd in, and saw the linnen Cloaths where they lay wrapped up: from whence may be concluded, that that Sepulchre which is now extant (howsoever perhaps it may stand in the same place) is not the same Sepulchre wherein our Saviour Christ was buried; for it is described to be four square, to be open at the top, to have within it two Vaults (an inward and an outward) and that you descend to it by Stairs, as you may read at the beginning of this Treatise; which description doth not agree with that of St. John's. Again St. John saith, that they rolled a great Stone to the door of the Sepulchre, did not lay it upon the top of it. Also Eusebius and Nicephorus affirm, that the Pagans and other heathen People filled up the Sepulchre of Christ with Earth, and built up in the place the Temple of Venus, and in it put her Image, where she was worshipped a long time after, untill such time as that godly Emperess Hellen caused that Tem∣ple to be abolished, and the Sepulchre cleansed and purified. Afterwards, at her instigation, Constantine the Great (who was her Son) built up in the very same place a fair and goodly Church in the memory of our Saviour, and bestowed great cost both in the workmanship, and in beautifying it with Gold and Silver. This Temple (as it was before it was destroyed by the Sara∣cens) is said to be built all of white polished Marble, and beautified with Stones of divers colours, gilt with Gold and Silver, covered on the out side with Lead to withstand the storms and showers of Rain that happened; but the inside was gilt all with splendent and refulgent Gold, which cast a wonderful lustre upon the Beholders. Upon either side of it were two walking Galleries, one above, which was close; and another below, which was open, extending themselves the length of the Sanctuary; all the Roof and Vault being covered over with Gold and artificial Work, the one being supported with Pillars of Marble, the other with Posts of Wood plaited with Silver. There were also three Gates towards the East, very fitly and fairly disposed, by which the multitude that resorted thither go in and out: within these there stood an Arch, representing, after a sort, the Hemisphere of the Heavens, extended to the top of the Sanctuary like a Circle, girded a∣bout with twelve Pillars of equal bigness, representing the twelve Apostles; and upon the top of this Arch were placed Cups of Silver, beautifully burnish∣ed. All which the said Emperour dedicated to God for a Monument. There were many other memorable things that did belong to this Temple, which were admirable to look on, all which, as you came up the high-street from the market place, were presented to your view; a stately sight, the like whereof those parts did not afford. This Temple was built by the Emperour Constantine, Anno Dom. 333. Venerable Bede, who was a Dr. of Divinity, and lived in England 700 years after Christ, described the holy Sepulchre after this manner: This Sepulchre over head was something round, and so high, that a man could scarce touch it with his hand; standing in that Rock
which extendeth it self to Mount Calvary into the Garden of Joseph of Arimathea: representing in form a little Chappel: the entrance thereinto was towards the East. And further he addeth, that they which went into this Vail, found on the right hand toward the North, a stone Tomb which resembled a Coffin, scituated in the pavement, joyning to the Wall; which stone Coffin was of a mix'd colour, that is, white and red, being seven Foot long, and three handfuls high. This description, Venera∣ble Bede received from certain Monks, that went upon devotion to Ierusalem to visit this Sepulchre: but since, it hath been divers times destroyed and polluted by the Turks and other Heathen People. From whence may be gathered, that the Sepulchre which is now standing and shewed unto Pilgrims, is some device of the Monks to get Money of Strangers, and procure a kind of Devotion in the hearts of Ignorant People; wherefore as the Angel said, Mark 16. Let us not seek Christ any longer among the dead, or in the Grave, but in his holy Church, where the lively pourtraiture of his Divine Presence is set forth unto us: that so we may be made partakers with him hereafter in that place of eternal Glory. Concerning the residue of this description you may see it before. Of Emmaus. THIS City or Castle of Emmaus, is distant from Jerusalem almost eight miles towards the North-West. It signifies the Mother of Fortitude; being derived of Em, a Mother; and Vtz, which the Hebrews call Fortitude. It stood where three several ways were, that so it might serve for a direction to Passengers. From whence Melancton saith, that it was a notable type of the Church, which is our true Mother, shewing us the way unto eternal Life. And although it be but little, and the number in it few, yet it is strong. As the Castle, though it were small, yet it is almost invincible; and for that cause called, The Mother of Strength, as the Church is called, The Mother of the Righteous, against which the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail. In the time of Iudas Macchabes (though it was then a small City) it was numbred amongst the greatest Cities of Iuda, because of the scituation and strength of it. To this place our Saviour travelled from Ierusalem the same day that he arose from the Dead, Luke 24. In the time of the Romans Wars in Iudaea, this City was wonderfully defa∣ced and ruined by the Souldiers of Tiberius Maximus (who was Chief Cap∣tain in this Country, in the absence of Titus Vespsian,) but yet not utterly abolished; for about a hundred and fifty years after, Heliogabolus Emperour of Rome caused it to be rebuilded, and called by the name of Nicopolis, that is, The City of Victory. Not far from Emmaus there was an Inn, or a place to which Strangers might resort, and there three ways met; two went of either side the Town, and one through it: in this place the two Dis∣ciples constrained our blessed Saviour to stay with them, because it was
then about Sun-set. Near unto this Inn, Nicephorus and Zozemenus say (in their Ecclesiastical History) there was a Spring or Well of that admirable Vertue, that if either Man or Beast that was infirm or sick did drink of the Water thereof, they were immediately restored to their former Health. The reason that these Authors have for it (because they are impertinent) I will omit. But to return to the City of Emmaus, as it is now called Nicopolis, being scituated eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East, in the way as you go thence to Ioppa: the Countrey round about it being very fertile and pleasant, by reason of the Rivers and Springs wherewith it is watered, as Pliny saith, l. 5. c. 14. and much altered from that which it was in times past. But because you may read more of this City in Pliny, as it is at this day, and in Nicephorus and Eusebius, I leave to speak further of it. Of Simon of Cyrene. THIS Simon, which carried the Cross of our Saviour Christ, was born in Kir, a City in Africa, scituated sixteen miles from Ierusalem towards the West, Mat. 27. Luk. 23. In which City Tiglath Phulasser, Emperour of the Assyrians, planted many of the Inhabitants of Damascus, after he had conquered that City, 2 Reg. 16. This City and the Country round about it, by reason of these new Inhabitants, by little and little changed the name: and whereas in former times it was called Kir, in the time of our Saviour it was commonly called Cyrene, and this Man (of that Country) Simon of Cyrene. At this day it is a strong and beautiful City scituated between Mareotides and Zeugitania: at first built by Battus, whom Callimachus the Poet claimeth to be his Progenitor. This Battus was a mighty King in Africa, but was one that had a great impediment in his Speech, insomuch that many think this word , to have been origi∣nally used by him, and by none other. Afterward (as is said) Tiglath Phulasser having obtained the Jurisdiction of this City, planted the People of Daascus in it: and they obtaining some Power there, continued till a long time after Christ, and imbraced the Religion of the Jews, built up Synagogues, and dispersed that Law in many parts of those Quarters. There were some of this Country that opposed that holy Martyr Stephen, and were consenting to his death. There were many learned men in it, as Eratosthenes the Mathe∣matician, Callimacus the Poet (both which were had in great estimation among the Aegyptians) Carneades also the Academian, Cronus Appolonus, and Hegesias the Philosopher (of whom Cicero speaketh in the fifth Book of his Tusculans) and Eratosthenes the Historian, who was Son of Agaclis. Salust saith, that this City in his time was so mighty that it maintained War against
the Carthaginians for their Bounds and Limits of their Fields and Grounds, a long time; and Iustin lib. 39. that they maintained War against two Nations, the Phoenes and the Egyptians: in which Wars they gave Aprius, the King of the Egyptians, such a mighty overthrow, that there were very few of his Army that returned into his Country with him, as Horodot. affirm∣eth, lib. 4. there were also many Great Princes that ruled in this City: of which, because you may read in divers other Authors more at large, I omit to speak of them. Of Joseph of Arimathea, who buried Christ. THIS Ioseph, which caused our Saviour Christ to be buried in his Garden, was a rich man, upright and just in all his Actions, a Senator of Ie∣rusalem, and one that expected the Kingdom of God; born at Arimathea, a City of the Iews, Luc. 23. This City was sometime called Ramathaim So∣phim, and sometime Ramah, because it was scituated in a high place, and in times past was a fair City standing 16 miles from Ierusalem toward the North-west, the description whereof you may read before. At this day it is called Ramalea; being nothing so fair as it was, but like a Country Town, the Houses being carelesly dispersed here and there, lying without Walls or Bulwarks to defend it; notwithstanding, the ancient ruines of the former City is to be seen even at this day. There is also a great Inn or resting place for Strangers, having within it many Rooms for the receipt of Passengers, and a Well of very sweet Water. This House was first pur∣chased at the charge of Philip Duke of Burgundy, and by him committed to the protection of the Monks of Mount Sion, by whom it is at this day made an Hospital, wherein Pilgrims, Travellers, and Strangers, are entertained, and find much relief. In an inward Orchard belonging to this Hospital, there is a fair plat of Ground that bringeth forth great abundance of Aloes, of which there is often mention in the holy Scriptures, but more especially in Psalm 48. Thy Garments smell of Aloes and Cassia, when thou comest out of thy Ivory Palaces, where they have made thee glad. Nicodemus, a Prince of the Iews, together with Ioseph of Arimathea, brought with them an hundred pound of Aloes mixed with Myrrh, to embalm the Body of our Saviour Christ, when they had begged it of Pilate, before they buried it, Ioh. 19. Myrrh is a kind of Gum that issueth out of a Tree that grows in the East Countries, but principally in Arabia. The Tree out of which it issueth is commonly two Yards and a half high, with some Pricks upon it, the Bark whereof being cut, there issueth out of it drops like Tears, which congealeth into a Gum, and is called Myrrh: The principal Vertue that it hath, is to keep the Bodies of the dead incorruptable, see Pli. li. 12. ca. 15. & 16. In Arabia Foelix there is such abundance of sweet Myrrh, Frank∣incense, and other odoriferous Gums, that such as Sail in the red Sea may
easily smell the savour of them. There is also found in the Holy Land Myrrh and Aloes. Aloes is the juyce of a certain bitter Herb, which by some is called Everliving: it killeth the Worms, and preserveth from Putri∣faction; it is also good for the Sight. There is to be gathered in India, Arabia, and the Holy Land, a certain Herb of an extraordinary sweet smell, with Leaves broad, fat and juycy, which being press'd yieldeth more Aloes than Honey; from whence this metaphorical Proverb is used, Quod plus molestiae quam voluptatis gignit, that is, more troublesome than profitable. You may read also in Plautus, that the Life of Man tasteth more of Aloes than Honey; and Iuvenal speaking of an evil Wife, saith, she hath more of Aloes than Honey. So Euripides, Every sweet hath his sowre. So also the Holy Cross seemeth to have more of Aloes than Honey, notwithstanding it preserveth us from eternal Corruption, and killeth the venemous Worms of Conscience, cleanseth us from our Sins, and freeth us from the fear of the Devil and eternal Death, that so we might be recreated, and by the Faith of our Savi∣our be raised up at the last day, and partake with him in his everlasting Kingdom: according to that of Iohannes Taulerus, Where the Cross, there the Light; where Temptation, there Prayer and Regeneration, &c. The Travels of Peter. IN the thirty fifth year after the Nativity of Christ, about the Month of Ianuary, and a little before the Conversion of the Apostle Paul; Peter and Iohn were sent from Ierusalem to Samaria, being thirty two miles, that the Samaritans might receive that admirable gift of the Holy Ghost, and there they disputed with Simon Magus, Acts 8. From Samaria they returned back again to Ierusalem, which was thirty two miles. In this Jonrney they went to divers Towns of the Samaritans, teaching and preaching unto them the Doctrine of the Gospel, Acts 8. In the sixth year after the Resurrection of Christ, Peter went to Lidda, which was distant from Ierusalem twenty miles towards the North-East; where he cured Aeneas, who had lain sick eight years of the Palsie upon his Bed, Acts. 9. From thence he went to Ioppa, which was three miles: here he raised Tabitha from Death, Acts 9. In the seventh year after the Resurrection of Christ, Peter went from Ioppa and came to Caesarea Strato, which was six and thirty miles: where he preach∣ed the Gospel to Cornelius the Centurion, and baptized him and his whole Family, Acts. 10. Clemens Recogn. lib. 9. From Caesarea he returned to Ierusalem, being thirty two miles; where being accused for going to the Gentiles, he excused himself, Acts 11.
In the eleventh year after the Resurrection of Christ, he was cast into Prison, and set at liberty by an Angel of God, Acts 12. So he went secretly from Ierusalem (as it was thought) into the Desart, or to some other un∣known place: upon the second day of August in the same year, Herod Agrippa King of the Iews was struck by an Angel of God at Caesarea, and he was devoured of Worms, Acts 12. Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 4. After, Herod Agrippa being dead and buried, Peter returned to Ierusalem, where he was in Council with the rest of the Apostles, about sixteen years after the Resurrection of Christ, and fourteen after the Conversion of Paul, Gal. 2. Acts 15. See also Bede upon the Acts of the Apostles. In the seventeenth year after the Resurrection of Christ, Peter went from Ierusalem and came to Antiochia in Syria, which Journey was 280 miles: there Paul resisted him, Gal. 2. From Antiochia he went to Babylon in Egypt, where he wrote his first Epistle: this Journey was 520 miles. So all his Travels which are menti∣oned in the Scripture were 955 miles. Allegations of the Author to prove that Peter was never at Rome. BUT that Peter was twenty five years seven Months and five days Bishop and Chief Priest of Rome, cannot be proved by the testimony of the Scripture, and is utterly repugnant to the supputation and true accompt of the times. First, Because it is manifest by that which hath been said, that he conti∣nued at Ierusalem and in Iudaea during the time that Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius were Emperours of Rome. And shortly after the Martyrdom of Stephen, he and Iohn were sent into Samaria, that the Samaritans might also receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. Paul also in the third year after his Conversion, came to Ierusalem, and there spoke with Peter, and remained with him fifteen days, Acts 9. Gal. 1. Fourteen days after the Conversion of Paul, Peter was at the Apostolical Council held in Ierusalem; and there, with Iames and Iohn gave the right hand of Fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, that they should go and preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and that he and the rest would go to the Iews and those that were circumcised, Gal. 2. In the time of Claudius Caesar, Peter was committed to Prison by Herod Agripa in Ierusalem, and miraculously delivered by the Angel of God, Acts 10. In the ninth year of Claudius Caesar, Peter was at Antiochia in Syria, where Paul resisted him to his face, Gal. 2. All these things manifestly prove that the Apostle Peter was not at Rome at such time as any of these three, viz. Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius were Emperours; but either in Ierusalem, or else at Antiochia in Syria. Secondly, it may exactly be made evident out of the holy Scriptures, that Peter was not at Rome in the time of Nero. For, in the second year of Nero,
Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, and sent it from Corinth by the hand of Phebe: in which Epistle, he saluted all his Friends which he had in that City, by name, as by the conclusion of the Epistle more plainly appeareth; but there is no mention of the Apostle Peter, who (if at that time Bishop of that place) surely should not have been omited. Also, in the fifth year of Nero, Paul being then in Prison at Rome, wrote his Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philipians, Colossians, and to Philemon; and in the conclusion of these Epistles he expresly nameth all his Friends that he had in Rome, yet makes no mention of Peter. And when he was the second time in Prison under Nero, in the last year of the Reign of this Emperour, he wrote from Rome his second Epistle to Timothy, being a little before his death: at the end of which Epistle he plainly shews, that he had no Companion there but Luke, 2 Tim. 4. From whence it is manifest, that Peter, during all the Pil∣grimage and Life of Paul, was never at Rome: how then can it possibly be, that Peter should be Bishop of Rome for the space of almost twenty six years? Truly there are many learned men, and they also of great Judgment, which hold this Opinion false, and utterly repugnant to Holy Scripture, neither can be proved by any good Authors or Histories. But if Peter were ever at Rome, he came thither after the last Imprisonment of Paul, and a few years before his Martyrdom. Because (as Onuphrius saith, in Comment. fast. lib. 2. also Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 22. and Tertul. Cont. Marcion.) Peter and Paul in the thirty fifth year after the Resurrection of Christ, and upon the third day of the Calends of Iuly (C. Fonteius Caitonius and C. Iulius Rufus being then Cousuls of Rome) were crowned with the Wreath of Martyrdom, and with their Blood sealed the Truth of the Gospel. But there are others of Opinion, that Peter never came at Rome, but that he was crucified at Ierusa∣lem by King Agrippa's Command; others say at Babylon. But because it is a thing doubtful, and not greatly material, I leave it to the Reader's considera∣tion Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Samaria. BEcause I have before briefly intreated of the Beginning and Foundation of this City, I shall not need here again to repeat it. I will now therefore shew the end of it, which was principally caused by the obstinancy of the Inhabi∣tants: who refusing the Doctrine and Prophecy of Elias and Elizeus, imbra∣ced and followed strange Gods, and offered Incense unto Idols; whereby the wrath of God was kindled against them, insomuch, that he left this good∣ly City as a Prey to the Gentiles and Foreign Nations, that carried the People thereof into Captivity; where, for a long time, they remained in great misery.
After the first desolation, because the Country round about this City was very fertile and pleasant, abounding with Springs, Rivers, Vines, Olive Gardens, Mountains, fruitful Vallies, fair Cities, and strong Castles and Towns. Herod Ascalonites (that great King of the Iews, who put to death the innocent Children) re-edified it, set up many goodly buildings, beautified with Marble Pillars and pleasant Walks: And also in the circuit of the Kings House, and under the buildings of the Nobility in the common Market-place, the Houses and Vaults were supported with Marble Pillars, according to the manner of the Iews. The Palace (called the Kins House) stood in the midst of the City, upon the top of the Mountain: and round about it there were divers other buildings set up, but much lower, even about the descent of the Mountain; yet scituated, that the Inhabitants might see out of their Houses the Country round about. Then close to the Palace, in the upper part of the City, he caused a Temple to be built in honor of Augustus. Thus having finished the inside, he compass'd it about with a mighty Wall, and upon that placed many Turrets: and then to flatter Augustus, called it by the name of Sebasten, which among the Grecians signifies Augustum & ve∣nerabile Principem: now although this City was very glorious and spacious in those times (for it was three miles about) yet at this day it is utterly ru∣ined and destroyed, insomuch, that there is not a House standing, two Churches only excepted, which were built in honour of St. Iohn Baptist: and the chief of these, which was the Cathedral Church, the Saracens have con∣verted to their use, so that at this day Mahomet is worshipped in it. In this stood the Sepulchre of St. Iohn Baptist, cut out in Marble, like the Sepul∣chre of Christ, where (as Hierom saith) he lieth buried between Elisha and Obediah the Prophets. This Church stands upon the side of the Mountain, in the descent. The Saracens do principally reverence St. Iohn. Baptist next after Christ, and they affirm the Virgin Mary to have conceived by the holy Spirit, and not by the Seed of Man: That St. Iohn was the greatest Prophet (except Christ) that ever was. They also believe Christ to be the Son of God, but not to be equal with God. Yet they prefer Mahomet before both, because they hold him a Messenger sent from God, not unto all Men, but only unto the Saracens and Turks, and their Subjects. The other Church, which stood in Samaria, was upon the top of the Mountain which somtimes the Kings Palace stood. In this Church, in times past, there dwelt certain Grecian Monks, which were Christians, and en∣tertained Christian Pilgrims with great Humanity, and furnished them with many Necessaries. But the City of Samaria it self hath been so often overthrown, and brought to such extream misery, that almost all the Ground where it stood is at this time converted into an Olive Garden. So that as that wicked King
Ahab turned the Vineyard of Naboth, which stood close by his House, into an Olive Garden; so God in his singular Justice hath turned the Palace of that King, and the whole City wherein he dwelt, which was the strength of his Kingdom, into an Olive Garden. There are not so many ruins found through all the Land of Iudaea (though there have been many worthy Cities destroyed) as are in this place at this day. The scituation of this City was very beautiful; for a man might have seen from it to the Sea of Ioppae and Antipatris, also to Caesarea Palestina, and thorough all the Mountain of Ephraim, to Ramatha Sophim, and so to Mount Carmel and the City of Pto∣lomais. Of Lidda. THIS City was scituated not far from Ioppa, upon the shore of the Medi∣terranean Sea, 20 miles from Ierusalem North-wward. In this City Peter healed Aeneas, who had been sick eight years of the Palsie. At this day there is nothing to be seen but the Church of St. George, who was beheaded by the Emperour Dioclesian, for professing the Christia Fith. The Greci∣ans call this Town Diospolis, i. An holy Town. And the Turks account St. George for a valiant Knight and holy man. Of Caesarea Strato. THIS City was scituated upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, some 32 miles from Jerusalem North-ward: in ancient time it was called Strato, being first built by Strato King of Sidon. But time having decayed a great part of it, Herod Ascalonita repaired it, and made it a goodly thing, cal∣ling it Caesarea, after the name of Augustus Caesar. And that Ships might lie at Anchor there without danger, he caused to be built a fair Haven to op∣pose the violence of the Sea. This Haven was so wonderfully cotrived and set up at such a great charge, that it was admirable to look upon; for he laid the foundation of it twenty yards under Water, burying in the deep Stones of an extraordinary greatness, some fifty foot long, eight foot thick, and ten foot broad, and many of them more. The Haven it self was beauti∣fied with fair Buildings and goodly Walls, supported with Marble Pillars and mounted up aloft, so that you might see the Ships as they were upon the Sea, and made way to his Harbour. The entrance into it was upon the North: at the mouth thereof there stood three mighty Colosses upon Mar∣ble Pillars. He also placed upon the Wall of the City towards the Haven mighty Towers; the chiefest and fairest of which he dedicated to Drusus Au∣gustus his Son in law, and called it by the Name of the Drusian Tower. The buildings that joyned to this Haven were all of white polished Marble, and the Streets of the City were directly towards it. Also the Market-place where
they bought and sold was not far from it. Upon a little Hill, close by this Port, he caused a Church to be built in honour of Augustus Caesar. This Temple was a very magnificent and stately building, and in it he caused the Statue of Augustus (curiously wrought and cast just in the figure of Iupi∣ter▪ Olympius) to be erected, and worshipped it as his God. There are many other stately and sumptuous buildings that were set up by this King. But amongst the rest, he bestowed great cost upon the Market-place, the Theatre and the Amphitheatre, which he wonderfully beautified, and instituted certain Games to be there used once every fifth year in Honour of Augustus, as Ioseph de Bell. Iud. li. 1. witnesseth. After the death of this King, Herod Agrippa was made King of the Jews. This Prince, some ten years after the Resurrection of Christ, caused James the Son of Zebedeus, upon the 25 day of July to be put to death in Jerusalem; and when he perceived it was acceptable unto the Jews, in the following year, about the the Feast of the Passover he caused Peter to be cast into Prison; who by the Prayers of the Church was miracu∣lously delivered, as you may read Acts 12. A little after, that is, about the month of August, this King was struck by the Angel of the Lord, and died miserably: for when he came to Caesarea Strato, he caused the publick Shews to be solemnly practised, and in honour of Claudius Caesar set forth very sumptuous Interludes and Plays; to which Feast and Shews all the Nobility and Gentry of that Country round about resorted. Where the next day, very early in the Morning, having put on a rich and goodly Garment, made all of Cloath of Gold, he went into the Theatre; and there, according to his usual custom, sat in a princely Seat, and made an Oration to the Inhabitants of Tyre. Now when the Sun was up and shone upon his Garments, the Rays ther∣of cast such a reflection upon the beholders, that it dazled their Eyes, insomuch that they could scarce see. Wherefore those that were his Flatterers, hearing his gracious Speech, cried with a loud Voice, O Agripa! be propitious unto us; for although heretofore we feared thee as a Man, yet now we well perceive thou art of a more Noble and Divine Nature. But when the King (taking delight in these speeches) would not restrain the impious clamour of these flatterers, a little after he lifted up his head, and upon the top of a Pillar he saw an Owl sittingover him. Presently he was troubled in his mind, and within a while after he was struck with an extream pain in his Bowels, insomuch, that with a loud Voice he cried unto his Friends, I, whom but now was called your God, am but a Man; and him that you imagined to be immortal, must presently die. These Words being ended, they carried him sick into his Palace, and it was given out that he was dead. No sooner came this News to the Ears of the Vulgar, but they with their Wives and Children put on sack-cloath, and fell upon the Ground with earnest Supplications to God to be merciful unto him. But the King look∣ing out of his Window, and seeing them lie thus prostrate upon the Earth,
wailing and weeping, he could not abstain from Tears. At length, after he had been cruelly tormented by the space of four days, upon the fifth died, being the second of August, the Worms having consumed his Guts, and eat∣en through his Body. Thus God greviously punished him, who had so much afflicted the Members of the Church of Christ: but towards other Men, as well Strangers as Gentiles, he was mild and courteous. He reign∣ed in the whole, almost seven years; for he held the Tetrarchy of Philip three years under Caligula, and other four years he held the whole Kingdom of the Iews. He died in the eleventh year after the Resurrection, and in the third of Claudius Caesar, being then about 54 years of age, Acts. 22. Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 19. Pliny saith, that this Town of Caesarea Strato was sometime called Apollo∣nia, but after obtained the name of Caesarea Palestina. Saint Ierom saith, in his Epitaph upon Paul, that in his time (which was 400 years after Christ) there was to be seen in this place the House of Cornelius the Centurian, whom Peter baptized, Act. 10. (This Cornelius is thought by some to have been of the Family of Lentuli in Rome, for they were also called Cornelii, as appear∣eth in Salust in the conspiracy of Cataline: and it may be, that this Cornelius was that Lentulus which wrote to Tiberius Caesar that excellent Epistle, con∣cerning the figure, proportion, and person of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ) Also the House of Philip the Deacon, and the Chambers of his four Daughters, who were Prophetesses. When Paul came unto this Town, Agabus the Prophet came unto him, who bound his Hands and Feet with the Girdle of Paul, saying, The Man that oweth this Girdle shall be thus bound by the Iews at Ierusalem, and they shall deliver him into the Hands of the Gentiles. Here he made a notable Sermon before Festus Agrippa, Iunior, and his Sister Bernice, Act. 16. This Town flourished for a long time after the Destruction of Ierusalem, and it was scituated in a fair and profitable place, fortified towards the West with the Mediterranean Sea, and towards the East it was compassed about with a Lake, in which were great abundance of Crocodiles, though the Water was very sweet, and of a great depth. Many Godly and Reli∣gious Men were here crowned with the Wreath of Martyrdom, for pro∣fessing the Gospel of Christ, as Eusebius, Bishop of this Town and of Pam∣philius, well observeth in his Eccles. Hist. But the Lord did so sharply revenge the death of these men, that at this day it is utterly destroyed, and there is not a house left, though in times past it had been a Bishop's See. There was also another Town built by Philip the Tetrarch, called Caesarea Philippi, whereof you may read before. Of Ioppa. COncerning this Town I have already shewed many things in the Travels of Ionas, but omitted some, specified by Brittenbach and Dr. Ran∣wolfe,
who have described the holy Land as it was in the year of our Lord 1575. which Authors affirm, that there is seen a great Chain of Iron fastened to a certain Rock, to the which Ships that lay in that Harbour were sometimes tied. Also the Chain wherewith Andromda was fast bound to a stone, when she should have been devoured of the Sea Monster. Also they say that there is a Chappel at this day built up in the place where sometime the house of Simon the Tanner stood, who gave entertainment to Peter, standing by a Rock close by the Sea side, and dedicated to St. Peter. But for the rest of the Town (although formerly it hath been a goodly City) it is utterly de∣stroyed, nothing standing but a part of the Wall, and two Castles upon the Haven to defend such as come thither with Ships, from the Injuries and Incursions of the Pagans and Saracens. Of Babylon in Aegypt. BAbylon signifieth Confusion, as you may read before. There were two Cities of this name; the one was in Chaldaea, and the other in Egypt. That in Chaldaea was scituated upon the River Euphrates; and this upon the River Nilus, being 244 miles from Ierusalem toward the South-West, and called in the Arabian Tongue Alcair or Cair, whether you please, which also signifieth Confusion. Concerning both which Cities you may read more at large in their former description. From this Town it is credibly thought (and not from that Town which stood in Chaldaea) Peter wrote his first Epistle, as the circumstances of the History do evidently declare: for that Babylon which stood in Chaldaea was in the time of Peter utterly de∣stroyed; but then this Babylon was had in great estimation. About this time also Mark, who was the Disciple of Peter, was the first Bishop of Alexan∣dria, as you may read in the end of this Epistle. Wherefore that Opinion which some would have to pass for truth, that Peter wrote his first Epistle from Rome, calling it allegorically Babylon, is utterly to be condemned, since there is none who can certainly prove that conjecture, neither is it grounded upon any firm foundation; for although Babylon in the Revelation of S. John (be∣cause it was a secret Prophecy) was allegorically used; yet in a plain and ma∣nifested history such kind of Allegories are not allowed. From whence may be concluded, that S. Peter wrote his first Epistle from this Babylon, not from Rome. The Travels of Saint John, with the Annotation of the Times wherein he lived. JOHN the Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, was born in the tenth year after the Nativity of our Saviour, and was made his Disciple
when he was 21 years of Age. He saw the Miracle of Christ when he chan∣ged the Water into Wine, John cap 2. In the year following, viz. in the 22 year of his Age, he was taken into the number of the twelve Apostles, Luke 6. Mar. 3. After that, in the three and twentieth year of his age, he saw the transfiguration of Christ in mount Thabor: and when he was four and twen∣ty years of age, he stood under the Cross of our Saviour Christ; and the same year, a little after Christs Ascension, he, with the rest of the Apostles, received the Gift of the holy Ghost, being then the Feast of Pentecost, which fell about the four and twentieth day of May: in the same year he was cast into Prison with Peter, for healing the lame Man. Acts 3. 4. Thus much of his Youth. About the middle of the first year after our Saviour Christs Ascension (Iohn being then 25 years old) was sent with Peter from the City of Ierusalem to Samaria, 32 miles. From Samaria he returned back again to Ierusalem 32 miles; and as he returned, preached the Gospel of Christ in divers Towns of the Samaritans, Acts 8. Mary the Mother of our Lord being now 59 years of age, died in the twelfth year after the Resurrection of Christ, and was buried by Iohn the Evan∣gelist in the Garden of Gethsemene, Iohn being then 35 years old. Four years after her death, he was present at the Apostolical Council in Ierusalem. Now Iames, his Brother, who was called the Elder, was beheaded two years before; for this Council was celebrated in the presence of Iames, the young∣er, Peter, Iohn, Paul and Barnabas, &c. about sixteen years after the Re∣surrection of Christ, and fourteen after the Conversion of Paul, Gal. 2. Before the Destruction of Ierusalem, which happened about the 61 year of his age, and 38 after Christs Ascension, Iohn went from Ierusalem, and came to Ephesus, 544 miles, where, after the death of the Apostle Paul, he governed the Churches of Asia minor. In the 86 year of his age, being cast into a Vessel of boiling Oyl, and coming out unhurt; by the command of Domitian the Emperour he was ba∣nished into the Isle of Pathmos, distant from Ephesus 40 miles. There he wrote his Revelation to the seven Churches in Asia minor; whereof you may read, Apoc. 1. From Pathmos he returned to Ierusalem, which was forty miles, being then 88 years of age, and there he raised Drusana from Death to Life. After this, he governed the Churches in Asia four years, that is, from the Govern∣ment of Nero the Emperour, unto the fourth year of the Government of Tra∣jan the Emperour, and called the young Man to repentance which was of the Society of Thieves: at length he died at Ephesus, when he was 91 years old, An. Dom. 100. as St. Ierom and Nicephorus li. 2. ca. 32. observe. So all his Tra∣vels were 688 miles.
The Testimony of the Fathers concerning John. THE Testimonies of the holy Fathers that are yet extant concerning Iohn, are these: In Euseb. i. 3. c. 1. 18. 20. 3. you may read the Hi∣story concerning the Conversion of the young Man from the company of Thieves. Irenaeus witnesseth the same, li. 2. ca. 23. In Irenaeus, also, li. 3. ca. 23. you may read the History of Cerinthus, and how that Iohn lived until the time of Trajan the Emperour. Also li. 3. ca. 11. he saith, that the Gospel of St. Iohn was written because of the Blasphemy of Cerinthus. The Description of the Towns and places to which John travelled. Of Ephesus. THIS was the Metropolitan City of Ionia, scituated in Asia Minor, 544 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. It was built (saith Strabo) by Androclus the Son of Codrus King of Athens, in the time of David King of Israel; and because of the beautiful scituation and ferility of the Soil called Ephesus: in future Ages growing into such credit and estimation, that it was mightily increased and became one of the most famous Mart Towns in all Asia; but it stood somewhat low, so that the Sea brake in upon it and drowned it, and many of the Inhabitants perished. Nevertheless Lysimachus King of Thrace built it up again in the same place where now it stands, and called it Arsinoes, after his Wives name. But he being dead, it was again called by the anti∣ent name Ephesus. There were many worthy Men that lived in it, as He∣raclitus, Scotinus and Hermadorus, who, for his excellent understanding and singular honesty, was banished. Hipponachus also the Poet, Perrhasius and Apel∣les the Painters, Alexander the Orator and Theodotio a Iew, who interpreted the Bible. It was in ancient times inhabited by the Amazons, whose Queen kept her court there, and wonderfully increased and adorned it with fair and beautiful Buildings. Here also that notable Temple dedicated to Diana, which as Strab. saith, li. 14. Plin. li. 36. c. 14. was 220 years a building. It stood upon Morish Ground to avoid the danger of Earth-quakes. There were in it 127 Pillars, erected by so many Kings; among which there were 36 that were curiously sicled, and artificially carved and ingraven: It was 425 foot long, and 120 broad. There were so many Gifts and Gratuities sent from all the Cities and Kings round about, toward the building of this Temple, that the Riches and Treasure thereof was wonderful; insomuch that when it was finished, it was accounted one of the stateliest Buildings the World could afford, and numbered amongst the Wonders of the World. This Temple thus built at such an extraordinary charge that it was almost unvaluable, was set on fire by one Herostratus a wicked and perverse Fellow, (in the same Olympiad and Day that Alexander the Great was born) who
having nothing in him that might make him famous in after-ages, burnt this goodly Building, that so (though not for his good, but for his evil) he might get a name. But the Ephesians were so incensed because of this Mischief, that they procured Proclamation to be made through all the King∣doms round about, that his name should not be once mentioned: which perhaps for a time was observed, but in future ages they could not prevent it, but that he was both spoken of and written of. Notwithstanding, after∣ward the Inhabitants of this City became so exceeding wealthy, that they soon after rebuilt this Temple of Diana, and made it much fairer than it was before; all the Citizens contributing with willing hands to the charge of the building: insomuch that the Women brought all their Silver, Gold, and other pretious Ornaments, and communicated them towards this great Work. Also in after times those fair Pillars before spoken of, were again erected; towards the rebuilding whereof they received so many and wonderful Gifts, from all the neighbouring Kings, Cities, and Countries, that this Temple might (as it was thought) compare with all the World beside for Riches and Treasure. It was standing in St. Paul's time, who came thither about twelve years after the Resurrection of our Saviour, and continued there three years; in which time he so faithfully, and diligently preached the Gospel, that he converted most of the Citizens from their Idolatry and Worship of Diana, to the reverend Knowledge and Confession of our bles∣sed Saviour. For which cause, Demetrius the Silver Smith (who made a great gain by Idolatry) stirred up a great tumult; so that the Gentiles running up and down the City for two hours space, cried out with a loud voice, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. Here also Paul fought with Beasts, 1 Cor. 15. And to this City Paul wrote his Epistle, and sent it from Rome, 996 miles. He made Timothy also a Bishop of this City, to whom he wrot two Epistles; the first was sent him from Laodicea to Phrygia, being 280 miles: the second from Rome, as I said. By these Epistles Timothy was greatly comforted, and taught them to his Disciples and Auditors, that so they might constantly continue and persevere in the Christian Faith and Religion to the end. To conclude, Iohn the Evangelist came also to Ephesus, and wrote his Gospel against the Heretick Cerinthus, who denyed Christ to be the true God; for which cause God grievously punished him, so that he died as he was bathing himself in a Bath, Irenaeus, lib. 5. ca. 3. Euseb. li. 3. c. 22. This was the first Church to which Iohn wrote his Revelation; and there, when he returned out of Pathmos, he raised his Host Drusana from death to life. So when he had governed the Churches in Asia thirty years, after the death of Paul he died, when he was ninety one years old, and was honourably buried at Ephesus, not far from the City. There was also another Iohn that liv'd in Ephesus, to whom (as many think) the Epistles of Iohn the Evangelist were dedicated, as Ierom sheweth in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers. The Sepulchre of this man is shewed, not far from the Sepulchre of St. Iohn the Evangelist, as Euseb. witnesseth, lib. 3. cap. 31. At this day this City is named Figlo ho Epheso. See Gesner. Of Pathmos. THIS is an Isle of the Aegean Sea, scituated betwixt Asia minor and Grecia, 2080 miles from Ierusalem North-Westward. Pli. l. 4. c. 12. saith, that it was thirty miles in compass. Into this Isle the Evangelist was banish∣ed by Domitian Nero, where he wrote his Revelation. It was one of the Cyclad Islands, which were fifty three in number that lay round about the Island Delus, as Stra. li. 10. Geog. observes. It stood forty miles from Ephesus South-Westward, and as Petr. Apianus saith, was sometimes called Posidius, but now, Palmosa. Of Smyrna. THIS is the second City to which Iohn dedicated his Revelation. It was sci∣tuated in Ionia in Asia minor, 540 miles from Ierusalem North-West∣ward. This was a very fair City, beautified with many goodly buildings, and of good account in Grecia. It was at first but a Colony, transplanted from another City in that Country; But Theseus that great Prince being then King thereof, that he might add some grace to that which he had begun, he called it after his Wives name Smyrna, signifying Myrrh. Herodot. saith that Homer was born here (but not Blind) and called by the name of Melisigines: but after the Gumaenians called him (of his Blindness) Homer. Strab. li. 14. Geogr. saith, that the Inhabitants take upon them to shew his Picture standing there, and also a Temple built in his Honour. During his Life he was a man of small or no Reputation, or rather contemned than honoured, as Herod. saith. But after his death, his Works beginning to grow famous, the Cities of Greece contended who should Patronize him. The Colophonians claim a part in him, because he was in that Town, and there made some of his Odysses. They of Chios say he belonged to them, because he lived there a long time, and taught School. But for ought that can be found by Authors, the Smyrnians have most interest in him. Nevertheless I leave him to them that please to Patronize him, since it is not certainly found where he lived. He lived about 900 years before Christ. Eusebius saith, Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 14. that in after-times this City grew very famous, and was so much inlarged that it became a Bishops See, where∣of Polycarus, a very godly and Religious man, was Bishop. He governed the Church in that place at such time as Iohn the Evangelist wrote his Re∣velation, and by him, cap. 2. is called the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. This man, after he had faithfully preached the Gospel for the space of 86 years, was
by the Inhabitants thereof condemned to death for the profession of Christ, Anno 170. But the town of Smyrna, because of the unthankfulness and cruelty of the Inhabitants, was grievously punished; for within ten years it was cast down by an Earth-quake, since which time, it was hardly rebuilt again. The River Pactolus, which beginneth in Lydia, runneth by this Town of Smyrna. But the Inhabitants, because of the golden Veins that are found therein, call it Crysorrhoas, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29. A little after that, there was such an extreme Plague happened in Rome, that they were constrained to carry out the dead Bodies in Carts. Thus God turneth the Air and the Earth to the confusion of those that persecute his Church. Of Pergamus. THIS was another of the Towns whereto Iohn wrote his Revelation. It was a famous City, and Metropolitan of Mysia, scituated in Asia minor, 228 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. It stood upon a high Rock close by the River Caicus, from whence it was called Pergamus. For in ancient times all famous and notable places were called amongst the Graecians Per∣gama, as Suidas and Servius observe. Strabo lib. 13. saith, that in the time of Lysimachus the Son of Agathocles (who was one of the Successours of Alexander the Great) it was but a Castle; in which place, because of the strength of it, he usually kept all his Treasure, and those things that were of account, and committed the custody of it unto one named Philetaerus, an Eunuch of Tyanus. But this man being accused to Lysimacus, that he would have forced his Wife Arsinoes, for fear of some future punishment because of that Offence, moved the Inhabitants of that Hold to Rebellion. At the same time also there hap∣pened many Commotions in Asia, whereby Lysimachus was constrained to leave this, and make opposition against Seleucus Nicanor, who had invaded his Dominions; But in this War Lysimachus was slain. And Philetaerus, having in his possession great Riches, that he might enjoy what he had, was always observant to him that got the Victory, by which means he kept himself and his Riches for the space of 20 years in that Castle; and then died, and left all his Wealth to Eumenes, his brothers Son, who inlarged his Government, and overcame Antiochus the Son of Seleucus. This Man, after he had reigned 32 years, died, and Attalus his Son succeeded him in the Government: who having conquered Galatia, made a league with the Romans, and by them was first called by the name of a King. After him succeeded his Son Eumenes, the second of that name, who aided the Romans against Antiochus magnus, King of Syria; for which service the Romans gave him all the Dominions that Antiochus had on this side the Alps. This man was the first that enlarged the Castle of Pergamus, and made it a goodly City, planting round about it a thick Wood or Grove, and called it Nicephorus. And after he had reigned 49 years, he died, and left his Kingdom to his Son Attalus, called
Philometor. This Attalus, after he had done many notable exploits, died without issue, when he had reigned five years, and left his Kingdom to the Romans, who turned it into a Province. There lived in this Town many learned Men, as Galen the Physician, who was famous in the time of Trajan the Emperour, and (as the Fame went) lived 140 years. Of that Town also was Apollodorus the Rhetorician, who was School-Master to Augustus Caesar, of which man the Apollodorean Sect took Name, and Dionysius Atticus his Scholar. Here Antipas was crowned with the Wreath of Martyrdom. To the Bishop of this Town Iohn wrote his Revelation, and in the se∣cond Chapter thereof sharply reprehendeth him, because he bore with the Sect of the Nicholaitans; which, although it lasted not long, yet it was very dangerous. Eusebius saith, That Nicholaus, one of the seven Deacons for the Poor at Antiochia, of whom you may read, Act. 6. was the first Author of this Sect: yet Clem. Alexand. clears him of it, laying that Offence rather on certain idle Persons, that misconstruing his Words, being given over to vile Affections, covered their Evils under his Name, calling themselves Nicholaites, though indeed he had no hand in it, but lived and died honest∣ly. The Opinion that this Sect held (as Euseb. saith, li. 3. ca. 23. and Irenaeus, lib. 1. chap. 27.) was, That Women were to be common; That it was law∣ful to eat Meat offered to Idols; That Fornication and Adultery was no Sin: beside many other wicked and perverse Opinions concerning the Deity, which would be too tedious to recite in this place. You may read more of it in Eusebius and Tertullian. Of Thyatira. THIS was the fourth Church to which Iohn wrote his Revelation: it was scituated close by the River Caicus, upon the Borders of Mysia and Ly∣dia, 600 miles from Ierusalem North-eastward. It was a very fair City in Asia minor, yet subject to the Lydians. In this Country Lidda was born, that dwelt at Philippa, and gave entertainment to Paul and Sylas, Act. 16. Philip∣pa was distant from this Town 400 miles. It was at first called (according to the Testimony of Stephen) Pelopea and Semiramis. But after, Seleucus Nicanor, King of Syria, (making War upon Lysimachus King of Thrace) coming to this Town, had News that his Wife had bore him a Daughter; in honour whereof he would needs have the Town called Thugateira, which in Greek signifies a Daughter; but Thyatira, Divine Reverence. Of Sardis. TO this City also St. Iohn wrote his Revelation. It was a famous and Prince∣ly Seat, scituated in Asia not far from the Mountain Tmolus, where Croe∣sus
King of the Lydians kept his Court, being 536 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North-west. It was so called (without doubt) of Sardus the Son of Hercules, which maketh Sardis in the plural number. Of this Town were those two Diodories which were Orators. The Younger of them did write Histories and Poems, and was one of Strabo's great Friends. Close by this Town is found a precious Stone, which after the Towns Name is called Sar∣dis: it is of a fleshly Colour, and therefore is commonly called Carnalia; of which you may read more in Pliny, lib. 37. cap. 4. Of Philadelphia. SAINT Iohn also wrote his Revelation to this City. It was scituated in Mya; a Country in Asia Minor; being 450 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North-west. This City is so often troubled with Earth-quakes, that the Inhabitants are many times constrained to dwell in the open Fields. Upon the East side thereof lies a dry and barren Country, which seemeth to be burnt and scorch'd with heat, being 60 miles long, and 48 miles broad; where there grows no Trees, but there are found great plenty of Grapes, which being prest yeild very pleasant Wine, and may compare with the best of those Parts. The Superficies of the Earth seemeth like Ashes, mountainy, stony, and black: many conjecture the cause thereof to be by reason of the great Thunders and Lightning that they have there; but there are some which give other reasons for it. It was called Philadelphia of Attolus Philo∣delphius who first built it. Of Laodicea. THIS was the seventh and last City that Iohn directed his Revelation to. It stood close by the River Lycus in Caria, a Country in Asia the less, five hundred and twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the North-west; and is likewise oftentimes troubled with Earthquakes, as Sardis, Magnesia, and Phi∣ladelphia are. The reason of these often Earthquakes is thought to be, be∣cause there are Vaults and hallow Caves under the Earth, into which the Air (in the time of heat) having free entrance, then closeth up again, so that it can find no passage out; it striveth with continual motion to make way through the Earth, by which means the Earth trembleth and shaketh: and look how much the deeper these Vaults are under the Earth, so much the more violent are the Earth-quakes; by which means, Cities are often∣times utterly overthrown and ruined, sometimes the Earth sinketh, and Ponds and Rivers are swallowed up. It was at first called Diospolis, that is, the City of Iupiter; then Rhoas; and lastly, it obtained the name of Laodicea. And although at the beginn∣ing it was but a small Town, yet by reason of the fertility of the Soile, and pleasant scituation, it of a sudden became a fair City, beautified with many
fair and goodly Houses, wherein there dwelt many wealthy Citizens, so that for their Nobility and Worthiness it was accounted the most famous Town in all Asia. Here Hiero dwelt who divided his Inheritance among the Citizens, and over and above he gave them two thousand Talents of Gold, besides many other Gifts and Gratuities, to adorn and beautifie the City. After him there lived Zeno the Orator, and Polemon his Son; who for his noble Acts was first by Antonio, and then by Augustus Caesar, honoured with the Dignity of a King, as Strabo witnesseth, lib. 12. This Laodicea, Colossis, and Hierapolis, where the Apostle Philip was cru∣cified, were sunk by an Earth-quake, about the tenth year of Nero, and a little before the Martyrdom of Paul. There were three Cities called after this Name; that is, this which stood in Caria (to which Paul never came; as appeareth in the second Chapter to the Colossians;) a second stood in Phri∣gia, where Paul wrote his Epistle to Timothy; and a third in Syria, near to Antiochia, Seleucia, and Apamea. The Travels of Philip. THEN a little after the Martyrdom of Stephen, which hapned in the Month of Ianuary, thirty and five Years after the Nativity of Christ) Philip, which was one of the seven Deacons with Stephen, Act. 6. went from Ierusalem to Samaria, which was thirty and two miles: and in many Cities of the Samaritans preached the Gospel, and did many Miracles; at which time he converted Simon Magus, Act. 8. From Samaria he went to Bethzur, which was scituated forty and four miles towards the South: here Philip baptised the Aethiopian who was Queen Candaces Eunuch. And suddenly he was taken out of sight by the Spirit of the Lord, and went to Azotus, which was 16 miles. From thence preaching in all the Cities as he went, he came to Caesarea Strat, which was 44 miles. So all his Travels were 136 miles. Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in his Travels, you may read of them in several places mentioned before. The Travels of the Aethiopian which was Eunuch to Queen Candaces, who kept her Court in Saba. FROM Saba or Meroe in Aethiopia, this Eunuch came to Ierusalem, which was about 964 miles, Act. 4. From Ierusalem he came to the Town of Bethzur, which was 12 miles: here he was baptised by Philip in the Month of Ianuary, the next Year after the Resurrection of Christ.
From thence he returned to Saba in Aethiopia, which was 952 miles. So all his Travels were 1928 miles. Of Saba. THIS City is before mentioned: and at this time when the Eunuch came to Ierusalem, Candaces governed it and a great part of Aethiopia, Ti∣berius Caesar being then Emperour of Rome. She was a very warlike Wo∣man, but blind of one Eye, as Strabo saith, lib. 6. and Pliny, lib. 6. cap. 29. In whose time the City Saba was called Meroe, and the Queens, for many Successions, Candaces; because of the worthiness of those Queens which had been of that Name. This Woman was very well beloved of her Subjects, and was very gracious towards them, as Suidas saith. To this Queen the Eunuch which Philip baptised was chief Steward; and no doubt spread the Christian Faith in many places of those parts. An Introduction to the Travels of Saint Paul. NOW before I enter upon the Travels of the Apostle Paul, I thought it fit to make a Collection of all the Countries, Islands, and Cities, wherein he taught: so that they which are skillful in Geometry or Cosmo∣graphy, might discern their Longitudes, Latitudes, and several distances, according to the Degrees and Scruples hereafter following. Towns in Italy.   Long. Latit. Rome 36.40 41.40 Puteoli 39.50 41.00 Naples 39.10 41.00 Capua 40.00 41.00 Brundusia 42.20 39.40 egium 39.50 38.15 Towns in Graecia. Constantinople 56.00 43.05 Neapolis 51.15 41.40 Philippi 50.45 41.45 Amphipolis 50.00 41.30 Apollonia Mygdoniae 49.30 40.30 Thessalonica 49.50 39.50 Athens 52.45 37.15 Corinthus 51.15 36.55 Cenchera 51.20 37.00 Cities in Syria. Antiochia 69.30 35.30 Seleucia 69.25 35.40 Sydon 67.15 33.30 Tyrus 67.00 33.20 Ptolomais 66.50 32.58 Caesarea Stratonis 66.16 23.25 Joppa 66.40 32.06 Jerusalem 66.00 31.55 Damascus 60.55 30.00 Cities in Asia minor. Thrasia 67.40 36.50 Attalia 62.15 36.30 Perga 62.15 36.56 Atiochia Pisidiae 62.30 39.00 Laodicea Phrigiae 63.40 39.40 Lystra 64.00 39.00 Iconium 64.30 38.45 Derbe 64.20 38.15 Calcedon 56.05 43.05 Nicea 57.00 41.40
Cities in Asia. Ilium 55.30 41.00 Troada 55.25 40.40 Assus 56.00 40.15 Pergamus 57.25 39.45 Philadelphia 59.00 38.50 Sardis 58.20 38.15 Ephesus 57.40 37.40 Thyatira Smyrna 58.25 38.25 Myletus 58.00 37.90 Halicaassus 57.50 36.10 Gydus 57.10 35.30 atara 60.30 36.00 Mira 61.00 36.40 Hycropolis 60.00 38.15 Cities in Egypt. Alexandria 60.30 31.00 Memphis Alcayre 61.50 29.50 Hermopolis magna 61.40 28.55 Islands. Ciciliae civitatis Siracusa 39.30 37.15 Malta 38.45 34.50 Corsica 45.40 38.15 Creta 45.00 34.45 Clauda 52.20 34.00 Salamis 50.00 37.00 Ebea 43.40 38.15 Andros 55.00 37.12 Samathrocua 52.30 41.15 Mithilena 55.40 39.20 Chius 59.20 38.25 Trogylion 57.15 37.40 Pathmos 57.00 37.35 Cous 57.00 36.25 Rhodus 58.30 35.40 Raphus cypri 64.10 35.05 Salamais cypri 66.20 35.10 The Travels of the Holy Apostle St. Paul, with an exact annotation of the Times. PAVL was born at Tarsus in Cicilia, about the tenth year of the Nativi∣ty of our Saviour; and was near about the age of St. Iohn the Evan∣gelist, as the circumstances of Histories do declare. After he grew to some Bigness, he was sent by his Parents from thence to Ierusalem, being 304 miles; where he had not been long brought up with Gamaliel (which sig∣nifies, The Recompence of God) Act. 22. but he became the Disciple of Simon the Just, Luke 2. Act. 5. This Paul was of the Tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 2. 2 Cor. 11. and being yet but a young Man, he was one of those that kept the Garments of the holy Martyr St. Stephen, who was stoned about the end of the four and thirtieth Year after the Nativity of Christ, Act. 1. at which time also St. Iohn the Evangelist was but four and twenty years of Age. If therefore you would observe the Age of the Apostle Paul in this following discourse of his Tra∣vels, deduct ten from the Years after the Nativity of our Saviour Christ, and the Remainder is his Age. At his Circumcision he was called Saul, that is, a mortal Man: but when he was made the Apostle of the Gentiles, he was called Paul; of which Name there was a noble Family in Rome, so called because of the lowness of their Stature, and smallness of their Body; as Carolus Sigonius observeth.
In the  Year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul was an Inquisitor for private Heresie, and a cruel Persecutor of the Gospel. The next Year he went from Ierusalem to Damascus in Syria, which was 160 miles; in which Journey (about the 25 day of Ianuary) he was converted; and upon the 28 day of Ianuary was baptised by Ananias. So he stayed some few days in Damascus, and taught the Gospel of Christ, Act. 9. & 22. In the same Year that he was converted, the Iews, and those that were Enemies to the Gospel, went about by deceit to take his Life; wherefore he went from Damascus to Arabia Petraea, which was 160 miles; here he continued teaching the Gospel by the space of three Years, that is, from the beginning of the 35 to the end of the 37 year after the Nativity of Christ, Act. 9. In the 38 Year after the Nativity of Christ he returned from Arabia Pe∣traea and came to Damascus; which was 160 miles; and there he diligently taught the Gospel of Christ. But when in the same Year Araeta King of Arabia went about to put him secretly to death, he was let down in a Basket over the Wall, and so went from Damascus to Ierusalem, which was 160 miles: and when he came thither he brought Barnabas to the Apostles, and shewed them his Conver∣sion, and remained with Peter fifteen days preaching the Gospel. At this time he saw Iames the Son of Alpheus and Brother of our Lord, Acts 9. 2 Cor. 11. Galat. 1. But when his Adversaries that were at Ierusalem went about secretly to put him to death, he went from Ierusalem and was brought by the Brethren to Caesarea Strato, which was 32 miles, Act. 9. About the 38 Year after the Nativity of Christ he went thence into Sy∣ria to Tarsus, a City of Cilicia, which was 272 miles; here he continued some Years teaching the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1. 2. Cor. 11. In the 41 Year after the Nativity of Christ, and about the seventh Year of his Ministry, he was brought by Barnabas from Tarsus to Antiochia in Syria, which was 120 miles. At this time, and in this Town, all those that believed in Christ began to be called Christians, whereas before they were called Disciples and Brothers, Acts 11. These things hapned in the eighth year after the Resurrection of Christ; about this time also Matthew wrote his Gospel, and Agabus prophesied of the universal Dearth that should hap∣pen under Claudius, Act. 11. In the 42 year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul being then at Antiochia. and about 32 years of age, was wrap'd up into the third Heaven, 14 years before he wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12. In the 43 year after the Nativity of Christ, the Famin whereof Agabus prophesied, being now begun, he went with the gifts of the Church from Antiochia to Ierusalem, which was 280 miles: this year Iames the Elder was beheaded at the Command of Agrippa, Act. 11. & 12.
In the 44 year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul and Barnbas with Pe∣ter, were delivered out of Prison by the Angel of the Lord. Now having distributed the Gifts of the Church, he returned in the Company of Iohn Mark, from Ierusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. So these Tra∣vels were 1928 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Tarsus or Tharsus. THIS was the Metropolis of Cilicia, scituated upon the River of Cydnus, which beginning at Mount Taurus, runs thence through this Town into the Mediterranean Sea. It was first built by Perseus King of the Persians, (whom the Poets feign to be the Son of Iupiter and Danae) and called Tharsus, of the Hyacinth stone which as it seemeth, is found thereabous. It was distant from Ierusalem 304 miles towards the North; in ancient time a goodly City; but through the Injury of the Time, and Invasion of the Enemy, much impaired, and lay almost ruined, till (as Strabo saith, li. 14.) it was repaired by Sardanapalus, that effeminate King of the Assyrians; of whom Tully remembreth this Epitaph, lib. 5. Tuscula: Haec habeo quae aedi, quaeque exatura libido. Hausit, at illa jacent multa & praeclara relicta. What things I eat or spend in Sport and Play, Those I enjoy; the rest I cast away. From his time, until the Reign of Darius, the last King of the Persians, it continued in great Prosperity, and was become a marvellous stately City, the Inhabitants thereof being grown very wealthy: but then Alexander the Great making War upon that Prince, amongst others, brought his Army against this City: but the Citizens hearing of his notable Exploits, durst not abide his coming: therefore they fired the City, lest he should make a Prey of their Riches, and fled: which when Alexander perceived, he gave order to Parmenio, with all possible speed to quench the Fire, and save the City. In the mean time the King (being press'd with an extraordi∣nary Thirst, by reason of the extream Heat that was in that Country, the Dust, and his long Journey) put off his royal Garments, and cast himself into the River Cydnus, which being a cold Water coming out of the North, struck the heat presently inward, and so benummed his Sinews, that had it not been for the present help of his Souldiers, and the extraordinary diligence and care of Philip his Physician, he had died immediately; notwith∣standing, by the great Providence of God, and the carefulness of his Physi∣cian,
he recovered his dangerous Sickness beyond the expectation of Man; and after overcame Darius in a sharp and cruel War, near to a place called Issa, as you may read before, See Plutarch in vita Alexand. and Quintus Cur∣tius. From that time forward this City grew to be very famous, and daily encreased in Stateliness and fair Buildings. And to add more dignity to it, there was a famous Academy, in which were many learned and rare Philo∣sophers; insomuch, that they of Tharsus exceeded the Philosophers of Athens and Alexandria for Learning and Knowledge, though indeed for number of Scholars and common Resort they exceeded Tharsus. Saint Paul was born and brought up in this Town, and here learned the Knowledge of the Tongues, Philosophy, and other good Arts. He also perused the Writings of Aratus, Epimenides, Menander, and other learned Men, whose Sayings are here and there dispersed through his Epistles. From thence he was sent to Ierusalem, where he lived and was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, who was Provost of that Academy; and after, was converted to be an Apostle of Christ Jesus, as appeareth Acts 22. This Town at this day is subject to the Empire of the Turks, and called by the Name of Terassa; being neither so famous nor so fair a City, as in the time when the Roman Empire flourished; for then, because of the extraordinary Vertue of the Citizens, it was indowed with the Liberty and Freedom of Rome. Of Damascus. THis was a metropolitan Town in Syria, distant from Ierusalem 160 miles towards the North-east; being an ancient and fair City, and, before such time as Antiochia was built, the head of all that Kingdom. It was sci∣tuated in a fair and fruitful place, close by the Mountain Libanus, which bringeth forth Frankincense, Ceders, Cypress, and many odoriferous and sweet smelling Flowers. There were many Kings that kept their Court in it, as Hadad, Benhadad the First, Benhadad the Second, Hasael, and others, who grievously opposed the Kings of Israel in many sharp and cru∣el Wars, as you may read before. The Land round about it aboundeth with white and red Roses, Pomgranates, Almonds, Figs, and other sweet and pleasant Fruits. In that place the Alablaster stone is found, very fair and clear. The Air, pleasant and healthful. The River called Chrysorrus runneth close by it, in which there is found golden Veins which yielded perfect Gold. The Houses without are not very curious, but within all of polished Marble and Alablaster, guilt with resplendent Gold so artificially, that it dazleth the Beholders Eyes. There was a certain Florentine who revolted from the Christian Faith, and obtained to be chief Governour of this Town; in which he erected a strong and beautiful Castle, which stood for the Defence of it. No man can suffici∣ently
express the Beauty and Glory of this City: there is great Traffique, and much resort of People to it, but especially of Turks, Saracens, Mama∣lucks, and other kinds of Pagan People, who are preferred before the Chri∣stians in that Government: and although there are many Christians in that place, yet they are constrained to endure great Injury by those Barba∣rians, because they are hated even unto the Death: and if any of them chance to die, they are buried in that place where Paul was converted. The Inha∣bitants shew the place where St. Paul was let down over the Wall in a Basket; also the House of Ananias who cured the Blindness of Paul, besides many other things that are memorable in that City, of which you may read in Se∣bestian Munster, Sebastian Frankus, Plin. lib. 5. and many other Authors. Of Arabia. MAny things are already spoken concerning this Country, as the divi∣sion of the place; one called Petraea, the other Deserta, and the third Foelix. Arabia Petraea is so called from the metropolitan City thereof, call∣ed Petra, which is scituated forty miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and bordereth upon Egypt and India. It is also called Arabia Nabathea, as you may read before. Paran and Sur are a part of it, compassing towards the East the Land of Iudaea, and so extendeth to Damascus. This Coun∣try is very full of Rocks and Stones, the chief City Petra being scituated upon a Rock, of which it taketh the Name. Here standeth the Mountains Horeb and Sinai; here the Children of Israel travelled when they went out of Egypt; here is the Sardonix Stone found; and the People of this Coun∣try in times past were great Prophets and Astrologians; here also St. Paul taught the Gospel a little after his Conversion, Gal. 1. at which time Are∣tas was King thereof, whose Sister was married to Herod the Tetrarch of Ga∣lilee and Petraea; but he cast her off, and married Herodias his Brother Phi∣lips Wife, upon which there began a bloody War between Aretas and He∣rod, and a sharp Battel was fought near to Gamala a City beyond Iordan. And although the two Kings were not at this Battel, yet by the Treason and Flight of the Souldiers out of Tracones, (who without all question would have revenged the Contempt done unto their Lord Philip) the Arabian Army carried away a notable Victory, as Iosephus witnesseth, lib. antiq. 18. cap. 4. Aretas signifieth, An excellent Man; which was a com∣mon Name to the Kings of Arabia. It is to be thought, that Da∣mascus and all the Country round about was under the Jurisdiction of this King; and that he ordained a Lieutenant or General in those Parts, who would have taken Paul and put him to death, Acts 9. 2 Col. 12.
The other part of Arabia is called by Ptolomy, Deserta,; but Strabo calls it, Scenilis, because the Inhabitants thereof are without Buildings or Tents, and live like Vagrants up and down the Woods. This is compass'd in up∣on the South with certain Mountains of Arabia Foelix; towards the North, it borders upon Mesopotamia; and towards the West, upon Petraea. The third is called Arabia Foelix, because of the Fertility thereof; for they have there every year two Harvests, as they have in India, as Strabo observeth. See Plin. lib. 6. cap. 28. Of Antiochia. YOU may read of this Town before. It is said, that Luke the Evange∣list was born here. This Man was by Profession a Physician, Col. 4. and an inseparable Companion to Paul in all his Travels: he was of the num∣ber of the seventy Disciples, as Epiphanius observeth. Tertullian saith in his fourth Book against Marcion, that Luke received his Gospel from the mouth of Paul: he lived till he was 84 years old, and then died, and lies buried at Constantinople, as St. Ierom saith; for his Bones were removed out of Achaia thither. The second Travels of the Apostle Paul, in the Company of Barnabas. IN the eleventh year after the Nativity of Christ, and in the four and fortieth year of Paul, he and Barnabas was sent by the Holy Spirit from Antiochia in Syria to Seleucia, which was four and twenty miles. From Seleucia they sailed to Salamais in Cyprus, which was 94 miles, Act. 13. From thence they went to Paphos, which is in the same Isle where Sergius Paulur was converted, and Elymas the Magician, who professing himself to be the Messias and Son of God, was struck with Blindness, Act. 13. This Journey was 100 miles. They loosing from Paphos, went by Sea and Land (the same year) to Per∣gamus a City of Pamphilia, scituated in Asia minor, which was 148 miles. In the 45 year after the Nativity of Christ, they went from Pergamus to Antiochia in Pisidia, which was 132 miles. From thence they went to Iconia, which was 96 miles; here they stay∣ed some time and converted many, Act. 13. & 14. In the 46 year after the Nativity of Christ, there being a great Tumult raised in that Country, lest the Inhabitants should have stoned them, they fled thence to Lystra a City of Lycaonia, where Paul healed the lame man, which was twenty eight miles. The Inhabitants seeing this Miracle, worship∣ped them for Gods, and called Barnabas, Iupiter; and Paul, Mercurius; because
he wrought the Miracle. But not long after, certain Iews coming from Antiochia and Iconia, arrived in Listra, by whose perswasion the People sto∣ned Paul; and supposing him to be dead, carried him out of the City: but when his Disciples came unto him, he rose up and went into the Town, Act. 14. The next day they went to Derbe, a City of Lyaconia, which was 48 miles. From thence they returned back again to Lystra in the same year; which was 28 miles. From Iconia they came to Atiochia in Pisidia, which was 16 miles: In this City they comforted the Disciples, exhorting them that they should persevere in their Faith, For through many Afflictions we must enter into the King∣dom of Heaven. They also elected Elders in the Churches, so with Fast∣ing and Prayers they commended them to the Lord in whom they believed. In the 47 year after Christ, they went from Antiochia thorough all Piidia and came to Pergamus a City in Pamphilia, which was 132 miles: here they preached the Word of the Lord, Act. 14. From Pergamus, in the following year, they went down to the City of Atta∣lia, which was 26 miles. In the 48 year after the Nativity of Christ, they loosed thence and went to Antiochia in Syria; which was 340 miles, here they assembled the Church and shewed what wonderful things the Lord had wrought by them, and how he had opened the door of Faith unto the Gentiles: In this place they stayed a great space, Acts. 14. In the year following they went from Antiochia to Ierusalem (which was 280 miles) to the Apostolical Council, which was celebrated in that Ci∣ty, Anno Dom. 49. and as they went they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, and there declared the Estate of the Church among the Gentiles, Acts. 15. From Ierusalem they (with Slas and Iudas, sirnamed Barsabas) went again to Antiochia in Syria, which was 280 miles: here Paul opposed Peter for preaching unto the Gentiles, Gal. 2. So these Travels of Paul were 1744 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Cyprus. BEcause you may read of Seleucia before, I therefore willingly omit it, that I might speak more fully of Cyprus. This is a fair and spacious Isle, scituated in the Mediterranean Sea in the Gulph of Issa, bordering upon Cilicia and Syria, distant 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, as Strabo saith, lib. 14. It is in compass 428 miles, very fertile, powerful and spacious for an Island. There inhabited in it in times past nine
Kings, and (as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 31.) called Macaria, or one of the happy Islands; the Inhabitants were given much unto Luxury and Venery; from whence it happened, that Venus was greatly honoured amongst them. It is said that there are many precious Stones found in it, besides Crystal, Al∣lum, and Cypress Wood, which abounds in that place, from which it seem∣eth the Island was called Cyprus. There are also found many Simples that are Physical, much Sack comes thence, and many other things necessary for the Life of Man. Here also standeth the Mountain Olympus, whose top seemeth to touch the Heavens, from whence it taketh the name because there never lies any Clouds upon it. Lucan. lib 2. There are four Moun∣tains of this name; the one lieth between Macedon and Thessaly; the other in Cyprus, the third amongst the Mysians, at the foot whereof Hanibal built Pru∣sa; and the fourth in Aethiopia, upon the East side of Heliopolis. There are many Cities in this Country, as Macaria, Cyprus or Gyrhea, after called Paphos, and now Baffa (in which there standeth such a famous Temple, that Venus of that is called Cypriae and Cytherea) Nicosia, and Salamus now called Famagusta. There have been many and cruel sharp Wars between the Venetians and Turks concerning this Country, but at this day it is under the Jurisdiction of the Turks; from whence they fetch great abundance of Pitch and Rosin for their Ships and Cables. Of Salamais. SAlamais, Salamin, or Salamania, was one of the principal Cities of Cyprus, and was distant from Ierusalem 196 miles towards the North; built by Tucer the Son of Telamon, and scituated in the Eubean Sea just against Athens. The occasion why this Town was built, happened by reason of a discontent that grew betwen Tucer and his Father Telamon: For Tucer returning from Troy (not having revenged the death of his Mother Ajax) so much incensed his Father, that he banished him his Country; whereupon Teucer sailed thence to Cyprus, where he built this City, and because of the extraordinary af∣fection that he bore to the Country where he was born, called it by the name of Salamena, or Salamais. Saint Ierom saith, that there is a River of extraordinary hot Water that runneth through a great part of this Country; and that it was once overcome by the Iews, and utterly ruined and destroyed; but after re-peopled and called by the name of Constantia. This Town at this day is called by the name of Famagusta, and was taken (with the whole Island of Cyprus), by Mustapha, chief Captain to Selimus the second Emperour of the Turks, An. Dom. 1570. Solon, that notable and famous Philosopher was born in this Town. And Paul and Barnabas sailed out of Syria and lived in this Town, Act. 31.
Of Paphos. THIS City is scituated upon the shore of Cyprus, 212 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North, and seemeth to take the name from Paphos the Son of Pigmalion the Artificer. In this Town there stood a notable Temple, built by that Pigmalion in the honour of Venus; for that (as it seemeth by the Poets) he was much given to Women. Here Elimas that wicked Magician, who (as some will have it) called himself the Son of Ie∣sus; as others, the Son of Iehovah, dwelt, whom the Lord by the Hand of Paul struck with Blindness. Here also Sergius Paulu the Pro-Consul was converted. It was in times past a goodly fair City, as the ruines thereof testifie to this day; but now it is destroyed and almost desolate. There (as it is for the most part through that Island) the Air is impure and unwholsom, and the ruines of many goodly Churches and Buildings are to be seen; also the Walls of a strong, and almost impregnable Tower, scituated upon a Hill in the middle of the City; and as may be thought, was sometime the ha∣bitaton of Sergius Paulus. There is also shewn under a certain Church (which in ancient times belonged unto the Brothers of the Minores) a certain Prison divided into seven Rooms, where Paul and Barnabas were imprisoned for preaching the Gospel. Here also under another Church is found a Spring of very wholsome Water, which is a present remedy for the Ague and Fever. Here also is excellent Wine. Of Perga. PERGA was a City of Pamphilia, from whence Diana is called Pergea, because there was a notable Temple in that Town which was dedica∣ted to her. It is scituated in Asia the less, near to Cheractus, as Ptolomais saith, but as Strabo saith, close by Cestria a fair and goodly River 356 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. The Country wherein this standeth is full of Mountains, extending from the Mountain Taurus (which beginneth in this place, abounding with Vines, Olives, and other Fruits) unto the Sea. There are many fair and fruitful Pastures in it, and many goodly and beautiful Cities; as Aspendius, Phaselis, and this Perga, besides many others, needless to be named. There was usually every year a great Feast kept here in honour of Diana; but Paul and Barnabas coming to this Town, converted most of the Inhabitants to the Knowledge of God and of his Son Christ Jesus, Acts 13.
Of Antiochia in Pisidia. THIS was the chief City in Pisidia, scituated in Asia Minor, 460 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. St. Paul converted a great mul∣titude in this Town to the Faith of Christ. Of Iconium. IConium was one of the Metropolitan Cities of Lycaonia, as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 27. scituated not far from the bowing of Mount Taurus in Asia the less, as Strabo saith, lib. 12. 420 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. In this City Paul and Barnabas continued a long time, and did many Miracles, by which means a great multitude of the Inhabitants were converted to the Christian Faith, Act. 13. 14. It is to this day a fair City, and under the Government of the Turks, who won it from the Prin∣ces of Caramanian. About 400 years before, there was a great Battel ought close by this Town, between the Saracens and the Army of the Emperour of Conradus the third, in which the Christians lost the day. Of Lystra. THIS is a City in Lycaonia scituated in Asia the less, 436 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the North. In this Town Timothy was born, Act. 16. 2 Tim. 3. In this City Paul healed the Cripple, and was stoned, Act. 14. 2 Cor. 11. Of Darbe. THIS also was a City in Lycaonia scituated in Asia the Less, 388 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, where Paul and Barnabas preached the Gospel, Act. 14. Of Attalia. ATtalia was a Haven Town of Pamphilia, built by Attalus Philadephus King of Pergamus, after whose name it was so called, as Strato obser∣veth, lib. 14. being distant from Ierusalem 332 miles towards the North. Paul and Barnabas sailed out of Syria into this Town. At this day it is cal∣led Catalia. The third Travels of Paul, in the company of Sylas. IN the fifth year after the Ascension of Christ, Paul took unto him Sy∣las, and going through Syria and Cilicia, came to Darbe, which is 400 miles, and there established the Churches, Act. 15. 16. From Darbe they went to Lystra, forty eight miles, where Paul circum∣cised Timothy, Act. 16.
In the one and fiftieth year after Christ, they went from Lystra, and so travelled through Galatia, Phrygia, and being hindred by the Spirit that they could not preach in Bythinia, they went thorough Mysia, and so came to Troas; where, by a Vision that Paul saw in the night, he was admonish∣ed to go into Macedonia, Act. 16. So this Journey between Lycia and Troas, was 483 miles. Loosing from Troas, they sailed with a direct course to Samothracia 116 miles. From thence they sailed to Neapolis, ninety two miles. From thence they went to Philippos in Macedonia, twenty four miles; Act. 16. here Lydda, the Seller of Purple was converted, and Paul dispossessed of a Devil: and then he and Scylas being scourged were cast into Prison; Paul being then about forty one years of age, Act. 16. From Philippos they went to Amphipolis, about 36 miles, Act. 17. From thence they went to Apollonia, forty four miles. From Apollonia they went to Thessalonica, where the Iews stirred up a Tumult: eighty miles. Wherefore they went thence by night, and came to Berrhaea sixty miles: here also the Iews stirred up a Tumult, Act. 17. These things happened in the Summer Season, An. Dom. 51. From Berrhaea Paul was brought by the Brethren to the Sea, where entring into a Ship he went to Athens which was 294 miles; where he converted Dionysius the Areopagite. From this Town he wrote both his Epistles to the Thessalonians, as the Subscription witnesseth, and sent them to Thessalonica. These were the first Epistles that Paul wrote. Afterward he went from Athens and came to Corinthia, seventy four miles: he came thither about the beginning of August, An. Dom. 51. and continued there a whole Year and six Months, preaching the Gospel, and making Tents with Aquila the Iew, who was of that Trade, Act. 19. From Corinthia, about the Spring, An. Dom. 53. he went to Cenchraea with Aquila and Priscilla, 304 miles. There, for Devotions sake, he polled his Head. From Cenchraea, he sailed in the company of Aquila and Priseilla to Ephe∣sus, about 304 miles. Here he left them, Act. 18. From Ephesus he sailed to Caesarea Strato in Iudaea, being 280 miles. From Caesarea he went to Ierusalem, 32 miles, and saluted the Church. From the City of Ierusalem Paul went to Antiochia in Syria 280 miles. So all these Travels were 2154. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Cilicia. BEcause you may read of Syria before, I will omit it, and proceed to speak of Cilicia. This was a Country in Asia the less, so called (as
some would have it) from Cilix the Kings Son of Phoenicia; compassed in upon the East with the Mountain Amanus; upon the North with the Moun∣tain Taurus; upon the West by Pamphilia; and upon the South by the Me∣diterranean Sea. At this day it is called Caramania, and is distant from Ie∣rusalem 304 miles towards the North, in times past it was divided into two parts, that is, into Cilicia the higher and the lower: Cilicia the higher aboundeth with Mountains, the lower is a plain Champian Country very fertile and pleasant. The principal Cities thereof are Tarsus, where the Apostle Paul was born, and where the River Cydnus runs through the midst of it; Issus, where Alexander overcame Darius, last Emperour of the Per∣sians; Anazarba, where Dioscorides, that excellent Physician was born, who was of great estimation with Antonius and Cleopatra. There are six Books yet extant of his profitable and necessary Labours in that Science. From hence may be gathered, that the Scituation is strong and pleasant; in regard it is fortified on every side with Mountains, but principally with the Mountain Taurus (famous for the fertility of it, and the passage of Alex∣ander with his Army, who at the time he conquered Darius, went through the streight passages thereof, being both dangerous and difficult) and watered with many Rivers that take their beginning from that Mountain, and so passeth Southward through all Cilicia, falling then into the Mediterranean Sea. Of Galatia. GALATIA, or Gallo-Graecia, is a Country of Asia Minor, distant from Ie∣rusalem 400 miles; having upon the hast Cappadocia, upon the South Pamphilia, upon the West Bythia, and on the North the Euxine Sea. The Cities of this Country were anciently Sinopis, where King Mithridates kept his Court and Diogenes the Cynick was born; Amisus, also Pessinus, where the Mother of the Gods was had in great honour, and was fetch'd thence by the Romans. This was a famous Mart Town as (Livy saith li 29.) Laodicea, Tavius, and Ancyra, where there was held a notable Synod: and in this large and spacious Country also stood Antiochia Pisidia; for the Galatians dwelt in all Paphlagonia, a part of Licaonia, Pisidia and Isauria; in which Coun∣tries the Apostle Paul taught the Gospel of Christ. These Inhabitants (which in those daies were called Galatians) are said to be a People of France, who joyning themselves to the Cybrians, Danes and Germans, under the conduct of Brennus their Captain, invaded Italy; in which Enterprise they were so fortunate that they conquered a great part of it, wherein they planted Colonies: and because of their nearness to their own Country, in process of time grew mighty; and from that begin∣ning, the Country where they inhabited was called Cice-alpine-Gallia; ta∣king that name partly of the Place, partly of the People. After, Brennus and his Army making use of their Fortunes, sorraged all Italy and came to Rome,
which they won and sack'd, all but the Capitol, and that also was in great danger, until such time as Camillus (a valiant Roman Captain) taking ad∣vantage of the Enemies Security (who now took more care how to satisfie their Covetousness than to defend what they had got) of a sudden set upon them; by which unexpected Invasion they were put to a marvellous straight, and the Besieged greatly incouraged; so that they also issuing out of the Capitol, made such a Slaughter, that they forced Brennus and his Army to re∣tire, and to restore all the Pillage that he had got, and also forsake the Country. This Misfortune they bore patiently, considering their former Prosperity, and in hope of better Success, ailed thence into Grecia: where, after they had attempted many noble Exploits, and failing in some, they determined a Voyage for Delphos, because there was great store of Treasure, and the Inhabitants (as they supposed) weak to oppose their Army. In this Expe∣dition they used much Pillage and robbing upon the Seas; and through many dangers came at length to this Isle, landed their Men, won the City, fired a great part of it, and put many of the Inhabitants to the Sword: with this Victory, most of his Army which were more Religious than the rest, would have willingly left the Country; but Brennus, who before-times had been used to Sacriledge, and those that were as covetous as himself, thought it Baseness through an Opinion of Holiness to leave so great a Booty behind them as was contained in the Temple of Aollo, (for that place of all the Temples of the World in those times was notorious for Riches and Trea∣sure) the many and great Gratuities and Offerings of most Princes, which were both magnificent and rich, being hoarded up in the secret Caves of this Oracle) wherefore they attempted the Assault, but with bad Success, for the Devil raised such a Tempest, with Thundring, Lightning, and other strange and uncouth Accidents, that Brennus in this Distemperature of the Air, wasSome say he killed himself with his own Dagger. slain, many of his Ships were set on fire, and the greatest part of his Army lost, being either spoiled with Lightning, slain by the Inhabitants, or dispersed with Fear: such Event had this sacrilegious Attempt. Those that remain∣ed, after they had gathered themselves into a Body, went thence into Asia the less, and planted themselves in this Country; where the Inhabitants, in process of time called them Gall-Graecians, adding their original name to that of the Country wherein they lived: and after, for beauties sake, they were called Galatians, See Liv. lib. 5. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 6. saith, That the Inhabitants of Galatia were so called of this People, in the time that Gideon judged Israel, and that Cyrus was Emperour of Persia; both may be true, considering the mutability and change of States in those times. Some think they were first called Galatians by Attalus King of Pergamus, (who gave them a great overthrow close by the River Halym) because they originally were of Gallia, and continued sometime in Graecia, and after came
into Asia; so he joyning these two names into one, called them Gallo-Gracian or Gallatians. This History is diversly reported by divers Authors; but all conclude that they rested and inhabited in Asia, where their Posterity continued to this day. In times past it was a very Warlike and Generous Nation, and in their Expedition performed many noble Exploits, attaining to Eminence only by their Sword; for which cause, many Princes near them were beholding unto them for their Aid: but withal, cruel and barbarous, insomuch as they oftentimes eat their Captives, or offered them to their Gods; and thus they continued for the space of 300 years, till Paul coming into that Country, preached the Gospel amongst them, and converted them from this Barba∣rism to the Christian Faith: he sent an Epistle to this People from Rome, being 1200 miles. They in those times held all Paphlagonia, a part of Phrygia, Cappadocia, and of all the neighbouring Countries thereabouts, which after their names was called Gallo-Graecia or Galatia: such a mighty Nation was this grown in a short time, at first being a People shut out of their own Country for want of a place to inhabit in, as you may read more at large in the fifth Book of Livie, whose Authority I have princippally fol∣lowed herein. Of Phrygia. PHryga is as much as to say, a dry and sandy Country, scituated in Asia the less, between Galatia and Mysia, 600 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. It is divided into two parts, the greater and the less: in the greater Phrygia stood Smyrna; in the less Dardania, so called of Dardanus who first built it: in which Town there reigned many wealthy and migh∣ty Princes as Ericthoin, Tros, of whom it was called Troy, Ilus of whom it was called Ilion, Laomedon who was the Father of Priamus the last King thereof; for in his time it was destroyed by the Grecians. Of which Desola∣tion I will not speak because it is commonly known. It lay wast so long (although it had been a fair and goodly City, the like not in the World) that the place where it stood was become like a plain Field, only here and there some heaps of old Ruines, to shew that there had been a City in that place. And as Virgil said, Iam seges est ubi Troja fuit, Corn now grows where Troy stood. A long time after there were a certain People that called themselves Trojans, who rebuilt it, but not in the same place, and in it erected a goodly Temple in honour of the Goddess Pallas to the which Temple, Alexander the Great (after he had conquered Darius King of Persia close by the River Granicus, which took begnning in a Mountain not far from Troy) went, and with singular Gladness and great Solemnity, offered many rich and goodly Presents, enlarged the Town, and greatly adorned. But after he had ended the Persian War, and conquered almost all the known World,
he sent very kind and loving Letters to these new Trojans, promising not only to inlarge the Town, and indow it with many Priviledges and Revenues but also to build up a fair and sumptuous Temple there, as Strabo lib. 15. saith: all which was done for the love he bore to Homers Iliads. Wherefore look what Alexander had promised, Lysimacus (one of his chief Princes, and King of Thrace) after his death performed; for he re∣turned to Troy, enlarged the City, beautified it with goodly Buildings, set up a stately Temple, and then compass'd it about with strong Walls. After this sort it continued a long time, untill Fimbria a Questor of the Romans (when he had slain Vallerius Flaccus the Consul, with whom he was sent, against Mithridates King of Pontus) besieged it and within ten days space won it; making his Vaunts, that he conquered that City in ten days, which Agamemnon could scarce do in ten years; to which one of the Inhabitants of the City answered, that then Troy had a Hector, but now it had none. But for this he cruelly wasted the City. This destruction happened in the 84 year before Christ: thus it lay desolate till Augustus Caesar's time, who caused it again to be re-edified and beautified with many fair and goodly Buildings, because the Romans, and especially those noble Families of the Iulii and Caesars do derive their Progeny from the Trojans: for which cause, Augustus used such diligence in the rebuilding of this City, and be∣stowed such infinite cost, that he much exceeded Alexander, and made it a fair and goodly City. At this day it is called Ilium. But in the place of old Troy there is little to be seen, only a small Town, as Strabo saith. It is distant from Ierusalem 760 miles, North-westward. Of Bythinia. THIS Country is opposite to Constantinople, scituated in Asia minor, distant from Ierusalem North-westward, and so called of Bythinus the Son of Iupiter and Thrax. It was sometime called Pontus, Bebrycia, and Mygdonia, as Stephanus saith. In this Country the Apostle Paul could not preach the Gospel of Christ when he went into Macedonia and Graecia, be∣cause he was hindred by the Spirit, Act. 16. The principal Cities thereof were Calcidon, Heraclea, Nicea, Nicodemia, Apamea, Flaviopolis, Libissa (where Hannibal lieth buried) and Prusa, now called Brysa, where in times past the Enperours of Turky kept their Courts, and were buried. The Mo∣ther and Metropolis of all these Cities was Nicea, or rather Nicaea, being distant from Ierusalem 720 miles towards the North-west; at the first called Antigonia, of Antigonus the Son of Philip King of Asia, who built it after the death of Alexander the Great. But Lysimacus called it Nicaea, after his Wifes name, and at this day it is called Nissa. The compass thereof is two miles, being four square, scituated (as Strabo saith, lib. 12.) in a fair and pleasant place, lying close by the Pool of Ascania, and hath in it four Gates standing in a direct line; all which Gates might easily have been seen
from a certain Stone which stood in the middle of the Market-place. In this City the most Christian Emperour Constantine the Great celebrated a Councel, Anno Dom. 325. at which time there were present 320 Bishops, who condemned the Arrian Heresie, and instituted the Nicene Creed. But after that, viz. Anno Dom. 326. the Arrians endeavouring to hold a second Councel in this City, to confirm their Opinions, and to dissolve that which went before, the Lord hindred them with an Earth-quake, by which almost half the City was thrown down. Not long after, there happened another Earth-quake which utterly destroyed it: Notwithstanding it was rebuilt again, and in it a second Councel held, wherein the Nicene Creed was con∣demned. There were many Cities of this name; that before spoken of, another in Thrace, a third in France, not far from the River Varus, a fourth (as Ste∣phans saith) is amongst the Lorrenses in Graecia, a fifth in Illeria, a sixth in India, a seventh in Corsica, and the eighth in Leuctris of Boetia. Of Mysia. THIS is a Country of Asia the less, bordering upon Hellespont and Troada; being divided into two parts, that is, the greater and the less. That part that bordereth upon Troada, is distant from Ierusalem 800 miles North-westward: but that which is called Mysia the less, and bordering upon Lydia, is 1028 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. In this Country stood Pergam, to which Iohn wrote his Revelation; Scepsis where one Neleus kept the Books of Aristotle till Apollonius time; also Antandrus, Adramitium, Tranoiapolis, and Aollonia, which stood close by the River Thyndaeus. The Inhabitants were Men of a base condition, and contemned of the World, insomuch as they became a Proverb, as often as a Man would de∣note a thing of no estimation, they would say Viimum esse myliorum, that is, It is worse than the Mysians, as it appeareth in Cicero's oration for Flaccus Yet notwithstanding, Paul and Iohn the Evangelist preached the Doctrine and Light of the Gospel to this poor and despised People, so that the Mysians, which were a contemptable and abominable Nation before all the World, were not so before God, for they were converted at the preaching of Iohn and Paul. From whence he saith, Not many Wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble; but God hath chosen the foolish things of this World, that they might confute and overthrow the Wise, &c. 1. Cor. 1. Intimes past they were a great People, though of small estimation, for they had under their jurisdiction, Lydia, Caria, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Phi∣ladelphia, and Laodicea; to many of which Iohn wrote his Revelation. Also (as Herodotus saith, lib. 7.) the Mysians and Teucrians, before the Trojan War, past into Europe, and there won and held Thracia, Macedonia, and all the Land of the Adriatick Sea &c.
Of Troas. THIS City Troas, where Paul raised Eutichus (which signifies Happy or Fortunate) from death to life, Act. 10. stood upon the Sea of Hellespont in Asia the less, 720 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. Antigonus King of Asia called it Troas, because it was in the Country where Troy was. But after the death of Alexander he called it after his own name Antigonia: and the better to honour it, kept his Court there. But Lysimachus King of Thrace having got this City into his Jurisdiction, bestowed great cost upon it, and set up many fair and goodly Buildings, then called it after Alexander's name, Alexandria, and so it began to be called Alexandria Troas, Plin. lib. 5. Strabo lib. 13. Ier. de locis Hebraicis: Now it was called Alexandria Troas, to put a difference between it and divers other Cities of that name, for there was an Alexandria in Aegypt, another in India, and many others elsewhere; but only this in the Country where Troy stood. It was scituated in a high and spacious Mountain, about a mile and a half from the Shore of Propontus towards the East, between which and Troas is twenty eight miles. It is a thing worthy Observation, to consider by what divers names the Sea that lies between Europe and Asia the less is called, for between Constantinople and Calcidonia, close by the Euxine Sea it is called Thrascius Bosphorus, in which place it is not above half a mile broad: here Xerxes, when he invaded Graecia, built up a Bridge for his Army to pass over. There is also another streight and narrow place in this Sea, which is called by the name of Cimmeriu Bosphorius These two Bosphori are so called (as some Authors hold) because a Bull when he loweth may be heard from the one side to the other: but Pliny seemeth to derive the name from Io, that fair Maid which Iupiter turned in∣to a Cow, who swam over this Sea, and of her was called Bosphorus, lib. 6. cap. 1. It is also called Proontus, because it lieth just before the Euxine Sea; and Hellespont from Helle the Daughter of Athamantis King of Thebes who was drowned therein; then running thence it falleth into a Gulph of the Mediterranean Ocean, and there it is called the Aegean Sea, of Aegeus King of Athens, who drowned himself therein for the supposed loss of his Son The∣seus. In this Sea were scituate the Isles of Pathmos, Mytelene, Samothrace, Chius, Lesbus, and many other Isles, as you may read in the Travels of St. Paul. Of Samothracia, or Samothrace. SAmothracia is an Isle of the Aegean Sea, scituated between Troades and Thracia, eight hundred and eighty miles from Ierusalem towards the North-west, close to that part of Thracia where Hebrus falleth into the Sea; sometimes called Dardani of Dardanus King of Troy, who when he had slain his Brother Iacius, and taken from him the Palladiam, he came first
into Samothracia, and then into Asia, where he first laid the Foundation of the City called Troy, and of that Kingdom. And although this Isle at that time was called Dardania, yet because of the nearness that it had to Thrace, and the altitude of the Rock whereon it stood, it soon changed the name: and then especially, when the People called Samos came thither to inhabit, who after their own name called it Samothracia. It stood upon such a lofty place, that from thence all the Countries round about might easily be seen. Arsinoe Queen of Thrace was banished by Ptolomeus her Brother, into this Island, who after put to death all her Children, and usurp'd upon the King∣dom of Thrace: A cruel part in a Brother. Virg. lib. Aeneid. 3. makes mention of this Island, saying, Terciamque Samum quae nunc Samothracia fertur And Samian-Troy, which now adays is Samothracia call'd. Strabo also writeth of it, li. 13. And in Act. 16. It is said, St. Paul sailed from Troadis to Samothracia, and so went thence into Thracia and came to the City of Neapolis. Of Neapolis. THIS Neapolis to which Paul went, was a City of Thrace not far from Macedonia, 880 miles from Ierusalem North-westward, called also of some Caurus. There are many other Cities of this name; one in Iudea, where Sichem and Sicha stood; another in Caria, a third in Africa, a fourth in Pannonia; but above all, that which stands in Campania is most remarkable, being the chief City of the Neapolitan Kingdom. Of Philippa. THIS City in times past was called Crenides, because of the Veins of Gold that were found close by it. But after, Philip King of Macedon, Father of Alexander the Great, caused it in the year before Christ 354, to be re-ede∣fied and inlarged, and then after his own name called it Philippos. It was scituated in Grecia close by the River Stridon, 926 miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the North-west, and indowed with many Priviledges. In those times the Gold was so much increased in this place, that the Revenue thereof was worth to this King more than a thousand Talents, which at 4500 l. the Talent, amounteth to forty five millions of pounds yearly. By the which means King Philip grew so rich, that he caused his Gold to be coined, and called it after his own name, Philippian Gold. To this place Paul came, and did many Miracles, taught the Gospel, and converted many. From hence he
wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent it to Corinth; even 292 miles. He also wrote an Epistle from Rome to the Christians of this Town, and sent it them by the hand of Epaphroditus, even 628 miles. It was afterward a Colony of the Romans. Of Amphipolis. THIS was a City of Macedonia, compassed about with the River Strymon, from whence it took the name; and was distant from Ierusalem 960 miles towards the North-west. Here also the Apostle Paul was, Act. 17. Of Appollonia. THIS was a City of Mygdonia, scituated not far from Thessalonica towards the West, close by the River Echedorus, 948 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North-west: being so called from Appollines, which signifies, the Sun: It stood twenty miles from Thessalonica. There are many other Ci∣ties of this name; one scituate in Grecia, close by the Adriatick Sea; another among Islands of Thrace; a third in Crete, on this side the River Ister; a fourth in Syria; and a fifth in Africa amongst the Cyrenes. Of Thessalonia or Thessalonica. THIS was a City of Macedon, in ancient times called Halia, because it stood upon the Sea; after called Therma, of the hot Baths that were in it; and lastly, Thessalonica, of Philip the Son of Amintas King of the Mace∣donians, who gave it that name either of the great Victory that he had against the Thessalonians, or else after the name of his Daughter called Thessalonica who was the Mother of Cassandrus. It stood close by the Thermaick Gulph, not far from the Mouth of the River Echedorus 932 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the North-west. The Apostle Paul taught publickly in this City, and there converted a great multitude of People, Act. 17. He al∣so wrote two Epistles to the Inhabitants thereof, and sent them from Athens, being 232 miles distant. In the time of Theodosius, the first Emperour of Rome, there hapened, by reason of some Discontent, a grievous Sedition amongst the Thessalonians; in which stir, some of his Captains and Governours were slain. Wherefore the Emperour (having intelligence of what had hapened) sent an Army against the City, with Authority to put to death a certain number of those who had rebelled: whence it happened that the City was fill'd with many unjust slaugh∣ters; for the Souldiers respecting more their private profit than the equity of the cause, spared neither Innocent nor Nocent, Young nor Old; so that as well the▪ Inhabitants as Strangers that resorted thither did partake of this Misery, and suffered like punishment as did they which were the first Authors of this Rebellion.
But because the Emperour was consenting unto these evils, Ambrose Bi∣shop of Millain would not suffer him without publick repentance to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: wherefore in a publick Assembly he ac∣knowledged his offence with great Contrition, Theodor. li. 5. ca. 17. & Soz. li. 7. ca. 14. This Town was afterward purchased by the Venetians, of Andronicus Pa∣laeologus Son of Emanuel Emperour of Constantinople; who held it a long time, until Amurath Emperour of the Turks won it from them, and exercised grie∣vous cruelty upon the Inhabitants. At this day it is a fair and goodly City, wherein is to be seen 23 Churches, and is inhabited both by Christians, Iews, and Turks, as Sebastian Munster saith: but the greatest number is Iews, who are partly Merchants, partly of other Trades; their number in this place (as it is said by some of their own Nation) is 14000, and they have 80 Sy∣nagogues; but they are constrained to wear yellow wreaths about their heads, the Christians blew, and the Turks white. There are many Iews also in Constantinople and Adrianople; but in no place more than in this Town, which is now called Salonica. Of Berraea. THIS is a City of Macedon, scituated upon the River of Halakmon, 960 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. In this City the Iews stirred up a great tumult and sedition against the Apostle Paul, Act. 17. At this day it is called Voria. Of Athens. THIS was the most famous City of all Grecia, the Mother of Arts, and a bountiful nourisher of large and mighty Colonies, in that part of Achaia called Acte or Attica. It was scituated upon the shore of the Medi∣terranean Sea, 720 miles from Ierusalem Westward. It took name from a Divine knowledg; for the word is derived of  and . the mind of God. It was first built by Cecrops, five years before Moses fled out of Egypt into the Land of the Midianites, and of him called Cecropia. This Cecrops was the first King thereof, and there succeeded him at least 40, both famous and wor∣thy Princes. But after it was called Mopsonia, of Mopsus King of Thessaly: and after Ionia, which name it held for a while: and lastly Athens, dedicated to Pallas (which goddess the Grecians say was born of the brain of Iupiter) which name it held a long time after. There lived in this City Solon, So∣crates Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, and many other excellent Philosophers. It was scituated upon a fair and strong Rock, beautified with many goodly Temples and Buildings; but principally that of Minerva was most sumptuous, in which there hung a great number of Lamps, which gave a continual Light. There was also the Monastery of the holy Virgins, and the Image
of Pallas made all of white Ivory very curious and costly. There were many Schools, Colledges, and pleasant Gardens in which Philosophers used to walk, and it abounded with sweet and delectable Musick, and with great resort of Merchants and Scholars. To conclude, in those times it was the most notable City in the World. Moreover, there were many profitable Havens for the receit of Ships, but that which was called Piraeum exceeded, being capable to receiveAs some say 400. forty Ships; beautified with many goodly buildings, in com∣pass two miles, fortified with seven Walls, and joyning to the City (whereof Terence writeth, Eunuch. Act. 3. Scen. 4.) At this day it is called Porto Lini, fortified with two walls four miles in length, extending to the Hill Munichya, the sirname of Diana (being compassed in the figure of a Chersoness, and so joyned to the City of Athens. In which distance there are two other Havens besides that of Piraeum. In this Iupiter had a magnificent Temple, and in it were found many artificial Tables, Pi∣ctures, and graven Images, all which are at this day destroyed and carried away. It hath been three times destroyed; first by Xerxes and Mardonius, which happened in the year before Christ 479. Then by Lysander, who broke down a hundred paces of the Wall, and almost utterly destroyed their Ships, and broke down the Haven of Peraea. It was also ore oppressed by the Ro∣mans, as they also brake down their Haven and burnt their Ships, but spa∣red the Town, and held it in great estimation. But was the third time overthrown and utterly destroyed by the Turks, who both changed the place and name of the City, after it had flourished 3113 years. At this day it is divided into three parts, and called by the name of Sethina, because of the variety of the Inhabitants that live in it, being very well peopled, and a fair and spatious City, but much altered from that it was in times past. For al∣though before it was the very Mother of Eloquence, and glory of Atica, yet at this day it is so much altered, that their Language is base, and their Glory is eclipsed. The uppermost part of the City, where former∣ly the Temple stood, dedicated to the unknown God, is now wholly and absolutely in the hands of the Turks, in which they have built a strong and almost invincible Castle, which hath the command of the rest of the Town. The second and middle part of the Town is all inhabited by Christians. In the third there standeth a fair and goodly Palace, supported with Marble Pillars, and adorned with goodly Works. In this part of the City there inhabiteth People of divers Sects and Conditions. And here also is the Seat of a Metropolitan, who hath under him many Bishops. So that God doth support and maintain his Church even amongst the Enemies thereof; for there are four Patriarchs in Turk to which all the other Christian Metropolitans and Bishops are subject; viz.
the Patriarch of Alexandria, Constantinople, Antiochia, and Ierusa∣lem. Paul was the first man that preached the Gospel of Christ in this City, and converted many Citizens, but especially Dionysius the Areopagite, who dwelt upon a Promontory without the City, and as it seems, was one of the principal Judges and Governours of the Town; for after he had taught publickly in the Town, and had disputed against the Iews and Philosophers concerning Christ, they supposing him to be a busie Fellow, and one worthy of death, as a Disturber of the common Peace, brought him before this Dionysius, that so by his Judgment he might receive condign punishment for his Offence. But St. Paul so well behaved himself, and preached with such admirable Eloquence and Learning, that he not only confuted his Ene∣mies, but among others converted this Dionysius Areopagitus, who was after∣wards the first Bishop of Athens (as Euseb. saith, lib. 4. cap. 13.) and went captive with Paul to Rome and from thence to Paris in France, where he suf∣fered Martyrdom under Dionysius the Emperour. Of Corinthia. COrinthus, a famous City in Grecia is scituated in Peloponnesus a pleasant Country of Achaia, joyning to the Continent of Grecia like an Isthmus or Peninsula, distant from Ierusalem 760 miles towards the West, com∣monly called Corantha, built (as Eusebius saith, by Sisiphus Son of Aeolus at such time as Ioshuah governed Israel; who was a mighty Pirate. At first it was but a Castle, and called after his name, Sisiphyus: but after, because of the strength of the place, and pleasant scituation, it became a fair Town and called by the name of Corcyra, as Strabo saith; then Ephym, of Ephyra, who was a fair and goodly Nymph, and Queen of that place. Now al∣though even in those times it was held in great estimation, yet it became much wasted and decayed through the continuance of time, until it was repaired by King Corinthus, who as some think was the Son of Marathon; Sui∣das saith, the Son of Pelops; others would have him the Son of Orestis; and after his name was called Corinth, that is, the Flower of Maides. It was a fair and goodly City, very commodiously built, for it stood between the two Seas of Ionium and Aegeum, so that there resorted thither great multitude of Merchants from all places. Close by the City there stood a steep Mountain, which was as it were a Bulwark for the defence there∣of, being 560 Feet high, and called Acrocorinthus, that is, The Glory and Strength of the Corinthians. It was also compassed about with strong Walls, and beautified with many goodly Buildings and Temples, but above the rest, the Temple of Venus was had in great reputation, which (as Strabo saith) stood upon the top of the Mountain Acrocorinthus, wherein
there were above a thousand Maids prostituted every year. This Temple was had in such great honour, and was so gloriously built, that above all the places of the World there was resort unto it. Close by it stood the an∣cient Castle called Sysyphius, built all of white Marble; and a little below that, the Fountain of Pyrene, dedicated to the Muses. There were many mighty Princes that ruled in this City, as Alethes, who was King thereof at such time as Samuel judged Israel, which was 1103 years before Christ; he bestowed great cost upon it, set up many fair and goodly Buildings, and ruled over it thirty and five years, as Eusebius saith. After him there succeeded many Kings, by whose Worthiness and Prowess it was so much enlarged, and made so famous, that it was little inferiour to the City of Rome: for, at such time as Ambassadours were sent thence to intreat of some Business concerning the State, the Corinthians did not let to give them many reproachful Terms, as Strabo saith, lib. 8. because of which Insolency, the Romans sent Lucius Mummus the Consul into Grecia, who besieged Corinth, and within a short time took it, and burn'd it down to the Ground, in the year before Christ, 145. of which you may read more in Florus, and in the second Decad of Livy. It was a marvel∣lous rich Town, and abounded with Gold, Silver, and costly Brass, also with Plate, and curious Pictures: so that although Mummus conquered Corinth, yet Corinth conquered Rome; for the Citizens thereof were so be∣witched with the Riches and Glory of this Town, that they forgot their an∣cient Severity, and with violence followed their Vices, as Salust saith, lib. 1. So that as before Corinth abounded with Luxury and divers other abomi∣nable Evils, as Whordom, Adultery, Fornication, Covetousness, Idola∣try, Rapine, and Murther: so Rome in future Ages became as bad or worse than it. Thus it continued waste from that time till Iulius Caesar was Emperour of Rome; who having travelled into those parts of the World, and seen the Ruines of this City, and the profitable Scituation for Traffick, caused it to be re-builded: after which time, it began to grow great and spacious, little inferiour to the former in glory, and no less corrupted with Vices, having forgot the former misery which it sustained by the hands of the Romans; and so continued from the year before Christ 44, until the year after Christ 41, at which time Paul came thither and preached the Gospel, by whose divine Doctrine, and godly Life and Conversation, they were converted from their evil Courses, and lived more holily and honestly, as appeareth by the two Epistles of St. Paul, wrote from Philippos to the Inhabitants of this Town. But after, they falling from their Faith, and forsaking their ancient Integrity, the Lord punished them with a second Desolation; for, at such time as Amurath, Emperour of the Turks, grew to Eminency, and had
conquered Thessalonica, Beotia, and Attica, he came into this Isthmus, and made all Peloponnesus tributary to him. Then after him Mahomet the Second (although the Inhabitants of Corinth had fortified their City with three Walls, and made it so strong, that it was thought to be almost invincible) besie∣ged it and won it, An. Dom. 1458. about six years after Constantinople was conquered by the Turks. But now it is in the command of the Venetians, and that, and all the Country is called by the name of Morea, as it appear∣eth in the Turkish History, lib. 10. The fourth Peregrination of the Apostle Paul. IN the Year after the Nativity of Christ, 53. Paul went from Antiochia in Syria, and came to Galatia and Laodicea in Phrygia, and thence wrote his Epistle to Timothy, as it appeareth by the Subscription of that Epistle; which was 380 miles. From Laodicea he went to Ephesus, which was 280 miles; and there ap∣pointed Timothy to be a Bishop, and daily disputed in the School of a cer∣tain Tyrant, and did many miracles, as it appeareth, Acts 19. From Ephesus he came to Troada, which was 200 miles, where, when he could not find Titus, he was troubled in Spirit, 2 Cor. 2. From Troada he failed into Macedonia, and came to Philippos, which was 232 miles: from hence he wrote his Epistles to the Corinthians, and sent them to Corinth, which was 292 miles. In the same year also, Paul passing through Grecia, (in every place where he came, preaching and visiting the Churches, Act. 19.) at length came to Corinthus, which was 480 miles. In the fifty seventh year after the Nativity of Christ, when Paul had wintered among the Corinthians; in the Spring (that he might avoid the de∣ceits of the Iews, who went about to take away his Life) he went thence and returned to Philippos, which was 292 miles, where he celebrated the Feast of Pentecost, Acts 2. From thence he sailed to Troada, which was 232 miles, where he raised Eutichus from Death to Life, Acts 20. From Troada he went to Assa, which was thirty six miles, Acts 20. From Assa he sailed to Mileten, which was 760 miles, Acts 20. From Mileten he went to Chius, which was 64 miles, Act. 20. From Chius he sailed to Samus, which was 60 miles, and continued in the Isle of Trogylius, which was close by Samus, as Plin. saith, lib. 5. cap. 3. and Strabo, cap. 13. From Trogylius he sailed by Ephesus, and came to Miletus, which was 160 miles. From thence he sent Messengers to the Ministers of Ephesus, com∣manding
them to have a special care to the Flock of Christ, which he had purchased with his precious Blood; and added, that he was so much the more importunate in that behalf because they should never see him again: where∣fore they embraced Paul with great Lamentations and Sorrow, Act. 5. From Myletus he and his Companions went with a direct course to the Island of Cous, which was 200 miles, Act 21. From thence the next day they went to Rhodes, which was 84 miles. From Rhodes they went to Patara, which was 100 miles. From Patara they sailed to Tyrus, leaving Cyprus upon the left hand; which was 360 miles, where he found certain Disciples, and remained there seven days, Act. 21. From Tyrus, Paul and his Companions sailed to Ptolomais, which was 24 miles. From thence they came to Caesarea Strato, who was 44 miles; there they remained in the house of Philip the Evangelist, who was one of the seven Deacons with Stephen, Act. 21. From thence Paul went to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles, and there, about the Feast of Pentecost, he was taken by the Iews, imprisoned and scourged, Act. 21. At this time Paul was about forty seven years of Age. So all these Travels were 3396 miles. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. And first of Assus. COncerning Laodicea, to which Paul travelled, you may read before▪ I will therefore proceed to Assus, which was a Town within the Juris∣diction of Troada, scituated close by the Aegean Sea, 700 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North-east, as Strabo saith, lib. 13. wonderfully fortified both by Nature and Art, so that it is a thing almost impossible to be con∣quered. There is found close by it the stone called Sarchophagus, in which if any Mans Corps be buried, within the space of forty days it is utterly consumed all but the Teeth, as Pliny saith, lib. 36. cap. 17. In this City Cle∣antes the Stoick was born, as Chrysippus saith. Of Mitylene. THE Isle and Town of Mitylene is scituated in the Aegean Sea, 624 miles from Ierusalem toward the North-west. In times past called Lesbus, which obtained the whole Jurisdiction and Government of Troada. It is in compass 136 miles, and containeth in length, from the North to the South, 56 miles. In it is found much matter for the making and calking of Ships: there was many goodly Cities in it, as Mitylene and Pyrrha, which stood
upon the West part of it; also the Metropolitan called Lesbos, Eressus, the Haven of Antissa, and Mithymna. Of Lesbos in times past this whole Isle was called Lesbus, until the City of Mitylene grew famous; being so called of Mitylene the Daughter of Macharus, as Diodorus saith, lib. 4. and after that Cities name called Mitylene. There were many other goodly Ci∣ties which stood in this Isle, but they were either consumed by Earth-quakes or drowned by the Sea. The Land thereof was very pleasant and fruitful, bringing forth grapes, whereof there was a very excellent and clear Wine made, which they of Constantinople principally liked: there is also found great store of Cypress, Pines, and plenty of Figs come thence. Their Horses are very strong, but of a low Stature: it is very mountainy, and pestred with wild Beasts. There were many famous men that lived and were born in this Country; as Pittachus one of the seven Wise Men of Greece, Aliaeus the Poet, and Alcimenides his Brother, Diophanes the Orator, and Theophanes who wrote the Acts of Pompey the Great, (as it appeareth in Tullies Oration for Archia) Theophrastus also that notable Philosopher, (who at first was called Tyrta∣manus, then Euphrastus, that is, a good Orator) and lastly, Theophrastus, that is, a divine Orator; this man was an excellent Peripatetick, and Scho∣lar to Aristotle, whom he succeeded in his School, and had 2000 Scholars. Vitruvius the Architect maketh mention of Mitylen in his first Book, say∣ing, that it was a very magnificent City, and rarely builded, but very bad∣ly scituated; for when the South Wind did blow, the Inhabitants grew sick; when the West, they coughed, and when the North Wind did blow they were made well. Notwithstanding, the Apostle Paul and his Com∣panions came to this City, as it appeareth, Act. 20. At this day it is under the Jurisdiction of the Turks, and is called by the Name of Midilly. Of Chius. THIS is an Isle scituated in the Aegean Sea, distant from Ierusalem 600 miles towards the North-west, being 112 miles in Compass; the prin∣cipal City thereof is called Chios, taking the Name, as some say, from the Mastick Tree, which sweateth out a certain Gum, of the Syrians called Chian, and by us Mastick: this Mastick is the best in those parts of the World. Ephorus calleth it by the ancient Name Aetalia; but Cleobulus, Chia; either because of the Nymph called Chion, or else because of the white∣ness of the Soil: there are others that call it Patyusia; and there are some who derive the name of Chius from the Temple of Apollo that standeth in it, called Chion. There stands in it a fair and goodly Mountain called Pellenaeum, from whence the Inhabitants dig very excellent marble. Also in times past the best Malmsey came thence, but in these days it is brought from Crete.
Of Satus. THIS is an Isle and City scituated in the Aegean Sea, upon a high or lofty piece of Ground, so that from thence the Inhabitants may see into all the Countries near adjoyning, lying upon the Coast of Ephesus and Ionia, 560 miles from Ierusalem toward the North-west; it was in compass eighty eight miles, very fertile and pleasant, much exceeding Chius, although it brought forth no Wine. In times past it was called Artemisia, Parthenea, and Ste∣phane; taking those names from a Crown or Wreath of sweet smelling Flowers, of which there were great plenty in this Isle; the Poets feign that Iun was both born and brought up in it; and Varro saith, That there was a fair and stately Temple dedicated unto her, where solemn Service and the Rites of Marriage were yearly celebrated Pythagoras the Philosopher was born here; and one of the Sybels (which prophecied of the comming of Christ) lived hre. St. Paul also came into this Isle, and converted many, as appeareth Act. 20. There is another Isle called Samus, scituated upon the Coast of Epirus, not far from the Gulph of Ambracius, called also Cephalenia, not far from the Promontory of Actium, where Augustus overcame Antonius; in Honour of which Victory he built up a City and called it Nicapolis, &c. Of Trogyllium. THIS is a Promontory and Town not far from Ephesus, scituated in Asia-minor, at the foot of the Mountain Mycales, four miles and somewhat more from Samus, where Paul stayed, Act. 20. It is distant from Ierusalem 460 miles toward the North-West. There are which say, that St. Paul stayed at a certain Isle joyning close to this Promontory, called after that by the name of Trogyllium. See Strabo, lib. 14. Of Myletus. THIS was a famous City, scituated upon the Borders of Ionia and Caesaria, close by the Shore of the Aegean Sea, 104 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-west. The Poets feign, that Miletus, who was the first builder of this City, was the Son of Apollo, and called it after his own name Miletus: but Strabo, lib 12. thinketh that it was rather built by Sarpedon the Son of Iupiter, and Brother to Radamanthus and Minos, and by him was called Myletus, from another City of the same name, which stood in Crete. The Wool that cometh from this Town is wonderful soft, and singular good for many purposes; but it was principally used to make Cloath of, which they died into an excellent Purple and transported into many places. There were a great many famous men that either lived or were born in this Town; as Thales Milesius, one of the seven Wise-Men of Graece,
Anaximander, who was his Scholar, Anaximenes and Hecataeus the Histo∣rian; also Eschenes the Orator, (not he that contended with Demosthenes, who taking too much Liberty against Pompey was banished) Timotheus the Musician, and Pittacus the Philosopher, besides many others. But of all these, Thales Milesius was held in greatest Estimation, because he was thought to be the first that taught natural Philosophy and the Ma∣thematicks amongst the Grecians. He was the first also that foretold of the Eclipse of the Sun, about such time as the Battel was fought between Cyaxa∣res Father of Astyages King of the Medes, and Hallyattes Father of Croesus, King of the Lidians, which was about the 44 Olympiad. There came unto him a certain Man, who asked him what was the hardest thing in the World; he answered, Seipsum nosce, To know himself. Another came to him, and ask'd him, how he might do to live justly; he answered, Si quae in alis repre∣hendimus, ipse non faciamus, That we do not those things which we reprehend in others. He died about the 58 Olympiad. Meletus at this day is called Me∣lasa. Of Cous. THIS is one of the Cyclad Islands, lying in the Aegean Sea, bordering upon Caria; being so called from the Vaults and Caves that are in it, and distant from Ierusalem 524 miles. It hath a City called after the same Name, wherein there was a stately Temple built in honour of Iuno; and another standing in the Suburbs thereof, dedicated to Aesculapius: this was a very sumptuous Temple, and made very rich, because of the many Pre∣sents and Gifts that were sent and dedicated to it. When the Romans had obtained the Command of this Isle, Octavius, the Father of Augustus Caesar, took out of this Temple a naked Venus, which was a goodly Image, and carried it with him to Rome in honour of his Progenitors, who derived their Progeny from her. It is in compass 56 miles, being so pleasantly scituated that it was a Sea-Mark to Mariners, very fruitful, and bringing forth abundance of Wine and Silk, by reason of a certain Fish that is found there, from which they got great Plenty. See Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22. There were many that lived only by weaving of Silk; and above the rest there was one Pamphila the Daughter of Plates, that was most excellent in that Art. There were many famous men that were, either born or lived in that Coun∣try, as Hippocrates that excellent Physician, Apelles that notable Painter, Si∣mus the Physician, Philetas the Poet and Orator, Nicia the Prince and Ty∣rant of Cous, Ariston the Peripatetick, and Theomnestus that notable Politici∣an. At this day this Isle is within the Turkish Empire, and by them called Stacu; also the principal City thereof is called by the same Name, and wholly inhabited by the Turks, two Towns only being inhabited by the Gre∣cians:
but there are many that dwell in strong Castles compassed with round and stately Towers. This Country is very fertile, abounding with Cattel, and the Mountains thereof are little inferiour to those of Crete. Of Rhodes. THE City and Isle of Rhodes (which is so called from the sweet Smell or Roses) is scituated in the Mediterranean Sea, a little from Asia the less, upon the South; being distant from Ierusalem 140 miles toward the North-west, as Strabo saith, lib. 14. It is in compass 112 miles. It was at first called Ophy, then Statilia, and after Telchin, of the Inhabitants thereof, who were called Telchines, a People which, as some say, were Witches; others say, curious Artificers, and were the first that found out the making of Brass and Iron. At last it took the name of Rhodes from the principal City that stood in it; for there were three Cities in it, viz. Lyndus, Camirus, and Ialyssus. In Lyndus, Cleobulus, one of the seven Wise-men of Greece, and Chares that famous Statuary, who made the Colossus which stood in this Isle, were born. Ialyssus, of a Rose that was found in it, was called Rhodes, being scituated upon an exceeding high Promontory, lying toward the East part of that Isle. This exceeded the other two Cities, both for Ports, Ways, Walls, and other Ornaments, and the Inhabitants were governed with such ex∣cellent Laws, and so skilful in Navigation, that it might compare with the strongest City of the World, and for a long time had the Command of the Sea round about, and utterly abolished all Pirates and Robbers from those parts. Diodorus Sicul. lib. 6 saith, that it was called Rhodes of Rhodia, a fair and beautiful Maid, who was dearly beloved of Apollo, and therefore this Island was dedicated to the Sun; for as Solinus saith, Though the Heavens be ne∣ver so cloudy yet the Sun shineth in Rhodes. Pindarus the Poet, (because of the fertility of the Soil, and the exceeding Opulency of the Inhabitants) saith, that it rained Gold in that Country. In former times it flourished with Learning and good Arts, insomuch that the Romans for the most part sent their Children to be brought up at Rhodes. This Isle is very fruitful, and bringeth forth many things necessary for the maintenance of Life; but above all, a certain Red Wine which the Romans did greatly delight in, and valued at a high Price. In this City lived that notable Painter called Protogines, which Apelles conquered in that Science, as Pliny saith, li. 35. ca. 10. Demetrius, King of Asia, erected a notable Colossus or Statue of the Sun in this Isle, which that notable Carver Chares made, being outwardly all of pure Brass, but within nothing but Stones; it was seventy Cubits high, and so artificially made, that it was accounted for one of the Wonders of the World. Afterward it was carried into Egypt by the Egyptians, who won the Town. This Isle is famous to this day: in times past it was accounted one o the Keys of Christendom, but at this day subject unto the Turk: of which yo may read more in the Turkish History.
Of Patara. PAtara was a City of Licia, so called of Patarus the Builder thereof; who was the Son of Apollones, or Lacones, as Strabo and Servius saith: it was scituated upon the South-side of Asia the less, close by the shore of the Me∣diterranean Sea, 408 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-west. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus King of Aegypt enlarged the City, and called it after his Sisters Name, Arsinoes Lysiaca, to put a difference between it and other Cities called after that Name; for there was an Arsinoe in Egypt, and another near Cyrene, where Apollo in certain months of the Winter Sea∣son (by the help of the Devil) gave answer to them that sought after him. St. Paul was in this Town, Act. 11. There was also another Town of this Name in Achaia, where St. Andrew was crucified. The Travels of St. Paul when he was taken Captive and carried Prisoner to Rome. IN the 57 year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul being then 47 years of Age, by the command of Claudius Lysius was taken and scourged by the Iews, and brought thence to Antipatris by Night (because there were forty Iews which had sworn his Death) which was twelve miles, Act. 22, 23, 24. From Antipatris he was brought to Caesarea Strato, which was twenty eight miles, where he was brought before Foelix, (who was President for the Ro∣mans in those parts) and was captive there for the space of two days, Act. 24, 25, 26. In the fifty ninth year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul being then 49 years of Age, or thereabouts, was sent by Portius Festus, President of the Iews, to Rome; so Paul sailed from Caesarea Strato to Sidon, which was 84 miles, Act. 27. From thence Paul sailed close by Cyprus, because the Wind was contra∣ry, and came to the Sea over against Cilicia, (which was very troublesom) and so passing by Pamphilia they came to Myra, which was 480 miles. Loosing from Myra they sailed to Gnidum, which was 248 miles, Act. 27. From Gnidum they sailed towards the South, and came to Crete, and so passed by the Towns of Salmo, Lasaea, and Assus, and so came to Phoenicia, which was 180 miles. From Phoenicia they came to the Island of Claudia, which was 108 miles. From the Island of Claudia they came to Melite, which now is called Malta; in which place they suffered Shipwrack, and Paul shook off the Vi∣per off his hand into the Fire, and did many other Miracles, which was 720 miles.
From Malta they sailed in a Ship of Alexandria, to Sir acusus in Sicilia, being 180 miles: Paul at this time was fifty years of Age, Act, 28. From Siracusa they sailed to Regium, being 52 miles. From thence they went to Puteola, being 164 miles. From Puteola they went to Apiforum, being 12 miles: there certain Christians of Rome came to meet them, above twenty two miles, and re∣ceived Paul with great Friendship. From Apiforum they led him to Tribatera, being six miles, here he met more Christians. From Tribatera he went to Rome, being sixteen miles, where he remained two years Prisoner, and there wrote his Epistles to the Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Philemon, and the Hebrews: so all these Travels were 2300 miles. And in the whole, from his first beginning, untill his being Prisoner in Rome, were 190270 miles. But being delivered out of Prison, the last ten years of his age he did not only preach the Gospel in Asia and Creta, where he appointed his Dis∣ciple Timothy to be a Bishop, and in Macedonia, (where being in Neapolis he wrote an Epistle to Titus, and sent it to him above 300 miles to the Island of Creta) but also preach'd the Gospel, and spread the Word of God abroad in the Country of Spain, Rom. 15. which is distant from Ierusalem 2800 miles: and being the second time imprisoned in Rome, he wrote his se∣cond Epistle to Timothy, and sent it above 996 miles to Ephesus: not long after, he was beheaded in Rome, in the place called Via Ostensi. Of the Towns and Places to which he travelled. Of Antipatris. THE Town of Antipatris is distant from Ierusalem twelve miles towards the North-west. In times past it was called Caphar Zalama, that is, a Village of Peace. There Iudas Macchabeus overcame Nicanor, 1 Mac. 7. Afterward, Herod that lived in the time of our Saviour Christ, built this Town much fairer and called it after the name of his Father, Antipatris. It stood in a very pleasant and fruitful Soil, having many fair Trees and fresh Waters about it, Ios. lib. 16. cap. 7. St. Paul was by Night brought Pri∣soner into this Town, Act. 23. Of Myra. THIS was a great Town, as Strabo, li. 14. saith, and stood in Asia minor, in the Province of Lycia, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea, 380 miles from Ierusalem North-westward. St. Paul was in this Town.
Of Gnidus. THIS Town lieth in Asia minor, upon the Mediterranean Sea, in the Pen∣nisdia called Doris, which by a narrow point joyneth unto the Province of Caria, and is distant from Ierusalem 492 miles. In this Town the God∣dess Venus had a great Temple, wherein her Image was placed, made by that cunning Workman Praxiteles, of Marble stone; and for that cause Horace calleth Venus Queen of Gnido, lib. 1: carm. Od. 30. O Venus Regina Gniide Paphi{que} that is; O Venus Queen of Gnidus and Paphos &c. There came many Learned Men out of this Town, as Eudoxus Agatarchi∣des, Paripateticus; Theopompus, and others. This Town is yet standing, and (as it is thought) it took the name of the Fish Gnidus, which is taken there in the Sea; which Fish is of so strange a na∣ture, that if you take it in your hand it stingeth like a Nettle. At this day this Town hath another name, and is called Cabo Chrio, as Conradus Gesnerus in his Onomastico writeth. Of Creta. THE Island of Creta took the name (as Strabo saith) from the People called Curetes that dwelt in this Island: those People used to cut all the hair off from the fore-parts of their Heads, and therefore they would not endure to suffer any Man to wear his hair being in the Wards; for which cause, in the Grecian Tongue they were called Couretes, and in time this name by corruption of speech was changed, and they called Cretans. This Island standeth in the Mediterranean Sea, between Graecia and Africa, 600 miles from Ierusalem toward the West. It is a great Island, being 200 miles long, 48 miles broad, and in compass 588 miles: it is very fruitful of Cypress Trees, Malmsey, Sugar, and other Spices: the Malmsey taketh the name from the Town of Malvesia, in Peloponnesus, standing upon the point of Malta, right over against Creta or Candia; and at this day the like Wine is made in Creta, and called by the same name, from whence it is com∣monly brought unto us, though in times past it came out of the Island of Chius. Among all the Hills that are found in the Island of Creta, the Hill Ida is most spoken of, because of the height: about it standeth divers Towns and Villages: it hath many Hills and Woods: for the Island is very full of sweet Cypress Trees, insomuch that there are Woods full of them. Pliny writes, that upon a time, there was such an Earth-quake in this Island, that one of the Hills removed, out of which there came a Man, being forty Cubits high. In this Island there are no venemous Beasts, but in times past it was inhabited by cruel People, of whom St. Paul complaineth in his first Epistle to Titus, cap. 1. where he reherseth the Saying of Epimenides, which was after this manner, The People of Creta are always Liars, evil Beasts, and slow Bellies. And to conclude, they resemble some of the Friars among the Papists; for as they
are idle people and shave their heads, so were the Men of Creta. Titus (Pauls Disciple) was a Bishop in this Island, and St. Paul wrote an Epistle to them and to Nicapolis▪ and sent it them above 320 miles. This Island in times past was very rich and populous, for in it there was a 100 Towns; the chief of which were Gnossos, Cortyna, and Zydon, but Gnossos was the most princi∣pal and ancientest, wherein King Minos kept his Court: in it the notable Geographer Strabo was born. This Town of Gnossos in times past was called Ceratur, of the River Cera∣ta which passed by it; but now it and all the Island is called Candia. The Venetians every three years appointed a new Duke to govern it. In this Island stood the Towns of Salmona and Lassica (by Pliny called Lasas) and in the middle between those two Towns was the Haven of Gutfurt, whereof Saint Luke maketh mention in the Acts of the Apostles, cap 27. saying, That Paul counselled the Saylers that were in the Ship to anchor there, and stay the Winter season in that Island: but the Captain of the Ship gave more credit to the Master of the Ship, than to Pauls words, whereby in the end they were in danger of their lives. The Towns of Salmona and Lassica with the Haven of Gutfurt, lay Southward in this Island, upon the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea: somewhat distant from them stood the Town of Asson, by Pliny called Ausum, where they hoised out their boat and sayl∣ed Northward; and because they had a fair South-wind, they thought to sail to Phoenicia, a Haven in Creta, but the wind coming about to the East, drave them back again into the Sea, by which means they were in dan∣ger of their Lives. This Island was brought under the subjection of the Romans, 66 years before the birth of Christ, and so for a long time continued, until the Sa∣racens entered therein, and took it from the Romans, 800 years after the Birth of Christ. After that, in the year of our Lord 979, the Emperour of Constantinople drave the Saracens out of the Island, and kept it; but in the end the Venetians brought it under their Subjection and Seigniory, in the year of our Lord 1202, and at this day it is called Candia. Of Clauda. CLaudea is an Isle not far from Crete, lying towards the Southwest in the Mediterranean Sea, 288 miles from Ierusalem towards the West: at this day it is called Porto Cabaso; here the Saylers, the Apostle Paul; and the rest of the company, haled overboard their Cock-boat, and tyed it to their Ship and fell to towing, lest they should have been sunk into Syris, a dangerous Gulph upon those Seas, Acts 27. Of Syrtis. THIS is a Gulph of the Sea lying upon the shore of Africa, in which the Water is both troublesome and the shore dangerous, because of quick
Sands; and in this there are two places most remarkable, called by the name of Syrtis, from drawing and attracting Ships unto them, by which they were greatly endangered: the one was called the greater, and the other the less; the greater lay 1000 miles from Ierusalem towards the West, but the other lay under the Isle of Mylete towards the South, being distant from Ierusalem 1320 miles towards the West: in this place it was where Paul and his Com∣panions were in such danger, mentioned Act. 17. Of Mylete. THIS Island was so called from the great abundance of Honey that was found in it; but at this day it is called Malta, scituated in the Mediterra∣nean Sea, 1340 miles from Ierusalem towards the West. It is very pleasant and fruitful, bringing forth great plenty of Wheat, Rye, Flax, Cumin, Cotton, Figs, Wine, Roses, Violets, Time, Lavender, and many other sweet and delightful Herbs, from whence Bees did gather great plenty of Honey. The Sun is very hot in this Island, insomuch, that by the extreme servor thereof, the Inhabitants lose their natural complexion and look of a tawny colour. In Summer Evenings there falleth great plenty of dews, whereby the Earth is refreshed and the Herbs increased. There is neither Snow or Frost seen in it; for the Northern Winds (which with us are the Authors of Cold and Frosts) with them procure Rain, which greatly re∣fresheth and increaseth the Fruits of the Earth; so that the Pastures and Me∣dows become very pleasant and full of Grass: and although it be but 28 miles long, and 60 miles about, notwithstanding it is very populous; for in the eight Parishes that stand in this Isle, there is numbred above twenty thousand Men. The Inhabitants are very honest, religious, and godly; and the Women fair, chast, and modest, for they never come abroad but with their faces covered. The Children that are born in this Country fear not any Snakes; neither are hurt by any thing that is venomous, in∣somuch that they will take Scorpions and eat them without danger, although in all other parts of the World those kind of creatures are most pernicious. In this Isle also there are bred a kind of Dogs that are but small, yet very white and shagged, and so loving, that the Inhabitants of all the neighbouring Countries will buy them, though they be at dear rates. The chief City thereof (called Malta) is so strongly fortified both by Art and Nature, that it is almost impossible to be conquered, unless it be either by Treason or Famine. The Town or Castle whereof is fortified with the Knights of St. Iohn's Order, who have mightily expressed their Valour and Resolution in defending this Town from the Turks. About a mile from this, the ruines of a goodly fair City are to be seen. And upon the East Promontory, a little from the City of Malta, there yet remain the decays (which are worthy to look upon) of a goodly Temple, dedicated to Iun.
It seemeth by what remaineth, that this Church hath been a fair and goodly thing in times past. There is also here and there in the Earth found certain brass Monies, ha∣ving upon the one side a superscription written in Greek Letters, and upon the other the Image of Iuno. There stood upon the South side of Malta a Temple dedicated to Hercules, the ruines of which are yet extant; and in it are found Mountains worthy of admiration. At such time as the Cap∣tain of Massanissa King of the Numidians had conquered this Island, amongst other pretious things that he found in these Temples, he took thence a great deal of goodly Ivory: but that religious King did faithfully restore all those things back again, and dedicated them to the several Temples. Thus we may perceive, that the Inhabitants of this Island of Malta were wholly given to Idolatry and Superstition, untill such time as Paul, by the Inconstancy and Vehemency of the Wind, was driven upon it, and converted them from that perverse and prophane Worship to the Christian Religion, at such time as he suffered Shipwrack, and wintered amongst them, Acts 27. The Inhabitants shew upon the North part of this Isle, the place where the Ship was cast away wherein the Apostle Paul was; in which place they have built up a Chappel, and dedicated it to Saint Paul. They shew also a Cave, in which they say he lived; and they verily believed that he ex∣pelled all Venome and Poyson out of that Island at such time as he was there. It was first subject unto the Africans, as may appear by certain Mar∣ble Pillars which are here and there found, in which there are ingraven cer∣tain Characters of the Carthaginians, not much unlike to Hebrew Letters. And although the Inhabitants are Christians, yet their Speech is much like the Saracens, which differeth little or nothing from the antient Punick. At such time as Dido built Carthage (which is thought to be 890 years before Christ) Battus was King of this Isle, and held a Confederacy with Dido: for when Hyarbas King of the Gelutians made War upon Dido, because he could not obtain her in Matrimony, she received Aid from this Battus; and when for the love of Aeneas she had killed her self, Hyarbas, having conquered Carthage, banished her Sister Anne, who was entertained by this Battus. But Hyarbas taking that unkindly, made War upon Bat∣tus, and conquered the Island of Malta: so it continued in the Jurisdi∣ction of the Carthaginians a long time after, until the Carthaginians were con∣quered by the Romans; and then one Titus Sempronius (about such times as Han∣nibal brought his Army before Trebia) won it 217 years before Christ. And after it continued under the Jurisdiction of the Romans 130 years, and then it was conquered by the Saracens; but they held it not long, for Roger Norman King of Sicilia got it out of their Power, Anno Dom. 1090. And so it continued in the hands of the Sicilians till Anno Dom. 1520. And
then Charles the fifth being Emperour, gave it to the Knights of Saint Iohn, upon condition that they should oppose the Turks Gallies, and defend that part of Christendom. So the Knights of St. Iohn, together with their Go∣vernour, sailed to Malta, and so fortified it that it is impossible to be taken, unless by Famin or Treason. There were many famous Bishops that lived in this place, and very devout Christians. In the time of the Emperour Theo∣dosius there was a Councel held, at which were present 240 Bishops. At this day this Bishoprick is subject to the Archbishop of Palermo; and the chief Government of the Isle is in the Power of the Knights of St. Iohn, &c. Of Syracusa. THIS was a City of the Isle of Sicilia, built by one Archia of Corinth, standing close by the Sea Shore on the North side of the Isle, 2756 miles from Ierusalem towards the West. It was a fair and goodly City, in antient time called Tetrapolis, because it was divided into three parts: one of which parts stood in the Isle of Ortygia separated from the Continent with a little streight Sea, and with that famous Fountain Arthusia. The other part was called Acradine, and the third Tycha; to which in after-times there was built up a fourth, and called by the name of Neapolis. All this City was compas∣sed in with three Walls, so strong and so admirably fortified both by Nature and Art, that it opposed the Carthaginians in equal War. It was called Syracusa, from drawing or sucking; and in process of time obtained the whole Jurisdiction and Government of that Isle; which was so well peopled in the time of Dionysius the Tyrant, that he was able to make and maintain an Army of one hundred thousand Foot and twelve thousand Horse. There were two Havens in that part which was called Ortygia, so marvellously for∣tified with such huge Rocks and other Munition, that they were wonderful to look upon. There also stood a Castle or Tower called by the name of Mercia, which was so strong, that when all the rest of the Town was conquered, yet that maintained War for a long time. In this Hold the Kings and Ty∣rants of this Country usually kept their Treasures, and other things that were material. There were many worthy and famous Princes ruled in it, but above them all Dionysius the elder exceeded the rest; who when he saw what abundance of Vessels of Gold and Silver Dionysius the younger had heaped together, cried out and said, In te Regius affectus non est, qui ex tanta poculorum vi amicum neminem conciliasti: That is, Verily, the mind of a King is not in thee, that out of so many Cups couldest not procure one Friend: For after he was banished, and constrained to keep a School. Both these Dionysians were learned Men and great Philosophers. It is thought that this Island was some time a part of Italy, and joyning to the Field of Bru∣tius; but in time, through the violence of the Sea, separate from the Conti∣nent: From whence it was called Sicilita, and also Trinacris, because there
were three Mountains standing upon three Promontories in three several places of it, giving the proportion of a Triangle; for there was an Angle toward the South called Pactinus, another toward the South-west called Li∣lybaeus, and another called Pelorus, which lay distant near about two miles from Italy. In times past it was under the command of the Romans, but now the Spaniards have chief Government of it. There are many things remain∣ing to this day worthy observation, but chiefly the Mountain Aetna, which still casteth out Fire and Smoak, &c. Of Rhegium. THIS was a Town of Italy, belonging to the Family of the Brutians; at first built by the Calcidonians and Messenians, upon the utmost bounds of Italy toward the Sicilian Sea, being distant from that Isle sixty Furlongs, and called by the name of Rhegium, as some think, from Rumpo, to break; for that near about the place where that Town stood, the Sea being very Tempestuous, broke the Isle of Sicilia from the Continent. Others think it was called Rhegium, because it was so strong and beautiful a City that it might well have been the Seat of a Prince. Close by this City, in the Sicilian Sea, there stands a Rock somewhat above the Water, representing in Figure the Proportion of a Man, and round about it are to be seen other little Rocks like barking Dogs. In this place the Water is so extream vi∣olent, and runes with so strong a current, that it is very dangerous for Ma∣riners (especially such as are ignorant) to sail that way. Wherefore the Poets made this verse, to signifie a man that stood in a Dangerous and Doubtful estate, Decidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charibdim. Seeking to shun Charibdis curled Waves, He thrusts himself into stern Scylla's Jaws: But that Mariners might avoid these dangerous places, upon the North angle of Sicilia, in the Promontory of Petorus, there is erected a lofty Tower, stand∣ing as a Sea-mark, that so they by that direction might escape these dan∣gerous places. Not far from Scillari is to be seen another Town, of that Rock called Scyllacus, but of the Inhabitants it is commonly called Scyglius, or Scyglio; and Rhegium also at this day is called Rezo and Reggio, of Antim∣nestus Captain of Chalcedon: and as Strab. lib. 6. saith, is scituated in Cala∣bria, 1332 miles from Ierusalem Westward. Of Puteoli. THIS City is in Campania, a Country of Italy not far from Naples, scitu∣ated on the Sea Shore 1381 miles from Ierusalem Westward: taking that name from Fountains or Wells of hot Water, being built by the Sala∣mians,
as Eusebius saith, about such time as the Tarquins were banished Rome, 507 years before the Nativity of Christ. It was antiently called Dicaearchia, because of their singular Justice and Noble Government. But when the Romans made War upon Hannibal, they fortified this Town to withstand his Forces, and then called it Puteoli, which name it retained a long time after. At this day it is called Puzzoli. At this City the Apostle Paul and his Companions arrived, when they sailed into Rome, Act. 27. Between Puteoli and Baia there lieth the Lake of Lu∣crinus, into which, by the command of Augustus Caesar, a Dolphin was thrown. Now there was a young Youth called Simon, the Son of a poor man dwel∣ling in Baia, who usually played among other Youths upon the Banks of this Lake: and seeing the Dolphin (it being a strange Fish in those parts, and very amiable to look upon) did take great delight in it, and oft times fed it with Bread and other things as he could get: insomuch, as the Dolphin when it heard the Boy's Voice upon the Bank of the River, would resort to him, and receive at his hand his accustomed Food. Thus it continued so, that the Dolphin would suffer the Boy to handle him, take him by the Gills, play with him, yea, and sometimes to get upon his Back, then swim with him a great way into the Lake, and bring him back again, and suf∣fer him to go safe upon the shore. After this manner he continued for many Years together, and in the end the Youth died. Yet the Dolphin resort∣ed to his usual place, expecting his accustomed Food from the hands of this Boy; but missing him, he left the shore, languish'd away, and died. Con∣cerning the nature of this Fish you may read more at large in Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 8. Of Colossa. THIS City is scituated in Phrygia, a Country in Asia minor, near the Rivers of Lycus and Meander, 520 miles from Ierusalem North-westward, not far from Laodicea; so called from the mighty Statues and Colosso's that were set up in it. These Cities, Colossa, Laodicea, and Hierapolis (where the Apostle Philip was put to death in the tenth year of Nero) a little before Paul's Martyrdom, were sunk by an Earthquake, which without doubt was a great judgment of God upon them, because they refused the Grace and Comfort of the Doctrine of the Gospel offered unto them by the Apostles. The Epistle of Paul, dedicated to the Colossians, was sent by the hand of Onesymus from Rome unto these Towns, being 1080 miles. For although the Rhodians were called Colossians because of that famous Colossus that stood there; yet this City wherein Archippus and Philemon dwelt (to whom Paul directed that Epistle, stood in Phrygia, a Country in Asia minor, and not in Rhodes.
Of Nicopolis. NIcopolis is a City of Macedonia, scituated close by the River Nessus, not far from Philippus upon the Borders of Thrace, 920 miles from Ierusa∣lem North-westward. From hence the Apostle Paul wrote his Epistle to Titus, and sent it to Crete, 600 miles. There are many other Cities of this Name; one standing in Epyre, built by Augustus; another between Cilicia and Syria, built by Alexander, in glory of his Victory against Darius; a fourth in Bythinia; a fifth in the Holy Land, formerly called Emmaus. Of Rome. THis City, if we rightly consider the derivation of the Name in Hebrew, was not built without the singular Providence of God; being derived of Rom, i. He hath exalted or made high. But the Grecians derive it from Romen, i. Strength and Power. Now although the Providence of God ex∣tendeth to every Creature, nay, to the very hairs of a Man's Head, yet where he determines to express his singular Power, there he worketh beyond the expectation of man. And who knows not that the beginning of this City was mean, raised from a confused Company, destitute both of Civili∣ty, Community, and Laws; yet hath it been, and for the most part is, the glory of the World, and the great Commander of the Princes of the Earth. It was so called at first by Romulus (as Livy, lib. 1. saith) who first built it, seven hundred fifty and one years before the Nativity of Christ; being sci∣tuated upon seven Hills, that is, Capitolinus, Aventinus, Palatinus, Cealius, Exquilinus, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. But after, when the City was com∣passed about with Walls, the Hill Ianiculus was inclosed within it. The Vallies that lay between these Hills were so raised up with Arches, Vaults, and artificial Mounts, that in process of time they became level with the top of some of those Hills. It was beautified with fair and sumptuous Build∣ings; so that as it was the head of the World for Command and Power, in like manner it exceeded all the rest of the World for Glory and Riches, but principally for stately Buildings. There were many goodly Temples, dedicated to Iupiter, Apollo, Aesculapius, Hercules, Diana, Iuno, Minerva, Lucia, Concordia, Fides, Pietas, Pax, Victoria, Isis, besides many other de∣dicated to other Gods. But above all, that was the most sumptuous that was called Pantheon Deorum; at this day called the Church of Alhallows. Moreover, here was to be seen the Princely Edifices of Kings, Emperours, Consuls, Senators, Patricians, and other Romans, who were mighty in Wealth and Substance, built all of polished Marble, beautified with Gold and Silver; beside Palaces, Bulwarks, Theatres, triumphant Arches, Sta∣tues, and such like; all which were glorious, and greatly adorned the City.
But above all these, the House of Nero was most worthy of Observation, which to see to, was built all of burnish'd Gold very curiously wrought. Here also stood the Monuments of the two Caesars, Iulius and Augustus; al∣so their Statues, the one made of pure Brass, the other of white Marble. Besides, there were many fruitful Orchards, Water Courses, and wholsome Baths, brought thither by Antonius, Nero, Dioclesian, and Constantine the Great. Also the Emperour Constantine erected many goodly Churches for the use of the Christians, and endowed them with great means; and amongst the rest, that which was dedicated to St. Iohn of Latteran, a fair and good∣ly Church, and for Riches and curious Workmanship might compare with the stateliest Temples that ever had been in the World, most of the Orna∣ments and Images being made of Gold and Silver: he also erected the Va∣tican, which was dedicated to St. Peter; and another holy House dedicated to St. Paul; in either of which he placed their several Sepulchres and Mo∣numents, bestowing extraordinary Cost to beautifie them. So many were the Gifts and Gratuities of this Emperour, that they can scarce be numbred; so that although the Emperour Trajan, and Boniface the Fourth, Pope of Rome, bestowed great Cost to beautifie and adorn the City, yet were they nothing comparable to that which this Emperour did. These things then being presented to your view, you might justly say, That Rome in her Pro∣sperity and Eminency was the Glory of the World; but as all Estates are fickle and uncertain, still subject to Variety and Change, so was this: first envied of the World, because of the extream oppression of her Governours; and after made desolate by Violence and Force, all her former Glory being eclipsed, and the greatest part of these goodly Buildings laid level with the Ground. Thus have I shewed you what Rome was when it was in her Prosperity; it resteth now to shew what Rome is. Rome at this day differeth as much from the ancient Rome as the Sub∣stance from the Shadow. For, although the Pope hath beautified and adorned the West part of it with many fair and goodly Buildings, and cal∣led it by the name of new Rome; yet it is nothing comparable to the an∣cient City, as it was when Augustus and Constantine the Great were Empe∣rours thereof, neither doth it stand in the ancient place; for the first City stood upon the East side of Tyber, this upon the West. The chief part of the other stood upon the Mountains Capitolinus and Palatinus, upon which were the stately Buildings of Senators, Kings, and Emperours, but now they lye desolate and waste. The Capitol also, and the Temple of Iupiter Feretrius (goodly Buildings) beaten to the Ground; only some Ruines, to shew that such things there hath been. And what now resteth, that are worthy note, are in the Command and Power of the Pope; which are not many: the most that can be named, are the Vatican, the Tower
of S. Angelo, the Pope's Palace, his Banquetting-house, and the Gardens and Walks about it; which are so well scituated, that they are a grace to all Rome, the rest are but ordinary and common Buildings. Thus may you see that there is nothing in this World but hath a period, to which, if with much Labour it attaineth, then it commonly declineth, seldom continueth; for who knows not with what labour, what perils by Sea, what dangers by Land, through how many Forein Wars and Domestick Seditions Rome was raised to her greatness? And how suddenly was all this lost? What the Vertue and Wisdom of grave and resolute Consuls, Captains and Com∣manders had with great hazard heaped up, thrusting their Capitol and other Treasuries full with the Triumphant Spoyls of Forein Nations, was left to be consumed either by Seditious Souldiers or prodigal Emperours, and the State left as a Prey to those that were mightiest; so that they were accounted most honourable, that with most Injury could get to themselves either Countenance to oversway Authority, or Opulency to purchase Emi∣nency; insomuch that there hath been no action so evil, nor any attempt so pernicious in former times, but may be match'd in the declining of the Roman State: Where more Murthers? where more Corruption? where more Oppression than is mentioned in Histories to be practised amongst the Romans? the Lives of Men, the state of Provinces, and the Crowns of Kings sold for Money, but now her time is finished, and her Ruins are left for succeeding Ages to admire; that so in beholding they might learn to know the difference between Virtue and Vice; and from thence conclude, that there is nothing permanent; and that those things wherein men most glory do oftentimes soonest decay. For if this City which commanded the Na∣tions and Princes of the Earth (whose Colonies, Armies, Legions, Confede∣racies, and Treasures were so Mighty, and extended so far, that there was almost no Countrey unconquered, or Nation that did not fear to hear the Inhabitants thereof named) is made desolate and laid level with the Ground▪ what then may be said of petty Cities, Towns, Lordships, Manors and Hou∣ses; shall not they likewise be subject to the like Calamities, and wasted and destroyed through the continuance of time? Verily yea. Wherefore let not the King glory in his Power, nor the strong man in his Strength, nor the Rich man in his Riches: but let him that glorieth glory in the Lord.
A Table of the Persons, Towns, and Places men∣tioned in the fore-going Treatise. A. ADam Fol. 51 Abarim 93 Abel of the Vines 94 Abner, and his Travels 145 Abraham, and his Travels 56 The typical Signification of Abraham 62 Absalom, and his Travels 148 Achor 98 Aethiopia 154 Ajalon 98 Alexandria 244 Amanus 271 Achus Epiphanes and his Travels 245 Antiochus Eupator 269 Apamea 242 Aphec 123 Achitophel 142 Arabia 395 Aroer 114 Asdod 99 Azeca 98 Asteroth 66 Athens 410 Antipatris 419 Ahab, and his Travels 164 Aeziongaber 91 Arbona Ibid. Almon Diblathaim 93 Athniel 105 Arad 106 Abdon 115 Ascalon 117 Of the Ark of God 123 Abiathar 134 Abishag 150 Ahaziah 165 Ahaz King of Iuda 185 Ahaziah 180 Athalia 181 Amazia 182 Azariah Ibid. Adoraiim 176 Abia Ibib. Abiin 177 Aza Ibid. Amos 216 Ammon King of Iuda 187 Assarhaddon 196 Abelmehola 205 An Instruction to understand the Prophets. 223 An alphabetical Table of all the Cities and Countries mentioned in the Pro∣phets from 224 to 232 Abimelech, and his Travels 111 Abiathar, Abimelech's Son, and his, Travels 134 Ange 240 Antiochia 396 Asseremoth 253 Adarsa 259 Addus 265 Addor Ibid. Arabath 267 Alexander, Son of Epiphanes 270 Alcimus, and his Travels 280 Arbela 281 Adummim 324 Aenon 325 Antiochia Pisidia 400 Attalia Ibid. Amphipolis 409 Apollonia ibid. Assus 415 B. BAbylon from 191 to 194 Babylon in Aegypt 381 Baaena, and his Travels 148 Baesa, and his Travels 161 Bazra 237 Baelath 152 Benhadad, and his Travels 172 Benhadad II. 174 Berea 112, 182 Bethabara 325 Bethania 363 Bethoron or Bethocoron 152 Bethel 72 Bethlem 75, 318 Bethphage 364 Bethsaliza 129 Bethsan 132 Bethsemes 124 Bethsura 176 Bethulia 242 Beerzaba 61 Baalzephon 85 Benei Iaachon 91 Balaan, and his Travels 94 Besech 410 Bahurim 144 Baalhazor 148 Baaelath 152 Ben Merodach 197 Balthazer, Emperour of the Assyrians 201 Bildad 239 Bithron 146 Bischamath 265 Bethsaida 344 Bethbesan 263 Bythinia 405 C. CAdes Barnea 90 Caesarea Philippi 337 Caleb, and his Travels 104 The typical Signification of Caleb 105 Caphar Salama 259 Carchemis 200 Carmel 129 Cedron, or Kydron, a little Hill that runs through Ie∣rusalem 368 Chasor, or Hazor 264 Crete, and the Scituation thereof 273 Chehelah 89 Chasmona 90 Chesbon 93 Chineroth 173 Cilicia 141 Caspin 258 Caspia 233 Chazor, a Field 264 Canah in Galilee 321, 330 Capernaum ibib. Chorazin 345 Of Cana Syrophoenicia 353 Of Mount Calvary 369 Caesarea Strato 378 The Isle of Cyprus, and how 'tis scituated 397 Corinthia 412 The Isle of Chius, and how scituated 416
Cous, how scituated, and why so called 418 Of the Isle of Clauda, and how scituated 423 Of Colossa in Phrygia 418 D. DOthan, so called from com∣manding 80 Doch, a Castle 268 Dora, a Haven Town 275 Dibon Gad 93 Deborah and Barak 107 Debir 99 Danites, and their Travels 119 Demetrius Soter, and his Tra∣vels 269 Demetrius Nicanor, and his Travels 272 Decapolis, and why so called 354 Derbe 400 David, and his Travels 135 The typical Signification of David 144 Damascus, a famous City of Syria 394 Dibon Gad 93 The Prophet Daniel 212 E. ELeazer (Abraham's Servant) and his Travels 69 Esau, and his Travels 77 The typical meaning of Fsau ibid. Edrie 94 Elim 86 Eglon 99 Ehud 105 Of Mount Ephraim 106 Eson and Ebzan. 114 Estaol 117 Elimelech 122 Ecron 124 Engedi 130 Endor 132 Ella 162 Elah 183 Ezekias 186 Evil Merodath, Emperour of Babylon 201 Eliah the Prophet, and his Travels 203 The typical Signification of Eliah 206 Elizeus or Elisha ibid. His typical Signification 208 Ezekiel 241 Elam 115 Egbatana, a famous City ibid. 240 Euxine Sea 218 Eleutherius 264 Esdrasthe Lawyer 233 Of the Book of Esther 235 The Types and Figures col∣lected out of Esther ibid. Eliphaz the Temanite 238 Esdrelon 241 Ephraim 363 Emmaus 371 Ephesus 383 Queen Candaces Eunuch, and his Travels. 389 G. GIhon, a Hill 28 Gerar 61 The Country of Gilead 73 The Land of Gosen 76 Goren Atad 80 The Graves of Concupiscence 88 Gideon, Judge of Israel. 108 The typical Signification of Gideon 111 Gilgal 97 Gibithon 161 Gibeon 98 Gaza 100 Of Mount Gerizim 112 Gath 124 Of Mount Gilboa, where Saul killed himself 131 Gazer 144 Gesur 147 Gurbaal 184 Gath Hepher 217 Gesem 241 Genezereth 264 Gadara 339 The Lake of Genezereth 340 Of Gethsamene, and the Gar∣dens thereabout 367 Of the Country of Galatia, and how the Inhabitants came to be called Galati∣ans 402 Gnidus 422 H. HAran, or Charan 57 Hebron, and the Inhabi∣ thereof 60 The Field of Hakeldama 29 The Hill Hamoskita ibid. Hazezon Thamar 66 Hadad, and his Travels 158 Hagar, and her Travels 67 Hagar's Well, and the Signi∣fication of it 68 Heliopolis, otherwise called the City of the Sun 80 Hadsi 147 Of Mount Horeb 84 Hazaroth 88 Harada 89 Hor gidgad 91 Of the Mountain Hor 92 Hazor 101, 108 Hemath 97 Hai or Ai ib. Hiel 163 Hobab 106 Hasael, and his Travels 173 Hannah the Mother of Samuel, and her Travels 122 Haggai the Prophet 222 Hananias the false Prophet 211 Hosea the Prophet 215 Of the Prophet Habaccuck, when he lived, how he li∣ved, when he died, and where he lieth buried 222 Of the River Hydaspis 240 Hion 173 Hyrcania 274 Heliodorus, who would have robbed the Treasury of Ie∣rusalem 276 Hermopolis, or he Town of Mercury 320 Hosea, King of Israel. 170 I. OF Ierusalem 5 Of the Scituation of it 16 The Description of it ib. The Circuit and Bigness of it ib. The Gates of it 26, 27. The Destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian, from 29 to 37 Of Jerualem after this Destru∣ction, from 37 to 40
Of Ierusalem as it is now, from 40 to 46 Of the Sects in Ierusalem, from 46 to 51 Where Ishmael dwelt 69 Of Isaac, and his Travels 70 The typical Signification of Issac 71 Iacob, and his Travels 72 The typical Signification of Iacob 76 Iudah, and his Travels 78 Ioseph, and his Travels 79 The typical Signification of Ioseph 81 Jotbatha 91 Igim 93 Jahza ib. Jaezer ib. Iael, and her Travels 106 Ioshua, and his Travels 95 The typical Signification of Ioshua 101 The Names of the Kings that Ioshua overcame, and where they dwelt 102 Of Jehoahas King of Israel 166 Jaboch Jogbeha 110 Jotham 111 Of Jaier Judge of Israel 112 Jephta, and his Travels 113 The divers Opinions concern∣ing his Death 114 Jabes 122 Jonathan, Saul's Son, and his Travels 134 Of the Country called India 153 Jeroboam, and his Travels 159 Of Jeroboam's Wife, 161 The Journey of the men of God which came out of Juda ib. Jezreel 164 Jehoram, and his Travels 165 Jehu, and his Travels 166 Jehoahas ib. Jeroboam, the second of that Name, and his Travels ib. Jehosaphat, and his Travels 173 The typical Signification of Jehosaphat 179 Joab, and his Travels 146 Ioram King of Juda, and his Travels ib. Of Joas King of Israel 167 Joas King of Judah 181 Jabnia 184 Jotham, King of Juda, and his Travels ib. Josiah, and his Travels 188 Jehohahas King of Juda, and his Travels ib. Jehoiakim King of Juda, and his Travels 189 Of the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar 190 Of the Prophet Isaiah 208 Of the Prophet Jeremiah, and his Travels 210 Of the Prophet Joel 216 Of the Prophet Ionah, and his Travels 217 The typical Signification of Ionah 221 Japho 217 Of the holy Man Iob 236 Of his three Daughters 239 Of Jesus the Son of Syrack 244 Iudas Macchabeus, and his Travels 253 The typical Signification of Iudas Macchabeus 259 Ionathan, and his Travels 260 Iohn Hyrcanus, and his Tra∣vels 268 Iason, and his Travels 277 Iohn Baptist, and his Travels 323 Jericho 97, 362 Of Ioseph of Arimathea 363 Joppa 380 Iordan 100 Iohn, and his Travels 381 The testimony of the Fathers concerning Iohn 383 Iconium 400 K. KIriathaim 66 Karkor 110 Kirjath jearim 119 Kyr 195 Kerith 205 Keder 240 Kegilah 134 L. LAbassardach 201 Lot, and his Travels 62 Of Lot's Daughters 65 Of the Kings that took Lot Prisoner ib. Of Libnah 89, 99 Lachis ib. Libanus 100 The Levite and his Trav. 120 Lais 119 Of Lacedemonia, called also Sparta 278 Lidda 378 Laodicea 388 Lystra 400 M. DIversity of Miles 1 Of Mount Moriah 8, 62 The allegorical Signification of it 9 The Buildings upon Mount Moriah 19 Of Mount Acra, from 21 to 23 Of Mount Bezetha 24 Of the Mount of Olives 28, 365 Of the Mount between Bethel and Hay 59 Machanaim 74 Mount Seir 77 Moses and his Travels 81 Midian 83 Marah 85 Mithca 90 Maceheloth ib. Maseroth 91 Makedah 98 Merom 100 Mizpah 113 Minneth 114 Michmas 129 Maon 130 Memphis, by whom, and when built 155 Menahem, and his Travels 168 Maresa 176 Manasses, and his Travels 187 Micah 221 Malachi 223 Mallos 241 Mattathias 252 Medaa 263
Menelaus and his Travels 278 Of a Mina 284 The Virgin Mary and her Tra∣vels 315 Machares 325 Of the holy Mountain near Capernaum 338 Misia 406 Of the Isle and City of Miti∣lene 415 Of the Isle and City of Mile∣tus now called Malta 417 Magdala 354 Of the Island Milete 422 Merodach 197 Myra 419 Of Masloth 281 N OF Neapolis or the new town 25, 408 Of Noah 56 Of Nimroth ib. Nob 130 Nadab 161 Nabach 110 Naaman the Syrian and his Travels 173 Nebuchadnezzar and his Tra∣vels 197, 198 Ninus or Niniveh, when built, and by whom 219 Nahum the Prophet 221 Nehemiah the Prophet 234 Naphtaly 243 Nazareth 317 Naim 339 Nicopolis 429 Niriglissoroor 201 O OF the Cave of Odullam 7 Oboth 9 Omry, and his Travels 162 Obediah the Prophet 216 Orthosia 276 Onias, and his Travels ib. P OF the Pool of Bethesda 12 Of Paradice, and where it stood 51 Of the Palm or Oak of Mam∣re where Abraham dwelt 59 Penuel 74 Of Pihachiroth 84 Phunon 92 Pisgah 94 Of Phrygia 404 The Plain of the Vines ib. The Philistines Travels from their Camp to Michmas 133 Pharaoh and his Travels 155 Peka and Pekahiah 169 Of Phul Belochus King of the Assyrians and his Travels 194 Pharaoh Necho King of Aegypt and his Travels 203 Pelusio 200 Persepolis, when built, by whom, and why so called 250 Ptolomais 264 Of the Country of Parthia 274 Perea 338 Peter and his Travels 374 Allegations of the Author to prove that Peter was never at Rome 375 Of the Island called Pathmos 385 Of the famous City Pergamus 386 Philadelphia 388 Philip and his Travels 389 Paul and his Travels 391 Of Paphos, why so called 399 Of Perga ib. Of Philippa 408 Patara 420 Puteoli 427 Q THe Queen of Saba and her Travels 159 R OF the Roman mile 2 Rachels Grave 75 Raemses, at what time it flou∣rished 84 Of the Red Sea ib. The Mystery of the Red Sea 85 Rephadim 86 Rithmah 89 Rimmon ib. Rissa ib. Rechob 97 Of the Rock Eta 117 Ramah 120 Reson, Solomon's Adversary 159 Rehoboam and his Travels 175 Of the four Rivers that wa∣tered Paradise 52 Of the River Cheber 212 Of the River Eulaeo 214 Of the Angel Raphael 243 Of Rages, a City of the Medes ibid. Of the Isle and City of Rodes and why so called 419 Rhegium 427 Rome and why so called 249 Rogel 148 S OF Stades or Furlongs 1 Of Mount Sion 7 The Allegorical meaning of Mount Sion 8 Of the Springs and Fountains about Ierusalem 28 Of the Sarazens and Turks from 48 to 50 Of Sem 56 Sichem 58 Sodom 63 Of the Sea Asphaltites ibid. Of the Valley Siddim 67 Succoth 75 Salem ib. The Desart of Sin 86 Of Mount Sinai ib. Of Saphar 89 Sidon 100 Sampson and his Travels 115 The typical Signification of Sampson 110 Of the River Sorek 117 Samuel and his Travels 124 The typical Signification of Samuel 126 Saul and his Travels ib. The typical signification of Saul 133 Sur 143 Sunem ib. Suchar 144 Shimei 149 Solomon and his Travels 150 The typical signification of Solomon 153
Travels of Solomons Ships 153 Saba, and the Scituation of it, 154 Samaria, by whom built 163 Seleucia, when it was built and flourished 273 Syria ib. Of the Star that appeared to the Wise-men of the East 322 Sychar 332 The Sea of Galilee 338 Teh description of the holy Se∣pulchre 369 Sallum 168 Saerah King of Aethiopia, and his Travels 177 Salmanasser, and his Travels 195 Senacharib, and his Trav. 196 Sysach, King of Aegypt, and his Travels 202 Sarepta 205 The Sunamite and her Tra∣vels 208 Of Susan 213 Serubbabel 234 Sobal 241 Simon, and his Travels 265 Sephala 268 Of a Sicle 283 Siloh 101 Simon of Cyrene who carried Christ's Cross 372 Samaria 376 Smyrna 385 Sardis 387 Saba 390 Salamais 398 Samothracia 407 Samus, an Isle 417 T. TAnais 59 The desciption of the Temple 91 Of the Porches or open Courts of the Temple, from 11 to 15 Of the Allegorical or Spiritu∣al meaning of the Temple, from 16 to 19 The Tower Antonia 20 The Tower Ophel ib. The Tower of the Centurions 21 The Travels of the two Angels 64 the Tower Aeder 76 Thimnah 78 Thahath 90 Tharah ib. Thabor 107, 355 Thebes 111 Tholah 112 Thob 113 The Travels of the Children of Israel when they fought against the Benjamites 121 Thecoah 149 Thamar 152 Thirza 160 Thipza 169 The Travels of the People that Salmanasser carried into Captivity 10 Tiglat Phulasser, and his Tra∣vels 195 Tyrus, or Zor. 200, 347 Thisbe 205 Tharsis 206 Tobias 242 Of the City Tharsus 250 The Tubiani, a People 258 Tripolis 270 Tryphon, and his Travels. 274 Of a Talent 284 The Travels of the Wise Men out of the East 321 The Travels of our Saviour Christ in his Infancy 326 The Travels of our Saviour Christ from his Baptism till the first Year of his Mini∣stry 327 The Travels of our Saviour Christ in the second Year of his Ministry 333 The Travels of our Saviour Christ in the third Year of his Ministry 340 Tyberias 345 Trachonitis 353 The Travels of our Saviour Christ in the fourth Year of his Ministry 356 Thyatira 387 Tarsus, or Tharsus 393 Troas 407 Thessalonia, or Thessalonica 409 Trogillium 417 V. THe Valley of Cedron 24 The Valley of Hinnom 28 Vizziah, or Azariah, and his Travels 182 Vriah, ad his Travels 211 W. OF the Walls that compassed the City of Ierusalem 25 Of Weights, Measures, and Moneys, from 283 to 311 The way between Iudaea and Aegypt 320 Y. THe Years of the Iniquity of Israel 160 Z. ZOan 59 Zin Cades 92 Zalmona ib. Zarea 117 Zoba 129 Ziph 131 Ziglag 143 Zemeraim 160 Zephah 104 Zachariah 168 Zarea 176 Zedekiah 189 Zephaniah 222 Zachariah ib. Zophar 239 Zabadei 264 Zacharias 314 Zidon 350 Zeboim 133 Zimri 162 FINIS.
