B6245 11675309 48096
A Iust and True REMONSTRANCE OF HIS MAIESTIES MJNES-ROYALL IN THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES. Presented By Thomas Bushell Esquire, Farmor of the said Mines-Royall to his Majestie. Printed at London by E.G. 1641. ¶ Cum priilegio.
Most high and mighty Soveraigne, WHereas Your Majesty was graciously pleased not onely to command my service to be im∣ployed in your Highnesse Mines Royall, upon occasion of some discourse of them at Enston-Rock, when your Majesty vouchsafed to ho∣nour that place with your presence: but also to give your Majesty a true relation, what they were when I entred up∣on them, what they are since at present, and of what hope for the future, if diligently pursued and cherisht by your Royall aspect. In obedience whereunto, I do in all humi∣lity affirme, that the Mines at my first entrance were drown'd with water, and consequently not worth the working as by severall certificates hereunto annexed appeareth, which did then much disencourage my undertakings: but considering my deepe engagements for your Majesties, many favours extended to me, the meanest of your Sub∣jects, I conceaved my selfe obliged to adventure upon the undermining of the adjacent Mountaines, thereby forth∣with to make triall, whether those Mines (if once discov∣red at the surface of the earth) would not prove richer in their deeper search, for experimenting whereof, ha∣ving received severall opinions from the best Mineral-ma∣sters of our age, as Sir Francis Godolphin, M. Alexander Ro∣berts, M. Ioseph Hexsteter, and M. Walter Barksby, with divers others well practised in that way, encouraging me therein; I then resolved to hazzard my fortune on them, assuring my self that all Minerals were to be discovered by some one or other. Because originally created for mans use, and Gods glory: and thus having setled my former irresolute
thoughts, I began with a cheerefull heart to cut through the maine Rockes of five severall mountaines, at their lowest levell, appearing by the Art of Dialling to be some sixtie, some eightie, and some an hundred fa∣thomes perpendicular, and so continued these battery-workes foure yeares, night and day, before my hopes could give me any happie assurance that the Minerall-beds of the earths riches, lay fast lock'd in those barren Rocks, untill my charge grew so great, that I became pitied of my friends, and insulted over by my enemies, which did anew perplex my minde; yet when I considered that I was not borne for my selfe, but for the service of God, your Maje∣stie, and my Countrie, and that I had not only that heaven∣ly guider to direct me, but also your sacred Majestie to en∣courage me, I then began to cast off these my former just∣ly conceived feares, and (notwithstanding any opposition or seeming diswasive arguments or experiments by any o∣ther) to pitch on this resolution, that better it were for mee to suffer shipwracke in my poore estate and credit, then that such treasures should lye buried in the BOWELS of those vast mountaines, and not be made both knowne, and be∣neficiall to your gracious Majestie, being inherent to your prerogative, as by the declaration under the hands of lear∣ned Councell hereunto annexed appeares, which hils al∣though large in extent, yet are not considerable in her∣bage, nor fit for any other plough, then the Miners sledge, gad, and twybill. That which first wrought in me a desire to try and fa∣thome those mines was a sensible discourse delivered me, by a Portugall in presence of Sir Francis Godolphin (by whose death I lost the hope of a most knowing partner) who had beene for many yeares imployed under the King of Spain in his West Indian Mines purporting that if his Master were
Soveraine Lord of those Brittish hils, as is your Majestie, he would not doubt but to make them a second Indies, and affirming with deepe protestations, that the greatest riches in those Mountaines lay in their lowest levels, which I finde to be true by laborious experiment, in those five mountaines. For by this way of working, and dri∣ving through the depth of Rocks, we are not only freed from the danger and deluge of waters, but also have discovered an increase of rich veines in quantity and qualitie, some containing twentie pound, some fifteene, some tenne, and some six in Silver, in the Tunne of Lead upon the great Test, which are answerable to most of the Mines, of the King of Spaine, the Emperour of Germany, and the Duke of Saxony; moreover we find that by mixing and smelting these severall veines together, the one proves a good additament to the other, and becomes thereby a meanes to advance the Mines Royall, and in them the good of your kingdome and Subjects. We have many gracious testimonies how much the Al∣mighty is pleased with these our innocent labours; by his continuall preservation, of the workemen amidst their hourely dangers, especially in one accident, which lately befell, upon occasion of driving an Addit into one of those mountaines called Tallybont, but because I was no eye-witnesse of it, I humbly desire your majesties perusall of the narration thereof (as I received it) being then in London, from a minister resident Preacher to the Minerall men, hereunto annexed. And as I am bound to give to Caesar that which is Caesars, I must further humbly acknowledge your Majesties large addition to your former Royall favours in granting mee (the meanest of your Creatures) liberty to give your Ma∣jesties impression to such Silver as the Mole-like Miners
cast out of the Earth, for their speedier payment, for they are the men who make the rocks their resting place, and expect no other reward or benefit for their sweaty browes then what they gaine from out of the darke Cavernes of the earth by harmelesse and importunate labour. And for declaration of part of my poore indeavours, your humblest suppliant begs a perusall of the annexed re∣monstrance, presented by your honourable and grave mi∣nisters of Justice, and other noble Gentlemen of quality, residing within your Principality of Wales, whose eyes have beene spectatators, as your servant, a diligent labourer in those Minerall Vineyards. And having thus far traced out, & dived into the secrets of natures treasures, & by the influ∣ence of your majesties favours, overcome those amazing difficulties, which hindred the entrance of these great ad∣ventures, (I then for better improvement of the workes, caused a meeting of Miners, Monyers, smelters and refiners, to consult debate and try, whether fuell of turfe would not separate the Oare, extract the silver, & reduce the Litharge, as well as the vast expence of whose Forrests of Woods formerly consumed for that purpose; and upon an exact triall made thereof, by altering the earthy substance of urfe into charkie cyndars, we found by infallible expe∣rience, that Your Majesties Turffaries will furnish Your Mines Royall with Fuell to all future ages. So that there re∣maineth nothing more to make the inside of these barren Mountains, produce an addition of gems to your Crowne, but to finish the building of your Princely foundation by your Royall recommendation thereof to your High Court of Parliament, whose judgements, will quickly discerne how much these Mines would redound to the generall good; Your Maiesties gracious letters ha∣ving already caused sundry Merchants, and Gentle∣men
of quality, to take a personall view of the harmlesse gaine, which accrewes from this publike work of the Mines Royall, as a maenes to inrich Your subiects the ancient Britaines of those parts, with the free trade, & vent of their Home-made-Cloth, & to employ & enable them to become Merchant-adventurers, as well by land as Sea. And for ma∣nifest proofe of my proceedings in this businesse, I shall with Your Royall assent, humbly desire a commission from the High Court of Parliament▪ to examine the former and present state of the Mines Royall, and Your Maiesties riches that are buried under the most inconsiderable herb∣age, of these vast Mountaines, which in time may alter the name of Welch Rockes into Welch Indies, and make it plain∣ly appeare to any (who is not meerely of an earthly, and avaritious temper, and can in any measure resent the nou∣risher and true support of a flourishing State, that they▪ (if followed) cannot but prove flowers to the Crowne, a glo∣ry to the kingdome, and a rich blessing to the subiect. Be pleased therefore most gracious Soveraigne, to vouchsafe that the beames of Your Royall favour, may cherish the growth of this hopefull designe, so as it be not blasted in the bud, and then my affectionate endeavours prove as fruitlesse to this Common wealth, as was the neglected tender of Columbus his discovery of the West-Indian-Mines in the raigne of Henry the seaventh. And to make it in some measure appeare to your Ma∣jesty, how desirous I am to advance your revenew in an imployment so much conducing to the publick good, I doe in all humblenesse offer (as an increase of rent after the expiration of the Lady Middletons Lease assigned to me and yet in being) one thousand pounds by the yeere for and during the continuance of another lease thereof granted to me in reversion, for confirmation of which
leases by your Majestie, and your High Court of Parlia∣ment, I do further humbly present 1000 Markes as a pre∣fine to your Majesties Privie Purse; over and above the benefit of your Majesties Mintage, the increase of shiping, and the importation of necessary commodities, occasio∣ned hereby, which às I am informed by Merchants of good worth that drive the trade, will amount to 4000 li. per annum. And for grant of the custome of exportation of such Lead only, out of which the silver is refined, I will (so it please your Majestie) be bound to double the yeerely Revenew of the Farmers booke, according to a medium, of seaven yeares cast up for that Port of Dovy: your Majestie having not from any former undertaker, or Farmour of those Mines, ever received either fine or penny of rent, all which I submissively propose, & desire the ra∣ther, to encourage my Coadventurers, who as they were first invited by Your Princely letters of assurance, so will they now (things being thus honourably setled) be most willing to expose their fortunes, for the consummating of so advantagious, so honourable, and so publick a good worke. Having thus made to your Majesty a true relation of the state of your Mines Royall in Wales, and a faithfull explication of my loyall intendments & of other Mine∣rall mens opinions conceived of those Mines, I professe before God and your sacred Majestie, that I therein, have no other ends, then the glory of my Maker, the honour of your Majestie, & the good of my Country. Let me there∣fore on a bended knee humbly implore your Soveraigne goodnesse, not only to peruse these Petitions, and Certifi∣cats annexed, but also to pardon the constrained pro∣lixity of Your Majesties most humble and devoted servant Thomas Bushell.
The declaration of learned Law∣yers what a MINE-ROYALL is, according to former presidents. ALthough the Gold or Silver contained in the base mettall of a mine, in the lands of a Sub∣ject, be of lesse valew then the baser Metall, yet if the Gold or Silver doe countervaile the charge of the refining, or be of more worth then the base Mettall spent in refining it, this is a Mine-Royall, and as well the base Mettall, as the Gold and Silver in it, belong by prerogative to the Crowne, Sir. Ralph Whitfeld. His Majesties Serjeant at Law Sir Ed. Harbert. Att. Gen. Oliver Saint Iohns. Sollic. Iohn Glandvill. Serjeant. Iohn Wilde. Sejeant. Rich. Creswell. Serjeant. Or. Bridgman the Pr. Sol. Robert Holborne. Esq. Iohn Herne, Esq. Edward Bagshaw. Esq. Thomas Lane. Esq. Richard King. Esq. Edmond Prideaux. Esq. Iohn Maynard. Esq. Edward Hide. Esq. Esquiers. Iohn Glyn. Charles Fulwood. Harbottle Grimston. Iohn White. George Peard. Iohn Francklin. Richard Weston. Iohn Glover. William Ellis. Thomas Culpeper. Iohn Goodwin. William Sanford. John George. James Haward.
To the Kings most excellent Majestie. The humble Petition of THOMAS BVSHELI Your Majesties servant. Most humbly sheweth, THAT whereas your Royall her of ever blessed memory,  was truly stiled the King of Peace, and mirror of mercy to the sparing of life and bloud, was graciously plea∣sed for saving the lives of such malefactors, as were condemned to death by the Law for petty fel∣lonies, being such as were not any scandall to the Church or State, nor had imbrewed their hands in blood, to admit their transportation to the East India, and Virginia Companies, for furtherance of their plantations. In which action doubtlesse hee did also cast his eyes upon the warrantable proceedings and presidents of other most fa∣mous Princes in the like kind, as the late Queene ELIZABETH, who built certaine Gallies of purpose
for imployment of such kind of offenders, of strong and able bodies, as might attend her memorable designes at Sea, especially upon all suddaine and re∣solute enterprizes; it being the usuall course of o∣ther Christian Princes, as the King of Spaine, both for the supply of his Gallies against the Turkes, and Moores, and especially for the enlargement of his Indian Mines of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, and the like, and his conquests of Mollocco, Goa, Ormus, and other rich and populous Ilands. The King of France for his Gallies at Marsellis. The State of Ve∣nice. The Duke of Florence, who by such kind of saved offendors built Legorne (one of the most fa∣mous Sea-ports within the Straits.) In all which States and services, divers of these malefactors by good incouragements have sought not so much by surviving, as by their incredible labours, effecting matters, otherwise held invincible, to obliterate their former ignominies by merit of rewards. And whereas in this your Majesties populous King∣dome, too many such offendors are most untimely cut off in their best abilities of service, so is there within the pale of this Your Kingdome, and with∣out any occasion of Sea, or forreine service, meanes of imployment for such persons, to redeeme their lost reputation, by endeavouring to doe faithfull service for their Countries honour, and the King∣domes good, in that happy worke, begun by Your Sacred Majesty, for the better discovery of Your
Silver Mines. His most humble suite therefore is that you would bee pleased out of all these weighty considerations and beneficiall consequences, tending so much to your Honour, Crowne and Dignity, and good of the Common-wealth, to grant Your Majesties Commission, (if it may bee thought fit by the advise of Your High and Honourable Court of Parliament) for the choosing of such severall per∣sons out of the prisons in this your Kingdome, as are, and shall be condemned for small offences, and of able serviceable bodies, by the approbation of Your Judges, and shall implore Your Majesties mercy to bee imployed by your said subject in the Works of your Mines-Royall, they giving security for their good behaviour, with such limitation of time, and allowance for their sustentation; as to Your Majesties said High Court of Parliament shall be thought fit, that by their dutifull and laborious performance therein, they may afterwards come into the happinesse of your Majesties pardon of Grace for their former offences, And your Petitioner shall ever rest, &c.
To the Kings most excellent MAIESTY. Most Gracious SOVERAIGNE, THE Loyalty of my faithfull service, will not suffer me to conceale a bequeathed Le∣gacy to your Majesty by the last Will and Testament of your most Loyall Subject IOHN Bishop of Worcester lately deceased of a treasure discovered by him, and committed to my trust, for the revealing thereof to your Majesty. Who perceiving the inclination, and affection I had to Mynes, and Mineralls▪ much commending it, as the most honest gaine, and greatest good to a Common-wealth, began this ensuing discourse unto me. Mr. BVSHELL, YOur owne eyes see how neare I am to the dwelling of death, by my gray hayres which are the true Records of fourescore and foure∣teene yeares of age, next my limbs which have no more strength, then those that are lap't in the Sepul∣chre of their winding-sheet, only my intellectuall parts are yet preserved, to ascribe God the glory, and
to disclose the secrets of two rich Mines, the one hol∣ding some quantity of Gold, worth the Extracting, the other in Silver worth the Refining; to your trust and fidelity, with a confidence that your charity cannot conceive me guilty, of betraying your judge∣ment with an imaginary treasure, when my soule and body are so neare the approach of death, as I must suddainly give an account in the other world, besides I have taken upon me, the calling of a spirituall pro∣fession, And have this day, received the Sacrament, as a pledge of my redemption, which I trust are sufficient motives, to beleeve truth from a dying mans tongue, who hath no other end, then that the hopefullnes of such riches, may not be buried by my dissolution, but that the honour and profit thereof might redownd to his Majesty, and his Royall po∣sterity, as a living and loyall remembrance of his Princely favours to me and mine. And thereupon he did enjoyn me upon the integri∣ty of my allegiance, to consecrate the first fruits of my labours therein, as his discovery and service to your sacred selfe: and thus having made a true rela∣tion of his discourse to me, I leave it to your Majesties wisdome to approve or dislike. Your MAIESTIES most humble Servant THOMAS BVSHELL
To the most Illustrious PRINCE CHARLES Prince of Wales. Most High and Mighty PRINCE, AS the smaller Rivulets by their natu∣rall motions make haste to pay their tribute unto the vast Ocean, as well as doe the greatest rivers: So come I with humble assurance, that your Highnesse will not despise this poore present, extracted out of your Welsh Mines, wishing the coyne could speak that language of Ophir, as it doth this of Cardigan, wherein I trust by Divine Providence, and your Princely prevailing with the most honourable Court of Parliament, for the confirmation thereof; I doubt not but that in processe of time, I shall be able
with the assistance of my Coadventurers, and helpe of their greater purse and fortunes: to make these Brittish hills, as in scituation, so in esteeme too, re∣semble the West Indies, or at least wise those re∣nowned mines of Saxony. Thus I most humbly take leave of your High∣nesse, hoping your Princely goodnesse will pardon my presuming to present so great a Prince, with so poore a present, as doth in all humblenesse. Your Highnesse devoted Bedsman, THOMAS BVSHELL.
To our dread Soveraigne Lord The KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY. May it please your Majesty, WEE doe most humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that by Your Majesties vouchsafing to this your Principality the trust of a branch of Your Royall Mint, is an honour that neither our Ance∣stors nor our selves durst wish for; and we doe as humbly and as thankfully acknow∣ledge and confesse, that by it you have not onely honoured us more, then any of Your Royall predecessors; but you have there∣by offered us the means to enrich our selves, to the making of us happier then our fa∣thers,
in freeing us from the cares and feares that hindred us from driving into these Mountaines that promise a masse of treasure. For be pleased to know, that be∣fore Your Majesty vouchsafed unto us this great favour, we were fearefull to adven∣ture far into the mountaines, because wee had far to send before wee could make the silver currant, that wee should at charge re∣cover. Nor was our care of carriage and recarriage the least hinderance to our pro∣ceedings, from all which by Your Majesties goodnesse, and the endeavours of Your in∣dustrious and faithfull servant Thomas Bushell, we are happily freed; for which favour, we whose names are hereunto sub∣scribed in the behalfe of all the inhabitants of this your Principality of WALES, doe render all humble and hearty thanks, and for them, and our selves, doe hereby pro∣mise to Your sacred Majesty, that we will doe our utmost endeavours, to finde out that measure, which we beleeve God and Nature from the Creation hath preserved
for Your Majesties use; that thereby wee may approve our selves Your Majesties loyall and most obedient Subjects and humble Servants, Thomas Milward Knight, Chiefe Iustice of Chester. Marmaduke LLoyd Knight. Richard Price K. Baronet. James Price Knight. Sampson Eure Knight. Iohn Lewis Knight. Timothy Turnor Esquire. I. Littleton Esq. Walter LLoyd Esq. Thomas Price Esq. Robert Corbet Esq. Evan Gwin Esq. Morgan Herbert Esq. Iohn Ʋaughan Esq. Vincent Corbet Esq. Humfrey Greene Esq. Iohn LLoyd Esq. David LLoyd ap Reigh∣nald Esq. Thomas Phillips Esq. Iohn Edmund Esq. Hugh LLoyd Gentlem. David Rees Gent. Iohn Bowen Gent. William Watkin Gent. Iohn Meredith Gent. Iames Kegitt Gent.
A Certificate from the Miners, presented to the Right Honourable, the Lords and other of his Majesties most Honourable Privy COVNCELL. May it please your Lordships, ACCORDING to your commands, We whose names are under written, being Miners, Smelters, Refiners, Carryers, Washers, and Monyers belonging to his Majesties Mines Royall, in the County of Cardigan, in all humi∣lity doe certifie of our certain knowledge and expe∣rience, concerning the new workes lately discovered by Gods providence to Thomas Bushell Esquire, Far∣mer of his Majesties Mines-Royall in these parts, that the said Master Bushell at his inestimable charge, having cut six hundred Fathome through the Rock at the lowest levels, North and South, for discove∣ring the lost veyne of Cum-sum lock, lying East and West, two hundred Fathome through the Moun∣taine of Tallybont, at sixty Fathome perpendicular, three severall Addits at Koginean, one above ano∣ther, twenty, and thirty Fathome center, another at the Darren, to come under the Romans worke, at an hundred Fathome center, another at Bryn-LLoyd fifty Fathom in length, and thirty Fathome Center, work∣ing
day and night for the Drayning of the water, which formerly in the time of Customer Smith, and Sr. Hugh Middleton in their working of the Mines-royal was never used, they only working upon the Su∣perficies of the Earth, the workes being drowned with water before they could sinke to the best of the veyne, both for quantity and quality, and so the charge made to exceed the benefit, which danger is pevented by the aforesaid▪ Addits, and the Royall Mines become more hopefull, especially by the as∣sistance of his Majesties mint, for the speedy pay∣ment of all those that are imployed in the said works, and Mr. Bushels own invention to save Wood, by reducing the Ore into Lead, and Silver, with Turffe and Sea-cole Charked, which happy inven∣tion had it not been found out, the works must needs have been left unwrought, the Country not able to have supplyed necessary Fewell. And further by the prohibition of transporting Ore unwrought, that holdeth silver worth the refining, which uncon∣trol'd liberty of transporting formerly, His Majesty in his Princely wisdome saw to bee very prejudi∣ciall, even to the utter overthrow of his Mines Royall. We have therfore great reason to be confident that his way of working, with the restraint of transport∣ing Ore, wil in short time greatly increase the Bullion of this Kingdome, for the honour of the King, and good of the Common-wealth, together with the employment of many hundred poore people, which would be otherwise an unsupportable burthen to this barren Country, who by their present labour
in these Mines are able to subsist with their Fami∣and thousands more might be daylie set on work if Mr. Bushells undertakings in the Mines Royall may be confirmed for a certaine time by this present High Court of Parliament. Miners. David Fowles. William Rashly. Henry Cokler. David Bebb. Joseph Jefferies. George Turner. Robert Lowning. Thomas Fletcher. David Evans. George Dixon. Hugh Mason. David ap Richard. David Loyd. David Williams. Henry Emblin. Maurice Taylor. John Emblin. Edward Reece. Hugh Reece. William Davids. George Scotsmer. Thomas Brickhead Will. Griffith. Peter Baltiser. Francis Pierce. Maurice Lewis. Peter Edriser. Edward Blewys. Rob. Emblin. Rob. Tailor. David Iinkins. Ioseph Acherson. Tho. Blewys. Michael Sanders. Morgan Williams. Tho Clocker. Tho. Greene. Barthol. Clocker. Francis Fisher. Hugh Benn. John Mason. George Tickle. John Mason. Iohn Fishr. Edmund Poole. Edw. Bebb. Iohn Mason sen. Will. Ficharett.
Evan Thomas. Iohn Harris. Will. Tyson. Watkin Reece. Iohn Smith. Morgan Pritchet. Griffith Iohn. Will. Reece. Iohn Tuddar. Iohn Huson. Phillip Benn. Thomas Iames. With two Hundred more, whom for brevity we omit to name. Moniers. Henry Such. Iohn Corbet. Richard Arnold. Refiners. Iohn Estopp. David Estopp. Samuell Iohnson. William Sturgeon. Thomas Parker. Arthur Elissa. Smelters. Thomas Botham. Hugh Iames. Griffith Evans. Iohn Watkin. Iinkin Owen. Iohn Epslie. Iohn Evans. Iohn Lewes. Iames Meredith. Washers. Iohn Wringe. Morgan Iohn Lewis. Davy Iohn. Iohn Iinkins. Morgan Griff. Iohn Edmund Symons. Reece Morgan. Charles Williams. Thomas Adams.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE the LORDS and others of His MAIESTIES most Honourable Privy Councell. ACcording to Your Honours command wee have enquired and considered how the Mines-Royall were left to Master Bushell by the Lady Middleton, and doe in all humility declare, that the silver mines were not worth the working, untill Master Bushell at his great charge discovered Rich Ore in the adjacent mountaines, which in all likeli∣hood will both increase the Bullion & by his way of working, in short time give his Majesty a true tryall what the invaluable riches of these His Welsh moun∣taines are: for whereas the Mines in these parts were formerly wrought by Pumpes, and so grow∣ing deepe were left drowned with water, M. Bushell cuts through the maine Rockes, at the lowest levell, to an hundred fathome perpendicular, according to the German manner of working, which though chargeable, yet certaine, having foure severall Ad∣dits which hee continueth driving day and night into foure severall mountaines, his industry also hath
outstript former times, for by melting the poore fusible Ore, with the Rich, he produceth a third part more of silver with the same charge: and for accommodating the workes with all materials fit for Mines Royall, he hath spared no cost about repairing the milles, hath also built in his Majesties Castle of Aberystwith a faire mint, hath contracted with mer∣chants of our owne and other Nations to supply the peoples necessity with Corne and other provisions, and payeth the miners and carriers at the Scales, and doubteth not to make them able Pyoners, and fit souldiers to doe His Majesty and their Country ser∣vice upon any assault of an enemy. All which we commend to Your Honourable consideration, pray∣ing, &c. Your Lordships humbly to be commanded, Joseph Hexsteter, chiefe Steward of the Mines. Samuel Reynish, Assay Masters of the Mint. Water Barkesby, Assay Masters of the Mint. Humphrey Owen, Clarke of the Mines.
DIE SABBATI 14. Aug. 1641. WHereas this House hath beene in∣formed, that Thomas Bushell Es∣quire, undertaker of His MA∣IESTIES Mines-Royall in the County of Cardigan, by his great charge and industry in cutting Addits hath gained His MAIESTIES old drowned and forsaken workes of Tallybont, and other workes. And made new discoveries of Royall mines there, which are already very con∣siderable. And whereas divers persons of qua∣lity encouraged by His MAIESTIES Letters to them directed, doe intend to adventure great summes of money in the said workes, which in time (if well incouraged) may prove of great Consequence, both for Honour and Profit to His MAIESTY and the Kingdome. And where∣as also it appeareth unto this House by divers Affidavits and Certificats of credit that some persons ill affected to these Honourable and Pub∣like services who in time may receive deserved
punishments, have disturbed the possession of the said Thomas Bushell in some of His MAIESTIES Mines-Royall, and Edifices appertaining to the Royall workes. And have plucked up divers plumps cast in the Rubbish, drowned, and (so much as in them did lie) destroyed the said works, so as it hath beene a labour of foure yeeres night and day to recover the same. And that also the said Thomas Bushell hath beene disturbed in the getting of Turfe and Peate for the service of His MAIESTIES workes, being an invention of his owne, very commendable and commodious for the preserving of Wood, which hath been here∣tofore by the former undertakers much wasted in those parts. Now for the remedy of the said mischiefes, and that the said Thomas Bushell and his Assignes, and such persons as are or shall be Undertakers and Adventurers with him in the said Services, may receive all due Incouragement and Assistance in those Chargeable undertakings. It is ordered by the LORDS in the Upper House of Parliament now assembled. That the Speaker of this House, in the Name, and by the Autho∣rity of the same, shall direct His Letters unto the Iudges of Assize, and Iustices of the Peace of the said County of Cardigan: Requiring them, that they doe in all lawfull things endeavour to ad∣vance, and encourage the said service in His MAIESTIES Royall Mines, and assist the said Thomas Bushell and other Undertakers, in all things so farre as lawfully they may, both for the
continuance of his lawfull Possessions, and the quiet and peaceable working of the said mines, untill he shall be evicted by due course of Law, as also for getting and working of Turfe and Peate, according to his Legall right upon his MAIE∣STIES Wasts, and other places lawfull, and all other lawfull accommodations of necessary passages, and other Legall things, which may any waies advance His MAIESTIES service in the said Royall mines. JO. BROVVNE, Cler. Parliament.
A letter from the L. KEEPER to the Iustices of Assise, &c. AFter my very hearty Commenda∣tions, I have here inclosed sent you an Order made in the House of the Lords now assembled in Parlia∣ment, which you are carefully to ob∣serve and performe according to the directions thereof in all things, so far as Lawfully you may. So not doubting of your readinesse therein, J bid you heartily farewell, and rest Excester-house 26. Aug. 1641. Your very loving friend ED. LITTLETON Cust. Sig.
A letter to Mr. Bushell, relating some strange accidents, which happened in the MINES. Honoured Sir, SVffer my congratulations of your late successe at Tallibont, to be admitted amongst the rest who have represented the same to your imagination: not so much for the historicall report of it, as for speculation on it; So it becomes my quality, for the rest are interessed, I a looker on Your Addit or great drift of Talybont, after above 200 fathome in foure yeers driving to come at the chiefe shaft of the old drown'd worke of 38 fa∣thome deep, being pearced by the water of the old worke, Iune 27. at midnight there befell two memorable accidents. The foure workmen about one in the night (as their manner was) withdrew to take Tobaco within ten fathome of the Addits mouth, lest in the forefield it should damp the ayre, which was conveyed to them by your leaden pipes with bellows. Their smoakie banquet was not yet at an end, when they heard a mighty and fearefull noise, which some of them said was thunder. But old Bartholmew Clocker (a well experienced Miner) although he left the worke without any suspition of so neere an approach, resolved suddenly, the worke is holed, come let us away. No sooner had they gotten the free ayre, but out gusheth the torrent of water with an incredible fury, such a breach it made in the solid Rocke, that it arose a full yards height at the Addits mouth and drove away above 100 Tun
of the rockie deads, affrighting the people of Talybont, who heard the noise and felt the water in their houses. I doe not remember that I was ever more astonish'd at the prodigious∣nesse of any spectacle, to see what perdition was threatned to the poore men, and they so to escape it. About foure houres after, the violence of water being past, Fisher one other of the Miners went in with more curiosity than wit, to see what ef∣fect it had wrought there: and being some sixty fathome in creeping very low, his candle enkindled a vapour, which came on him with three or foure flashes, and he suddenly returning had his haire burnt off, and his cloathes scorched, in which conclusion it gave a crack like the report of a peece, and in a fierce gust of wind blew out the Candles of three more com∣ming after him. To omit the Philosophicall inquisition of na∣turall causes, I account his preservation in as high a degree of wonder as the first. Thus happy are you here when least you think of it, for I finde the subterranean spirits, the supposed guardians of concealed treasure, as officious for you as if they were in pay with you. But in a stile more proper to my pen, Behold Sir, how deare you are to providence, which for your sake hath vouchsafed to digresse into a miracle, and such a one as is able to convert the most Sophisticall Atheist, whence your piety will inferre, that the gracious Authour of this in∣comparable bounty, expects from you some gratefull service, as high above ordinary (according to mortall capacity) as this favour hath been extraordinary We are all deepely in the same engagement, and have learned by this experiment, that these Addits or approaches (for thats the sence of the name of old deluge works) are attempts of desperate hazzard. Me thinks these Mountaines are as so many pregnant wombs, and now in labour call for your fortunate hands to deliver them, to the honour of your Royall Master, and perpetuated glory of the Nation.
What should you doubt in an imployment so serenely smil'd upon, by the highest both of Heaven and Earth? You use no enchantment or magneticall Rod to discover the veines; your only magicke, is an ingenuous conjecture of probabilities, with a cheerfull and indefatigable industry, which hath hitherto succeeded beyond expectation of most, and (peradventure) the desires of some. But who (as Agricola makes the question) that is not of a nature impoyson'd with envy, and malitiousnesse,Lib. 1. do R.M. can beare unfriendly thoughts to him, whose substance is in a man∣ner presented by the hand of God. I know it would be a motive of very feeble operation to tell you how Princes and States have raised their Crownes, by de∣scending into such abyssesses as these; with some of whom wan∣ton antiquity hath been pleased to sport her selfe, and to play upon the simplicity of many, as Midas, Gyges the Argonauts, Croesus, with the States of Athens, over whose Minerals was that renowned Thucydides a Praefect, as you are here. Of which Pliny delivers what may be worthy your attention, when he saies of them, that they were in a fruitlesse soyle, and on the hils, (as these with us.) And wheresoever one veine was found, it was not far from another; among which was one cal∣led Bebelo, that afforded him 300. pound weight of Silver a day. These were then the veines which conveyed the blood and spirit of life through all the limmes of his victorious Host. And have you not here our Britaines Asturia before you? Who knowes whether it may not yeeld a Bebelo? at least a Sne∣berg or Anneberg, who hath heretofore dream't of a Mine at Comsomloch, or of the happy lot you lately drew from the Mountaines of Keginian, Talybont, the Darren, Broom-Floyd and Cum-mervin? What did the outside of these pro∣mise you mere then the countenances of their neighbours? But
the complaint of learned Dr. Jurdan may here take place, that much silver was lost, for want of taking it out of Lead-Oares. For whereas those Oares which are rich in silver are common∣ly hard of fusion our minerall men neglect those Oares. No doubt many are concealed by reason they are Mines Royall. Where had been the Woods and Forrests yet undestroyed on these bald-headed Promontories that might suffice had you not taught the earth to afford you all, and the worthlesse valley, to meete the barren hill, by sending in fewell, to give forme to the matter: so that here is a rich bequest you leave to posterity, I meane your Eternizing the works, by preventing the excesse of water, and defect of fire. I have no more, but to signifie my confidence, that as your desires are set on the mate∣riall Rocks of Wales and Enstone, so will your better affe∣ctions be firmely grounded upon the Rock Christ Jesus, that no tempest may be able to shake you, when the Sandy projects of other will be laved to nothing by the floods they are built upon. Which will give more comfort and satisfaction to you then can be expressed by your True Friend and Servant, THO. BRODWAY. Julii 4. 1641.
An answer to Mr. Broadwaies LETTER. M. Broadway, YOur true relation, and lively expression of the miraculous delivery of the poore Mi∣ners from the deluge of Waters, which issued forth, upon the cutting through of Tallybont mountaine, seemeth by the con∣tents of your Letter to promise no other reward, to the first discoverers, then imminent danger of present death, in which, as in all things, we must ascribe the glory to God alone, and as the children of Israel were to meet with many hard accidents in those desarts, so must we resolve to encounter with many bitter stormes before we can discover Natures riches hidden in those mountaines, and who can expresse my sufferings, prising my reputation above life or fortunes? For fame flying with the wings of malice, desirous to put a period to these my harmlesse endeavours, hath made as you part∣ly know, my supposed friends, to become my professed Foes, and my neerest in blood, my greatest sorrow, lea∣ving me as naked, as was Job in his greatest affliction, some construing these my Minerall adventures to be but the fabricke of a fantasticke braine, others alledging that the greatnesse of my charge would ruine both me, and those who gave me credit, whereby those friends that conferred on me timely curtesies, instead of en∣creasing,
or continuing them, were moved to presse me for more speedy paymēt, then my present abilities were able to make good. What throes of sorrow perplext my midnight thoughts in these deepe ingagements, I leave to you to judge. I will therefore hasten my com∣ming downe, to settle the affaires of this great worke, that I might redeeme the mispent time of my youth by some memorable designe in my age, the hopefulnesse whereof you are pleased so to amplifie, which I trust will give livelyhood to many, injury to none, and be of much honour to our Nation, which was ever the height of my ambition, resolving to rest content with whatso∣ever the wise disposer of all should conferre upon me, and hereafter to leave those friends in trust, whom I found firmest, thereby both to pay themselves, and sa∣tisfie others, to whom I stand engaged. And thus with many thanks for your kind letter, and good counsell, I shall ever remaine Your faithfull friend, THO. BUSHELL.
