B779 10789525 45917
THE Great Preservative of Mankinde: OR The transcendent Vertue of the true SPIRIT OF SALT. Long look'd for, and now Philosophically prepar▪d and purified from all hurtfull or Corroding Qualities, far beyond any thing yet known to the World; being both safe and pleasant for the use of all Men, Women, and Children. By a Physicall Laboratory in LONDON, where all man∣ner of Chymicall preparations are carried on, without any So∣phistication, or abuses whatsoever. . LONDON, Printed by R. D. in the year 1662.
THE TRANSCENDENT VIRTUE Of the true SPIRIT of SALT. THere have been so many false preparations of that, commonly called, The Spirit of Salt, retaining most pernicious accidents, as it will be a hard matter to have the worth of that which is perfect admitted into a vulgar Creed. Yet when the noble and universall qualities of seasoning and preserving our Food by common Salt are weighed, the ingenious must needs conclude, that when separated from its dregs and scum, and presented to us in its strength and vigour, it cannot but be worth a welcome reception amongst modern intelligent persons, as well as it had amongst many of the learned Ancients. Therefore, as Basilius Valentinus, Paracelsus, Helmont, and many others most excellent Chymists, have wrote in the commendation thereof, it may well be hop'd, the pu∣blication of three or four hundred persons fresh experiences of its virtue in some particular cases, should not be unpro∣fitable for the publick good, who are ready to testifie the
truth of these Assertions following, against all opposers and objections. And indeed, its of so inherent an excellen∣cy, that it needs neither Epistle Dedicatory, or Commen∣datory: but that this famous City and Kingdome should not be ignorant of so great a mercy, its inward and outward virtues must not be conceal'd. And first, as to the Inward. Stomack. THough it communicates not much nourishment to the Body it self, yet procures good appetite, helps di∣gestion, keeps the Body loose, prevents putrifaction of any thing in the Stomack, strengthnining and cleansing it from all raw and flegmatick humours, whether they pro∣ceed from drinking, or otherwise, and prevents drunken∣nesse, or sicknesse therefrom. Feavers. In Feavers of long continuance, its very good given in the Spirit of Wine, quenches thirst in such as languish un∣derThirst. hot distempers, or from what cause soever drought doth arise in the well and healthfull, in hot weather cooling the Blood, and inflamed Liver. Blood. At all times it revives the Body, and defies diseases that arise from a corrupted Blood, by purifying it, th at lay before idle, and settled in the veins, and makes it volatile, and to proceed more regularly in its circulation. Rheums. It delivers the Breast and parts adjacent, from Rheums and Distillations. Cough. A rooted Cough, and the shortnesse of Breath proceed∣ing from thence, without much difficulty it perfectly cures.
Spleen. It helps the Liver and the Spleen, in its unnaturall weight and burthen. Jaundise▪ It stifles the Iaundise in the birth, or kills it in its strength. Wind. The hypochondricall Melancholly; pains also in the Sides and Bowels, and whatsoever hath its origine from Wind, it easily disperses and removes. Dropsie. Most especially it cleares the Body from all hydropi∣call humours, and those which the Legs bear with such re∣gret and trouble. Vrine. It keeps the Vreteries from all filth, or slime, and sends away the water that lurks betwixt the skin and flesh, by Stool and Urine. Stone. Gravell. Persons afflicted with the Stone, it helps whether in Reins or Bladder, and forbids Coallition of the Gravell, & in time dissolves the Stone, if not already congealed and hardned. Lungs. Falling-sickness. Palsie. Its good for healing the Ulceration and Consumption of the Lungs, the Falling-sicknesse and the Palsie. Scurvy. And for the Scurvy, its a most approved Antidote and Remedy. Wormes. Prevents breeding of Wormes, and kills them where they are. Plague. Its a received preservative against the Plague, and doth very much help those already infected. Poyson. As also any that are poysoned by Opium, &c. or stung by Serpents, Spiders, or otherwise.
Women. And as to Women, it removes obstructions, helps them to the benefit of Nature, And those that have the Matrix clog'd with superfluous humours, may use it with successe. Thus much for the inward Benefits. For the Virtue outwardly used. IT keeps a good and lively Colour. Any putrifi'd wounds or proud flesh, being gently washed with it, are cured, and the place preserved by it, clean and sound. It brings life into benumm'd Members, and is very good against the Cramp. It may be outwardly applyed for the French disease: as al∣so in cold Gouts, mixed with Oyl of Turpentine, VVax, Am∣ber, Harts-horn, or the like. Its good for the Kitchin, in rendring meats gratefull and pleasant; for instead of Vinegar, Lemons, or other sharp Sawces, its more healthfully taken: mixt with Sugar its excellent Sawce for Rosted meats. By it Raisins recover their former bignesse, and beauty, mixt with some fountain water, are pleasing to the pallat, and very cordiall to refresh a weak Stomaek. Pigeons, Chickens, and all flesh seasoned with it, are of a pleasing relish: Beef steeped in, or sprinkled with it, is made tender. It cleanseth the Teeth, and makes them white as snow, and takes all stains out of Linnen. To say no more, its that which cuts the Sinews of all di∣seases, and supports, as well as restores weak Bodies. One thing more cannot be omitted; when at Sea water is scant, a little of this prepared into a Salt, laid on the tip of the Tongue in a small proportion, takes a way all inclinati∣on to drink. These are some of the rare advantages, that attend this
Spirit of SALT: Others there be more secret, which re∣quire Private impartment. Who use it, find these Effects: If any doubt, let them try in some one, and by that judge the rest. Its to be had, near the Old Exchange, with Mr HUCH∣INSON, at the White Swan, in Burching-lane. At Grays-Inn, with Mr THOMAS FIRBY, under the Gate. At St Dunstons-Church, in Mr MARRIOT'S shop. At New Exchange, with Mr HENRY HAR∣RINGTON, in the Low Walk. At Westminster, with Mr HARMAN, in Stephens Alley. At Lambeth, with Mr NEVITTS, near the three Marriners. Where Directions are for the several occasions, and use of such as desire it, on moderate Rates. The Authors forbear their names, and publishing the further Vertues (that are almost wonderfull) untill they see the kind reception of this one Product of their great ex∣pence and labour. Veritas cum sit Lux Astrorum, angulis non coarctatur: Iti∣dem & SAL ex Astris Oriens, exaltatus, non potest quin radios suos hominibus effundat; veluti Prophylacticum simul & Alexipharmacum perpetuum, cum sit Aeternitatis Divinae Nobilae Symbolum. Truth being the Light of the Stars, cannot be closed in Corners: In like manner, SALT also arising from the Stars, being exalted, cannot but pour out its Rayes upon Mankinde, as a famous Preservative, and perpetual resister of Poyson, since it is a Noble Symbole of Divine Eternity. FINIS.
DIRECTIONS For the use of THE SPIRIT of SALT. FIrst, in GENERAL. All sorts of Liquors, are the Conveyes thereof; as Water, Beer, Ale, Syder, Wine, Broths, Sawces, &c. more healthfully used than Oranges, Lemons, Vinegar, or Verges; and with Oyl is most pleasant: Indeed its proper in all sorts of Cooke∣ry, to be used by the healthy, to prevent these Maladies, men∣tioned in the Treatise of its Nature, as well, as for their Re∣medy; and that so much, as gives the Pallate a smart Rellish, at the discretion of the User: No Error can be committed, by taking any quantity from 10 drops to 40, at any time, mingled with Sugar, may be doubled; and taken in a Mornings-Draught, is very Efficatious: For it preserves not onely the Body, but whatever it receives, from all manner of Corruption, by Restoring Nature to its Primitive State. In PARTICULAR. 20 Drops of this Spirit in half a Pint of any sort of Liquor, is a good Standard: And after the proportion of 60 Drops in a Quart, it revives all
sorts of Beer, Ale, Syder, and Wine; long preserving them both Strong and Generous: And the like quantity being put into Barrels of Water, for Marriners to drink at Sea, it will be better Preserved, have a gratefuller Taste, and avoid that pu∣trifaction which ariseth from Raw Water; especially prevent∣ing the Worms and Scurvy. And so also for preserving Meat in long Voyages, 40 Drops hereof mingled with a Pint of Water, and so proportionably covering the Meat, will in∣crease the Weight, and make it wholsom. In dressing all sorts of Fish, Flesh, and Fowl▪ being old and Tough, they are made Tender and nourishing, by so much hereof mingled with any Spices, Water, or Butter, and sprinkled on them, as may give a quick taste in their Sauces; and any cold Meat also sprinkled therewith, is preserved from detriment: And to make a harsh tender amongst the curious Pallates, dissolving a little Argall with this, and some SALT. makes most dainty wholsom food. In Pickling any Sallets, as Cucumbers, Capers, Fennell, Purslain, Broom-buds, &c. being mingled with Water, and Salt, so as to make it sharp and quick, is very healthily plea∣sant. To prevent the Toothach, to cleanse and preserve the Teeth white, Put 6 Drops in a spoonful of running Water, (or for the Curious into Rose-water) and with a small Linnen-Ragg, rub the Teeth, and its impossible they should cor∣rupt, or putrifie: It cleanseth them from their Corrosive Gravel. As for WOMEN, in most cases its fit to give private directions▪ But for such as give suck, let them, with 60 Drops turn a Pint of Milk into a Posset, and take the
Whey, mingled with Sugar (if they please) and drink a rea∣sonable draught thereof in a Morning, fasting an hour after it, and their Children will be kept thereby from the Scurvy, small Pox, Feavers, Convulsions, and the like Diseases. In CHILDREN. Who desire to prevent the Stone and Gravel, which (by Experience) destroys them, as well as others (who are not capable to take other Medecines, by reason of the Nauseousness and great quantities) may give them of this sort of Posset drink, and they will find it both preserving, and cleansing those parts of the Body subject to these Afflictions, and also promise good Naturall Rest to them. In want of Water, a Drop or two of this mingled with Sugar put on the Tongue, will refresh the Pallate, and quench Thirst. Wherefore to avoid the hazard of Glasses breaking, it shall be Compos'd also into a BALSOMICK SALT, Portable in any Box, Purss, or Paper; which will not onely accomodate the Rich, (who travel with Coach and Horses at their ease) but also the Poor, and Infantry of Armies; who travelling on foot in the heat of Summer, are often forc'd to drink Puddle-water, wherein Filth and Carryon lye, by which, they are subjected to Surfeits, and such other Diseases as make them dye like Flies. Almost infinite other Advantages; As preserving dead bo∣dies intire, &c. are hidden in this Spirit; which in success of time, by Gods grace shall be manifested: And if any desire more exact instructions in their particular Cases, they may repair where its made, and be more fully directed. But if any Persons of Honour, or Quality, do more esteem this Spirit of SALT, prepar'd sweet, and separated from all its sharpness, they may be pleasured with it, freed from any
Flegmatick Quality, being prepared from the pure Essence of that Spirit, by the assistance of a Learned, famous Grecian, who hath travelled most parts of Christendom, and experi∣enc'd the same: And being recommended from both Uni∣versities, is now entertained in a Laboratory, whence several other Chymical preparations, for the good of this Kingdom, its hoped ere long, shall appear. Besides the places published afore, (being much en∣quired after) this Spirit in several and great Quantities, may be also had in small Glasses, from one Shilling, to six Shillings, sealed up, At Horsly-down, with Margaret Alleyn, neer the Gate of the Artillery-ground: And at Mr. Samuel Watsons, at the sign of the Turks▪Head, a Coffee-house, in Friday-street, neer Cheapside: Also by the Tower, at the Lyon in the Den. Despicit, nescit. POSTSCRIPT. Courteous Reader▪ ALbeit, in the former Sheet of this Book, the Authors name is spoken of, as be∣ing suppressed; yet upon further consideration, (however void of all Osteuta∣tion in the thing) he hath made a mature retractation of his then thoughts, and doth now own himself to be the Author of this Book, by whom this Apologitick Epistle is subscribed: Not doubting, but that hereafter he shall suddenly hint something to the World, which shall be more for the Publick good, than this; hoping in the Interim, that this shall meet with all due, and favourable acceptance, as being in∣tended by him, for the good of others, more than his own; who now doth sub∣scribe himself, Thine in the Bond of the surest Engagements, R. BARKER. Sheet 1. Page 5. line 5. for Huchinson, read Hutchison. Sheet 1. Page 5. l. 22. for Nobilae, read Nobile. FINIS.
