B889 12011415 52423
Aetat: Suae 17 Vultus Apellinea pictus Barone tabella est Lotus Apollinea pingitur arte liber W. Marshall sculpsit. John Hobart Gent:
ΕΡΟΤΟΠΑΙΓΝΙΟΝ Or the CYPRIAN ACADEMY. BY ROBERT BARON OF Grayes Inne Gent: Velle pro posse.
TO THE SUPEREMINENT PARAGON OF ART, AND Literature, the truly noble James Howell Esquire, Nestors Longaevity and both worlds Felicity. Honored Sir, AS I did frequently take fresh aire in your Dodonaean grove attending the Articulate, and intelligible susurra∣tions of your ever verdant vegitals, (to which former ages have nothing (in that kind) to assimulate, neither shall future times be able to parallel,) from these Apollinean Plants of yours, I have slifted here a twig, and there a sprig, and I have bestowed some time in binding them in a bundle, which with my selfe I humbly offer to your approved censure, it being the Apex of my am∣bition to have your honour'd selfe my justice in Eyre, I cannot say with Persius Nec scombros metuent mea carmina, nec thus for this confused trusse of twiggs (as I may say) though made of greene wood, yet is it far from meriting any longaevity, it deserves rather to kin-
Helena, Ariadne, and Phyllis, with other innume∣rable eminent endouments which bounteous na∣ture hath liberally in all ages reposited in your lovely sex, as in the Apothecke or magasine of perfection, makes this my Gynophilian or amo∣rous infant long rather to be dandled upon your tender knees, then lie reclused in a dustie study. If you please to bestow part of that time which you spend in other divertisments to converse with this poore brat of my braine, it will paint out unto you though with a quavering pencell, and in course and caligenous colours the passi∣ons of your royall Amorists, with inducements to commiserate them, the event whereof (which may make them operative in this kind) will per∣haps make you repent no more of reading them, then I of composing them. When you talke with your children you expect from them no congru∣ence or quaint language, yet you are often plea∣sed to heare them prattle, & are delighted with their lisping Ideoms. This makes me hope that you will dispence with the Lallation & Low di∣alect of this babe, whose tone is rude, yet his meaning is plaine dealing, which according to the proverbe is a jewell, and consequently most fit for Ladies. Thus wishing you all delights, & happinesse, endlesse like the rings you weare, & that the period of my paines may be the begin∣ning of your pleasure, I remaine Your Ladyshyps in all observance ROBERT BARON.
On his beloved friend the Au∣thour, and his ingenious Cyprian Academy. NOe sooner in our Inne, but out in Print! Sure 'tis Arts Arcademy, and the Muses Mint: Where in Dame Nature Pupill is to Art; Bearing Minerva's Image in each part: The Court of Pallas and the Muses Throne; Where Ignoramus stands outlaw'd alone. Baron, goe, non suit momus; for's barren plea Against the Court; and tell him openly; The braine of Iupiter's each Courtiers Mother: Or bid him reade thy booke; and then thinke other. Me thinks I see the world thy booke admire; And Ladies dandling it with much desire To see that hand; these flowrie Pastrolls pen'd; And wish them Ring-like, without any end. What Uenus can denie to be the Fem', Of Laureat Baron; borne of Orpheus stem; None can object against thy worth, or line; Save more then Bigamie with the Nine: Pernassu's thine! make joynture then; And let God Hyemen say Amen. To Court th'art welcome; th' Muses blaze thy Prayse: Momus shall weare the Ivy; Thou the Bayes. William Beversham of Grayes Inne Esquire.
To my chosen Friend, the hopefull Mr. Baron. SO young! and write so well! it might appeare Impossible but that thy name is there Nature hath here her former selfe surpast, Shewing at once perfection and hast: Since thou like Virgills Genethliack bay Art a tall tree, ere time could thinke a spray. Well might thy happy lovers wish to come From th' Checquer shades of their Elizium, And suffer further miseries so they might Engage so rich a pen to give them light; For nothing was so well performd as writ, Such is the wide Prerogative of wit. Thy Booke and Picture contradictions tell, And thwart themselves into a Miracle. J: HALL. é Soc: Gray. hosp. Gent.
To his ever Honoured Friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his Cyprian Academy. HOw dare I venter to insert a line Before thy booke, when every word of thine Doth swell it selfe with a strong winded blast Of rich embrouerd Eloquences, what wa'st Not fraid of choaking in their bringing out. Or didst not bord with Lessius about Some 9 months since conception, and didst there With in thy throate make a full passage cleere To give them birth? what Midwife hadst at hand? Came not Minerva with Apollo man'd Merc'ry attending (in his proper place Most sweetly sings a fift and eight's the base) Dect with his wings, even hoarse in setting forth Thy new lict Faetus with its unknowne worth. Her'e is a Chimist which from a rude masse Extracts Elixar that death may well surpasse Spencers ninth Canto in the fairy Queene, Or Ben's vulpony, oh had he but seene Thy pregnant fancy, how could be forebeare To rend his Cat'line and by Jove to sweare Thy'ns the better, thou scornst exoticke words Or Exolericke Phrases which affords No luster to thy booke, thy webs not drawne Or Spun of home-made thred, 'tis pure fitt lawne For Pace stockings, Th' Acromatick straines Surely are flowne from out Cylen'ns braines; Thy words carry charmes, able to lay wist The direfull magick of an Exorcist,
Come Rhombus come I prethee pause a while Thy language is pedantick, her's a stile To Court a Lady in, away, away To Schole young Emperick and make no stay But come and learne to speake, to Court, to charme Th' obdurate Mistrisse in thy wanton arme. Hence all your Momus bratts leave off to fleere Away you Criticks which are wont to Jeere, Or else King Arthur with his Knights shall come And Robin Hood shall strike his paper drum In his defence, brave Guy shall bring a long St. George for England with a warlick throng Famous Parismus and Primaleon, Palm'rin D'oliua with Montelion: Cease now Antiquity T'hang weeping ore Brave Sydnys vrne invest thy selfe no more With sable weeds, he livs, for sure there is Of Souls a sam'an Metempsychosis, Is this not Sidney; marke his Veine in verse His stile in prose, I cannot here reherse His worth in severall arts, here Ptolemy Or Strabo may learne new Geography, Here Tycobrah may veiw the turning sphers Making still musick in his listning eares, Out of thy booke Euclid may learne to frame A sphere, or draw a paralellograme; But muse 'tis time to stop, dost thou not see Thou'rt o're guilty with Tautology; His booke shall praise it selfe, it may, nay can Suffice to make an English Uatican. THO: BRADFORD
To his honoured friend, Mr. Robert Baron upon his excellent Poem. BAron of Witt! 'tware sin to blazon forth, Vnder a meaner stile thy mighty worth: 'Tware but a trick of state if we should bring The Muses Lower house to vote thee King. Thou highly dost deserve it, and the bayes Should crown thy browes to thine immortall prayse While usher'd by the Graces thou art sent To sit as King ith' Poets Parliament. The famous Sidney's soule I think had gon A widow till the resurrection And never been inspir'd, now had not shee Found out her Match and been espous'd to thee. We have some things (call'd Poets) who although They nere were Verst but in the Crist-crosse-row And never swallow'd Possum thinke they're able, To be pertakers at the Muses Table. Who nere inspir'd with the thrice three-Sisters, But tooke their learning, as men doe their Glisters. And should you come and tell them what you lacke Their witts (like ware lost in a Pedlers packe They have, but know not where, perhaps their bun∣dle May yeeld a Ballad for the widow-Trundle,
Or some such businesse, wherein is shewn A mournefull ditty, to the pleasant tune. Fortune my Foe, or else-pox what d'ye call it When t'hath no more Concepit then has a Mallett. Who frō their spungy braines may squeeze a sonnet When th'ave a Fortnight chew'd the cud upon it. But shall such clumsey Humours ever be Renouned with the name of Poetrye? No, 'twere a sin beyound a pardon, you Deserve the Poets name and Laurell too. Thy booke swells high; thy lines well-wrought not weake Thy words might teach Apollo how to speake Which if he ever could have done, like Thee Daphne had ne're been turn'd into a Tree Thy twisted Plott so nice a hand hath spun, You'd sweare it were not only made, but done. And you would not beleeve me should I tell How soone this worke was done, when 'tis sowell. Go on (deare friend) enlarge thy spreading fame And let thy Pen immortalize thy Name. HENRY BOLD Fell N. C. Oxon.
To his ingenious friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his Cyprian Academy. I've thought upon't, yet faith I cannot tell Wether thy prose or verse doth most excell Each other, both in an Emphaticke style Roare like the torrent of a troubled Nile Stopp'd by an oblique beame thy words being pent I'th confin's of thy throate, did force, their vent To torture weake capacities, who'l say Reading thy book 'tis Greeke, wrote English way Nor is that all, some will conjecture by it That in'ts conception thou keep'st sparing diet They will not thinke thou did'st grosse Hamkins eat Least thou shouldst choake thy quibles with such meate Yet whatso'ere thou eat'st for other Palats They Orcheards apples yield, thy gardens sallads. Well may Antiquitie amazed be To view their chapells, an Academy So farre out vie'd in which are many bowres For Venus darlings, neatly strow'd with flowers Of Rheth'rick, nay the seaven li'brall artes Like thunder-clappsdoe act their severall parts In high expressions, which are forth brought Some of them sure stand for a thirteenth thought. But here I'le stoup, least I Tautologize In vaine ambages, when it will suffice That in worths plentuous cropps, of infant bayes I gle an handfull to adorne thy prayse. John Gleane Cantabri.
Roberto Barono, S. I. Apollines amplissimo cardinali ordine Amatorum. QUâ fronte ambulat monstrum illud sine labe? nes cis ignare? audies; Invenis Platonicus cujus os ruris filiae suum fe∣cerunt alvearium, Corpus Poeticum cujus caput Musis est capitolium, ingenium perpetuus dictator. Venoris argentea columba quae diu inter mystica sacra ejus numinis versata, tandem ad matris auri, gam se ntulit Phaebo pulchriore & sorore Phaebj. Sub Chirone Cupidineo Cypria Achilles acerri∣mus, Acteon sine cornibus, cujus oculis, Clorinda, Hecate illa triformis est obnoxia. Novum sydus lacteâ collocatum plaga, Mercurius qui caduceo suo amoris somnium jnduxit, totus aureus cui nupsit Pactolus. Hic est ille Laudatus eralogiae in Cyprianâ acade∣miâ professor, illius meritis hasce primitias, officij & observantiae pignus, libentissime consecrat Christophorus Baretus Londinensis. Coll. Cere. Chr. Cantb.
To his worthy friend upon his Excellent Book the Cyprian Academy. NAtur's Apelles that canst thus the State Of Lovers with thy pencill adumbrate Come quit this spot, and mount the starry quire Where sit inshrin'd soules made of purei fire; Halfe shadow'd Venus shall then come to thee Hoping perfection in thy Poetry. The winged post of heaven shall guild his place Knowing thy Attick tongue can goe his pace. When Priam's Paris liv'd (hadst thou been borne, The godesses would thee their judge have sworne. Had Barclay seene thy booke, he would have said Vnhappy Argenis thou art betrayd. To riper witts, in deserts mayst thou be (Hating bright Sol) deform'd Nyctimine Let Satyrs now be packing, and that name That would eclipse the lustre of thy fame. What shall I give thee? such titles sure as these Amphitruo or Bombimachides. Mentfieur of Helicon, Marquis of the Mount Pernassus, and of the Cabaline fount Poets Collosse, under whose mighty feet May saile a greater then the Spanish Fleete To Loves Elizium, in stately boules Where heav'nly Nectar suck Platonick soules. I sweare by Venus and her turtle dove, He's like a Tartar that ds not thee love. C. B.
To his worthy Friend Mr. Ro∣bert Baron upon his excellent POEM. LEt ancient Poets stand agast to see Themselves so farre out-run, out-stript by thee Minerva's Magazin, who hast not seen The third part of their yeares, nay scarce seventeen. Hither may ancients come, and grieve to see Their learning all Epitomiz'd in thee. Thy language is of proper words and phrase, What it affects it easily brings to passe, Were chast Penelope surviving now, Her stubborne heart it would make soone to bow. Cupid directs thy heart, thy pen Apollo, Or else such lofty straines thou couldst not swallow. Had'st thou not been in love, sure thou coul'st ne're Have writ such sublime raptures as are here. No more let Greece of famous Homer boast, No longer let old Ovids sacred goast Be grieved for, he now survives againe, Henceforth let dropping eyes cease, and amaine Let inke run from your quills in blazing forth This our inspir'd Poets praise and worth. I hold the opinion of Pithagoras, This Muse cannot be lesse then Ovids was, Onely it suffered a transmigration Into a body of a newer fashion.
Vnto thy booke may all men have recourse, It doth descry the effects of love, the force Of armies and after victory the rest Which no man can so all as are exprest. In this thy booke Faminius his life Thou hast exprest together with his wife Clorinda, Poets vaile fayre Helens Her's one indeede what she but painted was. Now lovers cease t'invoke and call upon God Pan for his sage direction In Nuptiall Hymnes, we scorne the common story This booke henceforth shall be our Directory, The prayses all to write should I accord Each line to me Encomiums would afford: But I have done, my pen is nought, and I Have but a slender vaine in poesie. Wherefore farwell, goe on as th'ast begun To make thy name more glorious then the sun. Thus wishing the each man a happy guest Unto thy booke I take my leave and rest. Tui amicissimus Joh. Quarles ex aede St Petri Cantabridg. Ana- RORERTVS BARONVS. RARVS AB ORBE NOTVS. gram. Rarus, haud cuiquam peperit Natura secundum Notus es, & scriptis (Baron) ab orbe tuis.
To my speciall Freind Mr. Robert Baron upon his ΕΡΟΤΟΠΑΙΓΝΙΟΝ. IEwell of Nature whom a blessed age To us hath brought forth ev'n an Albion sage. Were't not obsurdity with silent quill To vaile in verse and propose thy Atick skill. Had a wise Sybill our Euriphilus But auguriz'd of thy approach to us Each hand had itched to be buisied In weaving Chaplets to adorne thy head. Criticks may now prejudicate, what though? They shew their envy, neither hurt they you, Minerva brought thee forth, Eupheme then The Muses nurse nurst thee the gem of men. Thou Ovid-like thou from thy infancy Brought'st this Heroick straine now shewne by thee. In which high tract thou Mars and Venus clere, Thou Neptune also dost demonstrate heare. Thee Mars in field may justly generall, Thee Neptune may by sea vice admirall Insert: Thee Venus in her lofty state, May make her amorous associate. Now hither may resort most antique sages Incredulous that these our iron ages
A Phaenix should produce, t'is true, and sure Natures best fabrick now within us indure. If these but wits first blossomes are, what then May be expected from thy riper pen. In this faire roade proceede we thee desire That as thy youth, we may thine age admire. Charles Cremer. Cantabr. Idem in Eundem. Te, Barone, Canam. te Polyhimnia: Musarumque pater plectrasonantia Pulsans se recinet Daphidis arborum Docta fronte geras, est vigor in uis Occultus folijs, tergeminas habe Laudes, at quatiat sidera vertice Aequè Caelicolas terra Britannica Quae talem peperit de gremio suo Vatem; perge diu tramee prosperus Incaepto, & faveat nomen Apollinis. Carol. Cremer. Coll. Corp. Crist. Cantabr.
To his admired friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his Booke. Great Madam Nature's womb as yet I see Is not growne feeble, it hath brought forth thee, Our ages ornament, t' ath brought forth thee, VVho art a Nestor in thy infancie. Thy thoughts (though green) so ripe they are, and rare VVith hoarie wisedome they may well compare. In thy elaborate Poem, fancies seeme In Learnings choyce, and cheife spoyles triumphing. Wits deepest mines thy eagles eye can spy. Thy cleerer soule sound their profundity. This thriving bayes, this verdant lawrell sprout, O're tops old slanders, at's peeping out, It shall even Scythian frosts survive, and last In spite of spattering envy, and the blast Of Momus keener breath, it shall be seene, Like youthfull Daphnie alwayes clad in greene. Cant pale fac't study cowe thy haughty sprite? Renowned Sir, wilt thou proceed in spite Of knotty arts? goe on still and be blest, Tough ruggid sciences thou shalt digest, And swallow time himselfe, who ne're shall have Power to reare for thy great name, a grave. Sic vaticinatur, JOS. BROWNE Gent.
ΕΡΟΤΟΠΑΙΓΝΙΟΝ THE CYPRIAN ACADEMY. The First Booke. IT was in that time of the Year wherein party-colour'd Flora had diapred the Earth with her cheifest Treasurie, and Sil∣vanus the Rustick ruler of the woods had deckt the spreading trees, with his choi∣cest Livery, when the Illustrious and Heroick Flaminius (the delight of his Age, and the glory of his Nation) cast his love-infected eyes upon the faire Clorinda, a Lady who fill'd all mouthes
with the prayses of the amiable Physiognomy of her Face, and the laudable faculties of her soule) as she was walk∣ing in a shady bowre, attending to the chirping Notes of well-tuned birds, and picking (as Fancy prompted her) here a speckled Pinke, and there a Primerose, (the yeers Maidenhead,) now ablushing gillyflower, then a blew vai∣ned-violet, this she sticks upon her arme, that upon the borders of her curious plated haire, at length she bosom'd a happy rose-bud in her Lilly-brest, whereat the rest of the flowers contended for fresh beauty to delight her, and swelling with emulation to bid an ultimum vale to the brest of the dull earth to adorne hers (the Theater of ver∣tue) they all grew sweeter, and by a gentle gale sent an odoriferous invitation to her to pluck them. Flaminius beholding her in this heart-attracting posture, he forth∣with placed so in her all his future hopes of joy, and joyfull parts of his heart, as he left remaining in himselfe nothing but a maze of longing desire, in seeing he liked, in liking he loved, in loving he felt the effects incident to love; the torments which he sustained in her presence, the griefs which he indured in her absence, the pining thoughts in the day, the pinching dreames in the night, the dying life, the living death: his feare of losing her, his despaire of gain∣ing her, shall be the subject of the subsequent History. But first let us glance upon him in his minority, dis∣course a while upon the course of his fortunes, before he was reputed a man, and insert his Legend. He was by birth an Italian, borne in the delicate and luxurious City of Naples, first the receptacle of Philoso∣phy, now of Souldiery, Erected by sweet Siren, said to be By Phaleris built, stil'd once Parthenope;
Rich hort-yard of the dove-drawn Queen of Love, New field of th' Hydra slaying son of Jove. Fat soyle of liberall Ceres, crown'd with corne, Rare vineyard of the wine-wet god unshorne. Boast not because no Citie's like to thine, For sweetnesse, Empire, beauty, strength, corn, wine, Boast not thy raities, thy bubling Fount, Labulla call'd, nor yet thy bifork't Mount Vesuvius, whence Sol's Steeds (with mains be curl'd) That circumdates in twice twelve hours the world, Doe first begin their race, as if it were Their master Phoebus private Bed-chamber. Brag not of thy obscure Chimerian dale, Ne're seen by Sol, nor by his Sister pale. Nor cause thou giv'st a grave to him whose verse; The conquests of victorious Kings reherse, Brag neither of the pleasant water'd Lake, Aquano term'd, so fatall to the Snake. Nor of Authentick Sibills domicil, Whose past predictions bald time fulfill. Insult not Parthenope because you have Lacus Avernus, and black Charons cave, And sootie Vulcans fier-spitting Court, Wherin he tempers armes to make Mars Sport 'Tis this Parthenope, tis this that raise Especiall Trophies to thy lasting praise; Flaminius, whom fame affirmes to be Made in dame Natures prodigality; Flaminius, whose name live till times glasse run, For earths last dark Eclipse of no more Sun, Was borne in thee, at whose Nativity, A generall Turnament was held i'th Skie, The Stars did run a tilt, and Phaebus bright, Danc't a Coranto with the Queen of night.
The Rocks did Eccho forth his name, and none, Of their dull clifts, but did repeat that tone. Orpheus did string his harpe with nimble hand, To sound his praise,—Silvanus did command Mirtles to dance, the pines their roots forgoe, The Holmes and branching Elmes did caper too, Sweet firre-trees friskt, and sublime Cedars ran. Joves tall Oake fed by gumms Assyrian, Joyn'd in a Galliard with that lofty tree, Whose courtly boughs the meed of valour be, And odor-breathing Zephyr this news bore On's way, unto a grove of Sycomore, Whilst there he told it in a flowrie gale Tres bow'd their tops, as thankfull for his tale. Each flowing streame in gentle murmuring tones, Whisperd these tidings to the pebble stones. Nor was Amphions sphear enchanting Lute, (Whose sound erected Theban structures) mute. Pan on his reed, on his pipe Mercurie, Carrold in Sonnets their festivity. With beamie eyes, and bright disheveld hairs, The Nymphs tript ore the Lawns,—thus chim'd the Sphears Naples rejoyce, a Prince is borne in thee Whose fame shall burgeon to Eternity. He had for his father Pompilius a man of an affable na∣ture, in warre as expert, as valiant, in peace as provident, as prudent, alwaies resolute to undertake, and ever fortunate to execute any designe conducing to the emolument of the weale-publique, which he was industrious to advance, both in buffe, and fur, by armes and art. He tooke to wife Cpricia a Lady of an exquisite feature, and of so ripe a wit that the fragrancy of those redolent flowres of female loquence which blossomed in all her discourses, turned
all tongues into attentive eares whilst she was speaking. If she did deambulate, besides the making divers places happy by her steps, the very moving did adde an amiable life to her innate perfections. If she did set still, the con∣spiracie of her severall attractive graces combined toge∣ther, to present one perfect figure of incomparable beau∣ty to the ravished beholders. From this happy couple proceeded this miracle of art and nature Flaminius, in whom nature seemed to have planted the paradice of her perfection He was well sto∣red with civill vertues for peace, and martiall valour for warre; passion was not exiled from him, but suppressed in him; and so subjected to right reason, as he was ido∣neous for prosperitie or adversitie: whereof the one did not make him insolent, nor the other dejected. He was one of the silken wits of his age, by nature a Phylo∣mathy, so addicted to erudition and iterature, that he used his cradle like a Library, making Bookes his nuga∣ments. Apollo did so cooperate in his production as he lisp't meeter, and his first notes were Castalian layes, as if he had been borne in Tempe, or Pernassus, or had the sphear-borne harmontous sisters for his nurses. There was no vertue but he did depute it either fit for ornament, or use, no vice but he did condemne and con∣temn it as sordid. His exercises and refocillations from his infancy, and very nonage, were ingenious, manly, decent, and such as tended still to wit, valour, and activitie, which he u∣sed ad ruborem, non ad sudorem, his games did not make him pale with feare of loosing, nor hot with desire of gaining. He was a fit soyle for praise to dwell upon, and were it not as superfluous, as it is tedious, we might protract this tract, or register of his vertues in infinitum.
sharp tusked Bores, crafty Foxes, and timerous Hares, with all which kinds of Beasts, kind Nature (aspiring to recreate her darling Flaminius) had plentifully sto∣red that spacious Forrest. But to turne to our taske, the French King at this time had his residence at his standing house within a mile of Possy, whither this favourite the Duke of Luynes was sum∣moned, so that Flaminius was for a time deprived of his society, which he made not only necessitudo, but necessitas, almost essentiall to his subsistance: in whose absence Sa∣turne that leaden planet did cast his melancholy influ∣ence over all his intellectuals, yet he being willing to dissipate those black foggs of disconsolate pensivenesse, he rode attended by two of his Domesticks, Florian and Doristo, into the Forrest, where he suddenly heard such a plangerous and lamentable cry; as he was well assured it was the dolefull note of some object of pitty, wher∣fore making his eares his guide, he left not many trees behind him, before he discovered mounted upon a black Palfrey a Damsell of exquisite formosity, urged with sor∣row making towards him: her light moulded Horse though quickned and vivified with the whip, equalled not the celerity of her timerous mind, she had her sad Oration inscribed in pale characters upon her tristfull countenance, her eyes were distained, and cheeks be∣dewed and irrigated with watering tears: the thwarting boughs of the spreading trees did loose her tresses, and spred her hair on her shoulders after the Funerall man∣ner. Being come within his ken, she implored his aid in the rescuing of her Lady out of the hands of an in∣jurious usurper, and this boon shee beg'd with as much vehemeney of passion, as if her panting heart would have climed into her mouth, to take her trembling tongues of∣fice.
Flaminius whose heart was the Throne of ten∣der pitty, as well as of truculent prowesse, undertooke the quarrell, and followed the Damsell, who conducted him to that place were the Ladies Servants (which the strange Knight and his Complices had vanquished, and almost unliv'd) lay (besmeard in their congealed blood) calling upon Charon (with dying groanes) to afford them a speedy passage. Flaminius conceived it more necessary to resume the captiv'd Lady, then con∣dole the conquered Servants, wherefore he left them and out-stript the flower winde in pursuit of that Knight, whom he at last saw leading away the unwilling Lady, for whose sake he saluted him with this challenge. It sufficeth not that thou hast subdued yonder Peti∣toes of Mars, and captived their Lady, fortune will not sell her at so under a rate, it remaineth that you vanquish me also before you injoy her, the wager of our conten∣tion, whose mercy i'le constraine you to abide, and in whose defence my sword (blushing at thy impieties) shall strike thy soule to Erebus, and compell thee to gar∣ter thy hose with thy gutts. The strange Knight coyned this proud reply to this unexpected dee; I conceive it no hard taske to chastise thy insolency, for I take thee for no other then a body animated by a Pythagorean Transmigration, with one of those cowardly soules which I even now sent to seeke new Lodgings. With that he turned his Horse to take his career, ex∣pecting nothing but the fall of Flaminius, but he fell short of his expectation, at the first encounter being sent to fetch an errand in the dust, but remounting his bit∣champing coursier, they charged each other with much agility; so thick, as if every blow had striven to have been
foremost, but the strange Knights Horse carvetting, re∣ceived upon his head a forcible blow intended for his Master, the anguish whereof made him cast his burthen, to accompany his blood (which too too prodigally strea∣med out at his deep wounds) to the all receiving earth. Then Flaminius contemning advantages over an almost vanquished Antagonist, lighted also, and now these Cham∣pions entertained one another with fresh courage, till Flaminius let fall such a fortunate blow upon the unfor∣tunate strange Knight, as parted his ill-tempered shield, and despising the weake and inconsiderable oppugnation of his already broken armour, it made a great breach in∣to his heart-side, as if it would cut a passage for his un∣lawfull love to issue out at, and sent his whole body to strike the earth, falling, since he could offend his Anta∣gonist no better, standing. Flaminius (after he perceived his pale enemie had acted his lives Epilogue) accompanied the Lady to her Castle, which stood in the same Forrest, and in the journey he desired her to beguile the times hast, and abbreviate the waies length with the relation of her precedent fortunes. To this request of his the Lady shaped this Reply. Royall Sir, your commandment doth not only give me will, but power to obey you, such influence hath your ex∣cellencie. I will lay the foundation of this subsequent sermocination with any one name, which is Iulia, eldest daughter to signior le Aroine, and his wife Isabella, who both during the time of my minoritie, (having performed the message for which they were sent into the world) returned againe to their Maker. First, my indulgent Fa∣ther being too old to live, his decayed nature was con∣quered by triumphant death, and uselesse Physicke did yeeld to his manifold diseases, then my widdowed Ge∣netrix striving to survive without him, and liking not,
expir'd also. After this, I with my Orphan Sister Andro∣nica, retir'd to our Castle, (towards which we now equi∣tate) where we reape as much delectation in the rurall solentary groves and hewts of our owne, as the rest of the French Ladies doe in the populous streets of stately Paris, she that hath no looking-glasse to dresse her head by, will use a boule of water, she that wanteth a sleeke∣stone to repumicate her linnen, will take a pibble. The Countrey-girle girdeth her selfe as strait in the waste with a course caddis, as the Madame of the Court with a silke riband; and we were as well content in our Ru∣stick immorigerous roomes,, as others in the magnificent structures of our Royall Soveraigne. But to proceed, there arrived at my Castle Phylispis a valiant and heroicall Knight, one out of the number of those, whom renowned Fame will ever celebrate: his errand was to prostrate his love-sicke-heart at my feet, in the highest degree of lowest duty; and the purity of the verity is, he had taken a full possession of the Fort, before he did aske for the keyes; the match was concluded, and agreed on before the capitulations were treated on: my ravished eyes did no sooner behold him, then my amo∣rous heart did fancie him; (for he resembled Abdalmu∣ralis, the grandfather of Mahumet, who was so amiable, that women were enamoured of him;) yet my modest tongue did a long time hold him in wavering suspence, neither suffering his feare to fall into despaire, not his hope to hasten to assurance; though once to prove the reality of his unalterable affection, I charged him with whole vollyes of flatte denialls; though any man that had beene trained up in Cupids discipline, might easily perceive, I shot nothing but powder, to try his animosity, not bullets, to batter downe his breast-workes of hope already reared. To these hee framed this satisfactory reply.
Madame, the poore Fisherman that was warned hee should not fish, would notwithstanding at his door make nets. And the old Vintner of Venice that was prohibited from selling Wine, did stil hang out an inviting Ivie-bush; and so will I die in faith to you, if I may not live in fa∣vour of you: My malevolent and inauspicious starres may impeach my injoyment of you, but if they should im∣plore the assistance of Erynnis, and call into their ayd the three Acheronticall Haggs, Alecto, Megera, and Tyso∣phone, they should never force me from your love; which is radicated so profoundly in my heart, that hee which plucks it out, pulls up at once that, and my soule together. Your gifts inspir'd by bounteous nature, and your vertues acquir'd by liberall education, have stampt for you such an indelible impression of love & affection in my estimation, as no distance of place, length of time, or traverse of chance, shall be able to race out, or impaire, till death and sad despaire, make a sponge of my bleeding heart to wipe it out. For all this, I still made his condition like a taper al∣most burnt out, sometimes all obscured in blacke darke dis∣paire, and now and then a flash or two, an Ignis fatuus of comfort; but of so short continuance, 'twas as soon extinguished, as perceived, till at length, my kinder heart being willing to yeeld, I was content not to perswade it to hold out any longer, against the sweet blowes of love, but I promised him marriage, which is shortly to be consummated. Soone after him came this knight, who is by your va∣lour, Ad Charontem sine naulo missus, and he also pre∣tended a desire to match my matchlesse beauty, with matchlesse affection, him I denyed as fervently, as I did the other faintly. And now this Tripolis (for so he was nominated, whom you have vanquished) did attempt
to atchive that (Tarquin-like) by force of armes, which he could not effect by perswasion and argument, this made him devise all meanes, and waite for all occa∣sions to surprise me. It fortuned, though late, yet at last, there was a match concluded on between Arcates, sonne and heire to the ancient Duke of Orleans, and Claritia my Mothers si∣sters daughter; to solemnization of these nuptialls, I with my damsels tooke our way, and now earths black bab∣ling daughter spred the pinions of swift wings, advan∣ced her shtill trumpet, and fill'd the inquiring eares of Tripolis, with the relation of our journey; of which being certified, he diligently awaited for my returne, and had assuredly made me his captive, had not you been my rescuer; to whom I am indebted for my liberty (the joy of life) which I hold now the second time of you. Thus sir have you bound me to you in an energeticall chaine of gratitude. To attempt a requitall, would extreame∣ly extenuate your transcendent courtesie, and dero∣gate from the worth of your high favour: but for the other office of gratitude, retention, if you had a window into my memory, you might espie there safe∣ly stored up, and conservated, to preserve it from moul∣dring away in oblivion. By this time the setting Sunne with loose rayes was posting to his Westerne home, waiting onely to light Flaminius and Julia to the Castle, which was a place as strongly fortified, as rarely edified; it was erected of speckled free stone, adorned with marble shining pil∣lars, and statues of the predcessors of Signior le Ar∣tine, it was invironed with large walks both greene and gravelly, with spreading trees on either side, bowred on the top, so that in Summer time the scorching Sunne could not offend any with intemperate heat, there were
such delicate shaddowes, and in the Winter, the chilly and sharpe windes found no passe; the trees were so high and thick; round about these ran silver streames, whose sweet murmur, as they gently tumbled over their beds of pebble stone, did much adorne the plea∣sant solitarinesse of the place. Opposite to the front of this strong structure was a large parke, which for cheere∣full risings of the ground, for groves, and rowsings for the Deere, and for chrystall Rivolets of cleere water might compare with any. In the Hall, cost and inven∣tion strove for mastery, so many Stories did so succes∣sively succeed one another, that the most curious specta∣tors eye, (though his admiration might dwell in each peece) could find no cause of stay, untill hee had over∣look'd them all; here he did recreate his active fancy, with this varietie of pleasing objects. Here might he perceive the ruddy bloud drawne out of Daphne's tender leggs, by the enjurious thornes, as she over-hastily fled from persuing Phaebus, and her di∣shevell'd haire seemed to play with the warme breath of her following lover. There might he behold sorow∣full Venus bemoaning the violent death of her bore∣slaine minion Adonis, and striving to wash away the clot∣tered blood from his worried carkesse with her pearly teares, which dropt from her tender eyes like a continued chaine of pearle, gushing forth in such abundance, as if her rubie blood had changed its naturall course and co∣lour, to run forth at the wide open sluces of her eyes. She kist his pale lipps, as if she would willingly have melted her sad heart to have restored them to fresh colour, and breath into him another soule fit for her love. Here might he espie Leander beating the swelling Helispontck waves with his weary limbs, swimming to his expecting Hero, whose painted torches seemed to burne as bright
as those reall torches which by this time had inherited the set-Suns office. There might hee discrie the rude mouthes of Acteons dogs fill'd with white foame, greedy to dismember their brutified master, and delacerate his limbes instead of the innocent beast he persued. There griefe in the stead of gaine, paine in the roome of pleasure, seemed to bath its selfe in his sorrowfull eyes. By this time our Spectators appetites began to soli∣cite them in behalfe of their stomacks, the colerick lookes knockt, the trumpets sounded to supper, and when the tables were with-drawne, the Ladyes servants for the better entertainment of Flaminius (being ambitious to exhibite all their forces to performe any thing that might conduce to his contentment) presented him with this pastorall.
PROLOGVE Flambio. APelles coveting to please your sight Prepos'd those various objects of delight To recreate your sent Her's choyce perfumes Of unctious Narde, and Aromatick fumes. Our cost-neglecting cookes to please your tast Have drest choyce cates and veands of the best; And to delight your tooth we all conspire To adde what's corispond with that desire. Lastly this pastorall our wits prepare Even as second course to feed your eare. Expect no polish't linos, no sublime straines; But rurall Speech, such as is vs'd 'mongst Swaines. ACTUS 1. SCENA 1. Gripus. Hegio. VVHen gaudy Flora in her prime Observing it was Summer-time With fragrant flowers of each day Had made our mother Tellus gay, The new borne plumed minstrills fills The siiling heaven and ecchoing hills, With chirping musick, ev'ry grone Was made their quire.—Olympick Iove
Commanded Aprels balmy shoures, To refresh the March bred flowers, And May perfection in each field To Aprels suckling babes to yield. The spring pumed this brood, whose sm The Phenix nest might paralll. Now did approach the festivall Of god Silvanus nuptiall To his groue haunting Clarida, Then all the Fauns keept holyday. The nimble faries danc't, and all The dieties agresticall. Clius and kind Phisipile Vow'd loving Man and wife to be. So Clodin did to Colatine, So Serin to his Eglatine, So Cloris did to Coridon, And so delt sheapheards many a one. At length imploring love to be So propitious vnto me, To Mira the faire sheapheardesse In courteous wise, I did addresse My hand, my heart, my cap, my coyne, With all the good I could conjoyne, But she coy thing, refus'd to prove What gentle Hymen is, or loue. As pevish Daphne fled away From the illustrator of the day; Even so my sight coy Mira flies, My sighes she slights, my suit denies. When glorious Sol hath turn'd his back, And all the world is hung with black. Sleepe (natures soft-nurse) flyes my eyes, My mind's ore-cast as are the skies.
I'de rather fill a barne full then a bed; More profit tis to have a crooked plough Still going, then a tottering cradle rocke. But more then that, these I terme foolish men, (But foolish is the Amorists ephite, Ou peut a peine aymer ensemble estre sage, One scarse can be both wife, and love, together) That ere will trust their honour in a Barke, Made of so ight weake bulrush as woman, Apt every fleeting minute for to sincke it. And how can thou expect fidelity, In the disloyall sex call'd feminine. Remember fiftie sisters, Belus daughters, Who all (save one) made of their husbands slaugh∣ters. And both th' Atrides had their envied lives Endanger'd by the falsehood of their wives. Euriphile (false Hag) her husband sould To Polinyces for a chaine of gould. And Queene Euridice conspired How to deliver to grim visag'd death Her reall Lord, and husband, to enthrone In his voyd roome her fancied Sonne in Law. The fierce Medea did delacerate Absyrtus tender members, to escape Her Fathers pursute, if we may rely On the report of sage Antiquity. Grip. Thou pleadst against thy selfe, Ile turn the point Of thy last daggar into thine owne breast. Thou sayst Medea tore in twaine her brother Absyrtus, tis confest, 'tas to discover Her ardent, and firme setled desire To follow Jason, ungratefull Jason, Who after that, left her and all her charmes, To clap another Lady in his armes.
So have I seene a Horse-leach oft embrace, Cleave to and hang upon some bloud-swoln face, Till its owne turne be serv'd, it holdeth fast, Untill his panch be full, then drop at last. But to our take. Penelope liv'd chaste, Though twice five years her royall Lord was gone. Did not Aeneas flie, and leave his sword To let out over-credulous Dido's bloud. When as Hiero blam'd his wife, 'cause she, Never inform'd him of his stinking breath. I thought (quoth she) that all mens breaths smelt so. Arria when Petus was condem'd to dye, First stab'd her selfe, then giving him the steele, This wound (deare Petus grieves me not quoth she) But that which thou must give thy self grieves me. The Minians wives having obtained leave, To say valete to their dying Lords, Exchang'd their habits, and expos'd themselves (In their escaped Spouses roomes) unto The penalty of the offended Law. Dona the partner of her husbands woe, With him a long way (as his Page) did goe. When Conrad gave the Matrons leave to beare, From Weinsberg foe-girt town what best they lik't, Each tooke up her owne husband on her backe. Cornelia Annia did prostrate lye, On her defunct Lords Sepulchre, and dye; For this cause annually a paire of Doves Are sacrific'd to their firme setled loves. And happy Phillacides loyall wife, From death redeemd him with the losse of life. But many uncertaine waies hath Phillis gone. To find her runnagate Demopoon.
Hegio. Humanum est errare, I confesse, Both sexes then are faulty; but what else Doe thy deluded eyes discover in Thy Mira, that thy heart should fancy her. Ist for her skin-deep beauty (her chiefest pride) That's but times fading flowre, which as tis Most delicate, is as volatious. Its like unto the Colours Phidias drew, Which seemed most admirable to the view, But suddenly did vanish and impaire, At the weake puff of each aeriall breath. A wife is but a faire affliction. Symonides reputed her to be, The Shipwrack of a man, the tempest of A house, the troubler of quiet rest. A prison of life, a plague assiduall, A sumptuous conflict, a necessary evill, A horrible care, an ordinary battell, A sayly hinderance, the humane slavery, A faire Aspe, an inevitable paine, A pleasant damage, a domestick strife. If then coy Mira scorne with thee to dwell, On earth leave her to leade bruit Apes in hell. Gripus. Quote not these Accherontick Anchorites. Those stollid moatheaten Foolosophers, That libell against Angels, those night-birds That doe defile even their owne nests, nay worse, That strangle sacrilegiously the fames Of their owne mothers; Those ungracious brats That impiously requite with Stygian Inke The Nectar which indugently they lent them. Heed not the hissing of that viperous brood Of Parricides to their own mothers names. A female is the second part of man,
She is a male i'th the newest edition, A wife's the best of her Lords movable. For such a one fierce Champions have prov'd tame, The stoutest Souldiers trembled, and look wan, Ready to give their ghost up at a frowne, The oracles of wit and Philosophy, Have been loves fooles, and bent their litterature, But to expresse great loves Supremacie, And the extent of its Dominions. Nay under Venus sacred Ensignes march, Etheriall troopes of high mounted gods. Hegio. Well, each man as he likes, but should the mad Disloyall Sycophant, whose spheare is woe, Attempt to shoot a raving shaft at me, In's many peeces I would make't recoile Upon his corps, as there be golden sands, In the Pactolian or Tagean shores. Gripus. Cease, cease, good Hegio, to repine at love, Atlantas pace was staid by golden balls. And gods themselves are oft ensnar'd by love, For they have slipt beyond their skill in that, They have made beauty of a greater force Then they themselves are able to resist. For Laeda, Jove became a wandring Swan, And for Europia a loud lowing Bull, And for Antiopa a Satyre rude, And for bright Danae a storme of Ore. Did not Apollo leave his burnish't throne, Lay by his tresses? and in humane shape, Most humbly beg a boone at beauties gate? Did not Alcides for Jole's sake With huge oft draw the slender threed. He was tane captive by his captives looke, She tooke the Conquerour that had her tooke.
Kind Paris for to steale his dainty peece, Travell'd as farre as betwixt Troy and Greece. And Perseus amongst the Negroes sought, And faire Andromade from Inde brought. Cupid can make the Regall Lyon sport, In amorous dalliance with the frisking Kid. Venus can yoake the ravenous and fell kite, With milder Swans in the same Chariot; Immane rapacious Eagles she can linck And timorous silver-brested Doves together. When she commands all animalls lay by Their contrarieties, and antipathy. Exit. Hegio. Enjoy, sir, your conceit, but for my part, I am invulnerable, thou blind Boy Shalt never take me captive, I am like Achilles dipt in Styx, nor doe I feare Thy boy-ships shafts, goe play with angry Bees And painted Butterflies, and at the Wasps nest, And when th'art stung, in thy mams lap goe rest. SCENA 2. Venus. Cupid. HEarke Cupid and revenge, this prophane Swaine Do's slight thy quiver, and blaspheme thy bow, He sayes he's shot-proofe, scornes thy archery, Scoffos at thy skill. Cupid. Ile penetrate his heart, Ile make him be an earnest Votary Unto a marble-hearted female Saint. Ile melt to amorous thoughts his soule of stone, Ile torture 'm in loves torrid, frigid Zone. Ile make him in the same flames freez, and fry,
The world shall be inamour'd of his woe, Ile find a Shepherdesse in whom he'le joy, And this his darling I will soone infect With coynesse and with nicenesse, for her sake. His morning Orisons shall nothing be But numbers of innumerable sighs, Which he shall count by pearly teares, not beads. Ile make the cherries of her ruby lips The onely cordials for to sustain His loathed life, and those shall be like to Fugacia poma, which like Tantalus He alwaies shall desire, and alwaies misse. Ile make him view the place where she hath set, And thither he shall repaire, as if he thought, The place some soveraigne vertue did containe To ease him, and to cure his gnawing paine. Venus. Let him not wander far from home to seeke Deepe streames in which to wash his frisking flockes. Let such uncessant flouds flow from his eyes As may supply the want of rivolets, Let his pin'd cheekes and hollow countenance, Affight all wolves from his secure sheepe, Let him spend all his daies in pinching griefe, And melancholy discontents; and looke Like to a wither'd tree o're-growne with drosse. Let his illetable and pensive sighes, Scare all rapacious, and omenous Ravens From picking out the eyes of his young Lambs Bleating for nutriment unto their dammes. Cupid. Innumerable such effects as these, Shall all be caus'd by this keen pointed dart. When as the long-tongu'd Lord of envious light, Whose presence make the day, whose absence night. Betray'd my mother, and the god of warre.
Unto the sooty, black, club-footed dolt, As he was tempering of a thunder-bolt, For to revenge this wrong, I made him prove, The power of my golden shaft and love. And I will make this Hegio soone confesse, I am a god, and of the starry race. He shoots. Now lay thy hatred downe, thy spite decline, And prove a votarie at Daris shrine. Exeunt. SCEN 3. Hegi solus. BUt sure I was not borne Minerva-like? Nor did fond Paracelsus teach my Sire To make a man without conjunction, What furious madnesse did possesse my brest To flout at love? and wrong the femal sex? And to requite in a sharpe Satyrs straine, The roundelayes, and charming lullabies, That my indulgent genetrix did warble? What are my braines grown dry, or my bloud cold? Or am I on a sudden waxen old? I thought, though Cupids aire-deviding shaft, Soone penetrated the well tempered Corslet: which the hot-halting god of fire, Made for his boysterous rivall, it should not find, Or make a way to vulnerate my mind. And therefore Venus I blaspem'd thy sonne, But now I sing a Palinodia. Alas I have heheld that lovely face That from her eyes shot Cupids into mine.
T'abuse my sight, and worke upon my frailty, With their smooth oratory to undoe me, Among thy other trophies let me be, Kind Cupid, Hertan Porrigo to thee. Me thinks soft love hath lately made a breach Into the batter'd bulworks of my breast, And there commandeth all my yeelding powers, Which now insulteth in their vassalage. One looke hath struck my soule into a feaver, Me thinks affection whispereth in my care Faire Daris name, Daris the shepherdesse; An object beautified with the choice gifts Of liberall nature, and of vertue too, My wandring eye hath made my heart receive So good opinon of the forenam'd Nymph, And hourely it solliciteth my tongue, To trie my fortune, and to let it know, Whether its like in Daris love to rest In happy blisse, and blissefull happinesse; Which if deny'd, its suddenly prepared, To leave my skelliton unto grim death. But courage Hegio, let not cold despaire Chill thy greene, and wide-gaping wounds too fast; She is a woman, and she may be wonne, Venus Adonis lov'd, why may not she Prove love-sick too, and at length fancie me: Shall I be bashfull then, and so expire With griefe; fie, fie, what shall a womans eye Prevaile so farre o're me to cause me dye, And leave my name in the fooles Callender, And there be noted with a rubie letter, For a supereminent Festivall; No, I am loath to leave earth yet, Ile try If I may live, and find a remedie. Exit.
SCENA 4. Chorus of Faires. BRight Phoebus who with morning light Put'st Hesperus twinckling traine to flight, When as thou rowzest, and display Thy golden locks, and summon day; Thou who dost rest thy drowzie-head, In aged Thetis froathy bed: When as thy gilded Car of day, His glowingaxle doth allay. Thou who in twice 6 Months fulfill Thy journall on th'Olympian hill, Illustrious Lord of light, in vaine Thou bragg'st with arrowes to have slaine Thy Python sterne, whose massie bones Were Iron barres, like congeal'd stones His knotty sinewes were, the boughes Wer's shady covers; his great troughes Deepe Rivolets, which he (well nigh) Caroused at one watering dry: His belching shot forth flames, his eye Shin'd like the dapled morning skie. Faire Venus thy young hoodwinkt sonne More glorious trophies oft have won, Thou that crown'st thy loves with bayes, Inventer of mellodious Layes. Thou left'st Pernassus bifork't hill, And Tempe thy faire domicill, At loves command, and all to be At Daphne's shrine a Votary.
Thou that did'st by virtuall heat The happy plants, and herbes create, Couldst find no plant, or herbe to be A medicine for loves maladie. When thou commandst the birds to bring, In triumph to the world, the Spring, The new-clad earth hath quickly lost Hr Snow-white roabes, no chilly frost Candies the grasse, no ycie creame Congeale the lake, or pearly streame; No snow lies sheltred in the shade, The earth is thaw'd and tender made: For all thy heat, thy love doth lowre, Nor had thy scalding rayes the power To thaw hr Marble yce, and this T'was caus'd her Metamorphosis. Large limb'd Hercules trebly blest With fame, thou who in youth exprest Deedes of honour, thy cradle's crownd With brave achivements, which renown'd Thy name; thy valour was suppli'd With strength, thy haughty spirit defi'd An hoast of men, Heaven ne're conjoyn'd So strong a body, or so stout a mind. 1. Brag not cause you flew and withstood Within the thick Naemaean wood A beast, the temper of whose heart Was like a nether Milstone; Dart, Nor threatning Sword, nor frightfull Speare, Could terrifie it with Panick feare: Like knotty wreaths of craggy brasse His sinewes were, a noise did passe
From's mouth, which might strike deafe the cares Of mortals, and affright the Spheres, You wore his ruggid shaggie hide About your shoulder, and left side. 2. The Hydra by thy hand was slaine, Whose heads lopt off sprouted againe. The mud was made his downie bed. The stones were pillowes for his head, His speckled jawes which hideous were, Thy brawny armes did bodly teare. 3. Thy club made th'Erymanthean Beare. Lye weltring in his ruddy goare, His sharpened tusks shall spoile no more (As it was wont to doe before) Arcadia, which in antique dayes Did warble out her well-tund Layes, And sing loves on her oaten reed, Whilst her secure flocks did feed. 4. The Centaure thou subdu'st by force, Halfe like a man, halfe like a horse. 5. Swifter then wind you ran, or thought, On foot a running Stag you caught. 6. Rapacious bird Stymphalide, Were made a prey to death by thee. 7. Thou mighty Scavinger wertable To clense the foule Augean stable,
8. You made a Bull to crosse the Maine, And graze on Neptunes liquid plaine. 9. And Diomedes fell monster, Who made his captives provender To his proud pamper'd steeds, by thy Revengefull hand did justly dye. 10. False Cacus thou didst crush to death, And 'twixt thy armes squeeze out his breath: 11. Cease the adjuring world to tell Of thy forc't entrance into Hell. You swadled Charon with his oare, The triple-headed ban-dog roare, And yelle: you Pluto ere you're gone Confronted on his jeaty throne. 12. Hesperides fruit, sweet and gay, By thee were stolen, and borne away. By Juno's labours you war'nt broke, And yet you yeelded to loves yoake. Thus Love made Hegio to espie Sweet Daris Phisiognomy, And prove close pris'ner to that eye, Whose frownes make him prepar'd to dye, Love wound her too, that we may all Keepe holyday at their Nuptiall. Exeunt.
ACTUS 2. SCENA 1. Hegio. Grypus. NOw we are both in the same predicament Of Passion, we both blest objects love. But through their nicitie, and coy disdaine, We're like Loves cursed abjects both to prove. Now, now we Symbolize in egritude, And Simpathize in Cupids malady. My drooping head, my deepe contracted brow, My bloudlesse cheeks, dead eyes, pale lips, faint tongue, Shall strive in each point thine to equalize. My heart even now resolv'd my hasty feet Should measure out the over tedious way To Daris (whose faire face a garden is, In which fresh beautie plants her choysest flowres But frozen Winter keeps his risidence. It h Domicil ofr Adamantine heart.) I thought each wearie step to be a mile, I thought each pace to be a measur'd league, Untill I heard her tender nibling Lambes Imploring with their bleating oratory, Some aliment of their indulgent dames. At length I spi'd upon a happy mount. My Daris, whom the Sunne did gently kisse, (Being then mounted in his mid-day heat.) Daris both singing sat, and knitting too. As if her nimble fingers sought to keep, True tune with her tongues Musicke.— Thus shee sung.
Song. I Have a Sunne-burnt Pilgrim seen That dry hath been, Hasting unto the Christall Springs, Where downe he flings His prostrate body, then he'le be With bended knee A Votary Vnto the flowing Dietie. 2. But when his sweating face is drencht And thirst be quencht In her coole waves, then this his sweet With saucy feet He kicks, and from the slighted place Soone moves his pace, And court no more The silver Nymph so lov'd before. 3. So Io was with foule scorne wasted, When once tasted By the injurious ravisher Great Jupiter, Who first with prayers did invade The credulous Maid; After the rape He plagu'd her with a brutish shape.
4. Kind Mayden Goddesse by thy skill Protect, and still Let netts of passions finest thread Never thee spread, Nor snaring Poems proffer, d be T'intangle me. For they indure For their reward a Calenture. 5. That fondly prove too kinde to cure Loves disease.—I'de rather sure That my fond Lover still should pine Then that his wanne cheek should assigne, A sempiternall blush to mine. Still chast Dian let me be thine. Ile vow allegiance at thy shrine, No Nuptiall bands shall me combine. Whilst thus she sung, the winds grew whist, the wild Incensed Beares, and Panthers proved mild, Amazed I a fixed tree did prove, But wonder blasted trees did dance, and move, Each bends his palsie tops to worship her, And turne obsequious Idolater, Her Lyrick ayres intic't the ravish't quire Of birds to come, which (being come) admire. The scaly fish to heare her voice did lay Upon the waters top, and frisk, and play.
Ere while I fondly thought love could convay (Although he's deified) no other way, But through the gazing eyes, into the heart His love-infected, keene and fatall dart, But whilst I heard this smooth-tongu'd Syren sing On the harmonious aier-deviding wing Of her sweet voice, it plainely did appeare, That subtile love could enter at the eare. Long time I stood amaz'd, at length vow'd I To live by her propitious smiles, or dye By rigorous frownes shot from her awfull eye. I sad for nuptiall love, she strait deny'd, I plead affection, by she reply'd (Disdainfully) denialls, and left me An abject unto love and miserie. Gripus. Even now anatomiz'd by groanes and sighs, Almost interr'd and buried in woe, To Mira's pastures I resolv'd to goe, The sheep and lamkins with rich fleeces loaden, Became my spokes-men, and with bleating noise Pleaded at Mira's barr for my admission. She mounted sate upon a happy hillock. Clad in the verdent plush of Madam Nature, In twisted braids of silver Lillies knitting, The loose traine of her amber dropping haire. Phoebus my rivall prov'd, and wo'd my faire, He graz'd upon her corall lips, and bath'd Himselfe in balmy juice of fervent kisses. He seiz'd the rose-buds in the spicy beds Of her delicious cheekes, whilst thus shee sung.
Song. MEns loves like tinder set on fire Flame, and expire. Fond love doth fail With brittle beauty. Beautie's fraile Like Junes raine, or Decembers Sunne 'Tis quickly dene. Or like to the Solsticiall flowre, It buds and withers in an houre. 2. Caelia's locks so aptly twin'd, Each haire would bind Olympick Jove, I a strong twisted net of love, If to descend downe he assumes His Eagles plumes, These haires will change their hue, and grow Hoary and cold, as melting snow. 3. Like to a comely field of Snow Now shewes her brow, Rutts shall betray Ere long, and wrinkles deep display, Times plough have furrowed her brow. An Ice shall flow Through ev'ry veine, she shall discry Pale Death displaid in her dimme eye.
4. Each beame shot from her eye so gray Creates the day, That eye oft made By winkes, the noone-day Sunne a shade. Now it is youthfull Cupids nest, 'Tis at the best. For it will prove his grave, and be Ecclipsed in obscurity. 5. Of flowres both the King and Queen In'r cheeks are seen By graces led Thither, and laid in nuptiall bed On whom sips like Nymphs doe wait In regall state. They blush and redder grow, by this That they themselves, themselves still kisse. 6. No Lilly shall be found, or Rose In cheeke, chin, nose, When age growes on And beauties Summer time be done, As Swallowes seeke when Summers gone Some warmer Sunne. So will disloyall Lovers all Which now fond Celia servants call.
But why should I say if? 'tis sure enough Each Shepherd now is tuning of his pipe To warble your Epithalamians. Mira. Then let them turne them into Elegies And Epicediums for Gripus death. Daris. And let the Shepherdesses weaue a wreath Of Willowes to encircle Hegio's browes. Here comes our Parents. Tyndarus. These faire maides, I hope. Are counselling each other to prove kinde, And pitty their distressed lovers. Daris. Lovers, Sir, what have we to doe with lovers, wee Have sworne alleageiance at Diana's shrine; If we should love, we breake the faith we owe To Virgin purenesse, and our vestall vow. My. Such are like plum-trees that doe crooked grow Ore standing pooles, they laden are, and rich With pleasant fruits; but nought but chattering Pyes, And Crowes, and Catterpillars feed upon them. Tyndarus. O fie upon this single life, forgoe it, We read how Daphne for her peevish flight, Became a fruitlesse Bay-tree, Sirinx turn'd To a pale empty Reed, Anaxarite Was frozen into Marble, whereas those, Which married, or prov'd kind unto their friends, Were by a gracious influence transform'd Into the Olive, Pomegranet, Mulberie, Became Flowers, precious Stones, or eminent Starres. Dip. Imprudent girles, why should we women prove Sore tortures, and disturbances to men, If we be foule we're odious and loath'd. Theft. And such unkinde girles as these are, if faire, Are like rich vessels full of poysonous drugges,
Or like blacke Serpents arm'd with golden scales. Mira. Cease to perswade, for Gripus name and death Have both one sound in my esteeme, that tongue Which warble forth the one, doe chant the other. Daris. That direfull sound, that most disasterous knell Attendeth Hegio's name, and ever will. Tynd. Rare grace, and comely feature both are joynd In you, as if they both cospir'd to make Two parragons, which should excell each other. Shall common beauties then, and meaner faces Enjoy these joyes, which your selves deny Unto your selves, no let your gentle hearts Imbrace the sweets due to so faire deserts, Your lovely features were bestow'd on you By liberall nature for to be injoy'd; And 'twere a sinne where she have beene so free lovers sides, Of her best graces, to be nigardly. Micon. Wound not your selves through your poore Starve not your selves to make them pine away, Be kind unto your selves, if not to them. Dipsas. Vse time, the squabling Snake with age ore∣worne Casts off her hide, and re-assumes a new. The towring Eagle change her aged plumes, The fading Rose (the glory of the Spring) Receive an annuall birth from the sharp briar, Be wise, and crop in time your beauties flowers, They ne're spring more, being faded once, like ours. Thest. Vse time, no lovers will croud to impart Their thriving sutes to your age deafned eares, Chuse constant lovers then whilst that you may, Such as love for a like-long-age, not dayes, Your beautie's fraile, and soone will bud, and wither, Mir. With beauty love will bloome, & blow together. Daris. Beauty and love are like the coupled twins
Of wise Hipocrates, who both at once Received birth, and nutriment, and death. Mira. He ne're shall crop my youthfull beauties flower That i'le cease to love, when beauty 'gins to lower. Exeunt. SCEN. 3. Gripus. Hegio Gripus. OF late I did (not brooking a deniall) Renew my suite, attempt a further triall, Intreat, conjure, I left no way untri'd I must not, no I would not be deni'd. This was my resolution, but she The obdurate portall of whose Marble heart Was lockt, and barr'd against the powerfull art Of oft repeated teares, or far fetcht sighs, Or deep, and heart-bred groanes, stood deaf, and dumbe She must not, no she would not be o're come. Hegio. I never move her, but my hopelesse triall Alwayes reade Hieroglypicks of deniall. Gripus. Still lets proceede, who knowes we may pre∣vaile, Let not our best advis'd indeavours faile, To be employd, lets make a further triall, And fairly speed or find a foule deniall. Exeunt.
CEN. 4. Chorus of Faires SOme love, and have their loves rewarded Some love, and are no whit regarded, Some woe and speed, some woe and be Rejected for their loyaltie, This tyrant love compar'd may be To th' Macedonian dietie Whose lookes seem'd sometimes to disdaine This Champion, or that again, It would cast amorous glances forth Applauding to his mighty worth. No torture, no affliction Like to true loves passion, This made Sophocles wish his foe Might onely be tormented so. Exeunt. Finis Act. 2d.
ACTUS 2. SCENA 1. Hegio. Gripus. Hegio. EXil'd from mirth I wander up and downe, Gall'd with loves tyranous torment, Io Ily, Inthrall'd, and bound in Cupids golden chaines, Perplext with wo, my feature all is blur'd And chang'd, and I am Metamorphosed. Gripus. I am transformed too, O how hath passion Thrust all my thoughts, and senses out of fashion. Hegio. My head of late was thatcht with yellow straw Now it is perriwig'd with Winters gray. Gripus. My front as smooth as Ivory while ere Now beares deepe furrowes, made by sorrowes plough, In which the seeds of woe are scattered. Hegio. My eyes are Ilands, they're girt round about With troubled Oceans, and tides of teares. Gripus. I spend those teares whose store will ne're be spent, Yet shall I want teares, before cause of them. My Mira score not up my cares, and feares, Nor keep a Catalogue of my sad teares. Hegio. Quotidian feavers of reproch and scorue, Have chill'd the vigour of my wounded heart, Yet by the scorching raies of Daris eyes, It still is ignifi'd and glowes, and flames,
O Daris let the showres of thy love Asswage the glowing fire of my passion. Gripus. If I should put to Sea and boldly plough The glassie face of Neptune, love would be My Pylot. If perchance I walke abroad For recreation, my companion Is love, the fruitlesse love, of coy Mira. Hegio When the soft charmes of labour chasing sleepe Seize with their downy wings upon my eyes, When heavy Morpheus with his leaden keyes Close up my watchfull senses, love's my pillow. Grip. Me thinks the gentle gales of winds that move The trembling boughs, and through their palsie leaves, Breath musicke, whisper Mira's name to me. Hegio. Me thinks the notes of all the chirping birds Are chang'd, and warble nought but Daris name. Grip. Me thinks that Eccho which doe alwaies speak In answer to my sighs, say Mica's coy. Tis true, Diana hath more Nimphs then one In store, but no fruit else will please my taste, But what Hesperides garden brought forth, No colour please my eye but that which was Stained by the fish Maurieticall, And none but Mira can my fancy move. O Mira that my heart were flint like thine, Or thine were soft, and plyable, like mine. Hegio. The birds wander in the flowrie fields In the wild benefit of nature, live Happier then we; for they may choose their mates, And carroll their sweet pleasures to the Spring,
Now you would surfet him with happinesse, Now you would throw his Mistris Julio's armes, You'd have her struck too, that she sick might be No more of coynesse or unconstancie. Venus. The Eagle scornes to stoop unto a Fly, The Regall Lyon doth refuse to prey On him that prostrate lies, and will you prove More cruell then these be? Then Poets pens Shall Satyrs drop, and paint out thy disgrace, Thy childehood, nakednesse, and hood winck't face, Prove kind, and ev'ry tongue shall carroll forth, And chant in amorous lines thy lasting praise. Cupid, he shoots. Yeild (gentle girles) to love, now each goe rest, Her amourous heart in her true lovers breast. SCEN. 3. Gripus. Hegio. Eccho. Grip. Lanch forth sad soule into an Ocean Of teares, driven by the blustring gales of sighs, To find the Haven, and seeke safe harbour out, But stay a while, I thinke I'de neede provide Some other Pylot for to steere and guid Thy ballanc't bulk, besides sorrow, and griefe, For these I feare will strike, and split o'th sands, Wanting a Compas in their quavering hands. How ere th'art like to leake, and sinck i'th waves, Ith' raging Waves of sad despaire, if so Thy sailes and tacklings thou to flames maist tnrn Cast overboard thy hope, thy carkasse burne. My grief's a boundlesse Sea that knowes no Shore.
Hegio. O that I were a Basiliske that I Might venome Daris, or unvenom'd dye. To some tenebrious dungeon let us hie Where never day shall be acquainted with us, Where we'le remaine still in obscurity. Cursing our fats, and never more behold Sols radient and splendidious raies; and heare The melancholly Owle Nictimine, (The chiefest friend of solitarinesse) The fullen Dogs, the immitating Apes, Shall still converse with us, and such dumb things, To whom nature denies use to sound our names, Our grifes to blab, or fames to damnifie. Eccho. Fie, Hegio. We wish for death, we live without all hope, Eccho. Hope. Gripus. Hopes t'obtaine our loves their are none, Eccho. One. Hegio. Tis bootlesse to try againe, Eccho. Try againe. Gripus. Say, shall we then obtaine reciprocall love? Eccho. Love. Hegio. Shall we assuredly Upon a babling Eccho's voice rely? Alas, he fondly prates, shall we beleev't? Eccho. Beleev't. Gripus. We will; and as thy tale prove true, So will we credit Eccho's. Eccho. Credit Eccho. Hegio. Now as a well is hotter, when the ground Weare Winters hoary mantle, then when as Earth decking Flora doth invest the graffe In Summers tapestry, and Junes parliament roabs
By an Antiperistasin, or by The cirumambient ayres humidity, Which in a manner doe besiege it round, And make th'intrinsique heate unite, and so Concentre to resist th'invading foe: So let their coynesse set an edge on us, And cuspidat our animosities. Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito, Yeeld not to ev'les, but 'gainst them stoutlier goe. Exeunt. SCENA 4. Flambio. Agroicus. Flam. How happy am I in my bud of youth? The blossome of my nonage is not blowne, Nor doe the strength of nature (yet) beginne To uneffeminate my downy cheeke. I place no happinesse in womens smiles, Nor torture in their ill-becomming frowues, My heart is shot-free (yet) nor doth it lye in the faire casket of a Females eye, But haile Agroicus, what think'st of love. Agroicus. In good sooth, I know not how to devine it, or give an extract deminution of it, but as I deceive, its very nocent, and almost omninocent, where it gits the upper hand. Love and the botts have kill'd many an old horse, my Grandame told me that. And I have heard an old blancient boet say that Me∣gander swum through Hell to his Hero, I thinke hee was a Goose to doe so; And yet my Zonne Tom did
more the 'tother day, he leapt over a high wall, and wa∣ded through a deepe moate past his depth, to git to Margery. As I came up at the butt londs end, I met him in that case, but O, how did I bemire, and wonder, to see his new slop and all his cloathes bejeered with the mud of the pond he ran through. The old Boet I bominated before, said, That when folke fell in love, a blind naked boy, he called him Stu∣pid, shot them, 'Twas he shot my Zonne Tom, by the Maskins I would give the best cow in my yard, to find out this raskall Stupid, and I would thrash him, as I did the Henne last Shrove-tuesday. Exeunt. SCENA 5. Gripus. Hegio. Hymen. Gripus. Like as a guilty prisoner, upon whom Offended Justice lately past her doome, Drags his sad Irons from the loathed jaile, (Hopelesse to live) unto the cursed tree Where he stands muffled (but an inch from death) His last prayer said, and hearts confession made; At last (unlookt for) come a slow reprieve. And gives the wretch some few daies more to live. Now he (lost in amazement) boldly rends Deaths muffler from his eyes, and scarcely knows (Being over-joy'd) whether he lives or dyes: Even so joy whose life is quit from death, And despaire, by Mira's propitious smiles, Now 'gins t'approach my Festivall, and rest, I've chast dull sorrow from my pensive brest.
Hegio. Thanks gentle Eccho for thy sweet direction, Thankes gentle Juno for thy kind protection, Daris is wonne, Hence loathed Melancholly, At, avaunt from hence thou Snake-hair'd Devill, Thou ollow-eyde monster full fraught with evill, Hence, to the Abysle below, thy way imb, For that's thy Mansion, thy proper place. The gufe that wants a bottom, there mayst dwell, And preside o're the counsell of darke hell, Inthroan'd in Radamanthus seat maist raigne Among the Ccodmons, ne're againe Acen to cast thy influence ore my braine. Hymen. You that in this unfortunate age of love, This haplesse time of of Cupids tyranny, Have felt the worst that winged wag could doe Now banish sorrow, henceforth you shall be So happy as to thinke no wight is wretched, Or that there is a thing call'd miserie. What pleasures Poets fame of after death, In the Elizean abusted groves, Shall spread themselves 'fore you, as if you were Tenants, or Farmers of those blessed shades, It shall be a perpetuall Spring, where you Inhabit, all disasterous dewes, and blasts Shall strangers to your happy pastures be. Come follow me, this my well-lighted flame Shall light you unto Ceres Tempell, where (Expecting you) they Nuptiall garlands weare, That hold your hearts nain'd in their golden haire Exeunt.
SCEN. 6. Chorus of Fairies. Ring out yee Christall Spheares, Once blesse our listning eares, Let your sweet silver chime (Keeping harmonious time) Carroll forth your loud layes In the winged wantons praise. Mab thou Majestick Queene Of Fairies, be thou seene To keep this holyday, Whilst we dance and play, And frisk it as we goe O'th light fantastick toe. The Satyres and the Fawnes Shall nimbly crosse the Lawnes, O're tawny sands, and shelves, Trip it yee dapper Elves, Dance by the fountaine brim Nymphs deck't with Daisies trim, Come Lovers all in rowes, With your blith and jolly browes, With flowry chaplets crown'd, Come Lovers walke a round This Village, Venus say, Annually this day Her Sonnes triumphs shall be, Lovers expresse your glee. Exeunt cantantes.
Epilogue. Flambio. Our Lovers now find in their strict imbraces The true Elyzium, (the best of places,) Their joyes are full, they nothing want at all, But your acceptance of their Pastorall. FINIS.
BY that time this pastime was past, it was past time, to keepe their drowsie eyes any longer waking, who by this time, sollicited them to commend them∣selves to the elder Brother of death, but upon the ap∣proaching of the next Aurora, before the welkin had fully put aside the sable vizard of the night, before the stars were covered, and the earth discovered by the Sunne, Philispis (accompanied with a troope of Knights of such renown, and transcendent worth, as future times must out of duty owe them the debt of an honourable memory) came to celebrate his nuptialls with the Lady Julia. Now every busie Virgin is preparing costly jewels to adorne the Bride. every willing hand is providing orna∣ments to deck her. Rare beauty and well becoming grace damaskt her rosie cheeks, her glorious eyes did spark and rutilate, and eject rayes, her pace was carelesse, her deportment neglected, seeming to discover an amorists passions. She was led by Flaminius to the Chappel of the Castle; Flora did weaue the violets into a purple rugg, to spread het paths with. Cardinall de Rechileu tied that Cordian knot which sempiternally conjoyned these A∣morists. Having pay'd the duty they owed to their stomackes, for the greater magnificence of the solemnization a ju∣ing was held in the presence of Phylispis, and Julia, who now knew no other spheare besides joy to move in. The first that entred the lists was Flaminius, the first that en∣counter'd him was Mendorus, who though he was a Knight whose heroick deedes of chivalry, neither time
can weare out of memory, neither death himselfe by any meanes disolve) was forced at the first meeting to make a pillow of his Palfries croop. The second that came against Flaminius, was Pliti∣lius, in whose acts there is truth enough to make him fa∣mous, besides that which is fabulous, when these two sons of valour, (whose lightfooted steeds ran as if they had beene begotten by the winde, and ballassed with quick silver) met, breaking their knotty speares even to their gauntets, they seemed to have dim'd the air with the dispersed splinters of their shivered lances, whilst they passed by each other, not without evident tokens of their approved prowesse encharacterized upon their raced gor∣gets, the next time Flaminius encountred him with so much force, as he inforced him to leave his saddle. Our Champion next Antagonist was Alsus, a man of a haughty courage, and of grand experience in Military affaires, he bore for his device upon his shield, fickle for∣tunes whirling wheele; but this angry goddesse placed him in the lower spokes, for he was soone sent with his heeles upward to company his fellowes. Flaminius still continued unhorsing his unabiding e∣nemies, till the declining lamp of light did treble each shaddow, and Titans fierie chariot horses defatigated with their tedious race, were retired to drench them∣selves in their hospitable salt bath, for the refreshing of their sweating members; at which time he left the lists, having renowned Victory for his hand-maid, and the tro∣phies of the day adorning his crest. We may better imagine, then describe the rest of the entertainment, onely thus much, when the chorus of their dreames were ready to step upon the theater of the ima∣gination,
the over-wearied creatures of the world incli∣ning to repose, being now survayd by the Pale Lady of the night, the princely company there present attended Philispis and Julia to their Amphithalame, where one of the Actors of the precedent pastorall warbled worth this Epithalamium. Epithalamium. Mirth and nuptiall joyes betide Th' happy Bridegrome and fair Bride, Sol have quencht his glowing beame In the coole Atlantick streame, Now their shines no tell-tale sun Hymens rites are to be done, Now Loves revells 'gin to keepe, What have you to doe with sleepe? You have sweeter sweets to prove, Lovely Venus wakes, and love, Goddesse of Nocturnall sport Alwaies keep thy jocond court In this loving couples armes (O that my praiers might prove charmes.) Goddesse of the marriage feast Here approach at our request Saturnia, whose car I saw A harnest teame of Peacoks draw Fercely through the fleeting skie, wherein sate thy majestie,
On thee did an Hoast attend Of bright goddesses, descend From that chariot, and blesse Julia's womb with fruitfulnesse, Make her, when 9 Moneths be run Mother of a lovely son, Let every yeer the Queene of love Her new fill'd cradle rock, and move. Mirth and Nuptiall joyes betide The happy Bridegroome, and fair Bride. This Song being ended, they tooke away their candle, and wish't them good night. Soone after the nimble houres had yoaked Piroeis, Ae∣thon, Eous, and Phlegon, the fire-breathing Palfryes of Apollo, and their master Phoebus leaving the Sea-greene bed of his watry Lover, had with his golden Chariot made a swift passage through the ribs of the deepe, and saluted him at his Chamber window, Flaminius arose to take his leave of this glorious assembly, then he returned to Poyssy, and by degrees visited all France, past through the meridian of the slow pac't Spaine, and drunken Ger∣many, with the most part of those united Provinces, which are pluckt out of the jawes of Neptune, and after three yeares space he returned home to Naples, whose happy returne we heartily congratulate in these rimes. the low lowing Bull, the sharp-tuskt Bore, (Besmeared with Adonis ruddy gore.) And frisking Lambs, and with their blouds bestow A  , corall cture on the brow
Of froth becurled Neptune, lets arise, And to the carefull Sea-gods sacrifice. Let gratefull Aromatick odours burne, Let pious incense smoake, for the returne Of Great Flaminius, in whom abide More Art, then raised Athens to her pride, More civill Ethicks he containe, then may Well moralize all sauage India. Dance nimbly Ladies, beat the measur'd ground With your light feet, in a fantastick round, Lads joyntly joyne your hands, whilst y'are to greet Flaminius, we'l joyne our measur'd feet.
THE SECOND BOOKE Of the CYPRIAN ACADEMY. AS the Sea (that great Regiment of waters) cannot bee quartered in the cloyster of a slender nut, no, neither could the minde of the most renowned, and most wor∣thy to be most renowned Flami∣nius bee included or reclused in that small locall compasse which circumscribed his body, but it continually made its transcursians and progresses abroad, to finde out and en∣joy knowledge (its most optable object) though under remote regions, he was willing once more to leave his indulgent parents (whose lives were bound up in his welfare) and his selfe-sufficient country (though wee esteeme it difficient without him) that he might ratifie his judgement, and enrich his head with variety of knowledge, and leave fame for a patrimony to his po∣sterity. Now the Saylors have drunke their parting cups, vocat jam carbasus auras; Now Flaminius is ready to steere his course towards the white forest the land of fortune Albion, wee will usher him to his ship with this vale,
Farewell Flaminius, so smoothly sweep The glassy face of the becalmed deep, Devide the streames, let thy guilt brag out brave The prouder billowes, cleave each yeilding wave, Out-strip the tide, and with your painted oares Stout Saylors, glide along the moving shores. Kind Neptune claime the winds, let not them jarre Commencing with the bubling tide, a warre. Now the spreading sayles are hoysted up, now the Anchors are way'd, and the wind also the part of a duti∣full and observant servingman, waiting just behind him, and filling the swelling caves with prosperous gales, the cloath swel'd and grew proud of Flaminius presence, and the sea danced to receive him, and the winde sweet∣ly kist the waters whispering new joyes to inrich'd Thetis, who had now quite forgotten to bee colerick wisht she bore Flaminius, he soone left the lessened land behind him and gentle Neptune afforded him such a fa∣vorable transmarian voyage, as hee with more then or∣dinary celerity discovered Dover, where hee landed but not lazed, for hee no sooner left admiring at the laud∣able beauty of the Island, (which was then fluorishing, encoying a well setled and a happy peace under an un∣usurped Governement) but he repaired to the Metropo∣litan City, Albions imperiall chamber, Troy-novant. Rich Britain's unexchausted treasury, Illustrious Englands large Epitomie, By lib'rall nature stor'd with what belong To state, for beauty brave, for warfare strong, Refulgent Titan who surveigheth all Structures contained in the massy ball Ne're saw the like—As Cypres-trees excells The humble shrub in loftinesse and smell: As fairest Lillies, clad in hoary plush
Exceed the fruitlesse, wither'd bramble bush: As the springs glory (the red Rose) exceed In beauty, and in sent, the foulest weeed: Or as the fertile tree whose Laden boughes With varnish pride crownes jolly Autumes browes Transcend the Idle shrub: so you in worth Surpasse the edifices of the earth. As Caesars courts surmount Amyntas cells: So neighbouring republiques yours excells. The Silver Thames whose bed have alwayes been Made at thy feet, of rivers is the Queene, Her Barges standing in even placed rowes Like to a watry wildernesse shee showes. The Nerean goodesse twice each naturall day Comes fourescore thousand paces off to pay The tribute, whom precedent times did call Great Troy-novant polyanthropicall, Ring out Bow bells, proclaime your joyes aloud, People embrace the smothering throng and croud, To view Flaminius, Euphrosyne Right goddesse of free mirth come lead with the The frolick mountaine Nymph faire liberty. Attended on by youthfull ollity, And let your bonfires smoake asspire so high. As if you meant with earth to sing the skie. Let sweet Bellonius musick, and the voyce Of Cannons sing (in a loud base) your joyes. In this City his eyes made his mind know what pow∣er heavenly beauty had to throw it downe to hellish a∣gonies, he spied the beauteous Clorinda walking in a checkerd garden among those flowers which contended for breauty to recreate her, and were ambitious which should be fairest because just like to her, who was thrice fairer then the fairest, Flaminious steps could find no further ground, but here he cast anchor, and became in∣amoured
of Clorinda, A Lady every way as rarely accom∣plished with vertues becoming a woman, as he was with graces adorning a man, she was borne in the me∣tropolitan of beauties dominion, in complection a pure sanguine, in condition a perfect Saint, either her exte∣rior feature, or inferiour faculties did captivate all be∣holders, for vertue tooke as much paines to adorne the one, as nature did to compleate the other. Ut Solin Coelis; ut Lux in sole videtur: Uirtus in vultu sic habitare suo, Spectator quicunque venit, discedit amator Aut illum virtus, aut sua forma capit. As Sol in heaven, as light in Sol abide: So vertue in Clorindadoe reside, Who comes to view her ere he goes will love, Her vertue, or her beauty will him move. As the Tartarian plant Boxaneth grows up in the vi∣sible forme of a Lambe, and insensibly eats up all the grasse round about it, so did she by an intrinsique kind of magick subiugate all hearts to her eyes. There wan∣ted nothing in this Angell, that nature might add for perfection, or fortune bestow for wealth, or that the Gods at any time confer upon mortalls, the greatest re∣ritie that the world could shew was her beauty, though the least thing that might be encomionized in her was her beauty. Ben que le corps soit bean ame est encore plus belle, her faire body was but a fair Inne of a far fairer guest within, an excellent Cabinet of an incomperable jewell, the gifts of her minde did as far transcend the perfection of her face, as that did the beauty of the rest of the Ladyes of the court, among whom she shewed like a silver dove trooping with rowes, or like Cynthia among the lesser
stars, or like the discoloured tulip among weeds or like Jo among the rest of Argus herd. In a word let the curious hand of art extract from all vertues and graces an Elixer, or perfect quintessence of perfection & it will appear but the picture of her; for to fill this treatise with elogies of her, were to put Hercules shoe upon an In∣fants foot, to clap Bucephalus saddle upon a Spanish Ginnet, or lay Atlas burthen upon a childs shoulders, or to emptie the sea into a pond. One looke of this Paragon of the terrestiall pa∣radise struck Flaminius into a fever, and fyred him with her love, the exorbitant flames whereof he could neither suppresse, nor conceale. —Quis enim celaverit ignem Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo. Who can the ardent fire of Love conceale? Which by its owne light doth it selfe reveale. To this end the Poets painted Minerva the Hierogly∣phick of wisdome vailed, to signifie that wisdome may be covered, and reclused, but Cupid the character of affecti∣on they portraitured naked, to infinuate that Love is not to be over canopied, but these are the petulancies of Poets. To our taske, his passions cannot be written of mee with out flouds of teares, (which would wet the paper, and obliterate the relation) nor read of you without griefe: he observed the place of her recreation, where she would walke alone, and thether would be repaire, esteeming the place happy, yea, and holy too, which had contained so soveraigne a beauty, one night among the rest in a sad fit of Passion, (as if his soule had beene gone upon some errand, and left his corps in a paune till its returne,) hee gave way to his imaginations to
ruminate upon that which permitted him not to sleep, and these, or such like were his meditations, Alas Fla∣minius, what magick, what pyromancie, what enchant∣ment is inshrined in the ancles of Clorinda's eyes that have this influence upon the heart? why shouldst thou annihilate thy selfe, & pine, and dy for beauty, a guilded nothing, a rose can shew more vermilion then a Ladyes cheeke, a Lilly boast a richer white then her hand, alas a wife is but a faire affliction, 'tis true the disease of love is impatient, the desire extreame, whose assaults the wise can neither oppugne by policie, or the valiant by prow∣esse; its the epidemicall egritude of mortalls, and the best mallady in the world when it infects two together, but herein consists thy infelicity in affecting a Lady whom thou art no more like to obtaine then the Wolfe to drinke up the Moon, or the Gyants to dismount Jupiter. Thinkest thou that thou art caught alone with the bait of her Atheriall beauty, can an old hee goat bee without a beard, a leud userer without full baggs, a Uenus without a temple, or a faire Lady without a Lover. Can the Albion court afford never a votary to thy Saint. —Quae ditissima forma Mille procis placuit— Whose feature thousands doe invite To admire, and delight. Will the Partridge let the ripe eares of corne stand for the sparrow, will the cat let the crummes lie for the Mouse, or English Lords bequeath beauty to an Italian; no no, expire rather with a private scar then publique shame, if thy Lady never lov'd any she will not know how to affect thee, if any, shee will not leave them for thee. But courage Flaminius.
—Timidi nunquam statuere tropheam. covard aimant n'ent ou ny' aura beile amye. Faint heart never won faire Lady, will you then loose the day before you begin the battell, will you conclude your selfe conquered before the conflict, will you cast downe your shield before your sword breake, Mastifes fawne when they are fed, Tygers stoope when they bee tickled, Bucephalus wil prostrate himselfe to bee carried, and women yeild when they be courted, cast anchor here then Flaminius, what needst thou, —Per saxa per Ignes. By Scilla and Charybdis, sea, and land, By Rocks, and shelves, heapes of moving sands, Run to rifle the Easterne shore, when thou maist be∣hold farre more precious diamonds in her eyes, why shouldst thou, Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum. By Marine toyles And Martiall broyles. Steere thy course to Tyre for purple when thou maist find fresher in her ruddy cheeke. To what end shouldst thou dig Peru for that Ore which thou shalt finde excell'd by her golden haire, why shouldst thou ransack the rocky Licilian Sea for Corall, when thon maist enjoy it on her ruby lips? why shouldst thou seeke for Ivory in Africa when thou maist finde it upon her hands? what needst thou toyle in India for gummes when shee can breath a more redo∣lent Diapasma? or run to Arabia to heare the Phenix sing when her voyce makes a far more melodious Di∣apason?
Flaminius had of his acquaintance Grisonus an Ita∣lian who became his spokesman to Diaphoro (his Ladyes Guardian) to obtaine for him admission in this manner. Diaphoro, the intimacy that hath been alwaies between us since the first taste of our acquaintance, have emboul∣dened me in behalf of a noble Lord of my own country, to solicite your councell and assistance in a businesse of grand importance: his name is Flaminius of whose persō vertue her selfe is proud of so great patrimony, & of so comely personage, that it is dubitable whether hee bee more indebted to nature for the lineaments of his per∣son, or to Fortune for the encrease of his possessions, he is of a quick inventive and penetrating capacity, without spot of morosity, or colour, hee is aliquis in omnibus, fraught with all kinde of scientificall know∣ledge, if you aske what countryman he is? I may rather say, what country man is he not? he is Cives mund, a Citizen of the world, having with the sun (his fellow traveller) survey'd most of habitable and hospitable re∣gions, & in his travells being arrived in this happy king∣dome, and come to this magnificent City, that power∣full dietie Love, which have enkindled the hearts of mightyest monarches with the beautifull lineaments of rosie cheek't Ladies, at this time have manifested its so∣veraignety over him, who is taken in the snare of Clo∣rinda's love, and fetered with the chaine of affection. The countlesse griefes which day and night he indures may be as perswasive orators to moove any pittifull na∣ture to favour him, he doubts not of successe, had he but accesse, which if you shall please to procure him, you shall bind together with me to your self this noble Lord in the most corroborated limitts of truest affections. Diaphoro replyed, Sir, amongst the rest of the Enco∣mions of your Lord, you might have remembred the soundnesse of judgement, which I perceive and applaud in his choyce of Clorinda, a Lady adorned with singular
beauty and chastity, excelling in the one Uenus, in the other Uesta. Zeuxis, having before him fifty of the most eminent beauties of Sparta to include all their perfecti∣ons in the simulachre of one amiable Venus, said that fifty more of more excellent beauty then those would not administer sufficient beauty to shaddow the goddesse of beauty by; in the like manner it fareth with me, who dis∣paire by art to shaddow Clorinda (to whom the rest of her sex serve but as foyles) or by imagination to com∣prehend her. I may say, and that without a solaecisme that truth her selfe might be her Panegyrist and yet con∣tinue naked. If I doe any acceptable service to Flami∣nius that might conduce to his obtaining her, e∣steeme it but the shadow of what I desire to doe, in the meane time let me crave your society together with Fla∣minius at a slender meale at my house at night, not for the cates which you shall finde, but for your company which I fancy, what want in cost shall exceed in courte∣sie, and welcome shall be as great as your cheere little. Grisonus (after due thankes returned) departed from Diaphoro to certifie Flaminius his friendship, who now call'd upon Phaebus to whip on his lazie teame, and precipitate headlong to the west: which done hee repaired to Diophoro's house, where we will cover with a vaile of silence the entertainement (which was royall) though Flaminius best dish was the beauty of Clorinda, and Clorinda's the personage of Flaminius, so that they were both caught in one net, and both strucke with the same dart, & before Phaebus was ten times brought abed, their soules were knitt in an intire union, and their hearts lodg'd in eithers brest, but O the Remora's, and obstacles that obvaricate a lovers progresse, O the trit∣full casualties, the dolorous accidents, the sd contin∣gencies that waite upon an amorist, for no sooner was loves sacred jubile proclaimed by these new lovers, but a corrivall must step in to eclipse their joyes.
The glorious sun exhales the noysome vapours of the earth, and the shining jet drawes to it the contempta∣ble straw, and the rare beauty of Clorinda, (that load∣stone of love) attracted the heart of Vernar and layd it prostrate at her feet. To give a character of Vernar, he would have made a fit standard-bearer for that gigantick troop that bad Jove battell, and besieg'd the gods. He halfe in despaire because of Flaminius and halfe in hope because of Decia Diaphoro's Lady, (whom he inser∣ted in read letters, in the catalogue of his best friends) tooke his way to Chelsey to Diaphoro's house, where he found Clorinda sitting in a coole arbour thatcht with sucklings, and guarded by the enamoured chirping wood quire, which came thither to adore her (who could shew more graces then there be sands in the glasse of time,) She sat upon a banck of Lillies which grew pale to see themselves excell'd in whitenesse by her faire hand, the arbour was lined within with Roses, which blushed themselves into a fresher cornation to assimulate her cheekes, the pavement was of purple violets and o∣ther redolent flowres which could bost no sweetnesse, but what they derived from her, by the entrance of this arbour ran a silver streame which with its bubling ora∣tory did court the shore to dam up the torrent, that it might stand still to behold Clorinda, but being deny'd, it went murmuring away. The Nymphs and freshwater Syrens danc't, and the aeriall spheares laid a side their melodious lutes to lissen whilsts Clorinda gave an aire to these more charming notes. SONG. 1. First shall the Bee abhor the smell of Hybla's fragrant boure,
And sease her thigh with balme to swell? Suckt from each spicy flower. 2. First shall the chastest turtle dove Forget to bill, and fly From her owne mate, and emblem prove of loath'd inconstancy. 3. First Pan shall make a loving league betwixt the wolfes, and sheep First shall the hen her broode bequeath unto the Kite to keepe. 4. First shall the huge Leviahan abide i'th sea no more, But come to sport with active man upon the parched shore. 5. First shall the Lyon weary be. of solitary woods, And skip into the frighted sea to wanton in the flouds. 6. First North with South its place shall change Orient with West shake hand, First steadfast earth shall move, and range, and ayre fixed stand. 7. First spangled heaven below shall ly and sable hell above, Ere unto my Flaminius I false or unconstant prove. 8. First shall my ashes passe the fire and cloyster'd ly in urne, Ere my affections expire or loves flame cease to burne.
9. Love with my body shall not end that ne're shall faile, or fade, But shall upon my soule attend into the Sacred shade. Her Song ended; Uernar stept to her and thus spoke, Divine Madam, (Divine I call you because like a diefied goddesse you monarchize over my affections) the rare Idea of your beauteous portraiture, and supere∣minent accomodations have so fired my heart, that no∣thing but your propitious aspect can save me from be∣comeing loves abject. Since every part of you is deck't with some particular ornament, your face with etheriall beauty, your head with celestiall wisdome, your eyes with awfull majesty, and lovely lenity, make also your heart the throne of tender pitty, being the most excellent rayment, of the most excellent part. The lustre of your resplendent eyes have kindled those fires which nothing but the showres of your mercie can mitigate, you have wounded one, you one∣ly can heale me, like Achilles his lance you have as well a medicinall as a vulnerating vertue, the knife can as well spread a plaister as make a wound, and you can as well happifie me with your love, as pine me for your good∣liking. Let not Flaminius (whose life is a meere blanck where∣in brave actions shall never be inscribed for the militant of posteritie) enjoy what I sue for, Let not that strag∣ling stranger, who is enamoured of every new face he beholds, enjoy you the glory of women, of men the on∣ly admiration, shall that loathed Issue of his fathers loynes, that slander of his mothers heavy womb, that rage of honour possesse that which love sick-Albion Lords have sued for in vaine?
Modestie made in Clorinda's blushing cheekes, a fresh bed of corall, whilst she heard Flaminius (the mirrour of magnanimity and true patron of prowesse, and chi∣vallrie, thus reviled, and though these petulant expressi∣ons might well have sturd up anger, yet his deportment did rather breed disdaine in Clorinda, who thus re∣plied. If you knew how much your discourse displeaseth me, and how little it is like to profit you, you would esteem your time as vainly lost in pursuing your taske, as I account it over long untill you end it, and those flames of affection which you pretend shall sooner burn your heartto a cole, then enkindle mine with a recipro∣call ardour. Clorinda having given Uernar this bitter pill to swal∣low left him in dispaire, and repaired to Diaphoro, and Delia, as she walked the flowres did ambitiously croud themselves into love-nets to entangle her feet, and kisse them, and detaine them prisoners in their amorous stalkes, the Daffadillies wept when she removed and the Tulip call'd all it's bloud into it's cheekes to cout her, stay, Being come to Diaphoro and Delia, she said, As I was shrouding my selfe in a coole arbour, from the soultry rayes of the scorching sun, Vernar (the truest hyerogliphick of in solence) intruded, distill'd his love∣sick passions into my loathing eares, and so reviled he∣roick Flaminius, with contemptible provocations as would whet any cowards sword to carve out the reveng of his reputation, Nay had it been spoke of a disceased Hero, the inraged spirit in pitty of the ashes so propha∣ned, would nimbly lift up the sweating marble, and leap into the wronged dust, which being now new anima∣ted would become 'its owne revenger. Diaphoro and Delia answered, We grieve that Uernar should say any thing that
should produce your displeasure, but doubtlesse if you would please to blesse his suit with your good liking, it would extreamly conduce to your friends content∣ment. Ciorinda coyned this reply. The torrent of my affections ran in another chanel, Alexander would have no man ingrave him in precious stone but Pergotales, and I will have my picture imprin∣ted in the heart of no man but Flaminius, the Peacock is a bird for none but Juno, The Dove for none but Uesta, none might weare Uenus in a table besides Alexander, nor Pallas in a ring but Ulysses, as there is but Phaenix in the world, so there is but one tree in Arabia called Rasin that she will build in, & as there is but one Clorinda to be heard of, so there is but one Flaminius that she will like of. And let the inconvenience of forced watches be de∣monstrated in this Tragedy which I have oft heard Fla∣minius relate, (viz,) There fled in France some hundred and odd yeares since one Captain Coucy as gallant a Gentleman as those times afforded, if fortune had been as intentive to aug∣ment his possessions, as nature was to compleat his per∣son, he was tost iu Cupids blanket, and became servant to a gentlewoman from whom he received a paritie of affection, which newes no sooner arrived at her Parents eares, But they (to crosse her former intention) hud∣led up a constrained marriage, betweene her and one Monsieur Faiel, one whose wealth was more grave and weighty then his wit, and who had rather a mine of gold, then a golden mind, though his purse did guild his infirmities, and his purse compounded for his folly. Captaine Coucy (having an army of passions, for his con∣voy in discontent quitted France, and became a Com∣mander in the warrs of Hungary against the Turke, where he receivd his imnedicable wound not far remote
from Buda, being convaied to his Asylum, hee lingered and strugled with death some few dayes, and not long before he expired, he calld to him one of his Ueteran soldiers, and servants, of whose fidelitie he had formerly received sufficient evidence, he told him he had a busi∣nesse of grand importance to impart unto him, which he conjured him punctually to performe, which was, that after his soule had left his pined body, he should cause his corps to be ript open, and then take his heart out of his brest, and recluse it in an earthen pot, to be bak't to powder, then to inclose the powder in a small box to∣gether with that bracelet of Madamoisella Failes. haire, which had a long time entwin'd his left wrist, and with them a note which he had written to her with his owne bloud, and after he had cloysterd his carkasse in the bowels of his mother earth, to repaire with all ex∣pedition to France, and present that box to Madamoi∣sella Faiel's fair hand, This direction led the old Servant by the hand, who having fullfill'd the former command (this being the last importunitie that he had left to ex∣presse his duty to his Master) his hasty feet devoured the way to Paris, where comming to doe his errand Faiel interrupted his passage, and questioned him because he was assuredly certisied he was Coucy's man, and finding his faultering tongue to let fall some unadvised slips, he and his Servants ransackt him, and interrupted the box with the note which discoverd what was therein con∣tained, he dismissed the bearer with threats, and mena∣ces. And delivered the powder to his cooke, advising him to make a little well rellished dish of it, without wasting a dust of it, for it was a deare and precious relick, and and conjured him to serve it in himselfe after the last cours at Supper, which being done Faiel commanded all the waitors to absent themselves and enterd into a serious discourse with his wife, how ever sines their
nuptialls he observed she did indulge too much melan∣choly, and least it should bring her into a consumption, he had composed that approved cordiall, there upon he importuned her to eate up the whole dish, and after much perswading to declare what it was, he tould her she had eaten Coucy's heart, and so drew forth the box; and presented her with the note, and the bracelet, she (lost in amazement) in a sud lain exultation of joy, with a deep sigh sayd, This is a precious cordial indeed, and so lick't the dish, affirming It is so precious that it's pitty ever to put any meat upon it, from this her repast she went to her repose, and as soone as the morning began to draw dew from the fairest greenes to wash her face with∣all against the approach of her glistring lover, she was found dead in her bead. Worse successe attended the in∣auspicous forced match of Aegyptus 50. Sonnes to Danaus Daughters, who all (but one) made their bridall beds stages, whereon they acted their husbands tragedies, what inference may be drawn from all this conference but the inconvenience and misery of compelled marri∣ages, to prevent such sad events my owne choyce shall procure my good liking; the chariot of the Sun is for Phaebus, not for Phaeton, Seianus his horse will thrive with none but his Master, nor will the Tolosonian gold inrich Cepio's coffers, none can sound Mercuries pipe but Orpheus, non can unfold the Sphinx his riddle but Oedi∣pus, none but Laertes his ofspring can rob Pallas of her Troysaving Palladium, Uenus delights to heare none but Mercurie, and Clorinda, to love none but Flami∣nius. This her discourse was so full of rapture, that they only began to be sorry when she did end her speech, and wisht (in wonder) that she held it lesse vaine glory to talke much, then they did pennance to give audience to her dulciloquie. But let us returne to Uernar.
Now mischiefe began to unmaske her selfe, and take a pride to grow terrible, for he (seeing himselfe sligh∣ted) turned his love into loathing, and the heate of his affection into the height of malice, he repayred to, Flaminius and said. Sir, Bombar interposed betwixt Clorinda and your selfe and have eclipsed her affection from shining upon you, alas, your Lady plays fast and loose with you, her love is like a Gypsies knot, in one gale she both hoyst sayled, & waighed anchor, in one wind she sounded both an alarum, and a parly, pretending nothing more, in∣tending nothing lesse, then to love you, her tongue is furnished with fauning affection, as a Haberdashers shop with new fashions, and her heart is stuft with fraud as an usurers closset with parchment bonds. As in Logick there be Aristotelis Periherminias as well as his intricate questions, in the realitie of numerus, as in Ethicks his magna moralia as well as his Nichomacha, as in musick there is a diatessaron, as well as a paralamba∣nominion; as in Geometry there be oblique fines as well as right: an Isoperimetris as well as a dedocathedron, an Isosieles as well as an ambligonium, as in Retorick there be Schemes, and tropes, as well as pronuntiation: as in Grammer be Hereroclitans, as well as perfect nownes; as in physick be the colon as well a the Arteries: as in Geo∣graphie there is a Terra incognita periwig'd over with Po∣lemies Delphuego, as well as the know parts of the tempe∣rate Zone; so in women there be false intentions as wel as false conceptions, the herb Moly hath a flowre as whit as snow, and a roote as black as Inke, so hath Clorinda a faire tongue as false heart, tout ce qui luit n'est pas or, all is not gold that glistereth, thou knowest not what bit∣ter poyson I'le in sweet words, aux mots, & non aux mots, il faut juger d'le' home, a good archer is judged of by his aime, not his arrow, and a true friend knowne  by performances not protestations.
Toute chair n' est pas venaison all flesh is not venison, nor every tale true, straight trees have crooked rootes, smooth baites sharp hookes, & a honied tongue a heart of gall, the fairer the stone be in the toades head, the more pestilent is the poyson in her bowels, and your Ladies talke the more it is seasoned with fine phrases the lete it favouerth of true meaning, there is nothing more smooth then glasse, yet nothing more brittle, no∣thing more faire then snow yet nothing lesse firme, no∣thing more beautifull then a woman yet nothing more fickle. Flaminius breaking his long kept silence said, I shall never take joy of this life, if I may not enjoy her, for whose sake I joy principally to have life, but to what end is this supposition? if other women be bri∣ckle as glasses, my Clorinda stands a rock of Parian mar∣ble, firme and sure, the crystall shall be tainted, the E∣merlin spotted, and rude feet shall profane the galaxia, Leda's windes shall forsake their orbes, or Serpentarius di∣sert his small fry of twinisling starrs, or Lucidelyra de∣test her selfe of her refulgent beauty, or Bootes cease to drive on Charles wain, ere I'le harbour dishonourable thoughts of Clorinda, A Titan though curtained with clouds yet in time dissipates the congealed vapours, and gets the victory and dissolves those vailes into thin∣nisse, & so to nothing; so shall Clorinda these aspersions. Should you faigne the Elephant to chuse the Mouse for her companion (which all men know she feares) should you forge the Lyon to be delighted with the crowing of a cock, or the load stone to embrace Thea∣mides, or the Bee to build in the tree Alpina, when no man is ignorant but she, (either suspecting it to be ve∣nemous, or misliking it because it is so gorgious) all∣wayes shun it, who would extoll you for a naturalist that affirme things so unnaturall, more absurd is it to accuse Clorinda to become Helena, whom she excells as well in beauty as in chastitie.
Now Flaminius (usher'd by affection, and attended on by feare) departed from him, and directed his steps towards Chelsey, in the way he met Bombar, Diaphoro's, brother, whom he (misinformed) looked upon with narrow eyes, because he esteemed him ready to enjoy the perfection of his desires. But when Flaminius heard how Uernar reviled him, and accused falsly his constant Clorinda, with very anger at his insolence his eyes waxed bloud shot, and his fore∣head was furrowed with so fearefull a frowne as all the beholders trembled at the terrible aspect of his bunch∣ed brow, which notwithstanding was but the shaddow of his hearts impatience, choller choaked up the mouth of his voyces organ, so as he was unable for a time, to render any reply, but as soone as he had recollected him∣selfe he sent him this desire, Impious Uernar, Though you have practised villianie from your cradle, and suck't more mischiefe then milke from your hated dug, & hitherto scaped scot-free, yet now retaine a mortall chalenge from my arme, which glories to oppugne so foule a cause, I shall expect you in Hide Parke, as soon as the cleere Aurora be risen out of the armes of Titan that I may see what complection thy heart beares, and that thy body may be offer'd up for a breakefast to the Crowes by Your irreconsileable Antagonist FLAMINIUS. Uernar accepted the challenge and sent this retort, More (Impious Flaminius,) not dreading thy menaces I doubt not to carve thy body into steakes, and distribute it to the plumed spectators of thy tragedy, for the world shall sooner want adventures, then the courage to under∣take them, who stiles himselfe, Your utter enemie UERNAR.
A little before the time of combate, a Lady call'd the sage Artimaga came to Flaminius prophesied his victory, and presented him with a strong armour, more gorge∣ous then the Uulcan framed armour of Aeneas fetcht from the Cyclops forge, by the Pampian goddesse Cythe∣rea, when she sought for her sons safegard from the fu∣ry of Rutilian Turnus, fighting for a Kingdome and his love Lavinia, this armour Clorinda beautified with Locks of her golden haire, which was fastned to his cres, and obumbrated his Corslet dangling downe in small braides, tied up in Lovers knotts with silver ribands, the armour was of a sea-green colour with rocks, and sands of gold, his device upon his sheild was the jmages of the chast and constant Penelope, and his Lady Clorinda in silver, with their hands joyned, his impresse was. Est vunum velle duobus. Clorinda and Penelope The colum's are of constancie. The colour of his horse was milke white, but upon his brest and croop he was dap d with red staines, as when a white Tulip is streakt with red, or a few straw∣beries scattered in a messe of creame, he was fiery and of a goodly proportioned greatnesse, his hasty hoofes scorn∣ed the earth, and he sent proud challenges in his loud dialect to his enemie. Now Clorinda, Diaphoro and Belia, Grisonus, Bombar, Artimaga, Florian, Doristo, and others ushered Flaminius into the feild with this song. SONG. Armes and hon thy ory To thy fames immory, Adverse fortune ever y the,
No disasterous fate come nigh the, Prosper still in martiall courses Prosper still in arts and forces, Bright victory Attend the nigh, Whilst spreading fame Resound thy name And Blason forth Thy mighty worth. Just Astraea whom Poets say From wicked earth is fled away, And in the bandrike hast thy seate To make the Zadiack compleat, Once more from thy bright throne descend Thy owne stout Champion to defend, Sheild him from harme Strengthen his arme, Kind Mars come downe And his head crowne With wreaths of palme, Then myrh, and balme Sweet insence, with the Cypresse tree, And Cassia shall flame to the, And Th' Magpie, and the Woolfe which be Devoted to thy dietie, Ride on truths champion, and goe Assured thy haughty foe, Shall fall like Sparrowes 'fore a halke Thou ore his spoyles shalt boldy walke, Bright victory Attend the nigh, Whilst spreading fame Resound thy name And Blazon forth Thy mighty worth.
Flaminius waited not long before Uernar appeared gallantly mounted upon a bay browne coursier, full of black spots, his forehead marked with a white starr, to which in his whole body there was not any part answe∣rable but the left foot behind, his armour was rich and gorgious of a skie colour full of starrs of gold, he bore in his sheild the effigies of Cassandra the propheticall daughter of Priamus in silver, with this word Mentriri non est meum, Its not my part to lye. Flaminius (who affected not warr, but in cause of ne∣cessity, alwayes peace, but with honourable conditi∣ons) before he would extort from Uernar a forced con∣fession of injurie done to Clorinda, he went about first like a flexanimous Oratour to exhort him to it, Should you Sir Uernar accuse Helena of falcifying her conjugall trust, it had been but to tell over a tale that is already told, this accusation had been warrantable by traditi∣on, but to charge Clorinda with inconstancy, nay to think such a thought of her (whose beauty bewray her to be Uenus, but that she excell her in chastitie, and whose continence speakes her to be Diana, but that she staines her beauty,) were intollerable impudence, to speake such a word flat impiety, and to affirme it with oathes inexpiable injury. Or had Nullifidius whom no man will credit reported this it had not been worth my answering, or her regar∣ding, but that you Uernar who was sometimes of her intimate acquaintance (being Deli'as friend) Though as it is now evident a dissembling Sycophant, for you to relate this, others beleeve it, she stomaches it, and I'le re∣venge it, I had better take a blister of a nettle, then a prick of a rose, I am more willing that a Raven should pick out my eyes, then a Turtle pick at them, to dye of the food one affecteth not is better then to surfet of that one delighteth in, I am of Scipi'os mind who had rather that Hanibal should eat his heart with salt then
Laelius grieve it with discurtifie, or of the same with Laelius who chose rather to be slaine of the Spaniards then suspected of Scipio, I had rather an enemy should beate me, then a friend belye me, rather that an Antagonist should flay me, then one of acquaintance slan∣der me. Uernar replyed, We come not hither to debate, but to combate, not to prate but to praeleate, not to cavill but to duel, not to jest but to just, wherefore (having turned their horses) these champions met so furiously, That their shiver'd lances flew upwards, as if they challenged the skie before they falled on earth, never was game of death better playd, never did fury display it selfe in greater bravery, never were Hector and Achilles better imitated or rather excell'd, never were swords guided by more skilfull hands, never were hands accommodated with more trusty swords, which like deep mouth'd Cannons battering downe by peace meale their armours, made many wide breaches for troopes of wounds to rush in at, Her's the Trojan warrs in Epitome, her's the battell of Lepanto ac∣ted in Monomachy, her's Yorke and Lancaster fought over againe in a Hippomachy, her's the Pharsalian feild discrib'd in these lists, her's the fight at Canna excelled in a duell. Now the barriers blood began to chace sweat from the full possession of their outsides, for their armours blushed that they had defended their masters no better, force against force, prowesse against prowesse were in∣terchangibly encounter'd, as the fire the more its fed with fuell the more hungry its still to devoure; so the more they did strike the more unsatisfied they were with striking; they sharpned their sharpe swords with hope of victory, their thick blowes lighting upon their well tempered shields, made the ayre to Eccho the noyse whereof sounded as many waters in their feirce com∣bates
against some concave rock, by this time Uernar's body was scarified and broch't with so many wounds as his soule was in a doubt which way to get out at, but weakned with a prodigall effusion of bloud (which he sent to bespeake him a grave) he fell to the earth, and feeling the prevayling point of Flaminius sword at his wretched throate, he upon his knees confessed himselfe vanquished, and Clorinda flandered, in these words. Redoubted Flaminius as fire is to gunpowder, so is ambition to the heart of man, which if it be touched with felfe-Love mounteth aloft, and never bendeth downeward, till it be turned into ashes, I confesse my selfe to be a man whose eyes could not looke right upon any others happines, nor eares beare the burthen of any others praises, I knowing that each corner in the world rang of your praises, mine fits no mans mouth, this con∣sideration breeds antipatheticall difference, and discon∣tent brought forth emulation, emulatiō desire of reveng, that engendred execution, of such desires, to further this designe I had a further designe, I considered that you were to be joyned in nuptiall bonds, to the incompara∣ble Lady Glorinda, (whose beauty is so excellent, and her feature agreable in every lineament, her modestie so decent, and vertue apparent, that she may be rightly stil'd the Phaenix for beauty, and most famous among Ladyes for bounty) and I betroathed to the deformed Melena, (who bare upon a foule carkasse a fair and rich war∣drope, (which she may be rather said to carry, then en∣joy,) whose beauty is borrowed more from art then na∣ture, (it being now the common practice among such decayed, and superannuated faces, banquerouted by time, or accidents, to hide it from others eyes with art, and from their owne with false glasses) by her perswasion (O Proles nefanda, cerebri nefarij O horrid conceipt of a wicked braine) by her instigation I did calumninate, as sasly as subtly the vertuous and chast Clorinda.
Flaminius who was as mercifull as magnanimous, as vertuous as valiant, as pittifull as powerfull, granted him his life, but Vernar whose uncontrouled spirit dis∣dained a life of almes, with his ponyard soone put an end to his owne dayes, over whom our conquerour tri∣umphed. Soone after this Victory Amenides, brother to Clo∣rinda returned from travell, and now this Hero of a re∣fined wit and rectified judgement, and Flaminius were linked together with a Gordian knot of friendship a fraturnall claime of fidelitie, which neither time by de∣gresse could impaire, nor suspitions infrienge, such a love it was, as was betweene Daman and Pythias, and By∣lades & Onestes, Tytus and Gysippus, Theseus and Pyrithous, Scipio and Laelius. But Les peines importunes ne sont volon∣tiers loing de plus hautes tunes, troublesome paines be not (commonly) remote from the most perspicuous for∣tunes. As the lives of men, so their prosperity, run not up∣on a Helirri that still enlargeth, but on a circle, which a∣ving at the meridian, they decline in obscurity, and fall under the center againe. Il n'est de jour si clair qui n'ait quelque nuage, the most glorious sun risings are subject to shaddowings, and droppings in, the freshest colours soonest fadeth, the fairest flowers soonest withereth, the clearest day quickly clouds, black and white bee both commonly in one border, the sweetest rose is not with∣out its sharpe pricks, nor the fairest velvet without its list, nor the most fortunate life without crosses, the Bee beares honey in her thigh, but she carries a sting in her taile, the deceitfull Panther before the destruction of his eye-gazers, doth hide his head, and prepose his de∣lectate skin to the enticement of other beasts, the night is blackest alittle before day, the winds stillest before a storme, the sun bleakest, hottest, before a shower, the deformed Porpisces before the comming of some out∣ragious
tepmest are pleasantly sporting before the seamē and so did Lubricious fortune give Flaminius the fore∣mentioned victory, inventing to plunge him the deeper into misery, this fickle dietie resembles the sunne, who by his heate scorcheth the grasse of Pelion, which even now by his beames was vanished, she is like the monster Hylima, in a moment she can (Proteus like) change her selfe and grow variable, now shee tooke a pride to act both parts of her lubricity, and to crosse Flaminius joy∣fulnesse with this joylesse accident. Soone after that time of the day when the highest mounted sun make shortest shadowes, Flaminius for his wonted recreation accompanied Amenides and Clo∣rinda into a pleasant grove, which (through her presence) appeared like the sole Paradice of Silvanus, who had there planted many fragrant arbours for the recreating of his beauteous Clorinda, or the silent grove of Calisto, wherein the enamoured Jupiter in likenesse of a wood Nymph did sport with her, as they were here ambulatory there rushed in one Flaminius Fathers servants, all per∣boil'd in sweat, with visage pale as death, and this was his message to Flaminius, (viz.) That his mother Capri∣cia was lately arrested by a violent fit of sicknesse at the suit of death, and being ready to pay the debt she ow'd to nature, desired that he might close her eyes, these sad tydings made Flaminius prepare, Jam revocare gradum, patriasque evadere ad oras. To check his progresse, leave Albion strand And seere his course unto his native land. By this time these sad lovers have said that ill faring word, farwell; they husbanded their imbraces, as chil∣dren
doe their sweet-meates as being loath to devour them too soone. Flaminius accompanied with (his inseperable compa∣nion) Amenides tooke shipping to Dover, the Sea reci∣ved them with a smooth, and smiling face, and Nepe who had now learnt to fawne on Princes, blest them with a happy transfretation, Capricia soone after the sight of her sonne in an extasis of joy expired, and Po∣pilius (unwilling to survive so loving a wife, and wil∣ling because the journey was darke, and melancholy to bear her cōpany to the Elizian groves) his heart began proudly to beat up the alarums of death, and hee also became a prey to the leane-chapt Monster. Now the triumphs intended for Flaminius arivall are turned into funeralls, now all eyes are glazed with teares striving to deluge deeper then Ducalions, now the uni∣versal torrent of pearly drops have washt away almirth from that sad, and lamentable world which is muffled up in the mourning cloakes of griefe, and confun. Now the Honourable Senators and worthies of the gowne, are assembled to condole the maine engine of state Pompilius, whose approved whighty contan∣cie, and integrity as cleare as the noone day h cognomiz'd him the Atlas of the common wealth, and made him a fit subject unto these predicates, a plant, and planet of justice, a constellation of the form which have eternized him a perpetuall memory to po∣sterity, and have stampt so deepe an impression, in the hearts of the surviving as no age should oblite∣ate, hee did easily triumph over smarting rancor, and having run and posted over all the stages of his ife, have edificated a memorable statue, and trophie of his worth in the breasts of all to whom no testifi∣ation, or Epitaph can bee more precious. Now the courtly Ladies and grave Matrons are congregated to
bewaile the falling of this Cyprian starre Capricia from their Zenith, whose losse even heaven might la∣ment, did not heaven enjoy her. Now the valiant Souldiers that might have daun∣ted death himselfe when they wore the colours of this their disceased Vice-Roy in the field, with their drummes covered, pikes and teares trayled in a mournefull po∣sture, launces broken, insignia and instruments of war reversed proclaime their griefes, now all sorts, the creame and the scumme of the people, not to fill their eyes but to employ them, and to invest themselves in black for him whose purple they once adored, our muse shall beare part in this lamentation, and sadly weepe out this Elegie. AN ELEGIE. Hence, hence fond mirth, hence vaine deluding joyes, Glee and alacritie, you be but toyes, Goe gilded elves, love idle braine possesse With fickle fancies, thick and numberlesse, Sorrow the subject of my song shall be. My harpe shll chant my hearts anxietie, Pompilius the great, (who did appeare Arts Zodiack, valours Zenith, vertus Spheare) And sweet Capricia, (which all hearts did move, In whom fresh beauty, charity, and love Did claime a being) these ore all lands admir'd That Sol's bright circle warmes, are both expir'd, Thus the Didimies or twins did, whom fate To one another did conglutinate, Nature at one time both did animate, Both lives at one time did evaporate. Bright Car of Day, which dost ditunally Flame in the forehead of the azure skie,
Blush to behold this sad, and helplesse hap, And hide thy head in Thetis eazy lap, Let thy coruscant thy translucent light Not make a difference twixt this day and night, Let this black day be from all annalls cut Nor in the reckoning of the yeare be put, Let gloomy shades upon it ever passe For to delucitate how fatall 'twas. Rapacious Skeleton, leave death (that cares not For wit or beauty) monster fell, (that spares not Honours) can nothing thy nice pallate please, (Grim sir) but such Ambrosian cates as these, So delicate a dish may pamper thee But make ten thousand pine, and pensive be, Yet since thou hast caught this choyce Ambrosia (Sweeter then Joves) we will weepe teares which may Be Nectar too, our losse shall satiate thee, And with our sad teares mayst thou drunken be. Your envious fates (that holds the vitall sheares And set upon the nine infolded Spheares Whirling the Adamantine spindle round On which the brittle lives of men are wound,) Since this blest paire are fallen, let them have An earthquake (at the least) to ope their grave. They are magnificently interr'd in the chiefest Temple in Naples, and over them is ingraven this Epitaph.
AN EPITAPH. Here lies a blessed paire, alive one bed, Containd them both, and one grave being dead. lies interr'd the twins of fate, One was the Atlas of the State, His head the throne of Art, Of Pietie, his heart. Minos in furre, A friend of right Mavors in war, A devill in fight. I'th others lovely face Fresh beauty dwelt, and grace, An Angell cloath'd in flesh, and sent into a claie tenement She was,—Reader admire this, and wish Thy selfe a worme to tast so choyce a dish. Having given the parents the rights of buriall let us returne to the children, and speake some thing of their Daughter Dionella, although some may conceive it im∣pertinent to the History, yet they may find it no more repugnant, then in one nosegay to set two flowers, or in one counterfait diverse colours, yet to expect all pas∣sages and circumstances of their lives, were to loose ons longing, you may as well seeke Pauls steeple in Hordius his Map of the world, for abridgments, Histories are nets of a larger wash, which onely inclose great fishes, , things worth mentioning, the smaller fry, matters of lesse consequence, escape them, passing over therefore, and omitting all impertinent tautologies & ambages, we shall proceed to relate, how.
Amenides Clorinda's brother, an honourable slip of the antient tree of English nobility, a preg∣nant proficient in all discipline of state, of a sweet aspect, and comely forme and feature, of whom it may be justly spoken without Hyperbo∣lies of fiction, as it was of Cato Uticensis that he see∣med to be borne to that only which hee under∣tooke, Uersatilis ingenij (as Plutarch hath it) but to speake much of him were the way to leave out something that might adde to his praise, and to forget much that would augment his honour, in a word therefore he became enamoured of Dionella Flaminius his sister, a Lady that did cast upon her beholders so sweet a looke, as was able to raye one into a Galliard, that lay in a dead palsie, and to doat on that sweet countenance, but in that looke there raigned so divine a countenance, as cut off all lascivious and vaine hopes, her face was Queen vertues palace, adorned with natures choy∣sest tapesterie; thatcht with a golding hair, the win∣dowes of his gorgious Court, cast forth more glo∣rious beames then those wherewith rash trayn'd Phaeton sing'd the world, the rubie portalls boast in incomparable sweetnesse, for the fruition where∣of a man would even enthrall and inhell himselfe, upon the sanguine and Lillie walls of this Paphian structure interlaced, and kindly mixed with Ala∣baster & Uermilion where more Theoremes were livly portraitured then in whole volumnes tedious pari∣phrase, as her superlative beauty won the praise from all women that stood in degree of comparison with her, so her vertue was as amiable in mens judgements, as her feature in their eye sight, but to speak more of her were to take her lesse, only thus much, all faire Ladyes might breake their flat∣tering glasses and dresse themselves in her.
But let us leave her with Amenides happy in their reciprocall affection, and turne to Flaminius who (when he had digested his griefe) longed to returne to Clorinda, (with whom hee had left his heart for a pawne till he came back,) to this end he tooke hipping for England attended by Florian and Doo. At first the disembling sea smiled on them, but before they had sayled three leagues the sweet tongued Syrens began to sing, and the delighted Dolphins, and gamesome Porpises to dance to their musicke, and all on a suddaine, a ble cloud curtain'd the refulgent Lord of Light, the Seas were made a darke stage for a miserable Tragedy to bee acted upon, now proud Aeolus began (in a loud base) to sing de∣struction, now Neptune did Court and kisse Iris, and the traiterous Sea sweld it selfe into mountaines more high and hideous then the Alpes, on which the afflicted shippe as upon a pro∣mentory or starry pointed Piramid was carryed to invade heaven, to seeke safty there, being de∣nyed it upon the Sea, but was straight darted downe againe into a precipice of hellish darke∣nesse, as if it chose rather to ride upon gentle Phlegeton, then this now unnavigable Ocean, the Sea strove with the winde which should bee lowdest, and the welkin (now all inveloped in ugly darknesse) contended with the Maine which should bee more horrid, The distressed vessell, was like a foot-ball tossed by the rude feete of a rusticke crew, here only proceeded that little of safety which it had, it was equally as∣sailed on every side. All this time Flaminius sat with setled countenance discovering nothing that ar∣gued feare, hee Augustus like encouraged the
pale Pisot with that sentence, Flaminium & Flaminii fortunam vehis; how can that Vessell suffer ship-wrack that carries Flaminius, and his Fortune? the subject of his Meditations was the object of his love, Clorinda, a brighter Nymph then she that received a being from (his now angry enemy) the Sea, Toto sonuerunt aequr nimbi, the idle Compasse, the broken Rudder, and split Anchor were uselesse, the flapping mainsayle and shivered Mast were cast over-boord, the Sea-men were distracted, some ply'd the Pump, some their (till then neglected) Prayer-books. Nihil hic, nisi pentus, & aer. Now no objects presented themselves to these ab∣jects, but the raging Sea, and gloomy aire, neither had they a perfect prospect of them, but when cloud∣compelling Jove held out to them a Torch of Light∣ning, till at last kind Aurora became a Harbinger of that ensuing day, which shewed them light to land at Cyprus, a rich and flourishing soyle, placed under a smiling Heaven, and sacred to Venus, to whom wee direct this Meeter: Great Queen of change and mutability, As false as faire, fickle Deity, Were't not a sin, I'de doubt what Poets sing, And boldly swear from th'sea thou didst not spring, But from some silent grove, or bower of blisses, Where Turtle-billing Lovers hide their kisses; Thou wert begot in some Love-covering shade, And not of glassie Thetis crispt froth made, For then the bold imperious surges might Have been control'd by thee, then hadst thou fight, To quiet the proud billowes, and to chain In its prefixed bounds, the gadding maine, Which now contemnes thy idle blast, and roare For all thy threats, and rages more and more▪
Now stubborn Triton mounted on a Whale, Refus'd to hark to thy neglected call, And at thy slight commands he stoutly scorne, To sound retreating with his bugle Horne, Or give the flouds a signall to retire, But joyn'd Aeolus to swell them higher; Revenge this Cytherea, else who shall Adore, or let one graine of Incense fall Upon thy Altars, sacred Nymph arise, The Rebell-rout of Sea-gods to chastise, But legally, let Mercury be sent, To summon a celestiall Parliament, Exclude the common crew, deny the rude Fierce Hydra which we call the multitude, To sit with thee in Councell, or debate, To redresse grievances ith' Lovers state; Admit no vulgar gods, for they will be Like Tinkers, mending one hole they'l make three: Dispatch thy ayre-dividing Messenger With sealed Writs, and summon to appeare, Hymen, Thalassius, and Raucina too, The sacred Nuptiall Deities which doe Tye hearts in knots, and mutually twists In holy chaines, the soules of Amorists. The Quiver-bearing Wag, whose potent Bow Nor sex, nor age evades, nor high, nor low, The Goddesses so debonaire, and free Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne, Esteem'd by men for their heart-easing mirth, Whom thou (faire Cytherea) at one birth Bore to the Ivie-crowned God of Wine. Egeria, at whose adored shrine The youthfull teeming females doe implore The Goddesse ayde, to these and divers more Direct thy summons, when they all
Be congregated at great Joves White-Hall: (Divinest Queen of Love) perswade them still, To grant thy just demands, and passe this Bill, That whereas hoary Thetis did not chaine, (According as she ought) the boyling Maine. But traiterously did joyne with Dione And Malicerba to disturbe the Sea, When he (whose fame shall drop from many a pen, When Heralds shall want coates to sell to men, Whose Armes and Arts his glorious name shall raise, A like to wreathes of Pallas Oakes and Bayes) Did furrow the great deep, and gently glide Over the bubling face of th'hasty tide, Bound for Clorindas armes (that happy port, That true Elizium, Queen pleasures Court) So that Clorinda (a bright Nymph to whom We grant priority, being overcome By her rare feature, alas she misses Those enthusiastick raptures, Lovers blisses, It's this day ordered by the joynt consent, Of the sublime Aetheriall Parliament, That Phoebus (whom terrestialls doe Adore, and yearly pay a tribute to) For ten nights next ensuing shall not rest His drowsie head in Rebell Thetis brest, But in Clorinda's lap should we assigne A longer date, the Sun would never shine, We should have short dayes, Sol would never rise From her lap, but to gaze upon her eyes, And whereas Boreas did let loose his breath, And Aeolus threat nothing under death, And set the waves at variance with the skie, And made among the Flouds a mutiny: Its further order'd that for ten dayes the Fairy paire of jarring brothers cloysterd be,
In slender Bottles; its decreed they both With th'Marine Deities shall take this Oath. From this time forward solemnly we vow To wait on sacred Lovers, whilst they plough The vast Gulphes back; it plainely shall appeare We will retreat, as glad to see them there; We will concurre in one, both Sea and Wind, To make their speedly passage safe, and kind. I Sea will smooth my buncht brow, and invite Their blessed eyes, to see how I delight To bear their weight, and joyntly with them prove Zealous adorer of the Queene of Love. And I the Wind (to storme forgotten quite) Will whisper new joyes to rich Amphitrite, And in so mild a breath Ile tell my Tale, As it shall onely fill their swelling sayle. And I the Sea, will boyle officiously To bring them to their harbours, whilst sad I Lament their absence, and dissolve to teares, And rather drowne my selfe then them with feares. This done (kind Cytherea) now release The Winds, and grant to the relenting Seas Once more the ancient immunitie, The Lamp of Lights nocturnall Bed to be: Those acts by which fierce Juno did conspire Alcides bane, augmented, and swell'd higher His venerable name, which now shall last Till Time want sand to run, or Fame a blast; So make this tempest raysed by the Seas To ruine thy Flaminius, encrease His firme emolument (faire Queene of Loves) We doe conjure thee, by thy silver Doves, To be his Guardian, let his lasting glory Fill all men mouthes, and make the world a story. Finis Libri secundi.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE CYPRIAN ACADEMY. SOone after the Orientall Majestie a∣rose to over-circulate the Earth, Fla∣minius in a weather-beaten Ship, or rather the Carkasse of the Ship, or rather some few bones of the Car∣kasse, was driven upon the coasts of the Isle Cyprus, at the foot of a cacuminous Clift, whose steep-downe chalkie sides reverberating and beating back the rayes of the resplendent Sunne, by the beames reflection seemed to gild the Ocean with a new Phae∣bean glister. Flaminius (with his trustie servants) sat upon the Clift, beholding the perjured waters of the Changeling Sea, and uttering these complaints; Ah unkind Na∣ture, Queene of dissimilitudes, and vicissitudes, when wilt thou be glutted with the miseries of mortals? How unfortunate is the fate of man, to be subjugated under the yoake of so belluine and inhumane a step∣dame?
Thy gifts are onely temporarie, there is no stable happinesse in this circle of flesh, nor is it in the opticks of these eyes to behold permanent felicitie: Apres un peu de joye ou seut mieux la tristesse, a pound of griefe followes an ounce of joy: as the tree and the rinde groweth and sprouteth together, the one not sub∣sisting without the other; so with man is care and an∣xietie ingendred, which as an inseparable evill Angell follows him in all his actions, as the shadow doth the body: Lieur & mallieur se suyvent tour à tour, good and evill follow one another. What were the lives of those Hero's, Alexander and Darius, who strove toge∣ther which should be Cock of the Worlds Dunghill, but one continued perplexitie? If to day Mars smiled on one of them, he feared the amphibologicall successe of to morrow; for, Cela qu'un jour nous donè, un autre jour nous l'oste, what one day gives us, another takes away from us: so that a man can make himselfe sure of nothing without the power of his action (that is not wholly in his hands) for, Multa cadunt inter po∣culum, & labra, Chance is a Dicer; its vaine to put more confidence in this life then in one wind at Sea, but 'tis wisdome to have tackling readie for all vicissi∣tudes of Fortune. The Mulberry tree (as Herbalists observe) is long in begetting and keeping its buds, but (the cold season being past) it shootes them all in one night; and For∣tune, which sometimes is long in dandling her favou∣rites, (the edge of her lubricious affection being aba∣ted) she diverts from them her benignitie, and converts it to their miserie. But we will omit the rest of his complaints, desiring rather to relate matter then words. Flaminius arose, intending to direct his wearie steps to the Regall Citie Nicosia, almost n the heart of the
Island, in the territorie of Lapathia: the way was plea∣surable, and the earth clad in her best apparell, which made the Island appeare to be the field of Ceres, the garden of Bacchus, the prime pastorage of Pan, and the richest beautie of Silvian; the Wheat over-topt his head, the Vines over-lookt the Trees, the rank grasse justled with his knees, and the high-sprong Woods did threaten to invade the Clouds. He had not travailed farre, before he was set upon by a pack of Robbe a rout of crazed fortunes, whose crackt estates did gape to be soldered up by any wealthy bootie; but va∣lour respects not numbers: wherefore Flaminius (who esteemed few swords in a just defence able to resist many unjust assailers) commanded his trusty Squires, Florian & Doristo, (who had rather sacrifice their lives at their Masters feet, then seek (by flying) a dishonou∣rable safetie) to assist him, who like an enraged Lyon sent some arme-lesse, others leg-lesse, more head∣lesse, but many life-lesse, to take up their comfort∣lesse Lodgings under the black mantle of endlesse night. Florian lent such a terrible blow to one of their Chiefetaines, (who with open mouth threatned his destruction) as slicing off both his tongue and chaps, before he had ended his babling, gave a period to his oration. Doristo struck at another in the same po∣sture, and made his soule in a streame of clottered bloud, to sayle out at his mouth. Those that survived of this Rabble (seeing them∣selves over-matcht every way, and frustrated of hopes to resist any way) desisted, and Flaminius persisted on in his journey; but before he could reach the Citie Nicosia, it did advesperate, and the silent night with her pitchie Chariot had coursed over the face of the element, and he was forced to take the earth for his
pillow, the wide fields being to him in stead of a Cham∣ber, and the windie skies being a roofe to his blasted Lodging, and having the cold and humid vapours of Nocturna to accompanie the unwisht-for Bed of his repose: but as soone as he espyed the beautious Au∣rora had with Vermillion blushing cheekes forsaken the Saffron Couch of her age-wearied Lover, he con∣tinued his travaile through a most pleasant Valley; on the right hand stood a ridge of mountaines, whereof one surmounted the rest, and had mounted upon his top a Pyramid of Brasse; on the left hand was the Sea, bordered with continued hills, beset with varietie of fruits; the Champaine betweene was full of flowrie hillocks, not much over-topping their ranker valleyes, which were with Groves of Olive and Orange trees dispersedly adorned. At the end of this Paradise he entred into a solitarie desart, whose ornaments were uncouth Rocks; some eaten with age, others blasted with lightning, others bruised with thunder: no com∣fortable beame of pleasure shined here, no chearefull Sunne or Moone illuminated this palace of death with gladsome rayes; it was filled with deepe ditches, and soundlesse pis, which were inhabited by hoarse Frogs and croaking Toads; it was paved with bloud∣drawing Thornes: about the middle of this wilder∣nesse was a melancholy Cave, the black Domicill of the daughters of death; Flaminius passing by it, heard com∣ming from it these lamentations, couched in a Med∣ley, both for Verses and Tunes. 1 When Phaeton fell from Sols bright Throne, And fail'd in's enterprise, How did his sisters him bemoane, And fill the ayre with cryes?
2 Proud Pelops Wife, bold Niob, (Her off-spring being slaine) Gainst stormes approach, O how doth she In Marble still complaine? 3 What sorrow Orpheus did sustaine, When through th'infernall shade Thou, thy Euridice to obtaine, With Musick passage made. 4 What madnesse did corrode thy brest, wofull Androache? When Hector (being laid to rst) Thy lucklesse eyes did see. 5. Astianax flung from a Tower, (The hope of Troy, and thee) O cursed act of a curst houre, what sorrow might this be? 6. What griefe Jocasta haddest thou, To see Eteocles Ingaged by a fatall vow, To lay Polynices? 7. Sad Dedalus, how small's thy ease, That saw thy daring Boy Baptize the vast Icarion Seas, And leave thee void of joy? 8. What should I speak how Progne griev'd For her Spouse, spouse breach, tell Should I, how sad Anthony liv'd After Acteon fell.
9. All this black Troop of dismall wee enumerated here, Are pleasures if compar'd with those which horally I beare. 10. Had I more tongues my griefe to tell, Then Romans (loath to yeeld) In one Rome-wasting Battell fell, In lucklesse Canna's Field. 11. Yet should I want an Idiome, Or dialect, to say My griefe in an idoneous tone, My tongue, ah welladay. 12. The Tongues of Muses are too faint In Helicon that keep T'expresse the cause of my complaint, Come Muses with me weep. 13. But why should I perplex the Nine with my griefe, when tis known, They finde enough (Ah) without mine, To relament their owne. 14. The ancient Helicon they've left, Since their Antiomers Was of his wisht for life bereft, They've made one of my teares. 15. I oft and oft did them invoke, But none of them reply'd, Their Harmony (alas) is broke Since their Maecenas dy'd.
16. Come and approach, and attend to my cryes, you Hags and Hobgoblins, Register up and keep a catalogue of my teares, These archt walkes of midnight Grves will I never abandon, And Silvans shadowes, And shades that Clarida loves, Where silver buskin'd triping Nymphs were never affrighted, By harsh blows of the rude Axe from their hallowed haunt. 17. Here Death keepeth his Court, Here pitchy horror inhabits, This is griefes free-hold, Here will I chuse to abide, Come and aproach dapper Elves, Satyrs rough, and cloven-heel'd Fawnes, Not trickt and frounc't up As in the fresh flowry May, But civill suted Kerchift in Winter attire, Draw neer Ile teach you how To weepe teares in parts. 18. Sol retrograde with your fire breathing steeds, And shut my eyes up in eternall night, My soule have lost its Sun, my body needs No radient light. 19. Sinke toth'infernall shade, and let thy rayes, Illuminate their foggy hemisphere,
Give to th'Antipodes that share of dayes, Which I doe hate here. 20. Acquaint them not with my anxiety, For then thy guilt carr will prove tedious, They'l fall a grieving too, and implore thee To returne to us. 21. Kind Phoebus grant me what I postulate, But if you slight, and churlishly deny't, My teares my optick sence shall adumbrate, And so make a night. 22. Larke Nor Thrush In no bush Shall tell his tale, Nor sweet Nightingale That on the bloomy spray, Carrols praises of fresh May, Come and inhabit this dim dale, Cuckow ever telling of one tale, Raven and Nyctimine, that love the darke. 23. Come Steele-digesting Bird, come and draw neere You brood-devouring Kite, greedy Wane, That under-mines, fierce Cormorant: Come Faleon, and Vulture too, With the predictious Crow, Jay that ever talke, Griping Goshawke, Keep companie With mee, Here.
24. Antiomer, Apollo in the head, Mars in the hand, a Saint ith'heart, a man Who was the Magazine, or Vatican Oth' lib'rall Sciences, alas is dead. 25. Earth-decking Flora, beauteous Lasse that use To purple the fresh ground with vernal Flowers That suck in the Nectarian honied showers, Thou that wear'st Flowrets of a thousand hues. 26. Thou that the smooth shorne fields enamelest, And annuall wrapst the even shaven Plaine, In a mellifluous Rug of Flowers, daigne Propitiously to come at my request. 27. Come bring with thee the well-atti'rd Woodbine, The Lovers Pansie freakt with shining Jet, The tufted Growtoe, glowing Violet, Ruddy Narcissus, and pale Gessamine. 28. Bring the Faire Primrose (that forsaken dyes) The Daffadillies with cups fill'd with teares, All Amaranth's brood that Embroidery weares, To strew her Lawreat Hearse where my Love lyes. The Melody being ended, Flaminius desiring as well to satisfie his sight as his hearing, stept to the Cave, where he beheld the Querimonious Lady, in a garment of blacke Velvet, embroydered with sil∣ver, her haire was gathered up under a small cap, co∣vered with feathers, and set thicke with Diamonds, which glittering about her head dazeled his sight, but it was little in respect of that lightning which came from her face.
She was ravished with the rare feature of Flaminius, who doubtlesse had been as much taken with hers, had hee not been gained by another, but his soule wa so fill'd with the most excellent perfection of Clo∣rinda, that there was no place left for any other im∣pression. After some Discourse, the Ladies offer and his desires became convertible, shee requeste that which he most desired, which was to accompany her to the Court, and hee requested that which she was most ambitious to performe, which was, to in∣forme him of the cause of her querulous Soliloquie, which she did in these words. Gentle Sir, though I am assidually used to com∣plaints, yet were my heart contracted into tongue I should bee deficient in declaring the unspeakable∣nesse of my ineffable griefe, and though I despair to bring you any pastime, yet to passe the time, be pleased to heare this Tragedy. There arrived at thi Iland, Antiomers sonne to the Emperour of Germany, Knight, who was in peace sweet and humble, in Wa sterne and haughty, the East could not boast mor pearles then he could vertues, the gentlenesse of hi countenance, and the fircenesse of his courage seem∣ed to be two contraries in the same subject, his heart was uncapable of feare in any danger, but tractable and easie in conversation; in a word Antiomers, a man under whose name is comprehended all War∣like vertue; loved no women but mee, that loved not any man but him; he never spake but of me, h never made any relation which he esteemed good, if  were not the subject thereof; nor did I thinke any time lost, but what I spent out of his company. It so fortuned that Silenus, brother to Lycidus, the young King of Cicilie, proclaimed a generall challenge a∣ainst all Knights that should deny his Lady Adria
(daughter to the Great Turke) to bee the Paragon of the terrestiall Paradise; Fame proud to pro∣mulge this defie to all the world, graspt it betweene her teeth, and shaked it about, so that it came to Antiomers eares, who soon left Cyprus, and went to Cicilie, resolved to make him repent his brags, or to bury my honour with his owne body. I shall omit the circumstances of his Journey, and returne to Silenus, who hearing of Antiomers his approach entred the Field in an Armour of a Corna∣tion colour all be set with Croslets of gold in a Field Azure, he bore upon his Shield the Picture of Adrias in silver, with the Seven Starres round about her, un∣der her was engraven this Saphick. Adrias splende elut inter ignes, Luna minores. 'As Cynth among nights Fry, So Adrias shines resplendently. Antiomers had on a French Armour of an Ashie co∣lour, which hid the sparkes of a lively fire, spotted with Flower-de-luces of Silver and Gold, his device was a Heart ty'd to a pillar in the middle of a Faggot kindled by me, my portraicture was all beset with Flowers, and just under my Simulachrie was in∣scribed in Greeke Characters these words,  (the best of Flowers) his Feather was Gree-de-lieu and white, his Caparisons Gris∣de-lieu, embroidered with Gold, set thicke with sparks of Diamonds. These two Champions in their careere darkned the ayre with the dust they raised, and struck the earth into an Ague with their Horses battering hoofes, An∣tiomers in the middle of his course met his Enemy
like a Whirlewind, and fell upon him like a Tempest, they both sent the splinters of their Launces to digge Graves in the dust for their blood, which forthwith fill'd them, for there were many salliports cut in their Armours for their lives to issue out at, and death to enter in at. Silenus words and blowes were delive∣red so together, that it was aenigmaticall whither enterprizing or prevailing went first, his energeticall strokes seemed as thunder, to his words lightning; but hee found no barren ground for this feed, for Antiomers (abhorring sterility) yeelded him his own with increase, which because he did not expect, hee was perplexed by it, and in this respect, though reason and amazement bee seldome joyned, yet here they were not dissentaneous, for the most reasonable spe∣ctators had good reason to be amazed at the unrea∣sonable ferocity of the combatants, who both over∣wearied with fighting, fell prostrate to the earth, where Antiomers thus commun'd with himselfe. Can my courage faint remembring my Lady, or can any thing dismay me being in her favour, no the honour of her name (which I honour) hath call'd me to the Field, and her beauty is so perfect, as nothing shall be able to force me to flye. And now these Champions carried more by strength of affection then of body, by the cruelty of the second charge they wiped away the astonishmen of the first, till at last they were both carried out of the Field, with more appearance of death then hope of life. As soon as I heard of the event of the fight, I went to visit him, he no sooner cast his dim eyes upon me, but his co∣lour freshly revived in the pale cinders of his thin cheekes, and the old vermilian tincture began to plead a new possession of his severall mansions, but at length I saw the vermilian non-suited, and him pale and
dead (though even in that condition lovely, as if death had taken that shape to make me enamoured of him) alive he surprised and suppressed envy with vertue, and dead honours accompanied him to the grave. —Quis talia fando. Explicet, aut possit lachrimis aequare dolorem; What tongues can chant my griefe, what blubbering Eyes, With weeping can my sorrow equalize. Ocursed be the hand that kill'd, that kill'd him, cursed be his heart that had the heart to doe it, ô yee just gods let most direfull, and haplesse happs, hap∣pen to that hatefull wretch that made me wretched by his death, ô kind death lend my cheekes his pale∣nesse, which boast more of these trickling drops of teares, then the Pactolian sand hills doe of their most gorgious glistering pearles left there, and forsaken by the bbing billowes of the bubling waters, My teares shall raine upon his grave to make the gentle earth beare some Adonean, or rather Antiomerean flowre, which shall beare his name and memory. She would have uttered more circumstancies of the Tragedy, but she was forced to make their womb their tomb, and to bury them before she brought them forth, those other things which she intended should have had birth in her mouth dyed there, for her words were washt away by her teares which came dropping downe, like rayne in sun-shine, and hang upon her cheekes and lips, like drops upon cherries, which the dropping tree bedeweth, her swell'd eyes became her fortune, and made her teares comely. By this time they were come to the Court, where Arbella Daughter to Romulus King of Cyprus, (for so was the prementioned Lady nominated) brought him to the King, whose Sister Capricia (mentioned in the former part of this history) was wife to Pompilius vice∣roy of Naples, and Mother to Flaminius, so that the
King quickly so dispersed the rayes of his grace upon his Nephew Flaminius, as he thought his court defi∣cient, without this pregnant proficient of State, but let it be sufficient for the present that we have brought Flaminius to the court, and into the Kings favour, let us now returne to Clorinda, (disconsolate Clorinda,) whom we have too long forgotten. In this time of Flaminius absence, and consequently of her infelicity (for how could she choose but lan∣guish in the absence of her best Physitian) no carefull art, or art of carefullnesse was imployd in her ador∣ning her selfe, she left all to neglected chance, which yet could no more impair her perfections, then a dye cast any way could loose its squarenesse. Still her love did burne lik a vestall fire, which with Flaminius memory, richer then all spices dispersed fragrant odours, round about her Love-fick soule, and did refresh it, when 'twas in the dumpes, and stuck fast in the quagmire of melancholy. She was seldom out of the company of Delia, whose presence would have diverted much griefe, had it been curable by company, yet she set as cheerefull a coun∣tenance upon it, as the sadnesse of her heart would permit, after he had been absent from her some consi∣derable time, not having oportunity personally to kisse her hands; he sent this letter as his paper deputy to doe it for him. Flaminius to Clorinda, Sweet Princesse of my life. Some three monthes since I left the artificiall sea of teares (wept out of my dewy eyes, for the discease of my defunct parents,) and lanched out into the na∣turall sea bound for thy armes, (that haven of happi∣nesse, that port of pleasure) but I was unhappily di∣verted by a disasterous tempest which for twelve dayes tost me too and fro upon the inraged Ocean,
and then cast me upon the Isle of Cyprus, a Land eno∣bled for its celebrated excellencies,) here I am in fa∣vour with the King, and in credit at the court, but the thorne amongst these Roses, is thy absence, my greatest evill, is the want of my most beloved good, thy honoured selfe, the life of my hopes, and the hope of my life, which I keep only for thy service, nor can I loose it better then for thy love, and if I should sorrow for the losse thereof, it would be rather in re∣spect of thee then my selfe, and out of griefe I should have to see my end, before I have testified the begin∣ing of my service to thee. But my faire one, I (who live onely to dye for thee) I (who entertaine my selfe onely with Imagi∣nations, and live onely with hopes of thy love) con∣jure thee by the radient lights of thy eyes, (the onely suns by whose rajes I am animated) that thou dost not pine thy selfe (whilst I remaine in this darknesse, wherein I enwrap my selfe, during thy absence,) for so thou may cut off thy owne time, but not abate (but augment) my troubles, rather manifest a princely magnanimity of mind, in conquering this griefe by the valour of thy patience, and continue to love still. Cyprus. Madam. Thy Immutable Uotary, and constant Servitour. Flaminius. Clorinda. having oft honoured this letter with most affectionate kisses, dispatcht the messenger, (which was Florian) with this answer.
Clorinda to Flaminius. My Lord, THough I know that out of your ingenuitie and candor, you are noble enough to overvalue me so far, as to love me without any merits that might induce you to it, yet I were ungratefully sordid, and sordidly ungratefull, if I should not teach my pen (which is guided by my heart) to affirme that the least scruple of your love is not lost, but highly prized, and returned to you in like measure, beleive it Sir I am more torne and pursued by feares, of and for you, then Actaeon was by his doggs, I see not but through your eyes, I live not but by your love, which is in eternall characters ingraven upon the Amethist of my heart, and though the starrs condemne us to this seperation, yet your name and representation shall be alwayes the dearest jewells of the life, of Your Clorinda. England. Having delivered this letter to Flaminius let us looke upon Arbella, who made her heart rasam tabulam a white paper, longing to have Flaminius writ his love upon it, to this end she studied with great art to tie all those graces together, wherewith she accustomed to have her admirable beauty accompanied, for the glory she apprehended in captiving such a courage made her desire to seem faire, she would be seldome out of his company, hoping that if he were not taken with the inevitable strookes of her face, he should be constrained to yeild by her charming speech, and be∣cause she would move every stone, and leave no means unatempted, when she knew Flaminius (who was much delighted with the airey whistlings, and inar∣ticulate sufurrations of vegitables) to be walking in a tufted grove, adjoyning to the City, thether she re∣paired,
and placing her selfe within a leavy labyrinth in the navil of this obscure inmost bowre, sitting up∣on a mossie couch of grassie turfs she utterd these words. Faire silver shafted Lad goe burne thy frivolous bow, and in imitation of Hercules in these waving woods erect thy pillars and write Nil plus vltra, my conquest is ended, what shall Flaminius remaine al∣wayes as free, as invincible? can it be that so much va∣lour can be altogether unaccompanied with love? Flaminius (willing to convince her of her errour, in thinking him altogether without love, tooke a seat in an adjoyning arbour, & made this protestation of his love to Clorinda. Loadstone of love, life of beauty, picture of for∣mositie, flowre of comlinesse, Clorinda, believe that my affection is so perfect as it cannot be increased or diminished, since the first birth of it, but if it be ca∣piable of augmentation, thy late letter was as bellows to kindle a new fire in my soule, which shall never be extinguished by averse starrs, or adverse fortune, know (sweet Mistris of my love, and life) and believe that it is the royall prerogative of a lover to be metamor∣phosed into the essence of the party loved, and so it fareth with me, whose heart is as faithfull to you as the needle to the north. First, shall fertile soyles render nothing but thornes to Coridon, (as a reward for his good seede,) or rivers (the emblems of gratitude) forget to repay their flouds to Neptune, or a trustie grayhound transforme himselfe to a pilfering Tygar, or vertue become vice, and beauty a blemish, before any goddess be made go∣vernesse of the cittadell of my heart besides thy selfe. Arbella seing her hopes frustrated returned to her fathers Court, where she found Lycidus King of Sicilie her beauty shined so bright that the amarous King
was too weake to resist it, for although her minde was possessed with sorrow, & her body clad with mourn∣ing, & corrupuit oculos fletu, and she loboured to hide her feature, and dim the lusture of her face, yet could not the excellent perfection wherewith she was in∣riched be defaced. Neither Lycidus Rhetorick, nor his friends per∣swasions could procure for him Arbella's good like∣ing, therefore he out of the atrocity of his spirit, see∣ing his love rewarded with loathing, returned home and raised an army to make at once a conquest, both of Arbella, and her fathers Kingdome, when he had al∣most covered the Sea with his potent Armado, and made a bridg of ships over the miditerranian Ocean, Lemuroc (a man of an arrogant mind, a fit hing for mischeife to turne upon, one that like the fellow that burnt the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, would get himselfe a name, though it were for doing mis∣cheife, who was left by Lycidus in Cyprus under pre∣tence to negociate the match, did patch the Lions skin with the Foxes taile, and thus he acted his part for his Masters advantage, he congregated, and seduced the rout, and scumd the mud and froth of the people, the fittest soyles for this grand incendiary to sow his seeds of rebellion, with this Gallemaufery of Plebeians (who having nothing to lose, no not the oppulency of a good disposition) were easily ingaged in his tumult) he marched to the regall palace in Nicosia, the Walls, Turrets, and Battlements were white marble, the windows of carved silverworke, enamelled with In∣dian pearle, glazed with Christall glasse. Lemuroc mounted upon a high scaffold made this insinuating Oaion to his rebellious followers, among whom were some popular and discontented Lords.
My Lords, COnsider how this stragling stranger Flaminius hath so stollen into the Kings favour, that it is lockt up from you, you are of the Court but not of the Coun∣cel, hee is growne so excessive in the appetite of the Kings favour, and so excessive in the limitation of the Soveraigne aspect, that he alienates his Majesties grace from you, he hath intrinsicated the occult dispositi∣on of Romulus, and conformed his owne so exquisitely thereunto, that there is but one velle betweene them both. From hence ariseth that intire confidence, that Romulus who is jealous of all men else, is confident of him, nor doth hee hide any clandestine negotia∣tion from him; and to say true he makes himselfe but like a Cipher to make this Figure the more in number. Ere-while you were honoured in the sight of your Prince, enjoy'd his delights, you were crusht with honour as with burdens, you required no∣thing but you obtained it, so that all men admired and desired your estates: but now a sable cloud hath obscured all these faire beames in one day, your Prince frownes, your glory departs like a dreame, and you the Atlasses who carried such heapes and mountaines of honours upon your shoulders, have your Exits with reproach. All eyes are attracted to, and fixed on this new light of Flaminius, all hearts are pinn'd upon his sleeve, all neckes buckled under his girdle; from his hand only you receive your most importunate dispatches, you hold your selves graced by his injunctions, if he daigne not to disdaine your Petitions, you are highly honoured; If he please to breake silence in your behalfe, you are greatly obliged, you dili∣gently waite at his dores, and endure the churlish∣nesse
of his Porters, and bribe them to be the first that may obtaine accesse to this adored Idoll, you all labour to faine the choisest amplifyings to enco∣mionize him, and the greatest submission to flatter him, his strength makes you all weake, his soa∣rings makes you flag your wings, and flye close to the earth, his golden feathers are of such vastnesse, that they spread like sailes, and so becalme you all, that you want aire, and Sea-roome to raise your plumes, and taste the pleasures of your owne Ele∣ments. Hee is the Harpy which hath all eares lockt to his sound, you are but as Fidles unstrung; he among you that hath Flaminius for his Protector, neede not bend all his nerves to acquire dignities; he that hath him for his foe languisheth under disgrace, and mi∣sery. None can obtaine any elevation without his be∣nè placet, neither can any without his leave preserve himselfe with innocence and vertue. You may say of Flamin ius as Tiberius Subjects did of Seianus, ut quisque Seiano intimus ita ad Caesaris amicitiam validus: contra incensus esset metu ac sordibus conflictebantur. Hee hath even chang'd the nature of your Prince, and made him Saturnine and supercilious, who was once as debonaire and infastidious as Augustus of whom it was said, Augustus civile rebatur misceri volup∣tatibus vulgi, hee was a Prince, yet seemed a Citizen, and disdained not to beare a part in popular recreati∣ons. Will you run with so much patience to the in∣fringing of your liberties, and throw your selfe head∣long into the gulfe of servitude. Remove the cause of these grievances, and the effect will cease, take Fla∣minius from about the King, and the day of his be∣nignity will daun upon you. Or if a quiet and peace∣able Prince, and a prosperous Republique bee your summa bona, adhaere to my Royall Lord and Master
Lycidus, and hope by his assistance to attaine the Apex of felicity, the top of your desires. Flaminius having assembled a troop of loyall Cour∣tiers with them, went to appease the multitude, nothing fearing forreigne incursions, if hee could prevent home-bred insurrections, he therefore (who fought as if hee had beene suckled by Bellona, and ne∣ver ingerd ought but a Lance, and who spoke as if hee had beene foster'd by Minerva, and never hand∣led any thing but a pen; hee who shared as much of Mercury in his tongue, as Mars in his hand) began thus, O scelus, ô veterum proles vesana Gigantum. What? are Romulus his Subjects become Authors of a ryot, and actors of their owne tragedy? What, have you combined Phoenix-like to let out your owne life blood? What, will you imitate the Viper, and teare, and dilacerate the entralls of your owne great parent your Countrey? and are Plitus, Xanverde, Turpill and others of the gowne that should be participes curarum, companions in care to your Royall Soveraigne; you that should be co-props of the State, you that should beare part of the burthen with your Prince, are you confederated against him? you are advanced to as high a pitch of Supremacy as subjection will permit, or Soveraignty endure, and yet will you still aspire, till you expire? Are you so transported with a desire to raign, that all your potency seemes villinage so long as you must acknowledge any Superiour? were there a resurrecti∣on of your Ancestors, they would blush at your inso∣lence, and runne to kisse their graves that have hid∣den them from beholding such Rebellion, were your Fathers now to dye againe, they would every one bequeath as a legacie to his sonne that grave and laudable precept,
Nec tibi regnandi veniat tam dira Cupido. But looke before you leape, consider the Person you conspire against, is the Majesty of Romulus, who by coelestiall institution is the terrestiall Deity, its Ro∣mulus the Father of your Countrey, the fountain of honour, a man beyond all commendation, of a grave spirit, of a constant and well-setled judge∣ment, so that if all the rancour and malice in the world were contracted into one eye, it should never detract from him, he is a professed Guardian to the Muses and their refined fancies, hee is accute in witt, grave in censure, mature in judgement, and in all the liberall Sciences so frequent, and beyond com∣pare perfect, that they rather appeareinnate to him, then acquired by education. The Arts Court him to be called their Oracle, as if hee only had beene borne to uncloud whatsoever is included in their spacious Orbs, he holds a Dormant Councel-table in his own Princely breast, the whole current of his dispensa∣tions speake him a patterne to the admiration and i∣mitation of posterity. He is the prop, the Atlas on which the safety of you all leane, he is the hinge on which the whole State turnes; in a word, he is the Pelops for wisedome, the Minos for good government. Remember Amour & Royalte ne veulent point o'esgall, Love and Lordship suffer no fellowship. Forget not that Soveraigne authority is so delicate and tender, that it will take hurt with the least rude handling. Nor doe enterprizes against Princes prosper, re∣member that Seianus that contrived the death of Dru∣sus, Litia that consented to it, Endemus that com∣pounded the drug, and Ligdus the Ganimed that pre∣sented it, all perished miserably, and so let those fu∣ries all of them perish that undertake against the lives and prosperity of their Princes. But will you that have seene many yeares of Sun∣shine
dayes, and beene the happiest Nation upon the surface of the Universe, as if felicity had been calcu∣lated onely for your Meridian; will you make your Island the seate of warre, and stage of woe, and ba∣nish prosperity from your confines? doe you long to see your Babes brought forth for the sword to glut upon? to see the bodies of your Ancients made pave∣ments to walke upon, your Matrons become a prey, and prize to every ravisher, your Priests and Sacrifi∣cers slaine at the gates of your Temples, Quae tantum insanas voluit, dementia gentes? And you Mushromes, you lesser starres, that come not within any Constellation, will you joyne with them that quo rure, quaque injuria invade your Coun∣trey, you should rather joyne hand in hand to shoul∣der them out, who will use you but as instruments to ruine one another: you doe but shoote arrowes a∣gainst the Sun which will retrograde, and fall upon your owne heads: but if you be resolved to contribute to your owne destruction, I dispaire not to find some who are not such ickle and desultory temporizers as will concur in this rebellion against their King, but will never doe that which most of his Subjects doe, flatter him, but who will doe that which few of his Subjects do, love and honour him, and let these joyn with me in this acclamation, Vivat Rex, Vivat Romu lus, Vivat Rex Romulus, in Eternum vivat. Whilst thus he spake, conticuére omnes intentá{que} tene∣bant. Flaminius had such action in his speech, and grace in his action, as he raised attention with no less admiration then silence. For his Oration carried smoothnesse and concinuity enough with it to make many revolt from Lemuroc, only some few ambitious Lords, whether out of instigation, or as it hath beene conjectured out of emulation, and jealousie to bee e∣clipsed and over-shadowed by the fame and splendor
of Flaminius, swaid their Tennants and domesticke retenews, and fled to Lycidus (who by this time was intrenched in the plaine of Mamrash some five miles from Nicosia) under whose ensigne wee will resigne them, and assigne our stile to the perfecting of our for∣mer designs. Flaminius dispatched a Messenger to Amenides (whom hee desired might joyne with him in his at∣chievements, and partake of his glory) who soon left Dionella, of whom hee tooke leave with teares in his eyes, she also contributing hers unto their griefe, hee went accompanied with the same sorrow which hee left behind, and in ten dayes space arrived at Cyprus, with 1000. valiant Neopolitans, whose spangled plumes of divers coloured feathers obumbrating their steely crests, and their gilded helmets, shewed in sem∣blance like Mars his burganets overshadowed with the golden tressalines of his faire paphian paramoure; If unknown Choraebus with his troops of undaunted Ue∣terans were in Troyes extreamity, welcome to the di∣stressed Priamus, or the resolved bands of Achilles with his fierce Mirmidons acceptable to the Grecians in the time of intestine skirmishes; how joyful then was Ro∣mulus at the arrivall of Amenides in this time of disa∣ster, wherein hee more needed his Heroicke actions, then either Priam or the Grecian Heroes did their pro∣fered succouring aiders. By this time the Governours of the several Provinces (having fortified their Cities) repaired with their bands to Nicosia, where there was a general muster of Romulus his souldiers wch amoun∣ted to the number of 40000. the day of battel between the two Armies was appointed on the morrow, and the Plains whereon it was to be fought were the pre∣mentioned Plaines of Mamrash. As soone as the Coe∣lestiall Waggoner had forsaken the watry lap of The∣tis, and issuing out at the latticed portalls of the Ea∣stern
Ocean had swiftly followed the flying darknesse (which with sable wings had tane her speedy flight to the Westerne India) the thundring drumms and shrill trumpets proclaimed the battles approach. Romulus his Army was thus ordered; against the approch of his reproachfull enemies; the first Squa∣dron was conducted by Yeslin Governour of the Pro∣vince of Salamina, the second was given in charge to Amenides, the third was led by Flaminius, the fourth by Romulus the King, the last by Pruteus. This Army garnished with their discoloured plumes, raised such a lustre by the rayes of the earths illustrator, as hea∣ven it selfe seemed to blush at the gorgeousnesse of the inriched earth, whose duskie face was so admirably garnished with such a glorious Army. Lycidus also divided his Army which consisted of 60000. men into divers squadrons, allowing to each squadron 10000. men, the first was carried on by Le∣muroc, the second followed Turpill, the third Xanver∣de, the fourth was under Lycidus owne conduct, the fifth had his Brother Silenus for its Leader, the last was commanded by Plitus. The signall of the battell being given, the two bodies engaged; and the earth loath to behold such cruelty, hidde its face under a bloody mantle. Now the noise of the Souldiers (wch was no lesse then the mad Sacrifices of Bacchus in The∣bes and Phrygia, were wont to bee the neighing of horses, the clashing of the Armes, the groanes of the dying and wounded men, the obstrepency of the Ca∣nons and sounding granadoes drowned one another, and concurrd to make a discord, which at once both fed & frighted death. Now Charon sweated with ply∣ing his Ores, now Cerberus feared to admit so many of Romulus rebellious Subjects, because hee doubted (they were so inured to insurrections) that they would mutiny against Pluto. Now Radaman thus trem∣bled
to give censure against so many souldiers, lest they (disliking their doome) should make another ri∣ot, and breake the peace. But because I would not∣have the battle ended before I have described the man∣ner of it, I will leave roaving at Generalls, and parti∣cularize some of the most eminent Combitants. Flaminius (having valour for his leader, and for∣tune for his Auxiliar) delt downe right blowes (and them oft redoubled) upon his unabiding adversaries, his blood-bedabled sword guided by his ruthlesse hand cleft where it strucke, it cut out more worke for the Sexton then the Surgeon, it made no wounds but mortall ones, it left every one on whome it had dis∣charged its fury either dying or dead. Here his frantick arme cleave horse and man insuna der at one blow, there it makes an Orphan, here widdow, and so he remained pressing, and oppressing his enemies till being ringd about with the distracted and amazed multitude his steed was slaine by Turpil but Flaminius so executed his vigorous rage upon him, as he made the Traitor to late repent his but lately of∣ferd injury, for burying his blade in his cursed stomach he made him (bleching out his life together with his blood, bid a sorrowful farewell, to his more then sor∣rowfull souldiers, and he soon mounted himselfe on a fiery coursier, whose masters head he paid for his horse hire. Undanted Romulus also, who chose rather to trust to his body a castle of bones, then one of stones, no sooner delt blowes, then these gave wounds, and those wounds, death, till at length his force decrea∣sing, he was dismounted yet defended himselfe on foot till at last he espied, Flaminius coming, and then (whereas before he expected a noble death) he hoped for a glorious victory, for who can feare that hath Flaminius by him, whose very presence might apall his proudest foe, but how many he slew, (not stranger
for number, then for the manner,) how he sent them to their deserved deaths, were a subject delectable to mee to write, and to all to read, but I should be over tedious to discourse of every particular. Plitus advanced himselfea∣gainst Amenides, whose actions speak him higher then our Epithites, but the burnt child dreads the fire, the baited Beare will beware of the stake, the singed gnat dare not a∣gain flutter about the flame of the candle, the fish Sphyrana once intangled will shun the net, the dogs of Aegypt once terrified by the Crocadile wil seldom after lap at the banks of Nilus, and Pusillanimous Plitus having received two wounds sought by the swiftnesse of his horse a dishonou∣rable safety, Lemuroc took his place and incountered Ame∣nides, and it fared with him as with the young wrestler that came to the Olympick games, who having had a foyle thought scorn to retreat till he received a fall, or him that being prickt in the finger by a bramble, thrust in his whole hand among the thorns for madnesse, for having diverse wounds and not liking them, he left not, till he took that which was immedicable, & Amenides continued purpling the grasse with blood and inriching the ground with pale carkasses. Pruteus ran against Lycidus, and bea∣ring him quite over his saddle, he made him take a new & more uneasy seat upon the croop of his palfrey, Yeslin and Silenus were so forward in the careere, as the very earth seemed scarcely to bend under their horses hoofes, with such exceeding celeritie they passed to the en∣counter, but ô the impartiality of the fates, ô the atro∣city of chance, The well accomplished Socrates and just Phocian were executed like Traitors, whilst Rebell Caesar was advanced, the cruell Severus lived prospe∣rously and was adored, whilest the excellent Severus was miserably murthered, Sylla and Marius dyed in their beds, Pompy and Cicero slaine, when they would have thought exile a happinesse, and Yeslin, Loyall Yeslin, ell by the flesh-devouring hand of Silenus, but his bloud
being scattered like seed upon the ground, brought rich encrease to Romulus, for his death gave desire to the most pittifull, and power of revenge to the most coward∣ly, and now between both armies began a most bitter bicking, but Lycidus his army being not able any longer to continue the conflict were inforced to flie, feare added spurs to their hast, Flaminius and Amenides added fury to valour, and desperateneffe to fury, and pursued them with their Squadrons, and prosecuted the pursuit as far as Ceratina erected by Cyprus (now called Cerines) whose perfidious governour Dromus surrendred it to Lycidus, Flaminius and Amenides, sat downe before this City, where we will leave them and looke over the plaines of Mamrash. Here stood a head strong steed wanting no∣thing but a proud rider to guide him, there another drags his Lim-lopt Master up and downe the feild, the plaines which were never before overfloud, are now drowned in bloud, here lies a headlesse body, there a Limme newly discinded from that miserable trunk that lyes yet groan∣ing, here lies a gasping head cropt from its shoulders, there lye huge heapes of half dead bodies, whereof some curse fate, others blaspheme their misdisposed starrs, one pitties his poore widdow, another commiserated his Lucklesse Orphans, and curse the night wherein the chil∣dren were borne, because he must dye and leave them un∣happy, here lies a throng of livelesse carcases, whose eyes are dam'd up with bloud-congealed dust, there grovells the Son whose hopes were all his aged Fathers pleasure, there were slaine in this battell (as is evident by the bills given in of the dead) of Romulus party 500. whereof one was the honourable Lord Yeslin. Of Lycidus souldiers there fell 11000 and upward, among whom were Turpil and Xanverde of the nobilitie. Report carying the fame of these wars tied unto his wings, brought it to Clorinda, wherupon (education having given her more languages, then nature tongues) shee drew her thoughts into these es, adorned them with Roman attire, wrapt them in  & dispatcht them to Flaminius.
Clorinda Flaminio. Pax tibi tuta venit (comptos redimita capillos) Nunc fulgent violae, Lilia flava, rosae. Massica pampinei florescunt dona Liaei Nunc vocat ad dulces tibia grata choros. Pace virente, casas habitat securus Amyntas Neve citat tutum hunc tristis ad arma tuba. At cum trita patent furibundi limina belli, Turnus & armiferas aptat ad arma manus, Aspicis undantes effuso sanguine campos Si venit in terras martia turba tuas. Exurit passim segires, magalia, villas, Maria{que} artifici fulmina nube ruunt. Pace repertus amor, Mars spirat naribus ignem, Hic terram tumulis sarcinat, illa viris. Magnificis Pacem quis te non laudibus ornat, Ipsa Ceres, te nox induit, Ipsa Venus. Clorinda. Arbella loath any longer to see her Fathers King∣dome sustaine the miseries of war for her sake) fled se∣cretly from the Court in a disguise, and apparralled her selfe in a tawney armor, having for her device an Austridge holding a horse shoe in his mouth, with this word Sic nutriuntur Fortes, she repaired to the camp and sent this defie to Lycidus. Redoubted Lycidus it's both repugnant to your ho∣nour and honesty, to seeke to conquer that with Mars is lance, which can be subdued onely by Cupids shaft  meane Arbellas heart, appeare therefore in the field forthwith armed at all points to prove by what right you seeke the daughters love by the distruction of her Fathers Kingdome, be not inquisitive of my name bt
let it suffice you to know that I am Arbellas friend and consequently your enemy. The stranger had no sooner veiwed the advantages of the ground, but Lycidus forthwith issued out of the Abby (which was by this time straightned for want of Provision) with an armour of a sea green colour where∣on was the Simulachres of Priamus and Hecuba hanging their heads in their bosomes, and with their naked hands upholding a deaths head, whereon was written this composure, Nostrae spes tanta salutis, The stranger faild in his careere, and was sent to write his foyle with his helmet upon the dust, Lycidus (as rich in courtisie as courage) counting conquest by advantages rather stolen then accheived, left his sturdy steed to fight on foot, but Lycidus perceiving the stranger discovered more anger then either skill or strength, holding him farre unworthy of his hate, pittied his weaknesse, and said, Sir Knight, I conceive you fitter to masque with Uenus then march with Mars, to hold a distaffe with Hercules, then a lance with Hanibal, or to handle a Lute in a La∣dyes chamber, then a spear in Bellona's Camp, con∣test therefore no more, but husband your strength, em∣ploy it against your enemie, for my part I am your friend and will spend my life to serve you for Arbellas sake, whose friend you professe your selfe, the stranger replyed al the service I desire of you, is; that I have no ser∣vice for you, but abused courtesie, in Lycidus begat wrath who united all his force, & cleft the perfidious Helmet of the stranger which struck him to the ground, he thē thrust his glittering sword into his left side & having enloosed his helmet (intending to crop him shorter by the head) espyed golden tramells of faire haire, falling downe upon her shoulders, which witnessed that it was the bautious Arlla, whose corall lips trembled as if they were kissing death, the Lillie and rose which were before united in her cheekes now broake their league,
and commenced warr, the Lillie got the victory, and re∣mained master of the feild, and put the rose to flight, in her forehead where the wound was made a fresh tor rent of rubie blood (whose least drop might have ran somed Cupid, were he taken prisoner) strove to over flow its owne fairenesse, here the rose tooke sanctuary being expulsed from her cheekes, in a word here was an Island of perfect white invironed with a red sea, in whose deadly streame death came sayling, and arived at the port made in her front, and soon chaced the soule, though not the beauty from her lovely body. Now Lycidus (ashamed of his unluckie victory broke his sword, threw downe his gauntlet, and in three dayes shipt his whole army to returne to Sicilie, he be∣queathed his kingdome to his brother Silenus, and spent the residue of his discontented life, in the Monaste∣ry of mount Serat, where he became a Capouchin, His majestie out of the height of benignity passed a bill of indempnity, & pardoned his subjects, & as a legg broke well set is stronger then before, and as a bow cract and wel mended sounder then ever, so his peoples hearts were in the most corroborated chaines of love and o∣bedience chained him by this singular example of cle∣mēcie for Le pardonner n'est moindre vertu aux grauds quand 'lis sont offencez, que le vengeance vice aux petits quand ils sont injuriez, to forgive is no lesse vertue in Princes, when they are offended, then revenge is a vice in the com∣mon sort, when they are wronged, but to proceed, because his maiesty would not have the griefe for Ar∣bella's, death make a full conquest of his great minde, he admitted of this pastorall Eclogue. An Eclogue. The Kings magistie being seated, and the roome fill'd with spectators of quality, Flaminius and Amenides,
enter'd in a rurall disguise, intending to summon their senses, to attend their pastimes, to shew their alacritie, for the new established peace, and celebrate their La∣dies excellencies, under the pastorall names of Julietta, & Floretta, calling themselves. Archus, and Plaindor, Ar∣chus (which was Flaminius) disguised began thus. Archus. Come swaine assume thy slighted pipe, and play Upon thy oaten reed a rounde-lay, Come warble amorous anthems, call to be Partakers in thy mirth the Napaeae, That haunt arbusted groves, those rurall powers That live inshrin'd in oaken curled bowres, Among the sapplins tall, whose shady roof Are ringletts knitt of branching elm, star proofe, Call Naiades from their obscure sluse By which his Alpheus met his Arethuse, Call mountaine Orcades for to comply To further with us this solemnity, Call the thrice three sweet Aganipian Nymphs That steeps the fancy in Heliconian lymphs Of eloquence, and straines heroicall To help us tune our dulcid madrigall. Avaunt thou Styx borne sadnesse, I'le take care Thou shalt be mist no more, the shaddow's are I'th deep of night, when Morpheus Leaden key Locke mortalls under a black canopie, Rejoyce, and Jocaean sing to me Now Janus folding gates close boulted be, Sicilian tyrants are returned home Mars is appeased with a hecatombe. The tempest's ore, the Cyprian ocean's calme, Our victors browes are crown'd with wreaths of palme.
Plaindor. For Monuments we've hung up brused armes, To pleasuers we've converted ern alarms And dreadfull marches to delightfull greetings, And harnest squadrons into merry meetings. Grim Visag'd war hath smooth'd his brow, in stead Of mounting of a fiery barbed steed. To fright pale foes, now all in a qualme He capes in a Ladyes Amphithalme. Bends all his nerves, and every meanes he'l prove To the lacivious pleasing of his love. No more the fruitfull name of Cuirassier Shall scare our swaines, or fleet Harquebusier. We shall dispute no more what Cavallrie Or ammunition meane, or Infantrie The Pouldron and Vambrace, the casque the sheare The flankes both right and left, the front, the reere Are Exotick words whose very sound Shall be no more heard in Cyprian ground. Nor ranck, nor file, lesse when we go a maying All in a row, or when we be a playng At Course a Parke, or telling of a tale To the Ranck't Lasses at a Whitson ale. I ne're shall see a sword, but such as grow Upon a flitch of Bacon, never know An other pike but such as daily glides Along the softly whistling riv' lets sides And by Meanders rushie frienged bank, Where growes the willow greene, and Osier dank I neere shall Loricate, or imbrace armes But such as are Floretta's voyce of harmes. No shield but that of sinowie brawn wee beare Turne thou thy blade to knives great warrier To subdue Geese, and Capons, and caronse
Healths in thy close hilt in a frolick bouse. To Tabers change thy drum, to kitts thy fife Let Bagpipes and shrill Harpsicons be rife, Come change thy trumpet and Bellona's flute To the loud Cimballs, Violl, Harpe and Lute, Whilst in this piping time, these Halcion dayes We doe contest who best their Loves can praise. Arcas. Hark Plaindor then how I anatomize My Julietta, and her encomionize. Were all the goddesses compos'd in one They would come short of her perfection. Gray headed morne blush to see her more bright Then th'eye of Moone, or her excelled Light. The dangling Tramells of her curious haire Then fine faire flax, are far more small and faire. Those golden threds in an even order set Entangle hearts, like fishes in a net. Her front is the perfection of delight The downe of Uenus doves is not so white. What covert charmes, what latent magick lies Within the circles of her speaking eyes. Beames shot from heaven like to a fiery dart Transfixt my soule, and scorcht my ravisht heart When peerlesse beauty did her cheekes compose Th' ingredients were the Lillie, and fresh rose. They are like a plum which blush (the sole cause is) 'Cause Phaebus now and then doth steale a kisse. Her straight nose, dimpled chin, incirled eares A snowy sute, or Ivory mantle weares. The porphier portalls of her honour'd words A relish most mellifluous affords. From these Jemms clad in rubie livery I cul fresh balme to heale loves malady
Her teeth like orient pearle or ivory be Or like the new borne blossomes on a tree. Her thrice celestiall voyce which blesse our eares Proclames its consanguinitie with th'spheres. Her neck more comely then the polish't towre Whose walles Jove skal'd in a Tagean showre Her armes in hue heavens milkie zone surpasse Or white Aequoreall Neptunes fomie face. Her lovely armes are like prest curds, there stand Ledas pale Swan immewr'd in either hand. Now Muse returne into the milkie way Where Cupid (in a sweat) abathing lay About this beautious dale on either hand Loves Alpes and Uenus Pireney mountaines stand, With Azure curles each is inammel'd round And with a soft red Porphier berrie crownd. These are two Apples tane from Paradise The graces use to sport in wanton wise Under their shades Pomena's ripe fruit fall From lofty trees mov'd by no wind at all. To doe them homage, Cupid sucks from hence His sunshine dayes and love his influence. Greece borne and banisht love seeking to find A domicil where he might sit inshrin'd Parching himselfe in Juliettas eyes Intended in her heart to signorize But finding that too cold for's resience He tooke his flight to my close heart from thence, where with some firebrands, which himselfe did lay He sing'd his wings and must for ever stay. Her brest a feild of Lillies whiter shewing Then those Alcinons in thy Garden growing. Faire Erycina's Ida next to that Or Athos stand, or Cupids Ararat. Beneath this lies loves mediterranean The gulfe of Venice leading to th'lle of Man.
To praise the Coloums of this structure, this Adored bulke, this amorous edifice Were a fit theame for the elaborate lines Of ever honour'd Maro, whose worth shines Bright in the lampe of poesie, and raise As many trumps as men to chant his prayse. In softnesse they the silke wormes web surpasse Woven in leavy shop, on Loomes of grasse. In whitenes Albian clifts, in smoothnes the Repumicated glasse of Normandy. Her round small feet beneath her roab doe run Now out, now in, as if they feard the sun. Plaindor. Floretta has for Dioniaea power To make each place she comes in Cupids bowre. Nature did summon every grace to meet. At the composure of a saint so sweet; And with more beauties they did her invest Then Cabalinean Poets have exprest I'th comely Aspect of the Paphian Queene Or more then in Corinnas face was seene. My Love a quarrie is, or Cabinet Where beautious nature her choyce gemmes hath set. Her amber locks shine like the Topace bright, Or golden Carbuncle, or Chrysolite Her eyes at each glance rutilate and sparke Like Diamonds in murke, tenebrous darke: Her faire infolded eares, high front, nose, chin Resemble the hate-spot Emerlin. Argent and Gules in her cheekes kindly mix As in the particolour'd Jasponix. The orifice, or ports of her words are In colour Corall, in worth Cinoper. Her pearle like teeth are an even placed row Of occidentall Margarites which grow
In her fresh Rubie gumms, her round soft brests Where Cydias pigions fanbricate their nests Are Alabaster circumstructures, one Loves Ossa is, the other Pelion. Warme azure vaines (by prudent Natures skill) Inamell and inviron either hill, Streames of dissolved Jazul, circling founts Of liquid Turkise in these lovely mounts Make many pretty Islands, which appeare Some Ovall, some in figure of a Spheare. Her hands those gemms of love Antimonie Her digits nayles Arabian Oynx be. She's a chast Emerauld, and that this list Might perfect be, her hearts's an Amethist. Not stubborne and obdurate, but a heart Soone penetrated with loves wanton dart. Nor can the buckets of our rustick quire Quench this Asbeston flaming with Loves fire. The harmonie of lovelinesse and grace Combineth in the magique of her face. FINIS. AMORIS NVLLVS. Flaminius and Amaenides when their sport was past fell to their repast, and after that retired into a flowrie seild to digest their thougths, rather then their supper, as they were here ambulatory they espied a commet dar∣ting its flaming beard from the ruddy skie to the Ap∣paled earth, this prodigious omen was attended on by formidable thunder, and unusuall fulgurations, the Agast earth trembled, and with feare fell into convul∣sion fits, and Madam nature seemed to run mad, as she did when Caesar dyed, and small peces of minced flesh
discended in the manner of a showre, as it was once at Rome. Flaminius and Amenides after they had fil'd their eyes with these prodigies impoverished their cloathes to inrich their beds, and with what certaine imaginati∣ons are the slumbers of some eminent personages ad∣umbrated? the day before that execrable assassinate was committed on the person of great Henry the fourth King of France, (by Revillac an obscure varlet) the Queen was crowned, and that night succeding her co∣ronation, and the preceeding the Kings murder, she dreamt that the diamonds with which she was crowned, the day before were metamorphosed into pearles which are the emblems of teares. William Rufus the morning before he was unfortunatly shot in hunting, dreamed that an extreame cold wind passed through his sides. And Flaminius in his nocturnall unquiet repose, con∣ceived that those pastorall weeds, with which he had been disguised were converted into regall roabes, and that that paganical bonnet which incircled his head was transform'd to an imperiall diademe, and that that rustick sheep-hooke which fil'd his hand, was trans∣muted to a royall Scepter. Amaenides also being consopia∣ted and luld asleep with multiplicitie of cogitations, the ghost of king Romulus appeared to him with his head bound about with a wreath of Cypresse, and suddainly this ruthfull voyce exuscitated him out of his repose, Romulus is disceased, whom our muse shal condole in this elegie. In obitum serenissimi potentissimi{que} principis Romuli Elegia funebris. Romulus, Aonidum deus altus, honos{que} Gradivi, Insignis patriae nobilis at{que} pater, Qui modo terrificis tot regna lacesserat armis, Celsa fuit nostro Qui Cynosura polo.
Qui fuit Euboicos dignus transcendere fines, At{que} trisaeclini sêcla vetusta ducis. Qui fuit Haemonio dignus iuvenescere succo Aesonijs{que} oculis claudere, fata subit. Heu mihi, fata subit, (Stygia haecvox faucibus haesit) Nec favet officio mors inopina suo. Crudeles nimium Parcae, crudelia fata, Crudeli nimium stamina rupta manu Delacerate comas invenes, & tundite palmis Pectora, purpureas imbre rigate genas. Lugete Aonides, vos que altiloqui quibus offert Culta Heliconiadem Caliopea lyram, Uos Colophoniaci modulis vlulate poetae Occidit Aonij gloria summa chori. Lugent Sithonici ducis inclita castra sequentes Nam tulit atra viris, quae dedit alba dies. Omnia funesto tumeant jam flumina fletu, At{que} fluant lachrymae more fluentis aquae. Indoluit Phoebus radians, Heliconis alumnae Implerunt gemitu Castalidum{que} nemus. At nonulterius canimus, jam linquimus vdo Ore ipso lachrymis verba Ligata natant. FINIS. DOLORIS NVLLVS. This glorious King was well belov'd and as much lamented as any that ever swayd the Cyprian Scepter, he was admired and adored as the worlds wonder, and heavens darling, the love & fiduciary obedience which he had from his subjects was drawn as a thred through a needls eye out of the apprehension of affection, his body the earthly cabinet wherein so many heavenly endow∣ments had been stor'd up, as if all vertues had made a
confluence in him, their center) was eviscerated and polivi'd and carried upon a chariot drawne by six horses coverd with sable velvet (whose pensive posture made them seem sensible of their masters losse) to the funeral pile, never were ashes repleate with more wealth, his obsequie and funerall solemnities resembled the fire, wherein the body of Archemorous was consumed, corus∣cant jewells did crackle, heate disolv'd, silver stream'd, and gold melted, embrodered vestiments were consu∣med, and huge sublime oakes (fatted by the juyce of Assyrian gums) penetrated the skie, with bright shining flames, fier'd honey and Safforan hissed, full bowles of wine, and goblets of blood, and milke were powred out, potentates and nobles encircled the pile, and the eyes of the rest were infected with their weeping, thrice their weapons clash, and foure times their bruised armes ecchoed, as oft the meaner subjects strooke their bared brests, and fild the aire with out cryes, They were drowned in Sadnes to see the potentates drencht in such sorrow, the Plebeians lamented with trickling teares to beare the diapason in the peeres melancholy musick, heards of lowing cattell and beasts halfe slaine were de∣voured by another wastfull fire, the honoured dust of this renouned Prince, Patriot & Patron shall bee de∣plored with perpetuall elegies, this glorious sunne which was set in the terrene Horizon, and translated to shine in heaven, was inclosed in a slender vrne, and adorned with this Epitaph.
EPITAPHIVM. MIRACVLI HOMINVM ROMVLI REGIS. Immortale deus patriae, sol vnius orbis, Doctorum sidus, Sophiae, iustitiae ocellus. Pelliger invictis Martis laus Romulus armis In{que} intentè oga Charitum mellita voluptas His jacet; ante diem fatis ereptus iniquis. Sic furibunda suis mors sceptra ligonibus aequat. Thus was the dust (though not the immortall fame) of this monarch (of famous memory) interr'd, but now his imperiall throne was empty, his kingdome was an Anarchy, the lords brooked not a confused democra∣cy, and the commons affected not an Aristrocracy, or oligarchie, but all sorts applauding regalitie, (knowing deux testes sur vn' corps est chose monstrue two heads on one body is a monstrous thing, unnanimously expected a new monarch, the line of Romulus did determine in Arbella (whose Tragedy is prementioned) wherefore by unite consent Flammius (whose mother Capricia, was sister to Romulus) was proclaimed King of Cyprus (the fortunate Island the paradise of pleasure, The granary of Cores, the wine celler of Bacchus, the best Salt-pit of Neptune) in the place of his defunct uncle. His inaugu∣ration or publique coronatiō was prorogued for fourty dayes, which were spent in mourning for their late So∣veraigne, and this terme expird, his way was spred with scarlet cloath & he in a sumptuous chariot of gold, the wheeles being purest ebonv, and covering of crimson satten, crosbard with staves of gold, rode to the temple
of Uenus, where he was crowned, and seated upon a cushion stuft with the hearts of his subjects, as he re∣turned, home to the palace, his guard and attendents sung these verses. Haec sacra Erithraeis lux est signanda lapillis. Semper habenda bona est multo in honore dies. Nunc festo pulsanda pedeest tellus, & amaenis Nunc ornanda sacri floribus ara Jovis. Plaudite nervosi juvenes, reddantur honores Caelicolis, festis addite thura focis Addite fragrantes quos misit Eous odores Quos{que} Hispana novo pinus ab orbe tulit. Flaminius solium hodie petit altus eburnum, Ornat honoratas clara corolla comas, Uive diu faelix, patriae pater optime nostrae Et numeres annos quot tua vota vocant. Now Flaminius was to execute justice, as before Magna∣nimite now he made his life the example of his Lawes, and his Lawes the maxios arising from his deeds, so that I might with as much facilitie discribe the whole art of good government, as his proceedings honour and regality, make a difference between the neerest relati∣ons, and degrees of state, distinguish betwixt the most intimate associates, Flaminius and Amaenides, (which before were intire familiars,) now doe not so much as discourse but at a distance, Romulus his death made the one a royall soveraigne, the other a Loyall subject, though fortunes next taske was to elevate him, even ad culmen honoris, ad Regium Fastidium, and this meanes she used to accomplish her intention, She prompted him to invade Sicilie, and that he might gild his pro∣jecst with a specious pretence, he pretended to revenge the invading of Cyprus, and to pay Silenus in his owne coyne, and to punish him by the law of retaliation, By
his formidable courage in warr, and facetious carriage in peace he purchased and entailed the peoples affections to him, who were now ambitious to court any occasi∣on, to evidence to him how much they were his ser∣vants, they throng'd to enroll themselves, under so heroi{que} a chiefetaine who when he had listed 30000. re∣solved warriers enbarqued for Sicilie, to whom we will say as the Greek Commander did to Teucer,  proceed, and prosper. Flaminius was no sooner warme in his Throne, then he was fired with the thought of Clorindas Love, these cogitations were wing'd with desire of fruition, these wings (he having constituted Pruteus his vicegerent in his absence,) carried him to his port towne Famagosta, which is erected upon a palme betwixt too promonto∣ries, in forme almost quadrangular, whereof two parts are washt by the Sea, here he enbarqued for the impresse and empresse of the Sea, the darling of the Caerulian god, the female paradise, England, after foure dayes saile this noble fleet (consisting of twenty ships) was discried by an armado of Algire pirates whose first salu∣tations were the thundring reports of gally roaring peeces, the Cyprians in a quick reply sent out a back sounding eccho of firey flying shots, which make an Equi-nox to the clouds, the pirates presented them with another voll which rebounded backward in their owne perturbed brests the ambiguous sounds of feare and hope, now they all turned broad sides, and be gan the monomachy boarding one another, now the equorean park put on a new Livery, & was invested in a purple roab, the glittering fishes which use to be mens fosterment, have mens blood for their aliment and ele∣ment, Phoebus seeing so many wounded persons takes up his bed, fearing least they should leave him no roome, descended from his Olympian Charriot, and crouded in with them, so that the two shatterd fleets were com∣pelld
by the tenebrositie of the night to end the conflict, the Cythereans, (the Pirates being discomfited and dis∣persed) steerd forward to Albions Imperiall chamber Troyntvant, where their spousalls were celebrated, with as many complements of State as magnificence could give, or regalitie receive, Clorinda (like the sunes Hellotropeian flower that shuts its yellow Curtayne, when he declyneth and opens it againe at his fayer ra∣sing.) at her Lords departure closed up all delights, but now at his returne courted them againe, having a new and fiery spirit dauncing upon her amorous heart-strings The bridegroomes Suite was tissue, his cloak cloath of gold, whose buttons were the richest and largest Dia∣mons that ever Prince wore, or Subject saw, the Brides gowne was of white velvet having at every seame a lace of gould and row of Rubies, her faire haire had nothing on it but golden ribban twisted like a diadem, which be∣girt her high fronted forehead, and fell downe upon her back, closed up at each end with the richest Jewell in the orientall Cabinet, her neck (which stained the whitenesse of her garment) was adorned with, (or ra∣ther did adorne,) a carkanet of Indian pearle, for rich attire which is the sole ornament of Sophisticated and Plebeian beauties, did derive that lustre and gracefullnesse which it had from her elegant feature, which I dare not delineate, in all its demensions lest (Gentlemen Readers) I should prejudice you, which intended only to delectate, and make all your hearts (which were lately your owne freehold) to be copie hold in fee of her, let it suffice them to know that she was a Lady of a flowing sweetnesse, and the living glory of noble Ancestors, whose vertue and beauty were above all Titles. When Phaebus had spread his sweaty limbs upon his marine couch, the happy couple followed his example & bedded also, to whose solemnities Bombar chanted this Epithalamium.
Epithalamium. Mirrour of Men, tis Venus will Thou shouldst approve thy abler skill In loves Pharsalia, that she As well as Mars may boast of thee. Thy foe is the selected flowre Of Albions knot or beauties bowre A Cytherean Amazon. Loves Penthesilean champion. Imprison her in thy foulding armes And stoutly strike up loves allarms: And satiate with agile delights Your unrestrained appetites. My joy, and happie Omens meet With pleasure in the geniall sheet. In this sportive Sciamachie Where lips both shafts and targets be No cannons are, thy head to shroud In a blew mist or smoakie cloud. This is Cupids iolly feast Who proud to please so choyce a guest, Through loves Alimbique thee invite To distill the joyes of night, And from thy Mycrocosme by The art of Paphyan Chymistrie, One Catapasmian balme derive, Which may preserve thy name alive. May joy and happy Omens meet With pleasure in the geniall sheet. Both these whom Hymen here untie Make up but one Hermaphrodite
Let their affections (Queene of love,) Within the same spheare alwaies move, And never terminate or know A thing call'd period, but grow And with their wreathes be alwaies seene Like Daphne cloath'd in Aprills greene. Thou that canst thy trophies show O're these, and o're thy mother too, Kindle dayly their desires Towards one another with new fires. May joy and happy omens meet With pleasure in the geniall sheet. The influence of starrs above Do Sympathize with sacred love This night by Uenus assignation Of two is made one constellation For Uirgo is (to shine more free) Transferred into Gemini. These twinckling starres concur to beare A Hieroglyphick of you here, But stop here muse now Juno's rites Waite to be done, extinguish lights, Lest by their glaring is descride The blushing of the bashfull bride. My joy and happy omens meet With pleasure in the geniall sheet. Whilst golden mouth'd Bombar sung these, the hearers seemed to be charmed by the magique of his aires, and to be deprived of all motions in their bodies, their hearts were ravished with his wonderfull harmony, and their eares chained to the sweetnes of his tongue: but because these lovers happinesse should bee no longer provoked every one avoided the roome and emptied their cloathes to fill their beads, having their heads filled with dreames
of that felicitie they envied in others, and longed for in themselves, by that time the mornings mistris with dishevelled tressalines had ten times taken possession of the aire, and as oft released it againe to Cynthia, these Princes prepar'd to returne to their owne kingdome where they monarchized in the most unlimited latitude of supremacy. Let ruffling Eurus in Aeolian jayle Ly close confin'd without maine prise or baile. Come Amphitrite with thy sea greene traine Of Nymphs to trip it o're the liquid plaine, Come Doris with thy watry band, and all The Druid crew Chrysostomaticall. Come Crescis, and sweet tongu'd Cymodocea, With Zantho, and aequoriall Amothea. With golden tressalines Dexamine Come hand in hand both blith Cymothae. Through Neptunes park this Navy dance before And usher it to Cyprus peeble shore. The sea shouted for joy to beare Clorinda, and the windsung aloud his gladnesse to court her, hee fild the Canvas wings of the fleet with auspicious gusts, and carried it with a pegasian celerity to the intended har∣bour, the shore was made a goodly Theater, the rocks and battlements were crowned with venerable age, and lovely lasses, pressing to obtaine a glympse of their new Queene, who being crowned, and seated at Nicosia, this Masque was prepared for the entertainement of their Majesties.
DEORVM DONA A MASQVE. Presented before Flaminius and Clorinda, King and Queene of Cyprus at their Regall Palace in Nicosia. LONDON, Printed for I: H. T: H. T: I. 1647.
DEORUM DONA. A Masque Presented before Flaminius and Clorinda. THe palace being hung with rich Babiloni∣an tapestrie, of various shapes wrought by the needle of Semyramas, and perfumed with the wealthy gums of Parchica, such as the Arabian bird fils her nest with, when shee prepares to sacrifice her selfe, and their Majesties (cloath'd in the precious skins of Ermynes, wearing crownes, whose lustre dim'd Ariadnes coronet embeli∣shed with the glorious Olympian lamps) being seated, the first thing obvious to the sight, was a rich ornament that enclosed the Scene, on the one side stood a man, bearing a Scepter, with a hand, and an eye in the palme, in the other hand a booke, on his head a chaplet of Amaranthus, his curace was of gold, with a palludamen∣tum of blew, and antique bases of crimson, his foot trampled on the head of a Serpent, by him was impor∣ted just Governement, opposite to him stood two young women in draperies, with their armes joyned, the one denoting the glory of Princes, the other mansuetude. The curtaine was white, and a pale red in panes, which suddainely flying up discovered a faire prospect of the palace, and the city Nicosia, which being the Metropolis of the Kingdome, might (Synechdocally) bee taken for it all. The Genius of the Country warned by a loud masick descended, and enter'd.
GENIVS. WHen Jove, and nature metamorphosed The undigested lump, (which was the bed Of indisposed confusion) a rude load Where scuffling seedes of things misplac't aboad. Where springs, ponds, lakes immense and hewtes curl'd Were with things hot, dry, humid, frigid hurld. So when the game is playd, the Chessmen be Though dignified with names of majestie, Though God-like Kings, or reverend Bishops they, Or honourable Lords be call'd i'th play, Or Knights errand or worthies of the growne, They're altogether into one bag throwne. But to our taske, when out of this dull masse By heavenly Alchymie extracted was A world well orderd, and methodicall, The fire and thin aire were highest place't The solid selfe clog'd earth did lowest fall And was by the vast Ocean imbrac't, In whose larg precincts many sea-girt lands And Islands fenced by salt water stands, Which Amphitrite with her cripst locks hem So various jemmes inlay a diadem, Neptune his tributary gods that graces Gives them the government of these small places, And let them weare their saphrie crownes, and weild Their little tridents in their watry feild; But this faire Isle which of its selfe affordes Matter to build an Ocean furrowing ship From the top gallant to the keeles low bottom, And furnish it with tackling, and munition Without the help of exotick addition. Unto his blew hair'd dieties he quarters, And he himselfe with a brave flying guard Of winged coursers, her ingarison. Then her indulgent guardian provided A ruler worthy of so rare an Isle,
But Jove observing his just government Tooke him to his Olympus there to be His colleague, vicegerent, deputy, His life we lov'd, and wisht, but he expir'd Your hapinesse is of our hearts desir'd. And you the orbe where power, and beauty move Faire Queen of Amathusia, and love, Each Subject hath erected on his heart A vestall flaming Altar, to offer up A thankfull sacrifice for your arivall, At this white houre, t'inclose so faire a guest Our Land waxt proud, and I the Genius Am by so great a presence weakt, and glory To bid you welcome in your subjects names, Whose hearts dance in their eyes for joy of you, Their pulses all beat musique, and their blood Beat in their blew-rooft channells a soft measure, Even as the radiant Olympick cole Whose heate thawes annually the icy pole, By his coruscant beames correct the sight, Of mortalls eyes that dare gaze on light, Even so you move in so sublime a spheare With awfull reverence, and regall feare, Majestick Queen, your sacred majestie Fires kindled by your eyes doe qualifie, For you (Adored Cypria) had been The whole worlds Mistris, if no Cyprian Queen. Phoebus and Cynthia of our hemispheare, Father, and Mother, of our fertile Ile, May your admired court, and raigne become The pattern for all Princes imitation And be the coppy Kings strive to write after, Heaven crowne my wish, whilst earth concur to sing Kind fortune fan you with a courteous wing. Enter Forture conducting fame and vertue.
Fortune. Translucent twins of Love, and majestie I that of things ad libitum dispose, And this man elevate, and that depose, I that advanced Servus Tullius That tumbling came into the spacious world, A vassell cadit or cosmopolite. Even to the Apex of all mundan honour, I that cast Mustapha the Ideot From th' Ottoman throne, & sealed Osman there And dandled him in my lubricious armes, Till weary of my dalliance I threw him downe, Invested Mustaph in his pristine state, Reducing Osman to such penurie He beggd a draught of water at a fount, Then out of cruell pitty I commanded An obscure Ianizary to dispatch him, I, that made Arlots Illegitimate son To sway the scepter of rich Albion, I have depos'd my variablenesse And sworne alleagence to faire constancie, I'le never interrupt your happines By any churlish or disasterous frowne, Which oath is as irrivocable as The strickt law of the Meedes and Persians was, About your palaces the yellow streames Of Tagus, Isberus, and Pactolus, Shall run & meet there with the Indian Ganges. Little petty homagers all stubborne Princes Shall prostrate their shining scepters at Your most majestick feet and gredily Shall glory in your royall servitude, Crowns pil'd on crownes shall pave your happy paths, And Captive Kings wait on your chariot. And erect statues to your memoryes
Which shall survive Egyptian Pyramids, And last when Hyems hath frozen up the world, And when old palsie time shall droop, and halt Being ore worne, and moatheaten with yeares. Your joyes still bud, and grow, and gemminate And not be capiable to terminate. Fame. Before Joves spangled portalls (with a crew Of bright aeriall soules) I dwell insphear'd Chanting the conquests of the son's of valour And magnifying their great names, which last Unbitten by the canker worme of time, I neere can take a trump to carroll forth, Some royall Potentates heroick name, But Mars still rounds me in the eare, and sayes, Fame sing Flaminius worth, whose mighty facts Hath made the world a register of's acts, Whose manly heart propitious Jove doth blesse With haughty spirit, that spirit with successe, Victorious successe with lasting glory Which glory makes his martiall feates a story, Whose spreading fame with gray hair'd time shall vie And be companion of eternity. When I would blaze a beauty Uenus comes And with her fatall magick charmes me thus, Harke thou repositor of comelinesse, From Albions Isle where silver Thames dos dally With the even bosome of the spungie sands And often wash the fructifying sides Of her beloved bankes, with wanton tides, I have transplanted to my Cyprian Isle Clorinda, from whose fair sun bright eyes Issue such sparkling heart surprising rayes, As proclaime her the wonder of her dayes, Her brow excell's the Rodopeian snow,
Her silken haire which in curld ringlets grow Might make so many strings for Cupids bow. Her eyes can make a stubborne souldier melt Although his heart be hearder then his sheild, Each smile of hers hath a magnetick force To attract soules, her Angells voyce can charme A Satyre rude, and rock his wanton soule Into Elizian slumbers, let her be Genophilus the subject of thy song. Erect a temple to her honoured name The Virgin quire shall make it their devotion To pay her gratefull Paeans, and to crowne With ever springing garlands her faire statue; I have descended through the silver orbes To satisfie these dieties, I've tane A shrill resounding trumpet, new, and clean, Lest it it should taint my breath, whilst I blaze forth Your names which as in deep graven characters Shall last for times immortall processe sure, Whilst Phoebus, Phaebe, and nights fry indure. Uertue. Bright ornaments of the heaven covered world To whom the far fam'd Cyprian nation bow I'ts most obsequious, and willing knees, On whose illustrious fronts the regall crowne Imprint no rigorous, and austere frownes Your subjects hopes of joy to batter downe. But whose auspicious, and calmer eyes Pronounceth omens of ensueing joy, And defuse hopes of safety to their hearts, Which pious reverence doth thaw to streames Flowing ith' current of obedience. Your Raigne's become a lecture of pietie Which transfuse through your court an admiration, And Zealous ardour of its imitation,
Nay the high towring flames doe penetrate The dapled skie, and make Gods emulate, Jove envy your rare vertues (Potent Prince) And Juno (Mighty Queen) your share of graces, Which make you so resplendent in all places. Now the musick sounded and fortune, fame, and ver∣tue, danced to its measures, Corantoes, Durettoes, Moriscoes, Galliards, and sung thus, Fortune. With gentle starres I will concur in influence, On you of all joyes to confer the confluence. Fame. With every jocand spring your fames shall bud, and grow, No envious gust your fragrant names can make to blow. Uertue. Your loves I'me try'd in hard assayes Majestick paire Now shall a crowne of deathlesse praise adorne your haire. Fortune. Your joyes which on a Helix move no evill shall crosse Till Lachesis webs preys doe prove to Atropos.
Uertue. Then Royall Sir, and Regall bride my golden key Shall ope the palace where abide Eternitie. Fame. Your dayes shall daune with every day and shine, and glow Tributes of praise each age shall pay yet still must owe. Exeunt. The Scene was transformed to that part of the Sea, that washes the Cyprian shore, on the one hand were e∣rected two pedestalls, whereon Captaines lay chained, on the other hand a woman in a sea green drapery heightned with silver, on her head a corona rostrata, with one hand holding the rudder of a ship, with the other a little winged figure with a branch of palme, and a garland, this woman denoted navall victory. When the soft musick sounded, Neptune and a chorus of Marine Nymphs ascended, with a sea triumphe of children riding on sea horses, and young Tritons, with their writhen trumpets, they all sung this ditty. Best of men, and best of Kings, Homage and peace thy Navy brings Where ere she spreads her canvas wings, Thy Foemen when thy flags appeare Are halfe subdued with Panique feare Lest thou towards them thy course shoulst steere.
Alas they preliate in vaine 'gainst thy wing'd Pegasean traine Which gives club law upon the maine. We all thy Palizado's be To keep thy ebbing Ocean free From stormes, and filching piracie. A greedy Foe with as small toyle Another land may sack, and spoyle As touch thy sea Nymph guarded soyle. Should we give raines to flouds once more Till earth and sea one visage bore And that Sea knew no bounding shore, Thy moving bowers would in pride Supported by the raging tide Triumphing ore the drownd ball ride. Then would ore plaines and hillocks too Thy wounded pinas to visit goe High mountaines where they once did grow. Exeunt. The Scene changed to a magnificent palace, adorned with al manner of diliciousnesse, Comas appeared & said. Come lets dispeople all foure elements, And when we've ran th rough all the register Of past delights, lets set and study new ones, Darke vail'd Cotytto stay thy ebon chaire Wherein thou triumphest with Herate And let not nice mourne on the Indian steep Peep from her cabin'd loop hole, let no cock His matins ring, till pomp, and revellry
Have tane their fills, with masque, and pagentry. Let midnight see our feast and jollity And weare a blacker maske, as envious Of our dance, jocond rebecks, and wreathed smiles. Now Tellus is arrayd in fresh attire And prickt, and dect with Flora's tapestrie, And each groves Quiristers doe warble anthems And all to grace this nights solemnity. Now that blith youth upon whose clusterd locks A wreath of jvy berries set, have crusht From purple grapes a most Nectarian juce That mortalls may with freedome entertaine Blith joy, and debonair mirth, which againe At this good time to visit mortalls daigne. Musick whose losty tones grace Princes crown'd Unto this novall coronation sound. Fame with a blast as love as ratling thunder Proclaime this pompous frolick holyday, That Jeve may know of our quips, and cranks And to beare part in our smooth ditty'd pranks Leave valted heaven, and his skie Roabes put off And pure ambrosial weeds of Iris woof, Attended by Coruscant constellations Who to present shall make it their next taske Before your Maiesties an nother masque.
Let us leave these Potentates in their Court, the man∣sion of flourishing pleasure, (where delight in all her shapes, and studied varieties, every minute courted their soules to actuate their chiefe felicities) and step o're the Sea to Ameindes, who at his landing fell downe (by his foot slipping) and brought up some earth in his hand, as if he had taken livery and seisne of the Coun∣trey, he soone stormed the ancient seate of the Sicilian Kings Palermo the happy (so sir-named for the de∣lightfull scituation) but Lilenus came quickly downe, with a resolute legion, who made a hedge with their own bodies to impede the progresse of Amenides, and finding him possessed of Palermo, he then besieged him: but he, because he could not take a sound sleepe: but Hercules-like with club in hand because of the befiegers, challenged his enemies to let fortune decide the contro∣versie in a pitched field; which being assented to, and his army marshalled because hee was to venter all his stocke in one bottom, and to stand to the successe of one Croysado, he sharpned and festinated his Armies ani∣mosity with Brachylogie. My heroicke Heroe's, and couragious Compeers, my intention is to cuspidate and set an edge upon your magnanimity, and to cause an ebulition and boyling up of our high wrought spirits to the height, now when you had need of Robor & aes triplex circa pectus, a breast plate of adamant, a burganet of steel, to make you im∣penetrable, against the haile shot of impugnation. We must not expect that this honourable prize, this  will bee Salmacidum spolium sine sanguine, & , no, no,  the gods sell all for sweate, a Philomacoy comes not to his existency, nor obtains any competency of skill in the Encyclopaedie without many nocturnall lucubrations, Mutla tulit fecit puer, sudavit, & alsit. Hee must sucke in the smoake of
many candle lights studies, before he can perform any thing that savours of the lamp. A mechanicall Artificer cannot thrive in his vulgar station without more then vulgar sedulity, what run∣ning velletation, combates, and contentions were in the Pythian and Olympicke games to obtaine the Chaplet, and shall wee thinke that the Crowne of the Queene of the Mediterranian Islands will come dropping into our laps if wee be remisse and perfunctory in our proceedings. No, no, a Throne is not got with a wish, nor a Scepter obrepted with a Song. Non est a terris mollis ad astra via. Wee must not with Marcus Lepidus stretch our selves upon the grasse, and say ô utinam hoc esset laborare, our intention must rather be as stable, and unmoveable as the Roman Fabritius of whom it was said, that one might with as much facclity obvaricate the Sunnes pro∣gresse as cause him to digresse. Il faut semer devant qu' ou puisse moissouner, wee must sowe before wee reape, we must conquer before we triumph, win the Garland before wee weare it; timidity and consternation will hold out a Gorgon head of encumbrances, and tell of Chimaeras, and Phantasies of determents: but let not these dash our hopes, melt our courage, or emas∣culate our resolutions, for believe  the hyper∣bolicall game wil quit the cost, our noble reward is that great knot of strength which Cato called the grana∣ry and nurse of the people of Rome. Cicero terme'd it the treasury and life of the City, a Land deliciously fertile, and wonderfully productive, humectated with winding catracts, and small sluces, this will bee an opulent purchase, and a good penny-worth at my rate; Imperia pretio quolibet constant bené. Agrippica estee∣med the Roman Empire well bought, though she pur∣chased it for her Sonne Nero with the losse of her owne
life, Occidat modo imperet. Let us then oppugne all obstrigillations, which are but as steps for us to ascend to honour, and when the names of our conspirgated antagonists shall rot above ground, and they them∣selves be rung down to the dust with a peal of satyres, ours shall be odoriferous to posterity, and succeeding generations shall enbalm them with honour. This dul∣ciloquie inspired the faintest hearts with freshest cou∣rage, and made them impatient of delay, they and their horses too, with a clamor militaris, and loud acclamations assented to their Generalls Ora∣tion. Silenus also was encouraging his Souldiers when the classicum of their enemies was rhetorick enough to in∣vite them to their tasks. The black clouds poured down upon the Sicilians store of Funerall teares: and sholes of Ravens and other birds of prey) as predicting the harvest of carkasses at hand) flew over their hoast. A sore Battel was begun, and with equall successe a long time maintain'd, where the grasse became gray∣headed for want of moysture, it was sprinkled with a sanguilent Nectar. Here was a Father divided from his Son, here a Husband from his Wife, and yonder where there was no Kin they be joyned in blood. But because that Cato the Censor that taught the young men to preliate with a steady foote, would of∣ten say, that words and shoutings had more power to amaze and put enemies to the rout, then hand, strokes, wherefore Amenides hoast did amaze their adversaries with a shrill clamour, whereas the Cicilians (as if the whole army had had but one heart) let all their coura∣ges fall into their feet, which now they altogether tru∣sted to. Amenides who knowes as well how to use as gaine a victory, pursued his dissipated foe-men to Mount-royall
their chiefe Assylum, which place being reduced to the height of penury by the multitude of the Garri∣son, and deprived of supplyes from the adjacent and conterminent Villages, by its cautelous besie∣gers. Silenus in a disguise fled, and got to the Aca∣demy at Tolouse, where hee changed his royall Er∣mynes for sables, and became a phantasticall Schol∣ler, spending the residue of his life in enigmaticall disputations, as whether or no Cassandra was trou∣bled with the tooth-ache, how many knots were on HERCULES Club, of what colour ACHIL∣LES Beard was, hee studyed himselfe halfe bleare∣ey'd to know the true sementry of Caesars nose by a Shooing-horne, and all to bee dignified with the name of a speculative man. But the Citizens considering ameux vaut plier rompre, its better to bow then breake, and seeing that their egresse afforded no hope of regresse, of feare of their foes ingresse, and perceiving no happy helpe, for their helpelesse hap, had wit enough to set their sailes that way that the winde blew, and to wheele about as they saw occasion, that they might bee of the prevailing side. Much like the man in Macrobrius, who during the Civill Warre betweene Augustus Caesar and Antonius, had taught two Crowes their severall notes, the one to say Aue Imperator Antoni: the other to say Aue Imperator Augusti. That so when the Controversie was de∣termined, what side soever prevailed he might have a Bird for the Conquerour. So Silenus being fled, his Subjects subjected them∣selves to the Victor, and framed themselves to call Vivat Rex Amenides, who soon adorned his Roy∣all browes with the Regall Circle, the Gates were opened to entertaine his Army, and the peoples
hearts were opened to entertaine himselfe. But those which ingenuity prompted not to love him, hee taught to feare him, knowing primus in orbe deos fecit timor. But it was as possible for Phoehus to find new pathes to drive his Chariot in, or for the Load∣stone to forget its faith to the North, as for Amenides to turne Loves Apostate, and be unmindful of Dionella, by the ayre of whose Blessed name, Chamelion-like hee lived, having taken fealty of his Subjects, steered his course to Naples. At his presence Dionella was revived, as a starved flye is when the Sun get out, after their Epi∣thalmie, they repaired to Sicilie. Now these Potentates, Flaminius and Clorinda, Ame∣nides and Dionella, after they had a long time Monar∣chised in the highest degrees of Soveraignty (having left a numerous off-spring to sway their Scepters whom I wish a Chrysostomaticall repositor of their vertues) yeelded rather to a gentle dissolution then death. Their Bodies are interr'd in the most magnificent Cathedralls in their Dominions where the sumptuonsnesse of their Monuments proclaime their extrinsicall Fortunes, and their ever-living Fame their intrinsicall endowments. But when their Statenesse and Tombes, composed and erected of Gold, Marble, or Ivory, shall drop down into ashes, and crumble by peece-meale into non-en∣tity and bee found as ARCHIMEDES his Tombe (by CICERO) in Vepretis, crow∣ned with mosse, and over-growne with bryars, and thornes, I wish they may survive in this Monument of their Fame. FINIS.
