C2409 R10981 13115300 97743
THE KINGS MAJESTIES Letter to the Lord Willoughby, of PARHAM, Iune the fourth, with his Lordships answer thereunto. Together with a Letter sent by the Lord WILLOVGHBY, to an Honourable Member of the Parliament. Read at a Conference between both Houses this eighth of Iune, 1642. LONDON, Printed for A. N.
MY LORD, I Received a Letter from your Lordship, in which the House is pleased to oe mee a very great honour, farre above any desert of mine, and little expected by me; for my Lord, I well know my obedience tyes me to fulfill their Comm nds, and in th t I have done, I have but done my duty, and that which eve∣ry honest man ought to do, nd owh of right to the Par∣liament; and whosoever hath that principle in him, it will dictate to him as much, and keepe him from other by∣wayes, and for my owne part, my heart ever was, and ever shall be, both forward and ready to obey their Lordships commands in all things, both with integritie and industry, and Gods curse light upon him and his, that carryes any other heart about him; My Lord, it is too meane a way for me to expresse my acknowledgement in pper, to the House for this high favour which I have re∣ceived by your Lordships Letter. I hope to make it ap∣peare by my actions that their Lordships see, I am not an ngratefull servant. It is a great encouragement to these parts, their Lordships resolutions, in giving their Com∣mands to have the rest of the Militia put in present exe∣cution, and truly my Lord it was out of that regard that I did intimate it to my Lord of Essex, as holding it a thing much conducing to the publick good, and the only remedy to cure these distractions which the Kingdome is in, not out of any regard to my selfe, for I know if I
suffer in executing their Lordships commands, it must be against their wills, and when that day comes, I will not give a straw for all I have, were I but a looker on. My Lord, as I was this day at Lincolne, where I appointed to begin to Muster, there came a Messenger from his Maje∣stie with this Letter, which I held it my duty to acquaint the House with, and likewise my answer, and am for Lin∣colne, where as in all other places, I shall be ready to serve your Lordship. As your most humble servant. T. WILLOVGHBY. MY Lord, ere my letter was sealed up, I could not but giue your Lordship an accompt in how good a posture I found the Trained Band of Linolne, which was farre beyond my expectation, considering the unhap∣pinesse in the sicknesse being dispersed in the Town, which hindred the appearance of some, but truly my Lord that was fully supplied by a company of Voluntiers, equall in number and goodnesse of Armes to the Trained Bands. Lincolne 6. Iune. 1642. FINIS.
CAROLUS REX. To our trusty and wel-beloved, the Vice-Chancellour of the Vniversitie of Ox∣ford, and to all the rest of our loyall Subjects in that our Vniversity. Reverend Father in God, we greet you well, WHereas we have received a most large and ample testimony of the Affection of that our Loyall vniver∣sity to us, by the free loane of a very considerable Summe of mony, in a time of so great and Imminent necessity. These are to will and require you to give to that our Vni∣versity from us, our Royall thanks, and to assure them, and every of them, (our Loving
and Loyall Subjects) that this Testimony of their hearts towards us, shall never depart out of our Royall memory, and that both they shall be carefully repayd, and the mony em∣ployed only upon the defence of our selfe. The true Protestant Religion, and the Laws esta∣blished in this our Kingdom, and whereas wee heare, that for this Action, so full of loy∣alty and Allegiance, Som of that our Vniversity have beene ordered to be sent for, these are to will and require you, to signifie unto them and every of them, (who assume such Power to themselves without us) That wee will and command, that no obedience be given to any such summons, holding our selfe bound to pro∣tect and defend those, who shall be persecuted for that cause, by having contributed to our de∣fence and protection, And so wee bid you farewell. Given at our Court at Beverly the 18. day of Iuly 1642.
CHARLES R. To our trusty and well beloved the High Sheriff of our County, and the Major of our Citie of OXFORD. I Rusty and welbeloved, Wee greet you well, whereas Wee have lately received very am∣ple testimonies of the good affections of our Vniversity of Oxon, by the loan of such Moneys as could be thence spared for the sup∣ply of Our urgent and extraordinary occasions, For which dutiful and affectionate expression, We are informed, that severall worthy persons of that our Vniversity, our Servants and others are threatned to be troubled and molested, Wee
have thought fit to commend the care, assi∣stance and protection of that place and of the persons in it, to you as a service, wherin you shall merit our favour and good acceptance and of which we shall require an account And wee doe therefore will and require you as you tender our displeasure, if any warrant, order, or other direction whatsoever shall come to your hand for the apprehending or troubling any person or persons of that our Vniversity for his good affection to our service in advancing the businesse of lending and supplying us with mony which wee shall never forget, that you be so farre from countenancing or assisting a∣ny such warrant or direction, that on the con∣trary you use your utmost power to preserve those our good subjects from such oppression, the which we shall take in very good part at your hand, and for so doing this shall be your warrant. Given at our Court at Nottingham, Iuly 22. 1642. FINIS.
