C417 R3735 11953277 51476
NATURES PARADOX: OR, The Innocent Impostor. A PLEASANT POLONIAN HISTORY: Originally Intituled IPHIGENES. Compiled in the FRENCH Tongue BY The rare Pen of J. P. CAMƲS, B. of BELLEY. AND NOVV. Englished by Major VVRIGHT. Optabilis est in Amore fucus; eò gratior Superis, Quò magis Innocens. Macrob. in Saturn. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for EDVV. DOD, and NATH. EKINS, and are to be sold at the Gun in Ivie-Lane, 1652.
Errata. P. 2. 3. l. 39. 1. r. raised to that. p. 3. l. 15. r. Militia. p. 7. l. 33. r. have. p. 30. l. 38. r. Arctick p. 56. l. 10. r. no less. p. 57. l. 7. r. knowledge she. p. 59. l. 1. r. prejudiciall. p. 62. l. 15. r. Eyes of p. 70 l. 23, 24. r. declared p. 84. l. 5, 6. r. all-conquering fire. p. 95. l. 21. r. bend and make. p. 100. l. 11. r. troubled p. 107. l. 19, 20. r. indecency p. 142. l. 4. r. handsome cheat. p. 158. l. 32. r. difficult∣ly. p. 171. l. 24. r. proceed. p. 175. l. 31. r. indeavoured p. 189. l. 13. r. having. p. 194. l. 4. r. indear Celian. p. 198. l. 38. r. Gentlewoman, p. 200. l. 29. r. keep his. p. 231. l. 32. r. her slave. p. 245. l. 34. r. our words. p. 253. l. 33. r. trouble me; for, p. 256. l, 30. r. overwhelmed. p. 262. l. 4. r. contein'd but too many attractions to captive his desire. p. 269. l. 28. r. his valour. p. 272. l. 3, 4. r. received, p. 273. l. 13. r. beloved is to. p. 277. l. 3. r. falling into. p. 286. l. 18. r. So he. p. 289. l. 27, 28. r. walking. p. 304. l. 22. r. Specious. p. 309. l. 36 r. another Object. Whereupon, p. 320. l. 9. r. It is p. 325. l. 15 r. an heart, l. 25. r. stopt up, p. 331. l. 28. r. such Dexterity, p. 333. l. 12. r. told him; onely. p. 363. l. 10. r. so perfectly resembled a Br. p. 366. l. 5. r. honouring her. l. 16. r. Lady p. 367. l. 30. r. who had. l. 37. r. by a way.
The OECONOMY of this History. NAture's grand Historiographer mentions a Tree hee had seen at Tivoly, on whose Trunk were ingraffed severall Branches that bare distinct sorts of fruit; Here Cherries, there Plums, on that side Apricocks, on this Peaches: But this vegetive wonder could be of no long continuance, by reason its Radicall moisture was distributed to so many Species. What will bee the Fate of this tender Sien, depends on the smiles or frownes of the Ju∣dicious Reader, from the influence of which it must either grow or wither; however in some sort it is not unlike that Tree, since to the stock of the same subject are inocu∣lated some coyn'd varieties, which are but adopted to the maine Body of the History; They are Clouds, yet inoffensive (which Eclypse not absolutely the Daye's lustre, but onely veile the Glory of the luminous Planet that formes it) or rather Orna∣ments, which, in decking, somewhat disguise, and lay a fresh Vermillion upon the pale Cheek of Truth: Some, by nature or evill custome, have contracted such a disposition, that if an History (according to their apprehensions) carry an un∣common Face, they can afford it no other style than of a Fable, never considering that our Eyes converse dayly with a thousand things which pose our Reason; and many effects are palpably apparent to us, of whose Causes we are intirely ignorant. Another Tide of fantasticall humours carries some Braines into a Belief, that Truths are Fables, as the former esteem Fables, Truths. It is not unlikely, in regard this History hath some resemblance to Ovid's Fable of Iphis and Ianthe (whence indeed the names of the Principall persons in this Narration are borrowed) some will bee apt to say, It is either a fabulous History, or a Fable Historized: I am as little Master of their Tongues as of their judgements, let it suffice for an equitable Reader's satisfaction and mine own, that I have it from an Authour so authentick, that his report is as far beyond Question as Contradiction. Tis true, my renown'd Bishop acknowledges there are diverse Passages of his own invention inserted in the Principall relation of Iphigenes fortune: But whosoever would take away those parti∣colour'd Feathers, which He so ingeniously hath mixt to imbellish this Piece, would find its Body as little, in comparison, as a Nightingale's, which the Lacedemonian said was nought else but a Voyce. Certain Works there are, whose specious titles promise advantages in the Front, that are not to bee found in the Perusall; Others within a rough and inconsiderable out-side, conteine the precious Pearles of good Learning and profitable Documents: And notwithstanding at first they appear confused, or more beholding to Chance than any Method for their Contexture, yet (when at∣rentively considered) do disclose an agreeable Connexion, a well regulated Order, and no ill-observed Proportion. For which consideration (Courteous Reader) I thought it not improper to present you this OECONOMY, to the end you may know, that among all the Romantick Histories, which have fallen from my Author's Pen (and happily may have pass'd before your Eyes) there is not any that seem's
less Methodicall, and yet is more answerable to the Rules than this. Be not therefore too ready to precspitate your censure upon what your judicious Eye may incounter of leane and frivolous in this Story, Impartiality beeing able to require your Patience with the view of such Heroick Actions in this volume as may countervaile the simplicity of the rest; Though neither (in my opinion) be impertinent, unless you will deny the difference of Notes in Musick to be requisite for the composition of the most melodious Accords, and make Shadowes useless for the composition of the most melodious Accords, and make Shadowes useless for the imbellishment of Pictures, or diversity of Flowers for enamelling delightfull Garden-Plotts. This Narration runs in a continuall line, and the subject threds it self so insensibly, that you will feele your Fancy led (as it were) by a little chaine from one manner of Life to another, very different, without perceiving the change. Chymists give the name of Depart to a certain water which they use to separate diverse Metalls in one Lumpe; for your facility I shall make tryall of some such, to Anatomize the body of this Work. As the Eternall Gaider of all things hath divided the Spacious Roof of Heaven into five distinct Zones; Or as the Dramatists dispose their Stories into five Acts, subdividing them into severall Scenes, So the Relation conteined in this volume is digested into five Principall Parts. The First may properly be tearmed the IN∣FANTINE or INNOCENT; wherein you shall see the Birth and Educati∣on of IPHIGENES, with his pretty harmeless Employments during his tendrest years. The Second you may call the AULICK or COURTLIE Part; In this IPHIGENES appears in his Glory at the Court, the Splendour, Policy, Emula∣tion, Mines and Counterminings, with the rest of the Beauties and Blemishes of that Life my Authour represents not impertinently. The Third is the RUSTICK; where our Grand Favorite is represented in some kinde of disgrace (beeing confined to his Palatinate) amusing himself in the exercises of Hunting and Rurall divertisements: In this Part are described the discommodities and contentments of a Country-life, the imperfections of the vulgar People, Their rude, cruell and incivill dispositions. The Fourth deserves the title of HEROICK; because it treats of Wars, Combats, Sieges, Stratagems, not without the intermixture of some Love-Plots, Negotiations of State-Affairs and Treaties of Peace, wherein our HEROS displayes grand te∣stimonies of his Courage, and Conduct. The Fift and last is the NUPTIALL; Which, at the Marriage of IPHIGENES with LIANTE, represents the Banquets, Tiltings and Magnificences usuall at such solemnities, when KINGS will shew to those they love the Marks of their Grandeur and Affection; Which, in∣deed, are herein but sparingly described, because the precedent Parts had already extended this Relation beyond the intended Limits; In any whereof if you finde either a Deficiency or Over-acting Consider this Piece was composed by a Prelate, who (unless for his Divertisement) was not accustomed to loosen his Genius to such light studies, yet hath been so fortunate as not to be less esteemed for these Levities, by such as are capable to judge of his Language, than admired for the Graver pro∣ductions of his Pen; But if in my Dialect I have too weakly rendered his quaint Conceptions, I hope you will have Candour sufficient to pardon my Defects, and incourage by your indulgence the indeavours of Him, whose Ambition was rather to delight you than content. Himself. Farewell. J. W.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, JAMES, Earle of NORTHAMPTON; &c. And the Signally Vertuous ISABELLA, His Incomparable LADIE. RIGHT HONOURABLE, DId the indeavours of my Artless Pen suite with the Judicious Ingenuity of my Au∣thour, I might bee capable of indulging a Hope, that the Grandeur of your Persons, temper'd with the Candour of your Mindes, would finde something here that may help to wing your Houres; Since in this volume are represented in Green years, Maturity of Iudgement; in High Fortunes, Humility; in Authority, Discretion; in Abundance, Sobriety mixt with Generosity; Neither is wanting Valour accompanied with Honour (which have been the Marks, and are now the known Favorites of Your vertuous Inclinations) or Piety joyned with Purity, whereof you are living Copies, or
rather perfect Modells. Here the Passions are painted in their severall Convulsion-fits, the Excesses and Transports of which may raise no unpleasing reflexions upon the calme & untroubled freedome of your Spirits; In summe, you will finde the grave BELLEY hath stored his Principall Subject with both your own pretious Plenty, as if your severall vertues had sate while he drew his IPHIGENE; and I hope it will not offend you to see your Faces in such a Mirrour. Hee was so happy in his Addresses of the Originall that by the support and Patronage of that Prince∣ly Pair, the Duke of VANTADOUR and the Princess of TINGRY his Lady, it added no mean lustre to his deserving Pen, and got him such a spreading Applause from all his Readers, that a Third Impression sufficed not to satisfy their Curiosities. Suffer his Example then to excuse my Presumpti∣on, and give this Adventurous VIRAGO leave to fight her Battailes in both the Camps of LOVE and VALOUR under your Banners; Which granted (though Combated by Calumny and Criticisme) Shee cannot faile to come off Victorious. I am not insensible that this English Habit becomes Her worst of all her Wardrobe, but there is a Power in your Acceptance to make Plainness, a Fashion; and teach the World to deale gently with the defects of RIGHT HONORABLE, The humble Votary of his best wishes for a perpetuall Spring of Hap∣piness to your Honours, VVRIGHT.
To his highly valued FRIEND, Major WRIGHT; Vpon his Excellent Translation of his ROMANCE, Entituled, NATURE'S PARADOX: Or, The INNOCENT IMPOSTOR. LInes dipt in Love should not extracted be Wholly from Sublimated Mercurie; High-buskind Ayrs decline their proper end In Paeans to a true deserving Friend. Lines, like good faces, should have choice complexion, A neat proportion, and an apt Connexion. Where, as the Eye's the Index of the mind, The Inward Eye should like attraction find. Nor in my judgement do I hold it fit To Paraphraze upon a Divine Wit; Where ev'ry Clause displays a Cloze of Worth, And needs no tinsell Art to set it forth. Though there be pregnant Fancies, I confesse, Who have with much facetious happinesse Perform'd this Taske: yet have I oft been vext To see a Paraphase abuse the Text. Good Works are Tests sufficient, and retaine Such glorious beamlings from Minerva's braine, That should they want a Frontispiece, the Eye Might finde where to admire and Deifie.
Seven-mounted Quae fuit Historiae priscae vel origo mo∣dernae. Quin pc∣perit proli Regia Ro∣ma Suae? Prud. Rome from whence Romances came By thy politer Pen revive's her Fame; And from her ashy Urne heaves up her Head, To tell thee, Major WRIGHT, Shee is not dead, But so enlivened by thy serious Quill, That her Seven Mounts seeme one Pierian Hill. Her pure-Provinciall Italian. Tongue known to adorn Which thou enamelst so with thy Translation, Wee hold us happy that thou knewst our Nation. Reader, this Testate's just: I should bee loth To lure thee with hyperbolizing froth. If ever Builder rais'd a Story better, I to thy Iudgement will become a Debter; So it be Pure-refin'd: but if't appeare A thick Plebeian Scull; Friend, come not here. Cato's walke onely on this rich-pav'd Floor While Ignorance must knock and stand at door. Here's a new open'd Mine, where wits of Stature, And higher growth find th' PARADOX of NATURE, Full of Choice Sense and Language; and though th' Style IMPOSTOR bee, 'tis INNOCENT the while; But such an Innocence as 'twill beget Rich Influence in Him digesteth it. R. BRATHVVAIT.
Vpon this Exquisit ROMANCE, Written by the Famous B. of Belley, Naturaliz'd, and made English By Major WRIGHT. MY Wit lay Fallow, and my teeming Brain Thought to repose a while from any strain Of Poetizing, when the Air of France Rouz'd up my Fancy in this fresh Romance, This rich Romance, which both for Weight and Sense, For various Notions, and neat Eloquence; And now in point of Version may compare With any of this kinde though ne're so rare. Originall and Coppy Co-excell, The Prelate and the Souldier share the Bell: In Speech they differ, but for Minde and Frame They are unanimous, and still the same. By this I finde, which Men do seldom see, That Mercury, and Mars may well agree. JAM. HOVVELL.
Impartiall CONCEPTIONS CONCERNING The AUTHOR, and TRANSLATOR OF THIS Renowned ROMANCE. MUse, do not strive, I know thou art too meane To celebrate this rich Polonian Scene; This task's not thine, but their's, who whilest they praise, Desert in others deserve equall Bayes: And with triumphant Genius can compose Encomions in either Verse or Prose. And as this Storie's worth they cleare discern, By teaching Virtues they can Virtues learn; Shew young, and old, the Male, the Female state, Their Wills, their Actions how to regulate. Here Wisdome, Valour, Chastity, discreet Comportment, true Civilities, strong, sweet Rules for each Fortune; in varieties Of Friends, and Foes, Noble Fidelities; Their parts with such perswasive Graces act That they best Eyes, and Hearts of France attract. These, Hee whose Love is my lov'd Ornament With equall Grace to England doth present, That so in English minds his gen'rous Skill Those Virtues, and their Habits might instill;
Though Hee to us this glorious Theater Of Pleasure, and of Profit but transfer, His Work with so Victorious Art is wrought, The Dignity thereof exceeds thy Thought. Yet, Muse, although I grant you are too weak Of all with a due Elogy to speak, You, with assurance of applause, may say, WRIGHT writes best English, as, best French, BELLAY. John Chapperline.
To his Friend the STATIONER, on the publishing the Famous Romance, CALLED THE INNOCENT IMPOSTOR. TWill be expected now that I should raise Some Monument unto the Author's prayse, The Work's, or the Translatour's, else, I feare, The Reader'll wonder, what I do make here. Tis grown Apocryphall, And by the Wits Quite voted down; Who hold it not be fits A true-borne Fancy to be Smithfield-wise Put off with Toll and Vouchers; This defyes Such Crutches, for 'tis of so cleare a Nature Twill passe without the Chaplins Imprimatur, Or our Certificates. Besides, I carry Such a dislike to all things Customary, I'le cheate all Expectation, and will be Thankfull to them, but chiefly unto Thee. In these Selfe-ended times, we only do Or thank or praise those wee're beholding to. So call our Justice Charity, and say We do bestow, when we do only pay. For though the worke be rare; yet should it be Still in its Dress, what had it been to me? And though Translated by this worthy Pen, If not exposed to the view of men, I had ne're seen't perhaps. But since all three Have Clubb'd in this Production, I must be Gratefull to all and to give all your right, Must Prayse, and Love and thank Bellay, Dod, Wright. ALEX. BROME.
Vpon BELLEY'S IPHIGENES, better'd into English by the Inge∣nious Pen of His Dear Brother, Major WRIGHT. I Need not injure Truth to Blazon thee (Wer't in my pow'r) with Wit's false Heraldrie: For, but to give thee all thy due, would swell Too high, and turne the Reader Infidell. I'le onely tell him, hee'll finde nothing here, But what is Manly, Modest, Rich and Cleare. No Dropsi'd-Monster-words, all sweet, and cleane As the smooth Cheeke of bashfull Iphigene; Who, as thy Pen has made her woo'd and wooe, Might passe for Venus and Adonis too. Thy melting Language (big with nought but sense) Delight, and Wonder equally dispense. Thy words fall from Thee, like an April Shower, Whose every fruitfull drop awakes a Flower: Serpent and Dove first gently greet and kisse, Then lend each other their best qualities; Contract a conjugall alliance, whence Springs thy Impostor's cunning Innocence; Such rooted sweetnes growes in every part, As if wise Nature taught thee all thy Art. But why all this to thee? may Criticks say, Since what begin's the Page confesse Belley. Tis true, wee owe the ground to him, to thee Are Debtours for the rich Imbroiderie; And tis but just the World should constru't so, Rare Titian here copy'd from Angelo. Ro. Loveday.
To my Learned and Judicious Friend, Major WRIGHT, Upon this Select Piece; Intituled NATURE'S PARADOX, Or, The INNOCENT IMPOSTER. DEar Friend, I prize Thee high, but now I'le swear Th'art Metamorphoz'd to an Usurer, [A Paradox indeed] I meane of Tongues, Where Art's the Scribe, the Creditors Our Lungs: Yet such a one, that though the Increment Amount (at least) to Three times Eight per Cent. (Maugre the Act which limits it to Six) Wee'l Plead no Forfeit, nor Re-pay with Tricks. The Reason's this: [Thy Treasure's Beaten Gold, Nor Wash'd nor Clipt, but truly weight, and told: Th' Inscription Signall, (Learning, Judgement, Wit) Not simply GOD WITH US, but GOD WITH It; Wherein there's no IMPOSTURE, no Offence, But what concludes in Soveraigne INNOCENCE: Nor do'st thou Covet or Extort at all, Wee gaine by th' Use, as well, as Principall.] Why then an Usurer? Because indeed (Like unto Him) Th'art alwayes Pleading Need, [A Need of Languages;] and yet I'm sure Th'hast Conquered more, than the Grand Signiour: The Gulph of Venice Bounds that Monarch's Hand: Thou gett'st where e're Thou go'st, by Sea or Land. The Spanish, French, Polonian and Dutch, Italian, Irish, Welch, and Hungry-Scotch, Crow'd all within Thee; many more beside, I doubt ev'n Babell, save the Bricks and Pride. Learn but the Language of the Starres; and then Th'ast both the Languages of Gods, and Men. G. WHARTON.
NATURE'S PARADOX: OR, THE INNOCENT IMPOSTOR. The First Booke. ARGUMENT. The manner of Government in the Kingdome of Polonia. The Death of Rosuald, Palatine of Podolia, and his Wife. Liante and Modestina their Children, made Wards to Mieslas, who succeeded Rosuald in the Palatinate. Aretuza Wife to Mieslas, Her Policie to deceive his Cru∣eltie. The Birth and manner of Education of Iphigenes. His Marriage to Modestina. Iphigenes endeavours to contract an Alliance betwixt his Sister Clemencia and Liante. Iphigenes is made to understand his own condition by his Mother, and Governour Boleslaus. His love turn'd from Modestina to Liante. His sorrow for having indeared Liante so much to Clemencia. His departure from Podolia to the Court. THe Inhabitants of the Kingdome of Polonia do commonly give their Monark the style of the KING OF KINGS, and LORD OF LORDS: Not that they are so prophane, as (by too exe∣crable a Blasphemie) to ravish that eminent quality from him that beareth it ingraven on the blade of his Almighty Justice, who dispo∣seth at his will of the Souls of Princes, and who is terrible above all the Kings of the Earth; But by reason of the form of Government in that Country, which is ballanced with so∣much Aristocraticall temperature, that it seemes their King is So∣vereign
only by the benefit of Inventarie (as it is tearmed:) For where∣as other Kings are extreamly absolute, and have an uncontrouleable Power over the bodies, lives, and estates of their Subjects, disposing of them at their wills and pleasure (which is but according to the institution of Royalty determined by Gods own Sacred Mouth, and couched in express tearms in the holy Scripture.) It is nothing so amongst the Sarmatians (so were the People of Polonia called) where the Sea of Monarchie hath its bounds, and what storm so∣ever rises in their King's heart, what impetuous Surges or motions of Passion soever agitate his breast, hee cannot in any proceedings exceed those limits that are prescribed to his Authority by the Power of his States. The opinion of that antient Emperor, who said, That properly to be a Sovereign, was to do whatsoever hee lifted, is of no esteem or value with that Nation; Neither is less exploded there this saying of an imprudent Empress, That nothing was unlawfull for Kings to act, if it but pleased their humor. For in that Kingdome, whatsoever concerns the Power, Family and Function of the Monark, it is all so regulated, that Hee cannot deviate or out-strip his bounds in the I east, without drawing upon himself suddain Rebellions, and most formidable Combinations. The reason thereof proceeds from this respect, that among those People (who are as free as fierce, and no less generous then haughty) the Kings are Elective, Succession having no interest in that Crown, unless a Son, by his vertuous de∣portments and valorous Actions, render himself worthie (with the approbation of the Orders) to ascend into the Throne of his Pro∣genitors. From this libertie which the Polonians have of electing their Monark ariseth this Restriction of the Royall Authoritie, with∣in such confined tearms and limitations, that it is no more possible than lawfull to exceed them, without altering the Harmony of that Direction which hath there been establish'd beyond the reach of humane Memory, and exciting in the State Revolutions, or rather Convulrions of most dangerous consequence. It is to be observed, that the Eccle∣siasticks and the Nobility only have votes at these Elections: the third Order (which is, the Common People) is excluded, and must receive for their King, him, that is lawfully chosen, according to the form and custome of the Country, by the other two Orders; Who after the E∣lection (though they leave to the King the honour and prebeminence in all things, rendring him the homage and reverence that's due to a Sovereign, and all those whom the hand of Providence hath raised
that high Dignity) reserve to themselves however the power of go∣verning and administring Justice, by which Kings reign, and by which they maintein the Regencie of their Kings and Lawes. As for the Ecclesiasticall State, That hath its Policie apart, which particularly re∣gardeth Spirituall Affairs, and the Conduct or Cure of Souls: And the Secular (which concerneth Politicall matters, as the exercise of Justice, aswell Civill as Criminall, and the administration of Govern∣ment and Military functions) is chiefly in the hands of certain great Officers, named Castellains & Palatines, who are little Sovereign Lords, or Petty Kings, every one in his own Territorie. For instance, The Castellains are those who have Lands, Citties, Burroughs, Villages and Seignories under their subjection, as for matters concerning Justice; and their Authority is so great, that their Jurisdiction is without Appeal. Moreover, in case of troubles, they have power to levie Forces, impose Taxes, raise Monie to pay and beare the charges of their Miltitia, and do other Actions in this nature, which in other Monarchies are reserved only to the Sovereigntie. The Palatines are like Governours of Pro∣vinces, but they are so absolute in their Governments, that they com∣mand the Castellaines and the People at their pleasure, exact Tributes, press Souldiers, appoint quarters, give Commissions: in a word, they are like petrie Kings in their Palatinates, such suddain and exact obe∣dience is rendred them, so Supream and uncontroulable is their Power. Insomuch that the King (to return to the Proverb before mentioned) commanding as King over the Palatines and Castellains, is in this con∣sideration called KING OF KINGS, that is, of the Palatines, who are in effect petty Kings; and LORD OF LORES, that is, of the Castellains, who are like little Princes. The History which I am about to relate, obligeth me to represent this form of Government, as being the Basis and principall foundation thereof, by reason of the Power (al∣most Tyrannicall) of one of these Palatines, who shall appear upon this Scene we are now opening, and who would seeme strange, nay alto∣gether extraordinary to the Reader, that should fancy to himself a Coun∣try ordered according to the Rule and Policie of FRANCE or SPAIN, where the Monark being more absolute, the Authority of Governours is much lesse; not unlike to that of the meaner Lights of th' Heaven, which have no light or luster before the Sun of Sovereigntie: where∣as on the contrary in Polonia the Palatines do execute their Charges, and exercise their Jurisdiction in the presence of their King, as if their Authority depended rather on Monarchie then on the Monark, nothing
being able to make them be deposed or dispossessed of their Com∣mands, but State Crimes which make them lose their Dignities with their Lives. Under the Reign of him that preceded MONSIEVR of France (then Brother to CHARLES the IX. and Duke of Anjou, and who was afterwards HENRY the III. of France, having forsaken the Crown of Polonia) A certain Lord Castellain, by name Rosuald, who (though not descended of very antient Nobility, nor much in favour with Fortune for matter of estate) was elevated for his valour to the Palatinate of Podolia. Governments and great Offices are like Vessells full of liquor, whereinto if you cast a spunge, though ne're so dry and hard, it will presently be filled and pierced through. Rosuald was so able and understanding a Man, that without oppressing much his Sub∣jects, or exacting any thing in his Province, that might render him any way odious or blameable, by subtile and (probably) lawfull means he became so rich, that (Peace by vertue of his mediation and good con∣duct reigning among all the families where hee introduced Concord) Abundance entred within his Territories; insomuch that it might be said of him, That Glorie and Riches were in his House, That his Gar∣ners sunk under the burthen of Corn, his Cellers were overflowed with Wine, That out of the very stones burst Rivulets of Oile, That his Coffers were not capacious enough to contein his Treasures. In sum, That hee was one of the most opulent Palatines in Polonia: But the inexorable Parca that pardons no body (and who being blinde cut's the thred of life when she pleases, without distinction of Age, Condition or Sex) stopped the course of this Noble-man's dayes in the full Current of his Prosperitie (at such years as but just passing out of Virility hee sa∣luted only the first and freshest time of Old-Age,) by an unexpected accident, which made him bring Death with him home from Hunting. His Lady, who was then big with Child (though otherwise verie chast and vertuous, yet a woman (that is to say) as litle capable of constan∣cie as a Reed of steadiness) suffering her self to be transported by the excess of an inconsolable sorrow, precipitated her deliverie in the seaventh Month, and after a Son which she had brought forth into the World, but one yeare before, She was made a Mother at this se∣cond and last labour of a Daughter, which had life, but by her death. For whether her grief and conceding anguish hastned the birth of the Child, or whether because her Body was no less cruelly afflicted with the Pangs of her Travell, then her mind for the loss of her Husband,
the Daughter remaining with the living, layed her Mother among the Dead, leaving these poor innocent Orphanes to the merciless pitty of Men; but under the tuition of that great King of Heaven and Earth, who taketh little Ones for his Heritage, who taketh care even of young Ravens when abandoned by their Dams, and who gives himself the style of Guardian and protector of the Father∣less. In the charge of the Palatinate of Podolia succeeded Rosnald a Noble-Man of a middle Age, named Mieslas, who was born of a very antient & noble Family: But that falls out in Generations sometimes, which is alwaies incident to the most stately structures, that is, Time with his gentle file doth insensibly waste and diminish them; For it is frequently seen that the Nobleness of an Extraction advancing and inlarging its greatness by the long succession of years, the Estate is divided into divers branches, which so weakneth and lesseneth the stock, that in the end it is a shame to be so Noble and so poor, to have so great a Heart and such weak Reins, that (not having faculties sufficient) a man cannot maintein the splendor extracted from his Ancesters. For this Reason in great Houses the heirs have in a manner all, to the end that by this industrie their wealth may serve as nerves and supporters to up∣hold that magnificence, which distinguisheth those of Illustrious Des∣cents from the Vulgar. Mieslas being elevated to this eminent Dig∣nity (which renders men in Polonia of equall qualitie with the Peers of France, Grandees of Spain, and Earles of England, that is to say, the chief and most remarkable Persons of that Country, for they are as much as Vice-Kings;) And seeing himself as mean for matter of Estate, as considerable for Honour both by Birth and Qualitie, was on a suddain cast into an inconceivable distraction of Mind and pain; not much unlike unto that of the fabulous Midas, who not being able to feed or nourish himself, becaus everie thing hee touched was presently turn'd to Gold, poor in his abundance, Hee abhorred in a manner what he had aspired to with so much eagerness, being angrie with himself that his Abilities would not reach to maintein by a competent and suiteable expence the Pomp and magnificence of his Dignitie. The Condition of this ambi∣tious Sarmatian, me thinks, is very lively represented by the Child in the Emblem, whose wing seems to flutter up on one side, but the other is depressed to the ground with a heavie stone: being pricked one while with the spur of Glory (which puff'd him up by reason of his high birth and qualitie) another while being inflamed with an extreme desire of
having where withall to support the Height of his Dignitie and Extra∣ction, He was like an high mettled Hors, which feeling two sharp spurrs in his Flank, curvets and fling's as if hee disdained a Rider; But as the twisting Ivie cannot raise it self from the ground, unless it embrace the Trunk of some neighbouring Tree, or be back't by some kind Wall, so Mieslas deeming Wealth the greatest luster, and (as it were) the main Pillar of Honour, resolved to use any means (lawfull or unlawfull) to purchase it. The first that the Power (shall I say) or the Tyrannie of his new charge put into his greedy minde, was to load his shoulders with the sweet burthen of the Gardianship of the two Pupills alrea∣dy mentioned, although their Kindred strove to subvert his design, perceiving plainly that hee would prove like an Eagle's feather, which eats away and consumes the others, that is to say, That this old Sa∣turn would devoure those pirtifull young Children: In a word, having by favour, obteined the Wardship, or tuition of them, and being esta∣blished by Authority in the government, or more properly, in the in∣joyment of their most plentifull estates (as hee succeeded their Father Rosuald in the Palatinate) without scruple hee made use of his riches to maintein the Port and Magnificence of his great Birth and Office. But that Eternall Power which resides in Heaven, which presides over the designes of Men, who sees their thoughts a far off, knowes their waies and counts their steps, and who hath in his hands the ends of the Earth; It is he that dissipates the Counsells of the wicked, and reproves their inventions. It is Hee that takes into his safe-guard the widow and the Fatherless, and confounds the waies of the evill-doers: As we shall see in the progress of this Narration, which will demonstrate how Providence did by her disposing, take the Counter-point in opposition to the purposes of Mieslas; and whereas hee intended to swallow Ro∣suald's Estate, and make that Family fall into his, Heaven brought to pass the contrary. For as the Appetite comes with eating, and the desire of having being commonly compared to an Hydropicall humour, which the more it drinks the more it thirsts; Mieslas not conten∣ted with the administration of his Ward's whole Estate, which hee found a very plentifull, and almost undreinable Source of Riches, where∣of hee disposed at his pleasure (like one that cuts in the whole Piece) and made use of it to maintein the Pomp and State, that high degree of honour (whereunto Fortune had raised him) did require, aswell to avoid any Demands or Inquiries, and not to be subject to render an ac∣count to any, as to make this Estate in some manner his own, and
without inchantment to make the Corn leap from another's ground upon his; Hee passionately desired to draw unto himself that mighty Mass of Wealth by some Alliance (the ordinary hook that great ones use to catch the fattest Preys.) But God who meerly by the confusion of Tongues subverted the proud designe of the Children of Nimrod, laughing at the vain pretensions of Mieslas, gave him no Off-spring but Daughters; and every body knowes that sex is far more likely to transport a succession into another family, then to continue a name and convey it to Posterity. This multiplicity of Daughters put the fierce Sarmatian not only into impatience, but transported him into a boundlesse and unheard-of fury: For as if his Wife (a Lady full of Honour and Vertue) had been voluntarily the cause of his discontent∣ment, he used her so barbarously, that his inhumanity drew upon him the hatred and scorn of the whole World. Isaac at the importunity of Rebecca (who bad him get her Children, if hee would not see her dye with grief) answered, that hee was not God to give her Progenie: im∣plying, that as it is not from him that plants, or from him that sowes, that fruits proceed, but from God, who gives life and growth to e∣very thing, and who opening his hand fills every creature with his bles∣sing and fecundity, so Husbands cannot give Issue, if God showres not down upon their Marriage the Benediction of his sweetness; nei∣ther can they have Children according to their own wishes, but ac∣cording to the good pleasure of him who is Creator of both Fathers and Children, and from whom proceeds all Paternity in Heaven and on Earth. It was by an industry inspired from above, that Iacob spot∣ted with white and black the Lambs of his flock, to inrich himself in Laban's service: But though he gave them such coloured Coats as hee pleased by vertue of his wands, it was not in his power to make them of what Sex hee listed. The discreet Aretuza (so shall Mieslas his Wife be called) might have returned the same answer to her barbarous and unreasonable Husband, as Isaac did to the extravagant demand of his Wife; But that Mieslas was not to bee answered but by suffering and silence, otherwise hee would hvae raged like one of those Earth∣quakes, which overturn every thing that opposes their turbulencie. And that which agravated the distemper of his mind, was not onely that he had none but Daughters, but what was worse, and less suppor∣table in that Sex (whose Element is Beauty, or at least a gracefull com∣liness, which proceed's from a just and handsome composition) they brought into the World with them such remarkable imperfections,
and such monstrous deformities, that they could not appear in pub∣lique without making the Parents blush that had begotten them. The eldest was crump-shoulder'd and wrie-neck'd; the second was hip-shot∣ten and halted with both leggs; the third as somewhat handsomer in Bo∣dy was more ugly in face than either; the fourth (which was born at his first comming to that Palatinate) was not onely hulch-back't and squint-ey'd, but had one legg a great deal shorter then the other, which made her gate no less unseemly then painfull. These spectacles were so odious to the haught-spirited Mieslas, that had hee lived in that cru∣ell Philosopher's dayes, and followed his maxims, hee would have de∣prived those wretched creatures of the life which hee had given them, for in his heart hee had no kinde of fatherly tenderness towards them, but considered and abhorred them as Monsters that seemed to re∣proach the most secret defects within himself, and cast confusion in his Face, theatning him by their ill favoured aspect with some malediction. To repeat the reviling tearms wherewith hee abused the innocence of his Wife, and the insolent threats wherewith hee terrified her timidity, if ever she should bear him any more such Children, is far from my designe, neither will my time permit it: Somtimes hee swore hee would repudiate her; Somtimes that hee would kill her as a Source and Mo∣ther of Monsters; Sometimes hee upbraided her with faults whereof hee knew in his own conscience she was not guilty; Somtimes he tormented her with disdainfull slightings; Sometimes hee would banish her his pre∣sence, and confine her to the Country; Sometimes keep her close pri∣soner. To be short, there was no kind of discontent but hee made her feele her share of it; either Passion had so blinded his Reason, that hee could not see his own absurdity, or els out of pure Malice hee had a designe to make her, through dispair, cast her self into the Sepulcher. Notwithstanding all this ill usage, shee grew with Child again, which Mieslas perceiving, hee protested if she brought him forth (not onely an ill-favoured Daughter, but any Daughter) that hee would sacrifice to his indignation both her and her fruit; and this hee sealed with such execrable oaths, and in so passionate a manner, that there was no doubt to be made but his Tongue spake out of the abundance of his heart, and the setledness of his resolution. You may imagine in what a trance fell poor Aretuza, seeing her self condemned to Death for a thing uncertain, and which she was no way able to remedie. Piety made her resign her self totally to God's will, & submit to the inviolable decree of his Providence, knowing that those who put their trust in him never
are confounded; Nevertheless fearing to tempt him, she omitted not the means of humane Prudence, God making use oft-times of these second Causes to arrive unto that, whereto he disposeth both thoughts and actions by an incomparable sweetness. Among the gentlewomen that attended her, she had one (after the manner of great persons) that was her particular Favorite and Con∣fident: and although her sweet disposition begat her the affection of them all, and that they compassionated exceedingly her miserie, yet knowing too well the imbecillity of her Sex for matter of keeping Se∣crets, she thought it the safest way not to raveale her's to any more than one, lest it being disclosed shee should lose the benefit and content∣ment shee promised her self. You may understand already, that it was to change her Child, in case shee were brought to bed of a girle. Cleorite (her Trustee) took the business upon her; and having found out severall Women that were to lie down about the time of her Mi∣stresse's account, she blinded them with that powerfull powder of Gold which dazles all the World, and makes people undertake any thing. What then? The Heavens favorising the design of this inno∣cent Lady, gave birth to an earnest occasion, which drew Mieslas to Court, even as the time drew neer of her deliverie; Insomuch that being laid of a Daughter (as beautifull as an Angell, and whose grace∣full sweetness might have moved to pitty the bowels of her Tyrannicall Father) a Boy newly born was put in her place, so cunningly, that those (to whom Mieslas has given charge to watch his wive's actions, and give him a faithfull testimony of that particular) were surprised, and happily deceived. To relate Mieslas his joy when this news was brought him, were no easie matter. If by an express command the King had not staid him at Court, he would presently have gone to see his Son, who adding to the quality of Male (which he had so ardently desired) a beautifull face with a well-shaped body, rendred him no less satisfied than his former Daughters had given him discontent. To the fortunate birth of this Daughter (principall Subject of this mer∣veillous Historie, and who by her name gives it the Title of Iphigenes, for reasons which shall be produced in their time) succeeded the happi∣ness and strangeness of her education, which was thus. The King relishing the humour and the counsells of Mieslas, and considering that his wit and high courage were worthy of employment, reteined him for the most part about his own person, giving him be∣sides, some commands in his Arimes; and he acquitted himselfe of all
his Commissions with so much prudence, fidelity and valour, that be∣sides the great reputation he had acquired, he had purchased a vast estate, but that his humour being excessively given to vanity (which re∣quires an expence beyond all reason) what one hand saved the other spent, the King's liberalitie not being sufficient to support his Prodi∣gality, insomuch (as the Proverb saith) it was but casting monie into a bottomless bag. Sometimes he fished wealth at Court, sometimes in his Government, and every where he was observed to dissipate ra∣ther than dispose of what he had. If he made any stay in his Palatinate, he would so overcharge and exact upon his Subjects, that the chief Castellains wrought with the King under hand in such sort, that upon some pretence or other he was still sent for back againe to Court, to avoyd the ruine of the Province, and the trouble of further complaints. During these many journies and long absences of Mieslas, grew up the hopefull Iphigenes, whom the carefull Aretuza had caused to be nursed in a County remote from Podolia, having given charge of her to an antient and faithfull servant of her Father's, whom She made Deposi∣tary or Gardian of her Child and secret. Whilest the supposed Iphi∣genes passed his Infancy with Aretuza, Boleslaüs (foster-father of the true one) did not only make all those that came to see her believe she was a Boy, but bred the Child likewise in the same opinion; And al∣though her extraordinary tender Complexion seemed to accuse her of being a Girle, yet the advantage of imagining her selfe to be of the robuster Sex (added to the generosity which she had by Nature) made her not only incline, but delight in the sports and exercises of Boyes, as if she had been as her habit spake her. About two years after the birth of Iphigenes, Aretuza (who seemed to be ordeined to bring forth none but females, and fill the World with that Commodity which is hard enough to keep, yet harder to put off) was brought to bed of another Daughter, who had not so rare a Beauty as to make her be much admired, nor such remarkable defects as might make her be despised. Mieslas being then at Court, and having appealed his choller by the imagination he had of being Father to a goodly Son, expressed not much distaste at the comming of this fift Daughter, especially when he heard that she was faire e∣nough and without deformity. Aretuza made her be named Cle∣mencia, as having experimented in her the Clemencie of her Hus∣band, of whose more courteous usage she began thence-forwards to have some hopes. Among great persons Marriages doe not alwaies
accompanie Baptisme, but oftentimes precede it; for to allie illustri∣ous families, to purchase a support, to maintaine factions, and effect divers other such practises frequently used in Courts, Parents doe some∣times promise to marry their Children before they are in Being, as many do procure benefices and charges for the Children which they shall have: whence an eminent man of our times tooke occasion to say, That it was no marvell if great Ladies had hard labours, since their Children were Mitred and Armed before they came out of their Wombs. Such were the thoughts of Mieslas, who was so mad for a Son, onely to make him marry Rosuald's Daughter, his Ward, promi∣sing himselfe to obteine some spirituall Benefices for her Brother, and so make him renounce the inheritance, which he intended to draw in∣to his owne family by meanes of her marriage with his Son. Those that are lavish spenders, are glad to meet with Estates gotten to their hands, without any trouble or pain of theirs, for they naturally hate frugality. Mieslas who was of this humour, relyed absolutely upon the wealth of Rosuald, his predecessor in the Palatinate, with the Re∣venues and Interest of whose Estate he splendidly mainteined all his train, without touching the main stock, whereof he could not dispose without prejudice to his Wards. But because this Lamprey might in time slip out of his hand, he determined to take a Fig-leaf, that is, to contract an Alliance whereby he might gain the full possession of that mighty Estate, and make himself enter upon the labours and acquisi∣tions of his Predecessor. And in regard that the want of years in both Parties, might give occasion to the kindred of his Wards (already much displeased that he had ravished the Gardianship out of their hands) to endeavour to render invalid this Alliance, through the default of a mutuall consent, which is the principall knot of Matrimony, he obteined from the King a permission for them to marry in their Childhood, or at least to contract them so that the meanes could not be taken out of his possession. This was in agitation before Iphigenes was five yeares old: And Aretuza being not well pleased to see that a supposed Child should reap, before the season, that which she, as well as Mieslas, desired to preserve in their owne family, taking the opportunity of a whole year's time her Husband was absent, she sent the false Iphigenes home to his Mother, and took the reall one into her own tuition, giving Boleslaüs (who had brought her up from the Cradle) the conduct and govern∣ment of her, to the end that he should help to conceale that which she
would not have Mieslas know, and that he might see her learn all the recommendable qualities and exercises requisite for a Gentleman of such Extraction, (Permit that we speak of her hence forwards, as a Male, since her Mother will have it so, and her Father thinks her so.) Herein Aretuza was served as faithfully as she could desire in a busi∣ness sso ticklish and dangerous, that she ran no less hazard then of lo∣sing her own life, if Mieslas should discover the deceipt, who at his return found his Son so beautifull (for it was a little Angel) that he was quite ravished. But if his Body was agreeable, believe it, that ex∣teriour domicile lodged a Wit that surpassed many degrees any of that growth: which augmented exceedingly the Father's joy, who staying very little at home (being for the most part either visiting his Palatinate, or called to Court, or sent upon some Military expedition for defence of his Country) injoyed but seldome and short whiles the sight of his dear Son, who was the light and delight of his Soul. Iphigenes had scarce yet seen eight years in the World, when hee was marryed (God knows how) to Modestina, (Rosuald's Daughter, and Ward to Mieslas) who deserved that name for her incomparable Modesty; she was so much elder then Iphigenes, as that the Husband and Wife could make up eighteen years between them. Mieslas (being of a magnificent humour) invited the greatest part of the Nobi∣lity and Gentry of his Palatinate to the Wedding, which was celebrated with all the delights and greatest Pomp imaginable; But one Ceremo∣ny that he caused to be done, was very needless, which was to make a Venerable Matron lye betwixt the marryed Couple, lest they should approach each other in the Night. This Prudent caution of his would have made Aretuza laugh heartily, if her continuall apprehension, that the secret would be discovered, had not held her in the same transe that kept Damocles from eating at the Tyrant of Sicilie's table. Li∣ante, Modestina's onely Brother, was destined by Mieslas to be a Church-man, to the end that by that Spirituall and Leviticall Circum∣cision, his Sister might remain sole Inheritrix of Rosuald's Estate, and the whole Patrimony come to Iphigenes. This was the Palatine's plot; but Liante being high-sirited and of a Martiall disposition, took more delight in Arms, than at his Book, and was more ambitious of wearing a Sword than a Priest's Cassack. Nevertheless as Trees, which are young, may be bended which way the Master pleaseth; the same is commonly done with Children, who are like a blank paper or a piece of wax, whereon a man may make what impression he desireth.
At length the Benefice was procured, the Gown ready, the poor Youth made to put it on by threatnings, or by flatteries, although with a thousand repugnancies, a thousand heavy groans, and whole streams of tears. Besides his own Tyrannicall authority Mieslas made use of the King's name, after the custome of many great Persons, who a∣muse the People with this pretext, and cover all their passions under the robe of their Sovereign, whose word & power they abuse with im∣punity and insolence. Thus the two Wards were bred up with his two youngest Children, Iphigenes and Clemencia; for the four precedent Daughters, like the four monstruous Creatures of Ezechiel, he had commanded to be tyed to the Chariot of God's glory, (that is) had thrust them into Monasteries, there to draw the Ark; where we ill leave them, as it were, condemned to perpetuall imprisonment, to see the successes that arrived, upon the theater of the World, to the two Wards and Mieslas his two other Children, who make the four prin∣cipall parts in the Musick of this Narration. The married Couple (such as I have represented them to you) loved like Children; Liante suffered (as well as he could) the Yoke which he was forced yet to bear, but built a resolution within himself to shake it off, and fly our of his Cage as soon as Age had given him wings: Clemencia was designed by Mieslas to acquire him a Son in law of some great fortune, or at the worst, to keep her Sisters company in the Cloyster. These four Children being brought up together in one house, fed at the same Table, playing and spending the time alwaies together, lived like Brothers and Sisters with a pretty intelligence cor∣respondent to the innocence of their age and humours. Iphigenes by the industry of his Governour Boleslaüs lived untill eleven or twelve years old, in such simplicity, that he thought really he as a Boy, not conceiving that there was any other difference betwixt Male and Fe∣male than their manner of cloathing. Mieslas fearing that, if he should permit his Son too soon to consummate his Marriage, that might be prejudiciall to his health (seeing him of a complexion and stature more delicate than robust) appointed a Governess to over∣look Modestina, fitly named Perpetua, for she was perpetually at her back, casting an Argu's eye over all her actions, lest Iphigenes at any time should steal those Rights which Husbands have priviledge to challenge; But Nature had already provided other obstacles. They loved each other however very much, whether out of resemblance of their dispositions, or whether through that naturall inclination which
induceth us to affect those of the same Sex, as well as to be passionate for those of the contrary; Yet this affection betwixt Iphigenes and Modestina was rather friendship than love. But when Nature playing her part (which is so difficult a thing to hinder) carried Iphigenes fancy to delight in working and such Womanish amusements, busying him∣selfe very eagerly with Modestina and Clemencia; then his discreet Governour making him ashamed of such feminine employments, re∣claimed his thoughts to the practice of Manly actions, and confor∣mable to the Sex, of which the Innocent Youth yet thought himself, whose condition being more free, seemed to him far more desirable than that subjection wherein Maids and Women live. So that having an excellent wit, and a Body very active, though not robust, in every exercise whereunto he applyed himself, he became an admirable profici∣ent. It was nothing so in the vocation which Liante was compelled to embrace; for it is very difficult to become learned in despight of Minerva, and to garnish the Soul with the pretious furniture of know∣ledge and Sciences, if one have not some inclination to study, this young Noble-man being wrapped up (against his will) in an Ecclesi∣astick's Gown, meditated nothing but exercises contrary to that habit, Armes, Horses, Dancing, Hunting, and Warlike exploits were the onely delicious entertainments of his thoughts, all other discourse was irksome to his eares. This Constraint (under which Hee groaned, as if his Soul had been upon the Rack, and his Heart under the torture of a press) made him so melanchollie and pensive, that Hee seemed to traile the houres of his life with regret in an unpleasant Apprentiship. During this discontent, hee hatched a secret, but furious hatred against his inhu∣mane Guardian, considering him as the ravisher of his Estate, the Ty∣rant of his liberty, and the Oppressor of his free-Birth, projecting not onely to escape (as soon as hee could) but studying notorious reven∣ges for reparation of the injuries hee received. As for Clemencia she was yet so young, that the innocence of her years exempted her from Care or any passions of the mind; but it is with Youth as with a flo∣wer, It is no sooner budded, in a manner, but 'tis full blown, especi∣ally in Women, and chiefly in the Daughters of great Persons; for this Sex being naturally more subtile, they sooner do put off their Childishness than Men; besides those of high Births are brought up with such care & quaintness that their Wits are often ripe before the Sea∣son of their years requires it; whence it proceeds that they are sooner
susceptible of those Touches and Tyes of Affection which make young hearts seem to have past their Childhood. In the full ease of this sweet education Modestina modestly longed after the fruition of her beautifull, but as yet too young Husband; Her flames were so pure, and her desires so just, that (if Aretuza's deceipt had not abused her expctation) me thinks her wishes might without shame appear upon these leaves, whose Paper is less white then the Candor of those passions which shall be represented in this Volume. Iphigenes in like manner beginning to reflect upon himselfe, and who had no other propertie of Marble than the whiteness, grew into a pretty kind of indignation, that (being married) hee should be deprived of the possession of his Wife; and seeing himselfe passionately beloved of Modestina (who gave him all the civill testimonies of affection She could imagine) He must not only have renounced all Humanity, but have been altogether insensible, if hee had not been moved thereat; no charm being so powerfull to make one bee beloved, as vehemently to love. If whiles they were at their innocent childish sports they inter∣changed any kind embraces or affectionate words, their discours was soon broken by the presence of their two Argusses, Boleslaüs & Perpetua, whose thoughts (though different) arrived both at the same end, which was to hinder (that which never could be effected) the Consummation of their Marriage; Perpetua being encharged by Mieslas was very vi∣gilant to oppose it, lest his Son's health might be prejudiced thereby; and Boleslaüs having received the Command from Aretuza, was no less cir∣cumspect for feare her deceipt should bee discovered. Oh who could imagine any thing but purity in the innocent kisses and tender embrace∣ments of these two lovely Creatures, who like the twin kids in the Canticles did feed among the Lillies? Hee that would be scandalized to see two hen-doves join their bills, the union of the blooming Rose with the Morning dew, or the beams of the Sun when he licks the Chrystall of the Waters, might knit his brow at this innocent con∣junction, and exercise the malicious severity of his peevish melancholly, like a snaile that sullieth with is slimy train the delightfull enamell of the most curious flowers. If the agreeable Iphigenes bare much Love to his no less loving wife, Nature by waies as secret as unknown to him, bred in him as much affe∣ction towards his brother in-law Liante, and although his sullen and discontented humor rendred him very unsociable, and by consequent less amiable, it cannot be said how hee delighted in his conversation,
how much hee endeavoured to divert him. On the other side Liante (who looked upon Iphigenes, not as his Sister's Husband, but as his ene∣mie's Son, as the usurper of his Fortunes, and one whose greatness was established upon him ruines; Notwithstanding all these thoughts, whereby hee excited himself to Choller and Hatred like a Lyon that whets his fury by scourging his sides with his own tail) could not conceive any aversion against him, whether the sweetness of his dispo∣sition charmed him; whether his kindness, his complements, and his compliance to his humor won his heart; whether his beauty joyned with his gracefull deportment ravished him? or whether (which is most probable) the Sense bent his inclinations naturally towards this Object, for reasons which I had rather leave to conjecture than consign to this writing; Hee could not choose but love Iphigenes, although in appearance hee seemed much remiss, and rather sensible of his injuries than susceptible of affection. This cold reservedness increased Iphigenes heat (according to the disposition of that sex, who are commonly most passionate for those who do care least for them) insomuch that the more Linate seemed to sight him, the more hee redoubled his af∣fection and courtesies, as if hee had undertaken by the vigour of an ardent flame to dissolve the Isicles that environed his frozen Heart. At first Liante, whom Melanchollie had made mistrustfull, fancied that those marks of friendship were but feined, and proceeded from some artificiall Counsell or Plot to make him consent willingly to the dona∣tion of his Estate in favour of his Sister Modestina's marriage: But having perceived by the perseverance, that pur Inclination, not Interest or Pretensions, moved Iphigenes to affect him, Hee opened his heart more to him, complaining of the Rigour and Injustice of Mieslas, who forced him to embrace a vocation whereunto hee was no way disposed. This just discontent found in the soul of Iphigenes an humour so sweet∣ly compassionate, that although in all his discourse hee observed the respect which hee owed his Father, yet hee freely condemned his vio∣lence, protesting to Linate, what design soever Mieslas had in marry∣ing him with Modestina, that hee would never take of his inheritance any other Portion than what hee would please to give his Sister, jud∣ging it very unreasonable that a younger Sister should not only make (as she listed) a Portion for her elder, and only Brother, but deprive him absolutely of his Patrimony, in obedience to a superior Power that would carry all away by main force: That if the condition of an Ec∣clesiastick was not conformable to his humour, there was a possibility
to satisfie him, and content likewise the greedy pretensions of the Pa∣latine, by making a double alliance, and giving to him in marriage his Sister Clemencia, with so much of the Estate as belonged to him by his Father's death; being more willing for his own part to live a pri∣vate Gentleman, remitting his Fortune to his personall valour and the point of his Sword, reserving to himself only Hope (which was Alex∣ander's portion) than to possess unjustly another's means with continuall Remorses and internall Reproaches. These Reasons so conquered Li∣ante's heart, that thence-forwards all his affections hee thought too little for Iphigenes, whom hee began to consider as his Redeemer, as one who breaking his Iron bonds was to release him out of the hands of Pharaoh, and free him from the house of Bondage. Covetousness is a disease which reigns but little among young unex∣perienced People, who think (as the Proverb goes) that the World will never be at an end with them; The desire of pleasures, liberty and vanity, torments them infinitely more; All that opposes this Torrent, seems to turn the course of their Nature, and reduce them to despair. This made Liante (building an entire confidence on his Brother-in-law Iphigenes) declare unto him that the Regret which undermined him, and led him insensibly to the grave, was not so much for the loss of his Estate (which hee esteemed well bestowed, seeing it fell into so belo∣ved hands) as to see himself bound up in a Cassock, and ingaged in a manner of life which denyed him the use of Arms, whereunto his in∣clination called him, and whither all his Ambition tended; for War was his Element, where hee would rather choose to meet an honorable death, then lead a sweet, plentifull and peaceable life in the most rich and eminent Dignities of the Church, to the honors whereof hee never would pretend, not perceiving himself called thereunto like Aaron, that is, by a good and Royall way. Brother (replyed Iphigenes) take cou∣rage, suffer not Melanchollie to or'e-master or distemper you, preserve your self for generous enterprises; If you have a mind to take wing, and leave this nest of sluggishness, I have no less desire than you to seek in Militarie adventures the Laurells that grow in Mars's field; therefore let's goe to∣gether, let's steale away some favourable Night, and enter into the harvest of glorie in those places where Cowards dare not appear. These words revived the afflicted Liante, who was so over∣come by the inevitable charms of Iphigenes's Countenance and Conversation, that hee could live no more without him, being in his absence like a Marigold when the Sun hath left its Hori∣zon.
For as that flower doth close its leaves, when it is deprived of the aspect of that glorious Planet, so Liante, when seperated from Iphigenes, was overwhelmed with sadness, in such sort, that Hee seemed to bee rather a fensless Statue than a living Creature. Oh how it grieved him to bee divided in his exercises from him, to whom his heart was so united by inclination! To bee called to his studie was death to him, but if for divertisement his Master permitted him to see the riding of the great Horse, fencing, dancing, vaulting, and other exercises (which Iphigenes learned with as much care on his Parent's part, as dexteritie and aptness on his own) hee applyed his Spirits with such attention to them, that for a good while after hee could think on nothing else: if hee handled a foile, hee did it with such a grace, if hee Jumped, it was with such activeness, that it was easie to judge hee was as much in his Element at those recreations, as hee was out of it when his Spirits were tormented with the thorns of the Grammer. One time it hapned that complai∣ning to his dear Brother-in-law of the oruell Martyrdome which hee was made to suffer at his Book, and how he abhorred that long robe hee was compelled to wear, gret drops of tears, like so many Pearls, ran down his face from the Orient of his Eyes: This sight so mollified the tender heart of Iphigenes (who was of a Sex that hath tears at com∣mand) that mingling his with Liante's, hee fell on his face, and casting his arms about his neck, hee gave him manie loving, yet innocent em∣braces, which Liante received with such motions of joy and sweet de∣light, as surpass the tearms of any expression; then with an incomparable harmlessness they interchanged some kisses, wherein the malignitie of Nature put some difference by certain ardours, which are not found in those that pass betwixt persons of the same sex, both of them feeling themselves transported with a certain pleasure and ravishment, where∣of the Cause was yet unknown to them, but which proceeded from the treachery of Love, disguised under the appearance of Brotherly Friendship. Boleslaüs Seeing that this intimacie increased more and more betwixt the two Brothers, was afraid lest those Caresses and familiaritie should pass to such tearms as might discover to Iphigenes that of which (through his industrie and vigilancie) Hee was yet ignorant concerning himself. Aretuza never saw them together without unspeakable heart∣beatings & trembling, for shee thought her husband would never pardon her, if hee should come to the knowledg of the deceipt, whereby she had abused and amused him so long time; Besides she feared lest Iphigenes honour might bee interessed through Ignorance, though not Immode∣stie.
Insomuch by this perplexity of thoughts her Mind did feel no less convulsions and pangs, than a Woman in travell endureth in her Body. Whilest shee was in this trouble, the Union of the two Bro∣ther's hearts grew to such a perfection, that it seemed as if there had been but one Soul in their two Bodies; the same No, and the same Yea comming at the same instant out of their Mouths. You could never see the one without the other, if they were separated; their parting was never without tears. Modestina was already be∣come in a manner nothing with Iphigenes in comparison of Liante, and if shee had been of a jealous disposition, shee had cause enough to be∣lieve that her Brother withdrew the affection of her sweet Husband from her, but she imputed that rather to Childishness then any thing else, imagining that assoon as Iphigenes was advanced somewhat more towards Man-hood, she should easily turn the course of his inclina∣tions. Iphigenes in mean time having opened Liante's eyes for his Sister Cle∣mencia, was not contented to have put, or to have begun to put the fire into his brest, if he conveyed not all the flame into his Sister's heart, to whom hee gave such a Character of the vertues, gracefulness and per∣fections of his dear Liante, that in short time that spark grew to so furious a blaze, that it was neer reducing her to ashes; Hee had so framed the way to her Mind, that she was taken on a suddain, according to the Nature of certain subtile fire which takes sooner and more fierce∣ly in green wood than in drie, and whose first burning is alwaies the most violent. There was no comparison betwixt Clemeneia's passion and Liante's, for hee possessed far more attractive qualities to make him bee beloved of her, than shee had to captivate his liberty: Never∣theless Love being an Appetite which tends to the production of it's like, it is no wonder (as a Torch that's burning doth easily communi∣cate it's light to one that's out) if Love first begets another Love in the heart beloved, since to wish well doth almost of necessity challenge a reciprocall well-wishing. The Paleness, which soon took up its seat on Clementia's cheeks; The looks, messengers of her passions, which sent glances as suppliants to Liante's eyes; The delight shee seemed to receive in his coversation; The regret shee felt for his absence; The fear of discontenting him; The desire of pleasing him, and the exceeding contentment shee expressed in speaking of him; All these prettie Love∣symptomes spake her somewhat more than Child, and bringing her neer Woman-hood, changed the libertie of her Innocence into a Bon∣dage,
whose chains did seem so golden and so sweet to her, that shee thought shee never had tasted anie felicitie, but since the time shee had rendred her self a prey to the amiable Liante's charms. This Passion passing through her ear into her heart, & being ingraven by the tongue of Iphigenes, as with an instrument of flame, in the pro∣foundest of her thoughts, devoured or consumed her so, that shee was readie to die of the wound, if her kind Brother (who had kindled the fire) had not applyed the remedie, by assuring her of the reciprocall affection of him whom hee had perswaded her to love. Liante being acquainted herewith by Iphigenes (ingenious to hinder his own ad∣vantages) began by the gate of his Interest to receive some inclinations for Clemencia, conceiving that might bee a means for him to recover his Estate, and procure Honours: Afterwards seeing her so full of affection, that her too-much loving cast her into a languishing for him, hee answe∣red her desires more out of Compassion than Passion, or rather for Pittie than Affection: for indeed shee had more sweetness in her dis∣positions to mollifie, than Beautie in her face to attract the heart of the brave Liante. But the Conduct of these Amoretta's required more judgement and discretion than the small experience of such tender years could promise; They were to deceive so many eyes that pryed incessantly into their actions, that it was too hard a task, Love (like a fire) being difficult to be kept hid within the Bosom; And yet if any one perceived the least of this inteligence, all's lost, all these Designs will va∣nish into smoak, all these Projects flie away with the wind. Never∣theless Iphigenes had the dexteritie to manage this business with such circumspection, Liante had learnt to counterfeit with such subtilitie, and Clemencia (assured of her Lover's mutuall flame) could dissemble with so much constancie (that sex having a great empire over them∣selves when there is a necessitie of feining) that they practiced for a good while, this commerce of Love, without discovering but very weak sparkles of their fire. What cannot this Passion do when it refineth and subtilizeth thus such young Souls! Observe but how it brings to School again all the Prudence of hoarie heads. Modestina and Clemencia had but one Governess, but the two Bro∣thers-in-law had severall Conducters, in regard they were applyed to different exercises; yet neither Liante's Master, nor Perpetua perceived any thing of this secret correspondence betwixt Clemencia and the in∣tended Clergie-Man; so attentive was shee to hinder Iphigenes and
Modestina's private communication, and so handsomly did Liante with his ordinarie sadness hide from his Over-seer his affectionate pretensi∣ons. Only Boleslaüs, who watching like a Dragon, that never shuts his eyes, to preserve the secret of Iphigenes, observed that the great fami∣liarity 'twixt him and Liante, put in evident danger of beeing revealed all the Mysterie which hee had till then concealed with so much care; and fearing lest Liante rather than Modestina should discover what kind of man Iphigenes was, had a serious conference thereupon with Aretuza, who jumping with his opinion, thought it most expedient to single out Iphigenes, and declare unto her all the passages of her birth and education, to the end that seeing her self obliged under pain of lo∣sing her life (which punishment shee could not escape by discovering her self, no more than Aretuza) to keep this secret, and so to demean her self, that living with the libertie of Males, Shee might no way blemish the honour of her sex: Necessity (which is a very harsh Mistres) made them embrace his resolution, and it was no sooner concluded than put in execution. To tell you the astonishment that seized Iphigenes at the recitall of his own storie, would bee too difficult an enterprise; Hee thought that hee either dreamt, or was inchanted, and hardly could give credit to his ears and eyes. The joy that the Maydens had or might have re∣ceived, being transformed into Men (as some Histories make mention) may make us conceive some shadow of that sadness, which struck Iphi∣genes heart, when hee saw himself fallen from that degree of glorie, whereunto hee fancied the condition of being a Man, might have raised him. Hee could hardly refrain from falling out with those that had un∣seeled his eyes with the Medicine of their advertisement, and who had dispossessed him (like Trasimenes cured of his follie) of that sweet errour which contented him. Hee apprehended to be reduced to that, almost servile, Subjection of the female Sex, having by Custome made Nature of the libertie which Men enjoy. What? shall this Amazon change her Sword and Lance for a Needle and a Distaff? shall shee leave so many noble Exercises, wherein her generous Spirit took such pleasure, to sit constantly in a Chamber, tricking up her self, and consulting with her looking-glasses how to ensnare & inflame lover's hearts? What? in stead of having the Empire and command over Men, shall she be reformed to the submission and obedience, that is the only portion and propertie of Women? No, such a resolution is less supportable than death. Having been bred, the beginning of her daies, like a Man, shee will end them
like a Souldier, and seek in the bed of Honor an heroick Death, since shee hath lost the hope of a happy life. But this resolution is too extream; there's a remedie for every thing but dying. Aretuza flattered, and (as a Mother) conjured her shee-Son not to disclose himself. Boleslaüs, to second her, beseeched him to have pittie on his gray hairs, and not to hasten his journie to the grave, by paying with too unworthy an ingratitude his faithfull services, representing that upon him (who had been the Manager and Concealer of that De∣ceipt) Mieslas would chiefly discharge the burthen of his furie, if that Mysterie should come to his knowledg. Moreover, that the advertise∣ment they gave him, was not to oblige him to change neither manner of life nor habit, or to leave the exercises of Chivalrie, wherein his Courage and Activity gained the admiration of everie one: But quite contrarie they desired him to continue them with more eagerness, and to feine himself to bee a Man the more, the less hee knew it. That Time might produce some expedient means to gain his father's heart wihtout hazarding the lives of so manie persons, and in stead of Modestina (who could not bee his wife, by reason of those obstacles which nature had in∣terposed) hee might lawfully injoy Liante as a Husband, so that some one of their Children bare the Name and Arms of Mieslas, whereby his intention would not bee altogether frustrated in the Alliance which hee projected with the house of Rosuald. Judg how great the advnatages of Love are above the Sense of Friend∣ship. This last Clause which ingendred some Hope in Iphigenes to see herself united by marriage to the beloved Liante, effaced almost in an instant that incomparable sorrow that dejected her at first, seeing her self fallen from a quality so honourable and advnatagious, as that of Man. Insomuch that immediately changing the Love shee bare Modestina into a pure Friendship, and the entire Friendship shee had contracted with Liante, into a fervent Love, but vertuous, (since that it justified it self by the design of a chast Matrimony;) shee perso∣nated a Man better then ever, betook her self to her Military execises again with more eagerness, & looking upon Liante with other eyes than of a Brother-in-law, Shee treated him with more reservedness, deducting somewhat from the liberty of a Man, to add to the moderation of a Virgin, to whom Pudicity ought to be more precious than Life. O how much did shee repent her possessing Clemencia with so much Love for Liante, whereby shee had made her Sister her Rival, and kindled a fire which shee ought rather to have quencht, and which thence-forwards
shee promised her self to smother by all the industrie her invention could suggest. As for Modestina (whose friendship obliged her to a re∣ciprocall affection) shee feined to be more passionate for her than ever, and the better to act the Husband, Shee made a shew of desiring with much ardour the possession of her wife, being by that time neer fifteen years of age. Perpetua wrote to Mieslas (then at Court) that shee should be con∣streined to suffer, what shee could no longer hinder, and that if Iphige∣nes would make use of Modestina as her Husband, Modestina had no less desire to serve him as his Wife. Mieslas who had desired nothing more than the accomplishment of that marriage, out of an odd fantasti∣call humor would not consent to the Consummation, but delayed it from day to day untill his return into Podolia. But being not able to obtein leave from the King (who finding him very fit for the mana∣ging great affairs, had every day some new imployment for him) Hee bethought himself to send for his Son to the Court, (which is the Thea∣ter of young Nobility,) where hee would present him to the King, and make him appear according to his quality. This Command somewhat troubled Aretuza at the first; but Boleslaüs quickly perswaded her to condescend to that which shee could not oppose, promising her to watch so carefully over the deportments of his Nursling, that shee should receive neither reproach nor discontentment. This news was diversly received among our yuong Lovers, all their four hearts did feele at the same instant very different assualts. For Modestina pressed with the just impatiences of a marriageable Virgin, that expects till the maturity of a too-tender husband makes her both Wife and Mother, could not endure to thik of losing the sight of her Angel like husband, who was more the life of her Soul, then her Soul the life of her Body. To register her Sighs, her Groans, and her Tears, were no more easie than to number the puffs of winde in Autumn, the parching minutes of Summer, and the drops of rain in Winter. How Modest soever shee was in heart, as well as by name, her exceeding Love turning to Folly, and that Folly into Rage and Despair, made her commit Immodesties, which could be excused by nothing but the qua∣lities of Wife and Lover. Iphigenes seeing her in this condition, so de∣plorable, that it seemed the stroak of Death had been more favoura∣ble to her, than to see her self deprived of the light of his eyes, and plunged in the darkness of the Eclipse of that detested Absence, was touched with such tender resentments of sorrow, that Hee had much
ado by falling in a Traunce to keep himself from discovering that in his body there was a womanish weakness hidden under the habit of a Man. But this affection of compassion was nothing in comparison of the torment which shee felt, when shee came to think of her Separation from Liante: For since shee had the knowledge of her self, having put (as it were) a bar betwixt those familiarities and privacies with him that might have hurt, or any way blemished her honour, by this restricti∣on her smart was become more painfull, and the fire of her brest (like that in a narrow fornace) was rendred the more ardent, the more it was supprest. All her fear was, that the ignorance of her Sex, where∣in Shee must leave Liante, and the continuall presence of Clemencia, in whose affection Shee had ingaged him, with the help of her absence, would ravish from her that heart, which was the aym of all her pre∣tentions, & the golden Fleece whereunto aspired her most desired Con∣quests. Clemencia (who remained at home with no less passion for Liante, than Iphigenes carried with her to Court, yet covered the Coals of her desire with the ashes of Discretion & Silence) was in an extream pain for the absence of her Brother, in whom Shee lost a faithfull in∣terpreter of her thoughts: Yet promising her self to supply that want with the Pen, which should serve to convey her conceptions to him, and likewise his to her, Shee was the less afflicted for his depar∣ture. But the grief of the disconsolate Liante, was not so easily pacified; for feeling himself bound to Iphigenes with bonds which hee could not comprehend, and such strong ones as could not bee broken, hee did like the Cimmerians, who cry and groan when the Sun leaves their Countrie, as if theywere never to see it any more: Hee felt his very bowells rend within him at this Seperation: And as Rebecca, who had so much desired to be a Mother, repented her of her wish when She felt the pains that her two Children strugling together in her womb did make her suffer: So Liante could almost have wished that hee had never seen, nor loved Iphigenes, since that sweet Friendship produced so cruel a tor∣ment. And as those who are troubled with worms, which ingender in the head or th' Entrails, endure strange indispositions, without knowing the cause that doth afflict them; So this young Gentleman feeling that Viper, Love, which gnawed his heart under the appearance of Friend∣ship, did suffer a far more penetrating smart for his being parted from that beloved Object, than any one is accustomed to feel for the
absence of a friend. For Friendship doth kindle in the Soule a fire more sober and moderate than Love, whose flames are more fierce and pain∣full. Was it not enough (said hee within himselfe) that wee were separated in conditions and exercises, without dividing by such a distance those whose hearts are so united, that they are as the Unitie it self? To whom shall I have recourse hence-forwards in my discontents? Who shall se∣lace mee in my sadnesses? Who shall support and revive my decayed hopes? O my dear Brother, you are my onely stay, my second Soul, the light of mine Eyes; Absent from you, I shall never see the day more without pain; and the life (if it may be called life) that I shall lead, will be a continuall pu∣nishment to mee. Yet if I might bee but suffered to follow you, I should esteem my self too happie; but I am born under too unfortunate a Planet, to be otherwise than persecuted to the extremitie by Disasters. Would to God there were no other obstacle than my passlng over all the interest I pretend in my Father's Estate, according to the covetous pretensions of Mieslas, and that I might injoy the felicity but to wait on you as your servant; Indeed I prefer the meanest condition about your person before all the riches of the Earth, that sweet servitude before any Liberty. O Mieslas! why cannot you read my thoughts? why can you not see my intentions? I doe not think you so void of Humanity, as to keep mee any longer in this tortune, if you knew my heart. These Complaints recall to my remembrance the fable of the con∣testation betwixt the Sun and Boreas, which should first make the Tra∣veller put off his Cloak; at last the one did by the gentle heat of his rayes, what the other could not accomplish with his impetuous bluste∣ring. The Poets have reason to feine, and their cozen-germans the Pain∣ters, to picture Love naked, since his Power is far more prevalent to make a man strip himself of his Estate than are Cruelty and Rigor. But if I should stand to relate all the discourses of these young Lovers, I should never get out of this Farewell. To conclude, they were torn by Violence out of each other's Arms, and the streams that ran from all their Eyes, did make a little Ocean of Tears, yet this deluge could not drown all their Sorrows. I could borrow some pensills of the Poets to give the Colours to this Departure, were I not unwilling to retard the greedy curiosity of the Reader, who desires to be speedily informed of the good and evill adventures of Iphigenes.
The second Book. ARGUMENT. The Character of Iphigenes: His Reception at the Court. His Favour with the King and Queen. The Envie and unworthiness of Augustus the Lithuanian: His Banishment from the Court. The Princess Re∣spicia's affection to Iphigenes: Her Policie to obtein her Desires, and dissolve the Marriage betwixt Iphigenes and Modestina. Modestina's complaints against the Court-Ladie's unjust attempts to bereave her of her beloved Husband. Mieslas's indeavours to perswade Iphigenes to repudiate Modestina in favour of the Princess Respicia's propositions. Iphigenes's answer, and deportment towards Respicia. The Jealousie of Stanislas Palatine of Uratislau, and his plot against Iphigenes. IPHIGENES was no sooner arrived at the Court, with an equipage suteable to the humour and quality of his Father, but the Eyes of all the Courtiers and Ladies were fixt upon this new Sun, which rising upon the Ho∣rizon of that Climat, filled it with the splendor of his Rayes, casting such fiery glances, and so penetrating a light, that it was hard for any (if not blind) to avoid the scorching of his presence. The Spring is not adorned with so many flowers, nor Titan's glorious Orb with so many beams, as hee displayed Beauties and attractive Graces: All his Actions, his looks, his words, his de∣portments, his exercises, were as many Charms that inchanted the hearts of all those that did contemplate him. The attribute of Beauti∣full was presently given him by the common consent of both Gentle∣men and Ladies, and hee was usually called The beautifull Podolian. To see him and to bee in love with him were two things that followed each other, as the Lightning and Thunder are observed to do: And those that knew him but by reputation only cherished his Me∣mory,
for besides his dexteritie in those Exercifes, which Courtiers hold for vertues, as Singing, Dancing, Vaulting, Managing a horse with activitie and a grace, handling well his Arms, and having a good Garb, His Language was so smooth, his Disposition so sweet, his Com∣pliments so indeering, his Conversation so winning (especially amongst the Ladies) his Modestie so remarkable, his Chastitie, so extraordinarie in a Courtier, his Discretion so exquisite, his Courage so undaunted, his Tongue so moderate, his Gesture so well composed, his Generosity so splendid, his Liberality so magnificent, such Decency in his apparell, a Sternness in his Armour, so sweetly fierce, that it seemed as if Venus having taken possession of his Face, and Mars of his Heart, and the Fe∣rocity of the one, being tempered with the Gentleness of the other, had both conspired to give him the Empire over all hearts either by Force or Love. It cannot bee imagined what ravage his beautifull face made in the Ladie's brests, every one took him for an Angell descended from Heaven to set on fire all the daughters of Men; and what was most of all admired, was, to see, that this glorious Starre, like the Sunne, ingendred a thousand flames, without having in himself, or (at least) without making shew of any degree of heat, giving what he had not (that is) Love. There was during the winter (which is extremely rigorous in Polonia) a new disease so universally catching, that hardly any body did escape its malignity, it was called there the COKE∣LVCHE: And in regard there were very few Ladies at Court that had not particular inclinations for Iphigenes, and that spake not of him in tearms of admiration, a Wit of the Times called him the COKELVCHE of the Court. To this purpose a certain Lady said, That to be in love with him was a thing indispensable: Another answered a Gentleman that seemed to wonder at the so generall passions for this young Noble-man, saying, I believe you are either without Heart or Eyes. Hee was the Rock where their minds suffered shipwrack, few going with curiosity towards this Angelicall Object, but returned with a wound, or at least with some distemper. How many young Ladies longed hee were their husband! how many Fathers and Mothers de∣sired him for their Son-in-law! When it was known that Mieslas had already married him to Modestina, what sorrow was exprest! how many great and more advantageous matches were offred him, which made the greedy Father oft repent his hastiness, and he grew so proud to see his Son so well beloved, and so highly esteemed, that he swam in
satisfaction. And indeed hee that will fancy a most exquisite feminine beauty, a delicate white complexion, sweetly mixed with a lovely red, lively and sparkling Eys, hair like Silk, and the rest of those attracti∣ons that accompany that perfection which an Antient called an agree∣able Tyranny, and all this at the age of fifteen or sixteen years under a man's habit (who cannot have so little beauty but 'tis much for that Sex) will find nothing strange of all that hath been said. Oh! how could I extend this History if I should ingage my Pen to the recitall of the several evenements that befell him upon this Account! That specious form (which seemed to have been given him expressly to ruinate the pudicity of the most determinate and severe preservers of their honour) how many assaults and strange attempts did it make him suffer from those Ladies that thought him of a contrary Sex! But I fear in publishing the impudence of those shameless Souls, to call the bashfull blood into more modest Faces, who cannot endure any thing, I will not say of Dishonesty (for I should disclaim my Pen if it were tainted with any impure Relation) but only tending to wanton∣ness. The Wits of the Court, whose invention is very pregnant in such occurrences, know already more then I am able to imagine: others that are more simple shall remain (by my consent) in the commendable ignorance of such malicious practices. Whilest these inconsiderate Lovers try in vain to draw into their Nets him who hath caught their Hearts, and who takes pleasure in seeing them burn, like Flies, at the Fire of his eyes, Hee doth like those Engineers, who cast their artificiall fires all about, without receiving any dammage in their own persons; or like those Fountaineers, who shewing curious Water-works and Grotta's, where a thousand little Pipes cast water on every side, set themselves in some known place where they remain dry, whilst every one else is wetted to the skin. And as the secure Shepheards standing to feed their flocks upon some eminent Hills neer the Sea-side, behold from those firm and solid heights the tossing and agitation of Ships beaten with stormy weather: So did Hee contemplate, in the weakness of those spirits, so passionately enam∣ored of him, the imbecillity of a Sex, which bred in him rather Pity than Envy, and Compassion rather than Love. It was not on that side that Hee feared being surprised, his naturall impotency rendring him most potent to resist all those temptations. On the other side the at∣tractive graces display'd in the countenances of so many brave Cava∣liers (wherewith the Court was as glittering as the Heaven is with
Stars in a cleer night) moved him as little; An honorable desire of glory and the preservation of his chastity being a powerfull bridle a∣gainst the assaults and surprises of the Sense; besides that his heart was so prepossest with love for Liante, that there was no room left to place any other Object: Moreover his humor was so averse to vice and riotous deboshing (which hee saw was the continuall practice of dis∣solute companions) that their excesses made him rather shun than follow them, rather abhor the lewdness of their deportments, than fancy the handsomness of their persons; pitying rather than envying their conditions: whereas on the contrary his vertue and handsomness were more envyed than pitied by them. Yea, for as the Cantharides, those stinking and venemous Flies, do not settle but upon the most de∣licate Flowers; So those young Courtiers were grown mischievously jealous, because this new comer with his eminent beauty accompanied with sweet dispositions, and divers recommendable parts, came to do them the same affront as the Sun doth every morning to the meaner lights of Heaven, and ravished from them the hearts of all the Ladies, from whom they could no more receive any countenance, but slights. And, jealousie being a fire, which hapning to kindle in an human soul, hindreth it (by reason of the vapors which it excites) from seeing the Sun of reason, they conspired all together against Iphigenes, and plotted how to ingage him in severall quarrells. Already divers wicked Designs were layd to intrap his innocence, but the Preserver of the vertuous still delivered him: for the Courtiers (more changeable than the Sea or the Moon, accommodating them∣selves to the humour of the Times, more than the Fish, called the Po∣lypus, doth to the colour of the Rocks where it fastens) have no other rule for their Hatred, or their Love, than their interest, and the measure of this Interest is the Humour of their Prince. Although those who are most in the King's favour, are commonly the object of the People's ha∣tred; yet the dissembling complacency of the Court obligeth those, who follow its wind and tyde, to applaud those whom the Sovereign affects, notwithstanding they hate them in their hearts, or at least do not esteem them. Beauty accompanied with a comely carriage is a Let∣ter of admission, which openeth the Cabinet and Heart of Kings; for they are but Men as well as others, and the more subject to pas∣sions because elevated to an higher degree of Eminence, by the same reason that the tallest Cedars suffer most by the wind's impetuousi∣ty, and the loftiest Towers feel oftnest the effects of Thunder
and Lightning. And as the Elephants may be most easily wounded in the flank, which is the tenderest part in their unweildy bodies (as severall examples witness:) so great Persons are no where so weak, nor so easily to be surprised by any thing as by passinate affections, this being their generall defect. And indeed it were a difficult matter for those, who are beloved (I should rather say) served, adored and admired of so many deserving persons as are still about them, not to be sweetly enforced to render themselves to the particular affection of some one; whence it follows that Favour is the inseparable shadow of Royalty. For if the Sun, that lamp of the Universe, which from his Heavenly Chariot sees all things upon Earth, looks with another eye (amongst the flowers of a Garden-plot) upon the Marigold, and all other yellow flowers, which seem to be decked with the Gold of is splendent Rayes, and by that yellow livery do testifie the love they bear that glorious Luminary. So Kings who are the light of the World, and the Suns of the Earth, since 'tis from them that the most noble persons of a State do borrow their lustre, although they do ex∣tend their paternall care to all their subjects, as fathers of their People; yet in this generall solicitude they apply their Eyes and Ears to some particular servants, who by that means get ground in the territory of their hearts, and do rule the spirits of their Kings by the sweetness of friendship, as the Kings by the force of authority do reign over the Provinces under their subjection. And above all, Beauty hath the pro∣perty to establish her Empire with such polite and quaint indeerments, that whereas all other subjection is irksom, here Liberty is odious, and Chains amiable, every one contributing to bring himself into this tral∣dom: And how vain-glorious soever it be, it cannot exact from the humility and submission of its adorers such homages as those that are rendered to it by voluntary Sacrifices; thousands fall at its right hand, ten thousands at its left, all at its feet, as being the most visible Ray of the Divinity upon Earth. It was this Beauty, seated in Iphigenes countenance as on a Throne of Ivory, that framed his way, by the eyes, into the King's affection. And if the Iron, though heavy and insensible, and a Straw, that is light and without reason, do by a naturall inclination turn and make towards the Load-stone and Amber; if the Load-stone that hath touched Iron, doth communicate unto it that secret property of standing alwayes towards the Antartick Pole; if the Vines love the shadow of Olive Trees, and the other Fishes delight to follow the
Dolphin, without any other knowledge than the force of instinct: Who can deny that Man, whose senses are inclined to evill from the begin∣ning, may be carried away by Concupiscence, being allured and some∣times drawn and ravished by the objects? That monstrous vice, the abortive of Nature and Hell, which diffames the Orientall and the Southern parts, is hardly known in the Occidentall and Septentrionall Regions; at least if it be frequent there, it is very rare here; if there it be a vulgar and popular Malady, here it seem's to infect none but great persons. I am not the only Man that esteems Courts to be the recep∣tacles of Iniquity, the Theaters of Licenciousness as well as of Vanity, the Schools of Dissolution and Riot; for since Piety is excluded thence, ac∣cording to the saying of an Antient Writer, if the shades of Impiety reign there, in the place of that Light, what can one imagine to be practised there, but the deeds of Darkness? Therefore I shall not stick to say, that Asmodeus (that unclean spirit which suggests to animall Creatures the brutall desires of the flesh, whom the Pagans and Poëts made a Deity under the name of the Goddess of Cypru's Son) cast, like another Sinon into Troy, such Grecian fires into the sulphurous hearts of the Courtiers, that divers of them beholding with too much atten∣tion the perfections of Iphigenes, and thinking him of a Sex conform∣able to his habit, entertained such base desires as ought not to enter into any thought, much less bee repeated. Thereupon som of them to accomplish their execrable pretentions, used means to seduce the young Gentleman to the licentious frequentation of loose Women; thereby (one vice calling on another) to draw him into more enormous abominations. Here I might raise the trophy of our young Gallant's chastity with lines that would deserve to be exempted from Oblivion: But because the multitude of weak spirits, as well as that of the ill-advised, exceeds the number of the strong and prudent, not to offend the infirmity of those, wee will wean the ability of these. For as the light of the Sun is injurious to certain Eyes; So the truth is not always well received by all discreet hearers. But to believe that such horrible Imaginations could harbour in the Kings Brest, I should hold it a blasphemy to think it, yet they are Mortalls environed with frailties, and subject to failings: And who knows if any secret Malignity made the King conjecture, that under Iphigenes clothes was something more than Man? however his affection never went beyond the limits reserved to Moesty. But who can hinder Detraction (which carries the venim of Asps upon the lips)
from spreading its poyson upon the purest innocence? Persons which are seated in the highest place upon the World's Theater, are com∣monly the subjects of obloquies, as the Butts and Blanks of Ca∣lumnie. The King, besides the merits of Mieslas, and the remembrance of his former services, saw joyned with a ravishing presence such re∣markable vertues and perfections in his Son, that as a just, prudent and liberall Prince, hee could do no less than shew the esteem hee made of so many rare qualities, which rendred him the spectacle and marvell of his Court. And as this life is a perpetuall Game, full of contrarieties and vicissitudes, the disgrace and falling of one being the advantage and raising of another; as in Heaven when some Stars rise upon the Horizon, others at the same time set; when some are seen, others are hid, it being impossible that all should appear to us at once: So at the Court severall Favorites are incompatible, they strive to thrust each other out of their Prince's affection. This drew much envy and many quarrells upon the brave Iphigenes, but in all these contestations Hee came off with such good success and signs of courage, that as the files do polish and smooth the Iron by biting it, and the waters of the Deluge did raise the Ark by falling upon it; so these malicious op∣positions did increase the value and reputation of Iphigenes. Inso∣much that the King, whose solid Judgment was able perfectly to distinguish the Precious from the Vile, and knew what extreme diffe∣rence there was betwixt the Merit of that vertuous Gentleman, and the Demerits of so many others of his age (who lost themselves in game∣ing and deboistness) did an act worthy of so great a Prince to seat his favour in so good a place, withdrawing it from those who had not purchased his countenance by Desert but Art, imitating those Women that paint, who make borrowed and supposed Beauties be beloved in them, rather than Naturall. This transported with a desperate fury a yong Noble-man, named Augustus, Son to the Palatine of Vilne in Lithuania. Hee having been bred Page to the King, had found the means so to insinuate himself into His Majestie's favour, that hee had obteined a great Estate, of his gift, and a considerable charge in the Court, whereby hee was be∣come so haughty and insolent, that his humor was insupportable. Seeing then that Iphigenes entring into Grace was likely to cause his Ruine, and that the King turning his Eyes from him, and fixing them on this new Object, hee should bee supplanted; there was no sort of Bravado's
and Treacheries that hee left unattempted to provoke the patience of our innocent Cavalier: But his Discretion augmenting the Arrogance of the Lithuanian, whose abuses drew one day some language from Iphigenes mouth, which gave him to understand that hee feared his Biting no more than his Barking. His frowns and threats, (lightning which presaged a tempest neer at hand) were cause that the King in∣terposing his Authority, cut off this Contestation in the root, by com∣manding Augustus to contein himself within the bounds of his devoir, or quit the Court. This put him into an excessive rage, judging by this Soverign Oracle, which way the King's Heart inclin'd. Envy which murthereth low spirits, cruelly gnawed this Lithuanian's; but because this vice is so ridiculous, that it dares not shew it self, hee bit his bridle in silence, feeling his heart pierced with a thousand pricks, to see that his Competitor, high in the King's favour, acquired every day new honours, and that, (as when a pretious balsome is spilt) the good odour of his reputation dilated it self into all parts. Iphigenes was never mentioned but with tearms of high commendation, as not seen with∣out astonishment. If his Face was the glory and delight of those Eyes that beheld him, his Actions full of vertue and winning gracefulness purhcased him the quality (so rare in this age) not only of Irreprehen∣sible, but of the most accomplisht of Gentlemen. Hereupon Envy, who is sick at other men's well being, made Augustus feel such torment in his mind, as none of all those invented by the barbarous Tyrants men∣tioned in Histories could parallel. A just Vice in the unjust hatred it bears to Vertue, since it serves to torture him that gives it admittance into his soul. But the mischief is, that as the winds inclosed a long time within the bowells of the Earth, at length burst out with horrible Eart quakes that dis-joyn the frame of nature: So the furies of Envy suppress'd a good while with silence, most commonly disclose themselves all at once by most tragicall successes. In all honorable Exercises wherein yong Gentlemen use to shew their activity and skill, Iphigenes always had the better. There were no Rings but for his Courses, so exactly could hee command his Horse and Lance; At the tiltings his gracefull garb ravished all the specta∣tors; At dancings there were no Eyes but for him. And as the King's bountry to him was very great, his Expences, Sumptuousness, Liber∣ality and Magnificence increased proportionably; No body was so handsomly dressed, so richly attired, so well attended, so well moun∣ted, so well accompanied as hee, and all this with so much judgement
that it rendred his pomp doubly admirable. Hee was no Gamester at all, neither was hee guilty of running into any unnecessary Excesses, by which means hee was the abler to appear with the Nobler train. Mieslas ravisht with the Vertues and prudent Conduct of his Son, be∣came more reserved and moderate in his expences, imitating him as much as might be possible; and although his credit was great with the King, it was nothing in comparison of his Son's; For without entring into the quality of importunate (being very circumspect in managing his Master's favour) Hee alwayes received of the King more than hee demanded, conteining himself within the compass of what hee might or ought to do, if hee had been a greedy seeker of his own advan∣tage: But as the Shadow follows those that fly it, so doth Prosperity those that look not after it; In less than one year's time the King gave him a whole County with some Offices of Castellains, and destined him also for a Palatinate, assoon as Age had furnished him with Expe∣rience and Authority requisite. If Fathers were susceptible of Jea∣lousie against their Children, Mieslas had reason enough to conceive some against his Son, seeing the rarity of his beauty and discretion had thrust into his Hands in an instant a Fortune, which his long services could not attain; (but it is not with her as with a Goale, where those that run fastest come the soonest at it:) Hee was very glad to be surmounted in that by Iphignes, after the custom of most Parents, who desre nothing more than to see their Children higher and more advanced in the World than themselves. The Queen, a vertuous and wise Princess, and who saw but with the King her Husband's Eyes, could not but esteem him whom shee saw His Majesty so highly prize, and cherish, and who possessed so great a share in his Favour. For it is not seldom seen in Courts that Favo∣rites have more power in effect, though not so much state in appea∣rance, than the Queens, and that to accomplish their desires in some cases, these are glad to have recourse to their mediation. In such a con∣dition a man had need have a good brain not to be made drunk with the fuming vapors of Favour and a strong sight, not to be dazled with the splendor of so great a Light: for what Soul is there so re∣served that would not feele it self puff't up, at least somewhat more than glad, at such a height of Fortune, as rendreth in some sort in∣ferior, a person who acknowledgeth no Superior but God? It was in this particular that Iphigenes made chiefly appear the Excellency of his Wisdom, demeaning himself with such moderation and humility
towards the Queen, that hee was in a no less degree of favour with her than with the King, so far forth as to receive many considerable pre∣sents from her hand, not without some murmuring of the Ladies about her person, who wondered to see her bestow such liberalities upon a Man, contrary to her custom, and in their opinion, somewhat beyond Decency. But shee conforming her self to her Husband's hu∣mour, did onely shew by this imitation how much shee honored the King, seeing it was enough that Hee esteemed any one, to make her shew him the like respect and Countenance. Indeed it is probable, if shee had known all the mystery, or if the unbridled lusts of the Ori∣entalls could fall into the imagination of the Septentrionalls, that Jea∣lousie might have possest her with some ill thoughts of Iphigenes. But the incomparable Chastity and Modesty that apeared in all his pro∣ceedings, begat him so admirable an Opinion, that all the Men in the Court (and indeed wihout danger) would freely have trusted all their Wives to his keeping, as if hee had been the Prince of the grand Signor's Eunuches. There was never seen a Youth so discreet, a Beau∣ty so chast, a Favorite so courteous, a Greatness so affable, a For∣tune so reserved, an Elevation so moderate, a great Courage so humble, a Generosity so judicious; Hee was the Spectacle of astonishment, the Miracle of Grace, the Ornament of Nature, the Glory of his Country, the Joy of those that had dependance on him, the Honor of his Linage, and we may add the Flower of Polonia, the Eye of the Court, the Orient of Vertues, and the Occident of Vice. At all the Justs and Turnaments made for publick rejoycings, where Iphigenes was of the answering Party, (and alwayes Conqueror) Au∣gustus who studied nothing more than to meet with some occasion to do him an affront or mischief, made this Opportunity the Baud of his base Design, like those Traytors who in a Salve of Infantry at a Trayning (where they should use none but Powder) do charge their Muskets with Bullets, to shoot at some particular Enemies. For wheres all Gentlemen did run with but slight Arms, because their Lances were only pegg'd purposely that they might break in pieces at the least touch, that exercise, having no other end than to delight the Spectators; Augustus being to run against Iphigenes furnished himself with a Lance plated with Iron and ground very sharp, intending to pierce him through, or at least to make him so rudely measure the ground with his Body that hee should serve for a laughing-stock to all that saw him. But the Powers who love Justice, hate Iniquity,
and above all do abhor Traytors, turned this malicious desire upon Augustus own head; For, missing his Rest his Lance slided along the smooth guilded Arms of his Adversary, who not failing of his aym, broke his all to shivers with a very becoming grace; but one of the splinters falling with the point downwards pierced Augustus thigh, which put him to an intolerable pain. The furious Lithuanian seeing his blood, was inraged with Choler that hee was hurt, and no less mad for Spight that hee had mist his thrust; Insomuch that without consi∣dering that his wound proceeded from Accident and not from Iphi∣genes will, as if hee had been highly offended in his honour, hee re∣turned with full career, his Sword drawn, to revenge that affront upon Iphigenes; who protesting innocence, and declaring that hee was sorry for that chance, hee cryed out to him to draw or hee would kill him, vomiting against him a thousand injurious reproaches not becoming the mouth of a Cavalier. Iphigenes who was not used to such caresses, put himself in a posture to receive him and make him feel the punishment of his Arrogance. Augustus came full speed with his Sword's point towards Iphigenes to run him through, or bear him to the ground; But Iphigenes, who had more sleight than strength, putting by that thrust, charged him so home, that of a furious Assailant he had enough to do to prove himself a good Defendant. The King, who with the Queen was present at this shew, seeing this Quarrell begun by Augustus, who was the Aggressor, commanded them to give over fighting. But the inraged Lithuanian refused, saying, the King was Master of his Estate and Life, not of his Honour, which hee fancied was then highly interessed. This proud reply so incensed the King, that hee commanded his Guards to cut him in peices presently; mean time the Combat continued, and notwithstanding diverse Cavalier's intervening to hinder them, Augustus being mounted upon a Horse as full of fire as his Master of fury, made himself passage in desight of all those that indeavoured to separate them: And being even ready to fall, like a hasty storm, upon his Adversary with a quick back-blow the dexterous Iphigenes slit the nostrills of his Courser, who foaming and breathing fire out of his mouth, reared up on end and flung so des∣perately with pain, that casting his Rider with his heels upwards, added to the hurt upon his Thigh, the breaking in pieces of a Leg. Iphigenes nimbly leaping from his Ginet to give Augustus the con∣tentment to fight on foot also (though hee could have made his Horse passing and repassing trample out his guts) found him in no conditi∣on
to contend; So, without taking any other advantage than that of ma∣king him deliver his Sword, hee gave him his life before all that Assem∣bly, notwithstanding the King gave order he should bee kill'd for having disobeyed his Command. This done, Iphigenes prostrated himself be∣fore his Majesty; ceasing not to supplicate untill he had changed his Indignation into Clemencio, and obteined Life for him who would have procured his Death. Augustus was carried to his own house, loaded with as much infamy and shame, as Iphigenes reurned covered with the Laurells of triumph and glory: By chance one of his friends taking up Augustus Lance, found it made purposely to doe mischief, being very strongly plated with Iron and sharp-pointed, sufficient evi∣dence of his unworthy intentions; This being told the King, hee ba∣nished him the Court for ever, notwithstanding Iphigenes employed all the credit hee had to procure his pardon. The Sun is never without Shadows, nor Vertue free from Envy: yet among so many thorns some flowers may bee gathered. Iphigenes had so much quaintness and such sources of polite subtilities in his brain, was so dexterous and happy in captivating hearts, that he was called the Ma∣ster of that Art. It is true that shadows do still accompany the Sun, but they are very short, when hee is Elevated to his Apogee, or the ver∣ticall point of the Horizon. So Iphigenes being arrived at the highest degree of favour, and (which is very rare) as pretious in the King, his Master's sight, as in the Queen, his Mistresse's, in this Zenith of Ho∣nour hee contemned the vaine vapors of Envy, seeing, as it were from the top of a lofty mountain, the rowling Thunder grumble, and the stormy clowds burst under his feet. There are few that haunt Favou∣rites but either very powerfull or inconsiderable persons. For if the Royalty bee for them, is it not a Giant-like presumption to offer to ap∣proach that Greatness? If the Gods of the Earth bee for them, who can surmount, nay, who dares contradict them? Yet as wee see, al∣though the glory of the World's Eye bee never so bright, the least Atomes and exhalations (like moats) do rise to oppose and blemish it, but are as soon deprest as raised, and no sooner gathered together than dissolved: So do presumptuous spirits revolt and combine sometimes against the Eldest Sons of Fortune; but their fruitless indeavours im∣mediately do make appear the weakness, as well as the baseness of their hearts, swollen and pufft up with Vanity, rather than filled with Cou∣rage. Such was Augustus, such approved himself another Noble-man, named Polignotes, of whose vapouring and jealous Bravadoes I shall at
this present omit to make any further mention, esteeming it more to purpose, by mingling sweet with sower, to temper the animosities of these envious Antagonists, with the delicious amity of the innumerable friends, which Iphigenes had purchased by his most perfect Courtesie. This admirable knot of Friendship (which is the sweetest bond of hu∣mane Society) in its perfection is an Enemy to Multiplicity: A man may be Friendly to all, but should be Familiar with few, and in this Vertuous Familiarity consists that Communication, which giveth life and being to true Friendship. To establish an eminent Fortune and high favour, a man hath need, as of divers Supporters, of many Friends; But in regard Favour (no more than Love) can admit of no Corrivalls, it was Iphi∣genes industry sto to manage the good wills of those, that expressed any affection towards him, that making them participant of his Riches, hee reserved the King's favour intire to himself. Thus do those that make presents of Fruit, keeping the Tree and the Ground still in their own possession: Thus may one distribute Water, and allow their Neighbours part, and yet retain the Spring in its wonted place. Among others, of lower degree (I do not say for matter of quality, but affection) there were two particularly in favour with Iphigenes: One was a young Prince of Polonia, named Cassin, the other a Noble man of a very antient family known by the name of Pomeran; this was the Minion of his heart, and (as it were) the Favorite of the Favorite, for Hee loved with much tenderness the person of Iphigenes: The for∣mer (who cherished rather his greatness and quality, ardently embra∣cing whatsoever had reference to his Interest and Glory) was as the favorite of the Favor; like Hephestion and Craterus the two friends of Alexander the Great, whereof one loved him as Alexander, the other as King. Cassin and Pomeran were the two Arms and Eyes of our young Count, as those that applyed themselves more particularly to what con∣cerned him. Pomeran, being more disinteressed, considered nothing but the person of Iphigenes, for which Hee did feel passions, which would have been much more Violent, if hee had been as Skilfull to penetrate the secret of darkness, as Ignorance made him incurious. The Prince (who grasped at great Charges, and whose ambitious humour aymed at nothing but those Grandeurs, whereunto by his extraction hee justly might pretend, but could not yet arrive by reason of his too unripe age) accosted Iphigenes, as a Jacob's ladder, that hee might thereby clime to the top of his pretensions. His Mother (who shall likewise en∣ter
upon this stage, under the name of Respicia) brought him into the World before Shee could fully reckon the third luster of her age, her Husband (who had bee one of the highest rank in the Kingdome) having left her a widdow in her five and twentieth year; And although Shee was owner of Beauty enough to make her bee beloved, and in∣joyed an Estate that might invite the greatest in that Countrey to mar∣ry her, yet the affection Shee did bear to the memory of her deceased Husband, and the consideration Shee had of her two Children, made her remain almost ten years in a constant Widdowhood, breeding with all the splendour and care imaginable, those two pretious pledges of her former flames. However being one of the most consderable Ladies in the Court, and living in the height of delights (though then arrived at her five and thirtieth year) Shee found at length the death of her Li∣berty in the inevitable charms of Iphigenes Beauty. This COKELVCHE or Court-Vertigo had so turned her brain, that Shee forgot both the Idea of her Husband, the Affection to her Children, and the Care of her self, exposing her self to the hazard of being the table-talk through the whole World, to the disadvantage of that Honour, of whose preserva∣tion Shee had always thitherto made so exact a profession. Those Creatures that are signalized for the greatest Wiles, when they are taken, do display all their Shifts; so did this subtill-witted Lady, when Shee perceived her self tyed by the Heart with such delicious bands, that shee preferred this Servitude before her former Liberty. For, the better to dissemble her wound, the more shee felt the smart, of all the Ladies in the Court shee was observed to speak the seldomest and the least advantagiously of Iphigenes, suppressing all her passion with∣in her brest without suffering it to evaporate at the passage of her mouth but by very slight sparkles. But if shee said little shee thought the more, and fancied no mean projects to accomplish the design shee had to make her self lawfully his Wife. Widdows, who have learned in their Matrimoniall observances the secrets of pleasing Men, and how to intrap them, send glances from their Eyes so much the more at∣tractive, the less they are innocent; And as the most sparkling fire and hottest embers, are those which are cover'd with ashes; as the most shining flashes of Lightning are those which proceed from the blackest Clouds: So the kidnesses that come from under those great Veils, are generally the most attractive; those are the Fires that blaze in the midst of Water, when from Eyes destined to Tears are cast such speak∣ing looks. Yet all these artificiall affectations were Vainly employed by
this Princess to conquer or inveagle Iphigenes, whose Heart was no less susceptible of these flames, than his Body was capable of those legiti∣timate Embraces to which shee did aspire. However Iphigenes did very much esteem her person, but it was in that manner as hee could and ought, not as shee desired. This cautelous Student in Love's Politicks had learned particularly by Mieslas (the depth of whose thoughts shee had sounded by her sugred speeches) that the marriage of Iphigenes with Modestina was not consummated: Whereupon shee contrived a Plot, that will make appear the subtilty of a Wit refined by that Passion, which puts Invention into the simplest and most blockish brains. Shee, who had a conceit that Marriage consisted only in the use of the Bodies, never considering that the Union of the Hearts and the con∣sentment of the Wills, are the materialls whereof if formed the Essence of Matrimony, flattered her self that shee should easily disannull or untie that knot betwixt Iphigenes and Modestina, and put her self in Modestina's place; But fearing lest a repulse should make her the fable of the Court, and expose her to the people's scorn, shee thought best to bring her Daughter into play, and propose her to Mieslas for Iphigenes with such advantages as were neither in the Fortune nor person of Modestina. This Daughter of her's, named Simphoroza, was yet very young, but did promise in the Aurora of her age great perfections of Beauty at her Noon. The Palatine of Podolia who devoured in his gree∣dy thoughts all those high proffers of the Princess Respicia, (believing that Rosuald's Estate would however be intirely his own, by making Liante imbrace an Ecclesiastick life, and giving some slight Dowry to Modestina;) was easily induced to hearken to her propositions, con∣sidering (besides the great fortune shee promised to make her Daugh∣ter) the splendor of so Noble an Allaince; But this cunning Mother's designe was only to substitute her self in her Daughter's place (who was yet nothing neer Marriageable) and to supply with the luster of her Gold and immense Estate, what shee wanted in Beauty, or was super∣abundant in Years; Thus the Father was gained, which seemed no small advancement to our Pretendant's intentions, every one being apt to believe easily what they do desire. But the difficulty ws in obtei∣ning the Son's consent, (who being advertised of this Design by Mie∣slas, and knowing in his Soule that hee was no less unfit to bee Simpho∣reza's Husband than Modestina's, not to multiply his deceipts,) reject∣ed the propositions, feining scruples of Conscience, much passion for
his wife, and giving Mieslas to understand that hee had proceeded fur∣ther in the terms of Marriage with Modestina then hee imagined. The rigorous Podolian (who had in a manner ingaged his word to the Prin∣cess, thinking to finde more obedience in his Son's spirit) was ready to burst into a furious fit of Choller at this resistance, but considering that Iphigenes by his favour had all the power with the King, hee reteined the impetuosity of his passion, giving testimony enough however of his displeasure by the alterations of his Countenance. Notwithstanding this refusall Respicia gave not over her pursuite, feining, like a good Mother, to bee passionate for the advancement of her Children, for whom shee could procure nothing more advantageus than the Alli∣ance with Favour (mean time it was her own interest made her act with so much solicitude:) According to the nature of her Sexe, which never ceaseth asking untill they atchieve their end, shee prayed, pursu∣ed, pressed in time, out of time, leaving no means unattempted; and it was partly her perswasion that made the Prince Cassin, her Son, ren∣der such devoirs to Iphigenes, which made him worthy of his friend∣ship, wherein hee succeeded as is already mentioned. Thus did this crafty Spider spread her Web to insnare the beautifull Adolescent, and make her self wife to him, of whom shee might have been the Mo∣ther. Shee had such a hand over Cassin, that this young Prince at her in∣stance used all the arguments his Invention could suggest, to induce Iphigenes to marry his Sister, to whom, for quality, Modestina was not comparable. But Iphigenes had the skill to divert his discourse with such modesty and dexterity, that without giving him any occasion of distast, hee amused his expectation, and by little and little made him relinquish that thought, which hee esteemed unjust. It is an opinion that Batteries made Crosse-wise are the most destructive; Respicia raised her's in this manner, and as if shee had been desirous to sink all her house (which was one of the most opulent of Polonia) into the family of Mieslas, shee offered him to give her Dauther to his Son, and her Son to his Daugher Clemencia, and so make but one of both their Fa∣milies. which the Palatine, dazled at the splendour of so much honour, imbraced with both hands, not perceiving the hook that was hidden under this bait. Mean time Respicia covered so dexterously her Love under the mask of Ambition, that whilest shee was called a carefull and loving Mother, shee aymed at another Mark. Her importunities, to∣gether with the oppressing instances of Mieslas, did shrewdly tempt
the patience of Iphigenes, who against all these assaults had no other de∣fence than the rampier of the Fidelity which hee owed, & which hee had sworn to his wife Modestina to whom, being pressed with these ago∣nies, Hee wrote such passionate letters, that the most affectionate of Lovers could not express his imaginations in a style more Patheticall: Which kindled such a fire in the bowels of this Maiden Spouse, that the too much sense of Love deprived her of all sense. You may add to that Love, the Fear which is insepirable from those who fervently do affect, and the Apprehension of losing, by Change, that which is more pretious than Life. For shee knew by the mouth of Fame, which hath a thousand tongues and by letters from Iphigenes own hand, that hee was the common object of the Eyes and Hearts of all the Court Ladies, which bred a torment in her Miad, inconceivable by any Soul, that hath not experimented the just and incomparable affections that pos∣sess'd her heart. A thousand times shee was in the mind to go to Court to her Husband, and say to all her Rivalls, What do you? hee is intirely mine, as I am solely his; Your pretensions are too unjust to find any access into his brest, who is nothing but Fidelity, who feeds amongst the Lillies of Purity, and the Roses of Honour: Your attractions are too slight to move so constant a Spirit; Your Passions, bee they fein'd or reall, are but weak Va∣pours before the Sun of his Reason. Why then with too licentious a desire do you indeavour to purloin a treasure, that belongs peculiarly to mee? with∣draw your fond affections, banish those no less Vain than unanswerable pre∣tensions from your thoughts, for Iphigenes hath ingaged his faith to mee by the indissolvable tyes of a most sacred Hymen. Thus did this loving Spouse entertain her troubled mind, but Shame opposing her Design (if there can bee any shame in the legitimate desires of a chast wife) or rather the impossibiity of disengaging her self from under Aretuza's wing, and the strict guard of the too severe Per∣petua, made her seek in Patience the common Remedy of all her dis∣contents. How often did shee please her fancy with the imagination of transvesting her self, and by the help of a Man's disguise deceiving the eyes of those that watched her deportments, to convey her self into the Court to her beloved Iphigenes? But that Honour, whereof shee was so Jealous, did choak this Resolution at its birth, considering that such an Equipage would not only make her the discourse of inconside∣rate Censurers, but in stead of rendring her Husband a testimony of her Love, might perhaps attract upon her Innocence his Dislike. At length, not to do any thing unbeseeming her quality, shee resolved to hearken
to Modesty, and let Discretion prevail over all those Surges of Passion: Shee comforted her self with her letters from Iphigenes; the words in every line whereof were as many protestations of Constancy, and new oaths of Fidelity. The severall vertues shee had remarked in her dear Husband were as many Proofs, and those Proofs as many Assurances of his invariable Purity, whereupon shee reposed all her thoughts; And these thoughts, which often made her sequester her self into sad unfre∣quented places, were her most delicious recreations. The shade of woods, the coolness of Gardens, and the agreeable murmuring of Fountains fomented in her brest that humour which nourished it self with the dear remembrance of her adored Husband's perfecti∣ons. And if such were the resentments of this Turtle, being separated from the presence of her mate; Think not that Iphigenes felt any less discomfort amongst all his greatnesses, which hee would willingly have shared to his dear Friend and Wife, or, to have rendred the content∣ment perfect, have injoyed in their presence. His affection to Mode∣stina, and the Love hee bare Liante, never suffered him to take any rest, notwithstanding the multitude of Felicities, wherewith the King's fa∣vour had (in a manner) overwhelmed him. Thus in this world wee can have nothing perfect: Those whom wee do many times imagine (seeing them born up by the wings of the Wind of a Prince's favour) to Swim in an Ocean of Delights, do find amongst the agreeable flowers of Plea∣sure, some secret prickle of Sorrow, which marreth the harmony of their Prosperity. Of so many Objects whereunto the Court did invite Iphi∣genes to affix his affections, hee saw as few that hee deemed worthy of the application of his thoughts, as Hee who looked for a Man with a candle, at mid-day, amongst a great Assembly in a publick place. Whe∣ther the want of Freedome and Vertue (which is great amongst Cour∣tiers) made him meet with a scarcity of friends in that multitude which environed him; or whether (which is very probable) the first impressions of affection had so seasoned the new Vessell of his Heart, that here was no possibility of making it take any other tincture, or tast, than that which hee had relished in the conversation of Modestina and Liante, the sweet Objects of his education and most tender years: His Disposition being of an excellent temperature, and his Heart no coveter of Wealth, Avarice and Vanity (which are the two Bonds, the two Charms, and, as I may say, the two poisoned Tets of the Court∣favour) had very little interest in his Soul; And Voluptuousness (which
according to the saying of an antient Orator, hath no place of abode in the Kingdom of Vertue) could find no access in his Body, too Ho∣nest not to bee Continent: No wonder then if the fetters of the Court, though made of Gold and pretious Stones, were irksome unto him; and the sincere, chaste and true affection which hee bore those two ab∣sent Objects of his Love, made him in the midst of so many pleasures languish with the desire of their presence. The passionate resentments of his Soul for this detested Separation, He feelingly exprest in severall letters to Modestina and Liante, which they interchangeably communicated to each other according to the permissi∣on of their Overseers, & in order to Iphigenes particular injunction, who at his departure from them did earnestly intreat Liante to take, as in∣tended to him, the affectionate letters hee should write to his Sister, protesting that the Friendship hee did bear him, was no less tender nor less ardent, than his Love to Modestina (as may easily be believed by one that knows the reason, whereof Liante as yet was ignorant.) One day (Modestina and her Brother having been allarmed, by letters from the faithfull Iphigenes, with the Princess Respicia's design of breaking their Marriage, and giving him her Daughter to wife; whereunto hee had been Sollicited by Mieslas, whom shee had gained; But that hee had rejected their propositions, choosing rather to lose his life than his Loyalty) Hee received letters from them full of complaints and sting∣ing resentments of Jealousie; Modestina feining to fear, or fearing in effect that the rare Beauties and great Honors, whereof the Court is the Element, would in time ravish from her the Mind as well as the Body of her Iphigenes; And Liante writing that the acquaintance of great Ones would perchance make him not value the friendship of meaner Persons, in which rank hee placed himself. Whereunto a Reply was speedily dispatcht, which conteining large expressions of a holy and reall affection, comforted a little those two tender hearts which lan∣guished one for her Husband, the other for his sincere Friend: But why do I say comforted? I should rather say, that it caused the same effect in the sorrow of their Privation, as water in a Smith's forge being cast upon burning coals, whose heat it doth increase; Or as those hot drops of raine extorted by the Sun during the ardors of Summer, which rather Scald than Wet. Indeed if wee measured their discontents for his absence, with the satisfaction they would have received by the presence and possession of Iphigenes, wee might judge of its extremity. However not to give Iphigenes any occasion to bee afflicted at their
suspitions, they made him understand by Letters how great a confi∣dence they had in his promise and constancy, acknowedging that those honours which are accustomed to change the dispositions of weak and vulgar Souls, are below the thoughts of them that place their honour in their Faith, and who are not Reeds of the Desart in unconstancy, but Pillars of the Temple of Stability. By this reciprocall intelligence of Letters these three loving Hearts mainteined the harmony of their concord, that served for Oyl to nourish the Lamp of their mutuall affection. Mean time Iphigenes, blessed with the dew of Heaven and Earth, was the true Child of In∣crease, and the Nursling of Fortune, Fortune in him seeming to have lost those two qualities of Blinde, and being an Enemy to Vertue, since shee knew so worthily and so abundantly to acknowledge his Merit. The greatest secret to gain Fortune is to be Just, to abstein from Evill and do Good, for it is with Justice as with Wisdom, all sorts of felicity do attend her. The same success doth not accompany those, who by oblique and undirect wayes do seek to accomplish their pretensions, in imitation of Ships, who having but a bare quarter wind, do laveer and turn severall wayes before they can arrive at their intended Port. The Princess Respicia, being stung with that Wasp that rob's Minds of re∣pose, sollicited Mieslas without intermission, to press Iphigenes to the rupture of his non consummated Marriage, and become Spouse to her Daughter, Simphoroza; Which proposition jumped with the Fa∣ther's disposition, being equally greedy after her Wealth and Honour, especially the Prince Cassin likewise promising to marry Clemencia. As for this last Marriage, Iphigenes's consent was easily obteined thereunto, nay more, hee desired it might be accomplished, to draw that thorn out of his foot, I mean, that point of Jealousie, which sticking at his Heart did cause him to fear, lest Liante should bee so deeply ingaged in Clemencia's Love, that Hee should not be able to conquer his inclina∣tions when the time for his Revelation and Metamorphosis should be expired: But for the other hee labored all hee could to hinder it, al∣leadging his Faith given, the Honour of his Word, his Affection to Modestina, and the Obligations hee had to the fervency of her Love, whom hee would have them esteem as his Wife. All this Mieslas (after the manner of great Persons, who use to make and unmake Marriages according to their Interests) called Superstitious and fri∣volous Scruples, telling his Son, by way of reproach, that hee was too Religious for a Courtier, and too strict an observer of his word for a
Favortie. At least, sayd hee, Do not oppose the advancement of your Sister's Fortune by your too fond inclinations for Modestina; whereupon Iphigenes sodainly replying, promised, That hee would contribute the utmost of his endeavours to further the Match between the Prince Cassin and his Sister Clementia; and to that effect hee became a frequent Visiter of Respicia, who did express such extraordinary kindness in her receptions, that Iphigenes might easily have perceived the full scope of her thoughts, and whereunto did tend those Nets which shee pre∣pared for him. For producing her Daughter before him, rather loaden than deck't with Jewells, besides her Youth, being yet Infantine in a manner (an Age that hath neither Beauty nor Ugliness) her design was to induce him to make a Change, and catch him in her own Trap by attracting his looks upon her self. But Iphigenes being what hee was, ran no danger of being intangled in such Snares, this Bait and Line were not proper for that Fish. Love, how blind soever hee is esteemed, hath Linxe's Eyes, which penetrate to the very thoughts. Stanislas Palatine of Vratislaü, being a Widower in the strength of his Age, and having no other issue than an onely Daughter, had cast his Eyes upon the Princess Respicia, as the Party of all the Court most suitable to his quality. Shee through a va∣nity common to all Women, who take a pride in seeing themselves Observed, Courted, and Adored, admitted of his Visits, and by a tacite consentment approved of his Suite in not rejecting it. For, yong Widdows, that suffer Men to accost them, that give ear to their offers of Service, and their protestations of Fidelity, do seem (as Mistresses of their Motions) to give these Suiters some hold upon their liberty, or at least to foment a hope in them that their Vows shall not be dis∣pleasing. This Noble-man holding Respicia for his Mistress, was not well satisfied to see her visited by our Favorite, whose glory dazled all the World, and effaced the luster of the most Eminent persons. But his displeasure was redoubled, when hee perceived by Respicia's actions and countenance, that shee participated of the Court-vertigo for this fair Podolian. At last hee grew beyond all temper, having intelligence of the Marriage which was projected betwixt the Prince Cassin and Clementia; (for hee Marrying the Mother intended to match his Daughter to her Son, and by their double Alliance to draw the Prin∣cesse's vast estate into his own hands.) But when hee heard of the ad∣vantages that were offered to Iphigenes, if hee would take to Wife the Princesse's Daughter Simphoroza, this raised so furious a disorder in
his Mind, that hee believed the Favour would ruine all his pretentions, if hee did not speedily rid his Hands of the Favorite. Already Respi∣cia had no more any Eyes to see him, no Mouth to speak to him, no reception for his Visits; hee perceived nothing in her Actions but a cold Reservedness, in her Countenance Disdain, at his arrivall Sadness, at his departure Joy; apparent signs of his being in disgrace, if hee pre∣vent it not, all his hoes are vanished. Ambition kindled his Love, Love suscitated Jealousie, Jealousie hatched Despair, and Despair pre∣cipitated him into such a rage as made him espouse the wickedest of resolutions, to Sacrifice to his Revenge the Innocent blood of him who thought nothing less than to supplant him in the Princess Respicia's Favour.
The Third Book. ARGUMENT. The Combate betwixt Stanislas and Iphigenes. Stanislas killed by Iphigenes. The manner of his Death. The Palatinate of Uratislau given by the King to Iphignes. The Envy of the Courtiers, and their plots against Iphigenes. The King made jealous of the Queen, Shee no lesS um∣bragious of him, and both for Iphigenes. Iphigenes by the King's com∣mand is difmiss'd the Court. His generous deportment in this Disgrace. Perpetua having discovered the intelligence betwixt Liante and Cle∣mencia, advertiseth Aretuza and Mieslas. Liante made close Prisoner by express command from Mieslas. Iphigenes obtein's leave of the King to pass through Podolia into his Palatinate, under pretence of seeing his Mother, and taking his Wife Modestina with him. Mieslas having in∣deavored in vain to disswade him, command's Modestina to be impri∣soned and strictly garded in one of his strongest Castles. The King's and Queen's deportments when Iphigenes came to take leave of them. His speches to them at his departure. The manner of his retiring from the Court. The Princess Respicia having followed him into Podolia presses Mieslas to make him repudiate Modestina in favour of her Daughter Simphoroza. His Evasions. ONe Day Stanislas, attended by divers Gentlemen be∣sides his ordinary Train on Horse-back (after the Po∣lonian manner) met Iphigenes accompanied like a Fa∣vorite; And it being in a publick place where the Noble-men used to take their pleasures, Hee accosted him, desiring that Hee might speak two or three words to him in private: Iphigenes (who for Courtesie had not his equall through the whole Universe) presently left his company, and being
retired some little distance, Stanislas said to him in a fierce arrogant manner, That hee porceived hee had a design to establish a fortune to his prejudice, which was a thing repugnant to the Laws of Chivalry and Ho∣nour, and that hee might find wayes enough to advance himself about the King, without going to trouble or thwart his pretensions to the Princess Respicia, to whom Hee was Servant and ambitioned to be Husband, in∣tending likewise, by Marrying her, to make Cassin his Son in Law; there∣fore hee wished him to desist from pretending to that Alliance, which (hee heard) was projected betwixt him and Simphoroza, and that betwixt Clemencia and the Prince Cassin: Otheriwse Hee being obliged to resent so injurious an Affront, was resolved to revenge it with his Sword. Iphi∣genes answered very mildly (but with a resolution full of generosity) That Hee should be very sorry to make any advantage of another Man's detriment; That thitherto Hee had so managed his Fortune, that no body could frame any complaint against him for that respect; That Hee knew too well the honour which was due to His quality, and what Hee owed to his own Modesty to begin with Him to disoblige, by any prejudice, persons of such Eminence. That for his alliance with Simphoroza, it was not onely un∣likely but impossible, and whereof hee never had nor should imbrace any thought (although it might be done without tentering his Conscience) his affections beeing already so ingaged to Modestina, that, if shee were not his Wife, hee never would have any other, And therefore hee might rest satis∣fied for that point: As for the Marriage of the Prince Cassin with his Sister Clementia, it proceeded rather from Respicia's own seeking, than any motion of his, and for that hee did appeal to the Testimony of the Prin∣cess her self, to whose Alliance hee did neither hinder him to pretend, nei∣ther would hee barr Cassin of the free liberty to choose his Daughter, or Clemencia. Who could have ansered with greater moderation, re∣spect and sincerity? Yet the Savage Sarmation drawing vanity from the sweetness of this reply, like Spiders which make venim of Roses, rudely thus retorted, that is was not enough that hee pretended nothing to Simphoroza; but that Clemencia must not be Married to Cassin: Adding (with a proud Bravado) That there was not that Man living, that should dare to look upon her Mother, but should receive Death from his Hand. At which words Iphigenes with an accent no less civill then resolute said; My Lord Palatine, I have already told you that the Mother is left to Your self; That I pretend nothing to the Daughter, and as for my Sister shee hath never yet seen Cassin, neither hath shee any will but that of her Parents, who are discreet enough; the management of such matters belong's
particularly to them, and they know best what they have to do; Marriages are free, and Violence ought to have no place in such Sacred ties. And I told you (replyed Stanislas) that that doth prejudice mee, that I am the first pretendant to that Alliance, and no Man shall come to tread in my steps, but I will make him repent it, let him be ne'r so much in Favour, and his quality ne'r so eminent. Hereupon Iphigenes presently made this answer, It seeme's Stanislas, by the word Favour, that you address your speech to mee, as if I were the Subject of your discontent: I wear by my side where withall to give satis∣faction to persons of Honour, and you must know that I am no Man to suffer such out-braving Language. What I have said already ought to satisfie you, if you are reasonable; but if you are beyond that, I know the way to make you return to Reason. The Proud Palatine who aymed at nothing but to pick a quarrell, perswading himself by the weakly proportion of body, and the unsouldier-like countenance of Iphigenes, that a stout Heart could not bee harboured under so fair a Face; besides seeing himself at that time not onely better Horsed, but advantaged with a great Sable or Cimeterr which hung by his side, replied; There's too much said, Men of my Birth and Quality are not accustomed to bear such words, I must take thy Life, and so deliver Polonia from the Tyranny which thou dost exercise over their Soveraign. Whereunto Iphigenes immediately thus: I owe nothing to thy Birth, nor to thy Quality, they are both equa∣lized, nay surpassed by mine, and since my Mouth could not satisfie thee with Reason, my Hand shall punish thy unreasonableness with Justice. This said, they parted to give their Horses a turn. Stanislas being moun∣ted upon a stately Courser, came with his Sable in his Hand as if hee would have cleft Iphigenes to the twist, who riding upon a little Hun∣garian Nag, very swift and well managed, the nimbleness of the Horse, together with the dexterity of the Rider, rendred the direction of that Thunder blot of no effect: And the Nag being very ready, an∣swered the least motion of Iphigenes Hand, so that making a quick turn, hee presently gained the crupper of Stanislas, and sheathed his Sword in his Reins, of which wound (being mortall) hee fell immediately from his Horse. The two Troops that attended on them a loof off, were no sooner come up to them, but Stanislas, being at the last gasp, seemed to remain alive onely to acknowledge his fault, which decla∣ring in all their hearings, hee demanded pardon of Iphigenes, and of the Heavens, after which hee expired, protesting that nothing was more just than Heaven, nothing more unjust than his Jealousie and Choler.
This incounter, as that with Augustus, highly augmented the glory of Iphigenes, even the same persons that accompanied Stanislas condem∣ning the unjustness and blindness of his Passion. The King hearing this, and fearing lest this Temerity of Stanislas might imbolden other envious persons to attempt some malicious de∣sign against Iphigenes, commanded that the Process should be made against the memory of the dead Offender, and that his carcass should publickly suffer the shame of an ignominious punishment. But Iphigenes begging upon his knees before His Majesty, mitigated the severity of his resolution, deriving the fault upon Love which doth frequently over master Reason, and blind the cleerest Judgements. This increased the praises of Iphigenes, and made all his deceased Enemie's friends profess themselves his servants. The King, though overcome by per∣swasions to pardon his Honour, would however make his Estate suffer, the confiscation whereof hee gave to Iphigenes, but hee refused it, having not the heart to triumph in such mournfull Spoyls: yet after∣wards seeing the King would bestow it amongst his Courtiers (who, like Ravens or Kites, do fly greedily at such preys) to preserve it for the Orphaline, hee accepted it, and took a singular care of advancing the posterity of him, who so barbarously sought his Life, rendring, like a Flint, for unkind Blows, the sparkles of Favour and Courtesie. The Shoulders of the Princess Respicia were eased of no small burthen by this Palatine's Death; for (besides that it lay heavy upon her, his pursuit being become not onely importunate, but odious to her, since shee had cast her Eyes and affections upon the beautifull Podolian) shee fancied that, beeing watched now no more by that Dragon, shee should have better opportunity to disclose her intentions, and conduct them to the desired end. The same Death raised Iphigenes to the de∣gree of Palatine (which is the highest step of honour amongst the Grandees of Polonia) for the King requited his innocence, with the inheritance of his unjust Adversaire's Authority. Thus the Weights which seem to depresse the Palms, do make them grow up higher; Thus the Knife that cut's the Vines, maketh them flourish, and is cause of their producing new Leaves, whose Bredth and Beauty do efface the luster of the antient stock. As great Tempests are preceded by little Winds, which curl the smooth-faced Waters, and make the Tree's Leaves tremble; As many little stones do tumble from an House-top before the whole building falls; And as extreme Sicknesses are fore-run bymany slight indis∣positions:
So in great Prince's Favorites the declining of their Fortune hath it's presages; and although oftentimes they feel the Thunder-bolt before they see the Lightning, yet, to those that have but indifferent judgements, it is easie to prejudicate that some sinister accident doth threaten them. When Pamphlets, Songs, Advertisements, Satyres, Poems, and Diffamatory Libells are dispersed abroad, it is, as when those white Birds are seen flying upon the Sea coast, which are infali∣lible fore-runners of foulweather. The beautifull Face of Iphigenes (which betrayed and almost accused his Heart) was the Rock where∣on equally those that loved, and those that hated him were Ship∣wrackt. It's strange, that Hatred and Love should deduce their Origine from the same Principle. That which ravished his Lovers, made the Jea∣lous burst with Spight; and when some praised exceedingly those per∣fections which charmed so many Eyes, the Envious would take occa∣sion thence to blame him as being Effeminate: But as Iniquity com∣monly stop's its own Mouth, and give's it self the Lye, the two in∣counters of Augustus and Stanislas shewed evidently enough the nullity os that reproach, and compelled those that called Iphigenes a cowardly Paris, to acknowledge that Hee was rather to be honoured as a brave Hippolytus, who could joyn Valor with Beauty. Some others (who knew that hee had been Married very yong, and that hee had not proceeded to Consummation, and besides, (although the Ladies generally were inamored of him) seeing that hee repayed their flames with such indifferency) accused him of Impotency; For Courtiers have that base quality, not onely to make little esteem of Continency them∣selves, but blame it in others. Besides, Envy is a False Glass, which changeth the Face of Objects, which makes the handsomest things seem ugly, and chargeth Vertue with the same defects that render Vices blameable. It is true, Iphigenes the better to conceal what really hee was; would sometimes play the Courtier amongst the Ladies, taking pleasure to foster in their Brests a Disease, whereunto hee was inca∣pable of applying a remedy; and perceiving that divers amongst them, layed Snares to intrap his Liberty, hee delighted in cutting them out Work, and paying them in the same Coyn. What Jealousies, Quips and petty Quarrels did hee raise amongst that Sex, who are naturally inclined to Self-conceit and Envy? Their hearts were all as Brimstone to the fire of his Eyes, all as Heliotropes or Turn-sols to the Luster of his Presence. For, besides the advantage of being the King's Favorite (which is the North-Star of those, whose hearts are touched with
the Loadstone of the Court) hee was possessor of so many amiable qualities, that as soon as hee fixed his Eyes upon any Lady, shee presently imagined shee had caught him, when hee had taken her; and this Opinion raising her Fancy to the skies, shee thought to triumph over all her Competitors, and be Queen of the Bean, although shee had no part of the Cake. For Iphigenes changed his discourse so often, and knew how to amuse them all with such dexterity, that although hee loved none, hee seemed to consume at every fire hee approached. This gave Occasion to some malicious Spirits, Jealous of his Glory, to blast with their Satyricall invectives the blossome of his Reputa∣tion. Whilest these snarling Curs, who cannot bite Iphigenes, do bark after him, casting stones at him without discovering their Arms, and making Libells flie about, which the Authors durst not own but to their surest friends: Others more dangerous, like to the worm that eat's into the Root of the green Ivie, did set their wedges to the Root of his Fortune, to make the Tree fall down, and sturck their Pick axes into the Foundation, to undermine the Edifice. Hee that hath been an Homicide from the be∣ginning, hath in all times been busie in forging Calumnies, and indea∣voured to establish Lyes in the place of Truth: Hee hath alwaies sowed Darnell amongst the good grain, and mingled in the pure Gold of the most generous Actions, the Rust and Skum of false Reports and Detraction. The wheel of Fortune (like the Potter's) is in perpe∣tuall Motion, alwaies framing new Vessells, sometimes of Ignominy, sometimes of Honour, and seem's to raise those, on whom Shee con∣fer's Dignities, meerly to dash them in pieces by their fall, as Eagles deal with Tortoises. This fickle Step-dame (constant in nothing but In∣constancy, and who hath nothing certain but her Incertainty) favoring the designs of the malicious Enemies of the innocent Iphigenes, whom shee had till then been elevating to the highest point of her Circle, sug∣gested to their Envie the Invention, if not to work his utter Ruine, at least to make him bee discarded from the Court, and so, by a Disgrace, to precipitate him down the hill of his declining Greatness. Thus was their Plot, which they so cunningly contrived, that those who were sur∣prised in the same snare never did perceive it. Some Divellish Spirits, by means of certain Women (good workers of such wicked Strata∣gems) buzzed into the Queen's ears Imaginations, that ought not to enter into the thoughts of so discreet and so vertuous a Princess, perswa∣ding her that the King, in his friendship to Iphigenes, by an Orientall
Licentiousness did passe the terms of Honour and his Devoir. This was to touch the Queen on the Apple of the Eye, and wound her in the most sensible place about her: Insomuch that as those Meats which most delight our appetites in health, are the most loathsome to us being Sick; so the very name of Iphigenes, on whom shee looked so favorably beofre this false report, hereupon became odious unto her, and his pre∣sence insupportable. The matchless Civilitie, Modestie, and chast De∣meanure, which formerly shee had with leisure remarked in this beau∣tifull Youth, vanished all in one moment out of her Mind, and the place of Truth was presently usurped by false Reports and vain surmises. How easie it is in a Woman's heart to supplant the Inno∣cent! They had a fairer game to play with the King: For the familiarity and free access which Iphigenes had to the Queen and the other Ladies, more than ever was permitted to any other Favorite, presently cast dust in the Eyes of his Reason; And as for the most part wee are the last that know what is sayd of us, they made his Majesty believe that every one's mouth was fill'd with the ill deportments of Iphigenes, to whom moreover they attributed the insolence of boasting of Favors, which (though hee had received) hee ought to have kept secret; But this (they said) they could not bee induced to believe of a Princess so Vertu∣ous, & who had alwaies led so exemplary a life as the Queen; Neverthe∣less that Greatness was not Goodness, neither could her Dignity hinder her from being a Woman, that is, like Christall, the more brittle, the more it is resplendent. This is the usuall procedure of all envious Back-biters, they draw their Arms backwards, like Archers, to make their shafts enter deeper, feigning not to believe themselves, what they indeavour to perswade others: their soothing words are as the Oyl, wherein Surgeons use to dip the end of their Lancets to render the point more piercing. The Bed and the Throne admit of no Competitors; in these, Suspicions are Oracles, and Shadows seem Lights of Truth. Neverthe∣less the King (who had by long experience known his Companion, and who did not only believe her, but knew her to bee all white with purity and innocence, besides, not finding that the most venimous nails of Envy could make the least impression in the polished Ivory of Iphigenes acti∣ons, as far as hee ever could discern) like a prudent and equitable Prince, would not decide a cause of such importance upon that bare report, lest hee should thereby fall into Accidents as scandalous as full of injustice; Much less did hee think it sutable to his Majesty, to inform himself
more particularly in such ticklish matters, it being an Act of little dis∣cretion to seek too curiously after that, which one would bee aggrieved to find. But judging (and rightly) that a business of this Nature ought rather to bee hushed up than published, not to offend his own honour, nor give occasion to any other to bee scandalized, Hee thought it more convenient to unsow gently, than rend in pieces Violently: Knowing that if that relation were but a fiction, Time (the Father of Verity) would discover it's Vanity; that if those affections were then but beginning, Absence would deracinate them (like young plants) be∣fore they took too deep root; at the worst, that it was but casting Earth upon that Fire, that is, interposing a good distance of ground betwixt them, Love's power remaining effectless in the privation of the Object. The expedient which Prudence suggested to him, was to send Iphigenes from his Court, under pretence of taking possession of his new Palati∣nate, where being, Hee would command him to stay to acquire credit amongst his Subjects, and take account of the Castellians, without re∣turning to the Court untill further order, which in good tearms is called an Honourable Banishment. The Storm fell all at once upon the faultless Iphigenes, by the Eclips of the Gemini, the favourable looks of their two Majesties; and, which was very strange, the treachery was designed and effected so artifici∣ally, that hee could not devise who should bee the Artificers, nor, which afflicted him the more, knew the Cause of his disgrace: In that respect more miserable than those Criminalls, who by hearing their Indictment read, are at least informed of the reason of their punish∣ment. But what was most of all to be admired, was, that neither the King nor the Queen, who both agreed in this relegation, did communi∣cate to each other their Thoughts, which by different projects arrived at the same End. Those that have purchased Favour by Merit, not by Subtilities, have a certain generosity not common to all Favorites, by vertue whereof they descend with as much Glory as they were raisd, like a Lyon as bold in his retreat as in his Sallie, and as Cesar, who feel∣ing himself Stabbed in open Senat, took care to adjust the folds of his Robe, that hee might fall honourably, as is remarked by his own Historian. Iphigenes without inquiring further into the Occasion of his being thus on a sodain discountenanced, not to irritate their Majesties, and without preventing their Commands by a predemanded leave or any feined distast, was willing without reply to subscribe to the King's Will, which his obedience held to be a sufficient Reason. As hee was
just upon the point of fitting his train for his journey into his Palati∣nate, not complaining as commonly those do, who know them∣selves not guilty, or those that leave their Fortunes with Regret; nor seeking to justifie himself, which had been to accuse his Master of Inju∣stice, in regard that before Kings (in that, like God) no justification can subsist, their Disgrace only being capable to render the most Innocent Culpable. It was not without some remorse on the King's part, some discontentment on the Queen's, and the universall sorrow of the Court, that this fair Star was Eclipsed from that Climate, which seemed to borrow more less luster from his presence, than it received from the splendor of the Royaltie. But Mischiefs, which seldome or never come single, attended Iphigenes by the way, to make him alter his Course, and try his patience in more than one manner. Being ready to depart, a Messenger brought him news of a disaster befallen Him, who was the light of his eyes, and for the possession of whom hee would not only have left his Favor at the Court, but willingly have resigned Scepters and Crowns, which are but Vanities, as Onerous as Honourble. Liante, the Object of his thoughts, was made prisoner in one of his Father's Castles, and so stirctly garded, that hee was hardly permitted the liberty to take the Air; which imprisonment was imposed upon him for the rea∣son which you shall hear. Whilest Iphigenes was swimming in the full stream of Favor at Court, being the Torment and the Delight of all Eyes & Hearts, and the Minion of Fortune; Liante plunged in the depth of an inconceivable Melanchollie, as well for the absence of his dear friend, as to see him∣self constrained (like Sisyphus) to rowl an unpleasing Stone without any relaxation, I mean to wed himself to a vocation, which (though hono∣rable in it self) was however odious to him, had no other means to di∣vert his discontented thoughts, nor any other possibility of releasing himself out of that thraldome, than by flattering his fancy with the the alliance of Clemencia; who burning in a mutuall flame for him, did daily (with all the civill respects and discretion, that could bee desired of a modest and well educated Virgin) render him most fervent testimonies of her chaste affection. Although Love loveth secresie as the Violets do the shade; yet it is easie to follow it by the track, and, if it be honourable, to smell it a far off by the odour of its parfumes; if it bee otherwise, the blackness, the stinking smoak, & the shamefull Events that alwaies do succeed illicite desires, will at length make it known. Perpe∣tua sleeping in security as for Modestina's part by reason of Iphigenes's
absence, applied all her care to observe the deportments of Clemencia, in whom (like a subtile Matron) having perceived either by her Com∣plexion, in her Eyes, or her Actions the Tokens of an Heart distemper'd and taken with some Object, like a cunning Hound shee followed the sent so close, that in short time shee found where the Hare had made her Form, and discovered on which side Clemencia's Pulse did beat. The more knowledges hee gained of this secret intel∣ligence 'twixt her and Liante, the more shee feined ignorance, like Fishers who let their Angles loose, the better to draw the Fishes to them, or drive them genlty into the Leaps, there to make prey of them; Or like Fowlers who seem to go away, when they would have the Birds come into their Nets. Indeed how witty and inventive so∣ever young heads are, it is hard for them to deceive old People; for if their Bodies be decayed with Age, their Spirits beeing refined by Experience, do lead the others to the School of Prudence. In a word, this old Governess was too quick-sighted for our young Lovers; Shee, like an Owle, could see by Night, that is, in the most obscure corners of their retreats; Shee understood the Language of their Looks; Shee could Divine the meaning of their Hearts; Shee clearly saw the com∣placency of their conversations, whether in the House, sitting alone in the Gardens, walking in the Fields, or in company; Shee perceived that Modestina was likewise of their intelligence, and that Shee con∣tributed what shee could to the unity of these two Hearts, for the contentment of her Brother, whom Iphigenes had recommended to her above all things (Alas! with a quite other intention.) But that which made this Lynx penetrate into the depth of this Mystery, was the discovery which the restless old Ferret made of a private place, where our young Lovers were accustmed to put their Letters, and so interchange their correspondence without beeing perceived by any. This crafty Female finding them, perused them, and then put them into their place again, for they had no other seal than a little band of Silk; in regard they were to pass through no third hand, the secrecy of the place suffised to keep them close. Although Perpetua found by a long file of circumstances, that there was nothing but what was chast and honest in their pretensions, since all their designs did aym at that great Sacrament, whose sacred end doth in some manner justifie all the wayes that do conduct to the accomplishment of it: yet knowing the design of Mieslas, which was to make Liante espouse an Ecclesiastick like, thereby to draw al the Estate to Iphigenes by the right of his Wife
Modestina, and besides, being advertised of the Match, which was in agittion at Court, betwixt the Prince Cassin and Clemencia, Shee thought it no less than her duty to acquaint Aretuza with the secret affections of her Daughter and Liante, to the end they might be cropt in the Bud, and that such remedies might bee applied as should bee thought most convenient. Aretuza (who had other thoughts in her mind, knowing that Iphigenes, according to the hopes shee her self had given him, pretended to Liante with a more than ordinary passion) was glad of this advice, and being desirous to break this intelligence, to preserve Liante for Iphigenes, Shee forthwith gave Mieslas notice, as also did Perpetua. Mieslas (who was Rigour and Barbarism it self) commanded im∣mediately to separate those two Lovers, (as if Hearts could as easily be dis-joyned as Bodies) that Liante should be kept so close Prisoner in one of his Castles (with onely his Tutor and such Servants as were re∣quisite) that hee might have no possibility of continuing his corre∣spondence with Clemencia, whom hee had promised to the Prince Cassin and the Princess Respicia, and would have the Marriage concluded with all expedition. This command was no soner received but executed, and to the end the Process might be made by Evidences that could not be denied, Perpetua, like an hungry Kite wheeling too & fro, having pryed out the Cabinet where Clemencia kept the Papers shee received from Liante, one day shee fell upon it, and finding the Nest full of young ones shee seized on them with her greedy claws. Liante was the Father, and Clemencia the Mother of them, since (as Hens do their Chickens) shee kept them under the shelter of her Wings. The loss of those dear Pledges of Affection was resented by Clemencia with such sorrow, as you may imagine a vertuous Virgin would conceive beeing surprised in that manner. Liante's Tutour having received instructions from Perpetua did the like to his Pupill, which cast him into such a per∣plexity, as no words an express; And to heap up the measure of his sorrow, hee saw himself debarred of the presence of Her (whose sweet Disposition and Fidelity Hee had more reason to love, than Her beau∣ty, whereof Nature had been but sparing to her) and not onely that, but confined to a Prison, which was no less odious to him, than the cause of his imprisonment was unjust. Iphigenes received intelligence of all these passages from Aretuza, who knew that if this rigorous treat∣ment did dislike him in one respect, it would be pleasing to him on the other, since it did put an obstacle to that Alliance, which might have
been prejudicall to his design. But Iphigenes (who was grown so Rich and so Great, that the advantage of Rosuald's Inheritance was nothing considerable to him, and who loved Liante with a Love of perfect Friendship, that is, with an affection so free from Interests, that it aym∣ed at no other end, than the good of the person beloved) though glad on the one side to see that Mieslas so played his Game, as to stop the current of Liante's and Clemencia's corresondence, was much grieved on the other for the captivity of his dear Brother-in-law, whose liberty hee resolved to procure some way or other, though to the ha∣zard of his own contentment. This was the occasion, that before hee went into his own Palatinate of Vratislaü, hee demanded leave of His Majesty to go first into Podolia, under pretence of taking his Wife along with him into his Government; which request was so reasonable that there was no Probability of its beeing subject to a Deniall. Mieslas knowing of his Son's Design to go into Podolia, and fearing, amongst divers other things, the Consummation of his Marriage with Modestina (which hee had least reason of all to apprehend) and lest by the importunities of his Wife, Hee should be constrained to give Liante his liberty, and not onely that, but also to confirm the Match betwixt him and Clemencia, as hee had formerly seemed to desire; All which was extreamly contrary to the Resolutions, which hee had made with the Princess Respicia, concerning the double alliance of their Chil∣dren. Fearing, I say, all these events severally, and much more, beeing put together, Hee employed all his Power and Rhetorick to disswade his Son from going into Podolia, counselling him punctually to obey the King's command, which was, to retire into his own Palatinate of Vratislaü: But his hopes were, that hee beeing far distant from Mode∣stina, Time, the great Worker of Oblivion, might purge his Heart of that Passion, and dispose him to the Nuptialls of Simphoroza: But all his Intreaties, all his Perswasions could not induce Iphigenes to change his Determination; And although divers times, according to his haughty humour, hee would thuder out some imperious Language, and express himself in tearms that witnessed his Displeasure, yet hee durst not attribute too much to his Fatherly Authority, his Son beeing (according to the World) as Great, and in some respects Greater and Richer than himself. But what did hee? whether according to the dictates of his own Disposition (as Cruell as Covetous) or whether in∣stigated by the suggestions of the crafty Princess Respicia, to prevent
the mischief which Hee apprehended, Hee sent with all expedition a command to commit Modestina close Prisoner in another of his Castles, (but far stronger than where the afflicted Liante was) to hinder his Son, even to the extremity, from enjoying that Wife, which hee was resolved to take from him, and place Simphoroza in her room, under whose Infantine Countenance Respicia did hide her own full-grown desires. It is a generall Maxime at Court as well as in War, that a Man fails but once, as Hee can fall but once that tumbles from an high precipice (for at the first falling one's sure to break his neck;) the Favour of Princes holding somewhat of the Nature of the bone in an Horse's Leg, which being once broken can never bee well set again. For Monarks do imagine that they never do any body wrong, and that the most innocent are culpable, if they conceive but the least suspition against them. That if by evident proofs they are brought to acknowledge their unjust pre∣cipitation, instead of repenting (as if they were impeccable) they per∣swade themselves, (although by a re-establishment they salve the sore of the offended party) that the Cicatrice will yet remain, which leaves a sense of the injury, like that of the Goddess Juno, irritated by the judgement of Paris, who could never be reconciled. But all these Axiomes were contradicted in this dismission of Iphigenes; for never was any Disgrae more Gracious, Disfavour more Favorable, Misfortune more Fortunate, nor Exilement more Gentle. Oh! how highly would hee have obliged the King (if Kings can be obliged) whosoever could have devised some honorable expedient to retein Iphigenes! But the Plot was contrived against him with such subtility, that neither the King nor Queen (though they had desired it) knew which way to mo∣tion it. For although they both perceived the innocence of Iphigenes as clearly as the Sun is to be seen at Noon-day (if there had been no other proof than his leaving the Court with so little shew of disgust;) yet their Honours were equally ingaged to suffer his departure, to re∣move the reciprocall umbrages of suspition, wherein the malice of his Enemies had so cunningly involved them, that the King knew not that the Queen had any Jealousie of him, neither did Shee imagine that Hee had any diffidence of Her; for neither of them made the least shew of any discontent; their Tongues beeing, as it were, Inchanted with the charm of Calumny, could not communicate the conceptions of their Hearts. But when they considered that the Crown was in a manner falling from their heads, Iphigenes, the Soul or (as I may say) the Court
of their Court, beeing to take his leave, they could not but resent the compunctions of sorrow for that separation: however they swallowed that draught not so much to please their tastes, as for their health, since that Absence was to be the Medicine to cure their diseased Minds, and serve as a Touch-stone to the Truth, to discern Impostures. Never wasy any departure so glorious as that of Iphigenes, you would have said that hee went to put the Court into a Sepulcher, and that it was the Funerall of the publick Joy; if the Mourning appeared not in the apparrell, it was in the People's Hearts, which is far more essen∣tiall. The King himself, (when hee came to kiss his Hands) discovered in his Countenance most evident signs of Sorrow, not as repenting that hee had raised his Fortune, but that hee had so discarded him: And taking him aside, he spent some time in Discourse, guilding that Pill, & Sugring that Ruburb, to make him swallow it with the less difficulty, Telling him That hee must give way to the Torrent of Envy, for fear it should ruine all that opposed its fury; That it was a part of Wisdom to yeild rather than to withstand it; That indeed hee had many Detractours, but all their reports did make no more impression in his thoughts, than a Stone in a running wa∣ter. Hee promised to recall him er'e long, protesting That it grieved him to suffer him any time out of his presence, however hee would have him think that it was not to disparage him, but to authorize him the more, giving him the means to purchase Credit and Esteem in his Government, which might one day bee usefull for the service of his Crown; That hee used him like a Father, that send's his Son to Academies in strange Countries, to learn the Art of living in the School of the World, and return with more knowledge Home. Moreover, in token of his reall Affection, hee gave him as great Presents, as ever hee had done formerly, commanding his Treasurers to defray all the charges of his Journy, and giving his Courtiers to understand, that those who would accompany Iphigenes in Complement out of the City, would do him a Pleasure, and those that would attend him all the way, would do a Service as acceptable as if rendred to his own Person. To all this Iphigenes, confounded with so many signall Favours, could make no distinct answer; yet the confusion of his Speech, and the throbbing of his Heart, with the colours of Vertue, which rendred his Face more beautifull than that of Aurora, when shee riseth under a serene Sky, furnished him with a Discourse that surpassed the Elo∣quence of any Tongue; whereunto if you add that moving and fluent Language, which issueth out of the Eyes, when bathed with Tears, there
is no charm in all the Art of Rhetorick can parallel this manner of Ex∣pression: for 'tis the Heart that speaks in bleeding through the Eyes. What Iphigenes? do you play the Woman? Ha! Are you not afraid to bee discovered? certainly Vlisses knew that Achilles, under a Woman's habit, was a Man, by Tokens less evident. At length Sighs & Sobs having made way for Words, hee thus replied; Your Majesty looking on mee as a Creature of your own making, would be sorry to undoe that work of your Hands, therefore you are pleased to surcharge me with so many Favours, and heap such multitudes of benefits upon mee, that in despight of my Gra∣titude I must die Ingratefull to your exceeding Munisicence; but that spot can be no blemish to mee, seeing that it is the will which acknowledgeth Ob∣ligations, and payeth in some kind by Desire, what it cannot in Effect. Sir, you know how often I have beseeched you to moderate the Favours and Grace (wherewith your Liberality over-loaded mee) not to offend the male∣volent Eye of Envy, who not measuring Presents by the Greatness of the Giver, but by the Meanness of the Receiver, cannot endure that Kings should exalt those who have the happiness to gain their Favour, to the prejudice of their Capricious Humours, which make them find nothing to their minds. As Envy is displeasing to all the World, so all the World displeaseth it, all hands are against it, and it's hand is against the most innocent. I should take glory in its Malice, for thence I might derive an occasion to presume of having some vertue, since that is the common Object of its malign practises; But I must confess that in separating mee from the presence of Your Maje∣sty, it hath found the means to wound me in the most tender part, and dis∣covered the secret to put my Patience to the harshest triall that I could ima∣gine. For there is no Grandeur, no Riches that I would not trample under my feet as Dung. So that I might but remain neer Your Majesty, and all is but Dirt and Ashes to me in your absence. The Colours which they have chosen to banish me from your Court, are very specious; This is to pursue me with Roses and Flowers, to persecute mee in casting Oranges and Vialls of sweet Waters at mee; It is to cut off my Head with a Blade of Gold, or strangle mee with a Silken Halter. I do not question, Sir, the reason of my Exile, it suffiseth, that it is your Pleasure, to perswade mee that it is Just; if you would command mee to go meet Death, you should see mee run head-long to obey you, although I were most certain that I had not deserved it. Were it in my choyce, I should freely say to your Greatness, Bee pleased to take from mee what your immense Liberality hath hitherto powred upon my head. But since your Ordinance is otherwise, and that, burthened with Benefits, I must leave the Source for the Rivulets, and bee removed hence for the
advancement of your affairs and service (without considering the disadvan∣tage to my Honour, or the joy, I will not say, of my enemies, (for I have in∣deavoured as much as in mee lay not to purchase any) but of those that are jealous of the Graces I have received from your Goodness) I am willing to deprive my self, as long as your Majesty shall please, of the glory of your presence, in testimony of my extream Obedience and Fidelity, protesting that I had rather Die at your feet, than Live far from you in all the honours and delights Imaginable. This discourse interrupted sometimes with Sobs, and accompanyed with Tears, as pittifull as the Grief, which produced them, was reall, so moved the King's generous Spirit, that hee was al∣most in the mind to repeal Iphigenes Banishment. But humane Pru∣dence, for the reasons already declared, prevailed above his Affection; shewing therein his great vertue by subduing himself. Iphigenes after this, (with the King's permission) went to take leave of the Queen, who (like a woman,) knew better how to dissemble her regret, but not retein her tears, whose flowing betrayed her Counte∣nance, which shee had framed to Gravity and Disdain; So that at length shee was inforced to leave off that borrowed Visard, and shew openly enough to Iphigenes, that shee lost in him (not without resent∣ment) the richest Ornament of her Court, but that the King making her hope that his absence should not bee long, shee comforted her self with the expectation of his return, wishing him all happiness in his Journey, and recommending him to continue in the fidelity, which hee had al∣waies exprest in his Majestie's service, who had obliged him thereunto by so many gracious favours. Whereunto Iphigenes with a cheerfull and confident look, replyed, MADAM, Since after so many glorious dayes spent under the heaven of your Court, in the presence of your Favour, I must plunge, or rather bury my self alive in the obscurity of a tedious absence: my Reason more powerfull than my Senses, forbid's mee to complain, and denying utterance to my Sorrow, rendreth it so much the more miserable, the less it dare's disclose it's Agonie. Since afer so many graces received, and so many others that I hoped to receive from your Royall Beneficence, there is a necessity of my experimenting the Rain after the fair weather, and Thorns after the Roses, I can do no less than extoll the high Providence of Heaven, which destinying mee to Misfortune after so many humane Feli∣cities, hath ordeined that my Chastisement proceed's from the same hands that have made mee what I am, and from whom I have received greater benefits than I was ever able to deserve, If my Affection to serve your Ma∣jesties supply not the place of Merit. Indeed the Excellency of the Cause,
make's mee rather applaud than condemn the Rigor of the Effect. If the ex∣tremity of Sorrow may be allowed to utter words rather free than desperate, permit mee, MADAM, to say with all due respect to your Majesty, that if I have any way failed in the Honour or Fidelity that can be required from the most humble subjection and servitude; If I have deviated in the least from my Devoir, after the reception of so many Gratifications, there is no torment cruell enough to inflict upon such a Monster of Ingratitude. Banishment is too Mild, & such a one as is procured mee, too Honourable for a Punishment which ought to bee more Exemplary. But why do I speak, having protested to suffer in Silence? I belye my own proposition, and fly into complaints, which cannot appear just without doing injury to your Prudence and Equity. Ex∣cuse, MADAM, the vehemencie of my sorrow, since, seeing my self torn from the King, my Master, whose presence and favour I esteem more than my life, I feel my Heart rend in pieces, and my Soul seperate from my Body. What Trophies will my Enviers raise to their Malignity, seeing their designs which aym at nothing but my ruine, take effect? What Vanity will puffe up their poisonous Minds, that they have had the power to infect such clear Judgements as your Majestie's, making their Calumnies prevail against my Innocencie? But if suffiseth that it is your Will, I most humbly submit to the absolute Power you have over my Life, my Death, my Honour and my Fortune; for, being your Creature you may dispose of mee, as the Potter of his Clay, forming mee, according to your own pleasure, into a Vessell of Magnificence or Ignominie. I am ready to condemn my Innocency, whenso∣ever you shall pronounce it guilty, and to subscribe my accusation without replying: And if you please to dictate the Sentence of my Death, I will write and sign it with my Blood, and willingly fulfill your decree with the loss of my Life: For, preserving it for no other end, than to employ it in your Majestie's service, I cannot lose it more honorably, nor more advantagiously than to content you. But since your Majesties have otherwise determined, and that I am reserved to live, that my Life may be as a lingring Death to mee, I will yeild shamefully to those who procure my Disgrace, choosing rather to faile by a faint hearted Obedience, than defend my self with a rebellious Ge∣nerosity. Perhaps one day the Light may shine through the Darkness, and that Time, which maketh evident the most hidden things, drawing Truth out of the bottom of the Well, may render mee worthy to appear again before your Majesty with so much Advantage, that my present Dammage will seem as the seed of my future Prosperity. Imagine you if the Queen, being a vertuous and mercifull Princess, and a Woman, of a tender Disposition and susceptible of Compassion,
could hear this long discourse without being somwhat moved. So, for his farther satisfaction shee gave him to understand, That shee had been informed by the King, that this sending him into his Government was not intended through any dislike of theirs, but for reasons which regarded the State and the service of their Crown: Assuring him that for her part shee had no prejudiciall oinion of him, not suffering her self easily to bee carried away by slight suppositions and false reports, (which like importunate wasps are alwaies buzzing at the ears of Princes;) that hee might remain assu∣red, wherein shee could procure him any advantage, or do him any good office to her Husband and Sovereign, that shee would indeavour it with a sincere affection. To these words, which were worth mountains of Gold, shee added no presents, because those pass away, but these remain, and being more materiall give more occasion of Suspition, from which shee de∣sired to keep her self as fre as shee was from Crime. Thus Iphigenes in an unheard-of manner, was dismissed from Court, with extraordinary Caresses from both their Majesties, and (which was admirable) not dissembled. To demand permission to pass through Podolia, to take his wife thence with him into his Palatinate, and to obtein it, was all one. The Courtiers, those Protheusses, who change according to the inclinati∣on of their Prince, made (in imitation of the King) a thousand compli∣ments to Iphigenes, and large expressions of sorrow, when some of their hearts leaped with joy at his departure. The false accusers of Socrates, Anitus and Melitus, seeing the univer∣sall mourning of the Athenians for the death of that great Philosopher, being haunted with Furies, and tortured with the remorse of their own Consciences, became their own Executioners. The Calumniators of our Favorite, were upon the point of giving themselves over to the like rage; but they did more wisely to reserve themselves to a better end by repentance. Those who thought to have pleased their Majesties in not accompanying Iphigenes, found themselves deceived in their opi∣nions, receiving as little Countenance from the King, as they shewed little Courtesie to him: And those who did that civility to him, were favourably looked upon at their return: But how were they esteemed and applauded that rendring themselves his constant followers, became partakers of his adverse, as well as of his favorable Fortune? They in∣verted the sense of this common saying, The Fortunate are oppressed with Multitudes, and Solitariness environeth the Miserable. Some Flies & now and then a Swallow is seen in winter, and their rarity maketh them the more remarkable. Those who abandon not their friends when For∣tune
knits her brows, shew they are not led on by interest, but that affecti∣on to the persons beloved doth attract them. This apparent disgrace of Iphigenes did nothing diminish the ardent flames of the passionate Prin∣cess Respicia, all that troubled her was his ominous Journey into Podolia, which seemed to threaten the shipwrack of her pretensions. What will not a heart resolve being touched with that fire, which breeds the greater torment the more it is concealed? To hinder the Consummation of his Marriage with Modestina (which Mieslas had already prevented) shee determined to follow Iphigenes and Mieslas into Podolia, under pretence of affiancing the Prince Cassin with Clemencia, and to indea∣vour to perswade Iphigenes to marry her Daughter Simphoroza, though there was nothing more far from her intention than the latter. If Mo∣desty had permitted, shee would have put her self amongst that troop of Courtiers that accompanyed Iphigenes, amongst whom the Prince Cassin was the first in quality and in rank, taking this occasion to assist his fu∣ture Brother-in-law, and see his Mistress. The brave Pomeran, invio∣lably wedded to the fortune of Iphigenes, was likewise of the number: As also Argal and Pisides (who being a Lord Castellain in the Palatinate of Vratislaü, and of an antient family, resolved to employ all his own means, and use the utmost of his friend's power to serve Iphigenes after his arrivall in his Government;) Besides a great train of other Noble∣men and Gentlemen of Podolia, that returned from Court with Mieslas. Iphigenes in this pompous retirement was like a certain sort of Tapers, which composed of Aromaticall ingredients, exhale not so much sweet odor burning, as when extinguished, or Incense which smoaketh not untill put on the coals, and spices that render no sent untill they are beaten. This I say, because the reputation of Iphigenes was greater in his absence than in his presence, Privation making the injoyment of him more valuable. And as a Beard grows thicker after shaving, so his Re∣nown increased under the Razor of Detraction. Mieslas being entred into his Palatinate, made his Son bee received with the greatest delights and honours that hee could devise, but it was to make him taste Gall after this Honey, & give him an after course not conformable to this first▪ Service; for, being arrived at the place of his residence, hee neither found his wife Modestina, nor his Brother-in-law Liante with Aretuza, whereat hee expressed no slight discontent. And although by an especiall providence of Heaven, Mieslas had inclosed Modestina in a place inaccessible by any force (which might serve for a specious pretext to Iphigenes to keep hid the defect which hindred him
from acting the husband really) yet hee feined to bee very sensible of the injury they did him in debarring him of the possession of Her, whom hee could not injoy in that quality hee pretended, by reason of the ob∣stacles which Nature had imposed at his Creation. His Mother to whom hee communicated all his designes, could not enough admire with what grace and industry hee concealed his condition, and da∣zled the Eyes of such quick-sighted overseers. Whilest hee fumed and raged to have his Wife released (towards whom, if they had granted his request, hee knew not how to behave himself as a Husband) Mieslas opposed the rigor of his Fatherly Authority, alleadging, That his Marri∣age was made before the time, that the consentment of the parties at such tender years could bee but imperfect, and therefore hee held it as nothing; that the face of things being changed, hee did revoke the consent which hee had given to that Contract, having since ingaged his word to the Princess Respicia. Then, being further importuned to set Modestina at liberty, hee threatned his Son with fearfull maledictions, if ever hee took her as his Wife. Hereupon Iphigenes, handsomely feining Scruples of Con∣science, seemed to apprehend lest his Father's curses should light upon his Posterity, and absolutely ruine his Fortune, which already was shrewdly shaken; Insomuch that Mieslas perceiving that this battery made breach in Iphigenes Soul mounted no other Artillery, and employ∣ed no other Thunderbolts to reduce all his indeavours unto ashes. In the heat of these contestations arrived the Princess Respicia, bringing her Daughter Simphoroza, whose age being yet too neer Infancy, was incapable, for certain years, of bearing Hymen's yoke. At her coming (as at the appearance of Porposes a Tempest is observed to follow) Mi∣eslas began again to storm and torment Iphigenes to marry Simphoroza. Hee alleadged for excuse his Faith given to Modestina, that whom God hath joyned, men could not separate, that nothing but death should break the Bands that united his heart to her's; besides, hee would have perswaded them that hee had in a manner passed to a perfect Consum∣mation, and that shee was not only his wife by words but in effect: But this was contradicted by Perpetua and Modestina her self, whose inno∣cent deposition declared that shee never knew what Man was. Respicia knowing, that as in Naturall things the Corruption of the one, is the Generation of another; So in affairs, the Rupture of one, is the Accom∣plishment of another, urged nothing so eagerly as the Dissolution of this first Marriage.
The Fourth Book. ARGUMENT. The Result of the Divine's Consultation concerning the dissolution of the Marriage betwixt Iphigenes and Modestina. The Court-Maxime. Iphigenes object's the same Reason for not marrying Simphoroza, as was alleadged by the Casuists against Modestina. Simphoroza being ex∣cepted against for her too tender years, Mieslas (by Respicia's instigation) propounds the Mother in the Daughter's place. Iphigenes's answer to his Father. Clemencia refuses to marry Cassin. The fury of Mieslas for her Obstinacy. Cassin having left Podolia discontented indeavour's all hee can at Court to hinder his Mother's marriage with Iphigenes. Liante being escaped out of his Prison by means of his dear Brother-in-law Iphigenes is secretly conveyed into his Palatinate. Iphigenes retiring to his own Government leaves Aretuza as full of satisfaction, as Mieslas of Perplexity for the Crosseness of his Children. Respicia, accom∣panyed by Mieslas, returns with small contentment to the Court. Liante being arrived in the Palatinate of Plocens disguises himselfe in a Sheep∣heardesse's habit under the name of Almeria. Iphigenes loseth his company in Hunting to meet with his Almeria. Their Discourse. The Reason why Liante made use of that Disguise. Merinda Daughter to Celian, in whose House Liante concealed himself, fall's in Love with the feined Sheepheardess. Shee discover's her affection to him. The Character of Courtiers and Countrey-People. THere are in the World certain Divines à la mode, who can adapt the Scripture and the Fathers of the Church so dexterously to their own Fantasies, and to the pa∣lates of those that consult them, and whose passions they desire to flatter; that they fashion that Water of saving Wisdom to the form of the Vessell which re∣ceive's it, planting the Canons of the Church against such opinions as they list, and Levelling them in such sort as they Demolish, Edifie, root
up and set as they think fitting; Like Pilots who direct their Rudders in a strait and Oblique line according to the Motion of the Waves that agitate their Ships. Iphigenes to whom all women were indifferent, for the reasons already declared (making no other Intrenchment than within the Fort of his Conscience) had that scruple cleared by a Con∣sultation of Church-men appointed by Respicia and Mieslas; The result whereof was, That in regard the Infantine age of the parties Con∣tracted, being added to some kind of force used by the Contracter, Mieslas, rendred their consentment invalide, since the use of Bodies had not intervened they esteemed that Obligation voyd, and that without offence they might proceed to another Marriage; not con∣sidering, that as Contracts made by persons in Minority, do become valid when they do ratifie them in their Majority, whereby an imper∣fect Consentment is made perfect and of full force, when at an age more mature and capable of approving it, It is confirmed and renewed by mutuall promises: which had held undeniably in this case, if Iphi∣genes had been of a condition to take a wife, for as much as by divers letters written to Modestina and received from her, they had made a thousand and a thousand Oaths to each other of an inviolable Fidelity. But this Maxime is so strongly established at Court ——(the Powers above Laugh at the Oaths pronounc'd in heat of Love) that when Iphigenes alledged Protestations beyond number, both ver∣ball and under his hand, which hee had made to Modestina, never to have any other wife but her, they scoffed at his words and letters as if they had been engraven on the Wind, and written on the Water. But they were to seek what to reply, when to their confusion their decision rebounded in their own faces; For, Iphigenes readily presented to them that Simphoroza was of years, not only incapable to consummate the marriage, but to give a full and perfect consent, without which (accor∣ding to their own argument) that knot could not be rendred indisso∣luble. Hereupon the Princess Respicia made appear the subtility of her wit, feigning, what shee desired with impatience, to Subrogate her self in the place of her Daugher. This shee intimated to Mieslas with so much Artifice, and such Prodigious advantages for Iphigenes (for the most part of the Estate came by her) that the Palatine of Podolia, naturally desirous of wealth to maintein his excessive expences, was presently induced to hearken to her perswasions. On that side the bu∣siness was as soon concluded as propounded; but they foresaw much
difficulty to make the young Gentleman bite at this Golden Bait; for his own Estate was so plentifull, and his Honours so great, that how vast soever the Fortune of Respicia could bee, and how illustrious her Alliance; if the Appast (which youthly Palates do relish with most gree∣diness) composed of Beauty and Pleasure were wanting, it must needs bee imagined that hee would not easily be drawn into that Marriage, as unequall for years on the one side as on the other: For, as Simphoro∣za was too young, and her tender Beauty, being not yet full blown, did promise no great matter in the Bud; So her Mother was too old, though not so aged as to bee rejected for ugly, nor so young as to bee rank'd amongst the Beautifull: Shee was in that Point as Women be∣gin to leave the Attribute of Fair, to enter into the Predicament of Good. But beeing very Artificiall, shee had the Industry (without dis∣covering that shee Painted) advantageously to repair the dammages which Age had done to her Presence, and doting upon her own Per∣fections, Shee gave such credit to the false Reports of her Looking. Glass, that shee fancied her self to bee the most lovely Creature breathing. IPHIGENES making a Buckler, against his Father's Importunities, of the Child-hood of Simphoroza, Mieslas said unto him, And if I find you another Match Richer than shee, and of mature Age, will you accept of her? Hereupon Iphigenes (to whom all Women were alike, for any∣thing hee had to do with them) to counterfeit the obedient Son, de∣claring out of Compliment, That hee had no other Will then his, so that hee would please to give him time to know before hee Loved, there beeing nothing in the World so hard to do by Force, or in respect of Duty, as to Love. Mieslas, ravished with this Act of Obedience, after acknowledgement of the Immortall Obligations Hee would do him, if hee would leave Modestina to marry one of the noblest and most opulent Ladies of Polonia (beeing lessoned before hand by the subtile Respicia) proposed by a thousand crafty circumlocutions the Mother in stead of the Daughter; and setting out her Beauty (like flat∣tering Painters) with the Pensill of his Tongue, and magnifying her Riches with the Eloquence of a mouth of Gold, hee indeavoured to provoke Iphigenes appetite to relish that stale Fruit, and make him take a commodity that was not for his utterance. A modest blush covering his delicate Cheeks at the recitall of this Proposition; What? sayd Mieslas, you do like those foolishly nice Virgins that are dasht out of Coun∣tenance, when one speake's to them of a Husband. Indeed your Enviers at
Court were mistaken in the tearm, when they called you Effeminate, since you make so little account of Women, as to blush with shame when they are but mentioned. Truly Sir, replyed IPHIGENES (the Bloud rising faster in his Face, because his Father had taken notice of that Girlish Action) me think's (as that Ancient who would not be perswaded to marry, answered those that urged him thereunto in his youth, that it was yet too son, and in his old Age, that it was then too late) I may freely say, that as it is not yet time for the Daughter to dream of Marrying, so it is more than time that the Mother should leave such thoughts; the one is too young, the other too far advanced in years (for the word Old is injurious to that Sex,) and both of them (if I have any Judgement) are very unfit for mee: I have Riches and Honours more than I need, & beeing by favour of Fate be∣gotten by you, the alliance of a Wife can adde nothing to the nobleness of my Extraction, nor of my Posterity. In Marriage is required not onely an aug∣mentation of Fortune, but the equality of Age and Humours. This Discourse so displeased the arrogant Mieslas, who invoking Heaven and Earth against his Son, loaded his Rebellion with Impre∣cations, and fulminated a thousand execrable curses against his Diso∣bedience; Iphigenes feigning to be affraid of those Threats and terrible Thunder-claps of his Father's wrath, beseeched him to pardon him, if hee had declared his sense so plainly, knowing that the first Ideas are generally but little Judicious, and how the first Motions are not in our Powers. That Reason did oblige him to acknowledge the Beauty, No∣bleness, and Eminent advantages of the Princess Respicia; but that the Sense surprising for the most part the Judgement, it arrives oft-times that upon second thoughts wee desire with ardour, what at the first we too inconsideratly rejected: That He knew Matrimony to be so sage a Bar∣gain, that therein was not to bee given so much access to Appetite as to Prudence; That great Personages ought to hearken thereunto more out of Maxim of State, than for the consideration of Flesh and Blood, and that hee did desire onely some time to reflect seriously thereupon, and give his resolution. This satisfaction being speedily applied to the wound in Mieslas his cholerick brest, took away all the pain and inflamation in a moment. When Iphigenes had the full liberty of his thoughts, I give you leave to Judge what his Imaginations were of Respicia's Designs, all whose deportments repassing through his Memory, hee easily gathered by her former Discourses to him at the Court, that beeing inamored of the Beauty which appeared in his Face, shee had disguised her own Pre∣tences
under the Marriages of her Son and Daughter; and then making reflection further upon the weakness of a Sex accompanied with such cunning Plots, hee regretted that Nature having indued his Mind with such a Masculine Courage, had ranked his Body in so miserable a Con∣dition: At last, resolving never to deceive any other Woman than Mo∣destina, and in regard if hee married Respicia, his Secret would soon bee divulged, hee thought it most conducing to his purpose, to thrust back Time by the Shoulders, and amuse her with delayes. This Design hee imparted to Aretuza, who much approved his ingenuity; and you may guess, if knowing (as they did) the truth of Iphigenes Disguise∣ment, they had not occasion enough to make their Pastime of the Princesse's Pain: Who being full of Vanity, seeing her self Courted by Iphigenes with some little shew of Passion, conceited presently that, Basilisk like, shee had wounded him in the Eyes; which Opinion trans∣ported her into follies more extravagant than can been imagined; But I will leave them at the end of my Pen, not to verifie this saying of a certain Author, That there is nothing more ridiculous than a decrepite Souldier and an aged Lover. Mean time Iphigenes protracted the de∣termination of his resolution, having his brains more troubled about procuring the liberty of his dear Liante. To demand that grace of his Father upon the nick of Clemencia's Marriage to the Prince Cassin, were to put him quite off the hooks; besides, to break that affection between his Sister and that beloved Brother-in-Law, hee thought it materiall, first to let that Alliance betwixt the Prince and her bee fully concluded, wherein Mieslas did labour all hee could. Wee have already said that Clemencia injoyed not so much outward Beauty, as inward Vertue; and that if Liante had any Inclination for Her, it was, because Obliged by her Affection & Cordiality to him. But Cassin, who had seen so many objects at Court more worthy to stay his thoughts, did look upon her meerly to please his Mother, and to satisfie the ambiti∣ous Desire Hee had of raising himself to high Commands by the support and favour of Iphigenes, who beeing then retired from the Court, which is the Country of Occasions, and the Field where Dignities are reaped, this made the Prince more cold in his pursuit. Nevertheless having imbarked himself in that Voyage, and being advanced to offers of Ser∣vice to Her, and Tearms of Agreement with Mieslas, there was no possibility of his receding, without offending the Palatine, who had given Him his Word, and to whom Hee had reciprocally passed His. Besides that, His Mother, who was entred into some hope of possessing
Iphigenes (which Shee kept close enough from His knowledge) egged Him daily on to finish that Treaty. Iphigenes on the other side (beeing importuned by Mieslas to the re-search, or more properly, the Ac∣quisition of Respicia) found an expedient, (for his own respect) to pro∣crastinate that busines; which was thus. His Marriage with Modestina had been celebrated publickly and with Solemnity; therefore for his own Justification, and the good of his Posterity, it was requisite that it should bee declared void by publick Authority; for the effecting whereof they must have recourse to Rome, Hee beeing of Opinion that in mean time they should proceed to the accomplishment of his Sister's Marriage to Cassin. That shall be no hin∣derance, replied Mieslas, if that be all: And Respicia, more glad than if shee had gained an Empire, could not hold her Heart from Dan∣cing for joy assoon as Shee heard this news flattering her self that to Demand and Obtain that Dissolution was but one and the same thing. Whilest the Messenger was posting to Rome, the Parents laboured to effect the Marriage of the Prince and Clemencia: But the mutuall con∣sent of the Parties, beeing that which fasten's the Knot, it was travers∣ed by the resistance of Clemencia, who refused to subscribe that Con∣tract, declaring freely to her Father, that her Heart was Liante's, and that shee would bee wedded to a Cloister with her Elder Sisters, or have him for her Husband. Judge you what an impetuous storm of indigna∣tion rose in the Palatine's tempestuous Spirit, seeing himself contra∣dicted by a simple Girle in two things which were extreamly sensible to him: The one, that Liante should leave his Ecclesiasticall Vocation (which hee had forced him to embrace) to Marry his Daughter with∣out making him acquainted; The other, that shee should deny a Prince, who in his Opinion did her too much Honour, and to whom hee had ingaged his Promise. His Fury grew to such Excess, that Hee spake of nothing but dipping his Hands in her Blood, to punish her for a Rebellion which hee deemed worthy of no less than Death. And in effect if shee had not been withdrawn out of his Presence, probably hee would have committed some notorious scandall. Hee cursed and fu∣med against those that hindred him from tearing her in pieces, and tur∣ning himself with Eyes casting Flames of Rage towards Aretuza, Thus (sayd hee) you bring up your Daughters: Go, and if you make her not change her Note, and crave pardon for her obstinate refusall, hope for nothing from mee but most-rigorous usage, and to end your Days by some memo∣rable punishment. Ile teach you to obey mee, or Ile make you measure the
Ground with your extended Corps. Thus did the irritated Podolian vent his Choller, whilest the Prince Cassin without uttering one Sillable did lose himself in the confusion of his thoughts. What? sayd hee within himself, Am I come so far to receive an Affront, to gather the Reliques of a dying Favour, and suffer a repulse from a Creature that hath neither Beau∣ty nor Riches capable to attract my Love, that surpasseth mee neither in Birth nor Breeding; and must I return to serve for a Fable and Laugh∣ing-stock to the whole Court? Oh Mother! In what a business have have you imbarked me? Oh Ambition! upon what Rocks of ignominy dost thou preci∣pitate mee? Respicia on the other side was no less perplexed, this presaged no good to her Pretences; for, as Shee believe That one of these Al∣liances beeing accomplished, might bee a means to further the other, So, shee feared that the dissolution of This, would bee the destruction of That which shee most desired. At length Clemencia proved like a Leaf, that is moved with every breath of Wind. For, Aretuza know∣ing the secret of Iphigenes, and seeing into what Extremities Passion was likely to transport Mieslas, if Shee persevered in that Disobe∣dience, Prayed her, Preached to her, and tormented her so much, that in the end shee tore a kind of Consent from her, like to the second Myrrhe, which drops not from the Tree but by violent Scratching and Raking with Teeth of Iron. Cassin who would not possess the Body, when another injoyed the Heart, not to joyn (as it were) the Living with the Dead, carried himself with extream coldness in this Treaty, which hee signed onely out of compliance to his Mather's Will, who never ceased conjuring him; And Clemencia (with a thousand Tears, witnesses of her unwillingness) did the like, by the absolute command of her imperious Father. These were very discordant Accords, and which (if no other Tune were added) will never make any good Musick. But that which ruined all was, when Cassin came to the know∣ledge of his Mother's Affections to Iphigenes, and how shee managed the Accomplishment of her own desires under the Name of Simphoro∣za; For, judging how ruinous her second Marriage might prove to him, according to that Maxime, which saith, That Shee who re-marrieth, de∣clareth War against the Children of her first Bed; Hee resolved to return to the Court, and use all possible means by his Interest and Credit with His Majesty to hinder that Marriage of Iphigenes and His Mother. So, leaving Mother, Mistress, Mieslas and all Podolia, hee posted away to the Court without acquainting any of them with his Departure. In
what confusion Respicia remained, you may better Imagine than I De∣scribe, when shee saw her Practises Discovered, which shee had, till then, carried on with such circumspection. Iphigenes hereupon had a fair pretence to personate the Male-content, and defer those Matri∣moniall Ceremonies untill better opportunity, alledging that during his Exile (so hee tearmed his Retirement from Court) hee esteemed it not fit to Talk or Think of Marrying, no more than to wear Green for mourning; besides, that his Enemies might take occasion from thence to possess the King, that hee made little account of his Disgrace, since, hee passed the time in Feasting, Magnificence and Jollity. That which made Iphigenes fullest of Care and Pensiveness, was Liante's Imprisonment, the inlargement of whom Hee Resolved to pro∣cure by some Invention or other, or to perish in the attempt. What need is there of Strength, or Stratagems? Gold doth all. There's no Place impregnable to him that shoot's Golden Bullets; no Castle so strongly fortified, but is Accessible and Penetrable by a Mule loaden with that metall, as said a certain King of the Mecedonians. With these Suns of Darkness, hee dazled the Eyes of Liante's Keepers, and made him Escape away so handsomely, that it seemed to have been ra∣ther by his own Industry, than through any Negligence of their's: And by the intercourse of Boleslaüs, his faithfull Foster-Father, under∣hand hee conveyed to him all things necessary for a Journey into his Palatinate, where hee gave him a secret Rendez-vous, and followed him some few dayes after, leaving Aretuza full of Consolation to see him so well educated, and yet in mervellous perplexity of Mind, knowing that shortly all the Mystery, which had so long been concealed, would be discovered: But shee was somewhat eased by the assurance which Iphigenes gave her, of beeing carefull above all things to preserve his Honour, which was no less Recommendable to him than his Life. Mieslas, who formerly did so rail at Aretuza, now (like a Cupping∣glass) had drawn all the trouble upon himself: For, the Prince Cassin's going away Discontented; Clemencia's Passion for Liante, which (as shee witnessed by her Sighs and Tears) was unremoveable; Liante's escape out of Prison; Iphigenes's Displeasure for Modestina's severe con∣finement, who could no more be thrust out, than Respicia or Simpho∣roza be received into his Heart; the Princesse's affliction for all these confused Imbroilments: And lastly, the apparent Disgrace of his Son, having lost the King's Favour and Presence; All these hapning upon
the Neck of one another, put his Wisdom to seek a Determination. After long Raving, and not finding any Thred to draw him out of this Labyrinth, Hee resolved to return with the Princess Respicia to Court, to see how his Son's business stood there, and to hinder Calumnie from prevailing so much against his Innocency, as to cause the time of his Re∣legation to be lengthened, knowing well that those Regions which are most remote from the Sun are both Cold and Barren, and that by the long continuance of Frost, the Ice turn's into Chrystall, which the Rayes of the Prince of the Stars are not able to dissolve. Kings are commonly like Nurses, who care for their Foster-Children no longer than they are hanging at their Brests; For they cherish their Favorites, but while they are in their Sight: Absence with its insensible Spunge effaceth them by little and little out of their Memories. It is so ordinary a thing for Children to complain, when their Mo∣thers fly to a second Hymen, that it is no wonder if Respicia at her re∣turn found all the Court possessed with the news of her new Flames, which by her usuall subtilities shee indeavoured to smother: And to stop the Current of that Opinion, shee sayd, That the putting of her self in her Daughter's place, was onely to amuse Iphigenes, and to gain the time which was necessary for the annulling of his Marriage with Modestina, and that having him sure by an Agreement, it would be easie for her, Sim∣phoroza beeing grown to a competent Age, to remit her in her place to accomplish the Contract with Iphigenes, blaming her Son for taking with the Left-hand her Right intentions. This Excuse shee covered with so much Art (as shee plastered her Face with Painting) that as this made her seem Beautifull though shee was not, so that gave her Speech an ap∣parent shew of Truth, though in effect it was clean contrary. That in private shee rebuked with vehemency the Prince, her Son, threatning to deprive him of the Succession of her Estate, for having indeavoured to cast dirt in his Mother's Face, I make no difficulty to believe: for, such vain and haughty Spirits, as her's, suffer not without resentment the least Affronts or Obloquies. And Hee, who desired no better than the publick Declaration which shee made, of not pretending to break her Widdow-hood, made her all the Satisfactions his filiall obsequious∣ness could suggest, which shee included all in this one Condition, That hee should not disclaim the Agreement made with Clemencia; For, holding him fast tied with the Band of that Alliance, it would be more easie for her (shee conceived) to recover the Track of her former Chase. As for Mieslas hee was received into the same Rank hee had before
in the King's Council, and his Majestice communicated his designs more particularly to him, to the end hee might understand thereby, that the dismissing of his Son Iphigenes was not any Disgrace, but a Remedy ra∣ther to dissipate the clouds which Detraction had suscitated betwixt Him and the Queen. A Courtier Inured to the tricks and Policies practised in King's Pala∣ces, hath incomparable Industries and wayes to pick open the Secrets of the Mind's Cabinet. Mieslas did so much by his Inquests & close follow∣ing, that he discovered the Match, and by the Train found out the whole Mine. It being an ordinary thing amongst Traitors to appeach one another, some of the malicious Cabal of Calumniators, thinking to in∣sinuate with Iphigenes, (whose credit in Court they saw was nothing diminished by his absence) revealed to Mieslas, to the prejudice of their Companions, the whole Imposture concerning his Son, and what Stratagem they had used to work him out of the King's favour. Mi∣eslas having heard all the passages from point to point, evidently per∣ceived, by the severall discoureses which hee had observed to fall now and then by piece-meal as well from the Queen's mouth as the King's, that his Informers did not amuse him with fopperies, but touched the matter home. Iphigenes in mean time arrived in his Palatinate of Vratislaü, with a Train and Equipage little Inferiour to the King's, not unlike to those vast Rivers which overflowing their banks carry away all they meet in their Course through the Vallies, or those Massie pieces of Rock which falling from the ridge of a Steep Mountain, tumble before and draw after them a multitude of other small Stones. A great number of the Gentry of Podolia, conducted him to the Confines of Vratislaü, where hee was received by the Lords-Castellains and Gentlemen of his own Government, with such applause and joy, that it was plainly to been seen his Favour was not Extinguished neither in the opinion of the Nobles nor Comon-People. The King had by express letters com∣manded all the Towns in his Palatinate to render him the same Ho∣nours as to his Royall person, promising to acknowledg and gratifie those that respected him, whom Hee esteemed. Among all the Noble-men and persons of note about Iphigenes, Pomeran, Argal and Pisides appeared like great Planets among the smaller Stars, which in a Serene Night are seen twinkling in the Fir∣mament. Nevertheless Courtesie and Civility, (which polish the Spirits of Courtiers, and make a Visible distinction betwixt them and the
Country Gentry) were held in such recommendation by those Gallants, that in stead of Slighting or Scoffing at those who were so much their Inferiours, they treated them with such endearing Affability, that they made a Conquest of Hearts for the Palatine, so considerable, that within very short time hee had a most absolute power in his Province. In a select place whereof Liante having made his retreat, expecting an opportunity to confer with Iphigenes, judged it his securest way to avoid all sort of suspition, to disguise himself in the habit of a Country Wench: of which design hee advertised the Palatine by Letters, who applauded much the Invention. LIANTE having left all those of his attendance in a neighbouring Town, retired himself to a Country Farmer's House in a little Village within the Forrest, (having first dazled the Clown's eyes with that Metall, whose Power dimmeth the clearest sights, and makes tongues Silent, or speak what the giver listeth) where hee took the charge of his Cattle in quality of a Shepherdess. And Iphigenes (after hee had re∣ceived the first Honours of his Charge, and that by severall Magnificent Banquets, Balls, Turnaments, and other publique rejoycings, those of that Province had expressed the contentment which they received in seeing themselves subjected to so sweet a Government as his) for his ordinary divertisement made choice of the pleasure of Hunting, which is generally affected by great persons, because in Peace it make's them see some shadow of their profession of Warre, and entertain's their high Spirits with more Generosity than any other recreation: The Towns seemed Prisons to him, the Fields and Woods a Paradise. For, being deprived at one time of both those Luminaries, which enlightned his thoughts, Love and the Court; I mean, the two Objects of his Am∣bition and Affection, the King and Liante, Hee became like a Flower without the Dew, and the Earth without Water; Insomuch that it might easily bee gathered by the alteration of his Complexion, that there was no small disturbance in his Mind. And to confess the truth, if either of those Passions alone bee sufficient to trouble the firmest brain, what dis∣quietness will they cause being joyned together? The pain which pro∣ceed's from the desire of Glory, and of possessing the most eminent Dignities, is a great Torment to a generous Soul; And if you add the Interest of Riches, which are as the Bones and Sinews to sustein that Greatness, you will render the sorrow for the privation of these two things very vehement: But amongst people of no mean Judgments, the grief which the absence of a beloved Object doth ingender in the
minde, is esteemed the least supportable. You may imagine then in what a Tempest was Iphigenes Spirit agitated, having before his eyes neither of those favourable Stars, which only could procure his Calm, the Roy∣alty of his Prince, nor the Loyalty of Liante, Liante the King of his Affection, nor the King the Object of his Ambition. But where Love presides, all other Passions must give place: The loss of Iphigenes's hopes in Court was less sensible to him in the obscurity of this Exile, injoying Liante's presence, than the want of his beloved sight was in the midst of all his Honours and Delights at the height of his Fa∣vour. BOLESLAUS, the faithfull Depositary of all his Secrets, who was not Ignorant of the just pretensions hee had for Liante, (wherein as in all other occurrences, ayming at nothing but his contentment, hee dis∣posed himself to serve him) by his frequent comming and going to the Hamlet, where Liante (under the name of ALMERIA) kept himself concealed, prepared an Interview for these two dear friends. By whose directions Iphigenes went so many times a hunting that way, that at length in despight of all his followers (who never lost sight of him) hee happily lost himself to find out the Canton, where his Shepherdess fed her gentle Flock. Let all those, who are not Ignorant of the Effects of a sincere Friendship, bee Judges of the resentments of those two Souls at this meeting, so Long expected, so Ardently desired, and effected no less Succesfully than contrived with Dexterity. For, to re∣late you here all their indearing speeches in entertaining each other, would be perhaps to say much to little purpose, and fill these Pages, which are not destined (as not desired) for any other end, than to represent the Event of their Adventures. Only in two words I may say, that their Minds discharged themselves in each other's Bosome of that weighty Burthen of Thoughts, which they had been breeding ever since their Separation. Iphigenes first giving Liante an account of the divers Traverses, that Fortune, sometimes Kinde, sometimes Cruell, had made him Undergoe at Court, which is the Theater, whereon, to the View of the whole World, shee doth expose her most Extravagant actions. There hee displayed the severall successes of the King's Favour; the Queen's Courtesie; the Envie of the Grandees; the Calumnie of Ma∣ligne Spirits; the Passions of the Ladies; the Jealousie of Augustus and his being Banished; his Incounter with Scanislas, whose Palatinate hee injoyed, having taken his life; the subtle deportments of the Princess Respicia; his being dismis't from Court, by a Plot which had been disco∣vered
to him by Mieslas since his arrivall at Vratislaü; In summ, hee gave him an abridgment of every passage mentioned in this Narra∣tion, with divers other particulars which were too tedious to re∣hearse. LIANTE reciprocally acquainted him with the misery and discon∣tents which he had received by his absence, the bitterness whereof he was in hopes somewhat to mitigate by the sweetness of the affections, which hee had cast into his Soul for the amiable Clemencia, whose Goodness, Constancy, and fervent Love hee felt himself obliged to cherish, besides the passionate Ambition hee had of having a double relation to him, by the alliance of his Sister Modestina (for whose sake hee highly ap∣plauded his withstanding so may assaults) and by that which hee desired to Contract with Clemencia; wherereunto, if hee were not incited by that Glory, Hee should however esteem himself ingaged (unless hee would incur the Repute of the most Ingratefull amongst Men) for the firme Resistance which shee had made, notwithstanding all the Rigours of her severe Father, shewing the Excellency of her Courage, in that (to maintein the Faith which shee had so many times sworn to him) shee did refuse a Prince, who in Birth, Quality, and Estate, was far more considerable than hee, to whom the violent usur∣pation of Mieslas had left nothing but Alexander's Portion, Hope. From this Passion which hee expressed for Iphigenes's Sister, and which served as a Charm in his Melancholic restraints, Hee fell to the Treason of Perpetua and his Governour, (so hee tearmed the discovery of his Letters, under whose Ashes they disclosed his Fire;) thence to the Castle, where the Cruelty of Mieslas had kept him so close Prisoner, and from which hee owed his releasement to Iphigenes, whom hee styled his Deliverer, his Brother, his Master, the Star of his Hope, with as many other sweet Appellations as an Intire Friendship could suggest, which made his Friend clearly see the Profound Resentments of his Soul for this last Obligation, which was the greater, in regard Liberty is sweeter than Life. Whereunto Iphigenes replyed, That that was but the dore of the building of that great Fortune, whereunto Hee intended to raise him, if letting lye dormant for a while his Pretensions to Clemencia (wherein hee saw so many oppositions) hee would give eare to his Counsells, by which hee would render him the greatest man in Polonia. Iphigenes said this, because, as ordinarily wee are aptest to put our hands upon the place that paine's us most, the strong Inclination which Liante revealed for Clemencia,
bred a jealous Apprehension in his Brest, lest his Heart being prepossessed, could not admit of his Affection in that just manner hee desired, and you may easily Conjecture. As a great Light doth dimm a less, and (according to the Proverb) one Naile drives out another: So it is sel∣dome seen that two Violent Passions do reign together in one Heart, the Bed is two narrow to receive them both. Where Love hath the Empire, Vanity must yeild: For that Quality which causeth Love, hath little Ambition. But where that aspiring desire of Honours hath the As∣cendant, Love must deliver his Arms. And whatsoever the Fable telleth us of the Association of Mars and Venus, it is hard to finde them toge∣ther, as Vulcan did, without rendring them ridiculous; These Planets in their Aspects have never any favourable Conjunction; for, how can one joyne two things so directly contrary, as the Exercises of War and Peace? The Judgement of Paris doth sufficiently demonstrate, that the Apple could not bee divided, but that either Glory (which is de∣noted by Pallas and Juno) must give place to Pleasure; or that Delights must yeild to the Desire of Honours: For, as there is no entrance into the Temple of Honour, but by the dore of Vertue, so there is no admit∣tance into the Temple of Vertue, but through the Porch of Labour. This I say, because Liante, who was more Ambitious than Amorous (quite contrary to Iphigenes) catched with both hands at his Brother's pro∣positions, promising him not to think of Clemencia any father than his Commandements or Permission should allow, remitting his Fortune solely to his Conduct, and esteeming it a great happiness to attend on him in quality of a Servant, and depend absolutely upon his Will. O Iphigenes how sweetly did these last words flatter thy Imagination, since this Shaft hit so directly the Blank of all thy thoughts? As Iphigenes had even upon the Brink of his Lips the discovery of his Project to advance Liante in the World, (which was the point that tickled most his generous Heart, therein not unlike Virgins, whose Sen∣suall Temptations are the more pressing, because they fancy the Nup∣tiall pleasures to be far greater than they are:) Fortune, like the Sea which never keep's its face long Calm, thwarted the impatient desire of our disguised Shepherdess, to make her know that in this transitory dwelling wee have nothing perfect, that the fairest dayes are followed by Nights, the sweetest flowers environed with Thorns, and no Hony to be gotten without some Stinging. For, as he had assembled all the facul∣ties of his Soul in his Ears, to hear what his Brother had designed for his Promotion, the winding of the Hunter's Horns, making the Forest
resound with a thousand Ecchoes, gave them notice that the Game was not far off. So that, not to bee surprised together, they were inforced to part not without promising to meet again with the first conveni∣encie. The Hunts-men, who were more in pain for the straying of their Master, than their missing of the Stag, whose Strain they could not finde, all their Hounds being at a loss, seemed to ask news with their Horns and Hollowes of the Palatine, who rushing through the thickets to the place of the noyse, found his Men, but no Game; With whom hee returned as much contented that hee had seen Liante, as little satisfied for having discovered that hee reteined yet so much Passion for his Sister Clemencia. The Reader perchance will think strange why these Brothers should use such Circumspection in their Interviews, in regard Iphigenes, as well as other Palatines, being very powerfull, and in a manner Sove∣reign in his Palatinate, might have made Liante of his Train, and pro∣tected him in his own Pallace. But what safegard or Protection can shelter a man from Traitors, and secure him from the hands of those who Persecute him by waies the more dangerous, because least known? you are then to take notice, that as soon as Liante had made his escape out of Prison by means of his dear Brother-in-law, Miestas (whose Rigour and Cruelty passed the quality of a Sarmatian, and who from the beginning did express an unheard-of malice against this Innocent Youth) gave Commission to severall murtherous Villains, who bound themselves by Execrable Oaths to bring him back to Prison, or if they could not take him alive, to bring him his head, and in case they could not accomplish this by force, that they would make use of Policy and Poison. In this Barbarisme the Salvage Podolian had two ends; One, to hinder Liante from pretending to his Daughter, and that being out of the World his consideration should be no hinderance to her Alliance with Cassin, which hee exceedingly desired: The other, to gain his whole Inheritance to himself, by muing up in a Monastery with his other Daughters the unfortunate Modestina. Iphigenes having got an inkling of this accursed Conspiracy, gave notice thereof to Liante, which obliged him to conceale and Disguise himself, as is said. For if hee had been known, how could hee have secured himself from the Ambushes of Murtherers, who founding their Fortunes upon his Death, would alwaies have been Levelling at him, and held him in continuall fear? Was not this apprehension, together with the difficulty hee had to accost Iphigenes (who was his only Solace and Refuge) enough to afflict
this young Spirit, but the Fates must persecute him with further Dis∣asters, and assail him with unsavory Rustick importunities in his Disguise∣ment? The Country-man, in whose House hee had retired himself, beeing a Widdower, committed the managing of all his Husbandry and Hous∣hold to the charge of a Son, yet unmarried, and two Daughters ready to be Married; the Elder whereof (named Merinda) hee was con∣streined to acquaint with the secret of Liante, telling her that hee was a young Man, who having committed a Murther, was fled for shelter in his Cottage, and that to avoid the hands of Justice, hee was ad∣vised to disguise himself: therefore hee willed her to help him to a Country Wenche's habit, and hee would entertain him to keep his Cattell in nature of a Shepherdess; Injoyning her to bee silent under pain of his Displeasure, and making her understand besides, the great profit they should gain thereby, hee being a Rich Man's Son, and who might bee very beneficiall to them. Merinda put this Coal into her bosom, I should say, this secret; but it is all one for a Maid to hold the one or the other: yet I spake in some kind more properly than I was aware. For, Judge you, if it was not to put a Coal (and of the hottest too) in the bosom of a lusty Lass, the giving her a handsome young Man for a constant Companion. In summe, the Face of the feined Alme∣ria, insensibly made impression in Merinda's Heart, which put her in the like Condition as those that are stung with a certain venimous Creature, known in Italy by the Name of TARANTOLA, whose pricking, because not to bee perceived upon the skin, the affected place is never discovered by any swelling, untill the venim hath possess't the Heart and become remediless; Sight and Conversation are the two Wings of Love, which beating the Wind make the flame kindle. Merin∣da was all on fire, and reduce almost to Ashes, before her little wit per∣ceived the Burning. Fire is hard to take in great pieces of Wood; but if it bee once light∣ed, it is not easily quenched. This Element is so active, that in Pene∣trate's and melt's the hardest Mettalls, it calcine's Stones, no substance is able to resist its vivacity: But that which causeth Love, is yet far more subtile. For it is so generally spred through the whole Universe, that the Antient Philosophers esteemed it the Soule of the World. Therefore the Poets did Marry Olympus with Rhea, intimating that it was the Ligature of Heaven and Earth. It burn's the Fishes in the midst of the Waters, the Birds cannot avoid it in the Aire, and much less the Crea∣tures
that are more Terrestiall. Flints have secret sparkles in their hard Bodies, and if Mankinde were repaired by them, according to the fa∣bulous Invention of Deucalion and Pyrrha, yet should they be sensible of the Motions and Heat of Love. What wonder then if Merinda, who was not composed of Marble, did feel the Effects of this all-con∣quered Fire, beeing taken with the Graces of the amiable Liante? I will not stand to describe the Symptomes, whereby his quick-sighted∣ness read her Disease; but if Shee was forbidden to communicate to any other the Disguisement of Almeria, without Disguisement Shee manifested her own Passion to him with as few Words as much Since∣rity, telling him that shee loved him. I might give the Reader some Re∣creation here, if I would extend my self in her Homely and Naturall Expressions; For, as her Face (beeing no less exposed to the inclemency of the Air than the Shephard's Tabernacles, or the Skins of Salomon) was without Painting; So her Discourse was without any Artificiall Contexture. What pleasure, do you imagine, was this to Almeria (thus wee must call Liante as long as hee shall continue in his Sheperdesse's Weeds) to see her self Courted in this manner by her whom shee called Cousin? (for Celian, Merinda's Father, commanded his Daughters to use that tearm to her, saying hee was her Uncle, as Liante had desired him.) This pleasant humour contributed not a little to the diverting of the Melancholly, which otherwise would have overwhelmed his Heart in that solitary Residence, especially beeing in a Condition, which was as strange as difficult to him, to personate a Sex whereof he never had stu∣died the Deportments. However the Cassack, which hee had been forced to wear, made him the sooner acquainted with the long Coates, and the Modesty which had been taught him afforded some Decency to his Transformation. Almeria thinking onely to make a pastime of Me∣rinda's absurd Passion, pestred her self in the greatest intricacy imagi∣nable; for, as there is no great difference betwixt Folly and Fury, nor far from Fury to Despair, that little Spark was enough to cause a fu∣rious Flame. For, suffering the innocent Wench to intangle her self in her Nets, and feining to hearken to her Reasons, imbarked her so deep in the pursuit, that shee could not live without the conversation of this new Cousin. And as the Fire doth refine Iron untill it becometh Steel, so Love sharpning the Wits of those whom it possesseth, gives them more Penetrating Reasons, then are observed to proceed com∣monly from cold and raw Judgements. Which if you will have con∣firmed
by Example, heare what Merinda sayd one day to Almeria, as they were sitting alone under rhe shade of a great Elm-tree, whilest their Sheep were feeding. Although I am a Woman, do not you think good Sir, that I can keep a secret no more then a Sive hold Water, for I would rather indure my Soul to bee torne out of my Body, than suffer that to come out of my Mouth, which my Father hath committed to my Silence. You may assure your self, that never any disaster shall befall you through fault of my fidelity, I would rather imbrace death a thousand times, than harbour so unworthy a thought. And to let you see, for all I am but a Country-Girl, that my Soul is seated in a good place (and indeed it is well-seated, since it is wholly fixed to your Perfections) I pray hear what project is come into my Fancy, and which I will freely put in Execution, if you are so contented. You can pretend no∣thing more in the World, since, having killed a Man of greater quality than your self (as my Father hath informed mee) it is to bee supposed that all your Estate is confiscate, all your Hopes lost, and that the Justice, which is so rigorous in this Country, hath not pardoned your Memory, but hath done some publick ignominy to your Effigies, not beeing able to light upon your Body to punish it according to the Laws. Therefore as you have co∣vered your self with my Cleaths to secure your Person, give leave to the Passion which I suffer for you, that I may make use of yours (which I have carefully lock't up) to venter my Life by going to take down that shame∣full Picture, which without doubt serving as a spectale to all Passingers, tarnisheth the luster of your Reputation and dishonoreth your Glory. I be∣lieve you did not commit that Homicide treacherously, but that it was in your own Defence, or in running half the Danger; the Deportments which I have remarked since I frequent your Company, give mee a strong confidence that you have too much Gallantry in your mind, to do an Act unbeseeming a Man of Honour. If I should be surprised in this Exploit, which will offend the Justice (the torments, that I shall indure beeing a Testi∣mony of my Affection to you) I shall expire contented: for, not beeing worthy enough to live to, and with you I shall be glad to die for you, and make you see by my constancy that in a rustick Body there is some spark of Gene∣rosity. Almeria hearing such Language fall from that Silly Country∣wenche's Tongue, was no less astonished than Esop's Cock, that scraped a Pearl out of a Dunghill; or to speak more Religiously, than the high-Priest, when hee found the Sacred Fire in the Mud. But why so amazed Almeria? Do not you know that Love is the true source of
Hippocrene, the true top of Parnassus, that the Extasies of this Passion are as many Enthusiasmes which raise the Soul above it self; and that as a Squib flieth from the Earth into the Sky, assoon as the Fire is ap∣plied to its Train, So the clownishest Bodies do become gentile, and the dullest Spirits subtilized, when once they are touched with this fire? Can you imagine a more Naturall and a more generous manner of discovering an ardent Affection, or of demonstrating at the same time that one loveth not verbally, but in effect, and the most signalized of Effects (which is to expose one's Life for the party Beloved) than that which Merinda used to manifest to Almeria, the Fire, which shee had some time kept hidden under the Ashes of Discretion? Indeed there are some Productions of Nature so admirable, which all the Art in the World can never reach with imitation. At Court they talk of nothing but Despair, poure our such deep Protestations, as make the Hearers tremble, and Death, whom one of the Antients called the Diety of Lovers, is invoked every Moment; There it is ordinary to threaten to cast themselves away; to thrust their Souls out of their Bodies at a Sword's Point; they exclaim against Rigours; call Honour Cruelty, and the Impatience of Desires an insupportable Torment; their Tears are feined, their Tearms Specious; But all that is but vain babbling, a mo∣tion of the Lips, not of the Heart, an idle Resignment, no reall Re∣sentment; They say enough, but see who perform's: Fidelity is onely in their words, Infidelity in their Actions; Loyalty in their profes∣sions, Treason in the Execution; Purity in their Tongues, and base Designs in their thoughts; In summe, Fraud and Duplicity are the Pastimes of Courtiers, but their end is the ruin of Hearts, and the Poyson of Souls. Amongst Country People it is clean otherwise, their Cloaths, Diet, Lodgings, Industries, all are plain and simple, So are their say∣ings and their meanings; what they have upon their Lips come's from the profoundest of their thoughts, not belying by their proceedings the Union which Nature hath made of the Root of the Tongue with the Heart. So that Almeria easily perceiving the reality of Merinda's Passion, and being moved with Compassion to see that Shee fruitlesly aymed at an Object beyond her Port, and that her Desires were sup∣ported more by the Wings of Love, than of Ambition, thought her∣self obliged to esteem her Courage, and repay her Affection with this Answer. Dear Merinda, I fear I shall never bee able to do any thing for you, that can countervail the Obligations I have to you already, without adding this
incomparable Testimony of your Affection, offering to expose your Life for the defence of the Shadow of my Honour. It would bee too sensible a displea∣sure to mee, that you should employ your Body for a Fantome, for so I call the Execution of an Image, or rather imaginary Revenge, which the Ri∣gour of Justice may exercise against mee in my absence: as for my true Honour, it is out of all danger, in regard it was rather to defend than offend, that I did kill my Enemy: But his Kindred are so powerfull, that they will weigh down the Scale of Justice, and reduce mee to the greatest extremity, that disasters can compell an unfortunate Man to undergoe. Therefore I pretend to nothing now in my Country, nor to my Estate, but shall think my self happy enough if with preservation of my Life, I can se∣cure my Person from those ignominious Torments, which my Adversaries would make mee suffer, if I fell into their Hands, who seek to glut their re∣vengefull Spirits with my Blood. This is the Reason which made mee have recourse to the Fidelity of your Father and you, not contenting my self to embrace a Condition so much below that, unto which by the Favour of Heaven I have hitherto been educated, but by changing my Habit to ren∣der my self under this Disguise less Subject to the strokes of Fortune. As for the service you proposed to do mee in tearing down my Effigies from an in∣famous place, I believe that indeavour will bee needless, for my own Kin∣dred interessed by that dishonour to their Family, have doubtless e're this used means to take away that disgracefull Remembrance. But wherefore do I call it disgracefull, since the Infamy is in the Fact, not in the Punish∣ment? So that not feeling any remorse in my Soul for that, I ought not to esteem this any Disparagement; quite contrary when I recall to my memory with what valour I prevented the Assassinate which was intended to my Person, and how I behaved my self in the Combat, the Gibet whereon they have hung mee in Effigies, Seemeth to mee as an Obelisk or Pyramide erected to the Glory of my Vertue. Nevertheless I cannot but acknowledge a singular Obligation to you, for that worthy Office which your Friendship perswaded you to render mee, and I will indeavour by all possible devoirs to ascertain you, that Ingratitude hath no harbour within my Brest. Merinda, who was not so well acquainted with the Art of placing her words, but who had very reall Resentments of Affection for Al∣meria, replied after her manner, That what shee had proposed, was to let him see by the little esteem shee made of her Life, that thence forwards shee never would imploy it, but to Honour and Love him, to the end, that, if her mean Birth did render her unworthy of possessing his Favours, her Humility and perfect Submission might supply the place of Desert. But
why do I stand to disguise the Language of a simple Shepherdess, in whose Mouth polite words would sute as ill as Painting upon her Cheeks? I might have onely said, That Shee freely disclosed the Design shee had to Marry him, if he pleased, and follow him to the World's end, imagining, as the Helmet of a Valiant Warrier is sometimes changed into a Bee-Hive, and Chambers that have been hung with the costliest Tapistries, become Work∣houses for Spiders, the beautiful Adolescent, disgusted with the trouble in Cities and glutted with the Grandeurs of the World, (like that Antient Emperour, who resigned his Scepter for a Gardner's Spade) would perchance bee glad to reduce himself to a Pastorall Life, and endure some hardship after his sweet Delights. But Almeria was far from any such thought, her Ambition which aymed at nothing but Governing Provinces, & commanding Ar∣mies, could not descend to follow silly Sheep. Her dear Iphigenes (who had put a Flea in her Ear, and by his large Promises had left a thousand strange imaginations in her Brain) gave her other Ideas than this poor Shepherdess did conceive Shee harboured.
The Fifth Book. ARGUMENT. The Rustick's Labyrinth, and their generall mistake of Almeria. Manile Celian's second son, thinking Liante in a Shepherdesse's habit to be really a Woman, fall's in Love with Him. Lupicin Eldest Son to Celian, and Husband to Belida, seeme's to be taken likewise with the Beauty of Al∣meria. Fleurial Brother to Belida, and Antalcas Suitor to Merinda be∣come Rivalls to Manile. Remonda younger sister to Merinda is inraged with Jealosie against Almeria, because her Lover, Polemas, left her to make his Addresses to the gracefull stranger. Belida no less incensed be∣cause her Husband made shew of Affection to Almeria. Iphigenes re∣turns to his Shepherdess, who inform's him of all the Passages of her Country Lovers. Their Plot to increase the Country-People's Errors. Merinda is brought into some suspition of Almeria's condition by Iphi∣genes ambiguous speeches. Almeria, at Merinda's importunity to disco∣ver her Sex, make's her believe, that shee was really a Woman. Merin∣da's distemper at this Relation. Her spight in accusing Almeria to her Father and Brothers to bee a lewd Woman; to Belida and Remonda shee affirmed shee was a Wicked Man that had attempted to ravish her. The Men's severall Resentments of this Information. Belida and Re∣monda take Merinda's turn, having changed their Hatred to Almeria (as a Woman) into Love, thinking her a Man. Iphigenes his speech to Pomeran. His Reply. BUt as there is a certain imperious Inclination predo∣minant generally in our Souls, which maketh us im∣measurably affect to render our selves amiable, and bee admired as well as beloved, without regarding by whom; this sauce beeing so delightfull, that it make's all Meats go down: Insomuch that wee feel a complacency and contentment to see our selves followed and fawned
on by brute Beasts, as Sheep, Dogs, Cats, Birds, Fishes (witness the Murena of Crassus) and although they have neither beauty nor hand∣somness, their applying of themselves to us doth gain insensibly our Affections, and maketh us cherish them: Almeria to divert the me∣lancholly of that uncouth Life, and to recreate her fancy with the plea∣sure of Merinda's pain, took an humour to ingage her further in that Passion, by opening her the Gate of Hope with such quaint and cunningly framed Tearms, as (like Arrowes dipped in Oyl) they presently pierced through her Simple Heart. Merinda, like the generality of Country People, took Almeria's Words of Compliment and Civility for reall Obligations, and those Sparks grew to such a Blaze in her Brest, that it seemed as if nothing but the Ashes of the Grave could quench it, whilest the feined Shepherdess hugged her self with delight to see her so intrapped in her Snares; a pleasure, I must confess, very malicious, but marvellously delicious. But Shee was not the onely prey that fell into the Nets of the grace∣full Almeria, rather shee served as a Decoy to draw other silly Birds unto the Tunnell. For, as the Sun at his rising upon our Horizon, doth fill all places (where hee shewe's his Head) with the glory of his light and heat; So Almeria had no sooner illustrated that solitude with her Presence, but all Eyes (capable of considering her Worth) were fixed on her Face, as if it had been a Load-stone, or a piece of Amber for those Hearts, which may bee said to bee of Iron for their rude unpo∣lishedness, and of Straw for their simplicity. Merinda had a Brother, named Manile, who lived in the same House, and had the overseeing of his Father's Husbandry; This Brother having divers times seriously contemplated the not ordinary complexion of Almeria, was ravished as with the aspect of an Angell: and from this over-curious Sight proceeded the loss of his Liberty. Hee was certain that this lovely Stranger was no Neece of his Father's, and besides hee perceived by her garb that shee was born to some better imployment than following of Sheep; in a word, this imaginary Servant became the reall Mi∣stress of his Inclinations. One day, Hee inquired very earnestly, who that Maid was, of his Father Celian, who beeing unwilling to discover the Mystery of Almeria's Transfiguration, payed his curiosity with a Tale which hee invented on the sodain, making him believe that shee was a Gentlewoman of a Citty not far thence, who beeing fallen into some fault of Frailty, was fled thither to avoid her Friend's Fury, and that (the better to keep her self concealed) shee had transvested her
self like a Shepherdess, notwithstanding shee was descended of an Honourable extraction. This cast Oyl in abundance into the Fire that was kindled in Manile's brest; for, this Imagination presently mounted to his brain; If Almeria were a light Huswife, hee should easily Induce her to satisfie his desires; if otherwise, however shee might bee perswaded to bee his Wife, not caring though hee wedded a Disgrace, so hee might cure his Love. Thereupon hee forged these Reasons, apparently charitable; that taking her to Wife hee should withdraw her from Lewdness, Save her from the Shipwrack of her evident ruine, Protect her from the Fury of her Irritated Parents, Repair her Honour by that Sacrament, fancying to himself that Honour consisting in nothing but Opinion, shee would rather condescend to take Sanctuary in his Arms, and live with the Repute of an honest Woman in a Country Village, where her mis∣chance was not known, than in the Citty where shee would be scorned and upbraided by every body, and where (what pennance soever a poor Maid doth after such a scape) the World, that Inexorable Judge, will never restore her to the sweet savour of her reputation. Full of this confidence hee accosted this feined Kinswoman, and af∣ter a little time hee bluntly made her understand, that not contented with that Alliance (which was but imaginary) hee pretended to a straiter band, namely, that which of two Bodies makes but one Flesh by the sacred Lawes of Hymen. Almeria, laughing within her self to see that with such falsifying blows shee made such reall wounds, con∣tributed all shee could to strengthen Manile's error, and having learned of Celian with what opinion hee had possest his Son concerning her, shee was prepared sufficiently to jeer at that Dolt's simplicity; which having commmunicated to Merinda, you need not ask how they (be∣ing in the Fields together) did solace themselves with the conceit of his being so handsomely deceived. If Love be not the Mother, it is the Daughter of Idleness; and an antient Author calleth it, the Exercise and Occupation of lazie per∣sons. Manile, being Love-stricken, found many excuses to leave his Plough, to seek out his mistress Almeria, who with Merinda followed the Sheep to Pasture, and there hee discovered the depth of his Pretensions. Almeria accommodating her Speech to the Lye which Celian had made of her, cunningly feined to bee very Penitent for her past Folly, and to resolve to become wiser for the Future; which kindled more flames in that Swain's rude brest, than the Treacherous Sinon did cast into Troy to consume that stately City. It would be too tedious a
thing to relate particularly the subtill Inventions of the witty Almeria to augment her Lover's distemper: One while shee attracted him with her Refusall's, another while shee charmed him with her faire Language; now shee would heighten his desires to the highest pin, then kill all his hopes, representing sometimes to him by way of demand, if hee would bee contented to marry a crack't maid, or if hee did not fear that might bee a dishonour to him; sometimes againe faining to be fearfull her self, that after their Marriage hee would bee apt to cast that in her dish upon the first dislike: By these severall motions (which might bee com∣pared to the Ebbing and Flowing of the Tyde) shee put his Mind so out of frame, that hee knew not whereunto hee should apply his reso∣lution. But Love alwaies gained the Ascendant over his other Conside∣rations; Insomuch that despairing to gaine any thing of Almeria but by Marriage, hee resolved to Conquer her that way; to which the feined Shepherdess opposing new difficulties, did like Smiths in their Forges, who with light aspersions of Water increase the Ardour of their Fornaces. Hee, seeing his own Courtship prevailed nothing, took his Sister Merinda apart (who hee perceived had some Credit with Almeria) conjuring her to bee favourable to him, and perswade her Companion to accept of him for her Husband. Merinda being ready to burst with laughing, had all the pain in the World to keep her Tongue from blabbing, and dissemble what shee knew; but the fidelity which shee had sworn to Almeria, forbad her to undeceive Manile by declaring the truth of the Story, only shee ad∣vised him to withdraw his thoughts from that Object, representing to him how vaine and indiscreet a thing it was for him to seek his Pleasure to the prejudice of his Honour, that marrying one who formerly had lived loosely, it would be a perpetuall Reproach and Confusion to him, if ever it came to bee divulged; Besides, that Hee could not but bee in a continuall Jealousie, and Apprehension lest such a wife should return to her former lightness, and that the humours of Maids bred up in Citties were very hard to bee discerned, in regard they concealed as many crafty devices in their heads, as a Leopard discovereth spots in his skin. Yet all these Remonstrances made no Impression in Manile's minde, being determined to have Almeria, or perish: All this was but the beginning of the Labyrinth in which those Country-Spirits did finde themselves involved. It hapned one day, as Merinda was looking for something in her Trunk, that Remonda, her younger Sister, came unexpectedly into the
Chamber, where seeing a Man's apparell, which seemed to her very costly, Curiosity (an accident inseparable to the Nature of that Sex) egged her to inquire to whom those Cloaths belonged. Merinda sur∣prised a little at her demand, remained some time without replying; at length being urged to an answer, her affection (which had sharpned her wit) suggested her to pay the other's Importunity with this ready Eva∣sion; These are the Cloathes, said shee, which Almeria wore when shee came for refuge hither. How Almeria? sayd Remonda, These are Men's Cloathes; That's granted, replyed Merinda, for shee disguised her self in this habit to avoid the fury of her Parents, who would have Persecuted her to Death. Why so? answered the inquisitive Remonda, what had shee done? mee think's there is nothing more Sweet, nor faire conditioned than Shee. Then Merinda related to her the same Fiction wherewith Celian had fed the curiosity of Manile, with charge not to speak of it for her life; which afterwards occasioned a strange confusion. For, People of that Nature have never a greater itch to bee Tatling, than when they are commanded to be Silent, and the greater the danger is, the more are they tempted to reveal it. This was not all. Celian had another Son marryed to the Daughter of a rich Husbandman not far off, who since his Marriage lived in his Father-in-law's House. Lupicin (so was this Elder Son called) coming sometimes to visite his Father, had no sooner Invisaged Almeria, but asking who shee was, Remonda told him all shee knew, and added of her own what her Imagination did dictate. Where∣upon hee, being not very fond of his Wife, (whose disposition was none of the meekest) entertained presently a conceit that hee should render her more carefull to please him, if in her presence hee should make shew of some inclination to Almeria; but the Event was other∣wise, for shee grew horn-mad with Jealousie. Flurial (brother to Belida, Lupicin's wife) had no sooner observed this new Star on that Horizon, but hee was touched with her Influen∣ces, and became Manile's Rivall. Merinda and Remonda, before Alme∣ria's coming, had both of them Servants, that is, Young-men of their condition that made Love to them; But as in the presence of a Dia∣mond the Loadstone loseth the Naturall Vertue it hath of attracting Iron: So since Almeria's Arrivall, they lost all their attractions, and were as little minded as Stars at Mid-day, there were no eyes but to gaze upon the handsome stranger, shee was the Rock whereon they all suffred Shipwrack, or rather the Altar where they Sacrificed their Vows. Merinda, who saw all this Maze, and laught at the severall
passages with Almeria, was little troubled for the Inconstancy of Antalcas (who was her pretendant) having higher thoughts than hee, according to the hopes wherewith Almeria fed her Fancy. But Jea∣lousie transported Remonda into strange fits of Fury, seeing her self robbed of the Eyes, Heart and Conversation of her Polemas, who (before hee had seen Almeria's face) expressed so much affection, and sealed his Protestations to her with so many Oaths. Whereupon this spightfull Female fell into such tearms of Precipitation against Almeria, that shee did render her the most Infamous Creature under the Hea∣vens, adding to the Story Celian had framed, so many other horrid Cir∣cumstances, that it seemed Heaven had not Thunderbolts enough, nor the Earth Punishments sufficient to expiate the Imaginary crimes of Almeria, which shee published every where for truths. If her Father chid or threatned her, that did but irritate her spleenfulll appetite of scandalizing the Innocent stranger. Yet for all this her Sweet-heart looked no more after her, his Passion for Almeria either stopping his ears against the injurious Reproaches which shee vomited against him, and this new Object of his thoughts, or else making him believe that it was meerly Calumnie proceeding from the Envie which possessed her, for being frustrated of his Services. Merinda who gave her the Lie at every turn, and who said as much in defence of her Companion, effa∣ced by her commendations the malicious detraction of her Sister: and in respect wee are apt to believe what wee desire, that troop of Rivalls suffered themselves to bee perswaded by her that spake advantageously of the Common Object of their affections, rather than by her, whose invectives discovered so visible a Passion, that had shee spoken truths, they would have sounded in their Ears but as fictions. But as when blustering Boreas and the South wind are in contention, the Air and Sea are filled with Storms and Tempests, in such sort, that it seem's as if those two Elements would exchange their Centers: So when Belida's Jealousie together with Remonda's railing, came to joyn, or rather to oppose & give the shock to Merinda's justifications of Al∣meria, it made as foul an House as can be imagined to bee amongst vul∣gar Women that quarrell, where all Speak and none Heare, Reason being banished from their Pratling. Who ever saw a Company of Birds gathered together about an Owl, some pecking it, some admi∣ring (as it were) it's form, and all crying after that Night. theef, hath seen a shadow of this Medlie of Passions for one poor Subject, some of Love, some of Envie, others of Jealousie, and all as foolish as disor∣derly.
And indeed what else can be expected from Rusticks? Amongst whom Fleurial was one of the most eager, who not knowing that his Brother-in-Law Lupicin made shew of love to Almeria for any other end than to reduce his Wife to Reason by some prick of Jealousie, cast∣ing Oyl upon the Fire of his Sister's Fury, set her a Vomiting against her Husband such outragious speeches, as no discreet Woman would have been heard to utter. But her quality excused her somewhat, besides a slight Imposition of Hands which Lupicin made upon her Face, trying to strike Dumb that Evill Spirit which made her scold with so much Insolence. But when shee perceived that Fleurial was infected with the same Disease, and that hee began to talk of Marrying Almeria, shee expressed no less Impatience and Extremity of Choler against him, seeing hee would bring into their Family one, whom shee wished under ground, or at least at the World's end. What shee did and what shee said to hinder that design, which shee foresaw, would bee the Banishing of her from her Father's house, and the continuall Object of her Fear, or rather of her Fury, is needless here to mention. Mean time Almeria managed her Deportments and Favours with such Industry and Modesty, that Shee was the Idoll of all those Peasant's hearts, who Adored her as if shee had been a Mortall Goddess. But as it is impossible to force Nature, so it is hard to bend it and make it so pliable that it discover not some tokens of its reall Beeing. Achilles disguised in woman's habit could not forbear handling of Weapons, besides, his gate and discourse did oftentimes betray him: onely Iphi∣genes was able to appear directly other than what shee was, for, having been alwayes bred as a Man, and been possessed for a long time her self that shee was so, Education had taken the place of Nature, and reteined almost all her qualities. It was not so with Almeria, for sometimes un∣awares and not heeding the personage shee was to represent, shee did let fall some generous words, and performed actions more Vigorous than ordinary Females are guilty of undertaking; which after some ob∣servation made Fleurial & Belida likewise harbour a suspition, that shee was a Youth in Woman's cloathing. Yet considering the sweet attractive∣ness of her countenance, and the delicacy of her complexion, they re∣turned to their former opinion, thinking that she was really some Gen∣tlewoman, and that perchance those that had their breeding in Cities (for what may not people imagine of a manner of life whereof they have no knowledge?) were as dexterous and Valiant as Amazons, and no less capable of conquering with their Hands than with their
Eyes. At length Belida, whether by the inevitable instinct of Nature, (whose secret vertues wee are not able to comprehend) or whether through the suspition of that suit of Cloaths which Remonda had disco∣vered, did feel certain motions, sometimes of Hatred against Almeria, as believing her a Woman, and sometimes of Affection, as fancying the contrary. Thus this Feaverish Passion which agitated her thoughts, made her fall from Heat to Cold, and from a chill Shivering, into a scalding Sweat. To relate what thoughts ran through the Brains of the four Pretendants, Manile, Fleurial, Antalcas, and Polemas, were to no purpose: As for Lupicin, his design, as you have heard, was rather to punish his Cross-grain'd Wive's perversness, than for any other preten∣sion. Only Merinda and Celian, who knew the secret, did participate with their new Kinswoman of the Divertisement shee had in this plea∣sant Cozenage. Which Almeria longed to communicate to her dear Iphigenes, as the most agreeable Pastime that could be imagined: And to the end the Comedy might be exactly perfect, Celian and Merinda must likewise be brought into the Labyrinth, which was thus, but not without an extream Intricacy. Iphigenes having once more lost himself to finde out his Almeria, met Merinda with her (who stirred no more from that beloved Com∣panion, than the Shadow is seperated from the Body;) He was so advan∣tagiously Apparelled, that the silly Shepherdesse's eyes were dazled at such extraordinary Gallantry; but, if shee was amazed to see him, hee was no less surprized to meet her, for hee knew not how to bee rid of her, that hee might discourse more freely with Almeria. At last hee told them that hee was one of the Palatine's followers, who had lost his way and Company in Hunting, but hee had reason to rejoyce at his beeing strayed, since hee had found such honest Virgins as might give him some directions. It must be my Sister then, replyed Almeria, that must render you that good office, for I am Ignorant of the waies in this Forrest, beeing a stranger, and arrived but very lately in these parts. Iphigenes, who asked no better than to fall into talk, without taking notice that he knew Almeria, said, So mee think's Vertuous Shepherdess, for your Language is far different from that of this Province, and by your Face one may judge, that you are as unused to that habit, as unacquainted with the waies of the Country; if all Shepherdesses were like you, the Citties would become Desarts, and the Desarts bee quickly fill'd with People, many Young Gen∣tlemen would leave the Court, where nothing but Mischief and Envie is practised, to apply themselves to such agreeable Objects and so worthy to bee
beloved. Here Merinda imagining that Almeria's eyes had wounded the Gentleman's heart, as well as the Country Swain's, partly out of Jealousie, partly out of Simplicity, briskly thus answerd, addressing her Speech to Almeria; In good earnest, Cousin, I think the Gentlemen will fall in Love with you as well as the Plough-men, and that in the end you will set Fire in every place, if you take not heed. But you are too wise to hearken to such Gallant's words, who so much contemn us Country-maids, and ne∣ver commend us but when they think the contrary, of what they say, or if they do speak as they mean, it is but to abuse us. And you, Sir, continued shee, turning her self towards Iphigenes, should do better to pass on your way, without suffering your Mind to stray amongst us, as your Body hath done in these woods, that you may not lose both together, and like an ill Hunts-man in stead of taking, bee taken your self. The brave Palatine was not a little Astonished at her Language: For, besides that hee expected not such clear Reasons from so gross a Soul, hee feared lest by replying he might catch himself, and discover that hee had a better part than shee in the acquaintance of Almeria, who made him Signes with her Fin∣gers and Eyes not to take notice of her. Nevertheless not to remain absolutely without answering, hee thus said; Sweet-heart, You answer according to your own fashion, that is, uncivilly, to one that treat's you with Courtesie; your Companion is better taught, and whether shee bee a Citizen, or hath had her Education in some Citty, as her Countenance, her Speech, and her Carriage do testifie, shee would have had more Civility than to have retur∣ned such an answer. The sweetness which doth polish those that are well bred, is esteemed amongst you Rusticks Treachery; for, you are Naturally so Distrustfull, that when a man speaketh kindly to you, you think hee will betray you. You must not deal so ruggedly with a poor Gentleman that is Strayed, and who desire's to bee put again into his way, the rather, that hee may bee rid of such rude Conversation as yours. In sooth that shall not hin∣der you (replyed Merinda) from leaving us in Peace, follow mee and I will set you in the way that shall lead you to the next Village, where you may bee farther informed of those whom you seek This said, shee advanced to direct him; But Almeria (who was unwilling to let slip this occasion, the visits of her Iphigenes being very rare) drew her back, and whispered softly to her; Sister, what is your meaning? I know this Gentleman, hee is one of my best Friends, and who may bee very usefull to mee as my busi∣ness now stands, doubtless hee doth not know mee in this habit; but if you please to retire your self into yonder Copse whilst I Discourse a little with him, you will oblige mee infinitely. Merinda, who desired nothing more
than to please Almeria, thought her self able to make no better excuse on the sodain than to satisfie her demand. Shee beeing thus separated to give the two Friends liberty to talk freely together, it cannot bee exprest what pleasure Iphigenes took in hearing from the Mouth of the Feined Almeria the Relation of those Flames which shee had kindled in those Rustick Souls, and the uncer∣tainty wherein they were of her Sex, by reason of the different Tales already mentioned. Whereof beeing willing not onely to take share himself, but to make some of his Favorites participant likewise, that they might recreate themselves with the simplicity of those Swains, they conspired so to lay their Plot, that the Gentlemen might bee abused as well as the Clowns. Great Persons would not esteem their plea∣sures, if they were not singular; for, as their Condition raiseth them above the Vulgar, their Entertainments, their Occupations and their Divertisements ought not to bee Common. Greatness, like Bodies o're∣charg'd with Fat, draweth so many Inconveniences after it, that those that are in important Charges, and elevated to high degrees of Ho∣nour, are glad sometimes to pack up all that Baggage of Vanity which environ's them, to lead by stealth a low, popular and obscure Life, mingling themselves amongst the Lees of the People, and abasing their Dignities to the condition of the lowest Subjects, of whom the Plough drivers march in the last Rank, beeing (as it were) the Earthen Feet of that Statue which the King of Assyria saw in his Dream. Almeria, whose spirit Ambition much more disquieted, than these Recreations delighted, desired Iphigenes in mean time to tell her how hee would dispose of her after those Rurall Merriments were past; Whereupon Iphigenes (who aymed at nothing but to divert the af∣fection shee bare to Clemencia) proposed the Desire hee had to raise her to a great Fortune (this was to feel how her Pulse beat, by the pretention of Glory) by Marrying her to Simphoroza, or the Princess Respicia, her Mother, to the end hee might divert her Passion, and hin∣der her from breaking off his own Marriage with Modestina, in the Continuation whereof Liante's honour did seem to be ingaged. But if all that failed, Hee promised to give her his Ward, Leonora Daughter to Stanislas, whose Estate hee might have injoyed as well as his com∣mand of Palatine, if hee had listed, the King having given him the confiscation. All these Propositions were as many specious Ports to let Liante (hidden under the name of Almeria, and with the veil of a Shepherdess) forth of that odious condition, wherein Mieslas had en∣thralled
him, and gave him at the same time entrance into that of Wealth and Honours, after which hee so ardently did thirst. But all this disguised Nymph could do during the short space of their Interlocu∣tion, was to remit the conduct of all her Fortune into the hands of the beloved Iphigenes, to whom shee needed not to have made so strict a Recommendation, since therein Hee laboured for his own In∣terest. In mean time they resolved to play the Country-men the pleasantest Trick that could bee imagined: for ground whereof they agreed that within few dayes Iphigenes, accompanied by some of his Friends, dis∣guised like Peasants, should come to a certain Neighboring Village (where a Wake or some such Solemnity was to assemble a multitude of Country-People) and that they should make shew of beeing in love with Almeria, to see what mettle Jealousie would put into the four Rivalls already mentioned. And to leave the seeds of some suspition in Merinda's Soul, they thought it would not bee improper, that Iphi∣genes taking leave of Almeria, should now and then mistake himself, speaking sometimes as if shee were a Man, and sometimes as if shee were a Maid, in ambiguous tearms promising to assist her; some∣times to cover her shame, as if shee had been a defloured Virgin; some∣times to obtain her Grace, as if shee had been guilty of Homicide, which the ingenious Iphigenes carried with such dexterity, that Me∣rinda knew not where shee was, but thought shee had been inchanted. And indeed what with the Doubts and Suspitions, 'twixt which her spirits swam, besides the discourse which shee heard, there was enough to disturb a much stronger Brain than her's. Iphigenes having left them to their own liberties, By the Faith of a Maid (sayd Merinda to Almeria) I know not what to think, whether you are Fish or Flesh; to my sense you are like the Otters of our Marshes, which are both Terrestriall and Aquatick Creatures, or like our Geese which live in both Elements; for, if I consider the Lineaments of your Face, they are so attractive, and your Complexion so delicate, that I do not wonder, if in the Opinon of all our young Men you pass for a Maid; On the other side, when I look upon your stoutnesse of Heart, and vigorous activity of Body, I cannot but perswade my self that you are of the Sex of that Habit which I have in keeping for you: But, when I recall to my thoughts the reser∣vedness of your carriage to mee, who yet have never seen you do the least Action, nor speak the least word that shewed you to be a Man, that make's mee conceit that you are like mee, and whilest I laugh to see others deceived
in their pursuits, I am frustrated my selfe of my Expectation. Therefore without holding mee any longer in suspense, you will oblige mee very much to deliver my minde of this Perplexity. Almeria (like Hunts-men and Fowlers, who glad to see the innocent Creatures fall into their Gins, in stead of untangling them doe ingage them further in their Snares, let∣ting them struggle and torment themselves untill their own weariness make's them consent to their taking) in stead of casing Merinda of her pain, led her about with so many ambiguous Circumlocutions, that after a tedious Discourse shee left her no less unsatisfied than before, casting her by those intricate Explanations into a greater Obscurity, than that of her former uncertainties. Whereupon said the trouled Merinda, Thus the City-Wits, more slippery than Lampreys, riggle from us when wee think to grasp them: but in short, I have onely one question to ask you, Are you Man or Woman? Then Almeria, who took pleasure in this confusion, told her, That shee was extreamly sorry that shee had so long deceived her, in saying shee was a Man, for in effect shee was an unfortunate Maid; that thinking to tell her Sister a lie, shee had told her Truth, like a blinde Man that shooting at a Mark doth sometimes hit it by chance, Hazard supplying the defect of Address. However shee intreated her, if shee was thereby deprived of her Affection, that shee might not lose her Friendship, which shee saw was very necessary for her Preser∣vation, not resolving after her fault to cast her self into the precipice of her totall ruine, hoping that Heaven taking pity of her repentance, would create in the Heart of him that had abused her, the desire of repairing her honour by Marriage, by which means shee might bee re-established in her Estate, and regain her Parent's Favour. To describe the astonishment, together with the regret which seized on Merinda at this confession, is beyond my ability: for this Truth was not a little odious to her, and had not Compassion taken the place of the Ashes of Love, whose coals were dead∣ed on a sodain, shee had made foul Work. This Counter-point hurried her into the participation of Remonda's, and her Sister-in-law's Jealousies, and her Scoffing and Laughing at those young Men, who expressed such Passion for this stranger, retur∣ning to her memory, put her into strange distempers. I need not repeat the Reproaches shee made against Almeria, in regard her Anger was like to a storm, which after much Thunder and Rain, leave's nothing but Dirt and Vapors: for, Almeria had such an Art to pacifie her, that shee pardoned her that Deceipt, considering that broken Maids would do what they could to hide their Faults, there beeing nothing
so naturall as to shun shame. For the better effecting whereof, shee prayed her to spread a rumor under-hand amongst the People of the Village, that shee was a Man, to the end shee might remain unsolli∣cited, and likewise Remonda and Belida bee cured of their Jealousies. Whereof Merinda would not have failed, though shee had not been intreated, there beeing but one point which obligeth a Maid to keep a business secret, that is, when shee her self is interessed; take away that Flood-gate and shee will disgorge like a full Mill-Dam. Besides, Me∣rinda had reason to foment this supposition, to repeal Antalcas to his former observance of her, and cure her self of the reall jealousie which shee might conceive, if hee continued his Courting of Almeria: whom shee had no sooner left, but, like a person who sodainly shake's off a Coale that flie's upon his cloaths, shee ran to acquaint her Father with the Discovery, telling him that Almeria was indeed a Maid, who under Man's cloathing had escaped from the fury of her Parents, who would have washed in her Blood the Honour, which shee had stained and ravished from them. This startled the old Man at first, believing his Daughter might have had some proofs, which those of her Sex might gather with more Certainty and Modesty than Men. But (when hee perceived that her drift was to perswade him to turn her speedily out of dores, otherwise hee would nourish a Viper that would be his Destruction, and keep a fatall fire∣brand which would reduce his whole Family into Ashes, besides the Disho∣nour which he would reap by harboring an idle light Huswife in his House) he stopped her Mouth with a Multitude of Arguments in Almeria's De∣fence, feeling the profit sweet which hee got by her, his Heart beeing of the Composition of those mercenary Spirits, who for an Ounce of Gold would give an hundred weight of Honour. Merinda seeing that her Speeches availed nothing with her Father, to excite him to dismiss her, whom shee feared as much, believing her to bee a Maid, as shee loved, whilest shee thought her to bee a Man; besides, considering that in stead of apprehending that Manile would Marry her, hee seemed to hold the imaginary Ignominy of that Alliance too great an Honour, not believing that (although shee was a Fugitive) shee would condes∣cend to any such Bargain; at length, shee let him alone, and turning her course, shee resolved to disperse the uncertainty of her Condi∣tion among her Brothers and Sisters, not so much to oblige Al∣meria, (as shee had promised) as to satisfie her own spightfull Hu∣mour. To her Sister Remonda (as if shee had escaped some great danger)
shee related, how shee had thought to have undon her self by frequenting Almeria's company, believing that shee had been really a Maid (as shee had possessed Celian and her) but that shee now had found that Hee was a wicked Man, who having committed some Villanous Action, to avoid the hands of the Justice, was fled to hide himself in those Woods, and not thinking himself yet sufficiently concealed, unless hee denied his Sex, he had covered his Knavery under the Habit of a simple Shepherdess. If I should tell my Father or my Brother, what violence that Traytour offered to mee (con∣tinued Shee) I believe they would tear him in a thousand pieces, unless my Father bee too much blinded with the Gold which hee hath cast into his Eyes; for old Folk generally are of that Disposition, that Lucre make's them neglect all Honour. How do you think was Remonda affected with this Discourse? In stead of continuing in her former frenzy, which Merinda's intention was to resuscitate, shee felt on a sodain all her choler vanish, and gently slipping into it's place an agreeable sweetness, like unto that delightfull poyson which is called Love. The winning Graces of Almeria (as a Man) represented themselves to her Eyes in a more lovely form than ever, and turning her Passion in an instant, of a Mortall Enemy, shee became a voluntary slave to her, whom Jealousie had made her hate. Oh how shee than repented that shee had spoken so unworthily of the worthiest Subject in the World! How much shee apprehended lest her brawling and invective Speeches might bee an Obstacle to the Conquest, which shee projected of that Golden Fleece! Shee transplanted all her Rage and Malice into her Sister's Brest, and having in exchange imbraced her Affection, in stead of bla∣ming Almeria for the violence, which shee thought shee had offered to the pudicity of Merinda, perchance shee would rather have excused than accused the like attempt upon her self. Merinda made the like Relation to Belida, who presently felt her self eased of that Head-ache which troubled her, by reason of her Hus∣band's shew of affection to Almeria, and in stead of seconding Merinda in that choler (wherewith shee feined to bee transported against that disguised Ravisher) shee told her, that to make any further Com∣plaints would bee but a needless trouble, and that it was better to turn into laughter the Passions of those Men, who were so inamored of that supposed Maid, and cast in their Faces the confusion of having neglected the Legiti∣mate Objects of their reall Loves, to run after a Shadow. So Merinda finding no more Disposition in her Sister-in-Law, than in Remonda, to back the Design shee had of chasing away her, whom shee could not
love as a Maid, (perchance because shee had disclosed something, which shee then wisht shee had concealed, and which shee feared would bee discovered by the Frailty of her Sex, whom shee knew to bee in the impossibility of silence) shee resolved to continue her Plot, and beget a belief in her Brother Manile, and by his means in the rest, that Al∣meria was a Man, whom some heynous crime had obliged to take that disguise, thinking thereby to make them hunt her away, lest beeing dis∣covered by the Justice, they might bee brought in question and impri∣soned as harborers and complices of his crime. If Belida was glad to hear this Maid was a Man, changing her Gall into Hony, and the sharp prickles of her Hatred into the sweet flowers of Friendship, Manile was no less afflicted at this news; for, it was the burying of that amiable Passion which inlivened him, and which fed his imagination with the most agreeable Fancies, that ever hee had expe∣rimented. As if a Thunderbolt had swept the ground under his Feet, and a flash of Lightning sealed up his Eyes; or, as if hee had received a great Knock with a Club upon the Head, so hee stood amazed for a good while without any motion of Body or Tongue. At length, as, although the Fire bee out, the Ashes yet remain warm; So Pitty assu∣ming in the Heart of this Rustick the place of Love, which was quite ex∣tinguished by this Relation, Hee answered, That however, they ought to have compassion of those that were in affliction, and not to commit so base a Treachery as to betray a poor criminall, who did what hee could to shelter himself from the rigour of Justice, that it would bee a very unworthy part for Protectors to become Sergeants, that the Sanctuary should prove the Ruine, and serve as a Prison to those that fled thither for refuge, thinking to find their Liberty and safeguard; those Harbors beeing very unfortunate where vessells were cast away. The spightfull Female seeing hee made no more account of her com∣plaints than the rest, repaired to Lupicin, who was very glad of that advertisement; for, having no other end in following Almeria, than to tor∣ment his Wife, he thought it might be a means to make her see her folly, when that verity should come to bee divulged. Fleurial, Lupicin's Wive's Brother, was no less astonished than Manile, when it came to his ears, Oh! how hee wished it had been false, although hee believed it was too true, Merinda had the skill to relate it with such resentments of a Virgin, the treasure of whose integrity (shee pretended) Almeria would have ravished. Onely Antalcas, quondam servant to Merinda, had a con∣ceit, that what shee alleadged was a meer supposition, invented to
confound him, for forsaking her to Court the strange Shepherdess: for, hee carryed the perfections of Almeria so deeply ingraven in his brest, that hee needed a more Authentick proof than a bare report to disa∣buse him, so, hee sent her away very ruggedly, telling her that hee was not so Credulous, and that shee spake out of Envie. In summ, whilest all those eyes, like so many Argusses, were watch∣ing and observing every particular gesture of Almeria, shee had the wit so Dexterously to hold the Ballance in this Ambiguity, that shee led those Rusticks (as they say) by the Nose, like Bears that are Blind and Muzled. For, the Men by her Womanish behaviour, which shee acted to the life, were confident shee was of that Sex; And that to avoid their Importunities, shee had made Merinda publish that Lye: But Belida and Remonda applying their Observations more particularly to those Actions that spake her, as they desired her, had a conceit that Merinda had invented that Stratagem to preserve that prize to her self, in imitation of Nurses who lay Mustard upon their Nipples, when they have a mind to wean their Children, to make them shun the bit∣terness in the same place, whence they Sucked the sweet nourishment of their lives. Thus Remonda taking Merinda's turn, declared with∣out much Ceremony her Passion to Almeria, telling him that shee had seen his Cloathes, and that shee knew his Condition; And Belida, who would pay her Husband in his own Coyn, and make his Brains crow another while, began to make extraordinary caresses to Almeria, which were much less supportable than her Envie and Detraction. And Me∣rinda, (though shee studyed to shun the sight of Almeria with no less care, than shee had formerly desired it with eagerness whilest her sense made her hope for some satisfaction) could not forbear looking back∣wards (like the woman that was Metamorphosed into a pillar of Salt) and to call some Scruples into her mind, that perchance Almeria to bee rid of her importunities, made her believe that shee was a Maid, when shee was otherwise. The importance of all this was, that every one champed on his Bit in Silence, and out of the Mass of divers thoughts, could not draw one Drachm of resolution. These Rustick's heads being thus Intoxicated, a Solemnity in a neigh∣bouring Village invited the Country-people to assemble there; Alme∣ria seeming to bee unwilling to go thither, out of fear of beeing known, augmented by her backwardness the desire of her Suitors to see her appear amongst the other Lasses, like the Moon neer her full amongst the smaller Lights, which the Night displayeth in the Firmament. At
length by much wooing and intreaty, shee suffered her self to bee per∣swaded to bear Belida and Remonda company, who left her the least they could; Merinda likewise, beeing desirous to see the pastime, was forced to joyn with them, and re-accost Almeria, who cast such glances upon her as penetrated her very Soul, and without speaking a word, reproached openly enough her unworthiness. Whilest they are upon the way, let us take the time to relate the plot which Iphigenes layed to render invisible to the eyes of his friends the Passion which hee intended to make visible to Almeria, but in such a manner as I want words to express it. Pomeran beeing his bosome friend, Hee took him into his Closet, where hee thus disclosed his mind unto him: Dear friend, can I con∣ceal any thing from thee that come's neer my Heart, since thou takest so much part in my joyes or Displeasures? No certainly, unless I would of∣fend thy Friendship, which obligeth mee to an Intire confidence. Alas! At our last Hunting, whilest you having the Hart at a Bay, were making a Prey of him, I doubly lost my self in the Forest, and have Inthralled my Heart, but in such a Bondage as I esteem above any Freedome; Love hath made beoty of my Liberty, by the Incounter of a Shepherdess, who doth so much resemble the only Object which delight's my Soul (that is, my Wife, my dear Modestina) that at first blush I thought shee had been escaped out of the Prison, where the Cruelty of my Father reteineth her, and had concealed her self in these Woods, disguised thus, purposely to accost mee, and learn the resentments of my Soul. But by her Conversation I perceived it was not shee, though this hath a good wit for a Country-girl, accompanyed with an Incomparable Modesty: I have shewed thee some∣times her Picture, which I alwaies wear next my Heart, where her Idea is so lively Ingraven; by that thou wilt discern their likeness when thou seest this sweet Object of my Divertisement: For, really I must confess, since I have met with this living Copy, that Picture hath semed dead to mee, and if I have Strayed sometimes in the Forest, I may tell thee, it hath been to seek out this Image of my only Joy, the Originall whereof is de∣teined from my sight, by the Imperious command, I dare not say Cruelty of my Father. And although I confess there is an extream difference be∣twixt the Merits of my Lady and this Shepherdess, yet this deceipt is as sweet to mee, as that of an agreeable dream, which when wee awake makes us sorry it lasted no longer. I wish the Heavens may never pardon mee, nay contrary, I desire that my head may serve for a Butt to all their Thun∣derbolts, if in this pleasing imagination I have any design that is not con∣formable
to Vertue. I know what I owe to God and my own Soul, what I owe to the Glory of my Birth and Quality; I know what the inviolable Fidelity is, which I have sworn to my Wife, and I should bee the un∣gratefullest Creature breathing, if I did not correspond to the sincerity of her Affections to mee: thou mayest believe mee, were I to dye a thousand times, and by a thousand sorts of new torments, I would rather undergoe them all, than commit an act of Disloyalty against Her, or with This of whom I speak. For I hold, that to Love without Honour, (besides that it is an Infamy) is rather Pain than Pleasure, and those Sinister intentions are for the most part shamefull, and abhor the light; Which is quite contrary to mine, for I do not only declare unto you my Passion, but I desire, if you please, to make you participant of my Pleasure. Those that aim at no∣thing but such delights, as are common to us and Brutes, cannot endure any companions in their injoyments, being covetous to possess alone what they desire with as much Impurity as Impatience: But chast Love is not subject to any of those Frenzies, it's Jealousie look's no farther than the desire of rendring it self more perfect, more amiable, more accomplisht; to bee be∣loved, not alone, but better than others. Reason is the Conductor of this pure Affection, whereas shee is banished from all illicite Passions. All that I pretend in this Divertisement, which I am about to tell you, is only to amuse that concupiscible Faculty which is Naturall to us, (and which can∣not bee void, that is, useless in us) in giving it an Object, whose Simplicity can no waies lessen or cause any alteration of the Sincere affection which I bear Modestina: Let the Heavens so prosper mee, as I Honour and am Faithfull to her, & may I injoy no longer Life than I preserve my Loyalty to her; But, as in stead of beeing offended, I am sure she would be well pleased to know that in her absence I should love and make a thousand caresses to her Picture; So, I believe that rendring but Honourable and chast Devoirs to her living Image, I shall not prejudice the Faith which I owe her, seeing I do not cherish this Figure, but in consideration of her whom it represents, amusing my self therewith as an Innocent Child would do about a Ba∣bie, to divert the Melanchollie and disgusts which accompany my dis∣grace. You may say what you please, replyed POMERAN, for believe mee, Sir, it is impossible to speak so feelingly, and cry up the merits of any Subject with such Vehemency, without beeing touched with that Frenzie which turne's the strongest Brains. I dare not question your Fidelity to Mode∣stina, but as a Feaver is known by the Alteration, and by the Tongue is observed the indisposition of the Stomack; so by the discourse is discovered
the Intention of the Heart, since out of the abundance thereof the Mouth speaketh. The Image you so much adore, is too reall and too lively, to make mee believe that you cherish the Present only by Imagination, and the Absent in Effect; if you are not very cunning, and well-sented, you are now in dan∣ger of taking a change; these Savage Creatures have oftentimes such Wiles, as the expertest Hunts-men are never able to finde out. Any other Passion else may bee so handsomely dissembled, that a Man may cheat the Eyes of the most Circumspect, but in this, which carries away the Heart in∣tirely, it is not the Mouth but the bottom of the Soul which speaketh. Some do perswade themselves they Love very much, when they are not touched with the least Affection, and others sometimes do think they have but a spark of that Fire, when all their Bowells are on a Flame. Make no jest of this, Iphigenes, for whilest you think to catch, you may be caught, and believing to deceive others, you may be abused your self. For the most part this dangerous Passion, (the Murtheress of our Honour and the Enemy of our Repose,) insinuate's it self and slip's into our Souls under such specious pretexts, and by such plausible means, that with the Sugar wee swallow the Poyson, and contribute all wee can to our perdition. You say it is only for sport, and to recreate your discontented Mind, and that there is nothing of evill, or inde∣decencie in it; Can there I pray, be any thing more misbecoming, than to see a Man great by Extraction, great by Quality, great in Esteem, and great in Courage, abase his thoughts so low as to Court a Shepherdess? You, who have the Honour to deserve (what disgrace of Fortune soever may bee imagined by this retirement from Court) the Affection of both their Majesties, what will they they say of this Fantasie, but that Lucifer is fallen from Heaven, and that you have precipitated your self from the Verticall point of Honour into the Center of Dejection by some sort of De∣spair? Indeed you prepare matter for your Calumniators, who not con∣tent to triumph over your Innocencie, will add to their Trophies the Laughter at your Follie. Pardon mee Sir, if I speak so boldly to you, the excess of my Affection to your Person passeth the Reverence which I owe to your Quality, and I should esteem my self a Traytor, if I should conceal so remarkable a Verity. After a multitude of other disswasive Arguments, which Iphigenes refuted with no less subtility and eagerness, than Pomeran alledged them with Cordiall tenderness, Wee shall never have done contesting, said Iphigenes, unless I quite unbutton my breast to you, which I will do, Pomeran, with as much Freedom as I have Confidence in your Fidelity. This Fire which you think so great, or which you fear will grow to se great
a Blaze, is but a little spark which I desire to Choak, not to Cherish; For, beside the solemn Protestations which I make to Heaven, never to admit within my Soul any thought of Unfaithfulness or Impurity, I must abso∣lutely have renounced all Honour and Reason, if I should suffer my desires to stoop so low as the Condition of Almeria: But this is a plot which I have invented (wherein I have need of your assistance to cover my dissimulation) that Respicia losing all hopes of conquering me, and my Father, fearing lest this fantasie may ruine my Fortune, may consent to render mee possessor of my Modestina, without whom mee-think's the light of the Sun is irksome to my sight. Judge you then, Dear Friend, if my Intention bee unjust, or my wounds inflamed by the remedy which I apply to them. This would not bee the first time, answered Pomeran, that the Antidote were changed into poison. Violent cures are alwaies dangerous, wee never make use of Irons and Fire but in extremities, and when 'tis feared that the Gan∣grene will hasten Death. Wee cannot judge of Counsels and Enterprises by the beginning, but by the Event. It hapneth oftentimes that a Mutinous People seeking to shake off the Yoak of their Naturall and Legitimate Prince, do fall by their revolting under the Domination of a strange Ty∣rant, not acquiring the Liberty which they pretended, but having only changed a bad Master for a worse. Physick is not alwaies in season, and that which is good for one, is hurtfull to another; That which you are about to take, is as if in stead of casting your self from a precipice, you should fall into the Fire. Some potions are harder to bee taken, than our Diseases to bee supported; and mee-think's there is an Hook under this Bait: Therefore I conjure you by all the glory which accompanies you, to manage well and bee charie of your Renown; bee not carried away inconsiderately by these Passi∣ons, which will render you no less ridiculous, than you have hitherto been remarkable for so many Heroick and Generous Actions.
The Sixth Book. ARGUMENT. Iphigenes, under the Name of Iphis, attended by Pomeran, Argal, Pisides and Boleslaus (all disguised like Countrey-Fellowes) goes to Celian's Village and make's Love to Almeria. The Jealousie of the Swains, and their Malicious Combination against these Strangers. Almeria's Loving Speech to Iphigenes. His no less Passionate than Ambiguous Answer. Iphigenes the better to injoy his Almeria's Company, and blinde his own Friend's Eyes as well as the Clown's, procure's himself to bee received likewise into Celian's Service. Almeria by another feined story of Herself, staggers the belief of the other Shepherdesses more than ever. Their Plot against her, Iphis, and the other disguised strangers. The severall Censures of Iphigenes's Friends for his Disguisement. Iphis overcomes by Presents the Malice of his Clownish Enviers. Iphi∣genes and Almeria, accompanied by Boleslaus onely, steal privately away into the Woods. The sense of the Feined as well as the reall Swains con∣cerning their departures. Almeria and Iphis having changed Cloaths in the Woods, shee take's the Name of Calliante, and hee calls himself Scrife. Their parting from each other, the better to effect their Strata∣gem. Pomeran with his Companions and the Countrie Men going to seek Iphigenes, meet with his Hunts-men. The manner of their incounter, and the fall of the Stag they hunted. Iphigenes or Serife's Dream. Her own interpretation of it: Her Meditation. IPHIGENES beeing out of hope of winning Pomeran to favour his Desires; I see, said hee, you are too serious to accompany mee in this merriment, but I know when you see the issue of it, you will bee sorry that you deprived your self of a pleasure which might have afforded you much con∣tentment: For my own particular I am sure to come safe enough out of these imaginary dangers, and that I shall take no more Passion
than my Reason will bee able to over-rule. Whereupon Pomeran thus made answer, I am your Friend in all seasons, Summer, Winter, in Favour and in Disgrace, I have forsaken the Court to follow you, and I will leave the City to attend you in your Rurall Recreations, with you Imprisonment is Liberty to mee, Solitude a Paradice, and without you the Court is a forlorn Desart. I have served you in Combats, and in Duells, beeing resol∣ved to be yours as well in Death as in Life; I am upon the least summons ready to go with you upon any Exploit, though ne're so dangerous; And having given you my advice with all Sincerity and Affection, it is now my turn to embrace your's without seeking any further Reason than your Will. If you run your self into destruction, I will bee destroyed with you; but give mee leave to lament your ruin more than mine own, which is much less con∣siderable than yours; wheresoever you go, I will die at your feet, and in the Obedience which I have vowed to your command. To this Iphigenes pre∣sently replied; I love voluntary Sacrifices, Friendship admit's of none but free persons on board of her Galley, shee will have no forced service. I should bee sorry that you should do out of constraint, what ought to proceed from an hearty cheerfulness. I am sorry for the contradiction that I have caused to your Humour, which I perceive at present is not disposed to Mirth, for my own part I had rather Die with hunger, than Live upon Alms; I cherish my friends according to their Fancies; if they are joviall I rejoyce, and I am sad at that which afflicts them. However, I love you n'ere the less, Pome∣ran, for I know it is the Excess of your good Will to mee which make's you fear where there is no occasion. Therefore you may use what Exercise you please, whilest with Argal, Pisides and some others of my friends (who will not stand upon such niceties) I will take a Recreation which I hold to bee in∣nocent, and wherein I will do my indeavour to hinder Malice from introdu∣cing any of her stratagems. My proposing of those Reasons (said Pomeran) was not to oppose them against your Will, but to let you see with what mea∣sure I march in your service, for (you may believe mee) although I do not suspect your pleasures in the least, but believe your intentions are upright and sincere, yet I must tell you that what hath reference to your Advantage and Glory, toucheth mee more neerly than what concern's your pastimes, In which I shall not bee wanting, nevertheless to attend you, so that my presence bee not offensive or suspected. For, in such case I will rather retire my self, to remove an Object from your Eyes, that may bee an occasion of your perpe∣tuall trouble, and bar you of the Liberty of Speech or Actions. Iphigenes beeing desirous to preserve so reall a Friend, and knowing that first or last the success would disabuse him, not to give him any cause
of Discontent, consented that hee should accompany him in his Face∣tious Enterprise of going in a Peasant's Habit to make love to Almeria. Pisides and Argal (being not so considerate) were no sooner acquain∣ted with the Design, but they approved it, and with a complacency, familiar to Courtiers, they presently made Proffers of their Services, fancying already a thousand inventions to abuse the simplicity of those clownish Souls. There was none but Boleslaüs (Foster-Father and Con∣fident to Iphigenes) who participated of the truth of this Story, or knew whereunto tended the Morall of this Fable. Hee had already (disguised like a Traveller) been to confer with Almeria, of whom hee learnt the Dispositions of those Rustick Spirits, wherewith shee was environed; and the Politick Old Man (by whose counsell Iphigenes chiefly directed his course) cast now and then into the Soul of this sup∣posed Shepherdess certain hopes which gently flattered Her Am∣bition. All things beeing thus ordered, Iphigenes with his three Friends, Po∣meran, Argal and Pisides, not forgetting Boleslaüs, whom hee called Fa∣ther, marched like Country-fellowes to the Village where the solemni∣ty was; thither likewise came Almeria, accompanied with Belida, Re∣monda and Merinda, ushered by Lupicin and the four Competitours. Manile, Fleurial, Antalcas and Polemas. To make a comparison be∣twixt those Reall Rusticks and these disguised ones, I had need have the Pencill of that Painter, who (with onely turning the Picture) of an Horse that was tumbling in the dust, made one running full speed, and beating the dust in his Carreer. I will not here amuse my self in the Descrip∣tion of an Antick, nor abuse the time and the Reader's Patience with the Representation of a County-solemnity; I shall onely say that our Strangers appeared amongst those rough-hewen Boors, like that golden Sand which shines amongst the gravell of the River Tagus. There were no Eyes but for them, nor any but upon them. They carried away with such advantage the Glory in all the Exercises, as Dancing, Wrestling, Jump∣ing, Slinging of Stones, flinging the Bar, Shooting, or whatsoever, that they seemed as if they were come thither purposely to dazle the sight of all that did behold them: But their Carriage beeing too gentile for such mean Habits, their cleer Complexions and their studied Slights be∣trayed them. Every one ask't, Who are they? whence are they? but no body could give an account. This bred a suspition that there was some Plot in their coming, and that they were some cunning Shavers that in∣tended to surprise them. To repeat you the Discourse of these Stage-Peasants,
would bee too long and Frivolous; or to tell you that amongst the throng of Females Almeria was presently noted for her which de∣served the Golden Apple, would bee as needless. If Amity is formed betwixt equalls, or equalizeth those whom it unite's, there was no Body, how envious soever, that seeing Iphigenes Discoursing with Almeria, would not judge them the best Maach't Couple in the World, onely Hee appeared too white for a Man, and shee too brown for a Woman, but her brownness was Alablaster in comparison of the rest. Pisides and Argal commended Iphigenes (who had given himself the Name of Iphis) for his choyce: But Pomeran, who alwayes suspected this (seemingly feined) Love, conceiving that it had some reality which hee could not discern, had his mind balanced in the Flood and Ebb of different Imaginations; Sometimes reflecting upon the Resemblance of the Picture Iphigenes had shewen him, hee thought shee might indeed bee Modestina, but that conjecture was soon effaced by some homely Actions, which Almeria counterfeited with so much Art, that the most cleer-sighted would have taken them for Dame Nature's own production. Iphigenes ravished with delight to see his Design succeed, opened his Heart in private to Boleslaüs, who partici∣pated of his contentment to see how they were all deceived in Almeria, and shee her self in him. And in regard the pleasure would have been too short, if confined to one daye's time, our Disguised Gentlemen continued their Visits to Almeria, and the rest in Celian's House for the space of half a Moon: during which time the Palatine made a Report bee spread in Plocens (which was the chief City of his Government) that hee was retired to a Castellain's House in the Country for some Affairs of great Importance. In the fifteen Dayes time which Iphigenes with his Companions spent in a Rich Farmer's House not far from Celian's, their Expences and great Cheer quickly made appear that they had nothing of Country-men but the Habit. They went not to Plough, nor followed any such exer∣cises as the others did, but making Fishing or Hunting their daily Oc∣cupations, they missed no opportunity of accosting Almeria, either in the Groves, in the Meddowes, under the shade by the Rivers side, or neer some cool Spring. These frequent Meetings confirming Merinda in the Opinion shee had that Almeria was a Maid, turned Belida and Remonda to their first belief. Lupicin with the four Concurrents lost the suspition they had that shee was a Man, to embrace this, That these Strangers were perchince The Men which had shipwracked her Honour in
the City. These surmises kindled their Fires, and their Fires redoubled their Jealousies, seeing themselves supplanted by persons unknown. Envie, saith the Wise Man, is the vice of base abject Spirits. This Monster whose Pain is another's Ease, and who feed's upon his own Heart, seated himself in the Souls of these Churles, who could not indure the luster of so many gentile Qualities as rendred those New∣comers recommendable. And as Wolves, (Creatures that are singular, insociable, and which tear one another to pieces) do agree and go together, if there be question of falling upon a Flock of Sheep, or breaking down a Fold; So those Swains (who hated each other as Rivals) complotted with a secret intelligence how to chase away these strangers from Almeria, and conspired Machinations against her, which were the Effects of Hatred, though they proceeded from a contrary Cause. I omit their Reproaches and Detraction against her Innocency: For, their Jealousie beeing visible, our Gentlemen gave no credit to their Speeches, knowing that they troubled the pure Waters of that cleer Fountain, onely to hinder them from admiring and staying neer it. It was a pleasure to see the Schism that was amongst them, and how their deceitfull Lips uttered words quite opposite to their Hearts; Some reported that Almeria was a Man, pursued by the Justice for a Murther, and had transvested himself to avoid the punishment of his Crime; Others gave out that shee was really a Maid, but of a de∣boshed and lewd Life, who to shun the fury of her Parents (that would have chastised her for her Fault) or to Live with more Liberty, had cloathed Herself in a Shepardesse's Weeds. One said shee was a Citizen's Daughter, another that shee was born in the Country; some said shee was of one Province, others of another; Some affirmed shee was Celian's Neece, others denyed it. If Remonda called her Cousin, Merinda declared shee knew her not; Belida gave her the style of Kinswoman, Lupicin used another tearm; In summe, never a one could agree with his Companion, their Relations and Opinions beeing as differing as their Faces. You would have said Almeria had been the Moon, for whom her Mother could not shape a Garment, because shee was never long in the same condition. These various rumours marvellously divided the Spirits of Argal, and Pisides; for, amongst so many uncertainties they knew not what to apply their beliefs unto. Sometimes the Masculine courage of Almeria, and her vigorous exer∣cises made them incline to the thought of her beeing a Male Femi∣niz'd;
and when shee acted the Maid, the sweetness of her Carriage perswaded them the contrary. The brown tincture of her Complexion seemed to plead in favour of their former conjecture, but the Loveli∣ness and attractive Motion of her Eyes confirmed them in the later. However that her Education or Birth were of an Air which resented nothing of Rusticity, was evident: Insomuch that they were really of the mind, that whilest they thought to cheat her with their disguises, shee laughed at their Artifices, and by a coun-termine would render all their Indeavours fruitless. These imaginations they communicated to Iphigenes, who was ready to die with delight to see them so hand∣somly seduced. But Pomeran took no pleasure in these passages; for, out of all these contrary Relations, Hee drew these Consequences: If Almeria bee a Man, and what is worse, a Murtherer, What honour is it for us to amuse our Times about an Object, that one day upon a Gibet must make Faces at those that pass? Indeed wee are fallen into a rare conver∣sation of Clowns and Gallows-clappers; If shee bee a Woman, and of a loose Life, what credit will it bee for Iphigenes to singe the Wings of his desires at the Flame of so stinking a Torch? No, I cannot endure to see him cast himself away in the Embraces of a dissolute slut: But hee must first bee diverted by the sweetness of the Rayes of solid Reasons, and after∣wards by the violent Buffets of strong Remonstrances; and before the light of his Judgement bee quite extinguished, hee must be made to un∣derstand, that hee is upon the Brink of a Precipice, whose fall is so steep, that if hee do but trip, he will never bee able to recover himself untill hee comes to the bottom. Iphigenes rejoycing to see him so perfectly mistaken, it cannot bee imagined what delight hee took in imparting these particulars to Al∣meria: And whilest hee employed all his thoughts and time in enter∣taining his Penelope, those that accompanied him, seeing they could not make him hear of returning, fell a courting her Attendants; for, what else should I call the two Sisters & Belida, who were continually in Almeria's company? I should bee too long if I should relate in what manner those subtile Wits inveagled the simplicity of those silly Maulkins: for, to doubt of the advantages which the quaintness of Courtiers hath above the rude ignorance of Countrie-People, were to make a question, when it is most light, at Noon or at Mid-night. They made such fair Stories to those dull Souls, that presently they forgat the incertain Passion they had for Almeria, to frame new affections for these strangers, who told them wonders of their Flocks, of their
possessions, and of the commodities of their Village which they described to bee a Paradice on Earth; insomuch that all three Sisters were al∣most perswaded to follow them, out of a certain inclination, (naturall to every Body) to seek that which is most advantageous. This bred strange thoughts in Celian, Lupicin, Fleurial, and the rest, seeing these unknown Persons, and who had nothing of Peasants but their out-side, should breed alterations in the minds of those, where they had lodged their Affections. Nevertheless (as all base and dull-spirited Souls are alwayes guilty of cowardize, what Anger soever their Malice is hatch∣ing, they have not courage enough to produce any bold, or resolute Effects) they quietly suffered themselves to bee dispossessed of their ordinary Conversations. And this supplantation was easie enough, for the Clowns beeing pressed with Necessity, were more attentive at their Work and Profit, than their Pleasure; whereas these Strangers, having nothing else to do, than to spin out their Time, and besides, spending high, and making such cheer as the others were not accustomed to see, might with much facility have advanced their Designs, if they had had any other than to give their minds some recreation. In mean time Iphigenes who desired absolutely to blot out of Al∣meria's Thoughts the Affection of Clemencia, and place himself in her room, in making himself bee cherisht by his feined Mistris, other∣wise than a Friend, perished, like Tantalus, in presence of his Remedy. Hundreds of times Hee was upon the nick of Declaring all the secret to this beloved Object; But Boleslaüs (without whose advice he did nothing of importance) served as a Bridle to moderate the violence of his desires, telling him, that the time of his Manifestation was not yet expired, and that hee must bee contented untill hee was Repealed from banishment, to the end his Marriage might bee in the establishment of a Fortune more favourable for Liante. Who will now furnish mee with tearms to express Resentments, which for their singularity, mee-think's, ought to bee remitted to Thought alone? When these two Friends could steal any time to themselves, (for which they sought all pos∣sible opportunities) It was a pleasure to see the Admirations of Al∣meria, who sometimes thus entertained Iphigenes: My dear Brother, indeed it is not amiss that our so passionate conversation is not in my Sister's sight, for, although it is but her Image, and the lines of some resemblance of her which you love in mee, doubtless shee would find some cause to bee jealous of her Picture: I never saw you so fond of her, nor render such endeering devoirs to the Originall. It is true, that therein you were to bee
Excused by reason of the tenderness of your Age, which did not make you Susceptible of so great fire as you express to mee, on purpose to deceive more neatly those who do attend you. To deal really, were not the advan∣tages of our Sex incomparable, I could almost wish my self as my Habit speak's mee, out of a conceit I have that you would love mee as well as my Sister, and could I change my Nature, it should bee meerly to bee your Wife, not to share in those Honours and Wealth which environ you, but for the Merits of your own Person, which are abundantly more Estimable than all the Benefits which blind Fortune distributeth ordinarily to those that have no reall Desert. Oh! why am not I Almeria indeed? and these feined Affections which you so dexterously do represent to mee, why are not they essentiall? Believe mee, after that, my Ambition would be at an end. Who can but think that this Discourse deliciously flattered the imagination of Iphigenes? who to prolong that agreeable amusement, and still touch that String whose sound was so Harmonious in his Ears, thus replyed: You may see, Brother, how far doth transport mee not the Love of an Image, as you imagine, but the power of my Friendship to you, I say to you, to your Person, to Liante as Liante, not as the Portraicture of Modestina: Indeed I love her, as my duty obligeth mee, but do not you know that no∣thing is so ill performed out of that Respect, as Loving, since that Passion, beeing the Daughter of our Will, retaineth something of the Mother's Disposition, whose Element, or rather Substance, is Freedome? But be∣sides the constreint of a Matrimonall Bond, (which how golden soever it be, is alwayes a Bond) in my mind that Sex, in regard of it's frailty, is so little capable to sustein that streight and durable Knot of a true Friend∣ship, that the greatest inclination a Man can have for Women, is nothing in comparison to that pure and cordiall Affection which hee bear's to a Friend, who is his second self. For, it is betwixt two equall Hearts that is formed that reciprocall correspondence, wherein consisteth the Essence of Friendship. In that you apprehend to wish your self of another Sex to at∣tract from mee a more ardent Affection, you have reason, considering, that were to wish a mighty inconvenience for a mean advantage: For, perchance if you were as your Sister is, my Affection would bee much less fervent to you, for then I should look upon you with more Compassion than Pas∣sion, as a brittle Vessell more worthy of Pitty than Envy. Yet if your Heart invite's you to desire a condition so miserable as that of Women (whom God and Nature have Created to bee subject unto Men) to aug∣ment in mee an Affection which is already infinite; Give mee leave to
answer your wish, who without Dissimulation or Consultation would, to the greatest contentment of my Soul, relinquish not onely the favour of the Court, the dignity of my Palatinate, and the benefits I receive by the boun∣ty of the best and most liberall Prince in the World, (the King my Master) but all that I am, to purchase mee the power of beeing your Wife. It is I who am really jealous of Clemencia, and who would gladly have but so much priviledge of your thoughts as my Sister, whose inconstant Soul was so shaken with the wind of my Father's fury, that shee would have been perswaded to marry Cassin, had not the disdain of seeing his Mother desirous of my Bed, made him retire out of Podolia sooner than Mieslas expected. Oh fickle Girle! said I, when I saw her so poor-spirited in an incounter, where shee needed but to have spoken boldy, and carved out a Negative. Oh wavering Girle, said I, and unworthy of so perfect a Lover as Liante! had the Heavens put mee in thy place, I would surely have shewed more Fidelity and Resolution: But what can bee expected from that Sex, but infirmities, since it is the pure substance of Debility, and therefore alwayes shivering and moving like a Leaf? Yet what defects so∣ever I do condemn in that Sex, I would not greatly care if I my self were of it, if I thought thereby to be more your's, or that you would love mee as well as my Sister. Here Almeria taking the word out of Iphigenes mouth, said; Believe mee, Brother, That if you love me as much or more than my Sister (where∣unto I can hardly be perswaded, knowing the little reason you have) it is the like with mee; and as if our Stars had Embraced at our Births (to Express my Resentments naturally, and nakedly to you) I never had by many degrees so much inclination for Clemencia as for you; and thereby I find that Friendship hath a more powerfull ascendent over my Heart than Love, which, to say the Truth, is a Passion too Effeminate to have any regency in a Masculine spirit. And to give you assurance that the Re∣sentments are reall, which make mee declare my self in these Tearms, Hold for most certain that Clemencia shall never be any thing more to mee than what you please, and if you conceive that it may be for her advantage to Marry the Prince Cassin, and mine to have another Wife, I will most freelie renounce all those Pretentions, which your Perswasions induced me to have for her, my desire subscribing willingly to your command. Iphigenes seeing Almeria arrived at that Point, whereunto hee most passionate∣ly desired to reduce her Resolution, was strongly tempted to disclose the secret of his Birth; But, not having the conveniency to consult his two Oracles, his Mother and his Governour, hee conteined himself,
but with such pain as may better bee imagined than discribed. So, con∣tenting himself to have absolutely withdrawn Almeria's thoughts from Clemencia, which was the clog that most oppressed his Mind, and to have obtained her consent to his Sister's alliance with Cassin, pro∣mising to finde another Match that should raise her Fortunes infinitely beyond what shee could have hoped by Clemencia; It is requisite, said hee, to conceal your self from those whom my Father hath incharged to apprehend and carry you to him Alive or Dead, that you continue this Life, untill wee can finde the means to convey you into the Citty, or untill my Relegation beeing repealed, I may send for you to the Court, where by the King's Authority I doubt not but to secure you from the Tyranny of Mieslas, and shall take order for the advancement of your Fortune. Mean time for our Recreations, let us persist in dazling the Eyes of those that are about us, as well your Rusticks as my Attendants: Therefore the more ardour I shall express to you, the more disdainfully do you treat mee, the better to wipe out of their thoughts the sinister Opinion, which they have conceived, that you are a Maid of an unchast Life. And to the end our Conversation may bee more frequent, I have an intention to put my self likewise as a Servant to Celian, whom, I presume, wee shall draw to any thing by the powder of Injection, wherewith wee will fill both his Hands and his Eyes; making him believe, that to avoid the rigour of our Parents, who would not consent to the terminating of our Legitimate Affections by the sacred tie of Matrimony, wee have been constreined to leave our Native Citty, and make use of this stratagem to meet and enjoy more freely each other's company, but with all the Civilitie, that can be expected from per∣sons which make profession of Chastity. Almeria who was in the Hand of Iphigenes, as clay in the Potter's, condescended to whatsoever hee propounded; And in effect a Purse full of Chekeens, or Crowns of Gold, had no sooner made the Preface of Iphigenes Speech to Celian, but hee believed the rest as an Oracle, and with both hands pressed it to a conclusion; And taking this occasion as an occurrence of Treasure, hee prayed Iphigenes to dispose of all that was within his small power, as his own, and under the notion of Servant to command as Master. This did not displease the old Man's Daughters, who were not so blockish as not to like the company of this new Guest; Onely Manile was ready to run beyond his Reason, protesting with many Oathes to his Father to leave his House if hee entertained that stranger. Celian to pacifie him, shewed him how hee was an enemy to his own good Fortune; telling him that those Angells
were not onely the Gardians, but the enrichers of his Family. Where∣unto Hee, beeing deafned by Jealousie, could give no eare, but con∣tinued murmuring incessantly against his Father's covetousness. Mean time Almeria to disabuse her two lately created Kins-women, tell's them another new forgery. It is true, said shee, I came hither in Man's Habit, having made use there∣of to withdraw my self from under my Parent's Wings, not that I had made anie breach in my Honour, but fallen off from my Obedience to them. And I thought that their severitie did furnish me with a Sufficient dispensation: For, beeing desired in Marriage by one Iphis, a Young Gentleman richer and of a better Extraction than I am, although contrary to the will of his friends, in whose Opinion I seemed too mean a Fortune for him, my Father not daring to promise mee to him without the consent of his Father, whose power was redoubtable, wee deliberated, (to be free from that servitude) to betake our selves to the wide World; and therefore having put on Disguises, to facilitate our Escapes, wee fled into these Woods, expecting untill Time, which bring's all things to perfection, should dispose our Parent's wills to con∣descend to our chaste desires. Thus in few words you have the History of our Lives, wherein I see no other Crime than this ardent Affection which hath made us fall, not into any Dishonesty (for we detest Vice with horror) but into some sort of Lightness & immodesty, which may easily be pardoned by them, who know to what Extrmities are transported those that are touched, with the same Passion that animate's our Souls. This Discourse shee made to Merinda, Remonda & Belida which beeing ended, the two later looked as disdainfully as their Passion could make them upon the other, re∣proaching her of the false Accusations shee had raised against Almeria's Honesty; Whereupon Merinda very confusedly, Answered, that Almeria had with so many different Stories overturned her belief, that indeed shee knew not how to trust her, her former Lies prejudicing what Truths shee might afterwards deliver. To represent the divers Motions this last Invention cast into the spi∣rits of these three Parcae, would require too much time: for, seeing their hopes nipped in the Bud, as well on Almeria's part (whom one while they thought to bee a Man) as on the other Stranger's, whom they imagined did keep them company onely to wait on Iphis, they con∣curred, like the Parcae indeed, in the same conclusion, which was to cut the Thred of these strange Practises, by hunting away those unknown Persons that disturbed their repose. The same Design had Lupicin and his companions; But before they came to any violence, and to make
use of the Lion's skin, they were not so little politick as not to know that the Foxe's ought to bee employed first, having gained so much power over themselves as to dissemble what they thought. However they broke their minds to Celian, laying before his Eyes the many ha∣zards, whereunto he exposed himself by concealing in his House persons that were liable to the Law, and who durst not shew their Heads for fear of the Justice: But, the vertue of that yellow metall (which is the measure of all things) had so strongly operated in his brain, that he was incapable of any other reason, than that of his profit. In mean while the Time passed away so deliciously with Iphigenes, who serving with a condition to do no Work, (which was likewise Almeria's Agreement) saw not onely every day, but every hour of the day, the beloved Object, which onely could comfort him, and yet which was the sweet cause of all his disquietness. Great was the asto∣nishment of his Friends to see, that Passion had reduced him to so vile a Function; Especially Pomeran was in an unspeakable anguish for his Transfiguration, yet durst not speak much to him for fear of exasper∣ating his humour, knowing that fair perswasions would prevail much more upon his generous spirit, than the sharpness of Reproaches. Argal and Pisides were more moderate and complacent, making a favorable construction of all his Actions, yet they could not some∣times but resent a little indignation to see him so Wedded to that Al∣meria, in whom observing no such exquisite Beauty, they could not imagine whence should proceed those Charms that so strongly be∣witched, and besotted his Reason; then, condemning themselves again of too much harshness, they sought Excuses in the tenderness of their Affections to him, saying, This fantasie will not last long, it is too violent, the necessitie of the affairs of his charge will shortly call him back to his Government; All these passages will quickly bee carried to the Court, and Shame will make him forsake this enterprise. The actions of great Per∣sons, how secret soever they be, are at last divulged, such publick Mini∣sters can act nothing in private. Those that are exposed to the light of the Day, and to the view of the whole World, cannot remain long in obscuritie. Mean time we must endure this storm, and take our share of this unplea∣sant pastime; we would willingly follow the Palatine in some other oc∣casions, as more glorious, so more perillous; the worst that can befall in this, is but laughter; and besides, the Passion which produceth these actions, carrieth it's excuse in its blindness. Thus did the friends of Iphigenes discourse amongst themselves, But Hee was like unto those who having
Ulcers in their Bodies, do not apprehend any thing more than the hand of the Surgeon. Presents, saith an Antient Writer, pacifie both the Gods and Men; the Heavens and the Earth have a delight in receiving; Hee that in∣vented Gifts, hath forged Chains to inthrall Hearts. The poor Pea∣sants have a custome to bring petty Presents to their Land-lords, either to preserve or purchase their Favours; And our Rusticks received Gifts from those strangers to let them live peaceably amongst them. Celian was ravished, and thought it was Jupiter that was come to visit his House in a showre of Gold, his Daughters were all repaired with the Favours Iphigenes and his Companions bestowed on them; Not so much as Lupicin, Fleurial, Manile, Antalcas and Polemas, but every one of them resented the benefits of their Benevolence, besides the good Cheer which they made every day at their charge, Wine beeing as plentifull with them as Water, and no spare made of delicate Dishes. These Exercises of the Teeth hindred for a while their Tongues from murmuring, and did make as it were a Dam to stop the torrent of their envy. Nothing was to be thought upon but Feasts and Ban∣quets after the Country fashion, wherein Iphigenes made a great shew with a little Expence. Hee was presently taken for a Grand Monsieur, and Almeria for some Lady of quality; And since hee was so willing to pay all, those Trencher-Friends cared not greatly for working, every Day was Holy-day with them upon that account, and to keep Holy∣day after the Boor's fashion, is, not to labour at all, unless it bee with the Teeth and Gullet, Eating much and Drinking not a little; That done, Hunting, Fishing, walking amongst the Groves, or reposing upon the fragrant Banks of the Cristall River, repeating Verses, or making Eclogues upon the pleasures of the Rurall Life, to the no less admiration of the silly Swains, than the satisfaction of the rest, was their recreation for certain Dayes, which though then beeing at the longest of the Year, they thought the Sun did Gallop away too fast. Iphis during these Divertisements having taken all occasions to ma∣nifest the fervency of his Passion to Almeria, and shee as cunningly (according to their former Agreement) carrying her self with much indifference towards him, so puzled the imaginations of the Assist∣ants, that it was hard to say which were most surprized, the Country∣men or the Courtiers: For, having remarked nothing in either of them of Rustick but their Habits, if those did guess Iphis to bee some great
Man, these judged Almeria of an extraction far above that Vile (if I may not say) servile condition which shee had then embraced. Yet not remembring that ever Iphis had been ingaged in any Amoretta's at Court, nor at Plocens, nor in Podolia, they could not devise where hee should have contracted so particular an acquaintance with Almeria, whose condition it was impossible they should e're devine, having never seen Liante. And that which troubled them most of all, was to see that Iphis, who was far more beautifull than Almeria, had such an extraordinary Passion for an Object that seemed not to answer his Flames, but with a kind of disdain. But these Enigma's requiring a more ample Explanation, Night came on, which Eclipsing the Light of the Day, cast them into a double Darkness, both of Mind and Body, the ignorance of a truth beeing no less an obscurity to the understanding, than the shade of Night is to the Corporall sight, which depriveth it of its Function. The Night was differently spent by this disguised Company: For, whilest some troubled their Heads with projecting how to expound the Artificiall Demeanures of Iphis and Almeria (which gave many strange Alarms to their thoughts) These did meditate new and hand∣somly-contrived Frauds, to render them blind at high Noon. Having then conferred in private (which conveniency they had by lodging in the same House, though alwayes in the presence of Boleslaüs, whom Iphis might well call the Gardian of his Integrity) they determined to change their parts, and make the Rusticks believe that Iphis was a Maid (which was but too true) and Almeria a Man (which was not false:) to which effect, that the next Morning stealing very early into the Woods, they should change Habits, and put in Execution this Stratagem, as followeth. Boleslaüs conducter of the Bark having ap∣proved of the Design (partly out of a desire to see if his dear Nursling could act the Woman's part so well, as shee had till then naturally re∣presented the personage of a Man) the performance was extreamly easie. Scarce had the cleer Aurora opened the grand Gates of the Orient, to give passage to Titan's Chariot, but our Diana and her Endymion lost themselves in the Forest. Boleslaüs onely (who upon the Sea of such perilous occasions never lost the sight of Iphis, no more than Marriners do the Pole) was Witness Complice of their Conspi∣ragy. When the Brigade of the Feined as well as Reall Swains were assembled betimes, thinking to advise with the two Lovers wherewith
to deceive the houres of the following Day, the Gemini (the Starrs whereby they steered their course) appeared not; This was a foul storm for them, and which strook them with the fear of a Shipwrack. Every one thought diversly, and spake according to his Fancy. One said Almeria was not so rigorous as shee seemed, and that the back∣wardness shee shewed, was but a feined Copy of her Countenance. Another's Verdict was, that shee that would steal away from her Friends in that manner, would do worse. A third Man alledged, that it was not likely that shee should continue long without discovering what shee was, and that shee that could make a Pannier could make a Basket. Some made this construction of their going away, some that. Proteus never assumed so many severall shapes, as this absenting them∣selves had Explications. Celian was very sorry for the loss of two such profitable Guests, who were as the two Teats, from which his griping hunger of gaine found Suck in abundance. Hee stood amazed like a rich Miser that hath lost his Treasure, hee grumbled and railed against his Children, for not keeping amity with those goodly Angells, who would have put Wealth and Felicity in his House. And alas! They were rather more perplext than Hee; For if Almeria had carried away with her the Hearts of all the Men, Iphis had gained no less ground in the Affections of his Daughters by his admirable Beauty and extraor∣dinary Bounty. But the most astonished of all were Pomeran, Argal and Pisides, (for the rest were at home;) To remaine any longer in that Rustick equipage, was quite against the hair with them, for, it was meerly the desire of complying with the Palatine's humour, that brought them thither, and by his absence that complacency fell to the Ground. They resolved however to expect the return of Iphis for a while, considering they were not far from the City of Plocens, whither they could at all times make their retreat, if the too long want of his presence should drive them into impatience. The most amiable occupation of those who have nothing to doe, beeing Hunting: They commanded the Country-men to follow them, having already given them to understand that they were Gentlemen of that Noble-man's retinue, whom they called Iphis. Gain and good Cheer (after which your Plough-Joggers will run and throng as thick as Flies in a Kitchin) were main Spurrs to prick on their Observance, for these they were their humble Servants, ready at the first call, (that sort of People, although they were never so Lubberly and Heavy∣headed, Gold will make them like quick Silver, and as nimble as Mer∣cury,
this Metall puts Wings to their Heels, and make's them skip like Squirrells. Whilest they are going to their Stands, let us see what's become of our two Lovers, accompanied by the Moderator of their Passions. How joyfull were they to see themselves rid of the pesterment of their Companions, whose too observant Eyes followed the motion of their least actions? That moment of Liberty after such painfull restricti∣ons, was no less agreeable to them than the pleasure which a poor Prisoner feeleth, when his Irons are taken off. Beeing fallen upon the Discourse of their feined Passions, they protested to each other, that those Artificiall Expressions proceeded from a reall Resentment; And that as the whole Ʋniverse could not produce an Example of Friendship comparable to their's; So, if there were a distinction of Sex, it would be the most perfect Love, and the happiest Marriage in the World. Thence proceeding to the recitall of the handsom contrivance, and conduct of their Mummery (as one may call it) they were ready to split with laughing to see that neither Iphis's Friends, nor the Pea∣sants knew what to think or say. Judge you what contentment the subtile Boleslaüs had in beholding those two Hearts, so united by the Bond of Friendship, that it seemed as if one Soul had animated both their Bodies; especially when Almeria embracing Iphis with as much Simplicity as Tenderness, thus began; My dear Brother, Mee-think's those Clowns were no Fooles, when they said that thou hadst the Beauty of an Angell; for, I believe, if thou wer't a Woman, all Men would fall in love with thee; As for my own particular all the Men, and all the Wo∣men in the World are nothing to my Eyes, in comparison of thee; the Af∣fection I bear to thee, (although limited within the bounds of Honour and Decencie) hath I know not what tender Resentment, which I do not feel for all the rest of my Friends. Pomeran, Argal and Pisides (to give them their due) are very gallant Men; but, to my sense, they are no better than Statues to you; And yet it is not the greatness of your quality that dazleth my sight, but the onely merit of your Person. To this endeering Language Iphis presently replied, not without smiling upon Boleslaüs; And I believe, Brother, that I have been woun∣ded with the same Dart for thee; for, all Women are so indifferent to mee when I am in thy Presence, that me-think's there are none in the World; and this Name and this Disguisement of Almeria, strike's so deep into my Imagination, that what thou thinkest I speak but in Jeast, is unfeinedly the production of my Soul's most tender thoughts: And if thou wert in
Effect what thou art but in shew, I swear there is no Queen upon the Earth, whom I would have more willingly for my Wife than thy self. I pre-thee, Brother, (answered Liante, do not talk to mee of beeing a Wo∣man any further than in Habit; For, were it to make mee the Wife of the greatest of Monarchs, I would not bee of any other Sex than I am. But I'le assure thee, said Iphis, that were it onely to bee Married to Liante, I should be glad to be a Woman: And, that thou maist know with what sincerity I speak, if it be impossible for mee to be so, I promise thee, that I will lose all the remainder of my Credit in the Court, or I will make thee Marry the most Eminent Lady in Polonia; And I am very certain, that it shall be meerly thy own fault, if thou failest of that fortune; For, the King cannot denie Mee that Grace, when I shall demand it in thy favour. Almeria, as if with the Woman's Habit shee had likewise put on the curiosity, was very importunate with Iphis to name that so advantage∣ous Party; that shee might dispose her Courage to do some generous action, that might make her deserve so high an Alliance. It is not yet time, answered Iphis, that I should satisfie you therein; Wine, Love, and a Secret, if once vented, are worth nothing; you shall know it in it's sea∣son. Content your self now to learn onely that to merit the Possessions of so rare a Subject, you shall not need to run any further dangers, than what you have alreadie undergone, and that it depend's intirely on my will: For, of the Person whom I mention I have the absolute disposall; Almeria Smiling upon Boleslaüs whispered in his Eire, I know whom hee means, and what shee is; It is his Ward Eleonora, Daughter to Stanislas, his Predecessor in the Palatine of Uratislau, but the fruit is not yet ripe, a great deal of Straw and much Time will be required to bring that Medlar to perfection. Boleslaüs glad to see her in that pretty Error, told Iphis alowd what shee had said, who was extreamly well pleased that shee understood it so, and to stick her deeper in her mistake, The expectati∣on (said hee) will not be so long as you may imagine, I was not above two or three Years elder when I was Married to your Sister: However, the party whom I intended for you is in Estate and all things else so far beyond Clemencia, who possessed your thoughts for a time, that when you see her you will not stand to consult which choice you should make. At these words Almeria casting her self amiably upon Iphis Neck, as the amorous Vine imbraceth it's Supporter, the Elm I pre-thee dear Brother, said shee, speak not to mee of any other Party than thy service; for, as long as thou wilt own mee, I will never inslave my self to any Wife; or, rather, if you please, as long as you will permit mee to be your Servant.
I will have no other Master; or else if you think fit to Honour mee still with the style of your Mistris, I will never have any other Servant. Iphis ravished to see her so perfectly deceived, would willingly have re∣turned some answer, but that Almeria held his Mouth so straitly besieged and blocked up with Kisses, that hee had not passage for one single word, Onely their Tongues advancing to the Superficies of their Lips, made a mutuall communication of their Thoughts, and those Thoughts ingendred such Resentments as transported them almost into that Extasie which all Philosophie holds for the most powerfull Effects of Love. Boleslaüs, who feared lest that Fire which quickneth when it is in mediocrity, and consumeth when in Excess, should bee kindled so fat in his Nursling's veins, that afterwards it could hardly bee extinguish∣ed, to separate these Metalls, made use of the Water of Depart, that they might better practise those Caresses in their second Transvest∣ment, wherein Serife should bee more favorable to Calliante, than Almeria had been to Iphis, which intimated that it was time for them to undress and change their Garments. Heavens: what do I say? Bee not disturbed chast Souls, I will speak nothing but what the most rigorous Vestal may hear without blushing, and without the least in∣terest of her Modesty. Here it was that the naturall pudicity of Iphis acted its part, and that Almeria by her bold, not to say impudent, Actions did plainly shew what Shee was, by reason of her Sex, which rendreth Men lesse bashfull: For, as if Shee had had great haste to become Man again, Shee presently cast off that shamefull habit, which belying Her spirit had violented Her Nature. Whereas Iphis could not put off His without much regret; for which purpose hee begged the protection of a thick copse to hide the tumour of Her Brests, which began to broach Treason against him. Whereupon Almeria in a jesting manner said, What? Servant do you hide your self from mee, in a condition, wherein by your past sighs you seemed to have lodged the chief of your felicity? See, how hee counterfeit's the Woman already. Tru∣ly hee hath reason, said Boleslaus, to give Iphis time to go away; for, it is more shamfull for a Man to take upon him a Woman's attire, than for you, who are a Man, to resume your own naturall Habit. It was in the time of the most excessive Heats, when the delightfull coldness of the Water is most desired; So, there beeing not far off a River, which gently rowling its Chrystall, or rather liquid Silver upon the Golden Sands, Almeria cast her self into it, carrying her Body as
gracefully, and with as much ease along the stream, as a Swan doth seem to glide upon the face of a smooth Pond. Agreeable Water (said shee washing her self) purifie mee, I pray, from the Ordures I have con∣tracted under a Habit, which hath sullied the generosity of my Sex: And since it was from your Element that the Goddess which causeth Love did receive her Beeing, make my excuse to those that shall reproach my Effe∣minacy, and tell them that this Passion is of such a Nature, that as it in∣fuseth courage into the basest spirits, So it make's guilty of unworthy acti∣ons those that before had never sacrificed but to Glory, as the onely aim of of all generous Hearts. Let your Current, gentle River, carry all my follies into the bosome of the Sea, and drown in the depth of Oblivion the Name of Almeria, which I leave with her Garments. Whilest shee was thus bathing her self, and the water, which greedily environed her on all sides, served as a transparant vestment, Boleslaüs conveyed her clothes to Iphis, who could not bee so soon uncased for peeping at this swimmer through the boughes of the envious Trees, which seem∣ed to bee jealous of the attention of his Eyes upon that curious Spectacle. As hee was revesting himself in Almeria's Robes, See Father (said hee to Boleslaüs) to what the vehemency of my Passion reduceth mee: For, without feining, whilest hee that is the Legitimate Object of my desires is refreshing himself in that Water, I consume my self in this Wood, which would likewise bee burned if it were susceptible of my flames. Beeing by the help of Boleslaüs quite drest, Oh how handsome you are, my dear Fo∣ster-Daughter; (said the old Man) The Goddess of Cyprus came not so beautifull out of Thetys Bosome, as you appear in this Equipage. If in the habit of a Man you did cast so many fires amongst the Ladies at Court, with this you will set all Men, that look upon you, on fire: But bee wary, and keep your self upon your guard, for, at this Game, oftentimes he that intend's to take, is taken. After this advertisement hee went to carry Almeria the cloathes which Iphis had put off, which beeing of the Country-make, that is, not onely not fit, but a great deal bigger than needed, it was no hard business for our Masculine Nymph to get them on. As the weary Pilgrim after a tedious travell rejoyceth at the review of his Native Soil; Such was the gladness of Liante to see himself again in his Naturall Garb. After his dipping in that pleasant Bath, our Reformed or Metamorphosed Shepardess from the mouth of Bole∣slaüs received a new Name, which yet somewhat disguised his own,
before hee borrowed that of Almeria; it was Calliante; the faire Iphis called himself Serife, and under this name, as under his Shepher∣desse's weeds, shee appeared before the Astonished Calliante; I say Astonished: For, to see Serife, and to bee touched, possessed and ra∣vished, was one and the same motion in his Soule. What? said hee to Boleslaus, is this Iphis? No, answered the grave Senior, it is Serife, a handsome Shepherdess of this Country, which hath taken his place, und covered her self with the Cloathes which you put off; For, the name of Iphis is buried in this wood: And as that Water hath transformed you from a Shepherdess into a Man (as the Fable reports of the Fountain of Salmacis) what know you, but that Iphis may have Eaten of some Fruit in this Wood, the vertue whereof may have Metamorphosed him like∣wise from a comely Youth into a lovely Nymph? This hee said Smiling. But Calliante replyed seriously, Father, I know not where I am, nor what I am: neither can I perswade my self that I am awake, and see what I have before my Eyes. Is it not a Dream? am not I asleep? This hee said rubbing his Eyes. Is not this an Inchanted Forrest? Is this some vaine Apparition, or a reall Body, which under the lines of my Iphis Countenance, presents to my View a Serife? Boleslaus, I am not so easily deceived, Either I am no Man, or that is a perfect Woman; I will pawn my life that you have played mee some trick. Speak, Beautifull Angell, that I may know you, and bee assured whether you are indeed Serife, to mee you shall bee a Serafine, for, I will honour you as a Celestiall Crea∣ture, you shall be my good Angell, my Tutelary Saint, my Ursa or my Pole, towards whom shall ever turne the Needle of my most sincere af∣fections. In this Passion casting himself upon his knees, and taking her by the hand, hee thus continued; Beautifull Serife, hold mee no longer in suspense, but tell mee who you are, that I may know whose I am: For, howsoever Fortune shall dispose of mee, I can bee no other then yours, from you henceforwards will proceed all my Felicities or Disasters. This said, hee offered to lay his Lips to her Hands, but Serife hastily snatch∣ing them away would permit no such Familiarity, nor gratifie him with so great a Favour. By this, cryed out Calliante, I finde that Bo∣leslaus hath supposed a Serife in the place of my Iphis, or I am bewitched: For, if it were Iphis, to what purpose should hee deny mee so small a Fa∣vour, who whilest I was Almeria, made no Scruple of casting his Arms about my neck, and joyning Lips to Lips? Speak therefore; Sweet Serife, that I may hear from your own mouth my Doom, unlesse this Sorcery hath inchanted my Ears as well as my Sight.
The newly transform'd Serife perceiving by these transported ex∣pressions, that her beauty had wrought strange effects in the surprised Calliante, with a tone of Voyce that would have extracted the Essence of an affectionate resentment from the most barbarous Soul, answe∣red; Really, Brother, You counterfeit the Lover so feelingly, that if you continue to act your part so handsomely, no creature will be able to judge but that indeed you are in Love, and this will bee the best means wee can have to usher our Enterprise to the intended perfection. How, counterfeit? replyed Calliante, do you take mee for an Orlando upon a Stage, who make's a shew of being Furious or Passionate, when hee is only so in his gesture, and Extravagant actions? I pray, esteeme mee not of that rank, but believe that I am what I seem, and that what I say proceed's from the most Intire and tender resentment of my Heart; For, although that Face and that Speech represent to my Eyes and Ears my dear Iphis, yet I am so taken with Serife, that if you change not that habit, I shall never change my Passion, and hence-forwards farewell the thoughts of any Woman: For, though I would rather that the Earth should open under my Feet to swallow mee, than give that Crime admittance into my Brest, which cannot bee imagined, much less named without horror; Yet I may say with much truth that my Soul is so glued (as it were) to yours, and your affection hath so penetrated my Heart, that I love you above the love of Women. This is to bee understood in the chastest manner conceiv∣able; For, without Honour and Vertue, no Ʋnion of Hearts can bear the sacred name of Friendship: Otherwise, the Societies of Theeves and Infamous persons would assume that glorious title; which would be too great a Profanation. Therefore dear Serife, do mee the courtesie to per∣swade your self that I use no Dissembling in my Protestation of Service to you, or in the Declaration which I make, that your Idea banisheth out of my Fancy all other Images; Insomuch that my Spirits are so taken up with your perfection, that there is hardly any room within my self for my self. They had continued longer in this discourse, (Calliante being no less ravished with Serife's agreeable presence, than Serife with a secret glory to see that shee had reduced under her obedience a Cap∣tive, the possession of whom was the greatest happiness her Ambition did pretend:) But that Boleslaüs (who playing the Mirth-marrer at this Triumph, put Water into this fuming Wine, lest drunk with delight they should bee surprised, and their own Felicity render them unfor∣tunate) interrupted them, shewing the danger they ran of discovering
their Stratagem, if they were found together by those whom they had left in the Village, who Infallibly would leave no place in the Forest unvisited to seek them out. Heavens! what sweet words did hee stop in their Mouths, separating them in that moment wherein they were producing expressions, whose rehearsall would have much imbellished these Pages! But since Action doth better satisfie the Rea∣der's curiosity than Discoursing, let us see what succeeded this new changing of habits, which for an Iphis and Almeria, hath brought us forth a Serife and a Calliante. Calliante took a way by himself, and Boleslaüs accompanyed Se∣rife a contrary, unto a Village not far from that where Celian lived; where leaving her, hee returned to seek Pomeran, Argal and Pisides, where hee had left them; But hee found none but the three Sisters, Merinda, Belida and Remonda, who looked like Pictures that had lost their Colour and Lustre with the light: For, being deprived of Almeria, (who was their Ornament and Splendour, though the Ob∣ject of their Envie) they were like Fishes upon the dry ground. When they saw Beleslaüs (who, they thought, had been gone away with Iphis and Almeria) they were in hopes of hearing some news of them from him: But, hee feigning to have run severall wayes to inquire after them, without meeting any one that could informe him, seemed to bee much amazed at their so sodain departure; and to underfeel their censures, hee made very Sinister judgements of their stealing thus away; Then, asking what was become of his Companions, hee learnt that they were gone with the Swains a hunting, partly to follow the track of the run-awaies, partly to divert by that exercise the discon∣tentment which they suffered by their absence. Whereupon the old Man, who by the priviledge of his age was more inclined to his repose, than so much Coursing which debilitateth Hunts-men, and makes them buy a little pleasure with much pain, resolved to expect their return, passing the time in discourse with Celian and his Daughters, and ob∣serving carefully the motions of those Souls diversly passionate upon the subject of those Fugitives. Celian lamented their absence out of sense of his own Interest, ha∣ving lost the profits which hee hoped to have gained by their presence: the rest, either moved with Affection, or prioked with Jealousie, and all floating in uncertainties, manifested their Passions the more natu∣rally, the less capable their Clownishness did render them of those arts, which the more polite Spirits do use to cover their weaknesses.
Already Titan's panting Sleeds hasting to refresh themselves in the Western Waves, extended the shadow of the Mountains, when on a so∣daine a great noyse and winding of Horns from the thickest part of the Forest peirced their Ears, intimating that a great Troop of Hunts-men with a no small pack of Hounds were making that way. These were our disguised Courtiers, and the perfect Clowns, which had met in the Forest with Iphigenes's chief Ranger, who to keep his Horses and his Hounds in breath had taken all the Palatines hunting Equipage to harbour a lusty Stag, which hee had imprimed there. But in regard this meeting was not unpleasant, it will not bee impertinent to spend a little time in relating the manner. This Stag which bore all his rights, and whom Age had taught ma∣ny wiles, made so many doublings or turnings, that hee put the subtlest and best-sented Hounds to a loss; whilest the nimble footed beast ta∣king advantage of their delayes, hastned his Course towards a Pond, whose desired Waters hee had no sooner perceived, but hee plunged himself into the midst, bathing his over-heated tongue in that refresh∣ing Liquor, which hee seemed to suck all into his thirsty Throat, to quench the Fire that burned in his Stomack; ingaging his whole Bo∣dy (covered with Sweat and Foam) so far in the Water, that no∣thing appeared but his Head, couching his Horns upon his Back in the same manner as when hee used to swim. Our Clowns having dis∣covered him, made him quickly leave that agreeable refreshment, galling him with their Arrows; but the Wounds were so slight that they hindred not his Flight, which they were not able to follow, be∣ing not so light-timbred as that swift Animal; and hearing on the other side by the retorting of the Eccho's the confused noyle of the Hunts-men, and the Cry of the Hounds, they resolved to direct their steps that way, to inform the Hunts-men of the fearfull Fugitive's retreat. And in effect they found them so puzled to finde out the cunning turnings, wherewith that subtle Beast had imbroyled his Strain, that without their directions the Chase had been at an end. But the pleasure was to see the Hunts-men take the Change as well as their Hounds: For, Pomeran, Pisides, and Argal being disguised, and mingled without distinction with the Swains, they were not known by Arcade nor any of his Companions. So that passing all for Coun∣try-fellows (the custome of Prince's and Noble men's Hunts-men, espe∣cially in that Conntry, being to domineer over the Peasants, and force them by menaces, rather than intreat them to bee assistant to them)
Pisides and Argal, seeming to bee the nimblest and most dextrous of the Gang were commanded by the chief Hunts-man to goe with them to the Pond, whence they had Chased the Stag, that by the Blood which their Arrows had drawn out of his sides, the Dogs might reco∣ver the Sent. This made Pomeran say to his Comrades, laughing, what an Ancient Philosopher said of himself That they payed the Interest of their ill looks: Thou art mistaken, answered Arcade, it is because they are like∣lier men than thou, that I take them. Sir, said Argal to the Hunt-sman, if you ride very fast wee shall not bee able to follow you, for wee are very unfit men to bee Lacquaies. Sirrah, said Philaster, I'le make thee finde thy feet, and if thou come'st not away quickly, I shall put mettle into thee. Hee had his Arm already up to measure Pisides o're the Shoul∣ders, who not being accustomed to such caresses, slipt aside to avoid the blow, saying, You Master Hunts-man, mee think's it would become you better to goe on Foot, and mee to Ride, if you would please to alight, wee should end the Chase more conveniently. This hee said thinking Philaster would know him by his Voyce; But whether the heat of his Game, or the strangeness of Piside's habit rendred him so little civile, hee replyed; How now Rascall, dost thou jeer mee? As I am a Gen∣tleman, thou shalt pay for thy Insolence. With that hee was going to joyn the Effect to his Promise, when Pomeran, calling him by his name, said, Hold, art thou blinde? dost thou not know Pisides under this Peasant's Coat? Hee that meets a Ghost when hee thinks least of it, is less Astonished than Philaster was, hearing those words, and under∣standing the Error which hee was going to commit. So, leaping from his Horse, and falling on his Knees, hee demanded pardon of him whom hee would have beaten, making many excuses, accompanyed with Protestations, that were needless, since the disguisemement ren∣dered the offence nothing. Pisides and Argal turning all to laughter, took Philaster's Horse and Armelin's; Arcade would have given Pomeran his, but being unwilling to dismount the chief Conductor of the Game, hee took another. So, some running on Foot, some on Horse-back, they continued their Chase. The Hounds having recovered the Sent, followed the Stag full-cry, untill being brought to the Bay, hee rendred his life with Tears, and lamentable Groans, to the vio∣lence of the pitiless Hounds, and the force of our Gentlemen's Spears, who took pleasure to pierce him in divers places. The Chase being thus ended, they satisfied the Hunts-men's admiration, by telling them that the Palatine was in that Forest, disguised in the same manner for
his divertisement, incharging them not to say who they were, but only that they were Gentlemen of their acquaintance. Having thus given them their lesson, they returned to Celian's Village, there to break up their prey, and make good cheer for their Country-men. Their arrivall comforted the old Man, who intended to kill the fat Calf if his Iphis had been returned: But his joy was very short, when hee perceived not in all that company his desired Iphis and Almeria, and notwithstand∣ing all their jonkets, hee could not bee merry, because those two per∣sons whom hee loved more than his own Children did not appear. But Boleslaüs having given him some hopes of not beeing much longer de∣prived of their sights, hee made of Necessity a Vertue. But it would bee hard to say whose astonishment was greatest, that of Boleslaüs, Seeing Iphigenes Servants and all his Hunting-Equipage; or their's to see Boleslaüs, whom they knew to bee the inseparable shadow of their Master's Body. However the discreet Old Man, knowing the Palatin's Intentions and most secret Thoughts, told them that Iphigenes would not bee well pleased to finde them there, where hee concealed himselfe for some very important Affaires; therefore hee willed them to return next Morning betimes to Plocens. Which command they readily obeyed; For, hardly the Breaking Day had summoned the watchfull Stars to prepare themselves for a retreat, but the Hunts-men (as early as the Precursor of the Morn's approach) cast themselves again into the Forrest, with design to coast over the Country, Hunting, to theirs Master's House. But the adventure of their return deserve's the time to consider it. The Passionate Serife, whose senses felt no small commotions in Calliante's Presence, had during the Night, and in his absence lost the benefit of repose; For, this Idea was so lively imprinted in her mind, that shee was continually in Alarme untill her sight restored to her Eyes that malignly-sweet consolation, which is taken in the aspect of the Object beloved (the source of perplexing Agonies no less dear than troublesome.) Scarce had Aurora Guilded o're the Girdle of the Horizon, but leaping out of her Bed (which seem'd to her as if it had been strewed with Thorns) shee went into the Wood to entertain her Thoughts; sweet Thoughts, which hovering within the circumference of Love's Dominion still lighted upon Calliante as their Center, her Designes ayming at nothing but to captivate that high Spirit, whose ambition could not bee limited by any less subject than her self. After the spending of some time in seeking out a place suitable to the hu∣mour
wherewith shee was possest, shee chose in the thickest of the Forest, the brink of a Silver Brook, whose murmuring waters seem∣ed both to speak and answer at once, and tune their pleasant Purling to the agreeable noise, which the Leaves of the Neighbouring Trees did make, when frizled by the Zephyr's welcome Wings. There, un∣der the protection of the shady Boughs (which were so interlaced, that the Sun could not peep through, but rather Night in Day-time seem'd there to keep her Residence) beeing laid along upon the soft Flowers, which lost their lustre at the presence of those that appeared in her Face, an humid coolness having sent a sweet vapour into her Eyes, ushered in gentle SLEEP, who could not all Night upon the Feather-bed finde admittance. Scarce had that drowsie Deity benum∣med all her senses, but MORPHEUS (who take's delight in represent∣ing to the imagination the most extravagant Chimera's that can bee fancied) made her conceit, that the Princess Respicia displeased at his backwardness to satisfie her desires, had made recourse to the power of inchantments, which of an Iphigenes made a Stag, and that the same Stag thredding the brushy Woods, and having mued his Antlers, be∣came a Hinde, which beeing pursued by the Palatin's Hounds and Men, was reduced to such extremity, that if shee had not retaken her former shape, shee had been killed by these, and devoured by the others. These troublesome thoughts put her into strange perplexities, and passing her Hand twice or thrice over her Face, as it were, to strike off the Flies, shee felt a stinging more sharp than those Crea∣ture's ordinary touch, which made her awake; and shee had no sooner opened her Eyes, but the first species that formed it self to her sight, was an horrible Serpent of an immense growth, which made towards her, sliding himself in divers folds upon the Grass, infecting it with the poyson which distilled from his swollen Throat. This spectacle made the valorous Serife finde her Feet; but in regard shee had long since forgot the Trade of running away, gracefully brandishing her Shep∣heardesse's hook, shee marched couragiously towards that furious Snake, which casting fire out of his Eyes, and darting mortall poyson from his pointed tongue, disposed himself to give her a strange exer∣cise. But shee, who feared neither Wolf nor Bear, and who not long before had laid a wild Sow grovelling upon the Earth, (not inferiour in bigness or strength to the Erimanthian Bore) with three blows, addressed with an incredible dexterity, put this dangerous Serpent in a condition of defending rather than assaulting, and with two more
of flying rather than defending himself, beeing bruised in severall places of the Body; But, knowing that if those Creatures are not hurt in the Head, all other blowes are but of small effect, seeing that hee trailed but lazily his weakened Train, and that hee hardly could finde out his retreate, shee hit him so full upon the Pate, that presently hee remained without Motion. Then, shee bethought her self that this might bee the Event of her Dream, although the species were as dif∣ferent, as Ridles are from the sense which is commonly applied to them: But not beeing able to imagine, who had so opportunely waken∣ed her, shee believed it might happily have been her good Angell (to whose guard (as wee read) wee are committed) they having charge to preserve us in all our wayes, to uphold us lest wee should stumble, and to give us the courage to trample upon Serpents, and the most fell Animals of the Earth. With this thought lifting up her Eyes to the azury roof of Heaven, shee addressed this ELEVATION OF SPIRIT To the All-seeing DEITIE. SPIRIT Divine, whose onely Influence Fill's th Earth with Flowers, and the Skie with Light; Eternall Sun, who by thy Indulgence Mak'st blessed Souls taste fulness of delight: Show'r down on mee thy Clemency, thy Grace Infuse into my Spirit, and assure With Hope my Senses, that in this low Place My Confidence in thee may rest secure. Grant that I may withstand the Temptor's strength; Afflictions with Constancy support; Give Fervency unto my Heart, at length That I may finde safe Harbour in thy Port. Banish from mee all evill thoughts, from Wrong Preserve my Honour, and from Envie's stings; And as the Birds shelter their tender yong, Hide mee within the shadow of thy Wings.
The Seventh Book. ARGUMENT. Iphigenes in Almeria's Habit meeting with his own Servants at their return to Plocens, by reason of that Disguise runs the hazard of beeing ravished by them. His Speech to them. Their astonishment and shame when they knew him to bee their Master. Liante or Calliante having put himself in a Gentleman's Habit, come's to inquire after Almirea, who, hee said, was his sister. The feined Relations of his sister's going away with Iphis. Calliante endeer's the Country- swains to help him to finde out his imaginary Sister and her Lover. Iphigenes or Serife having changed her Shepherdesse's weeds into a Ladie's attire, fein's her self to be Modestina, to deceive Pomeran and her other Compani∣ons. Boleslaus's cunning dissimulation to strengthen the other's errour. The feined Modestina's Complaints against the inconstancy of Iphi∣genes. Pomeran's and his Companion's zealous Speeches, and their indeavours to comfort her. They discover the fallacy through Arcade's indiscretion. WHilest shee was in these Divine Meditations, a little Golden Feathered Bird seemed to warble and chant in her shrill Notes, Actions of grace to the Authour of all Good, for giving that Virgin the power to kill the Serpent, according to the threat pronounced against that cursed Creature at the first Creation. This pretty Har∣mony made Serife cast her Eyes to the place, whence her Ears received the sound, and having a while observed that this little Bird fluttering from Branch to Branch did follow her, as if it sang the IO POEAN of her Victory, Shee was amazed at last to see it cast it self with fury upon the Body of the Serpent, pecking him as if it would have killed him again after Death. Which recalled to her
memory a Relation shee formerly had heard of a small Bird called Saura, which is held to bee as great a Lover of Man-kind as a Hater of Serpents, and whose naturall custome is to peck the Faces of per∣sons who sleep in Medowes or Marshy places, as well to kiss them as to make them waken to avoid the Ambushes and biting of Serpents, that lie sculking under the Grass. Hence shee conjectured that those prickings which she had felt upon her Cheeks, sleeping, proceeded from the Philanthropie of that little Creature, which had the care to pre∣serve her from the deadly sting of that reptile Enemy, who would have conveyed Death with his Poyson into her Heart. But all this had little congruity with the species which her Dream (though short and sodainly interrupted) had so lively ingraven in her fancy. O Serife, justly you begin to act the Woman, wherein Women most play the Women, that is, by the observation of Dreams. As the light of the Sun dimmeth that of a Torch or Candle, so a great noise drowneth one which is less loud; That of a Chace with a full Cry and vehement impetuosity, banished from the Ears of our contemplative Shepheardess, that Bird's chirping, the murmure of the gliding Water, and the whistling of the Wind amongst the Trees. These were her own Hunts-men, who returning to Plocens by the ad∣dress of their Blood-hound had rowsed an Hinde, and loosed the whole Kennell after her. The Forest returned Ecchoes from every part, and this beeing an exercise wherein Serife took a singular delight, her former thoughts ravished with this present Object, were imme∣diately turned towards that part, whence shee heard that confused noise (which is more agreeable to those that love that sport, than the most melodious harmony, that Musick can produce in its best regula∣ted Concerts;) and taking a cross path, in short time shee arrived at the Game. Heavens! how was shee surprised with astonishment, when shee saw her own Hounds (whom shee knew severally by Name) and her own Servants, who were far enough from thinking her to bee their Master. Shee remained some while in suspense whether shee had best appear, or retire into the thickest of the Wood to avoid their sight, lest they coming to know her, might found some Opinions which might bee prejudiciall to her afterwards. But whether the excessive Pleasure shee took in this Cynthian Recreation, hindered her from retreating; or whether shee thought, at the worst, if shee were disco∣vered, that shee should easily turn into a laughter, the changing of her Habit, shee resolved to shew her self, and the first Man shee met shee
asked him what was their Game; That accent, that manner of speak∣ing, that grave and Majestick port, that Angelicall Face, and that de∣licate complexion, touched the Hounts-man so, that hee stood stock∣still as if hee had been at a loss; and considering with Attention this Shepherdess, hee thought hee had met Diana, or one of her Nymphs. In this confusion, hardly knowing what to answer, hee said, Excel∣lent Nymph, wee are in chace of an Hinde, which wee have singled out from the Herd; but if this Company hath made us take the Change, your presence is more capable of staying us: For, there's not one of my Com∣panions, but would become your servant as well as I, if hee had been so hap∣py as to meet you. Sir, replyed Serife, I am not so lately come into these Woods, but that I know the custome you Hunters have to abuse all the Shepherdesses you finde, and then at your return make your City-Dames (whose slaves you are) merry at their simplicity; But wee are not yet so dull, but that wee can discern your craft, and know that under the Hony which is upon your Lips, you hide the Gall which you carry in your Hearts. This answer retorted no less gracefully than wittily, seized Armelin (so was the Hunts-man called) with a new astonishment; Insomuch that falling further into discourse with this agreeable Nymph, hee indeavoured by a multitude of deep protestations to assure her, that shee had conquered him in a moment, and that hee never had felt him∣self taken with so violent a Passion, nor farther remote from dissimu∣lation for any Creature in the World. But as hee made shew of a∣lighting from his Horse to talk with her more at ease, and by his per∣swasions to render her more susceptible of his torment: Know, said Serife, that although wee come short of your City-Dames in Beauty, wee doe exceed them in Honesty, and that our Rustick Simplicity render∣eth us less capable of beeing surprized by your deceitfull and affected flat∣teries; Go, Sir, keep on your way, I'le follow your Game with my Eyes, and although your little courtesie refuseth to inform mee what it is, I am not so ignorant in this exercise, but that I may teach you; and if I can come time enough to the fall of your Deer, (so that you vouchsafe to lend mee your Sword) you shall finde that I know how to use it aswell as my Hook or Distaffe. This said, shee presently retired into the thickest of the Wood, leaving poor Armelin perplexed with strange imaginations; One while, hee thought it was an Angell that vanished as soon as it appeared; For, that Voyce, that Garb, those Eyes, and that manner of
Speech, seemed to have hee knew not what of Celestiall. At last, be∣lieving it was an illusion which had charmed his Senses, shaking off his amazement, hee set Spurs and hasted after his Companions. Having overtook them, hee prayed them to give him audience a little while, and having told them in few words, how hee had hapned upon the most beautifull, not onely Shepherdess, but Creature that his Eyes ever had beheld, who wandring all alone might perchance bee brought to yeeld, not to their Discretion, but to the Indiscretion of the unrea∣sonable Passion, which by his Description hee kind led in their Souls; They like Hare-brain'd Hunters and dissolute Courtiers, who at the first motion do burn with a base desire of evill-doing, pressed him imme∣diatly to conduct them towards that cleer spring, there to quench the thirst of their abominable Lusts. Their Request was no sooner made, but granted: So true it is that vice is alwayes leading to a Precipice, and that illicite Passions may not improperly bee compared to Bitches, which bring forth their young ones blinde, all first motions beeing without consideration. They rushing through the Wood thitherwards, where Armelin met Serife, had not gone far before they espied her advancing a great pace in a path, which shee thought would lead her to the Game. They presently rode up to her, and Arcade and Philaster seeing that Arme∣lin's words were very much inferiour to the merit and Graces of that Shepherdess, they thought this Prize, better worth than the Hinde which they were pursuing. Mean time the Hounds, which were no more incouraged nor cryed after, left their chace to follow their Masters, insomuch that they were environed with the whole Pack when they accosted Serife, who seeing her self bayed and barked at by those Creatures, began to fear that her dream might indeed then turn to truth; For, all the three Gallants beeing equally inamored of her Beauty, quitted their Horses with a resolution to have, by faire means or by foul, that which could not enter into the thought of any but persons whose brutall Pleasure is the onely Butt of their Passions. They began with Compliments, from thence they passed to insolent Language, and from insolent words to impudent Actions. Serife at first took much pleasure to see her own Domesticks in that pleasant errour, and by witty and ambiguous answers did seem to whet their Desires and quicken their Inventions. But at last when Impatience made them speak openly, and gave them the impudence to come to threats of Force, this extremity made her take off her Mask, and
casting her hand upon the guard of Arcade's Sword, shee drew it hasti∣ly, saying to them, with a tone and Countenance full of displeasure; How, Philaster, Arcade and Armelin, are you so doubly blinded, that you know not Iphigenes your Master? and admit it were not hee that speak's to you under the Habit of a Shepherdess, ought not you to dread his Anger and his Justice, if it should come to his knowledge that you should have committed in the meanest subject of his Palatinate, an act so dishonor∣able as a Rape? When they heard their own Names from the Mouth of a Person, to whom, they thought, they had not been known, and that the word of Master piercing their Ears, made the Scales fall from their Eyes, to know the Palatine under an habit so unsuitable to his quality; if the Earth had opened under their Feet, or some mighty Tree falling had squeezed their Bodies under it, I believe they would have thought it an happiness to have perished at that instant, rather than have swallowed the Shame and Confusion that over∣whelmed their Hearts and covered their Faces with the Livery of Guilt. They remained for some time so immoveable, that they resembled Statues, rather than living persons. And when this amaze∣ment had given them leisure to breath, they did like People that are drowning, who catch not at that which may best help them out of danger, but that which come's first to their hands. A free accusation is alwayes better than an impertinent defence. Therefore they did like the Crocadile, which weepeth and yet hath no tongue; tears were the discourse of their Repentance, and sighs and sobs the witnesses of their reall Resentments, which begat in the Heart of that generous Amazon a greater desire to pardon than to punish them, though they would have endured the chastisement with as much constancy, as they had little confidence to demand forgiveness. This persecution was no sooner ended, but there began another, no less perilous. For, the Hounds beeing inraged for losing the sent and footing of their Prey, falling foule upon one another began a furious skirmish, wherein Serife, who loved them passionately (as the custome is of great persons who take delight in Hunting) ingaging her self to separate them, beeing pressed with fury and ac∣customed to Blood, they turned their rage against her, and had it not been for the Sword which she had naked in her hand, they would have preyed upon her. Shee called them by their severall names, that they might the better know her, but their Barking and Yelping quite
drowned the sound of the Shepherdesse's voyce; the more the Hunts∣men beat them, the more eager they were to fasten on her. Thus Se∣rife, for having seen with too much curiosity her Diana (Almeria or Calliante) bathing in that Silver stream, had like to have undergone the miserable Acteon's fate: And her Dream was accomplished in such manner, that whereas other Dreams are but the representations of precedent Events, in this, there seemed to bee denoted some prin∣cipall Traces of succeeding accidents. Wherefore Serife taking by the fore-top this Occasion, which presented it self, of making use of her own Servants to effect her present designe, commanded Philaster and Armelin to repair without delay to Plocens with their Hounds, and not to hunt any more in that Forest without her order, palliating the dis∣guisement of her person, and her change of habit with the pretence of affairs, highly concerning the service of her King and Country: But the secrets of State which she then attended, were only those of her Passion; Her King was Calliante, in respect the Will is Queen of the Faculties of our Souls, and Love the King of the Will Shee kept Arcade to wait on her, having sent the others away one on Horseback, the other on Foot making use of Armelin's Horse for the purpose which you shall hear. Whilest they return to the City with the Seal of Silence upon their lips, (applyed by Serife's command) being resolved to bee more dis∣creet and reserved for the future; let us see what was the issue of our newly-transvested Lover's designe. Boleslaüs like a craftie Sinon, had already (according to Iphigenes intention) prepared the Spirits of Pomeran, Argal and Pisides to a belief, that the Palatine had enjoyed Almeria long before hee left the Court, though with such circum∣spection, that the watchfullest observer could never discover his in∣clinations; so that living secretly like a Paris with that Hellen, hee seemed in the Eyes of the World to bee another Hyppolitus; And that retiring from the Court unto his Palatinate, Hee had perswa∣ded her to wear a Shepherdesse's weeds, that hee might visit her as a Nymph of those Woods: Unto which Motion shee (who was a piece of Wax in his Hands) easily consented, burning with reciprocall ardors for the incomparable Iphis, though in appearance shee seemed to bee all Ice. This artificiall Fiction (whereof they had already some conjectures, especially since their stealing away in that manner) so balanced those Gentlemen's imaginations, that it presently passed with them for a certainty, and thereupon by a complacency (so ordinary amongst Courtiers) they determined to favour those amorous stealths,
like him who is reported to have slept at a Festivall meeting purpose∣ly to give another the opportunity to Court a Lady. Upon this surmise Boleslaüs made them resolve to expect the lost Couple's return, which was with a very handsome heat. For, Al∣meria, who was become Calliante, having changed in some town thereabouts his Contrie-slops for a Gentleman's apparell, and fur∣nished himself with a Horse, came upon the Spur to Celian's house, and making a shew of much earnestness and indignation, inquired of the good Man for a Sister of his, called Almirea, who, hee said, had been seduced by a Young man, named Iphites, threatning to make both of them feel the Bloody effects of his just displeasure, and re∣venge by their deaths the dishonour which through his Sister's Folly redounded to their Family. Celian surprised with this discourse, and judging by the perfect resemblance of this Gentleman's face to Al∣meria's, that indeed hee might bee her Brother, durst not at first de∣clare what hee knew of her; but making use of her absence, I know not (answered hee) where shee is whom you demand, neither can I give you any account of her. Hereupon came forth the disguised Courtiers, the reall Rusticks and Celian's Daughters, who all together environed the Stranger, and considering him with attention, they concluded pre∣sently that hee was Almeria's Brother. Calliante vapouring and cha∣fing thundered out a thousand Rodomontadoes, saying, That he must and would have them restore her, whom hee charged them with concealing in that House; alleaging that in the neighboring Hamlets hee had learned such certaine Intelligence thereof, that hee could not bee otherwise perswa∣ded. Then, falling to the relation of some particulars, and telling them that his Sister called her self Almeria in stead of Almirea, and that Iphites had given himself the name of Iphis, hee put all the company into a strange plunge, and their answers were as different as their cen∣sures. The three Sisters, being as envious as incapable of keeping a Secret, declared without much intreaty what they knew of her; which was in part confirmed by the Swains: But Iphis's friends thinking to ob∣lige the Palatine, denyed all that the others affirmed, being induced thereunto by Boleslaüs, who was ready to dye with delight to see this pleasant contradiction. Calliante feigning not to know Boleslaüs, ap∣plyed himself to those who told him news of the Fugitives, and, as if hee had had a Commssion to be a self-murtherer, hee drew his Rapier, after severall Exclamations, seeming to desire nothing more vehe∣mently
in the world, than to sheath that blade in the bowells of the lost Almeria. This confirmed the Rusticks in their suspitions of Al∣meria's honesty, and made them pass for a Cause adjudged the passi∣ons and privacies which they had observed betwixt her and Iphis. In summ, having said all they knew and thought of her, the conclusion was, that Calliante found nothing but the nest, the Birds had taken their Flight, and perchance upon inkling of his arrivall. But Pomeran being curious to dive somewhat deeper into the knowledg of this affection, prayed the Gentleman to inform him how it came to pass, that his Sister left her friends in that manner, where the place of her Birth was, and what the name of their Family. Calliante, who desired nothing so much as this demand, to have a Subject whereon to establish his Deceipt in the mindes of those Gentlemen also, desired to bee excused, saying, That the recitall of that Story would but tear up his wound again, and aggravate his de∣spair by the manifestation of his dishonour. This refusall sharpned the desires of the hearers, who joyned all together in a supplication to him, to satisfie their curiosity therein, promising to assist him in the search of that abused Damsell; and they pressed him so far, that, as yeelding to their intreaty, not without much unwillingness, Hee thus began. Gentlemen, In the Plain of Cracovia, not far from a place where the River Nidas loseth its name in the Vistula, standeth a very agreeable City named Corcin, wherein was the Mansion-house of my deceased Father; there exchanging Earth for Heaven, hee left my Mother a Widow, with a charge of two Male Children, and as many Females. I was born a Twin with a Sister, who hath often∣times been taken for mee, and I for her; when the tenderness of our Age rendred us incapable of discerning our Sexes, without which our Nurses (as I have been told) were oftentimes like to have exchanged us, being unable to distinguish us by our Faces. If you have seen the unfortunate Almirea here, I believe you will judge by my Gate, my Pitch, my Voice, and my Countenance, that I say nothing that can bee contradicted by your experiences; and if the habit which I wear did not make appear what I am, you would take mee for a disguised Damsell, or a Man transvested. And I remember, whilest the innocence of our Age permitted us those sports which are agreeable to Children, that wee did often∣times take pleasure in changing our Cloathes, to make us bee taken
one for the other, and so deceive in merriment all those that con∣versed with us. Insomuch that in our neighbourhood, it was com∣monly said, that either Calliante was Almirea, or Almirea Calli∣ante. Here the rude Manile (according to the custome of Country-lobs, which is to interrupt them that speak, without any respect or consi∣deration) said, In good sooth, Gentleman, You did well to avise us of that, for if you had not, there's none of all this Company but would have tane you for the same Almeria, that hath put so many Doubts, Jealou∣sies, Passions and Proclamations in our Heads. It may bee shee bewitched him that follow's her, and who, you think, hath ravished her; for in the few dayes shee was here, shee bred (I can tell you) strange ravages, or rages (what you will call 'em) in our Spirits. I marvell why you will take such pains to seek after a Creature, whose loss is as advantageous, as the possessi∣on dammageable. The rest of his Gang nodding their Heads approved Manile's reason, and not one of them but said in his Heart, that it was a faire riddance of her, and that the Gentleman was like those that are jealous, who are very eager to finde out what were far better let alone. After this interruption, Calliante continued his relation in this manner. Now, Gentlemen, that you may know mee for other then that idle Run-away (the reproach of our Blood and the shame of our Extraction) you must understand, that being in the Country with my Mother in a Castle of her's not far from the place of the King's residence in Summer time, and neer a Forest where their Majesties use sometimes to recreate themselves with the pleasure of Hunting, It hapned one day (for our sorrow) that one of the greatest men of this Kingdome, being strayed in the Forest and overtaken by Night, which robb'd him of the knowledg of the way to return to the Citty, where the Court was, retired himself to our House; where holding his arrivall for a great Honour, wee received him with the greatest respect and Courtesie wee could imagine, little thinking that hee should have been like that Machine of Wood which set on Fire that famous City, whose Story hath employed so many Pens. But this false Courtier having cast the Eyes of Concupiscence upon the unfortunate Almirea, and finding perchance some reciprocall an∣swers in that language of looks, which cannot bee understood but by those that love; That encouraged him to speak in generall tearms; thence to fall into Courtship and expressions of Affection,
and so by little and little into private Familiarities, which seduced the simple Girl into her perdition, being overcome with the glory of his Greatness, and egged on with that vanity, which is so naturall to that Sex, to see themselves Sued to, and Adored like Goddesses, which openeth the dores of their Hearts to that Passion, whereof if but one sparkle taketh in such weak Subjects, it presently flames like Fire in dry straw or Flax, and cannot bee quenched neither by Tears nor Blood. His visits following (& somewhat too frequent∣ly iterated) were the Match by whose Smoak wee easily discovered the Fire; But to oppose great persons and Favorites, or, like the Gyants in the Fable, if by heaping Hills on Hills you offer to wage War against those Gods of the Earth, so firmly seated on the top of Fortune's wheel, they will but laugh at your contradictions, as Hercules did at the ridiculous indeavours of the Pigmies. Although wee visibly saw that the design of this Polyphemus was to devour the Honour of our Family in abusing my Sister, yet it seemed that our low spiritedness stretched out the neck to this blow, and to ac∣cept this Yoke; thus Servile is the condition of those who suffer their Honour to perish to preserve or advance their Fortunes, as if a Fortune were estimable without being Honourable. It is no ordinary displeasure to mee to reveal this shame, which I should rather study to conceale, every one naturally abhorring Infamy; but what? this is a thing so publickly known already, that if you should not learn it from my Mouth, the very stones. would declare it to you, the whole World being full of it, by reason of the abuse of my Sister, and the greatness of him that hath made the unworthy con∣quest of her. But if I had watched so carefully, as I might have done, the deportments of my Sister, or that my Mother had had her Eyes open upon the golden Apple of her Integrity, wee never had felt those sad effects of sorrow which now afflict us: For, the pudicity of Virgins is like a Glass, which may bee preserved a long time if well looked unto, but with the least knock is broken all in pieces. Yet since faults are personall, why should I derive the vices of the Guilty upon the Innocent? Especially in regard the Honour of that Sex cannot be garded by any but themselves; for, the too strict observation of others in this case doth rather irritate than appease their Passions, and sharpen rather, or Set, than take off the edge of their de∣sires. No Demonstrations, no Admonitions were wanting on our parts, to disswade that inconsiderate Girle from the conversation
of that, no less dangerous than desirable, Visitant; intimating to her that although his frequent coming were without any evill effect, yet shee could not admit of his company without Suspition and Scandall, in regard the Actions of great Men, especially Favorites, were Subject to a thousand interpretations, whereof the most Si∣nister were generally the most Certain. Sometimes, when my Mo∣ther asked her what fruit shee could pretend of that, but too evi∣dent, Affection, unless it were the loss of time, and perchance of her Honour, (which is commonly attended by a publick shame and an universall table-talk, which hurrieth into the precipice of despair those that expose themselves to such miseries:) Shee, belying her own Heart, would answer, that shee believed Iph' (excuse mee, Gentlemen, if his name who ought to bee odious to mee, beeing at my Tongue's end, had like to have broke through my Lips, since out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaketh with pre∣cipitation) shee answered, I say, that shee thought that Nobleman had no more design upon her, than shee had inclination for him; That she took all his discourse and compliments but as essayes of his abundant wit, or tricks of Affectation which the Court-Gallants hold for commendable qualities; and that all his expressions pro∣ceeding only from the out-side of his Lips, penetrated no farther than the Superficies of her Ears, preserving her heart clear from the contagion of that venimous Passion, which most persons do con∣demne, but few eschew. But not to weary you with too tedious a relation, notwithstanding his Scorpion-like subtilty to hide the Poison of his Intentions, & her simplicity, too ingenious for her de∣struction, the End, which useth to Crown good Actions with Glory, discovered to us the ignominy of their evill practises, as you shall hear. When this great Favorite, being fallen into some disgrace at Court, was in a manner exiled to his own Palatinate; at this departure, their two Hearts, whose Bodies had perchance contracted another alli∣ance than that of words, could not support their dis-union: Inso∣much that by the King's command hee beeing enforced to leave the agreeable Climate of the Court, it was no difficult matter to per∣swade the imprudent Almeria to transvest her self and follow him, judging that in that habit every one would take her for mee. Shee presently condescended to this proposition, which, as it was the Life of her desire, proved the Death of her reputation. So, taking a Suit of mine of Sea-green, layed with Silver-lace, and having handsomely
put up her Hair, under a Grey Hat, covered with a White Plume, shee Mounted one of my best Horses; and in the Dusk of the Eve∣ning repaired to the place where her Paramour had assigned her: since which time I could never learn any certainty what was become of her, untill Fame (the inseparable shadow of great Persons Bo∣dies,) informed us that this Nobleman being come into his Go∣vernment, was no where less than in the City of his Residence, but consumed all his time in Hunting amongst these Woods, where hee was become a Prey to a Shepherdess of such beauty, that bred Envy in all those Ladies of the Court, whose Affections hee had ra∣vished formerly. Hereupon a thousand imaginations arose in my troubled Mind, sometimes, that hee had left my Sister inclosed in some Castle as a Trophy to his Vanity, contemning her with as much Cruelty after abusing her, as hee had seduced her with Malig∣nity; Sometimes, my Fancy seemed to perswade mee, that shee, who denying her Sex, had had the Courage to Disguise her self in Man's Cloathes to follow him, might well renounce that condition, and take upon her the habit of a Shepherdess, thereby to enjoy his conversation with less Suspition and more Liberty. At length, to sa∣tisfie my own Curiosity, and my Mother's desires, resolving to search out my Criminalls, Fortune conducted mee into these parts, where I am incouraged with some hope of finding what I seek: And now Gentlemen, I must conjure your Courtesie, by all that I read of Humane in your Faces, and doe believe to bee in your Hearts, to Favour mee in this so just a Cause, which I have so ingenuously re∣vealed unto you, to the end this Freeness of mine, joyned to the Generosity which is so naturall to all Persons of Honour, may ob∣lige you to afford me your assistance. For, not to conceal the least point of Truth from you, I am resolved in this business, which con∣cerneth not only mine, but the Honour of my Family, to play Dou∣ble or Quit, or to stake all I have, and (like the Bee which puts her life in her revenge, leaving her Sting in the Wound shee makes,) cease to live after the loss of my Honour; for, to injoy Life without Honour, I'esteem a condition farworse than a thousand Deaths. There∣fore if I finde assuredly that my Sister hath passed beyond the bounds of her Duty, and preferred her Pleasure before her Reputation, my resolution is by plunging this Poniard into her Bosome to tear that polluted Soul out of her unchaste Body; if otherwise, I will press the conclusion of her Marriage as much as I can, and decency will
permit. For, if Love equalizeth Lovers, Honour doth render the Condition of Gentlemen equall to the greatest Nobles; and my Extraction is not so obscure, but that I can reckon divers Palatines of my Ancestors, in whose Dignities, though I have not had the fortune to succeed, I cease not however to inherit a part of their Courage; Besides, I want neither Friends nor Kindred, who espou∣sing my Interests, will joyn their Arms with mine in this just quar∣rell: And; since hee is Master of another's Life, who despiseth his own, there is no sort of hazard, whereinto I shall stick to precipitate my self to get satisfaction from that Ravisher of Almirea, how great soe're hee bee, beeing perswaded by this Maxime, That hee dyeth gloriously, who perisheth with his adversary in the resentment of an injury. Nevertheless not to run head-long, or like one that's blind, I will first bee satisfied of the truth, and then I shall see how to settle my Resolution. Calliante filed these and diverse other particulars on the thred of his Narration with such Art, pronounced them with an Air and Accent so full of grace, and animated his Speech with Actions (though fein∣ed) which seemed so reall, that Boleslaüs, who knew all the mysterie, could not sufficiently admire his industry, that could so dexterously put a Mask upon his Tongue, which at the same instant deceived the Eyes, Ears, and Thoughts of all that were present, who though appear∣ing (as you know) to bee all of one condition by their Habits, were of two sorts extreamly different, yet equally deluded by the subtilty of Calliante. The Answers which hee received from these Auditors were very different, or rather contrary; For, the Peasants (through a vice which is ordinary to them) beeing extreamly jealous of Iphis, thought they had met with a fair opportunity to satisfie their malicious humor and destroy him, by declaring to the stranger that Almirea (who was in a Shepherdesse's habit, and called her self Almeria) was not onely in love with Iphis, but had lost her self in his embraces, which (they said) was manifest enough by their running away together. This Deposition was strengthened by the testimony of the Shepherdesses, who hating Almeria no less than they loved Iphis, endeavored all they could, not to wound, but rend in pieces the Reputation of her, who ravished them, whilest they thought her of a Sex contrary to her habit. But the disguised Gentlemen's Answer was quite otherwise; For, Pomeran speaking for them all, and shewing himself full of zeal for the preser∣vation
of Iphis, having boldly denied all that the malice of those base Souls had calumniously alleged, assured Calliante, That his Sister was so curious of preserving her integrity, that her Suitor had nothing so ordinary in his Mouth as the Complaints of her Severity (which Lovers are accustomed to qualifie with the titles of Cruelty and Ri∣gour) which the Rusticks could not gainsay without doing an irrepa∣rable injury to the truth; therefore hee exhorted him not to give credit to their Envy, but rather to believe the Report of Gentlemen, as they were, (though covered with habits disproportioned to their Conditions) than to the viperous Tongues of those Clowns, who carried the venim of Asps upon their Lips, and who spake onely by conjecture; But if Hee would not conform his Passion to the Rule of their Reasons, they had Reason, and knew how to rule his Passion, opposing with Force the Violence which hee threatned in his Dis∣course; Hee, whom hee was to incounter, (besides his quality and personall valour, which had rendered him victorious over so many redoubtable Enemies) not beeing so unprovided of Servants, nor fallen so in disgrace with Fortune, but that hee could yet command a great number of gallant Men, who would take glory in hazarding their Lives in his Defence. Pomeran had continued to urge this Point, and doubtless had in∣gaged Calliante in a single combate (wherein hee would have wanted no seconds;) But that the cunning Boleslaüs traversing this Discourse interrupted him, telling him in his Ear, that Iphis would bee very much displeased, if hee should pick a quarrell with Calliante, whom hee indeavored by all means possible to oblige, thereby to render his Sister more tractable; That all things beeing fairly carried, and the honour of Almeria no wayes interessed, there was nothing so easie as to terminate that difference in an amiable manner, without fighting upon such punctilio's of words, Menaces beeing but vain flashes, or like blasts of Wind which leave no trace behind them: that it would bee much better to follow this way of gentleness, than to repulse just Resentments with impertinent Bravadoes: that from this clashing, as from the collision of flints, nothing could proceed but sparks, which would produce veryd angerous flames: Besides; to his knowledge, Iphis would not bee well contented, that the Peasants should penetrate so far into his secrets, as to know his Affection and Quality, or the Condition of Almeria: that Calliante had already spoken but too much, unless hee should have quite discovered the Mine, which would
spoil all the sport, wherein they saw the Palatine did take an inno∣cent recreation, which diverted him from melancholly for his disgrace and absence from the Court. Pomeran relished these reasons, which beeing communicated to Pisides and Argal, they became like Men without the faculty of Hearing and Speaking; Boleslaüs assuring them thát in so doing they would oblige and render most agreeable Service to Iphis, of whose pleasure, hee told them, hee had certain know∣ledge, as also of the place of his retreat, which was not very far from thence. Mean time, Calliante having thus contrived his Designe, the better to bring it to effect, addressed his Complaints to the Countrey-men, who promised him Miracles, induced as well by their own base Dis∣positions, as with the hope of profit, which the Gentleman made glitter in large promises to them. Already they ingaged themselves to put into his Hands those whom hee was seeking, wherein they discovered no less temerity than baseness, obliging themselves to effectuate that which was neither within their Knowledge, nor Power. Calliante being transported with joy to see them so perfectly deceived, redoub∣led his Promises, and incouraged them to assist him with Propositions of considerable recompences. Hereupon they went to offer Sacrifices to Ceres and Bacchus, I mean, to make good cheer, at Calliante's charge; For, it is the custom of those Rusticks to seal all their Bargains with Dishes and Bottles, otherwise they hold no Agreement can bee firm or prosperous. On the other side, Boleslaüs, who had the watch∣word, promised his Companions to bring them the next Day to the place where the Lovers were, which was so strong, that being there∣in they might laugh at the folly of those Clowns, and at the vanity of Calliante, who after the Fashion of great persons had made choice of the worst side, that is, of Flatterers. Scarce had the cool Aurora powred out those drops of dew, which look like liquid Pearls, or little Eyes, upon the Grasse's tops, when both the Crues went forth to seek what they should never finde in the manner they did imagine, although they should have compassed the whole Earth and sea; Whilest the Countrey-men conducted Calliante in his Knight-errantry, entertaining him with smoaky promises, as hee fed them with the Vapors of Hope, Boleslaüs knowing the Blank, was sure not to miss his aym: For, Serife having assigned him the Rendez∣vous in a certain by place in the Forest, after a long wandring, this politick Guide feining to have mistaken his way (although hee had
on purpose brought them insensibly out of all beaten Paths) when they were all at a stand, not knowing whither to direct their course, the found of a plaintive voyce saluted their Ears; Which struck them into a sodain amazement, and made them the more astonished, the less they imagined to finde any reasonable Creatures in so wild a Place; the Desire of beeing put again into some way, added to the curiosity, which is so naturall to humane Spirits, of knowing other's miseries, made them advance towards the place, whence the Air conveyed those sad Accents to their hearing: For, whether Boleslaüs had made any sign, or whether they had been descried a far off by any one that was set Sentinell to that purpose, just as they arrived, a deep-fetch'd sigh broke the way to these Expressions. And shall I ever hence-forwards esteem the fidelity of any Man? Oh! let the Heavens invent some pains more bitter than those which they make mee suffer (if it bee possible to imagine any more rigorous) if ever I give credit to their Oaths, or open my Ears to their deceitfull Courtship! Oh Iphigenes, the most treacherous and ingreatefull amongst those that tread upon the Earth, is it thus that thou didst feed with vain Protestations, my too facile, credulity? But who would not have been surprised with thy Language, thy looks disguising thy words under so seeming a goodness, that I should have thought my self guilty of an irremissible crime, if I had con∣ceived the least doubt of their Reality? Is it thus, perfidious Man, that thou didst hide thy Heart full of Gall under Expressions of Hony, and that to catch mee, like an innocent Bird, with thy false Call, didst thou insnare mee with thy cheating Promises? A great glory indeed thou wilt acquire by abusing thus a miserable Maid, who reposed her belief upon the Reed or broken Staff of thy Fide∣lity. Heavens alter the motion of your Sphears, and thou Sun hence-forwards go take thy Resting-place in the Orientall plage, Ri∣vers run back to your Sources, and Day cease to be light, since the Constancy of Iphigenes is become moveable, notwithstanding hee pronounced a thousand solemn Oaths, that the Effects of Na∣ture should be enemies to their Causes, before his Soul should bee rendred capable of change. Hee hath changed however, disloyall as hee is, and without remembring the sacred plighting of his Faith, or considering the miseries which I have endured for his sake, hath aban∣doned mee as a prey to Melancholly and Despair. Heavens where are your Thunderbolts, where your Plagues?
A heavy groan having terminated these words, there was not one of the Hearers (excepting Boleslaüs, who was acquainted with the Plot) but thought it had been Almeria that charged Iphis with perfi∣diousness, seeing her self forsaken, like another Ariadne by Theseus, after the loss of her Honour. As they were upon the point of rushing in to shew themselves, and consolate the Affliction of that Desolate Plaintif, For Heaven's sake Gentlemen, said Boleslaus, do not appear before this Creature, untill I have discovered what shee is: For, mee-think's I have heard this voyce heretofore, and I am certain it is not Almeria's, beeing too much assured of Iphis Love to her, and that his Deportments beeing full of honour, Hee is no Man to commit so unworthy an Action. So, having perswaded them to stand still in a place where they could not bee perceived, the old Fox slipped gently into the Thicket, as if hee went to discover who that dolefull Female was, who (as if shee had been advertised of the approach of those that heard her) thus con∣tinued her Complaints. Deplorable Modesta, what Fruits hast thou of thy Fidelity and Patience, since thou hast sowed on a barren Sand, and since thy ar∣dent Affections have not been able to oblige the most inconstant of all Humans, to keep what hee had so often sworn to thee? Indeed thou hadst reason to believe that hee would play thee such a trick, considering without caring to deliver thee out of the Prison, where the rigot of thy Father-in-Law had inclosed thy innocence, hee slighted thy Disasters, and laughed at thy Tears and Captivity. Yet if hee had forsaken mee for that Princess, or those great Court-Ladies which were so passionately taken with him, it would bee some consolation in my incomparable Misfortunes, to see my self supplanted by those that exceed mee in Deserts, as far as I have sur∣passed in Affection to him all those of my Sex; But, to violate his Faith promised to mee, for a Country-Hoiden, for a Herd-Wench, who is as inferior to mee in Birth, Estate, Breeding and Beauty, as I am to those Starrs which render so illustrious the Court of our Monarch, that is a thing which I cannot endure without an Heart∣breaking anguish, more sensible and dolorous than a thousand Deaths. Therefore since I cannot survive an affront of such indig∣nity, I am resolved to die; but it must bee in the presence of him whose inconstancy doth murther me, that in expiring I may fasten to the coller of that ingratefull Wretch a thousand Furies, which may represent incessantly to his thoughts my Bloudy Ghost, to the end
that possessed with Despair for having reduced mee to that extre∣mity, hee may exercise a vengeance upon himself more horrid than can enter into my imagination. Here sobs breaking off her Speech, our hearers conjectured, and said amongst themselves, that it was not Almeria; And in regard none of the other three had ever seen Modestina, they could hardly think that it was shee, because they heard her call herself Modesta (which Name pleased her the more, because Iphigenes did commonly use it in his most Familiar caresses to her.) Whilest they were in this perplexity, returned the old Oedipus, who in stead of explaining this Enigma, ren∣dred it more obscure. For, counterfeiting much trouble in his Mind, with a low and trembling voyce hee said to them; Gentlemen, let us bee gone from hence, or wee are all undone; for my part I think that this is an inchanted Forest, and that all the Adventures wee meet with proceed from Magick Art, And that the Enviers of the Palatine's fortune keep him here by witch-craft, and us with him. For, how can any Man ima∣gine without a manifest illusion, that Modestina, my Master's Wife, should bee transported into this Forest (without the help of some that deale with the Divell) to come to utter her Complaints in this Desart corner, which hath no Inhabitants but ill-boding Schreech-Owls, and seemeth onely fit for a Sabat or Assembly of Sorcerers? And what know I but that Despair (wherewith her complaints do speak her over whelmed) hath driven her to make recourse unto this horrible remedy, to release her Body out of Prison, and free her Mind from the rage of her Jealousie? Thereupon hee told them, that it was, indeed, Modestina lying at the foot of a great Tree upon a Carpet of Moss, who made the Woods so resound with the Eccho's of her lamentable sighs; that if she perceived him, he was a lost Man, because shee would believe that hee had seduced her Husband to those Levities, or at least fomented them by his Assistance, conjuring them to retire themselves speedily from that place; or (if their curio∣sity invited them to hear any further) to permit him to flie, that hee might not appear before the face of his Mistris, transported with Anger and Grief. This amazement was so dexterously feined, and this advise colored with such probability, that it served as a Fascination to the three Gentle∣men's Eyes, and a Charm to their Ears, So really they believed this false Report. And whilest they were consulting whether they should succor that distressed Lady, or not discover themselves to her, Boleslaüs still urged them to retreat, but in such a manner, as rather increased
their desire of assisting her. At length, Pomeran, who had alwayes pleaded Modestina's cause without knowing her (when he indeavored to divert Iphis from the pursuit of Almeria) judging besides the hap∣piness hee should have to bee known to her, hee should begin his acquaintance by the most signall service he could render her, remitting her into her Husband's Arms, made his Companions resolve to suc∣cour the Lady, (which Boleslaüs desired most, yet seemed to fear) as∣suring them (the passion which possessed Iphis for Almeria proceeding but from a light youthly humor, and rather from Fancy than Reason, or a Disease in the Mind than any sound judgement) that hee would thank them in the end for that which perchance at first would seem displeasant to him, like those who revile the Surgeon which hurteth them in dressing their wounds, and afterwards return him thanks, with a good recompence, when the Cure is done. Upon this Resolution they all concluded to make Boleslaüs stay to bee witness of their proceedings, and that by his means they might the better bee made known to the Lady. But hee feined to strive to get from them, the more earnest they were to hold him. This Contesta∣tion could not bee without some bustling, neither was the bustling without some Voice and Murmure. At which a Man came rusling out of the Thicket, as it were to inform himself of the way, which hee seem∣ed to have lost. This was Arcade, whom Serife had retained having sent away Armelin and Philaster; hee having his Lesson, took no notice of them, but as Peasants; and thus spake to them: Friend's, what evill Spirit brought you hither to disturb the Silence, and re-double the Hor∣ror of this place with your quarrel some debates? Yet I am not sorry I have met with you, since your arrivall may do an afflicted Lady, and mee some service in setting us again into the way, which wee have been long seeking without hapning upon any body to direct us. Hee had no sooner uttered these words, but Pisides, knowing him by his Voyce, and Cloathes, answered; Arcade, what do you persist in the inchantment, which maketh you not know, (when your Eyes are open) those to whom you speak? Do not you remember, that you saw us not many Dayes since in these Cloaths, when the Chase made you put a Stag into our Hands? At these words, Arcade, as if hee had been much surprised, Replied, Oh my Lord Pisides. what good Angell directed you so opportunely into this solitude to the succor of our Palatine's Lady, whom a violent, though not unjust Jealousie doth inforce to traverse both City and Country! Upon further inquiry hee told them (as hee had been instructed by Serife, that Modestina,
beeing arrived at Plocens, had commanded him to conduct her into that Forest, where shee had learnt, that the Palatine, her Husband, beeing taken with the Love of a Shepherdess, had relinquished the care of his Charge, and contemned the Grandeur of his Dignity and Birth. These Gentlemen beeing prepossessed with so many Charms, accosted the sorrowfull Lady, who seeing them approach seemed to bee much affrighted, yet settled her Countenance again, as soon as Arcade, stepping in before the rest, informed her, that those, whom shee saw in Peasant's Habits, were Gentlemen of Quality of the Palatine's Re∣tinue, whom they sought as well as shee; Hee having eclypsed him∣self from their sights some Dayes since. They having never seen Mo∣destina, doubted not but Serife was shee; For (besides the Dress and Accoutrements of a Lady of note, wherewith shee was sumptuously attired) shee had so mortified, or rather dyed her Face with a certain yellowish Liquor, that it seemed Mellancholly had given her the Jaun∣dies; Besides, by the means of some device which shee held in her Mouth, shee feined another voyce so naturally, that they were deceived on all sides. After they had made their obeisance, and tendred all the services due to her Grandeur: The onely service, said shee, that I desire of you, is, that you would bring mee into my Husband's presence, or do mee the last of all Duties, put mee into my Sepulcher; For, to bee separated from him, and to die, is the same thing to mee. Hereupon they swore to use their best indeavours (but to make good their Oaths they needed not go out of the place) conjuring her to rise, and permit them to set her upon her Horse, which was feeding close by with Arcade's. As shee moved her self, shee espied Boleslaüs amongst them, on whom casting a stern look, And darest thou yet (said shee) appear before mee, thou disloyall servant to a faithless Master? After thou hast so misguided him, who was committed to thy Government, thou comest perchance with thy Companions disguised, like thy self, to plunge mee into new Miseries, and cast mee into another Prison. Ah! No, I will rather open my bosome with this blade (drawing a Dagger from under her Robe) than commit my selfe to the Mercy of unknown Persons, who may first attempt my Honour, and afterwards take my Life. Here Boleslaüs putting one Knee to Ground, answered, Madam, Let Heaven never pardon mee, if I am culpable of any misdemeanour towards you, and when you know the condition of these Gentlemen (whereof there is not one that would not lose a thousand lives for the preservation of your Honour) you will bee sorry
for conceiving such a suspition of them. I take the Sun, or rather him that give's it Light to witness, that it is no fault of mine, if Iphigenes hath not continued his Affections entire (as hee ought) to you. But alas! I am no more his Governour, but by Name, hee is my Master in effect, the truth (as to all great Persons) is become odious to him, hee spurn's at Remon∣strances; instead of taking my advises in good part, hee paye's them with injuries; his answers are harsh and froward, I cannot read his humour, hee is grown so extravagant (these Gentlemen know it as well as I) that I am not able to hold him; yet for my part, if I have not Power sufficient to stay him, I have Patience to let him run, but not Constancy enough not to be∣wail his condition. His Disgrace at Court is one step to his fall, and if hee continue in his obstinacy, that Gossip which hath bewitched him (I think) will ruine him absolutely both in Body, Mind and Reputation. Ah! Boleslaus, replyed the feined Modestina, if by the contagion of that deceitfull Spirit thou art not become impudent as well as hee; if thy words are sincere, tell mee, if I must lose all hope of regaining his Affecti∣ons, to the end I may presently by Death set a period to all my Miscries. Madam, said Pomeran, that remedy were worse than the Disease; For, it is easier to resuscitate affection in an Heart, than recall a Soul into a Body when once it is departed; For Heaven's sake banish such desperate Thoughts, and cast away that murtherous Weapon which so ill become's your hand; And I swear to you by the Faith of a Man of Honour, that if I were not seconded by any of these Gentlemen (although their Friendship & Courtesie promiseth mee otherwise of their Generosity) I will employ my Sword with those of my Friends, my Industry, my Diligence, and my own Life, to procure your repose & reduce Iphigenes to reason. These Gentlemen can tell what Disputes I have had with him upon this Account, and how often hee hath gone displeasod out of my Company, because hee could no more brook the Liberty which I took in speaking to him, than I the Liber∣tinage of his Life; But that was nothing to what I now desire to say and do, beeing no less animated by the sight of your Afflictions, than the Romans were moved at the view of Cesar's bloody Shirt. There was not one of the Company, but ingaged with Pomeran to lay their Lives down upon so just a quarrell, especially Boleslaüs, as if by that imployment hee desired to efface the suspition, which shee had conceived of him. Here Arcade, (who could not perswade him∣self that those Gentlemen, whom hee had seen so frequently and so familiar with Iphigenes, could bee so deceived) began to laugh upon Boleslaüs, saying to him in his Ear, That hee could not sufficiently admire the dexterity of the Palatine and him, in representing their Personages.
That whispering cast some jealousie into Pomeran's thoughts, which was increased by Arcade's often smiling afterwards and winking upon Boleslaüs, whereby a person of mean understanding might have evi∣dently perceived a secret intelligence. Another time Boleslaüs (fearing a Discovery) drawing Arcade aside to tell him in secret that under pain of incurring the Palatine's indigna∣tion, hee should bee more serious in his carriage, lest his lightness betrayed all; Argal, who was fallen into Pomeran's suspition, said alowd; Senior Boleslaus, amongst friends nothing ought to bee concealed, speak out, that wee may know what you are plotting there with Arcade; For, if it bee any thing that may countervene not onely the Service, but the will of this Lady, wee protest to oppose your designs with all our power according to our promise without exception; For, though wee are her Husband's friends, wee are friends no further than to the Altar; that is, as far as Vertue and Conscience do extend, beyond those bounds wee know not what it is to love. If hee renounce not his no less unjust than injurious Passion for that idle Almeria which hath metamorphosed him into a Shepherd, and quench in the legimate embraces of his Spouse the illicite flames where with the other hath possessed his Heart, and robbed him of the use of Reason, what complacency soever wee expressed heretofore to flatter his humour, wee are determined now to leave his service. This hee spake with such seri∣ousness (animating his Speech with a sharp and colerick tone) as there remained no doubt in Arcade's thoughts, but that they were really deceived, or that they dissembled purposely to deceive him; and make∣ing him the Fool of their Play, produce him for their laughing stock and the subject of their merriment. At length, notwithstanding all the signs Boleslaüs made him to contein himself, and the austere look which Modestina glanced to keep him in awe, hee could not refrain from laughter, when hee heard Boleslaüs return this excuse to Argal. That which I would have said to Arcade in private, was onely to inquire of the particulars of this Ladie's escape out of Prison; For, Mieslas kept her so close in one of his Castles, out of which it seemed so impossible for her to get, that I think Jupiter himself could hardly have found an invention to penetrate it, although hee should have resumed the same form, which facilitated his conquest of Acrisius his Daughter; or had shee been a Flora, I know not how Zephyrus could have accosted her. The feined Modestina to give colour to this invention, and to hinder those Gentlemen from discovering the whole Mystery by Arcade's imperti∣nent laughing, replyed.
You cannot conceive how subtile a Woman's Wit is, especially when sharpened by Love, and refin'd by Jealousie; you onely look upon the guards that did environ mee, and do not consider that a Woman, who hath a mind to deceive, or free her person out of Captivity, maketh those, who are incharg∣ed to watch her, the Instruments of effecting her own Designs: you might rather wonder how the news of my Husband's licentiousness-should pene∣trate my Ears in that recluse Mansion; But without having recourse to the Divell or Magick Art, know, that suspitions are Lover's Messengers, and their inquiries are so frequent and so urgent, that hardly any thing that regardeth the Object beloved can escape their knowledge: and I must tell you, that my diligence hath been such, that Iphigenes hath not done any one thing since his first going out of Podolia, either at the Court, or in his Pa∣latinate, but I know it as well as hee; and were hee now present, I would re∣proach him all his unworthinesses one after the other, and reveal his shame to his own Face; neither should hee be able to contradict or oppose any excuse to the Verities which I should alledge. If the Answer Boleslaüs returned Argal, put Arcade out of Coun∣tenance, this transported him beyond himself; and bursting into an ex∣cessive laughter, his Imprudence served in stead of the Oculist's Collyriū to make the films fall from the Eyes of those Gentlemen, who doubting already some pretty prank of Joviality, perceived at length their Error; insomuch that the sad and Tragicall beginning of this Cheat ended with a Catastrophe so Comicall, that the Deceived, as well as the Deceivers were marvelously delighted with that recreation. After this the feined Modestina, to take entirely off that Mask (which rendred her not absolutely unknown, but much harder to bee known) having dipped her Handkerchief in the Brook, and rubbed her Face therewith, wiped away that yellowish colour, which altered her Com∣plexion. Which done, shee seemed so beautifull, that had not the na∣turall tone of her voyce (which shee used again, having taken out of her mouth that which shee had put in to falsifie it) assured them that it was Iphigenes in a Woman's habit, they would have been more difficulty drawn out of this second error than the former. Then, they fell to discourse freely, and the Palatine declared to them, wherefore he had taken a Woman's habit to deceive them, as Calliante had done in Man's, who was no other than Almeria disguised. This new Discovery bred a new altonishment, and every one of the Company thought himself over head and Ears in inchantments. And the deceived party regretted, that they had not continued longer in
their agreeable error, that in the sincerity of their actions the Palatine might have read the fidelity of their friendship, and judged by its up∣rightness, that their Souls permitted them not to be Favourers of Vice: So Arcade was taunted on both sides, for having betrayed by his indis∣cretion, what had been contrived with so much subtility. But as in Spring-time, the Heavens beeing grown inamored of the Earth, do heat her bosome with the rayes of the Sun, you may hear the Birds chanting their Love-layes in severall Notes; So, Serife perceived by their language, that the powerfull glances of her Eyes had warmed the Hearts of those disguised Peasants: For, from extolling her Beauty beyond any thing Nature had yet produced, they fell to particularize her perfections, with such curiosity, that it was easie to judge that their Passion was the main Spring of their Eloquence. And as those who are over-mastered by Wine, disclose their infirmities by a flux of incongru∣ous words, whereby one may gather that their Brains are troubled with Fumes, which cloud and disturb the faculties of the Intellect; So, by the discourse of these three admirers, it evidently appeared, that that sweet Poyson which is drunk by the Eyes, had distilled its maligni∣ty into their Brests, and that their mouths pronounced but what pro∣ceeded from the abundance of their desires. Argal complained that Nature had not made Iphigenes a Woman; Pisides flattering his agree∣able Error, said, That as the Hyena is reported to change her Sex with her hair, so perchance Iphis having metamorphosed himself into Serife, and lea∣ving the habit of Male, was become a Female. Pensive Pomeran, who though hee spake not all hee thought, could not chuse but let slip some Expressions, which like sparks gave testimony of his inward fire; For, sometimes hee confessed himself filled with vain illusions, and to avoid a prejudiciall censure, in satisfying his Passion, he protested that hee would remain to the last Breath a friend to Iphis, and Servant to the incomparable Serife.
The Eighth Book. ARGUMENT. Arcade is sent back to Plocens by Serife. Pomeran and his Companions attend on Serife, whilest Boleslaus advanceth to prepare Celian and his Daughters to receive Her. Serife's feined Relation of Herself to deceive the Shepherdesses. Their indeavours to appease Her Counter∣feited Grief. Calliante with his Assistants returns from seeking Al∣mirea. Their amazement at Serife's admirable Beauty. Calliante's and Serife's moanfull Contention to out-vie each other in Misfor∣tunes. Her swounding at his feined Bravadoes against Iphis. Cal∣liante's seeming Anger against Almeria and Iphis, is appeased by Serife's conjuring Speeches. The Amorous and ambiguous discourse betwixt Calliante and Serife to puzzle the hearer's Thoughts. Serife seeming at length to bee overcome by his Courtship, make's shew of requiting the inconstancy of Iphis, by Answering Calliante's feined Flames. THe perplexity of Boleslaüs was no less than Serife's apprehension, lest what she had so long, and so seriously concealed should now be unad∣visedly revealed, to the ruine of her Fortune, & perchance of her Honour. At length it was con∣cluded that the Design should still continue to deceive the Country-People, to make themselves some Pastime with their Simplicity. To this effect lest Arcade by his indiscretion should give occasion of any sus∣picion likewise to the Rusticks, Serife sent him back to Plocens, incharg∣ing him not to mention any thing of those Divertisements, which shee would have buried in the silence and solitude of the Woods. That
done, they repaired towards Celian's House, whither Boleslaüs ad∣vanced a little before the rest, to see if Calliante with his attendants were returned from their Inquest: But hee found only the old Man accompanyed with his Daughters, deploring the loss of his profit more than the absence of the two Lovers, who hee imagined had lost them∣selves on purpose to finde a more free possession of each other. Some questions being past, Boleslaüs told him, that hee had other news for him, which was, That the Wife of Iphis, being transported with Jealou∣sie, was come into those Woods to seek him, where shee had been informed hee spent his time in the Embraces of Almeria, and that his Companions, who had by chance met with her, had sent him before to know if hee would bee willing to receive her in his house, shee being a Lady of quality, that had fufficiently where withall to recompence his services and Courtesie to her. That hope of Gaine was the onely Shaft hee could have shot to hit the pretensions of that greedy Churle; His Ears and his Dores were presently opened at the sound of that Silver Bell. And whilest they were upon these terms, arrived the other three, leading the beautifull Serife as it were in Triumph, upon a handsome Nag, whose Furniture was correspondent to the Richness of her Apparrell. That rare Beauty wherewith Nature had Favored her, being increased by the Luster of those pretious Garments, so dazled the weak sights of Belida, Merinda and Remonda, that they did not onely forget the Graces of Almeria, but lost the remembrance of the countenance of Iphis. So certain it is, that Cloathes do set off people in such sort, that they seem in a manner Metamorphosed. Celian looked no further than her Hands and Neck, whither his Eyes were invited by the sparkling of some rich Rings, and a Carcanet of pretious Stones, which hee already swallowed in his Fancy. Every one's attentions were divertised according to their dif∣ferent inclinations; the Courtiers admired the Beauty of Serife, the Shepherdesses the Magnificence, and their old Father the Rich∣ness. This feined Syrene being received (if not according to her merit, however in the best manner that Cottage could afford) renewed the deceipt which shee had so artificially begun in the Forest, and possessed those simple People (who devoured her words by Mouth-fulls) with what belief shee listed, telling them, That shee was Legitimate Spouse to Iphis (and indeed they were but one and the same Flesh, their Con∣junction being not onely Ʋnion but Ʋnity;) That shee had sought that
Perfidious and Ingratefull Man both by Land and Sea; That Hee had Traiterously abandoned her to Despair, forsaking her to follow an Idle Creature, who being little beholding to Nature for Beauty, had doubtless bewitched her Husband by some Magicall Charms; And yet (said shee) I love him (notwithstanding his Disloyalty) as dearly as my self, and if you please to measure his Malice by my Innocency, I am in some kinde culpa∣ble of my own misfortune, for, I am the Cause that my Rivall doth intirely possess Iphis. All this discourse, which had a double meaning, was throughly understood by none but Boleslaüs, who could not suffici∣ently admire the dexterity of his dear Foster-child, who the better to cover her Deceipt, drawing a Chain of Sighs from the bottome of her Heart, and drowning her Cheeks with Tears, moved not only the Daughters, but Celian himself to Compassion, and bred Astonish∣ment in the Courtiers to see her subtility in representing so to the life, a Sorrow, which they thought was feined. But those Sighs & Tears pro∣ceeded from, but too reall, a Source of Passion, so that the Deceipt held good on all sides. And, it being a curiosity as Blameless as Naturall, to inquire into the Disasters of Afflicted persons, to remedy them if it bee in our power, or at least to pitty the sufferers if wee cannot help them, the Shepherdesses who desired no less to learn some par∣ticulars concerning Iphis and Almeria, than to hear the Ladie's Story, beseeched her to give them the relation of her Afflictions, assuring her of their Fidelity; and promising, in exchange, to tell her what they knew concerning those two Persons, whom Passion had rendred extravagant. Then, Serife, after the manner of Musi∣cians, having made her self bee somewhat intreated, disposing them by that appetite, the more easily to believe her Inventions, thus began. Iphis and I were Married so yong, that wee could hardly know what 'twas to Love. I was Ward to his Father, who to draw my Estate into his Family, & of a Guardian become Master of all, made me Marry his Son. If there was any force on Iphis part, I know not, but in mee (I am sure) there was no Constraint, for I do not remem∣ber that ever I saw him without having some inclination for him. From the Cradle almost wee were brought up together: during our Childhood wee loved like Children, and our Affections increasing with our years, I loved him afterwards as my brother, but I must confesse after I was permitted to hope to injoy him as a Husband, I began to cherish him with a Love more ardent and delicate.
At length we were united by the bonds of Hymen, but alas! that was only in words, for the use of our bodies was forbidden by his Fa∣ther, who in respect of his tenderness of Age and Complexion, de∣ferred our contentments untill riper years had given both of us more Vigour and Ability to consummate our Marriage. Yet to ob∣serve the form of like Ceremonies, wee were both layed in one Bed, but with an old Governess, (that I had) betwixt us, who like a Sala∣mander did extinguish all our ardour, imprinting in our Spirits so much respect and awe, that during the whole Night, the motions of Love had no access in our Bodies. After that, to take away all oc∣casions of our accosting, and to deprive us of our ordinary conver∣sation, Hee was sent to the Court, where his good parts rendring him the common desire of the most accomplished Ladies, Hee still made me believe by his Letters (which were my only consolation in his absence) that among so many Stars which glittered before his Eyes, none could attract his sight from his Diana, whose Eclypse overwhelmed him with as much Darkness, as hee hoped to injoy Light, when I should again appear in his presence. With a thousand such like fopperies did that deceiver amuse my Simplicity, whilest in the midst of his Triumph over so many hearts, inthralled by his merits, hee became, I know not how, a Slave to a Fugitive, which leads him up and down Captive where shee pleaseth. Upon certain advice whereof I have done what I could by Letters to re∣duce him into the trace of his Duty and Reason; But Hee sometimes denyed flatly that report, sometimes hee accused mee of Jealousie, sometimes disguised his baseness in so many fashions, protesting in∣cessantly against my Suspition, and making such shew of Innocence, that (easie foole as I was) I belied my own belief to conform my self to his perswasions; and to purge him of crime, I accused my self of too much credulity. Oh how easie a thing it is to circumvent a Soul whose affection disposeth it to take in good part all that pro∣ceed's from the Object beloved! But at last perceiving by his flight with this new Hellen, whom hee hath ravished with her own consent; that (like a silly Fish) I had swallowed the hook under the bait, and what I held but for a Fiction was too manifest a Passion, alsolutely destructive to my contentment: Love armed with Jea∣lousie suggested such reproaches to my Tongue against his barbarous Perfidiousness, as you may better conjecture than I repeat; I ex∣claimed against Heaven and Earth, I accused the Innocence of the
Stars, as if their influence had contributed somewhat to his incon∣stancy, and strewing my Chamber with whole handfulls of my hair, I bruised my brest with my own Fists, punishing my self for the faults which hee had committed against me. His Father as cruell as hee is faithless, kept me close Prisoner in a Castle, where this news, which afflicted mee even to Death, could enter, but I had little hopes of getting out, to prevent by my Liberty this ruine of my Af∣fections and Marriage. My condition was like a Man's who seeth his House burning before his face, and is not able to carry any Wa∣ter to quench the Fire; Yet, besides that Necessity is ingenious, the Providence of Heaven (which watcheth over the afflicted) gave mee the invention and means to free my self from that Captivity to seek my Husband, & indeavour to draw him out of that Mire of Deboist∣ness, whereinto he is plunged: And being informed in a City not far from hence, that my Husband (who is but too well known amongst the chief of this Province) had retired himself into this Forest, where under pretence of Hunting hee made Love to a Shepherdess (which is no other than that Almeria, disguised in a Country habit) without taking any other counsell than that of my Affection, I came at a venter hither, not knowing which way to direct my Course, to meet with him who hath stolen my Heart, and robbed mee of his Faith. Thus Courteous Shepherdesses, you have the summ of my sad adventures, and the Subject of my coming amongst you. Perchance you will judge this escape an act of rashness, and unbeseeming a person of my Sex and Quality; But when you consider that those actions (which in themselves do appear not only not discreet but very reprehensible,) are justified by the Cause that produceth them, (which is a conjugall Love,) and by the End whereunto they tend, (which is to reform an Husband from his dissolute courses, and re∣claim him from the precipice of ruine to the tearms of Reason, Ob∣ligation and Honesty) I believe that the water which cometh from so clear a Spring, cannot be troubled with the Mud of any Calum∣ny; and that so Legitimate a Cause cannot produce Illegitimate Effects. Can any one bee so void of Humane Reason, as to censure a chaste Woman for endeavouring to make her Husband relinquish his extravagancies, and return to the injoyment of her lawfull em∣braces, since that is to seek her self, not another; and to re-unite what God hath joyned, and which no Mortall power can separate? But, alas! why do I say re-joyn that which ne're was joyned, unless in
Spirit and the Will? Yet the Will of my inconstant Husband may not bee said to have been united with mine; otherwise hee would never have forsaken mee for another, if it bee true that that Friendship can never cease, which hath been once perfectly contracted. Whose condition was ever like to mine? I am a Virgin, and yet I may say I am a Wife, without having suffered any detriment in my integrity; and being Wife to a Man which shuns mee, I remain a miserable Prey to sorrow. I am Marryed, and yet am a Widdow, that is, I dye all my life-time being deprived of my Husband by a ravishment more sensible than the stroak of Death. Not many dayes since I wandred disguised in Man's cloathes, despising for him, that de∣spiseth mee, the Glory of my Condition: and now I run my self out of breath after a wanderer, whom I am no more able to catch, than hee that follows his Shadow, overtake it. Bee favourable Judges of my misery, and if there is any Humanity remaining in your hearts, I am confident you will be so far from interpreting amiss my actions, that quite contrary you will not deny mee your assi∣stance in the necessity, you see, I am at this present. Here Serife cut off her Discourse with Sighs and Tears, which came so opportunely from her, that one would have said shee re∣served that Wind and Water in particular places of store, to let them out when shee listed. The Gentlemen (who knew the Fallacie, ad∣mired the readiness of her wit, which could so dexterously mingle Fables with Truths, and speak things of such double sence, that no∣thing she said favoured of any improbability) were less moved than the Shepherdesses; who believing nothing more certain, than that which shee had told them, felt powerfull resentments of Compassion at her so handsomely feined Sorrow. And as the blood in Humane bodies runneth to the part that is wounded, as it were to strengthen and cheer it up; so it being Naturall to comfort them whose affliction toucheth us, either by lessening their grief with the lenitive of comfor∣table words, Recalling their senses from Despair to Reason, Making them hope for a change of their evill Fortune, Promising assistance to withdraw or abate the miseries which oppress them, or by some other ingredients whereof are composed the Cataplasms, that are applyed to the wounds of the Heart: Those Geatlemen, who saw all these passa∣ges with a singular satisfaction, having (to bring on the rest) first made offer of their Services to the disconsolate Serife, for the conquering of her inconstant Husband, expected to see how the Shepherdesses would
undoe that knot which the Lady had knit and tangled with as much Art, as that which could not bee loosed without the Edge of a Sword. Their pitty presently ingaged them in the like tender of assistance to her, and (Women beeing as capable of keeping a secret as the reeds that betrayed Midas Asses Ears) they declared to her all they knew of Almeria's deportments; how shee came thither in Man's cloaths, which shee left in Merinda's hands as a pledge for those which shee procured her; How Iphis came after her in a Countrey-man's habit with those Gentlemen there present; How shee had fed them with lies, sometimes saying shee was a Maid, sometimes a Man, with so well-car∣ried a dissimulation, that they knew not what to think of her; such Sweetness and Modesty shee shewed amongst Women, such courage and dexterity beeing in the company of Men; That sometimes shee acknowledged shee had committed a fault, and therefore had stolen from her Parents, fearing their displeasure, Sometimes again shee would justifie her self to bee full of Honour, and as immaculate as a new born Babe: However (as Detraction easily slippeth into Reports) for their parts, they said, if shee was honest, they believed it was in words onely, not in effect; then, they construed in the worst sense the Pas∣sions which Iphis expressed for her, and the feined rigours wherewith shee rejected his pursuit: In summe, they all concluded that her run∣ning away with that Man convinced her sufficiently of the crime, which shee had before disguised with such cunning. Hereupon Serife (to make her self sport by sounding the malice of those Rustick Souls) pressing them, as if shee had been animated with a jealous curiosity, to discover freely to her, what suspitious, or unbeseeming actions they had observed betwixt those two Lovers; such tricks, replyed Merinda seek Darkness more than the Light; witnesses are not required at such bargains; those that have a mind to doe amiss, indeavour at least that Solitude and Silence may shelter their faults from Judgements and Murmures. I perceive, said Serife, that you deal with mee as Chirurgeons do with those who apprehend letting Blood, amusing their Eyes another way, whilest they open the Veine; or, as the Executi∣oners sometimes with criminalls, covering their Faces, that they may not see the instruments of their punishments; you veil my mischief, and thereby redouble my torment: For, it is some consolation to see on which side one fall's. Hence Belida took occasion to speak thus, Madam, the Jelousie which possesseth you, and which for a time did likewise disquiet my Braine, is a
Disease that maketh us seek what wee would be grieved to finde; it forgeth oft-times Idea's of that which is not, maketh small trespasses seem great offences, and like a malign Ulcer, impoysoneth it self by the same reme∣dies which are applied to cure it; any Wood will foment that Fire, but no Water can quench it. If you will bee ruled by mee, you shall content your self with that little which we have told you of the much which wee know; for your imagination, (ingenious to torment your self) will extend but too far, (to your sorrow) the particulars wee have already represented. I speak by experience of that Malady, which is worse than a quartane Ague, for, it proceed's from an odd conceited humour, which every thing doth aggra∣vate, and nothing easeth; Heavens bee praised I am now rid of it, and I hope I never shall bee afflicted with the like pain. I am confident, Madam, as the Starrs lose their Light in the presence of the Sun, that your Hus∣band, having but compared your Beauty with that which hee now so esteemeth in Almeria, will account all her Graces ugliness, and the more deformed, because accompained with the vilest and most infamous of vices, which is Adultery; and that balancing your Fidelity with the Lightness of her indiscretion, hee will the sooner acknowledge his fault, the greater Obligation hee hath to your merit. For, as wee finde by experience that the Sheep which have been drawn out of the Wolv's Throat, are the tende∣rest and daintiest meat; So his Love doubtless will bee the sweeter and more firm towards you, the greater his Repentance is for having offended such a Goodness, and tempted such a Patience as yours. Live in this hope, Madam, and assure your self, that if Iphis hath two Eyes, and seeth you, Almeria's gone; shee will bee the Object of his Disdaine, and you of his Affection; Perchance the difficulty of possessing you, hath transported him to this no less unjust than inconsiderate Passion. Remonda (after the manner of Women, who would bee sorry to hold their peace when others speak) interrupting Belida, would also pay her shot with the mite of her verdict, adding to her Opinion an expedient remedy to ease the Lady Serife's plain, to whom addressing her Speech; Madam, said shee, It seeme's that Heaven conspiring your good, hath sent hither on purpose a Man that will release you of that trouble, by tearing Almeria out of your Husband's Armes, and putting him into yours; it is one Calliante, who saye's hee is her Brother: hee came hither yesterday to inquire after her, and is gone this Morning with my Bro∣thers to see if they can finde them out. I marry Sister, replyed Merinda, there's a salve indeed for this Ladie's sore, to tell her of a Gentleman that is come with an intention to kill Iphis, or make him marry her whom hee
hath abused, which will be an absolute dissolving of his former Marriage, which is not consummated, by another whose consummation hath preceded the Wedding. At these words Serife seeming extreamly disturbed, feined to fall into a swound; and as there is no body so deaf as hee that will not hear, so there is none so sick as those that counterfeit themselves to be so: Serife dissembled her indisposition with such Art, that every one judged it to bee reall; some ran to fetch Vineger and Water, whilest some pinched her, and others rubbed her Face; the Shepherdesses hand∣led her after their fashion (that is) rudely, yet for all their doing shee stirred not, so that they thought her past recovery. The Courtiers knew not whether they had best laugh or cry; and in effect shee had continued longer in that pleasant extasie, if, when they came to un∣brace her, shee had not feared (by leaving to the view of those Ar∣gusses and Lynxes the pretious treasures of her bosom) that without divination they would have passed from Conjecture to the certainty of the Truth. So shee awaked out of that sweet Sleep, as full of Joy in her Heart to see her Deceipt take so handsomly, as of Sorrow in her Coun∣tenance; For, all her Blood beeing retired inwards, shee looked as pale as Death, and watering at the same time her Cheeks with Pearls, which shee had prepared in her Eyes, with a trembling, and, as it were, a dy∣ing voyce, she formed these words. Who was that which by an indeavour pitifully cruell hath restored the Light to my Eyes, to make mee contem∣plate in my self a Spectacle of nothing but Miseries? Oh Death! the onely Consolation of those who are remedilesly afflicted, why dost thou seise on so many persons that shun thee in the midst of their Delights, and leavest mee in this World, who invoke thee without cease, unless thy meaning bee to make my Head a Butt for all Misfortunes? Then, the Designe is to rob Iphis of his Life, or ravish him alive from mee; from mee who Live not but for him and in him, and who to save his Life would lose mine own, or rather many Lives, if I had them, to rescue him from Death. Oh Destiny! if thy Rigour bee yet susceptible of any spark of Pitty, close my Eyes with that Sleep, out of which one never wake's, before they see so tragicall an Event. My dear Friends, pray give mee leave to die, for it is time that by this last action I testifie to my Faithless Husband, how much I cherish his Liberty, and that if I have not strength enough to follow and overtake him, I have constancy enough to let him please him∣self. This said, shee would have drawn out of her sleeve, hanging after
the Sarmatick fashion, the same Dagger wherewith shee feined to kill herself in the Forest, had not the disguised Gentlemen held her Arm; but there needed no great striving to hinder her from hurting herself, who had no such intent, and who would have wounded Iphis assoon as herself. Mean time this strengthened the Deceipt: For, as there is no tincture so lively as that of blood, so there is no impression so powerfull as that which is mingled with some tragicall effect. The Shepherdesses were no lesse moved with the generosity of her courage, than mollified with compassion to see to what a point of Despair the unfaithfulness of Iphis had reduced the deplorable Serife: Their Eloquence beeing not able to form Consolations powerfull enough to appease such vehement Sorrow, all they did was to chide Remonda for her indiscreet babbling. By this time the Lamp of the Day beeing drawn neer his Occident, and beginning to give place unto the smaller Lights, which his absence kindleth in the Firmament, arrived Lupicin, Antalcas, Fleurial and Manile, accompaning Calliante, who came from the fruitless search of those whom they had before their Eyes without knowing them. At this arrivall the Gentlemen renewed their attention to consider this new Comicall Act, the best whereof was, that Calliante, who came with intention to deceive them, was himself deceived. By the complot betwixt him and Serife, at their parting in the Forest, hee knew the fallacy wherewith she had prepossessed the spirits of all the Company; But his return beeing unexpected, Boleslaüs had not the leisure to inform him speedily enough of Arcade's folly, who by his laughing had betrayed all the grace of that subtile supposition. It was a double delight to see Calliante's Mine countermined; But there remained a great mistake in the Gentlemen's Spirits, who took him for a Woman in Man's clothing, and that hee onely counterfeited a Man-like Countenance; on the contrary they believed Serife to bee a Man, who was really of the Sex they thought shee counter∣feited. What worthy Pensill shall I borrow to delineate to the Life the new astonishment of Calliante at his approaching neer Serife? For, having left her in his Country-weeds, and finding her in that glorious attire, which shee had put on purposely to compleat the conquest of his thoughts, hee could hardly perswade his fancy to believe it was the same Iphis, whom hee had left in the Forest. In a word, those rich Ornaments gave so much advantage to Serife's Beauty, that they did
the Office of Wood in augmenting Calliante's Fire; which was such, that losing the knowledge of himself, and the remembrance of the Person∣age hee was to represent, hee remained a good while, his Eyes fixed on her Face without motion, as if hee had been ravished in a profound Extasie; and resigning the Function of his Tongue to his Eyes, hee was angry with Nature, that shee had given him but two to contemplate so many Marvells. On the other side the Country-men, his attendants, who were not accustomed to see such eminent Beauties every Day, much less to bee visited by them in their Cottages, were not without admiration. Whilest they were in this maze, not knowing where to begin their Compliments, the Women who were as hasty to cast the secret out of their Mouths, as a Spider off their Bosoms, put them out of pain: For, Belida to her Husband, and Merinda and Remonda to the rest, had quickly related all that had passed since their going a∣broad, and what the dolefull Serife had imparted to them of Her Disasters. This bred some compassion in their Hearts, and made them imagine that it was not without some particular Providence of Heaven, that so many strange Accidents in so short time should bee presented to their sight. In mean time Boleslaüs accosting Calliante, after some common Discourse, intelligible enough, told him softly Arcade's fault, that hee might understand that the Gentlemen knew him. How? said hee, start∣ing, for Liante? No, replied Boleslaus, but for Almeria, their discovery hath gone no further. If they know no more, answered Calliante, bid my Brother keep his Countenance, and the scene not ending yet, the Country∣fellowes shall not be the onely deceived. To describe the greeting of these two Lovers transvested in Opinion, but in Effect, cloathed according to their Sexes, were a difficult task. For, Serife beeing deeply in Love with Calliante, never had so fair an opportunity of representing her Passions to him with as much reality, as hee thought them full of dissimulation: And Calliante feeling his Heart so streightly bound by the Charms of Serife's graces, knew not what to think, nor with what expressions to discover his Resentments. At length making use of the priviledge of the Deceipt which occasion then offered him. He broke silence, saying: That, if it were a Consolation to those in misery to finde their equalls in infelicity, hee might in some wise deem himself happy among his Disasters to have met with her: yet if per∣sons that have been bitten by mad Dogs, do feele their rage re-doubled by the approach of such as are affected with the same Disease, hee feared to
exasperate his by Communication, or (Maladies beeing contagious) to mul∣tiply his Afflictions by making known to her the just complaints which hee had to make against Iphis. Sir, replied Serife, I believe our disasters are arrived to such an height, that there can bee nothing added to their extremity; and if every thing which hath attained to its just plenitude is accustomed to diminish according to the course of Nature, me-think's in our Despair this glimpse of Hope is yet remaining, that henceforwards wee ought to look for the Decreasing of our Miseries, since they cannot increase without augmenting to infinitie. Your seeking and mine tend both to the same end, though by different wayes; wee aim at the same Blank from severall Stations. You lament the loss of your Honour, wounded by the lightness of your Sister, and I bemoan the Levitie of my Husband, who by a cruell Change doth unworthily abuse my Loyalty. I am confident if without Passion you could compare one affliction with the other, you would bee constrained to judge in my fa∣vour (ah wretched favour!) and acknowledge that I am the most mise∣rable: But, it is hard, especially in matters of Misfortune, for a Man to be an equitable Judge in his own cause, in regard a Straw in our own Eyes, or a scratch upon our Bodies, is more painfull to us than a Beam in the sight, or a great wound in the Body of another. Madam, answered Calliante, if all did run in the Race of Infelicity, every one would think hee were first at the End; For, there is no one living but esteem's his own Misfortunes the greatest in the World, and thence proceeds so many lamentable Complaints, wherewith the distressed fill the Aire. But this is a miserable contestation, wherein it is more advantagi∣ous to bee the Conquered than Conquerour; Nevertheless since in all things wee strive to overcome by an innate desire which wee cannot leave, but with our Lives; give mee leave to tell you, that if those who lose their means (as it passeth in some places for a Proverb) do lose their Senses, with what fury ought they to bee transported, who are robb'd of their Ho∣nour, which all well-tempered Minds will alwayes prefer not onely before the favours of Fortune, but their own Lives? This make's mee run in this inraged manner through the World, seeking my Sister, either to dip this Weapon in her Blood, if shee hath forgotten herself so far, as to dishonour our Family by an irreparable fault, or to venture my own life with her Ra∣visher, who (I am informed) is your Husband. At these words, pronounced with an angry Tone and an haughty Countenance, Serife began to Stagger; and (as if one had plunged a Dagger in her Heart) Shee let her self sink down betwixt the beloved
Arms of Calliante, who never received so acceptable a burthen; as shee never swounded with so much delight. This Fainting was beyond Jest, proceeding not from Sorrow, but the excess of Contentment, which transported her at the Presence of an Object dearer to her than the whole Ʋniverse besides: yet the aspersion of a little cool Water upon her Face recalled her Spirits from that amorous traunce. As an Infant sleeping betwixt it's Nurse's Arms, doth open leisurely it's little Eyes, when shee spurts out of her Brests some drops of Milk upon its Face; so gracefully did Serife unclose her's, feeling her Cheeks bedewed with some Tears, which Apprehension and Tenderness had squeezed out of Calliante's Eyes, beeing troubled at this unexpected Accident. This tempest beeing past, Calliante fell into another, beeing assault∣ed on all sides with the Reproaches and Accusations of the Assistants, for having raised that Storm, which blasted all the Flowers that ap∣peared so Lively, and so Lovely in that Ladie's Countenance. Alas! said hee, carrying Compassion in his Looks, persecute mee no more for a fault, which hath brought it's Repentance with it, and for which I crave this vertuous Ladie's and the whole Companie's Pardon. I confess that my indiscreet Expressions did hurry her even to the threshold of Death, but I am so sorry for having reduced her to that extremity, that I protest by the Beauty of her Eyes, (whose light I shall ever hereafter most inviolably honour) to belie those audacious Words by contrary Effects, turning the fury of my Passion against my Sister and my own Blood, and re-gain Her the possession of that Husband, whose disloyalty rendereth him unworthy of her Merits, and whom, notwithstanding, shee seem's so passionately to affect. Courteous Sir, replied Serife, as your first speeches precipitated mee into the pit of Death, this second give's mee a desire to Live. But have a care to verifie your words if you will have mee esteem you a Gentleman of Ho∣nour. Madam, said Calliante, if Death prevent mee not in the attempt, I will exactly perform my Promise; For, I had rather lose my Life, than stain my Honour with the breach of my Word. A more sensible affront cannot be done to any Man, than that which our Family receiveth from your Husband; but I remit the Vengeance to Heaven, and lay my interest at your Feet, resolving to exercise my Indignation onely against that unad∣vised Girle, who hath suffered herself to be abused by him. and who by her indiscretion hath blemished the honour of our House. If you forgive my Husband, for Heaven's sake and my consideration, with all my Heart I pardon Almeria th' offence which shee hath committed
against mee. But if Courtesie (the Queen of gentile Spirits, like your's) hath any ascendant over your Heart, I conjure you to let it plead for Mee, and obtain the Favour which I shall demand of you. Demand not, Madam, answered, Calliante, but Command; For, I esteem it as great a glory to obey you, as I should bee sensible of shame to refuse you any thing, were it to the hazard not onely of my Fortunes, but of my Life and Honour. I do not use to make any such Reservations, when I tender my services to Ladies of your Quality, especially when they are accompained with such Vertue and Graces as you possess. Sir, replied Serife, I am so far from desiring any thing prejudiciall to your Fortunes, Honour or Life, that clean-contrary I Study the preserva∣tion of them all together, beseeching you to pardon your Sister, and not to execute any Vengeance upon Her Person; Shee is your own Flesh and Blood, and (as it were) another self. Why do I say another Self? These Shepherdesses (who have seen you both) tell mee, that one drop of Water is less like another than you two, so that you seem not onely to bee Twins, but the same Person; there beeing none living able to distinguish the one from the other, and that would not take Her for Calliante if shee were in your Cloathes, and you for Almeria if you were in Her's. For (which Heavens forbid) if in the heat of your Passion you should dip your Hands in the Blood of that miserable Creature, who could exempt you from expiating that Parricide by the loss of your Honour, Life and Fortunes, I say, by the prosecution of humane Justice? which though you should finde means to escape, would not the Divine, (think you) persecute you through all the corners of the Earth, whither your guilt would make you wander (like a desperate Orestes) without finding any repose for your Conscience, which would be agitated with a thousand Furies, the Voyce of Blood crying out incessantly for Vengeance of your Crime? Calliante feining to bee overcome by her conjuring Speech, made appear that the Poet's fictions were not without reason, when they made Love disarm the God of War, and snatch the Thunder out of Jupi∣ter's Hand; For, casting all his Poyson under the beautifull Serife's feet, hee protested that hee would do no violence to the person of Iphis, nor vent his Passion against Almeria, but would continue loving Her as Himself, and honour Him in the person of that Lady, under whose obedi∣ence hee resolved to Live and Die. Thus the Peace was concluded, to the great contentment both of the Gentlemen & Rusticks, who were as much amazed to see in so little time so great a change, as when a furi∣ous Tempest, which fill's the Air with Thunder, & storms the Earth with
Rain and horrid Hail, is sodainly dissipated, leaving the agreeable Rayes of the Sun in full liberty to inlighten those that do behold them. It was as easie for Calliante to keep his Oath, as hard for him to break it; For, how could hee offend Iphis without injuring Serife, or take revenge of Almeria without turning his fury upon himself? So, they all agreed to terminate amiably this memorable adventure, and rather to employ the Oyl of Friendship, than the Vineger of Enmity for the healing of their imaginary wounds. Their Conversation beeing ended with the Day, Serife remained with Celian's Daughters, whilest Calliante and the other Gentlemen retired themselves with their Rustick Attendants to their Lodging. Mony beeing not spared, there was great cheer on all sides; For, be∣sides the Presents which Serife bestowed on Celian, and his Daughters, Calliante was no less liberall to his Assistants, who promised him a thousand services for his generosity to them. As it is the custome of Peasants in all places to drink freely, especially in the Septentrionall Countries, these spent the best part of the Night at that exercise; in so much that the Sun was already well advanced in his Diurnall course, before their Eyes were capable of discovering his Light. Whi∣lest they were buryed in that Liquor, the abundance whereof ingen∣dreth Sleep, no less than the juyce of Poppies, our Gentlemen had full leisure to entertain Calliante, who acting the modest Virgin before them, made shew of a certain bashfulness, which argued nothing of a loose Life; For, persons given over to Impudicity, do commonly ac∣quire the quality of Impudence; So that they knew not how to judge lightly of her, whom they saw so extreamly reserved; And this was the onely part Calliante had now to play, to make them still take him for Almeria. Then falling upon the Discourse of the passionate Affection hee expressed to Serife, the Gentlemen told her that they could not but admire to see the chance so turned, that beeing now in Man's apparell shee seemed to bee excessively taken with Iphis, who some Dayes be∣fore received nothing but Marks of her Disdain. Wherunto Calliante thus replied, I know not if those Cloathes bee inchanted, but I must con∣fess that since his change of Habit, my Heart is become so Linked to his perfections, that out of his Presence I am like a Marrigold, which closeth when the Sun is set. The Countrey-men beeing risen (to bee rid of their not much pleasing Company) hee dispersed them severall wayes, to make further search after the Fugitives, that they might not (as he pre∣tended)
travell up and down in vain as they had done the day before. They beeing gone upon this triviall errand, the conversation of the remaining Day was in the Forest, under the delightfull shades, in the company of the Gentlemen and Sheperdesses; who thought they had made no little gain by the change of Iphis and Almeria, for Calliante and Serife, measuring the quality and merit of the Persons by the profit which accrued to them. In this agreeable place, where the Shepheards used to lay their Nets for the innocent Beasts, did our Gallants con∣trive inventions to deceive their simplicity. Here it was where those who thought to surprise, were themselves surprised, and where was acted the most pleasant Piece of cousenage, that could bee ima∣gined. For, first, if you consider the Shepherdesses, there was not one of them, but took Calliante and Serife for quite other persons, than those which had appeared before, under the Names of Almeria and Iphis. Next, if you look upon Calliante, though hee did the office of a De∣ceiver, hee was deceived no less than they, taking Serife to bee a Man, whom Nature had created otherwise; than the Gentlemen, who had disguised themselves to abuse the Peasant's Eyes, had their error also; For, they thought Calliante to bee a Woman, when hee was really what his habit spake him. Neither was Serife without a share of mistake, in that shee conceived that the Passion which Calliante expressed to her was feined, when his Tongue was a faithfull Interpreter of his Heart's sincerest thoughts. As for Calliante's Scouts, Lupicin and the rest, their fruitless peregrination was a sufficient testimony of their beeing per∣fectly abused. Onely Celian was not deceived in his end, who ayming at nothing but to get what hee could on all sides, found his account well enough; it was indifferent to him whether Iphis and Almeria, or Calliante and Serife filled his House, so that his Purse was filled hee cared no further. Whilest the compassionate Shepherdesses indeavour to comfort the desolate Lady, with the hope they gave her of shortly seeing again her Husband, in regard there were so many Messengers well acquainted with all the passages of that Forest, sent severall wayes to seek him, she sighed for an Object present in Body, but whom shee thought absent in Heart, not deeming herself to bee the absolute Mistress of his desires. And as by instinct of Nature every one is apt to lay his Hand on the Sore, or to the place where he feeleth pain, they were no sooner seated under the favourable covert of a fair Sicomore Tree, whose root was
watered with the Chrystall of a cleer Fountain, but Serife began to rip up the remembrance of her disgrace. What Lenitives soever the assist∣ants indeavored to apply, it seemed as if the anguish of her wound was augmented by their remedies. Calliante and the other Gentlemen alleadged many exquisite reasons, and acute Arguments, to convince her obstinate grieving, which would much imbellish this History, if I did not fear to spin it out too far be∣yond my measure. I shall therefore content my self to remark only this pretty accident which interrupted their discourse: It was the plaintive chanting of a Turtle-Dove, who having chosen her seat upon a wither∣ed stump among those Leaves, began to salute their Ears with a tone so dolefull, that it would have moved Compassion in Souls least sus∣ceptible of pitty; which gave occasion to Serife to return it these words: Pittifull Bird, the living Emblem of my condition, thou comest very opportunely to present thy self to my view, and teach mee to bemoan, in an accent, like thine, the Miseries that afflict mee. Thou makest us suf∣ficiently understand, that thou hast lost thy Mate, either by the cruell stroak of Death, or some sinister straying; and thy Groans reverberating the Eccho's of these Woods, seem either to recall him to Life, or to carry him news of thee; to the end by his return thou maist give o're complaining. Sweet Dove, thou hast no Gall, neither hast thou any need of it; For, thou art assured that his unfaithfullness will never give thee cause to express any anger. Alas! I am not so perfect, nor so happy, for the jealousie which devour's mee, take's away all sense of sweetness, and make's mee hate to live, by reason of the inconstancy of him, who hath made mee so many deep Protestations never to be capable of disloyalty. Go pretty Pigeon, and since I have Married my Accents with thine, direct thy speedy Wings towards the place where my perfidious Iphis now is, and if thou canst not make him consider the torment which his ingratitude causeth mee to suffer, make him ashamed by thy presence, and let him see that Men (more unrea∣sonable in their irregular dispositions than Animals which have no un∣derstanding) may learn of them Lessons of Fidelity and Temper∣ance. Shee had continued longer in this mournfull strain, if Calliante seem∣ing to fear lest the excess of sorrow should transport her into some un∣seemly extravagance, had not broke off her Speech, telling her, that to talk to Birds, and to sow upon the Sands, were things equally absurd; That shee ought to hope for better Fortune, and take the consolation which is commonly given to young Widdowes, which is, that by the loss
of one Husband they may have the choyce of divers others. And beeing of a Joviall Disposition, especially in these delightfull Recreations, having a greater desire to pass his time in Laughing than Lamenting, he fancied an Air to some Lines, in answer (as hee said) of the Turtle's mournfull Tune. So with a very agreeable Voyce, hee animated these STANCES. THese Pains assail not you alone, For among Mortalls there's not one, But feel's his Reason overswai'd Sometimes; there are no Souls, whom Love Hath to such Discontents betrai'd, But like Effects of Pitty move. Why by an Humour then so Blinde, Which disturb's your Riper Minde, Feed you your Thoughts with bitter Pain; Since t'is the Poyson of the Heart, Rather by Custome to complain, Than by Reason ease the Smart? Some transports of Grief's excess May bee excused, I confess, But how can you e're justify These Afflictions indiscreet, Whereby you seeme an Enemy To that Face and Eyes so sweet? What Trespass hath that Golden Tress (Of Lover's Vows the dear Address) Done, to deserve the Penalty Of so Severe a Punishment, And receive the Salarie Of Crimes whereof 'tis Innocent?
Th' Ingratefull whom you thus bemoan, What rare Perfections can Hee own To merit, that away should fade The beauteous Roses of your Face, And let pale Sorrow thus invade, And play the Tyrant in their place? Appease the Tumults of your Brest, Change these Distractions into Rest, And by the End of this sad Rage (To oblige some better Spirits) Rob not your Beauties from this Age, Which hath its Glory from your Merits. If the Power you call to Minde, Wherewith your Graces use to blinde Beholders, when your Eyes are calm; Of Dying quit that strange Desire, And don't reject that glorious Palm, VVhich by their Luster you acquire. As long Hair imbellisheth handsome Faces, and rendereth more ugly those that are ill-favoured; So Musick hath that property to inlighten Hearts inclined to Mirth, and augment the Sadness of those that are Melancholly. The Gentlemen and Shepherdesses, whose Spirits began to droop at Serife's heaviness, were much rejoyced with this Singing; but the afflicted Ladie's heart seemed to bee deeper sunk in Sorrow. These sweet words were to those dull Rustick Souls, like Pearls cast before Creatures incapable to judge of their value; but they were otherwise understood by the Courtiers, who judging of the Lyon by the Claw, by this Essay of Calliante's wit (whom they still took to bee Almeria) presently gathered this conjecture, that the Palatine was more in Love with the Beauty of her Minde, than of her Body, which was comely enough for a Man, but hardly handsome for a Woman. After a little time Serife having weighed in her Thoughts the sense of Calliante's Verses, as soon as shee demanded it, obteined leave to eva∣porate these
SIGHES. WHen (Soul) wilt thou injoy some Rest, Leaving the Prison of this Brest? When shall thy Dayes and Pains have End, Since thy Griefs beyond compare Have onely the last Hope to friend Of those that perish with Despaire? Yet when this Body, pale as Lead, Augment's the number of the Dead, How shalt thou assurance have To see the End of thy Torment, If separated by the Grave To Thee remain's yet Sentiment? Heavens, Directors of our Fate, Planets, who, like a Reprobate, Condemn mee to bee miserable, If all things else their Limits know, Why will you render Memorable By it's Eternity my Woe? Fortune hath made my troubled Heart The Mark of each malicious Dart: The Source is dreined of my Tears, And now are alwayes in my Sight Of the dire Furie's Torch the Fears, In stead of Titan's pleasing Light. Alas! what Light can mee rejoyce, Since separated from my Choice The Morning-Star of my Delight? This is the worst of Tyrannies, To rob It of Its glorious Light Or to bereave Mee of my Eyes.
By hiding Him from outward view, Vnkindest Spirits, what? think you My inward Faculties to blinde, And by th' Essay of your dread Ire, Stealing the Pleasure of my Minde, To barr mee also of Desire? No, treacherous Ingratitude, Who of my Sense's servitude The Patience dost exercise, By Calms and Tempests, as you please, With no less Fury than do rise The Windes to agitate the Seas: Know, that by a generous wound, Rage in my dearest Blood had drown'd My wretched Life with this Disgrace, If through a fond Timidity, My Fury had not given place To the Feare of displeasing thee. The Courtiers (who were onely able to discern the Vivacity of this Reply, and not to savour simply the Air, as the Shepherdesses did, but tast the Sweetness which was comprised in these Lines) were hereby invited to display afresh all their Rhetorick to conjure that Sorrow, which Serife feined with such dexterity, that they could hardly believe it was a Fiction; but that shee had taken that Cloak to cover the reall Resentments of her Passion for Almeria. And with joynt supplicati∣ons they never ceased importuning her, untill they had drawn a solemn promise from her Mouth to requite Calliante's courtesie, by changing the Resolution, shee seemed to have taken, of Dying; as at her intreaty hee had renounced his of killing Iphis or Almeria. And hereupon Calliante beating the Iron while it was hot, and making use of this overture, was not satisfied with her yeilding to this request; but acting openly the passionate Lover, hee offered to bee her Servant, in case her Husband did repudiate her to marry Almeria, swearing to
her by all that was most sacred, That hee would bee as zealous to render her the most assured Testimonies of an inviolable Loyalty, as Iphis had been forward to afflict her with his unworthy Ingratitude. If it bee true that the Thunder proceed's from the Antiperistasis of Heat and Cold, and that there are passages from one Extremity to ano∣ther, which leave no perceptible Medium; whereof the experience may bee seen in great Friendships, which are changed into mortall Hatreds: It was in this Point, that Serife manifested either her Dexteri∣ty, or the Levity of her Sex; The first, in doing like those Coach-men or exact Horse-men, who shew their skill by their quick turning; the other, in changing Face much more sodainly than the Night ruling Planet, which is thought to have so much communication with the weaker Sex. For, as if Despight had restored her Reason, which an ex∣cess of Love had ravish'd from her, shee presently appeared as if shee had been cured of her dolefull Humour, and putting on a serener look, her Eyes gave an evident testimony that her Ears were not displeased with that new Proposition. But lest any should condemn her of too much easiness to bee won, they are to consider that this was onely a Fallacy to abuse the Country-People, (the Gentlemen knowing it already) and besides, that it was not without divers perswasions, as well on Calliante's part as of his associates, that shee delivered the Arms of her obstinacy by bending her Resolution to this Condescendence. Which shee did with such gracefulness, that shee effaced all suspition out of the Shepherdesse's Souls, as shee left no small admiration of her wit in the Gentlemen's, and to crown this action, shee demanded Permission to sigh out this COMPLAINT. MUst I then, Oh! cruell Fate, Out of my Soul's Image blot, And must Despaire now separate VVhom Death's severity could not? Must my sincere Affection's fire, Extinguish't by Disloyalty, Resign its Flames to the Desire Of a revengefull Tyrannie?
Sol may as well sequestred bee Of Light, as I of my Desire, Though his ingratefull Levity Indeavour's to befrost my Fire. His Oaths and execrable vowes, (From which Despaire now set's mee free) Dear Sighs and Torments, pleasing Woes, Can I forget and living bee? Can I with settled Front behold Of his bewitching Face the Charms, As motionless as Mountains bold Reject th' inclement Air's allarms? Alas! my treacherous Will, I fear, Will render my Fault pardonless, As it is seen in Treason, where They're punish't that in Will transgress. But if by his Inconstancy, I am compell'd to this Divorce, Reserving of that sacred tie, Onely th' ungratefull Mark of Force: To Free my self from his sweet Bonds, I contradict my proper Sense, And this no Reason else Commands But too much injur'd Innocence. In fine, the Lot's now cast, I'le trie (And let not any think it strange) To pay his Mutabilitie, With a just Vengeance by my Change.
Calliante finding this conclusion favourable to his Design, interrupted her Singing with these words: Madam, Nature hath indued our Souls with a certain instinct which inclineth us to the preservation of our selves, as ap∣pears by Persons that are drowning, who lay hold on any thing they can reach to save their Lives. Some few dayes since you and I, without Reason or Consideration, did run to finde out Rocks, where (according to the vio∣lence of the Passions which blinded us) wee could expect no less than a de∣plorable Shipwrack: But the just Heavens (which favour good intentions) have not permitted us to fall into those Precipices, quite contrary, in having made us known to each other, it seem's that they have imitated the Earth, which produceth no venimous Plant, but hath ordered i'ts Antidote to grow neer it, if wee have the skill to distinguish them. For, if wee manage aright the occasion that is now presented to us, wee may reap great Advantage by our Loss, and draw an extream Satisfaction from the Center of our Afflictions, as the purest Pearls, which are so clear and smooth, are taken out of black and rugged Shells. Then, to create a belief that shee should finde a more solid and firm supporter of him than shee fancied, hee made her a summary Re∣lation of his Condition and Quality (as hee had done before in Celian's House, when hee so handsomly cheated all that heard him) adding some circumstances, and so quaintly contriv'd Expressions, that the most scrupulous of the assistants could hardly believe their Eyes, their Ears were so surprised. It is true, beeing touched to the quick, hee ani∣mated his Discourse with so passionate an Action, that it was easie to discern hee had much interest in those passages; Which was taken diversly by the Shepherdesses, Courtiers, Serife and Himself. In summe, upon this last Resolution, the Sun beginning to make Night by the far extending of his Shades, they retired to the Village; the two Lovers more inamored than satisfied of each other, because, for divers respects, they durst not manifest their Resentments; The Shepherdesses not very well pleased with the Ladie's sodain change, who therein shewed her∣self more Woman than they could have wished for the Honour of their Sex, and the Courtiers full of admiration at the dexterous conduct of this Plot, whereinto they penetrated no farther than half way.
The Ninth Book. ARGUMENT. Serife's passionate Complaint to Boleslaus. His discreet Answer. Serife's moanfull Soliloquie beeing retired into her Chamber. Calliante's feined Plot to steal away Serife in the Night. His Speech to the Swains, perswading them to assist him. Hee discover's his Design to the disgui∣sed Gentlemen. Their's & the Rustick's severall resentments. Merinda acquaints Serife with Calliante's intention. Her counterfeited Astonish∣ment. The zealous Pomeran's serious Speech to Almeria, thinking her really a Woman. Her wittily-fram'd Answer to increase his Mistake. The Country-men by the Gentlemen's wrangling with Al∣meria (in Calliante's habit) are brought into suspicion of Serife's, and his transvestment. Pomeran demands the Justice's Assistance to prevent the feined Rape of Serife. The Character of Lawyers and Judges. Calliante and the Rusticks are imprisoned. The Rusticks are presently released upon Baile. Ʋpon their Petition all the disguised Gentlemen & Serife are likewise committed into severall Prisons. Their contradicto∣ry Answers to the Judge's Interrogatories. The noise of Iphigenes his Country-Mistress is carried to the Court. Modestina, beeing animated by Love and Jealousie, makes her escape out of Prison, and come's dis∣guised to Plocens to seek her Husband Iphigenes. Her resemblance to her Brother Liante makes her be apprehended, by Mieslas's command, for him. Arcade coming to advertise Iphigenes of Mieslas cruelty to the supposed Liante, is imprisoned likewise by the Clowns. His Depo∣sition before the Country-Judges, and his ambiguous Conference with Boleslaus, and his fellow-Prisoners. Calliante's and Serife's distemper at Arcade's news. Their severall Speeches to the Judges. They are more straitly imprisoned for their high Words. Boleslaus's subtle Plot to procure the inlargement of Serife and the rest. The extorting Judge, to screw monie out of his disguised Prisoners, condemns Serife and Calli∣ante
to a privy Search. Celian's Daughters are appointed to do the Office. Serife overcomes her Shee-visiters with Presents, and large Promises Calliante payes them with Kicks and Blowes. Hee is Beaten by the Peasants (that rescue the Shepherdesses) bound Hand and Foot, and threatned to be put to a shamefull Death. Humbertus Captaine of Iphigenes Guards, coming with his Troop upon notice from Boleslaus, apprehends the Judge with all his Complices, and releases Iphigenes and the rest. Humbertus his suspition concerning Calliante's suffering. The Conference betwixt Humbertus, Calliante and Iphigenes. A Consultation among the released Prisoners what punish∣ment to inflict upon those Clowns and Iudge. Boleslaus his discreet Opinion. The Iustice and Clemency of Iphigenes in punishing those Offenders. THey had not been long returned to their Village, before the weary Swains came dropping in from severall parts, as wise as when they went out; yet every one, not to appear an unprofitable Servant, made his report, which came as neer to the truth as white to black, and had as little re∣ference to each other. For, some promised him the next day to bring him certain tydings where the Fugitives were; others despaired of ever finding them; like the Scouts of the Israëlites, whereof some discouraged the People from entring into the Land of Promise, others made them believe wonders to animate them to that glorious Conquest. There was nothing to bee talked of, but to provide good cheer for those hungry Seekers. who had lost their labour in following a Shadow and imbracing the Winde. Thus the Evening passed, not without many Protestations of an in∣violable affection betwixt Calliante and Serife, each striving in cozen∣ing his companion to deceive himself. Their discourse for some time was in private, where (after some laughter at the simplicity of those whom they had abused) said Calliante, Amongst all this jeasting wee may be caught our selves in earnest. For, I protest, Brother (said hee in her Ear) thou dost act Serife so admirably, that I cannot take thee for Iphis, and I consume within myself by an unknown Passion, which give's mee a cruell torment, but such a torment, that I had rather bee cured by the hand of Death, than use the means which the Tempter proposeth to mee.
My Soul abhor's so execrable an impiety, so detestable an abomination, and I protest that I love nothing in thee but what seem's to be Feminine, and if there were a Fountain in the World, where Males might be Meta∣morphosed into Females, my Passion would make mee so uncivill as to do my best to plunge you in it perforce, having first employed all my Retorick to perswade you. But this is better to be wished for than expected, and fitter to amuse my Passion than ease my Pain. Alas! I suffer really what Ixion endure's in the Fable, and this for desiring (like him) to embrace a Cloud: For, what is that but the shadow of a Feminine Beauty which I admire in you? Ah! Dear Iphis, do you not pitty my perplexity? So much, answered Serife, that against the advantages which Nature giveth to the condition of Men, you make mee almost desire to bee a Wo∣man, that I might possess you intirely, and under the Lawes of Hymen bee perfectly yours. But, Brother, Is it possible that you can jeer so hand∣somly at my simplicity, and that you are so Artificiall as still to continue your dissimulation before mee, who plainly perceive your policy? Those Heats of the Liver which your Speech discover's, resemble the Surges that appear in the Sea some time after the Winds are down, and the Tem∣pest of the Air ceased, as marks of it's anger, and precedent agitation. You think (I believe) that those Gentlemen and Shepherdesses understand what you say, not considering that you speak particularly to mee, and that you are heard by no other Ears than mine. I do not use to be so ravished from my self, replyed Calliante, that I cannot see to whom and before whom I speak, and by calling you, Brother, you may well judge that I presuppose no body hear's mee but your self, and therefore I now unmask myself to you, assuring you that if under the simple habit of a Shepherdess you appeared to my Eyes no less beautifull than an Angell, under the Ornaments wherewith you are now attired, your pre∣sence doth so transport my senses that I may well forget that you are a Man, since mistaking my self I know not what I am, nor by consequent what I either say or do I feel a dizziness of Brain which so disturbeth my Reason, that if you alter not speedily the Scene, I shall bee overcome with these Illusions, and fall into the strangest Frensie that ever possessed a Spirit diversly agitated. They had not so soon ended this amorous Conference, but the hour of the Night separated them, Serife remaining in the company of the Shepherdesses (or rather of her own thoughts) and Calliante retiring with the Men to take some rest, if the perplexity of his Mind would permit. Boleslaüs by the priviledge of his grizled Beard, and the Qua∣lity
of Governour to Iphis, had the favour to stay some while after the rest with the Lady, as having some business of importance to impart to her. Beeing alone, after some merriment at the success of their stratagem, Serife who was all on fire, or rather all fire for Calliante, (yet who through a dissimulation, naturall to her Sex, could discreetly retein her impatiences) imbracing the old Man, said, Father, Now is the onely time of setting a period to my miseries, by discovering to Liante who I am, beeing fully assured of his Affection to mee. Then having related to him from point to point their sweet secret Discourse, Hee will doubtless, continued shee, hold it a perfect Miracle to finde mee as hee desire's mee. If I defer it any longer, Occasion (which is bald) will presently pass, and perchance I shall never finde one so favourable as this, which now presents it self; Fortune envious of Vertue, and who hath been my Enemy from my Cradle, will probably suscitate some cruell blast that may nip my Design in the Blossom, and reducing my hopes into Ashes make them be blown away with the Winde. My tongue's end itched to tell him what I was, but Shame stopt the passage of my Voyce, and besides Prudence suggested to my Thoughts, that (not to disobey my dear Mother Aretuza) I ought to do nothing without your advise, (my dear Father) I pray conform it to my Desire, if you Desire to preserve my Life. Madam, replyed the discreet Senior, I so much desire the preservation of your Life, that I will alwayes be ready to redeem it with the loss of mine own; but I beseech you to consider that all Passions are Precipitated; all Pre∣cipitation is Blinde & Blindness is incompatible with Reason. What we do through the violence of that Motion, is not judicious; & that which is with∣out Judgement is subject to great Failings, & those Failings to remarkable Repentance: You may do what you please, it is my Duty to Obey you, and move in the Sphear of your Authority. You are past Child-hood now, the yoak of Paternall power doth no longer press your neck, take heed of imitating the Birds whom Love driveth into the Fowlers Nets, and thence to Death, or, at least, into Captivity. The Servitude whereunto Marriage obligeth Ladies is not small, those Devoirs will seem very strange to you, and for a Pleasure which you esteem the more, the less you know it, you will purchase to your self much Pain. Besides, what will People say, nay, what will they not say, if you discover your self, and be Married in this manner? You will lose all your Estate and Honours, and you shall be sure to make your Father your Enemy, who will pursue you with Fire and Sword; your Mother will run the hazard of her Life, and
not beeing advertised of your proceedings, shee will be so perplexed, that the fear of Death will perchance make her anticipate the Vengeance of the rigorous Mieslas. Clandestine Marriages (whatsoever can be objected) are alwayes suspicious, and bear the Mark of Dishonesty in their Faces. What will these Gentlemen think that are in your company? At first, it may be, they will conceit, that all this was done by Witchcraft, but when Time shall have made appear, that there is no other Magick than Naturall, if they do not blame your Conduct, it will be either for want of judgement, or through excess of Friendship. Consider moreover, that if the secret which we have so long concealed, should be disclosed in this manner, you will render yourself the Fable of the whole World, and the most infa∣mous and dishonoured Creature under the Sun; Whereas, if moderating your Desires a little, you will but follow my former Counsels, (which you were than pleased to relish, and your Mother approved, and which are con∣formable to your Affection and Design for Liante) Fame will speak you not onely in Polonia, but through the whole Universe, the most admirable, the most Honourable and the most triumphant Virgin, that ever Nature framed: the Mouths of Mortalls will not have Tongues sufficient, nor their Tongues words, nor their Words tearmes elegant enough to express the Greatness of your Name, and represent the Splendor of that un∣speakable Glory wherewith you shall be crowned, and which will one day, by the Pen of some eminent Historian, convey your Esteem into the Me∣mory of succeeding Ages. Marriage, Madam, is a sacred and indissoluble bond which ought to be treated of with Grave and Serious deliberation, not amongst these Facetious Recreations; Those that contract Matrimony ought to proceed with great Circumspection, and think upon the establish∣ment of their Fortunes, and the good of their Progeny, rather than the satisfying of their Lusts. If you do otherwise, the Shadow is not so inse∣parable from the Body, as Repentance will be from your Action; And it is far more easie to prevent a Mischief, than remedy it when it is hapned. I am not against your beeing Married to Liante; since from your Infancy it seem's that Heaven (where Marriages are made) hath destined you for him, but I would advise you to deferr your Wedding, and of blameable render it glorious, of private publick; hide not with shamefull obscurity that which ought to be illuminated with the clearest Light that ever pro∣duced Day. What is but prolonged is not lost, and my judgement can fore∣see no Cause (what Venim soever envious Fortune spit's in Vertue's face) capable of hindering so just and so Legitimate an Effect, which may Crown your Father's Heart with Satisfaction, your Mother's with
Gladness, the King with Contentment, and the whole World with Wonder. These words pronounced with a zealous sincerity, conformable to the disposition of him that uttered them, were as Water cast upon the Fire of that Passion & as a Bridle to that Temptation which began to transport the Reason of the vertuous Serife. And immediately a Vermillion colour (the livery of Modesty) over-spread her Cheeks, not without some trickling tears, which the vehemency of her distemper extorted from her Eyes. Hee that hath ever observed the Pearls that Aurora sprinkle's upon red Roses, may fancy something neer the countenance of that Lady, scorched with Shame and watered with Tears. Thence the prudent Boleslaüs gathered, that her Heart was in no ill temper, and that Honour gaving gained the victory of Love, did render Reason triumphant over Passion. At length with no less Sweetness and Modesty, than hee had Compassion to see her in that Perplexity shee answered: Be assured, Father, that this assault, nor any other (Heavens permitting) shall ever make me forget my duty, neither have I hitherto admitted any thing into my thoughts, contrary to what a Virgin of Honour oweth to her Reputation and Vertue: The End which I pretend is so Glorious, that it is sufficient to justifie all the means I use to atchieve it. But since your Prudence, ripened by the advantage of Years and much experience, make's you judge that the fruit of my desire is not yet come to maturity, I will deferr the gathering it, untill you shall think it time for mee to cast off my veile. This said, not to press any farther her Heart, big with Sighs, Boleslaüs having made his obeisance and wished her good rest, left her, to retire to his other Companions. Then, Serife seeing herself alone and thinking shee was unheard, having opened the Flood gates of her Eyes, and given Air to her sighs, shee eased the burthen of her overswollen Heart by the utterance of these dolefull words. Wretched Serife, how long must thou (like a miserable Sisyphus) rowle this stone, which is no sooner brought to the top of thy pretensions, but by a fatall weight, in spight of all thy Force and Industry, it take's the advantage of the steep descent to precipitate thee into the bottom of Despair? Shalt thou never see an end of this Labour, no less Ʋnprofitable than Painfull? Shall a clear Day, dissipating the foggy Vapors which environ thee, never shine upon thy Repose? Is it then Registred in the Book of Fate, that thou must consume in these comfortless Woods the most flourishing season of thy Years, in the Presence, but not to the knowledge of him, who
is the innocent and amiable Cause of thy sufferings? must thou then spend, and perchance end thy Dayes in these obscurities without in∣forming him, who thou art, and of the true manner of thy Love? Oh Liante, Oh Calliante! if you could read within my Heart the Torments which you make mee feele, as you finde in my Face the subject of your own Disturbances, I am confident you would bee moved with the same Compassion for my Woes, as you desire mee to have of your's. Alas! you have this Comfort at least in your Disease, that you tell mee freely what you think, but I nourishing your Perplexities by my own Pains, dare not speak half my thoughts, lest you should discover what I am, and know too soon for my Content∣ment, what you will never know but too late for my Desire. Rigo∣rous Law of Honour, why hast thou chosen the infirmity of our Sex, unless it bee to render more sensible the effects of thy Violence? But no, dear Honour, Pearl beyond esteem; no sacred Chastity, (who to every well-bred soul art a kinde of inviolable Deity) I am deter∣mined to consecrate my pleasure to thee, and sacrifice upon the Altar of thy severity my innocent Desires; I have ever hitherto been too Religious an observer of thy dictates, to forget now so lightly what I have been, what I am, and what I ought to bee, if I will close the Period of my Life in that Reputation, which in this World I have ac∣quired. Yet I finde by Experience (which I did not heretofore be∣lieve) that there is no punishment so great as the sight of that which wee are forbidden; For, the Object irritating Desire, and Respect striving to suppress it's Motions; in this contention is formed the most exquisite torment that ever tortured any Soul. But when I con∣sider that it is partly for Honour's sake, partly for a subject which I esteem beyond Expression, the Beauty of these Causes abateth the Rigor of the Effect, and makes mee finde I know not what Pleasure in my Pains. Onely the silence, which I so exactly keep, aggravate's their smart, and render's my Flames more ardent, the more they are supprest. Hee that dare's vent his Misery by Complaints, suffer's but halfe the Anguish; they are Happy in their Ʋnhappiness who suffer for an Object that is informed of their Martyrdom, and is capable of corresponding with their Desires: But 'tis a double torment to bee consumed with Care, and with the Fear of revealing it. This is to dye like a silly Sheep, which without crying receive's the Knife in her throat.
Oh Heav'n! the witness of my Moans, Who th' ruine of my Joy conspires, Grant that the Authour of my Groans Like you, may read my Heart's Desires: Or consolate my troubled Sense, By lessening my Misery; Or, else give mee the Confidence To say in Dying, that I Die. As if these verses had had the power to call SLEEP out of his dark Cave, where the Poets feine, that hee frameth the fantasticall ex∣travagancies of Dreams, hee gently powred into her languishing Eyes some juyce of Poppies, which caused so pleasant a drowsiness, that letting her body fall upon the bed, all her sorrows were drowned in that repose, which Nature hath ordained so necessary for the preserva∣tion of Life. The Country-People's Houses are commonly so ill built, that they let in the Light by as many holes as Argus had Eyes, so that out of one Chamber one may not onely hear, but see what passeth in the next. This gave Celian's Daughters the curiosity, not onely to hearken to the Discourse betwixt Boleslaüs and Serife, and to her complaints after hee had left her, but also to observe her deportments; whereby they gathered that shee was really much afflicted. But neither by their Discourse, nor her behaviour, could they ground any conjecture contrary to the Opinion they conceived, that shee was indeed Iphis Wife, induced to affect Calliante as much out of spight to see herself rejected by the one, as by inclination to the merits of the other. Thus passed away the Night, whose sable veile equalizeth High to Low, Rich to Poor, and, by the benefit of Sleep, the unhappiest to the most For∣tunate. Next Morning some of the Swains, allured with the luster of gain, offered themselves betimes to Calliante to make another Search; but hee thinking to have better sport by their presence than in sending them away, having warmed their Heads with Wine, made them this pleasant Proposition, saying: Honest friends, you know the injury Iphis hath done mee by abusing my Sister; you know the Assistance you have promised mee in taking my Revenge of him, I cannot de∣sire a more sweet, a more fit, nor a more ready one, than by stealing
away his Wife and making her Mine, to oblige him by this irrepa∣rable Offence to Marry my Sister (as hee hath promised) and leave Serife to mee, whom hee would bee loth to acknowledge for his Wife, after shee hath been in my possession. In saying this hee dazled their Eyes with an handfull of Crowns, which made them promise to further his Design without any farther consideration; Then continued hee; But you must beware lest these Gentlemen, (who are his friends, and as many Spies to watch our actions) discover this Match: For, if they should perceive any thing, our Plot would bee prevented and my hopes absolutely ruined, which would transport mee into the desperatest Rage, that can possesse a Soul doubly inflamed with Love and Revenge. You know that this Lady hath some inclination for mee, and that the vexation of seeing herself forsaken by her Husband, doth animate her to resent that affront in the same man∣ner as I propose to you. It is true that as that Sex is subject to Ap∣prehensions, it is incapable of sodain and violent Enterprises; besides, Ladies are generally of that disposition, not to yeild without some shew of compulsion, even in things where they are lest of all forced. I can assure you, how displeased soever shee seem's, and whatsoever shee saith to the contrary, that the Rape which I intend will bee attended by her own Consent, which will bee a sufficient justification for my action and your assistance. But, in regard Re∣solutions of this Nature, have all their Effect and vigour in their sodain Expedition, this must bee put in execution this Night, by favour of the intelligence wee will have with Celian's Daughters, your Sisters and Allyes. This was no sooner moved, but resolved. Calliante having disposed them to this attempt, discovered presently the design to the Gentlemen, to the end they should oppose the carrying away of Serife, and that their opposition might make another Scene of Merriment, which will have an Exit contrary to what hee imagined. The Swains of necessity must communicate this Plot to the Shepherdesses, in regard they were to bee instrumentall to the effecting of it. But hee that tell's a Secret to three Women must not look to have it long kept Secret. They pre∣sently revealed it to their Father, that hee might not be surprised with that action. But Hee, who loved the present better than the future, and Effects better than Promises, did not approve of that enterprise, which besides it's injustice, and beeing subject to many disasters, rob∣bed him of his dear Guests, who yeilded him more profit in a week,
than hee could get by his tillage in a Year; So that, partly out of Prudence, partly for his private interest, hee absolutely refused his consent, commanding Merinda to advertise Serife, that shee might stand upon her Guard; this Office Merinda would have performed without his injunction; For, her Heart was so oppressed with that Secret, that shee had resolved to disburden it by her Tongue, whatsoever befell. At this newes Serife counterfeited such amazement, that shee seem∣ed, for a while, as if Fear had been carrying her Soul out of her Body; at length having somewhat recollected her Spirits, with a trembling voyce shee said; To what a degree of Misery doth Fortune reduce mee, since shee persecute's mee so cruelly, that in the same Port where Hope promised me Security, Shee make's mee suffer Shipwrack? What? must I then follow those I ought to shun, and fly from those who promised mee all assistance? Those disguised Gentlemen, my Husband's Friends, will they be my Protectors against him that made mee such solemn protestations to preserve me from all injuries? Ah Calliante, you will sell at a dear rate the promise you gave mee of your succour, since without having the patience to stay till the Fruit be Ripe, you will gather it by breaking the branches, or rather transplanting the Body of the Tree out of the Ground of it's Duty. Have you forgot, Soul blinded with Passion, that I consented to the admittance of your Service and Affection, onely in case Iphis (whose yet I am) repudiated me to marry your Sister, and so to cure at once the Honour of that abused Virgin, the Disloyalty of my inconstant Husband, your Love and my own Jealousie? Believe it Calliante, if I finde any Asistance, this Precipitation shall cost you dear; and if all humane succours fail mee, I will borrow from the courage of my own Heart, and the vigour of my Arm the last remedy of all miseries, which is Death; and sheath∣ing a Dagger in my Bosome, I will reduce all your Designs into Smoak. Madam, answered Merinda, by Heaven's favour, you shall not be put to any such extremity: For, if my Father expresly forbid's my Brothers and their Companions to act any thing against your Person, the contriver of this Plot will reap nothing but the Shame of having at∣tempted it, and you shall be free from the Displeasure his unadvisedness would have caused to your Thoughts. Serife knowing that it was the powder of injection, which made the Rusticks favour that Project, to trie their Dispositions, and tempt them by feeling their Pulses on both sides, having put some small Chains of Gold into the Shepherdesses
Hands, to make them Bracelets; and shewing them severall rich jewells, shee promised them, that those should bee the meanest Recompences of their fidelity, if by their means that storme blew over her Head; giving them besides, some pieces of Gold to hinder Celian to keep his Sons in order, and some to bee distributed among them; Hereupon they became like that corrupt Judge, who caused a Coach (which a Client had given him to pronounce sentence in his favour) to bee drawn by Horses of a greater value, which the adverse Party had pre∣sented him. Whilest this was in agitation on one side, Pomeran (who was, as wee have said, jealous of the Palatin's Honour, and who did not great∣ly relish his Passion for Almeria) entertained in his thoughts the plea∣santest imagination that could bee devised: Hee fancied that Serife had an intent to marry Calliante under that disguise, and it beeing done and past all remedy, that (hee resuming the habit of Palatine) would laugh at their simplicity, as well as the Country-People's. Therefore out of a desire to oblige Mieslas and Modestina, and (as hee thought) I phigenes himself (as those do a courtesie to poor Creatures that are frantick, who take the pains to binde them, although they raile and exclaim all the while they are tying) Hee thought it very requisite, that Hee with his two companions and Boleslaüs, should oppose in good Earnest that Imaginary Rape; and to the end they might the more securely effect their intention, it was not held improper to require the Justice of the Place's succour. The Evening beeing come, every one stood upon his Guard; Serife not onely stirred not abroad, but refused the entrance of her Chamber to Calliante; Celian watched like the Hesperian Dragon over his Trea∣sure; His Daughters were set Sentinells, to call for help upon the least allarm; the Swains beeing overcome by the Commands of Celian, and presents which Serife sent them, pretended difficulties, and stood still with their Arms across; and the Gentlemen were resolved to preserve Serife; Hereupon Calliante feining to bee in an excessive Rage, fell to vaporing with the Country-men, thundred out divers threats against their baseness, called them treacherous Villains for failing him in the onely time hee had need of their help, and vomited all the bitterest tearms that Despair doth use to suggest in like occurrences. But the houre of Rest summoning them to retire, they all continued for a while in a sad silence, every one allowing the more liberty to his Thoughts, the less hee gave his Tongue; untill Pomeran, esteeming it
necessary, to speak in that extremity, thus began; Almeria, it is now time to quit that Mask, we are not Men to be cheated as you imagine, con∣tent your self with having ravished the Heart of Iphis by the Charms, which his Passion make's him finde in that little Beauty, which appeareth in your Face, and seek not to rob his legitimate Spouse of his Body; He cannot be yours untill his first bonds be dissolved, which he hath so publick∣ly and solemnly sworn never to violate; greater Ladies, than you can ever hope to be, pretend to his alliance, if that first Marriage could be declared void. Do not think to inchant us, or surprise the Palatine by your artifi∣ciall Stratagems; For, we are resolved with the perill of incurring his dis-favour, and losing our own Lives, couragiously to hinder your Design of making your self his Wife; be satisfied with the part you have in his Af∣fections, without aspiring farther, unless you have a minde to see a strange disorder, and humane Justice as well as the Divine opposed against your Practises. Calliante concluded by this Discourse, pronounced with a grave and settled Countenance, that Pomeran was seriously and really de∣ceived. Therefore to intangle him the faster in his Net, hee replied: My Honour is so deeply ingaged in this business, that I must die or bring it to perfection, nothing but Marriage can make mee Repara∣ration; Iphis hath plighted mee his Faith, beeing in full capacity of Ʋnderstanding & Self-disposall, whereas that which you pretend was forced, and in an Age so tender, that he knew not what hee promised; therefore I maintain that hee is more Mine than Modestina's, and Iphis is able to justifie his ingagement to Mee in despight of all your indeavours and contradictions. These expressions were like Oyle cast upon the Fire of that Indigna∣tion, which was kindled in the Genlemen's Hearts. So they grew to high Words, then to Threats, afterwards to Exclamations; Iphis was named aloud, Almeria likewise. Hereupon the Country-men that were in the next room, sending their looks through the crannies, and lean∣ing their Ears to the Wall, suspected there was some deceipt in the dis∣guisement of those unknown persons; and Antalcas reflecting upon Serife's resemblance of Iphis, and besides hearing Calliante called by the Name of Almeria, hee presently concluded that Calliante was ALMERIA and Serife IPHIS, which filled those Rustick's Heads with such strange imaginations, that no sleep could seize upon them for that Night. Scarce had the bashfull Harbinger of the Day saluted the edge of
the Horizon, when Pomeran (who had not closed his Eyes) leaving his Companions as Guards upon Calliante, went to the Justice of the place to require succour for the preventing of a violence intended a∣gainst a Lady of quality. The Officers of Justice in villages are a pret∣ty sort of People; For, Ignorance having predominance there, the Dominicall Letter is less known than the Golden Number, so that their Rule is Mony, and the Levell of their Justice is this Maxime of Law-Makers, I give thee 'cause thou givest mee, and Do thou for mee, and I'le do for thee. The Springs which make this Engine move are of quick-Silver, The first thing they ask is, who is Plaintif? the next, who must pay us? and before hand, like true Executioners of Justice. Those petty Tribunalls are the ruine of the People; and whereas true Justice is to give every Man his own, These have the trick to rob every one of what hee hath: For, those thirsty Leaches suck indifferently the good blood and the bad. Pomeran having spared nothing that might induce these to assist him in that Action (which hee thought very important) they went, as the Grecian Orator said, to a Golden harvest. First they seized upon Calliante and the Rusticks, charging Celian with Serife, seeming in this execution as inflexible as Rhadamanthus: But it is sufficiently known that in the Country, one hand rubb's the other as well as in Citties, that partly by interest, partly by Favour, and for respects of Parentage, the Eyes of Justice are usually blinded, as the brightness of the Sun is dimmed by the interposition of Mists and Clowds. In what part so∣ever it bee, a Stranger is alwayes more to blame than an inhabitant of the place. The Country men onely saluted the in-side of the Prison, and were presently released upon Baile, but Calliante found that place according to the description of the pious Trojan's descent into Aver∣nus, where the entrance was easie, but the coming out very difficult. Such are the Scales of humane judgements, while one is up the other is down, never even. The Rusticks incensed with this affront, and sufficiently instructed by what they had heard the Night before, of the Cheat which had been put upon them, resolved to bee revenged, and to that end presented a Petition to their Justice, desiring that those Gentlemen and the Lady also might bee imprisoned, urging that they were persons disguised, and who under habits different from those of their condition, were come thither to plot and ingage them in some dangerous Designe; Moreover, that they had assumed habits contrary to their Sexes against
the Lawes of the Land and Modesty, and that upon farther search it would appear, that Calliante was a Woman and Serife a Man; which, they said, they would maintain with the hazard of losing their Lives and Goods. This put their wise Judges to a Nor-plus, yet they were not much troubled at it; For, seeing these contradictions they promised themselves good Fishing in that troubled Water, and as the Raven in the Fable, seeing a Dog and a Wolf fighting, said, that whosoever had the Victory, hee should bee sure of a prey; So, by this Debate they hoped to fill their Purses, beeing resolved to take with both Hands. Herupon Order was given for the securing of their persons; The Commons of the Village assembled in such multitudes, that what could three or foure Gentlemen do in such an hubbub, unless by resisting, make themselves bee Butchered by ignoble Hands? Besides, Serife (who willingly submitted herself) making them signs to do the like; flattering herself that only by pronouncing the name of IPHIGENES, shee should dissipate all that rabble, as a great Eagle Scatter's a flight of Pigeons when shee stoops among them. To bee short, they were all Apprehended and Committed, but to severall rooms, which troubled Serife not a little (who thought shee should have been put with Calliante) and cast the rest of the Gentle∣men into strange perplexities; And Boleslaüs, (though hee spake not all hee thought) could not refrain from saying as hee passed by Serife: Madam, you see into what troubles your Passion hath brought us, now it concern't you to take your measure so as to draw us out of this Dungeon by your power, whereinto wee are cast for your Pleasure. Serife knew not well construe these words of Boleslaüs; For, respecting his wisdom as shee ought, having alwayes found her success as evill when shee rejected his Counsells, as advantageous when shee followed them, and gathering by his looks and tone of voyce, that hee spake seriously, her thoughts were in no small perplexity by this allarm, which seem'd a presage of the extremity shee should suffer by that imprisonment. But the short time shee had to reflect upon his advertisement, and the violence of her desire to bee with Calliante, caused the ballance of her judgement to incline to the worst side, suffering herself to be immured in that labyrinth, whence those Monsters (the corrupt formalities which so disfigure the fair Face of Justice) opposed her inlargement more than shee imagined. Their examinations were taken severally, which had as little con∣formity
to each other, as the sable Mantle of Night to the azure robe of Heaven in a clear Day. Calliante said hee was a Man, and beeing asked if it was not hee, who not long before, beeing in a Woman's habit, went under the Name of Almeria, he answered, Yes: This raised a generall laughter, as if hee had been an Hermaphrodite. Serife denyed that Shee was Iphis, protesting that shee was a Woman; and her deposition was the less believed, because true. Pisides fearing to displease Iphis, said, that hee knew not what that Lady was, but hee was Iphis humble servant, and that Iphis was a Man of such quality, that they should finde hee had power to Judge his Judges, and punish that Country with Fire and Sword, if they did Him the least in∣jury; Beeing demanded what the Quality of that Iphis was, hee an∣swered, that hee had Age and Wisdom enough to satisfie them himself: Beeing urged to declare his own Condition, hee told them, hee was a Gentleman of the retinue of that same Iphis: Beeing asked why hee had so disguised himself, to pass my time (answered hee) and please him that commanded mee. Argal, in stead of answering to their interrogatories, laughed at his Examiners; to their threatnings hee returned Bravadoes (which had suited better with a Man in Liberty, than a Prisoner) and without con∣sideration of his Captivity, speaking like a Resolute Captain, at the head of a gallant Party of Horse, that had command to cut those Rogues in pieces, hee had nothing but Fire, Sword, Slaughter and Re∣venge in his Discourse. Pomeran, more serious and temperate, answered with much more Modesty and Reservedness, and judging that a brave Spirit ought to say nothing but the truth, hee told them really his Opinion, and what hee esteemed ought to bee said for the Honour of Serife, in these words; Gentlemen, it is not good handling a burning Coal, nor an Iron red hot without Tongs, you have Him in your Hands, in whose you are, and who hath the power to Exercise an horrible Revenge upon you, if you do him the least Displeasure. I advertise you that this Lady whom you have imprisoned, and who hath given herself the Name of Serife, is your Palatine IPHIGENES, whom the love of Almeria hath thus transformed; and Almeria is no other than Calliante, who hath made those People (that have caused us to be put here) believe hee was her Brother, but I can assure you hee is the same Almeria, who is likewise a Gentleman of quality. I confess this Changing of cloathes is against the Lawes; but these Lawes are but like Spider's Webs, which catch onely the
smaller Flies, Great persons (whose recreations are Extraordinary) are exempted from their Rigor: For mine own particular I am a Gentleman of the Palatine's train, who beeing come with Him into these Woods to take my pleasure in Hunting, to comply with his humour, did fit my self with this Peasant's habit, not thinking fit to leave him whilest hee amused him∣self in the conversation of this Creature whom hee Love's. It concern's you to make your benefit of my Deposition, which will serve you as an Advertisement, if you make the right use of it; if not, it will prove the presage of a grand Destruction, that will befall this Place, in case you should be so unadvised as to attempt any thing that may incense him, who is able to ruine You utterly. Those that have gotten the repute of Liars, are so unhappy as not to be believed when they speak Truth; Pomeran seeming to speak more wisely than the rest, was held to bee the greatest Fool, and his Predicti∣ons were as little regarded, as those of Cassandra by the Inhabitants of Troy. Boleslaüs beeing last of all to Answer, desired to speak in private with him that was to examine him, and (knowing that nothing was impossible nor impenetrable by the Power of God) dazled his Eyes with some pieces in hand, and the promise of a greater summe in case hee qualified that business, and restored to liberty so many Persons of Honour, who were not accused for any crime, and at the worst could be convinced onely of a piece of Youthfull folly. The Judge, who went in as fierce as a Lyon, came out again after this Conference as gentle as a Lamb, having promised Boleslaüs to let them all out by the golden Gate; but for the more clear Escape it would bee requisite that they should make themselves a Bridge of Silver. This done, for Form's sake hee examined Him again and the rest in the Presence of their Accusers and Adversaries, whose Hearts were ready to flie out of their Mouths for joy, to see themselves triumphant over those that would have affronted them. All their answers were so ambiguous, and their ambiguity so different, that it was no less dif∣ficulty to expound them than those ancient Oracles, which had severall Faces and divers Senses. In summe, there was nothing said, whereon they could build any conjecture. At length, these Gentlemen asked leave to write to Serife, that by her authority shee might deliver them out of trouble: This was granted, upon condition that the Judge first saw their Letters, who found
sport enough in the diversity of their styles. For one called her Ma∣dam, another Sir, the third My Lord, which made the doubt grea∣ter; and so puzled those thick-scull'd fellowes, that they could not devise what to censure. Those Officers of Justice, like Surgeons and Physitians (whose profit is by tedious sicknesses and wounds that are a long time healing) thought by protracting this business to make themselves all rich. But whilest our Prisoners are learning Patience in it's true school, let us see what is acted more seriously upon the Theater of the World; and how these passages were but a shadow, and a weak representation of that which passed, contrary to Iphigenes knowledge, in places, where hee had interest, and reason to preserve more tenderly his Reputation. It is a frequent observation of Historiographers, that before Wars (which are God's Scourges) begin in any Country, there are seen cer∣tain signs which serve for presages of Civill Dissentions, as terrible Me∣teors, Apparitions, and Armies seeming to joyn Battle in the Air. These Rurall recreations which wee have here represented, were in like man∣ner the fore-runners of the troubles, and divers For tunes which atten∣ded Iphigenes, as will appear in the sequele of this Narration. The Actions of great Persons, and of those who are placed like Luminaries in the Orbes of eminent Charges, can bee no more kept hid∣den than the Light; which (in how close a place soe're it bee) discover's it self by sending it's Rayes, and Splendor through some little hole or cranny. The Palatine's disguisement could not bee long disguised at Plocens; What hee thought to do in private, was said openly; what hee practised in the secret retreats of the Forest, was the common table∣talk in the City, either by the indiscretion of his own Hunts-men, or the Relation of some of Celian's Neighbours. In summe, hee could not keek his Fire so close but that it was discovered by it's smoak. An ig∣nominious report is like a spot of Oyl, which increaseth as incessantly as insensibly. The Court was already filled with these Rurall Affections of Iphigenes, and (as the least failings of Favorites are sifted and aggra∣vated by their enviers) Heaven know's with what Glosses they adorned this simple Text. Every one censured him according to their humours; Some pittied, others fed their Envy with his folly: Onely the King could not believe so extreme an over-sight of him, whom hee had alwayes found so extraordinary discreet beyond what could bee ex∣pected from his years. His Calumniators without considering that this Report might bee false, published it for an evident truth with all the amplifi∣cations
their Malice could suggest. But among so many Objects that were taken with the presence of Iphigenes, none beeing inamored comparably to the Princess Respicia, you may imgaine with what plea∣sure her Ears received this news, what a multitude of confused thoughts immediately assembled in her braine. Shee grew exceeding∣ly impatient concerning her expeditions from Rome, (which, accord∣ing to the Form and Matter of their Seal, go but with Leaden Feet;) this occurrence redoubled her longing, and set a spur in her Heart, which pricked her to know a truth no less than shee feared to finde it. Shee laboured all shee could at Court to smother this report; but what could her Tongue do alone against so many Mouths opened to Detraction? As for Mieslas, the interest hee had in his Son's reputati∣on cast him into a rage not easily to bee expressed, hearing in what manner it was wounded; And hee resolved to applie such remedies as his Prudence should inform him to be most convenient. For, to un∣dertake as many quarrells as there were scandalls, would have been a labour more difficult than that of Hercules against the Hydra. But as Mischiefs seldome come alone, another trouble fell upon the neck of this, which put him into no less distemper than the former. If the news of this Pastorall Love of Iphigenes disturbed the Minde of the Princess Respicia, assoon as nimble Fame had dispersed it in Podolia, and conveyed it to Modestina's Ears, shee was possessed with so inraged a Jealousie, that without the Hope shee had of escaping by some industry out of Prison, to go seek her Husband, and tear him out of those Arms unworthy to imbrace him, Shee had doubtless by some desperate wound forthwith set a period to both Life and Pain. Shee had no sooner framed the Design of going to him, at what rate and in what manner soever it was, but shee began to think of effect∣ing it by corrupting some of her Keepers. It was in vain, shee knew, to offer to tempt her Governess Perpetua (shee beeing too rigorous an observer of Mieslas his Tyrannicall commands:) Therefore shee cast her Eyes upon a young Youth (Son to some Officer of the Castle) who beeing about her growth, and having yet not the least sign of any Beard in his Face, might bee taken for a Woman, if his habit had been suitable. After shee had gained this young Keeper, by her Presents and Pro∣mises that the Palatine, her Husband should advance his Fortunes, Shee beeing covered with a Suite of His, hee found the means by favour of the dusky Evening to convey her safely out of the Castle, and having
provided, a quarter of a League off, a good Horse for her, and another for himself, hee brought her at length to Plocens, by the crossest and least-beaten wayes hee could pick out. If the excess of her Affection, had not been accompained with an extream Justice, I should bee loth to excuse her Action, or make her appear in such manner as might give Birth to any scandalous censure. But who can with reason blame a Wife that followe's her Husband, to take him out of the Arms of an Adulteress? unless hee will likewise accuse Marriage it self, whose Law is such, that the Husband hath not the power of his Body, but the Wife; as reciprocally the Person of the Wife is not her's, but her Hus∣band's, on whom shee absolutely depend's. Beeing arrived at Plocens, shee fitted herself with handsomer and richer Cloathes, than those which shee brought out of her House of bondage: And, lest Menochius (so was her Conductor named) should be known by any of Iphigenes's followers, that might have seen him in Podolia, shee bought him a Woman's habit, and charged him to stay in the Inn, whilest shee went like the Man about the City, to inquire what news was there of her Iphigenes; which shee found but too conform∣able to the report shee had heard in her Prison. But shee, having much resemblance of her Brother Liante's favour, was presently taken for him by some of Iphigenes followers, who took particular notice of her Lodging, thinking to oblige their Master at his return, by telling him that his Brother-in-law was there. The poor Lady was much in pain to know in what Forest her Husband was with his Shepherdess, yet shee durst not bee too inquisitive, for fear of discovering herself; Besides, that business was so closely carried, that although this Endymion was known to bee in the Forest with his Diana, yet very few could give in∣structions where to finde him; So that to ingage herself in the Laby∣rinth of those intricate Woods, (wherewith that Province was abun∣dantly covered) had been the way to lose herself rather than finde what shee sought. Whilest shee was in this perplexity, Mieslas (having received In∣formations out of Podolia of her escape) arrived at Plocens, imagining that shee would have posted thither to her Husband, as a Straw flie's to Amber. This tydings troubled Respicia no less than Mieslas; For, shee apprehended, like Death, the consummation of that Marriage, which was the Death of all her Hopes. The Amoretta's of Iphigenes with that Shepherdess gave no small allarm to her Heart, yet esteeming them onely a liberty of Youth, and rather to divert his Melancholly than out
of any desire to cast himself away upon a creature so much below his Quality, the tumults of her Mind were the sooner pacified; But upon notice of Modestina's flight, Passion pleading her interest, shee depart∣ed from the Court, within short time after Mieslas; and notwithstand∣ing all the speed hee could make, shee arrived in a manner assoon as he at Plocens. Mieslas was no sooner alighted at his Son's Palace, but inquiring for him hee learn't that hee had been neer a Moneth lost in the Forest; but no body could tell him any other particulars, than that having found a Shepherdess which pleased his Fancy, hee had dismissed all his train, re∣serving onely two or three of his familiarest Friends to bear him com∣pany in his Courtship. To finde out where hee was thus fettered with the Chains of his own Will, was a difficult matter; For, hee had shift∣ed shape and places so often, that it had been as hard to follow his steps, as the strain of a Stag that doubles and uses all his wiles to deceive the pursuing Hounds. But in stead of seeking him, whom hee had no hope to finde, hee was informed of one, whom hee did not seek. For, one of Iphigenes domesticks (thinking nothing) said to him, My Lord, though the Palatine bee not here, his Brother-in-law is in this City, expecting (I believe) my Lord's return. What? Liante? (replied Mieslas amazed) where is hee? The simple fellow told him his Lodging, and offer'd to goe call him to him, if hee pleased to command him: But lest hee should not obey, take two or three of my servants with you, (said Mieslas) that if hee be unwilling you may bring him perforce. You may imagine with what astonishment was poor Modestina seized, see∣ing come into her Chamber (when shee least suspected them) four men armed with Sword and Pistoll, which comanded her to goe before the Lord Mieslas Palatine of Podolia. Who, I? (said shee) what's his will with mee? My Lord Liante, replied the chief of them, understand∣ing at his arrivall, that you expected here his Son's return, hee judged it more fit for you to stay in his House (which, you know, is at your command) than to lodge in an Inn, and I am confident that Iphigenes at his coming will acknowledge it. Gentlemen, answered the imaginary Liante, if that bee all, I had rather enjoy my Liberty in an Inn, than bee a Prisoner in his House, as hee hath kept mee already too long; I pray thank him for his courteous proffer, and tell him, that I left not his House with an intent to return any more with my good will; Hee hath put us so in his House, that hee hath drawn our House into his, and not content to deprive us of our E∣states, hee will yet triumph over our Liberty, which is the greatest happi∣ness
on Earth. Sir (said hee, to whom Mieslas had given the command) do not take it so, wee have order to carry you to him alive or dead, be you willing or unwilling, and you had better go quietly with us than oblige us to bind you, and drag you along the streets, for wee are resolved to execute faithfully what hee hath injoyned us. Is it thus, answered the disguised Liante, that you treat persons of my Quality? Lett's goe then, since I must follow the Destinies, and submit to the Law of Necessity; I hope his Ma∣jesty beeing informed of this Violence will do mee Justice, and deliver mee speedily out of the Hands of his Tyranny. So they went to the Palace, where Mieslas had given order to imprison Liante in a close Chamber, with a strong Guard, untill hee should bee further resolved what to do with him. Hee would not suffer him to come into his pre∣sence, lest his tender Age, and supplications should kindle any spark of pitty in his inhumane brest. Next Morning, lest the intreaties or authority of Iphigenes in his own Palatinate, should restore him to Liberty, his Cruelty suggested to his Fancy the most barbarous resolution that e're was harboured in the heart of Man, to bee quit of that innocent Creature (whose Gardian hee was, and whom hee ought to have cherished as the apple of his Eye.) But to what will that execrable hunger of Riches, and the stings of Ambition not transport men's thoughts? In Histories wee finde some examples of Fathers and Mothers, who renouncing all interest of Na∣ture, have either murthered or made blinde their own children for the Jealousie of ruling. What doth this savage Sarmatian to extinguish absolutely in the race of his Predecessor in the Palatinate of Podoha, the hope of Progeny, and by that means make all the inheritance sure to his own Family? Hee gave order to deliver the Prisoner into the hands of certain bloudy Villains (fully disposed to the execution of his Bar∣barisms) commanding them to carry him back to his Prison in Podolia, and make him an Eunuch by the way, or kill him in case hee would not suffer that affront, which is the most sensible that any mortall could receive. These rugged Executioners led away the supposed Liante, threat∣ning him with Death, to make him condescend to suffer that indignity by the desire of Life: But before his departure they bade him examine his Conscience, and prepare himself for a journy, longer than hee ima∣gined, not onely from Plocens into Podolia, but out of this World into the next. Some of Iphigenes followers having intelligence of this Tyranny,
and abhorring it, were inraged they could not prevent it, and hee that had been the imprudent Instrument of the poor Gentleman's beeing ap∣prehended, was ready to bee his own Executioner, fearing the just in∣dignation of his Master, when hee should come to the knowledge of so unjust and horrid a Fact. Among the rest, Arcade having notice thereof (thinking to oblige his Master by advertising him, and de∣siring to save the miserable Liante's Life) presently took Horse, and rode with all possible speed unto that part of the Forest, where few Dayes before hee had met Iphigenes, and served him under the name of Serife, where not finding him, after much inquiry hee learn't the way to Celian's Village. The report of those Stranger's imprisonment beeing dispersed all over that part of the Country, at his arrivall in the Village, hee asked to speak with the Lord Palatine, about some business of great import∣ance. At the first the People laughed at him, thinking that his coming had been some new Imposture, and illusion to dazle the Eyes of their Judges, and hinder them from doing Justice. At length hee spake so much Reason, that they took his Folly for Discretion; and to act with more assurance, they apprehended him and put him into another room of the Prison, to hear more at leasure his depositions. Wherein hee declared, that hee demanded a Nobleman, habited like a Gentlewoman, who made herself bee called Serife for private reasons which hee knew not; That this Nobleman was his Master, and that this Master was Palatine of Plocens, named Iphigenes: That there was hapned since his absence an oc∣currence which required his presence, So necessarily, that it concerned no less than the Life of one of those persons, whom hee esteemed the dearest in the World. This relation waken'd the Judge's attention; For, Arcade spake so seriously, that they could not think hee came to deceive them. Yet before they told him that Serife was in Prison, they led him to Bole∣slaüs Chamber, who asked him at the first sight, What? Arcade is my Lord out of Prison? doth hee take pleasure to make us lie languishing here? For my part I comprehend not his meaning, but I finde no Felicity in such Pastimes, I prethee bid him leave off these Fopperies speedily, at least if hee will oblige mee. How (answered Arcade) should I tell him that? I know not where hee is; these People have made mee a Prisoner, I know not whether it bee by his Order or by Inchantment, but I am sure there is a business in hand at Plocens (for which I am come hither) that require's none of these delayes,
unless hee will suffer his Brother-in Law to lose his Life. What? replied Boleslaüs much troubled, have they sent Calliante to Plocens? what talk you of Calliante? (said Arcade) I know no such Man, but I say Liante my Master's Wive's Brother. That is the same I mean, answered Boleslaus, and whom they have put in Prison here with us. I know not, said Arcade, wherefore you are Prisoners, unless it bee to please the Pa∣latine's Fancy, but I cannot conceive what pleasure there is in keeping you penn'd up thus: Is it not that hee may have more liberty to dally in the Woods with his Diana? Malediction light upon her, shee is cause that my Master is dishonoured, and his reputation lost at Court, and all over Polo∣nia. There's no other discourse at Plocens, but of his Loves; and no body knowing the certainty, Every one speak's according to his own Fancy. Hee is so far (said Boleslaus) from giving any such command, that I tell thee, both Hee and Liante, with Pomeran, Pisides, Argal and my self are all Prisoners here in severall Chambers; whether the Palatine take pleasure in it, or commanded it so, I cannot say, But wee have been now five or six Dayes in this trouble, neither can wee yet tell what these People intend to do with us. And I know less, Answered Arcade, how they mean to deal with mee, whom they have likewise apprehended for no other crime, that I know, than for demanding to speak with my Master. But in earnest, Boleslaus, are you a Prisoner, or is this still to continue the stratagem you know of, and for which I was sent away, because I could not dissemble and act my part so gravely as I should? I protest seriously, said Boleslaus, there is no jeast in what I tell thee, and I have almost lost my Reason and Temper in these fopperies. The Palatine hath brought us into these broils, but I do not see how hee will bee able to enlarge us again sodainly, hee beeing in restraint as well as wee. How? a Prisoner, said Arcade, did the King command him to bee commit∣ted? No, not the King said Boleslaus, but these Peasants, under the name of Serife, and with him (I tell thee) they have imprisoned all us that attended Him. What? answered Arcade, is hee then yet in the Ladie's habit hee had when I left him, and his Lady (by consequence) in Man's, and each in a seve∣rall Prison? But would hee bee committed to Prison, without disclosing his Quality? Nay more, said Boleslaus, now that hee is in Prison hee denieth himself to be what hee is, and saye's hee is what hee is not. This is the strangest fancy, answered Arcade, that ever I heard of, and which will produce new Discourses, that will not redound to his Honour.
However I must speak with him, to tell him that hee must speedily take some order to succour his Brother-in-law, whom Mieslas (who is now at Plo∣cens) hath delivered into the hands of certain fellowes, that will take away his Life or (at least) his Honour, if they bee not prevented by some sodain remedy. Hitherto, said Boleslaus, thou hast spoken like a discreet Man, but now I perceive thou ravest; For, I know where Liante is and am sure that hee cannot bee in Mieslas hands. Their reasoning might have continued long enough, e're they could have penetrated each other's meaning, Boleslaüs not daring to speak all hee knew, for fear of displeasing Iphigenes, and never beeing able to imagine the adventures of Modestina. The Judges and Commons of the Village, who heard all this Dialogue, knew not what else to think, than that of all the Fools that they had seen in their Lives, they never saw any so sens-less. After this they led him to Pomeran, Pisides and Argal, whose discourse was yet more ex∣travagant; For, they knowing not Liante, spake altogether of an Al∣meria and a Calliante, names which Arcade never had heard: Insomuch that the Judges could pick nothing out of their various Speeches, than cause of laughter. But when hee was brought into Calliante's Presence, hee began to bless himself, his Heart panting as if hee had seen a Ghost. For, hee could not perswade himself that without Negromancy hee could ap∣pear before him there, having seen him (as hee thought) at Plocens. At length, My Lord Liante, said hee, is it you whom I see, or hath some Spirit borrowed your shape? certainly you cannot bee in two places at once, and I am as sure that I saw you at Plocens within these two dayes, as that your likeness now appear's before my Eyes; Either that which I saw at Plocens must bee an illusion, or this which here troubleth my sight. Yet me-think's it is your voyce, which I hear, said hee (Liante having answer∣ed him) But in regard Magicians by their Diabolicall Art, can counter∣feit that as well as Faces, give mee leave to touch you, that I may know it is your Body. Which Liante having permitted; This is Flesh and Bones, said hee, this is no Spirit certainly; I will rather believe that the other which I did onely see, and that at some distance too, was but a Vision, where∣by the more than barbarous cruelty of Mieslas will bee deceived, and I am glad for your sake, that you are out of his power; for, if you were in the place of that Ghost of your's, which hee hath put into the hands of some no less inhumane than himself, I should esteem you the most unfortunate Gentleman upon Earth.
These words having bred in Liante's Spirit a curiosity to know what cruelty Mieslas intended to his Person: Arcade told him what had passed at Plocens, and that it was the main cause of his coming into that Desart, to acquaint Iphigenes with that design of Mieslas. You may imagine what an allarme this made in Liante's Heart; with what impatience hee was presently seized to see himself at Liberty, that hee might flie before that storm, and avoid the clutches of that rigorous Sarmatian. Fear, which made him tremble at every shadow, bred a suspition in his thoughts, that all this Pastorall Comedy had been invent∣ed by Iphigenes, onely to impe the wings of Time, and amuse him untill Mieslas had apprehended him, and sent him back to his prison; there to force him to suffer the affront whereof Arcade had given him no∣tice. These imaginations put him beyond all temper; and, ready to run into despair, hee fulminated terrible threats against those Clowns, if they released him not speedily. These apprehensions so violent, and sovisible, gave birth to diverse sinister Opinions in the Judges and Country-men there present, making them suspect him for some notorious Criminall, or some dangerous Person; in regard Arcade talked of murthering or reducing him to an incapacity of aspiring to Marriage: yet the strong impression they had Calliante was Almeria, and really a Woman, made them revoke all this story into doubt, as a fiction invented to delude their Senses. In∣somuch that in stead of giving Liante any hope of a sodain inlarge∣ment, they made him closer Prisoner, having received no other conso∣lation by Arcade's visit, than the assurance of Mieslas beeing at Plo∣cens, and of the horrible desire hee had to commit in his person the Murther of his Posterity. Thence Arcade was conducted to Serife's Lodging, who after a long Paradoxicall Conference (beeing certainly informed of her Father's ar∣rivall in that Palatinate, by whom shee had no will to bee seen in that equipage, and a Prisoner to those base People, whom (according to the authority of Palatines in Polonia) with the least word shee could have sent to the Gallowes) raising the tone of her voyce in a more grave and Majestick manner, than became the quality of a Prisoner, shee thus spake to her Judges; Gentlemen, dispatch quickly your formalities, and do mee Justice, I begin to bee weary of this Prison: Whether I am Man or Woman, is nothing materiall to any of you. Besides, I believe you can lay no Crime to my Charge, nor Calliante's, who for pastime onely, not with any ill intent, conspired with those Swains (whom you have set at
liberty) to carry mee away, whereof I was advertised and contented, what displeasure soever I expressed. Do not make mee intreat you twice to dis∣charge mee; For, if you compell mee to discover who I am, there is not hee among you, but will tremble at my very name, beeing able to render you of Judges Criminals, of Apprehenders Prisoners, and send you presently, if I please, from the Gaole to Execution. These words shee pronounced with so couragious and Masculine an accent, that notwithstanding her delicate Complexion and Feminine dress, they began to perswade their fancies that shee was more than a Woman. But if Hercules could not resist two, what should shee have done against so many? It is the naturall disposition of Clowns, and such Mechanick Souls, as compose the Lees of the People, to bee in∣sulting, and as inflexible as Lions or Tigres, when they have the power in their own hands; as they are like meer Cowes and Sheep, when they are in subjection. They scoffed at Serife's words, and, according to the custome of such Brutes, they imparted their scorn to the Eccho's of that solitude by their lowd shouting. After which, one more impudent than the rest, replied, Master or Mistress, (What shall I call you?) What or whosoever you bee, wee shall teach you to speak otherwise, and not to affront People in this manner. You must not think to rule us, but to bee ordered by us, who have power to keep you here untill your Process bee ended, or discharge you at our pleasure; wee will teach you to obey, not command, and if need bee, wee want nei∣ther Bolts nor Manacles for your Feet and Hands, nor yet Gags for your Mouth, to the end you may know another time how to respect Officers of Justice. If there bee any Magicall operations in all this, the illusions will cease by the authority of the Judges, and wee shall so conjure those Spirits, that in spight of their resistance wee shall bring the truth to light, and make it appear to your confusion. These words having transported Serife into a more violent fury than ever Anger had kindled in her Brest, shee was ready to declare her true Name and Quality; and Arcade likewise was much tempted to tell that sawcy Clown, that hee should deerly repent that Language; (yet hee forbore, for fear of disobliging him, whom hee desired to serve, and whose indignation hee dreaded no less than Thunder;) But without further delay they made him quit the room, and having ne're the more cleered their doubts by this confronting of the parties, they left Serife to entertain her cholerick thoughts, and re-inclosed Arcade betwixt foure walls, threatning to torture him if hee told them not the naked Truth.
The like Message was sent to the other Prisoners, and by the Shep∣herdesse's means came to Serife's Ears, which increased her Rage to a resolution of consuming all that Country with Fire and Sword. But there was no remedy, shee must indure the bitterness of that Pill, not having then the Power to declare her Grievances to any but the Walls of her Prison, as deaf, as her brutall Judges were inex∣orable. Whilest the rest of the Prisoners, allarmed with the barbarous inten∣tions of the Rusticks, consume their Spirits in impatient sumings, threatning, and meditating most remarkeable revenges: The subtle Bolestaüs (who knew that Needles are not thredded by violent stroaks, and that Birds beeing fallen into the Fowler's gins intangle themselves the worse, the more they struggle) having preferred a Petition to those Country-Judges, full of Modest & Submissive Tearms, besides Promises of revealing great matters to them, they went to his Chamber, where speaking in private to the same Officer, (whose hand hee had already oyled) and having disposed his Ears to give a favourable audience by replenishing the hollow of his hooked hand with Crowns; Sir (said hee) much mischief may arise by this business, if it bee discussed by rigor of Justice, in regard it concernes the Honour and Life of Persons of emi∣nent Quality, who may resent it in an high nature; and nothing can fall to your share by the way of Process, but perchance some Forfeitures and Fees, to make you bee indulgent to those that prosecute; Were it not better for you to oblige so many Persons of Honour, who are now in your Power, and gain foure times as much? The Judge (who hungred and thirsted after Justice, and who (like ano∣ther Leviathan) could have swallowed all the Golden Sand of Tagus without difficulty, and let a whole Jordan of Silver run down his throat without slacking his thirst) opened. with his Ears, his Heart to this Proposition, and Judas-like, answered, What will you give mee, and I will set you free? Whereupon they agreed upon a summe, which (though immense,) Boleslaüs promised to make him good, knowing that ere long hee should make him vomit that Dose hotter than hee swallowed it, and that the Gallowes should bee the salary of his ex∣torting Avarice: But that's not all (said the Judge) to promise, For, wee never condemn or quit any but according to what is evidently proved and delivered. I have sworn never to play upon ticket with Gentlemen, I will not open any dore unless I see the golden Key, and the Mony told out upon a Table.
Sir, answered Boleslaus, I mean it so, and Ile assure that the summe you shall receive shall bee all in good pieces and down weight: But you know I cannot coin them here, either give mee leave to go fetch them, or procure mee a trusty Messenger, who shall receive them upon a Letter, which I hope you will permit mee to write. As for going out (replied the Judge) that is a thing I cannot condescend unto; For, Prisoners are like Birds which Sing no more when out of the Cage; and Nightingales which are observed never to warble, but in the Nest, where they hatch their Eggs. But for writing I am well contented to permit; So that I see your Letter: For, I am no Man to indure any treacherous dealing. I desire no better than that you should read what I write (said Boleslaus) For, my intentions are no other than just and honest. Then, Paper beeing brought, hee traced some lines to a friend of his at Plocens, desiring him to send upon sight thereof the summe, which hee had indented to deliver that Justice-seller: And at the same time hee wrote another note to the Captain of Iphigenes Guards, thus; It is of no less concernment than the Life and Honour of our Master (who beeing fallen into the hands of Theeves, is here imprisoned by them) that you should come speedily with your troop, whither this bearer shall direct you, make him give you right Instructions, by setting a Pistoll to his Throat: But let not Mieslas know any thing of your coming, nor of this Ac∣cident. The first note hee shewed the Judge, which was according to his own desire, but hid the other in his sleeve. The Judge having perused it, would have sent it away presently; But, said Boleslaüs, without my own Seal it will bee of no effect, therefore give mee leave to seal it in re∣gard the summe, as you see, is of no small importance. The Judge, think∣ing hee spake as really as reasonably, gave it him again to close: But in seeming to seal it, hee slipt this into the place of the other in his sleeve, (beeing both of one bigness and made up alike) and having written the superscription, and sealed the later, hee delivered it to the Judge with some pieces of Gold to give the Messenger, desi∣ring him to let him goe on Hors-back, because the business required haste. After this golden conference the Judge grew more temperate, hee talked no more of torturing upon the Rack, but of releasing the Pri∣soners, telling the Rusticks that all those passages were onely tricks of Youth, and that there was nothing to bee done in this case, but to plume them like Pigeons, and then let them flie again; and that it was enough
to let their Purses blood, and make good cheer at their charge; by which means they would bee sufficiently revenged of those, that inten∣ded no other evill than to laugh at their simplicity. But hee found more repugnance in those savage Souls, than hee imagined; For, with one Voyce they all cryed out, Justice, Justice. This troubled the Judge not a little, knowing the brutality of the vulgar People of that Nation. But as hee that betraye's Justice, may as well betray the Criminals, It is no rare thing for Judges (whose Eyes have been dazled with the luster of Gold) to condemne those that cor∣rupted them, not to seem corruptible; and to hide their extortion un∣der a double wickedness. This moved that abominable Minister of Injustice to make use of a most malicious Stratagem, to content that inraged Rabble by satisfying his own avarice. Hee resolved to condemn to a privy search those persons whose doubtfull faces did not by their Chins give evident testimony of beeing Men. Boleslaüs, whom the Winter of Age had already covered with it's Snowy Livery, was ex∣empted from that harsh and shamefull sentence; neither were Pome∣ran, Pisides or Argal concerned in that Decree, the downy shadow on their youthfull Checks declaring sufficiently of what Sex they were. Serife and Calliante were the onely stumbling-blocks, whose changing of Habits multiplied the Rusticks imaginations, and disturbed their Reason; which (what er'e befell) hee thought should serve to colour his unworthy ACT, adjudging them to very considerable amercements, in case of disobedience. This Design hee communicated to the Prosecutors, who received it with a generall applause and acclamation, conceiving that they could no way have a more sweet and full revenge of their cozening them, then by doing them this affront under the Cloake of Justice. The Order was no sooner drawn, but it was notified to Serife and Calliante. Calliante, who esteemed such an indignity much less supportable than Death, threatned to tear in more pieces than the Bacchides did Pentheus, whosoever should approach him for that purpose: But they taking him to bee really a Woman, laughed at his weakness, telling him, that they had knockt down Bulls far stronger, and more fierce than hee. And the Pharisaicall Judge, to seem a modest and curteous Man, let him understand, that hee would do him the favour to give him the choice of beeing searcht by Men, if hee was a Man, or by Women, if a Woman; whereunto Calliante inraged, said, I will have neither one
nor other, let mee alone as I am, for if any Women come to mee I shall make them ashamed, and if you send any Men, I shall make them feele the strength of my Arms. As for Serife, shame and indignation so transported her, that to say which was greatest, were no easie matter. All her Intreaties, Threat∣nings, Protestations that shee was a Man and their Palatine, Son to Mieslas, Palatine of Podolia, were to their rude Ears but as chaff before the Winde; and notwithstanding her appealing, the Judge comman∣ded them to execute his Order, without which they could not be sa∣tisfied of the Truth; at length, hee offered her the same civility as hee had to Calliante; to which shee returned a like answer, desiring the Judge to cause Her to bee strangled rather than condemn Her to an abuse which Shee must resent as long as Shee had breath, and whereby Her fury would bee incited to a Vengeance, that could not terminate him by the sack∣ing, and absolute ruine of that whole County. These high menaces that Clownish multitude answered with lowd laughing, pressing her still to choose, otherwise they would proceed to the Execution of the Judge's Ordinance: At length, a Ray of Prudence inlightning her in this extremity, made her Name Celian's two Daugh∣ters with their Sister-in-law Belida, hoping to gain them by Gifts, or compell them by force to depose what shee listed. These were before appointed to search Calliante; whereunto Merinda was nothing un∣willing, Curiosity increasing her desire to know whether that Almeria (whose face was the same as Galliante's, and had raised such tumults in her mind) was Male or Female. Boleslaüs and the other Gentlemen knew nothing of these proceed∣ings; For, the Judge promised himself, that his Messenger would bee returned e're night with the summe, for which hee had indented with Boleslaüs, and his Sentence beeing executed upon Serife and Calli∣ante, hee should by that means please the Peasants as well as his own covetous humour, and seem just, though his proceedings were con∣trarie. Serife's Prison beeing the neerest to Celian's House, the Shee-Inqui∣sitors came first thither to doe their Office. It would bee needless to repeat the worthy excuses they made at their entrance, and with what Rustick eloquence they imputed their curiosity to the Justice's con∣straint, whereby they were forced to an action, which they undertook with no less unwillingness than shame. This kindled so much choller in the Heart of the generous Amazon,
that Reason could hardly disswade her Passion from inflicting upon their Bodies a punishment suiteable to the baseness of their Souls: But con∣sidering that had her Poniard executed her just revenge, the fury of those Peasants would not have been satisfied with less than murthering her, and that the loss of her Life would be seconded with the stain of her Honour (whereof shee was chiefly carefull) shee hearkened to the moderate dictates of Policy, which suggested to her thoughts this strata∣gem, which took better than shee expected. It was to rob her Neck, Ears, Hair & Fingers of all the Rings, Chains, and Jewells (wherewith they were splendidly adorned) to fill the Hands, and stop the Mouths of those three Harpyes, promising them besides a thousand Crowns a piece, before shee went out of Prison, if they would favour her in that connivence. The resolution of these Women, whom Weakness and Poverty made inclinable to corruption, staggered at those extraordinary Presents, and large Promises; But (seeming somewhat scrupulous for fear of beeing punished, if they gave in a false evidence) Serife drawing the Dagger which shee wore under her robe, and beginning to brandish it with threats, pronounced in a manlike and couragious manner, so intimi∣dated their low Spirits, that beeing inticed on the one side with the hope of gain, and seized on the other with fear, they ingaged them∣selves to do and say whatsoever shee should command, beseeching her, if they should bee discovered, to free them from the severity of the Justice. Whereunto Serife thus replied, Let not that trouble you, for the Judge himself (you may tell him) shall have his share of the Cake, I intend more for him than all that I have given and promised you. If you will have a testimony of my beeing a Man, and the same Iphis whom you have so often seen in the company of Almeria, look not upon the Effeminacy of my Face, but consider the strength of my Arm; with that shee shook them so for∣cibly, that Merinda fell to the ground, and the rest had much adoe to keep upon their Feet. By this (continued the stout Virago) you may see what I am, and accordingly you may assure the Judge of my Sex. As for Calliante, what bravadoes soever hee make's, believe mee, hee is a Wo∣man, and the same Almeria whom you have all known already; Therefore if you have any Order to search her content your selves with my Relation, otherwise in regard shee is so robust, and so used to all manly Exercises (for which I love her more than for her Beauty) I fear you will finde but a sorry welcome; Wherefore make your Report according to my Decla∣ration,
and fear not that I shall make you avouch any thing contrary to the Truth; For witness whereof see the advantages that will redound to you, besides the immortall Obligations that you will acquire upon Iphis and Almeria. The Goddess Perswasion with her golden Tongue having inthroned herself by these words in Serife's Mouth, there was not one of the three Searches, but judged this good Office as feasable as reasonable. In this Resolution they went forth, and having met the Judge, with the Swains, who expected their return, they remained some while speechless, counterfeiting as much bashfulness as if they had been see∣ing some strange business. Which gave some of the Rusticks occasion to cry out, Oh! oh! Did not wee guess right to say that Lady was a Man? Indeed Master Judge (answered Merinda) it was not so well done of you to scoff in this manner at our simplicity, and send such, as wee are, to see Men that laugh at our folly. Then Belida, who beeing a Married Wife had somewhat more confidence, laughing full mouth, said, By my Soul if that bee a Lady, my Husband may bee a Lady too; For, I am sure they are both made alike; and turning towards Lupicin, See friend, (said shee) upon what employments you send your Wife. This made an hooting suiteable to the condition of the persons be∣fore whom this Comedy was acted. That done, the Judge gave them Order forthwith to go to Calliante. Which they refused with much seeming unwillingness, and far-fetch'd excuses, untill the Judge, hold∣ing his gravity of President, iterated his Command, telling them that they must obey the Ordinances of Justice, if not, hee knew how to compell them. Whereupon replied the crafty Belida, that shee was contented to obey, so that shee and her Sisters might first confer with him in private. That request beeing thought too reasonable to bee denied, shee told him punctually what had passed betwixt them and Serife, and that there was nothing more sure than her beeing a Man, and Calliante a Woman. Then, they shewed him the presents they had received of her, besides the promise of three thousand Crowns for themselves, and twice as much for him, if hee would bee iudulgent in the Execution of that Order. This made him as gentle as an Ermine's skin, and open both his Ears to their Proposition; But to enhaunce his Justice to the highest rate, hee resolved to gather with both Hands, as if hee had been in a Treasury, in a Mine, or at an Harvest of Gold: Therefore after a
little pause, This is not enough (said hee to them) Wee have now before our Eyes the fairest opportunity of inriching our selves that can bee pre∣sented, wee must take it by the fore-lock, and beat this Iron whilest it is hot, onely, (if you can) bee prudent and secret, otherwise in stead of gaining wee shall undoe our selves. You are now going to search one that is really a Woman; if the other, who is a Man, beeing frighted with his Crime and Imprisonment, hath given and promised you so much, what may you not get of her, who will at what rate soever preserve her honour, and free herself from the Infamy and Laughter of all these People? Go then, and manage your business so, that you may get a good fleece off her, and forget not mee; For, you know I sit at the Helm, and that all must bee done by my Order, their Lives, Honours, Imprisoment, and Liberty beeing wholly in my Hands: Bee sure you take not Promises for Payment, But put Eyes into your Hands to believe what they shall see and receive: For, if you do her the favour not to search her according to the Order, it is but Reason that shee should recompence your Courtesie with some remarkeable Gratification; Do not quit Her for less than what Iphis hath given and promised you, For, the Favour is greater to Her than Him. Beeing thus instructed, and determined to follow precisely these Instructions, they went, like Commissaries deputed by the Justice, to know of what Category Calliante was. And as a Ship saile's swifter when shee is in open Sea, and hath the Wind more full; So the greater hope these VVomen conceived, and the more their desire of having was increased by the advise of that good Judge, the more eagerly and cheer-fully did they run to execute this second Commission; whereby they hoped to get more than they had done by the former; Neither was their expectation frustrated; For, they were no sooner entred and had made their goodly Speech, but Calliante falling into a Lyon-like fury, in stead of speaking, began to answer them with his Hands, making them feele the weight of a Man's Armes. The dore, which was lock'd again, that they might the more secretly, and without scandall per∣form their Office, gave him better opportunity of pummelling them; For, not beeing able to run away, they were inforced to indure that storm of blowes without shelter. One had her Eyes beaten into her Head with his buffeting, another her Teeth struck out, the third hee trampled under his Feet, which was not without their crying out Murther, help, help: But the Peasants, who stayed within hearing, thought it had been Almeria, whom they three were forcing to a
Manifestation, which shee could not suffer without striving and shame, & in stead of succouring them, they drowned their cries with laughing, till their Lungs were ready to split, and calling out to them, You are three against one, you will overcome her at last; continue, do what the Justice hath commanded you. Judge you what leisure this gave Calliante to kick, and beat his Visiters, as if they had been three barrs upon an Anvill, and his Fists the Hammers. At length having layd them all under his feet, so tired and sore with blowes, that they could hardly breathe, one of them swoun∣ded, another feined her self dead; but Belida, who seeing Calliante draw a Knife which hung at Merinda's Girdle, thought (as it was probable enough) that hee meant to cut their Throats; as a Torch that's going out casteth the greater flame, so shee in that extremity, summoning all that little Spirit shee had left, cryed aloud, Lupicin, I am dead, Hee kill's mee, help, help. These words made them consider, that indeed they might have need of help, Despair having perchance transported Almeria to some action in her own defence beyond the ordinary strength of a Woman; there∣upon they rushed into the room, where they saw two lying like dead bodies on the ground, covered over with their own blood, and Cal∣liante dragging Belida about, with one hand up ready to sheath the Knife in her bosome. It was then no time to consult but to act; They presently made to∣wards Calliante, who flinging that scurvy Woman from him, flew, like a Tigre that enter's into an Herd of Deer, among those Rusticks. Who ever saw a furious wild Bore foaming with rage, beeing inclosed in the Toyles between the Hunts men's Spears and the Hound's mouths, make an horrible slaughter, tearing out the bowells of this Dog here, tos∣sing another yonder, fastning his Tusks in an Horse's belly on another side, and trample upon the over-turned Rider; but at length beeing over-power'd with the multitude of Assailers, is inforced to submit to the greater strength; Hee may imagine the behaviour of Calliante in the midst of that rude company; the first whereof that came neer him, received a great stab in his Arm, another a cut or'e the face, o∣thers felt the smart of the same Weapon in other places: Hee flung himself here and there, and sometimes by agility, sometimes by main force, hee wrested himself out of their hands, watching still to get to the dore; But the throng of those that pressed to come in, rendered the passage impenetrable, which put him into such an agony, as you may
imagine, seeing himself ready to bee murthered by the hands of those irritated Swains. At last having done all that a gallant courage ow'd to a just defence, so many People fell upon him at once, that they forced him to quit the Knife, and seeing him disarmed and under their Feet, they began, by binding him Hand and Foot, the outrages which they were relol∣ved to make him suffer, devising ignominies and revenges inimagi∣nable against him. But the care they had of the wounded Women, and to recall their affrighted Spirits into their martyred Bodies, made them deferr for a while the punishing of Calliante, whom they threat∣ned with no less than a shamefull Death. The Judge, who came in when all the blowes were past, and the Pri∣soner fast bound, inveighed highly against Calliante's Rebellion, as con∣temning and resisting the Order of Justice; and precipitating his Sen∣tence, hee said, that nothing could make a sufficient reparation but Death, and if that lewd Hussif were not found to bee with Child, that shee should bee executed the next morning. These were the Consolations of the poor Calliante, who beeing all bruised with blowes, besides the pain hee received by the Bonds and Chains wherewith hee was loden, saw himself upon the point of beeing Sacrifised to the vengeance of those Salvages, whom it is not enough to call Sarmatians to expess their cruelty. But as that barbarous Rabble was going to make a shamefull Ana∣tomy of the Body of Calliante, in the Opinion they had that hee was a Woman, intending the next day to make him indure a torment con∣formable to their inhumane Dispositions, the whole Village was al∣larmed on a sodain with the arrivall of a great Troop of Horse, that came with great diligence: Before them rode a Man with his Arms pinion'd, and his Feet bound under the Horse's Belly, as if hee had been some Notorious Thief whom the Provost Martiall had lately taken. The Judge upon notice hereof, (thinking they had been some Of∣ficers of Justice) went forth to meet them, to desire their assistance for the Execution of a Prisoner that would have broke the Gaole, and who had wounded divers persons that withstood him. Doubtless, said the Captaine, this must bee the place: then, turning towards the fellow that was bound, hee continued, is not that Prison here, whither wee com∣manded thee to conduct us? Yes Sir, answered hee, and there is the Judge, who committed them, and sent mee to you from one of the Prisoners to bring the summe of money conteined in the Letter.
At these words the Judge knew his Messenger, and his Conscience accusing him, hee was ready to sink with fear, when two or three of them setting their Pistolls to his throat, said, Deliver us My Lord quickly, or you are a Dead Man. What Lord? answered hee trembling: the Lord Palatine of Plocens whom you have imprisoned here, perchance not knowing him. Hereat a cold sweat over-flowing the Judge's Face, seeing that hee had brought himself into a Premunire, and that no less than his Life was concerned; See Gentlemen, said hee, if that bee hee which hath done such havock in the Prison; Then ten or twelve alight∣ing went in with their Arms in their hands, where Humbertus Captain of the Guards knowing Liante (having seen him often in Podolia) stood amazed, thinking that Mieslas his Executioners had reduced him to that extremity, to force him to suffer the affront, which they were commanded to do him: But seeing none of them, and onely the Coun∣try-People, Wee shall finde (said hee to his Companions) that they have given that barbarous Commission to these villanous Boors, holding it too base an Office for them to execute. Thereupon Hee said to the Peasants; Friends, what dee you intend to do with this Gentleman? why do you use him thus cruelly? It is no Man, replied one of the Clowns, but a mad Woman, who had almost spoiled us all with a Knife, there never was any such Fury in the World. Hum∣bertus thought that was an illusion, hearing him style a Woman, one whom hee saw in Man's Cloaths, and whom hee held to bee a Man; Signor Liante, said hee to the Prisoner lying on the ground, is it you, and do you not know mee? How should I know you, replied hee, that do not know myself? For, all these People will make mee believe per force that I am a Woman, although I am most certain of the contrary. Infallibly, said Humbertus to the others with him, this poor Gentleman is become distracted, not beeing able to preserve his Judgement entire, after that horrible affront which they have made him suffer; For, beeing no longer a Man, hee denie's that hee is a Woman, which indeed hee is not however. Then speaking again to Liante, Sir, said hee, who brought you into this place? my own foolish Will, said Liante. Who put you in Prison and committed you into the power of these People? Iphigenes, answered Liante, I know not whether his intention bee to rid Himself of Mee thus. This made Humbertus presently conjecture, that Iphigenes had an hand in the Plot with Mieslas, to purchase to himself Liante's whole
Estate by vertue of his Marriage with Modestina. Therefore not to dive any further into the business before so many hearers, he left Liante under the Guard of two of his company, telling them, that he must first see the Palatine, or speak with Boleslaus. So going forth hee seized upon the Judge, and told him, that hee must shew him where the PALATINE was. What Palatine? said hee. Ha? re∣plied Humbertus roughly, there's no jesting nor trifling with mee, I ask for IPHIGENES Governour of this Palatinate, who is Prisoner here. Sir, answered the Judge, if I were to die immediately, I am not able to tell you where hee is, nor what hee is; For, hee is one whom I never saw. At least, said Humbertus, you shall let mee see Him that wrote mee this Let∣ter, hee is an old Man. The Judge having demanded to see the Letter, and having read it, Ah! treacherous old Man, cried hee, are these the Mountaines of Gold which thou wer't to bring forth? Then without farther intreaty (his Messenger desiring him to release him out of his pain) hee conducted Humbertus with his attendants to Boleslaüs Cham∣ber, who in few words gave him the full Relation of their Comicall Chace, their severall disguises, and their imprisonment, which had like to have had a Tragicall conclusion. Then resigning his place to the Judge, Sir, said Boleslaüs to Humber∣tus, Let us now go directly to the Palatine; For, although for his pastime hee hath been Author of all this, I fear his own trouble is not the least, and when hee is free wee shall easily release the rest. This said, the Judge, beeing Manacled, was forced to go before to shew them where hee had put Madam Serife; For, Boleslaüs who knew the secret, told him, that shee was the Palatine whom they sought, and that now hee should make him believe by good tokens those verities, which hee before so much slighted and laughed at. When Serife saw Boleslaüs entring into her room; Ah! Father, said shee, what good Angell hath brought you hither to release mee out of this Captivity, where I was in the greatest perplexity imaginable? Whereupon Boleslaüs told her his Stratagem in sending for that Troop, which was commanded by Humbertus, who attended her pleasure at the dore. O Father, said Iphigenes, suffer him not to come in, For, I should bee yet more afflicted if hee should see mee in Woman's Cloaths; bid him command one of the Guards to give mee his and let him take one of the Peasant's ha∣bits, that I may quickly get out of this Dungeon, where I have indured so much unworthiness. This command was presently performed, and Iphigenes appeared
in the form of Iphis, not of Serife, before her Guards. Shee was no sooner out, but Passion made her ask for Liante. Alas Sir, said Hum∣bertus, I left him in the Prison with two Souldiers to guard him, but hee is in a pittifull condition, I cannot but grieve at his disaster, yet it con∣cerne's not us to contradict our Master's will. How, in a pittifull condi∣tion? Sir, said Humbertus, your Grandeur knowe's better than I the whole story. Tell mee, Humbertus (replied Iphigenes) what story? Then the Captain related to him, what hee had heard of Mieslas order in Plocens, which hee believed his Father would not have commanded without communicating it to him. This so troubled Iphigenes, that hee could not bee satisfied without going to see him, notwithstanding Humbertus diswaded him all hee could; beeing come to Liante's Prison, where hee found a multitude of Clowns crouding in, hee commanded his Souldiers to seize upon them all, and advancing neer Liante, who lay upon the ground all co∣vered with blood and dust, and loaden with Irons; What is the matter, Brother, said hee, in what equipage do I see you? These are your sports, replied Liante angerly, you may end them when you please, but I am sure they have almost ended mee. How ended? said Iphigenes. It was this infamous Generation of Clownish Rascalls, answered Liante, that hath put mee in the pickle you see mee, and if my paines are a pleasure to you, you may let mee alone in my misery, Death it self will bee welcom to mee if it proceed from your Hand or Order: But you would oblige mee very much to send mee into the Wars, where I might lose my Life with Honour, and not bee butchered by these Ox-drivers. All this was a Riddle to Iphigenes and Boleslaüs; for, having been kept every one in a severall room, they knew nothing of each other's sufferings. And it beeing then no time to stand long in Discourse, Iphigenes contented himself to protest to Liante, that hee was innocent∣ly the cause of that imprisonment, whereof hee was not then to repent; but, that hee was in no wise consenting to the treacherous design of Mieslas, which hee would most evidently make appear. What do you talke to mee of Mieslas, Replied Liante, whilest they were loosing his bands, I think that Sorcerer Arcade hath inchanted you as well as mee, and hath made you believe I know not what story of your Father concerning mee, which is the most ridiculous Tale that e're I heard. Is it not so then? said Iphigenes, What, Brother? have you not been in the hands of Mieslas his servants? I have neither seen Mieslas, nor any that have relation to him, onely Arcade (whom they brought hither to mee
th'other day) told mee that hee was at Plocens, and that hee had caused me to be apprehended there, with severall other idle circumstances, which cannot proceed but from a distracted Brain. You have then no other harm than what these Peasants have done you, said Iphigenes: Or than you have made them do mee, continued Liante, but if I get once free of these bonds, I'le make them feel the weight of my Fingers. Have you no other wounds than what wee see? said Iphigenes, No other, answered hee, but if I had not been succoured in time, and if Humbertus had not appeared when hee did (but you gave him his just time that your Game might bee compleat) they threatned to do mee the greatest affront that ever was offered to any Man, and expose my Body naked to the view of every Passenger, and not satisfied with that shame, which I hold worse than Death, they purposed to make mee die publickly by the authority of the Justice, against which they taxed mee for having commit∣ted a Rebellion (in defending my self against their insolences) which they said could be no otherwise washed away than in my own Blood; but all this I believe was but to fright mee. Hereupon Humbertus said softly to Iphigenes, Sir there is nothing more certain than that Mieslas servants have delivered him into these Pea∣sant's hands, to execute that shamefull Commandement which hee had im∣posed on them. If it bee so, replied Iphigenes aloud, I will make them bee hanged immediately in my own presence. If you do not, answered Calliante, I shall say that you had a hand in it, and though I were to bee hewed in a thousand pieces, there is not one of them but I will sheath my Sword in his Bowells, the injurious words and unworthy treatment where∣with they have violated my Patience, cannot bee satisfied with any less Vengeance; For, what command soever you gave them to torment mee, I am confident they have exceeded their Commission, and used mee worse than they were injoyned. In summe, not to dwell any longer in these lawless proceedings of that corrupt Justice, the rest of the Prisoners beeing released, when they least expected it, after some mutuall Conferences and Communicat∣ing their respective Sufferings in Prison; the matter was decided to the confusion of the Judge, and all the Inhabitants of that Village, who were as Blanke at this alteration as Bell-founders when their Mettalls answer not their Expectation. IPHIGENES was acknowledged to bee Palatine of that Country; Almeria known to bee Liante (but onely to Humbertus and some few others, who were injoyned to si∣lence under pain of the Palatine's high displeasure) and Arcade found
a true and faithfull servant, beeing confronted with Humbertus. No∣thing was wanting but Halters to hang those Clowns, and the Judge higher than the rest: Which Iphigenes, beeing pressed by the conjura∣tions of Calliante and the other Gentlemen, would have had executed forthwith. The chiefe Actors were presently apprehended, as the Judge and his inseparable shadowes, the Clarks, and other blood-sucking Of∣ficers, with Celian's Sons and the three Harpies, besides some others which were found Complices of their insolences; of whom the Soul∣diers, to revenge the Palatine, chose each of them one, to tie him to the branches of the next Tree. Those Rusticks who were a little before such insulting Tyrants, be∣came now humble Petitioners, and begged pardon upon their Knees, making many excuses, pleading ignorance and condemning their rash∣ness. Calliante, seconded by Pomeran, Pisides and Argal, cryed out for nothing but Vengeance and sodain Execution, every one relating the particular affronts they had received: Onely Boleslaüs more discreet then those young fiery Spirits, harkened attentively to what they said without uttering a sillable, untill Iphigenes said, What? Father, do you say nothing? To this hee replied, It is not that I have not had my share of the bitter∣ness of this Cup as well as the rest, but me-think's the Sun hath now given place to the Night, as it were, on purpose to give us Counsell, and somewhat settle the motions which agitate our severall thoughts; that which is done in cold Blood is alwayes riper and more considerate than what is acted in heat of Passion. Choller is a short Madness, the producti∣ons of that Passion are seldom judicious; you may do what you please, but as the King of the es is without a sting, So you will finde by experience that Clemency is more convenient for those that govern, than a rigorous Justice. I do not say this to excuse the Malice of these Swains; but you are to consider that for your own Pastime you have cast your self into this Tempest; if you give a Tragicall end to a Comedy, you will not observe the Rules of the Play: You laid the block before their feet, whereat they have so indiscreetly stumbled. It become's not the Palatine of Plocens to revenge the injuries offered to Serife unknown, nor Liante to resent those which were done to Calliante and Almeria. When this shall come to bee divulged by so solemn an Execution, what will People say, but that you have imitated Cats, who first play with the Mice, and then kill them? and there will not be wanting some that will compare this Action to the
cruelty of the Roman Emperours, who at their Feasts made the Gladi∣ators, in their presence, feed their Eyes with humane Blood, whilest they were filling their Bellies with the Flesh of Beasts. Calumny, which forgeth what is not, how will not shee aggravate this which hath some image of rigour, although in effect it is but an Act of Justice? Sir. I tell you again, you may do as you think fit, but the Zeal which I have of your glory, make's mee desire rather to hear the praises of your humanity, re∣sounding on the Tongues of Men, than complaints against your severity and rashness. What? said Iphigenes, shall such crimes then pass unpunished? by no means, answered Boleslaus, I would not have you bee insensible of their misdemeanours, but I advise you onely so to manage your Chastisements, that your Enviers may finde no occasion to defame your manner of Govern∣ment, and cast you farther into the King's disfavour than you are. For, as it is easie to impose any thing upon one that is absent, by consequent it will not bee hard to render him odious. What? shall this wicked Judge then escape for such abominable extorti∣ons? said Liante; I will rather strangle him with my own Hands, then that the World shall be infested any longer with such an Harpy; And wee, said the other Gentlemen, will do as much to those other Monsters, who have nothing of humane but their shapes. Gentlemen, answered Boleslaus, to stop the boyling of your irritated bloods, there is a way to content you, to punish them sufficiently, and pre∣serve the Honour and Reputation of the Palatine. This proposition ha∣ving procured all their attentions, hee coninued thus: Do not you think the fear of Death, will bee a punishment answerable to the pains which they have made us suffer, and into which indeed wee cast our selves for our own pleasures? whereunto if you adde the Lash or the Strapado with a perpetuall Banishment, I do not see but that you may be throughly satisfied, they rigorously enough punished, and that those who shall hear of this penalty and their offence, will not have occasion rather to applaud the Palatine's Mercie and Prudence, than condemn his rigour. And for the Judge, I confess hee deserve's Death by all humane Lawes; but if you consider how his case is linked with the Peasant's, and that by your disguisements you puzled their understandings you will finde that if they are not worthy of Grace for their own sakes, you ought to pardon them for the Love of your selves, since by your secret connivance you did in a man∣ner make them tumble into the ditch of Error, which led them into these exorbitances.
At last Boleslaüs by his mild and discreet Arguments stopt the im∣petuosity of their wrath, as heaps of soft Earth use to stifle Can∣non-bullets, and perswaded those high Spirits to condescend to his re∣monstrances. So Night beeing far spent, they settled themselves to rest, resolving to put his advice in Execution next morning. In mean time, the Trances and Agonies, which the apprehension of Death made the Country-People feel, were beyond expression. The Day which rejoiceth all the World was odious to them, as that, which was to veile their Eyes with an everlasting Night: But Heavens provided for them otherwise then they expected. For, to give them a full mea∣sure of fear, Iphigenes commanded they should bee all hanged forth∣with upon trees neer their own dwellings, which the Souldiers were very ready to execute; but, as they were about to give them the swing, Boleslaüs and the other Gentlemen cast themselves at the Palatine's feet, to beg their Lives, of which, Apprehension had almost bereaved them already. Then came the deplorable Celian watering his hoary-Beard with tears, and prostrating himself before Iphigenes, beseeched him by all that was most sacred in Heaven and on Earth, not to de∣prive him of all his children at once, and quite extinguish those sparks, by whom hee hoped to revive in his Posterity. This supplication was seconded with the lamentable cries of the three Searchers, who were tied to their severall Gibets like the rest; the image of Death (painted on their Faces, and which danced before their Eyes) touched with some compassion those who were the day before so eager for revenge, deriving all the fault upon the Judge, who escaped very narrowly beeing sacrificed to Example, and having been (as the He∣brew's Emissary Goat) loaden with the Faults and Maledictions of all the People. But in stead of perishing for the rest, hee had his grace as well as they, a disgracefull grace, yet just and full of equity. For, if their lives were given them, it was to prolong it by a condi∣tion, which those that are happy in a Country, and who love their na∣tive soile, would esteem worse than Death: It was Banishment, which was so dreadfull to the Romans, that they thought it was to die, to live out of Rome. 'Tis true, that with poor People it is as with those that are extreamly generous, to whom every Land is their Country, as the Air and Water are the Elements of Birds and Fishes. But before the pronouncing of this sentence, (which could not but bee sweet to those that were recalled from the Sepulcher) It was de∣creed, to spare the pains of fetching Surgeons, presently to let blood
those People, whom the fear of Death had cast into a violent Feaver, to recommend them to the discretion or rather indiscretion of the Soul∣diers, who to save rods, laced their shoulders so well with their stirrop∣leathers, that they made them swim in their own blood, which was in∣flamed with the Wine they drank some dayes before in so great abun∣dance. And the three Shepherdesses, deputed for that search, had their share of this whipping-cheer. After this blooding, six Souldiers were appointed to conduct them forthwith to Danzic, to bee imbarked and transported thence into Moscovia (a Country more rude and barbarous than Sarmatia) there to continue to perpetuity, under pain of beeing Hanged if ever they returned. Where they remained untill Iphigenes's re-establishment at Court, who then considering that they were sufficiently punished, sent them his Grace, and permitted them to repossess their former Habi∣tations.
The Tenth Book. ARGUMENT. Iphigenes to prevent the malicious Practices of Mieslas against Liante, causes him to bee secured in a strong Castle in his Palatinate. Hee re∣turns to Plocens to meet his Father Mieslas. Their Salutations, and Speeches concerning Liante, and Almeria. Mieslas perswades Iphi∣genes to give the Princess Respicia a visit. Her imaginary content∣ment at his seeming Professions of Affection. Iphigenes beeing with his Father, and the Princess, is sent for by Menochius in a Ladie's habit, who gives him an account of Modestina's escape out of Prison, and her beeing taken in Man's Cloaths for Liante by Mieslas servants. Iphi∣genes perplexed at this Relation, consults with Boleslaus how to demean himself. His sage advice: to satisfie Iphigenes, Hee undertakes in per∣son to inform Liante of what had passed at Plocens. The affront of∣fered to Modestina by the barbarous instruments of Mieslas cruelty against Liante, is related to Mieslas in his Son's presence. The just re∣sentments of Iphigenes for that indignity done to his Wife, and his resolute Speeches to his Father concerning Her and Liante. The furi∣ous Mieslas severe Replies. Iphigenes's reserved carriage towards the Princess Respicia, after this passionate Conference with Mieslas. Her Amorous Complaints. Liante relates his Dream to Boleslaus. He applies the circumstances of that Dream to the transfiguration and Disaster of Modestina. Liante upon this assurance of Maieslas's bar∣barismo, without acquainting him, or any else with his Design, steals privately out of the Castle. Mieslas having learnt where Iphigenes had concealed his feined Shepherdess, marches with a strong Party of Horse thither in the Night; beeing entered, under the Name of Iphi∣genes, hee commands his Men to leave no corner unsearcht for Almeria. Next Morning early Iphigenes with a more considerable strength hasts after his Father; Meets him coming forth of the Castle; Passion
perswades Iphigenes to charge him: Boleslaus disswades it. The blustering words betwixt the Father and Son at this Incounter. After some Dispute they returne to Plocens. Mieslas much displeased at his Son, retires himself to his own Palatinate: the Princess Respicia to the Court. Shee causes a complaining Letter to be left upon the Table in Iphigenes Chamber. Hee slights her Torments, but is much perplexed for the loss of Liante. Liante's Letter to Iphigenes. The Grand Duke of Lithuania commonly Elected to the Crown of Polonia. The Reason of the Lithuanians Rebellion against their Prince. Liante is received and honourably treated by the Palatines of Troc, and Minsce, chief Commanders of the revolted Party. Iphigenes's resentment for Liante's siding with the Rebells. The King prepares a great Army, to suppress them. Mieslas returnes to Court, is made Lieutenant Ge∣nerall. The Princess Respicia procures Iphigenes to be repealed from Banishment, lest he should ingage in the Warrs. His answer to the King's Letter inviting him to the Court. Tho Substance of Modesti∣na's Letter to Iphigenes, and of his Answer. Iphigenes raises a con∣siderable Party of Horse for the present Service, meets his Father at the Rendez vous. The Royall Army besiges Minsce the Rebells chief City. A description of the Palatine of Minsce's two Daughters Oloria and Amiclea. Liante falls in Love with Amiclea; Oloria with Him. Liante sends a Challenge to any of the Royall Party: Is incountred by Iphigenes, both unknown. After some dispute Liante is worsted. The Gallantry and Courtesie of Iphigenes to his Enemy, before hee knew him to be Liante. Their Deportments and Speeches after this Disco∣very. Mieslas's rage against his Son for sparing Liante's Life. Mieslas beggs of the King the confiscation of Liante's Estate, pretending he was in actuall Rebellion. Liante sends Mieslas a Challenge. Iphigenes is second to his Father, and Polemander to Liante. Iphigenes unhorses Polemander, and Liante had killed Mieslas, had not Iphigenes res∣cued him. The Lithuanian's Reception of Liante after this Victory. Olavius designes his Daughter Oloria for Liante. Shee discovers her Passion to Him. Hee rejects her, and becomes more inflamed for Amiclea. THe Peasants having thus payed for their insolence, the Pa∣latine, accompanied by those Gentlemen and his Guards, repaired towards Plocens, to meet his Father. And in re∣gard hee could not conceive who should bee that miser∣able Creature, whom Mieslas had taken for Liante, and had comman∣ded
to bee so ill-treated, not to expose that innocent Nobleman to the hazard of receiving any affront from that rigorous Sarmatian, hee sent him with a Convoy of twelve Souldiers to a Castle in his Dominion, intreating him to stay there untill further intelligence from him, with an exact account of Mieslas intentions; and whence that news was derived, which Arcade brought in such hast, and was afterwards con∣firmed by Humbertus. Liante beeing thus secured from Mieslas fury, Iphigenes gave order that his other Domesticks, and Hunts-men should meet him a league from Plocens, where hee dismissed his Souldiers, and entred into the City with a more peaceable train. His Father received him with great demonstrations of joy, and hee returned the Honours and Respect which Nature obliged him to render to the Author of his life. The complements and imbraces beeing past, they presently fell into the Discourse of what was said and done at Court. There hath been no Action of late (said Mieslas) whereof, I believe, you have not been informed; But perchance your intelligence hath not been so punctuall in letting you understand what is said there; For, generally what is reported of us come's last of all to our knowledge: the Eye which seeth all other Objects, see's not it self, and knowing how every thing else is made, is ignorant of it's own composition. Thereupon Iphigenes, not without colouring his cheeks with a gracefull vermillion, having inquired how People censured him, said; It is no wonder if my Name be traduced, the ordinary Discourse of Courtiers beeing principally of Favorites, or of those who are in disgrace, to whose Actions they give what colours they please. I will tell you really (said Mieslas) it is not of your perfidiousness or any treason that you have committed: For, every one know's the educa∣tion I have bestowed on you, and how I never recommended any thing so much to you as Loyalty, and Obedience towards your Soveraign. Neither is there any mention of your absence from Court, which cannot be called a disgrace, in regard the King and Queen never speak of you but in very honorable and advantageous tearms: But, all mouths are filled, especially the Ladie's, with your new affection for a certain Shepherdess in these Forests, who is esteemed an invisible Diana, and you her Endimion. There are some, who beare her as much Envy as they are full of Pitty and Passion for you, admiring that you who have sailed through the Sea of the Court without striking upon any Rock or Sand, should now be shipwrack'd in a sorry Brook; and who having despised the splendor of so many Suns in
the Sphear of the Grandeurs of Polonia, should abase your self to do ho∣mage to a Moon in the obscurity of these Woods. And divers speaking with mee concerning you, have said that they believed this servile yoak, so disproportionable to your quality, was fallen upon your neck as a punish∣ment for the scorns wherewith you payed the merit of those Ladies of ho∣nour that affected you. Iphigenes desiring to turn all this into a Gallantry of Youth, and prepossess Mieslas in case hee should chance to learn any farther par∣ticulars, gave him a brief relation of his Rurall Recreations, of the Country-People's insolence, and what punishment hee had inflicted upon their unworthiness, vernishing his Narration as hee pleased, to the end this first impression might take place of after-reports, which flew about in severall formes, but all so far from the truth, that it might properly bee said of Fame, shee is like a Camelion, which take's all sorts of Liveries, except the whiteness of Verity. In conclusion, hee said, that hee was more passionate in shew for his Shepherdess by much than in effect, in regard shee was nothing recommendable for Beauty, but onely for her extream Nimbleness, and Dexterity in the Exercise of Hunting. So much I have alwayes promised my self of your judgement (answered Mieslas) what ever others would make mee believe of your Affection to this Country-wench, whom they stuck not to give out that you were re∣solved to Marry. I am not yet arrived to that degree of folly (replied the subtile Iphigenes) neither have I so little sense of my condition, that I should make a Shepherdess my Wife, considering that the conquest of such People is not so difficult, but that a Man may accomplish his desires better cheap, than by a publick shame, and the loss of both Fortune and Ho∣nour: Besides, I should esteem myself unworthy of the Blood I have from you, of the rank which I possess by the King's Favour, and of the Estate which I injoy and expect to have by him and you, if the onely thought of so ridiculous an alliance should harbour in my brest. I can believe no other (said Mieslas) but the Women are not so satisfi∣ed: For, beeing the pure substance of infirmity, they presently take the allarme, and seizing on the Fire-brand by the burning end, they construe every action in the worst sense. This is averred by the Princess Respicia, who at the first broaching of this news (out of excess of Passion for you) fell into such strange distempers, imagining that you would give her the slip, that shee never ceased persecuting mee, untill I came to bring water to quench this new Fire, and dissipate or at least hinder by my presence
your imaginary Marriage: And to make you sensible of her impatience, (which cannot be blamed but for an extremity of Affection) shee hath followed mee so close, that I arrived here but one day before her. How, said Iphigenes, (counterfeiting an astonishment, though hee had been in∣formed of her comming) is shee in this Country? I must acknowledge as much Obligation to her Love, as her jealousie hath done mee injury: But doth shee esteem mee so little judicious, or guilty of so much incon∣stancy, as to change the glory of appertaining to her, for the imbraces of a silly Shepherdess, who cannot be compared to her, unless it were to make appeare how beautifull the Day is by the horrours and darkness of the Night? I am glad, said Mieslas, that this opposition make's you consider the value of that Lady, and especially to hear you speak in such tearms of her Merit, which is yet greater than you imagine, and her affection to you be∣yond comparison. If you had expressed yourself thus before, things would not have been in the condition they now are; but your first Marriage not beeing consummated, you might have freely contracted this second, without staying for any needless Dispensations, whose tedious delayes are incom∣patible with her Desires. You may be confident, Sir (replied Iphigenes) that I suffer no less then shee the rigour of that Law; but me-think's my Conscience would never be at ease, if that be not declared void by a pub∣lick authority, which was so solemnly contracted. It is true, what ce∣remonie soever was used, I never had any intention to marry Modesti∣na, which may easily be judged by the tenderness of my Age in which your absolute Will m me take her to Wife, rather than my own Inclination, which neither at that time nor since, hath been much bent towards any Woman in particular. I must confess as Love is paid but by it self, this affection wherewith the Princess is pleased to honour mee, obligeth my Soul to a reciprocall resentment, unloss I would purchase to myself the title and blame of the most ingratefull among Mortalls; And, I will assure her, that assoon as I shall be legally freed from the yoak of Modestina, I will render myself her Seave, and make her my Wife, if shee continue in the same desire of having mee to Husband. Mieslas, beeing much satisfied with this Speech so conformable to the Passion hee had to see this Marriage accomplished, and the former dissolved, said; if the Princess heard you speak thus much in her favour, I think Joy would so play the sweet Tyrant in her Brest, that it would in a manner rob her Heart of Life. It is a singular happiness for mee (an∣swered Iphigenes) that I am able to give you and her satisfaction, and
(in obeying you by Duty and Obligation) finde besides what correspond's to my own desire. For, I am not so void of understanding, as not to see how much this alliance, both for Estate and Parentage, is more advantageous to mee than Modestina's, whose Fortune will be much diminished by Liante, who having now taken his flight into the World, will first or last finde the means, either by the favour of some Eminent Person, that may perchance make him his Son-in-Law, or by the support of the Justice of this King∣dome, regain the possession of his Inheritance, whereof indeed wee cannot frustrate him without exposing our selves to the detraction and Envy of those, who carp at my actions. Let not that trouble you (said Mieslas) For, I have taken such a course, that wee will enjoy both, beeing most undoubtedly sure of that I have al∣ready in my Hands. For, Modestina hath protested very solemnly, if her Marriage to you be declared void, that shee will never have any other Husband than a Cloister. As for Liante, I have unexpectedly met with him, and committed him into the hands of such trusty Executioners, as will cleer all these doubts, if hee will not indure to be reduced into a condition of never having issue. Iphigenes having brought him to the point, whereof hee desired with much impatience to bee satisfied, deferred not to aske him, how Liante happened into his Hands? Mieslas thereupon told him, that coming to Plocens hee found him there, expecting his return from Hunting. Sir, answered Iphigenes, did hee tell you that hee came to see me? No, said Mieslas, for I saw him not, but thus he said to those whom I sent to apprehend him. Did not you see him then, answered Iphigenes? No, I would not, said Mieslas, lest the compassion which the tenderness of his Youth might have suscitated in my Brest, should have made mee la∣ment his Fortune, and recant the Design which I had resolved to execute upon him. That Design, said Iphigenes, is very severe, and it is to be feared, that being divulged (as it is no easie matter to conceal such actions long) it will produce one of these two mischiefs; either that it will cast you into the King's disfavour, (who doubtless will abhor so strange a proceed∣ing) or else that the despair of so inhumane a violence, may make that poor Gentleman resolve to preserve his own Life to take away yours, and revenge himself at what rate soever of that affront, which is the most sen∣sible any Man can indure. I have other wayes, answered Mieslas, to bridle his fury: the Prison whither I have sent him, shall keep him safe enough, untill hee hath purged away all his Choller. As for the King's displeasure I fear it not, consi∣dering
that I have rendered him services capable to counterpoise this action, which will rather excite laughter than any thought of punishment. You are too consciencious for a Palatine, if you quit not these vain Scruples, you will never raise your fortune to the height. In this World a Man must be daring, and allow somewhat to adventure; hee that hath so much circumspection, will never acquire great Riches; be sure to get what you can into your Possession, and then you may dispose afterwards at leisure. I have alwayes (replied Iphigenes) held Scruples to be vain doubts, which make us esteem evill that which is not so; But it is neither Superstition nor Scruple to call evill that which visibly is so; and for my part I had rather Live and Die poor, than inrich my self by unlawfull wayes: if you call this Humour, I call it Reason, and I am so wedded to this Reason, that nothing shall make mee renounce it, no, not all the Wealth, nor all the Scepters in the World. Leave this Discourse (said Mieslas) and go give as much satisfaction to the fair Princess, (who is come to see you) as you have given mee, by the promise you have made to answer her affection by your services, and make my Prayers follow by your Obedience. So, they went immediately to wait upon the Princess, whose agitations of spirit I will not stand to represent, nor repeat her words, contenting my self to say, that Iphi∣genes, who was Wit and Eloquence it self, omitted no sort of Honours, Complements, respectfull Behaviour and quaint Tearms to foment her Fire, and fill the sails of her Hope with a thousand Protestations as fri∣volous as the Winde: Insomuch that beeing ravished with joy to see her self, as it were, at the top of her pretentions, her Fancy floted up∣on the Sea of her desires, and fed it self with imaginary content∣ments. The whole Fable of Almeria (the Diana of those woods) was repre∣sented in new colours, wherewith Iphigenes shadowed his Narration so artificially, that the Enamell hath not so much grace when most cu∣riously laid on Gold, as those flowers of Rhetorick in his Mouth gave ornament to that story. Night summoning every one to a Retreat, a Page came to acquaint Iphigenes, that there was a Lady in the Hall, who desired to speak with him about some business of great importance. Hee, who was all Cour∣tesie, especially towards Ladies, made her not long expect him: But shee having intreated him to hear in private what shee had to impart to him, hee led her into his Chamber, where shee said, My Lord, the person that speak's to you under this Woman's habit is a Man Iphigenes
not a little surprised at these words, & the room beeing somewhat ob∣scure, thought it had been Liante; which made him presently say, Ah! Brother, wherfore are you come hither? do you long to be butchered, and pre∣cipitate your self into Death? you do not (it seem's) know the affront Mileslas intend's to your Person. My Lord, answered the disguised Man, You take mee for another, I am Menochius, one of your Mother Aretuza's servants, appointed to waite upon your Lady, Modestina, in the Castle where your Father commanded her to bee kept close Prisoner: There shee first gained my heart by Pitty, then by presents, and lastly by promises and assu∣rances, that the service shee desired of mee would bee acceptable to you; It was to convey her out of Prison: which I effected very for∣tunately, having covered her with one of my Suits; and having pro∣vided Horses in a convenient place not far thence, I conducted her hither, where shee commanded mee to take the habit wherein you see mee, whilest shee went abroad to inquire after you: And here was confirmed to her the newes, which made her resolve to finde you out, beeing pricked with Jealousie and the apprehension of losing you by a Passion, which shee was informed, possessed you for a Shepherdess in these Neighbouring Forests, whom you were report∣ed to have been resolved to marry. But her ill fortune was, at the arrivall of Mieslas, to bee observed by some of his followers or yours, and to bee taken by them for Liante, by reason of her likeness to him in Face, and her beeing in Man's cloaths. Upon this mistake shee was apprehended by order from Mieslas, and I hear that hee hath sent her back into Podolia, to the same Castle where Liante was Prisoner: But when shee is known, I believe shee will bee sent where shee was before, with her Governess Perpetua. And I, My Lord, remain here destitute of all relief, having no hope but in your Pity, no confidence but in your Mercy. If I have transgressed in ser∣ving her in her desires (which proceeded onely from the extream and incomparable affection shee bears you) I am ready to receive such punishment as you shall please to ordain. If your more favourable censure judge mee not culpable, I flie for refuge under your Protection against the fury of Mieslas, who will make mee bee torne in pieces, if hee come to know that I have contributed any thing to her escape: For, hee dreaded nothing so much as to see her with you. Iphigenes seeing that Menochius ended there his Speech, asked him
if hee knew no farther news of Modestina? No, answered hee, For, fearing to discover my self, I durst not inquire after any other particulars. By this Discourse Iphigenes presently perceived what gave the rise to that Report, which Arcade brought him into the Prison, and the veile fell from those Enigma's, which held his imagination in suspense. But this was to him a falling out of the Frying-pan into the Fire: for as his Passion for Liante was great, so his Affection to Modestina was not ordinary; and if hee would have desired to change his Sex, it should have been meerly for her sake, and to bee really her Husband; none among all the Ladies hee had ever seen deserving more than Modestina to possess his Body as well as his Heart. And indeed Iphigenes had lost much of the glory of his sweet Disposition, if hee had done less than love Her, who besides their long education together, the conformity of their humours, and the bond of their Souls, came to give him so remarkeable an evidence of her Love, exposing her person to so many perills to seek him, & enjoy the felicity of his Presence. So Liante being already secured from his Father's rage, all his care was bent towards Modestina, as the Object which had most need of his succour; and ha∣ving dismissed Menochius, after advising him to continue in that Wo∣man's habit, and stir little abroad untill Mieslas were returned to Court, promising him his Protection and Assistance against whomso∣ever: and in acknowledgement of the service which hee had rendred to Modestina, hee filled his hand with a good summe of Gold, as an ear∣nest of the favours hee would do him, assuring him in mean time to exempt him from Danger and Necessity. Which done, hee cast himself upon his Bed, overwhelmed with such a multitude of thoughts, that his Eye-lids were hardly closed all night; For, his Heart beeing divided betwixt Modestina and Liante, and sus∣pended like a piece of Iron between two Load-stones, hee knew not which way to incline his resolution. This restlesness of Mind deny∣ing repose to his Body, hee sent very early in the Morning for Boleslaüs, to take advice of that faithfull Councellour, how hee should shape his course in that tempestuous occurrence. Hee repeated in brief what Menochius had told him; and the fear lest (Modestina beeing disco∣vered by his Father's bloudy instruments) they, to comply with his seve∣rity, should murther her, put his Heart into an unspeakeable perplexity. To post presently to her relief, had been to contradict what hee had made the Princess and his Father believe of his slender esteem of that Wife, from whom hee seemed to them to desire nothing more than a
separation: Not to go, and not to assist her in so urgent a necessity, hee deemed an ingratitude not to bee digested by any generous Spirit. On the other side beeing too well acquainted with the cruelty of Mieslas, and the design hee had against Liante, hee began to think that hee had not provided sufficiently for his safety, keeping him so neer that in∣exorable Sarmatian. And although Palatines (who are incontroule∣able in their own Governments) have no authority in another's Domi∣nion; yet the quality of Father gave Mieslas I know not what privi∣ledge in that of Plocens, which Iphigenes would not have permitted to another. Having communicated all these painfull imaginations to Boleslaüs, hee answered; My Lord, it happen's oft-times that recreative sports are the presages, and as I may say, the Prologues of more serious oc∣currences: It was your pleasure to make your's lately in the Forest, and perchance it is the Heaven's Will now to act their part. You made Liante bee covered with Woman's cloathes, whilest his Sister made her escape in Man's; and whilest you courted Him in that feined appearance, Shee followed you in her disguise. Hee love's you with perplexity, because hee think's you are a Man; and Shee is jealous of you, not imagining that you are a Woman. You perso∣nated Modestina in the Woods, while shee represented Liante at Plocens; your Friends were deceived in you, and your Father in her. Observe how all these passages are linked to each other. It was not without the particular providence of Heaven, that wee escaped the affronts which those irritated Clowns would have made us suffer; and I beseech the Powers above to continue us the same grace, and draw us out of the Labyrinths, wherein, I foresee, that wee are likely to bee involved. Indeed it would require the thred of a greater Prudence than mine to conduct us safely forth; But since you do mee the honour to believe mee, my fidelity having been approved by you. I can do no less than persevere in assisting you till Death with my Head, Hands, Advice, and Life. All the remedies you can now apply to Modestina, will bee too late; For, since her beeing appre∣hended, shee is infallibly either Dead or re-inclosed in her Prison; besides, by going in Person, or sending to rescue her, you would dis∣cover a Meaning contrary to what you have professed in Words to your Father and the Princess; which would bee very prejudiciall to a person of your condition, who never ought to bee surprised in double∣dealing. The best way therefore in my opinion is to expect the cer∣tainty
of this Event, and take it as from the hand of Providence, what e're it bee. If shee bee Dead, consider that your Sorrow will not recall her to Life; and besides, shee is a Creature, the privation of whom ought to bee the less grievous to you, in regard Nature hath forbidden you the injoyment of her Person. But for the preservati∣on of Liante, whom you cherish above all the rest of Mortalls, you ought in time to apply your Care, Diligence and Authority. Yet as the deepest Waters make the least noise in their course, so the solidest Judgements conduct their affaires with more temper, and less rumour, more Effects and less shew. The surest guards you can give Liante, are Secrecy and Silence. Make as if you knew not where hee is, and let Pisides, Argal and Pomeran remain in the error, which possesseth them that hee is Almeria; Close with the Seal of Authority Ar∣cade's lips by a severe prohibition to reveale this Mystery; and com∣mand Humbertus and his Souldiers under pain of Death not to de∣clare what they know concerning him. If, notwithstanding all these veiles, Mieslas should chance to discover the place of his retreat, wee shall easily make him escape out of this Country, or by Night convey him into some private Corner, which shall bee known but to very few. However wee must advertise him of what particulars wee have learn't since our arrivall (said Iphigenes) and who shall wee appoint to carry him this message? Do you think Arcade fit for this purpose? I would not ad∣vise you (answered Boleslaus) to commit this secret (which toucheth you in the Apple of the Eye) neither to Arcade, nor to paper; For the one may miscarry, the other be corrupted: If you conceive mee worthy to serve you therein you may freely command mee; For you are the onely Master whom I do, or will ever serve. Father, said Iphigenes, imbracing the old man's neck, and washing his Face with tears, you continue obliging mee in things that are more sensible, and which I esteem more pretious than my Life; do mee then the courtesie to go in my Name to him, for whom I preserve my self, and tell him that to preserve him there is no force, but I will imploy it, no respect of Father that I shall stick to violate; since choosing him for my Spouse, I ought to prefer him before Father and Mother. You shall be a living Letter, and I am sure you will represent to him the passages here much better then I can write; onely in one thing I should surpass you, that is, in representing him my affections: For, there is none but that Tongue whose Heart is pierced with Love, which is able to express to the Life the resent∣ments of a passionate Soul.
Boleslaüs, to satisfie the impatience of Iphigenes, departed presently with this Commission, and had hardly delivered his message to Liante, when newes was brought to Mieslas (his Son beeing then with him) of the Discovery of the imaginary Liante, the Story whereof was thus. THE DISCOVERY OF MODESTINA. THose who had taken upon them the charge of conducting Mo∣destina, disguised in Man's habit, beeing arrived in a place where, they thought, they might securely execute their damnable design on the person of that innocent Creature, having to that effect procured a Chirurgion for a great summe of Mony, and masked him, lest beeing afterwards known by him to whom they intended to do that hor∣rible affront, hee might bee liable to the Law or his Revenge; The pitifull Prisoner suffered herself to bee bound, like an harmeless sheep whom the rugged Butchers carry to the Slaughter-house, without the least Replication; And whether Modesty tied her Tongue, or the horrour of the affront by a sodain apprehension deprived her of the use of Speech, shee remained some time without so much as asking what they intended: At length as if her Spirits had returned out of a deep trance, and fearing more the loss of her Honour than of her Life, shee screaked out like a Virgin calling for aid against the violence of some dissolute Ravisher: For, shee conceived that they having perceived what shee was, would have sated their brutall ap∣petites on her. But shee learn't other newes by him that brought the Commission from Mieslas, who speaking as if shee had been Liante, told her, that shee must resolve to imitate the Beaver when hee is chas'd, or lose her Life; that if shee were wise, of those two evills shee should choose the least, and save the whole by losing a part. In a word, hee Made her understand the Will and Command of Mieslas, which was to make her an Eunuch against her Will, since shee had refused to make herself such by a voluntary embracing of an Ecclesiastick Life. Then Modestina seeing herself reduced to this extremity, judged it time to declare her condition, and disabuse them of their errour: But it was after attempting this last means, protesting that shee was
ready to obey the Will of Mieslas in resigning herself wholly to the ser∣vice of the Church, beseeching to defer their Execution untill they had received his definitive answer. For that the lot is already cast (reply∣ed the chief of the Band) there is no other determination to be expected than your choice. It concerns not us to interpret the commands of our Master, wee have now no leisure to discourse, time require's a speedy Expedition, choose the hand of the Chirurgion, or that which shall plunge a Poniard in your Brest. Hereby Modestina perceiving that her last remedy was in vain, and that shee must use other tearms; Thou Barbarous Wretch, said shee, couldst thou have the Heart to sheath that murtherous blade in an inno∣cent Woman's bosome, who is capable of receiving Death, but not the affront which thou proposest? There is as much difference betwixt him, to whom thou think'st to speak, and mee, as between Brother and Sister; I am not Liante, but Modestina, the Daughter-in-Law to thy cruell and impious Master, Wife to Iphigenes, who will bee able to revenge my Death, if thou killest mee, or my honour, if thou dost mee the least affront. See, said the inhumane villane, what an invention this Gallant hath found upon a sodain to save himself in this storm, how the oxtremity of danger doth subtilize men's Wits? But wee are not come thus far to stop in so fair way, wee must put him in a condition of never pretending to the possession of the Lady Clemencia, shee is reserved for a person of more eminent quality than hee. This said, hee prepared himself to make a search much different from that which the Shepherdesses would have made of Liante in the Prison. What resistance should this poor sheep have made in the midst of so many Wolves? that chaste Andromeda had recourse to her tears, whose tender drops were able to penetrate Marble, and mollifie Hearts more rigide then the sensless Rocks. Shee conjured them by all that shee thought might have most ascendance over their brutall Souls, to bee pleased onely to take notice by her Hair if what shee said of her Sex and Condition were not true. Then having unbound her Head, a wave of delicate Curling Hair overflowed her shoul∣ders; and covered all her Body to the waste, which made them spend some time in Admiration; yet they thought this but an illusion. That not satisfying, shee intreated them to unbutton her doublet, and they should finde in her Bosome a disposition correspondent to
her Hair. Which done, as by the sweetness of the Mountaines, one may judge of the Soile in the Vallies; So the Chirurgion, who was present, and had some knowledge in the constitution of humane Bo∣dies, seeing the gentle rising of those Snowy Hills upon her Breast, assured them of the Naturall condition of the Dale. Insomuch that this Conjecture (which in all reason was sufficient) might have served as a bridle to their curiosity, if Misfortune (which had not yet ren∣dered the state of that miserable Lady desperate enough to bee released by Miracle) had not suggested to those Tiger's thoughts the desire of beeing farther satisfied by the visitation of certaine grave Matrons, who affirmed upon their Consciences (having used the Lady with all sort of civility, and made no farther search than of her Head and Bosome) that shee was a Lady full of as much Honour as Vertue and Integrity. How cruell and fiery soever those barbarous Executioners were, yet they could not hinder cold Feare from freezing up their Hearts; which distilling it's Icy liquor through every vein, benum'd their spirits so, that they stood in a no less maze, then one who (unawares) chan∣ceth to tread upon an angry Snake, lying in ambush under the green Tapistry of the Earth, whose horrid hissing invite's the Passenger's Eyes to behold him raising his poisonous Head, and darting Death from his forked Tongue against the Foot that press'd him: They be∣gan to think themselves lost Men, for offering such an affront to a Person of her Quality, believing that neither in her's nor her Husband's Heart there could be any place for pardon of so unspeak∣able an injury. In this despair they consulted together to render their last error worse than the first. The blood of the innocent Modestina was put into the ballance; The principall Man of that accursed crue made a proposition to take away her Life, alleadging that they might justifie themselves to Mieslas for that action, by the resistance which they would fein shee made; and besides that thereby Iphigenes would bee in full liberty to marry the Princess Respicia, without expecting the issue of so many formalities. This Proposition was put in delibe∣ration, and discussed both wayes. At length mercifull Heaven (whose Eyes continually behold the just, and watch over their preservation) contrary to the ordinary course of the World (where evill Counsells commonly oversway the good) made the best and discreetest advice prevaile in favour of that innocent captive. So that at length they
concluded to suspend that cruell Execution, untill they had adver∣tised Mieslas of that mistake, and received directions from him, how to demean themselves in that occurrence. And this newes was brought to the Palatine of Podolia, whilest hee was with Iphigenes, the Messenger adding of his own conceipt, That of a Hen they could not make a Capon. Iphigenes having been already informed by Menochius of Mode∣stina's beeing taken, was the less astonished at this relation; But Mie∣slas was no less surprised than angry; surprised with the strangeness of the error, besides the uncertainty wherewith his thoughts were perplex∣ed of the impression which this event might make in his Son's mind, who hee believed would bee very sensible of that affront done to a person of so neer relation to him: And angry to see that, in stead of Liante (whom hee intended to raze out of the number of Men) hee had but a shadow; and which was worse, that the design hee had against his per∣son beeing divulged, and coming to his Ears, hee would bee more care∣full to avoid falling into his hands; or else, that perchance Despair would transport him to some memorable revenge. Nevertheless dis∣sembling the distemper of his Minde, and hiding his Choller under a smiling Countenance, hee feined to turn this evenement into Laughter; yet could not forbear protesting if ever Eiante did fall into his hands, that hee would deal him hard measure. His manner of speaking, drew from Iphigenes mouth this reply; The affront which you had plotted against him was the cruellest and most bar∣barous that could enter into the thoughts of Man, and I should bee very sorry if it had been executed in my Palatinate: For, I do so abhor the injustice of that proceeding, that I should have imployed all the power and force I could command to hinder it before it was attempted; and there is no sort of vengeance and punishment but I should make them suffer that had put it in execution. What? if I had commanded it? said the fierce Mieslas. Sir, answered the resolute Iphigenes, I know my duty to you as my Father, but you must give mee leave likewise to consider what I owe to my King, to my Province, to the People who under my Government are committed to Justice and my Conscience. Alexander the Great denied a request his Mother demanded of him, because in his Opinion it was not just. As beeing your Son I owe my Life to you, but for the Honours and Estate which I possess, I must acknowledge my self indebted to the King's beneficence; and for my Government I must thank my Sword. You know
that the jealousie of ruling makes Children not regard their Parents; That of commanding likewise make's Parents dis-own their Children. I have read in the History that a certain Consul of Rome having made his own Father alight from his Horse to render him the Honour which was due to his Magistracy, was applauded for that Action not onely by all the Senate and People of that City, but by his Father also, as making the Lawes of Nature, which were but particular give place to those of his Charge, which was publick. And this I say to you, Sir, to the end that not any of your Attendants may dare to attempt any thing against Liante, if they should meet him within the territory of my Palatinate; otherwise I should torture them with so cruell a Death, that their punishment should serve for an example of horrour to Posterity. And let not those brutall Villains, who have done that unworthy affront to Her who is yet my Wife, be so audacious as ever to appear in my presence; For, as the Creator live's, before whom I stand, I will pass and repass my Rapier through their Bodies for punish∣ment of their insolence. The furious Mieslas, who was not accustomed to suffer such caresses, without retorting an answer with his hands aswell as his Tongue, seeing himself out-braved by him, whom hee esteemed to bee his subject, had no small pain to contein his Passion. Hee did however for that time, beeing bound by a certain respect, which Vertue and Verity do usually imprint in the most brutall and least tractable Spirits. So, having calm∣ed his countenance, hee replyed, Iphigenes, I see that contrary to your custom you grow cholerick and that your Passion transports you beyond the limits of that reverence which is due to mee; I thought I had had more power with you, and a greater credit in your Dominions, than I finde I have; But you are to remember that how eminent Dignities soever the King hath conferred upon you, no humane Law can exempt you from the obedience which by the Precepts of Heaven you owe to mee as your Fa∣ther. In contradicting mee you plead against your self: For, do you not see that what I do is for you? that I scrape together onely to make you rich? Will you undoe what I design for your good? will you preserve those whom I seek to destroy, to establish you? Are not you like the Peacock, which un∣cover's the House where hee roost's, or Ivy which pull's down the wall that hold's it up? Sir, answered Iphigenes, Every one act's according to his understand∣ing; and is the Artificer of his own good or bad Fortune; I will not ground mine upon the maximes which you hold, nor therein imitate your ways. If I am an honest Man, I have Wealth and Honours enough already by
the meer liberality of the King my Master: If I am wicked, I have but too much. And I hold as an especiall favour of Heaven this image of disgrace which hath absented mee from Court, and thereby hinder's mee from at∣teining to that utmost degree of Fortune, that is envied by all the World, and which cast's those who are elevated to that height into the publick Ha∣tred, and tearms of continuall apprehension, when Hope can promise them no more. And to declare freely my sense, I had rather be reduced to the extreamest Period of Misery, than live splendidly by the unjust acqui∣sition of another's Estate, beeing resolved, if I do Marry the Princess Re∣spicia, to renounce all that I can pretend of Modestina's, without compel∣ling her to intomb herself alive within the walls of a Monastery, much less to force Liante's Genius, which hee hath so oft professed to mee to be a∣verse to Learning and an Ecclesiastick Life, and wholy inclined to Arms and Martiall Exercises: and it may happen, if of a good Souldier hee become's a good Captain, that hee may make you restore by force of Arms in his Majority, what you have usurped of his during the weakness of his Minority. For my part I will not mingle the Good with the Evill; that is, what I have justly acquired by the King's Bounty, with that which you shall rake together by such unjust practises. This discourse, said Mieslas, is the Child of your Scruples, and proceed's from the little experience you have yet in Worldly affairs. You think it is but to open the Sailes and receive the Wind of Favour, as you have done hitherto; But if once Fortune knit her brow, you will catch at what you can, and to uphold yourself you will grasp with both hands as well as others. But I perceive through the ashes of the counterfeited coldness, which appeareth in your Speeches, certain coales that are yet burning in your Brest for that Modestina, whom you call your Wife, although shee was no more joyned to you in Heart then in Body, according to your own confes∣sion, since you acknowledge never to have consented but with your Lips to her Marriage; And you are so simple as to consider Liante as your Bro∣ther-in-Law, although hee hath not the least relation to you. I say still, answered Iphigenes, that I never was greatly in love with Modestina but my Friendship can admit of no out-vier: For, if our Faces tan insensibly by beeing in the Sun, and cloaths are perfumed by lying neer sweet odours, it is impossible but that the long education you have given us together, should have planted in my Soul the roots of affection, which make's mee desire her happiness, and detest that which doth her mischief; I may say with much truth, I love her as my Sister, and by the same reason Liante as my Brother, and in this quality wee have so often
joyned hands of association, that I should esteem myself a Traytor and an execrable Monster both to God and Men, If I should imbrace the thought of doing them any injury. Therefore, Sir, I conjure you by all that hath any power to move your Heart, to give order speedily that no harm be done to Modestina, otherwise I will go my self to rescue her. If it be your plea∣sure to re-imprison her in the same Castle where shee was, untill the arrivall of the Dispensation for my leaving her my Consent shall attend your Will, but upon this condition, that finding another Match you shall give her a Dowry according to her quality; otherwise I will settle upon her of my own Estate as much as you detein of her's, protesting to do the like for Liante, & what is more, to become their Protectour in such manner against all their enemies, that I will prosecute with Fire and Sword whosoever shall do them any injury. I fore-see then, replied Mieslas, (sparkling Fire out of his Eves) that you and I must have ae quarrell. Sir, said Iphigenes, I shall kiss your weapons and lay my Standard under your Feet, whensoever you appear; but (except∣ing your Person) I shall esteem my mortall Enemies those that shall attempt any thing against Creatures who are so much my Friends. If I suffer for so good a cause, I shall bless my Persecutions, and hug Death if shee sei∣zeth on mee in so just an action; humbly beseeching you to excuse mee, if for the lawfull defence of my Friends I use these words of Precipitation, and exceed the terms of a respectfull Modesty. I see, said Mieslas, that you speak like a Palatine in your own Palati∣nate; that is like a Sovereign and not a Son; But Fortune may so turn her wheel, that you will bee glad to creep under the shadow of my wings, and shelter your self under my Authority. Sir, you see that I do what You will, and I judge to be reasonable; I marry without injoying my Wife, I unmarry, I marry again, and all this more to satisfie your desire, than follow my own inclinations; you are the Rock, I am the Polypus, I receive my colours but from you, I am as Wax to your impressions; and yet if I speak in favour of a friend, you presently cry out against my disobedience. Pardon mee, Sir, if I tell you that you requite very ill the sincerity of my intentions, and that you give mee cause to make use of that liberty which the Heavens gave mee at my Creation; the liberty that is in my Soul, which Soul I received by their infusion, having nothing from you but this wretched Body, which I can no less than abhor, when I contemplate it's misery; yet in the greenness of it's youth you will bind it to a withered old Woman, whom it is fitter for mee to reverence as a Mother than embrace as a Wife; as if Love, which proceed's from our own choice, were the child of Duty.
At length, (said Mieslas (who felt Choller gaining the ascendant over his Reason) you will say so much, that my Patience beeing too far tempt∣ed will turn to Fury and constrain mee to let you see by some violent effect, how much this Language displease's me. Sir, replied Iphigenes, my sorrow is so just, and my resentments so legitimate, that if I were not moved for this outrage done to my Wife, I should be unworthy of the Name of Hus∣band; And of friend, if I did not with all my power oppose the mischief intended to Liante. The worst that can befall mee, is to lose by your hands the Life which you have given me, but to take away my honour and fideli∣ty is beyond the power of Man. Hereupon Mieslas beeing ready to burst with rage, and thundering out no small Oaths, said; Wee shall see (Gallant) if Liante ever fall into my clutches, how you will hinder mee from executing my will upon him. As for Modestina her innocence move's mee to some pitty; besides that, her Sex protects her from my choller, with the design shee hath of espousing a Monastick life when you are married to this other (who is more worth then shee or you) which resolution will make mee treat her with less rigour, and for the present I am contented to send her back to the same Castle, whence shee made her escape (but her Guards must bee more carefull than they were before) or else I will commit her to Aretuza's charge, who will bee watchfull enough of her deportments, and execute upon her as I shall com∣mand. I see that hence forwards you will follow your own fancies, and do but what you list; But in believing your self take heed you be not counsel∣led by a fool; For, such have onely a dear repentance for their Wages. The Court hath taught you loosnesse, which it seem's you reserved to put in practise untill you came into your Palatinate, and beeing puff't up with his Majestie's favour you take upon you Liberties against my will, by with∣drawing yourself from my subjection. However, I will have patience, and making Vertue of Necessity, I will forbear, expecting the time to ex∣press my Resentments; But if you resolve not to marry the Princess, who doth you too much honour in desiring your alliance, let Heaven never pardon mee if ever I pardon you. Sir, replied Iphigenes, Wee are Men onely by Reason, and Reason is manifested by your Words; I am a Man of both, and I will never recede from what I promised, So that the conditions annexed to my promise be performed; the one is my dispensation, the other if shee will have mee in the condition I am. I would to Heaven (answered Mieslas) that the first were as ready as the second. For, in the Passion wherewith shee is in∣flamed for you, I know there is no exile so disgracefull no condition
so miserable, wherein shee would not esteem herself happy to injoy you; And for my part I think her very unhappy in having placed her affection on a subject so full of ingratitude, and who acknowledgeth so little her Love and Merit. After much other discourse to the same effect, they parted very little satisfied of each other. Mieslas went to see the Princess, to whom, though hee dissembled, hee could render no pleasing account, which put her into such distemper, as may bee imagined in a Woman of her Spirit, haughty by reason of the nobleness of her extraction, eminence of her dignity, and the vastness of her Estate; besides all which beeing in∣flamed with Love, and yet who perceived through all these advantages, her affections repayed with some kind of slight. Not long after Iphigenes went to visit her; But to repeat what passed in this interview, were to fill these pages with Passions, which are bet∣ter concealed than published, and more easily conjectured than re∣hearsed. All that I can say, in short, was, that the affection of Respicia made her act the part of an earnest Suiter, who indeavour's by all sorts of perswasion to charm the inclination of his Mistress; And the reser∣vedness of Iphigenes made him seem like a Virgin, whom Modesty ob∣ligeth to express a pure indifference to those that court her, and an absolute refignation of her will to her Parents pleasure. All that shee could obtain of him, was a solemn protestation (which hee often iter∣ated) to take her to Wife, when hee was released from Modestina, with this Proviso, That Shee would accept of him for her Husband, when hee should be in full liberty of disposing of himself. Which clause was offen∣sive to her Ears, as revoking into doubt her constancy, and the resolu∣tion which shee had taken to bequeath herself irrevocably to the beau∣tifull Palatine. Mean time shee languished almost to Death, though neer her remedy; and in the midst of so many occasions of delight, as his splendid entertainment afforded her, shee could not hinder her sighs from discovering by stealth her grief. So, having imprisoned herself within her Closet, where shee had full Liberty of expressing her thoughts, shee brake her perplexed Silence with this Complaint against
THE INCONSTANCIE OF MEN. I Can no longer hide this tort'ring pain; Soul wast thy self in Sighs, disclose my smart; And since my Passion's answer'd with Disdain, Let Iphigenes know, Love broke my Heart. Unfaithfull Iphigenes, who did force Thee to make shew of so much fervent Love To mee, when by I know not what remorse, Th'effects a perfect contradiction prove? But of such faithless Souls it is the use To make a purchase of our firm Desires, And by false Oaths our credulous Hearts abuse, And quench with Icie difrespects our Fires. Yet why should I be troubled at his Change, Since 'tis the humour of all Men to vary? Their Words are Wind, their Fancies love to range, And all their Faith is but Imaginary. The Constancy which they so deeply vow, Is but the paint of their inconstant Hearts; And by their Levities too late wee know, They glory in augmenting of our Smarts. That there a Phenix is most People say, But who her spicy Nest did ever see? And if by the Effects wee censure may, Such is my Idol's vow'd Fidelity.
VVhile shee is spending her Breath in Sighs, and thirsting like Tantalus in the midst of pleasant Waters; Let us go see how Boleslaüs hath discharged the Commission of his Embassie. Beeing arrived where Liante, by Order of the Palatine, was concealed; Father, said the young Gentleman, your appearance rejoiceth mee no less than Phebus doth the VVorld, when hee chaseth away the shades wherewith the Night had covered the Face of the Earth. This last Night I had the most ex∣travagant Dream, and which put mee in the greatest paine of any I can remember; For, mee thought that beeing escaped out of the clawes of those Harpies, which I belaboured so handsomely in our Country-prison, I was fallen into the Hands of those barbarous Rusticks, who searching mee, bound as I was, found mee to be a Woman, which bred a strange Agony in my Thoughts; For I speak really, I had rather imbrace Death, than be subiect to their sad Condition: And that which troubled mee most, was that brutall newes which Arcade brought us of the Design Mieslas had against mee, which my Fancy made mee believe those rascalls had exe∣cuted on my person. But, wakening put mee out of all pain, and your arrivall, unveiling all these Enigma's, will set my Thoughts at rest. I never was with Artemidorus of Morpheus Councill, said Boleslaus, but it is probable that by some kinde of transpiration, or by the means of Spirits things acted at a distance are conveyed to persons absent, and repre∣sented to them in their sleep with strange disguisements. Your Dream is but too true; for, that Liante (of whose disaster Arcade brought us notice) is no other than your Sister, who came in Man's apparrell to seek her Hus∣band, beeing prick't with Jealousie for Almeria; the poor Lady had made her escape out of Prison, but at Mieslas arrivall at Plocens, shee was ap∣prehended for you, and delivered into the Hands of some Villains who un∣dertook to execute what Arcade told us: But, I believe, if their bar∣barism transport them to the impudence of a search, finding themselves mistaken, the apprehension of being severely punished by Ighigenes will make them seek their security by flight. If this newes doubly distempered Liante, I give him leave to judge who know's how sensible to a Bother that's full of honour, is an affront offered to his Sister: Besides, considering how much more precious the Skin is then the Shirt, the danger whereunto hee saw himself ex∣posed by the rigour and proximity of Mieslas, agitated his mind with no small perplexities. Hee would have inquired divers particulars con∣cerning Modestina, but Boleslaüs could informe him no farther than
what hee had learned by the relations of Menochius and Arcade: Onely hee assured him that Iphigenes intended an exemplary revenge against those inhumane instruments of his Father's cruelty, if they at∣tempted any outragious act upon the person of her who was so dear to him. And as for him, that hee came purposely to let him understand, that the Palatine would expose his own Life in his defence against the rigours of Mieslas; by whom hee need not fear to bee surpised, as well in regard Iphigenes was more powerfull than hee in his own govern∣ment, as that Mieslas could not learn where he was, those same Gentle∣men whom hee had seen in the Forest, beeing still in the opinion that he was Almeria. Notwithstanding all these reasons, fear made so hot an allarm in the poor Gentleman's Heart, that confidence could finde no admittance. Hee was too well acquainted with the imperious and brutall humour of his Tyrannicall Guardian to trust him, the experience of his long imprisonment and unworthy treatment formerly, represented them∣selves feelingly to his Memory. Insomuch that thinking his onely safety was in his heeles hee determined by withdrawing himself secret∣ly out of that Province, (where he had passed so many perills) to secure his person from the violence of that Tempest. Nevertheless hee pru∣dently dissembled his resolution to Boleslaüs, lest hee should divert his design by perswasions, or oppose it by the authority of Iphigenes. Inso∣much that after some other discourse, Boleslaüs (thinking that hee had sufficiently pacified his thoughts by the assurance of Iphigenes protecti∣on) took leave of him to return to Plocens, whence hee promised to give him frequent intelligence of what passed. But Liante, who studied nothing more than to be out of Mieslas reach, easily accomplished the design of his security: For, not beeing Prisoner in that Castle, it was no difficult matter to steal away from those, who were commanded to defend, not to detein his person. And doubtless it was not without the suggestion of some good Angell, that hee so sodainly took the resolution of leaving that fatall coast, which was no less dangerous to him, then Scylla and Charybdis are to those Mariners that saile through the Sicilian Sea. For, whether Mieslas would revenge himself upon that imaginary Shepherdess for the liberty which Iphigenes took in speaking to him, or whether hee conceived that shee was the main obstacle that hindered him from answering Respicia's desires, beeing moved thereunto by her instigations, hee set so many Engines to work, that in short time
hee learn't where that Castle was in which Iphigenes concealed that supposed Mistress. And it beeing an hard matter to keep long undis∣covered a thing done in the presence of many; whether Pomeran out of zeal for the Palatine's honour desired by that means to divert his friend from that Passion, which hee esteemed ridiculous; or whether some of the Souldiers, corrupted by mony, revealed the secret to Mieslas; hee stole away from Plocens in the Night, and beeing well ac∣companied hee marched to that Castle, hee introduced himself cunningly under the Name of Iphigenes. Beeing entred hee asked for Almeria; but the inhabitants answering him that Liante was no longer there, hee thought they mocked him: The Master of the house on the other side thought Mieslas mocked him and began to grow angry to see himself braved in his own House by persons whom hee knew not, onely they had made use of the Palatine's Name to facilitate their ad∣mittance. Mieslas fearing lest, during those debates, the party whom hee came to seek might by some subtility bee evaded, commanded his followers to search diligently every corner of the Castle. But neither Liante nor Almeria could bee found, for they were both retired to a place unknown as well to the Governour of Plocens, as the cruell Pala∣tine of Podolia. Day had no sooner opened the watchfull Iphigenes Eyes, but beeing informed of his Father's nocturnall chace, and fearing lest hee should take his Turtle in the Nest you may imagine what perplexities disturb∣ed his thoughts. But at length Love gaining the ascendant over all other respects, made him presently take Horse, and having assembled as many Gentlemen, besides his Guards, as could not but over-power the Party which attended Mieslas, hee marched with all speed to∣wards that Castle, resolving to defend his Friend against the violence of his Father. Undoubtedly their incounter had been very bloudy, if hee had found Liante taken: For, what would not our Amazon have done for the price of such a victory? Hee arrived at the Castle just as Mieslas, after an exact Search, was coming forth. In his heat Iphigenes would have charged his Father's Troop without further Examination, beeing determined to rescue Liante, or lose his Life: But Boleslaüs tempered that impetuosity, tel∣ling him that before hee came to so desperate an effect, hee should first consider the certainty of the Cause. Then asking some of his Father's Attendants if Liante was taken, hee was answered, that Almeria was not to bee found. Passion having too much overbalanced his senses,
I care not for Almeria (said Iphigenes) so that Liante be free, You may well think (said Boleslaus in his Ear) if Almeria be not taken, that Liante is safe enough; For, they go both one way, and under the same Cloaths. But when hee advanced towards Mieslas, that meeting of the Fa∣ther and the Son was like to the opposition of the Planets of Mars and Saturn, whose Aspects dart none but maligne influences. Mieslas ta∣king occasion to speak first, said to his Son; I think this is an inchanted Castle, for the People answer all by contraries; I asked for your Diana, and they toldmee that Liante was no longer there; hath your Bother-in-law been in this place then? Sir, replied Iphigenes angerly, are you come hi∣ther to search? shew what Commission you have from the King to that purpose, otherwise give mee leave to tell you, as Palatine of this Country, that you have nothing to do to seek either of them here. But if I had found either of them (said Mieslas) I should have made them knew what my Power is, and all your strength would have been too weak to have taken them out of my hands. As beeing my Father (an∣swered Iphigenes) you have priviledge to use these tearms, But there's none else breathing upon Earth whom I should not make throughly sensible of the Power I have in the Countries which depend on my authority. Therefore, Sir, you must tell mee if you have taken either of those persons; For, I will die in the place, or I will make him that hath them in keeping release them; and whatsoever you are able to do or say, nothing shall hinder mee from cutting in pieces all those that accompany you, if they are not delivered to my hands: For, to suffer this breach in my Charge, and that before my Face any one should seize upon Persons that are under my Pro∣tection, is an affront which I can less indure than Death. This inflamed the fiery Sarmatian with such Fury, that fetching a Career hee had fallen upon Iphigenes like an hasty storm, if hee (who was no less dexterous than the other fierce) had not handsomly slipped aside, and let pass the impetuosity of that Torrent. Then those that attended him interposing themselves to hinder them from joyning, you might have seen Mieslas foaming with rage, and brandishing his naked Sword, with threats to dip it in his own blood, (that was) in the body of Iphigenes; who having not so much as laid his hand upon the Guard of his, was resolved rather to die by his Father's hand, than draw his Sword against him. But as how graceless soever Children are, yet there remain's some raye of Paternall reverence in their Souls; So in the Heart of a Father,
what Choler soever animate's him against his Children, there is a secret Advocate which plead's their Cause, and make's the Weapons fall out of their hands. This was verified by that occurrence; for, what Pas∣sion soever transported Mieslas at the present, hee was afterwards glad of those Gentlemen's opposing his fury, and that they had given his Indignation leisure to appease the impetuosity of it's violent Surges, beeing better satisfied to have killed his Son with his Tongue then his hands, and run him through with threats then with his Rapier. At length Iphigenes beeing assured by the Gentleman of the Castle, and the Souldiers, that Liante had given them the slip the day before, his mind was indifferently well pacified, but yet much troubled, that hee knew not whither hee was gone. So, the storm beeing quite blown over, the Father and Son accosted each other; and Mieslas aba∣ting not a little of his rigid haughtiness, By-. (said hee swearing despe∣rately) I think you will force mee to deliver those whom I have not in my power, but if I had, you should assoon wrest the Club out of Hercules hands, as teare them out of my clutches. I bless the Heavens, Sir, said Iphigenes, that things be in the condition they are: I must confess I should be much troubled to see persons ill treated in any territories, whose preservation is pretious to mee. But, said Mieslas, may not I know if that was Liante? Sir, answered Iphigenes, that equivocall appellation deceive's you; it is Almeria, who having put on Man's cloaths to go a Hunting, and do violent exercises with more Freedom and Activity, call's herself Calliante, which name I imposed upon her in an humour, it signifie's Fair-Flower. What, Fair-Flower? said Mieslas, indeed shee did well to vanish before I came; For, never any Haile did so much spoil in the Vineyards, as my Blowes should have done on Her Shoulders, if I could have laid hold on Her. With some other such like passages which wanted not Quips and Jarring words, they re-entred the City of Plocens, Iphigenes having al∣wayes his hand upon his wound, that is, his thoughts continually retur∣ning to his Loss of Liante. The Pilot that in the midst of dangerous Rocks is agitated by a ra∣ging Tempest, and from whose Eyes the horrid shades of Night doe hide the twinkling flames of his directing Star, is not in greater per∣plexity then our Iphigenes, not knowing which way to steer his course in pursuit of his dear Liante. With what an Eye did hee behold the Princess at his return, esteeming her the principall cause of all these
troubles? Hee carried himself with such indifference towards her, abating so much of those Courtesies, and Compliments, whereof hee was esteemed the onely Master, that it was much the despight of seeing her affection so ill recompensed, had not cured her of that wound which the Beauty of Iphigenes had made in the Center of her Heart: But alas! it was incurable, since neither Time, Absence, Cruelty, nor Dis∣dain, the sovereign remedies of that Desease, were able to asswage the torment of her languishing Pain. Mieslas very unsatisfied with his Son's deportments, resolved to de∣part next Morning for Podolia, as well to give orders concerning the affairs of his Charge and Family, as to cause Modestina to be more strictly garded, & take his Daughter Clemencia with him to Court, there to attend the Queen untill the Prince Cassin should marry her. And the Princess Respicia settled her resolution to return to the Court more in love than ever with the perfections of Iphigenes, but less satisfied with his Courtesie. Onely Hope (which never leaveth us in the midst of the greatest disasters) somewhat appeased the tempest of that Ladie's thoughts, by the assurance which Iphigenes confirmed to her of making himself her's, assoon as his dispensation had restored him to himself. The same Night shee went from Plocens, Iphigenes found under the Carpet in his Chamber a note, the Characters and sense whereof ac∣cused the hand and invention of Respicia; all the contents were amo∣rous complaints and exclamations against inconstancy, but no sub∣scription, nor any particular address to him; yet hee needed no Oedipus for the expounding of that Riddle; hee plainly saw that shee complained of him, but hee feared less that despight would cure her Love, than to see her flames increase by the Ice of his neglect. Let her be pleased or displeased, said hee within himself that concerne's mee little; For, sooner or later her error must be manifested: and coming at length to understand how unable I am to answer her desires, that knowledge will make her lose all farther hopes. Oh! that my misery consisted onely by beeing in her Prison, then my disease would never trouble; mee, for any mean medicine would be able to heal my wound. But the rigour of my Fate, never ceasing to persecute mee, make's mee love in so strange a manner, that groaning under the pangs of Death in my Martyrdom, I dare not ex∣press my sufferings. Oh! if in the presence of the Object which ravished mee, and which is now ravished from mee with so much cruelty, I had not the confidence to declare my condition and my smart, how should I doe
it in his absence, and such an absence as is to mee an absolute loss; since in my disaster I am yet so unhappy as not to know where hee is? Ah! Liante, could you have the Heart to steal your self away from the person in the World which love's you most, without leaving mee the consolation of beeing advertised where you were retired? For your flying and my following should have been in the same path; and if you had flown before as the Lightning, I should have come as close after as the Thunder∣claps. Judge by this discourse how forcible is the attraction of inclination. Iphigenes was no more where hee was, but where hee loved; and as hee knew not where that was which hee loved, hee knew not well where hee was himselfe; like an Archer that shoot's without seeing the mark, or one that run's a race without knowing where to end his Career. So great riches and such high honours as environed him, were but as many burthens to the wings of his desires, hee would have esteemed himself more happy, if his condition had been more miserable. To repeat his Exclamations against the severity of his Father, (who not satisfied to have persecuted him from his birth, seemed to aim at nothing but the ruine of his contentments) would bee superfluous. What recreations soever Pomeran, and his other friends invented to mitigate the sense of his Affliction, nothing had the power to divert him from his Melancholly musings. Beeing deprived of the Aspect of the Star of his desites, nothing but obscurity and confusion possessed his thoughts. At length after the revolution of some dayes, consumed in a com∣fortless discontentment, having received no answer from the severall places whither hee had sent to inquire after Liante, at a time when hee least expected newes, hee received from the hands of an unkown Messenger a Paper wherein hee read these words. LIANTE'S Letter to IPHIGENES. Since the Fortuen of your Family, and the Misfortune of mine, have conspired to make mee perish, be not displeased (dear Brother) that I go to seeke in the Warrs an honourable Grave: the edge of Mars's VVeapons cannot cut so deep, but
that it will yet bee more favourable to mee, than that which the rigour of your Father, (insatiable of my calamities) hath de∣signed for mee. You conceive (I presume) my meaning, there∣fore I shall not express myself in any other tearms, lest this Paper should blush at that, which cannot bee related with any Face, under which remain's the least drop of generous Blood; nor projected but by a Soul that's absolutely Brutall, it were too little to say Barbarous. This Reason is sufficient to justifie my flight, which I never would have undertaken without your privity, could I have given my Soul as much confidence in your Power, as I had of your Will to protect mee; and could I have banished from my apprehension the just distrust I con∣ceived of the fury of that inhumane Tartare. The greatest displeasure I have, is, that before the Death, whereinto I am going to precipitate my self, I could not give you the last ADIEU, and assure you that my Affection to you shall sur∣vive my Ashes, and that the coldness of Death shall never have the power to lessen it's agreeable ardours. If I have not deserved to Live neer you, and in your service, at least it shall bee for your service that I die thus destant from you; too too happy in this last indeavour, if I could make you see the oblati∣tion which I shall Sacrifise to you of my one Life. I know that this is the intention of Mieslas; and that I can doe nothing through the whole course of my Life, that will bee more agree∣able to him than to end it; and thereby sate his extream cove∣tousness of having that little fortune which my Father left mee. Oh Heavens! if the resigning of my whole Estate to him, would purchase mee the happiness of injoying freely your presence, how well satisfied should I bee? Let all Riches, the causes of so many troubles, perish: Hee did well that cast all his into the Sea, saying, that hee had rather lose them, than stay till they lost him. And for my part I should think nothing lost if I possessed you; but not seeing you any more, I have now no∣thing to lose but my Life, if it bee living to spin out tedious
Dayes, languishing in the privation of that, which wee esteem the dearest of any thing the World produce's. All my Des∣pair is, that going to the War (wherewith this Kingdome is threatned by this last commotion) I shall bee constrained by the severe Law of Necessity, to imbrace an interest which my own Conscience, and the generall Opinion holdeth the least justifiable. But what safety could I promise my self in the King's Army, where Mieslas cannot faile of having eminent Com∣mand's? were not that to deliver my self to my Enemies in doing service to my Prince? Hee that hath a will to die, pre∣sent's himself to the blow; such is my resolution, not to dis∣serve his Majesty, to whom my Family oweth all its Fortune. I conjure you, if you are recalled to the Court, to make him understand the sincerity of my intentions, and assure him, that my casting my self on the Rebell's side is not to maintain their interest, or foment that unnaturall Fire, but to ruine and sub∣vert their designes; at least, if my birth procure's mee any power and credit among them. In mean time I bid you a long ADIEU by these Lines, less black with their Ink than my sorrow. ADIEU, Brother, no less beloved than you are lovely, and the onely Idoll of my Heart. ADIEU, since the unkinde influence of our Starres separates us; and since I could not Live to Die at your Feet, if I Die (as I am determined) let mee Live in your memory. Preserve mee some place in your Thoughts, and believe that your Name, and the Idea of your Perfections shall bee to Eternity the most pre∣tious Treasures of mine. Was not this Discourse sufficient to make our Amorous Palatine die with Love, had hee not already been overwelmed with Grief? Oh sighs of Iphigenes, the Winds must bee your supporters; for, no other Tongue, but that of silence is capable of expressing you. The words of this Letter were as Oyle upon his Fire, and Wood in the flames of his disquiet Minde. Well, Iphigenes, you complained, that you had no news from your dear Liante, nor what Region hee had
chosen for his Retreat; and now this knowledge is more afflicting, than the torment of your ignorance. Poor Mortalls, let us cease to wish, since our proper desires are contrary to us, and that the inflamation of our wounds increaseth by the application of those remedies, whereby wee think to refresh and lessen their anguish. But for the perfect understanding of Liante's Letter, and to give light to the sequele of this Narration, I am inforced to make a little Digression in the History of those times, to describe the condition wherein Polonia then was. The Monarch of that Kingdom is accustomed to add to his Title of King of Polonia, the style of great Duke of Lithuania, Prusia and Russia, although the Knights of the Teutonick Order possess a great part of Prusia, and the Emperour or grand Knez of the Muscovites a great part of Russia; but as for Lithuania hee injoyeth it intirely, and hath reason to stile himself Grand Duke thereof, in regard it is a Dutchy of a very large extent. In the Sea the great Fishes devour the smaller, In the Heavens the appearance of the Sun Eclipseth the Stars, and in the World the strongest States swallow the weaker. Divers Dukes of Lithuania were chosen by the Polonians to be their King, by which means the Lithuanians having reigned in Polonia, made Polonia reigne in Lithuania. For, from the time of Iagellon (as yet an Idolater) who, beeing turned Christian, received in Baptism the Name of Ʋladislaüs, and married the Daughter of Lewis King of Hungaria and Polonia, that Crown continued for many successions in the Family of the Jagel∣lons, untill the reign of Sigismond Augustus, in whose time happened the event which I now relate. All which by their birth rights, beeing Dukes of Lithuania, were elevated by Election to the Royall Throne of Polonia: And although they joyntly held those two Sovereignties, yet they were distinct, and might bee separated; Not that the Po∣lonians omitted any indeavours to unite that Country to their State, and add that pretious Pearl to their Diadem; but the Lithuanians powerfully opposed them. And this was their Reason. There is no Nation nor Province so petty, but the People would bee glad to have a Prince of their own Land, though in this they know not what they ask. For, beeing received for a Maxime by the sagest Politicians, that little Principalities are great Tyrannies, and that a Soveraignty is the more just the greater it is, Who see's not that the pettiest Princes, stri∣ving to imitate great Monarchs in their Pompous Trains and Mag∣nificence, to maintain that state are inforced to oppress their Subjects
with extraordinary impositions? Nevertheless the Lithuanians, sick of this popular error, desiring alwayes a particular Duke, would never consent to an union with the Polonians. Insomuch that during all the forementioned successions, very few years passed without some insur∣rection and revolting in Lithuania, to keep in breath the valour of the Polonian Gentry. And at the same time Liante took this resolu∣tion to perish in the Wars, the Palatines of Troc and Minsca, beeing returned mal-content from the Court, made a League offensive and defensive against the Polonians, and hooked into their Confederacy, be∣sides those of Kiovia and Polocia, divers Castellains of other Palati∣nates; in a word, the rising was in a manner universall through all Lithuania. Liante had no sooner made his addresses to the Palatines of Troc and Minsoe, chief instruments of this Commotion, but hee was received by them with respects answerable to his Birth; the Palatine of Minsce protesting that hee had alwayes made profession of a singular friend∣ship to his Father. They were presently Cozens, and Liante intrust∣ed with places of great command, before hee had passed through the Military Discipline and Obedience: Like Themistocles banished, hee blessed his misfortune, seeing himself raised on a sodain to those ho∣nours which hee so vehemently ambitioned. Hee troubled not his thoughts to penetrate into the depth of the Cause; it suffised him, that hee had met with an employment wherein, by the effects of his valor, he might make appear the Greatness of his Courage. Iphigenes beeing certified of Liante's beeing among the Rebells, (al∣though his Love pleaded an excuse for the other's Despair) could not comprehend how that generous Soul should fix upon that resolution of taking Arms against his Sovereign, which hee held the unworthiest action any Gentleman well-born could bee guilty of; For, in effect the Sun-beams are not more inseparably concomitant of Titan's luster, than the Nobility ought to bee of Royalty. Mieslas had no sooner settled the private affairs of his Family, with those which concerned his Publick Charge, and remitted Modestina to the guard of his Wife Aretuza, but upon a Summons from the King hee repaired speedily to the Court, giving order that his Daughter Glemencia should bee brought shortly after him, whom hee placed at her arrivall among the Queen's Maids of Honour. The Lord Castellain of Cracovia (who is above all the Palatines of that Kingdom, and one of the principall persons of State) was made Generall of the King's Army, and Mieslas Lieut. Generall.
The Princess Rospicia (lest her Iphigenes should bee diverted by the Functions of War, from answering her pretensions, after shee had ob∣tained his Dispensation) dealt so with the Queen by the intercession of some Ladies neer her person, and her own perswasions, that shee resolved to intreat the King to repeale the beautifull Palatine from his exile; whereunto, after some consideration, hee condescended; beeing informed besides, that hee beeing much afflicted at his so long absence from Count, was determined to seek a glorious Death in the Bed of Honour, rather than train so obscure and discontented a Life. And beeing overcome by the Ladie's importunities, hee dispatched a Mes∣senger to him with Letters so favourable, and full of such charms, as had been capable not onely of drawing Diana out of the Woods, but the Moon out of her Sphear. But this kinde invitation, which would have ravished Iphigenes with joy, could hee have injoyed Liante's com∣pany; without him, seemed inconsiderable and irksome. Therefore hee forthwith returned an answer full of respect and humility to the King, with no less expressions of the Greatness and Gallantry of his Courage in these Words. IPHIGENES Letter to the KING. Most Gracious SOVEREIGN, I Should esteem my self unworthy, not onely of so many Fa∣vours which render mee your Creature, but also of beholding the Sun, (who is the image of your Bounty, as you are that of God) if Fortune now presenting an occasion, to make appear the devotion of my Heart to your Service, and the zeal of my fidelity, I should plunge my self in the Delights of your Court, whilest others are mounted in the field for the defence of your Royall Authority, against the Insolence of the Rebells. What would those envious persons say, whose Calumnies have for so long time deprived mee of the Honour of your presence (the onely felicity of my Life) or rather what would they not say, if in this publick occurrence, I should not give some testi∣mony,
that I am not so desirous of receiving your Liberalities, as to deserve them by my indeavours, and the effusion of my Blood? which are but slender proofs of the boundless affection I have to serve you. Permit therefore, gracious Sir, by whose Munificence I injoy both my Honour and Estate, that I may expend this, and imploy that for your Majesty, to whom I am so far ingaged, that although I should sacrifice my Life in your Wars, I should not requite the least of those Obligations, which render me Eternally your Debter. Scarce had hee by this answer waved the inticements of the Court, but a Surcharge (shall I say of Affliction, or importunate Affection?) op∣posed his determination; it was a tedious, but loving Letter from Modestina, adorned with the Flowers of so plaintive a Rhethorick that Iphigenes heart was much more moved at those sad Contents, than allured with the King's invitations; yet having paid her with a like excuse, hee continued his preparations for the War. The Palatine's power is so absolute in Polonia, that when they command the Drums to beat for any Expedition, all those in their ter∣ritories, who are obliged to the exercise of Arms, must presently bee in a readiness to march. Besides this Authority; Iphigenes beeing of a very obliging and liberall disposition, in short time hee raised a con∣siderable party of as gallant Horse, as any were in the whole Army. Mieslas used the like diligence in his Palatinate; but beeing of a gree∣dy tenacious humour, and more ready to take from others than im∣part any thing of his own, his Levies were not comparable to his Son's, who met him at the Rendez-vous: And although they were ill satisfied enough of each other, yet at that time they trampled under feet all private considerations, to apply their united forces to the pre∣sent service of the Publick, and their Prince. The revolted Lithuanians not daring to incounter the Royall Army in the Field, sheltred themselves under the bulwarks of the strongest Holds then in their possession. So that after some slight skirmishes, the Loyall Party besieged the Mutiniers in their chief City named Minsce, scituate upon the River Nepor, which the Antients called Boristhenes. Liante amongst others had cast himself into this place with Olavius Palatine of that Province, and Bogdales Palatine of Troc his Confederate, besides divers Castellains and Gentlemen of note.
This City was strongly fortified, and well stored with Provisions, and all necessaries requisite to maintain a Siege. And as Despair redouble's the courage of those who know the unjustness of their cause, there was not any of those Factious Spirits, but resolved to suffer the utmost of extremities rather than surrender. Olavius had retired within those Walls his whole Family, Wealth, and as I may say, all his Fortune. Whilest the Royall Army were draw∣ing their Lines of Circumvallation, the Rebells made Sallies daily, and allarmed them with hot skermishes; and sometimes sent Challen∣ges for single Combats. I should swell this Volume too much, if I stood to relate the particulars; therefore, not to tire the Reader, I shall onely men∣tion some persons principally concerned in my History. But first I must crave leave to say, that the Planets of Mars and Venus, who do so frequently interchange their glances in the Heavens, have such powerfull influences upon Earth, that it seem's the one hath no sooner cast his Aspect upon any Morrall, but the other by some agreeable Sympathy, take's possession of the same Object. And in effect among those who make profession of handling a Sword, it seem's that the wearing thereof would not bee fortunate to them, if it were not im∣ployed for the consideration of some Lady; as it is commonly seen, that Gentlemen expose their Persons to most eminent dangers, to give testimony of their Valour in favour of Her whom they serve. Liante, who till then had lived in exceeding restraint, seeing him∣self in full liberty of his desires, was easily induced to the naturall in∣clination hee had to Love. Olavius, among divers other Children, had two Daughters, whose Beauty deserved observation: But the younger had a great advantage of Nature above her Elder Sister, who was inferiour to her in all things but her age, wherein shee surpassed her by many years. The one was full-ripe, and in a condition that seemed visibly to demand an Husband. The other was a Bud not quite blown, yet discovered something that promised in her season all the excellences of a perfect Rose, but as yet so green, that her yeares might have dispensed the hastiest of her Sex to render her selfe under Hymen's pleasing yoak; her humour was childishly vain, and more apt to give then receive Passion, her Judgement beeing yet insusceptible of any. It was Liante's Fortune to be caught with this bait; betwixt seeing
her and beeing taken, there was no great intervall. His Birth and Estate, which hee hoped to recover by Olavius means gave him con∣fidence enough to aspire to that alliance, and the merit of the Object contein'd captive but too many attractions to his desire. Nevertheless hee hid his Fire under the Ashes of discretion, expecting a fit time and opportunity to disclose his intentions. Clemencia Sister to Iphigenes possessed no such charms, as could ob∣lige him to much Constancy; her fidelity onely having moved his Heart to a reciprocall amity: but in regard the Despair of possessing her, by reason of Mieslas cruelty, and the Prince Cassin's research, forced him to relinquish that desire; hee thought more of beeing revenged of that savage Palatine of Podolia, than of seeking her alliance, beeing the ra∣ther incited thereunto by Despight, seeing his Sister Modestina upon the point of beeing repudiated by Iphigenes. Upon these considerati∣ons hee suffered the inclinations of his Minde to bend under the yoak of this new Captivity, suppressing however his flames within his brest, allowing nothing to outward appearances, but what Modestie and Decency might permit. Whilest hee was contriving projects for the conquest of this Rachel, Olavius studied how to ingage him in his alliance, by giving him the Leah: It beeing the custome in these dayes, as well as in Laban's time, to marry the Elder Daughters before the yonger, Age, Reason and Decency requiring no less. Olavius having formerly been familiarly acquainted with Liante's Father, and knowing to how great an estate hee was heir (though Mieslas unjustly deteined it from him) thought it no small advantage to have him for a Son-in law (notwithstanding his disgrace) which hee could not have hoped for, if Fortune had been more kinde to him. Therefore to make him fall into his Nets, hee received him, as yet all wet with his Shipwrack, into his house, cherished him as his Son, and rendered him all the indeering Offices, that could bee expected from a tender Father. His Table, Horses, Attendants, and his Purse, hee might command with as much freedom as himself: So that Liante feeling his generous heart o're-charged with so many Obligations, meditated nothing more then Olavius service, and how best to comply with his disposition, that hee might see hee had not sowed his favours on an ingratefull Soil. This Palatine of Minsce had a Son, whose tender youth might have excused him from the use of Arms, had not his high Courage invited him to Martiall exercises for the defence of his Father's Fortune, then
ingaged in the Party of the Revolters. Him Olavius commanded to render so many, and such respectfull devoirs to Liante, that at length those Courtesies (which would have won the most untractable of Spirits) absolutely charmed our gallant stranger's noble Heart, and laid the foundation of an inviolable friendship betwixt them. Already the desire of dying was half quench't in Liante's Minde, and the Ambition of living to establish his Fortune, and serve Amiclea (so was Olavius yonger Daughter named) wholly possessed his thoughts. And through the dore of this Love entred another ray of Glory, tick∣ling his aspiring Heart, which inflamed him with a desire of conquering that Michol by the death of many of her enemies. Whilest hee consumed in this ambitious impatience to signalize his valour by some honorable Combat, Oloria, Olavius eldest Daughter, suffered a no less torment, but of a contrary quality: For her Eyes having fed too greedily their sight with the delicacies of Liante's Countenance, that sweet Idea slipt into her Soul, and there ingraved it self with so deep an incision, that it was beyond her power to efface it. Besides this inclination (which shee dissembled as much as pos∣sibly shee could by the priviledge and innate Modesty of her Sex) when shee had an inkling from her Mother, to whom Olavius had communi∣cated his designe, that they intended to marry her to Liante, you may imagine with what joy her Heart was dilated. Upon this assurance shee let her thoughts take Wing, and restreined her desires with the less caution, because the end of her pretensions was honourable and lawfull; and passing somewhat beyond those Limits of Discretion and Modesty, which a fervent Love is easily perswaded to exceed, shee prevented his Courting of Her with extraordinary caresses, which made his Heart recoile as fast as shee advanced; Ac∣cording to the generall custome among Men, who never eagerly pursue any, but such as flie them, and contemn those that meet or follow them: And it is likewise the Order of Nature and Civility, that Ladies should make themselves bee served and observed, untill of Soveraigns Marriage tendereth them Subjects: Those that do other∣wise have found the direct means to make themselves the Fable and laughing-stock of all that see and know them. But to what extremities doth not that Passion, which blind's the discreetest Eyes, reduce the firmest and most resolute Souls? Liante, who acknowledged himself highly obliged to her Father, for his favourable treatment, and her Brother for his Courteous
respects, could hardly constrein his humour from letting her under∣stand, that those affected attractions, and too fond indearments were not pleasing to him. Shee used all the Plots her Passion could invent, to accost him, but hee shunned her incounter by such studied evasions, that they seemed rather to proceed from the casualty of occurren∣ces, than any subtilty of his. This cast the poor Oloria into perplexities beyond expression, and inflamed her desire to excesses unimaginable. And as if Liante had premeditated to consume that passionate admirer of his perfections, the more shee importuned him with her unwel∣come kindnesses, the more hee addressed his Courtships to Amiclea, whom though hee feined to love onely for divertisement, her Image was imprinted in the Center of his Heart. Which possessed Oloria with so devouring an Envy, that it deprived her Soul of all sort of contentment and repose; I might style that torment of her's Jealousie, if shee had ever communicated her affection to Liante, and hee given her any hope of reciprocating her flames; but no such correspon∣dence having past between them, me-think's the name of Envy doth better represent her pain, understanding but too well, by the faithfull report of her Looking-glass, the advantages Nature had bestowed on her Sister above her; and seeing Amiclea preferr'd before her by him whose senses shee desired to captivate, and render susceptible of her resentments. Prudence and Decency permitted not Olavius to break the Ice, and offer his Daughter to Liante, lest that might give him occasion to think that hee intended to sell his favours to him, and press him with a bond which ought to tie none, but those that are willing. Polemander (so was Olavius Son named) who would have been very glad to have had him for a Brother-in-law, that already professed to bee his friend, desired nothing so eagerly as to see Liante's Eyes turned towards his Sister Oloria; But what Gins and Netts soever the Fowlers use, the Birds doe not alwayes light where they could wish. Thus Liante was esteemed by her whom hee neglected, and adored her who had not yet Judgement to discerne his Desert, nor recompence his Love. In this condition to divert the cares, which disturbed his thoughts, by the importunity of the one, and the insensibility of the other, there beeing every day occasion of action, hee watcht for some opportunity of rendering himself remarkeable by his valour. Few dayes passed without some desperate Sallies, Skermishes, Assaults, or Surprisalls,
wherein Liante was continually one of the forwardest to charge, ad last in the retreat: And divers single Combats were fought be∣twixt particular Gentlemen, wherein the besieged were sometimes Conquerours, sometimes conquered, according to the chance of Armes. Liante intended to challenge Mieslas, and take an honourable Re∣venge of the unworthy outrages which hee had received from his Bar∣barisme; but Olavius (who tendered his preservation as his own Son's) advised him first to make his triall upon some other, lest undertaking a Combat with too much unadvisedness hee should not come off with his Honour. At length having obtained leave (not without much perswasion) of the chief Commanders, hee put on a suit of black Armour imbellished in the extremities of the Joints with fillets of Gold; and having chosen in the Palatine's stable an Horse of the same colour, caparison'd with black Velvet inriched with a golden Purle, and all his furniture of the like trimming, hee sent a Trumpeter forth to invite any Gentleman of the Royall Army to break a Lance, and un∣sheath his Cimeterre, in favour of the Lady whom hee chiefly ho∣noured. Upon this invitation appeared in the Field, mounted on a stately Steed, more white than the newly fallen Snow, a Knight of an admirable pre∣sence, covered from the Head to the Knees with an Armour of refined Silver, so curiously wrought, that the value of the Mettle, though pure and precious, was surmounted by the rarity of the Workmanship. The harness of the Horse was set all over with plates of burnisht Silver, which made a shew like so many severall Looking glasses, according to the motion of the Palfrey, no less couragious than full of gracefull pride; a Milk-white Plume shadowed the Torse of his glittering Helmet, and floted in agreeable waves upon his shoulders: His Port was full of sprightlie Activity, in his Countenance hee seemed another Mars; and his Carriage made appear less fierceness then Courage. Liante could not have pickt out a more worthy Adversary to content his Vanity. Scarce were they come within sight of each other, but the Trumpets on both sides sounded; and the Champions, having taken space e∣nough to make a full Career, incountred with such Violence and Dex∣terity, that sitting as immoveable as Mountaines, their Lances (beeing broken to the very Handles) sent their splinters into the Airy Region; then casting away their Truncheons, they ended their cours, in so exact
and handsome a manner, that it seemed rather a Turnament than a Combat: And to conclude with their Swords what they had begun with their Lances, they both drew and rejoined upon their Manege; but having both Armour of proof, they hack't a long time before ei∣ther of them received any wound. At length the white Knight thinking to cut Liante over the Beaver with a back-blow, his Horse curvetting received it upon his Head, the pain whereof made him reare on end, beating the Air with his Fore-feet ready to cast his Rider. But that which troubled Liante most, was to feele the reins in his hand and the bit out of his Horse's mouth; for, his Adversarie's Sword having cut the head-stall, the Bridle fell presently from him. The fiery∣spirited Beast, which could neither bee tamed nor guided by him that back't him, inraged with the smart of his wound, running full gal∣lop cross the field, carried Liante towards the besieger's Trenches. Hee, who would rather have embraced Death from a generous Ene∣mie's hands than fall into Mieslas power, seeing the unruliness of his Horse, leap't nimbly out of his Saddle, and returned on Foot to present himself to the Silver Knight, who pursued him full∣speed. But when his Adversary was come within hearing, a clear voyce out of the Silver Helmet pierced his Ears, saying, Knight, I will not make use of this advantage which Fortune hath given mee, true valour is not to bee tried upon such unequall tearms: Liante (who gave himself for Dead, imagining that his Enemy came with such fury to make his Horse dance upon his belly) received a new Life, when hee heard the beloved voyce of that person whom hee esteemed above all Creatures breathing. So the white Knight had scarce set foot to ground, but hee in the black Armour bowing his Knee, and lifting up his Beaver, cryed alowd; Brother, as it never was my intention to offend you, so I will not defend my self against you; although I should give you my Life, I should not conceive that I had satisfied the least of those Devoirs which I owe you. By this you may know it was Iphigenes, who beeing no less desirous of Glory, than Liante of putting himself in credit, had undertaken this Combat in that white Armour; and upon Liante's words hee presently replied, My dear Brother, it is you that have overcome mee; yet alas! you are ignorant of your victory. But this is no place for us to dispute of Courtesies, lest wee should bee suspected of some private intelligence and treason. Rise quickly, and let us give notice to our severall Parties, that
after knowing each other, our long education together having rendered us Brothers by Alliance, wee would not renew the tragicall spectacle of Eteocles and Polinices, nor change into Horrour the Admiration which wee desired to breed in the beholders of our Courages. Wee may confer secretly in the Night, or interchangeably make known our intentions by Letters, and other means which subtility will suggest to our inventions, for the advancement of his Majestie's interest: And to the end wee may have no advantage of each other, return you to the City upon my Horse, which I give you, I beeing sure to have your's restored mee, in regard hee hath taken his course towards the Quarters where I have a Command. Liante took Iphigenes advice; so the two friends parted to the great astonishment of the Enemies, who observed these passages at a distance. But when they understood that the Combat, which they had so gloriously begun, before they knew each other, was terminated, after their discovery, by the force of their antient friendship, which snatcht their Arms out of their hands, there was not one but rather commen∣ded them for that generous affection, than condemned them for want of courage, deploring the uncivill condition of civill Wars, which constrein sometimes, in like Occurrences, friends to murther Friends, and Fathers to plunge their Weapons in their own Blood. Onely Mieslas, (whose Rigour could not bee satisfied with less than the ruine of Liante's Honour and Life) gave out in all Companies that hee had basely begg'd his Life of Iphigenes, against whom (such is the blindness of Fury) hee murmured and expressed much displeasure, that hee had not made use of his advantage to ranke Liante among the number of the Dead. And in regard the motion of that sordide interest, which made him so thirst after Liante's Blood, could not bee published without his own disparagement, hee covered it with the Cloak of the Publick Cause, indeavouring to make that poor Gentle∣man's revolt more odious than the Lithuanian's, hee beeing a Native of Polonia, and owing all his Fortune to the King's munificence: But the barbarous Sarmatian was not so ready to declare the occasion hee gave his Ward to take that desperate course, and in those commotions to secure himself among the Rebells. Nay, his Brutality transported him so far, that hee stuck not to taxe his own Son of intelligence with the Enemy, because hee had left Liante living, when hee might have kill'd him, or at least made him Prisoner, which hee rather desired: Not contented to resemble Hogs-heads, which (beeing filled with new
Wine) bedawb themselves with their own froth, hee thought that during this revolt of Liante's, was the onely Harvest-season for him to reap his Estate, by vertue of the King's Letters of confiscation: Which hee obteined at his first request, His Majestie beeing willing to oblige Him, whom hee esteemed one of the best Politicians in his Army; and besides to terrifie, by this example, any other Polonians from assisting the Lithuanians in their Rebellion. This Grace made Mieslas triumph, and boast that hee had done Liante more harm with a sheet of Paper, than his Son with his Sword. Fame with her airy trump at length conveyed these Bravadoes to Liante's Ears, which kindled a rage in his couragious brest as unutter∣able as insupportable; Insomuch that returning to his former Despair, hee perswaded himself (considering Mieslas as his scourge) that Ho∣nour obliged him to take away that Wolvish Gardian's Life, or lose his own. In this resolution hee sent him a Challenge to fight with him on Horse-back in the view of both City and Army. At first Mieslas scoffed at his Childish indiscretion (as hee tearmed it) slighting him as much as the grand Apollo in the Metamorphosis did Citherea's little Son. But at length feeling his reputation prick'd, and his Choller incens'd by some notorious reproaches and braving Language in the Letter of Defiance (whereof Liante had dispersed diverse Copies through the Camp) hee resolved to dispose himself to chastise that peremptory Boy publickly, as a Pedagogue would correct his Scholler: These tearms Passion made him utter against his youthfull adversary. This Challenge, beeing so divulged, could not bee unknown to Iphigenes, who would not bee diswaded from beeing a Second; as well to purge himself of that stain wherewith his Father had indevoured to blemish his fidelity to the King, as to preserve the Life of him that gave him his, (in case Liante should gain the advantage) or Liante's, on whom his own Life depended, in case Mieslas should have the better, which was most probable. I will not stand to particularize the severall equipages of these Combatants, there beeing this difference betwixt Turnaments and Duells, that in the former every one studie's what is most magnificent and pompous, not what most serviceable; in the later the richness or curiosity of the Armour is not so much considered, as the excellency of the temper. However they were not negligent to shew themselves in good order, and upon the best Horses they could purchase. Iphigenes having sent back Liante's black Horse, obliged him by
that action to return him his, lest that exchange might breed any sus∣pition of intelligence: yet they took others for this second incounter, that breathed Fire out of their Mouths, & threatned Death with their Looks. Mieslas appeared in guilded Armour, upon a pide Horse of a size bigger then ordinary: Iphigenes was mounted upon a Sorrell, well maneged and ready, armed as before, but with a coat, after the Sarma∣tian fashion, over his Armour, all imbrodered with Gold. Liante march'd proudly out of the City upon a stately Bay horse, trapped with black, in the same Armour hee wore in the former Duell, but with some different trimming: His Second, who was the young Polemander, seemed rather dress'd than arm'd, Inexperience making him go to this shock as to a Wedding. His Armour was Gras-green, artificially set out with scales of burnisht Silver; a delicate Plume of white and green, curiously mixt, o're shadowed all his Casket; his Horse of a Dapple-gray colour, (whose Make and Manegement was fitter for a Festivall shew before Ladies than exploits of Warre) was harness'd with a Caparison of green velvet, inriched with a Silver im∣brodery; his Deportment spake him rather a spruce Courtier than a re∣solute Souldier: In summe, he was a fit Subject to honour the triumph of Iphigenes victory. The glory of making his essay of Arms against the King's Favorite, & a Palatine of so eminent esteem in Polonia, height∣ned his courage; and his vanity promised him a success that should make him touch the Firmament with his Crown. But Heaven which dispo∣seth the events otherwise than Men propose them to their fancies, made this Gallant a prey to him whom hee thought to devour; and Iphigenes, who was Courtesie it self, became to him like the Lion of Samson's emblem: For, instead of swallowing him, hee gave him Life, and in the Effects of this Valour hee made him feel the proofs of his Civility. For, assoon as they were come into the Field, and the Judges had assigned the ground, every one resolved to do his best, except Mieslas, who carried himself negligently in that Action, as if hee disdained to measure his Sword with a Novice, or had been to play at cuffs with a Boy. At length having taken the space that was convenient for their Horse's full Career, they charged each other with such impetuo∣sity, that the banks of Boristhenes returned by frighted Eccho's the sound of their Palfrey's thundering Feet, and his Waters hasted away for fear. Iphigenes, whose dexterity on Horse back was beyond com∣parison, having hit Polemander in the right place to make him quit
his Saddle, carried him so furiously from his Horse to the Earth, that with the force of the fall hee seemed to have digg'd his own Sepulcher in the Sand. The weight of his Arms, the violence of the Shock, toge∣ther with the tender Age of that young Astianax, cast him into a Trance, which depriving him of the ability to rise or move, made him appear, as if his Soul, not daring to withstand so invincible an adver∣sary, had left his Carcass as a trophy to the Victor's glory. Iphigenes seeing him in no fighting condition, turn'd his Eyes whi∣ther his Heart was already flown; But Heavens! what saw hee? his Father in the greatest danger that could befall an Enemy; For, as hee gave his Horse the half-turn, to set him in his Career, the right stirrop brake, which discomposed his Port, and rendred him incapable of executing what his Vanity made him believe unquestionable: For, the heaviness of his Armour weighing him down in the Saddle, that incon∣venience hindered him from ordering his Lance, which glanced with∣out effect under Liante's Arme, who having dexterously directed his, where the point found entrance, the thrust was so violent, that had not Mieslas been well fixed in his seat, hee had doubtless held Pole∣mander company: However it bare his Body so far backwards, that his Crest almost kist the Crupper, and the Lance flying in pieces, a splinter entered into his Horse's shoulder, the pain whereof disabling him for such an incounter, put his Rider beyond his schoole-play, and in no small apprehension. Liante without losing time, having cast away the truncheon that remained in his hand, drew his Sable, and his Horse beeing swift of foot and ready at hand, hee presently gained the Crupper of his no less arrogant than inhumane Enemy; and began to deal blowes so thick upon him, that you would have thought you had heard all the Cyclopes beating upon one Anvill. Who ever saw a furious Bull tormented with the stinging of a Gad flie; or a great wild Boare lugged by the Ears by a young Mastiffe, may the better fancy that lusty Sarmatian assaulted by the generous Liante. At length the little stone cast down the great Colossus; it happened thus. Mieslas seeing his Horse useless, and one Leg hanging without a stirrop, thought to alight, judging that hee might better defend him∣self on Foot, than in that incommodious posture; but having his Sword in his hand, and beeing incumbred with his Armour, his other foot remain'd ingaged in the stirrop; The Horse who had not yet lost all his fury, perceiving this disorder, began to kick and drag Mieslas after him some steps, which so crushed and bruised him, that hee thought
hee had been at the last period of his Life. Then was it in the brave Liante's power to take a full revenge of all his barbarous dealings, by making his Horse trample his unworthy Soul out of his conquered Bo∣dy. But Iphigenes, seeing the danger of him from whom hee had his Beeing, leaving his adversary on the ground, ran presently to Mieslas, whose deplorable condition sufficiently implored his succour: At length hee stopt the fugitive Horse, and leaping from his own, hee cut the stirrop that trailed his Father's Body, which was in little better case than Polemander's. Hee was already without motion, and questionless had taken his leave of the World, if the pious Iphigenes, opening his Head-piece, had not given him some Air; which hee no sooner felt, but hee recovered Breath, not without voiding blood at the Nose and Mouth in great abundance. After some passages of the triumphing Liante, the desire of preser∣ving Mieslas drew these words from Iphigenes Mouth (which his high spirit would never have permitted his Tongue to utter, if his own person had been reduced to the greatest of extremities) Liante, it is now in thy power to rid thy self of both Father and Son at once, if thou permittest thy Vengeance to despise my Friendship: but know that Heaven never leaves Ingratitude unpunished; content thy Ambition with the advantage the Chance of Arms hath now given thee, without abusing by Insolence thy Victory; and if thou art as good a Friend as a stout Cham∣pion, go succour him whom I have reduced to the same danger as thou hast my Father. Brave Iphigenes, replyed Liante, thy Friendship, which shall never die in my Soul, shall alwayes have more power over mee than the Outrages of that Tyrant; It is pitty that a Son so full of Vertue should proceed from a Father so worthy of Ha∣tred. ADIEU, and know that thy Will is the Chain of my Free∣dome. This said, hee passed as quick as a flash of Lightning, spurring to∣wards Polemander, in whose pale Face Death had already plac'd her Ensignes. Having loosened his Helmet, hee saw his Eyes begin to open, as if hee came from the other World. But not to spend any longer time in this Relation, at length every one returned to his Quar∣ters the best he could, leaving the judgements of the Spectatours suspen∣ded upon the strangeness of this incounter; which gave scope enough for discourse on both sides. But let this suffice, that all acknowledg∣ed the hand of Heaven upon the Arrogance of Mieslas, had compas∣sion on Polemander, esteemed the fortunate Valour of Liante, but
extolled to the Skies the Courage and Piety of the Palatine of Plocens. To express the rage that seized Mieslas, when (come again to him∣self) hee represented to his thoughts the Affront hee had recei∣ven in the Face of the whole Army, were impossible; Eloquence want's tearms to relate the Excess of his Fury. Sometimes hee ac∣cused Heaven as the Cause of his Disaster; Sometimes hee condemn∣ed his Servants for bringing him that Horse; Sometimes hee was in the humour to dy, rather than survive such a disgrace; Sometimes in¦stead of acknowledging the courtesie hee had received from his Ene∣my, hee seemed as if (like a Torrent or Thunder-bolt) hee would force through the Walls of the besieged City to tear the heart out of Liante's Bosome. Hee that hath e're beheld a Bear, wounded with an Arrow sticking in his Flank, beat himself against the Shaft, take it in his Teeth, and striving turn it within his Entrails, hath seen an emblem of Mieslas Passion, which bred such torment in his mind, as cannot bee express'd but by the Name of Despair. All bruised as hee lay in his Bed, beeing hardly able to move, hee studied memorable revenges against him to whom hee owed his Life. But leaving him to foam out his Choler, let us see what Liante do's within the City, where there were not Laurells enough to make him Crowns, nor Praises signi∣ficant enough to extoll his Merit. The indisposition of Polemander, somewhat disturbed the Inhabitants rejoicing; but the publick Good always overbalancing the disaster of any particular person, it did not diminish the applauses of his Gallantry; Be∣sides, hee having no other harm than what hee received by his fall, the care of his Parents, his own youth and good constitution soon re∣stored him to a condition that promised more Hope than Fear of his recovery. Mean time, whilest the Brother's Body was healing, the Sister's mind impaired; For, Jealousie, which is a Love that's sick, increased in Oloria's Heart proportionably as Liante rendered more evident De∣monstrations of affection to Amiclea. And now his thoughts beeing swell'd with the glory of this Victory, what durst not hee promise himself? as you may well imagine, his Minde beeing naturally ambiti∣ous, hee easily suffered himself to bee carried upon the Wings of the Wind, feeling a pleasing murmure of popular praises buzzing in his Ears. Neither was hee deceived; For, Olavius conceived such an opinion of him, that thence-forwards hee deliberated at what rate
soever to make him his Son-in-law, imagining that that commotion beeing ended, it would bee no hard matter for him to procure a re∣voking of that confiscation, which Mieslas had obtein'd of his Estate; or rather to make it one of the Articles of their Capitulation, if they should come to treat with the King for the repose of Lithu∣ania. But as the Heart beeing seated in the middle of the Brest as the Center of humane Bodies, leaneth however more to one side than the other: So although Liante composed his Countenance and Gestures, and ordered his Speeches in such manner, that hee seemed to share his respects equally betwixt the two Sisters, it was impossible for him to hinder his Eyes (which are the Windowes of the Soul) from be∣traying his inclinations; For, the presence of the Object beloved to a Lover as the Needle of a Compass, touched with a Load stone, is to the Arctick Pole. His looks discovered his thoughts, which sallied out at the same port-holes, that gave Entrance to those Desires, which, like theeves, stole away his Heart. At length (Amiclea being yet too young to understand the Language of his Eyes) Liante, unable to sup∣port any longer the torment hee indured by reteining his Passion pri∣soner, it hapned that the same day hee broke his tedious Silence to declare to his new Idoll the Sacrifice hee offered her of his Affections, poor Oloria unfortunately arrived to Shipwrack her Hopes against the Rock of Disdain, discovering to Liante her Jealousie, before shee had disclosed her Love. I will not stand to repeat their Discourses, loth to fill up this Paper with frivolous words, contenting my self to say that Liante's aversion against Oloria was much augmented, when hee had read the malady of her Mind, and that impertinent humour, whereby shee seemed to impose Lawes to his Will, as if shee had already gained an Empire over his Soul. And beeing very ingenious (without disobliging her otherwise) he made her understand in handsome tearms that hee cared as little for her Affection as her Jealousie, and that his sight was not yet so bad, but that hee could discern Objects more capable of content∣ing his contemplation. But hee continued his addresses with much fervency, and dayly increased his Indearments to Amiclea, who though yet young enough not to resent the assaults of that Passion, which is so contagious, that few are exempted from it's infection, even of those that most condemn it; yet shee was not composed of Ice, nor any insensible Materialls.
That inclination of inflaming Lovers, which is so naturall to the Female Sex, sharpen's Virgin's wits betimes, and rendereth them sub∣tile and full of Malices before their Age can afford them a perfect knowledge. This ray of Honey, those inchanting words and obli∣ging devoirs opened Amiclea's Eyes, and gave her considerations for Liante, which before shee did not conceive. But as that Sex is born to dissimulation, the cleerer shee saw the more shee feined to bee blind, and hearing his Complaints, shee made as if shee understood them not. Insomuch that after hee had displayed the secrets of his Heart, and discovered the honour and integrity of his pretensions to her, shee studied to deceive his Passion with a more reserved carriage in his con∣versation. Mean time this artificiall behaviour, covered with the cloak of innocent Childishness, was such a bait or gin to intrap Liante's heart, that hee cherished not his own thoughts, but when they represented to him the Object which gave them Beeing.
The Eleventh Book. ARGUMENT. Iphigenes and Liante's private Meeting and Conference. Iphigenes Plot to reduce the Lithuanians, and extinguish Liante's affection to Amiclea. Hee is taken Prisoner (with his own consent) by Liante. The Lithuanians exultation at this Prize; their treatment of Iphi∣genes. The Palatines of Troc and Minsce's Wives and Daughters fall in Love with the beautifull Prisoner. Their indeavours to injoy him, and supplant each other. Iphigenes Jealousie, and Distemper at Liante's passionate Research of Amiclea. Love perswades Iphigenes to reveal his Secret to Liante; Bashfulness disswades it. Amiclea, inamour'd of the fair Prisoner's perfections, offers to procure him Li∣berty, and escape with him. His civill refusall of her Courtesie. The Divertisements of Iphigenes in his Prison. Hee relates his own Story to the Ladies under borrowed Names. His Apprehension at Liante's Morall, or Exposition of his Fable. At Liante's and the Companie's importunity hee transvests himself to the admiration of both Men and Women. Mieslas is inraged at his Son's captivity: Offers to Ran∣some him: Sends Liante a Challenge. His Answer. The Resent∣ments of those in the Royall Army, and at the Court, for Jphigenes imprisonment. The King's Letter to the Rebells in his behalf. Their Consultations and Answer. Iphigenes discreet Advice, and Letter to the King. The Conflict of Love and Vertue in Melindra's brest. The old Palatinesse's Jealousie of their Daughters for Iphigenes. Lian∣te's Ʋmbrages of Iphigenes for Amiclea. Their Speeches, after Liante had discovered his Passion. Liante departs discontented. Iphigenes distemper at his distast. The contention of Jealousie and Honour in Liante's heart. Finding no invention to get Iphigenes handsomly out of Minsce, hee returnes to give him an account of his indeavours. Their Conference. Liante thinking Iphigenes was his Rivall, construes all his protestations of Friendship to a contrary sense.
DO you not think it time that Iphigenes should come to cast Water on that Fire, lest the flame grow unquenchable? If Oloria was tormented with her Jealousie, Iphigenes received no favo∣rable treatment from his Passion; onely Ami∣clea, without ingaging her own Liberty, subtilely triumphed over Liante's. But what remedy shall wee finde for Iphigenes, to mitigate his ineffable sorrow for beeing deprived of Liante? Hee that compared the Fire, which causeth Love, to Thunder, was not mistaken in his Analogy: For, the effects of both are marvellous, the one bruise's and consume's the Bones, without making the least contusion in the Flesh, and preserving the Scabbard, melt's the Blade: the other hath Subtilities and Inventions beyond the reach of thought to dazle the Eyes of the most circumspect. Nothing is impossible to him that Love's: Iphigenes practised such secret and facile Intelligen∣ces with Liante, that if they had been both in the same Camp, they could not have had more convenience to communicate their thoughts. In Day time their Conference was by Letters, which, fastened to Arrowes, they shot into certain places at prefixed houres; In the Night they found opportunity enough to Discourse together, without apprehension of beeing over heard by any witnesses. Once, after divers other particulars. Iphigenes regretting that Peaceable time, wherein they injoyed in the Forest of Plocens with more freedom each other's conversation, and wishing to see the like season, that hee might in his own government impart his honours, and estate to his dear Bro∣ther. Of what Peace, and what pleasure (replied Liante) do you speak? For my particular I do not think that in all my Life I ever felt a greater disturbance in my thoughts, than what glanced into my Brest from the penetrating Eyes of Serife; For, those extravagant illusions so over∣whelmed my Reason, that I thought I should have lost it in a Labyrinth of conceptions so confused, that I may call that disaster happy which re∣leased mee out of that error. But now my Condition is quite altered; For, if during that Peace; I felt a War within my self, in this War I have met with so great a Calm and so sweet a Peace, that I hold nothing so de∣licious as the double Prison wherein I am. What Prisons are those? answered Iphigenes. The first, said Liante, is the inclosure of these Walls, but the second, and most agreeable, is an
Object whose Captive I am; but my thraldome is preferable to any Liberty. At this word a cold sweat trickled along Iphigenes Face, and hardly could hee forbear in falling to a trance; yet recollecting his Spirits, hee prest Liante to tell him, what Object that was to whom hee had so dedicated his services. Hereupon Liante, as if hee had resolved to discompose the frame of Iphigenes intellect, and absolutely turn his Brain, began to make him a lively description of Amiclea's beauties; which was less wel∣come to his Ears, than the newes of approaching Death. But when hee added, that those perfections beeing not yet come to Maturity, that green fruit was so tart, and crabbed that it rather set the teeth on edge, than gave any delight, and by reason of her tender years (which rendered her not onely insusceptible of Love's flames, but incapable of acknowledg∣ing his affection) that in the same place where his desires had their Birth, his Hopes did finde their Funerall, Iphigenes recovered breath. And, as every thing hath two handles, and its counterpoise, when Liante added to the Passion hee indured for Amiclea, that which hee made poor Oloria suffer, our amorous Palatine was yet better satisfied; imagining that this Contradiction would hinder Liante from making any great progress in Amiclea's affection. But from this Feaver, hee fell into an hotter, the storm beginning afresh with more impetuosity in his thoughts, when hee heard Liante protesting, that the Jealousie of the One served as a spur to incite him to bee more eager in the research of the Other, wherein hee believed his in∣deavours would not bee fruitless, in regard of the particular advice hee had of Olavius design to give him one of his Daughters; and that his last Victory had reduced him to that point, that hee was contented to grant him his own choice, hoping to make the confiscation of his Estate bee revoaked by their treaty with the King for the appeasing of those tumults in Li∣thuania. See how Jealousie transport's the best composed Braines. Iphi∣genes, who had all his Life-time shewed so much Discretion, and Reservedness in his Actions, suffering himself to bee carried away with the stream of Fury, broke forth in these Words: Ah! Traytor, and the most defiled with infidelity of any the World pro∣duce's? Is this the promise so oft repeated in the solitudes of my Palatinate, when thou sworest (but with Oaths which flew away with the Winds) never to love any but mee, and never to suffer thy Soul to entertain any other Flame? Is it thus thou wilt now renounce the too too easie, too
too credulous Serife? That Serife, who hath no Eyes but to contemplate thee, and who love's her Heart onely because of thy Image which is so lively imprinted in it. That Serife, who hath been more tender of preser∣ving thee, than her own Life, who would have raised thee to greater Ho∣nours, and Riches than thou can'st hope for in any other place. And foole, as shee was, shee turned all thy Discourses to her own advantage, and fed her vanity with the praises wherewith thou extolled'st her perfections, with as much treachery as flattery; And after this should shee esteem the fide∣lity of any Man? May the Heavens afflict her with some new torment, (if there bee any greater than that which thy disloyalty make's her suffer) if ever shee put's confidence in such faithless Souls. Thou should'st have kil∣led her upon her Father's body, rather than have reserved her to hear such language as is less supportable than Death. If Liante was surprised at this Speech, let him judge that hath re∣marked the conduct of Iphigenes hitherto. Hee thought hee dream'd, or that Iphigenes raved. For, to what purpose should hee bring again upon the Stage, the sweet illusions of the Forest of Plocens, when Almeria was beloved by Iphis, or when Calliante acted the passionate Lover of Serife? At length, Brother (said hee) What is in your mind? I think the Charms of that inchanted Forest possess you yet, or (which is more likely) you sleep, as Lions doe, with your Eyes open. You may bee confident that I shall never relinquish (but with my Life) that Friendship which I have sworn to you as my Brother, and the dearest Friend, I have or ever shall have: And I believe no less of you, than that you are likewise so desirous of my Good, & advance∣ment (according to the testimonies you have so often rendered me) that you will not hinder mee from imbracing a good Fortune, when it thrust's it self into my Hands, after having persecuted mee from my Cradle, and made mee feel in the Current of my dayes the most rigorous Effects of her Tyranny. Indeed if I saw any other dore, than that which is now opened before mee, whereby I might get out of the Dungeon of my Disgraces, I would most willingly pass that way; but if you consider the condition of my affairs, you will see that I am like a drowning Man, that catche's at any thing hee can reach (not alwayes what hee would desire) to save himself from perishing. Your Father, my Persecutor, hath rendered mee so odious in the King's sight, that I have more reason to fear his indignation, than hope for any favour in Polonia; which make's mee resolve either to lose my self in the overthrow of Lithuania, or if it raise it self again out
of it's ruines, thereby to repair those of my Fortune. Would to God I might bee permitted to spend my dayes with you; For, if I enjoy∣ed that happiness, all my ambitions might expire, knowing with the power you have, that I could expect no less than great effects of your exceeding Love. But did not you take notice that your plea∣sant raving made you speak like a Woman, as if that Serife to whom I vowed my Affections, were any other than your self? So, you might make mee believe that I am Almeria. See how farre our past follies transport us, agreeable follies however, since they please you; but very bitter to mee, whom they had almost bereaved of sense. This long reply having given Iphigenes some leisure to appease the tumults of his Passion, and re-consult his Judgement, the fear of ha∣ving too unadvisedly discovered his condition, quickned his spirits spee∣dily to repair that fault, and crush the Scorpion upon his sting: I spake (said hee) in my Sister Clemencia's Name, to whom you have so un∣worthily falsified your promise. Whereunto Liante thus answered: Wherefore do you accuse mee, Iphigenes, of a crime whereof your own Soul is guilty, breaking so cruelly that Faith, which you had so solemn∣ly sworn to Modestina, to comply with the barbarous inclinations of your Father, who make's you change Youth for old Age, Beauty for Ugliness, a Virgin for a Widdow, your Equall in years for one that may be your Mother? and all this to satisfie his Avarice and Ambition, and aug∣ment your Titles with the Style of Prince; as if the King's Favour, which your absence hath not quite extinguished, could not raise you high enough, and heap as much Riches upon you as you can desire. Hereunto Iphigenes could make no reply, but to end all those de∣bates, hee wished, that one of them two were a Woman. Not so, said Liante, for, I love you too well to desire you so great a mischiefe, and for my own particular, as long as Heaven give's mee strength to hold a Sword in my hand, I will hinder Mieslas well enough from razing mee out of the ranke of Men. See then, answered Iphigenes, how much I exceed you in Friendship; For, you would not change your Sex for Love of mee, and I would bee glad to bee a Woman to stop your inconstancy. Whilest wee amuse our selves with these Chymericall, and impossible imaginations, said Liante, wee dissipate our Spirits, which should rather lend their attentions to more serious thoughts, and imploy them with our in∣deavours to procure the publick Peace, thereby to finde the assurance of our private intentions.
This said, they parted, Iphigenes returning so perplex't in minde, that hee knew not how to finde a thred to guide him out of the Laby∣rinth of his confusions. At length after long musing, sometimes con∣cluding, then altering what hee had concluded; Sometimes resolving, then revoking his Resolutions, beeing agitated with more severall motions than the Sea hath waves, Love, the true Mercury of humane spirits, suggested an invention to him, that could not proceed but from a soul extreamly passionate. Was it not a marvellous piece of sublime Policy to joyn the publick Peace with his private Tranquillity, and the service of his Sovereign with the contentment of his own Soul? But in this design it was re∣quisite to proceed like Watermen, who turn their backs to the place whither they row: For, Iphigenes conquered by suffering himself to bee conquered, and made appear by a memorable example of Love and Fidelity, that there was a Zopyrus yet living in the World. The Spagirists in seeking the Ʋnion of Essencos, have by the Sympa∣thies and Antipathies found out the dissolving of all naturall Bodies, how solid foe're they bee, and this by the means of some slight ingre∣dients, and with a simple dew: Spirituall Chymistry taught Iphigenes not onely to dissolve that factious Body, which formed the revolt of Lithuania, by giving himself entrance into Miesce, there to sow the powder of Gold with the dew of sweet words and fair promises: But also to unite himself to Liante, the injoyment of whom hee esteemed more desirable than the possession of a Crown. However hee thought it not fit to communicate his secret to Boleslaüs, lest opposing the coldness of his Age and Judgement, against the ardours of his Youth and Passion, hee might divert or thwart his enterprise; neither did hee judge it expedient to reveale it to Liante, although hee was to bee the Effecter of his design, as hee was the Cause. So, having well adjusted his mea∣sures hee determined, for the safety of his Country, to do like Cur∣tius, (who cast himself into a Gulf) by delivering his Person into his Enemie's hands, there to indeavour their Re-union and Submission to the King's Service, and at the same time divert Liante's design for Amiclea. At their review Iphigenes, seeming to have seriously deliberated upon what Liante had proposed at their last meeting, said, that hee disap∣proved not his re-search to Amiclea, considering that hee hoped to re∣enter into the possession of his Estate by that alliance; But if hee would
contribute his industry to pacifie those Commotions of Lithuania, by re∣ducing the Rebells to their due obedience to his Majesty, Hee assured him that hee would not onely re establish him in his inheritance, but render him (next the King) the greatest and richest Nobleman of all Polonia and Lithuania. This Proposition was specious enough to ra∣vish the heart, and open the Ears of the ambitious Liante; But observe in what consideration the Point of Honour is to a Generous Spirit. Your promise is very great, answered hee, But if, to obtein all that you proffer, I must commit (I will not say) Treason or Disloyalty, but the least Treachery, move mee no farther; For, might I bee rewarded by the purchase of a whole Kingdome, I would not violate my Faith, nor offend the Hospitality of Olavius, who by his Courtesies hath heaped upon mee so many extraordinary Obligations, that I must remain his debter all my Life, and at the last yet die insolvable. Besides I have such confidence in the Gallantry of your Soul (dear Brother) that I believe a base action can have no admittance into your thoughts; For, I know how high an esteemer, and how jealous a preserver you ever have been of Honour. Iphigenes having commended the generosity of Liante's answer, told him, that hee was so far from ingaging him in any dishonourable act, that hee would first remit his own Person into his Hands, to open him the way they were to follow for the reducing of Lithuania unto the King's Subjection. Liante having asked him the particulars of that enterprise. First, (said hee) after your having worsted my Father, I would have you have the honour of taking mee Prisoner, and then beeing with you I will teach you the secret to content all those who have so much obliged you; and with∣out injuring them or blemishing your own honour, make you the most con∣siderable Subject in this Kingdome. The pledge that Iphigenes offered was so pretious (giving himself in pawn to the Lithuanians) that Liante believed his Heart intended no other than what his Tongue declared. Therefore having impor∣tuned him to give a more particular instruction of his Design; Brother (said Iphigenes) The King before my coming to this Siege, commanded mee expresly by Letters to return to Court, assuring mee that I should bee better welcom than ever; and that at length the Sun of Truth had pierced and dissipated the Fogs of my Envier's Calumnies: Nevertheless the desire of rendering him some remarkable testimonies of my Fidesity in the occurrence of this War, made mee prefer the toyles and perilis of this
Martiall Life before the delicious Recreations of Cracovia. This assu∣rance of his Majestie's Affection, beget's in mee an hope, nay a Confi∣dence, that (his favour to mee beeing not extinguished) upon the first no∣tice of my imprisonment, hee will at what rate soever purchase my re∣leasement, either by ransom, or by force. Now, what fairer oppor∣tunity can you desire to regain your inheritance than this? especially when I shall have certified His Majesty that not any desire of revolting or disserving him, induced you to associate your self with these Rebells; but the fear of falling into Mieslas Hands, and the Despair whereinto his cruelty reduced you. I will do more; For, beeing fully informed of his Majestie's temper and intentions, my fancy promiseth mee that I shall dis∣pose the two Palatines (now besieged) to lay down their Arms, and restore Peace to this Province, with such advantages to their Families, and the whole Country of Lithuania, that the Generality of this Nation shall have cause to extoll their Sovereign's goodness, and They be particularly obliged to his Clemency and Liberality. How should Liante not bee overcome by the charms of these Pro∣positions, which were so far above his Hopes, that hee scarce durst soar to them with his Desires? And although hee advised Iphigenes (if hee were not very well assured of the King's affection) not to expose himself to that adventure, nothing under Heaven beeing more uncer∣tain than the inclinations of Men, and especially of Princes, whose chiefest tye is their Interest: yet hee was constreined to yeild to Iphi∣genes intreaty, which overbalanced his perswasions. Then they agreed to contrive the taking of Iphigenes so, that (although it was premedita∣ted) t should seem casuall. Their plot was thus. Iphigenes for certaine dayes successively should ride pckeering, and discharge his Pistolls against the Gates of the City (as Gentlemen usu∣ally do to shew the gallantry of their Courages and Activity, trusting for their retreat to the goodness of their Horses, and swiftness of their Course;) after which, at a prefixed time, Liante should set some Souldiers in Ambuscado to invest him. Which was as handsomly effect∣ed as ingeniously projected. At this newes represent to your imagination the fury of Miestas, the trouble of the Royall Camp; and on the contrary the rejoycing of the besieged, and with what Laurells they loaded Liante's head. Ola∣vius beeing no longer able to contein his joy, ran to imbrace him, and extolling his fortunate Valour to the Skies, hee offered him the choice of his two Daughters, with such a part of his estate as hee would please to demand for a Dowry.
Liante, well contented with those triumphs and trophies, which they erected to a Victory that cost him so little, perceived thereby how vain the judgement of the World is, and that as punishments are not alwayes inflicted on the most wicked persons, but the least fortunate; So Glory was an infamous Courtisan, which cast herself not alwayes into the Arms of the most valiant, but most successefull: And to incite Olavius the more to press him to accept a Present, which hee so pas∣sionately desired, with an artificiall modesty hee pretended that he was unworthy of so much favour, beeing at that time a distressed Gentle∣man, banished from his Country, and dismantled of all his Estate by an injust Confiscation. Whereupon Olavius, falling of himself into the Nets, replied, That the restitution of his inheritance would bee the least part of the brave Prisoner's ransom, wherewith hee had inriched their City, and that hee ought not to stick upon that consideration, in regard hee had alwayes respected him more for his Vertues than his Fortune, esteeming it more advantage for his Daughter to have a Man that wanted means, than means that wanted a Man. But Liante demanding time to deliberate more at leisure upon that business, desired him to thinke of treating Iphigenes with such Civility, that hee might have just occasion to com∣mend rather than complain of Lithuania. Which was performed in such honourable manner, that if the gallant Iphigenes had been Gover∣nour and Master of that rebellious City, hee could not have received greater respect. Hee had no other Prison than his own Parolle, Liante rendering himself pledge for his fidelity. Since the beginning of the Siege, the two Palatines of Troc and Minsce had secured their Wives, Children, and what they had of most considerable value in the Castle, as the place of greatest safety; there Liante likewise had his Quarters, neer which they conducted Iphi∣genes into a Chamber, so richly furnished, that in the King's Pallace hee could not have been lodged more splendidly. Good Cheer was no more wanting than all sorts of Games and honourable divertise∣ments. The company of Ladies was his ordinary attendance; For, they had no sooner tasted the inevitable charms of his conversation, but they became more licourish and greedy of it, than Bees are of Flowers, or their Hony-combs. If that beautifull Face (which shewed to Mortalls the image of the Angells) had infected with it's pleasing Poyson the Court-Ladie's hearts, imagine you how those of Lithuania could be exempted from
that delicious contagion; you would have said, that this new Sinon had been come to bring the Grecian fire to reduce that Ilion to ashes, and that beeing a prisoner in Body, his design was to inthrall and torture all their Mindes. For, that agreeable venim, which is swallowed by the Eyes according to the variety of Spirits, conveyed into their hearts such secret flames, and those flames caused such torments, that hee seem'd to have the same destiny as Sejanus Horse, who put all places in disor∣der where hee was received. Bogdales had a Wife so advanced in years, that the blood of her veines (which ought by the course of Nature to have been Icie) seem'd exempted (by the benefite of her Age) from those ardours, which are onely excusable in youth; with her was retired into that Castle a Daughter, which Hee had married to a gallant Nobleman of Lithuania, who not delighting to bee inclosed within the walls of that besleged City, kept a flying Army in the Field, accompanied by the Palatine of Trod's Son, his Brother-in-law. His merit was sufficient to have made all the Affections of his Wife terminate in his Person; but the Perfections of the beautifull Prisoner so perverted her Reason, that as the Primum Mobile by a violent motion drawe's all the other sphears after it, shee could not hinder her Heart from following her Eyes, whose too inconsiderate looks betrayed the licentiousness of her thoughts. So that the Mother, and the Daughter were both taken in the same snare at once. Neither could Olavius Wife (as wise and reserved as shee was) withhold the motions of her Minde from Dancing the same brawle. And as if that rare Object had been formed on purpose to ruine the constancy of the most continent, few saw him without taking pleasure to behold him, and few beheld him without strange allarms and agita∣tions of Spirit. That fire must bee very fierce which presently take's in green Wood. Amiclea, who never yet felt any resentments for Liante, that de∣served the mentioning, was presently all inflamed with that Feaver, whose fits are so agreeable, that those who resent their Heats and Colds fear nothing more than to bee cured of that Disease. On a sodain of ignorant shee became knowing in the Art of Love, judging by the pains which shee indured, that which shee had caused to Liante's Heart. Oh Liante you will bee henceforwards but a difformed Esau, this white Jacob will supplant you and you will see the ruine of your pretensions arise from the same ground whence you expected your esta∣blishment.
Onely the poor Oloria remained constant in her affection to him who despised her; For, her Soul beeing filled with the Idea of that first Object, was insusceptible of any other impression. If Iphigenes had been a Man, what vanity would he have conceived in his thoughts, seeing himself the blank of so many desires? But beeing such as Nature had created him, those Roses were to him but Thorns, and those Ado∣rations Importunities. To relate the distemper which these new Passions bred in those weak Brains, I dare not undertake, much less to express the confusions that imbroyled their thoughts; For, Love, Envy, Despair, Jealousie, Shame & Desire, were as many Worms, or rather Vultures that gnawed continually their Brests. Even the Men that were too attentive in the contemplation of that Angelicall Face, had not their minds free from disturbance; For, believing him a Man, they wished him of the other Sex, that they might in some kinde settle their complacency on his perfections: And the Ladies who thought him not a Woman, esteem∣ed themselves as happy to have amongst them that beautifull Prisoner (to whom they were all slaves) as the Trojan youths were to injoy that samous Beauty of Greece within their walls. Oh Iphigenes! as those who cast artificiall Fire-balls, are burn't oft-times themselves; So a∣mong so many storms which thou excitest, thou art not without some agitation. With what Pencill shall I delineate the division of those Spirits? The old Ladies were ready to die with Despair and Shame, to see themselves in an Age (which according to the Lawes of Nature pro∣tected them from the Tyranny of that little Boutte-feu which inflames Heaven and Earth) become Subjects to unjust and infamous Desires (whose sweet cruelty was more redoubtable to them than the pangs of Death) and bee afflicted with a languishing Pain that could expect no other remedy than the Grave. Bogdale's Daughter, a Lady full of Honour, and who would assoon have cast herself into a Fire, as violated the Faith shee owed her Hus∣band, felt her Heart however, in spight of her resistance, tickled with that gentle Flame which so many persons cherish, and so few extin∣guish; But to apply the remedy of the least Word, was a thing where∣unto shee would less condescend than indure the severest of Tor∣ments. Mean time the ardour of her Desires, like that in Furnaces, redoubled it's violence, beeing inclosed, and having no place for evaporation.
As for Amiclea, though shee began to have age enough to discern, shee had not enough to dissemble sufficiently her Resentments: For, a first love is like new Wine, which burst's the Vessell if it hath not vent. VVhilst for Liante her mind was less agitated, it was easie for her to contein herself: But a vehement and extraordinary Passion is not so easily concealed, which made her above all the rest give evident de∣monstrations of her flame. VVhich was very excusable in her; For, besides the glory of captiving so gallant a Spirit, and possessing so ac∣complished a Body, what Soul is so stupid as not to bee pricked with the spur of ambition, seeing a Noble person illustrated with such emi∣nent Dignities, and accompanied with Riches that had no limits (since they were founded upon the favour of one of the greatest Kings of Europe) Besides the common desire of all young Gentlewomen to bee highly and richly married, and render themselves agreeable and admi∣rable to all Eyes? In summe, Iphigenes was the Object of all those Ladies Esteem, and of their attendants, as they were the Butts of his Contempt; But as they accounted themselves honoured with his company, so and con∣ceived himself importuned by their's. At length Oloria as well as the rest, if not in effect, at least in appearance, seemed to be intrapped in his Snares: For, whether out of a desire to bee revenged of Liante's scorns, or (which is more probable) to reduce him to her affections by the sting of Jealousie, shee feigned at first to love Iphigenes, and stuck not to give him severall manifest proofs of her inclinations: But by little and little shee ingaged herself so far, that her Counterfeiting became a Reality. VVhich made her fall from bad to worse, and in stead of a Body run after a shadow, which fled from her: For, if shee had been so unfortunate as not to bee able to cast any bait before Liante's Heart, that might oblige him to set any value upon her Affection, judge you how that train could take in Iphigenes Bosome, who was so little capable not onely of satisfying her desires, but of ha∣ving any inclination for her. Thus our lovely Prisoner, the Rock and stumbling-block of their thoughts, was innocently culpable of all their pains. But hee had more intricate troubles to quell in his own brest, without imbroyling him∣self in their follies: For, hee was not like the Sun, which warmeth all things else, not having any degree of heat within himself. If hee bred torments in their Minds, hee suffered pennance for that guilt in his own. VVith what countenance, in your Opinion, could hee behold
the submissions and devoirs, wherewith the passionate Liante besieged the Heart of the disdainfull Amiclea? what despight possessed him to see the Pride of that scornfull Rivall, who robbed him of that which hee esteemed most pretious, the affection of Liante? and this with∣out any other advantage than that of her habit. If you had seen him at any time contemplating his excellent Features in a Looking-glass, you would have said that hee had been making a strict inquiry in that Chrystall, concerning the Victory which his Beauty, in the Full, gave him over the Cressant of Amiclea's. Nothing remained in his opinion, but to unseel Liante's Eyes, and let him understand his condition, to make him quit the Passions and Pretentions hee had for that unpolisht Dia∣mond. But this was the main difficulty, which bred a disturbance in his thoughts, no less dolorous than the throes of a Woman, who de∣siring to conceale her labour dare's not cry out in her greatest extre∣mity. Poor Iphigenes! who shall deliver thee of these mortall an∣guishes? An antient Historian make's mention of a Souldier, who despairing of his Life by reason of an intestine Pain, which tormented him, cast∣ing himself into the hottest of the Battle to purchase an honourable Death, received a thrust with a Sword through the Body, which broke an Impostume within, and was so favourable to him, that hee found health where hee expected Death. Oh how desirable were that stroak with the Tongue, that would make Liante understand what the Pu∣dicity of Iphigenes forced him to conceale, with so much prejudice to his own contentment! Sometimes hee resolved to write, and employ to that Office the whiteness of Paper, which is incapable of blush∣ing; But representing to his more serious consideration the divers inconveniences that might proceed from committing that secret to a Letter, and it's weakness in comparison of the force of words pro∣nounced Viva voce in like occurrences, hee changed that Resolution. And then, as if hee would premeditate the Speech of his manifestation, the disorder of his thoughts stifled the words in his mouth, and re∣duced him to the tearms of induring the obscure Death of Silence, rather than prolong his Life by a Discourse, which in his own judge∣ment hee should never have the confidence to utter. Oh sacred Bashfulness! a quality inseparable to all well borne Souls, how thou paintest with different colours the Faces of such as are subject to thy allarmes! Those wherewith the agreeable Aurora imbellisheth every morn the Horizontall Line, appear not with more
variety. Is it possible that Iphigenes wit so full of subtility, and whose quaint inventions were so esteemed at Court, should remain sterile in this occurrence, when the most important affaire that ever hee ma∣naged in all his Life was in agitation? In summe, wee must conclude, what valour soever wee admire in him, there was yet some dram of the weakness of his Sex, which hath the property of beeing extream subtile in matters of small consequence, but little capable of great en∣terprises. Dispatch brave Iphigenes, and quickly ravish Liante's Heart by a free Declaration; this Pill is somewhat bitter. this Draught unplea∣sant to the taste, But it must bee swallowed, for his good as well as your's. You possess such great advantages in all respects above your Rivall, that you shall onely need to unveile your self to cover her with darkness, or do her the same affront as the Sun's arrivall doth to the Heaven's meaner Lights. Let but Liante know what you are, and Farewell all Amiclea's, farewell Rebellion, and all the pretensions hee hath in Lithuania. After many such debates within himself, at last hee was resolved; nothing was wanting but a fit opportunity to reveal this grand Mystery. But whether the Jealousie of those Ladies that besieged him, or whether the Palatines had commanded them to let Iphigenes have the least private Conference that might bee with Liante, lest they should plot some conspiracy, it beeing a Maxime of War alwayes to distrust an Enemy; The time passed, and Iphigenes consumed like a Torch, that give's light to others, and hath nothing but darkness for it self, meeting with no occasion to make this desired Discovery to Liante. Not but that hee spake with him every day, but it was in the presence of many shee-witnesses, in whose hearing hee had no will to com∣municate that Secret. Insomuch that in this condition hee languished, beeing Heart burned with Jealousie, which like a devouring fire inces∣santly increased, as hee perceived Liante more earnest, and publick in his research of Amiclea, declaring himself upon all occasions her Vassall, though (her Eyes beeing dazled with the luster of the rare Prisoner's beauty) shee made no great account of his services. It would bee a no less tedious than difficult task to relate the dif∣ferent effects of those Ladies passions; For, if Envy agitated the old Matrons, Jealousie bred no less distemper in the young Damsell's thoughts. I shall content my self to remarke onely their contrarieties. The two Palatinesses strove with an envious Emulation, which should
render best Offices to the Prisoner, so far forth as to let him sufficient∣ly know, if hee would have understood them, that those indear∣ments proceeded as much from Love as Courtesie. The Palatine of Troc's Daughter managed her affection with more Dexterity; yet Iphigenes perceived but too plainly all her subtilities. Oloria less cir∣cumspect in her carriage, discovered through her simplicity so much folly, that shee made Pitty grow where shee intended to Plant Desire. The tender Amiclea, by reason of her youth, beeing more inconside∣rate, and by consequent more hardy, not contented with a free ma∣nifestation of her inclinations to Iphigenes, promised him to contrive his escape, upon condition that hee would carry her with him and make her his Wife, in acknowledgement of the liberty which shee ingaged herself to procure him. But hee who was more bound by his own will than his Parolle, and more imprisoned by his Passion than those Walls, although the Gates had been set wide open, would not have gone out of that place. whereinto hee had invented such strata∣gems to enter. So that thanking her for her courteous offer (for beeing a Prisoner upon Parolle hee would not for a World falsifie his word) hee left her in a continuall Feaver, whose violence was re∣doubled sometimes by Jealousie of her young Rivals, sometimes by the fury of the old, who under pretence of watching his deportments, were angry that her Age and Beauty gave her more access to Iphi∣genes than any other. In a word, they were like so many Archers, who shoot all at the same Marke, yet take their aym from severall stations. Among diverse other means which those amorous Ladies used to make time seem less tedious to Iphigenes, besides Gaming and Wal∣ing (whereof hee had full liberty, so that hee were accompanied) the divertisement of Conversation, as it was most agreeable, was most usuall with them. Among other exercises of Conversation, some there are consisting of the commendable and witty invention of Words or Fancies, which onely tend to an honest and recreative Communicati∣on. Some of the most ingenious of those Rivalls made use of this means, to make their adored Object covertly understand divers things which the Gravity and Modesty of their condition permitted them not to disclose any other way. To this Iphigenes made Dissimulation his Buckler, seeming as if hee conceived not their meaning, although hee penetrated to the bottome of their Hearts. One day it hapned that to entertain the Company, it was pro∣posed
and resolved, every one should tell a Story, and that Hee or Shee who, according to most Voyces, could relate the strangest Evene∣ments, should bee recompensed with a Garland of Flowers, and a Kiss from all the rest of the Assembly. I should spin out the Thred of this History to a too unmeasurable length, if I should stand to repeate what every Lady and Gentleman of that Society related. Besides, my intention beeing onely to write the History of Iphigenes, I doe not think my self obliged to mention any thing, but what concern's him, or fell from his mouth in this occurrence; which was a sit occasion (as hee thought) to open Liante's Eyes, and gently prepare him to receive the light of that Truth, which hee desired to make him com∣prehend. So then, after it was come to the beloved Prisoner's turn to speak, and that by industrious excuses (purposely invented) hee had shar∣pen'd the desire of his Auditours (whose Ears were no less covetous of hearing, than their Eyes charmed with seeing him) as if hee had been overcome by the intreaties of so many persons worthy of respect, hee acquitted himself of the charge imposed upon him, beginning his dis∣course in this manner. Since these Ladies and Gentlemen who have spoken before mee, have imbellished with such exquisite Flowers of Rhetorick the strange Evene∣ments which they have reported as well of Men as Women, it would bee a vain ambition in mee to aspire to the atchivement of the promised Crown, and that delicate Kiss which is the Crown of that Crown, if my Hope flattered mee not that the strangeness of the Fable I shall tell you, would supply my defect of Elegance; For, already I renounce the prize as in reference to the Ornaments of Language, and other parts requisite to the perfection of a Discourse: But whether I am too indulgent to my own Judgement, or that the Truth is such, as that it make's it pre∣ferable, I never hitherto read any Story comparable to the strangeness of what you now shall hear. For, I beseech you (worthy Assembly) Can there bee any thing more miraculous, than that the same person should be both Man and Woman without beeing an Hermaphrodite? Consider how this Prodigy can enter into your thoughts; and if your imaginations cannot form the Idea of this Miracle, acknowledge e're I proceed, that what I shall let you hear surmounteth all conception. If your Spirits were no less amazed than delighted with the extraordiary accidents you have already heard, you are to consider that those hapned to Men or Women distinctly; But what Monster, in your Opinion, should hee bee, that with∣out
beeing bathed in the Fountain of Salmacis is neither Man nor Wo∣man, and yet is both Man and Woman? But not to hold your Ears any longer in suspense, abusing the favour of your attention, my Narration shall here take it's beginning. Then, mixing the reall Story of his own Birth and Education, and his inviolable affection to Liante, with the Fable of Iphis and Ianthe, illustrated by the Pen of the most ingenious of the Roman Poets, Hee disguised all the passages so quaintly, and amplified his Relation with such eloquent Expressions, that hee left all their Ears (as it were) gaping, and their Spirits suspended with admiration at the strangeness of that Metamorphosis, and the delicacy of his Language: When Liante (who perceived by their indulgent looks, that all the voyces were ready to allot the Crown to Iphigenes, and that Kiss, of which (for Amiclea's sake) hee was most passionately covetous) said, Ladies I oppose your Votes, and believe that the prize will bee adjudged to mee, if you do mee Justice. What Justice? replied the Palatiness of Troc. Madam, answered hee, that I may relate a verity lately arrived, which surpasseth in strange∣ness the vanity of this fiction, wherewith Iphigenes hath fed your Ears. If you allow mee the advantage that Histories have of Fables, I am con∣fident I shall win. Iphigenes no less astonished than the rest, casting his Eyes upon Liante's Face (the ordinary aym of his tendrest looks) disposed himself to hearken with attention, when Liante explained his Speech in these words (which sounded as the voyce of Thunder in the Ears of the troubled Iphigenes:) Without borrowing any other person∣ages than who are present in this Room, I will change you this Fable into an History, and by the judgement of Iphigenes himself (after I have related it) I question not but the prize will bee mine without contra∣diction. In few words, Ladies, this Fable is nothing else but the History of Iphigenes and my self; do you not see, by reflecting upon the Names, how that of his feined Iphis agreeth with his own, and mine with Ianthe's? If the roof of Heaven had seemed to break over Iphigenes head, hee would have been less surprised than at this Discourse, whereof dreading the sequele more than the hand of Death, hee indeavoured to divert it, or at least remit it untill another time, and that hee had con∣ferred in the interim with Liante, who (hee believed) had sounded the depth of his intentions. But seeing that hee could not withstand the Torrent of the Ladie's curiosities, who pressed Liante with no less
importunity to speake, than hee conjured him to bee silent; at length hee was constreined to make use of that authority which his Friendship and Quality had alwayes given him over that beloved Brother-in-law, forbidding him under pain of his indignation to proceed any farther untill hee had spoken two words with him, which hee esteemed of no slighter importance than his Life. The grave and stern Countenance, with the sharp and angry tone, wherewith Iphigenes pronounced that threat, stopt the current of Liante's Speech no less miraculously than a little Remora make's a tall Ship stand still in the midst of the working Ocean, though the windes had filled all her Sailes. Iphigenes without losing time, presently de∣manded of Liante in private, after what manner hee intended to re∣cite that History; and having learn't that hee would onely apply it to their recreative transformations in the Forest of Plocens, not a little pleased that Liante had penetrated no farther into his Secret, serenity returned into his Face, the panting of his Heart ceased, and having re∣collected his Spirits hee said to the Assembly; My Laidies, that which Liante is about to tell you, is indeed a reall History, but it seem's as like a Fable, as my Fable hath th'appearance of an History; it is the relation of his Follies and mine, wherein I am confident you will finde nothing of such admiration, but that it's strangeness will excite you rather to laughter than astonishment. Therefore without despairing of the Crown, and the Favour that is to follow it, I shall let him speak, beseeching you not to ground your Sentence upon the Art of his Eloquence, which is able to illustrate the meanest Subjects, and make a Chrystall pass for a Diamond. This said, they having all re-taken their seats, composed their ge∣stures, and prepared their Ears for attention, Liante repeated all the Mistakes, Disguisements and pretty Contrivances practised for their recreation in the Woods, in the same manner as hath already been described; whereunto hee added the transvestment of his Sister Mo∣destina, and how shee had been treated by command of the barbarous Mieslas. But having run through this long Navigation, without touching any Rock, just at the Haven's mouth hee cast Iphigenes into a new perplexity. For, coming to mention the non-consummated Marriage of Iphigenes and Modestina, and the pretentions of the Princess Respicia, adding the Passions of some other Ladies in the Court, and the report that was spred through all Polonia of his af∣fections to the Shepherdess Almeria, hee represented Iphigenes so chast,
so bashfull, and so little inclined to Women, that hee made him appear not onely as the vertuous Hyppolitus, but so like that Iphis in his own Fable, (who of a Woman was transformed into a Man) that without changing the name you would have thought hee had been concerned in that Metamorphosis. This redoubled Iphigenes Feaver, confirming his suspition that Liante had discovered something of that Mistery, which hee had al∣wayes been so carefull to conceale. At length Liante returning to his Passions, or (as hee called them) his illusions for Serife (whom hee described with tearms beyond my capacity to rehearse) My Ladies (said hee) To the end you and all these Gentlemen may believe mee, in∣treat the beautifull Palatine to dress himself in some of your cloathes, (I assure my self your requests will be as commands to him) and I believe that there is not any among you, but will acknowledge that I was happily deceived; for as Hee is too fair for a Man, Hee is so perfectly hand∣some in a Woman's habit, that (without excepting her who possesseth mee) the most amorous of herself among you all, I am confident will freely yeild to Him the Palm of Beauty. Iphigenes hearing this was like unto a Man, who saved from Ship∣wrack by some sloting Board, is troubled to get on shoar, the waves sometimes pitifull, sometimes cruell, driving him towards the Land, and then snatching him back againe into the Sea; sometimes raising him above the Water, sometimes plunging him into their briny-bottom. For, seeing Liante's Shafts come so neer the Mark of the Truth, hee began to harbour a feare that his secret had been disclosed before its time: On the other side hee was transported with joy to see Liante fall of himself into the Nets which hee laid for him, and make so cleerly manifest, unawares, the most tender Resentments of his Soul. Liante's perswasions so prevailed with the Ladies, that they over∣whelmed Iphigenes with Conjurations to give their Eyes the content∣ment to behold under some of their rich ornaments the choycest Jewell of Nature's pretious Treasury. Whereunto Iphigenes after many excuses condescended, to their unspeakable admiration, and the absolute ravishment of Liante's Heart, which was his onely am∣bition, and for which consideration hee was no less willing to transvest himself than they earnest to desire it, to the end hee might again in that equipage dazle Liante's Eyes, and renew in his Brest that Idea which had rendered him his slave in the Forest.
This transformation gave birth to many quaint conceptions, and agreeable entertainments in that Assembly; But at length the Coun∣cill was called to deliberate, who was to have the prize: And it was concluded, that it could appertain to none but Iphigenes or Liante, who in stead of disputing which should receive it, contosted which should remit it to his Competitour. Their civill contention would ne'r have found a Period, if by this expedient Iphigenes had not ended it, suffering that Garland of Flowers to take place among the dressings, wherewith the Ladies had adorned his Head, and giving Liante the Liberty to take the other part of the prize from their Lips. This Decree beeing put in Execution, after much recreative Discourse and Compliments, Iphigenes quitted his Woman's apparrell, to the Ladies as well as Gentlemen's great regret: For, that splendid attire so increas∣ed his Charms, that all their Spirits were inchanted with his sight: And Liante in particular felt his heart so divided betwixt Serife and Ami∣clea, that like a Ship agitated on the Sea with contrary winds, hee knew not to which Port to steer his Course. But whilest wee amuse our selves too long in the Relation of what passed within those besieged Walls, wee forget to take notice of what was acted without. The Besiegers advanced their Trenches, and the King's Army received dayly new supplies. Yet the Besieged possessing the Out-works, and having strength and convenience e∣nough to Sally, scarce any day passed without some notable skermish. Hee that could express the trouble of the Camp, when Iphigenes was taken Prisoner, would bee no bad Oratour; But the fury of Mieslas, of necessity, must bee covered with the Veile of Silence. For, the Love which hee bare to his own Blood, to that Son, who was the Pillar of his Fortune, and the best Child upon the Earth, together with his implacable hatred to Liante, bred a strange Tempest in his Thoughts. Hee was no sooner cured of his contusions, and able to manege his Horse, but hee made severall Courses to the Citty-gates, thundering out such Bravadoes and Threats, as would have frighted People less resolute than those that kept that place. At length hee motioned the ransoming of his Son; But Iphigenes, who was not yet ready to go forth, having private intelligence with Liante, made their demands bee so excessive, that hee, who was no less covetous than cruell, would assoon give his own blood as stand to that bargain; And imagining that Liante, was chiefly in fault, hee sent him a Paper conteining this
CHALLENGE. THou owest the advantage of our last Incounter to my Mis∣fortune rather than thy Valour; and my Disaster pro∣ceeded from a defect in my Horse, rather than want of Courage in mee. Fortune, the sworn Enemy of Vertue, doth alwayes oppose the most Worthy, it beeing her ordinary Custome to Favorise the least deserving. The testimonies that I have given, in so many places, of my Valour, will not permit that a Fall from my Horse should blemish my Reputation. Those that shall undervalue Mee for that Mischance, will shew them∣selves as very Fools as thou, who gloriest in thy pretended Victorie, without remembring thy self, that three dayes be∣fore, my Son (less powerfull in Arms than I) gave thee thy Life. Now, if thou hast as much Courage as Vanity, I in∣vite thee to restore Mee with thy Sword, what thou think'st thou hast gained of Mee with thy Lance. For to leave My Honour in such feeble and childish Hands, is a thing I can less indure than Death. Thou maist come with assurance, since I pretend nothing but to give Thee thy Life, after I have conquered Thee, which I shall doe without much difficulty. If thou fearest Mee, and desirest that I should pardon Thee, send back my Son. Judge you, by these tearms, of the Fierceness and Pride of that Sarmatian. This defiance ran through severall hands, Liante not beeing able to conceale it, by reason it was brought publickly by a Trumpeter. It gave occasion of laughter to the discreetest Perusers; For, Vanity is generally accompanied with this Misery, that the more it strive's to be elevated & flyes towards Glory, the deeper it plunges it self into Contempt. Onely Iphigenes was discontented to see that every body blamed (though justly) the extravagance of his Father: For, as Fathers are blind and indulgent over their Children's imperfecti∣ons, So Children cannot acknowledge the defects of their Parents.
Those that commanded within the City would not suffer Liante to render Mieslas the satisfaction hee desired by a second Combat. Which obliged him to return by the same Trumpeter this ANSVVER. COurtesie obligeth mee to acknowledge, that the advantage I had of you proceeded rather from your Misfortune than your Fault, and from my good Fortune than my Valour. Indeed it was not without displeasure to my self, that I spilt your Blood, since I would willingly spend mine own to spare your's, performing therein the office of a Guardian to him, who abusing the rights of Tutelage, hath violently wrested out of my hands the Estate which my Father had purchased for Mee. Bee assured, Mieslas, that those supreme Powers, who make use of the weakest things to confound the most Mighty, will first or last give Mee a full Revenge of the Rigours which you have exercised upon mine Innocency. If I were Com∣mander of this place, I would give you that satisfaction with my Sword, which you desire, and I am resolved to let you have, assoon as I am at my own Liberty: But beeing onely a private Souldier, I cannot dispose of my self without my Captain's con∣sent. It is not that I dread your Choller, for I have already learn't the means to quell your Fury. The Testimonies that you boast to have given of your Valour, are below that stroke which overthrew you. I'le begin the same Game again with you when you please, after I am at my own command. I have yet the same Heart, and the same Art, and, what's more, the same Desire of giving you your Life, if you fall again into my Mercy. Although the Lawes of all good Chivalry would dispense Mee (without any Interest of my Honour) from fighting a second time with one, who is already indebted to Mee for his Life, as every body knowe's you are. Your Son (more happy in his imprisonment then hee was with you) is not
so much in my power as I am in his. You must capitulate with others about his Ransom. For my part I hold my self as glo∣rious in having been conquered by his Gallantry, as it is ho∣nourable for Mee to have remained Victorious over your Arrogance. This Answer made the haughty-spirited Mieslas ready to tear down the Heavens with Fury: For, nothing so outragiously torment's the Fancy of a Vain Man, as when the too good opinion hee hath of his own desert is undervalued with contemptible tearms. But there was no other remedy than making a Vertue of Necessity, and applying the Balsome of Patience to his Sore. All the brave Courages of the Army (Iphigenes beeing taken) seemed to bee stupified, and rendred like Bees that have lost their Sting: For the presence of that Magna∣nimous Palatine gave them I know not what Spirit, which animated them to generous Actions; and as if hee had been the Soul of that great Body, you would have said it languished, beeing deprived of the Star that gave it Life. And at the Court his imprisonment was so resented, that it seemed as if the Sun had lost it's Light, or at least the Day-star fallen from the Sky. To relate the Ladies Complaints, and especially the Princess Respicia's sighes, were as if you would count the Starres, or number the Tears of Heaven in a great Shower. The Queen herself (as dis∣creet and reserved as shee was) had no small pain to hide her Incli∣nation under her Majestick Modesty; and not beeing able to contein the Naturall distillation of her Eyes, shee covered her particular sorrow with the Veile of the publick Calamity. And the King, touched with tenderness for so dear a loss, notwithstanding his other indispositions besides Age (which is a continuall Malady, and can never bee cured but by the Grave) resolved to arme himself, and go in person to his Camp, if the Rebells released not his Favorite. To which effect hee presently dispatched a Post to them, that they might know his Will in these Words.
THE KING'S Letter to the REBELLS of LITHUANIA. I Am informed that by Treachery you have taken Prisoner my Cozen, the Palatine of Plocens; you wanted but that to raise your Rebellion to the height, and draw upon your Heads all that a King can have of Thunder and Indignation. Treason, the inseparable Companion of Revolts, hath given you that advantage, which you could never hope for by the way of true Valour. But the God of Revenge, (Protectour of Kings, who Reign by him, and are his lively Images on Earth) will make Mee take such Vengeance on your Insolence, that if you come not to acknowledge your faults, your Punish∣ment shall serve for a memorable Example to Posterity. You will never finde any Spirit so depravedly reprobate (unless it bee infected with the same Contagion that hath poysoned you) that can authorize your Arms against the Fidelity which you owe Mee by Nature, and to which you have solemnly ingaged your selves by Oaths: For, there is no Cause that can justly dispense any Subjects of the Obedience, which they owe to their Sovereigns. But admit your Arms were as just as they are criminall, you cannot refuse to release, upon reasonable Ran∣som, him whom Fortune hath delivered into your hands. You are not ignorant that I love him for the esteem I make of his Vertue; Therefore let Mee know at what rate you will set his Liberty, that I may content your Avarice. Which if you refuse to do, and that sodainly, know that within few dayes you shall see Mee at the Head of mine Army, incamped before your Walls, which I will thunder down with an hundred Cannons; And if you abuse my Clemency, I shall never thence forwards express my Pleasure to you but by their Mouths.
This was spoken like a King, and a King transported with Passion for a Subiect full of Merit. This Letter was received with all the respect that true Subjects owe their Sovereign; And the Coppy was sent to the other Palatines, and Noblemen of the League, who kept the Field, to have their advise concerning what Answer they should re∣turn. Hereupon a generall Councill was held at Minsce, wherein nothing was treated but what came to Iphigenes knowledge by Liante. To say how glad hee was to see what esteeme the King had of him were superfluous. But not having rendered himself a Prisoner volun∣tarily, to bee released against his Will, and fearing to leave Liante so imbarked in the affections of Amiclea, that hee should marry her in his absence, Hee searched among his thoughts what Invention hee might finde, either to draw Liante from among those Rebells, or remit them all into the King's, favour and mediate an attonement for the Peace and Benefit of the whole Kingdome. As a little salt season's a great deal of Meat, and a little Levine communicate's its spirits to a great lump of Dowe: So oftentimes one Grain of particular Interest doth much good or harm in publick affairs. Who would have said that Love could suggest such devices? And who may not think that this was the onely point which Archimedes demanded, to remove the whole Earth from it's Center? At length by Iphigenes own advice (whereof Liante was the secret Interpreter) it was concluded, that they should keepe the Palatine of Plocens, and make him as their buckler against their Prince's sury; perchance in imitation of Themistocles, who made himself a Rampire of the King of Persia's own Son against the violence of that Monark's rage. Liante ingaged himself that Iphigenes should intercede for them, so that they would condescend to Reason, without prejudice to their Liberties and Immunities, for the preservation whereof they had taken Armes. Hereupon a Gentleman was presently ordered to go to the Court with
THIS LETTER FROM THE LITHUANIAHS, TOKINK SIGISMOND AUGUSTUS. Dread SOVEREIGN, YOur thrice-humble, and thrice faithfull Subject's and Ser∣vants, the Palatines, Castellains, Gentry, and Com∣mons of your Dutchy of Lithuania, united for the defence of their Lives, Estates, and Liberties, do with all humility re∣present to your Majesty, That they acknowledge You for their Naturall Prince and Sovereign Lord, ordained by God to hold the Reins of their Empire, and that they will never decline from the respect, fidelity and obedience which they owe to your Roy∣all Majesty. Neither in effect have wee taken Arms to form any Revolt (for wee detest Rebellion as the blackest and basest crime in the World) but to deliver our selves from the Iy∣ranny of our Enemies, who besieging your sacred Person, will not allow us any access to expose our reasons before Your Maje∣sty, Whereby wee have been inforced to have recourse to our Arms as an help which Nature teacheth us, for the assurance of our persons, the exempting of our selves from their domina∣tion so insupportable to us, and the maintenance of our Rights, Priviledges and Immunities, which is all the glory of our Countrie. Sacred SIR, It is Your Patrimony, Your Inheri∣tance, Wee are Your Children, Your Naturall Subjects, the Sheep of Your Flock; wee most willingly submit our selves to your Scepter, and desire no other Liberty than that of Your Commands: But as you are just, and established by God to doe us Justice, Wee desire no better than to bee under the Yoak of your Lawes, so that they bee not dictated by the Mouths of our Adversaries, and that They draw them not by surprisall from Your's. Whether wee will or not, wee are obliged to ac∣knowledge You for our Master, by the right of Succession
which You have from Your Predecessors, and render the same devoir to Your Posterity, if Heaven blesseth you with anie. Which the Polonians cannot say, for they are too jealous of their election, to bind their obedience to the Lineage of a Prince. God shorten our dayes to lengthen your's: But if hee should call you to his Glory, and from this Earthly Kingdome to the Crown of Heaven without Heirs, Your Majesty may judge if our Condition would not be like unto that of slaves; and if the Po∣lonians (whose voices are vendible at Elections) would not sell us to what Master they pleased. SIR, wee are resolved to die everie Man, rather than indure such an affront, and give away our Liberties at so cheap a rate. A glorious Death shall alwaies bee more acceptable to us than an infamous Life, and which should blemish our Names in the memorie of our Posteri∣ty. For, what would our Nephews say of us, if they should finde that in our daies without the shedding of our bloods wee should submit our necks to the Yoak of the Polonian's servitude, whom wee have in former times discomfited, and reduced to shamefull conditions? Your Predecessours, by the Armes of our fore∣fathers, have gained Victories over them, which made them triumph with their Crown for the space of two compleat Ages. Great KING, take notice of these truths, and that if Your Vertues have made you be elected by the Polonians, it was be∣cause they found nothing in any other State so worthy of reigning over them, as in the Throne of Lithuania. Shall their Charms gain so much power over your Spirit, indued with such wisdom and rare conduct, as to induce you to lop off with Your Sword Your naturall Branches, in favour of those wild Plants wor∣thie of so much hatred? SIR, wee humblie beseech Your Majesty to maintain us in the same Honours, Prerogatives, and Liberties, as wee enjoyed under your Ancestours; and that for having been alwayes faithfull to you, our recompense may not be an ungratefull bondage under a cruell Nation, which we have ever abhorred; especially since (having carried out of
this Countrie the Bodies of our Princes, to seat them in their thrones) they have indeavoured to withdraw their Hearts, de∣priving us of the effects of their benevolence. If wee must die, can wee face Death in a more just quarrell than this, which wee defend, not to the prejudice of Your most excellent Majesty, but against those Tyrants which abuse Your Facilitie, and the good∣ness of Your Royall Disposition? If Your Majesty comes in Person to our siege, what a glorie will it be to us to fall under the victorious Sword of so great a Monarck, and render him our Lives to whom wee owe them? By this means wee shall wash awaie, with our own Blood, the fault, wherewith wee should be shamefully taxed by our Posterity, if wee should be so base as to leave them this thraldome for inheritance at a cheaper rate. This wee shall expect with a constant and undaunt∣ed courage. And since the Fortune of our Arms (favorised by Heaven) rather than any treachery, hath delivered into our hands a Person, who of all the Polonians was most dear to you, and who, by the vertues which Wee daily discover in him, makes appear the Excellency of Your Majestie's judgement in the choice of those whom you will honour with your Affections: Your Majesty must give us leave to make a Rampire of that Trea∣sure which is fallen to us, and which shall serve us as a Buckler against the violence of your Choller and Vengeance. For, when the mouths of your Cannons shall begin to express your Pleasure against our Walls, the first Gabion that wee will op∣pose shall be the bodie of the Palatine of Plocens, your Crea∣ture; knowing that you bearing the image of God on Earth, will not destroie the work of your own hands, nor give your self entrance into our City, by a breach besprinkled with the bloud of a Person so considerable in your esteem. But if that hinder you not from executing your rigours, what Grace can wee ex∣pect, but that of those who have lost all hopes, seeing him so cruelly treated whom you honour with your Favour? But wee promise our selves better things from the Clemency and Pru∣dence
of Your Majesty, and that as Father of Your Country, you will not procure its ruine. And although the perswasion of our Adversaries should make you construe our legitimate Defence a Crime, wee are assured that Your Wrath and Chastisements will never fall upon us without the mixture of Love and Pitty. Permit, Great KING, that appealing from Your Majesty to Yourself, wee may obtain either an amicable Conference, to de∣cide our Differences with the Polonians, or a free Audience at the Tribunall of Your Sovereign Iustice, to spare the bloud of Your Subjects; And there wee hope to advance such powerfull Reasons, that if Might oversway not Equity, wee shall gain the Cause, and give for Motto of our Triumph; The vertue of SIGISMOND hath raised him to the Throne of POLONIA, But the Love of LITHUANIA hath overcome SIGISMOND. To this long Declaration Iphigenes (who in his Captivity injoyed as much Liberty as hee would take) had the permission to annex his Letter to the King; nothing beeing impossible for him, having Liante for Mediatour; To whom hee shewed his dispatches: And in re∣spect they tended onely to the Peace and Ʋnion of those two Na∣tions under the King's Obedience, Liante was glad to be an instrument of so good and laudable an Enterprise. The substance of his Informations to the King imported, That it was rather by good Fortune than bad, that hee had fallen into the Lithuanian's hands, or at least, that it was so fortunate a misfortune, that hee thank't Heaven for nothing so much as that Disgrace; not onely that thereby hee had rendered some testimonies of his fidelity to His Majesty from whom he had received so dear a proof of his affection, by the cars hee expressed of procuring his Liberty: But that hee had found the means by his imprison∣ment (so that His Majesty would be pleased to let it continue somewhat longer) to reduce the exasperated Spirits of those Rebells to the regulated temper of a just Obedience: Which hee esteemed so feasible, that if his Majesty would condescend but a little, hee doubted not to purge them of their Factious humours, and make them understand their duties. That hee had observed among them the seeds of great Affection and Respect to their Naturall and Legitimate Prince; And that, with the least shower
of clemency powred down upon those Plants, they were likely to produce acceptable fruits in their season. That hee beeing born a Polonian, de∣sired, as much and more than the other Palatines, the glory of Polonia and the advantage of his Countrie; But having considered that Peace with their Neighbours was the maine means to make Polonia flourish, and that to subdue by violence the Lithuanians (a Nation both redoubtable, and in his judgement invincible) was an enterprise so far from any likelyhood, that it was rather an exposing of Polonia to the Conquest of Lithuania, than a way to reduce Lithuania under the subjection of Polonia. That that Province beeing altogether as vast and powerfull as Sarmatia, it might balance and counterpoise the authority, and preheminence of the Polonians; who of Elder Brothers without contradiction, might bee supplanted by their younger, if they came to dispute it by force of Arms, whose Evene∣ments are so full of uncertainties. That it was onely allowing some part of the inheritance to those second Children, who perchance beeing treated with moderation would bee contented with little. That hee must not think to give them the portion of the Eagle (which is the Arms of Polonia) who leave's nothing to the other Birds; otherwise the armed Knight (which is the Arms of Lithuania) pretending to the booty would fight for his share of the spoile. That hee had felt the pulse, and sounded the dispositions of the principall Authours of that Revolt, whom hee found resolved to die for the defence of their Liberties (a pecious Pretext and capable to make the whole Earth rise) or (if they did submitt to the Crown of Polonia) to participate in the Charges and Government of the State. These with diverse other heads by way of advice did Iphigenes write, and sent them to the King with the following LETTER. SACRED MAJESTY: TWo grand benefits I hope to reap by the dammage of my imprisonment; One, to re-purchase my self your Opinion, if I have lost it, or preserve it if I have yet any place in your Fa∣vour. The Other, to arme such indeavours for your present service as may stile mee a faithfull Servant to so Royall a Master. SIR, I am your subject with many others, but I am, besides, the particular Marke of your Liberalities and Benefi∣cence, which make's mee the Blank of Envy and Detraction (if Envy can have any Blank) But I hope by this occasion
which I have now in hand (or rather in whose hāds I am) to make the malice of my Enviers burst, as certain venimous Creatures are observ'd to do at the smell of Roses. For, if Your Majesty will be pleased onely to prolong my imprisonment, and authorize by your approbation according to the advice I have sent you with this present) my Negociations and Proceedings, I doubt not in short time to reduce unto such tearms the affairs of this Civile War, that Your Majesty triumphing in the midst of your Ene∣mies, shall see them beg mercie at your Feet; which I kiss with all humilitie in acknowledgement, and thanks for the care you take of my inlargement out of this servitude: Happie servitude! amiable Prison! since it is for the service of a King, whose Goodness exceed's his Greatness, and who deserve's that the Extremities of the Earth were the Limits of his Dominion; Yet would it be inferiour to his Vertue. Agreeable Prison! wherein I manage the Liberty of my Country; which never can have place but in the Publick Tranquilitie. SIR, all the fruit of War is Peace: But Hee that can gather that sweet fruit, blessed by Heaven and desired on Earth, without water∣ing his Palms with Blood, and his Olive-Branches with Tears, is hee not much happier? Who doubts but the refreshing breath of gentle Zephyrus, is more agreeable than the bluster∣ing blasts of rigid Boreas, and that the wayes of Mildness are the best and most advantageous to Monarks, who can shew by nothing better than Clemency that they are the livelie Images of the Deity? This makes mee beseech Your Majesty to speak alwayes like a King in your Letters, expressing your Courage and Indignation by threatnings, but within your Heart to reserve inclinations to Mercy and Forgiveness: Con∣sidering that you Command Men, and Men that are free-born, People of an haughtie Spirit, and whose untractable dispositions naturally make them rather break then bend. It is fit that your Majesty imitating the Divinity, which you represent to us on Earth, should make the voice of your Thunder be heard over
the Rebell's heads, to the end the astonishment may keep them All in Fear, although the Blow hit very Few. And let not your Majesty stick to hazard my Life, or apprehend exposing it to the Mutiny of an inraged Rabble; For, as I shall not preserve it but onely for your service, I cannot lose it better than for so glorious a cause. I would I had a thousand Lives, and that it were but my losing of them all to give you a full testimonie that I am the most faithfull, as the most obliged to Your Majesty of all your Subjects. I shall adde this word for the consideration of Liante, who amazeth all Polonia, that beeing a naturall Polonian, hee should espouse the Lithuanian interest. Your Majesty may please to take notice that the Despair, whereunto the rigorous treatment of my Father, his Gardian, hath re∣duced him, compelled him to that extremity, rather than the desire of disserving Your Majesty, or favorising their Rebel∣lion. When I shall inform Your Majesty one day, what drove him into that Desperate Course, you will acknowledge that it was rather a Necessity unavoidable, than any Designe accom∣panied with Malicious ingratitude: Hereof I have daily ex∣perience by the assistance which I receive from him for the ad∣vancement of Your Majestie's Service among these Mutiniers. If by the confiscation of his Estate Your Majesty hath made him feel the severitie of your Indignation, when you shall under∣stand the truth, and that his Services shall have averred his innocence, and cleered his accusation, hee hopes, with the rest, to taste the fruits of your Clemency, as I am loaden with those of your Liberality. Your Majestie's most humble, most faithfull and most obliged Subject, Servant and Creature, IPHIGENES.
The King having received this Packet, seriously reflected upon the advice of his beloved Favorite, of whose wit and vertue hee had al∣wayes made no meane account, but nothing comparable to the esteem hee conceived of him on this occasion, seeing with what Prudence and Conduct hee changed his private Disaster into the Publick good. And in effect hee served the King in this occurrence as the Dolphin is said to serve Fishermen, who finding him in their Nets, after stroaking and caressing him, cast him again into the Sea, because hee leads into their hands the other Fishes, which in great trains attend him as their Prince. But alas! as in a calme season when the Dolphins sport above the water, it is the infallible presage of a storm; So, while Iphigenes laboured, in playing, to procure a publick tranquillity, a Tempest a∣rose with such impetuosity, that hee had almost perished; neither could it be appeased notwithstanding all his industry, but by wracking the secret which hee had so many years conceal'd. Whilest the King was deliberating his affairs, having commanded the most trusty, and best experienced of his Councill to advise con∣cerning the meanes of quenching that fire which threatned both his States of Polonia and Lithuania with a vast ruine, Iphigenes by a sodain Gust saw all his hopes upon the very brink of Destruction. For, Ola∣vius seeing the great ascendant Liante had over the Spirit of Iphigenes, and that Hee had no less over the King's; The Politick Lithuanian conceived that there was no better means to moare his Vessell at An∣chor, and secure himself from the Shipwrack that threatned his Fortune, than by marrying his Daughters. The aspiring to the alliance of Iphi∣genes, was what hee desired more than hee durst hope. Oh! if Ami∣clea's glances had penetrated as deep into that Favorite's brest, as they had done in Liante's, what great matters would hee have promised to his Ambition! But (besides that hee knew Iphigenes was Married to Modestina, and was not ignorant of the Designes of the Princess Respicia) seeing the great indifferency that beloved Captive shewed for all Women, as hee lost the Hope of atchieving so high an advantage, hee quitted the thought of desiring it. Which made him turn all his pretensions towards Liante, promising himself to obtain of the King by Iphigenes, what hee should demand of Iphigenes by Liante. If this Palatine had an ambition to make Liante his Son-in-Law, Liante was no less desirous than Hee to contract that alliance: But hee was not so simple as to take the Elder for the Younger, there
was no darkness impenetrable to the sight of such a Lover. Since Oloria had turned her Eyes towards Iphigenes, beeing trans∣ported with the ravishing Garbe of that beautifull Object, shee slighted Liante's scorns; The same cause made Amiclea disdain the esteem which Liante made of her, and nothing was so irksome to her, as when hee entertained her with the discourse of his Passion. Melindra, Daughter to the Palatine of Troc, beeing assaulted on one side by the Legitimate Affection and Fidelity, which shee owed to her absent Husband, and on the other by the Charms which the pre∣sence of Iphigenes cast into her thoughts, felt Combats of Love and Honour in her Heart, whose convulsions approached the torments of a Woman in travell, who would but cannot bee delivered. The Con∣flict or violent opposition that Heat and Cold make in the conca∣vity of a Clowd, is some resemblance of the Contradictions in her Minde. And after many passionate Complaints continuing to ag∣gravate her sore with a thousand various imaginations, shee impoison∣ed the Humour more, and sometimes shunned the remedy, sometimes desired it with impatience. Nevertheless shee remained so firm in the steps of Vertue, that although her languishing looks, broken sighes, and tears discovered plainly enough her distemper to Iphigenes, yet shee observed a severe silence, never giving her Tongue the liberty to say any thing, but what was within the bounds of a modest Civility. Wherein shee made appear as much vertue as the two old Palati∣nesses shewed little; For, they were grown so jealous of their Daugh∣ters, having discovered their inclinations, that like Furies they were perpetually haunting them, and reprehending in them a fault, which they authorized in their own deportments. I will not stain their memory with the extraordinary means, which they used to inveigle this Fish into their Nets. Imagine you onely what Women can doe, or rather what they cannot do, when animated with a violent Passion, and in an Age whose weakness redouble's the other's force. At length Despair had made them commit a treachery, and change their incli∣nation into vengeance, if the Publick necessities had not retarded them in their Private animosities. So they borrowed of Time and Patience the succour of Hope, which is alwayes ready to assist the most miserable. But Iphigenes, who had been beaten with fiercer, and more danger∣ous storms at Court, laughed at those Feminine divisions, and looked (as from an eminent place) upon those fraile Vessels, agitated
with that violent tempest, as a Shittle-cock in the Wind, and the subject of his Disdain. The assault which I am now going to relate was otherwise resented, for it came from the Place that was onely capable of putting Iphigenes beyond his Temper and Art of Dissi∣mulation. You may conceive already, that it proceeded from Liante, whose Spirits beeing settled, after the motion which Iphigenes transvestment had caused in his brest, relapsed into the vehemence of his Passions for Amiclea; whose Scorns befrosted his Pretensions, as much as her Graces inflamed his Inclinations. At length, the Eyes of those that love, beeing very quick-sighted, hee perceived it was onely the presence of Iphigenes that ruined his Designes, and that his Idoll was so possessed with the Idea of that beautifull Palatine, that no other could finde ad∣mittance into her Soul. This presently bred Jealousie in Liante, and so much power hath the Tyranny of Love above the ties of Friendship, that hee felt the later diminish, as fast as the other dilated it self in his thoughts. Hee wish∣ed hee had some occasion not to love Iphigenes so well; but his in∣dearing deportments, his vertue, and (above all) that incomparable Modesty, which accompanied all his Actions, wrested out of his Minde all thoughts of loving him less. Afterwards, considering to what danger that brave Palatine had exposed himself to save his For∣tune, and the promises hee made to raise him to the most eminent Dignities of Polonia, if hee would follow his advice (which hee had alwayes found as advantageous as sincere) that expunged all manner of Gall out of his Heart, and restreined him from doing or saying any thing, that might be prejudiciall to so pure and inviolable a Friendship. One of whose principall Effects beeing Confidence, hee resolved to open his Heart to Iphigenes, and discover to him as well the extre∣mity of his Passion for Amiclea, as the pricking torments of his Jealousie. But when hee had displayed all his distempers, the End of his Dis∣course was the Beginning of Iphigenes paines; for fearing nothing so, much as the loss of that Heart, which hee desired to keep intire to himself, it was an inconceivable torture to his Minde, to see him so violently bent upon another. Object Whereupon hee thus spake to Liante; I marvell not at your beeing in Love, for the Subject deserves it; But your Jealousie put's my senses beyond all temper; for (I pray) what occasion have I ever given you to doubt of my Fidelity? Observe
Liante, how far my Friendship extends: if you had but said to mee, Iphigenes, I would not have you look upon such a Lady, although her Image were ne're so deeply ingraven in my Soul, I would tear it away, or pluck the Eyes out of my head, if they were so rash as to cast but one glance upon her. I am sure if I had brought your's to this test, it would not have indured the touch, and you would defend your disobedience by the advantages that Love, who is but a Child, possesseth or'e those Spirits that are subjected to his Empire. See, Liante, how I surpass you in all things, and (which is as much to your shame as my honour) in the Preroga∣tives of Friendship; which is vainly reported to equalize Friends, since you are inferiour to me by so many degrees, that you dare not think in my favor, what I would willingly execute for your Consideration. What imaginati∣on possesseth your mind? do you think to make Amiclea love you against her will? Certainly you understand very ill the motions of Love, which have no other foundation but the Liberty of choosing, and therefore it is called Dilection, as if one should say an inclination of Election. And you are very ignorant of the humour of Ladies, who (like shadowes) do usually follow those that flie them, and shun those that follow them. You have reason to say that Amiclea love's mee; hee must bee blinde that perceive's it not; so do many others, whose Passions are very irksome to mee: my Ears are dayly storm'd with her Complaints, and these importunities which are so unwelcome to mee, would be such favours to you, as would elevate your thoughts to the Skies. But what should I do in this case? I can no more hinder her from loving mee, than compell her to affect you. Affecti∣on is not so easily put off as a Garment, nothing is more difficult to be done by devoir than to Love. Shee knowe's that her desires are with∣out hope for my particular, and yet I cannot disabuse her of her Errour, nor disswade her from amusing her Fancy after a Subject, which cannot lawfully be her's. I would, for your satisfaction, that it were in my power to transplant her Passion, and turn it from my self to you; if this were possible, you should finde that among all the Friends in the World there never was any more faithfull, nor more desirous of pleasing you than I am. At these words Jealousie resigned the possession of Liante's Heart; and hee, acknowledging the ingagements hee had to the incomparable Friendship of Iphigenes, said to him: I think Heaven hath created you to serve as a Spectacle of admiration to all those that see you, but much more to those that frequent you. It is impossible to hate you, and know you; But what say I? I maintain one cannot
know you without loving you, no more than see the Sun without light or heat. But what can bee the reason, that (like that glorious Planet) you cause such ardours in these feeble Souls, without con∣ceiving the least degree of heat in your own? For, never Man was so beloved of Women as you are, and (I think) never any cared less for them than you. What? Do you then love none so well, but that you could leave her if a faithfull friend should intreat you to be unfaithfull to her? Hereunto Iphigenes made answer, A perfect Friend will never desire any thing so dishonorable as infidelity; but if any Friend of mine should be much inflamed for some one of that Sex, (who to mee are all indifferent) I should make no difficulty to resigne an affection, wherein I were no otherwise ingaged than by a Civile respect; especially if hee had been the first pretender. For, I hold it the greatest injury that can be done to a Friend, to indeavour to spoil his market in matter of Marriage, and that there is nothing more capable of breaking all Friendship, than Jealousie proceeding from such a cause; in regard it is an offence beyond reparation. There is not hee breathing among Mortalls but knowe's that Love and Royalty admit of no Companions, and that they are two Torrents which overturn by the impetuosity of their Course all sort of Ob∣stacles. Dear Iphigenes, replyed Liante, I think thou hast undertaken to transport mee quite beyond my self, making mee see in thee, not the Image, but the Essence of the most perfect Friend under the Circumference of the Firmament. I deliver up my Arms, Dear Brother, and in all wayes acknowledge my self conquered by thee; But since thou hast given mee so many times my Life, now thou givest mee the Courage to desire thee to preserve in mee thy own handy-work, and release mee from the trouble that torment's mee. Know then, that without the possession of Amiclea I cannot live. And to imbrace the Body of one, whose Heart is with another, is a thing I can as little indure, as to be tied to a breathless Carcass; It would be a punishment to mee, not a pleasure. Therefore I beseech thee to further mee in the Conquest of her Affection, and favorise this alliance with thy assistance. I am but too certain of her Parent's con∣sent, and that they are no less willing to make mee their Son-in-law, than I desire to have their Daughter to Wife. Then, after some other discourse, conceiving that nothing hinder∣ed him from beeing beloved by Amiclea, but the Passion which con∣sumed her for Iphigenes, Liante continued his supplication to him to
deprive her of all Hope of injoying him, that shee might likewise lose the desire, flattering his imagination that thereby her Love, having no more wings to raise it self, would doubtless fall to the ground; the onely means of curing that Disease in her Fancy, and to pluck the Thorns out of her Heart, beeing to put the Rose out of her reach. Al∣leadging that to perswade her to divert her thoughts another way, and fix them upon a subject to whom shee might easily and justly pretend, hee had a thousand reasons, and wanted no inventions to lend him merits that hee possessed not, and convey them into the belief of that Lady. That if, by his mediation, hee purchased her Affection, hee would esteem that favour above the benefit of his Life (for which hee remained his debter) in regard Life would be loathsome to him, if hee could procure no admittance into Amiclea's Heart. Imagine you into what extremities Iphigenes saw himself reduced, not beeing able handsomly to refuse serving Liante in an occasion that hee dreaded the most, and which was most destructive to his own de∣sires. Having remained long time in this perplexity, as motionless as if hee had seen a Medusa, or been stunn'd with some violent blow, at length recollecting his Spirits, and like Anteus, receiving vigour from his fall, hee gave his voyce passage to pronounce these words. Liante, if you knew the harm and injury you do mee, you would have some compassion of my suffering, and acknowledge that you condemne mee to a punishment much less supportable than Death, by intreating mee to serve you in this occurrence. I know you will say, that the triall of a Friend is in difficult matters, and time of need; But if wee ought to love another, by the modell of that Love which wee owe to our selves, it followe's necessarily that our own interest ought to have the precedence, according to the order of the most perfect Charity. It is not yet time for you to know the injury I receive thereby, nor the extream dammage and hinderance it will bee to your Fortune, which I intended to raise above all other Grandeurs in Polonia, except the Royall Dignity. I see plainly that it is the luster of some pleasures, and vain pretensions, that make's you precipitate your self from this Pinacle, and seek your fall, where you thought to raise your self. Questionless I shall bee a Cassandra to you, and tell you divers truths, but you will believe none. Well, Liante, perchance my Death will open your Eyes, and then (by a remorse too late and out of season) you will regret that you had caused it to one, who prepared for you the happiest Life that your
imagination could fathome. Nevertheless I will drink this Cup of bitterness, which you present mee, and although it bee to mee a poyson beyond remedy, I will swallow it, to shew the force of my Friendship to the prejudice of my Love, to a Man, who (I believed) could not be capable of ingatitude. Hereupon Liante thinking hee had discovered all the secret, said; Brother, have I caught you? I knew this straining would so torture you, that in despight of your dissimulation, I should at length wring out of your own Mouth the verity, which you hid in the bottome of your Heart. You love Amiclea then, for whom you counter∣feited so much coldness and indifference; and, thrusting Time back by the shoulders expecting the conclusion of the Peace, you would amuse mee in the interim with promises of imaginary dignities, like those who give Children Cherries with certain mag∣nifying Glasses, that make them shew as big as Apples: To the end at the same time you may kill two Birds with one bolt, and by breaking your Faith to the Sister deprive the Brother of a Love, which hee preferr's before his Life. At length after a tedious Conference to this effect, Liante beeing perswaded by the suggestions of Jealousie, that the fair Palatine was the onely obstacle of his pretentions, in a discontented humour quit∣ted the room, leaving Iphigenes with such a tempest in his thoughts, as you may fancy, Love, Despight, Shame, Choller, Despair, and Sorrow (which then tormented him all together) by their impetuous blasts were able to raise in a Lover's minde. Yet beeing resolved to suffer all extremities, rather than breake absolutely with Liante, hee searched among his thoughts for Excuses, and some Reasons to pardon his ingratitude. And after a thousand Musings, and as many extrava∣gant Discourses, Alas! said hee to himself; It is thou (I phigenes) who art cause of thy own mischief, yet thou accusest the innocent, thou hidest his Eyes and complainest if hee hurt thee. Restore, restore his sight by discovering to him what thou art, and then thou wilt finde that as the shadowes of the Night fly from the Presence of the Sun, So all his Suspi∣cions will vanish when thou shalt let him see the cleer Day of Truth. Thus Iphigenes sometimes injuring Liante, sometimes crying him mercy, sometimes accusing, sometimes excusing him, digested that bitterness with such anguish, that (if a timely shower of tears had not wetted the Wings of his agitated Spirits, benum'd his Senses, and at last closed his Eyes) hee was in danger of falling into a Frenesie.
Mean time Liante neglected no indeavours to get Iphigenes out of the City, judging that in respect Hee had entred upon his Word, his Honour was ingaged to remit him in the same condition as hee took him: Besides, the interest of his Love instigated him shrewdly to ex∣pedite that enterprise, imagining, as a Loadstone loseth it's faculty of attracting iron in the presence of a Diamond, that hee should never be able to draw the Affections of Amielea to him, as long as her Eyes had that beautifull Palatine to contemplate. But as it is no less easie to bee caught in a snare, than hard to get loose; So in the Warres a Man may bee soon made prisoner, but not so sodainly inlarged. Liante to acquire the glory of that Prize, had conducted that intelligence without communicating it to the Palatines of Minsee and Troc: But to make Iphigenes escape without advertising them, had been to ex∣pose his Person to a shamefull punishment, and declare himself an Ene∣my and a Traitour to the publick good: So that hee knew not what to resolve. On the other side, the Passion hee suffered for Amiclea never gave his Mind any truce: yet to marry one that loved him not, in that great Aversion and Perplexity of Spirit, (th' Idea of another Object having wholly prepossess'd her thoughts) he saw as little likely∣hood as contentment. In this anxiety hee went to tell Iphigenes, that without his Counsell hee could not finde a thred to lead him out of the Labyrinth, where∣in hee had ingaged himself by entring into Minsce. Iphigenes, who had no desire to go out, was glad to take this advantage of Liante, saying, That comming in upon his word, hee thought the Gates should be open for him when hee pleased. And, Liante having told him the difficulties and obstacles hee found in procuring his inlargement, hee continued; See what a great Name you have in appearance among the Rebells, and how little Power in effect. It is not so with mee in the King's Party; For, I am so confident of His Majestie's goodness, that hee will receive you graciously, and when I shall have acquainted him with the motives of your. Despair, that hee will re-establish you in despight of Mieslas in your Estate, and confer such Dignities upon you as you can never hope to gaine by this Rebellion. And if you will decline those thoughts of Marriage with Amiclea (which are as ruinous to you as grievous to mee, for Reasons which it is not yet time to tell you,) Let mee alone with the conduct of your Fortune, and assure your self, that I will not onely repair the Breaches of it, but raise it to such an height, that your desires will scarce be able toto reach it.
Passion is a deceiving Medium, through which wee cannot rightly discern the sincerity of any thing. Liante beeing prepossessed with a false suspicion and prejudice against Iphigenes, thought all his Potesta∣tions and Promises but onely inventions to deceive him; especially in regard they tended to make him break those Bonds, which hee esteemed above all Honours or Libertie: And not conceiving where∣fore hee should have such repugnancy to his Marriage, hee resolved to play the Adder, stopping his Ears to that wise Charmer, and press all he could his Alliance with Amiclea. Whereupon hee answered, That hee was not so little judicious, as to leave a certainty for an uncertainty, and a Prey which hee had already in his Hands, to follow a new Sent; No, hee was too well skill'd in hunting to take the Change. That hee preferr'd the conqst of his Mistirs above the King's favour. That hee hoped his particu∣lar Peace should bee included in the publick Articles. That hee knew no better means to ingage the Lithuanians to insert that Clause in their Capitulations, than by his Alliance with Olavius. That that was his last resolution, the Plank and Anchor of his Shipwracked For∣tune; That all perswasions to the contrary should move his Heart no more than the Sea's insulting Billowes displace the sturdy Rocks. This hurried the thoughts of Iphigenes beyond the bounds of Pati∣ence, seeing the obstinancy of that inflexible Courage: yet hee moderat∣ed his passion a little, not without letting appear some sparkles of his inward fire by these words. You cannot restore me my Liberty, & you will marry Amiclea against my Will. Well, Liante, know that being more powerfull than you in all respects, I can take again my Liberty when I please, and hinder you from having Amiclea to Wife. For, I know, unless I am so contented, that shee will rather consent to Death, then your Marriage: As for my going out of this Castle, take notice that I have as many sally-ports as there are W. (hee would have said Women, but not to discover himself too much, hee said) Windowes. This made Liante believe (see how one absurdity drawe's on ano∣ther) that Iphigenes made use of some Magicall charms to purchase himself the King's favour, rise to such high Dignities, acquire Ho∣nour in the War, gain the Affections not onely of Ladies, but of all the World, and make his escape out of Prison, either by flying like De∣dalus, or transforming himself into a Bird. In this Opinion he said, That cannot be done without sorcery.
I will use no other Charms, than those which Nature hath placed in my Face (replyed Iphigenes) nor any other Armes than those of my Tongue. Then (answered Liante in a fury) complaine not against Mee if you get not out of Prison; And do what you can, I defie all your inchantments, White or Black, Naturall or Diabolicall, for hin∣dering Mee from marrying my Mistris, since I have her Father's word, on which depend's her Will by the Law of Filiall Obedienoe and Paternall Authority. With that hee flung away, as full of Anger as hee left Iphigenes opprest with Sadness.
The Twelveth Book. ARGUMENT. Iphigenes to content Liante seem's to sollicite Amiclea in his behalf. His Speeches to Her, Liante standing behinde the Hangings in the same Chamber. Her sharp Replies. Liante's fury at Her slights. Iphigenes and Amiclea's indeavours to appease his Rage. Liante, transported with Love, contracts with Her Parents to marry Amiclea contrary to Her Will or Knowledge. Her Sister Oloria informs Her, and Shee acquaints Iphigenes with these Proceedings. Iphigenes falls desperat∣ly Sick with Griefe for Liante's unkindness to Him, and his obstinate Research of Amiclea. The Politick Boleslaus, under pretence of beeing an Apothecary, conveye's himself into the Castle with the King's Phy∣sicians that came to attend the Prisoner. Iphigenes after a passionate Declaration of his Distemper, swounds in Boleslaus Arms. His per∣plexity, and Invention to asswage the Palatine's sorrow. To disabuse Liante and withdraw his affection from Amiclea, Hee discovers the whole Mystery of Iphigenes Birth, Education and Passion for Him. Liante's astonishment at this Relation, with his Speeches to Boleslaus. The Amazement, and Joy of Iphigenes upon Boleslaus assurance of Liante's mutuall flames. Boleslaus brings Liante to Iphigenes Chamber. Their Passionate Deportments at this interview. Their perfect Reconciliation. Their Plot to cheat the Eyes as well of Ami∣clea and Oloria as the rest. Olavius in hope to match his Daughter to Iphigenes, disposes the Lithuaninans to an accommodation. Iphi∣genes receives a Commission from the King to treat with them. Mieslas, during the Treaty, indeavours to intercept Liante at his re∣turn into the City. The Policy and Resolution of Iphigenes to defend Him. Next day Hee is stayed, and accused of Treason by his inraged Father. Mieslas to break off the Treaty, and intrap L'ante (if hee sallied) gave out that Hee would execute Iphigenes with his own hand
as a Traytor. Liante with a strong Party of Lithuanians rescues the supposed Iphigenes, takes Mieslas Prisoner. Amiclea to release or re∣venge her beloved Iphigenes, in a suit of Polemander's Armour sallies among the rest, is taken by the Royalists, and given by the Generall to Iphigenes. Hee returns with his Shee-Champion to Minsce; Ex∣cuses her disguisement to Olavius and her Mother. Receives a Pleni∣potentiary power from the King to agree with the Lithuanians: The Pastimes during the Treaty. Liante's Grace and re-establishment is included in the Articles. The Peace concluded, Iphigenes is sent for to the Court: Is magnificently received by the King. He obtains Liante's pardon, and re-instates him in the King's favour. The King offers his Sister Florimunda in Marriage to Iphigenes in satisfaction of his acceptable services. His modest refusall. The Queen's importunity to effect that Alliance. His seeming consent and resignation to their Ma∣jesties Commands. Iphigenes discovers to the King in private the whole secret of his Birth, Education and Affection to Liante; Im∣plores his assistance for the accomplishment of his desires. Their Plot to stop the Rumour of his Marriage to Florimunda, and suppress her Passion, by reporting that He was impotent. The Princess Respicia's distempers at this Newes, and Her indeavours to make good Her Dispensation. Modestina and Aretuza are sent for to the Court. The fears of the later, the Jealousie and passionate Expressions of the other against Respicia. The Palatine of Minsce brings his two Daughters to Court, challenging Iphigenes and Liante of their promise to marry them. The King opposes his authority to their pretentions, makes Mieslas condescend to give Liante one of his Daughters. Hee produces a concealed one named Virgenia or Iphigenia. The contestation of Modestina, Respicia and Amiclea for Iphigenes. The King appoints a day for hearing, and undertakes to content them all by his Award. His speech to the Queen and Assembly, while Virgenia (drest like a Bride) is conveyed into a private Gallery, and Liante reassumes the form of Almeria. Boleslaus by the King's command brings forth Iphigenes sumptuously apparelled in Man's cloaths, Leading Liante in a Woman's. Their Deportments and Speeches to the Assembly. The severall censures of the Spectatours. The Archbishop declares Iphi∣genes Marriage to Modestina void: Affiance's him to Almeria. The destemper of Mieslas at this sight. They retire and change Cloathes. The King's private Discourse with the three Pretendants in mean time. Liante by the King's command re-enters the Stage in Man's
apparrell with the reall Iphigenes attired like the supposed Iphigenia. They are publickly contracted. Mieslas is deceived in his own Daugh∣ter. The Queen's and Infanta's discourse concerning the betrothed Couples. His Majestie's grave Speech to the Assembly, unfoulding the secret of Iphigenes Birth. The amazement of the Hearers. Miesias fury against Liante is turn'd to Joy and Kindness. The King appoints a day to celebrate their Marriage with magnificent solemnities. Iphi∣genes, more in favour than ever, Marries and advances all his Friends and Attendants. Liante's Dignities increase proportionably to the favour his Wife procured him. Their life at the Court. The Mosco∣vians invade Polonia. Mieslas, by his Daughter's means is made Lieutenant Generall. Ambition incites Liante to assist in that Ex∣pedition; Love and Honour forbid Iphigenia's stay behinde him. Their Gallantry in the Battle. Mieslas is slaine; The Generall dies; That Charge is confer'd upon the two Favorites. The Triumphs that were made them at their returne to Court. Liante is re-instated in his Inheritance, & made Lord high Marshall of Polonia. Cassin, Pome∣ran and the rest are Honorably rewarded by His Majesty, for their va∣lorous deportments in his Service. THis distance and discontentment having continued for some dayes, the inamoured Prisoner, desiring to leave nothing unattempted to Conquer Liante's Heart, sent to beg a visit of him. Cour∣tesie, so naturall to persons of Noble birth, permitted him not to refuse so small a favour to so great a friend; Besides, the hope hee had that Iphigenes, repenting himself for having thwarted his designe, might happily assist him in the purchase of Ami∣clea's Love, induced him to satisfie his desire. Beeing come into the presence of him, whom hee had so dearely loved, and so much disobliged, touched with a thousand remerses, hee had not the confidence to invisage him. Iphigenes, perceiving the per∣plexity, and trouble in his thoughts, by the changing of colours in his Frace, after many passionate Reproaches and Complaints against his ingratitude, said; You foster an Opinion as I would have disswaded you from the Alliance with Amiclea, that I do hinder her from consenting to the Marriage proposed betwixt her and you. If I make you see and hear the contrary of your Errour, what can you alledge for your excuse? But
to speak verities to one that is incredulous, is to sow good Grain on an in∣fertile Ground. I am not so wedded to incredulity (replied Liante) as not to believe what I see and hear; but you must pardon mee if I have no Faith in your last words, since they are directly contrary to your former, from which (if you remember) I could gather no other sense, than that you would hinder Amiclea, to the utmost of your power, from giving her consent to make me her Husband. I is true (said Iphigenes) that if I did by the least compliance bewraye an inclination to answer the Love, (which you cannot but perceive shee beareth mee) it would bee a sufficient Remora to stay the Vessell of your Designes, were it going full-saile upon the Sea of the fairest hopes that could be imagined. But if I have never amused her in her pretentions; if I have been to her Ears a per∣petuall Advocate pleading the Cause of your Merits, before the tribunall of her Heart; if without cease shee hath rejected my per∣swasions, not so much for the affection shee bear's mee as the aver∣sion shee hath to you; aversion which is changed into horrour, since shee hath understood that with her consent, or by force you have boasted to obtain the possession of her, and that it is impossible for her to avoid beeing married to you; if I have alwayes indeavoured to rebate the edge of her indignation, and moderate her bitterness against your proccedings: In summe, if I have stript my self of all the right I might pretend in her to invest you with Her affections, where will you finde a Face to blush enough at the indignities, which you have not onely made my Innocence suffer, but wherewith you requite the Services I have rendred you? Of all this it is easie for mee to give an invincible proof, if you do but take order that Ami∣clea may come to see mee, and if you have the patience to see and hear, what shee will say, when shee think's you absent, and you stand hid behind the Tapistry: But I have something else to commu∣nicate to you more serious than these fopperies of Love, which ought at least to give some respite to Men's Spirits in such times of trouble. It is true the King wages War against you very gently, upon the hopes that I have given him of mediating, in time, a good agree∣ment that may spare the Blood of his Subjects: you have indeed occasion and some reason to amuse your thoughts with that Passion, which is the employment of those that have nothing else to doe
(during this kinde of cessation of Arms) but to busie their wits with the ordinary exercise of Gentlemen in times of Peace; which is, to make Love. Now, as I will not hinder you from this, so I intreate you by all that can oblige a generous Spirit, by the reverence which you owe to your Sovereign, by the care of your particular Fortune, by the ad∣vancement of the publick good, I would add by the Friendship which you have born mee (if there remained any sparke unquench't of that sacred fire) that you would not oppose any obstacle to the Treaty, which I pretend to make by the Commandement, and for the service of His Majesty with the Lithuanians. Let us, like those two great Captains of Greece, who beeing Enemies deposed their private grudges to succour their Country by a Friendly intelligence. And although, for my part, I protest, I have not any Gall against you; however your Heart is to mee, you ought for your Countrie's good to contribute your assistance, unless you will contract the staine of an impiety, that will render you odious to God and Man. If this differ∣ence bee but reconciled, let your rigour execute upon mee after∣wards all that your umbragious or Cholerick humour can suggest; I will have no better destiny, than what is spun by your hands, nor sur∣vive the loss of your affection. I Doubt not that your principall intent (said Liante) is to procure the agreement betwixt Lithuania and Polonia, (an enterprise which I exceed∣ingly commend, so it bee conducted with Sincerity and Judgement, and for which I would willingly imploy my Blood and Life, it beeing (in my opinion) the richest Monument a Man can crect for himself, to die for the repose and safety of his Country:) But why cannot you perform that publick Office, without traversing the particular inclinations I have for Amiclea, as if that alliance imported any thing to the service of His Majesty, or the Publick? If it please you to assist mee in the one, I pro∣mise you to contribute my best indeavours for the advancement of the other. Then Liante having put Iphigenes in minde of his promise to let him hear the perswasions wherewith hee would mollifie Amiclea's Heart, and induce her to imbrace his Affection; Iphigenes renewed his in∣gagement to him. Whereupon leave beeing obteined of Olavius for her to visit the Prisoner, Liante repaired joyfully to the place appoint∣ed, to see the Despair of his pretensions. This Sentinell was no sooner set, but Amiclea (who had already received intimation privately from Iphigenes of the Design) beeing
come into the Chamber, after the ordinary Civilities, Hee enter∣tained her with this discourse: Madam, all the ill treatment you see mee suffer in this place proceedeth onely from an opinion crept into Liante's fancy, that I hindered you from Marrying him; you know in what tearmes I have alwayes represented to you the merits of that Gentleman, and that to divert you from the Passion which you are pleased to express towards mee, I declared the impediments that debarred mee from acknowledging so great a favour in such manner as my devoir and Courtesie would oblige mee to, if I were free. Therefore I beseech you to quit the desire of a person, who cannot lawfully bee your's, and apply your Heart to him, whom your Parents have designed you, and who so perfectly honour you, that I believe nothing can bee added to the greatness of his affection. I am incited to make you this request, by the antient Friendship, which from my infancy I have contracted with Liante, the selicity I wish you and (if I may dare to make this addition) the desire I have of moderating my restraint. Seigneur Palatine (answered Amiclea,) you are a better Friend than faithfull Lover; I have told you so many times that it is as impos∣sible for mee to lodge Liante in my Heart, as displace you; you continue deaf to my Complaints, yet you would have mee be exorable to his; you are too blame to condemn mee for a fault which you authorize in your self, and perswade mee by your words what your Example disswade's. For, if you will not receive mee into your Affection, for some weak reasons wherewith you oppose my importunities, why should not I defend my self from his alliance for many good and powerfull ones, which I have so often inculcated to you? I know not with what Antipathy Nature hath imbued my Soul against him, but however I strive to compell my hu∣monr, I can see nothing in him that pleases mee. And what probability is there then, that I should render my self to the violence whereby he pretends to force me to a consentment? He deceive's himself if he think's to win me that way; For, in stead of attracting my affection he will in∣cense my hatred; But in dsobliging hee hath obliged me, for by letting me understand his jealous dsposition before I was any way ingaged to him, he give's me timely warning not to contraot my self to a Man, from whom I can expect nothing but Tyranny. What? He styles me His Mistris, yet he would ah easy treat me like a slive, and impose upon me Lawes not ac∣cording to Reason, but his humour. If he desire's that I should partici∣pate of that ardour, which he saye's he indure's for me; Doth he not see
by that foolish rule, that he will oblige me to cherish all those that shall but seem to Love me? Hee would have me Love him, but not you; indeed a pertinent injunction; if hee conceit's that hee deserve's Love more than you, why will he constrain my Liberty? Have not I more reason to de∣sire him not to Love me, (in regard I have no inclination to him) and suffer me to Honour you since I Love not my own thoughts, but when they entertain Me with the agreeable Representation of your Merits? Doth he think thus to inthrall the Liberties of Persons, who are nothing inferiour to himself, and already take upon him the severe Authority of an imperious Husband, in stead of keeping himself in the respects of an observant Lover? I know not whence can proceed those thoughts; neither, if hee should perswade himself that his services ought to oblige me to be his, do I know that he hath rendered me any so remarkeable as deserve my Liberty for recompence. If his Sighs, his Tears and Complaints, which are as many importunities to me, are taken for current payment, it is not at the rate of such slight things (and which are but Water and Winde) that I will purchase to my self a slavery. He hath often told me that his Life depended so upon the possession of me, that without it he should die; but I do so abhor him since I have discovered his humour, that I will rather marry a Grave than ingage my Faith to him. But said Iphigenes, since hee love's you so excessively, you cannot without ingratitude do less than give him your Heart in exchange for his, which hee hath remitted into your hands. I cannot give an Heart that is not mine, answered Amiclea, and (what Friendship soever there is betwixt you) take that from you which is your's by my Free-gift, to give it him; it is easier for mee to return him his own, which I never entertain'd though he offered it often; or at least intreate him to take it again, and bestow it on some other Subject more fit than I am to support his Tyrannies. You know (replyed Iphigenes) that the Law of Gentlemen permit's not any generous Spirits to play the supplanters to their Friends, and that Liante beeing the first pretender to your Service, I may not imbrace that Designe untill hee hath quitted it, or that you have quite broken with him. As for the first (said Amiclea,) it depend's on him, and I know not (hee is so obstinate in his own mischief) whether hee will let go that which hee hold's but by imagination; The second is fully resol∣ved on for my part: For, I have desired him so many times not to importune mee any more with his Tears and Sighs, that I know
not what pleasure hee take's to Shipwrack his Vowes so often against a Rock that laugh's at his Disasters. In a word, whatsoever You can say or Hee do, I will never bee his in Body nor Minde. I have not so little courage, but that I know the way to set a period to my Life, when I shall perceive it worse than a thousand Deaths. After divers other Speeches to the same effect, Iphigenes said, Ma∣dam, let mee intreat you to quit that resolution so cruell to him, and so unpleasing to mee; Unpleasing to mee, out of the sorrow I con∣ceive, because I cannot answer your Affection as I would: And cruell to him, because I know if this newes come's to his Ears, it will bee the message of Death. Imagine you with what perplexities the afflicted Liante heard from the Mouth of his Mortall Goddess the sentence of his condemnation: with what reproches did hee not charge her Severity in his Minde, yet hee loved her ne're the less; on the contrary her Cruelty and Ingra∣titude like two whet-stones sharpened his Passion, and rendered it more fervent. At length beeing no longer able to sustein the vio∣lence of his distemper contrary to the promise hee had made Iphigenes not to appear, hee left his Post in fury, and (his Eyes overflowed with Teares, and his Heart swell'd with Sobb's) hee cast himself at Amiclea's feet, at the same instant as shee had taken Iphigenes Hand and was raising it to to her Lips. This Action with the discourse hee heard had almost transported him beyond the bounds of respect: At last having obtained some truce of his Passion, hee disburthened his mind in these words. Since after so many fruitless Sighs for having been the faithfullest of Lovers, I am paid with ingratitude by one, whose Heart I never thought capable of such a Vice, and for having offen∣ded the Heavens by honouring too religiously a Creature, I feele the punishment of my Idolatry in her disowning mee: Since the Respects and Services which I have rendered her are held Offences: Since I am betray'd by him in whom I reposed my greatest confi∣dence, and despised by her whom I esteemed most, what do I more in this Life, unless it bee to prolong the insolences of Fortune, who is never weary of persecuting mee? Cruell AMICLEA, more hard than the Rocks, more deaf than the Sea, less exorable than Death, finish, finish thy work pierce with the point of this blade (offering her his Poniard) this wretched Body, which thou so hatest, and send away that Soul which is so importunate and irksome to thee. I shall
esteem this last Office an Act of Pitty, and to make appear that thy disdain is less supportable to mee than Death, thou shalt see mee honour the Effect of thy Cruelty to the last Moment of my Life. Amiclea (although shee had been advertised of his beeing hid in the room,) was however so troubled at his presence, and so frighted to see him in that desperate posture, that her voyce cleaving to the Palate of her Mouth, shee was not able to frame an answer. Iphigenes fearing, lest shee refusing to take that Weapon, Liante's fury might transport him to plunge it in his own bosome, presently seized upon his Arm, to wrest that murtherous blade out of his hand. Liante seeing Iphigenes disarming him, If that Lady (said hee, looking on Amiclea with an Eye full of Love and Anger) hath not the courage to advance the tearm of my miserable Life, cut thou (if thou hast ever loved mee) the Thred of my Dayes; and since thou hast robbed mee of my Heart, where all my hopes were seated, make an End of thy Felony by Ending Mee. Guess you if these furious words which the extremity of griefe forced out of Liante's Mouth, were not sufficient to draw tears from the tender Iphigenes Eyes. Amiclea beeing recovered of her amaze∣ment, to appease the fury of that mad Lover, resolved to use him more gently, and, with a more pleasing tone, shew him how much hee was too blame in suffering himself to be so transported with Passion: But as Medicines are useless to those whose Diseases are incurable, or who are not disposed to receive them: So Despair had so stopt us all the advenues of Reason in Liante's Soul, that hee thought there was no other way but through the Gate of Death, to get out of his inconsol∣able torment. I should bee too tedious if I stood to relate the diverse arguments, whereby Iphigenes and Amiclea indeavoured to appease the frantick transportments of his Minde. But sometimes vomiting Blasphemies against Heaven; Sometimes tearing the Earth with Execrations; Sometimes cursing himself; Sometimes quarrelling with Providence; Sometimes accusing Amiclea, and then craving her Pardon; Some∣times reviling Iphigenes, then condemning his own rash Judgement, Hee did and said such things as are more fit to bee wrapped up in si∣lence, than displayed upon this Paper; and which made evidently appear that if Anger bee a short Fury, Love is a pure Folly. At length having received from Amiclea no word of consolation that might pre∣serve
his Hope in that tempest of Rage that assailed his thoughts, after no mean contention with Himself, hee went out of the Chamber, in the same manner as an inraged Bull breake's through the Rankes of those that see him baited, invoking Heaven and Earth to assist him in a Revenge. Soon after Liante's departure Amiclea was called away by her Governess, who attended her in the next room; Iphigenes beeing left alone had his thoughts so divided betwixt the interests of Love and Honour, that his pains, exceeding the bounds of any expression, cast him into a languishing indisposition, which within few dayes render∣ed him so feeble, that hee was inforced to confine his distressed body to his Bed: where hee appeared with such advantage, that his sickness seemed to have cast him down, the more to raise the lustre of his Beauty; which beeing then betwixt Pitty and Envy ravished those Souls that had not rendered themselves before to Passion. The Ladies (who were as if they had been chained to his Bed-stead) strove to out∣vy each other in inventing remedies for his Body, and divertisements for his Minde: And the Palatines, both of Minsce and Troc, came fre∣quently to visit him, promising to give him all the contentments hee could desire of their Courtesie. Mean time Liante gaping still after his Prey, resolved to have Ami∣clea, though against her Will, not to give himself the Lie; founding his determination upon this belief, that Time would bring all things to perfection, and that which was forc't in the beginning, might bee made willing in the End. Her Father had already given him his word, and was much displeased that the obstinacy of his Daughter should oppose his Promise and Authority. By Polemander's means he gained likewise the Mother's consent, who thinking him an advantageous Match for her Daughter, made no account of her contradiction. The Contract was agreed on without Amiclea's knowledge, but beeing in∣formed of all the passages by Oloria (whom Despair had almost di∣stracted) shee comforted her with this assurance, that shee would never consent to marry Liante, nor any other untill Shee were provided; which somewhat qualified her jealous Sister's pain. Amiclea was not long before shee gave Iphigenes notice of those proceedings, which gave so furious an assault to his debilitated Heart, that increasing the violence of his Feaver, the Physicians began to distrust his Recovery. This newes was presently noised in the Camp, and thence carried to the Court; and that which the Lithuanians most
feared (which was a suspicion that hee had been poysoned by them) was the first impression His Majestie's minde received. Whereupon hee sent them Letters, more bloody than Tamberlan's Crimson Flag; To which they returned their Excuses and Protestations of innocence; But Poyson is not purged by Oaths, and those who are so abominable as to pracise such baseness, make no great scruple of beeing per∣jur'd. The King presently dispatched his own Physitians and Surgeons with command to attend the Person of Iphigenes. They were very civilly received by the besieged Party, as had already been those whom the Generall and Mieslas had sent from the Camp. Boleslaüs, who was touched with a more then Fatherly tenderness for his dear Foster-Child, found means to slip himself in amongst the Physitians, feining that hee was an Apothecary. The Physitians in their Consultations found that Iphigenes Body was not prisoned, but their Learning did not reach so far as to read the Disease of his Minde. They being retired, when Boleslaüs appeared before the Patient's Eyes, already clouded in the shade of Death, they received some vigour; and his Spirits as it were, wakening out of the slumber wherewith Passion and Mellancholly had oppressed them, his Tongue loosened it self to utter with a faint and almost dying voyce these words. Father, I bless the Heavens who have sent you hither (as a Tutelary Angell) to render mee the last devoirs as of your officious Piety I have received the first; your Arms which have heretofore served mee as a Cradle, must shortly do mee the office of a Biere; for, I can no longer support the Sorrow that destroye's me. I have nothing else to recommend to you but the Care of my Honour, which I have alwayes maintain'd inviolable in despight of those mischiefs that have persecuted mee, Bee sure that the Earth may cover my Secret with my Body, since I have chosen to die rather than disclose it. Since that I die before the time which your Prudence had de∣termined to discover it, I applaud the Providence of him under whose will run all the Moments of our Life. For, to survive the loss of Liante's Friendship, is a thing which I cannot do if I would, and which I will not do though I could. Here Tears, Weakness and Grief stopped the passage of his voyce, and hee fell into a Traunce, out of which it cost some time to recover him. Imagine you how Boleslaüs was afflicted seeing him in so great Extremities, and knowing so little whence proceeded this indisposi∣tion. At length having settled his dear Nursling in a little better
temper as well of Bodie as Minde, and desiring him to let him under∣stand the ground of his Disease: Father (said Iphigenes) Let mee die in silence, and do you onely have a care of that Honour after my Death, where∣of you have been so jealous during my Life. The discreet old Man knowing with whom hee was to deale, and that Iphigenes loved not to bee press't, feined to resolve to die with him, as not having the Heart to behold the Day after the loss of him, whose consideration made him love its light. Iphigenes, moved with Pitty at the old Man's tenderness, to hinder him from dying, seemed to re-affect the desire of Living; and, to un∣load his Heart of that sad burthen which oppress't it, hee took the pains to relate him every particular that had passed since his imprison∣ment, and how hee had voluntarily made himself bee taken, as is al∣ready mentioned. By which Discourse Boleslaüs seeing cleer to the bottom of his Soul, and reading there the Cause of his distemper: Take courage (said hee) we shall not die of this sickness, if wee will be ruled by good advice. Father (answered Iphigenes) when things are desperate, it is no time to consult but to suffer: It will be easier and better for mee to die, since I am already so neer it, than re-enter into a thousand Deaths by recover∣ing my Health. Liante's Heart beeing dead to mee, I have nothing more to do in this mortall Life. After Boleslaüs had used diverse arguments to perswade Iphigenes to banish the ingratefull Liante out of his thoughts, as unworthy of the favour of his Affection, Hee answered, Father, do not increase my torment with vilifying him whom my Soul honoureth; For, notwithstanding all your allegations and his unkinde usage, I cannot divert the inclinations of my Heart, nor change the resolution of Loving him, but by losing my Life. Therefore if you love mee (as I have no reason to doubt) and if you will oblige mee to love you yet more (if it bee possible) I be∣seech you go without delay to him, and conjure him not to flie from Iphigenes, who would seeke and run after him, if his Sickness did not fetter him. Tell him that if I had contracted with him but a common acquaintance, Civility would oblige him to visit mee, much more since hee is cause of this extremity, whereunto I am reduced. Tell him I quit him of the Promise hee made mee to restore mee my Liberty, when I committed my self into his hands; That I will not constrein him to quit Amiclea; That I will rather take upon mee the care of solliciting against my self his Marriage with her; And
that hee would vouchsafe onely to see mee, and close my Eyes, that, with the favour of Heaven, I may likewise die in his. Hereunto I pray, good Father, study no Excuses nor Replyes, if you desire that I should Live. Boleslaüs, who knew the Palatine's humour, promised a punctuall performance of his commands, adding for his comfort, that by the long experience hee had of Liante's Disposition, hee doubted not to render him more flexible and sensible of his torment. And then having dexterously taken his time, Dear Child (said hee) since you have so changed into Nature this Love, that it is become an accident inseparable to your Beeing, by undertaking to preserve your Life, I will also aym at the preservation of your affection; and since I finde you cannot live content without Liante, I must use some invention to reduce that Heart in∣to your power. At these words you would have thought Iphigenes had been raised again out of the Grave; or at least that hee resembled a dainty Flower too much beaten with the Sun's Rayes, which re-take's new vigour by the coolness of the Dew. In a word, Iphigenes was a Woman, and among so many Heroick vertues which shee possess't, the Naturall inclination of that Sex to curiosity could not bee extinguished in Her. The subtle Senior perceiving it, made himself bee intreated a while; at length, after many circumstances, hee said, Child, it is no time to spare when a Man is come to the last penny of his stock. The last thing wee must do in this World is to die; to prevent that Check, and prolong that fatall hour, nothing ought to be left unattempted. When you would have discovered your self to Liante in the Forrest of Plocens, you were pressed onely with a temptation; Now you are constrained by necessity. You will say that the remedy is not yet in season, and that it will be the ruine of your Fortunes: If you die, your Fortunes will be otherwise lost; after Death, Physick is of no use. You will alledge this remedy is very hard to digest, and I will answer you that pain is cured by pain, there is no Medicine but is unpleasant; yet to avoid Death you must neither spare searing nor incisions. You will reply that the apple is now much less ripe than at that time, in regard Liante is filled with Gall, not inflamed with Love; then I must tell you, that to quench a Fire People carry Water, and Diseases are cured by their contraries. It is now time or never to open Liante's Eyes, and make him see how much hee is to be blamed for enter∣taining any suspicious or jealous thought of you, Nature having opposed the
obstacles you know of to the pretensions, which hee believ's you have for Amiclea. In summe, I will manage this discovery with such circumspecti∣on, that there can arrive no dammage to you; For, in sparing you the shame of telling it (the onely Subject of all your Sorrow) I will leave you in the power of denying that truth, and rendring ridiculous those that should offer to mention it. At first I will sound Liante by Enigma's, Cir∣cumlocutions and Figures; and according as I shall find him bite at that bait, I shall know how to draw him to the Bank; but before I unveile the whole Mystery to him, I will oblige him by such horrible Oaths to keep it secret, that if hee should have a desire to reveale it, hee cannot without fearing a punishment of Thunder from the Hand of the King of Heaven. All this Discourse was so many words of Life to the distressed Iphigenes; and, if an Angell had spoken to him, hee could not have heard him with more joy and attention than hee did Boleslaüs. Then (prick't with curiosity) saying, But how? The old Man stop't his Mouth with this answer: A Man must never say, I will doe this, or I will say that, and in such a manner I will conduct my Design by rea∣son of the incertainty of Events; and the obscurities wherein the Future is involved; But when things have had a good issue, one may say, I have done this, and my designe succeeded thus. I will do nothing but what you shall know, yet give mee a little liberty, and permit that in imitation of most discreet People, I may do somewhat before I speak. And be assured that this old Man (whom Experience hath no less improved than Age rendered hoary in your service) hath some Master-pieces of subtilty which he employe's not but upon great occasion; and that he who delivered you out of the Prison in the Forest, and freed you from the Clawes of those Harpyes, will also draw you out of this Mire, if you will follow his Advice with Patience, and resolve to further your own Re∣covery. This said, Boleslaüs went to put in execution his Design, which succeeded to his wish; but not without much trouble, many subtile in∣ventions, and at length a full relation from beginning to end of Iphi∣genes Birth and Education, as hath already been described; whereby hee made Liante see as clear as the Day the reasons that had retarded Iphigenes in the discovery of that Miracle, his designe to declare it first to the King, that His Majesty might see how false and imperti∣nent had been the Calumny of his Enviers, and (beeing re-established in his favour) the resolution hee had to invest Liante in the possession
of all his charges and estate, by giving himself to him according to the sacred order of Matrimony. This transported Liante with such astonishment for a while, that hee knew not whether hee was a sleep or waking; yet the serious deport∣ments of the grave Boleslaüs, made him give credit to this Story, and this beliefe was perfectly confirmed, when hee repassed through his Memory all the tokens of Love rather than Friendship, that hee had remarked in Iphigenes, his carriage to him in his Infancy, his chaste de∣portments at the Court, his continuall contempt of Women, his in∣comparable Beauty, his passionate expressions of affection to him in the Forest of Plocens, while the one acted Serife, the other Almeria; besides, divers other Caresses, Wishes, Sighs, Languors, and such like demeanours, the sparkles of that Fire which can as little bee concealed as avoided. Oh Liante, what glory after so many pains! He that hath long been kept in darkness, coming on a sodain into the Sun is in a manner blind, the Light, which make's every one else see, depriving him of sight: So Liante, though hee held as true as Oracles, all that Boleslaüs had told him, yet hee remained as voyd of Speech and Motion as one that's incredulous or stupid. The entrance of his Heart was too narrow to let in at once the throng of affections, that thrust and crowded to bee introduced; the multitude of thoughts quelled him; the Honours and greatness proposed to him by that Party were above his Ambition, and beyond his Hopes; his own Patrimony, usurped by Mieslas, seemed nothing to him; But above all, the so many attractive Charms, where∣with Nature had inriched Iphigenes Face, was the Primum Mobile that transported him. Adding thereunto so many rare vertues, so many singular qualities, such Courage, & Valour, which Dexterity in all generous exercises, and chiefly such exemplary Piety, as rendered him the delight of all those that accosted him, filled him with the Bene∣dictions of Heaven and Earth, begat him an high renown, with the King's favour; which doubtless would bee redoubled at the discovery of this Marvell; Oh Liante, what transportments? Then reflecting his consideration upon himself, hee could not imagine that hee had merit enough to oblige Iphigenes to so constant a Friendship, as that, which hee had alwayes expressed towards him, loving him from the tende∣rest of his years with such sweetness and cordiality; after this, return∣ed to his Memory how compassionately in all his troubles hee bare a share of his sorrowes; how hee alwayes maintained his cause against
his own Father; conveyed him out of Prison; secured him from the dangers wherewith the Cruelty of Mieslas threatned him; so courte∣ously entertained him in his Palatinate; had given him his Life in the Combat; voluntarily rendered himself a Prisoner to injoy the content∣ment of his conversation; and besides all this, the extreme and admi∣rable Modesty, that made him resolve to die rather than speak one word, which hee thought too bold for a Soul to utter, that make's profession of Honour, with a numberless multitude of other Vertues, which glittered in that matchless personage like Starrs in a serene Night. Whilest Liante's brain was agitated with a thousand such imagi∣nations, Boleslaüs reading the convulsions of his Mind by the altera∣tions in his Face, knew not however in what manner hee resented what hee had told him, and whether hee conceived it right or wrong, (whereon depended his Life or Death, and, what was yet more dear, the contentment or ruine of Iphigenes) untill Liante breaking the si∣lence of his long amazement thus began; Friend, I am like a Glass or Bottle with a narrow mouth, which being too full of liquor cannot discharge itself. My Spirits are so ravish't and over whelm'd with the transport∣ments of Joy and Wonder at the recitall of so great a Marvell, that al∣though I see my self awake, and believe what you tell mee, yet me∣think's I Dream, or am possessed with the fondest imagination that e're disturbed a Brain. At length after condemning his own demerits, and comparing them with the excellencies of Iphigenes, hee continued say∣ing Dear Boleslaüs, I prethee mollifie that Hbroick courage for me, which ought justly to be offended with my Levities, indiscretion and ingratitude, to the end, according to the Dispositions you shall finde in that generous Soul, I may at least indeavour by my Death to express the remorse I now conceive for having so ill ordered my Life, and so unworthily abused his Friendship. If you stay till you are killed by one that love's you more than himself, you will live to a fair Age (said Boleslaus) his desire is to see you Live contented, not Die with displeasure; and assure your self that as his Love was alwayes greater than your Injuries, so your Transgressions are less than his Clemency. The variety of thoughts that mustered in Iphigenes minde, whilest Boleslaüs was carrying this Message (whose report was the sentence of his Life or Death) I must leave to your imaginations; Neither am I able to relate the Anxieties of Liante's minde, whilest that trusty Agent flew
towards Iphigenes, to tell him in a jesting manner , that Liante took all his Discourse for Inchantments, that hee rejected all Hee had told him of his Birth and Education as a thing no less incredible than improbable. At which Narration Iphigenes, ready to expire with grief, said; Fa∣ther, I would to God my Death had preceded this newes; Oh! why did not I descend alive into my Grave? Hereat Boleslaüs clearing the clouds of his Countenance, and bursting into a laughter, said, I told you thus only to try your constancy; take courage, the Victory is our's; I bring you Liante more gentle than a Lamb, he com's to present his throat to your hand that you may Sacrifice him to your Revenge. He believe's all that I have told; him onely the despair of obtaining pardon for his ingra∣titude to you, hindering him from coming to demand it in person, he hath made me his Ambassadour. Then having related every particular pas∣sage betwixt him and Liante, and disposed Iphigenes to receive him, He presently went to conduct him into the Prisoner's Chamber. Liante was so sensible of having disobliged so admirable a constancy as that of Iphigenes, that hee approacht his Bed with no less throbbing of Heart and confusion of thoughts, than if hee had been going to re∣ceive the punishment of some haynous Crime: And shame raised tu∣mults not much less disorderly in Iphigenes minde, seeing himself ne∣cessitated to acknowledge what he had so long kept from the World's notice. Hee that had beheld the penctentiall tears of the one, and the mo∣dest blushes of the other, would have thought hee had seen red Roses impearled with the dew of Heaven. I had rather confess my igno∣rance than imbark my self in the relation of Passions, which must bee consigned to Silence, since hee that would express their mutuall satis∣factions must bee transformed into the Resentments of their Souls. Those two Hearts opened themselves so perfectly to each other in the presence of the Old Man, Depositary of all their thoughts, that there remained nothing that might oppose the perfection of their chaste Love. There full reparations were made by Liante, and his Excuses received by Iphigenes: There absolute Remissions cast all offences into Oblivion; There Iphigenes charging herself with one part of the fault for having concealed her Secret so long from her dear Liante, and Liante accusing himself to excuse Iphigenes, bred a sweet contention which pacified all other quarrells. There were made all the Promises, and plighted all the Faiths necessary to swear an inviolable Fidelity.
There Suspicions, Diffidence, Ʋmbrages, Choller, and all other Fail∣ings were so buried, that the wounds left onely scarrs in shew that they had been. In conclusion, to hide the blazing of this mutuall Fire from other's view, it was decreed in their secret Councill (whereof Boleslaüs was the President) that Liante feining not to desire to force Amiclea's will, should seem to have cured himself of her Contempt by Despight, and turn his affection towards Oloria, in compassion of her Sufferings, and for consideration of her Constancy rather than her Beauty. As for Iphigenes (all Obstacles and Scruples beeing now taken away) It was judged convenient that hee should make open profession of caressing and serving Amiclea, not without some handsomely contrived inven∣tions for the deferring his re-search untill the treaty of Peace was con∣cluded. And to render their Design less perceptible, they added this industry, That Liante should continue in his dissatisfaction of Iphigenes, and (although absolutely free from Passion for Amiclea) should how∣ever still make a shew of Jealousie, at least of Envy and Choller against him, as having robbed him of that Ladie's Heart, which hee pre∣tended. As they resolved, so was it executed: Insomuch that Oloria became no less contented to see him (who had so much despised her) make his addresses to her, than Amiclea to see herself delivered of his im∣portunities, just as shee was upon the point of rendring herself to the imperious compulsion of her Parents. But when shee knew it was to give Iphigenes the place, whose mutuall Love was the height of her Desires, you may imagine, in that condition, if shee could refrain from telling her Mother (Iphigenes having injoyned her to keep it secret, purposely that shee should divulge it;) and her Mother, beeing a Wo∣man, could not hold long from acquainting her Husband, which raised his thoughts to the Skies, beeing carried upon the Wings of the Hope hee conceived to have the Favorite of Polonia for his Son-in-Law. This imagination contributed not a little to the advancement of the King's service, and the publick Peace. For Olavius having great credit in the Lithuanian Party, induced them to submit to diverse of the King's Demands, desiring to conclude the Peace, that those allian∣ces might be brought to perfection. Whilest our Lovers swam in the contentment of their reciprocall affections, the World, which, like the Sea, hath nothing more constant
than its inconstancy, and whose most faire dayes are the least certain, prepared them an horrible Tempest. The King, at the return of his Physitians, beeing informed of Iphigenes recovery, dispatched Deputies from his Councill to the Camp, with a Commission to Iphigenes to treat with them and the principall Officers of his Army, concerning an agreement with the Lithuanians, and the generall Peace. Hereupon there was a Cessation of Arms on both sides, seconded by a Truce for certain dayes; during which time those of the Besieger's Army went freely into Minsce, and the Besieged had liberty to go into the Camp, or where else they listed. Iphigenes, with the Commissioners of the Lithuanians, going dayly into the Camp to treat with the King's Of∣ficers, had advanced their affairs to such a forwardness as promised an happy conclusion: But when they came to the Article, that concern∣ed the re-establishment of Liante in his Estate, indeavouring to con∣tent the Palatine of Podolia (who could not bee perswaded to that restitution) by means of an alliance betwixt that young Nobleman and one of his Daughters, the furious Sarmatian refusing to consent to either, re-entertained in his brutall Minde the desire of executing upon Liante that barbarous Design wee have already mention∣ed, and which cannot bee rehearsed without shame. For this effect hee set his Engines on work, who were not so secret in the Conduct of their business, but Iphigenes had notice of their proceedings; And beeing informed that contrary to the publick Faith this enterprise was to bee attempted at his retreat into Minsce, (where as beeing a Pri∣soner hee was obliged to render himself every Night) hee implored the Generall of the King's Armie's succour to hinder that violence. Which was effected according to his desire, Liante beeing retired into the Castellain of Cracovia's Quarters, who in despight of Mieslas ambushes caused him to bee safely convoyed into Minsce, Iphigenes still accompanying him, with a resolution to treat his own Father like an Enemy, if hee had come to assault them. This so inraged Mieslas, that the next day hee resolved to bee revenged of his Son; therein not much unlike an irritated Mastif, who bite's the stone not beeing able to reach him that threw it. And in effect when hee thought to re∣turne, after the Assembly, according to his Custome into the City, Mieslas seized on him, saying, that as a perfidious Traitor to the King and Publick, hee would sacrifice him to Example, and like a brutall and unnaturall Brutus make him die by his own hands in the view of the whole Army. Iphigenes who knew that such an execution could not bee
done without the formes of Justice, and besides feeling himself inno∣cent, submitted without resistance, desiring that they would execute upon his person all the cruelties they could imagine, if they found him guilty of any persidious Action towards his Prince or Country. This was onely a pretence which Mieslas had framed to effect what you shall hear. The rumour of Iphigenes affections to Amiclea, and the report of their Marriage beeing noised through the City of Minsce, by the communication of the Besiegers with the Besieged during the Truce, the Royall Camp was filled with this newes, and at last it came to the Palatine of Podolia's Ears. This incensed him with the greatest in∣dignation against his Son, that hee had ever yet conceived; nothing beeing more sensible to Parents, than when their Children marry against their Wills, and match themselves with persons whom they think not fit for them. Hereupon hee took occasion to detein his Son, and accuse him of Treason against the Polonians, because hee was about to contract an Alliance with the Lithuanians. Besides, beeing a Man of Blood and Slaughter, hee produced diverse Arguments against the Treaty of Peace, and hating mortally the Lithuanians, hee could not indure that they should participate, as Compatriots, of the honours of the Crown of Polonia, which was the principall point of all the Trea∣ty. Insomuch that desiring to hinder this agreement, hee took this pretence of keeping his Son, knowing that those of Minsce would presently take Armes hereupon, and so the Truce should bee broken. As hee presupposed, it succeeded; For, immediately the Lithua∣nians shut their Gates, inclosing and keeping Prisoners no small num∣ber of the Royall Army, besides those that were delivered as hostages for the person of Iphigenes. This bred much confusion and tumults on both sides: Whereunto Mieslas added this stratagem. There were certain Souldiers, who for some crimes were condemn∣ed to Execution. One of these hee caused to bee clad with a Suite of the same colour of that Iphigenes then wore, and the next Morning, having commanded a Scaffold to bee raised in sight of the whole Camp and City, hee gave out that with his own hand hee would cut off his Son's head, for beeing a Traitor to His Majesty. The fatall hour beeing come, hee drew up all his own quarters in Battalia; then having or∣dered the Criminall to bee set upon the Scaffold, and cloathed the Executioner with an habit not unlike his own, by this spectacle hee
intended to take away from those of the City all hopes of re-posses∣sing Iphigenes, by whom they expected much favour from the King in the conclusion of the Peace. Iphigenes beeing kept close Prisoner in a Chamber, knew nothing of all this; But what became Liante at this deplorable sight? What Amiclea? what Olavius? what the Palatine of Troc? What all the Ladies? What all the Inhabitants of Minsce? It was then no time to sit in consultation; all of what quality soever demaunded a Sally, which could bee no more refused by the Palatines that commanded, than a passage hindered to the fury of an impetuous Torrent. Liante like the Poet's desperate Coroebus, seeing his Cassandra drag∣ging to the Block, placed himself at the head of this resolute Party; and flying out of the City-gates with no less fury than a fell Lyoness hast's from her Denn to rescue her stolen Whelps, filling the whole Forest with her horrid roaring, precipitated himself to seek Death in the thickest of the Enemie's Squadrons, beeing resolved to die a thousand times or save Iphigenes Life. If all things else give place to Love, it was verified at that time; for, if the assault was violent on the Lithuanian's part, the resistance was but weak on the Polonians, in regard divers Souldiers (not well pleased to see their companion executed) made way forthe Assailers, and gave them so cleer passage by their flight, partly Voluntary, partly Forc'd, that Liante arrived at the Scaffold as sodain as a flash of Light∣ning; where terribly slashing th'Executioner (whom hee took to bee Mieslas) hee thought at the same time to rid himself of a mortall Enemy and save the Life of a Person whom hee esteemed the dearest in the World. But having found out the deceipt, hee ceased not to end the Hangman, and set the Criminall at Liberty, having cut the Cords that bound him, and given him an opportunity to escape in the Throng. Never were greater feats of Arms seen done by Man, than those which Despair, Love and Anger produced from Liante in this Action, thinking hee had fought in the presence of the person beloved, whom hee desired to give the strongest proof of affection that is betwixt Mor∣talls (which is) to lay down his own Life to preserve another's. Mieslas, who suspected they would make a Sally, had prepared him∣self with a considerable Party of Horse to intercept them in their re∣treate, and inclose them between the Army and his Men. But having a bad Cause, and a cruell Resolution to cut them all off, especially
Liante, if hee fell into his hands, his Enterprise turned to his own confu∣sion, and he found himself intrapped in his own snares. For, they, having released the Criminall, another strong Party was sent out of Minsce to succour the former, and facilitate their retreat. Insomuch that Mieslas and his Men beeing ingaged betwixt both Parties, the Souldiers were almost all killed, his Horse was shot under him, and hee beeing woun∣ded in the Thigh, besides bruised with a fall, and loaden with Armes, was constrained, with an incredible Despair, to render himself Pri∣soner, and remit his Life to the mercy of Liante, who threatned him with the cruellest of Deaths, if it appeared that hee had attempted any thing against Iphigenes. Mieslas to save his Life assured Liante, that Iphigenes had no other harme than to bee lock't up in a Chamber, and that hee had devised that Plot to execute a Criminall in his place, thereby to spare his Ran∣som, and hinder the alliance hee intended to make with the Lithuani∣ans. Upon this assurance Liante having commanded him to bee slung upon an Horse, led him with diverse others in Triumph through the City. To express the shame and rage of that brutall Podolian would re∣quire tearms that never yet were heard. As there were divers Polonians taken, so there were some Lithuani∣ans that remained as pledges in the King's Camp, aswell of those that had ingaged too far in the Enemie's Quarters, as those that were shut out of the Gates of Minsce; lest among Friends they should like∣wise let in Enemies, as is often seen in like occurrences. Among the rest was found a Gentleman extreamly young, and whose marvellous beauty attracted the Eyes of every one, exciting much more Envy than Pitty, and much more Pitty than Anger. Hee was led to the Gene∣rall, who wondered that hee had taken Armes at such tender years. After some demands hee desired they would give him leave to see Iphigenes, who (hee believed) would know him, having seen him in Minsce. The Generall commanded his desire should bee satisfied: Do you ask if the Palatine of Plocens was astonished to see that there was more than one Lady in the Army that bore Arms? This was the pretty Amiclea, who upon the newes of Iphigenes Exe∣cution had taken a sodain resolution to die, or revenge the Death of him whom shee loved with so much Passion. And seeing that all sorts of People took Armes to follow Liante in that expedition; shall a Lover (said shee to her self) be said to have less courage and fidelity than a Friend? No, no, I must, I will die gloriously; for, to survive such a
loss is a thing impossible for Amiclea. In this Resolution shee went to her Brother Polemander's Armory, and having taken one of his Suits of apparell with an Armour, shee mounted one of her Father's best Horses, the Servants thinking her to be Polemander; and in this equi∣page shee ranked herself among those that sallied, and ingaged so far among the Enemies, that shee remained Prisoner. This was a singular testimony of Affection and Generosity; and Iphi∣genes feining to requite this Obligation by consummating of her hopes, was grieved at the Soul that hee could not recompence so great a Love as he could have desired. If there was much joy within Minsce for the taking of Mieslas, and a great deale of glory for the triumphing Liante, there was no less sorrow for the loss of Amiclea; no body could give an account what was become of her, neither should they ever have imagined shee had done what shee did; Some were of o∣pinion that her Love for Iphigenes might perchance, through Despair, have made her make away herself in some secret Place, a violent remedy, yet frequently enough practised by weak Spirits. Shee was sought for in every corner, but found no where; every one lamented her loss, but the sad Parents above all, in respect that beeing assured of Iphigenes Life they lost by this meanes the hope of an alliance, which they held infallible by the imprisonment of Mieslas, and the promise of Iphigenes. Who beeing set at liberty by express command from the Castellain of Cracovia, Generall of the King's Army, took Amiclea with him to his Tent; where beeing presently admitted, He said, Seigneur Castellain, I beseech you do not refuse mee one grace that I shall demand at your hands. Seigneur Palatine, answered the Generall, since the King denies you nothing, I should be very ill advised not to agree to any thing that you shall be pleased to desire within the compass of that Power which His Majesty hath committed to mee, especially being injoyned by particular Letters from him to give full credence to your Councells. My Request (replied Iphigenes) is onely that you will give mee this Prisoner, who is of such quality, that I hope to get my Father exchanged for him. Sir, (answered the Generall) you may dispose of him as you shall think fit, the Palatine, your Father, is the onely cause of his Mis∣fortune: For, against all the Lawes of Arms, having violated the Truce, hee is but justly fallen into the Ditch which hee had digged for the Besieged. My Lord (said Iphigenes) his particular disaster will be a benefit to
the Publick; For, whilest hee is in the Lithuanian's hands, wee shall be bet∣ter able to conclude the Treaty of Peace according to His Majestie's com∣mand, and renew the Truce. Mean time you shall see that this pretty Prisoner's Eyes are more redoubtable than his Sword, and that naked he is more powerfull than arm'd; with that lifting up Amiclea's Head∣piece, a long Tress of golden hair fell about her shoulders: And judge you (continued hee) if I could perish beeing defended by such fair hands, It is not needfull to relate the astonishment of those that were pre∣sent at this agreeable Spectacle, where Love and Loyalty appeared in a new equipage. If diverse would have esteemed themselves happy to serve so exquisite a Beauty, how happy ought they to account Iphigenes, who was beloved and served by her with such proofs of Affection? The Palatine of Plocens word obliging him to render himself priso∣ner again to the Lithuanians, besides his own inclinations, and the desire hee had to free his Hostages from further trouble (of whom Pisides was one) hee returned with his pretty Champion; who not daring to appear before her Parents in that manner, desired Iphigenes to make her Peace, before shee came in their sight. His excuses for Amiclea's disguisement were so well received, that Olavius and his Wife commended her for that adventure as an Heroick Act, and which would afterwards make her bee reckoned among the Amazons. Mieslas beeing shut up, like a mad wild Beast, in a Tower (where for his Son's sake hee was treated according to his Quality) the Treaty of Peace went forwards. The Truce was re-established more free than before: the King disowned Mieslas for having acted against the Law of Arms, and sent a Plenipotentiary power to Iphigenes to a∣gree with the Lithuanians. During this Conference there was nothing but Sports, Turnaments, Dancings, Comedies, Banquets, and all sorts of rejoycing of both Parties, infallible presages of an happy Peace. Among other Playes represented at the Castle of Minsce, for the recreation of the Besie∣ged, and those of the Camp that came to visit them, Liante comman∣ded the Players to act the Tragedy of Iphigenia, Agamemnon's Daugh∣ter, as beeing a lively Image of that which had passed in the delive∣rance of the Criminall, who should have been executed in the place of Iphigenes: Wherein there was not any of the Spectators so dull, but easily comprehended that the Hinde placed in Iphigeniae's stead, repre∣sented
the poor Souldier whom Mieslas made pass for Iphigenes; that the Anger of the Goddess offended for her Stag, expressed the indignati∣on of the King for the imprisoning of his Favorite; every one inter∣preted this Embleme according to his own fancy; But no body could conceive that the Marriage of Pylades with Iphigenia, had any relati∣on to our Lovers, and that Orestes beeing cured of the Furies, signifi∣ed the appeasing of Mieslas Fury: Yet Hee began to bee more tame, seeing himself a Prisoner. And as there is no man so covetous, who will not bee prodigall of his Estate to save his Life, the Proposition of restoring to Liante what hee had so long detained from him, and giving him one of his Daughters in Marriage, seemed no more so strange to him. There is no Creature so daunted as a Wolf, when hee is catcht in a snare; nothing so tractable as a cruell Man, when hee is in his Enemie's power. This fierce Palatine condescended to whatsoever they would, esteeming it a favour if Liante (quitting the pretentions hee had to Clemencia, whom hee had promised to the Prince Cassin) would take any of his other Daughters, leaving him the benefit of his Estate during his Life. But Liante seemed to slight his Offers, not to give any occasion of distast to the Palatine of Minsce, who was desi∣rous to make him his Son-in-law. Mean time the Article for the restitution of Liante's Estate passed among the Commissioners of the Treaty of Peace, which at length was concluded by the diligence and dexterity of Iphigenes, who had all the glory of that good Office. This Treaty beeing ratified by the King, the Peace was proclaimed with incomparable rejoycings on both sides. That done, the Siege was forthwith raised, the Souldiers disbanded, Armes laid down, the Prisoners released, and Mieslas got off better cheap than hee expected. Iphigenes was immediately repealed to the Court; where both their Majesties burned with impatience to see him crowned with Olive∣branches interwoven with Laurells and Palms. There hee promised Olavius to use his indeavours to procure the King's consent to his marriage with Amiclea, and Liante's to Oloria; which the Palatine of Minsce held for a singular obligation, and the two Sisters were infinitely pleased. The joyes of Cracovia at the beautifull Pala∣tine's returne, may bee guessed by the regrets of the inhabitants of Minsce, who by his absence thought they indured a perpetuall Eclipse, and could almost have wish't that the Warr had still con∣tinued,
to have injoyed the happiness of possessing him longer. To relate the Pomp and Magnisicence of Iphigene's reception, were to undertake the description of a great King's entrance into some Metropolitan City. For, as the King, to shew that the sending him into his Palatinate, was a reason of State rather than a disgrace, would have his Courtiers accompany him when hee left the Court; At his re∣turn hee commanded all those that desired to please him, should go to meet him, that the World might see hee re-entred more in his fa∣vour, than hee was before; and that if formerly hee had loved him by inclination, then hee cherished him for Reason, and (if a Subject can oblige his Sovereign) by obligation. So, all those of the Court went to receive him at a good distance from the City; even his Enemies, who saw themselves his Foot-stoole, rendered him that Devoir; and although they had done him all the ill Offices they could devise, they prudent∣ly covered under Dissimulation the Despight which gnawed their Hearts. Mieslas besides his re-purchased Liberty was ravisht to see so many Laurells shadowing his Son's Temples, and so many Praises and Bene∣dictions showring down upon his head; conceiving that hee had a share in those applauses, in regard a vertuous Son is a Crown to his Father. His Sister Clemencia, who for his sake was much cherished by the Queen, could not contein her joy to see her Brother appear like the Sun crown'd with Rayes. As there was no interest that touched Iphigenes heart so neer as that of Liante, his re-establishment was one of the first things hee moved to the King; and having made His Majesty see into his intentions, and consider the Despair which had inforced him to cast himself a∣mong the Lithuanians, with an advantageous representation of what hee had contributed, for His Majestie's service, to the Treaty of Peace, the King (who was a very gracious Prince) received him into Grace, and promised Iphigenes not onely to revoak the confiscation of his Estate, but to re-establish him therein, and contribute to the augment∣ing of his Fortune according as occasions should bee presented. This was a good beginning for Liante, who participated more than any other of the influences of his beautifull Star. But shall wee say nothing of the contentment of the Princess Re∣spicia, who was now arrived at the top of her Desires? For, shee had received from Rome the dispensation that was required to make the Marriage of Iphigenes with Modestina bee declared void; Insomuch
that relying upon her beloved Palatine's promise shee held the con∣summation of her's unquestionable. It is not my design to describe here the manner of the King's and Queen's entertainments and reception of Iphigenes, the pleasure of the Ladies, and the joy of the whole Court at the appearance of that welcome Sun upon the Horizon of Cracovia. I shall onely say that their Majesties, beeing cured of the suspitions which the Malice of his Enviers had cast into their Souls, conspired who should give the grea∣test testimonies of Benevolence to him, whom the voyce of the People (which is commonly that of God) styled the PEACE MAKER of POLONIA, the RECONCILER of the POLONIANS and LITHUA∣NIANS, the ANGELL of PEACE, the GLORY of his Country, the HONOUR of his Family, and the JOY of all his Compa∣triots. They often consulted together with what worthy recompence they should requite the Services and Merits of such a subject: At length not beeing able to offer him any part of that Kingdome (whereof they had onely the use, not the propriety) they believed that nothing could oblige his Noble spirit so much as some eminent Alliance, that might approach him to their Parentage and the Honour of their Blood. So, whether it was their own motion, or whether the Princess Flo∣rimunda, the King's Sister, had spoken any thing to the Queen, having taken her part of the Court-vertigo by the infection of Iphigenes eyes, yet had through Modesty concealed her affection; Which way soever it hapned, they determined to give him the Infanta in marriage with a dowry suitable to her quality. In the presence of this great Star neither Modestina, Respicia, Ami∣clea, nor any of the rest whose pretentions beeing hidden, their flames were the more violent, appeared with any luster; there was nothing but Despair in their Hearts, Sobs in their brests, Sighs in their Mouths, and Tears in their Eyes. But how, think you, was Iphigenes surprised, when the King, in presence of the Queen, told him in his closet the ho∣nour he intended to do him, making him his Brother-in-Law by giving him his own Sister to Wife? At which words hee fell upon his knees before their Majesties, and represented to them all the arguments hee could devise to divert them from that Designe, which hee assured them would bee as ruinons to him as honourable; For, That lifting him aloft as the Eagle doth the Tortoize, threatned him with a fatall fall; That beeing raised
from a Mole-hill to a Mountaine, that Eminency would expose him to the outragious Tempests, and Thunder-claps of Envy and Detracti∣on; that thereby hee should become the Blank and Butt of all the wounding Tongues of those, who having seen him their equall would cast despightfull glances upon the elevation of his Fortune. That hee knew not how the Lady Infanta herself stood inclined, who per∣chance would bee unwilling to abase herself so low as to marry a private Gentleman, who was nothing in the World but what it pleased His Majesty to make him. That competent Fortunes, as the most certain, were the most desirable. That hee beseeched His Majesty to consider, his Enemies would attribute to his Ambition, what proceeded from his Royall Benevolence. That hee was too conscious of his own mean condition to entertain a thought of lifting his Eyes towards a Subject of so high a Dignity, whose too great lustre would dazle him in stead of giving him light. Therefore hee conjured His Majesty to preserve in him the work of his own hands, and not ren∣der him unhappy by too much happiness. That as Lamps (if over∣filled with Oyl) go out, So Fortunes that are too vast commonly come to nothing. That queasy stomacks ought not to bee over∣charg'd with Meat, nor weak-braines with much Wine: That the Fabrick ought to bee proportionable to the Foundation, lest it should fall to the ground by it's own weight. That this were to set a Statue of Gold and Silver upon a Pedestall of Clay, and expose him to the fury of all the Grandee's jealousies, in stead of sheltering him from their rages. And for his last Reason hee reserved his Marriage with Modestina, after which (hee having concluded with the hum∣blest supplications, and the most indearing Conjurations hee could invent to turn away that tempest from him:) The King answered grave∣ly in these words. That all his Reasons were full of Humility, Modesty, Fidelity, and Prudence, but yet they ought to submit to his Command. That such was his Will, which hee could not resist without Crime. That it was the Propriety of Kings, and the greatest point of their resemblance to God, to raise the poor out of the Mud, and place them among the Princes and most considerable Persons of their Kingdoms: Other∣wise the Little ones would never become Great, and the wheele of Fortune would remain without motion. That Vertues were more desirable and estimable than Birth, and since they made the first Nobility, and that by them in the beginning of Monarchies were
seated upon Thrones those that had most merit, it was but reasonable to prefer them before Scepters and Diadems. That his Sister's minde was but too well known to him, who (besides that shee was ready to submit in all things to his Will) had a particular inclination to him, which made her desire that Marriage. That in stead of beeing abased, shee would esteem her self exalted, and in stead of losing her glory by that alliance, shee would communicate her splendour to him. That had it been in his Power to have given him a part of his Kingdome, hee would have done it as a testimony of his affection and gratitude: But, having no Crown more illustrious than that of his Blood, hee had determined to give him the Infanta Florimunda with means sufficient to maintain so honourable a Consanguinity. That this Match in stead of exposing to, would exempt him from the Malice of his Enviers, by the same reason as the Stars are ex∣empted from Eclipses by their elevation and distance from the Earth. That during his Reign hee ought not to fear any retrogra∣dation or Declining of Fortune, in regard Hee was a Prince that did not take pleasure in destroying his own Creatures; besides the assu∣rance his opinion gave him that Iphigenes, by the Prudence of his conduct, would give his Sovereign no such occasion. That Hee would so establish him, that after his decease, no power of Polonia should bee able to diminish his Grandeurs. As for his Marriage with Mo∣destina, hee replied, that it was declared void by a Breviat sent from Rome to the Arch bishop of Gnesna to be notified in publick; which having been procured by the Princess Respicia, should serve for the Infanta Florimunda. The King ended his Speech with Such is our ab∣solute WILL and PROPER MOTION, which are tearms so sovereign and sacred, that the Oath of the fabulous Deities by the River Styx was not more inviolable. The Queen added hereunto her perswasions mingled with intreaties, & such certain testimonies of the Infanta's affection to Iphigenes, that it plainly appeared to proceed as much from the Princesse's own sollicit∣ing, as their Majesties deliberation. Insomuch that the fair Palatine was inforced to yeild to so many sweetly imperious violences, and receive with acknowledgements full of modest bashfulness, what hee could not refuse without highly offending their Majesties, and irri∣tating the Infanta beyond hope of Pardon. Neither had hee been so indiscreet, if Nature had not opposed to that eminent Fortune the obstacles you already know: Which hee was even ready to declare to
the King and Queen; But considering that shee (how great soever in Dignity) was yet of that Sex, to which Prudence forbid's the revealing of any secret without deliberation, hee forbore, reserving that mani∣festation to the King only, whose authority and advise hee intended to implore for the effecting of his intentions. The Queen was no sooner gone forth, but shee met the Infanta, who was as impatient to know the result of their Mediation, as the other was to tell her it; whereof Florimunda conceived such joy as cannot bee comprehended but by a full-ripe Virgin, who receive's an assu∣rance of marrying him whom shee love's with passion. After the Queen's departure, lest the rumour of his marriage with the Infanta should bee noised about the Court, Iphigenes judged it requisite to squeeze the Scorpion upon the wound, and apply speedily the remedy to that growing mischief. So, having beseeched the King to give him a private Audience, wherein hee promised to discover the most marvellous History hee ever yet had heard, Hee related him that of his Birth, Sex, Education, Ele∣vation, Progress, Fortune, and unparalel'd affection to Liante; in summe, hee concealed nothing from his Master, of all the remarkable pas∣sages expressed in this Narration; and at the close of his recitall, cast∣ing himself at his feet, imbracing and kissing them, and washing them with his tears, hee humbly besought His Majesty to look on him as his poor and unworthy Creature, and dispose of his Fortune according to his good pleasure. The King's astonishment at this strange Story can less bee described, than a flash of Lightning, or the Sun shine bee represented in paint∣ing. His admiration was such, that hee remained a long while with∣out beeing able to speak but with his Eyes, which were fixt with much amiableness upon Iphigenes. This first assault wanted not much of converting his Amitre into Amorousness and making his Favorite be∣come not his Master, but his Mistris. Yet His Majestic's old Age which invited him to Temperance, his singular affection to the Queen, (who reigned over his Heart by her Vertues, as much as hee ov  Subjects by his authority) the Fear hee had of resuscitating her Jealousie, and making her believe as truths her former suspicions, together with the long practise and deep rooting his Soul had taken in Piety and Moderation, suppressed the impetuosity of his desires. But nothing bridled him more powerfully than the extraordinary Modesty hee had alwayes observed in Iphigenes, knowing that to bee a Rock
against which all unjust pretentions would suffer Shipwrack; Besides, reading at that same instant in that lovely Face such chaste Characters, and so severe a sweetness as stifled in their Birth all licentious imagi∣nations. In this occurrence it would bee an injustice to conceale the due praises of that Prince, who made a Buckler of vertue against the wea∣pons which Love, hidden within Iphigenes Eyes, treacherously darted against his Heart. But to deny that the affection, which rendered Iphigenes his Favorite, was much increased, by the discovery of his condition, cannot bee, without taking from so vertuous a Prince the quality (which is common to all great Persons) of beeing extreamly courteous to Ladies. I will not extend my self in relating the Protestations the King made to preserve him in his Favour and Friendship, notwithstanding this Change; nor the praises of his Beauty which were as extraordina∣ry as the subject was beyond Nature's ordinary compositions. At last after diverse Caresses and Compliments, accompanied with thanks and resentments of obligation to the deserving Iphigenes, His Majesty conjured him to declare freely and fully his desires, promising by the Faith of a Prince to indeavour the effecting of them to the utmost of his Royall power. Hereupon Iphigenes illuminating his Beauty with a lively and grace∣full vermillion, which or'e-spread his cheeks; confessed to His Majesty That after the glory of his Benevolence, the height of his desires was the legitimate possession of his beloved Liante. How chaste & warrantable soever are the flames of honourable Virgins, it is impossible for them to acknowledge their Loves without painting their Faces with those Colours which render the Aurora so agreeable; as if it were as great an imperfection in them to love, as it is a perfection to bee lovely. The King perceived by that livery of vertue the chastity of that generous spirit, which increased his esteem of Iphigenes. And beeing informed how that Passion had taken its birth in a manner from their Cradles, that a mutuall inclination had given it Beeing, Nourish't, Entertained, and Elevated it to its perfect state, hee thought it a renouncing of all Hu∣manity to disapprove so legitimate an Affection. Then, having demanded of Iphigenes in what manner hee should manage the discovery of that secret, which would astonish not onely all Polonia, but the whole Ʋniverse; our Amazon, who had princi∣pally premeditated that part, gave His Majesty the Overtures; which
hee approved in all their circumstances, according as shall bee declared in the Sequele of this Declaration. Onely to hinder the designe the King had for his Sister from beeing divulged, it was thought expedient to apply a speedy remedy, and raze the Passion out of that Princesse's heart, by making her believe that Iphigenes was incapable of performing the Rites of Marriage: (an Opinion able to befrost the most ardent flames.) This invention the King found very pertinent, and to execute it subtilely hee went to the Queen, who had already made the ordinary congratulations of joyfull newes to the Infanta (but with the seale wherewith Ladies are accustomed to close their secrets, that is, a prayer to say nothing, as if a third Person were obliged to conceale that which they cannot keep in their own brests:) And Florimunda had so well and discreetly kept this agreeable tidings, that shee had already communicated it to all her Gentlewomen, but with the same caution as the Queen had told it her; and they all promised her to bee silent, but with this reservation, when they had no body to speak unto. Presently among themselves there was no other discourse than of their Mistres∣se's sodain marriage, and the more their Tongues itched to be tattling, the stricter their Command was not to mention it. The King not knowing that the Queen had been so forward, told her that Iphigenes had acquainted him with other matters than what was spoken in her presence; and he was now fully satisfied, that those ma∣ny Excuses and Conjurations, which hee had made to them not to press him to marry the Infanta, proceeded not from any want of Desire, (hee not beeing so blinde as not to see the advantages hee should receive by so glorious an alliance) but from a naturall disabi∣lity to answer the expectations of a Bride. For proof whereof hee alleadged to her the non-consummation of his Marriage with Mode∣stina, besides that extraordinary Continence which hee had al∣wayes shewed at the Court, opposing such cold reservedness to the flames of so many Ladies, that burned so inexpressibly for his Beauty. The Queen amazed at this newes, was sorry shee had so soon given her Sister-in-law joy of a Contentment, that was vanished e're possess't, like Lightning which die's assoon as it is born. After some ingenious (but not offensive) reproaches to the King for his former jealousies of her, and having condoled that defect of Nature in so beautifull a person, Her Majesty continued; But that which troubles
mee most is the consideration of your Sister, who will finde no small pain to cure herself of her Passion, and must sigh in vain for an imperfection be∣yond remedy. It is easie (replied the King) to pluck up a Plant but newly set, and dispossess her heart of a Passion, which hath yet searce taken Root. perceive (answered the Queen) that you are a stranger to your Sister's thoughts; shee confessed to mee when I presst her to dis∣cover her resentments, that long before the fair Palatine left the Court, shee had great inclinations to affect him. But the respect shee bare you, with that which shee owed to her own quality, hindered her from disclosing her minde; the greatness of her courage, proceeding from her Birth and Vertue, vanquished her Desires; and although the violence of her Passion was extream, shee would rather have buried it's impetuosity under the Ashes of Death, than have rendered it visible to the prejudice of her Modesty. But assoon as shee understood that your intentions concur∣red with what shee desired more than shee hoped for, shee declared herself, the readiness of her obedience proceeding as much from her own interest as her respect to you. I have already wished her happiness in the accom∣plishment of her desires by the Consent of Iphigenes, so that now I know not how to carry her the sad newes of the Death of her Hopes, and the Funerall of her Contentments. But this I must injoyne you (answered the King) For, since you have committed the fault by your precipitation, it concern's you to repair it. How the Princess Flormunda was afflicted when the Queen made her this recantation, I must leave to your Conjectures. But as the Passions which terminate in the Sense, lose their Effect and force in the privation of the Cause which gave them Beeing (like Bees that leave their lives with their stings) It was no very difficult matter for the Infanta to cure her self of a Disease, which brought it's remedy in the acknowledgement of his infirmity. (The ardours of those who are inflamed for the Beauty of an agreeable Face, are quenched assoon as any Sickness hath withered the flowers of that Complexion, or any Accident rendred the shape deformed: And those who covet Mar∣riage for the injoyment of Pleasures, which of unlawfull are thereby rendered honourable, easily quit their weaned from the Hope of possessing what they desire.) Florimunda nevertheless prudently dissembled her regret, and having in effect nothing that troubled her so much as that shee had discovered her Passion too openly, shee laboured all shee could to
beget a belief in those to whom shee had communicated it, that it had been more to comply with the King, than for any inclination of her own, that shee had entertained the thought of Marrying Iphigenes; And that His Majesty, (like a kinde Brother, beeing unwilling to press her to a thing which shee had given him to understand was as little agreeable as advantageous to her,) had desisted importuning or therein, expecting some more eminent Alliance. All this could not bee carried so secretly, but that the Winde whis∣pered it in the Ears of the Princess Respicia, who (upon intelli∣gence of the King's Design of Marrying his Sister with Iphigenes, be∣sides the rumour of his impotency) took the allarm so hot, that her Minde, tormented with severall resentments, indured no less agita∣tion than a Ship tossed in the contention betwixt the Winds and Tyde. At length shee did like those that the Tempest drive's against the Rocks, who save their Lives in seeing their Vessell split. Shee fancied to herself that the Palatine, beeing more jealous of maintaning the promise hee had made her, than ambitious of the Honour that was pro∣posed him by Marrying Florimunda, had invented that Plot to dis∣pense himself hand somely of that alliance, which would have exposed him to the Envy of all the Grandees. And, as Desire is a grand Master of Perswasion, shee easily believed what shee desired. Reasons were not wanting to confirme this Belief. For, shee had never observed any thing in Iphigenes, but what was Generous. The proofs of his valour were not unknown to any but strangers; All Polonia had seen him per∣form Exploits of Warr, which Fame had not Tongues enough to celebrate. If hee was so able for Mars, could hee bee inept for Her whom Vulcan surprised with that God? This is a Charity which his Enemies do him (said Shee not without Sighes) because hee hath the Face of an Angell, they say hee is no Man; and his Enviers call him Effeminate; suppose hee bee so, is he the less fir for Women? That hee hath not accosted Modestina, was because Mieslas alwayes hindered him. It is upon the delicacy of his Complexion that they have built this Lye. Thus did the abused Princess flatter herself in her own misfortune, beeing resolved to see the effect of the Dispensation, which shee had procured from Rome with so much trouble. Having conjured Iphi∣genes herself, and sollicited him by Mieslas to make good his word to her; his answer still was, that his first Marriage beeing declared void, hee would marry her if shee were so contented: Hereupon Shee impor∣tuned dayly the Archbishop to produce her Dispensation, which was in
his hands. But nothing in this case could bee done in the absence of Modestina, whom (notwithstanding all the oppositions Mieslas could make) the King (incited thereto by Iphigenes) commanded to be sent for to the Court. With her came Aretuza, Mother to Iphigenes, who though faithfully advertised of all these passages by Iphigenes and Bo∣leslaüs, was ready to die with Fear, distrusting the success of that strange Discovery. To repeat the reproaches Modestina made to her fair Husband, the injurious tearms shee gave Respicia, and the reolution shee took to oppose herself till Death against the dissolution of her Marriage, I esteem needless. Hee that can imagine the resentments of a Wife affronted in that manner, may guess how far her Choller transport∣ed Her. On the other side Olavius having intelligence of the Princess Respi∣cia's pretensions, of the arrivall of the Dispensation, and of Modestina's and Aretuza's coming to Court, conceived (for the interest of his Daughter) that hee was obliged to carry her thither. So, with his Wife, Polemander, his two Daughters Oloria and Amiclea, hee took his way to Cracovia, to see if hee could accomplish the two alliances which hee had projected with Liante and Iphigenes. The Prince Cassin resolved to keep himself reserved in the research of Clemencia, untill hee saw the success of his Mother's pretensions. Simphorosa, his Sister, grew every day in Bigness and Beauty, but shee was yet so tender, that although shee was capable of breeding desires in others, shee was not of entertaining any in herself; And by reason of her youth and attractive sweetness, she was called in the Court the Fair INNOCENT. There was no body but the King, Iphigenes, Aretuza, Liante and Boleslaüs that knew the Stratagem, which was then to bee put in exe∣cution in the face of all the Court. Liante beeing importuned by Oloria, gave her not much satisfacti∣on, but remitting himself to the King's will, and deferring her untill hee were re-established in the Estate, which the Palatine of Podolia detained from him, hee amused her expectation. The King to pre∣pare all things for his design, made Mieslas condescend to give Liante of all his Daughters (except Clemencia) her whom hee should fancy most, promising to give her a portion himself, and leave him the use of Liante's Estate during Life. It was not hard to perswade the Sar∣matian to imbrace this offer, whereby (besides the great advantages
that accrued to him) hee saw all sorts of Enmity, Hatred, and Con∣tention cease. As for those that were immur'd in the Cloister, their Veils (besides their naturall deformities) were as a Buckler against all Worldly pretensions. So that there was no remedy but to produce Virgenia (who for her resemblance of Face and Fashion to Iphigenes was commonly called Iphigenia, yet the World knew her not till then to bee Mieslas Daughter.) Against all the oppositions Oloria could make to hinder this alliance, the King's authority served for a defence and excuse for Liante; and although the Palatine of Minsce murmured against this proceeding, hee was inforced to give over his suite, the supreme Law beeing the Prince's Will. That beeing thus determined, the next question was to which of these three Graces Iphigenes should appertain; to Modestina, Respicia, or Amiclea. The beautifull Palatine, who knew hee could bee injoy∣ed by none of them, gave himself to them all with so cheerfull and free a behaviour, that each of them, thinking shee had the prehemi∣nence in his affection, raised the Trophy of her Hopes to the Glory of possessing him. Each one presumed on her prerogatives, and put her pretentions in the first place. MODESTINA alleadged that in all Justice IPHIGENES belong'd to her; For, shee was married to him, hee was her Husband. RESPI∣CIA founded her plea upon her high Birth and Riches. AMICLEA drew her preheminence from her Beauty. All three made their Buckler of the Word and Promise of the Palatine. For, hee had said to his dear Modestina (whose disaster hee did really lament) that hee would never leave her as long as shee would have him for her Husband: Whereupon shee beeing resolved never to say otherwise, held her victory infallible. Respicia, (supported by the Paternall authority of Mieslas and the acknowledgement Iphigenes had made that hee never gave his consent to the Marriage of Mode∣stina) esteemed her Conquest no less certain. And Amiclea recollect∣ing in her Memory the many Caresses, inamored expressions, and severall demonstrations of affection, wherewith Iphigenes had fed her Fancy in Minsce, (besides the immortall obligations shee had acquired upon that generous Spirit, by her sallying out of the City in her Brother's Cloaths and Armour to succour him; And then consult∣ing often with her Looking glass to remarke the great advantages Nature had given her over her two Rivalls) could not perswade
herself if the fair Palatine had any Love, that it could bee for any but her. Imagine you if the Queen and the Infanta laughed not at these va∣nities; and if they had not occasion to say that there was a great Pro∣cess for a barren ground. All stood in expectation of the voyce of the Oracle, which was the sentence of the Arch-bishop, who beeing inform∣ed by the King of the reality of the Story, and rendered participant of the Stratagem, after some usuall formalities, pronounced the Marriage betwixt Modestina and Iphigenes void, by default of Con∣sentment given in an age incapable of determining Wills. It would bee hard to represent the resentments of the poor Mode∣stina, when shee heard this Sentence, which seemed no less cruell to her than if it had condemned her to Death; Nevertheless shee held yet by one thred of Hope, the word of Iphigenes. In this World the one's loss is another's gain. This Decree opened the Heavens to Respicia, and made her sing the Triumph before a perfect Victory. For this Marriage beeing dissolved, shee believed there would bee no further obstacle to her pretensions; when Amiclea opposing herself to Her Designes, summoned Iphigenes to performe his promise to Her. It were impossible to relate the Discourses that Jealousie (which is an inraged Fury) put into the mouths of these Rivalls, Which had made diverse Quarrells and Combats, but that the King by his Pru∣dence knew how to calm those storms. Modestina indeavoured to ex∣cite her Brother to fight with Iphigenes: (Consider you to whom shee addresst herself, and what pleasure the King took to hear her perswa∣sions, which Liante repeated to him.) Respicia pressed her Son, the Prince Cassin, to challenge Olavius or Polemander, to revenge her of Amiclea. Oloria conjured Polemander to ingage in single Combat with Liante. And Amiclea was so transported with rage, that shee was almost resolved to re-arm herself to take Prince Cassin's Life in revenge of Respicia's opposing her desires. At last beeing not able to ingage any others in their quarrells, Passion so bemadded them, that (had they not been hindered) they would have ended their differences with Poniard and Pistoll (wherewith they had each armed themselves) unfit instruments for the use of such delicate Hands. In what contentment did His Majestie's fancy swim, seeing the Cards thus shuffled to his own desire? At length beeing willing to
terminate all these differences (whereof hee reserved the knowledge to himself) in as gracious as marvellous a manner, hee promised to content them all by his Judgement without commanding (like the Hebrew King) that Iphigenes, should bee divided. Hereupon Hee prefix't a certain day to pronounce the decision of this controversie, which (according to the opinion of the Pretendants) for one Happy was to make two Miserable. The whole Design beeing conducted with an admirable secrecy, the Queen and the Infanta Florimunda accompanied with onely foure, or five of the principall Ladies of the Court, seated themselves in the King's Chamber by his command. Then were called in the most part of those, whom wee have named in this History, and those who had most frequently been in Iphigenes company, (for hee suggested to the King the contrivance of all this Design) Especially the three Rivalls, Modestina, Respicia and Amiclea; the Palatine's three Prin∣cipall friends, Pomeran, Pifides and Argal; The Palatines of Minsce and Troc with their Wives; Oloria followed her Mother, and Me∣lindra her's; Polemander accompanied his Sisters; Perpetua was in∣troduced as Governess to Modestina; Aretuza entred with Mieslas, as those who next to their Son and Ward had the principall interest in this business. Of Boleslaüs beeing there, you need not doubt; the Prince Cassin accompanied his Mother, and Clemencia attended on the Queen. The Arch-bishop beeing instructed what hee was to do, was admit∣ted, as hee that should give a blessing to the Feast, with other Prelates and Ecclesiasticks of note, who knew nothing of the Designe. Mean time the King had commanded that Virgenia, (naturall Daughter to Mieslas) should bee conducted into his Closet, dresst like a Bride, and as if shee had been then to bee contracted to Liante, who with Iphigenes, sumptuously apparelled, was brought into the same closet; where, in Coffers (whereof Iphigenes had the Keys) were Garments necessary for the representation of the Comicall Action wee are now relating. The King having left them in his closet, returned into his Chamber, where during that grand Assembly, having briefly, but with much gra∣vity represented, That God having created Man free, there was no∣thing that he abhorred more than to see Wills constrained; That beeing by the Providence of Heaven elevated to the Throne, to represent on Earth the Image of God in Heaven, he would never indure that the person whom
hee honoured with his Favour should bee forced in his inclinations, especi∣ally in that which of all things in the World ought to bee most free, that is, Marriage. That hee had under-hand intimated to the three Conten∣dants a secret Cause which ought without further dispute make them quit their pretentions; But that their Passion beeing stronger than their Reason, they flattered themselves with a Belief, that his Information was, onely an artificiall Pretence to make them desist from an Enterprise, wherein they could reap nothing but Shame. That by the mouth of the Church, Iphigenes having been declared free from his first Bonds, his Will was that hee should not bee fettered a second time contrary to his own desire. That it was sufficient, that against the Motions of his own Minde hee had already once testified his Obedience to his Parents by tying him∣self to Modestina, without submitting again his Will to their's for an Alliance disproportionable; That the Age of the Princess Respicia did oblige him rather to reverence her as a Mother, than cherish and research her as a Wife; That her Daughter Simphoroza was yet too young for an Husband; That Amiclea might bee dispensed from Marriage for the same Reason, besides that the promise of a Prisoner is never held to pro∣ceed from any other motion than Compulsion. And in sum, as well against that, as the paternall authority of Mieslas, hee opposed his Royall and Soveraign Power, to remit purely and freely Iphigenes in the Liberty of his own Choyce. That hee had sounded his Intentions, and beeing fully informed thereof by his ingenious Confession, hee had besides alleadged very pertinent Reasons, that hindered him from Marrying any of those three that desired him. Which made him ingage his thoughts elsewhere, and contract a Marriage in private (which was then to bee made evi∣dent and confirmed by the Church) with a simple Shepherdess named Almeria, whom hee found according to his own Heart, and who possessed as much ingenuity, Vertues and Graces as shee had little Beauty. That hee had made him see so cleer into the Purity, Innocency and Sincerity of that Affection, that in stead of blaming him for having abased his Spirit to a Subject so inferiour to his Birth and Condition, hee esteemed him the more, judging how faithfull would hee bee to his King who had so religiously preserved his Faith to so mean a Creature. That for these considerations imposing Silence to his Father and Mother, and rejecting the Pretensions of the three Rivalls, his Will and Pleasure was, by vertue of his full and absolute Power, and of his Royall Authority, that that Marriage should bee celebrated by the Arch-bishop, who had disannull'd the former, and that immediately in the presence of all that Company,
the Rustick Almeria having been brought secretly into the Palace for that purpose by his Command. These last words pronounced with a serious and Majestick accent, stopt the mouth (not without an extream impatience) of the irritated Mieslas, who intended to do no less then kill Almeria with his own hands, or make her bee poysoned within few dayes after her Mar∣riage. What discourses in the Thoughts, what Thoughts ran through the Minds of the three Rivalls, what pain had they to hold their pea∣ces in so fair and so pressing an occasion to speak! One onely thing gave them the respit that Heart-breaking Grief denied them, which was, that this ceremony was onely to contract Iphigenes to Almeria, the Marriage beeing remitted to a more pompous solemnity; inso∣much that they promised themselves, during that intervall, to use new indeavours to breake that alliance, and procure the accomplish∣ment of their own pretensions; For, if betwixt the Mouth, and the Glass arrive diverse accidents, severall means might bee found in that interim to divert that blow which was so fatall to their Hopes: Be∣sides, not daring to oppose the King's Will in his own presence, every one remained in silence, when the King turning himself towards the Arch-bishop, asked him if he was not ready to recive the Promises of the future Marriage of the Palatine of Plocens with the Shepherdess Al∣meria? Whereunto the Prelate made answer, that he saw nothing to hinder him from obeying so Just a Command, in regard Kings may dispossess their Subject's Parents of the Power which they have in such cases over their Children, and dispence these of the Obedience which they owe to them; the Regall Authority, as a grand Sphear, imbracing the Paternall under it; For, Kings are above the Lawes; and Favorites sometimes above the Kings. This Conceit made the King laugh. Then the betrothed Pair beeing demanded, the Commission of bringing them in was given to Boleslaüs, who beeing the maine En∣gine in this stratagem, whilest the King was making his Speech, had made Virgenia retire herself into a Gallery neer the Closet, whilest hee drest Liante in a Woman's Habit, plain and modest, but decent and honourable enough; then having ordered his Hair, and rendred his Complexion more tawny by the application of some of that liquour mentioned in our Rurall recreations, no body could discerne him to bee other in that equipage than the same Almeria, whom Pisides, Argal and Pomeran had seen in the inchanted Forrest of Plocens.
The houre was purposely appointed in the Evening, and the King's chamber disposed in such sort that all the light that appeared, was directly in the Eyes of the Assembly; those that were to, be contract∣ed remaining on the darker side. When they saw Iphigenes come in, imbellished with all the advantages of rich Ornaments, leading the comely Almeria by the hand, the difference of their Complexions made every one compare them in his imagination to a black Pigeon paired with a white. What other thoughts passed through the severall fancies of the Spectatours, your Conceptions must supply the defect of my Ex∣pressions. The Queen and the Infanta Florimunda cherished an Opinion, that hee had purposely made choyce of that Creature to cover his imper∣fection, having to that end implored the assistance and goodness of His Majesty. The three Rivalls, who knew themselves Greater and more Beautifull many degrees, believed that their Splendor would easily dissipate the Clowdiness of that obscure and homely Mistris. Mieslas was inraged that hee durst not speak. Aretuza was ready to die with apprehension, seeing the moment approach that would discover her deceipt. Onely the Arch-bishop saw cleer through all these shades, the rest (ravished with astonishment) held all their Thoughts suspended, and their Eyes fixed, sometimes upon the incomparable Beauties of Iphigenes, sometimes contemplating the Countenance of Almeria; in whose Gesture and Grace they could read nothing of Rustick. Beeing placed at the best advantage for their Design, Iphigenes having premeditated his Speech, said; That preferring his Faith above all the Honours and Wealth in the World, hee was come thither (under His Majestie's Favour) to testifie, in the Face of the whole Court, that which hee had given to the vertuous Almeria in the ob∣scurity of the Plocensian woods; and shew her, as shee had been his onely consolation during his disgrace, that hee would make her par∣taker of the Favours, wherewith His Majesty was pleased to honour him. That hee was not ignorant of the severall censures the World would make upon his Choyce, saying that for a Man whom Fortune, by the Favour of a great Monarch, had raised to such eminent Dig∣nities, hee was unworthy of that happiness, suffering his thoughts to crawle after a subject so disproportionable to his quality. But hee was able to justifie his action by examples, as well sacred as profane, of the greatest Kings and Princes of the Earth, who had not dis∣dained
to make slaves their Wives; hee was not however so much invited by their imitation as his own inclination; Affection proceed∣ing from Election, not those other considerations which Humane Prudence dictate's to those who prefer its Maximes above their own contentment. That the Repose of the Minde (wherein consisted the greatest felicity on Earth) was not an Effect of the multitude of Riches or Honours, (since to the contrary they begat Inquietudes and Trouble) but of the satisfaction which every one draw's from him∣self by setting limits to his Desires and Fortunes. That the King, his Master, had already made him too great, since hee was elevated by his Favour to Dignities beyond the aym of his most aspiring wishes; That (beeing supported by so high a protection) hee might have pretended to a more advantageous Party, but seeing himself raised to an eminent Condition, which permitted him not to content himself with an ordinary Match, Hee had made choyce of a Wife, whose quality was extraordinary mean, according to the Judgement of Men, but whose Vertues and rare Perfections had won his Heart, and rendered him entirely her's. That in time hee would make ap∣pear that Almeria's extraction was not inferiour to Modestina's, to whom hee did no injury, since the Justice and Judgement of the Church had declared their Marriage void. That hee had divers other Reasons to oppose against the Pretensions of Respicia and Amiclea, but for Modestie's sake hee should forbear to publish them, beeing contented to submit himself to his Majestie's Will, under whose favour hee humbly beseeched the Lord Arch bishop to receive the Faith which hee would plight to Almeria Who taking her turn and counterfeiting her Gesture and Voyce, lest shee should bee known to bee Liante, said in few words; That her ambition had never aspired to so much Glory as to appertain to Iphigenes; but the Providence of Heaven having looked upon her Humility, shee gently condes∣cended to its Ordinance; And, besides the servitude and subjection which were due to His Maiestie's commands, that the Charity shee owed to her selfe Commanded her not to reject so good a Fortune, whereof however shee esteemed her self un∣worthy. Then the King calling Pisides, Argal and Pomeran (being already in∣formed of their disguisements in the Forrest) asked them if they knew not that Shpepherdess to be the same Almeria, in whō they had remark∣ed so many Vertues, and such Dexterity in the exercises of hunting and
Arms in the Forrest of Plocens; which verity they unanimously con∣firmed; For, they really believed it to be so, in regard they having discovered onely the deceipt of Serife (as hath been already said) the condition of Almeria was yet unknown to them. Upon this acknowledgement the King uttered many favourable expressions in praise of that Gentile Amazon giving covertly to un∣derstand That Modestina was neither richer nor of a better Family than Shee, and that Time (which brings the secretest things to light) having made her known to the World, diverse astonishments would bee either redoubled, or cease. That they would bee redoubled by seeing the proofs of her extraordinary valour, or would cease when they should finde that Iphigenes could not make a better choyce, what merits soever those other pretenders conceived they possess'd more than Almeria. These words were Riddles to the Hearers but you shall shortly understand the explication of these Oracles. The King having left speaking, every one remained without reply∣ing any thing; and in this silence the words usuall at the solemnities of Contracts beeing interchanged by the Parties, the Arch-bishop con∣ned them by his Benediction. That done, Iphigenes prostrating himself before the King, said, That among so many favours wherewith His Majesty had gratified him, hee accounted that in the first rank, in regard without it all the rest would have been less sensible to him there beeing nothing in the World that satisfie's a Lover so much as to see him∣self in the possession of that which he loveth. Almeria kneeling afterwards, and kissing the King's hand, said three or four words of like Compliment, with such a grace, that the Queen was constrained to say, that Shepherdess had been bred in some other place than the Woods, and that shee saw nothing of Rustick in Her. Thereupon they retired themselves, and the King having comman∣ded that Liante and Iphigenia should bee brought forth to bee con∣tracted likewise, Mieslas starting up said to the King; SIR, I hope I shall have more contentment by this second alliance than the former: to whom the King sodainly replied, when you shall know what I have to tell you, I am confident the one will bee as agreeable to you as the other. Heavens grant it, answered Mieslas, but my advancing was to adver∣tise your Majesty that the Daughter which I give Liante is named Virge∣nia, and not Iphigenia, onely by abuse some call her so, because of her resem∣blance to her Brother.
Wee will call her then Virgenia, (replyed the King) because shee is a Virgin, and Iphigenia also, because shee is more like her Brother than two drops of water are like each other. The King said this to amuse them, and give Iphigenes time to put on his Woman's habit, and Liante to re-take his own cloathes with his former complexion. Mean time hee gave order to Boleslaüs that they should not come forth of his Closet, untill hee gave the command to call them: Then having taken aside the Queen, the Infanta, and the three disgraced Graces, hee began to tell them, as a secret, of the im∣potency of Iphigenes, who had not taken that Nymph, but to cover his imperfection from the Eyes of the World. Thereupon having given them leave to reply, the Queen and the Infanta, beeing forbidden by Modesty to speak in a business wherein they had so little interest, con∣fined their thoughts to silence, leaving the field open to the three passi∣onate Pretenders. MODESTINA, who was the most interessed, as having her Hus∣band torn out of her imbraces, replyed, That to give her the liberty of Speech after so solemn a Contracting, was to bring a Physitian after Death; besides that the absolute Will of His Majesty was an inviolable Law to her, which must bee obeyed without murmuring; Yet if shee might bee lest to her own free disposition, shee would content herself to spin out the rest of her dayes with Iphigtnes without experimenting him for an Husband any otherwise than shee had thitherto; accusing him of little Friendship in that hee had not discovered that defect to her, which shee should have hidden as well as that Country-wench: So Jealousie made her tearme Almeria. The Princess RESPICIA, who perswaded herself it was a false report, protested that it was the Vertues of Iphigenes which made her desire him, not his Beauties, nor the consideration of pleasure; (judge you how her Tongue corresponded with her Heart) and that notwith∣standing his Infirmitie, shee would have Married him, having already Children enough to preserve her Name and Memory. AMICLEA, who had abated somewhat of her ardour, would not however seem less affectionate than the rest, and following their track, her Ditty was to the same Tune. The King hereupon told them that Marriages contracted with such persons were invalide. Then, replied MODESTINA, that which is now in agitation will bee of no force. There are some private Reasons (answered the King) which will make it authentick. Kings, said RESPICIA, have alwayes some reasons
of State which pass all Ordinary Rules; they can do, undo, do again; they play with their Subjects as if they were Tennis-balls. The King smiling at this freedome of her's, replied; Princess, when the Scales are fallen from your Eyes, adn the Veile of Passion taken from before your Reason, I assure my self that you will rather pitty than envy Iphigenes. Your favours, answered the Princess, will render him alwayes more worthy of Envy than Pitty. Upon these words Boleslaüs returning into the King's Chamber gave him notice by a private signe, that all was ready. Whereupon hee presently commanded him to call Liante and IPHIGENIA to bee contracted by the Arch bishop: The Ceremony beeing past without any contradiction, the two Lovers standing hand in hand, Liante accompanied his costly apparrell with so gallant a Garb, that hee seemed quite another Creature than Almeria; and those pretious Rayments wherewith Iphigenia had splendidly adorn∣ed her self, added such Iuster to her naturall Beauty (augmented by the vermillion of shame which overspread her Cheeks) and her attire had such conformity with that which Virgenia wore, when shee was brought into the Palace, together with the favour of the Time, Place, and Shadiness of the Chamber, that no body could know her on the sodain for Iphigenes; there was not one but had his Eyes dazled at the splendour of so rare a Beauty, and not one Soul in the whole Company so Envious, as not to confess, seeing those two Lovers that they were, as the happiest, so the handsomest Couple in the World. Mieslas was the first couzened; Insomuch that hee cryed out a∣lowd, hee did not think hee had been Father of so beautifull a Daugh∣ter. What think you, Madam, said the King turning to the Queen, were it not an impiety for a Father to disown so admirable a Daughter? Shee seem's to mee an Angell rather (answered the Queen) and that shee hath more reason to acknowledge the Heaven for her Father than Mieslas. Indeed, said Florimunda, it were great Pitty that such a Jewell should be hidden; hence-forwards this Lady will be one of the richest Ornaments of the Court. That's evident (replied the King) and Liante shall do well to be carefull of her, for if so many Ladies were in∣amoured of her Brother, her penetrating glances will ingender no less flames in diverse Courtier's Hearts. The Royall Chamber seemed at that time like a Serene Heaven, wherein their Majesties were the greater Lights; the others the
meaner Planets, as the Infanta Florimunda, Modestina, the Princess Respicia, Amiclea, Melindra, and poore Oloria quite Eclipsed. But what Rank can wee give to the fair IPHIGENIA, unless it bee that of the Planet that bear's the Name of the Goddess which causeth Love? When Oloria saw that glorious Star, shee would have hidden her∣self from her own Eyes. The changing of her Colour shewed suffici∣ently the distemper of her thoughts, but all the Assembly was so at∣tentive in contemplating the incomparable IPHIGENIA, that no body took notice of her alterations. Shee confess't her self vanquish∣ed by that eminent Beauty; therein shee read the cause of Liante's scorns, whom in her Heart shee called Traitor, for having spoken of Affection to her beeing prepossessed with that Object; Shee had no∣thing left to support her senses in that Despair, but this sorry conso∣lation, that her Sister Was as much excalled in Beauty, as Shee surpassed her in handsomness. At length shee excused her unfaithfull Lover, as having made a choyce so worthy of his Judgement, that shee herself was constain'd to approve it. The Queen having for some time held her Eyes attentively fixed on IPHIGENIA'S Face, turned to Florimunda, saying, Sister, by the Life of the King, my Lord, I do not think it is possible to finde through the whole World two Faces more like than those of the Brother and the Sister; There is but one Letter's difference in their Names, but in their Faces I finde not the least tittle of exception; and if Iphigenes were in Women's cloaths, I believe we should hardly be able to distinguish them. Iphigenes hearing this Discourse, notwithstanding the gravity and modest bashfulness, wherewith hee had studiously composed his Conntenance, could not refrain smiling, but with so pleasing a grace, as obliged the Infanta to reply; Madam, There is no difference but in their action; For Iphigenes hath I know not what of Martiall in his Face, but this Lady hath a certain sofclier look so full of attraction, that her sweet∣ness charm's me. What Philosophicall severity would not have changed countenance at these Speeches? The King had all the pain imaginable to contein himself, seeing so universall an Errour. Then, the Infanta speaking again to the Queen, said, Madam, do's not your Majesty perceive that this Nymph Almeris, whom Iphigenes hath chosen for his Wife, excepting her complexion (which is somewhat tauny by beeing much exposed to the
Sun) hath some resemblance to Liante? I did think so (replied the Queen) but not to interrupt the King who was speaking, I forbore declaring of my sense. The King who made a shew of not hearing this Discourse, knew that artificiall things (like Paint) are but of little durance; and if hee should differ the discovery of that Secret much longer, hee should lose the pleasure of his Stratagem. For, hee overheard already the Palatine's three friends, Pomeran, Pisides and Argal saying to each other, Would not you say that were Serife? I must confess I never saw any Sister so perfectly a Brother. Clemencia hearing the high praises every Spectator gave to the per∣fections of her Naturall Sister, would willingly have quitted the quality of Legitimate to have possessed so eminent a Beauty: and a secret worm of Envy gnawing her Heart, made her conceit that the extolling of Iphigenia's graces was the eclypsing of her's. The Prince Cassin, who could have wished to himself as many Eyes, as the Poëts gave Argus, the better to contemplate IPHIGENIA, could not forbear, saying, that Liante was the happiest of Men. As many Heads as many Opinions, as many Mouths as many Censures. Onely poor Are∣tuza dreading the success of this adventure, was like one that hold's the Porringer whilest the Surgeon is opening his Vein; the Cruelty of Mieslas swam in her Fancy, his inhumane humour dazled her Eyes with terrour; and although shee was in the King's Court (a sacred and in∣violable Sanctuary) and under his protection; yet shee trembled like a Pigeon that see's a Gerfaulcon neer him. LIANTE and IPHIGENIA beeing contracted, the King pro∣mised Mieslas to pay his Daughter's Dowry, and gratifie Liante with such pensions and Honours, as hee should not grudge to leave him the use of his Estate during Life, ordeining that the first Male-Child that should proceed of that Marriage should bear the Name and Arms of the house of Mieslas, and the rest Liante's. All the Ceremony beeing past, the Queen and Florimunda, accord∣ing to the ordinary curiosity of great Ladies, would have had Iphi∣genia come neer them, that they might examine her Beauties, and make triall of her Wit. But the King who knew that Gold would not indure the Touch, commanded Boleslaüs to re-conduct the new Contracted Couple into his Closet, untill hee should give order for their coming forth together with the former, like the four wheeles of a Triumphant Chariot.
Which done, beating the Iron while it was hot, and not to give leisure to the assistants of discoursing and communicating their Opi∣nions, having prepared their attentions by promising to tell them one of the strangest Evenements any Age had produced upon the Theater of the World, hee related summarily the History of the Birth, Education and Fortune of Iphigenes, with the principall Passages already declared in this Narration. And then turning to Mieslas, Behold (said hee) Seigneur Palatine the memorable Marvell your Rigour hath produced; are not you happy to have brought into the World a Daughter that surpasseth so many Men in Valour and Generosity, and so many Women in Beauty? And let mee tell you, if for preser∣ving this Miracle of Nature, you should conceive any displeasure against your Wife, who hath shewed herself so discreet and vertuous, and indured your insupportable humours with such patience, you would bee the most unworthy Father and Husband that ever the Sun beheld; Neither must you think ever to appear in my presence, or stay within my Dominion, if you should dare to attempt any thing against the Mother or Daughter, whom I take into my safe∣gard and especiall Protection. See how the Heavens overcoming your Malice by singular Mercies, have rendered you more happy than you, imagined; upon whose gracious Obligations prepare hence∣forwards a due Repentance and Acknowledgement of their Goodness. And you, discreet Aretuza (who have had this laudable industry to elevate your Child with so much Vertue and Prudence, by the care of this aged Man, whom you made her Governour) rest contented and without Fear: For, besides the security you may expect from mee for your own Person, know that I will raise your Son-in-law LIANTE and your Daughter IPHIGENIA to such a degree of Fortune, as many Mothers would desire none but Daughters upon the same condition. Neither shall this Happiness terminate in them alone; our Intention and Will is, that all those who have contri∣buted any thing to her preservation, shall bee participant of her preferment. And you, Fair Ladies (said hee to the three Preten∣dants) who have so honourably loved the beautifull Palatine, change your fruitless Love into a just Friendship, which will be more advantageous; cease to afflict your Souls with sighing after a vain and sterile Passion, and reserve your selves for the joyfull so∣lemnity of Her Nuptialls, who honours you as shee ought. These two alliances which you have seen contracted are but one; onely
the habits beeing changed made LIANTE Almeria, and an IPHI∣GENIA of Iphigenes. Whereof you may bee more fully satisfied, if you take the paines to go into my Closet, or desire to see them again here. I prepared all things in this manner purposely to increase your astonishments, and make you know that the Heavens work mi∣racles on Earth, and before our Eyes. This Discourse of His Majesty bred such an amazment in the Spirits of all the assistants, that Admiration transported them beyond themselves. But the most transported of all was Mieslas, not with Choller but Joy, and his Heart (before more rigid than the sensless Rocks) beeing mollified with these words, discharged it's Ran∣cour in a showre of Tears: Hee cast himself at his Majestie's knees, and imbracing them could not thank sufficiently the goodness of that great Prince: Hee did not pardon his Wife, but ask't her pardon. It was a pleasure to see that Father and Mother weep for Joy, and all the rest with Tenderness, Astonishment and Pity. Hee that could relate the diverse Resentments of so many persons as had part in that Commune rejoycing, were no bad Oratour; yet it is better concealing than expressing them, since Silence is an effect of Admiration. The Queen's and Infanta's impatience made them advance into the Closet, where they found IPHIGENIA in the disposition of a Criminall, that expect's when the Judge will pronounce the sentence of his Condemnation. Liante possessed with a joy beyond beliefe, felt his Heart dance with excess of Contentment. Poore Virgenia (who had waited in the Gallery all ready, like one that were to bee Married) was found with her Governess ignorant of all this, and with a conceit that the Company was then coming to assist at the Ce∣remony. In summe, the Truth was discovered, the Mask laid aside, and every one spake according to his own Sense. Onely the three Rivalls (happy, in their unhappiness, by their owne Cures) became the Subject of Laughter and Divertisement to the Gallants of the Court. The King, to inrich this Evenement, and render it yet more illu∣strious, gave order to honour the Marriage (which was solemnly to bee celebrated) with such Pomp, Tiltings, Masks, Banquets, and other Magnificences, that hee seemed (like another Assuerus) to desire to shew upon this occasion the greatness of his Glory, and the splen∣dour of his Royall Liberty.
The beautifull Iphigenes who had been the Subject of Sighs to so many Ladies, became the Object of Admiration to the Men, when hee was become Iphigenia; and although Liante alone had the pri∣viledge of possessing her, shee could not hinder others from Loving and Honouring. Whilest these splendide preparatives were making for the Wedding, Iphigenia (who was more in credit than ever with the King) contrived diverse other Alliances. That of the Prince Cassin with her Sister Clemencia was concluded. Pisides, whilest hee was an Hostage for Iphigenes in the Castle of Minsce, became a Prisoner to Amiclea, but durst not disclose his Passion, for fear of beeing accused of Presumption, and payed with a shamefull Repulse; Besides incurring the displeasure of Iphigenes; But the shades beeing dissipated, hee declared himself to Iphigenia, who procured him Amiclea to Wife. Argal was contented with Oloria; and Pomeran, whom Iphigenia cherished particularly, received Modestina for his Mstress. Polemander chose Eleonora, Iphigenia's Ward and Daughter to Stanislas. Onely Respicia remained in her Widdowhood, and her Daughter Simforoza in the expectation of some great match, when her Age should render her Marriageable. All Parties were content. Oh Hymen! what Cures after so many wounds, what Joy to all these persons tossed with so many Stormes, to see themselves so sodainly arrived at the Port, and set on shore with as much Happiness as safety. Virgenia likewise was not ill provided; For, by Iphigenia's means, (to whom every one was desirous to bee allied, beeing the chief person in His Majesties Favour) Her Husband was a Castellain of Lithuania, neer Kinsman to the Palatine of Troc, named Aradius, who was one of the gentilest and most accomplisht Gentlemen about the Court. These were the fruits of the Peace and Re∣conciliation of POLONIA and LITHUANIA. The Solemnity of this Marriage beeing past, Iphigenia desired His Majesty to honour the rest likewise with his presence. Which shortly after were solemnized accordingly, with such a train of Feasts and publick Expressions of Joy, that Cracovia seemed to bee the onely Theater of Pleasure. Peace having thus restored to Polonia that abundance and felicity which commonly doth attend it, you would have said that the Golden Age had been come to sojourn with that of Iron. Our incomparable Amazon guiding the Bark of her Fortune in this full Sea of Favour with such Dexterity, that shee seemed to have
Married Good-luck with Desert, never ceased untill shee had placed her Dear Liante in the same Degree of Favour with the King as shee possessed; and the King discerning so many Dispositions in that Gentleman worthy of his Benevolence, loved him first for Iphigenia's sake, but afterwards for his own Merits. It is no small advantage for a diseased Person to have some one to helpe him into the Bath. Diverse very deserving Men remaine in Obscurity for want of some to expose them to the Light, and make them known to those, who like Gods on Earth doe spin the Thred of meaner Mortall's Destinies. Liante's access beeing thus facilitated, hee was forthwith instal∣led Palatine of Plocent; not long after hee became Lord Cham∣berlaine, then Lord High-Steward of the King's Family, and so increased daily in Dignities proportionably as hee advanced in Favour. Iphigenia beeing contented to see him well anchored about the King, studied nothing so much as to ingratiate herself with the Queen, which Designe (by a great Assiduity about Her Majestie's Person, and with Submissions and Respects, that would have inchanted Marble) shee sodainly accomplished. For, the Queen who was no ill-willer of her's, whilest shee thought her a Man, finding her of her own Sex redoubled her Affection; and the Infanta Florimunda did no less: Insomuch that those two Princesses in their Concord had only this Debate, and in their Discord they accorded in this point; Which should love her most. Florimunda who had every day full liberty to review that same Face, which shee had so much esteemed in Iphigenes, and beeing ra∣vished besides, with the sweetness of her Conversation, could not choose but love her with a Friendship beyond ordinary; And the other Ladies, who have beene ashamed to discover their Passions whilest they esteemed her as shee seemed, made no difficulty of decla∣ring the violentest motions of their Hearts, when they saw her to bee one of them. But whilest I stand to represent the happy Estate and Deport∣ments of our Lovers, I forget to tell you how they acknowledged the Friendship of those, who attended them in their meaner Fortunes. Our Favorites (who advanced their Grandeurs by way far different from that of others, who scrape all they can to themselves) had nothing in greater re-commendation than to establish their own
Fortunes by doing or procuring good to others; like the Sun, who cast's his Rayes outwards, and shine's not but by the comunication of his Light. No body could approach them without resenting the effects of their perfect Courtesie, no more than stand neer a Fire without par∣ticipating of it's heat. As occasions served they failed not to represent unto His Mejesty the merits of their Friends: Mieslas was made Lord Chamberlain when Liante was raised to the charge of Lord High Steward, and that without Envy: For, beeing fully reconciled, and esteeming him as his Son by his Marriage with Iphigenia (after the manner of most Parents) hee desired his advancement rather than his own. The Prince Cassin, who ambitioned a Government with impati∣ence, obtained (at their request) of the King a promise of the first Pa∣latinate that fell. All the rest were either made Lords Castellains in severall places, or had considerable Offices given them about the King or Queen. Onely Boleslaüs, in whom Ambition was quite extinct, desired to end his dayes with his dear Foster Child, who esteemed and honoured him as her Father. The POLONIANS have two powerfull and very bad Neighbours, the MOSCOVIANS towards the Septentrion, and the Turk in the Orientall part: Against the inundations of these two Torrents they are forced to raise and repair their banks continually. The grand KNETZ, or Duke of Moscovia, hath alwayes an Heart burning to see the Kings of Polonia extend their Dominions beyond the Boristhenes, having one foot in Russia: This displeasure incites him oftentimes (either out of Ambition, or to exercise his Souldiery) to make Incursions with his Army into that part called the POLONIAN RUSSIA. Newes beeing brought to the Court at Cracovia, that this Enemy was raising very considerable Forces to invade Polonia, it was resolved to prevent his Design, and oppose his fury by incountering him upon the Frontiers of his own Territories. The Lord High Martiall of Polonia was appointed Generall of the Army; and because hee was very aged and sickly, the Lieutenant Generalship was given to Mieslas, with a promise of the first Office of Marshall that should bee vacant. which his Daughter, to content his Ambition, procured him. The occasion seemed so fair that all the grand Gallants of the Court resol∣ved to bear Arms in that Expedition. Liante, who burned with desire to shew that by his Services hee would indeavour to deserve those favours hee dayly received from
His Majesty, would bee of the number; and notwithstanding all the instances the King could make to reteine him in Cracovia, hee would not bee induced to submit to that Obedience, which  tearmed shamefull and unworthy of a Man of Honour. Iphigenia (who during the Peace could not forget the exercises of Chivalry, and who had been one of the chief in all their Tiltings) determined to accompany her Husband to the field, and bear Arms. Whatsoever the Queen, the Infanta and all the other Ladies could alledge, it was impossible for them to extinguish in her that Mar∣tiall humour, which shee had so long practised. Shee was never so much esteemed as in this occurrence; Envy it self, which carrie's the venime of Aspes under its Tongue, could not forbear commending her; All said that with that living PALLADIUM they were assured of the Victory, and that no less than the Fortune of Cesar attended that invincible Amazon. The King himselfe could not sufficiently admire and applaud the Greatness and Gallantry of her Spirit, and had the infirmities of his Age per him, hee would gladly have been a Spectatour of her br Exploits. Lopez the famous Comicall Poet of Spaine, hand∣somely inferrs, that those who are descended of generous Parents can∣not but bee inclined to Heroick Actions; And in regard his Language is graver and more gracefull than I am able to render it, for the satis∣faction of the Lorers of that Tongue, I have here placed a Copy of his own Verses, Ni por el yole el Elephante grave, Ni as por el Agua el Foenix nuevo, Ni entierra el Pez ni por la mar el Ave, Ni menes en el ayre el Topociego, Ni en tierra seca el Ruysen̄or suave, Ni el Platano en la Arena, el Cisne en fuego, Ni el Hombre que es de Padres principales, Sin las hazanas a su nombre yguales. In Icy Clymes no Elephants doe live, Nor Water a new Life to th' Phaenix give; Fish cannot dwell on th' Earth, nor Birds i'th Deep, Much less the Mole in th' Ayry Region creep;
The barren Heaths sweet Nightingales disclaime, Plane-trees love not the Sands, nor Swans the Flame: Neither can Persons borne of Noble Sires Bee void of Noble Hearts, and high Desires. To aske whether Liante and the rest of the Gentlemen, mentioned in this History, had honourable Commands in this Army, were a frivo∣lous question: It is but considering what favour can doe in like occa∣sions. Polonia never saw a more compleat Army, nor Gallanter men; They repulsed the Enemy (who exceeded them in number) so far into their own Country, that those that came to assault, were hardly able to defend themselves. Having taken and sicked diverse places in Russia, and discomfited the Grand Knez Forces, they re∣turned loaden with Laurells and rich Boety, with a Generall applanse and magnificent Triumph. But Fortune, who is never fully indulgent, mingled, according to her custome, some Gall amongst this Honey, which was by the death of Mieslas; who in routing the Enemies, in∣gaged himself so far in the pursuit of the fugitives (whereof hee had made an horrible slaughter) that at length Despair having rallied them, they gave him a fresh charge; and beeing but weakly attended, hee was forced to resigne his Life, and fall a Sacrifice to the irritated fury of the re-assembled Enemy. Thus he buried himself in the Tomb of Honour, which he had alwayes so much desired, like Sampson who died in the midst of his Enemies, or him that was squeezed to Death under the Elephant which he had killed. If he had been less couragious, he had injoyed more fruits of his Victory, and seen himself Lord High Marshall of Polonia; For, hee who had commanded the Army in that expedition, ended there his dayes, not by the hand of his Enemies, but Sickness and Old Age. So that all the charge fell upon our two Favorites, who like CASTOR and POL∣LUX shared the honour with such equality, that both refusing it, both increased their praises. I am not able to make a relation suiteable to the memorable te∣stimonies of Valour, that day, rendered by our generous Amazon, and Liante fighting before her; who vexing that a Woman should lead him the way to honourable Dangers, and teach him his Lesson in Marse's Schoole, striving to surpass himself hee shewed by his blowes (which never fell in vain) that bee was Master of as an uncom∣mon a Puissance, as incomparable Dexterity. Cassin, Pander, Pi∣sides,
sides, Argal, Pomeran, and Aradius, signalised themselves by Acts of marvellous Prowess; and Boleslaüs, as old as hee was, gave proofs of no less Courage in this warlike exploit, than Prudence in the more Peaceable transactions. Majestick were the Triumphs which the King made for his Favo∣rites at their return to Cracovia, making them bee proclaimed, the Preservers of their Country; and to crown this Victory with a worthy acknowledgement, every one that had rendered himself remarkeable in that Action received a particular recompence from His Majesty. The Prince CASSIN was rewarded with the Palatinate of PLO∣CENS, Liante reserving to himself that of PODOLIA, where all his own Estate lay, and the memory of his own Father and Father-in-law were yet recent. The Office of Lord CHAMBERLAIN was con∣ferred upon POMERAN, as well in consideration of his own vertue, as for MODESTINA'S sake whom hee had Married. All the rest likewise tasted of his Majestie's Favours, according to their Merits and Qualities: And Liante was confirmed in the Office of Lord High Marshall of POLONIA, to the Shame and Heart-breaking of his Enviers, the Joy of his Friends, the singular Contentment of IPHIGENIA, the Glory of the KING, and full Satisfaction of his own Desires. In honour of whose triumphant Memory and compleated Happiness, a Poet of the times affixed these VVISHES. IN Fine thus Fortune ceas'd to frown, And Passion's stormes were overblown; Our matchless Lovers thus (made free From the foule breath of Calumnie) Rais'd to the Top of their Desires, Quench'd and reviv'd each others Fires. Let then no Torments of the Minde Disturbe their Calme; Let no unkinde Aspect, with Grief or dismall Warre, Their fortunate Conjuncture marre; Supernall Pow'rs, bless their repose, And ne're let Thistles choake this Rose.
Flye from their thoughts Chimera's vaine Of Hatred and Umbragious paine, That their link'd Soules may fully prove The sweets of Pleasure, Peace and Love; And after all their Tempests may Ride safe at Anchor in the Bay. These Surges beeing past and Mindes appeas'd, I hope, like them, my Readers will bee pleas'd. FINIS.
