C6156 R3628 11882959 50343
A COPPIE OF A LETTER, Sent to Lieutenant Generall CRUMVVEL From the Well-affected Partie in the CITY. printer's or publisher's device Printed in the Yeare 1647.
A Copy of a Letter to bee sent to Leiutenant Generall Crumwell, from the well-affected Party in the City. HE that is ignorant of Crumwels Valour and Vertue, let him bee ignorant. He is the Great Councells Eye, the great Generals Hand, Englands, Irelands, nay and Scotlands Wonder. Open thy Gates, O London, and let Crumwel enter, whose Gallant spirit is able to fill thy spacious Roomes, and whose unerring Genius will lead thee to that Religion and Liberty which neither Besse, not Iames, Charles, nor his Parliament had ever so much Happinesse as to dreame of. Hee that is not sufficiently Organized to see thy worth, 'tis not because thou wantest Splendour and Brightnesse; but because he wanteth his Eyes. Hee that is obstinate, and shuts the windowes of his face on purpose, let him neither enjoy the light of the Sun, or which is worse, not the light of thy Countenance. O blessed Crumwell, thou art not onely the finisher of the old Warre; but the Wise, the Valiant Resto∣rer of a new one. A new one, we say: not only in respect of the Cause which is changed from Popery to Presbyterie; But in respect of the Title from Truth and Peace to Truth and Righteousnesse. Formerly we fought for Peace and Truth: But Peace is an old over-worne Malignant Title; and therefore now, as heretofore, waving Peace, wee march on va∣liantly for Righteousnesse sake. And truely Sir, whose∣ever
be our Generall, we unanimously resolve that you shall be our Ring-leader. Our name shall be the New Army; the word Modell is too peaceable a Title: and because we have new lights by your Permission, and new causes by your In∣vention, and a new warre in hand by your Instigation, we will therefore call you not in disgrace (as was Cicero) but in honour by Antiphrasis our Novus Homo, our New-man. We are not ignorant that all your Papers to the Parliament, your humble or high Remonstrance, your particular Charge against the Publick Members have the name of Fairefax before them; it is good policy, to make one man beat the Bush, whilst you catch the Bird; and we wish from our heart, that name may be ominus, othat you may fare & fac, say and doe. But Sir, to our singular comfort, we by experience dare aver, that you are the principall wheele, the Primum movile, that moves and sublimates both him and others to this New, this Brave, this Holy war. Sir Thomas is the Esau, whose rough hands the Parliament feele with great regreat: But you are the Iacob, the supplan∣ter, that carries the Cause smoothly, and like the deep River, though you have most force, yet are you most silent. Pardon us deare Sir, our affection to you hath so farre ravished us, as we forget the Cause for which we write, which shall be concluded in two particulars: 1. In giving of Thanks. 2. In giving, and desiring advice. Now that which is the grand occasion and Argu∣ment of our Thanks, is that long looked for Charge against the eleven Members, who have been as Motes
in our eyes, as thornes in our sides, and have much in∣fringed the liberty of the Saints. We have observed of these 11. Members in generall before the particular Charge came in, that they had been very active to advance Presbyteriall Government, and therefore long ago worthy to be cast out of the House, and exposed to our scorne and infamy; But we are sorry the iniquity of the times is such, that you must be put to so much pains, as to beate your braines for Articles, and that a bare Accusation qua Presbyter. will not serve the turn; you have indeed attainted them boldly (as Machiavell instructs) and we are assured something will sticke by them; But (O) that instead of eleven you had made them a Dozen, that is a Round Number; but in this case the Bakers Dozen which is uneven we hold the better. Truly Sir as we said before, we hope your designe is against Presbytery not Injustice, against corruption in Discipline, not against corruption in Offices, for were it so, you would strike a terrour into your owne Party: now to Charge an Independent with a Presby∣terian that be far from you. Alas Sir, you know we have had the Magazine both of Armes and Treasure, all the Committees and Se∣questrators at our beck, we have placed and displaced, turned the Kingdome of England and Ireland topsie turvy, we have plaid Rex indeed. We displaced Waller, Massie, Mitton, and divers others, and yet continued in C. B. who is B. of C. M. D. N. F. as our owne crea∣tures by that Almighty power which was vested in us, and if justice should now be done these were undone, for they behaved themselves so as some called them not Parliament drivers (as Mr. L. is in your Declara∣tion)
but War drivers, or War contrivers, of which Craft and Trade we hope one day you will be made free. And now Sir, having done with the first Part we come to the first Branch of the second Part, which is giving advice. And to speake freely, as we alwaies do in either our publique or private addresses, we could heartily have wished that you had abstained a while from Particu∣larizing of 4. Persons, not that either their lives or reputation is deare to us, but because they seeme either popular, or else innocent men; your Inke in your Declaration is too little to make them blacke enough, is there not two false witnesses in a whole Army? they say, —Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur venalesque manus— or do we lack a Iezabel instead of a Crumwell to mould the design; You know Massie is generally loved because of his Gallantry; Glyn is a noli me Tangere, because of the City; and as for Harley and Long, I doubt you may stay long enough before you have accusation or proofe sufficient; for may not any man go to the Lady Carliles Lodging, is she or her house a Malignant, or may it not be lawfull for people to assemble, or when two or three Parliament men walke or talke together, is this a designe? beware you speake not a word, in any case which may bring up a scandall upon our conventicles. Besides, what is Mr L? why, you tell us he is a Par∣liament Driver (Peace man, the world is not our own yet) must he therefore by an expresse be driven out of Parliament because he is a Parliament Driver?
The Gallantry of Massie is knowne, because he did once save the Kingdome in saving of Gloucester; and though we conceive he did not fight for the righteous∣nesse of Christ, yet he hated the unrighteous Mam∣mon. Horatius Cocles having defended th' Romans against the three Curiatij alone, though afterwards he killed his Sister, yet was he pardoned by the State for that Noble service which he accomplished for the States; and this Story will be laid in our Teeth. You have almost subdued him in subduing his Ar∣my, and his free Spirit hath made him not worth the fleecing, and therefore it were not amisse we conceive to reprieve him, and picke and choose another Mem∣ber where you please. Glyn is the mouth of the City, and should we think to stop the Cities mouth, (who know us well enough since we searcht the Lord Maiors Pockets to find the King) he would make such a Cry as all the Kingdome would heare, and then Scotland will heare too. As for his Wife if she be unsound, we desire she may be searched by a Jury of Women. Harley is an innocent Puny, a little Bit, and not suf∣ficient to stay our stomacks: We have not time to dally, and with Commodus to kill flies: Besides, we con∣ceive he goes but according to the Liberty of his con∣science, which to maintaine we now take up Armes: Non gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis: Long, as your Pa∣pers shew us, is but a Coward, and that is pardona∣ble, every man is not a Cromwell, or an Ironside; marry if Cowards must be complained of quà Cowards, what shall become of our Saw-pit Lord, or poore Nat. Fines? Now we are come to the last Branch, which shall not
we hope be troublesome to your patience, and that is to crave advice to eight Queres. 1. Whether it be not unseasonable to question men for malignancy while we are a closing with them, as Iudge Jenkins well observes? 2. Whether the Accusation of Eleven Members be suf∣ficient to daunt the whole Body? 3. If love and honour be to be shewen to the King, ac∣quaint us with measure and time, that is, how much and how long? 4. What is further to be acted for the bringing up of our Army into the City? 5. How shall we answer the Objection, that we stand up∣on Puntilios of Honour, whilest in the meane space Ireland lies gasping? 6. How shall we resolve that Objection, that the Army strives to be under pay, and yet strives against obedience? 7. Is there not need of an Index expurgatorius, to blot out all the reverent Titles, all the obedient passages, concerning the Parliament out of our Independent Books? 8. Whether the Assembly of Divines shall not be attain∣ted of High Treason for labouring to introduce a forreigne Power of Government, contrary to the Liberty of free Reli∣gion in this Kingdome? By the appointment of the new Fraternity. Signed Iohn Worth-Rush. Secr. FINIS.
