C7590 08648046 41529
AN ESSAY CONCERNING Church Government, Out of the Excellent WRITINGS OF CALVIN AND BEZA By A. C. M. A. Printed Anno DOM. MDCLXXXIX.
TO THE MODERATE PRESBYTERIAN. WEre Picques and Resentments kindled unto Charity, Prejudi∣ces of Education, and Wordly Designs laid aside, RELIGION preferred to Interest, and the power of Godliness to that of Domi∣nion; then all the powers of Hell endued with the Pharisee him∣self, should never make Protestants of this Reformed Church of Scot∣land divide about matters of Ecclesiastick Government: It is clear to a Demonstration, (such as the Nature of the thing requires) that a President Episcopacy hath the Divine Institution, the Apostolick practice, the Reception of the Primitive Church, and the Solemn Approbation of a Revelation from Heaven: This Demonstration (from Calvin and Beza themselves) is the matter of this Essay; Which I cheerfully offer to your censure and ingenuity; Adding, my Hearty Prayers, That, Our Zion may at length be at unity within her self, serving one Lord, accord∣ing to one Rule, with one Heart, and Mouth, to the Glory of GOD, the joy of Heaven, and all good Men upon Earth; The true happiness of the King and People; The good contentment of our Brethren abroad; And the Melancholy displeasure of the Adversary.
DEFINITIONS I. THE Power of ORDINATION is that Right in the Governours of the CHVRCH,Calvin. Instit: Lib: 4: cap. 4: Sect. 2. This is to be consi∣dered, that on∣ly the Pastors, and not the whole multitude laid on hands on their Ministers at Ordinations. to sepa∣rate Persons duely Qualified, unto the Holy Ministry of the Gospel. II. The power of Iurisdiction is that Right in the Gover∣nours of the Church,Calvin: Titus chap. 1: verse 5: We learn indeed from this place that there was no such Equalitie among the Ministers of the Church. but that some One was pre-eminent in Authority and Council. to make Canons which are wan∣ting, or to Execute those already made, for the Regu∣lation of Church-Members. III. The President Bishop, is he, who from his Office Pre-eminent to other Ministers, is invested with a fix∣ed Power ofCalvin: 2 Tim: chap 1. verse 6. Paul himself declar∣es, That he alone and no other Ministers with him, laid on hands on Timothy. Ordination, Regulated bv Canons, and ofCalvin: Inst: lib: 4: cap: 4: sect: 2: What ever parts the Consul had in the Senate, the same Office did the Bi∣shop alwayes sustain in the Meeting of Presbyters. Jurisdiction, ballanced by assisting Ministers. IV. The Angel of any Church Representative,Beza, Rev: 2: chap: 1: & 24: v: To the Angel, that is, To the President, as whom it behooveth, especially to be admonished, touching those matters; and by him both the rest of his fellow Collegues, and the whole Church likewayes. 24: verse, But unto you, that is, unto you the Angel the President, and the Assmbly of your Collegues, and to the Rest, that is, to the whole Flock. is the President Bishop over the other Ministers, within the Respective Diocess, Province, or Patriarchat.
POSTULATUMS I. THat the 70 Disciples (from among whom Matthi∣as was called,Calvine, Luke 10: chap: I, 16, vers. After the A∣postles had re∣turned to Christ, he sent out moe secondarie Preachers: And this is the great commen∣dation of the outward Ministry; That CHRIST Declares, that whatsoever honour is given to his Faithful Preachers, is given to Himself. to be ordained one of the 12: A∣postles) were Persons in holy Orders in the Ministry. II. That (b) Timothy in the Church of Ephesus,Calvine, 1 Tim: 1: chap. 18: v: &Timothy was not one of the common Ministry, but one next to the Apostles, who in the frequent absence of Paul, was in his place, Titus 1. 5. Beside the ordnary Office of Pastors, Titus had ths charge, that he should constitute a certain Form of Church Politie and Discipline; and likewise ordain Ministers over the Churches. Titus in the Church of Crete, were from their Offices pre∣eminent to other Ministers, invested with a fixed Power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction, regulated by Canons, and ballanced by assisting Ministers. III. That for the avoiding of Schism,Calvin: Inst: lib: 4: cap: 4: sect: 2: Presby∣ters out of their number in all the cities, chose one, to whom especially they gave the title of Bishop; lest from a Parity, as useth to be, Divisions might arise. Ierom sayes, at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist to Heraclas and Dionysius, Presbyters alwayes placed one in a pre-eminent degree, whom they called a Bishop. the Primitive Church retained the Government of one single per∣son, pre-eminent in Office, unto other Ministers. IV. That the 7 Angels of the 7 Churches,Beza, Rev: 2: chap: 26: v: My works, that is, he who shall faithfully per∣form the work laid upon him; For he bespeks the Assembly of Pastors in the person of the President, to whom he promiseth Victory against all the wicked, if he rely and trust in the Authority and Power of that true and only head of the Church. written unto, in the Book of Revelation, are incouraged against all the devices of the ungodly, upon condition of their continuing faithfull in their Administrations.
AXIOMS I. THE Regular Call of any Minister already ordain∣ed,Calvin, 1 Tim: 3: 13: Because in one or two Centu∣ries after the death of the Apostles, it was the constant custom that from the Order of Deacons, the Presbyters were chosen, therefore commonly they have exponed this place, of the Advancement to a Superior Degree. is from an Office of an inferiour, to another of a Pre eminent Station. II. The Pre-eminence in any Office,See Defini∣tion, II. & III. includes a pro∣portioned Jurisdiction, over the Officers who are un∣der them. III. The Divine Right is manifest,Calvin: Inst: ilb: 4: cap: 6: sect: 1: We have not be∣fore touched upon the pri∣macie of the Roman See; whence the Papists strive to prove that the Catholick Church is only with them: be∣cause it hath not taken its Original from CHRISTS institution, nor the custome of the Ancient Church, as the other Offices have done, (viz. Bish: Presb: & Deacon: cap: 4: sect: 1:) mentioned already. in that Ecclesiastick Government which is instituted by Christ, continued by his Apostles, retained in the Primitive Church, and approven from Heaven by Revelation; in sub∣serviency to any end, wherein the well-being of Chri∣stianity is nighly concerned. IV. The want of that Government in the Church,Calvin: Inst: lib 4. cap 8: sect: 2: For nei∣ther the light and heat of the Sun, Meat or Drink are so nourishing and sustaining this present Life, as the Apo∣stolick and Ministerial Office, for preserving of a Church upon Earth. which is of Divine Right, is pernicious to the Gospel, and Christian Religion.
PROPOSITION I. The twelve Apostles were President Bishops over the 70. Disciples. Demonstration. THe President Bishop is he who from his Office Pre-eminent to other Mini∣nisters, is invested with a fixed power of Ordination, Regulated by Ca∣nons, and of Iurisdiction ballanced by assiting Ministers; (by Definition III.) But in respect to the 70 Disciples, who were all in the holy Ministry, (by Postulatum I.) and from among whom Matthias was called to be of the 12. (by Postulatum I.) The scred College of, the Apostles had a fixed Pre-eminence (by Axiom I.) Invested with the power of Ordination regulated by Canons; (by Postulatum I: and Definition I:) And of Iurisdiction bal∣lanced by Assisting Mnisters; (by Axiom II.) Therefore the 12. Apostles were President Bishops over the 70. Disciples, which was the thing to be Demon∣strated. PROPOSITION II. Timothy was a President Bishop over the Church of the Ephesians; and Titus over the Church of the Cretians. Demonstration. These are President Bishops who are from thei Office Pre-eminent to other Ministers, invested with a fixed power of Ordination, Regulated by Canons; and of Iurisdiction ballanced by assisting Ministers; (by Definition III.) But Ti∣mothy in the Church of Ephesus, and Titus in the Church of Crete, from their Offices had a pre-eminence over other Ministers, invested with a fixed power of Ordination and Iurisdiction, Regulated by Canons, and Ballanced by Assisting Ministers; (by Postulatum II.) Therefore Timohy was a pre∣sident Bishop over the Church of the Ephesians, and Titus over the Church of the Cretians. Which was to be Demonstrated. PROPOSITION III. The Fathers of the Primitive Church were President Bishops. Demonstration. The Primitive Church retained the Government of one single person, pre-emi∣nent in Office unto other Ministers; (by Postulatum III.) But the pre-eminence
in any Office includes a proportioned Iurisdiction over the Officers who are un∣der them; (by Axiom II.) And the power of Iurisdiction is fixed in the president Bishop, (by Definition III.) Therefore the Fathers of the Primi∣tive Church were president Bishops. Which was to be Demonstrated. PROPOSITION IV. The President Episcopacy is approven by CHRIST in the Book of the Revelation. Demonstration. The 7: Angels of the 7: Churches written unto by St: John, in the Book of the Revelation, are incouraged against all the devices of the ungodly, upon condition of their continuing faithful in their Administrations; (by Postula∣tum IV.) But these Angels were president, Bishops over other Ministers with∣in their respective Churches; (by Definition IV.) Therefore the president E∣piscopacy is approven by CHRIST, in the Book of the Revelation. Which was to be Demonstrated. COROLLARIE I. The President Episcopacy is of Divine Right. Demonstration. The Divine Right is manifest, in that Ecclesiastick Governuent which is instituted by CHRIST, and continued by his Apostles, retained in the Pri∣mitive Church, and approven by CHRIST, by a Revelation from Heaven, for subserviency to any end, wherein the well-being of Christianity is nighly concerned; (by Axiom III.) But the President Episcopacy was instituted by CHRIST; (by Proposition I.) Continued by His Apostles; (by Proposi∣tion II.) Retained in the Primitive Church; (by Proposition III.) And approven by CHRIST, by a Revelation from Heaven; (by Proposition IV.) For avoiding of Schism wherein the well-being of Christianity is nighly con∣cerned; (by Postulatum III.) Therefore the President Episcopacy is of Divine Right. Which was to be Demonstrated.
COROLLARIE II. The want of the President Episcopacy is prejudicial to the cause of CHRIST. Demonstration. The want of that Government in the Church, which is of Divine Right, is pernicious to the Christian Religion; (by Axion IV.) But the President Episcopacy, is that Government in the Church which is of Divine Right; (by the preceeding Corollarie.) Therefore the want of the President Episcopacy is prejudicial to the cause of CHRIST. Which was to be Demonstrated.
