D1765A R33457 13356135 99242
Dr. Robert VVild's LAST LEGACIE, OR A POEM SENT With a Guinney to Mr. B. D. for a New-years-Gift. December 30. 1678. SIr, since the Proclamation from the King, For apprehending any Man, or Thing Of whom we may be jealous▪ I have got One able to Discover all the Plot▪ By the Great Cross he weareth, you will see Ground to suspect, he Catholick may be. Long hidden in a Corner he had been, And loth I found him to be known or seen: His Words but few, and those in Latine too; What you can make of him, I pray you do: For though he sets a Good Face on the Thing, And pleads that he hath Count'nance from the King, (As too too many Counterfeits, you know Delude and cheat the World by pleading so) He is no Native; but from foreign Parts Came over to bewitch our English hearts. Seiz'd on as soon as landed, and convey'd Into the Tower, and there a Priz'ner made; There he was Tri'd, & Cast: Thence made Escape, And now goes Currant under Royal Shape: Yet you'l suspect him by his Blushing so, For that's an Argument of Guilt, you know. He goes by Name of Guinney; new-coin'd names, And new-nam'd Coins are Jesuitish Games; Give me old Gold, with English names; like these Crowns, Nobles, Angels, and Jacobusses.
I must not be misconstru'd, let him wear The Image of the Lawrel he doth bear, And never given to change; may no Disaster Ever prevail to make him change his Master▪ For I prefer, and so all Subjects True, An Old Jacobus far before A New: It is the Matter, not the Form I charge; And here in his Impeachment might be large, As far as from one Indie to the other, Against both Gold and Silver his pale Brother. We find St. Peter in the daies of Old (That was the Golden-Age that hated Gold;) Had neither Gold nor Silver, but when they Usurp'd the Chair, they banish'd Faith away: And when these once forsake the Tripple Crown, Both Pope and Popery must tumble down. 'Tis these set men together by the Ears, Put Difference 'twixt the Commons and the Peers: These have the great Command at Sea & Land, They Raise the Army, they can it Disband: They Hatch'd and Brooded the late curst Intent, To Kill the King, and Change the Government. For them — vote, by them they Rise, 'Tis Love to them, upholds Pluralities. For them the Lawyers brawl; They fool the Wise: They cast a Mist before the Judge's Fyes: They pay the Pensioner, the Pimp, the Miss: They brought the Treasurer to what he is. If they don't fetch him off, off flies his Head. And who can help't, They cannot raise the Dead. Their Charge is infinite, I must give over, Let Praunce the Silver-smith the rest Discover. Mean time, do you Sir under Lock and Key Keep Guinney safe, for fear he steal away, For if but once he can get out of Door, Twenty to one, you never see him more. London, Printed for A. B.
