D1994 R36098 15603078 104069
GREAT BRITTAINS VISITATION. By the Lady ELEANOR. printer's or publisher's device Printed in the Yeare, 1645
THE APOCALYPS PROLOGVE. WHerein a revolution or returne, Exprest, as in those dayes it came to passe, when as City and Countrey opprest so: By such an univer∣sall imposed taxx: Inns so full that for our only Saviour to be borne in. No place but an open Stable afforded: And thus like the truth
which no Corners or Curtaines requires. The joyfull tydings they in the wide field, First saluted with them: Shepheards that kept watch the glory from the Lord by night which shone round about them. So lastly at his second comming, or returne also reveald to be afore hand, the watch∣full Pastors saluted: ouer Spirituall Flocks from him, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the morning Starre and evening both: the first and the last. As this the Lord of Sabbaths Angel whose countinance as the Sun, and lighted at the evening of time with the seven Starrs, &c. And Golden Candle∣sticks all watch Lights round about him, even so farther for the little Booke of Life, who had its Swadle-Bands (as it were un∣loosd: with Seven fold Seales bound so fast up, when wonderfull acclamation such in hea∣ven
& Earth (Revel. 5) as came to passe with the Angel; a multitude of the Heaven∣ly Host suddainly praising God: Luke 2 such Corispondencie ever between the Son of God, and Gods Word which for ever and ever in∣dures. Maugre the Old Serpents malice. And his Angels, let loose againe, as in the dayes of the Gospels first progresse. And therefore to say the truth, Though the Bottomlesse pit freely opend, no wonder: affording beside evill Spirits their Fellowship, Munition also of all Kinds, And the winds let loose out of their Prisons, And Wrathfull Vialls the last powrd out, Who shall commisserate their Condition? when open house or Court (as it were) kept in Heaven, inviting all, Darkenesle notwith∣standing preferd at last shall be before Light: Like those frivolous and light excuses made of marriage: its mutability preferd above the
estate of Angels: And before eternall life: Farmes their Leases or the like, as sold their life in blessed Paradice for such a toy. Thus no marvel, although the infernall pit opend, where those Legions of Wormes or Locusts swarming out. Our Pruining Hookes have turnd into Swords, our union into divi∣sion; And so much for these present vigilent dayes of ours from which nothing conseald is, or hidden, even the things in the little golden booke as with no little expedition are presented here.
THE REVELATION OF JESVS CHRIST Interpreted. SHews how ONE Isle calls unto ano∣ther, The Jle of Pathmos, unto the Iles of Great Brittaine. The great day of the Lords com∣ming revealing it: Whereof let the Jsles be glad, Now or Ne∣ver.
Of whose Visitation from him which is, and which was, and which is to come: what date the time beares, the first witnesse these, And from the seven Spirits in sight of the Throne or nearest there unto, vers. 4. Which as it signifies or figures the present Century, or the last seven hundred years Also points at the present reigne, when it began, about Easter, witnesse these: And from Jesus Christ the first begotten of the dead, And the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Ʋnto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his owne Blood, verse 5. Even as two for failing can
witnesse, Sonne and Father both: crown'd or created Kings, about the aforesaid Resurrection feast kept, concluded thus: And hath made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever Amen. verse 6. Behold he com∣meth, &c. as much to say, the last father and sonne of that kind from the Conquest: since when hath been 24. of them, making up the blessed Prophets and A∣postles number. And so farewell the blessed yeares of Grace, and time to be longer as in the yeare 1625. was
revealed to his Hand-maid, the first yeare of his reigne, to whom the day of Judgement being at hand de∣clared: was dedicated in a booke by her: And the generall Resur∣rection to bee in his dayes as from the Prophet Daniels mouth given to understand: concerning the aforesaid time: And at that time shall the great Prince Mi∣chael stand up, which standeth for the children of the people or defender of the Faith, even Great Brittaines troublesom time, pointing thereat with the plagues pursuing one another for mortality as never since a Nation the like: Of whose Jnauguration or standing up
at the aforesaid Resurrection feast thus signified: Many of them that sleepe in the dust of the Earth shall wake, some to everlasting life, &c. Dan. 12. And for a faithfull witnesse So goe thy way Daniel, as no few in their Mother Earths Bosome dayly take up their lodging of free cost, till Michael his a∣larme awakens them, where also the yeare 1625. (untill which dayes Daniels visions to waite) Thus cast up two Hundred & ninety daies and three hundred and five and thirty, 625. (Dan. 12.) But going on with John whose
name to no Nation better known then unto Ours, who stiles him∣selfe your Brother and compani∣on in tribulation, in the Isle that is called Patmos, where confi∣ned was on the Lords day visited by the Holy Ghosts Angel, the First voice saying, J am Alpha and Omega, and what thouseest write in a Booke and send it, &c. Wher∣upon being turned, saw that dreadfull appearance, ONE all looking from head to foot like fire, that stood in the midst of those candle stickes of Gold, and ther∣upon falling dead at his feet by a touch of his Septer, the seven Starrs in his right hand, being a∣againe
revived come to himselfe: was againe charged to write the things to come, the mistery of the seven starres which he saw in his hand, the Lord of Sabbath Even to display times Coate by CHARLES Waggon or Wayne, to wit the seventh present Cen∣tury, about the midst of it, even to looke for the generall Resur∣rection time, as present, past, and future here with times voice te∣stified from him which is, and which was, and is to come. Wherefore in the day of Judge∣ments likenesse was presented unto him the Booke of the Old and new
Testament, that Alpha and Omega: Whose Body as it were clothed and girt. The Bible in gilt paper bound with brasse Clasps which in such a yeare beares date, 1700. When interpreted the booke of the Revelation as whatsoever spoken in darkenesse or in the Eare assur'd to be made cleare as the light. And he that hath an eare let him heare what the Spirit of prophesie saith, and in time repent and a∣mend, or expect a blow for his paines, when he stands at the doore and knocks so long, the Comforter sent saying, behold J come quickly. And he shall Sup, and sit with mee that hears my voice opens the doore.
CAP. 4. THough hastning with win∣ged time: yet some more Evidence requisit in this a matter of such weight the day of judge∣ment: And so shewes a doore opened here, as much to say, Nothing conseald or hidden, as hea∣vens cathederall shewed here, the voice saying come up heither, J will shew thee things to come. The Resur∣rection propheticall alarme veri∣ly, like that afore, J am he that was dead and am alive, &c. and have the Keyes, &c. First saw where the ancient of dayes sate,
Inthroned under a Canopey, raine bowe like: Where all in Priestly Vestments round about those Elders with restlesse Thunde∣ring voices extolling his name who lives for ever and ever. And Holy, Holy, Holy, crying out as it were glory be to the Father, &c. Amen. For whose pleasure all things created. As for the lamps before the Throne, to wit the year of God call'd the seven Spirits of God, of the same influence with the seven Stars, requires no far∣ther repetition being both one: Neither these in the likenes here of Saints and Angels, in Hea∣ven whose wings so full of eyes be∣fore
and behind signifying those eye witnesses their watchfullnesse and as personating the blessed Prophets and Evangelists: So lastly far∣ther for the mysterie or morall of these crown'd Elders expresly shews, How many intered Princes in this Isle since the conquest which in the space of seven hundred yeares last past in Alablaster Shrowds clothed, That have cast their Crownes before the Throne or before the great day.
CAP. 5. ANd without boasting or amplifying, these the truth in few words: This blessed Booke first cryed, He that hath an eare let him heare. And here by a strong An∣gel proclam'd: Who is worthy to o∣pen the booke in the right hand of him sitting upon the Throne: No other then the misterie of times and sea∣sons, in the yeare of the worlds Redemption, 1625. to be reveald or unseald. And because this so difficult (no man found worthy &c.) John that therfore much wept, by that Elder willed to weep no
more. Jnformed ECCELEO radix David, vicet, to open the booke and loose the sevenfold seales: being not improper to explain this like∣wise, as he said, J am Joseph, so am I David, This name of mine enterd here: by that Elder even Daniel, as much to say, Goe thy way Iohn, let those words satisfie thee spoken to Daniel: The words are sealed up untill the time of the end, Thou shalt stand in thy lott, &c. (Dan. 12.) Reservd till a time and times and halfe: Poin∣ting to the present Century so signified in behalfe of it, three pe∣riods and a part, &c. So dignus est agnus, viz. Anno
Domini, in such a yeare of our Re∣demption, the first yeare of such a reigne. These Sabbaticall Seales unloosed witnesse, For thou hast redeemed us and made us Kings and Prophets and we shall reigne. Even so let every Creature in the sea, namely the Isles Blesse those right hand yeares, with that Grand Iury, the 24. Elders before the Throne falling down. VVho give up their Verduit, Davids Keye hath prevaild ho∣nour, glory, and blessing, &c.
CAP. 6. ANd the Sonne of Thunder this fourth Evangelist that heard the day of Judgements Sommons, The noise of thunder as it were, one of the seven Seales being unloosed: One of the foure Beasts saying come and see. As much to say, display'd times and seasons mistery: Jn the seventh Century, And unto what Nation, this new Song of the Lords comming de∣dicated: as no unnecessary cir∣cumstance time, a thing observed of old, when the word of the Lord came unto them.
For evidence hereof the Con∣querer & Rufus, here behold their ancient Seales: Where first saw a White Horse, and He that sate on him a Bowe, and a Crowne given un∣to him. The English bowe re∣noun'd farr and neere: (verse 2.) Whereby cleere as day given to understand the Sonne of God re∣veald out of the Scripture to these very Jsles. Wherefore listen O Jsles. And this misterie of time sea∣led with the yeares foure seasons, their discriptions, The Sun like a Conquerour: and Gods word like the Sunne which overcomes whatsoever Dispells all darkenesse, saying:
He that hath an eye come and see: The worlds eye, like an expert Horseman upon his Carreer: running his restlesse course about, who first enters the victorious crowned yuory Ramme, the Wholesome Spring more then Gold to be embraced, the Odorifferous Spring giving to every creature Life. The second Rider so furious, he on the Red Horse, giving all one word, Come and see: Not difficult to be discern'd, the Crabb at all points armed, Summers scor∣ching rayes: when red as fire all: Slaying in Armes as it were with Sythes and such like no short weapon.
The third a Blacke Horse, he that sate on him, a paire of Ballance in his hand, in his proper colours and complexion signified not inferior to his fellowes, as Automes voice cleeres it, who these Celestiall Horsemen, or Riders were, a voice heard in the midst of them, say∣ing, A measure of Wheat for a peny, and three measures of Barley. And hurt not the wine and oyle, even the Sun in his circuit passing by the Equinoctiall, weighing equall houres to day and night: Thus all the world come and behold also the fourth seasons misterie, ex∣plained in this new Calender or Prognostication.
The fourth a pale Horse, he that sate one him called Death. Or like the last day so gastly and paile the grizled Goate with his Beard. Hoary Winter its wann vi∣sage that starvs with hunger young and old, shaking every Limbe. And these Characters poin∣ting at those foure Beasts, Aries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorne, Like as the foure Evangelist. By winged Beasts foure, full of eyes. Which Motto, come and see, may serve them to which rests not Day nor Night. And after foure of the Seales
opened the mistery shewd of the foure seasons, the Suns restlesse course (to say) finish'd. The next offer'd to considerations veiw, in this Story or Treatise, is the blessed case of those poore Soules in∣treated a little Season to rest: till their Fellow Souldiers and Brethren killed as they, VVhose Blood for the Testimony they held crying so loud, How long Lord, &c. to wit, to the day of venge∣ance, as behold defferd no longer the day of Iudgement immediat∣ly which followes in its dread∣full likenesse, when as fullfild, white robes given likewise to the rest of their brethren arrayed,
(to wit) in cleane Shrowds. Then Time to his untimely end comes, whose thride of life suddainly cutt off, of whose sable Hearse thus, & what mourners accompanying the corps of time, about 44. aged in the midest of his dayes: First the qua∣king Earth Mother of all in such a consumption. The Sunn next as blacke as Sackcloth of haire, coverd all over. And the Moone over watched with her red face looking like blood, the condole∣ling Heavens shedding their stars in stead of teares as fast, impati∣ent windes as loud: their shrill Throat setting forth, ready to
rent all assunder with Sighes hollow Grones. So all departing as they came: the Heavens as it were quartering those Ancient Coates the foure Sea∣sons, which were like Scutchens roled up together like a Scrole: The Islands carried away with the violence of the Seas uproare: Each acting a part, the Kings and Great men ring∣ing out such a Peale, all flying a∣way and hyding themselves for the great day of his wrath to come as who able to stand, routed all, surprised in such a moment darkenesse.
CAP. 7. ANd these like Iacobs Ladder reaching at last to Heaven Gate: (Ascendentem abortusolis:) Behold saw foure Angels stan∣ding on the foure Corners of the Earth holding the foure Winds that they should not blow, &c. Even gives to understand in what year the Finall blow, saying: hurt not, &c. till we have sealed so many, And there were sealed a hundred forty and foure, &c. of the ser∣vants of God in the fore heads, as much to say, the yeare of God, 1644. when compleat, then the
disolution comes quickly or is at hand. And thus like the Covenant of late sealed, whereso many names also the months of the yeare, setting their hands at it were twelve times twelve. verse 4. And as including the yeare compleat or accomplished, 44. till when those pernitious winds restrayned not to hurt the Earth nor any Tree: So Aludes to that fruitlesse tree after the fourth yeare to be for borne, no longer interceded, for in the Gospel. Wherefore Sir, these are to let you know it is spo∣ken to your Majestie, the last of those crowned foure and twenty
Elders, being full forty foure aged, and reigning since aged 24. saying Sir thou knowest who they are, verse 14. That Albion Regiment, these Folke in white Robes fleeced and famished as yee see, the very condition of Prisoners taken by you: The Prophet Jsaiah gives notice of it, They are his words too, Listen O Jsles, &c. 49. Cap. That thou mayest say to the Prisoners goe forth, to them that are in darkenesse they shall hun∣ger and thirst no more, neither shall heat nor Sun any more smite them, for the Lambe in the midest of the Throne having the seven eyes,
which are the seven spirits of God, shall wipe away all teares from their eyes. And more over for these words aforesaid, as serving for the midest of the Century, about the yeare, 44. So points at the very halfe yeare, about Michael the Arch Angells Feast, the aforesaid Blow, or last Blow, there about till when those hurtfull winds restrained, Mi∣chaelmas riggs so called. As aforeshewed forbidden to hurt the VVine and the Oyle: all speaking as it were with Au∣tomns boysterous voice, a greater Blow then great Babylons, when that hand writing appeared, wri∣ten
by that Angels hand, that Prince affrighting and his nume∣rous Peers, not a little. CAP. 8. ANd like as about halfe an houre after the clocke had stricken, shews about the space of halfe an houre there was silence in Hea∣ven, after the seales were opened which imports not only when a vacancie in the Church. These Angels their standing before God then, preparing themselves to sound, but shews withall a space of time allotted to repent of their contempts stood in, and cruelties before his
men of warre sent forth. But the marriage of the Lambe being ready they unworthy that were bidden: The censure fil'd with Alter Coales is cast downe the curse defer'd no longer, the a∣foresaid seven Angels so highly preferd, sound fire and sword, woe to Land and Sea. And so the great Ship its being lanchd forth, shewed at large, ver. 12. likened to Etnas burning mountaine with like Sulpharous smoaks smiting of Sunne Moone, and Starrs, the third part: and with such a spacious Lampe like a Starre even well named Worme∣wood: verily the Arch Bishops Cha∣recter,
His lanching out or ad∣vancing both goes together: Bishops and Ships able both to choake all with their smoakes and the like. The very root of bitternesse made of it, and this the meaning of this unluckey Starrs falling burning as a lamp. The contriver of this third king∣doms cumbustion this aforesaid high Officer in the Church, also with the yeare of God 1633. Sep∣tember accompanied, when he tran∣stated as in truth this Prognosticati∣on serves from the yeare 1625. untill 44. compleat. The third Angells pro∣claimes it: Witnesse Woe, woe, woe, treble woes to the Earths Jnhabitants
to wit, England, Scotland and Jre∣land. And so much for these An∣gels alarme imparted concer∣ning the third part of creatures in the Sea distroied: and the third part of Ships. And the third part of the lights of Heaven smitten, and to slay the third part of men, Saying come and see or behold great Brittains Mapp, as visible as the Heavens foure Seasons shewd in the Calender. Even Lucifers being cast downe lik lightning in our dayes First the Arch Bishop in whose custodie the Keys of the AByss power given him to imprison, Levie Taxes, wage warre at his
pleasure, the loose Reines laid on his Necke that breake his owne the portion of that aspiring Hypo∣crite full of the misterie of Jniquitie: And so much for the misterie of that malevolent Starre. CAP. 9. PRoceeding one with these calculated for this Kingdom shewing, as Heaven open'd and those horsemens comming pro∣claim'd come and see. Also open'd the bottomlesse pit, ecclipsing the Sun and Ayre, set open by him the Sonne and Heire of perdition, father of that generation of Vipers: So Dragons and Deeps, like the evill spirits confesse and praise God when men faile. For
discovering whose comming at hand the day of judgements stan∣ding at the doore, the very cur∣rent coine demonstrated of this Kingdome all horsemen, money made their Gold that odored Masse occasion of evills all, Beget∣ting such uunatur all doings, Warrs, and Jmprisonments, desired death where it flees away, of late like Hell throng'd as full every where. Of which flying current halfe crowne pei∣ces Currentium in Bellum, with Crownes on their heads, what peices of Plate they are no need to aske or goe farre to inquire, whose Image with deformed haire, Hermo∣phradite Locks, none of that mayden Queens doubtlesse with
Breast plates all, &c, such tor∣menting doings and Dolers un∣knowne in her dayes. And so much for those signes with that star of the bottomlesse pitt in the likenesse of Scorpio and Sagitarious, with faces like men, but as the nose in the face or the like so difficult whose to discerne, whose su∣perscription or discription, & with our old Gold plainly called the An∣gel of the aforesaid AByss (that Distroyer) not without a double signification like those names, Abbadon and Apollyon, giving to understand withall as under the Angels feet the Scorpion or Dra-Anglia giving the Angells name fatall to the Old Serpent to receive there his fall.
And here one woe is past (The sower of debate and divi∣sion Anatamiz'd) And two woes more comming after, passing over how farre Civill warre exceeds other. the Navyes preparation comes next, those winged Horses of the Seawith Lyons heads and Serpents tayles. The winds withall prepared for an houre, a day, amoneth, and a yeare, which Angels foure com∣manded to be loosed bound in the East as it were: or Babylons great river Euphrates, not only points at that suddain hand wri∣ting sent but to the yeare of 1644. past as much to say, then the third woe the day of judgement comes after or quickly, like a
Theise. Of which Horse men even bound in the narrow Seas say∣ing. He heard the number of them or list of their names, with fire and smoake and Brimstone issuing out of their tayles the very firie Lake, to behold with stinging great Gunns or peices chargd as here peices of all kinds numberd, of late since discovered the Jndies, And so farre for a discoverie of the time also, and these serving to explaine the rest: And the rest of the men that were not killed, &c: (verse 20.) repented not that they should not serve Divels of Gold and Silver, &c. (Daemonia) neither repented they of their
though not unforetold how bitter a pille it would prove: So might be in∣fisted on his writing to a LADIE (wil∣ling her) not to salute with God speed them of the faction of Antichrist. But unwilling to be voluminus to intrude too farr on the bounds of patience in distracted times. FINJS.
