D2681A R218196 99835116 39774
ART and NATURE JOYN HAND in HAND. Or, The Poor Mans daily Companion. Wherein is shew'd for TWO PENCE Charge, how you may Cure any Distempers Incident to HUMANE BODYS: As first, The Magical and Physical Vertues of Beasts and Birds, of Trees and Herbs, Charms to cure Agues, the true time for gathering of Herbs, at the right Planetary Hours for Ever, and their Vertues for curing of most Diseases Astrologically; A brief Treatise of Urines, as well of Mens as of Wo∣mens, to judge by the Colour which betokneth Health, which Sickness, and which Death; Also to judge the Danger of falling Sick by the Age of the Moon; Also a Charme to know whether the Sick Party shall Live or Die; Also to cure the Kings Evil, with a Rule to know the Kings Evil: Against Wry-Necks, Quartane Agues, for one that cannot make Water; how to make the true Antidote Powder cal∣led, The Orvietane of Rome: To take away Pearls, and Films from the Eyes; Elixir Vitae, or, Elixir of Life, Gascoynes Powder, the Royal Styptick Water, which stops Blood in an instant, also good for Wa∣tery Eyes, Rheumatick Eyes, Inflamations in your Eyes, Pin, or Web, and strengthens them to Admirati∣on; with many other things worthy of Note. By John Durant, Student in Physick and Astrology. London, Printed for Sam. Clark, in George-yard, in Lombard-street, 1697.
THE Magical and Physical VERTUES OF BEASTS and BIRDS. Of the Hare. THe Heart of a Hare dried, and worn about the Neck cureth the Cramp; and Drunk in Wormwood-Water, cureth all the Worms in the Stomach or Belly. Of the Mole, or Want. The Bones of a Dog Want sewed up in Silk, and worn about the Neck, causeth a Woman to Conceive. Of the Tortoise. Take the Shell of a Tortoise Egg, and wear it about you, and all that while you shall never have desire of Venery. Of a Ram. He being a Creature of the Sun, and if he
be Knock'd down, or Kill'd at any of those times, when Herbs of the Sun is to be gather'd, as shall be shewn hereafter at large, and Rings made of the Horns, and one put on the Finger next the little Finger on each Hand, cures the Cramp to Admiration. Of a Magpye. Being a Bird of Mars, if it be kill'd at any of those times when any Herbs of Mars are to be gathered, and the Brains of it taken out and dryed to Powder, and put into white Wine, and the Wine drunk, if any one hath not Pissed in three or four days, within an hour it causeth them to Piss abundantly. Of a Hedg-Sparrow. Being a Bird of Venus, and killed at any of those times as afore was shewn, and Salted well, and eaten Raw, is one of the best Re∣medys to cure the Stone in the Reins or Bladder, or Vritory Passages. Of the Land Toad. Take a great Toad, kill him, and put him into a Horse Dung-hill, there let him lie, and the Ants will consume the Flesh; in the Head you shall find a thing like a Stone, great or little, the which being set in Gold, and worn about a Man or Woman, it doth give them warning of any Mischief, or Ill to them, that weareth it, by changing Colours in divers manners. Of a Spider. Take a Spider and shut it up close in a Wal∣nut-Shell, and wear it about you, cures an Ague to Admiration.
Of a Stag. The Horns of a Stag kill'd in October, and being dryed, and one Dram thereof taken, doth cause one to Vomit. And take the Bones of his Heart, being kill'd in May, and worn about one who hath the Falling-Sickness, cureth him in a very short time; it cureth the Passion of the Heart; and is a very wholesome thing. And being taken for a Fume, doth cure the Fits of the Mother. Of the Row-Buck. Take the Horns of him and make Beads thereof, and wear them about your Neck, or Wrists, it causeth Coception; and if a Men weareth the same, he shall not have his natu∣ral course of Seed, though he be with a Woman. Of the Squirrel. Take his Fore Teeth and wear them, and you shall never be troubled with the Cramp. Of the Water Rat. Take his Shin and Dry it and Dress it as a Furr, and being worn about a Woman, it cu∣reth the Mother. His Bones beaten to Powder doth the same effect being Drunk; and it stops the Ʋrine of them that have no Retention, and whose Water goeth from them by Day and Night.
The Magical vertue of Trees and Herbs. The Pine Tree. THE Pine-Aples being gathered when they are full Ripe, the Kernels being worn by any, the said Party shall have no Lice a∣bout him. The same do cause a Woman to her Terms. The Salt of Pine-Apples is an excel∣lent Medicine for divers things, especially for the Stone and Strangury. Of the Orange Tree. Take the Leaves of the Tree and carry them in a little Bag bound to the Navel, and it will cause a Woman speedily to Conceive, and al∣so to keep in the Conception or Child. The Leaves powdered and drank in White Wine, cureth the Green Sickness; and stopeth the overflowing of the Seed: The Juice of Oranges Pounded, and the Peels Distilled, is very good for the Stone, with Fennel Seed, Pursey Seed, an Ounce, of Dill Seed, half an Ounce. Of the Nutmeg Tree. Take a Nutmeg that hath the Mace on him, and sew it in a Linnen Bag, and bind it about a Womans Leg, and another to her Navel, and it causeth speedy Delivery; It will also cure the Squinancy, if it be worn about the Neck: The Rind of this Tree Boyled in fair Water and drunk, stops all kind of Fluxes. Of the Pomegranate Tree. Take the Juice of a Pomgranate, and one part of the Kernels, and of Rose Water two
parts, and put it together, and give it to a young Child who Sucks, being sweetned with Sugar, it doth firmly knit the Navel, and keep him from a Rupture; but this said Juice and In∣gredients must be first twice Distilled. Of the Lemmon Tree Take a green Lemmon and wet it in Wine Vinegar, and sew it in a Bag, and bind it to the Nape of the Neck, and immediately stops the Bleeding. Of the Sassafras Tree. This is an Excellent Tree, and of Divers Vertues, his Magical vertues are by his Smell, and that is for the Megrim and such like pains of the Head; and most Excellent against the Falling Sickness. The Decoction of Sassafras is a great dryer, it cureth the Rheum; the Salt of it is a very Excellent thing for many Dis∣eases, but especially for Morbus Gallicus, the Dose is half a Dram in Butter, to be taken in a Pill or two. Of the Yew Tree. The Berries of a Yew Tree dried, and worn in a little Bag about the Neck, doth wonder∣fully help the Trembling of the Heart, and is good against the Kings Evil, and stayeth Bleed∣ing at the Nose; one Dram of the Powder of them being taken in Drink, doth stop Fluxes, the Running of the Reins; also it cureth the Scalding of the Ʋrine. Of the Lime Tree. Take a piece of a Fingers breath, of the big∣ness and square of the Timber of this Tree,
and if any one be Hurt, or Bleed at the Nose, write his Name on one side of the Stick, and on the contrary side the Charactor of OR, then burn the Stick, and it ceastth Bleeding Immediately. Of the Wild Ash Tree. Take a cluster of the Green Berries and con∣vey them about the Party Suspected to be a Witch, and then examine her, and she will confess. Take a cluster of the same Berries and hang them about a Horse Neck, and it will cure him of the Farcy or Fashions. Take three Ripe Berries of the said Tree, and pound them, and give them in White Wine, and it doth absolutely cure the Yellow Jaundice. Of the Service Tree. The Fruit of it dryed and worn about the Neck stoppeth Bleeding; it causeth a Woman to keep her Child in the Womb, and not to Miscarry. Of the Mandrake Apple The Mandrake green Apple being worn about the Neck of the Party that hath a Wen, even as the Apple doth wither, so shall the Wen. Of the great French Mallows. Take of his Seeds and Lace them upon a Thread, and being worn about the Arms and Neck, it helpeth the Ague and Cramp; and bound about the gathering place of a Woman in Travel, it causeth speedy Delivery; the small Mallow is better than great, it suppleth and looseth; it is very good for a Bruise, and it is of a very cold Nature.
Of the Mouse-ear. Take of the Leaves of Mouse-ear, being an Herb of the Moon, and dry them, and being worn about a Man or Woman, no Infection can take hold of the Party. Of Angelica. Take the Roots of Angelica and dry them hard, then cut them in square slices, and Lace them on a Silk Thread like to a Bracelet, and wear them about the Arm or Neck, and it keepeth away all Infection from the Body, and cureth the Spleen; and it will cause a Woman to Conceive. Of St. John's wort. This Herb being gathered when the Sun is in Aries, and then presently dryed, and made into fine Powder, and worn about the Neck in a Silk Bag, doth cure the Squinsey, the Mumps, the Megrim, and Disi∣ness of the Head. Of Carduus Benedictus. The Down of Carduus being scraped into a little Bag, and worn about the Neck, doth cure the Kings Evil if it be not yet broken; it cureth also the Swelling of the Throat. Of Valerian. Take the Roots of Valerian, and cut them in pretty thick pieces like a Die, and dry them in an Oven, then Lace them on a Thread, and wear them about the Arms as a Bracelet, it will cure the Cramp; and it is exceeding good for the Shaking Palsey; and being bound about the Leg of a Woman, causeth her to
have speedy Delivery, and it causeth a Wo∣man to have her Monthly Visiter. Against the Head-ach. ℞ The Herb that groweth upon the Head of an Image, and it cureth the Head-ach by its Magical Vertue. Of Sparagus, an Herb of Jupitur. The Root being applyed and kept upon the Tooth, draws it forth without Pain. Of Penony under the Sun. The Root being hung in Childrens Neck, is good against the Convulsion Fits, Pyrathrum, or St. Anthonies Fire, doth the same. Of the Swallow. You shall find in young Swallows, taken at the Encrease of the Moon, and if you siit them by the Belly you'l find two little Stones, one of one colour, and the other of divers, which being tied in a piece of Calues Skin, and hung on the Neck, is good against the Episepsie, and cures it. Of Plantane under Venus. Plantane Roots being worn about the Neck, are good against the Kings Evil, and doth Dis∣solve it.
MAGICAL CHARMES. For an Ague. WHEN Jesus went up to the Cross to be Crucified, the Jews asked him, saying, Art thou affraid, or hast thou an Ague; Jesus answered and said, I am not affraid, neither have I the Ague, but all those which beareth the Name of Jesus about them, shall not be affraid, nor have the Ague, Amen, Sweet Jesus, Amen, Sweet Je∣hovia, Amen. Another. There came two Angels from the East, the one brought Fire, the other brought Frost, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, out Frost, in Fire. Another. Write these Characters in a piece of Parch∣ment, and wear them about you, and they are these following, Abracadabra. Abracadabr. Abracadab. Abracada. Abracad. Abraca. Abrac. Abra. Abr. Ab. A.
Or else take all the Nailes paring of the Toes and Fingers of any Man or Woman, lying Sick of an Intermittent Feaver, and to mix or Incor∣porate them with Wax, so as the Party in the doing hereof do say these words, I am about a Remedy for the Tertian, Quotidian, or Quar∣taine Ague, according as the Patient is trou∣bled with the one or other of these Feavers, which done and said, to stick up the Wax upon the Door of another Man or Womans House that is not Sick at all, and that before the Sun be Risen, which no doubt will cure the Sick Person, and set the Ague or Feaver upon the well Person.
Planetary Hours.   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Sunday ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ Sunday Night. ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ Munday. ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ Munday Night. ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ Tuesday. ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ Tuesday Night. ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ Wednesday. ♀ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ Wednesday Night. ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ Thursday. ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ Thursday Night. ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ Friday. ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ Friday Night. ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ Saturday. ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ Saturday Night. ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ☉ ♀ ☿ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ But for your better Understanding I have incerted a Planetary Table, shewing what Pla∣net Reigns every hour of the day through out the Week, as for example, I would know what Planet rules on Sunday, June the 6th. at which time the Sun rises at three a Clock, which is the first hour of the day, for the beginning of the day is always counted from Sun-rising, which right again Sunday, under the figure of one, I find the ☉ rules at Sun-rising, being at three a Clock, ♀ at four a Clock, ☿ at five a Clock, and so on.
The Directions following are sufficient to enable any Person whatsoever, tho of never so mean a Capacity, provided he can but Read, and know what a Clock it is, may know when to gather an Herb in the right Planetary hour for every day in the year, that Herbs are fit to be gathered, pointing directly to the true time; so that you have no more trouble but to know what a Clock it is, and your expecta∣tion is answer'd, which Rules are the same Perpetually. As first, the true time to gather Herbs in A∣pril, which if it be an Herb that the Sun do's rule, you may gather them on any Sunday in this Month, from 6 a Clock to 7 in the Morn∣ing, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon; Al∣ways observe, that if you are to gather Herbs of the Sun, then gather them on a Sunday, be∣cause the Sun is Lord of that day, and on the Planetary Hour as I have shewn you before, for then the Herbs have a double Vertue. In gathering Herbs on any Munday in this Month, the right time to gather Herbs that are govern'd by the Moon, is from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon. In gathering Herbs on any Tuesday in this Month, that is govern'd by Mars, is from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon. In gathering Herbs on any Wednesday in this Month, that is govern'd by Mercury, is from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon.
In gathering Herbs on any Thursday in this Month, that is govern'd by Jupiter, is from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon. In gathering Herbs on any Friday in this Month, that is govern'd by Venus, is from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon. In gathering Herbs on any Saturday in this Month, that is govern'd by Saturn, is from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 1 to 3 in the Afternoon. By observing the foregoing Rules, you may gather Herbs of the Sun in June on a Sunday from 5 to 6 in the Morning, and from 2 to 4 in the Afternoon; Herbs of the Moon on a Munday from 5 to 6 in the Morning, and from 2 to 4 in the Afternoon; Herbs of Mars on a Tuesday from 5 to 6 in the Morning, and from 2 to 4 in the Afternoon; Herbs of Mercury on a Wednesday, from 5 to 6 in the Morning, and from 2 to 4 in the Afternoon; Herbs of Jupiter on a Thursday, at the same hours; Herbs of Venus on a Friday at the same hours; Herbs of Saturn on a Saturday, at the same hours; this Rule will serve for ten days in July. In gathering Herbs on the first ten days of August, which you may gather any Herbs ac∣cording to the foregoing rules from 5 to 7 in the Morning, and from 2 to 3 in the After∣noon; and to the 20. day from 6 to 7 in the Morning, and from 2 to 3 in the Afternoon. Now I shall proceed to the Virtue of Herbs
For Curing Wens, Tumour, or Swelling, or any Rising in the Flesh, or Warts. TAke hot Asmart, called also Peachwort, Water Pepper, it hath no black spots as the Cold hath, it being a Weed of Mars, let it be gathered as directed, and put in cold Water, being well moistened, take it out and lay it to the place Defective, and let it lie on it till the Asmart be hot, then take it and Bury it in the Ground above two Foot deep, and as that doth rot or consume, so will the Wen or any of the other sink or grow less and less, till it be quite gone; for that which hath been long, do it twice. Vervaine. Vervaine an Herb of Venus, being gathered as directed, and bruised and hung about the Neck, helps the Head-ach, the Distill'd Water of it, so gathered, droped into the Eyes, cleanseth them from all Mists, Films, Clouds that hinders the Sight, and wonderfully Strengtheneth the Optick Nerves; the Leaves in Syrrup or Decoction, helpeth all inward Pains and Lungs, Kidneys, Stone or Wounds, healeth Ʋlcers, Gangreens or Fistula's, in any part of the Body. Wild Carrot Seeds. Being under Mercury and taken in Wine, or Boyled in Wine, removes Stiches in the Sides, Provokes Ʋrin, and Womens Courses,
and helpeth to break and expel the Stone; for the Dropsie, and those whose Bellies are Swel∣len wiih Wine, helpeth Collick, the Stone in the Kidneys, and the Rising of the Mother, it helpeth Conception; the Leaves applyed with Honey to Running Sores or Ʋlcers, it Cleanses them, and Heals them in a short time. Hop Seeds. Take half a Dram of it in Powder in a lit∣tle Drink, killeth the Worms in the Body, bringeth down Womens Courses, and Expel∣eth Ʋrine. Columbine. Being under Venus, a Dram of the said Seeds taken in Wine with a little Saffron, openeth Obstructions of the Liver, and is good for the Yellow Jaundice, if the party after the taking thereof be laid to Sweat well in the Bed; It causeth a speedy Delivery of Women with Child, if one Draught suffice not, let her drink the second, and it is effectual. Cinke-foyle, or five Leav'd Grass. Being gathered as directed is the best that grows, being an Herb of Jupiter, for curing of all kind of Agues, be it what Ague soever, being boyled in white Wine, or white Wine Vinegar, being strained out, and the Wine drank as hot as sufferabe two or three houres before the Fit, as Doctor Culpepper saith, he never knew it fail: I have had tryal of it above 12 years, I never knew it fail but it produced the desired effects at three times taking as most, by those that have had the Quartane a∣bove
a year, there is no Doctor can prescribe a better remedy for Agues, the directions rightly observed, for every day, or every other days Ague, once or twice taking hath rid it away, some have taken it in strong Beer, Ale, Sider or Metheglim, it hath done the like; It cures the Gout in any part, and Sciatica, being boyled in red Wine and drank, it stops all Fluxes of Blood, and Red or White. Henbane. A Weed of Saturn, the root taken up as directed and dryed to powder, touch but the tooth that aketh with the powder, and it will fall out; the root taken up as aforesaid and dryed, and a Necklace made thereof and put round the neck of a Child that breedeth teeth, they cut the Gums and breed them without pain, they are to be hung a bout the neck as Bracelets are. Celandine. Gather this herb as directed and when the Sun is in Leo in Trine to the Moon, and make an Oyntment of it with Hogs Lard, and anoynt your Eye-lids when you go to Bed, and in so doing it will take a way any Skins or Films that shall grow over the sight of the Eye; or else take Celandine, field Daises, and ground Ivy, cla∣rified, and a little fine Shugar disolved therein, and droped into the Eye, is a soveraign remedy for Watering of them, for Paines, Redness; and also for the Pin, Web, Skins, and Films grow∣ing over tht sight, it helpeth Beasts as well as Men; the Juice dropped into the Ears doth
wonderfully help the Noise and Singing of them, and hearing which is decayed. Lavender Corten. Being an Herb under Mercury, and gather∣ed as directed, resisteth Poison, Putrifaction, and helps the Bitings of Venomus Beasts; a Dram of the Powder of the dryed Leaves taken every morning fasting in any convenient Vehicle, stops the Runing of the Reins in Men, and Whites in Women; the Seed beaten into Powder and taken as Wormseed, it kills the Worms, not only in Children, but also in People of Riper years, the Herb it self being boyled in Milk and the Milk drunk, the body Bathed with it cures the Itch; the Decoction of it helps Scabs and Itch. Ground Ivy. Being an Herb of Venus, and gathered as directed, and a Decoction made of it and drunk in Wine for sometime together, procur∣eth ease unto them that are troubled with the Sciatica or Hip Gout; as also the Gout in the Handa, Knees or Feet: If you put to the Deco∣ction some Hony, and a little burnt Allum, it is excellent good to Gargle any Sore Mouth or Throat, and to wash the Sores and Vlcers in the Privy Parts of Man or Women; it speedily helpeth green Wounds, being bruised and bound thereunto; the Juyce of it boyled with a little Honey and Verdegreece doth wonderfully cleanse Fistulaes, and Ʋlcers; and strengthens the Spreading or Eating of Cancers or Ʋlcers.
Peletory of the Wall. An Herb of Jupitur, as directed, and made into a Syrup, or the Juice Clarified, is an ex∣cellent remedy for the Stone, and Gravel, to cleanse and heal the Kidneys, and Bladder, Ʋri∣tory Passage; for Cleansing, boyle it in white Wine, for dissolving, make it in Syrrups to cleanse in white Wine. A brief Judgment on Ʋrine, by the Colour and Contents. 1. URine fat and troubled, betokeneth a Burn∣ing Feaver, Proceeding of Choler. 2. Red and thick all over, with a black circle, signifieth Sickness in all the Body. 3. White and thin, and little in quantity, shew∣eth cold in the Body. 4. Clear with a black Circle, sheweth that the Sick Man hath the Ptysick. 5. Red and thin, with a bright Circle signifi∣eth an evil Stomach. 6. Thin somewhat green a bove, signifieth a Cold complexion, and if it Shew blew above in the casting, it is the Ptisick. 7. Thin and black above in Casting, signifieth great loss of Nature. 8. Thick and troubled, like horse Piss, signifieth the Head Ach. 9. On the colour of Whey, with Slime flying up and down in it, signifieth the French Pox. 10. Fat in the bottom, and white in the midst and red above; signifieth a feaver Quartan.
11. Fat like flesh, and dregs in the bottom, as shaddowing, signifieth the Dropsie of cold; but if like Whey above, and clear in the middle, and sha∣dowing beneath, it signifieth a hot Dropsie. 12. Black dregs, like gobbets of Coal in the bot∣tom, signifieth Worms in the Body. 13. With black Contents, small as motes in the midest of the Ʋrine, signifieth an Imposthume under the Side. 14. Contents, like shavings of Parchment in the bottom, signifieth the stoping of the Reins and of the Pipes of the Liver. 15. Black and green of Colour, with long white contents in the same, signifieth the Palsie. 16. Grains under the Circle, signifieth that the stomach is full of Worms, burning of the Heart. 17. Foul above, signifieth heat in the Heart, Lungs and Spleen. 18. Contents with blackness in the bottom signifi∣eth Costiveness in the body. 19. Long lasting, signifieth Biting in the Body and great Rheum. 20. Thick, little and high coloured, signifieth great burning in the Body. 21. Frothy, clear, and little red, sheweth Pain under the right Side. 22. Frothy, signifieth wind and pain under the left Side. 23. Red as a Coalt, signifieth an Imposthume in the Liver. 24 Red as burnt Gold, if it be Hydropick, signifieth Death. 25. Divers colours in ones Ʋrine which is to say,
Red, Black, Green, and Blew, in a hot Feaver, signifieth Death. 26. Black and a little Fat and Stinking, in a hot Axis, Death. 27. Lead Colour all over, signifieth a prolonging of Death. 28. Dark above, and clear beneath, signifieth Death. 29. Shining raw and bright, and the skin in the bottom, signifieth Death. 30. Thin fleeting above, like a dark Sky, signifieth Death. 31. Drossie, stinking and dark Sky within, signifi∣eth prolonging of Death 32. White as water, with a dark Sky in a feaver, signifieth Death 33. Dregs in the bottom, mixed with Blood beto∣keneth Death. 34. Black and thin, if the Sick loath when he go∣eth to stool, and that he speak overthwart, or under stand not a right, and that the sickness depart not, it signifieth Death. Vrines of Women. 1. WHite, heavy and stinking, signifieth pain in the Reins, and Mother, and sickness of Cole. 2. Fat fleeting above, signifieth pain in the Reins of the Back. 3. Black contents in the bottom, sheweth falling of the Flowers.
4. White contents in the bottom, signifieth much falling of her Flowers. 5. Colour of Linseed, with a Flux, signifieth death of the Woman. 6. Bright as Gold, signifieth she lusteth for a Man. 7. Also in Woman with Child, their Ʋrines are clear, and diversly coloured. 8. And from the beginning, there appeareth con∣tents like Carded Wool. 9. Also there seem certain grains or small notes Swiming about up and down in the Ʋrine, and sometimes a thing like black Ink and some filthy contents. 10. If she be with Child, the Ʋrine will have some clear streaks, and the most part shall be troubl∣ed, the troubledness shall be Redish, in the manner of Tawny, and these tokens do at no time fail, as soon as the Child shall have Life. 11. If it be a Man-Child, as soon as it hath life, the troubledness shall be thickest above. 12. If it be a Maiden Child, the troubledness shall be beneath. 13. Also, if thou may'st see thy face in the Vrine of a Woman, and that she have no feaver, and the Vrine having in it tawny contents, then she is with Child, and these tokens never fail. 14. Also Vrine of a woman white as whey, having also a Cloud in the bottom, with white showrings, sheweth she is with Child. 15. Likewise Ʋrine of Women, read as Gold, with a Watery Circle aboue, signifieth she is with Child. 16. Also, colour of Lead, if she be with Child,
signifieth the Child is Dead; if she be with Child, and that the Ʋrine be Lead colour, and stinking, it signifieth that the Matrix is Rotten. To Judge the Danger of falling Sick by the Age of the Moon. 1. HE that falleth Sick on the first day of the Moon shall Dye, if the Sickness be very Fierce and Tedious. D. 2. Altho' he be sore Sick, yet he shall be cured. R. 3. He may with due regard in Physick be recover'd. R. 4. Shall very soon be restored. R. 5. Promiseth his cure after ten days. R. 6. No danger, but speedy Health. R. 7. Injoy Life but three Months. D. 8. Languish a long time. L. S. 9. Recover Health after Nine Days. R. 10. Recover after Ten Days. R. 11. Very long Sick, yet recover Health. L. R. 12. Amend after Twelve Days. R. 13. A long and grievous Sickness. L. S. 14. Soon restored, tho' it comes Fiercely. R. 15. Easily escape Death. R. 16. Great danger of Death, if he take the Air. Dan. 17. No Physick will prevail. D. 18. A good day, easily Recovered. R. 19. A good day, easily Recovered. R. 20. A good day, easily Recovered. R. 21. Sickness Mortal and Incurable. D. 22. Long Sick, but escape after 3 Months. L. S. 23. After few days he shall Dye. D.
24. Long time in Sickness. L. S. 25. Are all days of Recovery. R. 26. Are all days of Recovery. R. 27. Are all days of Recovery. R. 28. Are all days of Recovery. R. 29. Are all days of Recovery. R. 30. Hardly Escape with many Medicines. Dan. Secrets to Judge of Life and Death in a Sick Body. First, Take a Marigold, and put into the Ʋrine of the Sick, if it keeps open, they will Live, if it closes, they'l Die. Second, Also it is said of some, that it may be known by speaking Two Words at the Bed-side, viz. Ancora Pancorene, and if he hear it, it notes Life, if not, Death. The Kings Evill. Take Barly Flower, Tar, Wax, and Oyl, of each a like quantity, mix all together, and Seeth it well, and put it into a little Piss of a young Child, and stirring it well about, lay it upon the Sore Plaister wise. A rule to know the Kings Evil by. Take a ground Worm alive and lay it upon the place, and cover him with a Leaf, if it be the Kings Evil, the Worm will change and turn into Earth, if not he will remain alive.
A Secret to Stanch Blood. Take the blood of healthful men and dry it in the Sun, and make it into powder. To stop Womens Courses. Take a Toad and bind him with a little band, and hang it about the womans Neck that hath that infirmitie, and in few days she will be cur'd. Against Wrye Necks or Gouts. Take the stone of a Beaver, called Castoreum, white Pepper and Pursley of each alike, beat altogether and sift them, take a Spoonful of it and put in so much Honey, and two mouth∣fulls of hot Water, and give it the patient to drink before Breakefast, and he shall be healed. For a Quartane Ague. Take Asrabacca one Dram, and give it the Patient one hour before the fit comes, in white wine, it Purges upwards and downwards. For one that cannot make Water. Take a Flint stone, put it into the fire till its red hot, and there with warm your Ale, then drink it.
How to make the Antidote Powder, called, The Orvietan of Rome, a Cordial. Angelica root, Serpent, Contrierva root, Calanga root, Dictamus root, Aristolocnia root, Gentian root, Arris root, Casamus, Ze∣doary root, Acorus root, Agarick, Ginger root, ana ʒ i. Peratterum ʒ iv. Trochisk ʒ ii. Vipers Flesh, Red Roses, Dictmnus leaves, Sarubucum Leaves, Saffron, ana 40 gr. Anni seeds, Parsly-seeds, Fennel seeds, Caraway-seeds, Cummin-seeds, Dasie-seeds, Cisilias-seeds, Cardamum, Cubeb, ana 30 gr. Cloves, Cinnamon, Gascoynes Powder, Nutmeg, white Pepper, Colander, ana 40 gr. Lemniam earth, Storax, Calamit, Juniper Berries, Elicampane, ana ʒ i. Curcuma Root ʒ iii. Sagaveny, Opa∣panar, ana ʒ i. beat all these fine to a Powder, and this is the true Ovietane Powder; And mix it with pure fine Honey, and it makes the true Roman Orvietane, which Expelleth Poyson out of the Body. To take away Pearls, Films from the Eyes. Take Honey, Juice of Cellandine, ana ℥ iv. Aloes, Scammony, Sarcocol in fine Powder, ana ʒ iv. Lapis Tutia prepared, mix them well together, and put it into the Eye every Night going to Bed, and every Morning before Ris∣ing.
Elixir Vitae, or, Elixir of Life. Take of Rosemary, Lavender, Saffron, Ca∣stor, and of our Treacle, ana ℥ iv. Rectified Spirit of Wine Tartarised, lb x. digest all for three Months, Decant of the Tincture, to which add Clarified Honey, ℥ vi. the Essence of Bawm and Celandine, ana ℥ iii. Circulate all for a Month, and keep it for use. The Virtues of this Elixir are great in Curing and Preventing the Vertigo, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Palsie, Madness, Melancholly, Swounding, Asthma, and all Diseases of the Stomach, the Terms, and helping the Green Sick∣ness, Dose ℈ i. or ʒ i. in a convenient Vehicle. Gascoins Powder. Which Secret he sold to the Bishop of Wor∣cester for 300 l. I will give it freely. Take the Toes of Sea-crabs boyled, beat them to Powder, which must be done the ☉ and ☽ be∣ing in Cancer ♋; of this Powder take ℥ i. of the Magistery of Coral and Pearl ana ʒ ii. of the true Bezoar ʒi. make Rolls with the Jelly of Vipers Skins, or if thou wilt of the Flesh of the whole Vipers, which is as good, and being dryed let them be made up again, and dryed with the same Jelly, the oftener you do it, the better; the use of it is to beat it into Powder, and to give from ℈ i. to ℈ ii. almost in any Disease, repeating it often.
The Royal Styptick Water. Which stops Blood, also good for Watery Eyes, Rheumatick Eyes, Inflamation of the Eyes, Pin or Web, and makes the Eye look Fair and Lovely. Take Colcothar, or Red Vi∣triol that remains in the Retort after the Spi∣rit is drawn out; Burnt Allum, Sugar Candy, ana ʒ ss. the Urine of a Healthful Young Per∣son, Rose Water, ana ℥ ss. Plantaine Water, ℥ ii. Stir them altogether a good while in a Mortar, then power the mixture into a Viol, which when you use it seperate by inclination; Note, when taken Inwardly ʒ ss. or ʒ i. may be taken at any time in Knot-grass Water. FINIS.
Avertisement. IN Camamile-street at the Sarazens Head Inn near Bishops Gate, are Sold most Excellent and well aproved PILLS for Six Pence the Dose, which Cures the Dropsy, Scurvy, Black and Yellow Jaundice, Tertian, Quartan and Quotidian Ague, Stoppage of the Liver, Coldness of the Stomach, Pains in the Head, or Swimings, against the Grip∣ings in the Guts, Ʋlcers in the Rein, Kidneys and Bladder, and is very Powerful against the French Pox, they open the Obstructions in the Womb, and Cleanseth it from all Impurities; it Cleanseth the whole Mass of Blood, and Purgeth both Thick and Thin Humours, it Purgeth the Head, Sharpens the Sight, Quickens the Memory, and adds a good Co∣lour to the Face, stays Flux of Blood, and Kills Worms in Young or Old. Also, such as are desi∣rous may be Resolved in all Lawful Questions de∣pending on that Noble Art of Astrology, at the a∣bove mentioned place.
