D62 12255531 57395
A Present Remedy FOR THE POOR: OR, The most probable Means to provide well for the Poor of the Nation; to free us in time from paying the Poors Rates; and deliver us now from the publick Nusance of Beggars. Humbly submitted to the Wisdom of the next Sessions of Parliament. LONDON; Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard. M.DCC. Price 3 d.
A Present REMEDY FOR THE POOR. HIS Majesty's Wisdom, Care, and Goodness in recom∣mending this publick Grievance to the Sages of our Nation in the last Sessions of Parliament, deserves the universal Acknowledgment and Thanks of the whole Kingdom. No sooner was his Mind at liberty from the perplex∣ing Thoughts and heavy Burden of a tedious War, but he appli∣ed it to the study of promoting the Peace of his People, by advi∣sing the redress of a known Evil, in these words: I think it would be happy if some effectual Expedient could be found for imploying the Poor, which might tend to the great Increase of our Manufactures, as well as remove a heavy Burden from the People. By this and many other Instances we may clearly see our Happiness in the injoyment of so excellent, valiant, wise, and publick-spirited a Prince, under whose Government and Conduct we may promise to our selves a last∣ing Quiet at home, and a flourishing Trade abroad: We may promise to our selves all the Blessings of a happy People, if we could be as unanimous and diligent in observing our Duties and Obli∣gations, as he is vigilant and careful in minding us, and performing all that is required from him in that high Station of Honor and Trust, where a divine and savourable Providence to us, our Religion and Nation, hath placed him. But I intend not here to inlarge upon
the deserved Praises of our King, whom Europe and the whole World admires for his extraordinary Abilities both in Peace and War; and who with much more Reason and Justice might claim the glorious Sirname of GREAT, for having saved three Kingdoms from utter Ruin, than the Vanity of others hath assum'd it, for having destroy'd multitudes of Mankind. My business in these Lines is, to lay open to the wise Governours of our Nation this great Grievance of the Poor, which his Majesty recommended to the Consideration of the last Parliament, and which hitherto con∣tinues without Redress. A growing Grievance that is as disgrace∣ful to our wise and reformed Nation, as it is troublesome to us all, tho we our selves are exempted from the smart of Po∣verty. I shall also venture to offer, with all submission to the Wisdom of the Government, the most probable, or perhaps the only means likely to succeed to remedy this publick Nusance, and what Advantages we may in time procure to our selves and Nation by taking the Method I propose. I need not tell you that Nature, as well as Christianity, calls upon us to commiserate the Wants and Sufferings of our own kind; and we are taught by the Birds of the Air, to supply out of our Abundance the Necessities of our own Species. That Bird is most remarkable, mentioned by the Royal Prophet, Psal. 104.17. and named by him Chasidah, the merciful Bird, because it is an excel∣lent Example among natural Beings, to recommend Charity and Liberality: For as it is reported, the young will not only fetch Food for the old, but bear them upon their Wings, when helpless. And of the Eagle it is said, That it is so noble, as to call the rest of the Birds round about to partake of that Plenty that Provi∣dence vouchsafes it. However, Reason can tell us that our wise Benefactor having created the World, and the Blessings of it, for the general use of Mankind; If his Providence appears partial in the distribution of its Gifts, 'tis not with a design that we should ingross them to our selves, but learn to imitate our good God, by imparting them to others, who are in want. Stewards therefore we are, and not Proprietors of our Enjoyments; and the intent of our liberal Maker is, that we should convey what we have received from his bountiful Hand, to such Objects of Cha∣rity as we meet with in our mortal Race; and the more liberal our
God is to us, the more free we ought to be to them. But the whole Body of our Religion, as it is the Product of pure Grace, and a divine Charity, calls upon us, and injoyns us with many Pro∣mises to incourage our Liberalities to the Poor and Needy, and frequently to extend our Charity answerable to the heavenly Bounty. Nay, all our expectations of Forgiveness of Sins, of the Mercies of our Redeemer, and of the future Rewards, de∣pend in some measure upon our Favor and Bounty to the poor Members of Christ's mystical Body, whose Indigency a wise Providence lays daily before our eyes, that we may by their Assi∣stance and Relief lay up for our selves a good foundation for a fu∣ture State, and make our selves Friends, that is, oblige God their Redeemer, and the holy Angels their Guardian-Spirits, to lend us also in requital their assisting hand in times of want and dan∣ger. But I hope I need not inlarge upon this Exhortation to Charity. Our Nation has always been noted for Liberality to Foreigners in distress, and 'tis not probable it will be less boun∣tiful to its own Natives. How many excellent Laws have been made for that purpose, for the continual Relief of the Indi∣gent in every Precinct. I may say that the Charity of the Na∣tion hath proceede in these latter days to an excess; insomuch that many Poor trusting to it, wholly neglect the other means appointed and required by God and Reason to recruit their Wants. It belongs therefore to Wisdom, and our Christian Prudence, to di∣rect, as well as to incourage our Charity to the Poor, and pitch upon a right Method to relieve their Necessities; such a Method as may be agreeable with the state and condition of the Nation, and may incourage Trade, the chief Source of Plenty. Poverty is a universal Cry and Complaint both in City and Country. Divers Families have bin brought into distress by the Evils and Mischiefs of the Times, the Casualties of War, and seve∣ral other human Accidents. And like the miserable Cripple of the Pool of Bethesda, Poverty is of it self helpless, not able to move without the assistance of others. And tho it sharpens In∣dustry to contrive new Inventions, 'tis in such Cases as when it is not altogether despirited by the want of all Necessaries, but hath a convenient supply of means and life to stir and act. Herein Charity is the more oblig'd to discover it self, because it is to help such as
are both willing, and strive to help themselves out of the Calami∣ty; and in this case all its Proceedings and Liberalities are crown∣ed and rewarded with success, and a double Blessing. Indeed Poverty in it self is an Evil of that magnitude, that we need no artificial Glass to increase and inlarge it to our Eye. It is attended by so many bad Circumstances, that may easily move our Compassion, and oblige rational Beings to indeavour to re∣move it both from the publick Society, as well as from our selves. Were there nothing else but the Clamors and mournful Out∣cries of the Poor that daily fill our Ears, and the sense of their urging Necessities, and of their Families; were there nothing but their Nakedness and Misery, this would be sufficient to render the publick Poverty grievous to us as well as to them. But it is a grand and chief Cause of many other Mischiefs among us. First, it is the Cause of many Robberies, House-breakings, Mur∣ders, and other Villanies, to which Poverty prompts Persons who are in want, and by that means renders our living and dealings in City and Country the more unsafe. And I am perswaded that a great many who are executed every Sessions and Assizes, would never have committed such Wickedness, if Poverty had not dri∣ven them to such abominable Actions. It is the Cause of Irreligion, and Ignorance of our Duty; for such as are desperately poor, seldom or never mind instruction, nor the study of Religion: they are brought up as Heathens, and the want of Necessaries takes up all their thoughts how to pro∣vide Bread; so that they have no time to think upon God or Eter∣nity, nor the way that leads thither. It drives many to the ne∣cessity of begging. It incourages Idleness, and makes several whose strength and abilities might render them useful Members of the Society, to be not only useless, but pernicious and mischievous. I need not reckon the other many Evils that Poverty and Beg∣ging brings upon us. The number of Beggars increases daily, our Streets swarm with this kind of People, and their boldness and im∣pudence is such, that they often beat at our Doors, stop Persons in the ways, and are ready to load us with Curses and Imprecations, if their Desires be not speedily answer'd. Besides, it is reported of the common Beggars, that they have their Meetings and Rende∣vouz, where what they have got by their lazy Trade, they can spend
freely in Debauchery, Drunkenness, and other Sins. By this means the Charity of good People is strangely misapplied, to the dishonor of God, and the disgrace of Religion among us; and these ordinary Beggars hinder us from regulating and disposing of our Charity upon the right Objects. For the remedying of this Evil and its woful Consequences, it is needful to imploy our Poor according to the antient and known Laws of the Government, and not only to put in execution the old, but to make such new as may stop the increase of this beg∣ging Trade. It is needful that our wise Governors would con∣sider how to dispose of these poor People, and confine them to Work-houses, where they may be furnish'd with necessary Tools, and oblig'd to get their living in a lawful way. But the great dif∣ficulty is how to proceed in the disposing of such vast numbers of both Sexes and of all Ages, and how to raise a Fund to supply the wants of so many thousands. I answer, That there is every year a million of Mony collected in this Kingdom from all Parishes for the relief of their Poor; and if this were rightly applied to the imploying, instead of buying them present Necessaries, it would be sufficient not only to provide them Tools and other things needful to keep them at work, but that, together with the Product and Advantage of their Work, would answer all their Necessities, and supply all their Wants. But the Difficulty is, how and in what manner to proceed. I am not igno∣rant, but know perfectly well what Methods are observ'd in Holland and France; where 'tis of late days that Beggars, unless they belong to Religious Houses, are not suffer'd; and all Persons never so mean are provided for, without the gathering of such vast Rates as among us. If in laying down the best means, as I conceive, to provide for our English Poor, I vary from foreign Methods in some things, 'tis because our Constitution and Government differs much from theirs, and the Evil is greater among us than it was among them, and therefore requires a Remedy answerable. First, as it is needful to imploy our Poor, and to set them to work, there is a necessity that they should be confin'd to a certain House where they may have all Conveniencies for Life and Im∣ploiment. The Work-houses that are already built, are not so convenient as may be contriv'd for such a vast number of Poor
as are among us. I offer therefore to give the Model of such a House as shall not be for State, nor to shew the Grandure of our Nation, but shall be for Use, and capacious enough to contain and imploy two thousand Persons in daily Labor. Let such a House be erected near the City of London, as a Model for all the rest; I suppose that three such Houses will be sufficient to contain all the Poor of this great City and Westminster. And in imitation of the Metropolis, let all other Cities erect for themselves such conve∣nient Workhouses for all sorts of Trades, and to imploy and improve the Growth of the Country: for without such a Con∣finement, lazy People, used to begging, will not take any pains. This House must be under the Command of a Governour, De∣puty-Governour, and other inferiour Officers, chosen in time from the poor People, who are to be kept in hopes of rising to Honour and Authority in the House, by their Industry, Diligence, and other good Behaviour. The Governour and Deputy-Governour are to be chosen first by the Justices, and Magistrates of every County; and the other inferiour Officers by the Governour and Consent of the House. Let the Parishes give in the number of the Poor who have con∣stant relief, when the Houses are built. Let them send them that are chargeable, with their whole Families to such Houses, be∣ing directed by the Justices, or Persons appointed by Authority, what Parishes are to agree to put their Poor together; the num∣bers of such Poor to be in every House, upwards of a thousand, and not exceeding two thousand or thereabouts. The Governour's Office shall be to buy Necessaries, to provide Wool, Flax, and other Commodities; to take charge of the Peo∣ple; to see that every one labors; to receive and take an account of their Work when done; to pay them their Wages; to be answerable for all things; to have Authority in his House as a Justice of Peace, and to punish with the consent of other Officers all Misdemeanors, not injuring neither Life nor Limb. Let there be in every such Work-house a Chaplain, a Reader who is to be a School-master, a Physician who is to be a Doctor, Apothecary and Surgeon, a Butcher to buy and provide Food, a Brewer, Baker, and Cooks convenient: Some of which may be taken out of the poor People.
The House is to be built in such a manner upon waste Ground, or Common, or other convenient place, with necessary Gardens be∣longing to it, where all Trades are to be distinct, with the Spin∣ning-rooms, Infirmary for Maim'd and Cripples, for Old and una∣ble to work, and a Nursery for Bastards and Orphans; with a Chappel of an oval Figure, with Galleries, round Theatrewise; the Pulpit and Desk near the middle: the Model I offer to give, able to contain greater numbers than any of our Churches in a lesser Com∣pass: The Ministers and School masters Lodgings at one end, the Apothecaries at the other. By this means care will be taken both of their Souls and Bodies. All the Poor to be lodg'd at the discretion of the Governour, to be provided at the publick Charge, with Clothes all of one color in every House; Linen, Tools, Beds and Beddings, with other Conveniencies. And they are to fetch from the Governor or his De∣puty, Wool, Flax, Hemp, Iron, Leather, &c. and when return'd, to be allowed as other Masters give, or rather more. So that unless such as are able to work employ themselves, they are not to eat. Laws are to be prescrib'd to every House, which they must re∣ligiously observe; such Laws as are agreeable with our holy Religi∣on, the Laws of the Land, and the good and peace of such Socie∣ties. And such as are not able to work, to be provided for; but what every one can do, he is to be directed by the Governours, and furnish'd with Materials accordingly; for the Governor is to have an oversight over all the Offices of his House, to advise, di∣rect, incourage every one to do his Duty. And for the better managing of a Trade, it is convenient, that four or more Merchants in London should associat to furnish and take off such Commodities and Manufactures as are there made, and in the Custody of the Governors in their several Ware-hou∣ses in the said Great House; and that these Merchants should have their Correspondents in several Parts of England to buy off such Manufactures made, some for ready Mony, some upon trust, as they can agree, and vent the same abroad, and have Returns. The Governors are to keep an account of all such Monies re∣ceived and paid, and to whom; what Benefit is made of the Work, and to be answerable to the Justices at their Sessions.
The Governors shall receive from each Parish, weekly or month∣ly, what each Parish was wont to pay to their several Poor for some years, until a stock of Mony can be raised; and to prevent Frauds, severe Penalties must be imposed upon Offenders, and an ac∣count must be publish'd and printed yearly, that the Nation may see that there is no cozenage. Let every Governor imploy some in making of Sails, Ropes, Nets, and other things for Shipping and Fishing; and when they have Youths able and willing for the Seas, let them out of the publick Stock buy one or more Boats, or convenient Busses or Vessels at Sea, to belong to every House; and that all the Fish taken shall be brought thither, if not too far from the Seas, and dispos'd of at the Governour's Discretion, allowing a Subsistence and Salary to their Agents. By this means the Shipping and Fishing Trade will be incouraged. And if at any time poor Families have no Work, who be∣long not to these Houses, there they shall be furnish'd with Wool, Hemp, &c. and other Materials for them and their Fami∣lies. So that these Houses may imploy many more than are shut within the Walls. If any are sturdy, unruly, or refuse to work, or run away, a course may be taken to remedy that and other accidents. A se∣vere Law must be made to punish Officers of Parishes that neglect to carry them back, and others that offer to give them any relief; and such Penalties and Fines are to be return'd and paid in to the Governors of such Houses, together with the Persons of such Run∣aways. No maintenance is to be allowed them, but within the House, and that proportion'd to their deservings. If they run away again, let them be whip'd publickly, and be carried back as often as they shall thus escape. Now if any poor Families be not able to subsist by reason of Children, and their Parents cannot well be spar'd from the Neigh∣bourhood, because of their handy work, let the eldest of their Children be sent to these Houses; first taught to read, write, and cipher, and to be put to such Trades and Masters in these Houses as may teach them their Craft and Skill. So that the Officers of every Parish shall not need to give any weekly allowance to such poor Parents; and in a little time, when a considerable Fund may
be rais'd by such Trade and Working, no Poors-Rates will be any more gather'd in the Nation. If any sturdy Beggars be incorrigible, let the Governors, with the consent of the Justices at the publick Sessions, have Power to tran∣sport such unruly Persons beyond Sea, if they be young and fit for Travelling to our Western Plantations, or to send them to seve∣rer Houses to a straiter Confinement, there to be dealt with ac∣cording to Law, till they shall resolve to amend. Let every such House have convenient Privileges granted to it to incourage the Poor to be industrious. Let their inferiour Offi∣cers be all annually chosen by themselves, with the assistance of the Governor and his Deputy, who alone must be appointed by the Government. Let the Commodities and Manufactures made in such Houses be freed from Customs, or pay not so much as others when ex∣ported out of the Land, for a limited time. Let it be in the Power of the Governors of such Houses near Seaport-Towns, and other places, with the consent of such Persons of their Societies, as will of their own accord, to plant in the West-Indies and such Plantations, to belong to the Governors and their Houses, and to the Parties so sent, as they shall agree. By which means they may vent a great many of their Manufactures made in their Work-houses, and have Returns in Sugars, Tobac∣co, &c. Let there be a Prebendary or two belong to each House, or a Benefice or spiritual Living adjoining, for the incouragement of the Minister and School-master, and let that be to them instead of a Salary to maintain them. Let some other publick Incourage∣ment or Income be appointed for the Physician to incourage him also. Let every Child within the House be first taught to read, write cipher, and other necessary Learning, with the Principles of true Religion, by the Minister and his Reader, or School-master: and let constant Catechising, and expounding upon the Catechism in a fa∣miliar way, be practis'd every holy day and Sunday in the after∣noon; and Prayers twice a week on the working days, or oftner if it be convenient. And let all within the House come or be brought to the Divine Service, at least every Sabbath Day, if Sick∣ness hinders not.
Let all within the House live in a loving and courteous manner, abstaining from Swearing, Cursing Scolding, or opprobrious Language, according to the Laws there to be observed. And let them buy their Necessaries of one another, that their Mony may there cir∣culate within themselves, and incourage their Industry and Labor. And for a greater incouragement to such charitable Houses, let the Governor of his Deputy, and other Officers, with the Appro∣bation of the Justices of the County, have Power to buy Lands, Tenements, and other Rents, which may belong to such Houses for ever, and to receive the benefit of any Gifts or Legacies, &c. which religious Persons shall bestow upon them for the Repair of their Houses, and the greater incouragement of the Poor. Now for the maintenance of such Governors and Deputy-Go∣vernors, without taking any thing from the publick Monies, I of∣fer to lay down an easy and practicable Method, which I doubt not but will be approv'd of. And besides, when the Trade shall grow considerable in these Houses, let them have but the ordinary Fees of Factors and Agents beyond Sea, or at home, that will greatly in∣crease their first Incomes, and cause them to live with Splendor and Plenty, without diminishing any thing from the Poors Mony, or the Publick Stock. And for the intire Suppression of the begging Trade, let it be lawful for all poor Prisoners, who have nothing to subsist upon but Charity, to turn themselves over to these Work-houses to get their living; and what they can spare out of their Work, let it be im∣ployed to pay their Creditors, as the Wisdom of the Nation shall think fit. But how shall such Houses be erected, and who shall pay for the same? I answer, Several easy and practicable Means may be proposed, for the raising sufficient Sums of Mony for the speedy building of Houses. First let a Collection be made by way of a Brief in every Coun∣ty for the benefit of that County; and the Monies so collected be return'd into the hands of the Sheriff, or his Deputy, to pay off the Workmen and buy Materials. Let all Commutations for Whoredom and Bastardy, be likewise converted to this publick Use, and the Mony to remain in the
hands of the Chancellor or Official for this purpose, to be com∣manded from thence by the order of the Government. And let a strict Inquiry be made, and all Persons guilty be oblig'd either to fine or do penance. Truly this Mony can never be better imployed; for I have seen in the dispensing Deeds of the Ecclesiastical Courts, that it is to be imployed, Ad usum Pauperum, & alios pios usus: To the use of the Poor, and other religious Uses. Let all Prebendaries and Dignities of the Church, which shall be hereafter bestowed, pay a year or two years Rent, or a cer∣tain Proportion, to be charg'd at the Discretion of our Parliament, and let this continue until such time as these Houses so erected be paid for. And let all Benefices above 100 l. per annum pay the Overplus into the Bishops hands, or his Receiver, for two years af∣ter Induction. And let the Clerk oblige himself by Bond, or be forc'd by Law to pay the same, and let him be instituted and in∣ducted upon that condition. Let all such as now injoy great Benefices, multiplicity of Pre∣bendaries and other Pluralities, be charg'd to this pious Work as the Wisdom of our Parliament shall think fit. But all Deans, Ca∣nons, Prebendaries, and Sine Cures, ought in reason to contribute: For these Estates were first granted by the religious Donors, ad per∣petuam Eleemosynam; not only for the incouragement of Learning, for the maintenance of the Service of God, for a more splendid Government of the Church, but for the Benefit and Comfort of the Poor in every County, where they had no Laws then to gather Taxes for their relief. Let also some certain Fines to be impos'd by the Government, at the Assizes and Sessions, and in Courts of Judicature, upon Offenders, be appropriated to the Building of these convenient Houses in the several Counties where the Offences were committed. And for a more effectual carrying on of this good Work, let four or more Persons be appointed as publick Commissioners, to push it on and bring it to perfection. Let them divide the Nation between them, and visit every County, and there advise with the Justices for convenient places to erect such Work-house for the Poor. Let them be authoris'd by the Government to take waste Ground, to agree with the Proprietors and Workmen, and to appoint, with the consent of the Justices, Governors and
Deputy-Governors, to oversee the Workmen, and hasten the Building, according to the first Pattern to be erected near the City of London. And let them make such Regulations as shall be con∣venient. And let them order a stock of Hemp, and other Com∣modities and Monies to be deliver'd and paid to the Governors of the Poor out of the Monies collected in each County. And for their incouragement, let such Persons have some publick Office of Profit or Advantage bestowed upon them to incourage them, and defray their Charges, that what they do may be gratis in relation to the Poor, or their Stock, and nothing may be diminish'd out of it, but wholly spent for the relief and imployment of such poor Persons whose whole Families, may be admitted, and all put to work according to their several Abilities and Ages. Some other easy Methods may be contrived to raise Mony for the building of these Houses, which may not in any wise burden the Commonalty of the Nation; For instance, let all great Offices in Law, and other profitable imploys in Church and State, be charg'd with the payment of some Proportion of such large Revenues for this publick Good. I doubt not but those worthy Gentlemen whom God hath bless'd with plentiful Estates either in Church, Law, or Government, will not grudg to allow something out of their abundance to this pious Work, for the easement of their Neighbours and themselves. If these Proposals may be accepted, and the Methods here laid down be found agreeing with the Wisdom of our Governors, as it is both rational, just, and feasible; I doubt not but to shew ano∣ther Expedient for the raising of a considerable Sum of Mony, with the general Applause of the whole Nation, if any of these former Methods displease the Humor or Stinginess of such as are desired to contribute; or if the Fund so rais'd be not sufficient to com∣pleat this great Work; that is, to erect the Work-houses, and buy in to them a sufficient Stock of the Growth of the Coun∣try, as may imploy all the idle and lazy Poor of the Nation. Let there be an inquiry made into two or three grand Abuses in the Nation, and such as are found guilty, be depriv'd of their unjust gain▪ that is, what they for some years have usurp'd and enjoyed contrary to the known Laws of the Land, and be oblig'd to quit and to refund for two or three years back what they have thus
taken: I dare be bold to promise a considerable Sum either into the King's Exchequer, or for the carrying on this Work. And for the City of London, for which I have always had a particular Affection, having receiv'd there my first Education; as the Poor in the adjacent parts thereabouts are more numerous than in any other part, and the number of Beggars, and the Evil great∣er, so larger Sums of Mony are required for the erecting these necessary Work-houses. I suppose no less than three may be re∣quired in and about this large City, for the containing of all the poor Families. One in the City and Liberties, another about Spittle-fields, or towards Wapping, and another for Westminster and that part. I offer to the worthy and honourable Governors of this noble City, if they shall please to listen to my Proposals, to shew them an easy Method to raise Mony for the time to come, with∣out burdening their Neighbours, sufficient for the building and pre∣paring all these Workhouses, and to give my pains freely in the management and carrying on of this Work, without expectation of any other Reward but the Honor and great satisfaction of seeing it brought to perfection. I understand that the religious Governors of this City, impower'd by Law, have taken Methods already to imploy their Poor, have raised Mony, hired large Houses in Bishopsgate-street, and are pre∣paring them for their Reception, and have brought this Business to a tolerable perfection, within their Jurisdiction. Let them in prosc∣cution of their judicious Indeavors, appoint Officers to such a num∣ber as they can well manage. Let a Care be taken of Religion a∣mong the Poor, that we may expect a greater Blessing upon the publick Proceedings; and let an Act of Parliament be desired, to confirm and grant such things as shall be thought necessary for the carrying on of this pious Work. And let there be a Stock of all Commodities grow∣ing in our Country be provided, to imploy such Poor as are within and without the House. I doubt not but to see this business compleated to the Satisfaction of all the Inhabitants whoin a short time will rejoice to see their Mony so well imployed. I intreat them therefore to consider, and seriously to weigh what I have here offer'd, how reasonable it is that it is necessa∣ry that the lazy Poor should be confin'd and oblig'd to work either for want of Food, or by some other Restraint and Com∣pulsion.
That such Houses being built and regulated in this man∣ner, under a Governor and his Deputy, are the most convenient for this purpose. That this Method tends to the Glory of God, the Instruction as well as Imployment and Maintenance of the Poor, to the freeing of the Nation from all lazy and idle Beg∣gars, to the increase of Trade, to the augmenting in time of his Majesty's Revenues, to remove out of our sight a great Eyesore and Grievance. It tends to ease us from the great burden of those Rates that we pay to the Poor, more to incourage their laziness, than to relieve their wants. It tends to the Glory and great Advantage of our Trading Nation, and to the Honor of our Reformation. And this business may be so carried on, that no Person shall find him∣self either burden'd or aggriev'd. And if any Objection, which I can't at present foresee, shall be made against this Expedient to pro∣vide for our Poor, I offer to answer it, and to prove that it tends wholly to the publick Good more than to any private Interest. Nei∣ther can there be any imbezling or diverting of the publick Monies from the appointed Uses, because such as shall be intrusted, may be narrowly lookt after; and no longer are they to receive the same, than they free every Parish from their present Burden of the Poor. And I judg it more reasonable for us to trust such judicious Gover∣nors with a prudent management of the Poors Mony for their good, than to put it into the hands of such idle and lazy Prodigals (as we now do) who trust wholly upon the Sweat and Labors, and to the forced Charity and Benevolence of their poor Neighbors, and lavish it often at a strange rate. And these Houses, the fuller they are, and the more hands to work, the richer they and their Gover∣nors will grow: So that in a few years they will take away all our Poor without contribution, who will be able to subsist plentifully and better within these Houses than ordinary People without, and free us in time from the payment of all Poors Rates. I pray God direct our wise Governors in this and all their other Consul∣tations, for his Glory, his Majesty's Honor, tho Nations Credit, the Increase of true Religion, and the publick Good. Amen. M. D. FINIS.
