D894 99828070 32497
The Lord Mayor & Court Of Aldermen.
THE PRESENT STATE OF London: OR, Memorials COMPREHENDING A Full and Succinct Account Of the Ancient and Modern State thereof. By THO. DE-LAƲNE, Gent. Civitates ab initio Ʋtilitatis causa constitutae sunt. Aristot. 1. Polit. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin, for Enoch Prosser and John How, at the Rose and Crown, and Se∣ven Stars, in Sweethings-Alley, near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.
To the Right Honourable Sir Patience Ward, Knight, LORD MAYOR OF THE City of LONDON. My Lord, THese Memorials, respecting the An∣cient and Modern State of this great and Renowned Ci∣ty, of which (un∣der His Majesty) Your Lordship enjoys the Supreme Magistracy, cannot find a more Pro∣per,
or more Honourable Patron than Your Lordship; considering the High Place You hold in that Meridian for which This Discourse is Calcula∣ted. The General Grief expressed by all Loyal English Protestants, for Your Lordships late Indisposition, and the General Rejoycing amongst them, for Your Happy Recovery, as a Mer∣cy to this City, (of both which, the Presenter of this Address was in part a Witness and Partaker) are Eviden∣ces both of Your Lordships Good Ad∣ministration in so Eminent a Dignity, aud the Universal Satisfaction of this Famous Metropolis in Your Go∣vernment. Your Prudent, Zealous, and Cou∣ragious
Conduct in these Perillous and Menacing Times, suitable to those Never-to-be-forgotten Speeches, de∣livered by Your Lordship, and Your Eminent and Worthy Predecessor, Sir Robert Clayton, at the Time of Your Election to this August Ma∣gistracy, has engaged all True Pa∣triots, and Abhorrers of Foreign and Domestick Vassalage, (a thing at∣tempted to be Introduced by those Execrable Mediums of Assassina∣ting the Sacred Person of His Roy∣al Majesty, and Everting His Go∣vernment) to give Your Lordship an Eminent Place in their Esteem, and Justly Obliges this Great City to Honour Your Lordship in a De∣gree suitable to so High a Merit.
My Lord, I hope You will vouchsafe me Your Pardon for my Presumption in Publishing this small Product of my Recess and Solitude, under the Patronage of Your Honourable Name, for which, and the Famous City You Govern, I have so High a Vene∣ration, that it Obliges me to be Your Lordships most humble Servant, Thomas De-Laune. London, June 24. 1681.
To the Reader. THis Abstract is partly collected from the best Authors I could meet with, as the Chronicles and Statutes of England, Antiquaries, Modern Writers, &c. I have endeavoured to avoid Pro∣lixity, and to omit no Remarkables, as far as my designed Brevity would admit; intending rather a Compendi∣um, than a Voluminous History. What lay scatered in divers Vo∣lumes, are reduced (in a method whol∣ly new) under their proper Heads, briefly, yet (I hope) not obscurely. I have intermixt many new things, which fell within my own observa∣tion (or my Friends) respecting the Present State of this City, never to my knowledge (I am sure never in this Method) Published. It is said, That Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile Dulci: If that be not done here, yet it is an Essay of that kind, being a mix∣ture wherein with great variety, things highly useful are interwoven with
delightsom. And if there be any mi∣stakes or imperfections, which all men are liable to, upon any Informa∣tion, (which shall be thankfully re∣sented) it may be capable of Recti∣fying hereafter. I do not pretend to give a full ac∣count of all things worthy to be known, in this great City, or of its fa∣mous Citizens, for that would make an huge Volume, but onely of the most Eminent which have occurr'd to my Reading or Observation. As to the Method and particulars treated of, you are referred to the Synopsis, or Table of Contents follow∣ing; by which you may easily find out any thing in the Book. If the City thinks this worth en∣tertainment, it will engage me to proceed in perfecting other Materials I have by me, and offer it in another work, which I trust will be useful to all. I have an high Honor for this Il∣lustrious City, and the worthy Inhabi∣tants thereof, as an Instance of which, this Essay is offered to the perusal of the Candid Reader, by Thomas D-lau
To his Friend, Mr. Thomas De-Laune, An Acrostick on The Present State of LONDON: This is that City which the Papal Crew Have by their Damn'd Devices overthrew Erected on her old Foundations, New. Pourtrayed once by Stow, and now again Rebuilt, and Re-reviv'd by thee, De-laune; Extracted Phoenix-like, whose splendor shows She triumphs o're the Ruine of her Foes. Excellent Architect, that in few Sheets New builds a City of Five hundred Streets. Temples, Courts, Churches, Monuments and Halls. Shores, Towers, Gates, Inns, Citadels, and Walls. The Grandeur of this fam'd Metropolis, Arts, Laws and Customs, thou hast shewn in this: This Little Volume comprehends the Great European-Empory, the Royal Seat Of English Monarchs, whose Succession runs From Royal Fathers, Lineally to Sons. London, the Author fully lets Thee see Orders and Customs of Antiquity; Names, Honours, Titles, Companies drawn forth, Display'd in Banners, Badges of thy Worth: Of all the Cities on the Continent, No better Governours nor Government. R. S.
To his Friend the Author, UPON THE Present State of LONDON. REader, Survey DE-LAƲNE, and his Survey, Who LONDON's Glories lively doth display In Her immediate State; whose Stately Pile Exceeds all Structures on the British Isle: Look through this Little Book, as through a Glass, You may behold what now She Is, and Was. View between Sixty Six, and Eighty One; Can you not see Great Alteration? In Sky-Invading-Flames three days She burns, Which all her Glories into Ashes turns: But stop not there; Look nearer yet by Ten; Doth She not mount to greater Glory then Before? Look nigher yet by Five, for this Her Present State a Pleasant Prospect is. This Glass (Brave City) he presents to Thee, That Thou Thy Self, Thy Self may'st better see. This Thy Remote and Distant Friends will move To Admiration, and Ʋniting Love. When they peruse those Gallant Laws whereby Thou'rt Rul'd, and Rulest by Just Policy. Thy Piety, Thy Splendid Trade, by which Thou art become so Great, so Good, so Rich. Those worthy Characters which he hath writ, Exalts Thy Greatness, Justifies his Wit. 'Tis not my Task Thy Splendor to Commend, It is Exalted by DE-LAƲNE Thy Friend. My Muse would fain Attempt his Commendation, But is constrain'd to rest in Admiration. D. E. Philopolis.
The CONTENTS. CHap. 1, Of the Antiquity, Original, and Name of London. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Situation of London. P. 3. Chap. 3. Of its Increase, Magnitude, Publick Stru∣ctures, and number of Inhabitants, p. 5, 292. Sect. 1. Of its Walls, Towers, Gates, &c. p. 9. Of the Tower, and Ancient Castles, p. 13, 17. Sect. 2. Of its Churches and Monuments, p. 19 Of Pauls Church, and Westminster-Abby, p. 20 The Ancient State of all the Churches in London Alphabetically, with their monuments, &c. p 27. The Monument of Mr. Fox, Martyrologist, p. 69. Of Mr. Speed the Famous Historian, p. 73. Sect. 3. Of Hospitals, viz. Christs Hospital, and St. Thomas his Hospital, &c. p. 81. Of the Charter-House, or Sutton's Hospital, p. 90 Of Old and New Bedlam, p. 97. Sect. 4. Of its Palaces, viz. Whitehall, or the Kings Court, &c. p. 99. Of St. James's Palace, and the Park, p. 122 Of Westminster-hall, and the Courts there, viz. Common-Pleas, Kings-Bench, Chancery, and Exchequer, p. 126. Of Dooms-day-Book. p, 135. A full Account of the High-Court of Parlia∣ment, &c. p. 193. Of Somerset-house, p. 156. Sect. 5. Of the Royal Exchange, &c. p. 159. Sect. 6. Of Colledges and Inns of Court, viz. Gre∣sham-Colledge, Sion-Colledge, Physitians-Col∣ledge, Doctors Commons, Colledge of Heralds, &c. and Inns of Court and Chancery, p. 162, 179. Sect. 7. Of London-Bridge, p. 191. Of the River of Thames, and Lord Mayors Ju∣risdiction there. p. 195. Of the New River, p. 209.
Chap. 4. Of the Government of London, Ecclesiastical, Temporal, and Military, &c. p. 213. to 288. Of the Charters, By-Laws, and Courts in Lon∣don, p. 263. to 277. Chap. 5. Of the Trade of London, its Merchants, the Original of Money; an Account of the several Cor∣porations, and their Coats of Arms blazon'd. p. 269. The Oath of a Freeman, p. 331. Of Guild-hall, Leaden-hall, Blackwel-hall, and the Custom-house, p. 333, to 336. Of Docks, Porters, &c. p. 340. Of the Markets for Coals, Corn, and Fish, p. 342. Of the Navy-Office and Post-Office, p. 343, 345. Of the Penny-Post. p. 350. The Rates of Coachmen, p. 359. An Alphabetical Account of the Carriers, Waggo∣ners, and Stage-Coaches, that come to the re∣spective Inns in London, from all parts of Eng∣land and Wales, with the days of their Coming in, and Going out. p. 383. The Rates of Carmen and Watermen. p. 436, 442. An Historical Account of the Wars, Tumults, Fires, Epidemical Diseases, Rarities and Accidents, that have happened in the City of London: Briefly ab∣stracted from Ancient and Modern Writers, p. 443. An Appendix containing the Names of the present Aldermen, and the respective Wards they Govern; With a List of the present Officers of the Lord Mayors House, and the Officers belonging to the Two Counters.
THE PRESENT STATE OF LONDON. CHAP. I. Of its Antiquity and Original. OUr Famous Antiquaries generally agree that the Britains, whose Posterity now inhabit the Dominion of Wales, and are called Welsh, ee the Founders of the Renowned City of LON∣DON:
They were in old times known by the Name of Aborigines, because they first inhabited the Coun∣trey. Some derive the name London (which is the greatest probablity) from the British word Llhong, which sig∣nifies a Ship, and Dinan, a Town, that is, a Town of Ships, this City being in all Ages, since its foundation, very renowned for Shipping and Navigation. (2.) Others from Llhwindian, because (as Caesar in his Commentaries, and Strabo mention) the Ancient Britains called their fortified Woods Llhwn, which is equivalent to a fenced Town, and that, where S. Pauls Church now stands, there was in old times a Wood, where a Temple was built for Diana, it being the custom of those Pagan Times to build their Fanes or Temples to Diana in Woods or Groves, and so it signifies Dianas Town. (3.) Some derive it from Llhandian, the Britains still calling Llan a Church, and so may signifie Dianas-Church or Temple, for there have been frequently digged up Oxens Heads and Bones, which have been offered as Victims or Sacrifices there, viz. in Camera Dianae. So that this word came in tract of time to be pro∣nounced London. Caesar (Comment. lib. 5.) calls it Civitas Trinobantum, viz. The City of the Tri∣nobants (some would have it translated the state of Trinobants) for Trosa Nova, or Troy Novant, New Troy; Which appellation was in old times by many ascribed to London; as Geoffery of Monmouth the Welsh Historian affirms. It is said by the same Author, that King Lud re∣paired this City, and much augmented it with fair buildings, calling it Caire Lud, that is, Lud's Town, and from him Ludgate takes its Name. This City was built 2789 years ago, that is 1108 years before the birth of Christ, (and, by the exactest computation) in the time of Samuel the Prophet, and 350 years before the building of Rome. Of all
Historians Cornelius Tacitus, who first called it Lon∣dinum; says, that it was in his time (which is about 1655 years ago) Copia Negotiatorum & Commeatu valde celebre; that is, very famous for multitude of Merchants and Traffick, (or Commerce.) Herodian in the Life of the Emperour Severus, says it was Ʋrbs magna & opulenta, that is, a Great and Rich City. Marcelinus says, That in his time (which is 1200 and odd years ago) it was Vetustum oppidum, an ancient Town. Fitz-Stephens tells us, That haec Civitas Ʋrbe Roma, secundum Chronicorum fidem, satis Antiquior est, &c. Viz. This City, according to the credit of Chro∣nologers, is far more ancient then Rome. In the flourishing Estate of London, it was called Augusta, a Name denoting Dignity and Majesty; for the Great Octavian, Successor to Julius Caesar, took to himself the Name of Augustus, as a Title most Sacred and Honourable. This Marcellinus witnesses, in his 27 and 28 Books, calling it Augusta, and that in old times it was called London. It was very famous by that Appellation under the Emperour Valentinian. And in Constantine's time there was a Mint appointed there, and Money stamp'd with this Impression, P. Lon. S. that is, Pecunia Londino Signata, Money stamp'd in London: And the Overseer or Master of the Mint was called Praepositus Thesaurorum Augu∣stensium; that is, Provost of the Treasures of Augu∣sta in Britain. CHAP. II. Of the Situation of London. THe Wisdom of our Ancestors is very Eminent and Remarkable in the Excellent Situation of this famous City, which we shall shew, 1. With respect to Air, 2. Its conveniencies of being supplied with all sorts of Provisions by Sea and Land.
1. With respect to Air, This City being situ∣ate on the North side of the River, in the Latitude of 51 Degrees 30 Minutes, and so far distant from the Sea, that it is not annoyed with the boistrous Winds, or unwholsom Vapours of it; and yet so near, that it enjoys the mild salubrious Breezes of the Eastern, Southern, and Western Seas, with the whol∣som gusts and fresh Air of the Country round about; it must needs therefore have an Excellent Air. And it is by Experience found to be as healthy a City (considering its greatness and Number of Inhabi∣tants; with the prodigions quantity of Coals burnt yearly in it,) as any in the known World. 2. The Soil is rich and fertile, abounding with plenty of all things useful for the life of Man. The Country round about it, being very well Inhabited, supplying it with plenty of all Sorts of Provision, and the Respective Manufactories of England, to furnish not only the Inhabitants, but for Transportation to the several parts of the World, where its Merchants Trade: For which it has the advantage of large, strait and fair High-ways for Carriages and Passengers by Land; and a Navigable River for the Conveyance of heavy Commodities, as Fuel, &c. So that it may be called the Grand Mart of England. And for Na∣vigation and Foreign Commerce (in which no Em∣porium in the World can Challenge precedence and by which a considerable share of the Riches of other Nations is imported) the Reader is referred to the Chapters where we shall Treat of Trade. The River Thames, upon wih it is seated, and by it in the form of a Crescent, each part of the City enjoying the bene∣fit of the River, and yet not far distant from each o∣ther. This City is so far from the Sea, that it needs not fear a Forreign Surprize, and yet in 12 hours by the help of the Tide, it is capable to receive the greatest Ships that Traverse the Ocean.
CHAP. III. Of its Increase, Magnitude, Inhabi∣tants, Publick Structures, &c. AS it was said of the People of Rome, that e parva origine, from a small beginning they grew to a vast greatness, so we may truly say of this Famous City (the Metropolis of our Monarchy) which even in Neroes days was Renowned for Concourse of Merchants, and provision of all things, (as Speed informs us,) and must Consequently be Great and Populous. That it has received an accession and in∣crease in the Respective Ages, is certain; and in our Memory, we have seen it to multiply exceedingly in beautiful Structures and number of Inhabitants. So that it is at present of vast extent, being from Lime-House to the end of Tuttle-steet, from East to West, above 7500 Geometrical paces, that is, above seven Miles and ahalf; And from the further end of Black∣man-street in Southwark, to the end of St. Leonard-Shore-Ditch is 2500 paces, that is two Miles and a half. The Principal Streets, Lanes, and Alleys, in this great City, are above 500 in number, and yet some of them above half a measured Mile in length. Be∣fore the dreadful Conflagration in 1666, there were computed within the Walls above 15000 Houses, which is but one fifth of the whole City, as appears by the Weekly Bills of Mortality, so that the Total of Houses may be 75000, which are mightily increased since the Rebuilding of the City, enlarg∣ing it self every way, especially, about St. James's and Sohoe-Fields, where it has received such Additions of beautiful Buildings, as by themselves would make a brave City. So that now London for fair and state∣ly
Edifices, uniform and Regular buildings, and other publick Structures, does not only excel its former State, but (all things considered) may outvie the most Magnificent Cities of the Universe, as shall be Demonstrated more particularly. As to the number of Inhabitants when London was by more than a fourth part less than it is now, there were computed to be eaten 67500 Beefs yearly there, ten times as many Sheep, that is 675000, be∣sides abundance of Calves, Lamb, Swine, all sorts of Poultry, Foul, Fish, Roots, Milk, &c. And that every year to supply the City with Coals, there is brought into the River about 300000 Chaldrons, every Chal∣dron being 36 Bushels. The Bills of Mortality in times of no Infection, do yearly amount to 20000 and odd, which is three times more than Amsterdam; and equal to, if not be∣yond Paris, as by the Bills themselves may be seen. In the year 1667. when the greatest part of the City lay in Ashes within the Walls, and much without, and consequently many of the Inhabitants forced to retire into the Countrey for Habitation, according to exact computation there were brewed that year in Lon∣don 452563 Barrels of Beer, 580421 Barrels of Ale, and 489797 Barrels of Table-Beer, (or Small Beer.) The Strong Beer 36 gallons to the Barrel, sold at 12 s. 6 d. the Small Beer also 36 gallons to the Barrel, sold at 6 s. 6 d. the Ale 32 gallons to the Barrel, sold at 16 s. But now there is a vast greater quantity (besides abun∣dance of Spanish, French, and Rhenish Wines, Cyder, and other Liquors) consumed. The Excise of Beer and Ale, though very moderate, is (or has lately been) Farmed of the King at above 120000 l. a year. Parish Churches, besides Chappels, there are in all 132, which is twice more then any City in Christendom hath; which leads us to take a View of the Publick Structures, which for methods sake shall be described in this order.
NEW-GATE. LUD-GATE.
CRIPPLE-GATE. ALDERS-GATE
WESTMINSTER ABBY 25 PARLAMENT HOVS THE MON VMENT
St MARY OVERIES▪ CHVRCH BOW STEEPLE
BISHOPS-GATE. MOORE-GATE.
THE TOWER. ALD-GATE.
1. The Walls, Towers, Gates, &c. 2. Churches and Monuments. 3. Hospitals and Work-Houses. 4. Palaces, and the Houses of the Nobility. 5. Exchanges and Publick Halls. 6. Colledge and Inns of Court. 7. Bridges, and the New River. 8. Markets. SECT. I. Of its Walls, Gates, Towers, &c. SImon of Durham, the Ancient Writer, tells us, That London was first encompassed with Walls by Constantine the Great, at the Request of his Mother Helena, about the year 399. or according to Stow, 306. Which Wall being of rough Stone and Brittish Brick, was in compass three miles, inclosing the Mo∣del of the City almost in the form of a Bow on the Land-side, (except Denting in betwixt Cripplegate and Aldersgate) but on the South-side it was as the String of a Bow, furnished with Towers and Bulwarks at due distances. The City is of greater length from East to West, then from North to South: That part of the Wall which stood on the Thames side, is by the con∣tinual flowing and washing of the River, fallen down and decayed; yet there appeared some remains there∣of in Henry the Second's time: Fitz-Stephens, who then lived, says, That London was ab Austro-muraa & Turrita, that is, Walled and Towered on the South, but that in Tract of Time the River Thames destroyed it. Mr. Stow in his Survey tells us, That the City being destroyed by the Danes, Anno 839. was repaired by Alfred King of the West Saxons, Anno 886. after it had lain waste 47 years, Anno 1215. the sixth of King John, the Barons en∣tred
the City by Aldgate, plundered the Jews, repaired the Walls with the Stones of their Houses. Anno 1257. Henry the Third caused the decayed Walls to be re∣paired at the common charge of the City. Anno 1282. Edward the First giving Licence to enlarge the Black Fryars Church, and to break down a part of the Wall between Ludgate and the River Thames, he gave certain Customs to the Mayor and Citizens to build a Wall from Ludgate West, to Fleet-Bridge, and so behind the Houses by the Fleet-Water (now the New-Channel) to the River. In the year 1310. Edward the Second commanded the Citizens to finish the Wall already begun, and the Tower at the end of it, within the Water of the River Thames near Black∣Fryars. Anno 1322. being the second of Edward the Third, the Walls were again repaired. It was also granted by King Richard the Second in the tenth year of his Reign, That a Toll should be taken of the Wares sold by Land or Water for ten years, towards the repairing of the Walls and cleansing the Ditch a∣bout London. In the sixteenth of Edward the Fourth, (viz. Anno 1476.) the Mayor of London (Sir Ralph Joceline) caused the part of the Wall betwixt Aldgate and Aldersgate to be repaired; the Skinners repairing from Aldgate to Burys-marks towards Bishopsgate, as may appear by their Arms in three places fixed there. The Mayor with his Company of Erapers, repaired from Bishops-gate to Allhallows-Church in the same Wall, and from Allhallows towards the Po∣stern called Moor-gate. A great part of the same Wall was repaired by the Executors of Sir John Crosby Alderman, as may appear by his Arms in two places fixed there; and other Companys repaired the rest of the Wall to the Postern of Cripple-gate. Bi∣shops-gate was new built by the Merchants Almains of the Still-yard. The Goldsmiths Repaired from Cripple-gate towards Alders-gate, and there the work ceased, which was a great Service for one Year.
The Circuit of the Wall on the Land side from the Tower to Aldgate in the East is 82 perches; from thence to Bishops-gate 86 perches. From Bishops∣gate in the North to the Postern of Cripple-gate 162 perches. From Cripple-gate to Alders-gate 75 perches. From Alders-gate to New-gate 66 perches. From New-gate in the West to Ludgate 42 perches. From thence to the Fleet-Dyke West 60 perches. From thence to the River Thames about 70. In all 643 perches, every perch being 5 Yards and a half, contains 3536 Yards and a half, which is 10608 foot, or two Miles and a half, and 608 foot over, to which if you add from Black friers to the Tower, it will be found, that the whole Circuit of the Walls was above three English Miles. The Principal Gates of this Noble City are seven, viz. on the West, Ludgate of King Lud, it being built by him, as Geoffry of Monmouth says, about the Year of Christ 66. Though some (as Leland) conjecture, it may be called, Lud-gate for Flud∣gate, from a little Flud running beneath it. It was made a Free Prison Anno 1379. Sir Nicholas Bremer being Mayor, which was confirmed in the Year 1382. By a Common Counsel in the Guild-Hall▪ by which it was Ordained, That all Free-men this City should for Debt, Trespasses, Accounts, and Contempts, be imprisoned in Lud-gate, where at first they paid nothing for Lodging and Water. This, Gate was Repaired in the 28 of Q. Elizabeth, Anno 1586 at the Common charges of the City, amount∣ing to above 1500 l. In the 3d of Edw. 4. Sir Ma∣thew Philips being Mayor, Dame Agnes Foster, Relict of Sir Stephen Foster Fishmonger, (who was also Mayor in the one and thirtyeth Year of King Hen. 6.) for the Comfort and Relief of all the poor Prisoners, procured an Establishment of certain Ar∣ticles in a Common Council, viz. That the New Works then lately Edified by the same Dme Agnes,
for the enlarging of the Prison of Lud-gate, from thenceforth should be had and taken as a part and parcel of the said Prison of Lud-gate, so that both the old and new Work aforesaid to be one Pri∣son, Goal, keeping and charge for evermore. The Quadrant built by the said Sir Stephen Fo∣ster and his Lady, contained a large walking place by ground of 38 Foot and a half in Length, besides the thickness of the Walls, which were 6 Foot in all 44 Foot and a half, the Breadth within the Walls was 29 Foot and a half, which with the thickness of the Walls makes it 35 Foot and an half broad. The like Room there was over it for Lodgings, and over that fair Leads to walk upon, well imbattelled for fresh Ayr and refreshment of Prisoners. 2. New-gate which was so called for its Newness, as being erected later than the rest, viz. about the Reign of Henry the first, or of King Stephen: This was the fairest of all the Gates, and was Rebuilt af∣ter its being destroied in the dreadful Conflagration in 1666 more stately than ever, (of which we will give a particular account hereafter, as also of the Re∣vival of London, from those Ruinous heaps in which the Hellish Malice of cked Incendiaries had bu∣ried it.) This Gate being a Sumptuous and Capaci∣ous Fabrick, is the Publick Goal or Prison for Cri∣minals, and also for Court-Actions, for the County of Middlesex, and has been so for many Ages, as ap∣pears by Records in King John's time. There have been many Benefactors to this place, who gave somthing Yearly towards the Relief of Pri∣soners, as Sir John Poultney, who gave 4 Marks per annum, Anno 1237. and many others since. Anno 1312. It was re-edified by the Executors of Sir Rechard Whittington. 3. Alders-gate is said to Derive its name of Elder-rees which grew about it, others from its Antiquity, (viz. Olders-gate,) and some Derive it from Aldrich
a Saxon. This also is (and indeed all the Gates that have been consumed in the great fire, are) now built more Magnificently than ever they were. 4. Cripple-Gate so called of a Spittle of Crip∣ples somtimes adjoining thereto, that were wont to beg at the said Gate. It has been formerly a Prison, where Persons were Committed, as now to the Com∣pters. It was Re-edified by the Brewers of London, in the Year 1244. And by the Executors of Ed∣mund Shaw Goldsmith, Mayor, Anno 1491. 5. Moor-Gate, so called from a Moorish ground hard by, but now turned into very pleasant and de∣lightful walks, called Moor-fields. This Gate was built by Thomas Falconer Lord Mayor, in the 2 H. 5. Anno 1414. 6. Bishops-Gate, so called of a Bishop the Be∣nefactor, which the Dutch Merchants, or Hans of the Still-Yard, were bound by Covenant to repair and defend at all times of Danger and extremity. 7. Aldgate, on the East, so named from the old∣ness, or Elbe-Gate, this is one of the Principal Gates, and of the 7 double Gates mentioned by Fitz-Ste∣phens. It is Rebuilt at the Charge of the City. Besides these, in ancient times there stood two Gates on that part of the City next the River whilst the Wall stood, namely Billings-Gate, now a Whaf or a Key; and Doure-Gate, or the Water-Gate com∣monly called Dow-Gate. There are some Posterns also, which may go for Gates, as that out of Christ-Church and Hospital, to pass from thence to the Hospital of St. Batholomews in Smithfield, to make which, License was given to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, in the 6. of E. 6. Sir Richard Dobbs Lord Mayor. There is also ano∣ther that leads to Moor-fields. And that near the Tower, by the Remains, seems to have been a fair and strong Arched Gate of much trust there having formerly been always a Person of Quality as Custas▪
or Keeper of it. In the 2 R. 1. Ann. 1190. William Longshamp Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor of Eng∣land, caused a part of the Cty Wall; to wit, from the said Gate (towards the River) to the White Tower, to be broken down for the enlarging the said Tower, which he encompassed with the outer Wall and broad Ditch, but coming too near the foundation of the aforesaid Gate, it was much loosned and weakned, so that 200 and odd years after, viz. Anno 1440. 18 H. 6. It fell down and was never since re-edified. There were several other Water-Gates, which were purchased by private Men, as at Black-frier-stairs a free landing place: Puddle-Wharf: Pauls-Wharf, a free landing place: Broken-wharf: Queen-Hith: a place called Woolf-Gate, in the Parish of Alallows, after called Woolf-lane, but the lower part being built on by the Earl of Shresury; and the upper part by the Chamberlain of London; it was grown out of use. There was also a Gate called Ebgate, now the Old Swan. There was also a small Gate cal∣led Oyster-Gate, because Oysters were sold there, and other Shell Fish. Bridg-gate so called of London-Bridg, was reckon∣ed by Fitz-Seephens, one of the Principal Gates of the City. Next Buttolph-gate, so called of St. But∣tolphs-Church adjoining. Of Billingsgate we have spoke already. There was a Water-gate by the Cu∣stom-House, at the South end of Water-lan, and ano∣ther Water-gate by the Tower. Of the Tower of London. THe Wall of the City was furnished round about with Towers and Bulworks at due and Regu∣lar distances. Of which (where the Wall ended to∣wards the River on the East-side) the most eminent was that which we call the Tor of London, Built by William the Conqueror, about the Year 1078.
(Some say that Caesar built the White-Tower, but that is not so: nor does he mention it in his Commentary, though an exact Recorder of his own Actions) Gundulph Bishop of Rochester, being Principal Sur∣veyor and Overseer of the Work. This was the great Square Tower now called the White-Tower, which has been much inlarged by several Buildings since adjoyned at diverse times, and incompassed with a Wall. And Anno 1190 in the 2 R. 1. (as was said,) the Bishop of Ely Chancellor of England, inclsed it with a thick and strong outward Wall of stone Embattailed, and caused a Broad and Deep Ditch to be cast about the same, thinking to have Invironed it with the River of Thames, so that it is a most Famous Goodly Citadel, resembling a big Town. Edward the 4th. fortified this Tower, inclo∣sing a certain piece of Ground taken from Tower-Hill, on the West, which is now called the Bulwark. Near West-gate opening to the South, there is a strong Postern for passengers, by the Ward-House, over a Drawbridg let down for that purpose. On the South side towards the East, is a large Water-gate, for the Receipt of small Vessels, under a store Bridg from the River Thames; beyond it  a small Pstern with a Draw-bridg, seldom let down but to receive great Persons that are Prisoners. The Lyon-Tower was built by Edward the 4th. This is not on∣ly a Fort or Citadel to Defend and Command both City and River, but alo a Royal Palace, where our Kings with their Courts have Lodged some times. 'Tis furnished with an Armory and Royal Arsenaf of Arms, and Ammunition for 60000 Men. Here are kept the Tresury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the English Crown, the only Mint now for Coin∣ing Silver and Gold in England. And the most An∣tient Records of the King's Courts of Justice at West∣minster. This is the Chief Prison for the safe Cu∣stody of Great Persons that are Criminals. It is out
of any County or Parish, yet a great part of it is within the liberty of the City. For it was the Judges opinion that those that were to be Tried for the Mur∣der of Sir Thomas Overbury, must be Tried in the City, the Fact being done there. The Office of his Majesties Records is of venerable Antiquity. And as the Chapel of the Rolls in Chan∣cery-Lane, and Petty Bag-Office, doth fill with Re∣cords out of other Offices, they are transmitted into the Tower after some years, for preservation and secu∣rity. These Records contain the Foundations and Dissolutions of Abbeys, Donation of Land, &c. These Records at the Rolls being joyned to those in the Tower, will make a perfect continuance of all the Antient Rights of England, as, 1. The Leagues and Treaties of Foreign Princes. 2. The Warlike Atchievments of the English in France and other Parts. 3. The Original of all the Laws Enacted and Recorded till the Reign of Richard the 3. 4. The Homage and Dependancy of Scotland upon England. The Establishment of Ireland in Laws and Dominions. 5. The Dominion of the British Seas exclu∣ding both French and Dutch from Fishing there with∣out the Kings License, proved by Records before the Conquest. 6. The Title of the Realm of France, and how obtained. 7. And all that the Kings or Princes of this Land have until that time done abroad, on granted, or confirmed unto their Subjects, at home or abroad. 8. Tenures of all Lands, extents of Surveys of Mannors and Land, Inquisitions post mortem. 9. Libertys and Priviledges Granted to Citys, Towns, or private Men. 10. Several Writs Bleadings, Proceedings, &c.
in Courts of Chancery, Common Law, Exche∣quer, &c. 11. Inspeximus's and Inrollments of Charters and Deeds before the Conquest. 12. Metes and Bounds of all Forrests, with the respective Rights of the Inhabitants to common pa∣sture; besides many other things too tedious to be repeated, and are in the Petition of the Com∣mons of England in Parliament. Anno 46. E. 3. Num. 43. Said to be the perpetual Evidence of every Mans Right, and the Records of this Nation, without which no Story of the Nation can be written or proved. They are reposited in Wakefield-Tower, adjoyning to the Blood-Tower near Traytors-gate. It is to be kept open and constantly attended, for all Resorters thereto, from 7. to 11. of the Clock in the Morn∣ing, and from 1. till 5. in the Afternoon every Day of the week; but in December, January, and Februa∣ry, from 8. in the Morning to 4. in the Afternoon, except Holy-days, &c. The Governor is call'd the Lieutenant of the Tower, who ought to be a Person of Worth and Fidelity, and by Vertue of his Office, is to be a Justice of Peace in Kent, Surrey, and Middlesex; he is High Steward of a Court there held, hath a Deputy, may refuse an Habeas Corpus, and may give Protection to all Debt∣ors belonging to the Tower, all England over. He can take two Gallons and a Pint of all. Wine-Ships that come. His Sallary is 200 l. per annum. His usual Fee for every Prisoner sent to the Tower, who are commonly Men of Estates, is 20 l. and 3. l. a week of an Esq 5. l. for a Knight; for a Baron or above 5. l. at Entrance, to whom the King weekly al∣lows 10 l. whereof two parts to the Prisoner, the third to the Lieutenant for Lodging and Dyet, and 50 l. to the Lieutenant, upon the Prisoners discharge. The Gentleman Taylor is put in by the Lieutenant
of the Tower, and his Fee is 41 s. of a Gentleman, and 5 l. of a Knight. There are 40 Warders of the Tower, accounted the King's Domestick Ser∣vants, and sworn by the Lord Chamberlain of His Maiesties Houshold, or by the Clerk of the Check. In this Tower is kept the Office of His Majesties Ordnance, the standing and grand Magazine of the principal Preparatives, Habiliments, Utensils, and Instruments of War by Sea and Land. It is under the Government in chief of the Master of the Ordnance, by whom it is committed to principal Of∣ficers, as a Lieutenant, who, in the absence of the Ma∣ster of the Ordnance, imparts all Orders and War∣rants directed to the Office, and is to see them duely executed, and to give Order for the discharging great Ordnance when required, at Triumphs, Festivals, &c. As also to see the Train of Artillery, and all its Equipage, fitted for motion upon any occasion. The Surveyor is to survey all the Stores and Ordnance; to allow Bills of Debt, and see that all Provision be good, &c. The Clerk of the Ordnance Records all Orders and Instructions for the Government of the Office, and Patents, Grants, Names of Officers, &c. Draw Estimates of Provision and supplys, Letters, Contracts, &c. Make all Bills of Imprest and Debentures; Keep Journals and Liegers of Receipts, and Returns of Stores. The Store-keeper takes into his charge the Munitions and Stores, and is to look that the Store-houses be kept in due Repair. The Clerk of the Deliveries is to draw all Pro∣portions for Deliveries of any Stores or Provisions, and to be present at the Delivery. There are other Patent Officers, as the Master-Gunner of England, the Keeper of the small Guns, a principal Engineer, with divers inferior Attendants and Artificers, which, for brevity, we omit. In the Tower is also the Office of Warden of the
Mint, where is Coined all the Bullion that is minted in England. The chief Officer is the Warder of the Mint, who receives all the Silver and Gold brought in by Merchants, Goldsmiths, or others, and pays them for it. Then the Master-Worker, who causes the Bullion to be melted, delivers it to the Moneyers, and when minted, receives it again from them. The Comptroller, who is to see that all the Money be made according to the just Assize, &c. The Assay-Master weighs the Bullion, and is to see that it be according to the Standard. The Auditor passes all Accompts. The Surveyor of the Melt∣ing is to see the Bullion cast out, and not to be al∣tered after it is delivered to the Melter. There are several other inferior Officers, &c. As for the Mo∣ney, &c. See the Present State of England, p. 10. The first Gold that was Coined in the Tower, was in the Reign of Edward III. and the Pieces were called Florences, of the value of 6 s. 8 d. All great Sums before were used to be paid by the Weight, as so many Pounds or Marks of Silver or Gold, but not stampt. Lesser Payments in Starlings (probably because there was a Star stamped upon them) and were called Pence: nor can we read of them before the Reign of Henry II. In this Tower only is the Brake or Rack, usual∣ly called, The Duke of Exeter's Daughter, because he was the first Inventer of it. So much of the Tower of London. Besides the Towers on the Bridge, which have suf∣fered by the Accidents of Fire, Antiquaries speak of two Castles that were on the West-part of London, one the Castle of Monfiquet, built by a Baron of that Name, that came over with the Conqueror, but since demolished, and the Black-Fryars risen out of the Ruines of it. The second is Baynard's Castle by Paul's Wharf, built by one Baynard, who came hither likewise with
the Conqueror, who being Ennobled, the Honour suc∣ceeded from Father to Son a long time, till it came to Robert Fitz-water, a brave and valiant Knight, who falling into the displeasure of King John, was banished, and the Castle ruined; but recovering his favor by a notable Combat he perform'd in France against an English Knight, (Fitz-water being on the French side) he was re-invested in his Posses∣sions, and so repaired the Castle again. He was made chief Bannerer (or Banner-bearer) of London; what his Office was, and the Solemnity about it, is to be seen in Stowes Survey of London, in the Chapter of Towers and Castles. When thi Honour fell from the Fitz-Waters, or Baynard Castle, is uncertain. Henry VII. repaired this Castle and Queen Mary was proclaimed there. We rea of a Tower that stood where Bridewell now stands and a Royal Palace where our Kings kept the Courts, and summon'd Parliaments. A great par of this on the West-side was given to the Bishop Salisbury, and thence is derived the Name of Salis∣bury-Court. The Eastern-part was waste, till Hen. built a stately Palace there, and call'd it Bridewel where the Emperor Charles V. was most magnifi∣cently entertained Anno 1522. There was a Tower call'd the Royal Tower i the Parish of St. Michael de Pater Noster, wher King Stephen kept his Court, afterwards call'd, Th Queens Wardrobe. There was another at Bucklerbury, called, Serns Tower, where King Edward II kept his Court, and his Exchange of Money. Barbican was likewise another Tower, where th City Centinels were wont to Watch, but demolishe by King Henry III. Anno 1227. after he was rconciled to the Barons.
Sect. 2. Of its Churches and Monuments. THE Number of Parish-Churches, besides Chapels, within the Weekly Bills of Mor∣tality, is 132, (twice more than any City in Chri∣stendom can shew;) The Cathedral of which, is dedicated to the Apostle St. PAƲL, and the onely Cathedral of that Name in Europe. It was founded by Aethelbert King of Kent, Anno 610. (under whom Segbert a Saxon Reigned in this Tract of Ground) in a place where stood a Temple of Diana, and afterwards did endow it with Lands and Privileges; so did afterwards Athelstan, Edgar and Eward the Confessor. It was much enlarged by Erkenwald, the Fourth Saxon Bishop thereof: And being almost destroyed by Fire Anno 1078. Mau∣ritius, another of its Bishops, began the Foundation of this magnificent Pile, and went on about 20 years, but the Quire and Tower were not finished till Anno 1221. As to other Casualties, we refer you to the Chapter that treats of Fires. As to its Dimensions, the length of it, according to Stow, was 240 Taylors Yards, or 720 Foot; the Breadth, 130 Foot; the Heighth of the Steeple, 520 Foot; whereof the Stone Work was 260, and the Spire 260 Foot. The Length of it, according to others, was 690 Foot, that is, 20 Foot more than St. Peters at Rome. It stood upon so much Ground, as contained above three Acres and an half. Upon the Spire of Timber was a Bowl of Copper Gilt 9 Foot and 1 Inch in compass, whereon stood the Cross 15 Foot and an half high, and very near 6 Foot across, made of Oak, covered with Lead, and another Cover of Copper over the Lead. Above all, stood the Eagle, or Cock
of Copper Gilt 4 Foot long, and the Breadth of the Wings 3 Foot and an half. It was built in Form of a Cross, and in the midst of the Cross, upon mighty high Arches, was the Tower built. It was a very magnificent Structure for Beauty, Dimensions and Proportion, as William of Malmsbury says, adding, That it ought to be numbred among the Number of the most excellent Edifices, the large Arched Vault, and the Church above it, being of such a capacity, that (saith he) it may seem sufficient enough to receive any Number of People. The Caemitery, or Church-yard, was of a very great Dimension, for it reached North, as far as St. Nicholas Market-place; West, almost as far as Lud-gate; South, near to Baynards Castle. I my self this last year, viz. January 1680. saw in the place where the New Conduit is a building, where they digged to lay the Foundation, several Coffins and Bones, so that it extended farther by far on that side, and probably on all sides, than it does now. As to its Benefactors, and its being consumed by the dread∣ful Conflagration in 1666. more shall be spoken un∣der their proper Heads. As to its Situation, it was built on the highest part of the City, and so more conspicuous, perhaps, than any Cathedral in the World. His present Ma∣jesty in the year 1673. having with great cost pulled down the Burnt Walls, removed the Rubbish, and cleared the Foundation, has laid another Foundation, which is considerably advanced; and for Magnifi∣cence, Splendor, Solidity, Figure, and Curious Ar∣chitecture, will, probably, excel any to be seen elsewhere. Besides this stately Cathedral, there were destroyed in the dreadful Fire of 1666, Eighty seven Parish Churches, and six Consecrated Chapels, a great many of which are since Re-built (far more stately and,
magnificent than ever they were before) of solid Stone, with very curious Workmanship, beautified with excellent various Towers▪ and Fronts of true Roman Architecture. Of the Churches in City and Suburbs we will give a brief Account, beginning with Westminster Abby, and so on with the rest Alphabetically. Westminster Abby was founded by Sebert King of the East Saxons, out of the Ruines of a Temple of Apollo which stood there, and fell by an Earthquake in the time of the Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius, about the year of our Lord 605, and had its Name from its Situation, as being West from London, and its Minster. It was dedicated to St. Peter, and de∣stroyed in the furious Wars of the Danes, but Re∣edified by Bishop Dunstan, by the favor of King Edgar, who gave it some few Monks. Afterwards King Edward (called the Confessor) built it anew, and richly endowed it; but about 160 years after, King Henry III. Rebuilt it from the Ground, with that rare Architecture now seen. It was the work of 50 years complete. The King him∣self laid the first Stone, and covered the Roof with Lead in the year 1220. The Abbots much inlarged it afterwards to the Westward. And King Hen∣ry VII. Anno 1502. bestowed 14000 Pounds in Building that admirable Chapel (which Leland calls the Wonder of the World;) for if we respect the admirable and artificial Work without and within, Beauty, and Elegancy, it can scarce be parallel'd in the World: And it is the judgment of the most Exquisite Architects, that it comprehends whatsoever is rare and delicate in that Noble Art. Here is to be seen his own Tomb and Monument made of solid and massie Brass. The Form of the old Building, as an old Manu∣script shews, was, That the principal Plot or Ground-work of the Building, is supported with most lofty
Arches, cast round with a Four-square Work and semblable Joints. But the Compass of the whole, with a double Arch of Stone on both sides, is enclo∣sed with Joined Work firmly knit and united together every way. The Cross of the Church, which was to compass the Mid-quire of those that chaunted unto the Lord, and with a twofold supportance that it had on either side to uphold and bear the lofty top of the Tower in the midst, simply ariseth at first with a low and strong Arch; then mounteth it higher, with many winding stairs, artificially ascending with a num∣ber of steps; but afterwards, with a single wall, it reacheth up to the Roof of Timber, well and surely covered with Lead. But the new Work of King Henry III. far ex∣cels that for rare Workmanship, being supported with several Rows of Marble Pillars in very curious Order, and the Roof covered with sheets of Lead. When the Monks were driven from this Church, it had (1) A Dean and Prebendaries. (2) After∣wards one Bishop (viz. T. Thurlby) who having wasted the Church Patrimony, was removed. (3) Queen Mary set the Monks and their Abbot in pos∣session: But (4) They were by Queen Elizabeth and the Parliament cast out, and it was converted to a Collegiate Church, and a Dean placed therein with 12 Prebendaries, and as many old Soldiers past Ser∣vice. Petty Canons, and others of the Quire, to the number of 30. And ten Officers belonging to the Collegiate Dyet, a Schoolmaster, and an Usher. Forty Scholars, who are in their due time preferred to the Universities, they are called the Queens (or Kings) Scholars. Twelve Almsmen, with plentiful Maintenance for all. Twelve poor Scholars, besides Stewards, Receivers, Registers, Collectors, and other Officers; the Principal whereof is the High Steward of Westminster, who is usually one of the Prime No∣bility. The Dean is intrusted with the Custody of
the Regalia at the Coronation, honoured with a place of necessary service at all Coronations, and a Commission of Peace within the City and Liberties of Westminster. The Dean and Chapter invested with all manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Civil, not only in the City and Liberties of Westmin∣ster, but within the Precincts of St. Martins le grand, within the Walls of London, and in some Towns of Essex, exempted in the one from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London, and in the other from that of the Archbishop of Canterbury. There is a fair publick Library free for all Strangers to study both morning and afternoon always in Term-time. William the Conqueror, and all our Kings and Queens since, have been Crowned in this Church. The Monument of King Henry VII. in the New Chapel, was made and finished in the year 1519. by one Peter a Florentine, for which he received of the Kings Executors 1000 l. The King, with Eliza∣beth his Queen, lie Interr'd in it, being (as was said) a Tomb of solid Brass, compassed about with these Verses, which, for their Elegancy, and because they describe him to be so Renowned, we shall here insert. Septimus Henricus Tumulo requiescit in isto Qui Regum splendor, lumen & orbis erat. Rex vigil, & sapiens, comis, virtutis amator Egregius formae, strenuus atque potens. Qui pperit pacem Regno, qui bella peregit plurima, qui victor semper ab hoste redit. Qui natus binis conjunxit Regibus ambas, Rgibus & Cuncti foedere Junctus erat. Qui sacrum hoc struxit Templum, statuitque sepul∣chrum, Pro se, proque sua conjuge, prole, Domo. Lustra Decem, atque annos tres plus compleverat annis. Nam tribus octensis Regia Sceptra tulit.
Quindecies Domini centenus fluxerat annus, Currebat nonus cum venit atra Dies. Septima termensis lux tunc fulgebat Aprilis, Cum Clausit summam tanta Corona Diem. Nulla Dedere prius tantum tibi saecula Regem Anglia, vix similem posteriora Dabunt. This Church is famous for the Monuments and Tombs of our Kings, Queens, Nobility, and other eminent Men, as Sebert the first Christian King of the East Saxons. Harold the Bastard, Son of Canu∣tus the Dane, King of England. King Edward the Confessor and his Queen Edith. Maud Wife to King Henry the First, the Daughter of Malcolm King of Scots. Henry the 3. and his Son. King Ed∣ward the 1. with Eleanor his Wife, daughter to Fer∣dinando the first King of Castile and Leon. King Edward the 3. and Philippa of Henault his Wife. King Henry the 5. with Katherine his Wife, Daughter to King Charles the 6. of France. Anne Wife to King Richard 3. Daughter to Richard Ne∣vil Earl of Warwick. King Henry the 7. with his Wife Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the 4. and his Mother Margaret Countess of Richmond. King Edward the sixth (that most Religious and tru∣ly Vertuous Prince,) who lyeth under the Brass richly Gilded Altar, most curiously wrought with Excellent Workmanship. Anne of Cleave, the 4th. Wife of King Henry the Eight. Queen Mary, and the Renowned Queen Elizabeth; upon the Remove of whose Body from Richmond (where She Dyed,) to White-Hall by Water, these Lines were Writ∣ten, which may for their Elegancy, and in Remem∣brance of that most Illustrious Protestant Queen be inserted. The Queen was brought by Water to White-Hall, At every stroake the Oars their tears let fall.
More clung about the Barge; Fish under water Wept out their Eyes of Pearl, swam blindly after: I think the Barge-men might with easier Thighs, Have row'd her thither in her Peoples Eyes, For howsoe'er, thus much my thoughts have scann'd, Sh'ad come by Water, had she come by Land. Prince Henry, eldest Son of King James, the First Monarch of Great Britain. King James Himself and Queen Ann his Wife; and the first Male born of King Charles the First, dying an Infant. Of Dukes, and Earls, and Lords Degree. Edmund Earl of Lancaster, second Son of King Henry the Third, and his Lady Aveline de fortibus, Countess of Albemarle. William and Andomar of Valente, of the Family of Lusignian, Earls of Pembrooke▪ Alphonsus, John, and other Children of King Ed∣ward the first. John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, Son to King Edward the Second. Thomas of Wood∣stock, Duke of Glocester, the youngest Son of Ed∣ward the Third, with other of his Children. Elea∣nor, Daughter and Heir of Humphry Bhun Earl of Hereford, and of Essex, Wife to Thomas of Wood∣stock. The young Daughter of Edward the Fourth. And King Henry the Seventh. Henry, a Child of two months old, Son of King Henry the Eighth. S∣phia, the Daughter of King James, who died as it were, in the first Day-dawning of her Age. Phi∣lippa Mohun▪ Dutchess of York. Robert of Henault, in right of his Wife, Lord Bourchier, Ann the young Daughter and Heir of John Mowbra, Duke of Norfolk, promised in Marriage unto Richard Duke of York, younger Son to King Edward the Fourth. Sir Giles Dawbny, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the Seventh, and his Wife, of the House of the Arundels in Cornwall. John Viscount Wells. Frances Bran∣don, Dutchess of Suffolk; Mary her Daughter. Mar∣garet Douglas, Countess of Lenex, Grandmother
to James, King of Great Britain, with Charles her Son. Winefrid Bruges, Marchioness of Winche∣ster. Ann Stanhope, Dutchess of Somerset, and Jane her Daughter. Ann Cecil, Countess of Ox∣ford, Daughter to the Lord Burleigh, Lord High-Treasurer of England, with Mildred Burghley her Mother. Elizabeth Berkly, Countess of Ormond. Frances Sidney, Countess of Sussex. James Butler, Viscount Thurles, Son and Heir to the Earl of Or∣mond. Besides these, Humphry Lord Bourchier of Corn∣wall. Sir Humphry Bourchier, Son and Heir to the Lord Bourchier of Berners, both slain at Barnet∣field. Sir Nicholas Carew, Baron Powis. Thomas Lord Wentworth. Thomas Lord Wharton. John Lord Russel. Sir Thomas Bromley, Lord Chancel∣lor of England. Douglas Howard, Daughter and Heir General of Henry Viscount Howard of Bindon, Wife to Sir Arthur Gorges. Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Edward Earl of Rutland, Wife to Wil∣liam Cecil. Sir John Puckering, Lord-Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Frances Howard, Coun∣tess of Hartford. Henry and George Cary, the Fa∣ther and Son, Barons of Hunsdon, both Lords Cham∣berlains to Queen Elizabeth. The Heart of Ann Sophia, the Daughter of Christopher Harley, Count Beaumont, Ambassador for the King of France in England, bestowed within a small Gilt Urn over a Pyramid. Sir Charles Blunt, Earl of Devonshire, Lord-Lieutenant-General of Ireland. Geoffrey Chaucer, the Prince of English Poets in his time. Ed∣mund Spencer, an eminent Poet. William Cambden, Clarencieux King of Arms. Causabon the Famous French Writer. Michael Drayton, &c. Then there is George Villiers Duke, Marquiss and Earl of Buckingham, Favourite to King James, and King Charles the First. Also the Earl of Essex, and several others Interr'd there, during His present Ma∣jesties
Absence from His Government. There is also Interr'd George Duke of Albemarle, (Father to his Grace the present Duke,) whose Funerals were Solemnly performed the Thirtieth of April 1670. The Dutchess of Albemarle, was also In∣terr'd in King Henry the Sevenths Chappel, the twen∣ty eighth of February 1669. in Westminster Church. There is likewise Interr'd, that Celebrated Poet Mr. Abraham Cowley, under a Monument of Ex∣quisite Curiosity, at the Charges of his Grace the Noble Duke of Buckingham. Having done with Westminster-Abby, we shall give a Brief account of the other Churches Alpha∣betically, as they were before the Fire: And of such as are Re-built, (which are now far more Durable and Stately than before) the Reader may expect an Account hereafter. I. St. Albans Church in Woodstreet, is of great Antiquity, being Dedicated to St. Albans the first Martyr of England. Another mark of Antiquity was to be seen in the manner of the turning the Arches in the Windows, and heads of the Pillars. There were also Roman Bricks found inlay'd here and there among the Stones of the Building; it was, Anno 1632. (being wonderfully decay'd,) pull'd down in order to be Re-built. In it were diverse Monu∣ments, which for brevity sake are omitted. II. On the North side of the East end of Tow∣er-street, is the Parish-Church called All-hallows Barkin, a very fair Church, standing in a large Church-Yard; on the North side whereof, was built a fair Chappel by King Richard the first, whose heart ('tis said) was buryed there, under the high Altar. This Chappel was Augmented by King Edward the first. And a fraternity setled there by King Edward the fourth. King Richard the third new Built it, and founded therein a Colledge of Priests; which was suppressed in the Year 1548.
in the Second of Edward the sixth, and the Ground made a Garden-Plat, till the time of Queen Eliza∣beth; and then Built upon, and made a Store-House for Merchants Goods. The Church was Beautified and Repaired in the Year 1613. III. On the East-side of Bread-street, at the corner of Watling-street, is the Church of All-hallows Bread-street, wherein were divers Monuments. This Church had a fair Spired-Steeple of Stone, which in the Year 1559. September the Fifth, about Noon, by a great Tempest of Lightning, and a great Clap of Thunder, was struck about Nine or Ten Foot be∣neath the Top, out of which fell a stone that over∣threw a Man, and slew a Dog; but the Spire was taken down to save the Charge of Repair. This Church was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish Charge Anno 1625. IV. Great All-hallows in Thames-street, was a fair Church, with a large Cloyster on the South side, in which were Sundry Monuments, but now Rui∣nated. It was Repaired and richly Beautified at the Parish Charge, Anno 1627. and 1629. In the year 1632. all the Iles to the Chancel were raised a Foot and a half, and the Pews a Foot above that, for conveniency of Hearing, which cost six hundred Pound. There was a Monument of Queen Eliza∣beths, with these Verses: If Royal Vertues ever crown'd a Crown, If ever Mildness shin'd in Majesty, If ever Honour, honour'd true Renown, If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency, If ever Princess put all Princes down For Temp'rance, Prowess, Prudence, Equity, This, this was, She, that in Despight of Death, Lives still Admir'd, Ador'd, ELIZABETH. Many Daughters have done Vertuously, but thes excellest them all.
In the Figure of a Book over her, were these words: They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which shall not be removed. On the one side. Spains Rod, Romes Ruine, Netherlands Relief, Heavens Jem, Earths Joy, Worlds Wonder, Na∣tures Chief. On the the other side. Britains Blessing, Englands Splendor, Religions Nurse, the Faiths Defender. Under her. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, &c. V. In Hony-lane near the Standard in Cheap-side is the small Parish-Church called All-hallows Hony-lane, Repaired at the Parish Charge, anno 1625. At the cost of above Fifty Five Pound. VI. In Thames-street is the Parish-Church of All-hallows the less, which stood on Vaults, and said, to be Built by Sir John Poultney, sometimes Mayor of London; the Steeple and Quire stood on an Arched-gate, which was (being fallen) Re-built by the Parish, anno 1594. The whole Church was Re∣paired and Beautified at the cost of the Parishoners, anno 1616. Here was also a Monument of Queen Elizabeths. VII. In Lumbard-street, stood the Parish-Church called, All-hallows Lumbard-street,—begun to be New Built anno 1494. and finished 1516. To which the Pewterers were good Benefactors; the Steeple
was finished 1544. about the 36 of H. 8. Here were also divers Monuments. It was Repaired and Beau∣tified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1622, and 1623, and cost 177 l. 9 s. VIII. The Parish-Church of Alhallows-Stayn∣ing, or, as commonly call'd Stane-Church, lies on the South-side of Langborn-Ward, somewhat within Mart-lane, in which were divers fair Monuments, as of John Costin a Cirdler, who dyed 1244. and gave the Poor of the Parish an Hundred Quarters of Charcoals yearly for ever. John Mann, Citizen and Mercer, who gave an Hundred Pounds towards the Repair of the Church, and dyed in the year 1615. It was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1630. IX. The Parish-Church of Alhallows the Wall, so called, because it stands close to the Wall of the City in Bread-street-Ward. It was Repaired and Beautified at the Charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1613. Again most curiously Repaired and Beau∣tified, Anno 1627. at 220 l. Cost. Queen ELIZABETHS Monument. Read but her Reign, the Princess might have been For Wisdom call'd Nicaulis, Sheba's Queen Against Spain's Holofernes, Judith she Dauntless gain'd many a glorious Victory: Not Deborah did her in Fame excel, She was a Mother to our Israel. An Hester, who her Person did ingage To save her People from the Publick. Rage; Chaste Patroness of True Religion, In Court a Saint, in Field an Amazon; Glorious in Life, Deplored in her Death, Such was Ʋnparallel'd ELIZABETH.
Born, Anno 1534. Crowned, An. 1558. Jan. 15. Reigned years 44. mon. 4. days 17. Dyed An. 1602. Mar. 24. X. The Parish-Church of St. Alphage. The principal Isle of this Church, towards the North, was pulled down, and a Frame of Four Houses set up in the place. The other part, from the Steeple upward, was converted into a Parish-Church of St. Alphage: And the Parish-Church which stood near unto the Wall of the City by Cripplegate, was pulled down; the Plat thereof made a Carpenters Yard with Saw-Pits. This being decay'd, the Parishioners Repaired it, Anno 1624. and being Beautifully finished, Anno 1628. it cost the Parish 500 l. XI. St. Andrew Hubbard, or St. Andrew in East-Cheap, is situate in Love-Lane in Billingsgate-Ward, which was Repaired and Beautifully adorned at the Cost of the Parish, Anno 1630. amounting to above 600 l. XII. St. Andrew Ʋndershaft, stands at the North-West-Corner of Aldgate-Ward, a Fair and Beautiful Parish-Church; so called, because every May-Day in the morning, they were wont (in old times) to set up a high Shaft or May-pole in the Street before the South-door, which, when fixt, was higher than the Steeple. But this practice was dis∣continued since Evil May-Day, when there was an Insurrection of Apprentices, and other Young Per∣sons, against Foreigners, Anno 1517. The said Shaft being laid along under the Pent-houses of a Row of Houses upon Iron Hooks, till the 3d of Edw. 6. the People Saw'd it in pieces, after it had lay'n 32 years, every man taking the length of his House: Which was occasioned by the Preaching of one Stevin, who at Pauls Cross said, It was an Idol, as giving Name to the Church. It was New Built by the Parish,
Anno 1520. to which Stephen Jennings, Merchant-Taylor, sometimes Lord Mayor, was a great Bene∣factor; as also John Kerby, Merchant-Taylor, some∣times one of the Sheriffs; John Garland, Merchant-Taylor, and his Executor, Nicholas Levison, and seve∣ral others, and fully finished, Ann 1532. It was af∣terwards Repaired and Beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1627. They had at the lower end of the North Isle, a fair Wainscot-Press full of good Books, the Works of many Learned Divines, where at convenient times any that would, may read. XIII. The Church of St. Andrew Wardrobe, was a proper Church in Baynard-Castle-Ward, but few Monuments in it. John Parut founded a Chaun∣try there, it was Repaired at the Charge of the Parish, Anno 1627. XIV. On the North of Pope-Lane, so called of one Pope that owned it, is the Parish-Church of St. Ann in the Willows, (or St. Ann Aldersgate) so called (as some think) of Willows growing former∣ly thereabouts. It was Burnt in part 1548. but since Repaired. It was afterwards much decay'd, but beautifully repaired, Anno 1624. XV. St. Ann Black-friers, it seems, was built in the Reign of Edw. III. It was new built in the year 1430. 8 H. 6. Sir William Eastfield Mayor, William Russe and Ralph Holland Esqs. Sheriffs; and the Commonalty granted of the Common Ground of the City, Three Foot and an half in Breadth on the North part, and Four Foot in Breadth toward the East, for the enlarging thereof. This Ancient Church belonging to the Black-friers, be∣fore the dissolution of such places by H. 8. was one of the most spacious and fair Churches in London, but afterwards demolished Anno 1613. The Inhabi∣tants of Black-friers purchased so much Houses on the South-side of their Church, as was 36 Foot in
Length, and 54 in Breadth; the Purchase whereof, together with the Vault for Burying, and other Rooms under that part of the Church, &c. cost 1546 l. 6 s. Anno 1632. The Inhabitants of the said Black-friers, purchased the Rooms directly under an upper Room, formerly converted to a Church, to repair the Walls and Foundations whereon the Church stood at the cost (together with the Repairs) of 500 l. The Sum of all bestowed upon Black-friers Church, since the Reformation, amounted to 2600 l. 4 s. till the year 1633. It was burnt down, Anno 1666. in the great Fire, and not yet Re-built. XVI. St. Anthonie Church (vulgarly called St. Antlins, or St. Antholins) in Budge-Row in Cord-wainer-street Ward, was a fair Parish-Church; Sir Thomas Knowles, late Lord Mayor of London, lieth Buried there, who Repaired, and was a great Bene∣factor to it. It was Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1616. towards which, Sir William Craven, Mr. Henry Jay Aldermen, Mr. Adrian Moore, Mr. Tho∣mas Boothby, Mr. Francis Dorrington, Mr. William Parker, Mr. Cleophas Smith, Citizen and Draper of London, were free and bountiful Benefactors; the cost amounted to near 1000 l. XVII. The Parish-Church of Augustine (vul∣garly Austin) in Watling-street in Faringdon-Ward-within, was a fair Church, and well Repaired. And was in the years 1630, and 1631, in part Re-built, and Beautifully adorned at the charge of the Pa∣rishioners, which cost 1200 l. XVIII. The Parish-Church of St. Bartholomew Exchange, at the end of Bartholomew-lane, was new Built by Thomas Pike Alderman, with the assistance of Nicholas Yoo, one of the Sheriffs of London, about the year 1438. Sir John Lepington's Lady founded a Chauntry there, in the 21 of Edw. 4. Sir William Capel Mayor, added a proper Chapel, Anno 1509.
on the South-side. James Wilford Taylor, one of the Sheriffs, 1499. appointed by his Testament, a Doctor of Divinity, every Good-Friday to preach a Sermon there of Christ's Passion, for ever, from six a clock, till 8 before Noon. This Church was Re∣paired and Beautified at the charge of the Parishio∣ners, Anno 1620. XIX. The Parish-Church of St. Bennet, which, of Robert Fink senior who new Built it, is called St. Bennet Finck, stands in Thread-needle-street in Broad-street-Ward, which was a proper Church. It was Repaired and Beautifully adorn'd at the Parish-charge, Anno 1633. at the cost of above 400 l. XX. In the Street formerly called Grass-street, (but vulgarly Graces, or Gracious-street) is the Parish-Church called St. Bennet Grass-Church, of the Herb-Market kept near it, but vulgarly Grace-Church in Bridge-Ward-within. This Church was Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1630. with a new Clock-Dyal, and Chimes added, Anno 1633. XXI. St. Bennet Pauls-Wharf in Thames-street in Castle-Baynard-Ward, was a proper Parish-Church, with several Monuments in it. XXII. The Parish-Church of St. Syth, hath an addition of Bennet-Shorne, (or Shrog, or Shorehog) and is vulgarly called, St. Bennet Sherehog. The ancientest name of these is Shorne, of one Benedict Shorne, sometime a Citizen and Stock-fishmonger of London, who New Built, Repaired it, or was a Bene∣factor thereof in the time of Edward II. so that Shorne is corruptly called Shrog, and more corruptly Shorebog. Being very much decayed, it was at the Parish-charge very amply Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1628. It is near Needles-lane in Cheap-Ward. XXIII. The Parish-Church of St. Botolph in Thames-street in Billingsgate-Ward, was a handsom Church, and had many fair Monuments in it, but now
defaced. This Church was Repaired and Beautiful∣ly adorn'd at the Parish-charge, Anno 1624. XXIV. Christ-Church was founded by King Henry VIII. who gave the old Parish-Church of St. Nicholas, to the Mayor and Commonalty of London, towards the maintenance of this New Church to be erected in the late dissolved Church of the Grey-fryers called St. Ewin, which Parish-Church, with the aforesaid Parish-Church of St. Nicholas, and so much of St. Sepulchres Parish as is within Newgate, were then made one Parish-Church by the name of Christ-Church. Of the Hospital there, we shall speak under its proper head. There was a fair and spacious Gallery erected in the North Isle of this Church, Anno 1628. which cost the Parishioners 149 l. 10 s. which was not only necessary, but graceful and beautiful. It is in Faringdon-Ward-within. XXV. In Broad-street-Ward near the Stocks-Market, is the Parish-Church of St. Christopher: To which Richard Sherington, Anno 1392. gave Lands; so did the Lady Margaret Norford, Anno 1406. John Clavering, 1421, &c. But, above all, the charity of Robert Thorne Merchant-Taylor, and a Batchelor, is to be perpetuated, who lay Interred there in a fair Tomb of Touch, and gave, by his Will, 4445 l. to pious Uses. This Church was Re∣paired and Beautified at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1621. XXVI. St. Clements East-Cheap in Candlewick-street-Ward, is a small Parish-Church. William Chartney and William Overie founded a Chauntry there. It was Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Parishioners, Anno 1632. XXVII. At the South-west corner of Lime-street in Langborn-Ward, stood the fair Parish-Church
of St. Dionis, called Back-Church, new Built in the Reign of Henry VI. to which John Bugge Esq was a great Benefactor. John Darby Alderman, ad∣ded thereto a fair Isle or Chapel on the South-side, and was there Buried, Anno 1466. He gave (be∣sides sundry Ornaments) his Dwelling-house, be∣sides other Houses, unto the said Church. The middle Isle of this Church was new laid in the year of our Lord, 1629. The Steeple was repaired, a new Tur∣ret built, new Frames were made for the Bells, and the Church very decently beautified, Anno 1632. XXVIII. The Parish-Church of St. Dunstans East, is so called, for difference from another Church in the West of that Name. It was a fair and large Church, of an ancient Building, and within a large Church-yard: There be many rich Merchants, and other rich Tradesmen in that Parish, chiefly Salters and Ironmongers. In this are divers Monuments of worthy persons. There are also Seven shillings three pence given to the Poor every Sunday throughout the year in ready money, besides Bread, and other Gifts, according to the Wills and Dis∣positions of Sir Richard Champion, and Alderman Heardson, with Coals given besides at certain times. One man hath given yearly on Ox, to be distributed by a quarter thereof quarterly, and a Peck of Oat-meal therewithall, to the Poor: But so ordered, that they that have the quarter of Beef and Peck of Oat∣meal at one quarter, must stay till other Poor be so served, and that it comes to their turn again. There are other Charities which came in Gifts of ready mo∣ney, and are accordingly truly distributed. This Church being decayed, began to be Repaired in the year of our Lord 1631. and was fully Repaired, and curiously adorn'd, Anno 1633. the charge of it amounting to above 2400 l. to make up which, ma∣ny worthy Parishioners did very bountifully con∣tribute.
XXIX. The Parish-Church of St. Edmond King and Martyr, commonly called St. Edmond Lombard-street by the South-corner of Birchover-lane, is also called St. Edmond Grass-Church, because the Grass (or Herb) Market came down so low. In this Church were divers Monuments, and several pious Benefactors contributed to the Relief of the Poor; of which more in its proper place, under the Head of Benefactors. This Church was Repaired and Beautified very richly, at the charge of the Parishio∣ners, Anno 1631, and 1632. It cost 248 l. XXX. The Parish-Church of St. Ethelburgh stands near Little St. Helens in Bishopsgate-Ward. It was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1612. And Anno 1620, the Steeple was Repaired. Anno 1630, a Gallery was built in the South Isle, at the charge of Owen Sant∣peere, an Inhabitant of that Parish. XXXI. At the West-end of Jesus Chapel un∣der the Quire of Pauls, was the Parish-Church of St. Faith, commonly called St. Faith under Pauls, which served for the Stationers, and others dwelling in Pauls Church-yard, Pater-Noster-Row, and places adoining. The Chapel of Jesus being suppressed in the Reign of Edward VI. The Parishioners of St. Faith's Church were removed into the same, as be∣ing more large and lightsom, Anno 1551. As to the Repairs of this, we will only say (what was ancient∣ly said of it) that This Church needs no Repair at all, Saint Faith's defended by Saint Paul. XXXII. In the midst of Fenchurch-street stands the Parish-Church, called St. Gabriel Fen-church, to which Helming Legget Esq by Licence
of Edward III. in the 49 year of his Reign, gave one Tenement with a Curtelage thereunto belong∣ing, and a Garden with an Entry thereto leading, to the Parson and his Successors, as a Parsonage-house, and the Garden to be a Burying-place for the Pa∣rish. This Church was inlarged Nine Foot, and very richly Beautified, at the charge of the Parish, Anno 1631, and 1632. which cost them 537 l. 7 s. 10 d. XXXIII. The Parish-Church of St. George Botolph-lane in Billinsgate-Ward is small, but had divers Monuments. It was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1627. XXXIV. Adjoining to the place where Lol∣lards Tower stood, called the Bishops Prison, where they committed such as gain-said the Opinions of their Church, is the Parish-Church of St. Gregory, appointed to the Petty Canons of Pauls. This Church was repaired and richly adorned, at the cost of the Parishioners, Anno 1631, and 1632. which amounted to above 2000 l. XXXV. The Parish-Church of St. Hellens in Bishopsgate-Ward, was sometimes a Priory of Black Nuns, founded in the Reign of Henry III. which was demolished the 30 of Henry VIII. The whole Church, and the Partition betwixt the Nuns Church and Parish-Church being taken down, remaineth to the Parish, and is a fair Parish-Church. This Church was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, 1631, 1632, 1633. which amounted to above 1300 l. XXXVI. The Parish-Church of St James Dukes-Place in Aldgate-Ward, was built in King James's time, and consecrated Anno 1622. Sir Peter Proby being Lord Mayor, John Hodges Esq and Sir Humphry Hanford Kt. Sheriffs and Aldermen. It
was built where the Priory (as they called it) of the Holy Trinity formerly stood, the Parishioners obtain∣ing License of King James to build themselves a Pa∣rish Church, having long been destitute; to the building of which, many worthy Persons were Bene∣factors. It is a very beautiful and handsome Church, and at the time of re-edifying it was called, Trinity Christ Church. XXXVII. The Parish-Church of James Gar∣lick-hithe, or Garlick-hive, because on the River Thames, near this Church, Garlick was usually Sold in former Days. This was a handsom Church. It is Recorded that Richard Rothing, one of the She∣riffs of London, new built it in anno 1326, and lyes Buryed there, &c. The North Ile was New Built, and the whole Church Repaired at the charge of the Parishioners, anno 1624. which amounted to above seven hundred Pound. This is in Vintry-Ward. XXXVIII. The Parish-Church of St. John Bap∣tist, (called St. John upon Wallbrook, because the West end thereof is on the very Bank of Wallbrook, by Horse-shooe-bridge in Horse-shooe-bridge-street) was some Years before the Fire new built. For in the Year 1412, License was granted by the Lord Mayor and Commonalty, to the Parson and Parish, to enlarge it with a piece of Ground on the North part of the Quire, one and twenty Foot in length, and seventeen Foot in breadth, and three Inches; and and on the South side of the Quire, one Foot of the common Soyl. The most Memorable Monument there, was that of Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin, Draper, the first Lord Mayor of London, (in the Tenth of King John, anno 1208.) who continued by many Elections in the Mayoralty several Years. His dwelling House in that Parish was divided into two or three Houses, and given to the Drapers, for which they pay a quit-rent in his Name yearly for ever. So that Mr. Stow's avouching that he was Buried in the
Priory of the Holy Trinity within Ald-gate, (now cal∣led Dukes-place) is a mistake. The Curious in this matter may be satisfied in the Drapers-Hall. This Church was Re-edified and Adorned, anno 1621. It is in Wallbrook-Ward. XXXIX. On the East side of Friday-street, (so called of Fishmongers dwelling there that served Fri∣days Market,) is the Parish-Church commonly cal∣led St. John Evangelist, in Bread-street-Ward. It was Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Pa∣rishioners, anno 1626. And a new Gallery was Built and Beautified at the proper charge of Thomas Good-year, a Citizen and Draper of London, that dwelt in the Parish. XL. At the North-West Corner of Maiden-lane, in Aldergate-Ward, is the fair Parish-Church of St. John Zachary. Thomas Lichfield founded a Chauntry there in the Fourteenth year of Edward the Second. Sir Nicholas Tyford, Goldsmith, and Lord Mayor, with Dame Margery his Wife, lye Interr'd there. Of whose Goods the Church was made, and new Built with a Tomb for them and their posterity, Anno 1390. Amongst many other Pious and Wor∣thy Persons and Benefactors to the publick, we can∣not omit a Monument erected there in Memory of Sir James Pemberton Knight, who being Sheriff of this City, at the coming in of King James, entertain∣ed near Forty Earls and Barons when the King was proclaimed. Anno 1612. he was Elected Mayor of this Honourable City of London. He Erected a Free-School in the Parish of Ecleston in Lancashire, sixteen years before his Death, and gave Fifty Pound by the Year for the maintaining thereof for ever. He gave also five hundred pound to Christs-Hospi∣tal, and two hundred pound to the Company of Goldsmiths, besides many liberal Gifts to the Poor of his Kindred, and many other most Charitable uses. He Died the Eighth of September, 1613, Aged Sixty Eight Years.
This is the substance of the Inscription, with these Verses: Marble, nor Touch, nor Alabaster can Rveal the Worth of the long buryed Man: For oft we see Mens Goods, when they are gone, Do Pious deeds, when they themselves did none. Mne (while I liv'd) no goodness did express, 'Tis not Inscriptions make them more or less: In Christ I hope to rise amongst the Just, Man is but Grass, all must to Worms and dust. There are many other Verses, but our intended brevity will not admit of Transcribing them. The Repairs of this Church from the Year 1616, to 1631, cost 120 l. 11 s. XLI. Next Northumberland-House in Aldgate-Ward, is the Parish-Church of St. Katherine Cole∣man, which addition of Coleman, was taken of a great Haw-Yard or Garden, of old time called Cole∣man-Haw, in Trinity Parish now Christ-Church, and in the Parish of St. Katherine and All-Saints called Coleman-Church. Sir James Dean hath given two Shillings weekly in Bread to the Poor for ever, which is duly performed every Friday; and the Parishion∣ners give as much every Sabbath day. This Church was Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1620. And 1624. their Vestry was built, and a Gallery new made for the Poor of the Parish to sit in. XLII. The Parish-Church of St. Katharine Christs-Church in Aldgate-Ward, commonly called Cree-Church, stands in the Caemitery of the Dissol∣ved Priory of the Holy-Trinity, and is a very fair Church. Mr. William Gilborn a Draper, gave Four Marks Yearly for ever, to be bestowed in one Dozen of Bread, and to be distributed on every Sabbath
day to the Poor of the said Parish, which is duly paid: he gave twenty pound towards building a Gallery in the said Church. Mr. John Smith Mercer, gave three pound yearly for ever, to be distributed amongst the Poor every Christmas yearly. Mr. George Lee Sadler, gave twenty Shillings yearly for ever to the Poor. Mrs. Dane a Widdow, gave Eight Shillings yearly for ever. Mrs. Alice Bate∣man, gave forty two pound six shillings to the Parish, the profit to be distributed to the Poor for ever. Mr. John Bedow Gent. gave ten pound to be distri∣buted in Bread yearly to the Poor. Mr. George Hothersal Merchant-Taylor, gave four and twenty shillings yearly for ever, out of his Land, to the Poor of this Parish. Mr. John Waddis, Cook, born in this Parish, gave to the Poor thereof three pound to be distributed among them in Bread yearly for ever. Stephen Roberts, Cook, gave also four and for∣ty shillings yearly for ever, to be distributed in Bread. These good Persons are remembred as such whose Memories are worthy to be perpetuated, and to be upon Record as an Example for others to imitate. But more under the head of Benefactors. The Foundation of this Church was lay'd the twenty third of June 1628. It is said in Stow's Survey, pag. 839. Edit. 1633. That digging under the South Row of Pillars, they found the Scull of a Man, the thickness of which, was three quarters of an Inch and better, measured by many, and admi∣red by all (as well they might) that saw it. The Structure was built of the best Free-stone that could be got, and finished anno 1630. There were many bountiful Benefactors and Contributers to it; And a curious Table (one of the fairest in the City,) set up as a Monument of our Renowned Queen ELI∣ZABETH, but the giver would be concealed. XLIII. Southwest from Guild-Hall, in Cheap-Ward, stands the fair and large Church of S. Law∣rence-Jewry,
which addition, (viz. Jewry) was, be∣cause of old time Many Jews Inhabited thereabouts. It had diverse Monuments. Mr. Stow tells us, That Seventy years before his first Edition of his Survey, which was 1598, that is now 163 years ago, he saw the Shank-bone of a Man (as it was taken,) twenty five inches long by the Rule, and remained before the Fire, fastned to a post of timber noted more for the thickness, hardness, and strength thereof, then the length, for when it was hanged on the Stone Pil∣lar, it fretted (with moving) the said Pillar, and was not it self fretted, nor did it grow lighter by remain∣ing dry; but how found or discovered we cannot learn. Also a Tooth of a very great bigness (he says of a mans Fist) hanged up for a show in a Chain of Iron upon a Stone Pillar; but conveyed from thence long since: the credit of this rests upon him. This Church was repaired and richly beautified at the Charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1618. Amongst other Monuments, we must not omit that of our celebrated and most Illustrious Queen Elizabeth, in this Church, with these Verses, Here lyes her Type, who was of late The prop of Belgia, stay of France. Spains foil, Faiths Shield, the Queen of State, Of Arms, of Learning, Fate and Chance: In Brief, of Women ne'er was seen So great a Prince, so good a Queen. Such Vertues her Immortal made Death (envying all that cannot Dye,) Her Earthly parts did so invade, As in it Wrackt self Majesty. But so her Spirit inspir'd her Parts, That she still lives in Loyal hearts, &c. XLIV. The Parish Church of St. Laurence in Candlewick Street and Ward, was increased with a
Chappel of Jesus by Thomas Cole for a Master and Chaplain: which Church and Chappel was made a Colledge of Jesus and of Corpus Christi for a Ma∣ster and seven Chaplains by Sr. John Poultney Lord Mayor, (of whom this Church was called St. Lau∣rence Poultney) or Pountney, Confirm'd by Edward the Third in the Twentieth year of his Reign. This College was surrendred in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, the Steeple of the Church was new Leaded, Five new Bells were hung, and the Frames new made, all the les new raised and levelled, and the whole Church within and without most beautifully repair∣ed at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1631. and 1632. XLV. On Fishstreet-hill in Bridge Ward within, is the Parish Church of St. Leonard Milk-Church, so termed of one William Melker an especial Builder thereof, but commonly called St. Leonard-East-Cheap, because it standeth at East-cheap corner: The Church and Steeple were repaired and beauti∣fied in the Year, 1618, 1619, 1620, and 1621. at the cost of Eight hundred and fifty pounds. XLVI. On the West-side of Foster-lane in Al∣ders-gate Ward is the Parish Church of St. Leonards, called St. Leonards Foster-lane; for them of St. Mar∣tins le Grand: A great number of Houses being built in place of the Great Collegiate Church of St. Martin, the Parish is very much increased: It was inlarged, repaired, and adorn'd at the Parish charge, Anno 1631. To which, John Trot Citizen and Mer∣chant was a bountiful Benefactor; the cost amount∣ed to above Five hundred pounds. XLVII. On the East-side of Bridge-Ward stands the fair Parish Church of St. Magnus, in which were buried many Eminent men: it had many repairs and charges in the Years 1623, 1624, and 1625. which cost above Five hundred pound; in the Year, 1629. it was very richly and beautifully adorned, all at the proper cost and charge of the Parish.
XLVIII. The fair Parish Church of St. Marga∣rets Lothbury in Coleman-Street Ward stands upon the Water-Course of Walbrooke, which was Re∣edified, Anno 1440. Robert Large gave to the Quire of that Church One hundred Shillings, and Twenty pounds for Ornaments: and to the Vaulting over the Water-course of Walbrook by the said Church, for the inlarging thereof Two hundred marks: This Church was repaired and richly beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1621. XLIX. In Friday street in Breadstreet-Ward, is the Parish Church of St. Margaret Moses, so called of one Moses that was Founder, or Newbuilder there∣of. It was Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Parishioners, Anno 1627, L. In the same Wardon Fishstreet-hill stands the Parish Church of St. Margarets New Fish-street, which was a Proper Church, but without any Monuments of Note. LI. St. Margaret Pattens in Rood-lane, Billings-gate Ward, being much decayed, was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, Anno. 1614. who from that year, to 1632, expended 275 l. five s. 6 d. upon it. LII. St. Mary Abchurch standeth near unto the South-end of Abchurch-lane, in Candleweek-street-Ward, upon a rising ground, and was a Fair Church with sundry Monuments in it: It was Beautified and Repaired at the proper cost and charge of the Pa∣rishioners, in the year of our Lord, 1611. LIII. In Alderman-bury-street is the Fair Pa∣rish Church of St. Mary Alderman-bury, with a Church-Yard and Cloyster adjoyning, in which Cloyster (as Mr. Stow says) was hanged and fastned a shank-bone of a man, in length Twen∣ty eight inches and a half, of a size larger by three inches and a half than that in St. Laurence Jewry, but not so hard: this is Monstrous, for it is more then
after the proportion of Five shank bones of any Man now living amongst us. The Church was repaired and beautified An. 1633. at the cost of the Parish. LIV. Alder-Mary Church on the South-side of Budg-Row, by the West corner thereof, in Cord∣wainer-street-Ward, is so called because older than any Church of St. Mary in the City. Sir Henry Keble Grocer and Lord Mayor, who deceased 1518, gave a 1000 l. by his Testament, towards the Re∣building it. It was repaired and beautified by the Parish Anno 1632. LV. At the upper end of Hosier-lane toward West Cheap, is the fair Parish-Church of St. Mary∣le-Bow, (vulgarly Bow-Church.) This Church in the Reign of William the Conqueror, being the first in this City builded on Arches of Stone, was there∣fore called New Mary Church, or St. Mary de Ar∣cubus, or le Bow, in West Cheaping. The Court of the Arches is kept in this Church, and taketh Name of the place, not the place of the Court. 'Tis in Cordwainer-street-Ward. We read that anno 1090. the Third of William Rufus, by tempest of Wind the Roof of this Church was overturned, wherewith some persons were slain, and Four of the Rafters of twenty six Foot in length, were pitcht with such violence in the Ground of the high street, that scarce four Foot of them remained above Ground, which were fain to be cut even with the Ground, because they could not be plucked out, for the City of London was not then paved, but a Moorish ground. Anno 1271, a great part of the Church fell down; and slew many people, Men and Women. John Rotham or Rodham, by his Will Anno 1465, gave the Parish (wanting room in their Church-Yard) a cer∣tain Garden in Hosier-lane, for burial of their Dead, which so continued near a hundred Years, but now is built up and converted to a private dwelling. The
old Steeple was Re-edified Anno 1469, so that it was ordained by a Common Councel, that the Bow-Bell should be nightly Rung at Nine a Clock, to maintain which, (viz. the Ringing of Bow-Bell,) John Denne Mercer, by his Testament dated 1472, according to the trust of Reginald Langdon, gave to the Parson and Wardens two Tenements with the Appurtenances, since made into one, in Hosier-lane. This Church has been Re-built very gorgeously since the great fire, and the Steeple finished with that Elegancy of rare Architecture, height, and cu∣riosity, that it excels any in Christendom; of which more hereafter. LVI. On the South-side of Walbrook-Ward, from Candlewick-street in the mid way betwixt Lon∣don-stone and Wallbrook-corner is the proper Parish-Church called St. Mary Bothaw or Boathaw, because adjoyning to an Haw or Yard, wherein of old times Boats were made and Landed from Dowgate to be mended. It was repaired and beautified at the Charge of the Parish, in the Year of our Lord 1621. LVII. The Parish-Church called St. Mary-Cole-Church in Cheap-Ward, is so named of one Cole that Builded it, upon a Vault above Ground, so that Men were forced to ascend thereunto by certain steps. It was repaired and beautified at the Parish charge, Anno Feb. 1623. LVIII. In St. Mary-Hill-lane is the fair Parish-Church of St. Mary on the Hill, because of the ascent from Billingsgate. In the Year 1322, Rich∣rd Hackney, one of the Sheriffs of ondon was buryed there,Stow. p. 227. and Alice his Wife, as Robert Fabian writeth, saying thus: In the Year 1379, in the Month of April, as Labourers digged for the Foundation of a Vault, within the Church of St. Mary-Hill, near
unto Billingsgate, they found a Coffin of Rotten Timber, and therein the Corps of a Woman, whole of skin, and of bones undissevered, and the joints of her Arms pliable, without breaking of the skin, upon whose Sepulchre this was ingraven: Here lies the Bodies of Richard Hackney Fish∣monger, and Alice his Wife; the which Richard was Sheriff in the 15th of Edward II. (viz. anno 1322.) So that her Body was, 175 years after she had been buried, found uncorrupted: It was kept above ground three or four days without Noyance, but then it waxed unsavoury, and was again buried. This Church was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parish, Anno 1616. LIX. In Milk-Street in Cripple-Gate-Ward, stands the Parish-Church of St. Mary Magdalen, in which were several Monuments, amongst which, one for Queen Elizabeth. It was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parish in the year 1619. LX. Over against the North-west end of Lam∣bert-hill-lane in Knight-Riders-street, is the Parish-Church of St. Mary Magdalen, commonly called so, with the addition of Old Fish-street. It was repai∣red and beautified at the charge of the Parish, Anno 1630. which came to 140 l. in this was a Monument of Queen Elizabeth; it is in Castle-Baynard-Ward. LXI. The Parish-Church of St. Mary de Monte also, commonly called St. Mary Mounthaw, is situate on the West-side of Old Fish-street in Queen-hith-Ward. It was built to be a Chapel of the House of the Mounthaunts, and the Bishop of Hereford is Patron thereof. It was in part new built, and very much inlarged and beautified, Anno 1609. In the South Isle there hung a very fair Picture of King James, with the Figures of Peace and Plenty on ei∣ther side of him; Peace with her Olive Branch, and Plenty with her Sheaf of Wheat in her hands
being the Gift of Robert Plonker, then Church-Warden. LXII. The Parish-Church of St. Mary Som∣merset at the South-end of St. Mary Mounthaw-lane over against Broken-Wharf, is also in Queen-Hith-Ward, and a proper Church; it was repaired and beautified, Anno 1624. LXIII. The Parish-Church of St. Mary called Stayning, because it standeth at the North-end of Stayning-lane in Aldersgate-Ward, was repaired and beautified at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1630. LXIV. Near Stocks-Market in Walbrook-Ward is the Parish-Church called St. Mary Wooll-Church, so called, of a Beam placed in the Church-yard, which was thereof called Wooll-Church Haw, of the weighing of Wooll there used; for amongst the Customs of London written in French in the Reign of Edward II. there is to be found a Chapter, in∣tituled, Les Customes de Wooll-Church Haw. Where∣in is set down what was there to be paid for every parcel of Wooll weighed. This weighing of Wooll was there continued till the 6th of Richard II. till John Churchman built the Custome-House upon Wooll-Key to serve for the said purpose. This was (and is now) a fair and large Church. LXV. The Parish-Church of St. Mary Wolnoth in Langborn-Ward, was a proper handsom Church, with some few Monuments in it. LXVI. In Ironmonger-lane in Cheap-Ward, is the Parish-Church of St. Martin, formerly called Pomary, possibly of Apples growing where now Houses are built. It was repaired and beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1629. LXVII. The Parish-Church of St. Martin by Ludgate in Farringdon-Ward-within, was a proper Church, to which, Anno 1437. (viz. 15th of H. 6.) Sir John Michael Lord Mayor, and the Commonal∣ty, granted a parcel of Ground, containing 28 Foot
in length, and 24 in breadth, to build their Steeple upon. LXVIII. The Parish-Church of St. Martin Orgar in Candlewick-street-ward, is a small Church; Sir William Crowmer Lord Mayor built a handsom Chapel on the South-side thereof, and was buried there in an ancient Tomb, Anno 1533. it was re∣paired 1630. at the cost of 122 l. 6 s. 6 d. There was a rich and very beautiful Monument in the Chancel of Sir Allen Cotton Knight, and Alderman of London, and sometimes Lord Mayor, who dyed the 24th of December, Anno 1628. with a large In∣scription, concluding with these Verses. When he left Earth, Rich Bounty Dy'd, Mild Courtesie gave place to Pride; Soft Mercy to bright Justice said, Oh Sister! we are both Betray'd; While Innocence lay on the Ground By Truth, and wept at eithers Wound, The Sons of Levi did lament, Their Lamps went out, their Oyl was spent; Heaven hath his Soul, and only we Spin out our Lives in misery: So Death, thou missest of thy End, And kill'st him not, but kill'st his Friend. There was also a delicate Monument of our famous Queen Elizabeth. LXIX. The Parish-Church of St. Martin Out∣wich, is on the South-part of Threadneedle-street in Broad-street-ward; it is so called of Martin de Oteswitch, Nicholas de Oteswich, William Oteswich, and John Oteswich, Founders thereof, and all buried there, as appeared by their ancient Monument. There was Interred Richard Staper, Elected Alderman of London, Anno 1594. the greatest Merchant in his time, and the chiefest Actor in the discovery of the
Trades of Turkey, and the East-India. He was prosperous, wealthy, bountiful, and a good man; he died, Anno 1608. Sir Henry Row gave 5 l. yearly for Ever to the Poor of this Parish, to be bestowed in Bread and Coals. And Mrs. Sotherton yearly for Ever in Bread, 50 s. LXX. The Fair Parish-Church called St. Mar∣tin Vintrey in Vintrey-Ward, was sometimes called St. Martin de Beremand Church. It was new built, Anno 1399. by the Executors of Matthew Colum∣bars, a Stranger born, and a French Merchant. LXXI. The Parish-Church of St. Matthew Friday-street, Farringdon-ward-within, had divers Monuments in it. It was repaired and beautified at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1633. AS TO LXXII. The Parish-Church of St. Michael, called St. Michael at Basing-hall in Basing-hall-ward. LXXIII. The Parish-Church of St. Michael Cornhil in Cornhil-ward. LXXIV. St Michaels Crooked-lane in Candle∣week-street-ward. LXXV. St. Mich. Queenhith in Queenhith-ward. The are handsom Churches, affording no Re∣markables, but what will fall under other Heads. LXXVI. St. Michael ad Bladum, or at the Corne, (corruptly called St. Michael Querne) is in Farringdon-ward-within, and was a fair Church, with divers Monuments in it, amongst the rest one for John Leland, the famous Antiquary, and others, as John Banks Esq Mercer, who by his last Will writ∣ten with his own hand, gave to pious and chari∣table Uses 6000 l. which his Executor Robert Tich∣burn carefully discharged. LXXVII. St. Michael Royal in Vintrey-ward is a fair Parish-Church. It was new built, and made a Colledge by Sir Richard Whittington Mercer, and four times Lord Mayor; for a Master, four Fellows,
Masters of Art, Clerks, Conducts, Chorists, &c. There was also an Alms-house for thirteen poor men. The College was suppressed in the time of Edward the Sixth, the Alms-houses, with the poor men, do remain, and are paid by the Mercers. This Church was beautified at the proper cost of the Parish, Anno 1630. at the charge of 130 l. 9 s. LXXVIII. The Parish-Church of St. Michael in Wood-street in Cripplegate-ward, was a proper Church, in which were divers Monuments. Here was Interred the Head of James the Fourth, King of Scots of that name, slain at Flodden-field. Here was also a Monument of Queen Elizabeth. LXXIX. The Parish-Church called St. Mil∣dred Bread-street in Bread-street-ward, had divers Monuments, amongst the rest, one for Sir John Chadworth, or Shadworth Kt. some time Mercer and Lord Mayor of London, who gave a Vestry to this Church, an House for the Pastor to dwell in, and a Church-yard to the Parishioners, wherein to bury their dead. He deceased the 7th of May, An. 1401. In Memorial of whom, there was a fair Inscription on the Wall, in these words: Here lies a Man, that Faith and Works did even (Like Fiery Chariots) mount him up to Heaven: He did adorn this Church. When words were weak And men forget, the living stones will speak, He left us Land: This little Earth him keeps, These black words Mourners, and the Marble weeps. At the upper end of the Chancel was a fair Win∣dow full of cost and beauty, which being divided in∣to five parts, carried in the first of them a very art∣ful and curious Representation of the Spaniards great Armado, and the Battel in 1588. In the 2d, the Monument of Queen Elizabeth. In the 3d, of the Gun-powder Plot. In the 4th, of the lamen∣table
time of Infection, 1625. In the 5th, the view and lively portraicture of that worthy Gentleman Captain Nicholas Crisp, at whose sole cost (among other) this beautiful piece of Work was erected, as also the Figures of his virtuous Wife and Children, with the Arms belonging unto them. Upon the sto∣ry of 1588, were these Verses: Star-gazing Wizards sate upon this year, Matter of wonder, and did threaten fear Towards us, insomuch that Rome and Spain This Land accounted their assured gain. But mark how God did quite their hepes confound, Both ships and men we did see flee and drown'd. Queen Elizabeth's Monument. Marvel not why we do erect this Shrine, Since Dedicated in to Worth Divine; Religion, Arts, with Policy and Arms, Did all concur in Her most Happy Reign: To keep God's Church and us from Plotted Harms, Contriv'd by Romish Wits, and force of Spain. The Powder-Plot, 1605. When Force could not prevail, nor Plots abroad Could have Success, Sin now invents new Fraud; Guy Faux is sent Ambassador to Styx. And thence returning, furnisheth with Tricks His damned Crew, who forthwith all conclude To blow up King, the State, and Multitude. The Great Plague, 1625. The Story's past, God's blessings to the State Do clearly shew; but sure we were Ingrate,
For now, behold, instead of sweet protection, Thousands are swept away by foul Infection; But mark God's mercy in midst of greatest crys, He sheath'd his Sword, and wip't tears from our eys. The Founder's Figure, with their Wife, Children and Arms. These Ensigns which you see and Monument, Are not so much to represent The Founder's Person, as his zealous care T' express God's Love and Mercies rare To this his Vineyard, for to that sole end Did he these Stories thus commend To After-Ages, that in their Distress, They might God's Goodness still express. LXXX. In the main Body of Cheap-Ward, stands the Parish-Church called St. Mildred Poultrey. The Founder is not to be read in any credible Re∣cord, but it appears by certain ancient Evidences of the said Church, that from the beginning it had not so much spare ground about it, as to make a Church-yard of, until Anno 1420. And the 8 of H. 5. Thomas Morstead Esq and Chyrurgeon to the Kings H. 4. H. 5. & H. 6. (and afterwards, Anno 1436. was Sheriff and Alderman of London) gave unto the Church a parcel of Ground lying between his dwelling House, and the said Church adjoining to it towards the North, to make a Burying place of, containing from the course of Walbrook towards the West, 45 Foot; and in Breadth from the Church towards the North, 35 Foot. Besides other Monuments, here was one for Queen Elizabeth, with several Copies of Verses, some of which are before recited, (for there were Monuments for Her in several Churches, and She well deserved it, as being a most Heroick Prin∣cess, that check'd the Plots and Incroachments of the
Pope and his Adherents, and is therefore to be per∣petuated to Posterity,) and therefore what we have not elsewhere met with, shall be inserted. On the top of the Monument were these Lines: If Prayers or Tears of Subjects had prevail'd, To save a Princess, through the World esteem'd, Then Atropos in Cutting here had fail'd, And had not cut her thrad, but been redeem'd. But pale fac'd Death, and cruel Churlish Fate; To Prince and People brings the latest Date. Yet spight of Death and Fate, fame will display Her Gracious Vertues through the World for aye. Under Her were these Verses: Th' Admired Empress through the World ap∣plauded, For Supream Vertues Rarest imitation, Whose Scepters Rule, Fames loud voto'd Trumpet lauded, Ʋnto the Ears of every Foreign Nation. Canopied under powerful Angels Wings, To her Immortal Praise sweet Science sings. LXXXI. The Parish-Church of St. Nicholas-Acons in Lumbard-street, in Langborn-Ward, was Repaired and Imbattled by Sir John Bridges Draper and Lord Mayor, Anno 1520, who was buried there. It was afterwards Repaired and Beautified at the Charge of the Parish Anno 1615. There was the Monument of John Hall, Master of the Worshipful Company of Drapers, who dyed the Nineteenth of November 1618. Aged Ninety three Years; and Fifty eight Years a House keeper in that Parish, and had Twenty seven Children all born there. LXXXII. Towards the West-end of Knight-Riders-street,
in Queen-Hith-Ward, is the Parish-Church called St. Nicholas Cole-Abbey (formerly Cold-Abbey,) which was an Antient and proper Church. In the Twenty sixth of Edward the III. Thomas Frere, Fishmonger, gave a piece of Ground to the said Parish-Church of St. Nicholas, containing Eighty Six Foot in Length Forty three Foot at one end, and Thirty four at another in Breadth, for a Burying place or Church-Yard. It was Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1630. LXXXIII. On the West-end of Bread-street-Hill, also in Queen-Hith-Ward, is the Parish-Church called St. Nicholas Olave, wherein were divers Mo∣numents. Thomas Lewen Ironmonger, Alderman, and one of the Sheriffs 1537, gave his Messuage with Fourteen Tenements in the said Parish, to the Iron∣mongers, and they to give Stipends to Alms-Men in Five Houses, built in the Church-Yard of that Pa∣rish. His Monument, with Agnes his Wife, was Re∣vived and Beautified at the Charge of the Right Worshipful Company of Ironmongers, Anno 1623. LXXXIV. At the North-west corner of Sy∣don-Lane in Tower-street-Ward, is the handsom Pa∣rish-Church called St. Olave Hartstreet, in which were many Monuments. It was Repaired and Rich∣ly Beautified at the Parish Charges, in the Years 1632, and 1633, at the cost of above Four hundred thirty seven pound. LXXXV. In the Street called the Old Jewry in Coleman-street-Ward, is the Parish-Church called St. Olave Jewry, in old Records called St. O∣lave Ʋpwell, in which were several Monnments. LXXXVI. At the North-end of Noble-street in Alders-gate-Ward, is the Parish-Church called St. Olave Silver-street. It was New built in the
Year 1609, (and inlarged in Breadth above seven Foot, (and Anno 1619, Repaired and Beautified, and inriched with a Fair Gallery, Anno 1632. LXXXVII. In Needlers-lane in Cheap-Ward is the Parish-Church, called St. Pancras Soper-lane. Here was a fair Monument of James Hush (Citi∣zen and Grocer of London) who by two Wives had twenty nine Children, he dyed the twentieth of Au∣gust 1590. he was a good Man, and Charitable; up∣on his Tomb was an Elegant Latin Epitaph. Mr. Thomas Chapman in the Year 1617, gave a very fair and costly Table, bearing the Figure of the Monument of the Renowned QƲEEN ELI∣ZABETH. LXXXVIII. At the South-West corner of Wood-street in Farringdon-Ward within, is the handsom Parish-Church called St. Peter-Cheap. In which are but few Monuments, Sir John Shaw Gold∣smith and Lord Mayor, (deceased 1503,) appointed by his Testament, the said Church and Steeple to be New built at his cost, with a flat Roof. Yet Thomas Wood Goldsmith, of the Sheriffs 1491, i accounted a Principal Benefactor, because the Roo of the middle Ile was supported by Images of Wood-Men. It was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the Parish in the Years 1616 and 1617, which came to 314 l. LXXXIX. The Parish-Church of St. Pe∣ters in Cornhil is an antient building; there is in that Church a Table fast chained, wherein it is said, th Anno 179, King Lucius founded this Church, an made it an Archbishops See, and the Metropolitan or chief Church of this Kingdom: and so endure Four hundred Years, then the Archbishops See an Pall were removed to Canterbury. But whethe the Church that King King Lucius built, be thi or St. Peters Westminster, is controverted by Histo∣rians,
and therefore we shall not wrangle about it. To the Poor of this Parish were sundry Benefactors, as Lancelot Tompson of London Draper, who amongst other Charities gave one hundred pound to the Dra∣pers Company, and they to allow Five pound year∣ly for ever▪ for Bread and Coals for the Poor of the said Parish; whom several other well minded Peo∣ple imitated. It was most richly Repaired and Beau∣tified at the Parish Charge, amounting to about one thousand four hundred pound, in the Year 1633. XC. The Parish-Church called St. Peter-Pauls-Wharf, was in Queen-Hith-Ward, wont to be called Parva or Little, because it was a small Church; it was Repaired and Beautified Anno 1625. Therein was a Monument for Queen ELIZABETH. XCI. In Broad-street-Ward is the Parish-Church vulgarly called St. Peter-Poor, peradventure so called, because the Parish was Poor formerly, (but now they are otherwise,) or to difference it from others of that Name; here are sundry Monuments, and several Be∣nefactors to the Poor of the Parish. The Lady Pay∣ton, gave 40 s. Yearly for ever in Bread; the Lady Ramsey gave four pound Yearly for ever. Mr. John Quarles Citizen and Draper of London, gave the Sum of five pound Yearly for ever, &c. It cost in sun∣dry Repairs from the year 1615, to 1630. the Sum of one thousand five hundred eighty seven pound; all which, except four hundred which Sir William Gar∣way Knight gave, was the proper charge of the Parishioners. XCII. The Parish-Church of St. Stephen in Coleman-street and Ward, had divers Monuments, and Benefactors, but I cannot omit the Verses on the Monument of Barne Roberts Esq who Dyed Anno 1610. they are so Elegantly expressive of his Wifes affection, (she was eldest Daughter to Sir Wil∣liam Glover Kinght, and Alderman of London,) who
Erected the Monument Anno 1611. at her own Charge. If human worth could have preserv'd him still, He had been much too strong for Death to kill. Yet being Conquer'd, he got by the strife, A better being, in a better life: So, that great Victor over Nature, left him More happiness ten fold than he bereft him. This Church was sometime a Synagogue of the Jews, then a Parish-Church, then a Chappel to St. Olaves in the Jewry, and 7 E. 4. it was Incor∣porated a Parish-Church: It was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish Charge Anno 1622, and a very fair Gallery added in the South Ile Anno 2629. Here was also a Monument for Queen ELIZABETH. XCIII. In Wallbrook-street, and Ward, is the fair Parish-Church called St. Stephen-Wallbrook. Sir Robert Chichely somtimes Lord Mayor, in the Year 1428▪ 6 H. 6. gave to this Parish one Plat of Ground containing two hundred and eight Foot and a half in Length, and sixty six Foot in Breadth, to Build a New Church, and for a Church Yard on the East∣side of the Old Church, (the place of the Old Church being converted to a Parsonage-House,) This Ground he bought of the Grocers for two hun∣dred Marks, which was Lett before for twenty six Marks Yearly. He gave over and above one hun∣dred pound, to the said Work, bore the Charges of all the Timber-Work on the Procession-way, and laid the Lead upon it at his own Post. He gave also all the Timber for the Roofing of the two Iles, and paid for the Carriage therefore. It was finished 1439. The Breadth being sixty seven Foot, the Length 125. The Church-Yard Ninety Foot in Length, and thirty seven in Breadth and more. It
had many Repairs to the Year 1632, amounting to five hundred and ten pound fifteen shillings and six pence. XCIV. The Parish-Church of St. Swithins is also in Wallbrook-Ward, on the South-West corner of Swithins-lane, wherein were divers Monu∣ments. XCV. In Knight-Riders-street in Vintry-Ward is the proper Parish-Church of St. Thomas Apostle. In which was a neat Monument, on which was an Elegant Epitaph in Latin Verse, composed by Mrs. Katherine Killegrew for her self in her life time. And another in neat Greek Verse by her Si∣ster Elizabeth, for the said Katherin when she dyed; besides two more, expressing the great Learning and Accuteness of those Noble Sisters. But our intend∣ed brevity permits the Recital but of two, and that for a aste, and to shew what Women may arrive to, if Studious. What she Writ her Self was: Dormio nunc Domino, Domini virtute resurgam, Et  meum carne videbo mea, Mortua ne Dicar, fruitur pars altera Christo Et surgar Capiti, tempore, tota, meo. Here was another Epitaph by Andrew Melvin. Palladis & Phabi comes una, & Pieris una, Pieridumque soror, Pieridumque Parens Gratia, suada, lepas, Gravitas, Constantia, Candor, Religio, Pietas, & pudor, & probitas, Atque Palestinae, & Latiae, Graiae{que} Camenae Clausit olim uno omnes pectore, nunc Tumulo. It was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish
charge, amounting to three hundred pound, Anno 1630. There was also a Monument of Queen E∣LIZABETH, but the Verses being the same we had in other places, we omit them, to avoid pro∣lixity. XCVI. In Knight-Riders-street is the small Parish-Church of the Holy-Trinity. To which John Bryan Alderman in the Reign of Henry the V. was a great Benefactor, &c. It was Re-built at the Parish charge (being lamentably decayed) Anno 1607, and 1608. To which the Worshipful Com∣panies of Merchant Taylors and Vintners, were very Bountiful Benefactors. As also these Aldermen, Sir Thomas Cambel, Sir John Swinnerton, Sir John Gore, Sir William Craven, Sir Thomas Middle∣ton. XCVII. The Parish-Church called St. Vedast, alias Foster, in Farringdon-Ward-within, was a Fair Church, had had many Benefactors, and in it were several Monuments. To this Church at the Chancel end, the Breadth being twenty Yards and above, was added twenty Foot of Ground, which Ground was given to the Parish, to Lengthen the Church, out of a Fair Court then belonging to the Sadlers-Hall. Having given a brief Account of the Churches within the Walls as they were formerly, (reserving their present State to another Head, there being Eighty seven Destroyed by the Fire, of which many are bravely Re-built, &c.) We shall proceed Al∣phabotically to those sixteen without the Wall. And, I. The Parish-Church of St. Andrew-Holborn, stands at the very corner of Shooe-lane in Holborn. In which are several Monuments, but we cannot omit that of Rlph Okey of Lincolns-Inn Esq be∣cause
of his Piety and Bounty in Legacies. He was Master of St. Katharines, and one of the Masters of Requests to Queen ELIZABETH, he Dyed the Fourth of June 1596. He gave by his Testament to Christs-Hospital, one hundred pound. To the Colledge of the Poor of Queen ELIZABETH in East Greenwich, one hundred pound. To Poor Scholars in Cambridge, one hundred pound. To Poor Scholars in Oxford, one hundred pound. To Prisoners in the two Compters, of London, two hun∣dred pound. To Prisoners in the Fleet, one hun∣dred pound. To Prisoners in Ludgate, one hundred pound. To Prisoners in Newgate, one hundred pound. To Prisoners in the King's-Bench, one hundred pound. To Prisoners in the Marshalsea, one hundred pound. Which is Eleven hundred pound. Besides twenty pound to the Prisoners in the White-Lyon. And to the Poor of St. Katha∣rines, twenty pound. And to every Brother and Sister there, forty shillings. He hath a Curious Mo∣nument in the Wall of the Quire, expressing in La∣tin his Descent, Employs, Deerts, and Piety, &c. II. In treating of the Parish-Church of St. Bar∣tholome-Great, in Farringdon-Ward-without, it is necessary to say somthing briefly of its Original. On the East-side of Duck-lane near Smithfield, one Rahere, a pleasant wittied Gentleman, Founded the Priory of St. Bartholomew, about the Year 1102. He placed Canons there, and became himself their first Prior, and so continued while he lived, and was Buried there in a Fair Monument, Renewed by Prior Bolton, who was the last Prior in that House; this Priory was New built Anno 1410. King Henry II. Granted it the priviledge of a Fair to be kept Yearly at Bartholomew-tide. When it was surrended in the Thirtieth of H. VIII. it was valued at six hundred fifty three pound fifteen shillings per annum. Six Bells in a Tune belong∣ing
to it, were Sold to the Parish of St. Sepulchres. And then the Church being pulled down to the Quire, the Quire was by the Kings order, annexed, for the inlarging of the old Parish-Church adjoyn∣ing, and so was used till the Reign of Queen Mary, who gave the Remnant of the Priory-Church to the Friers Preachers, or Black-Friers, and was used as their Conventual-Church, until the first of Queen Elizabeth. Then those Fryers were put out, and all the said Church, with the old Parish-Church, was wholly as it stood in the last Year of Edward the VI. given by Parliament to remain for ever a Parish-Church, to the Inhabitants within the Close, called Great St. Bartholomews. Since which time much cost hath been spent in Repairs upon it. III. The Hospital of St. Bartholomew (now the Parish-Church called St. Bartholomew the less,) was Founded by the above mentioned Rahere. This was confirmed by Edward III. in his Twenty sixth Year; this Hospital was valued at the Suppression Anno 1539. in the Thirty first of Henry VIII. at thirty five pound six shillings and seven pence Year∣ly. It Remaineth now the Parish-Church to the Inhabitants in the Precinct of the Hospital. In the later end of July Anno 1552. This Hospital was Repaired, New Endowed and Furnished at the charge of the Citizens. IV. The Parish-Church of St. Bridget or Bride, in Farringdon-Ward-without, of old time was a small Thing, but increased since with a large Body and side-Iles towards the West, at the charge of Wil∣liam Vennor Esq Warden of the Fleet, about the Year 1480. All which he caused to be brought about in the Stone, in the Figure of a Vine, with Grapes and Leaves, &c. The partition betwixt the old work and the New, some time prepared as a Screen, to be set up in the Hall of the Duke of Somerset's-House in the Strand, was bought for eight score pound,
and set up in the Year 1557. This Church was Repaired and Richly and Curiously Beautified at the Charge of the Parishioners 1630, 1631, 1632. The Battlements were New built, the middle Roof, and a very Fair Gallery on the North side of this Church answerable to that on the South, erected An∣no 1607. V. As to Bridewel Precinct we refer you to the Section of Hospitals, with respect to that Founda∣tion. It was Enlarged and Beautified at the pro∣per cost and Charge of the Governors and Inhabi∣tants of the Precinct, Anno 1620. Sir Thomas Middleton being President, and Mr. Thomas Johnson Treasurer. There was above twenty four Foot in Length added to it. It is a Beautiful Chappel; that commends the care of its Governors. We must not omit to insert, that close by the Pulpit, hangs the Picture of King Edward the VI. that truly Religious and most Vertuous Protestant Prince, with the following Lines: This Edward of fair Memory, the sixth In whom with Greatness Goodness was commixt, Gave this Bridewell, a Palace in old times, For a Chastising-House of Vagrant Crimes. There is likewise a Monument of Queen Elizabeths, but the Verses being before Recited, we shall for bre∣vity here omit them. VI. In Alders-gate-Ward, and in Britain-street, so called of the Dukes of Britain that lodged there, is the Parish-Church of St. Botolph, called Alders∣gate. There was a Popish Brotherhood Founded there Anno 1377, indowed with Lands above thirty l. per annum, (a great Sum then;) but suppressed by King Edward the VI. In this were divers Mo∣numents, amongst the rest was a Fair Pyramid erect∣ed
against a Pillar, with this Pathetick Inscription, not unworthy to be Transcribed. Katharina Mountague obiit 7. die Decembris anno Domini. 1612. What Epitaph shall we afford this Shrine? Words cannot Grace this Pyramid of thine: Thy sweet Perfections, all summ'd up, were such, As Heavens (I think) for Earth did think too much Religious Zeal did thy pure heart command, Pity thine Eye, and Charity thy Hand: These Graces, joyned with more of like degree, Make each Mans word an Epitaph for thee. Calm was thy Death, well order'd was thy life, A Careful Mother, and a lving Wife. Ask any, how these Vertues in thee grew? Thou wast a Spencer and a Mountague. VII. The Parish-Church of St. Botolph-Ald∣gate, is a very Fair Church, not far from Ald-gate in Portsoken-Ward. It is a Populous Parish, and there are several Monuments in the Church. Amongst which (for his Charity, which deserves to be Remem∣bred,) we shall Remark that of George Clark) Citizen and Vintner of London, who gave these following Legacies. For a publick School in the University of Oxford, the Sum of two hundred pound. To the use of the Poor of the four Pre∣cincts of the Ward of Portsoken, being in this Pa∣rish, two hundred ninety three pound six shillings and eight pence. To the Parish of White-Chappel, for the Relief of the Poor there, one hundred and six pound fifteen shillings and four pence. To the Com∣pany of Vintners ten pound. To the Poor of Christ's-Hospital five pound. That is, eight hundred forty five pound two shillings and two pence. He Deceased the fourteenth of April Anno 1606. Aged
63 Years. This Church was Repaired and Beau∣tified Anno 1621. There is a Memorial Erected by the Right Worshipful the Company of Merchant-Taylors, for Robert Dove Esq Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, Master of the same Company, and one of the Customers in the Port of London, who gave, in his Life-time, Three thousand five hundred twenty eight pound ten shillings and eight pence, for Charitable Uses for ever, to divers Poor Brethren of the same Company, and other Uses for the said Company, viz. To Christ's-Hospital. To St. Sepulchres-Parish. To the Two Compters. To Ludgate and Newgate. To the Poor of this Pa∣rish. To St. John-Baptist's-Colledge in Oxford. To Queen Elizabeths-Hospital at Bristol, &c. He Dyed the Second day of May 1612. at the Age of Ninety Years. His Arms under him, Three Doves. He lived Vertuously all his Life, and Dyed a sin∣cere Professor of the True Christian Protestant Re∣ligion, in the Eleventh of King JAMES; who is remembred as being a Worthy Example to the liv∣ing, and deserves a Memorial in All Ages. VIII. The Parish-Church of St. Buttolph-Bishops-gate in Bishops-Gate-Ward, stands in a Fair Church-Yard, (adjoyning to the Town-Ditch, up∣on the very Bank thereof,) inclosed with a come∣ly Wall of Brick, Repaired by Sir William Allen, Lord Mayor Anno 1571. Because he was born in that Parish, where also he was buryed. Mrs. Wood the Wife of Robert Wood, gave large Gifts and Le∣gacies to this Parish, she Dyed November the twen∣ty fifth 1600, and lyes buried there. John Hey∣ward, Citizen, and Alderman of London, by his last Will and Testament, Inrolled in the Court of Hust∣ings in the Guild-Hall of London, Anno 13th. of Edward the IV. gave 25 Quarters of Charcoals Yearly, to be delivered by the Company of Tallow-Chandlers, betwixt the first of November, and the
twenty fifth of December, with a Penalty of For∣feiture of twenty shillings for the first quarter, if they be not Delivered as aforeaith, forty shillings for the second quarter, four pound for the third quarter, and eight pound for the whole Year, if they be not delivered: and so double still from quarter to quarter, if defect of Payment herein be made. John Bricket Citizen and Tooth-Drawer, (by Will dated the Eleventh of Feb. 1554.) gave for ever, Twelve Sacks of Charcoals to the Poor of this Parish to be paid at Easter. Mrs. Mary Wilkinson, gave them Sixty Quarters of Coals to be paid in Novem∣ber and December for ever, provided that out of each Load (being Four in all, Thirty Quarters being two Loads) the Overseers of the Precinct of Norton-Folgate, shall have Ten Sacks to be by them given to the Poor of that Preinct. Sir Wil∣liam Allen, gave thirty shillings for ever to be distri∣buted by the Ironmongers to the Poor in Bread every Year. Sir Stephen Scudamore Twenty shil∣lings paid likewise by the Company of Vintners▪ Ma∣ry Webster gave ten shillings for ever, so be paid to the Poor on St. Thomas Day. Mr. William Hobby gave the Tenor Bell. Mr. Ralph Pinder Citizen and Draper of London, gave to the Poor in Money Sixty pound, for which is given to Thirteen Poor People every Sunday in the Year, two pence a piece, in good Wheaten Bread. Anno 1626. Nicholas Rieve, gave the Sum of Forty six pound five shillings to the Parish, with which they purchased Lands at Stratford and Bow, worth twenty five pound per an∣num. In the Year 1628, on the twentieth of June, the Earl of Devonshire then deceasing at Devon∣shire-House without Bishops-gate, gave one hundred pound for ever to the Poor, for which the Church-Wardens give every Sonday in the Year to Fifteen Poor People of this Parish, two pence a piece in good Wheaten Bread. T. C. Citizen and Armourer
of London, gave a 100 l. to the Chamber of London, for which 5 l. yearly is to be paid, to buy five Waste∣coats, and five Kirtles of good Kersey or Cloth, each Wastecoat and Kirtle to be worth at least 15 s. five pair of Stockings, each worth at least 18 d. five pair of Shoes, each worth at least 2 s. for five poor aged Widows, to be received on St. Thomas the Apostles day for ever. These Charities are briefly remem∣bred, as Examples for others. There is a Remarkable Monument in Petty-France, at the West-end of the Lower Church-yard of this Church without the Church-yard wall, erect∣ed to the memory of one Coga Shawsware, a Per∣sian Merchant, principal Servant and Secretary to the Persian Ambassador, with whom he and his Son came over. He was aged 44 years, and buried the 10th of August, 1626. (now almost 55 years ago) the Am∣bassador himself, young Shawsware his Son, and many other Persians, mournfully following him to the Ground about Nine in the Morning. Their Cere∣mony was, the Son sate cross-legged at the North-end of the Grave, did sometimes read, and sometimes sing, both intermixt with sighing and weeping for about half an hour. Some of them, morning and evening, came precisely at six for a month to∣gether, and might have come longer, but that the Rudeness of our People disturbed them. The Son, at his own charge, erected this Tomb of Stone for him, with an Epitaph in Persian Characters. IX. The Parish-Church of St. Dunstan, called West, to distinguish it from that in the East, is a fair Church with divers fair Monuments. William Crowch Citizen and Mercer of London, one of the Common-Council, besides other Legacies, gave 10 l. a year for ever, to be distributed among 36 poor People of honest life of this Parish. He dyed April 16, Anno 1606. this is his pious Epitaph:
Lo, thus he Dy'd; For vain and frail is Flesh: Yet lives his Soul (by Faith) in endless Bliss, By Faith in Christ; whose Grace was so inlarg'd, That by his Blood mans sin he hath discharg'd. X. Over against Suffolk-place in the Borough of Southwark and Bridge-Ward-without, is the Parish-Church of St. George, sometimes pertaining to the Priory of Bermondsey. Mr. William Evans of the Right Worshipful Company of Merchant-Taylors, deceased July 1590. gave 10 l. 8 s. to the Poor yearly for ever, to be distributed in Bread, by which 208 poor People are served every Sunday, as appears by his Epitaph. James Savage gave 5 l. yearly, for ever, for the same use. This Church, Steeple and Gallery, was Repair'd, New Pew'd and Beautified, and the South Ile inlarged by the Parishioners, with the assistance of several Benefactors, amongst which several of the Companies of London contributed 166 l. 10 s. Anno 1629. XI. The fair and large Parish-Church of St. Giles Cripplegate, is without the Postern in Cripple∣gate-ward, which was burnt 1545. 37. H. 8. In it were divers Monuments, amongst which we must not forget John Fox the learned, godly and famous Au∣thor of the Book of Martyrs, an indefatigable Searcher into Antiquity, and a most faithful Assertor and Defender of Gospel-Truth, who revived the Marian Martyrs, as it were Phoenixes, from their ashes. He lies Interred in this Church, and dyed the 18 of April, Anno 1587. (that is, in this present year 1681, 94 years ago) in the 70th year of his Age, in whose Memorial his eldest Son, Samuel Fox, upon a very fair Marble Stone on the end of the South-wall of the Chancel, placed his Epitaph, which we shall insert, though we are sure his Name will ever live in that Never-dying Monument (his stupendious
and most elaborate Work, viz. his great Martyrology to all succeeding Generations. The substance of his Epitaph you have before in English, but take it in Latin too. CHRISTO S. S. JOhanni Foxo, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Martyrolog Fidelissimo, Antiquitatis Historicae Indagato Sagacissimo, Evangelicae Veritatis propugnator acerrimo, Thaumaturgo admirabili; Qui Martyres Marianos, tanquam Phoenices, ex cineribus redivi∣vos praestitit. Patri suo omni pietatis officio impri∣mis colendo, Samuel Foxus illius primogenitus, hoc Monumentum posuit, non sine lachrymis. Obiit die 18 Mens. April. An. Dom. 1587. ja Septuagenarius Vita vitae mortalis est, Spes vitae immortalis. There is a fair Plate Engraven on a fair Stone in the Chancel under the above Monument, where he lies buried with these Verses: Sacra sub hoc saxo tria Corpora mista quiescant, Gulielmi Bullen Medici, Fratrisque Richardi, Ac Johannis Foxi: qui tres, mihi, crede, fuerunt Doctrina clari, rari & pictatis alumni. Gulielmus Bullen Medicamina semper habebat, Aeque pauperibus danda, ac locupletibus aeque. Sicque Richardus erat, benefacere, &, ipse paratus, Omnibus ex aequo quibus ipse prodesse valebat. At Foxus noster per multas hos Parasangas, Vita praecurrit, studiisque accedimus omnes. Extant quae scripsit tormenta cruenta piorum, Extans perdocte permulta volumina scripta, Quae scripsit Foxus: Nulli fuit ipse secundus. Obiit An. Dom. 1587. Apr. 18.
Though the Learned need no interpretation of these Verses, yet for the satisfaction of the English Reader, I will adventure to paraphrase them, having a great Veneration for the Memory of this good man, to whom all Protestants in Europe are so much beholden. This is what English my Extemporary Muse can give them: Three Sacred Corps beneath this Stone do rest; Of William Bullen, who with skill profest Physick; with Richard his dear Brother, and John Fox: No three more famous in the Land. Of pious Doctrine they Promoters were; In Life and Holiness Examples rare. Bullen had Med'cines for the free Relief Of Poor and Rich to ease them of their Grief. Richard was still a ready Benefactor, For common good, where he would be an Actor. But our Great FOX, did largely these out-do In course of Life, and lib'ral Studies too. His Works are extant, where he did describe, Saints cruel Torments, by a hellish Tribe. The Learning in his pious Volumes shown, Do still proclaim him, Second unto None. On the same Stone are these words, Here lieth buried William Bullen, who dyed the 17th of January, 1576. Ʋnder this Stone sleepeth the Body of Richard Bullen, a Faithful Servant and Preacher of Jesus Christ, and was buried the 16th of October, Anno Dom. 1563. Roger Mason of this Parish, Citizen and Vintner, gave to the Poor of this Parish 200 l. wherewith a yearly Rent of about 16 l. per Annum, is purchased for ever, to be bestowed on ten Gowns of Black
Cloth lined, to be Yearly given to ten Poor Men of Freedom of this Parish, upon All-Saints-day; he dyed the Third of September 1603, Aged thirty se∣ven Years. William Day Citizen and Vintner of London, gave to the Poor of this Parish Eighty pound, with which the Yearly Rent of six pound is purchased for ever, to be bestowed upon twelve Coats of Green Cloth, for twelve Poor Orphans up∣on All-Saints-day. Other Benefactors were Thomas Busby Cooper, who gave fourty Dozen of Wheaten Bread, and four Loads of Charcoal to the Poor for ever Yearly. Mr. Blighton Butcher, gave forty Dozen of Wheaten Bread, and two Loads of Charcoals to be Yearly distributed. Mr. Charles Langley Brewer, gave twenty Gowns for Men and Women, and twen∣ty Shirts for twenty other Men, and twenty Smocks for twenty Women Yearly for ever on All-Saints-day, and a remainder of money to be given amongst the Poor people that day, and forty shillings also that day allowed for a Sermon. Mrs. Ann Harvist, gave forty Tenements of twenty pound Yearly Rent, to be distributed quarterly to twenty Poor Widows by five shillings a quarter each. Mr. Robert Smith, gave four Bibles in Octavo, well buffed and bossed, to four Poor Mens Children, such as can best deserve them by Reading, to be given every Easter for ever. (A very good Act.) As also, fifty two Dozen of Wheaten Bread, every Week one Dozen for ever. Mr. Richard Hanbury and Mr. Richard Bud, gave six Common Prayer Books, and fifty Dozen of Wheaten Bread, in the same manner to be distributed. Mr. Roger Bellow, Brewer, gave twenty pound per annum, of which ten pound Yearly to the Poor, and ten pound to be reserved to purchase Land for the Relief of the Poor. Here is also the Monument of John Speed, the
famous Geographer and Historian, who dyed July 28. 1629, in his seventy eighth Year. As also his Wife Susanna, who was his Wife 57 Years, and had by her twelve Sons and six Daughters; who dyed in her seventieth Year, the twenty eighth of March 1628. Here are divers other Monuments, but for brevity we omit them. XII. The Parish-Church called St. Olave South∣wark, stands on the bank of the River Thames in Bridge-Ward-without, the Parish, is large. And in the Church there are some Monuments; amongst the rest, one for Queen Elizabeth. XIII. The Fair Church called St. Mary Overy, (or over the Rie, that is, over the River) vulgarly called Sviours Southwark, was formerly a Priory. For from a House of Nuns, it was converted into a Colledge of Priests. And Anno 1106 Founded again for Canons Regular. William Gifford Bishop of Winchester, Builded the body of the Church Anno 1106. 7 H. 1. It was surrendred to Hen∣ry VIII. in the thirty first of his Reign. Oct. 27. Anno 1539, valued at 624 l. 6. s. 6. d. per annum. The Inhabtants of the Burrough in December fol∣lowing, purchased the Church of the Priory, of the King; whereof they made a Parish-Church, for the Parish-Church of St. Mary Magdalen, on the South∣side of the Quire out of St. Margarets on the Hill, which were made one Parish of St. Saviour. In it there be divers Monuments; as of John Gower a Famous Poet, and a great Benefactor to this Church, who lived in the times of Edward the III. and R. II. The Monument of that Famous and Learned Bishop Andrews, who dyed in the Eleventh of Charles the I. Anno 1626, Aged Seventy one Years. Here is likewise a very Fair Monument of Dr. Locl∣yer, that Famous Physitiar. There are also divers
bountiful Benefactors to the Poor of this Parish; and other Pious Uses. This is a Stately and Spacious Church, and has been from time to time kept in good Repair, and with much cost has received ma∣ny Graceful and Useful Additions. Here is a Mo∣nument of Queen Elizabeth, with these Verses: ELIZABETHA REGINA. St. Peters Church at Westminster, Her Sacred Body doth inter. Her Glorious Soul with Angels sings. Her Deed live Patterns here for Kings, Her Love in every heart hath Room, This only shadows forth her Tomb. XIV. The Fair Parish-Church of St. Sepulchres stands without Newgate, in a Fair Church-Yard; but of late much Incoached upon, as being part of it Lett out for Buildings, and a Garden-Plat. This Church was Re-built about the Reign of Henry the V. or Edward the IV. one of the Pophams was a great Builder there, namely of one Fair Chappel on the South-side of the Quire, as appeareth by his Arms there, &c. Here are divers Monuments. There has been much money spent in Repairs upon this Church. In it there is an Excellent Organ, and a very good Ring of Bells. It is in Farringdon-Ward-without. XV. Anno 1552. The Citizens of London ha∣ving purchased the void suppressed Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, in the Month of July, began the Reparations thereof for Poor, Impotent, Lame and Diseased People, so that in November next fol∣lowing, the Sick and Poor People were taken in. The Church of this Hospital, remaineth as a Parish-Church for the Inhabitants thereabout, by the Name
of St. Thomas Southwark. The Steeple was Re∣paired, New Leaded, and from the Ground to the Top, Coated with a Beautiful Rough-Cast, and Inriched with a very Fair Turret in the Year 1633. It is in Bridge-Ward-without. XVI. In Portsoken-Ward is the small Parish-Church called Trinity Minories, there was first a Monastery of Nuns of the Order of Sancta-Clara, called the Minories, Founded by Edmond Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, Brother to Edward the I. Anno 1293. Which was Demolished in King Henry the Eighths Thirtieth Year, Anno 1539. There were built Store-Houses for Armour and other Mar∣tial Habiliments, with divers Work-Houses for that purpose, and near it, this Church for the Inhabi∣tants; who at several times Repaired and Beauti∣fied it. In the Body of this Church is a Monument with this Inscription: Vivere Cornices multos dicuntur in annos, Cur vos Angusta conditione sumus. We shall now proceed to the out Parishes in Mid∣dlesex and Surrey. I. As to Christ's-Church, we refer the Reader to another place, where he shall have a fuller account than we can give here. II. The Parish-Church of St. John at Hackney, is an antient and handsom Church, and kept in good Repair; there are divers Monuments in it, but our Discourse being Principally of the City of Londo it cannot be expected, that we should enlarge much more than the bare mention of generals, having things much more Material, that require our dispatch. But the Fair Parish-Church of
III. St. Giles in the Fields, is a very Neat and well built Parish-Church, in a handsom Church-Yard. It was formerly an Hospital, Founded by Queen Matilda, Wife to King Henry the I. about the Year 1117. at which Prisoners, convey'd from London to Tyburn to be Executed, were presented with a great Bowl of Ale, thereof to Drink at pleasure, as to be their last Refreshing in this Life. In this Church are several Monuments. It began to be Raised a New, Anno 1623, and was Finished in two Years, and incompass'd with a Fair Brick-Wall in the Year 1631. To which there were ma∣ny good and great Benefactors, many of whom would be concealed. This is a very large Parish, and (next to St. Giles Cripple-gate and Stepney) is reputed to be the most Populous in England, (if not in Europe;) it being thought by such as have made an Estimate, that it contains above 100000 Souls, besides Strangers, who are very Numerous. IV. The Parish-Church called St. James Clerken∣well, in the North-West Suburbs, was formerly a Priory, so called of Clark's-Well adjoyning. It is a handsom large Church with divers Antient and some Modern Monuments. And it had sundry Bene∣factors. William Hern a Master of Defence, and Yeoman of the Guard 1580, gave Lands and Te∣nements to the Cloathworkers in London, they to pay Yearly for ever fourteen pound to the Church-Wardens of Clerkenwel, and fourteen pound to the Church-wardens of St. Sepulchres, towards Repara∣tion of those Churches, and Relief of Poor Men. More he gave after the Death of one Man, eight pound a Year for ever, to the mending of High-Ways. Thomas Sackford Esq one of the Masters of Re∣quests, gave to the Poor of that Parish forty shil∣lings
a Year for ever, out of his Alms-House at Woodbridge in Suffolk, where he is buried. Henry Stoke, Gardiner, buried there, gave twenty shillings a Year for ever, towards Reparation of that Church. The Priory was valued to dispend 262 l. 9. s. per annum, and was surrendred 30 H. VIII. and is now a Parish-Church. It was Repaired after the fall of its Steeple, which spoil'd a great part of the Church, and finished, Anno 1627. at the cost of 1400 l. V. The Parish-Church called St. Katharine-Tow∣er, because near the Tower of London. On the East-side was an Hospital of St. Katharine, Found∣ed by Queen Matilda Wife to King Stephen. There lye buryed (besides many others) in this Church, the Countess of Huntington, Countess of the March in her time, 1429. John Holland, Duke of Exeter, and Earl of Huntington 1447, and his two Wives, in a Fair Tomb, Thomas Walsingham Esq and Tho∣mas Ballard Esq by him 1465. This Church was Repaired, and throughout Trimmed and Beautified, Anno 1618. Inlarged with a Fair Gallery 1621. The Walls and out-side cloathed with a Beautiful Rough-Cast, at the Charge of Sr. Julius Caesar, Anno 1626. Mr. Stephen Scudamore, Citizen and Vintner of London, gave 20 s. per annum, to be bestowed in Fuel amongst the Poor for ever. Mr. John Boum, Baker, gave 5 l. per annum, to be bestowed in Bread among the Poor for fourty Years. VI. In the Church at Lambeth, are very many Monuments, which for brevity we pretermit. VII. The Arch-Deacon of London is always Parson of St. Leonard Shore-Ditch, and the Cure is served by a Vicar. There were divers Honorable Persons buried there; and there were many Bounti∣ful
Benefactors to the Church and Poor. John Ful∣ler of Bishops-Hall Esq gave a Sum of Money for the Building of twelve Alms-Houses, for twelve Poor Widdows of this Parish; who receive fifty pound per annum of his Gift. William Peak Esq gave two shillings a Week to be distributed in Bread for ever on Sundays. Robert Brainforth, Gentleman, gave eight pound Yearly for ever to the Poor. Thomas Russel, Draper, gave twelve pence Weekly for ever, to be paid by the Drapers. George Clark, gave to the Poor one hundred Marks in Mo∣ney, &c. VIII. The Parish-Church of St. Magdalen Ber∣mondsey, was built by the Priors of Bermondsey, near the Abby of Bermondsey, which was surrendred to King Henry the VIII, it was much enlarged, Anno 1608, at the Charge of 860 l. so that it became (and is) a Fair Church. IX. The Church of St. Mary Istington. And, X. The Parish-Church of St. Mary Newington, are Fair Parishes, with some Monuments, but being so Remote, we pretermit them. XI. St. Mary White-Chappel is as it were a Chappel of Ease to Stepney-Parish, and the Parson of Stepney hath the Gift of it, 'tis a handsom Church and in good Repair. There are some few handsom Monuments in it. XII. The Parish-Church of St. Pauls in upper Shadwel, was also lately made a Parish-Church; the Parish being too Numerous for the Church of Step∣ney. It is a handsom Church with a large Church-Yard, and the Parish very Populous. XIII. In the Parish-Church of Rotherhith (vul∣garly
Redriff) are some Monuments also. It is a pretty handsom convenient Church. XIV. The Parish-Church of Stepney is indiffe∣rent capacious, yet too too narrow for the Inhabi∣tants, it being the most populous Parish in England, as appears by our Bills of Mortality, and of a great Extent. There are divers Monuments in it; and some of great Antiquity. Now we shall speak of the Churches in the City and Liberties of Westminster. I. The Parish-Church of St. Clements Danes near Temple-Bar, is so called, because one Harold, a Danish King, and other Danes, were buried there. It was in the Liberties of the Dutchy of Lancaster. This was a fair Church, and likely; ere long, to ex∣ceed its former beauty. Here were several curious Monuments. And 'tis a populous Parish, full of handsom Buildings. II. St. Pauls Covent-Garden is a very handsom and a delicate Church, of no great Antiquity, yet a populous Parish. III. St. Martins in the Fields is a spacious Church, and the Parish wonderful populous. In it are divers fair Monuments, and of several Persons of Honor, which are too tedious to be recited, only for the pithiness, I shall insert one Distich upon Charles Blount, an Infant, 2d Son to the Earl of Newport. Vivus nil poteram fari, quin mortuus Infans, Ecce loquor, Mortis sis memor, atque vale. Which I shall English, without minding the Slavery of Rhiming: Living I could not speak, an Infant dead, Behold I speak, Mind Death, and so farewel. IV. After the Savoy-House was burnt by the Kentish and Essex Rebels, for Malice to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, which for beauty and stateliness none in the Kingdom could then compare with, as from Antiquity we learn; it came to the
Kings hands, and was Re-built, and made an Hospi∣tal of St. John Baptist, by King Henry VII. about the year 1509. for which he purchased Lands, to re∣lieve an 100 poor People; it being valued to spend 529 l. 15 s. per Annum, was suppressed in Edward the Sixth's Time; the Beds, Bedding, and Furniture thereof, and 700 Marks of the said Land yearly given to the Citizens of London, with his House of Bride∣wel for a Work-house for poor and idle Persons, and towards furnishing the Hospital of St. Thomas South∣wark. The Chapel of this Hospital serveth now for a Parish-Church to the places adjoining, called St. Mary Savoy; in it are divers Monuments. The Benefactors to it, are Registred in a Book kept there, which are too many to be inserted in our small Volume. V. The Parish-Church of St. Margarets West∣minster is a sumptuous and stately Church, Re∣built by King Edward the Confessor, for the Ease and Commodity of the Monks of Westminster, because before that time the Parish-Church stood within the old Abby Church in the South Ile, somewhat to their annoyance. It was new built again by the Mer∣chants of the Staple, and Parishion of Westmin∣ster, and is now, as was said, a very fair Parish-Church, with very strong and beautiful Galleries, where, in Parliament-time, the Honourable House of Commons sit, &c. in it are divers fair Monu∣ments of Persons of Quality. Having given a brief Account of the Churches within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, reserving some Additions, especially relating to their Modern Estate, and the Re-building of those demolished by the great Fire, to another place; and omitting particu∣lar Chapels, of which there are many, and the con∣tiguous Churches round about London, (because not so immediately relating to the Design in hand) we shall proceed to treat of Hospitals, especially the most Eminent.
NEW BEDLAM. BRIDE WELL.
SECT. 3. Of HOSPITALS, &c. 1. CHrists-Hospital was founded by that Pious King Edward VI. upon this occasion, which being so Remarkable, we shall recount from Mr. Stow and others. Dr▪ Ridley, then Bishop of London, Preached be∣fore the King's Majesty at Westminster, in which Sermon he made a fruitful and godly Exhortation to the Rich, to be merciful to the Poor; and also to move such as were in Authority, to act by some cha∣ritable way and means to relieve them. Whereupon the King's Majesty, (being a Prince of Towardness and Virtue for his years, as England before never brought forth, and being also so well retained and brought up in all godly knowledge, as well by his der Uncle, the late Protector, Edward Seymour. Duke of Sommerset, as also by his virtuous School∣masters) was so careful of the good Government of the Realm. and chiefly to do and prefer such things as most especially touched the Honour of Almighty God. And understanding that a great number of poor People did swarm in the Realm, and chiefly in the City of London, and that no good order was ta∣ken for them, did suddenly (and of himself) send to the said Bishop, as soon as his Sermon was ended, willing him not to depart, until he had spoken with him. And this that I now write (saith Mr. Sto) was the very Report of the said Bishop Ridley, who (according to the King's Command) gave his at∣tendance. And as soon as the King's Majesty was at leisure, he called for him, and caused him to come to him in a great Gallery at Westminster, where no per∣son was present but they two, and therefore made
sit down in one Chair, and He Himself in another, which before the coming of the Bishop were there purposely set, and caused the Bishop, notwithstand∣ing his unwillingness, to be covered, and then enter∣ed communication with him, in this manner: First giving him hearty Thanks for his Sermon and good Exhortation; He therein rehearsed such special things as he had Noted, and that so many, that the Bishop said, Truely, truely, (for that was common∣ly his saying) I could never have thought that ex∣cellency to have been in His Grace, but that I be∣held and heard it in him. At last the King's Ma∣esty much commended him for his Exhortation, for the Relief of the Poor. But my Lord (quoth he) you willed such as are in Authority to be careful thereof, and to devise some good Order for their Relief; wherein I think you mean Me, for I am in Highest Place, and there∣fore am the first that must make Answer to God for my Negligence if I should not be careful there∣in, knowing it to be the express Commandment of Almighty God, to have compassion of his poor and needy Members, for whom we must make an Account unto Him. And truely, my Lord, I am (before all things else) most willing to travel that way, and I doubt nothing of your long and approved Wisdom and Learning, but that you having such good Zeal as wisheth help unto them, have also had some conference with others, what ways are best to be ta∣ken therein, and therefore I pray you to say your mind. Which Speech being so truely Virtuous and Noble in so young a Prince, deserves an everlasting Record. The Bishop thinking least of that matter, and being amazed to hear the Wisdom and earnest Zeal of the King, was (as he said himself) so astonished, That he could not tell what to say. But after some
pause, said, That he thought (at this present) for some entrance to be had, it were good to practise with the City of London, because the Number of the Poor there are very great, and the Citizens also very many and wise; and he doubted not, but they were also both pitiful and merciful; as the Mayor, and his Brethren, and other the Worshipful of the said City: And that if it would please the Kings Majesty to direct His Gracious Letters unto the Mayor of London, willing him to call unto him such Assistants as he should think meet, to consult of this matter; for some Order to be taken therein, he doubted not but good would follow thereon; and he himself promised the King to be one himself that should earnestly travel therein. The King (forthwith) not only Granted his Let∣ter, but made the Bishop tarry until the same was written, and his Hand and Signet set thereto; and commanded the Bishop not only to deliver the said Letter himself, but also to signifie unto the Mayor, that it was the Kings especial Request and express Commandment, that the Mayor should therein tra∣vel; and so soon as he might conveniently, give him knowledge how far he had proceeded therein. The Bishop was so joyous at the having this Letter, that now he had occasion to travel in so good a matter, wherein he was marvellous zealous, that nothing could have more pleased and delighted him: wherefore the same Night he came to the Lord Mayor of London, who was then Sir Richard Dobbs Kt. and delivered the King's Letter, and shewed his Message with effect. The Lord Mayor not only joyfully received this Letter, but with all speed agreed to set the matter forward, for he also favoured it very much. And the next day▪ being Monday, he desired the Bishop of London to dine with him, and against that time the Mayor promised to send for such men as he thought
meetest to talk of this matter, and so he did. He sent first for two Aldermen, and six Commoners, and afterwards more were appointed, to the number of 24. In the end, after sundry Meetings, (for by the means and good diligence of the Bishop it was well followed) they agreed upon a Book that they had devised, wherein first they considered on Nine special kinds and sorts of poor People, and those they brought into these Three degrees, 1. The Poor by Impotency. 2. The Poor by Casualty. 3. The Thriftless Poor. 1. The Poor by Impotency, are also divided into three kinds, viz. 1. The Fatherless Poor Mans Child. 2. The Aged, Blind and Lame. 3. The Diseased Person, by Leprosie, Drop∣sie, &c. 2. The Poor by Casualty, are likewise of 3 kinds; that is to say, 1. The Wounded Soldier. 2. The Decayed Housholder. 3. The Visited with any grievous Disease. 3. The Thriftless Poor, are three kinds in like manner; viz. 1. The Rioter, that consumeth all. 2. The Vagabond, that will abide in no place. 3. The Idle Person, as Strumpets, and others. For these three sorts of Poor, three several Houses were provided:
(1.) For the Innocent and Fatherless, which is the Beggars Child, and is indeed the Seed and Breeder of Beggary; they provided the House that was the late Gray-Fryers in London, and called it by the Name of Christs-Hospital, where poor Children are trained up in the knowledge of God, and some virtuous Exercises, to the overthrow of Beggary. For the (2) Degree, was provided the Hospitals of St. Thomas in Southwark, and St. Bartholomew in West-Smithfield, where are continually at least 200 Diseased Persons, which are not only there lodg∣ed and Cured, but also fed and nourished. For the (3) Degree, they provided Bridewell, where the Vagabond and idle Strumpet is chastised, and compelled to labour, to the overthrow of the vicious life of Idleness. They provided also for the honest decayed Housholder, that he should be relieved at home at his House, and in the Parish where he dwelt, by a Weekly Relief and Pension. And in like manner they provided for the Lazer, (or Leprous Person) to keep him out of the City from Clapping of Dishes, and Ringing of Bells, to the great trouble of the Citizens, and also to the dan∣gerous Infection of many, that they should be reliev∣ed at home at their Houses, by several Pensions. Now after this good Order taken, (to the Eter∣nal Honour of this Noble City) and the Citizens willing to further the same, the Report thereof was made to the King; And His Majesty, for the Ad∣vancement thereof, was not only willing to grant such as should be Overseers and Governors of the said Houses, a Corporation, and Authority for the Go∣vernment of them: but also required, that he might be accounted as the Chief Founder and Patron thereof. And for the furtherance of the said Work, and continual maintenance of the same, He, of his meer
Mercy and Goodness granted, that whereas (before) certain Lands were given to the maintaining of the House of the Savoy, founded by King Henry VII. for the Lodging of Pilgrims and Strangers, and that the same was now made but a Lodging for Loyte∣rers, Vagabonds and Strumpets, that lay all day in the Fields, and at night were harboured there, the which was rather the maintenance of Beggary, than any Relief to the Poor: gave the same Lands, being first surrendred by the Master and Fellows there, (which Lands were of the yearly value of 600 l.) unto the City of London, for the maintenance of the Foundation aforesaid. And for a further Relief, a Petition being made to the King's Majesty, for a Licence to take in Mort∣maine, or otherwise without Licence, Lands to a cer∣tain yearly value, and a space left in the Patent for His MAJESTY, to put in what Sum He pleased: He looked on the void place, called for Pen and Ink, and with His own Royal Hand wrote this Sum, 4000 Marks by the year, (which is 2666 l. 13 s. 4 d. and with the former 600 l. makes in all 3266 l. 13 s. 4 d.) and then said, in the hearing of his Council, Lord, I yield thee most hearty thanks, that thou hast given me life thus long, to finish this work to the Glory of thy Name. After which Foundation established, he lived not above two days; whose life would have been wished equal to the Patriarchs, if it had pleased God so to have prolonged it. He dyed at Greenwich the 6th of July, Anno 1553. He was in Body beautiful, of a sweet Aspect, and specially in his Eyes, which seemed to have a starry liveliness and lustre in them. For his pregnancy of Wit and Knowledge in all kinds of Learning, Cardan (who coming into England, had often conference with him) reporteth of him, that he was extraordinary skilful in Languages, and in the Politicks; well seen in Philosophy, and in Divinity;
and generally indeed, a very Miracle of Art and Nature. He would answer Ambassadors sometimes upon the sudden, either in French or Latin. He knew the state of Foreign Princes perfectly, and his own more. He could call all Gentlemen of Account through his Kingdom, by their Names. And all this, when he had scarce yet attained to the Age of Fif∣teen Years, and dyed before Sixteen. That from hence we may gather, It is a sign of no long Life, when the Faculties of the Mind are ripe so early. His Pious and Religious Life was Remarkable, as may be seen in the whole series of it; and his Death was no less, for the hour before he dyed, he was over∣heard to pray thus by himself: O Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life. O Lord, thou knowest how happy it were for me to be with thee; yet for thy Chosen's sake, if it be thy Will, send me life and health, that I may truly serve thee. O Lord God, save thy cho∣sen People in England, and defend this Realm from PAPISTRY, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy Holy Name for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake. So turning his Face, and seeing some by him, he said, I thought you had not been so nigh. Yes, said Dr. Owen, we heard you speak to your self. Then, said the King, I was praying to God; I am faint, Lord have mercy upon me, and receive my Spirit: And, in so saying, his blessed Spirit departed, to take possession of an heavenly Crown, when he had enjoy∣ed an earthly Crown, six years, five months, and nine days. He was buried the 9th of August, in Henry the Seventh's Chappel at Westminster, near the Body of the said King Henry the Seventh his Grandfather. This small Digression, I hope, will not be unaccep∣table
to all true Christians, being in memorial of that Peerless, and Never-enough Bewailed Prince; but he was too good for the World, and rests now in endless Happiness. In the year 1552, began the Repairing of the Gray-Fryers House, for the poor Fatherless Chil∣dren, and in the month of November the Children were taken in to the same, to the Number of almost 400. On Christmas-day in the Afternoon, while the Lord Mayor and Aldermen Rode to Pauls, the Children of Christs-Hospital, from St. Lawrence-lane end in Cheapside towards Pauls, all in one Livery of Russet-Cotton, Three hundred and forty in Number; and at Easter next they were in Blue at the Spittle, and so they have continued ever since, but they were this Year at St. Sepulchres. This indeed was a work of extraordinary Piety, and, in my judgment, it is a very Comely Sight to see the Poor Boys, when they Sup all together, with what Decency, Order and Neatness they are serv'd and Governed, by the respective Persons in that Office; how plentifully they are provided with good Dyet, Washing, Lodging, and Learning, to fit them for bu∣siness, which the City takes care to settle them in, ac∣cording to their respective Capacities; and it is known that many of them came to be Men of Note, Wealth, and great Usefulness in their Countrey. Christs-Hospital, Bridewel and St. Thomas are In∣corporated, by the Names of the Mayor, Commonal∣ty, and Commons of the City of London, Governors of the Possessions, Revenues and Goods of the Hos∣pitals of Edward King of England, the Sixth, o Christ, Bridewel, and St. Thomas the Apostle &c. St. Bartholomew-Hospital is Incorporated, by th Name of the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens the City of London, Governors of the Hospital
the Poor, called, Little Saint Bartholomews, near to West-Smithfield, of the Foundation of King Hen∣ry the Eighth. In the Year 1533, the 10th of April, Sir George Barn (being Mayor of this City) was sent for to the Court at Witehall, where the King gave him ( was said) his House of Bridewel, and 700 Marks of Land, late belonging to Savoy Hospital, and all the Bedding, and other Furniture, &c. for Bridewel, and St. Thomas in Southwark. The Gift was confirmed by Charter, dated June 26. following. And in the Year 1555, Sir William Gerrard Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, entred Bridewel, and took possession thereof, according to the Gift of the said King Ed∣ward, the same being confirmed by Queen Mary. This Bridewel, is now bult in a very curious and stately manner. To reckon up the several Eminent and Bountiful Benefactors to these Hospitals, would be endless, they, except some that would be concealed, are to be found in the Records of those places, to which the Reader is referred. Only it being a very singular Example of Honesty, Industry, and Piety, (not to detract in the least, from any Worthy and Bountiful Benefactor) I will Remark one Richard Castel, o Castellr, Shoemaker, dwelling in Westminster, a Man of great labour and care in his Faculty with his own hands, so that he was called the Cock of West∣minster, because both Winter and Summer he was at his Work before Four a Clock in the morning: This Man thus honestly and painfully labouring for his Living, God blessed and increased his Labours so bundantly, that he purchased Lands and Tenements n Westminster, to the yearly value of 44 l. And ha∣ving no Child, with the consent of his Wife, who sur∣vived him, and was a virtuous good Woman, gave the same Lds wholly to Christs-Hospital aforesaid, to the Relief of the Innocent and Fatherless Children,
and for the Succor of the Miserable, Sore and Sick, harboured in other Hospitals about London. Sir William Chester Kt. and Alderman of Lon∣don, and John Calthrop Citizen and Draper of the same City, at their own proper Costs and Charges, ade the Brick-Walls and Way on the Back-side, which leadeth from the said New Hospital, unto the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, and also covered and vaulted the Town-Ditch from Aldersgate to New∣gate, which before was very Noisom and Contagiou to the said Hospital. Sir Rowland Hill Lord Mayor, in the 3d Year of this King, besides many large and bountiful Chari∣ties on other things, gave this Hospital 500 l. in his Life, and 100 l. at his Death. In the Year 1552, the Citizens of London ha∣ving purchased the void suppressed Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, in the Month of July began the Reparations thereof, for Poor, Impotent, Lame, and Diseased People, so that in November following the Sick and Lame were taken in. II. Of all the Hospitals that ever were Founded in Christendom, there is none can parallel that of Thomas Sutton Esq called, Sutton's Hospital, which will commend to all succeeding Posterity the duely deserved Praises of that truely Worthy, and Never-to-be-forgotten Gentleman, the Phoenix of Charity in our Times. The Dissolved Charter-house by West-Smith∣field, belonging to the Right Honourable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, after Lord Treasurer of England, is sufficiently known to be a very large and goodly Mansion, beautified with spacious Gardens, Walks, Orchards, and other Pleasures, Enriched with divers Dependencies of Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, and very aptly seated for wholesom Air, and several other Commodities.
All which Commodiousness of Situation, and largeness of Circuit, gave occasion to this well mind∣ed Gentleman, Mr. Sutton, to affect that House, as the only Place whereon to build the Foundation of his Religious Purpose. For among other his Christian Determinations, he had formerly intended to build an House at Hal∣lingbury-Bouchers in Essex, to be an Hospital for such Poor Men and Children, as he himself in his life time (or future Governors for the same to be Deputed) should think fit to be Lodged and Re∣lived there. Also for a School-Master and Ʋsher, to Teach Children to Read, and Write, and instruct them in the Latin and Greek Grammar, with a Learned Divine likewise, to Preach the Word of God to them all. And a Master beside to Govern all those People belonging to that House. But finding this Goodly Mansion of the Charter-House, to be much more convenient for the pur∣pose, he became an earnest Suitor to the Earl of Suffolk, to purchase that House of him, acquainting his Honour with the alteration of his mind concern∣ing Hallingbury, and his earnest Desire to make the Charter-House the Hospital. The Earl being Honorably inclin'd to so Godly a motion, the Price being concluded on, the Bargain and Sale was as∣sured. The Sum disburs'd for this purpose amount∣ed to 13000 l. which was Paid down in hand, before the unsealing of the Conveyance. Then he became Suitor again to his Majesty, to perform all that, at the Chartor-House, which he had formerly intended at Hallingbury. Whereto the King readily yield∣ed, being Graciously affected to so Charitable a Work, and Granted His Letters Patents to the same effect. This Gentleman lived always a Batchelor, and by sundry Employments and Parsimony grew to great Wealth, which he well Employed, to his immor∣tal
honnour. He endowed  Hospital with above 3000 l. a Year in Land, viz. All and singular the Mannors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tonements, Reversions, Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Ad∣vowsons, Patronages of Churches, and Heredita∣ments of the said Thomas Sutton whatsoever, Situ∣ate, lying and being within the County of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridg, and Middlesex, or in any of them, with all and every of their Rights, Mem∣bers, and Appurtenances whatsoever. Except all his Mannors and Lordships of Littlebury, and Hadde∣stock, with their Appurtenaces in the County of Essex. In this Hospital he placed Fourscore Poor Men, with convenient Lodging, Dyet, and Allow∣ance of Money for Apparel; also Forty Poor Children with the like Provision; and a Grammar School, with a Master and an Ʋsher to Teach them: over all whom, he ordained, a Learned Man to be Master of the Houshold, to be chosen by the Governors whom he appointed for the present, by the Authority of the Kings Letters, Patents, to be George Archbishop of Canterbury; Thomas Lord Elsemore Lord Chan∣cellor; Robert Earl of Salisbury Lord Treasurer, John Bishop of London; Lancelot Bishop of Ely, Sir Edward Cook, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Thomas Foster, a Judg of the Common-Pleas, Sir Henry Hubbard, the Kings Attorney-General, Doctor Overal Dean of Pauls; Doctor Mountain, Dean of Westminster; Henry Thursby Esq Master of the Chancery; Richard Sutton Esq Auditor of the Impress; Geoffery Nightingale Esquire; John Low Gentleman; Thomas Brown Gentleman, and Master of the Houshold, for the time being, to be always one; and as any of those Sixteen Governors should die, the Survivors to make pre∣sent Additions of others. Towards the building of this Hospital, Chappel and School-House, he gave 5000 l. but he lived not
to see it performed, but what Death bereft him of, he left to the performance of his Faithful Executors, Mr. Richard Sutton, and Mr. John Low, Men of Religious and upright Souls, who carefully accom∣plished the Work, so that the Monday after Mich∣mas day, being the 3d of October, Anno Dom. 1614. The Captains, Gentlemen, and Officers, en∣tered into their Famous prepared Hospital, to the Glory of God, Honour of the King's Majesty, Cre∣dit of the Governors, and Joy of Honest minds, and the Eternal Fame of the Noble Founder, who is laid in a goodly Tomb in the Chappel of his own Hospital, With this Inscription: Sacred to the Glory of God, in Grateful Memory of Thomas Sutton Esquire. Here lieth buried the Body of Thomas Sutton, late of Castel Camps, in the County of Cambridge Esq at whose only Costs and Charges this Hospi∣tal was Founded, and Endued with large Posses∣sions, for the Relief of Poor Men and Children. He was a Gentleman, born at Knayth in the County of Lincoln, of Worthy and Honest Pa∣rentage. He lived to the Age of 79 Years, and Deceased the 12th. Day of December, Anno Domini 1611. Though we Design to avoid all Prolixity, yet 'tis hoped it will be Pardoned, if we Transcribe an Epitaph, made upon this Worthy Man, by a Friend to Piety and Goodness; for he being a Rare Exam∣ple, challenges, as his due Merit, a more than ordi∣nary mention.
When bad Men die, the Memory Remains Of their Corruptions and ungodly ways, As Merit to their mis-applyed pains, Out of ill actions forming as ill praise. For Vertue wounded by their deep disgrace, Leaves Fame to their posterity and Race. When Good Men die, the Memory remains Of their true Vertue, and most Christian ways, As a due Guerdon to their Godly gains, Out of good Actions forming as good praise. For Vertue cherish'd by their Deeds of Grace, Leaves Fame to their Posterity and Race. Among these Good (if Goodness may be said To be among the seed of Mortal Men,) In upright Ballance of true Merit weigh'd, Needs must we reckon Famous SUTTON then, In whom, as in a Mirror doth appear, That Faith with Works in him did shine most clear. And let us not, as is a common use, Measure him by a many other more; In Death, to cover their bad lifes abuse, To lanch out then some bounty of their store. No, SUTTON was none such, his Hospital, And much more else beside, speaks him to all. For as God blest him with abundant Wealth, Like to a careful Steward he emplo'd it; And order'd all things in his best of health, As glad to leave it, as when he enjoy'd it. And being prepared every hour to die, Disposed all his Gifts most Christiany,
In Abrahams bosome sleeps he with the blest, His Works, they follow him, his worth survives, Good Angels guide him to eternal rest, Where is no Date of time, for Years or Lives. You that are Rich, do you as he hath done, And so assure the Crown that he hath wo▪ To conclude in a word, this Famous Hospital, with the value of the Lands laid into it, the Purchase of the House, Stock laid in, (which he hath given into the Treasury, or Store of the said Hospital to begin with, and to defend the Rights of the House, being 1000 l.) and Allowance towards the Build∣ing: also the Remainder of his Goods unbequeathed, his large Gifts and Legacies to divers Honorable and Worthy Friends, besides great store of far more inferior account (which would puzle me to number) and the residue of 20000 l. left to the discretion of his Executors, may truly and deservedly be said, to be the very greatest and most bountiful Gift, that ever was given in England, no Abbey (at the first Foundation thereof) excepted, or therewith to be compared, being the Gift of one man only. He gave to the Poor in Barwick 100 Marks. To the Poor of Stoke-Newington 10 l. To the Poor Fishermen of Ostend in Flanders 100 l. To the mending of the High-Ways between Islington and Newington, in the County of Middlesex 40 Marks (or 26 l. 13 s. 4 d.) To the mending the High-Ways between Ashden and Walden, called Walden∣lane in Essex 100 l. To the mending the High-Ways between Great Lynton in the County of Cam∣bridge, and the said Town of Walden 60 l. 13 s. 4 d. Towards the mending of Horseth-lane 60 l. To the mending of the Bridges and ordinary High-Ways between South-Minster and Malden in Essex 100 l. To the Chamber of London 1000 l. to be Yearly lent to Ten young Merchants, not having any great
Stocks of their own: and those Ten to be appoint∣ed by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City for the time being, and the Dean of Pauls: they are to pay any Interest for it, nor any to enjoy it but . the Poor People of Hadstock 20 l. To the Poor of Littlebury and Balsham 40 l. To the Parson and Church-Wardens of Balsham for the time being, towards the buying a Bell, to be hanged up in the Steeple, to amend the Ring there 20 l. To the Poor of South-minster 20 l. To the Poor of little Halenbury 20 l. To the Poor of Dunsby, in the County of Lincoln 20. l. To the Poor Pri∣ers in the Prisons of Ludgate, Newgate, the two ompters in London, the King's-Bench, the 2000 l. to be paid and divided among the same Prisoners by even and equal portions. To the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of the Cor∣poration of Jesus College in Cambridge 500 Marks▪ To the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of the Cor∣poration of Magdalen Colledge in Cambridge, 500 l. To every one of his Feffees, put in trust about his 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. To the Poor of Beverly, a  in Cottingham. To the Poor of Lincoln, a Remainder of Years in the Rectory of Glentham in the County of Lincoln. To Mr. Hutton, Vicar of Littlebury 20 l. To the Poor of mps Castle 10 l. To the Poor of Elcomb 10. l. To Mr. Floud, Parson of Newington 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. To the Poor of the Parish of Hackny 10 l. with several others, &c. And so much for Famous SƲTTON and his Hospital, which deserves an Eternal ME∣MORIAL. III. The Hospital of St. Mary of Bethlem, vul∣garly called Bedlam was, Founded by Simon Fitz-Mary, one of the Sheriffs of London, Anno 1246. He Founded it to have been a Priory of Cons,
with Brethren and Sisters: and King Edward the III. granted a Protection for the Brethren, Militiae Bea∣tae Mariae de Bethlem, within the City of London, in the Fourteenth of his Reign. But it was an Hospital for Distracted People. Stephen∣nings, Merchant-Taylor, gave 40 l. towards chase of the Patronage, by his Testament, Anno 1523. The Mayor and Commonalty purchased it with all the Lands and Tenements thereunto belong∣ing, in the Year 1546. The same Year King Henry the VIII. gave this Hospital unto the City. The Church and Chappel thereof were taken down in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and Houses built there, by the Governors of Christ's-Hospital in Lon∣don. In this Place People that be Distracted of their Wits, were received and kept at the Suit of their Friends, but not without Charges to their bringers in. This Place being old, narrow, and not very plea∣sant, the City of London resolved to build a New Hospital, which in April 1675, was begun, and to the great Glory and Ornament of the City, and the great benefit of the Poor Lunaticks, was finished July 1676, in so Stately and Beautiful a manner, that the whole World can hardly Parallel it; It is of a great Length, reaching from Moor-gate, to the Little-Postern, leading out of the North-East part of Moor-Fields, into the City, near the City Walls, with a most Glorious Front towards those Delicate Walks of Moor-Fields; the Architecture is very Regular, Exquisite, and Rich, with a Stately Turret in the midst of a Curious Form, and Fair green Courts, part of which are Paved with broad Stone for walks, Environ'd with a very hansom Brick-Wall; there are two Stately Galleries, reaching from one end to the other, on the sides of which, are the Lodgings of the Distracted People, which are ve∣ry neat and convenient, they are carefully and very
decently served with plenty of good wholsom Dyet, and very well attended, by Persons appointed to that purpose. This Work cost above 18000 l. to which many Noble Citizens, &c. were Benefactors, is indeed, a Work very well becoming the Mag∣nce of this Renowned City, who in all their undertakings, and in all Publick Acts of Ornament to the City, or Charity to the Poor, have demonstra∣ted themselves to be Peerless. Besides these Grand Hospitals, there are a great many Alms-Houses in and about the City, which were the Gifts of Pious and Worthy Persons, of which, as far as we could obtain a distinct Informa∣tion, we have given an account in the Chapter of Churches. I have Read that in the 44 of Edward the III. an Hospital was Founded by Robert Denton, Chaplain in the Parish of Barking, for the Sustenta∣tion of Poor Lunaticks, or such as were Phrenetick, or Sick of the Phrenzie, there to remain till they were perfectly whole, and restored to good Memo∣ry. There was also an Hospital of St. Mary Spittle, in Spittle-Fields, but dissolved. There was like∣wise an Hospital of St. Anthony, in the Parish of Ben∣net-Fink. The Protectors of this House were to Collect the Benevolence of Charitable Persons, to∣wards the Building and Support thereof. These Officers were charg'd with the over-sight of the Markets in the City, and did several times take from the Market-People, Pigs starved, or otherwise unwholsom for Mans sustenance; which they slit in the Ear, and one of the Proctors of St. Anthonies, tyed a Bell about the Neck, and let it feed at plea∣sure, on Dung-hills, or other places, which no Body would hurt or take up: but if any gave them Bread or other Feeding, such would they know, watch for, and follow, whining till they had given them some∣thing, whereupon was raised a Proverb. e whines (or followeth) like a Tantony-Pig; but if the Pigs
WESTMINSTER HALL THE ROYALL EXCHANGE
CLARENDON HOVSE COVENT GARDEN
came to be Fat, and of good liking, the Proctor would apprehend them for the Use of the Hospital; which is a matter not be much wondred at, for those Persons usually loved their Bellies very well. There was of old an Hospital of St. Mary Rounci∣val by Charing-Cross, but suppressed, and turned to Tenements. So much for the Hospitals. SECT. 4. Palaces and Houses of the Nobility. WE will begin with the Royal Palaces, as White-Hall, where the Court is kept when the King is in the City. In antient times West∣minster-Palace was the habitation of the Kings of England, from the time of Edward the Confessor, which was by casual Fire burnt down in the time of Henry the VIII. This was a very large and stately Palace, and for the building in that Age incompara∣ble. In the Remains of which, the High Court of Parliament Sits, but more of that hereafter. King Henry the VIII. translated his Seat to a House not far of, built by Cardinal Wolsey, and is called White-Hall. This Place formerly belonged to Hu∣bert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, by whom it was given to the Gray-Friers, and of them bought by Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, and called York-place; but Anno. 1529, the King took it from Wolsey and the Archbishop, and named it White-Hall: this King built there a Sumptuous Gallery, and a very Beautiful Gate-House, thwart the High-street to St. James's-Park. In this Gallery the Princes▪ with their Nobility used to stand or sit, to behold all Triumphant or Military Exercises. To Describe all particularities relating to this Royall-Seat, would be too tedious. Take a few
short Remarks. There is a most Magnificent and Stately Banquetting-House, built by King James. And the Delicate Privy-Garden was lately enlarged towards the South, with a Pond of an Oval form, supplied with Water from Hide-Park, where you may see the Water shot, or forced up to a great height from the surface of the Pond, and by its wind∣ing-fall delights the Eye, and the Ear, with its pretty murmur. Although this Palace of White Hall makes not so Glorious a shew on the out-side, as some other stately Edifices, yet there is not in Christendom a Court more convenient, and meet for Royal Accom∣modation, nor more Richly Furnisht. But for the Readers more distinct information, we will give him a Brief account of our King's-Court, under two heads, Viz. 1. Its Government both Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military. 2. Its Hospitality, and plentiful Tables. 1. Its Government, &c. The Dean of the Kings Chappel is usually some Grave and Learned Prelate, chosen by the King, who only is his Superiour, his Chappel being exempt from all Ecclesiastical Juris∣diction, being called Capella Dominica, the Demean Chappel, in no Diocess, but is a Regal Peculiar, Exempt and Reserved to the Visitation and imme∣diate Government of the King, who is Supream Or∣dinary, and as it were Prime Bishop over all the Churches and Bishops of England. By the Dean are chosen all other Officers of the Chappel, viz. A Sub-Dean or Praecentor Capellae; Thirty two Gentlemen of the Chappel, whereof twelve are Priests, the other twenty, commonly called Clerks, of the Chappel, are to perform, with the said Priests, the Office of Praying, Singing, &c. One of these
being well skill'd in Musick, is chosen Master of the Children, whereof are twelve in Ordinary, to instruct them in the Rules and Art of Musick, for the service of the Chappel; three others are chosen to be Organists, to whom is joyned, upon Solemn Days, a Consort of the King's Musick, to make the Musick more full and compleat. There are four Officers called Vergers, because they carry Silver Rods in their hands, viz. a Sergeant, two Yeomen, and a Groom of the Chappel. Common Prayers are Read there three times a day. The King has his private Oratory, where some of his Chaplains in Ordinary perform the Office every day of the Week. Upon twelve high and Principal Festivals in the Year, the King (after the Service is over,) at∣tended with the Principal Nobility, offers a Sum of Gold to God, in signum specialis Domini, that by his Grace he is King, and holds all of Him, which belongs to the Dean to be distributed amongst the Poor. This Gold offered is called the Bizantine, which anciently was a Piece of Gold Coyned by the Emperours of Constantinople, in Latin, Bi∣zantium; That which was used by King James, was a piece of Gold, having on the one side, the Pourtrait of the King kneeling before an Altar, with four Crowns before Him, and this Motto cir∣cumscribed, Quid retribuam Domino, pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? On the other side was a Lamb lying by a Lyon, with this Motto, viz. Cor Contutum & humiliatum non despiciet Deus. The King hath (besides His Extraordinary, which are many) Fourty Eight Chaplains in Ordinary, who are Eminent Doctors in Divinity, whereof Four every Month wait at Court to Preach. The Lord High Almoner is usually the Bishop of London, who disposeth of the Kings Alms, and for that use receiveth (besides other Moneys allowed by the King) all Deodands, and bona felonum de se, to be
that way disposed. Under the Lord High Almoner, there is a Sub-Almoner, two Yeomen, and two Grooms of the Almonry. Then there is the Clerk of the Closet, usually some Reverend Divine, much esteem∣ed by His Majesty, who attends at his Right hand in Service time, to Resolve Doubts about Spiritual matters, to wait upon His Majesty in His private Oratory or Closet. The Dean of the Chappel's Fee, is 200 l. Yearly. And the Sub-Deans, one hundred pound. The Clerk of the Closet's▪ Fee is, twenty Nobles per annum. The Chief Officer of Civil Government in His Majesties Court, is, the Lord Steward. To whom the State of the Kings-House is committed, to be Ruled and Guided by his Discretion; whose Com∣mands in Court are to be obey'd; whose Power, State, and Dignity is very great. He hath Authority over all Officers and Servants of His Majesties Court, except those of His Ma∣jesties Chappel, Chamber and Stable, &c. He may by his Office, without any Commission, Judge of all Discords, as Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Bloodsheds, committed within the Court, or the Verge thereof, which is every way within Twelve Miles of the Chief Funnel of the Court, (only Lon∣don by Charter is exempted;) because where the King is, Justice ought to be immediatly sought of the King's own Officers. So that the Jurisdiction of the Verge hath been from very Antient times Execu∣ted by the Lord Steward, with great Ceremony, in the Ntaure of a peculiar King's-Bench, and that not only within, but without the Kings Domi∣nions. The Lord Steward is a White-staff-Officer, for he in the King's presence carrieth a White-staff, and at other times going abroad, it is carried by a Foot∣man bare-headed. Which White-staff is taken for a Commission. When the King Dies, he breaketh
his Staff over the Herse made for the King's Body, and thereby discharges all the Officers, whom the succeeding Kings usually establish in their former Offices. His Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes of Meat daily, besides Wine, Beer, &c. The next Officer is the Lord Chamberlain, who hath the Over-sight of all Officers belonging to the King's Chamber (except the Precincts of the King's Bed-Chamber, which is wholly under the Groom of the Stole) and all above Stairs, who are all sworn by him (or his Warrant to the Gentlemen Ushers) to the King. He hath also the Over-sight of the Offi∣cers of the Wardrobe, at all His Majesties Houses, and of the Removing Wardrobes, or of Beds, of the Tents, Revels, Musick, Comedians, Hanting, and of the Messengers, of the Trumpeters, Drum∣mers, of all Handicrafts and Artizans retained in the King's Services. He hath also the Over-sight of the Heralds and Pursuivants, and Sergeants at Arms; of all Physicians, Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, Barbers, Chaplains, though himself be a Lay-man. Also of the Charges of Coronations, Marriages, En∣tries, Cavalcades, Funerals, &c. His Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes each Meal, with the Appurte∣nances. The third great Officer is the Master of the Horse, anciently called Comes Stabuli, or Constable, who hath the ordering and disposal of all the King's Stables, and Races, or Breed of Horses. He hath al∣so power over the Escuries and Pages, Footmen, Grooms, Riders of the Great Horses, Farriers, Smiths, Coachmen, Sadlers, and all other Trades working to the King's Stables; to all whom he (or by his Warrant the Avener) giveth an Oath to be true and faithful. He hath the Charges of all Lands and Revenues appointed for the King's Breed of Horses, and for Charges of the Stable, and for Lit∣ters, Coaches, Sumpter-Horses, &c.
At any Solemn Cavalcade, he Rides next behind the King, and leads a Leer Horse of State. His an∣nual Fee is 666 l. 16 s. 4 d. and a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal. The Accompt of the Stables for Horse-meat, Livery, Wages, and Board-Wages, are brought by the Avener, being chief Clerk of the Avery, to be passed and allowed by the Green-Cloth. Under these Principal Officers, are almost all the other Officers and Servants, as under the Lord Steir∣ard in the Compting-house, is the Treasurer of the Houshold, the Comptroller, the Cofferer, the Master of the Houshold, the two Clerks of the Green Cloth, the two Clerks Comptrollers, one Sergent, two Yeomen, the Cofferers Clerks, or Clerks of the As∣signments, the Groom, two Messengers. The Compting-house is so called, because the Accompts for all Expences of the King's Houshold are thee daily taken by the Lord-Steward, the Trea∣surer, Comptroller, the Cofferer, the Master of the Houshold, the two Clerks of the Green Cloth, and the two Clerks Comptrollers, who also there make Provisions for the Houshold, according to the Law of the Land, and make Payments and Orders for the Well-governing of the Servants of the Hous∣hold. In the Compting-house, is the Green-Cloth, which is a Court of Justice continually sitting in the King's House, composed of the Persons last men∣tioned; whereof the three first are usually of the King's Privy Council. To this Court, being the first and most ancient Court of England, is committed the charge and over-sight of the King's Court Royal for matters of Justice and Government, with Au∣thority for maintaining the Peace, within 12 Miles distance wheresoever the Court shall be and within the King's House, the power of correcting all the Servants therein, that shall any way offend. It is cal∣led
the Green-Cloth, of a Green-Cloth whereat they , over whom are the Arms of the Compting-house, bearing Vert a Key, or, and a Staff Argent Saultier, signifying their power to Reward and Cor∣rect, as Persons, for their great Wisdom and Expe∣rience, thought fit by His Majesty, to exercise both these Functions in His Royal House. The Treasurer of the King's House is always of the Privy Council, and, in absence of the Lord Steward, hath power with the Comptroller and Stew∣ard of the Marshalsea, to hear and determine Trea∣sons, Felonies, and other Crimes, committed within the King's Palace, and that by Verdict of the King's Houshold. If any Servants within the Check-Roll be found Guilty of Felony, they are to have no Benefit of Clergy allowed them. The Comptrollers Office, is to Controul the Ac∣compts and Reckonings of the Green-Cloth. His Fee is Annually 107 l. 12 s. 4 d. A Table of 16 Dishes each Meal. He bears a White Staff, &c. The Cofferer is a principal Officer, and hath especial Charge and Over-sight of other Officers of the House, for their good Demeanor and Carriage in their Offices, and is to pay the Wages of the King's Servants, above and below Stairs. And for Provisi∣ons, by the Direction and Allowance of the Green-Cloth. His Annual Fee is 100 l. and a Table of seven Dishes each day. The Office of the Master of the Houshold, is to survey the Accompts of the House. His Fee is 100 Marks, and seven Dishes daily. All Bills of Comptrolment, Parcels and Brieve∣ments, are lotted and allowed by the Clerks Com∣ptrollers, and summed up by the Clerks of the Green-Cloth. ☞ Note, That though the King pays still the ancient Fees, which at first were above ten times the
value they are now; yet the Perquisites in many O∣fices, make sometimes a place of 10 l. Fee, to be worth near 500 l. per Annum. ☞ Note also, That in each Office there is a Succession from one to another, the inferior Degree still coming into the place of the next above if he dyes, as one of the Children may come to be Groom, then Yeoman, then Gentleman, then Sergeant, &c. as he happens to out-live them above him. The Chief Clerk waits upon, and appoints, the Kings, Queens, and Houshold Dyets every third Month; waits upon all Foreign Princes, Strangers, and Ambassadors, when His Majesty gives them En∣tertainment. He keeps all the Records, Leger-Books, and Papers, relating to that Office; makes up all Bills, Parcels and Debentures, for Board-Wa∣ges, and Provisions and Necessaries, issuing from the Offices of the Pantery, Buttery and Cellar. Keeps Accompt of, and makes up the Remains, with several other Duties, which oblige him to constant Waiting. He appoints Scowrers, Turn-Brochers, and Porters in his turn with the Master Cook, in the several Kitchens, and hath a Fee equal to an Officer of the Green-Cloth, and Diet, of seven Dishes each Meal. The second and third Clerks wait upon the Diet, as abovesaid, each of them one month in three, and attend the King and Queen in their Progresses, when appointed by the Green-Cloth, and have a Table of five Dishes. There are three Master Cooks for the King, Queen, and Houshold, who have each a Table of five Dishes. There is a Knight Harbinger, three Gentlemen Harbingers, and seven Yeomen Harbingers. The Office is given to the Knight-Harbinger by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, during Life. When the King goes on Progress in Eng∣land, or Beyond the Seas, he does by himself, or
his Deputy, provide and appoint all Lodgings and Harbingage for all great Persons, all Noblemen, Bishops, all His Majesties Servants and Attendants, &c. For all Ambassadors and Foreigners, &c. His Salary is 20 Marks per Annum, and 10 s. a day out of the Exchequer, besides Fees for Honours given by the King, and Homage done to His Majesty, and divers other Perquisites. In the Court the Officers, according to their seve∣ral Degrees, are called either Lords, Knights, Esquires, Sergeants, Gentlemen, Clerks, Yeomen, Grooms, Pages, or Children. There are two Lords, viz. the Lord Steward, and the Lord Chamber∣lain. Two Knights, viz. the Knight Marshal, and the Knight Harbinger. Four Esquires of the Body, &c. The Knight Marshal, called Mareschalus Hos∣pitii Regis, hath Jurisdiction and Cognizance of all Crimes within the Royal Palace, whereunto one of the Parties is the King's Servant. He is one of the Judges of the Court called the Marshalsea, or Mar∣shal-Seat of Judicature, which is held in Southwark, and hath there a Prison belonging to the same. Upon Solemn Occasions he Rides before the King with a short Baston tipt at both ends with Gold, and hath six Provost Marshals or Virgers, in Scarlet Coats to wait on him, and to take care of the Royal Pa∣lace, that no Beggars, Vagabonds, Common Women that prostitute their Bodies, Malefactors, &c. come within or near the Court. There are divers other Officers below Stairs under the Lord Steward, as also the Officers belonging to the Queens Kitchin, Cellar, Pantery, &c. and to the Lords Kitchin, to∣gether with Children, Scowrers, Turn-Broaches, &c.
His Majesties Servants in Ordinary above-stairs, are as followeth: THE Gentlemen of the Bed-Chamber, where∣of the first is called the Groom of the Stole, as it were Servant of the Robe, or Vestment, he ha∣ving the Office and Honour to Present and Put on His Majesties first Garment or Shirt every morn∣ing, and to order the things of the Bed-Cham∣ber. The Gentlemen are usually of the prime Nobility of England. Their Office is each one in his Turn to wait a Week in every quarter in the King's Bed-Chamber, there to lie by the King in a Pallet-Bed all Night, and in the absence of the Groom of the Stole, to supply his place. They wait on the King when he eats in private, for then the Cup-Bearers, Carvers and Sewers do not wait. The yearly Fee to each is 1000 l. There is a Vice-Chamberlain, a Keeper of the Privy-Purse, a Treasurer of the Chamber, who pays Riding and Lodging Wages, as the Lord Chamberlain shall direct, a Surveyor General of His Majesties Works. The Master of the Robes belonging to His Majesties Person, whose Office it is to order them at Coronations, St. George's Feast, and Parliament-Time. He has also the or∣dering of all His Majesties Wearing Apparel, of His Collar of Esses, Georges, and Garter beset with Dia∣monds and Pearls. The Grooms of the Bed-Chamber are Twelve, besides some Supernumeraries. They are to be un∣der the degree of Knights, and to attend in the King's Bed-Chamber, to dress and undress him in private. The yearly Fee to each is 500 l. Then there are Six Pages of the Bed-Chamber, Four Gentle∣men-Ʋshers of the Privy Chamber, who wait, one at a time, in the Privy Lodgings. There are Forty
eight Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in Ordina∣ry, who are all Knights, or Esquires of Note, of which Twelve every Quarter wait on the King's Per∣son within doors and without, so long as His Majesty is on Foot; and when the King is in the Privy Chamber, they wait at the Table, and bring in his Meat. They wait also at the Reception of Ambas∣sadors, and every Night two of them lie in the King's Privy Chamber. A Gentleman of the Privy Cham∣ber, by the King's Commandment onely, without any written Commission, may Arrest any Peer of Eng∣land, as Cardinal Wolsey acknowledged. There are Six Grooms of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, all Gentlemen of Quality. These wait (as all Grooms) without Sword, Cloak, or Hat: whereas the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, wear always Cloak and Sword. There is also a Library Keeper. In the Presence Chamber, Gentle∣men-Ʋshers daily Waiters in Ordinary are four, whereof the first hath that considerable Office of the Black Rod, and in time of Parliament is to at∣tend every day in the Lords House, and is also Ʋsher of the most Honourable Order of the Garter. Second Gentleman Ʋsher, daily Waiter, &c. their Office is to wait in the Presence Chamber, and to attend next the King's Person; and after the Lord Chamberlain, and Vice-Chamberlain, to order all Affairs, and all Under-Officers above-stairs are to obey these. There are Eight Gentlemen-Ʋshers, Quarter-Waiters in Ordinary, who wait also in the Presence Chamber, and are to give Directions in the absence of the Gentlemen-Ʋshers daily Waiters to the Grooms and Pages, and other Under-Officers, who are to attend in all Offices, next below the Gentle∣men-Ʋshers Quarter-Waiters. The Grooms of the great Chamber are Fourteen; Six Gentlemen-Wait∣ers, Four Cup-Bearers, Four Carvers, Four Sewers,
Four Esquires of the Body, whose Office is to guard the King's Person by Night, to set the Watch, and to give the Word, and to keep good Order in the whole House by Night; as the Lord Chamberlain, and his other Officers, are to do by day. The Sewers of the Chamber are Eight. The Groom-Porter's Office is to see the King's Lodgings furnished with Tables, Chairs, Stools, Firing; to furnish Cards, Dice, &c. to decide Disputes arising at Cards, Dice, Bowling, &c. There are Sixteen Sergeants at Arms, all Gentle∣men, or Knights, attending upon His Majesty. There are also Four other Sergeants at Arms, whereof one attends the Lord President of Wales, another the Speaker of the House of Commons, and another the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. There are Forty eight Chaplains in Ordinary, usually Doctors in Divinity, and, for the most part, Deans or Prebends, and all principal Preachers, who attend by Four every month to Preach before the King. There are Four Physicians in Ordinary for the King's Person, whereof one is assigned to attend the Queen. There are also Physicians in Ordinary to the Houshold, of which one is for the Tower of London. There are, besides these, above Twelve able Physicians, who are the King's Sworn Servants, but wait not, nor have Fee. There is a Master and Treasurer of the Jewel-house, and three Under-Officers, called Yeomen and Grooms, whose Office is to take charge of all Vessels of Gold, or Silver Gilt, for the King and Queens Table of all Plate in the Tower, of Chains and loose Jewels not fix'd to any Garment. The Master of the Ceremonies, has a Fee of 200 l. his Assistant 120 l. 13 s. 4 d. and one Mar∣shal, 100 l. per Annum. This Office of Master of the Ceremonies. was instituted by King James, for
the more Honourable Reception of Ambassadors, and Strangers of Quality. The Assistant Master of the Ceremonies, is to execute the same Imployment in all Points, whensoever the other is absent. The Marshal of the Ceremonies is their Officer, for the more easie performance of the said Services, and be∣ing subordinate to them both, is to act nothing but by the directions of one of them. Amongst the King's Servants in Ordinary, are three Kings of Arms, six Heralds, or Dukes of Arms, and four Pursuivants at Arms. The Title of the first is Garter, whose Office is to attend and direct at those Ceremonies and Solemnities that con∣cern the most Noble Order of the Garter, and to Marshal the Solemn Funerals of the Knights of that Order, as also of the Peers of England, and to direct all things else relating to Arms, which apper∣tain to the Peerage. The Title of the Second is Clarencieux, who regulates and directs the Proceedings at Solemn Fu∣nerals of all Degrees under Peers as shall be cele∣brated in his Province, which is the Counties on the South of Trent, and whatsoever else there relateth to Arms. The Title of the Third is Norroy, who regulates and directs like the Second throughout his Province on the North of Frent. The Offices of the Heralds and Pursuivants, besides their Services at the aforesaid Solemnities, are (together with the Kings of Arms) to attend at Pub∣lick Solemnities, and some or all of them to proclaim War or Peace, carry Defiances, summon Fortified Places, or Rebels in Arms, proclaim Traytors, and to do their best Service in whatsoever relateth to the Nobility and Gentry of England in point of Honour and Arms. Amongst the King's Servants in Ordinary, are reckoned one Geographer, one Historiographer, one
Hydrographer, one Library-keeper, one Cosmogra∣pher, one Poet Laureat, and one Publick No∣tary. The King, besides the Great Wardrobe, hath di∣vers standing Wardrobes at Whitehal, Windsor, Hampton-Court, the Tower of London, and Green∣wich, &c. whereof there are divers Officers. There is the Removing Wardrobe, which always attends upon the Person of the King, Queen, and the Children, as also upon Ambassadors, Christenings, Masks, Plays, &c. at the Command of the Lord Chamberlain, who hath the disposing of vacant pla∣ces. Here are fix Officers, one Yeoman, two Grooms, and three Pages; the Salary of the Yeoman is 200 l. of the Grooms 100 l. and of the Pages 100 Marks. And to all together, six Dishes each Meal. The Moveables of this Wardrobe are at length divided into three parts, whereof the Yeoman hath one for his own use, the Grooms another, and the Pages the third. In the Office of the Tents, Soyls, Hayes, and Pa∣vilions, are two Masters, four Yeomen, one Groom, one Clerk Comptroller, and one Clerk of the Tents. The Master of the Revels is to order all things concerning Comedies, &c. there is one Yeoman, one Groom. Engraver Sculptor, one in each Office. In the Office of the Robes, besides the Master above∣mentioned, there is one Yeoman, three Grooms, one Page, two Purveyors, one Brusher, one Taylor, one Dyer, one Girdler, one Clerk, one Lace-man, one Cutter and Racer, two Embroiderers, two Silkmen, one Shoemaker, one Perfumer, one Feather-ma∣ker, one Millener, one Mercer, one Hosier, one Draper, one Surveyor, &c. Falconer with Thirty three Officers under him. Master of the Buck-Hounds, with a Sergeant, and Thirty four persons under him. Master of the Ot∣ter-Hounds. Master of the Harriers, and five un∣der
him. Master of the Ordnance, a Lieutenant, and Master Armorer, with Seventeen Under-Offi∣cers. Messengers of the Chamber in Ordinary, two Clerks of the Check, and Forty more, in all Forty two. Musitians in Ordinary, Sixty two. Trumpeters and Kittle-Drummers, Fifteen. Drummers and Fifes, Seven. Apothecaries Two, one for the King's Person, and one for the Houshold. Chyrurgeos two. Brbers two. Printers three, besides one for the Oriental Tongues. Bookseller, Stationer, and Book-binder. Silman, Woollen-Draper, and two Taylors. Post-Masters for all the Port-Towns in England, all sworn to, and paid by the King. A Master of the Game of Cock-fighting. One Sergeant Skinner, who hath the care of His Majesties Furrs. Two Embroiderers. Two Keepers of the Privy Lodging. Two Gentlemen and one Yeoman of the Bows. One Cross-Bow-maker. One Fletcher. One Cormorant-Keeper. One Hand-Gun-maker. One Master and Marker of Tennis. One Mistriss Semstress, and one Laundress. One Perspective-Maker. One Master-Fencer. One Haberdasher of Hats. One Comb-maker. One Sergeant Painter. One Painter. One Limner. One Picture-Drawer. One Silver-Smith. One Goldsmith. One Jeweller. One Peruque-maker. One Keeper of Pheasants and Turkies. Joyner. Copier of Pictures. Watch-maker. Cabinet-ma∣ker. Lock-Smith, of each one. Game of Bears and Bulls, one Master, one Sergeant, one Yeoman. Two Operators for the Teeth. Two Coffer-bearers for the Back-stairs. One Yeoman of the Leash. Fifty five Watermen. Ʋpholsterer, Letter-Carrier, Foreign-Post, Coffee-maker, of each one. Ten Officers beionging to Gardens, Bowling-Greens, Tennis-Court, Pall-Mall, Keeper of the Theatre at Whitehall. Cutler, Spurrier, Girdler,
Corn-cutter, Button-maker, Embosser, Enameler, of each one. Writer, Flourisher, and Embellisher, Scenographer, or Designer of Prospects, Letter-Founder, of each one. Comedians, Seventeen Men, and Eight Women, Actors. Gunner, Gilder, Cleanser of Pictures, Scene-keeper, Coffer-maker, Wax-chandler, of each one. Keeper of Birds and Fowl in St. James's-Park, one. Keeper of the Volery, Coffee-club-maker, Sergeant-Painter, of each one; with divers other Officers and Servants under the Lord Chamberlain to serve His Majesty upon occasion. Many of which Offices and Places are of good Credit, and great Profit, and en∣joyed by Persons of Quality. As to the Officers under the Master of the Horse, there are Twelve Querries, so called of the French Escayer, derived from Escury, a Stable. Their Of∣fice is to attend the King on Hunting or Progress, or on any occasion of Riding abroad, to help His Majesty up and down from his Horse, &c. Four of these are called Querries of the Crown-Stable, and the others are called Querries of the Hunting-Stable. The Fee to each of these is only 20 l. year∣ly, according to the ancient Custom; but they have allowance for Diet, to each 100 l. yearly, besides Lodgings, and two Horse-Liveries. Next is the chief Avener, from Avena, Oats, whose yearly Fee is 40 l. There is, moreover, one Clerk of the Stable, four Yeomen-Riders, four Child-Riders, Yeomen of the Stirrup, Sergeant-Marshal, and Yeomen-Farriers, four Groom-Farriers, Sergeants of the Carriage, three Surveyors, a Squire and Yeomen-Sadlers, four Yeomen-Granators, four Yeo∣men-Purveyors, a Yeoman-Peckman, a Yeoman-Bit∣maker, four Coach-men, eight Litter-men, a Yeoman of the Close Wagon, Sixty four Grooms of the Stable, whereof 30 are called Grooms of the Crown Stable, and Thirty four of the Hunting and Pad-Stable.
Twenty six Footmen in their Liveries, to run by the King's Horse. All these Places are in the Gift of the Master of the Horse. There is besides these an antient Officer, called Clerk of the Market, who within the Verge of the King's Houshold, is to keep a Standard of all Weights and Measures, and to burn all that are false. From the Pattern of this Standard, all the Weights and Measures of the Kingdom are to be taken. There are divers other considerable Officers, not Subordinate to the Three Great Officers, as the Master of the great Wardrobe, Post-Master, Master of the Ordinance, Warden of the Mint, &c. Upon the King are also attending in his Court the Lords of the Privy-Council, Secretaries of State, the Judges, the College of Civilians, the King's Council at Law, the King's Serjeants at Law, the Masters of Requests, Clerks of the Signet, Clerks of the Council, Keeper of the Paper-Office, or Papers of State, &c. There is always a Military Force to preserve the King's Person, which are His Guards of Horse and Foot. The Guards of Horse are in Number 600 Men, well Armed and Equipped; who are general∣ly Young Gentlemen of considerable Families, who are there made fit for Military Commands. They are divided into Three Troops, viz. The King's Troop, distinguished by their Blew Ribbons and Carbine Belts, their Red Hooses, and Houlster-Caps, Embroidered with His Majesties Cypher and Crown. The Queens Troops by Green Ribbons, Carbine Belts, covered with Green Velvet, and Gold Lace, also Green Hooses and Houster Caps, Em∣broidered with the same Cypher and Crown. And the Dukes Troop by Yellow Ribbons, and Carbine Belts, and Yellow Hooses, Embroidered as the others. In which Troops, are 200 Gentlemen, besides Offi∣cers. Each of these Three Troops is divided into
Four Squadrons or Divisions, Two of which consist∣ing of one hundred Gentlemen, and Commanded by one Principal Commissioned Officer, two Brigadi∣ers, and two Sub-Brigadiers, with two Trumpets mount the Guards one day in six, and are Relieved in their turns. Their Duty is always by Parties from the Guard, to attend the Person of the KING, the Queen, the Duke, and the Dutchess, wheresoever they go near home, but if out of town, they are attended by Detachments out of the said Three Troops. Besides this, there is a more strict Duty and At∣tendance Wly on the KING's Person on Foot, wheresoever He walks, from His Rising to His going to Bed, by one of the three Captains, who always waits immediatly next the KING's own Person, be∣fore all others, carrying in his hand an Ebony-staff or Truncheon, with a Gold head, Engraved with His MAJESTIES Cyper and Crown. Near him also attends a Principal Commissioned Officer, with an Ebony-staff, and Silver head, who is ready to Re∣lieve the Captain on occasion; and at the same time also, two Brigadiers, having also Ebony-staves, head∣ed with Ivory, and Engraven as the others. There is added a Troop of Grenadiers to each Troop of Guards, one Division of which mounts with a Division of the Troop to which they belong; they never go out on small Parties from the Guard, only perform Centry-Duty on Foot, and attend the KING also on Foot when he walks abroad, but always March with great Detachments. The KING's Troop consists of a Captain, two Lieu∣tenants, three Sergeants, three Corporals, two Drums, two Hautbois, and eighty private Souldiers Mounted. The Queens Troop, of a Captain, two Lieutenants, two Serjeants, two Corporals, two Hautbois, and Sixty private Souldiers Mounted. The Dukes Troop consists of the like Number with the Queens.
The Captains of His MAJESTIES Guards always Command as Eldest Colonels of Horse; the Lieutenants as Eldest Lieutenant-Colonels of Horse; the Cornets and Guidons, as Eldest Majors of Horse; the Quartermasters, as Youngest Captains of Horse; the Brigadiers as Eldest Lieutenants of Horse; and amongst themselves every Officer, according to the Date of his Commission, takes precedency, when on Detachments, but not when the Three Troops march with their Colours, for then the Officer of the Eldest Troop, commands those of equal Rank with him in the others, though their Commission be of Elder Date. Next immediatly after the Three Troops of Guards, His MAJESTIES Regiment of Horse Commanded by the Earl of Oxford takes place, and the Colonel of it is to have precedency, after the Captains of the Guards, and before all other Colonels of Horse, whatsoever change may be of the Colonel; and all the Officers thereof, in their proper Degree, are to take place according to the Dates of their Commissions. As to the Foot, the King's Regiment, Commanded by the Honorable Colonel John Russel, takes place of all other Regiments, and the Colonel thereof is always to precede as the first Colonel. The Colestream Regiment, Com∣manded by the Earl of Craven, takes the next; the Duke of Yorks Regiment next, then His Majesties Holland Regiment, Commanded by the Earl of Mulgrave, and all other Colonels, according to the Dates of their Commissions. All other Regiments of Horse and Foot, not of the Guards, take place ac∣cording to their Respective Seniority, from the time they were first Raised, and no Regiment loses its precedency by the Death of its Colonel. At the KING's House there is a Guard for His Person, both above and below stairs. In the Presence Chamber the Band of Gentlemen Pension∣ers
wait, instituted by King Henry the VII. and chosen out of the best and antientest Families in England, to be a Guard to His Majesties Person, and also to be a Nursery to breed up hopeful Gentle∣men, and fit them for Employments, Civil and Mi∣litary, as well abroad as at home; as Deputies of Ireland, Embassadors in Foreign Parts, Counsellors of State, Captains of the Guard, Governours of places, Commanders in the Wars, both by Sea and Land, of all which there have been Examples. They are to attend the King's Person to and from His Chappel, only as far as the Privy Chamber: also in all other Solemnity, as Coronations, publick Audience of Embassadors, &c. They are 40 in Number, over whom there is a Captain, usually some Peer of the Realm, a Lieu∣tenant, a Standard-bearer, and a Clerk of the Check. They wait half at a time quarterly. Those in quar∣ter wait daily five at a time upon the King in the House, and when He walks abroad. Upon extra∣ordinary occasions, all of them are Summoned. Their ordinary Arms are Gilt Pole-Axes. Their Arms on Horse-back in time of War, are Cuirassi∣ers Arms, with Sword and Pistol. These are only under their own Officers, and are always Sworn by the Clerk of the Check, who is to take Notice of such as are absent when they should be upon their Duty. Their Standard in time of War, is a Cross Gules in a Field Argent, also 4 bends. In the first Room above stairs, called the Guard-Chamber, attend the Yeomen of the Guard of His Majesties Body; whereof there were wont to be 250 Men of the best quality under Gentry, and of larger Stature then ordinary (for every one was to be Six Foot high) there are at present 100 Yeomen in dayly waiting, and 70 more not in waiting, and as any of the 100 die, his place is filled up out of the 70. These wear Scarlet Coats Down to the knee, and Scarlet Breeches, both richly Guarded
with black Velvet, and rich Badges upon their Coats both before and behind, moreover black Velvet round broad Crown'd Caps, with Ribbons of the King's Colour: One half of them of late bear in their hands Harquebuzes, and the other half Parti∣zans, with large Swords by their sides: they have Wages and Diet allowed them. Their Office is to wait upon the King in His standing Houses, 40 by by Day, and 20 to Watch by Night; about the Ci∣ty to wait upon the King's Person abroad by Water or Land. The KING's Palace Royal (ratione Regiae dig∣nitatis) is exempted from all Jurisdiction of any Court, Civil or Ecclesiastick, but only to the Lord Steward, and in his absence to the Treasurer and Comptroller of the King's Houshold, with the Stew∣ard of the Marshalsea, who by vertue of their Of∣fice, without Commission, may Hear and Determin all Treasons, Fellonies, Breaches of the Peace, Com∣mitted within the KING's Court or Palace. The Orders and Rules for the Demeanor of all Officers and Servants, are hung upon Tables in several Rooms at the Court, and Signed with the King's own hand, worthy to be Read of all Strangers. The Court or House where the King resides, is accounted a Place so Sacred, that if any Man pre∣sume to strike another there, and, only draw blood, his Right hand shall be cut off, and he Committed to perpetual Imprisonment, and Fined. All oc∣casions of striking are also there forbidden. The Court of England, for Magnificence, Order, Number and Quality of Officers, rich Fur∣niture, Entertainment and Civility to Strangers, and for plentiful Tables, might compare with the best in Christendom, and far Excels most Courts abroad. It hath for a long time been a Pattern of Hospita∣lity and Charity, to the Nobility and Gentry of Eugland. All Noblemen or Gentlemen, Subjects
or Strangers, were freely Entertained at the plenti∣ful Tables of His Majesties Officers. Divers Dishes were provided every day extraordinary for the King's Honour. Two hundred and fourty Gallons of Beer a day, were allowed at the Buttery-Bar for the Poor, besides all the broken Meat, Bread, &c. gathered into Baskets, and given to the Poor, at the Court-Gates, by Two Grooms, and Two Yeomen, of the Almonry, who have Salaries of His Majesty for that Service. The Lord Almoner hath the Priviledge to give the King's Dish, to whatsoever Poor Man he pleases; that is, the first Dish at Dinner which is set upon the King's Table, or in stead thereof four pence a day, (which anciently was equivalent to four shil∣lings now;) next he distributes to 24 poor men, na∣med by the Parishioners of the Parish adjacent to the King's place of Residence, to each of them four pence in money, a Two-penny Loaf, and a Gallon of Beer, or in stead thereof three pence in money, equally to be divided among them every morning at seven of the Clock at the Court-gate. The Sub-Almoner is to scatter New-coined Two-pences in the Towns and Places where the King passes through in his Progresses, to a certain Sum by the year. Besides there are many poor Pensioners, either because so old that they are unfit for service, or the Widows of any of the King's Servants that dyed poor, who have a Competency duly paid them: Besides, there are di∣stributed among the Poor the large Offerings which the King gives in Collar days. The magnificent and abundant plenty of the King's Tables, hath caused amazement in Foreigners. In the Reign of King Charles I. there were daily in his Court 86 Tables well furnished each Meal, whereof the King's Tables had 28 Dishes, the Queens 24, 4 other Tables 16 Dishes each, 3 other 10 Dishes, 12 other 7 Dishes, 17 other 5 Dishes, 3 other 4, 32 had 3, and 13 had each two; in all about
500 Dishes each Meal, with Bread, Beer, Wine, and all other things necessary. There was spent yearly in the King's House of gross meat 1500 Oxen, 7000 Sheep, 1200 Veals, 300 Porkers, 400 Sturks, or young Beefs, 6800 Lambs, 300 Flitches of Bacon, and 26 Boars. Also 140 dozen of Geese, 250 dozen of Capons, 470 dozen of Hens, 750 dozen of Pul∣lets, 1470 dozen of Chickens, for Bread 36400 Bush∣els of Wheat, and for Drink 600 Tun of Wine, and 1700 Tun of Beer. Moreover, of Butter 46640, together with the Fish, and Fowl, Venison, Fruit, Spice proportionably. This prodigious plenty in the King's Court, caused Foreigners to put a higher value upon the King, and was much for the Honor of the Kingdom. The King's Servants being Men of Qua∣lity, by His Majesties special Order went to West∣minster-Hall in Term-time, to invite Gentlemen, to eat of the King's Acates or Viands, and in Parlia∣ment-time, to invite the Parliament-men thereto. On the Thursday before Easter, called Maunday Thursday, the King, or his Lord Almoner, was wont to wash the Feet of as many poor Men, as His Majesty had Reigned years, and then to wipe them with a Towel, (according to the Pattern of our Saviour) and then to give every one of them two Yards and a half of Woollen Cloth, to make a Suit of Cloaths; also Linnen Cloth for two Shirts, and a pair of Stock∣ings, and a pair of Shoes, three Dishes of Fish in Wooden Platters, one of Salt Salmon, a second of Green Fish or Cod, a third of Pickle-Herrings, Red Herrings, and Red Sprats, a Gallon of Beer, a Quart Pottle of Wine, and four six-penny Loaves of Bread, also a Red Leather-purse with as many single Pence as the King is years old, and in such another Purse as many shillings as the King hath reigned years. The Queen doth the like to divers poor Women. The Form of Government is by the wisdom of many Ages, so contrived and regulated, that it is al∣most
impossible to mend it. The Account (which is of so many Natures, and is therefore very difficult, must pass through many hands, and is therefore very exact) is so wisely contrived and methodized, that without the Combination of every one of these fol∣lowing Officers, viz. the Cofferer, a Clerk of the Green Cloth, a Clerk Comptroller, a Clerk of the Kitchin, of the Spicery or Avery, or a particular Clerk, to∣gether with the conjunction of a Purveyor and Waiter in the Office, it is impossible to defraud the King of a Loaf of Bread, of a Pint of Wine, a Quart of Beer, or Joint of Meat, or Money, or any thing else. Having given this brief Abstract, if any would be more curious to read it more at large, or about the Courts of the Queen and Royal Family, they are re∣ferred to the Present State of England. II. West from Charing-Cross, there stood some∣times an Hospital of St. James, founded by the Citi∣zens of London, before the time of any Mans memo∣ry, for 14 Sisters, Maidens that were Leprous. This Hospital was surrendred to King Henry VIII. in the 23 of his Reign. The Sisters being compounded with, were allowed Pensions for term of their Lives, and the King built there a goodly Mannor, now the Duke of York's Palace, annexing thereunto the beautiful Park called St. James's inclosed with a Wall of Brick, serving inderently for that Palace, and the Court or Palace of Whitehall, which, in a word, for extraordinary Commodiousness, Conveniency and Situation, being seated between a Noble Navigable River, and a most Deiectable and Spacious Park, full of great and rare Varieties, (as hath been hint∣ed) for the Great Chamber there, called the Ban∣quetting-House, the like whereof for Spaciousness, Beauty Peinture, and exact Proportion, no King in Europe can parallel, deserves the View and No∣tice of all Strangers.
III. Although it might seem more proper to treat of Westminster-Hall, under the Head or Chapter of Publick Halls or Courts, yet being a Place so Emi∣nent, above any other in this Renowned City, and formerly a Royal Palace, we shall leave our Remarks upon it with the Reader in this place, and give a brief Account, (1) of its Foundation and Antiquity; (2) of the Courts held there, especially the High Court of Parliament, which, we hope, will be ac∣ceptable. 1. Many Eminent Authors do affirm, That this Great Hall was built by William Rufus, about the year of our Lord 1097. amongst whom, Roger of Windover, and Matthew Paris write, that King William being returned out of Normandy into England, kept his Feast of Whitsontide very Royal∣ly at Westminster in the New-Hall, which he had lately built. This Hall, for all Dimensions, is not to be equalled by any Hall in Christendom. It is (say some) 270 Foot in length, and 74 broad. It is reported that the King should say to one that thought the Hall too big, That it was not big enough by one half, and was but a Bed-chamber in compari∣son of what he meant to make. This Palace was Repaired Anno 1163. by Thomas Becket Chancellor of England, with exceeding great celerity and speed, being before ready to have fallen down. It hath been the principal Seat and Palace of all the Kings of England since the Conquest, where they kept Coronation, and other Solemn Feasts, till the time of King Henry VIII. In this Palace (by a marvelous Inundation or Overflowing of the River of Thames in the year 1236, which drowned many Cattle and Men, Women and Children) Men did Row with Wherries in the midst of the Hall. The like (or rather more dreadful Inundation) hapned in the year 1242. the Thames overflowing the Banks about Lambeth.
In the year 1299, 27 Edw. 1. this Palace was burnt by a vehement Fire, kindled in the lesser Hall of the King's House, by which the same (with many other Houses adjoining, together with the Queens Chamber) was consumed, but after that repaired. In the year 1397, King Richard II. caused the Walls, Windows and Roof to be taken down, and new made, with a stately Porch, and divers Lodgings of a marvelous Work, and with great Costs, which being finished, Anno 1399. He kept a most Royal Christmas there, with daily Justings and Runnings at Tilt, whereunto resorted such a number of People, that there was every day spent 28 or 26 Oxen, 300 Sheep, and Fowl without number. He caused a Gown to be made for himself of Gold, garnished with Pearl and precious Stones, to the value of 3000 Marks. There daily fed there 10000 People, as appeareth by the Messes, told out from the Kitchin, to 300 Servitors. A great part of this Palace was burnt Anno 1512, the 4th of Henry VIII. since which time it hath not been Re-edified: Only the Great Hall, with the Offices near adjoining, are kept in good Reparations, and serveth, as afore, for Feasts at Coronations, Ar∣raignments of Great Persons charged with Treason, and keeping of the Courts of Justice. For whereas for∣merly the Courts and Benches followed the King wheresoever he went, before and since the Conquest, but being found to be troublesom, chargeable, and in∣convenient to the People, it was, Anno 1224, 9 H. 3. agreed, that thee should be a standing place appoint∣ed, where Matters should be heard and judged, which was in the Great Hall at Westminster. I. The Court of COMMON-PLEAS. Where he appointed Three Judgment-Seats, viz. at the Entry on the Right-hand, the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas;
So called, because there are debated the usual Pleas between Subject and Subject, as about Tenures of Lands, and Civil Actions. None but Sergeants at Law may plead in this Court, and so many of them as the King shall appoint, are bound by Oath to assist all that have any Cause depending in that Court. Pleas are distinguished into Pleas of the Crown, (as Treason and Felony, with Misprision of Felony, which belong to the Kings-Bench) and Common or Civil Pleas, whereof this Court takes Cogni∣zance. This Court may grant Prohibitions, as the Kings-Bench doth. The Chief Judge is called the Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, or de Commu∣ni Banco, the Common Bench, who holds his place by Letters Patents, Durante Beneplacito, and so do the other inferior Judges of this Court, whereof there are commonly Three. Here all Civil Causes, Real and Personal, are usually Tryed, according to the strict Rule of the Law. Real Actions are pleadable in no other Court, nor Fines levied, or Recoveries suffered, but only in this Court. The King allows to the Lord Chief Justice of this Court, a Fee, Reward, Robes, and two Tun of Wine. Also to the other Judges of this Court, and to four Sergeants, is allow'd Fees, Re∣ward and Robes to each one. The Officers are ma∣ny, Custos Brevium, three Protonatories, Clerk of the Warrants, Clerk of the Kings Silver, four Exigenters, fourteen Filazers, Clerk of the Juries, Clerk of the Essoignes, Clerk of the Outlawries, which belongeth to the Attorney General, who ex∣ercises it by Deputy, &c. For which at large, see the Present State of England, Pag. 102. Edit. 1679.
II. KINGS-BENCH. At the upper End of the Hall, on the Right-hand, or South-east Corner, the Court of Kings-Bench was appointed, which is of a larger Extent of Pow∣er, and more Uncontroulable than any other Tribu∣nal: For the Law presumes, that the King is there still in Person, He being Lord Chief Justice of Eng∣land Himself; yet it is observable, that though He should personally sit upon the Bench, He can pass no Sentence of Judgment, but by the Mouths of His Judges, who did use to sit there at His Feet when He was present. After the House of Lords in Parlia∣ment, this is the Highest Court in England, and the Judicature, in the Absence of the King, belongs to His Judges. In this Court are handled the Pleas of the Crown, all things that concern loss of Life or Member, of any Subject; for then the King is concern'd, because the Life and Limb of the Subject (in the sense of the Law) belong only to the King, so that the Pleas here are between the King and the Subject. Here are handled all Treasons, Felonies, Breach of Peace, Op∣pression, Misgovernment, &c. This Court hath power to Examine and Correct all Errors in Facto, and in Jure, of all the Judges and Justices of England in their Judgments and Pro∣ceedings; and this not only in Pleas of the Crown, but in all Pleas Real, Personal, and Mixt, except only in the Exchequer. In this High Court sit commonly four Grave Reve∣rend Judges, whereof the first is stiled, The Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, and is Created not by Patent, but by a short Writ, yet of large Extent in point of Authority, thus— Rex, &c. Ma∣thaeo Hale Militi, salutem. Sciatis quod constitui∣mus vos Justiciarium nostrum Capitalem ad placita
coram nobis tenenda, Durante beneplacito nostro, teste Me Ipso apud Westm. &c. That is in English, The King, &c. To Sir Matthew Hale Kt. Greeting. Know ye, That we have Constituted you our Capital (or Chief) Justice in Pleas held before Ʋs, during Our Pleasure. Witness My Self at Westminster, &c. The rest of the Judges of the Kings-Bench, hold their Pleas by Letters Patents, in these words— Rex omniblis ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod Constituimus Dilectum & Fidelem nostrum A. B. Militem, unum Justiciario∣rum ad placita coram nobis tenenda, Durante beneplacito nostro. Teste, &c. These Judges, and all the Officers belonging to this Court, have all Salaries from the King, and the chief of them have Robes and Liveries out of the great Wardrobe. In this Court, all young Lawyers that have been called to the Bar, are allowed to plead and practise. This Court may grant Prohibitions, to keep other Courts, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, within their due Bounds and Jurisdiction. The Juris∣diction of this Court is general, extending to all England, as before. None can be a Judge in this Court, unless he be a Sergeant of the Degree of the Coif, that is, a Sergeant at Law, (and yet in the Writ or Patent to them made, they are not called Sergeants) who upon taking this high Degree, is ob∣liged to wear a Lawn Coif under his Cap for ever after. For the Officers of this Court, see the Present State of England, of the same Edition, Pag. 98. III. CHANCERY. On the Left-hand, or South-west Corner, sitteth the Lord Chancellor, accompanied with the Master of the Rolls, and eleven other Men learned in the
Civil Law, and called Masters of Chancery, which have the King's Fee. This Court is placed next the Kings-Bench, to mitigate the Rigor of it. It is Curia Cancellariae, because (as some think) the Judge of this Court sate anciently intra Cancellos, or Lattices, as the East-end of Churches are sepa∣rated per Cancellos, from the Body of the Church, as peculiarly belonging to the Priest, and were thence called Chancels. This Court is Officina Justitiae, the Fountain of all our Fundamental Laws, and Proceedings in Law, and the Original of all other Courts. It is as an∣tient as the Civility of the Nation, though perhaps by another Name. This Court proceeds, either ordinarily according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs, of the Nation, and in Latin, granting out Writs Mandatory, and Remedial, Writs of Grace: or else according to Equity and Conscience, and by English Bill: so that the Chancery hath two Courts in one: The Equita∣ble part is by Bills, Answers, and Decrees, to Examin Frauds, Combinations, Trusts, Secret Ʋses, &c. To moderate the Rigour of the Laws, and Rescue Men out of the hands of their Oppressors. To Relieve a Man especially in three things, viz. against Cheats, unfortunate Accidents, and Breaches of Trust. Out of this Court Issue out Writs, or Summons for Parliaments, Edicts, Proclamations, Charters, Protections, safe Conducts, Writs of Moderata Mi∣sericordia, when any Person hath been Amerced too high, are for a reasonable part of Goods for Widows and Orphans, Patents for Sheriffs, Writs of Certiorari to remove Records, and false Judgments in inferior Courts, Writs of Audita Querela, and Scire Facias: here are Sealed and Inrolled, Letters Patents, Treaties and Leagues with Foreign Princes, Deeds between Party and Party touch∣ing Lands, Estates, or Purchasers, taking Re∣cognizances,
and making Extents upon Statutes, and Recognizances for Payment of Money, or securing of Contracts, Writs Remedial or Magisterial, Com∣missions of Appeal, Oyer and Terminer, &c. The Court of Common Pleas, which are between Subject and Subject, hath its Original and Commission from the Chancery, and cannot hold Pleas without it. For the Latin part of this Court, are the 24 Cursitors; and for the English part, are the Six Clerks. The Court of Equity, that proceeds not accord∣ing to Law, is no Court of Record, and therefore binds only the Person, not his Lands or Goods. The Judge of this Court is the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. He is here the Sole Judge, whereas in other Courts there are three or four Judges. But he may and doth often, in Cases of greater Weight and Diffi∣culty, in Cases of Law, call some of the other Judges to his assistance; and therefore it is said, this Office may be discharged by one that is no professed Law∣yer, as it has been frequently to their great Praise. It is the highest Dignity in England, that a Lay-Man is capable of, it is Summum ambientis animi quasi solstitium; and the Chancellor is, Magistra∣tum omnium Antistes. Antiently the Lord Chan∣cellor had somtimes his Vice-Chancellor, common∣ly called Keeper of the Great Seal, but of latter times they differ only in Name. The Chancellor is said to be Keeper of the King's Conscience, to Judge secundum aequum & bonum; according to Equity and Conscience; he is to mo∣derate the ; the exact Rigor and Letter of the Law, whereunto other Judges are exactly tyed: For the Princes of this Realm, (in imitation of the KING of Kings, governing the Wold by Justice and Mercy) have Erected two Suprem Tribunals together, at the upper end of
Westminster-Hall, one of Justice, wherein nothing but the strict Letter of the Law is observed; and the other of Mercy, where in the Rigor of the Law is tempered with the sweetness of Equity; which is nothing else, but Mercy qualifying the sharpness of Justice. This Court being a Court of Conscience, the less it is perplexed with the Quirks of Lawyers, the more it is guided by Conscience and Equity. The manner of proceeding in this Court is thus; the Action is by Bill or Plaint, the Witnesses Ex∣amined in private, the Decrees in English or Latin, not in French. No Jury of Twelve Men, but all Sentences are given by the Judge of the Court. The place of Master of the Rolls is of great Dig∣nity, in the Gift of the King, for life, or during pleasure. This Officer hath Jure Officii, the Gift of those considerable Officers of the Six Clerks in Chancery, hath the keeping of the Rolls, and in the absence of the Chancellor, hears Causes, and makes Orders by Vertue of a Commission, with two Ma∣sters, and that Jure Officii by right of Office. This Court is always open, whereas all the others are shut, but only in Term time; so that if a Man be wrongfully Imprisoned, in the Vacation time out of Term, the Lord Chancellor may Grant his Writ of Habeas Corpus. and do him Justice according to Law, so likewise may this Gourt Grant Prohibiti∣ons in time of Vacation, as well as in Term time. The Defendant is to Answer Bills and Interro∣gatories upon Oath, though to the accusing of him∣self in divers matters Dammageable and Penal; the Witnesses are to Depose upon Interrogatories and in perpetuam rei Memoriam, by the Term and use of Final Decree, agreeable with the Civil Law. In the Master of the Rolls Office are kept all the Rolls, since the beginning of King Henry the VII. the rest are kept in the Tower of London. In this
Gift are besides the Six Clerks Office, the Offices of the Examiners, and three of the Clerks of the Petty-Bag-Office. The Office of Clerk of the Crown, is of High im∣portance; he is either by himself or Deputy con∣tinually to attend the Lord Chancellor for special matters of State, and hath place in the Higher House of Parliament. He makes all Writs for Election of Members of Parliament, Sitting in Parliament, upon Warrant directed to him upon the Death or Removal of any Member; and also Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Goal-Delivery, Commissi∣ons of Peace, and many other Commissions distri∣buting Justice to His Majesties Subjects. The Office of the Protonotary of this Court is chiefly to expedite Commissions for Embassies. The Office of the Clerk of the Hanaper (or Hamper) is to receive all the Money due to the King for the Seals of Charters, Patents, Commissi∣ons, and Writs, and to attend the Keeper of the Seal daily in Term time, and at all times of Sealing, with Leather Bags now (but antiently probably with Hampers) wherein are put all the Sealed Charters, Patents, &c. And then those Bags delivered to the Comptroller of the Hamper. The Office of Warden of the Fleet, or Keeper of the Fleet-Prison, is very Considerable. He is to take care of the Prisoners there, who are com∣monly such as are sent thither from this Court, for contempt of the King, or His Laws, on such as will not pay their Debts, &c. The Sergeant at Arms Office, is to bear a Gilt Mace before the Lord Chan∣cellor or Keeper for the time being. The Six Clerks are Officers of great account, next in Degree to the Twelve Masters in Chancery, whose Office is to In∣roll Commissions, Pardons, Patents, Warrants, &c. that are passed the Great Seal. They are Attorneys for Plaintiffs and Defendants, in Causes depend∣ing
in this Court. Their Offices are at a place cal∣led Six-Clerks-Office in Chancery-Lane; they keep Commons together in Term time. The Three Clerks of the Petty-Bag, are under the Master of the Rolls, they make all Patents, for Customers Comptrollers, all Conged' Estires, first Summons of Nobility, Clergy, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parliament. From the Subpoena-Office, are Issued Writs to Summon Persons to appear in Chancery. There are two Examiners who are to examin Witnesses upon upon their Oaths in any suit on both sides. The Curssiters Office is to make out Original Writs, they were antiently called Clerici de Cursu. They are in Number 24, whereof each one hath certain Counties and Cities allotted to him. They are a Corporation of themselves, &c. IV. EXCHEQƲER. Within the Port or Entry into the Hall, on ei∣ther side, are ascendings up into large Cham∣bers without the Hall, adjoyning thereunto, where∣in certain Courts be kept, namely on the Right hand, is the Court of Exchequer, which is so called▪ as some think, from a Chequer-wrought-Carpet, co∣vering the great Table in that Court, or else from the French word Exchequer, a Chess Board, because the Accomptants in that Office, were wont to use such Boards in their Calculation. Here are Tried all Causes that belong to the King's Treasury or Re∣venue, as touching Accounts, Disbursements, Cu∣stoms, and all Fines imposed upon any Man. In this Court do Sit the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Lord Chief Baron, and Four other Learned Judges, called Barons of the Exche∣qur, and one other Cursitor-Baron, but the two first dom Sit, and the five last seldom fail. The first
of these five is the Principal Judge of this Court which is a place of High Honour and Profit, he i stiled Lord Chief Baron, is created by Letters Patents to hold this Dignity, quam diu bene se gesseri wherein he hath a more fixed Estate than the Chi Justices of either Bench, for the Law intends this a Estate for Life: In the absence of the Lord Chie Baron, the other three Barons supply his place, according to their Seniority; but the 5th is said to b Cursitor of the Court, and Administers the Oaths t the Sheriffs, under-Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Searchers, Sur∣veyors, &c. of the Custom-House. In the Exchequer are held two Courts, one o Law, another of Equity, all Judicial proceedings according to Law, are Coram Baronibus, before the Barons; but the Court of Equity held in the Ex∣chequer-Chamber, is, Coram Thesaurario, Cancella∣rio, & Baronibus, before the Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons. The Authority of this Court is of Original Juris∣diction, without any Commission. All the Twelve Judges belonging to these High Tribunals, sit in Robes, and Square Caps like Doctors of Divinity, because (as some say,) they were in old times most commonly Clergy Men. There are divers Officers belonging to the upper Exchequer, as the King's Remembrancer, in whose Office are Eight Sworn Clerks. All Accounts pass there that concern the King's Revenue, for Customs, Excise, Hearth-Money, Subsidies, and all aids grant∣ed to the King in Parliament, and all other Accounts of what nature soever, concerning the King's Re∣venue, either Certain or Casual; all Securities whe∣ther by Bond or Recognizances to the King for any of His Debts, are taken here. All proceedings up∣on any Statute, by information for Custom, Excises, or any other Penal Law. All proceedings upon the said Bonds or Recognizances, or any other Bonds
taken in the King's Name by Officers appointed thereunto, under the Great Seal of England, and transmitted into this Office for Recovery thereof. From whence Issue forth Process, to cause all Ac∣countants to come in and Account, &c. This Office is in the King's Gift. The Office of the Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer is to make Process against all Sheriffs, Receivers, Bayliffs, &c. for their Accounts, and many other things of Moment, as Estreal Rules, all Charters and Letters Patents, whereupon any Rents are re∣served to the King. This also is in the KING's Gift. The Clerk of the Pipe hath all the Accounts and Debts due to the King, drawn down out of the Re∣membrancers Office, and chargeth them down out of the Remembrancers Office, and chargeth them down in the Great Roll or Pipe, (and therefore pro∣bably called the Pipe-Office;) he hath under him Eight Sworn Clerks. Here Accountants have their quietus est, and here are made Leafes of extended Lands. The Comptroller of the Pipe writes out all Sum∣mons twice every Year to the High Sheriffs, to Le∣vy the Farms and Debts of the Pipe. He keeps a Roll of the Pipe-Office Accounts, whereby to disco∣ver any thing that shall be amiss. In the Office of the Clerk of the Pleas, all the Officers of the Exchequer, and other priviledged Persons, as Debtors to the King, &c. are to have their Priviledge to Plead, and be Impleaded, as to all matters at the Common Law. And the Pro∣ceedings are accordingly by Declarations, Pleas, and Trials, as at the Common Law, because they should not be drawn out of their own Court, where their attendance is Required. In this Office are four Sworn Attorneys. To the Forign Opposers-Office, all Sheriffs re∣pair
to be by him opposed of their Green-Wax, and from thence is drawn down a Charge upon the She∣riffs, to the Clerk of the Pipe. This Office is kept in Grays-Inn. The Office of the Clerk of the Estreats is to re∣ceive every Term the Estreats or Extracts out of the Office of the Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer, and to write them out to be Levied for the King. Also to make Schedules for such Sums as are to be dis∣charged. The Auditors of the Imprest, Audit the Great ac∣counts of the King's Customs, Wardrobe, Mint, First Fruits and Tenths, Naval and Military Ex∣pences, Moneys imprested, &c. The Auditors of the Revenue, Audit all the ac∣counts of the King's other Revenue, that arise by Aids granted in Parliament. The Remembrancer of the first Fruits and Tenths, takes all Compositions, for first Fruits and Tenths, and makes Process against such as pay not the same. This Office is kept in Hatton-Garden, &c. As to the other part of the Exchequer, where the King's Revenue is received and disbursed, the Principal Officer is the Lord Treasurer, whose place is somtimes (and is at this present) managed by Commissioners, appointed by His Majesty. The next is the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who is an Officer of great Account and Authority. He hath a Principal Power, not only in the Exche∣quer-Court, but also here, in the managing and dis∣posing of the King's Revenue: he hath the Custo∣dy of the Exchequer-Seal. He hath the Gift of the Comptroller, or Clerk of the Pipe, of the Clerk of the Pleas, of the Clerk of the Nichils, and of the Seal of the Court. He is also under Treasurer, and hath the Gift of the two Praisers of the Court. Then there are two Chamberlains of the Exchequer, in whose Custody are many ancient Records, Leagues and
Treaties with Foreign Princes, the Standards of Mo∣neys, Weights and Measures, those antient Books called Dooms-Day, and the Black Book of the Ex∣chequer. The former was six Years a making by William the Conqueror, and is a Cense or compute of all England as it was then, viz. all the Lands, with the value and Owners, and Account of all Ci∣ties, Towns, Villages, Families, Men, Souldiers, Husbandmen, Bondmen, Servants, Cattle; how much Money, Rents, Meadow, Pasture, Woods, Tillage, Common, Marsh, Heath, every one possessed. So that in Disputes about Taxes, this determined it without further controversie, as the Book of the Great day of Doom will then, (and therefore so called.) It is kept under three Locks, and not to be lookt into under 6 s. 8 d. And for every Line Transcribed, is to be paid 4. d. The Auditor of the Receipts, is to File the Bills of The Tellers, whereby they charge themselves with all Money Received, and to draw all Orders to be Signed by the Lord High Treasurer, for Issuing forth all Moneys by Vertue of the Privy Seals, which are Recorded and Lodged in his Office. He makes all Debentures to the several Persons who have Fees, Annuities, or Pensions, by Letters Patents, from the King, out of the Exchequer, and directs them for payment to the Tellers. He receives every Week the state of the Account of each Teller, and also Weekly certifies the whole to the Lord High Treasurer, who presently presents the Estimate or Ballance to the King. He takes the Tellers Ac∣count in Gross at Easter and Michaelmas. By him are kept the several Registers appointed for paying all Persons in Course, upon several Branches of the King's Revenue; he is Scriptor Talliorum, hath five Clerks to manage the whole Estate of Moneys received, disbursed and remaining. There are four Tellers who Receive all Moneys▪
due to the King, and thereupon throw down a Bill through a Pipe into the Tally-Court, where it is received by the Auditors Clerk, who there at∣tends to write the words of the said Bill upon a Tally, and then delivers the same to be Entred by the Clerk of the Pells, or his under Clerk, who En∣ters it in his Book. Then the Tally is cloven by the two Deputy Chamberlains, who have the Seals; and while the Senior Deputy reads one part, the Junior Examines the other part with the other two Clerks. The Clerk of the Pels, Enters every Tellers Bill into a Parchment of Skin, (in Latin Pellis, whence this Office hath its Name,) all Receipts and Pay∣ments for the King, for what cause, or by whom∣soever, and is in Nature of a Comptroller, hath four Clerks, whereof one is for the Introitus, and another for the Exitus. Moreover he is to make Weekly and half Yearly Books, both of the Receipts and Payments which are delivered to the Lord Trea∣surer. He that Pays the King any Moneys, receives▪ for his Acquittance a Tally; (so called from the French Verb Tallier to cut) that is, one half of a Stick cloven, with certain proportionable Notches there∣on, expressive of the Sum from the said Deputy Chamberlains, who keep the other cloven part of the Stick, called the Foyl, and Delivers it to the Tally-Joyners on the other side of the Exchequer, who are also Deputies to the Chamberlains, an they joyn it with the Foyl, which agreeing, the give it their Test, and send it by an Officer of the own to the Pipe, where their quietus est is Ingrosse in Parchment. In the Office of the Deputy-Chamberlains: Westminster, are preserved all the Counterfoyls these Tallies, so exactly ranged by Months an Years, that they are to be presently found out, t
be joined with their respective Stock or Tally, when required, which proving true, they deliver it Attest∣ed for a Lawful Tally, to the Clerk of the Pipe, for to be allowed in the great Roll; but in Case any Corruption hath been used, the same is easily and soon discovered, and the Offender severely punish∣ed, by Fine and Imprisonment. This Antient way of striking of Tallies hath been found, by long experience, to be absolutely the best way that ever was invented, for it is Morally im∣possible so to Falsifie or Counterfeit a Tally, but that upon rejoyning it with the Counterfoyl, it will be obvious to every Eye, either in the Notches, or in the Cleaving, in the Longitude, Latitude, Na∣tural growth or shape of the Counterfoyl; whereas Acquittances in Writing cannot be so done, but that they may be Counterfeited by skilful Penmen, and that so exactly, as that he who wrote the Ori∣ginal, shall not be able to know his own hand from the Counterfeit, as hath been frequently seen in all the Courts of Westminster. There are two Ʋshers, whose Office it is to secure the Exchequer by Day and Night, and all the A∣venues leading to the same, and to furnish all Ne∣cessaries, as Books, Paper, &c. There is a Tally-Cutter, and four Messengers. This Exchequer is the best ordered publick Reve∣nue in the World. Court of the Dutchy of Lancaster. Before we come to treat of the High Court of Parliament, we will give an Account of the Court of the Dutchy of Lancaster, kept at Westminster-Hall, on the left hand above Stairs, which takes Cogni∣zance of all Causes that any way concern the Re∣venue of that Dutchy, which hath been long since Annexed to the Crown.
The Chief Judge of this Court, is the Chancel∣lor of the Dutchy, who is assisted by the Attorney of the Dutchy. To this Court belong divers other Officers. It is kept near the lower Exchequer, and at the Office of Sir Gilbert Gerrard at Grays-Inn. Of the High Court of PARLIAMENT. Sir Richard Baker tell us in his Chronicle that King Henry the I. instituted the Form of the High Court of Parliament: and that the first Council of this sort was held at Salisbury, on the 19th of April, and the 16th of his Reign, which is 560 and odd Years ago. Before the Conquest, the great Coun∣cil of the King, consisting only of the Great Men of the Kingdom, was called Magnatum Conventus, the Convention or Meeting of the Grandees, or Great Men, or else Prelatorum Procerumque Con∣cilium, and by the Saxons in their own Tongue, Michel Gemot, the great Assembly. After the Con∣quest it was called Parlementum, a French word derived of Parler, to talk together, consisting still only of the great Men of the Nation, till the afore∣said King's Reign. None but the King hath Authority to Summon a Parliament: In the King's absence out of the Realm, the Custos Regni in the King's Name, doth Summon a Parliament; and During the King's Mi∣nority within the Realm, the Protector Regni doth the same. When the King of England is with His Parlia∣ment, in time of peace, He is then said to be in the height of His Royal Dignity, as well as when He is at the head of His Army in time of War. He can with the concurrence of his Lords and Commons then do any thing in point of Enacting or Repealing Laws, Legitimate one that is born
Illegitimate, Bastardize one that is born Legitimate. He can make an Infant of full Age, make an Alien or Foreigner an English Man, can Attaint a Man of Treason when he is Dead, and when he is no more a Man, &c. A Parliament is Summoned in manner follow∣ing: About fourty Days before the Parliament doth Assemble, the King Issues out His Writ out of the Chancery, cum advisamento Consilii sui, with the advice of His Council, and the Warrant is, per ip∣sum Regem & Consilium, by the King Himself and His Council. The King's Writ (which is a short Letter or Epi∣stle) is directed and sent to every particular Person of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, commanding the Lords Spiritual, in Fide & Dilectione, in Faith and Love; and the Lords Temporal, per fidem & allegantiam, by their Faith and Allegiance, to ap∣pear at a certain time, and place, to Treat and give their Advice in some certain Important Affairs, con∣cerning the Church and State, &c. Other Writs are sent to the High Sheriff of each County, to Summon the People to Elect two Knights for each County, two Citizens for each City, and one or two Burgesses for each Burrough, accord∣ing to Statute, Charter, or Custom. In these Elections, antiently all the People had their Votes, and most Votes carried it, but for avoid∣ing of Tumults and Trouble, it was Enacted by Henry the VI. that none should have any suffrage in the Election of Knights of the Shire, but such as were Free-holders, did Reside in the County, and had of Yearly Revenue 40 s. which till the disco∣very of Gold and Silver in America, was as much as 30 or 40 l. now. The Persons Elected for each County, are to be Milites Notabiles, or at least Esqs. or Gentlemen, fit to be made Knights, as it is in the Statutes of
Henry the VI. they ought to be de discretionibus Militibus & ad laborandum potentioribus, of the discreetest Knights, and most able to endure La∣bour, of age, (viz. 21 Years at least,) and Expe∣rience, without Rancor, Malice, Heat and Envy to be constant so as not to be swerved from Right, by Fear, Reward, or Favour, and in Judgment no re∣specters of Persons; of a ripe and good Memory, that remembring Perils past, they may prevent Dan∣gers to come. They are to be Vigorous, Active and Temperate, and content to give their Attend∣ance for Publick Good, with which they are In∣trusted, Men of Noble Spirits and good Estates, to prevent their being Mercenary or Bribed, to betray their great Trust; Men well verst in National and Political Affairs, and of Capacious Understandings, that so they might not be imposed upon' by the Sub∣tilty of such as would over-reach them. They ought also to be well acquainted with the Laws of the Land, and the Transactions of former Parliaments, in order to the Repeal of Old Laws; which though fit for the times they were made, may not be so for the present times, (the Circumstances of things be∣ing varyed much from what they were, by divers Revolutions,) and to Enact New Laws for general Good. And indeed we have had of late Parlia∣ments of this Character, Men of such brave Spirits, such Sagacity, Prudence, and Integrity, to promote the General Welfare of that Great Body Politick, whose Worthy Representatives they were, as have exceeded their Predecessors, and will hardly be out∣done in succeeding times. They ought to be Native English Men, or at least such as have been Naturalized by Act of Parliament. No Alien or Denizen, none of the twelve Judges, no Sheriff of a County, no Ecclesi∣astical Person that hath curam animarum, the cure (or care) of Souls, may be chosen to Serve for any County, City, or Burrough.
This Grand and Illustrious Senate, Consists of the three great Estates of the Kingdom, (the King's most Excellent Majesty being the head,) viz. The Prelates and the Peers of the Realm, and the Com∣mons; in which is such a Co-ordination of Power, such a Wholsom mixture betwixt Prince and Com∣monalty, during the time of Consultation, that they make but one Body Politique, their Results when they concur, being as so many Harmonious Diapa∣sons, arising from the Touch of different Strings. This Great Council is the great Bulwark of the En∣glish Liberty, Property, and Religion, and the great Bank that keeps them from Slavery, and the Inun∣dations of Tyrannical Incroachments, and unbound∣ed Will-Government. The People are lyable to no Laws but what they themselves make, and are subject to no Contribu∣tion, Tax, Assessment, or Pecuniary Leveys what∣soever, but what they themselves Vote, and Volun∣tarily yield to. For there all Degrees of People be Represented, the Yeoman, Merchant, Tradesman, Mechanick, &c. have their inclusive Votes, as well as the Gentry, and Free-holders, their Burgesses, and Knights. The House of Lords consists of Eleven Dukes, whereof two are of the Royal Family, viz. the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, then the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Privy Seal, takes Place before all Dukes not of the Royal Blood. There are two Marquesses, the Lord High Cham∣berlain of England, the Lord Steward of the King's Houshold, and the Lord Chamberlain of the King's Houshould (in respect of their Offices) takes place of all Earls, who at present are in Number, (viz. such as may Sit in the House of Lords) 64. Then there are 7 Viscounts, and 60 Barons, (according to the Printed List of the last Parliament that met at
Oxford March 21. this present Year 1681.) Then there are two Archbishops, and twenty four Bishops, so that the whole Number may be about 176, some of which Lords are under Age, some Employed abroad by the King, some Sick or Infirm: so that the ordinary Number that Sits, (besides the Peers in the Tower, and such as are Excluded by Act of Parliament for Recusancy, &c.) may be about one hundred. The House of Commons consists of two Knights for each of the 40 Shires in England, being 80. One for each County in Wales, being 12 Knights. Two for each of the 25 Cities in England, and four for London, in all 52. Sixteen Barons for the Cinque-Ports. Two Burgesses for each of the two Ʋniversities. About 330 Burgesses, for 168 Bur∣roughs in England, of which, some few send but one Burgess a piece. Lastly, of twelve Burgesses, (viz. one for one Burrough in each County of Wales, so that the Total, according to the aforesaid List, is 513. Of which many are absent, som∣times by permission of the House upon business, or because of Sickness, &c. The Number of the Parliament Men, that each County sends, are as followeth: 1. Bedfordshire. 4 2. Berkshire. 9 3. Buckinghamshire. 14 4. Cambridgeshire. 6 5. Cheshire. 4 6. Cornwall. 44 7. Cumberland. 6 8. Derbyshire. 4 9. Devonshire. 26 10. Dorsershire. 20 11. Durham. 4 12. Essex. 8 13. Glocestershire. 8 14. Herefordshire. 8 15. Hartfordshire. 6 16. Huntingtonshire. 4 17. Kent. 10 18. Lancashire. 14 19. Leicestershire. 4 20. Lincolnshire. 12 21. Middlesex. 8 22. Monmouthshire. 3.
23. Norfolk. 12 24. Northamptonshire. 9 25. Northumberland. 8 26. Nottinghamshire. 8 27. Oxfordshire. 9 28. Rutland. 2 29. Shropshire. 12 30. Somersetshire. 18 31. Southampton, Or, Southamptonshire. 26 32. Staffordshire. 10 33. Suffolk. 16 34. Surrey. 14 35. Sussex. 20 36. Warwickshire. 6 37. Westmorland. 4 38. Wiltshire. 34 39. Worcestershire. 9 40. Yorkshire. 30 BARONS of the CINQUE-PORTS. Port of Hastings. 2 Town of Winchelsey. 2 Town of Rye. 2 Port of new Rumney. 2 Port of Hieth. 2 Port of Dover. 2 Port of Sandwich. 2 Port of Seaford. 2 WALES. 1. Anglesey. 1 Bewmaris. 1 2. Brecon. 1 Town of Brecon. 1 3. Cardigan. 1 Town of Cardigan. 1 4. Carmarthen. 1 Town of Carmarthen. 1 5. Carnarvan. 1 Town of Carnarvan. 1 6. Denbigh. 1 Town of Denbigh. 1 7. Flint. 1 Town of Flint. 1 8. Glamorgan. 1 Town of Cardiff. 1 9. Merioneth. 1 10. Pembrook. 1 Town of Haverford-west. 1 Town of Pembrook. 1 11. Montgomery. 1 Town of Montgome∣ry. 1 12. Radnor. 1 Town of Radnor. 1 The Barons of the Cinque-Ports, are at this Day, only as Burgesses in Parliament, yet they are still cal∣led Barons, after the antient manner, because here∣tofore they got Renown by their Exploits at Sea, in
defending the Kingdom, in Memory whereof, they have yet the priviledge to send Burgesses, to bear the Cloth of State over the King's Head on the day of His Coronation, and to Dine that Day in the King's presence. The Writ or Summons to the Sheriff, for Ele∣ction of Members to Serve in the House of Com∣mons, runs to this purpose: The KING to the Sheriff, &c. Greeting. WHereas by the Advice and Assent of our Council, for certain arduous and ur∣gent Affairs concerning Ʋs, the State and Defence of our Kingdom of England, and the Church of England, We have Ordamed a certain Parliament of Ours, to be held at this Our City of—the—Day of—next Ensuing, and there to have Conference, and to Treat with the Prelates, Great Men and Peers of Our said King∣dom; We command and strictly enjoyn you, that making Proclamation at Our next County Court, after the Receipt of this Our Writ, to be holden the day and Place aforesaid, you cause two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and discreet of the County aforesaid, and of every City of that County two Citizens; of every Burrough, two Burgesses, of the discreetest and most sufficient, to be freely and indifferently chosen, by them who shall be pre∣sent at such Proclamation, according to the Tenor of the Statutes in that Case made and provided; and the Names of the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so chsen, to be inserted in certain In∣dentures, to be then made between you and those that shall be present at such Election, whether the Parties so Elected be present or absent, and shall make them to come at the said Day and Place; so that the said Knights for themselves, and the
County aforesaid, and the Citizens and the Bur∣gesses for themselves and the Commonalty of the said Cities and Boroughs may have severally from them, full and sufficient Power, to do, and to con∣sent to those things, which then by the Favour of GOD, shall happen to be Ordained by the Common Councel of Our said Kingdom, concerning the bu∣sinesses aforesaid, so that the business may not by any means remain undone for want of such Pow∣er, or by reason of the improvident Election of the foresaid Knights, Citizens and Burgesses: But we will not in any Case that you, or any other She∣riff of Our said Kingdom, shall be Elected, and at the Day and Place aforesaid, the said Election being made in a full County Court, you shall cer∣tify without Delay unto Ʋs, in Our Chancery un∣der your Seal, and the Seals of them who shall be present at the Election, sending back unto Ʋs the other part of the Indenture aforesaid, affixed to these presents, together with the Writ. Witness Our Self at, &c. The King is in the sence of Law the Fountain of Justice, He is Lord Chief Justice of England, and therefore all the Laws of the Realm are called His Laws; for He is Caput, principium, & finis Par∣liamenti, (that is, the head, beginning, and end of Parliament,) and nothing can have the Force of a Law, but what has His Royal Assent. The highest Court of Judicature in England, is the House of Lords in Parliament, who are assisted with the most Grave and Eminent Lawyers of England, both in Common and Civil Law, who are only Ministerial there, and have no Voices; but to give their Opinions in matters of Law which become doubtful. To the Judicature of this Supreme and most Honorable Court, all other Courts and Persons that
are Subjects of England, are accountable for all Crimes not properly Tryable, Remediable, or Pun∣ishable in other inferiours Courts of Justice, and to this Court all last Appeals are made, from whose Sentence there lies no Appeal, but to a succeeding Parliament; and this Supreme Judicatory, or Judicial Power, lies only in the King and House of Lords, and at the Bar of this High Court may the House of Com∣mons, as the Grand Inquest of the Nation, Impeach the Highest Subject of England, whether of the Clergy or of the Laity, and prosecute them till it come to a Sentence. All Members of Parliament, both Lords and Commons, that they may attend the publick Ser∣vice of their Country, are priviledged with their Menial Servants attending on their Persons, together with all their necessary Goods brought along with them, from all Attachments and Imprisonments, for Debts, Trespasses, Account, or Covenant, all the time that they are on the way to the Place of Par∣liament, all the time that they tarry there, and re∣turn Eundo, Morando, & ad propria redeundo, but not from Arrests for Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace. The place of Meeting for this High and Hono∣rable Assembly, is in whatsoever City, Town, or House, the King pleaseth; but most usually at West∣minster. All the Lords Sit in a fair Room by them∣selves, and the Commons not far from them in ano∣ther Fair Room, heretofore the antient Free Chap∣pel of St. Stephen. The King, as oft as he comes, (which is usually at the opening of Parliaments, passing of Bills, or Solemn Debates) is placed at the upper end of the Room in a Chair of State, under a Cloth of State, under which, on either hand, sit none but the King's Children. On the King's right hand is a Seat for the Prince
of Wales, on His left hand is a Seat for the Duke of York. On the King's right hand next the Wall, are placed on a Form, the two Archbishops, next below on another Form, the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester. Upon other Forms, on the same side, the rest of the Bishops sit, according to the Priority of their Con∣secration. On the King's left hand, upon Forms are placed the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, President of the King's Council, the Lord Privy Seal, if they are Barons, above all Dukes, except those of the Royal Family; if they are not Barons, then they Sit up∣permost on the Wool-sacks. On the same side Sit the Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, according to their Creations. Upon the first Form, across the House below the Woolsacks, sit the Viscounts, and upon the next Forms the Barons, all in Order. The Lord Chancellor or Keeper (if the King be present,) stands behind the Cloth of Estate, other∣wise sits on the first Woolsack, thwart the Chair of State, his Great Seal and Mace by him, he is Lord Speaker of the Lords House. Upon other Woolsacks sit the Judges, the Privy Counsellors, and Secretaris of State, the King's Council at Law, the Masters of Chancery; who being not Barons, have no suffrage by Voce in Parliament, but only sit (as was said,) to give Advice when required. The Reason of their sitting upon Woolsacks, is thought to be to put them in mind of the Great Im∣portance of our Woollen Manufactories, which is the Grand Staple Commodity of England, and so not to be by any means neglected. On the Lowermost Woolsack are placed the Clerk of the Crown, and Clerk of the Parliament, whereof the former is concern'd in all Writs of
Parliament, and Pardons in Parliament. The other Recordeth all things done in Parliament, and keepeth the Records of the same. This Clerk hath also two Clerks under him, who kneel behind the same Woolsack, and write thereon. Without the Bar of the Lords House, sits the King's first Gentleman Usher, called the Black-Rod, from a Black-staff he carries in his hand, under whom is a Yeoman Usher that waits at the Door within, a Cryer without, and a Serjeant at Mace, al∣ways attending the Lord Chancellor. When the King is present with His Crown on his Head, none of the Lords are covered. The Judges stand till the King gives them leave to sit. When the King is absent, the Lords at their entrance do Reverence to the Chair of State, as is or should be done by all that enter into the King's Presence Chamber. The Judges then may sit, but may not be cover∣ed, till the Chancellor or Keeper signifies unto them the leave of the Lords. The King's Council, and Masters of Chancery sit also, but may not be cover∣ed at all. The Commons in their House sit Promiscuously, only the Speaker hath a Chair placed in the mid∣dle, and the Clerk of that House near him at the Table. They never had any Robes, (as the Lords ever had,) but wear every one what he fancyeth most. The time of Sitting in Parliament, is on any day in the Morning, or before Dinner. When the day pre∣fixt by the King in His Writs of Summons is come, the KING usually in his Royal Robes, with His Crown on His Head, declares the cause of their be∣ing Assembled, in a short Speech, leaving the rest to the Lord Chancellor, who then stands behind His MAJESTY; the Commons in the mean time standing bare at the Bar of the Lords House, who are Commanded to chuse then a Speaker, which
without the KING's Command they may not do; whereupon they Return to their own House, and choose one of their own Members, whom they pre∣sent on another Day to the KING; and being ap∣proved of by His MAJESTY, sitting in His Chair, and all the Lords in their Scarlet Robes, he makes a modest refusal, which not allowed, he Petitioneth His Majesty, That the Commons may have, during their Sitting, 1. A free Access to His Majesty. 2. A freedom of Speech in their own House. 3. Freedom from Arrests. Which the King Grants. Before they enter upon Affairs, all the Members of the House of Commons take the Oaths of Alle∣giance and Supremacy, in the presence of an Of∣ficer, appointed by the KING. And since the Pa∣pists have been found (by the Wisdom of the KING and Parliament) to be Plotting and Con∣triving to introduce the pretended Supremacy of their Pope, and inslave the Nation to their Tyran∣nical Anti-spiritual Jurisdiction, by Horrid Projecti∣ons, Plots, Intrigues, &c. to prevent any such from Voting in either House, it was thought meet, (though no Oaths can bind such who profess the Impious Doctrine of Equivocation,) that all are to declare their Opinion against the Doctrines of Transub∣stantiation, Invocation and Adoration of Saints, the Sacrifice of the Mass: which Test, the Lords also are Obliged to take in their House, before they can Sit and Debate upon any Affair. The Lords House hath a power not only in Ma∣king and Repealing Laws, but also in tractando & Consilium impendendo, (that is, in Treating and Counselling, &c.) as the words of the Writ are; also in Judging of Controversies, Judging in the Ar∣raignment
of any Peer of the Realm, putting Men to their Oaths, especially in matters of Importance, as the Corruption of Judges and Magistrates in Illegal proceeding in other Courts, in Appeals from Decrees in Chancery. No Papist is to Sit, or have Suffrage in the Lords House. The Lords, in case of necessary or unavoidable absence, may make their Proxies to Vote in their place, after License obtained under the KING's Signet. The Commons (as was said,) have a power in Making and Repealing Laws: they have a Negative Voice, as the KING and Lords have; for nothing can pass into a Law without the joint concurrence of the King and both Houses. Bills for Levying of Mony upon the Subject, begin in the House of Commons, because the greater part of the same arises from them. The Commons have a power to Supplicate and pro∣pose Laws, and (as before,) to Impeach publick De∣linquents of the Highest Quality that are Subjects; for they are the Grand Inquest of the Nation, and are to present Publick Grievances to be Redressed, and Delinquents to be punished. To this end the Lords sit in their Robes on the Bench covered, they Swear and Examine Wit∣nesses, and at last pass Sentence; the Members of the House of Commons stand bare at the Bar of the Lords House, produce Witnesses, manage Evidences, &c. Though every Member of the House of Commons is chosen to Serve for one particular County, City, or Borough, yet he Serves for the whole Kingdom, and his Voice is equal to any other; his power is absolute to consent or dissent. They are to make it their special care to promote the good of that County, City, or Borough, for which they Serve; so as that, no particular benefit may interfere with, or be prejudicial to the Good of the whole Kingdom.
The Lords are to bear their own Charges, because they Represent only themselves. The Commons usually had their Reasonable expences. In the 17 of Ed. II. they had Ten Groats for Knights, and Five Groats for Burgesses a day, and not long af∣ter, Four s. a day for Dubbed Knights, and Two s. for all others, which in those days, as appears by the Prices of all things, was a considerable Sum, above Twenty times more than it is now. So that some decayed Boroughs finding the expence heavy, Peti∣tioned that they might not be obliged to send Bur∣gesses to Parliament, and so were Ʋnburgessed, &c. It is the Practice of each House to debate all publick Affairs, relating to the general or particular Welfare, of the Kingdom or Subject. And every Parliament may get a Bill drawn, and give it to the Speaker, or Clerk of the Parliament, to be pre∣sented in convenient time. Whatsoever is propo∣sed for a Law, is first put in Writing and called a Bill, which being read in a full Assembly, it is either unanimously rejected, or else allowed to be Debated, and then it is Committed to a certain Number of the House, presently Nominated, and called a Com∣mittee. After it hath been Amended, and twice Read two several Days in the House, it is Ingrossed, that is, Written Fair in a Parchment, and Read the Third time another day, and then (if in the Lords House) the Chancellor, or (if in the House of Com∣mons,) the Speaker demands if they will have it put to the question, whether, a Law or no Law? If the Major part be for it, there is Written on the Bill by the Clerk (of the Lords House,) Soit baille aux Seigneurs,—or (of the House of Commons,) Soit baille aux Communes, retaining the Antient Custom, which was to speak in French. When the Speaker finds divers Bills prepared to be put to the Question, he gives Notice the day be
before, that to morrow he intends to put such Bills to the passing, or third Reading, and desires the spe∣cial attendance of all the Members. If a Bill be rejected, it cannot be any more pro∣posed during that Session. All Bills sent by the Commons to the Lords House, are usually attended (to shew their respect) with several of their Mem∣bers, and as they come up to the Lords Bar, the Member that's to present the Bill maketh three profound Reverences, and delivers it to the Lord Chancellor, who comes down to the Bar to receive it. A Bill sent by the Lords to the Commons is usu∣ally by some of the Masters of Chancery, or some o∣ther whose seat is on the Wool-sacks (and by none of the Members) who coming up to the Speaker, bow thrice, and deliver it to him, after one of them hath read the Title, and desired it might be taken into Consideration. If it pass that House, then is Written on it, Les Communes ont assentez. When any Member of the House of Commons speaks to a Bill, he stands up uncovered, and di∣rects his Speech only to the Speaker; then if what he Delivers be confuted by another, yet he is not allowed to Answer again the same day, lest the whole time should be spent in a Dispute between two talkative persons. Also if a Bill be debating in the House, no man may speak to it in one day, above once. If any one speak words of offence which the House takes cognizance of as such, he is called to the Bar, and sometimes sent to the Tower. The Speaker is not allowed to persuade or dissuade in passing of a Bill, but only to make a short and plain Narrative, nor to Vote, except the House be equally Divided. In Committees, though of the whole House, it is al∣lowed to Speak and Reply as often as they please. In the House of Lords they give their Suffrages or Votes, beginning at the lowest Baron, and so to
the highest Peer in order, every one Answering apart [Content, or Not content.] In the House of Commons, they Vote by Yea's, and No's, and if it be doubtful which is the greater Number, then the Yea's are to go forth, and the No's sit still, because these are content with their present condition, without any addition or altera∣tion of Laws, as the other desire; and then some are appointed to Number them: But at a Commit∣tee, though it be of the whole House, (as it is some∣times) the Yea's go on one side, and the No's on the other, whereby they may be discerned. If a Bill pass in one House, and being sent to the other House, they of the other House Demur upon it, then a Conference is demanded in the Painted Chamber, where certain deputed Members of each House Meet, the Lords sitting covered at a Table, and the Commons standing bare: the business is then debated; If they agree not, it is Nulled; if they do agree, it Passes. When Bills have past both Houses, they are pre∣sented to his Majesty for his Royal assent, who comes in his Robes with the Crown on his Head, and being Seated in his Chair of State, (the Lords being all in their Robes,) the Clerk of the Crown reads the Ti∣tle of each Bill, and as he reads, the Clerk of the Parliament, according to his Instructions from the King (who before hath maturely considered each Bill) pronounceth the Royal assent. If it be a Pub∣lick Bill, the Answer is (Le Roy le veut,) and then that Bill becomes a Law. If a Private Bill, the Answer is (Soit fait comms el est desire.) If it be a Pubblick Bill which the King likes not, then the Answer is, (Le Roy s'avisera) which is taken for an absolute Denial, in a more Civil way, and that Bill wholly nulled. So that nothing but what the King confirms by his Royal Assent, hath the force of a Law.
The King can by Commission granted to some of His Nobles, give His Royal Assent to any Bill that requires haste. If it be a Bill for Monies given to His Majesty, then the Answer is, (Le Roy remercie ses Loyaux Sujets, accepte leur Benevolence, & aussi le veut) which is an ancient Ceremony of Thanking the Subjects for parting with their Money. The Bill for the King's General Pardon hath but one Reading in either House, because they must take it, as the King will please to give it; so the Bill of Subsidies granted by the Clergy Assembled in Con∣vocation for the same Reason. When the Bill for the General Pardon is passed by the King, the An∣swer is thus, (Les Prelates, Seigneurs & Commu∣nes en ce Parliament Assemblez au nom de tous vos autre Sujects, remercient tres humblement vo∣tre Majeste & prient Dieu vous donner en sante bonne vie & Congue. All Acts of Parliament before the Reign of Hen∣ry 7. were Passed and Enrolled in French, now in English. The stile runs thus; Be it Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral, and Commons, &c. When it pleases the King, the Parliament is Ad∣journed, Prorogued, or Dissolved, thus: Adjournments are usually made in the Lords House, by the Lord Chancellor in the King's name, to what other day and place the King pleases; and then all things already Debated and Read in one or both Houses, may be resumed, because they conti∣nue in the same State they were in before, to the next Meeting. When the Parliament is Prorogued there is a Session, and then all Bills and Debates must begin anew, at the re-assembling of the Parliament.
The Speaker of the House of Commons, upon notice given that it is the King's pleasure, that that House shall also Adjourn, doth say with the Assent of the House, This House is Adjourned. When the King Prorogues or Dissolves the Par∣liament, He commonly comes in Person to the House of Lords in his Robes, with the Crown on his Head, and sends (by the Ʋsher of the Black-Rod) for all the House of Commons, to the Bar of that House, and after the King's Answer to each Bill sig∣nified as aforesaid, his Majesty usually makes a So∣lemn Speech, the Lord Chancellor another, and the Speaker of the House of Commons a Third. Then the Lord Chancellor by the special Command of the King, doth pronounce the Parliament Pro∣rogued or Dissolved. The King being Head of the Parliament, if his Death doth happen, during the Sitting of the Par∣liament, it is ipso facto Dissolved. IV. Sommerset-House in the Strand is the Queens Palace. In the Year 1549. Edward Duke of Som∣merset Uncle to Edward the 6th, and Lord Pro∣tector, pulled down several adjoyning Buildings to make him a Mansion-House there, the Stones of which Houses, and some other more remote Build∣ings which he demollished, were converted to this Spatious and Beautiful Palace; of which we cannot add much more, but that it was the Fatal place, where the wicked Romish Assassinates (prompted by Hell and their accursed Principles,) most barba∣rously Murdered that Noble Patriot and never to be forgotten Knight, Sir EDMOND-BERRY GOD∣FREY, on Saturday the 12th of October, 1678. The Bloody Villains being enraged at the Discovery of their Execrable Plot, in which this brave Gentle∣man was very active, made him a Sacrifice to their Revenge, so that he may be truly stiled the Mar∣tyr of the English Protestant Interest, and deserves
a Memorial in all Loyal Christian Hearts. The Nar∣rative is published at large, to which we refer our Reader; only we cannot omit his Majesties Royal act, who so resented this Abominable Villany, that he issued his Proclamation the 20th of October, pro∣mising 500 l. to the Discoverer, and a Pardon if one of the Malefactors; and another soon after pro∣mising on the word of a King, not only the said Reward of 500 l, but such care for the Security of the Discoverer as he could in Reason propose; up∣on which Captain William Bedlow (since Dead,) and Mr. Miles Praunce, a Silver-smith in Princes∣street, (which last confessed to have been in the Fact,) made the Discovery; and upon their clear and un∣doubted Evidence, three of the Wretches were Exe∣cuted, viz. Green, Berry, and Hill, the rest fled from Justice, but cannot escape Divine Vengeance. Having spoken of these principal Palaces, it may be expected that we should speak something of the Great and Famous Houses of the Nobility, which are very many and Magnificent, not yielding to any in Europe; as Clarendon-House, which for Si∣tuation, stately Architecture, spacious solid uniform Structure, is admirable; Berkley-House, Wallingford-House, Northumberland-House, Salisbury and Wor∣cester Houses, Bedford, Leicester, Newport, Moun∣tague and Southampton Houses, and indeed most Houses of the great Peers: But the brevity of our Volume will not admit a large Description, only in General we shall say something of them in the Section that Treats of the Fire, Anno 1666. and the Rebuilding of the City.
SECT. 5. Of Exchanges and Publick-Halls. THe Royal Exchange in Cornhil-Ward, was E∣rected in the Year 1566, just one hundred Years before it was Burnt, in this manner. Certain Houses upon Cornhil, containing Eighty Housholds, were purchased by the City of London for above 3532 l. which they sold for 478 l. to such as would take them down and carry them away. Then the Ground or Plot was made plain at the Charges of the City, and Possession thereof was gi∣ven to Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, a Noble Mer∣chant, and Agent to Queen Elizabeth, by certain Aldermen in the name of the whole, for to Build an Exchange thereon for Merchants to Assemble. On the 7th of June he laid the first Stone in the Foundation, being accompanied with some Alder∣men, where every one of them laid a piece of Gold, which the Work-men took up; The Work was ad∣vanced with such Expedition, that in November, 1567, it was finished, and afterwards in the pre∣sence and by the special Command of the Queen, it was Proclaimed by a Herald, and with sound of Trumpet named, The ROYAL EXCHANGE. It was Built most of Brick, and yet was the most splendid Burse (all things considered) that was then in Europe. The Burse for Merchants was kept be∣fore in Lumbard-street. In the great and dismal Conflagration, Anno 1666. the Royal Exchange was consumed; But it is since Rebuilt in a far more stately and Magnificent man∣ner, of excellent Portland Stone, almost as dura∣ble as Marble, with such curious and admirable Architecture, especially for a Front, a Turret, and
for Arch-work, that it surpasseth all other Burses in Europe. The Form is Quadrangular, with a large Paved Court where the Merchants Meet, it is Quadratum Oblongum, an Oblong square, and on each side are stately Galleries or Portico's Checquered with a smooth and delicate Stone-Pavement, the Arches supported with strong Stone Pillars, where in case of Rain or extream Heat, the greatest part may be sheltered. The whole Fabrick cost above 50000 l. whereof one half was disbursed by the Chamber of London, and the other by the Company of Mer∣cers: And to reimburse them, there are to be let 190 Shops above-stairs, at 20 l. per annum, and 30 l. Fine, besides the several Shops below on the several sides, and the huge Vaulted Cellars under ground, so that it must needs be the richest piece of Ground in the World. For, The Exact Dimensions of the Ground whereon this Goodly Fabrick is Erected, is but 171 Foot from North to South, and 203 Foot from East to West, and little more than three quarters of an A∣cre of Ground, yet producing above 4000 l. Year∣ly Rent. The New Exchange on the Strand was called Durham-House, Built by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham, who being made Bishop of that See, Anno 1549. continued so 36 Years. It was a very Capacious Edifice, on the North side stood a row of Thatcht low Stables, which the Right Honoura∣ble Robert Earl of Salisbury, then Lord High Trea∣surer of England, purchased and pulled down, E∣recting in the room thereof, at his own Charge, a very goodly and beautiful Building, with Cellars underneath, and a Walk fairly Paved above it, with Rows of Shops, and the like above stairs. The first Stone was laid the 10th of June 1608, and it was finished in November following. The
Shops above and under were curiously adorn'd, and in April following the Earl Invited King James, the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of York, to come thi∣ther, who came attended with many of the Nobi∣lity, where after a Rich Banquet the King named it Britains Burse. There are also two Exchanges more, viz. The Middle Exchange, and Exeter Exchange, which last was lately built; in both which Goods are sold, as at the Royal Exchange. Having done with Exchanges we shall proceed to the Publick Halls of Companies. As for the Great Guild-Hall, for Orders sake the Reader is referred to the Section in the Chapter of Government that Treats of Courts. And as for the Publick-Halls of Companies, the Reader is also Re∣ferred to the Third Section of the 5th Chap. that Treats of the Respective Corporations. SECT. 6. Of Colleges and Inns of Courts. THis RENOWNED CITY may not unfit∣ly be stiled an Ʋniversity, for all Liberal Arts and Sciences are here Taught and Profest. Here is Divinity, Law, and Physick Read; the Municipal or Common-Laws of the Nation Taught, and Degrees taken therein, which can be said in no other Nation: Here a man may Learn all orts of Languages, all the Branches and Parts of the Ma∣thematicks, and the Military Art, whatsoever is ne∣cessary to make an ingenious Nobleman or Gentle∣man throughly accomplished, in Geography, Cosmo∣graphy, Chronology, History, Hydrography, Navi∣gation, Arithmetick of all sorts, Vulgar, Instru∣mental, Decimal, Algebraical, or Geometry, Astro∣nomy,
WHITE HALL THE TEMPLE
PHISITIANS COLLEDGE LORD SHAFTSBVRY HOVSE
Fortification, Gunnery, Gaging, &c. Bra∣chygraphy or Short-hand, the Arts of Riding, Fencing, Dancing, all sorts of Musick, Vocal and Instrumental, Fire-works of all kinds, Limning, Painting, En∣amelling, Sculpture or Ingraving, Heraldry, Archi∣tecture, Grammar, Rhetorick, Poetry, and indeed any thing that may be nam'd of European Art, whether Liberal or Mechanick, may be here Learnt with most exquisite Curiosity. But that which is to be most commended as the chief Blessing is, that this Famous City excells all other in this World for number of Pious and Godly Protestant Christians, of Reverend, Godly and Learn∣ed Divines, and Ministers, who Preach the Gospel in order to its propagation in the Power and Truth thereof; Men eminent for ability in all sorts of Learning, and for Piety and Holiness in their Lives and Conversations; such Examples, as very well se∣cond their Preaching. (Which is spoke not to boast of any humane perfection, as meritorious, nor to magnifie any without cause, nor including univer∣sals, because some that take that Sacred Function upon them prove otherwise, but is represented as a motive to provoke the Inhabitants to thankfulness for so great a Mercy, and to make a seasonable and profitable Improvement of the Blessing, lest their Candle be removed.) In a few words it may be said of this City (in al∣lusion to what is spoken, Rev. 22. 11.—He which is filthy, let him be filthy still,—and he that is holy, let him be holy still;) That whosoever has a mind to Associate himself with sincere, pious Chri∣stians, may have the opportunity to do so as much as can be desired, and such as are driven by the im∣petuosity of irregular and too much prevailing evils, may find (which ought to be lamented, and if it may be, restrain'd) Companions in all sorts of wick∣edness, which is not mentioned by way of dispa∣ragement
to any individual, much less to the City (which is certainly better Govern'd than any in the World,) and more free from those vile Debauche∣ries so extraordinarily frequent in other great Cities; but as a check to those licentious persons, that (when they would act the parts of ill persons) Re∣sort to the Suburbs without the Jurisdiction of the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor. It is indeed admirable to see what Order is kept, and with that Harmony, so that upon any extraordinary occasion a civil man may walk any hour in the night, giving good words and a good account to the well or∣der'd and regular Watches, &c. But of this more in the Chapter of Government. Of Gresham-College. The same Noble Merchant and Citizen of Lon∣don, Sir Thomas Gresham (of whom we spoke before) that gave the Royal Exchange, and Built Alms-hou∣ses in Broadstreet, that gave considerable sums of Money to be distributed quarterly for ever to five Prisons and four Hospitals in and about this City, Built Gresham-College, and endowed it with the Revenue of the Royal Exchange, of which he gave one Moity to the Lord Mayor and Commonalty and their Successors, and the other Moity to the Right Worshipful Company of Mercers in trust, that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen should find in all time to come four able Persons to Read Divinity, Geo∣metry, Astronomy, and Musick, and to allow each of them, besides fair Lodgings, 50 l. a Year. And that the Company of Mercers should find three more able men, to Read Civil-Law, Physick, and Rhe∣torick, each of which to have also, besides fair Lodg∣ings, 50 l. a Year, which Lectures are to be Read every Day in the Week (except the Lords Day) in Term-time, in the Morning in Latine, and in the
Afternoon the same in English, except the Musick Lecture, which is to be read only in English. There was also within these few Years a Mechanick Lecture for Natural Philosophy, instituted by a worthy Gentleman, Sir John Cutler, with a Salary for the Reader of 50 l. per annum, to be read at the time and place where the Royal Society shall meet. Of the Charter-House, called Sutton's Hospital, where are 80 decay'd Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Merchants, with a Governor and Chaplain; 44 Scho∣lars, with a Master and Usher, plentifully maintained in Diet, Lodging, Cloaths, Physick, &c. living in a Collegiate manner, with much neatness and handsom∣ness, the 44 Scholars (when fit for the Universities) being to receive an Allowance of 20 l. a Year for eight Years after their Reception there, out of the Revenue of this Colledge. And such as are fit for Trades, a considerable Sum to bind them Apprenti∣ces; where there are also all meet Officers, as a Phy∣sician, Apothecary, Steward, Cooks, Butlers, &c. with competent Salaries; we have spoke largely already in the Section of Hospitals, to which we refer. Of Sion Colledge. This Colledge stands not far from Cripplegate in Cripplegate-Ward, where there was in ancient Times a House of Nuns. This being in great decay, Wil∣liam Elsing Mercer, anno 1329. 3 E. 3. began in the place thereof the Foundation of an Hospital for one hundred blind men, to which he gave two Houses of a considerable value. But 'twas anno 1332. made a Priory for Canons Regular, and in the same place there was at last a Colledge erected by Thomas White Doctor in Divinity, for the use of the Clergy of London, and the Liberties thereof, and a part there∣of to be for 20 poor People, 10. Men, and 10 Women. To perform all this, (besides several Sums
of money, and considerable yearly Revenues given by the said Doctor White, to pious and charitable Uses in divers places) he gave 3000 l. to purchase and build this Colledge; and for the maintenance of those Poor, he setled 120 l. a year for ever, and 40 l. a year for four plentiful Dinners for the Clergy that shall meet there, who are to have four Latin Ser∣mons, one at the beginning of every quarter. In this Colledge is a fair spacious Library built by John Sympson Rector of St. Olaves Hart-street, London, and one of the said Doctor White's Execu∣tors, who fitted it with Wainscot, Stalls, Desks, Seats, and other necessary and useful Ornaments, befitting the place, at his own charge. This Library is well furnished with choice Books of all sorts, but chiefly such as are useful for Divines, and that by the bounty of several Benefactors. This Colledge felt the Rage of the great Fire, anno 1666. but it is very handsom∣ly repaired; and the damage of the Library, which was very great, made up, It receives increase every year, by the Legacies or Gifts of worthy Persons, and the Piety of good Authors, who commonly bestow one Book of what they publish, especially of Sub∣jects that are Voluminously handled, upon this Col∣ledge, where they are Chain'd up, and kept very well; which is a very good work, much tending to the ad∣vancement of Learning. Here any Student may re∣pair at seasonable hours, morning and afternoon, and may study six hours in a day without interruption, and may enter himself a Member, if he pleases, paying Half a Crown to the Library-Keeper, and Twelve-pence to the Person that sweeps and keeps it clean. To conclude, it is extraordinary useful, especially for the poorer sort of Students, who cannot purchase a necessary store of Books for their own use. And I could heartily wish, that some of our learned men who are of brave, publick, and generous minds, would examine wherein it is deficient, and set on foot some
Medium to furnish it better, especially with Mathe∣matical, Physical, Common and Civil Law-Books, of all which there are many of our Modern Writers have Treated more Exquisitely, than any of their Predecessors. Of the Colledge of Physicians. In this Renowned City, there is a Colledge or Cor∣poration of Physicians, who by Charters and Acts of Parliament of Henry VIII. and since his Reign, have certain Priviledges, whereby no man, though a Gra∣duate in Physick of Oxford and Cambridge, may without Licence under the said Colledge Seal, practise Physick in London, or within seven Miles of the said City, (nor in any other part of England, in case he hath not taken any Degree in Oxford or Cambridge) whereby also they can administer an Oath, Fine and Imprison any Offenders; in that and divers other Particulars, can make By-Laws, purchase Lands, &c. whereby they have Authority to search all the Shops of Apothecaries in and about London, to see if their Drugs and Compositions be wholsom, and well made, whereby they are freed from all troublesom Offices, as to serve upon Juries, to be Constables, to keep Watch and Ward, to bear Arms, or provide Arms or Am∣munition, &c. Any Member of this Colledge may practise Chyrurgery if he please, not only in Lon∣don, but in any part of England. This Society had anciently a Colledge in Knight∣rider-street, the Gift of Dr. Linacre, Physician to King Henry VIII. since which, a House and Ground was purchased by the Society of Physicians, at the end of Amen-Corner, whereon the Famous Dr. Harvey, anno 1562, at his own proper charge did erect a mag∣nificent Structure both for Library and a Publick Hall, and for the meeting of the several Members of this Society, endowed the same with his whole In∣heritance,
which he resigned up while he was living and in health, part of which he Assigned for an Anniversary Harangue, to commemorate all their Benefactors, and exhort others to follow their good Example, and to provide a plentiful Dinner for the Worthy Company. This Goodly Edifice was burnt Anno 1666, and the Ground being but a Lease, the present Fellows of the College, have purchased with their own Mo∣neys, a Fair piece of Ground in Warwick-Lane, whereon they have raised a very Magnificent Edi∣fice. Of this Colledge there is a President, four Censors, aud eight Elects, who are all Principal Members of the Society, and out of whom the President is Yearly chosen. The four Censors have by their Charter, Authority to Survey, Correct and Govern all Physitians or others that shall Practice in London, or within Seven Miles of the same, to Fine, Amerce, and Imprison any of them, as they shall see Cause. The usual Fee of a Doctor in antient times was 20 s. and one that had not taken that Degree, 10 s. But now there is no certain Rule, but some that are Eminent have received in Fees Yearly 2000 or 3000 l. and purchased great Estates, which in other Coun∣tries (because the Fees are exceedingly less,) is very rare. Besides the Members of this Colledge, there are divers able Physitians in London, that have great Practice, although they never had any License, which is conniv'd at by the Colledge; and so is the too much practice of Empericks, Mountebanks, Apothe∣caries, Chirurgeons, &c. with other pretenders to Cure, by things which they call Ʋniversal Medicines, or Panpharmc. And certainly it is a very Peril∣lous and Destructive abuse, to suffer unskilful Persons, that know not the Nature of Diseases, nor are able from the Constitution of the Patient, and requisite Symptoms, to infer a Rational Conclusion, or make
a true discovery of Causes, or give probable Prog∣nosticks of the event, to take up this profession, because they neither understand the Nature of Sim∣ples, nor the proper and fit mixture of Compounds, and consequently cannot apply sutable Medicaments to the languishing Patient, but where (by meer chance) they Cure one, they destroy hundreds, such being as great Murtherers of the Body, as some Au∣dacious, Graceless, Heretical, and unskilful Pre∣tenders to Preach the Sacred Mysteries of the Go∣spel, are instruments to pervert their too too Cre∣dulous Disciples, and consequently to destroy their Souls; which is hinted not to cast any disparage∣ment upon those Honorable Functions, but only such as abuse them, and are not fitly qualified to practice them. And it could be wished that there were a Reformation of the abuses in each, their er∣rors having a direct tendency to destroy both Body and Soul. Indeed the Law of England has provided, that if one who is no Physitian or Chirurgeon, or is not ex∣presly allowed to practice, shall undertake a Cure, and the Patient die under his hand, it shall be Fe∣lony in the Person presuming so to do. And the Law of God is as expresly against the other, who must give a strict account to the Physitian of Souls, for infecting, instead of Spiritually healing (as far as instruments may do) his Flock. But this by the way. Of the College of Civilians, called Doctors Com∣mons. The Civil Law is most practised in London, though Degrees therein are taken only in Oxford and Cam∣bridge, and the Theory there best acquired. The College called Doctors Commons, was first purchased by Doctor Henry Harvey, Dean of the Arches for
the Professors of the Civil Law, where commonly did reside, the Judge of the Arches, the Judge of the Admiralty, and the Judge of the Prerogative Court, with divers Eminent Civilians, who living in a Col∣legiate manner, and Commoning together, it was called Doctors Commons. It stood near St. Pauls in the Parish of St. Bennets Pauls-Wharf in Far∣ringdon-Ward-within. The Buildings were utterly consumed by the Dreadful Fire in 1666, and then they resided at Exeter-House in the Strand, but it has been since Re-built at the proper Cost and Charges of the said Doctors, in a most Capacious and Beautiful manner, where they keep their Courts and pleadings every Term, which begins and ends almost at the same time with the Term at West∣minster. The Chief Court is that of the Arches, so called from the Arched Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, in Cheapside, where this Court was wont to be held, but now in the Common-Hall at Doctors Commons, the Judge whereof, is called the Dean of the Arches, having Jurisdiction over a Deanry, consisting of thir∣teen Parishes within London, exempt from the Ju∣risdiction of the Bishop of London. Hither are directed all Appeals in Ecclesiastical matters, within the Province of Canterbury; to this belong divers Advocates, all Doctors of the Civil Law, two Re∣gisters and ten Proctors. The Dean or Judge of the Arches, sitteth alone without any Assessors, and Heareth and Determineth all Causes, without any Jury of Twelve Men. The manner is briefly thus: Fist goes out a Citation, then a Bill and Answer, then by Proofs, Witnesses and Presumptions, the mat∣ter is Argued pro and con, and the Canon and Civil Laws quoted, and then the Definitive Sentence of the Judge passeth, and upon that Execution. But by Statute 25 Henry the VIII. it was provided that
it shall be Lawful for any Subject of England, in Case of Defect of Justice in the Court of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, to Appeal to the King's Ma∣jesty in His Court of Chancery, and that upon such an Appeal, a Commission under the Great Seal shall be directed to certain Persons, particularly De∣signed for that business; so that from the Highest Court of the Archbishop, there lyes an Appeal to this Court, and beyond it to none other. It is cal∣led the Court of Delegates, and in Civil Affairs is the Highest Court in England. Ecclesiastical Criminal Causes are Tried by way of Accusation, Denunciation, or Inquisition. The first, When some one takes upon him to prove the Crime. The second, When the Church-Wardens Present, and are not bound to prove, because it is presumed they do it without Malice, and that the Crime is Notorious. Thirdly, By Inquisition, when by reason of Common Fame, inquiry is made by the Bishop, ex Officio suo, by calling some of the Neigh∣borhood, or the Party Accused, to their Oaths. But this Oath ex Officio, was taken away by Parliament, in the time of King Charles the First. If the Party Accused, after Admonition submits not, he is Excommunicated from the Church, and is disenabled to be a Plaintiff in a Law Suit, &c. Which is called Excommunicatio Minor. Excommunicatio Major excludes from the Church, and from Society in Temporal Affairs, and that for Heresie, Schism, Perjury, Incest, or such griev∣ous Crimes; then a Man cannot be Plantiff, or Wit∣ness, in any Civil or Ecclesiastical Court. And if he continues Excommunicated 40 Days, the King's Writ de Excommunicato capiendo is granted out of the Chancery against him, whereupon he is cast in∣to Prison, without Bail, there to lye till he hath sub∣mitted to the Bishop, and satisfied for what he is charged with; by which many tender Consciences
have suffered deeply. There is an Anathematis∣mus inflicted upon an obstinate Person, that is Judg∣ed an Heretick, wherein he is Curs'd and Rejected to Damnation. There is also an Interdict, Prohi∣biting all Divine Offices to a Place or People; if against a People, it follows them any where; if against a Place, the People may go elsewhere to hear. Somtimes a Person Adjudged a Delinquent, is punished another way, which is called Publick Pen∣nance, and is to stand in the Church-Porch upon Sunday bare Headed and bare Footed, in a White sheet, and a White Rod in his Hand, then he is to go into the Church, and his Crime being publickly re∣peated, and he professing Repentance, is Absolved; but in some Cases the Party may come off for Mo∣ney to the Poor, or some Pious Use, which is not al∣ways converted that way. Christian Burial is denyed to Persons Excommu∣nicate, or Perjured, to such as are Hang'd for Felo∣ny, or Kill themselves, to Apostates, Hereticks, and Extortioners. Somtimes the Clergy Men are suspen∣ed, ab Officio, viz. from the Exercise of their Fun∣ctions, somtimes there is a Deprivatio a Beneficio, when deprived of their Livings; somtimes they are Degraded, that is, Deprived of their Orders, which is commonly for some Heinous Crime. So much Briefly of these Censures and Punishments. The Office of Actuary attending the Court of Arches, is to set down the Judges Decrees, Register the Acts of the Court, and send them in Books of the Registry. The Office of the Register is to Attend the Court by himself or Deputy, and re∣ceive all Libels or Bills, Allegations, and Exhibits of Witnesses, Files all Sentences, and keeps the Re∣cords of the Court. The Beadle attends the Court, carryeth a Mace before the Judge, and calls the Persons Cited to ap∣pear.
The Judge and all the Advocates (who are all Doctors of the Civil Law) wear Scarlet Robes, with Hoods lined with Taffata, (if they be of Ox∣ford) or White Miniver Furr, (if of Cambridge) and the Proctors ought to wear Hoods lined with Lamb skin, if not Graduates; but if Graduates, Hoods according to their Degree. The Proctors are Persons that Exhibit their Pro∣xies for their Clients, and make themselves Parties for them, and draw and give in Pleas, or Libels and Allegations, in the behalf of their Clients, produce the Witnesses, prepare the Causes for Sentence, and and attend the Advocates with the proceedings. All Arguments made by Advocates, and all Peti∣tions made by Proctors, are to be in Latin. All process of this Court, runs in the Name of the Judge, and returnable before him, heretofore in Bow-Church, but now in the Common-Hall at Doctors Commons. The Places and Offices of this Court are in the Gift of the Archbishop of Canterbury. These Ecclesiastical Laws consist of Canons made by General Councels, the Opinion of Fathers, the Decrees of several Bishops of Rome formerly admit∣ted, and our own Constitutions, made antiently in several Provincial Synods, which by 25 Henry VIII. are in Force so far as they are not Repugnant to the Laws and Customs of England, or the King's Pre∣rogative. Then the Canons made in the Convo∣cations of latter times, as Primo Jacobi, and con∣firmed by him; some Statutes Enacted by Parlia∣ment, and divers old Customs not written, but yet in use; and where these fail, the Civil Law takes place. Amongst the Great Officers of the Crown, which are Nine, (viz. the Lord High Steward of England, the Lord High Chancellor, the Lord High Treasurer, the Lord President of the KING's Council, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Great Chamberlain,
the Lord High Constable, the Earl Marshal, and the Lord High Admiral of England.) The last only appertains to this place; his Trust and Honour is so great, that it has been usually given to the KING's Younger Sons, near Kinsmen, or some of the Highest and Chiefest of all the Nobility. He has the ma∣nagement of all Maritime Affairs, as well in respect of Jurisdiction, as Protection; he Governs the Navy Royal, and decides all Civil and Criminal Causes in Sea Affairs, whether done upon or beyond Sea, in any part of the world, on the Sea Coasts, in all Ports or Havens, and all Rivers beyond the First Bridg next towards the Sea. Which Dignity is now exe∣cuted by Commanders. To the ADMIRALTY belong several Courts, but this at Doctors Commons is the Principal or Su∣preme, and it may not be improper in Treating of this Colledge, to give a brief account of it; for the rest the Reader is referred to the Present State of Eng∣land. In this Court, called the COURT of AD∣MIRALTY, he hath usually a Lieutenant, called Judge of the Admiralty, who is commonly some Learned Doctor of the Civil Law. The proceed∣ings in all Civil Matters, are according to the Civil Law, because the Sea is without the Limits of the Common Law, and by Libel they proceed to the Action, the Plaintiff giving Caution to prosecute the Suit, and to pay what shall be Adjudged against him, if he fail in the Suit; the Defendant on the Con∣trary, securing the Plaintiff by a sufficient Surety or Caution, as the Judge shall think meet, that he will appear in Judgment, and pay what shall be Adjudg∣ed against him, and that he will ratifie and allow all that his Proctor shall do in his Name, whereby the Clients are well assured to obtain that which by Law shall be Adjudged to them, let the Cause fall on which side soever. They make use also of the Laws of Rhodes and
Oleron; whereof the former is an Island in the Me∣dirranean Sea, about 20 Miles distant from the Continent of Asia Minor, and is now under the Turk, the antient Inhabitants whereof by their mighty Trade and Power at Sea, grew so expert in the Regulation of all Maritime Matters and Dif∣ferences, that their Determinations therein were esteemed so Just and Equitable, that their Laws in such Affairs, have ever since been observed for Ora∣cles. Those Laws were long ago incorporated into the Volumes of the Civil-Law: and the Romans who gave Laws to other Nations for their Sea Af∣fairs, referred all Debates and Differences to the Judgment of these Rhodian Laws. Oleron is an Island antiently belonging to the Crown of England, seated in the Bay of Aquitaine, not far from the Mouth of the Garonne, where our Famous King Richard the first caused to be compi∣led such Excellent Laws for Sea-Matters, that in the Ocean-Sea West ward, they had almost as much re∣pute as the Rhodian-Laws in the Mediterranean; and these Laws were called La Rool d' Oleron. What we have of the Rhodian-Law, with the Com∣ments thereon, inserted by the old Juris-Consults in the Pandects, and the Constitutions made by the Roman Emperors, contained in the Code and in the Novelles, still hold preheminence of all others. Un∣der this Court there is a Court of Equity for De∣termining Differences between Merchants. Former Customs and Decrees are of Force also to decide Controversies. The proceeding in Criminal Affairs, as about Pi∣racy, is, according to two Statutes made by H. VIII. to be Tried by Witnesses, and a Jury, by special Commission of the KING to the Lord Admiral, wherein some of the Judges of the Realm are ever Commissioners, and the Trial according to the Laws of England, directed by those Statutes.
All Causes that happen between the High and Low-Water-Mark are determinable at Common-Law, because that place belongs then to the body of the Adjacent Country, but when it is Full Sea, the Admiral hath Jurisdiction there also, (so long as the Sea flows) over matters done between Low-Water Mark and the Land, as appears in Sir Henry Consta∣bles Case, 5 Report, Coke, p. 107. For Regulating and Ordering His Majesties Na∣vy, Ships of War, and Forces by Sea, see those ex∣cellent Articles and Orders in Stat. 13. Car. 2. Cap. 9. The Writs and Decrees of this Court run in the Name of the Lord High Admiral, and are Direct∣ed to all Vice-Admirals, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Constables Marshals, and other Officers and Ministers of our Soveraign Lord the King, as well within Liberties s without. To this Court belongs a Register; a Marshall, who carries a Silver Oar before the Judge, where∣on are the Arms of the King, and the Lord High Admiral. The Lord High Admiral hath here his Advocate and Proctor, and all other Advocates and Proctors are presented by them, and admitted by the Judge. This Court is held on the same day with the Ar∣ches, but in the afternoon in the same Common-Hall at Doctors Commons. But the Admiralty Sessi∣on is held at St. Margarets-Hill in Southwark, where it was antiently kept for the Tryal of Malefactors, and Crimes Committed at Sea. The Places and Offices of this Court are in the gift of the Lord High Admiral. At Doctors Commons is another Court belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury, called the Prero∣gative Court, which Judgeth all Estates fallen by Will, or by Intestates; It is so called because the Arch∣bishop, by vertue of his Prerogative, hath this Power
throughout the whole Province, where the Party at the time of Death had 5 l. or above, in several Diocesses. All Citations and Decrees run in the Name of the Archbishop. This Court is kept in the same Common-Hall in the Afternoon, next day after the Arches, and was heretofore held in the Consistory at Pauls. The Judge is attended with a Register, who sets down the Decrees and Acts of the Court, and keeps the Records, all Original Wills and Testa∣ments of Parties Dying, having Bona Notabilia, &c. The place is commonly called the Prerogative Office, now kept in the Deans Court near St. Pauls Church∣yard, where for a Moderate Fee, one may search for, and have a Copy of any such Testament, made since the Rebellion of Wat-Tyler and Jack-Straw, (which is above 300 years ago, in the Reign of Richard the Second) for by those Rebels many Re∣cords and Writings in London and other places were then burnt and destroyed. The Places belonging to this Court are in the Gift of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Court of Delegates, who upon every New Business have a New Commission, and New Judges, according to the Nature of the Affair, is kept also in the same Common-Hall in the Afternoon, the Day after the Prerogative; But of this we have spoken something before: the Citations and Decrees here run in the King's Name. Of the College of Heralds. Not far from the College of Doctors Commons, stood the College of Heralds, now Rebuilt. It was an antient House Built by Thomas Stan∣ley Earl of Derby, who Married the Mother of King Henry the VII. and was bestowed by Queen Mary on the King's Heralds, and Pursuivants at Arms for
ever, to the end that they and their Successors might dwell together (if they so pleased,) and Assemble, Confer and Agree for the good Government of their Faculty, and that their Records might there be safely preserved. These are to be the Messengers of War and Peace, they are skilful in Descents, Pedigrees, and Coats of Arms. They were made a College or Corporati∣on by Charter of King Richard the III. and by him had several Priviledges granted unto them; as to be free from Subsidies, Tolls, and all troublesom Offices of the Kingdom. Another Charter of Pri∣viledges was granted unto the Society by King Ed∣ward the VI, in the Third year of his Reign. Of this Collegiate Society are three stiled Kings at Arms, six called Heralds, and four Pursuivants at Arms. The first and principal among the Kings at Arms, is called Garter, Instituted by King Henry the fifth, whose Office (as was said in the Section wherein the King's Court is treated of) is to attend the Knights of the Garter at their Solemnities, and to Marshal the Solemnities at the Funerals of the higher Nobi∣lity of England, to advertise those that are chosen of their New Election, to call on them to be In∣staled at Windsor, to cause their Arms to be hung up upon their Seats there, to Carry the Garter to Kings and Princes beyond Seas; for which purpose he was want to be joyn'd in Commission with some principal Peer of the Realm, &c. The next is Clarencieux, so called from the Duke of Clarence, to whom he first belonged: For Lionel, Third Son to Edward the Third, Marrying the Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Ʋlster in Ireland, had with her the honour of Clare in Tho∣mond, whereupon he was afterwards Created Duke of Clarence, or the Territory about Clare; which Dukedom Escheating to King Edward the Fourth,
by the Death of his Brother George Duke of Cla∣rence, he made this Herald, who properly belonged to that Duke, a King at Arms, and named him Cla∣rencieux in French, and Clarentius in Latine. His Office is to Marshal and dispose the Funerals of the Lower Nobility, as Baronets, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen on the South-side of Trent, and there∣fore sometimes called Surroy, or Southroy. The Third King at Arms is Norroy, or Northroy, whose Office is to do the like on all the North-side of Trent. These two are called Provincial Heralds, England being divided by them into two Pro∣vinces. These, by Charter, have power to visit Noble∣mens Families, to set down their Pedigrees, to di∣stinguish their Arms, to appoint men their Arms on Ensigns, and with Garter to Direct the Heralds. The Six Heralds, antiently belonging properly to Dukes, have been called Dukes at Arms, and are thus called and Ranked. 1. Windsor. 2. Richmond, 3. Chester. 4. Somerset. 5. York. 6. Lancaster, who now wait at Court, attend Publick Solemnities, Pro∣claim War and Peace, &c. Of these Heralds there are at present but Four, who are named Rouge-Cross, Rouge-Dragon, Portcullice, and Blew-mantle; from such Badges heretofore worn by them, as it is thought. The Service of the whole College is used in Marshalling and ordering Coronations, Marriages, Christnings, Funerals, Interviews, Feasts of Kings and Princes, Cavalcades, Shews, Justs, Tourna∣ments, Combats before the Constable and Marshal, &c. to take care of the Coats of Arms, of the Ge∣nealogies of the Nobility and Gentry; and whatso∣ever concerns Honour. They all receive yearly Sal∣laries out of the Exchequer, and are to be Gentle∣men at least. The Six Heralds are Expesly made Esquires by the King, when they are Created; which is now done by the Earl-Marshal, who hath
a special Commission for every particular Creation, which anciently was performed by the King himself. For the Creating and Crowning Garter King at Arms, there are provided a Sword and Book, whereon to take a Solemn Oath; then a Gilt Crown, a Collar of SS's, a Bowl of Wine, which Bowl is the Fee of the New Created King, also a Coat of Arms of Velvet, richly Embroidered. He is thus Created. First he kneels down before the Earl-Marshal, and laying his hand on the Book and Sword, another King at Arms reads the Oath; which being taken, and the Book and Sword, the Letters Patents of his Office are read, during which the Earl-Marshal pours the Wine on his head, gi∣ving him the Name of Garter, then puts on him the Coat of Arms and Collar of SS's, and the Crown on his head. His Oath is, To obey the Supream Head of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, and then the No∣ble Knights of that Order, in such things as apper∣tain to his Office; to inquire diligently what Nota∣ble or Noble Acts are performed by every Knight of the Order, and certifie the same to the Register of the Order, that he may Record it, and to give Notice to the King and the Knights of the Order, of the Death of any of that Society: To have an exact knowledge of all the Nobility, to instruct Heralds and Pursuivants in doubts concerning Arms, and to eschew and avoid all persons of ill reputati∣on; to be more ready to excuse then to blame any Noble person, unless called by Authority to Witness against them, &c. This Officer hath a Double Sallary, that is, twice as much as the other two Kings; he hath Fees at Instalments, yearly Wages given by the Knights of the Garter, and their uppermost Garment when In∣stalled, &c.
The two Provincial Kings at Arms, Clarencieux and Norroy, are Created by Letters Patents, a Book, a Sword, &c. as Garter, and with almost the same Ceremonies. A Herald at Arms is Created with the like Ce∣remony, but his Coat of Arms is to be Satin, imbroi∣dered richly with Gold, he is brought in by two He∣ralds, as a King at Arms is by two Kings at Arms. They take a Solemn Oath to be true to the King, to be serviceable to Gentlemen, to keep Secrets of Knights, Esquires, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, to assist distressed Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Wi∣dows and Virgins, to avoid Taverns, Dicing, and Whore-Houses, &c. The Pursuivants at Arms are Created likewise by Letters Patents, a Book, a Bowl of Wine, and a Coat of Arms of Damask, and to be brought in as the Heralds before the Earl-Mar∣shal or his Deputy; to Swear Solemnly to be true to the King, to be serviceable to all Christians, to be Secret and Sober, more ready to commend than to blame, to be humble, lowly, &c. This College felt the fury of the great Fire, but is since very beautifully re-built by the Members, and the bountiful contribution of Honourable Persons. Here are always Officers waiting to satisfie Comers, touching Descents, Pedigrees, Coats of Arms, &c. These Officers are the King's Sworn Servants, of which see the fourth Section of the third Chapter, where we treated of the King's Court. Inns of Courts. The Colleges of Municipal or Common-Law-Professors and Students are Fourteen, which may be (not unfitly) stiled an Ʋniversity, where the Students of the Law and Practitioners thereof live not of common Stipends, but by their Places or Pra∣ctice, or their own Proper Revenues, or their Friend▪
Exhibition, for they are most commonly Gentle∣men by Descent, and it was the command of King James that none but such should be admitted, be∣cause others may be prone to debase the honour of the Law, and play tricks; whereas the sense of Honour, in persons of Birth and Fortune, engages them to preserve their Reputation. These Colleges are called Inns, which was the old English Word for the Houses of Noblemen or Bi∣shops, or men of great Note, as the French word Hostel at Paris. There are Two Inns of Sergeants, Four Inns of Courts, and Eight Inns of Chancery, of which there are Nine within the Liberty of the City, and five in the Suburbs. Those within the City Liberties are Sergeants Inn Fleetstreet Sergeants Inn Chancery-lane For Judges and Sergeants only. The Inner The Middle Temple, in Fleet-street, are Inns of Court. Cliffords Inn, Fleetstreet Thavies Inn Furnivals Inn Bernards Inn Staple Inn Holborn Are Inns of Chancery. Without the Liberties are Grays Inn Holborn Lincolns Inn Chancery-lane Inns of Court. Clements Inn New Inn Lyons Inn Inns of Chancery. Of these we shall briefly speak in this Oderas.
1. The Sergeants Inns are so called, because Di∣vers Judges and Serjeants at Law keep their Com∣mons, and Lodge there in Term-time. In these Inns (or Colleges) the Students of the Common-Law (when they are arrived to the highest Degree) have Lodging and Dyet. They are called Servientes ad le∣gem, Sergeants at Law. These are bred two or three years in the University, and there chiefly versed in Logick and Rhetorick, which are expedient for a Lawyer, as also in the Theory of the Civil-Law, and some knowledge in the French Tongue as well as Latine, then the Student is admitted to be one of the Four Inns of Court, where he is first called a Moot-man, and after about seven years Study, is chosen an Ʋtter Barrister; and having then spent twelve years more, and performed his Exercises (of which more hereafter,) he is chosen a Bencher, and sometime after a Reader. During the Reading, which heretofore was three Weeks and three Days, as afore-mentioned, the Reader keeps a Constant and sumptuous Feasting, Inviting the Chief Nobles, Judges, Bishops, Great Officers of the Kingdom, and sometimes the King himself, that it costs them sometimes 800 l. or 1000 l. Afterwards he wears a long Robe different from other Barristers, and is then in a capacity to be made a Sergeant at Law, when his Majesty shall be pleased to call him, which is in this Manner. When the Number of Sergeants is small, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, by the advice and consent of the other Judges, makes choice of six or eight more or less, of the most grave and learned of the Inns of Court, and presents their Names to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, who sends by the Kings Writ to each of them, to appear on such a Day before the King to receive the State and Degree of a Serjeant at Law; at the appointed time, they being habited in Robes of two
Colours. viz. Brown and Blew, come accompani∣ed with the Students of the Inns of Courts, and at∣tended by a Train of Servants and Retainers, in pecu∣liar Cloath-Liveries, to Westminster-Hall, and there in publick take a Solemn Oath, and are Cloathed with certain Robes and Coifs, without which they may be seen no more in publick: After this, they Feast the great Persons of the Nation, in a very Magnificent and Princely manner; give Gold Rings to the Prin∣ces of the Royal Family, the Archbishops, Chancel∣lor and Treasurer, to the value of 40 s. each Ring, and to Earls and Bishops Rings of 20 s. To other Great Officers, to Barons, &c. Rings of less value. Out of these are chosen all the Judges of the King's Bench and Common-Pleas; Wherefore all those Judges do always wear the white Linnen Coif, which is the principal Badge of a Sergeant, and which he has had the priviledge to wear at all times, even in the King's presence, and whilst he spake to the King, though antiently no Subject may be so much as cap∣ped in the King's presence. When any of the Judges are wanting, the King by advice of the Council makes choice of one of those Sergeants at Law to supply his place, and by Letters Patents Sealed by the Lord Chancellor, who Constitutes him (sitting in the middle of the rest of the Judges) by a set Speech, Declaring to the Serjeant that upon this occasion he is called to do Justice with Expedition and Impartiality to His Majesties Subjects, causing the Letters Patents to be read, and then Departs; after which the Lord Chief Justice places the said Sergeant on the Bench, Junior to all the rest, and having taken an Oath well and truly to Serve the King and his People in his Office, to take no Brib, to do equal and speedy Justice to all, &c. He sets himself to the Execution of his Charge. Being thus advanced, he hath great honour and a conside∣rable Salary, besides perquisites, for each one hath
1000 l. a year from the King. His habit of a Sergeant is somewhat altered; his long Robe and Cap, his Hood and Coif, are the same; but there is besides a Cloak put over him, and closed on his Right Shoulder, and instead of a Caputium lined with Mi∣never, or de minuto vario, divers small pieces of white rich Fur; only the two Lord Chief-Justices, and the Lord Chief-Baron have their Hoods, Sleeves, and Collars turned up with Ermine. ☞ Note that the two Sergeants Inns belong to the twelve Judges, and about twenty-six Serge∣ants. The Fees in old times from a Client to a Serge∣ant at Law, for advice in his Chamber, or for plead∣ing in any Court of Judicature, was but 20 s. and the Fee of a Barrister 10 s. which is now more then is given in our Neighbour Nations, but at present it is usual to give some some Sergeants 10 l. and some 20 l. and to a Barrister half as much at the pleading of any Considerable Cause; so that some Lawyers gain 3000 or 4000 l. yearly in Fees, and purchase great Estates in a few years, and are sometimes ad∣vanced to be Peers of the Realm, as late times es∣pecially have shewn. When there was a call of Serjeants at Law, it was almost incredible to hear of their preparations in old times, they have often kept their Feasts in Ely House, which was the Bishop of Ely's Palace in Hol∣born. There was a call of Seven Sergeants, in the year 1464. 4. E. 4. in Michaelmas Term, who kept their Feast in this Palace, to which Sir Matthew Philip, Lord Mayor of London, with the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the most eminent Commoners, were in∣vited, to which they came; but the Lord Gray of Ruthen, then Lord Treasurer of England, was placed (against the minds of the Serjeants, as they said) before the Lord Mayor, who thereupon took such
Distaste that he went away with the Aldermen, She∣riffs, and Commons, without partaking of the Feast, to the great trouble of the New Sergeants, as well as the dissatisfaction of the City. There was another Feast kept there for Five days by the Sergeants, in the Year 1531. 23 Henry VIII. where the King, Queen, and Foreign Ambassadors Dined, as also the Lord Mayor, the Judges, the Ba∣rons of the Exchequer, the Aldermen of the City, and several Eminent Persons, Merchants and Pub∣lick Officers, and many Gentlemen of Quality. There were brought to the Slaughter-House 24 great Beefs, at 26 s. 8 d. a piece, from the Sham∣bles; one Carkass of an Oxe at 24 s. One hundred Fat Muttons, at 2 s. 10 d. a piece. 51 great Veals, at 4 s. 8 d. a piece; 34 Porks at 3 s. 8 d. a piece; 91 Piggs at 6 d. each; 10 Dozen of Capons of one Poulterer, (for they had three) at 20 d. a piece; Capons of Kent 9 Dozen and a half at 12 d. a piece; Capons Course, Nineteen Dozen at 6 d. a piece; Cocks of Gross 7 Dozen and 9, at 8 d. a piece; Cocks Course 14 Dozen and 8 at 3 d. a piece; Pullets the best 2 d half penny, other Pul∣lets two pence; Pigeons 37 Dozen, at 10 d. the Dozen; Swans 14 Dozen; Larks 340 Dozen, at 5 d. the Dozen, &c. with all other Appurtenances needful for a Splendid and Magnificent Entertain∣ment. Which is mentioned the rather, to shew the Change of Prices, this being but 150 Years ago. The two Temples near Temple-Bar, were former∣ly the dwelling of the Knights Templers, who foun∣ded them in the Reign of Henry the II. These Tem∣plers took beginning about the Year 1118. Their first profession was for safeguard of Pilgrims, com∣ing to visit the Sepulchre at Jerusalem, and increased mightily. They bare Crosses of red Cloth on their uppermost Garments, to be known from others, they
were called Templers, or Knights of the Temple, be∣cause their first Mansion was near the Temple in Je∣rusalem, granted to them by King Baldwin. Many Noblemen afterwards in all parts of Christendom became Brethren of this Order, and built themselves Dwellings in every great Town, but this at London was their chief Dwelling in England. Matthew Pa∣ris Reports, that they were first so Poor, that they had but one Horse to Serve two of them; but they be∣came very Rich and Pompous afterwards, and en∣tertained the Nobility, and Foreign Ambassadors, and the Prince Himself frequently; their Seal for the reason aforesaid, was two Men riding upon one Horse. Many Parliaments and Great Councels have been there kept, as appears in our Historys. In the Year 1308. all the Templers in England and all Christen∣dom were apprehended, and committed to divers Prisons, for Heresie and other Articles, by means of Philip King of France, who procured them to be Condemned by a General Councel, whose Lands were given by a Councel at Vienna, Anno 1324, to the Knights Hospitallers, called the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, who took the Island of Rhodes from the Turk, and bravely maintained it, till the time of Solyman the Magnificent; who after a most sharp and tedious Siege of six Months, took it, when they had Valorously kept it about 200 Years, and made a dismal slaughter in Solymans great Army consist∣ing of about 200000 Men, and 300 Gallies, &c. These Knights have since Inhabited Malta, another Island in the Mediterranean Sea, given them by the King of Spain. In the Reign of Edward the III. this Temple was purchased by the Students of the Com∣mon Law, which is above 300 Years ago: they are called the Inner and Middle Temple, in Relation to Essex-House, which was part of the Knights Tem∣plers, and called the Outer-Temple, because Sealed without Temple-Bar. As to the Casualties of Fire
and Tumults, by which this Temple suffered, (but now restored in a Beautiful and Stately manner,) we re∣fer to the Chapter that particularly Treats of such things. The Inns of CHANCERY, are Cliffords-Inn in Fleet-street, somtimes belonging to the Lord Clifford, but afterwards let to Students of Law, Thavies-Inn in Holborn, begun in the Reign of Edward the III, and since purchased by Lin∣colns-Inn, as was also Furnivals-Inn in Holborn, Ber∣nards-Inn, and Staple-Inn, belonging to the Mer∣chants of the Staple; These Five Inns of Chancery are within the Liberties of the City: And Clements-Inn so called, because it stands near St. Clements Church without Temple-Bar; New-Inn, so called, because of a Newer Foundation than the others, and Lyons-Inn, antiently a Common-Inn, with the Sign of the Lyon; which three last are without the City Li∣berties. These were heretofore Preparatory Col∣ledges for Younger Students, and many were en∣tred here, before Admitted to the Inns of Courts. But now they are for the most part taken up by At∣tornies, Solicitors and Clerks, who have here their Chambers apart, and their Diet at a very easie rate, in a Hall together, where they are obliged to ap∣pear in Grave long Robes, and Black round knit Caps. These Colledges belong all to some Inns of Court, who send Yearly some of their Barristers to Read to these. In each of which, one with ano∣ther, there are about 60 or 70 Persons. There are two Inns of Court without the City Li∣berties, called Lincolns-Inn, which antiently belong∣ed to the Earls of Lincoln; and Greys Inn, belonging to the Noble Family of the Greys. These two Inns are very Capacious and Stately Colleges, with very lovely Walks, and Gardens; Greys-Inn especially, be∣ing
Seated upon the very Edge or Skirt of the Sub∣rbs in Holborn, yeilds a most Gallant Prospect into the Country, and in its Beautiful Walks, one may partake of the fresh Country Ayr, as well as if in the Country. In these two Inns, and in the two Temples, (which are our four Inns of Court, as was said,) the Gen∣tlemen that are Studious of the Common Law, re∣side in a Collegiate manner. And in the Reign of Henry the VI, they florished so that there were in each about 200 Students, each expending Yearly about 20 l. which was as much as 200 l. now, and were, as Fortescue saith, Ʋltra Studium legum, quasi Gymnasia omnium morum; that is, Besides the Studies of the Law, as it were Schools of all sorts of Civi∣lity and Good breeding, or manners. These Societies are no Corporations, nor have any Judicial Power over their Members, but have cer∣tain Orders among themselves, which have by con∣sent the Force of Laws: For lighter offences they are Excommoned, or put out of Commons, not to eat with the rest; and for greater Offences they lose their Chambers, and are expelled the College; and being once expelled, they are never received by any of the three other Societies. Which deprivation of Honour to Young generous Spirits, is more griev∣ous than perhaps Deprivation of life. They wear a Grave black Robe and Cap, when they meet at Chappel, at the Hall, or at Courts of Justice, and at other times walk with Cloak and Sword, or what they please. These Colleges have no Lands nor Revenues, because being no Corpo∣rations they cannot purchase, but the charges of the House are defray'd by what is paid at Admit∣tances, and Quit-Rents for their Chambers. The whole Company of Gentlemen in each So∣ciety, may be divided into 4 parts, Benchers, Ʋt∣ter-Barristers, Inner-Barristers, and Students.
Benchers are the Seniors, to whom is Committed the Government and ordering of the whole House, and out of these is Chosen Yearly a Treasurer, who Receiveth, Disburseth, and Accounteth for all Mo∣nies belong to the House. Ʋtter-Barristers are such as from their Learning and Standing, are called by the Benchers to Plead and Argue in the Society doubtful Cases and Que∣stions, which are called Moots (from Meeting, the old Saxon word, for the French Assemble, or else from the French Mot, a word,) and whilst they Ar∣gue the said Cases, they sit outermost on the Forms of the Benchers, which they call the Bar. Out of these Moot-Men are chosen Readers for the Inns of Chancery belonging to the Inns of Court, whereof they are Members, where in Term time, and Grand Vacations, they Argue Cases in the presence of Attornies and Clerks. All the rest are accounted Inner-Barristers who for want of Learning or time, are not to Argue in these Moots; and yet in a Moot before the Bench∣ers, two of these Inner-Barristers sitting on the same Form with the Ʋtter-Barristers, do▪ for their Exercises, recite by heart, the pleading of the same Moot-Case, the one taking the part of the Plain∣tiff, and the other of the Defendant. They divide the Year into three parts. 1. The Learning Vacation. 2. The Term times. 3. The Dead, or Mean Vacation. They have two Learning Vacations, viz. Lent Vacation, which begins the first Monday in Lent, and continues Three weeks and Three days: and Sum∣mer Vacation, which begins the Monday after Lam∣mas day, and continues also Three weeks and Three days. In these Vacations are the greatest Confe∣rences
and Studious Exercises in this manner. The Benchers appoint the Eldest Ʋtter-Bar∣risters to Read among them openly in the Hall, whereof he hath Notice half a Year before; he then, the first day about Eight of the Clock, makes choice of some Act or Statute, whereupon he Grounds his whole Reading for that Vacation, and declares such Mischiefs and Inconveniencies as were not pro∣vided against before the same Act, and then Re∣citeth certain Doubts and Questions which he hath devised, that may grow upon the said Statute, and declareth his Judgment therein: after which one of the Younger Ʋtter-Barristers, repeats one Questi∣on propounded by the Reader, and doth by way of Argument labour to prove the Readers Opinion to be against Law; and after him, the Senior Ʋt∣ter-Barristers and Readers, one after another, ac∣cording to Seniority, do declare their Opinions and Judgments in the same, and then the Reader who did put the Case, endeavours to Confute the Ob∣jections laid against him, and to confirm his own Opinion. After which the Judges and Sergeants (if any be present) declare their Opinions; then the Youngest Ʋtter-Barrister, again Rehearseth another Case, which is Prosecuted as the former was. And this Exercise continues Daily Three or Four hours. Out of those who have Read once in the Summer Vacation, and are Benchers, is chosen al∣ways one to Read in Lent, who observes the same Method and Order as the former. Out of these Readers, Sergeants at Law are usually chosen. The manner of Mooting, is thus: In these Vaca∣tions after Supper in the Hall, the Reader with one or two of the Benchers comes in, to whom one of the Ʋtter-Barristers propounds some doubtful Case; which being Argued by the Benchers, and lastly by him that moved the Case, the Benchers sit down on the Bench at the upper end of the Hall, (whence
they are called Benchers) and upon a Form in th Middle of the Hall sit two Ʋtter-Barristers: an on both sides of them on the same Form sits o Inner-Barrister, who doth in Law-French, declar to the Benchers (as the Sergeants do at the Bar i the KING's Court to the Judges) some kind o Action, the one being (as it were) retained by th Plaintiff, and the other for the Defendant. Whic ended, the two Ʋtter-Barristers Argue such Que∣stions as are Disputable within the Case. Afte which the Benchers do likewise declare their Opi∣nions, how they take the Law to be in thos Questions. In those Mootings the Junior always argueth first as is used among the Judges in the Exchequer-Cham∣ber, and among the Sergeants in open Courts o Judicature. The Inner and Ʋtter-Barrister Plea in Law-French, and the Benchers in English, an at the Readings, the Readers Cases are put i English. Mootings in the Inns in Chancery, are thus: I the Learning Vacation, each Ʋtter-Barrister, who is a Reader in the Inns of Chancery, goes with two Students of the same Inn of Court, to the Inn o Chancery, where he is appointed to Read, and there meet him Commonly two of each of the other Inn: of Court, who (sitting as the Benchers do in the Inns of Court at their Moots,) hear and Argue his Case: in the Four Inns of Chancery, the Moots are read by those of Greys-Inn, or Lincolns-Inn; in the other Four, by these of the two Temples. In Term Time the only Exercises of Learning is Arguing and Debating Cases after Dinner, and Mooting after Supper, in the same manner as in the Vacation time. The time between the Learning Vacations and Terms, is called the Mean Vacation, during which time, every day after Dinner, Cases are Argued a
at other times, and after Supper Moots are brought in, and Pleaded by the Inner-Barristers in the pre∣sence of the Ʋtter-Barristers, which sit there in the Room of the Benchers, and Argue as they do in Term Time and Learning Vacation. Every quarter Commonly the Benchers cause one of the standing Officers of the House to Summon a Parliament, which is only an Assembly and Con∣ference of Benchers, and Ʋtter-Barristers, which are called the Sage Company, and meet in a place called the Parliament-Chamber, and there Treat of such matters as shall seem expedent for the good ordering of the House, and the Reformation of such things as they shall Judge meet to be Reform∣ed. Here are the Readers for Lent and Summer Vacation Elected; also the Treasurer is here chosen, and the Auditors appointed to take accounts of the old Treasurer, &c. Here Offences Com∣mitted by any of the Society are punished, &c. In these Four Inns of Court, are estimated to be about 800 Students. SECT. 7. Of Bridges, Rivers, &c. VVE shall begin with the Bridge, which for admirable Workmanship, vastness of Foundation, for all Dimensions, for Solid Stately Houses, and Rich Shops built thereon, surpasseth all others in Europe; it hath Nineteen Arches, besides the Draw-bridge, Founded in a deep broad River. It is 800 Foot in Length, Sixty High, and Thirty Broad; it hath a Draw-bridge almost in the mid∣dle, and 20 Foot between each Arch. It was about the Year 1176, begun to be Built of Stone, and af∣ter the Labour of 33 Years Finished, viz. Anno
1209. which was a work of exceeding cost and dif∣ficulty, considering the great flux and reflux of the River in that place, so that it hath been frequently known that at the Ebbing and Flowing of the water, it falls with so violent a Cataract, that it has Drown'd many that would adventure to Shoot through the Arches at such times. Before some part of the Hou∣ses were burnt (for there hapned many grievous Fires there, of which and other Accidents, more hereafter) it lookt more like a stately and Continu∣ed Street, than a Bridge. The Charges of keeping this Bridge in Repair are so great, that there is a large House, a vast Revenue in Lands and Houses and Divers considerable Officers set apart for the constant care and Repair thereof: The principal whereof are the two Bridge-Masters, chosen out of the Body of the Liveries upon Midsummer-day, after the Sheriffs and the Chamberlain. Concern∣ing this Bridge, and the stupendious site and stru∣cture thereof, take the ingenious fancy of Mr. James Howel, in imitation of Sannazarius the famous Vene∣tian Poet, who writ the like about that City and the Rialto, the prime Bridge there. Cum Londinensem Neptunus viderat Ʋrbem Vectus ibi propriis atque revectus Aquis, Dum Densam penetrat sylvam, lucos{que} ferentes Pro Ramis funes, pro foliis{que} cruces, Cum superimpositum torrenti flumine Pontem Viderat, & Rapido ponere jur freto, Cum tantos Muros, ferrumina, Castra, tot Arcus Vidit, & haec tergo cuncta jacere suo. Arcus, qui possunt totidem formare Rialtos Metiri siquis summa vel ima Cupit; Haec Deus undarum aspiciens, fluxusque retrorsum Tundere, & horrendos inde Boare sonos, Nunc mihi quanta velis terrae miracula pandas, Est primus Mundi pons, ait, iste Stupor.
The same Paraphas'd in English. When Neptune, from his billows, London spy'd, Brought proudly thither by a high Spring-Tide: As through a floating Wood he steer'd along, And moving Castles cluster'd in a throng; When he beheld a mighty Bridge give Law Ʋnto his Surges and their fury awe; When such a shelf of Cataracts did roar, As if the Thames with Nile had chang'd her shoar; When he such Massy Walls, such Towers did eye, Such Posts, such Irons on his back to lie: When such vast Arches he observ'd, that might Nineteen Rialto's make, for depth and height: When the Cerulean God these things survey'd, He shook his Trident, and, astonish'd, said, Let the whole Earth now all her Wonders count, This Bridge of Wonders is the Paramount. There was first a Ferry where this Bridge is built, and the Ferry-man and his Wife Dying, his only Daughter, a Maid, named Mary, with what her Parents left her, and the profits of this Ferry, built a House for Nuns, where the East part of St. Mary-Overy's Church now stands, and gave them the o∣versight and profits of the Ferry. This Nunnery was afterwards converted into a Colege of Priests, who built the Bridge of Timber, but the time when, is uncertain, but mention is made of it, Anno 994. when the Londoners overthrew a part of Sweyn King of Denmark's Army, who besieged them; many of the Danes being Drowned in the Thames, because in their hasty flight they took no heed of, or could not recover the Bridge. This Bridge was burnt, Anno 1136. It was after∣wards new built; but the Charges of continual Re∣paration being so great, it was by the Aid of the Ci∣tizens
and others built of Stone, as beforesaid, the Timber Bridge having been maintain'd partly by the proper Lands thereof, partly by Legacies and Lib∣rality of Divers Persons, and partly by Taxations in divers Shires, at least 215 years before the Bridge of Stone was built. And that we may give an Esti∣mate of the Payments and Allowances belonging to this great Bridge, it is recorded that in Henry the 7th's time it amounted in one year to above 815 l. by which may be guessed what improvement and increase it is come to by this time, the prices of things being so vastly altered. Besides this Bridge there are three other curious Sone-Bridges over that mighty Chargeable and beau∣tiful work or Channel, rendring Navigable the Fleet Brook, from the River Thames to Holborn-Bridge, which is 100 Foot Broad, on the sides of which are many huge Vaults to treasure up Coals for the use of the poor, &c. About the middle of this Chan∣nel stands Fleet-Bridge, being considerably advan∣ced, though it lies in a level with Fleet-street, and the bottom of Ludgate-Hill, so that all Waggons, Coaches, Carmen, &c. pass over it, the other two Bridges, viz. Bridewell-Bridge, and Fleet-lane∣Bridge are raised 14 Steps or Stairs above the Streets on each side of the said Channel, in order to the ad∣mittance or giving passage to all Lighters, Barges, Boats, Hoys, &c. which bring in plentifully every Tide, Coals; for which, and other Goods brought, there are certain Duties paid to the City, which were granted to the City by an Act of Parliament. This Channel was finished, Anno 1676. at the Cost of a∣bove 74000 l. And by the same Act of Parlia∣ment, Hlborn-Bridge, at the North-end of this Channel, was ordered to be enlarged, which is very commodiously done, to the great advantage of Passengers. Thee were several other inferiour Bridges mentioned by Stow and others, but being
of no great eminency (and can hardly now be dis∣covered) we pass them by. Of Rivers, Aqueducts, &c. The Great and famous River of Thames deserves precedency, not only of all other Rivers in England, but perhaps of the World; because it's breadth, depth, gentle strait and even Course, extraordinary wholsome Water and Tides, render it more com∣modious for Navigation, than any other that we read of. The Sea Flows up this River near fourscore miles, that is almost to Kingstone, 12 miles above London by Land, and 20 by Water, bringing the greater Vessels to London, and the smaller beyond; then against the stream, Boats are drawn to Oxford, and higher many miles. It is High Water at this City when the Moon comes to the North-East and South-West points of Heaven, the one in our Hemisphere, and the other in the opposite Hemisphere. The highest Tides are upon a Land Flood, the Wind Northwest at the Equinoctial, and the Moon at Full; When these Four Causes concur (which is very rare) the River over-flows its Banks in some places, endamaging Westminster in their Cellars. This Noble River opening Eastward towards Germany and France, is much more advantageous for Traffique then any other River of England. There is a variety of excellent Fish, especially in∣comparable Salmon, and along its Banks on either side a fat and fruitful Soyl, pleasant with Meadows, and innumerable Palaces, and stately Buildings of the Nobility, Gentry, and great Citizens, that it yields as beautiful a sight as can any where be met withal; Which may be thus Described only from Windsor to London, with a little alteration of Mr. Draytons Lines.
But now this Flood upon his Voyage prest, (That finds with strength his beauty still increast, Where Windsor stood on Tip-toe to behold The Goodly Thames so far as e're he could: With Royal Houses Crown'd, of stately pride, On either Bank as he along doth glide) With sweet Delight doth his long Course pursue, Doth Oatlands, Hampton-Court and Richmond view, Then Westminster great Thames doth entertain, That vaunts her Palace and her sumptuous Fane: The Lands Chief Seat, that challengeth for hers Kings Coranations and their Sepulchers. Then goes along by that more beautious Strand, That shews the Wealth and glory of the Land▪ (Such sumptuous Seats within so little space Th' all-viewing Sun scarce sees in all his Race) By London leads, which like a Crescent lies, Whose Windows view with the be-spangled Skies, Her rising Spires so thick themselves do show, As do the Reeds that on her Banks do grow, There sees his Wharffs and People-crowded Shores: His bosom spread with shoals of labouring Oars: With that great Bridge that doth him most Renown, By which he puts all other Rivers down. This Noble River hath her Original out of the side of an Hill in Cotswold Downs, a little above a Vil∣lage called Winchcomb, in Oxfordshire, where it was antiently called Isis, or the Ouse, running to Ox∣ford, and by the way receiving many small Rivulets and Brooks joyning at that City with the Char∣well, then by Abington, Dorchester, where the River Thame and Isis joyn, from whence it is called Tha∣msis, or Thames; thence by Reading, Maiden-head, Windsor, Stanes, and several other considerable Palaces, Towns, and stately Houses, to London, and receives the Medway, a considerable River that
runs by the City of Rochester, and Waters all the Southern parts of Kent: The length of it being, at least, if measured by the Journeys at Land, 180 Miles, and Ebbs and Flows, as before, near 80 Miles. The Common difference betwixt Tide and Tide is found to consist of 24 Minutes, which wanteth but 12 of a whole hour in 24, by which they come later than the other. Mr. Stow tells us that in his time (the first Edition of his Survey being Printed above 80 years ago) there were 2000 Wherries or small Boats, whereby 3000 Water-men got their Living, their Gains being most in Term-time, but now there are a great many more, this River being a Nursery to breed young Men sit for the Sea to Serve His Majesty, or the Merchants, &c. Besides these, there is an Infinite Number of Wherries, Tide-Boats, Tilt-Boats, Barges, Hoys, &c. for Pas∣sengers, or to bring necessary Provision of all sorts from all Quarters of Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buc∣kinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hartfordshire, Mid∣dlesex, Essex, Surrey, and Kent, unto the City; but of the Navigation of London, we refer to the Chapter of Trade; and the Rates of Water-men to a distinct head, to be Treated of hereafter. The Extent of the Jurisdiction and Prero∣gative of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London on the River Thames, &c. THe Lord Mayor of LONDON for the time being, and his Successors for ever in that great Dignity, have full Power and Authority over the Rivers of Thames and Medway, to inflict punish∣ment upon all Transgressors relating to the said Ri∣vers, the Water-Bayly of London being his Substi∣tute.
The Extent of this Jurisdiction begins at a place cal∣led Colnie-Ditch, a little above Stains-Bridge West∣ward, as far as London-Bridge, and from thence to a place called Yendall, otherwise Yenland, or Yen∣leete, and the Waters of Medway. This Authority and Jurisdiction belongs to the Lord Mayor, Com∣monalty and Citizens of London, by divers Grants, Charters, and Confirmations made by the Kings and Queens of England, besides sundry Acts of Par∣liament. Yet there have been some contests betwixt the Lord Mayor, and the Lord High Admiral of Eng∣land about it, but after a fair and Judicial Tryal in open Court, the Controversie was decided in fa∣vour of the City, and the Lord Mayor was adjudg∣ed to be Conservator of the Thames. There were also some Controversies about the Rivers of Thames and Medway, but all differences were absolutely con∣cluded, Anno 1613. Sir John Swinnerton being then Lord Mayor, and Thomas Sparry Esq being then his Deputy in that Office. So that the Lord Mayor bears always since (as in former times) the stile of Conservator of the said River, within the said Li∣mits and Bounds. And whereas there was a Company of Fishermen called Tinckermen, that with unlawful Nets and o∣ther devices, made an infinite destruction of the young Brood, or Fry of Fish, to feed their Hogs; by the singular care and cost of the Lord Mayor, and vigilance of the Citizens, they were many years ago supprest, and a regular and orderly manner of Fishing brought in use, that such a havock may not be made of the young Fry; As also sundry other a∣buses by unlawful Fishing, and some annoying Tim∣bers in Tilbury-hope, dangerous to Passengers, and destructive to the young Brood of Fish and Fisher∣mens Nets, were also to general benefit reformed. Likewise they took care to clear and cleanse the Ri∣ver
Westward of about 79 Stops or Hatches, con∣sisting of divers great Stakes and Piles, erected by Fishermen for their private lucre, and standing ill∣favouredly for Passengers near the Fair-Deep; but none now are left, except such as stand out of the passable high stream, that can prejudice none. The like Course was kept in the time of Henry the 4th, and Henry the 8ths times. There is also a watchful Eye that no Carrion nor Dead Carkasses be thrown into the River to pollute or infect the stream. To all these intents and purposes the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen his Brethren, with the under Offi∣cers, meet eight times a year in the four Counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, and have a Judicial sitting for Maintenance of the Rivers Rights and Priviledges, where they have power to Impanel Juries, to make Inquisition after all Offences com∣mitted upon the River within their Exte, and as the Verdict given by the Jury makes it appear, so they proceed to the punishment of the sors according to the quality of the offence, whereof it may be proper to give this Memorable Instance, as it is Recorded by Mr. Stow in his Survey, page 20, Printed Anno 1633. and more briefly deliver∣ed by Mr. Howel in his Londinopolis, Printed Anno 1657. page 15. Thus. Sir John Rolls Knight, and Lord Mayor of the Ci∣ty of London, and Conservator of the River of Thames, and Waters of Medway, as∣sisted and accompanied by the Aldermen and two Sheriffs then contemporary, and attended by the Recorder, and the Sub-conservation, or Water-Bay∣ly, with 50 Officers and Servants, took their Barges at Billings-gate, the third of July, 1616. and in a few hours arrived at Graves-end in Kent, where a Session for Conservancy of the said River was kept before the said Lord Mayor and his said Assistants, at which place and time a Jury of the Free-holders of
the said County being sworn to inquire of all Offen∣ces committed in any part of the River whatsoever, within the said County; The Common Sergeant of the City (the Recorder being then absent upon ex∣traordinary occasions) Delivered them a Charge to this effect, That for as much as there had not been any Session of Conservancy in many years passed kept by any Lord Mayor of London in that place, it was probable and evident they could not be well informed, neither of the Lord Mayor's Jurisdiction and power to Reform Annoyances and Offences there, and to inflict due punishments upon the Of∣fendors; nor of the Nature of the Service to be by them performed in the Course of their Inquiry; therefore he thought it convenient to make both the one and the other known unto them. Hereup∣on he shewed them that the Jurisdiction of the Court of London in the River of Thames, from Stanes Bridge Westward, unto the points of the River next unto the Sea Eastward, appeared to belong to the City, in manner and form following. I. First in point of Right by prescription, as ap∣pears by an ancient Book called Dunhorp, That Civitatis fundationis, aedificationis, & constructio∣nis causa erat Thamesis Flvus, quorum vero Ci∣vitatis & fluminis gubernationem tam duces, Ma∣jores, Custodes, Vicecomites, Aldr. & Magnates Ci∣vitatis Memoratae hucusque obtinuerunt & habue∣runt. Whence he inferr'd that the Government of the River hath, belonged to the City time out of mind. In 21. H. 3. Jorden Coventry, one of the Sheriffs of the City, was sent by the Mayor and Aldermen to remove certain Kiddles that Annoyed the Rivers of Thames and Medway; who, ultra Yenland versus mare, did take divers persons that were Offenders, and imprisoned them; Whereupon complaint being
made to the King, he took the matter ill at the first, and sent for the Lord Mayor and Citizens to Ken∣nington; Where, upon hearing of the Matter be∣fore the said King, the Cities Jurisdiction over the said River was set forth and allowed, and the Com∣plainants convinced, and every one of them Amer∣ced at 10 l. and the Amercements adjudged to the City; And afterward their Nets were burnt by Judgment given by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in the Hustings. 1. R. 2. Writs were directed to the Sheriffs of Essex and Kent, Reciting the Cities Title, with Command not to suffer the Citizens of London to be molested contrary to the Liberties formerly granted and allowed unto them. II. Secondly, In point of Right by Allowance in Eire, the Conservation of the Thames belongs to the City: For it was produced that 1 R. 2. before Hugh Bigot, Justice Ienerant, the Sheriffs and Citizens of London were called in Question for their Jurisdiction exercis'd on the Thames, be∣fore whom it was found, by a Jury in Southwark, Quod nullus habet aliquid Juris in Thamisia, us{que} ad Novum Gurgitem nisi Civis London. In the 14, E. 2. The Constable of the Tower was Indicted by Divers Wards of London before the Justices in Eire at the Tower, De muneris & recep. Cove, pro Kedellis in Thamisiis & Consta∣bularius ad Kidellas respondet quod Justic. non habent Jurisdictionem extra London, prolitum: inde cognoscere cum praedict. Kidelli sunt in aliis Comitatibus, & Justic. dixerunt, aqua Thamisiae pertinet ad Civitatem London, usque Mare, & si velit respondeat; Who then Pleaded, Not Guilty.
III. He went further, in point of Right; that this Jurisdiction belonged to the City by antient Charters, 8 R. 1. that is 480 and odd Years ago. Dominus Richardus Rex, Filius Regis Henrici secundi con∣cessit & firmiter praecepit, ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia amoveantur ubicunque fuerint in Tha∣misia; —1. Joh. Rex concessit, & firmiter praece∣pit ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia vel in Medway amoveantur, & ne caeteri Kidelli alicubi ponantur in Thamisia vel in Medway super forf. 10 1. sterlingorum. Then he urged the Famous Charter of King Henry the III. which ran thus: Henry by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou, un∣to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Stewards, Ministers, and to all Bayliffs and to all his True Men, Greeting: wotteth well, that we for the health of our Soul, and the health of the Soul of King John our Fader, and the Souls of our Ancestors; and also for the Com∣mon profit of our City of London, and of all our Realms, have Granted and stedfastly Commanded, That all the Weares that be in Thames or in Medway be done away: and that from henceforth no Weares be set in Thames or Medway, upon the forfeiture of 10 1. Also we claim quit to our Citizens of London, all that, that our Constable of our Tower of London was wont to take of the said Weares. Wherefore we will, and stedfastly Command, that no Constable of the aforesaid Tow∣er at any time from henceforth forward, any thing ask, nor any Grievance do to any of the same City by Echeson of the same Weares; it is to us known enough, and by our true Men do us to understand, that most privacy and least profit might fall unto the same City, and to the whole Realm by Enche∣sen
of the same Weares; which we make for ever firm and stable unto the same City, as the Charter of our Lord King John our Fader, which our Ba∣rons of London thereof have reasonably Witnes∣sed. Witnesses Eustace of London, Peter of West∣minster, &c. at Westminster the 18th of February, in the Year of our Reign Eleven. Besides these he produced divers others in this King's Reign to the purpose aforesaid, and the 7th. of E. III. IV. This Jurisdiction belongs to the City of Lon∣don by Acts of Parliament, W. 2. cap. 47. an. 13. No Salmons to be taken from the Nativity of our Lady, unto St. Martins Day in all points, nor none to be taken in Mill-Pools from the midst of April, until Midsummer, under penalty for the first Offence, of burning of Nets and Engines; the second Offence, Imprisonment for a Quarter of a Year; the third Offence, for a whole Year. 13. R. II. confirms the restraint of taking Sal∣mons in many Waters, from the midst of April, un∣til Midsummer, upon the same pain; nor within that time to use any Nets, called Stalkers, nor any other Engine, whereby the Fry may be destroyed. He urged likewise 17 R. II. cap. 9. and the 11. H. VII. cap. 15. 1 Eliz. cap. 17. Against Nets, Wheeles, and other Engines, for destroying the Fish, against kil∣ling of Salmon and Trouts out of season, against killing Pike or Pickerel, not ten Inches long, or Salmon not 16 Inches long, or Trout not 8 Inches long, or Barbel 12 Inches and more; nor to Fish with any Nets, but such whereof every Meash or Mash shall be two Inches and a half broad, An∣gling excepted. This not to extend to Smelts, Roches, Minoes, Bullhead, Gudgeons, or Eles, in place where the same have been used to be taken, The Offender to lose for every Offence. 20 s. and
the Fish, also the unlawful Nets, Engines and In∣struments. The Mayor of London (Inter alia) hath full Pow∣er and Authority by this Act to Inquire of all Of∣fences Committed contrary thereunto, by the Oaths of 12 Men or more, and to Hear and Determine all and every the same, and inflict Punishments, and impose Fines accordingly. V. He proceeds to assert the Cities Right, to the Conservation of the Thames, and the Waters of Medway, by way of Inquisition, whereof there were two, the one taken at Raynam in Essex, the other at Gravesend in Kent, before Sir William Cambridge Grocer. then Lord Mayor of London, 9 Henry V. where it was presented, that whereas by the antient Ordinances of London, the Meshes of Nets should be two Inches in the fore part, and one Inch in the hinder part, and it being found that the Offences according to the said Inquisitions, are Contra li∣bertates & consuetudines Civitatis, it was adjudged that the Nets should be burnt, according to the antient Custom in that behalf provided. VI. He goes on after to prove that this Right belongs to the City by Decrees. In 8 Henry IV. the Mayor and Aldermen did exhibit their humble Pe∣tition to the King's Councel, reciting, that (time out of mind) they had the Conservation and Cor∣rection of the River of Thames, of all Trincks, Nets, and other Engines whatsoever, in the River of Thames and Medway placed, and have used to make a Sub-Conservator under them: and complaining that Alexander Bonner then Sub-Conservator, hav∣ing discharged his Duty in removing Kiddles, he was ill intreated by the owners, dwelling in Erith, Bra∣triferry, Barking, Woolwich, and other places in the Counties of Kent and Essex: and upon hear∣ing
of the matter in Camera Stellata, they were found Guilty, and Constrained to submit themselves to the Lord Mayor, and ordered to bring always their Nets unto him, before they should use them, and that the Kiddles then taken should be at the disposition of the Lord Mayor: so the Offenders made their submission accordingly. VII. He proceeds; This Right appertains to the City of London, by Letters Patents, which he pro∣ved by a Grant made by Edward IV. to the Earl of Pembroke, for setting up a Wear in the River of Thames: which Grant was Revoked, and Cancelled at the Request of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, upon shewing their Right, therefore alleaged it was contrary to their antient Liberties. At which time the Cities Title to the Conservancy of the Thames and Medway was at large set forth, and recited to have been shewn to the Lord Chancellor, and to the said Earl and his Counsel, which accordingly was also read. VIII. He reinforceth the Right of the City by Proclamations, whereof one was made by H. VIII. in the 34 of His Reign, wherein it is affirmed, that the Lord Mayor and his Predecessors, have had by divers Grants of the Kings of England, and by Acts of Parliaments enjoyed always the Conservacy of the Thames without Impediments or Interrupti∣on: By which Proclamation it was Commanded that none should resist, deny, or impugne the Lord Mayor or his Deputy in doing or executing any thing that might conduce to the Conservacy of the River, and of the Fish and Fry within the same. IX. He produceth Report, for in a Contro∣versie betwixt the Lord Admiral, and the Lord Mayor, for the Measuring of Coals and other things
upon the Thames, it then fell into Debate, to whom the Conservacy of the Thames did belong, which cause was referred by Queen ELIZABETH's Coun∣cel of State, 1597, to the Attorney-General, and So∣licitor, who joyntly Certified amongst other things, that the Conservancy and care of the said River, did, and ought, to belong to the City of London. X. By quo Warranto it was proved that the Conservacy of the Thames, belongs to the City: for 3 Jac. a quo Warranto was brought against the City in the Exchequer, to know by what Title She claimed the Conservacy of the River of Thames, and the Waters of Medway; whereupon the City made Her Title Good thereunto, by antient prescription, and otherwise: so Judgment was given in Her Fa∣vour. XI. He goes on afterwards to confirm the Right of the City, by Proof of Ʋsage, in regard the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have time out of mind made Ordinances, concerning the Good Government of the River of Thames, as well for the Seasons and Manner of Fishing beneath London-bridge Eastward, upon pain of certain Penalties, as appears from time to time, from the Reign of Henry III. and so down∣ward. The Lord Mayor hath removed Kiddles, Wears, Trinks, and other unlawful Engines, and reformed the disorders of such as have offended besides in the River of Thames, and inflicted punishment upon Offenders accordingly. The Right of the City appears also by the Writs, and Preceps under the Teste of the Lord Mayor, to the Sheriffs of Kent and Essex, for the Returning of Juries before him, to inquire of Offences done in the River. The same Right of the City appears also by Commissions, whereof divers have been directed
to the Lord Mayor, to put in Execution the, Acts of Parliament, made for Conservance of the Thames and Medway, and to inquire of all Offences made, or done in the said Waters, and to punish the De∣liaquents accordingly. Lastly, He makes good the Right and Title of the City, by the Continual Claim She has made thereunto, as appears in those various Contests She had with the Lord Admiral of England, wherein af∣ter divers Debates and Disputes, She still came off well, and made Her Title good. Which moved King Jamts in the third Year of His Reign, to put a Final Determination to the Business, by the Let∣ters Patents he passed unto the City, wherein he saith, That ad omnem Controversiam in hac parte Temporibus, tam presentibus quam futuris tollen∣dam, & omne Dubium amo vendam; that to cut off all Controversies, as well of the present times, as of Future, and to remove all Doubts, he did Con∣firm and Ratifie the said Right unto the City of London, &c. I. This Office of Conservator of so Noble a River, is of great Extent, for he is to preserve the Cur∣rency of the stream, on the Banks on both sides. II. To preserve the Fish and Fry within the same, that no Fishermen use unlawful Nets or Engines, or fish at Prohibited Seasons. III. To hinder the erection of any Weares, Kid∣dles, or Engines, and the knocking in of any Posts, Piles, or Stake., which may in any sort hinder the Stream, or Navigation; and to pull them up, if al∣ready done, and punish the Offenders: also to pre∣vent all incroachments upon the Rivers, and the Banks thereof: likewise to inquire of all Bridges,
Flood-Gates, Mill-dams, and such like Annoyances; and whether any do hurl in any Soyl, Dust, or Rub∣bish, or other Filth whatsoever to choak her. But for the strength and safety of the River against the Invasion of an Enemy, by Block-Houses, Forts, Bastions, or Castles, and the securing of the Merchant and Navigation to and fro, that Charge belongs to the Soveraign Prince. The former Charge, Care, and Circumspection belongs properly to the City of London, which is Seated in a fit place to be watchful over her, for which Vigilance, the Thames Rewards the City abundantly, by bringing her in the Spices of the South, the Jewels of the East, and the Treasures of the West, yea a considerable share of the richest Merchandizes of the World, &c. so that this Fa∣mous River may be said, to be (as it were) the Ra∣dical Moysture of London, and its best Friend; which was hinted by the Lord Mayor to King James; for the King being displeased, because the City would not lend Him a Sum of Money, told the Mayor and Aldermen, that he would Remove His Court with all the Records of the Tower, and the Courts of Westminster-Hall, to another place, with further expressions of that kind. The Lord Mayor calmly heard all, and at last Answered, Your Ma∣jesty hath Power to do what You Please, and Your City of London will obey accordingly; but She hum∣bly Desires, that when Your Majesty shall remove Your Courts, You would please to leave the Thames behind You. Besides the inestimable Benefit that this Noble River brings to the City, and the Adjacent places, by the easie conveyance of all Sorts of Goods and Mer∣chandizes, almost all the Fuel for Firing being also brought by it from Newcastle, Scotland, Kent, Es∣sex, &c. It supplies the City in very many places
with excellent wholsom Water, convey'd into all the Adjacent Houses by Water Engines, of great cost and Artifice. So much for the Thames. The City of London is supply'd with pure Spring-Water, from above Twenty Conduits, so Commo∣diously placed, that they serve all the Chiefest parts of the City. And in all parts, though on the highest Ground, It is abundantly Served with Pump Water, and those Pumps in many places hardly. Six Foot deep in the Ground. Of the New-River. This Famous and never-to-be-forgotten Work brought by the Liberal Charge and Exquisite Skill of one Worthy Man, Sir Hugh Middleton, Knight and Baronet, Citizen and Goldsmith of London, de∣serves an everlasting Memorial. Several Wells and Springs of sweet and fresh Water with which the City was served, being Decayed, sundry Projects were on Foot to supply that want; but this Prin∣cipal Device was found out by the aforesaid Gentle∣man, and the Difficulties and vast Expence made it for some time to be retarded, but Courage and a Resolution to promote the Publick Good, promp∣ted him on to the Atchievment, which since hath proved happily Commodious, and of infinite Uti∣lity to the whole City, so that the brave Adventurer deserves a Statue to Eternize his Name, and Trans∣mit his Memory, to keep it Fresh (like his Waters) to future Ages. Now as Mr. Stow speaks very in∣geniously, if those Enemies to all Good Actions, Danger Difficulty, Detraction, Contempt, Scorn, and Envy, could have prevailed by their Malevo∣lent Interposition, either before, at the beginning, and in the very Birth of the Attempt, and a good while after, this work had never been accomplished.
Queen Elizabeth granted Power to the Citizens by Act of Parliament, for Cutting and Conveying of a River, from any part of Middlesex or Hart∣fordshire to the City of London, with a Limitation of ten Years time, for the performance thereof. But She dyed before it was undertaken. King James Granted the like, but without limitation of time. And when others would not undertake it, Sir Hugh Middleton did, with infinite Pains and vast Charge, both begin and finish it. He brought it from Amuel and Chadwel, two Springs near Ware in Hartfordshire, from whence, in a turning and winding Course, it Runs threescore Miles before it reaches the City. At the North-side of the City at Islington, he built a large Cistern to receive it, and from thence it is dispersed in Pipes, serving the highest parts of London in their lower Rooms, and the Lower parts in their higher Rooms. It was begun the 28th of February, Anno Dom. 1608, and finished in five Years. It can hardly be imagined what difficulties and rubs there were in the way, through which the Wa∣ter was to pass, some being Ozie, Soft, and Muddy; other again as Hard, Craggy, and Stny; in some places the Channel is Thirty Foot deep; in other places it is carried over Valleys in open Troughs betwixt Hills, which Troughs are supported by Wooden Arches, some of them fixt in the Earth very deep, and rising in Height above 23 Foot. Over this New-River are made 800 Bridgs, some of Stone, some of Brick, and some of Wood, and six hundred Men have been at once imployed in this Great Work. The River being brought to the said Great Cistern, the Water was not let in till Michaelmas Day, Anno 1613. Sir John Swinnerton, then Lord Mayor, and Sir Thomas Middleton, Brother to the
said Sir Hugh, being Elected Lord Mayor for the Ensuing Year. In the Afternoon, Sir John Swin∣nerton, and Sir Thomas Middleton, with Sir Henry Mountague, the Recorder of London, and many of the Worthy Aldermen, Rode in a Solemn man∣ner to see the Great Cistern, and first Issuing of the strange River thereunto, which was then made Free Denizen of London; and the Solemnity was thus: A Troop of Labourers of the Number of Sixty or more, well Apparrelled, and wearing Green Monmoth Caps, after the Brittish manner, all alike, carried Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, and such like Instruments of Laborious Employment, and march∣ing after Drums twice or thrice about the Cistern, presented themselves before the Mount, where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were (with a Wor∣thy Company besides,) and one Man in the behalf of the rest, delivered a handsom Speech in Verse; at the Conclusion of which, the Flood-Gates flew open, and the Stream ran Cheerfully into the Cistern, the Drums Beating, and Trumpets Sounding in Trium∣phant manner, and a Gallant Peal of Chambers gave a Period to the Entertainment. Upon which brave Man, these Lines were made. Ad Hugonem Middleton Equitem Aurat um, De stupenda hac aquarum opera. Compita qui fluvium per Londinensia Duxti, Ʋt jam quisque suis vicus abundet aquis, Non Aganippe tuas satis est depromere laudes, Haec scaturigo novae quam tibi fundit aquae.
Before we leave this Head, although it is no necessary to give a particular Account of every Con∣duit, whereof there are many in and about the City (as was said,) and one now a Rearing in the place of the Old Conduit, at the West end of Cheap side, which is intended to be a Stately one, and be∣seeming the Magnificence of the City, and that Gallant Street where it is to be Erected, &c. Ye that neatly-wrought Conduit in Stocks-Market, a the West end of Lumbard-street, is not to be omitted, whereupon is placed a very Magnificent Statue of KING CHARLES the II. on Horse∣back, Trampling upon an Enemy, all in Excellent White-Marble, at the Sole Cost and Charges of Sir Robert Viner, who was Lord Mayor of Lon∣don, in the Year 1675. There is likewise a very Magnificent Statue of King CHARLES the I. on Horse-back, all of Solid Brass, at Charing-Cross; the Figures of both which are here Exhibited.
THE K. AT THE STOCKs MARKET THE K. AT CHARING CROSs.
CHAP. IV. Of the Government of London. IN this Chapter we shall briefly Treat of the Go∣vernment of this Renowned City, in Three Se∣ctions. 1. The Ecclesiastical Government. 2. The Temporal or Civil Government. 3. The Military Government. SECT. 1. Of the Ecclesiastical Government. THe Government of London, considering how great and populous it is, is very admirable, and might take up a volume in the Description thereof. The Ecclesiastical Government is by a Bishop, and I have read that in the Britains time it was an Archbishops See, (of which see page 57. before) but removed in the Saxons time to Canterbury for the sake of Austin the Monk, who first preached the Gospel to the Heathen Saxons, and lies buried there. To the Cathedral of London belongs a Dean, a Chapter, a Treasurer, and 30 Prebendaries. In the several Parishes there are placed many learned and eminent Divines, a Rector or Vicar for every Parish, who are reputed the most excellent Preachers in Christendom, insomuch that divers Foreigners have come hither, on purpose to learn their way. There is in every Parish a Vicarage, or Parson∣age-House for these Divines and their Families, with good allowances for their Maintenance, of which▪ and the Union of Parishes, take the following ac∣count▪
By an Act of Parliament made in the 19 Car. 2. Cap. 3. Sect. 31. It was Enacted that the Parishes to be Rebuilded within the City of London, in lieu of those which were demollished by the late Dreadful Fire, should not exceed the number of 39. But in the 22 Car. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 62. It was Enacted that for as much as upon an exact Survey taken of the Number of Houses to be Rebuilded, and of the Extent of the respective Parishes necessary to be continued within the said City, it doth appear that the Parishes to be setled and continued, and the Pa∣rish-Churches to be rebuilded within the said City of London, in lieu of those demollished or consu∣med by the said late Fire, cannot conveniently by Union, or otherwise, be reduced to a less Number than fifty one; It was therefore further Enacted, that the Number of Parishes to be setled, and of Parish-Churches to be rebuilded within the said City of London, should be Fifty One, the aforesaid Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary, notwith∣standing. There was also Anno, 22. and 23. Car. 2. Cap. 15. An Act of Parliament for the better Settlement of the Maintenance of the Parsons, Vicars, and Cu∣rates of the said Parishes, to prevent Controversies of Law that might arise about the alteration of Hou∣ses in the Rebuilding of the City; It was therefore reduced to a certainty of Tythes, or a sum of Money in lieu of Tythes, as in the following Table may be seen. ☞ Note that the first Seventeen Parishes after mentioned, are to remain and continue as heretofore they were: and that the respective Parish Churches to each of the said Parishes belonging, were to be Rebuilded for the use of the said Parishes.
☞ Note likewise that the rest that are joined in Order, are the united Parishes, and that the first Pa∣rish mentioned in each line, is the Parish-Church of the Parishes so united, and that the sum annex∣ed to each is the annual payment to be made to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the same, in lieu of Tythes. l. 1. Allhallows Lumbardstreet 110 2. S. Bartholomew Exchange 100 3. S. Bridget, alias Brides 120 4. S. Bennet-Fink 100 5. S. Michael Crooked-lane 100 6. S. Christopher 120 7. S. Dionys Back-Church 120 8. S. Dunstans East 200 9. S. James Garlick-hith 100 10. S. Michael Cornhill 140 11. S. Michael Bassishaw 132 l. 11 s. 12. S. Margaret Lothbury 100 13. S. Mary Aldermanbury 150 14. S. Martin Ludgate 160 15. S. Peter Corn-hill 110 16. S. Stephen Colemanstreet 110 17. S. Sepulchres 200 Parishes United. 18. Alhallows Breadstreet and S. John Evange∣list 140 19. Alhallows the Great, and Alhallows the Less 200 20. S. Alban Woodstreet, and S. Olaves Silver∣street 170 21. S. Ann and Agnes, and S. John Zachary 140 22. S. Augustine, and S. Faith. 172 23. S. Andrew Wardrobe, and S. Anne Black-Fryers 140
24. S. Antholin, and S. John Baptist 120 25. S. Bennet Grace-Church, and S. Leonard East-cheap 140 26. S. Bennets Pauls-Wharff, and S. Peter Pauls-Wharff 100 27. Christ-Church, and S. Leonard Foster-lane 200 28. S. Edmond the King, and S. Nicholas Acons 180 29. S. George Botolph-lane, and S. Botolph Billings-gate 180 30. S. Laurence Jewry, and S. Magdalen Milk-street 120 31. S. Magnus, and S. Margaret New Fish-street 170 32. S. Michael Royal, and S. Martin Vintry 140 33. S. Matthew Friday-street, and S. Peter Cheap 150 34. S. Margaret Pattons, and S. Gabriel Fen-Church 120 35. S. Mary at Hill, and S. Andrew Hubbard 200 36. S. Mary Wolnoth, and S. Mary Wool-Church 160 37. S. Clement East-Cheap, and S. Martin Or∣gars 140 38. S. Mary Abchurch, and S. Laurence Pountney 120 39. S. Mary-Aldermary, and S. Thomas Apostles 150 40. S. Mary-le-Bow, S. Pancras Soper-lane, and Al∣hallows Honey-lane 200 41. S. Mildred Poultry, and S. Mary Cole-Church 170 42. S. Michael Woodstreet, and S. Mary Staining 100 43. S. Mildred Breadstreet, and S. Margaret Mo∣ses 130 44. S. Michael Qeeen-hith, and Trinity 160 45. S. Magdalen Old Fish-street, and S. Gregory 120 46. S. Mary Sommerset, and S. Mary Mountaw 110 47. S. Nicholas Cole-Abby, and S. Nicholas Olaves 130 48. S. Olave Jewry, and S. Martin Ironmonger-lane. 120 49. S. Stephen Walbrook, and S. Bennet Sher∣hog 100
50. S. Swythin, and S. Mary Bothaw 140 51. S. Vedast, alias Fosters, and S. Michael Quern 160 These respective sums, in liue of Tyths, are to be yearly paid over and above Glebes, Perquisites, and Bequests, the Assessment to be made by the Alder∣men of each Ward or his Deputy, the Common-Councel-men, and Church-Wardens, and one or more of the Parishioners. Impropriators are by the said Act to make the same allowances to the Incum∣bents, as they did before the Fire. Upon Refusal of Payment, the Lord Mayor may Grant his Warrant to the Collector, who with a Constable in the Day∣time, may Levy the same by Distress and sale of the Goods of the Party so refusing, &c. restoring the overplus; but may deduct the reasonable Char∣ges of making Distress, &c. Provided that it shall and may be lawful to and for the Warden and Mi∣nor Canons of S. Pauls Church London, Parson and Proprietors of the Rectory of the Parish of S. Gre∣gory aforesaid, to receive and enjoy all Tythes, Ob∣lations, and Duties arising or growing due within the said Parish, in as large and beneficial a manner as formerly, &c. The Parish-Churches were to be Rebuilt accord∣ing to Models appointed by the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, the Bishop of London, and the Lord Mayor of London, with the King's Approbation. The Church-yards of the Demolished Churches were to be inclosed with Brick or Stone-Walls, for Burial for the Parishes formerly belonging to the same, and the Parishes to which they are respective∣ly united, and not used or employed for any other purpose whatsoever, except such parts thereof as the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, with the Consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bishop of London, and by his Majesties Approbation, shall be
thought necessary to be laid into the Streets and Markets for Enlargement and Accommodation thereof, and for publick Store-places, &c. This Brief account we hope is not impertinent, and being pursuant to our promise, page 27. and for common information, we could not well omit it. These Parish-Churches are for the most part Built (or a Building) in a very stately and beautiful man∣ner, far excelling their former Conditior. So much for the Etclesiastical Government. I will only add, That for the sincere and pure Worship of God, and Profession of the Reformed Religion, there is no City or place in the World can compare with London. There being, besides the Learned Divines of the Established Church of England, a great Number of very Pious, Learned and Reve∣rend Ministers of the Gospel, who are called Dis∣senters, (and I wish some peevish persons would forbear Nicknames) because they disapprove some things, with respect to Discipline, and some Opini∣ons of the Church of England. But it is my hearty wish, that since they all agree in the Fundamen∣tals of Religion, that there may be no clashing or disunion in point of Brotherly Love and Charity be∣twixt them, for so God Commands, and the times call for it, the common Enemy (like the Kite in E∣sop) hovering for an opportunity to Devour us all: To prevent which (next the Divine Providence) there cannot be used a more certain Medium, then for all Protestants to Joyn (with heart and hand) toge∣ther against their combining and united Foes, of whose temper they have had instruction enough, by Plots, Massacres, Fires, and other Barbarous Actions, of which all Protestants (but such as are Masqueraded) are convnced by demonstrations, as clear as any Geometry can afford a Mathematician. But (though I am no professed Divine yet) I have admired, why men will be so angry with o∣thers
for not agreeing with them in some Point or Opinion in Religion, not Fundamental; that is, not absolutely necessary to salvation: yea so Barbarous and Inhumane are some grown, as to reproach, disgrace, yea, persecute each other, because one will not be persuaded to see with the others Eyes▪ Which is certainly a most irrational and Unchristian, (if not Antichristian) practise, and I cannot but suspect such a persons Religion to be no other then humour and fancy, acted by pride and spight, to such as perhaps cannot in Conscience agree with them. A thing may be clear to one man, that would fain impose it, but it may be doubtful to him on whom it is imposed, which no man can help; Must he therefore be persecuted? If the point be clear in Scripture, what needs any new Article of Faith to impose it? If only deduc'd, what one thinks clearly deduced, another, as learned and able as he, may think not to be so. Mens understandings are as various as their speech or faces, and is it just for one man to quarrel with another, because different from him in either of these, or to put him upon a Rack in order to stretch him to his own Dimensions, if not so tall as he? certainly that man is defective in charity that thinks all Dissenters are either maliciously or wil∣fully blind. No man can be forced to believe; he may be compelled to say this or that, but not to be∣live it. His brains may be sooner knockt out then made clear, and able to see or perform an action morally beyond his power. A man may as easily make a man stark blind to read Greek, or distin∣guish Colours, as an unbeliver to believe, for that is God's Gift. Arguments are good inducements, but force has no countenance in the Gospel, much less a Command, John 20. 31.—5. 39. 2 Tim. 3. 15. Deut. 12. 32. Force may make one blind, but
never to see clearer; it may make a Hypocrite, but no true Convert. The Magistrate is (and ought) to punish evil do∣ers, but not evil believers, God reserves that to him∣self: And man can never have a right cognizance of evil thoughts in another, for the greatest Professor may be the greatest Atheist. Nothing is more de∣rogatory to the honour of God, than for men to think that he wants their help to defend him: Nor can any thing more affront him, than for any one to intrude into his Tribunal, and usurp his Soveraignty. Christ conquered his Enemies by Preaching and Suf∣fering. And he that takes up Arms to preserve him∣self from Persecution, is either a stark Atheist, be∣cause he believes there is no such Reward, as Mat. 5. 12. or a stark fool (or mad-man) to reject the opportunity of gaining it. In a word, what to me seems clear, (which I humbly submit to the consideration of others) is— 1. That none ought to be persecuted for Religion, whose Principles are consistent with humane Socie∣ty, and behave themselves according to the Establish∣ed Laws of the Land quietly, and peaceably, but are to be won by the mild ways of the Gospel. 2. That if under pretence of Religion they disturb the common peace, or wrong any other, or be se∣ditious and unquiet, they ought to be punished by the Magistrate; because Religion teaches no such things, but the contrary. 3. That where we agree in Fundamentals we should have mutual Christian Fellowship, without wrangling about Circumstantials, and that for this Reason; which to me is instar mnium: I would ask the sober Reader, whether he thinks his Brother that agrees with him in Fundamental Articles of Faith (which I could wish were rightly stated) and lives soberly, has Communion with God or no? If he says No, he has no Charity, and
his own Religion is become as sounding brass, or a tinkling Symbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1. If he believe that he hath Communion with God, how dares he deny him his Communion? is he better than God? or where is his Warrant for so doing? 4. That when we have done our endeavour to convince such a dissenting or doubting person in a Christian way, by Scripture, we have then clear'd our selves, and therefore ought to leave the rest to God, who only is his Judge, and takes cognizance of such things, yet still to walk in love with him as far as we agree, always provided the erros he holds are not expresly against the Faith and Order prescri∣bed by God, but things dubious and capable of debate. 5. Lastly we ought to have no Religious Com∣munion with Atheists, Infidels, Papists, or Idola∣ters, prophane or ill livers, or Hereticks, who err in Fundamentals; yet not to persecute any of them meerly for their Principles, but where they transgress the Temporal Laws, let them, as others ought, suf∣fer accordingly; though it is absolutely necessary for the Magistrate to restrain the spreading of such blas∣phemies and immoralities, &c. as direly affront the Divine Majesty. I beg the Readers pardon for this little digression, which my zeal for the Union of Protestants, (though I would not have any to give up or lose Divine Truths with the purchase of outward peace) forced me to insert, (and perhaps it were more fit for a Divine, and for another Treatise) in this Section of the Ecclesiastical Government of this Renowned City. There belong to this Cathedral, besides those mentioned before, A. Chaunter, a Chancellor, five Arch-Deacons, viz. London, Middlesex, Essex, Col∣chester, and S. Albane, a College of 12 Petty Canons, 6 Vicars, Choral and Choristers, &c. In the Bishop of London's Diocess there is contained the City of
London, all Middlesex, and Essex, and a part of Hart∣fordshire. SECT. 2. Of the Temporal Government of the City of LONDON. THis great and populous City is governed with that admirable Order and Regularity, that it is even astonishing: For therein (as in most other things) she excells all the Cities in the World. To handle this at large, would make this small Tract swell be∣yond bounds, we shall therefore give a brief abstract of it for Methods sake under these heads. 1. Its Magistrates and Publick Officers. 2. Its Charters and Priviledges. 3. Its Particular or By-laws. 4. Its Courts. 5. Its Prisons. 6. Its Watches. 1. Of the Magistrates and Publick Officers of London. This Renowned City, in the time of the Romans was made a Praefectura, and the chief Magistrate▪ call'd a Prefect, which continued about 300 years. In the time of the Saxons the name was changed into a Portgreeve, that is, Custos or Guardian, and some∣times Provost of London. After the coming in of the Normans, the chief Magistrate was called Bailivus, from the French word Bailler, tradere committere, that is Commissarius, or one that hath Commission to govern others, and there were sometimes two Bay∣liffs in London, till King Richard the First, in the year 1189. changed the name of Bayliff into Mayor, which hath so continued 482 years.
The first Lord Mayor was Henry Fitz-Alwin Dra∣per, who continued in the Mayoralty from the first of Richard the First untill the 15th of King John, which was above 24 years. He was interred in the Parish Church of S. Mary Bothaw near to London-Stone, where he dwelt, (not S. John Baptist, as was by mis∣take affirm'd, p. 39. which the Reader is desired to correct by this,) &c. In this place, before we come to treat more particularly of this great and honoura∣ble Magistrate, it may not be amiss to give a List of all the Lord Mayors and Sheriffs from that time to this present year, 1681. Richard the First began his Raign July the 6th. 1189. A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1189 1 Henry Fitz-Alwin. Henry Cornhil. Richard Reynere. 1190 2 The same. John Herlion. Roger Due. 1191 3 The same. William Haverel. John Buckmote. 1192 4 The same. Nicholas Duke. Peter Newly. 1193 5 The same. Rger Duke. Richard Fitz-Alwin. 1194 6 The same. William Fitz-Isabel. William Fitz-Arnold 1195 7 The same. Robert Besaunt. Joke de Josne. 1196 8 The same. Gerard de Antiloche. Robert Durant. 1197 9 The same. Roger Blunt. Nicholas Ducket. 1198 10 The same. Const. Fitz-Arnold. Robert le Bean. 1199 11 The same. Arnold Fitz-Arnold. Ri. Fitz Bartholomew
King John began his Reign the 6th of April, 1199. A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERRIFFS. 1199 1 Henry Fitz-Alwin. Arnold Fitz-Arnold. Ri. Fitz Bartholomew 1200 2 The same. Roger Dorset. James Bartholomew. 1201 3 The same. Walter Fitz-Allice. Sim. de Aldermanbury 1202 4 The same. Norman Blondel John de Ely. 1203 5 The same. Walter Browne. W. Chamberlaine. 1204 6 The same. Thomas Haverel. Hamond Brond. 1205 7 The same. John Walgrave. Rich. de Winchester 1206 8 The same. John Holy-land Edm. Fitz-Gerard. 1207 9 The same. Roger Winchester. Edmund Hardle. 1208 10 The same. Peter Duke. Thomas Neal. 1209 11 The same. Peter le Josue. William Blound. 1210 12 The same. Adam Whitbey. Stephen le Grass. 1211 13 The same. John Fitz-Peter. John Garland. 1212 14 The same. Randolph Eyland. Constantine Josue. 1213 15 Roger Fitz-Alwin. Martin Fitz-Allice. Peter Bate. 1214 16 The same. Solomon Basing. Hugh Basing. 1215 17 William Hardel. John Travers. Andrew Newland.
King Henry the III. began His Reign the 19th of October 1216. A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1216 1 William Hardel. John Travers. Andrew Newland. 1217 2 Robert Serl. Thomas Bokerel. Ralph Holyland. 1218 3 The same. Bennet Senturer. William Blundivers. 1219 4 The same. John Wail, or Veil, Josue le Spicer. 1220 5 The same. Richard Wimbledon. John Wail, or Veil. 1221 6 The same. Richard Renger. John Veil. 1222 7 The same. Richard Joyner. Thomas Lambert. 1223 8 Richard Benger. William Joyner. Thomas Lambert. 1224 9 The same. John Travers. Andrew Bokerel. 1225 10 The same. The same. The same. 1226 11 The same. Roger Duke. Mar. Fitz-Williams. 1227 12 Roger Duke. Stephen Bokere. Henry Cocham. 1228 13 The same. The same. The same. 1229 14 The same. William Winchester. Robert Fitz-John. 1230 15 The same. Richard Walter. John de Woborn. 1231 16 Andrew Bokerel. Michael of St. Helen. Walter de Enfield.
1232 17 Andrew Bokerel. Henry de Edmonton. Gerard Bat. 1233 18 The same. Roger Fitz-Mary. Roger Blunt. 1234 19 The same. Ralph Ashwray. John Norman. 1235 20 The same. Gerard Bat. Rich. or Rob. Hardel. 1236 21 The same. Henry Cobham. Jordan Conventry. 1237 22 The same. John Tolason. Gerv. the Cordwainer. 1238 23 Richard Benger. John Codras. John Wilhall. 1239 24 William Joyner. Reymond Bongy. Ralph Ashwy. 1240 25 Gerard Bat. John Gisors. Michael Tony. 1241 26 Reymond Bongy. Thomas Duresm. John Voyl. 1242 27 The same. John Fitz-John. Ralph Ashwy. 1243 28 Ralph Ashwy. Hugh Blunt. Adam Basing. 1244 29 Michael Tony. Ralph Eoster. Nicholas Bat. 1245 30 John Gisors. Robert Cornhil. Adam of Bewly. 1246 31 The same. Simon Fitz-Mary. Lawrence Frowick. 1247 32 Peter Fitz-Alwin. John Voil. Nicholas Bat. 1248 33 Michael Tony. Nicholas Fitz-Josue. Geoffry Winchester. 1249 34 Roger Fitz-Roger. Richard Hardel. John Tolason.
1250 35 John Gisors. Humphrey Bat. Will. Fitz. Richard. 1251 36 Adam Basing. Lawrence Frowick. Nicholas Bat. 1252 37 John Tolason. William Durham. Thomas Wimborn. 1253 38 Richard Hardel. John Northampton. Richard Richard. 1254 39 The same. Ralph Ashury. Robert of Limn. 1255 40 The same. Stephen Doe. Henry Walmond. 1256 41 The same. Michael Bokerel. John the Minor. 1257 42 The same. Richard Otwell. William Ashwy. 1258 43 The same. Robert Cornhill. John Adrian. 1259 44 John Gisors. John Adrian. Robert Cornhill. 1260 45 Will. Fitz-Richard. Adam Browning. Henry Coventry. 1261 46 The same. John Northampton. Richard Pichard. 1262 47 Thom. Fitz-Richard. John Taylor. Richard Wallbroke. 1263 48 The same. Rob. de Mountpeter. Osbert de Suffolk. 1264 49 Thomas Fitz, Thomas Fitz-Richard. George Rkestey. Thomas de Detford. 1265 50 The same. Edward Blnt. Peter Anger. 1265 51 William Richards. John Hind. John Walraven. 1266 52 Allen de-la-Zouch. John Adrian. Lucas de Batencourt.
1267 53 T. Wimborn Custos. Sir Stephen Edward. Walter Harvey. William Duresm. 1268 54 Hugh Fitz-Ottonis, Custos of London, and Constable of the Tower. Thomas Basing. Robert Cornhill. At this time the KING Granted the Choice of the Mayors and Sheriffs, to the City it Self. 1269 55 John Adrian. Walter Potter. Philip Taylor. 1270 56 The same. Gregory Rochesly. Henry Walleis. 1271 57 Sir Walter Harvey. Richard Harris. John de Wodeley. King Edward the First began His Reign the 16th. of November, 1272. 1272 1 Sir Walter Harvey. John Horn. Walter Potter. 1273 2 Henry Walleis. Nicholas Winchester. Henry Coventry. 1274 3 Gregory Rokesley. Lucas Batencourt. Henry Frowick. 1275 3 The same. John Horn. Ralph Blount. 1276 5 The same. Robert de Arar. Ralph L. Fewre. 1277 6 The same. John Adrian. Walter Largley. 1278 7 The same. Robert Bsing. William le Meyre.
1279 8 Gregory Rokesley. Thomas Box. Ralph Moore. 1280 9 The same. Willliam Farrendon. Nicholas Winchester. 1281 10 Henry Walleis. William le Meyre. Richard Chigwell. 1282 11 The same. Ralph Blunt. Hawkin Betuel. 1283 12 The same. Jordan Goodcheap. Martin Box. 1284 13 Gregory Rokesley. Stephen Cornhill. Robert Rokesley. 1285 14 Ralph Sandwich. Walter Blunt. John Made. 1286 15 The same. Thomas Cross. Walter Hawteyne. 1287 16 The same. William Hereford. Thomas Stanes. 1288 17 The same. William Betaine. John of Canterbury. 1289 18 The same. Fulk of St. Edmund. Solomon Langford. 1290 19 The same. Thomas Romain. William de Lyre. 1291 20 The same. Ralph Blunt. Hamond Box. 1292 21 The same. Elias Russel. Henry Bole. 2293 22 The same. Robert Rokesley. Martin Awbery. 1294 23 The same. Henry Box. Richard Gloucester. 1295 24 Sir John Briton. John Dunstable. Adam de Halingbury. 1296 25 The same. Thomas of Suffolk. Adam of Fulm.
1297 26 Henry Walleis. Richard Refham. Thomas Sely. 1298 27 Elias Russel. John Armentor. Henry Fingene. 1299 28 The same. Lucas de Havering. Richard Champnes. 1300 29 Sir John Blunt. Robert Collor. Peter de Bessenho. 1301 30 The same. Hugh Pourte. Simon Paris. 1302 31 The same. Will. Combmartin. John de Burford. 1303 32 The same. Roger Paris. John de Lincoln. 1304 33 The same. William Causon. Reginald Thunderley. 1305 34 The same. Geoffry, at the Con∣duit. Simon Billet. King Edward the II. began His Reign the second of July, Anno Domini. 1307. 1307 1 Sir John Blunt. Nicholas Pigol. Nigellus Drury. 1308 2 Nicholas Faringdon. William Basing. James Butler. 1309 3 Thomas Romaine. Roger le Palmer. James of St. Edmond. 1310 4 Richard Reffam. Simon Cooper. Peter Blacney. 1311 5 Sir John Gysors. Simon Metw. Richard Wford.
1312 6 Sir John Gysors. John Lambin. Adam Lutkin. 1313 7 Nicholas Faringdon. Robert Garden. Hugh Garton. 1314 8 Sir John Gysors. Stephen Abingdon. Hammond Chickwell. 1315 9 Stephen de Abington. Hammond Goodcheap William Bodeleigh. 1316 10 John Wingrave. William Caston. Ralph Balancer. 1317 11 The same. John Prior. William Furneaux. 1318 12 The same. John Pointel. John Dalling. 1319 13 Hammond Chickwell. Simon de Abington. John Preston. 1320 14 Nicholas Faringdon. Reinald at the Con∣duit. William Prodham. 1321 15 Hammond Chickwell. Rchard Constantine. Richard de Hackney. 1322 16 The same. John Grantham. Richard de Ely. 1323 17 Nicholas Farindon. Adam of Salisbury. John of Oxford. 1324 18 Hammond Chickwell. Bennet of Fulham. John Cawston. 1325 19 The same. Gilbert Mordon. John Causton. 3126 20 Richard Britain. Richard Rothing. Roger Chauntclere.
King Edward the III. began His Reign the 25. of January. 1326. A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERRIFFS. 1327 1 Hammond Chickwell. Henry Darcy. John Hawton. 1328 2 John Grantham. Simon Francis. Henry Cobmartin. 1329 3 Richard Swanland. Richard Lazer. William Gysors. 1330 4 Sir John Pountney. Robert of Ely. Thomas of Worwode. 1331 5 The same. John Mocking. Andrew Aubery. 1332 6 John Preston. Nicholas Pike. John Husband. 1333 7 Sir John Pountney. John Hammond. William Hauford. 1334 8 Reginald at the Con∣duit. John Kingstone. Walter Turk. 1335 9 The same. Walter Mordon. Richard Vpton. 1336 10 Sir John Pountney. John Clark: W. Curtes. 1337 11 Henry Darcy. Walter Neal. Nicholas Crane. 1338 12 The same. William de Pomfret. Hugh Marbler. 1339 13 Andrew Aubery. William Thorney. Roger Frsham. 1340 14 The same. Adam Lucas. Bartholomew Morris. 1341 15 John of Oxenford. Richard de Barking. John de Rokesly. 1342 16 Simon Francis. John Lufkin. Richard Killingbury.
1343 17 John Hammond. John Steward. John Aylesham. 1344 18 The same. Geoffry Witchingham Thomas Leg. 1345 19 Richard Lazer. Edmund Hemenhall. John of Glocester. 1346 20 Geoff. Witchingham. John of Croydon. William Clopton. 1347 21 Thomas Leggy. Adam Brampston. Richard Fas, or Bas. 1448 22 John Loufkin. Henry Bicard. Simon Doleby. 1349 23 Walter Turk. Adam of Bury. Ralph of Lynne. 1350 24 Richard Killingbury. John Notte. Will. of Worcester. 1351 25 Andrew Aubery. Iohn Wroth. Gilb. of Stenineshorpe 1352 26 Adam Francis. John Peace. John Stotly. 1353 27 The same. William Wood. John Little. 1354 28 Thomas Leggy. Will. Nottingham. Roger Smelt. 1355 29 Simon Francis. Thomas Foster. Thomas Brandon. 1356 30 Henry Picard. Richard Nottingham Thomas Dolsel. 1357 31 Sir John Stody. Stephen Candish. Bartholom. Frostling. 1358 32 John Loufkin. John Barns. John Buris. 1359 33 Simon Doulseby. Simon of Bemington. John of Chichester. 1360 34 John Wroth. Walter Borny. John Dennis.
1361 35 John Peche. William Holbech. James Tame. 1362 36 Stephen Candish. John of St. Albans. James Andrew. 1363 37 John Not. Richard of Croyden. John Hiltoft. 1364 38 Adam of Bury. John de Metford. Simon de Morden. 1365 39 John Loufkin. John Bukilsworth. John Ireland. 1366 40 The same. John Ward. Thomas of Lee. 1367 41 James Andrew. John Tarngold. William Dickman. 1368 42 Simon Mordan. Robert Goideler. Adam Wimondham. 1369 43 John Chichester. John Piel. Hugh Holdich. 1370 44 John Barns. William Walworth. Robert Gayton. 1371 45 The same. Adam Staple. Robert Hatfield. 1372 46 John Piel. John Philpot. Nicholas Brembar. 1373 47 Adam of Bury. John Aubery. John Fished. 1374 48 William Walworth. Richard Lyons. William Woodhouse. 1375 49 John Ward. John Hadley. William Newport. 1376 50 Adam Staple. John Northampton. Robert Laund.
Richard the II. began His Reighn the 21. of June. 1377. A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1377 1 Sir Nicholas Brember Nicholas Twiford. Andrew Pikeman. 1378 2 John Philpot. John Boseham. Thomas Cornwallis. 1379 3 John Hadley. John Helisdon. William Barra. 1380 4 William Walworth. Walter Doget. William Knighthode. 1381 5 John Northampton. John Rotu. John Hynde. 1382 6 The same. Adam Bramme. John Sely. 1383 7 Sir Nicholas Brember. Simon Winchcomb. John More. 1384 8 The same. Nicholas Exton. John French. 1385 9 The same. John Organ. John Churchman. 1386 10 Nicholas Exton. William Stondon. William More. 1387 11 The same. William Venor. Hugh Falstalfe. 1388 12 Nicholas Twiford. Thomas Austin. Adam Carlehul. 1389 13 William Venor. John Walcot. John Love. 1390 14 Adam Bamme. John Francis. Thomas Vivent. 1391 15 John Hinde. John Shadworth. Henry Vamere. 1392 16 William Stondon. Gilbert Mafield. Thomas Newington.
1393 17 John Hardley. Drew Barintin. Richard Whittington 1394 18 Sir John Froyshe. William Bramston. Thomas Knolls. 1395 19 William More. Roger Ellis. William Sevenoke. 1396 20 Adam Brown. Thomas Wilford. William Parker. 1397 21 Sir Rich. Whittington John Wodcock. William Ascham. 1398 22 Sir Drew Barintin. John Wade. John Warner. King Henry the IV. began His Reign the 29. of September. 1399. 1399 1 Sir Thomas Knolls. William Waldren. William Hende. 1400 2 Sir John Francis. John Wakel. William Ebot. 1401 3 Sir John Shadworth. William Venor. John Fremingham. 1402 4 John Walcot. Richard Marlow. Robert Chichely. 1403 5 Sir William Ascham. Thomas Falconer. Thomas Pool. 1404 6 John Hinde. William Louth. Stephen Spilman. 1405 7 Sir John Woodcock. Henry Barton. William Cromer. 1406 8 Sir Ric. Whittington. Nicholas Watton. Geoffry Brooke. 1407 9 Sir William Stondon. Henry Pontfract. Henry Halton. 1408 10 Sir Drew Barentine. Thomas Buck. William Norton.
1409 11 Richard Marlow. John Law. William Chicheley. 1410 12 Sir Thomas Knolls. John Penne. Thomas Pike. 1411 13 Sir Robert Chicheley. John Rainwell. William Cotton. 1412 14 William Waldren. Ralph Lovenham. William Sevenoke. King Henry the Fifth began his Reign the 20th of March, 1412. 1413 1 Sir William Cromar. John Sutton. John Michael. 1414 2 Sir Thomas Falconer. John Michael. Thomas Allen. 1415 3 Sir Nicholas Wotton. William Cambridge. Alan Everard. 1416 4 Sir Henry Barton. Richard Whittington John Coventry. 1417 5 Richard Marlow. Henry Read. John Gedney. 1418 6 William Sevenoke. Jo. Bryan, Jo. Barton, John Parvess. 1419 7 Sir Rich. Whittington Robert Whittington. John Butler. 1420 8 William Cambridge. John Butler. John Well. 1421 9 Sir Robert Chicheley. Richard Gosseline. William Meston.
King Henry the Sixth began his Reign the 31th of August, 1422. A.D.A.R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1422 1 Sir William Waldren. William Eastfield. Robert Tatarsal. 1423 2 William Cromar. Nicholas James. Thomas Watford. 1424 3 John Michael. Simon Seaman. John Bywater. 1425 4 John Coventry. William Milled. John Brokle. 1426 5 Sir John Rainwell. John Arnal. John Higham. 1427 6 Sir John Gedney. Henry Frowick. Robert Otely. 1428 7 Sir Henry Barton. Thomas Duffhouse. John Abbot 1429 8 Sir William Eastfield. William Russe. Ralph Holland. 1430 9 Nicholas Wotton Walter Cherssey. Robert Large. 1431 10 Sir John de Welles. John Aderley. Stephen Brown. 1432 11 Sir John Parveis. John Olney. John Paddeslye. 1433 12 Sir John Brokle. Thomas Chalton. John King. 1434 13 Sir Roger Oteley. Thomas Barnewell. Simon Eyre. 1435 14 Sir Henry Frowick. Thomas Catworth. Robert Clopton. 1436 15 Sir John Michael. Thomas Moriseed. William Gregory. 1437 16 Sir William Eastfield. William Hales. William Chapman.
1438 17 Sir Stephen Brown. Hugh Dyker. Nicholas Towe. 1439 18 Robert Large. Philip Malphas. Robert Marshal. 1440 19 Sir John Paddesley. John Sutton. William Wilinhale. 1441 20 Robert Clopton. William Combis Richard Rich. 1442 21 John Aderley. Thomas Beaumont. Richard Nordon. 1443 22 Thomas Catworth. Nicholas Wyford. John Norman. 1444 23 Sir Henry Frowick. Stephen Foster. Hugh Witch. 1445 24 Sir Simon Eyre. John Darby. Godfrey Fielding. 1446 25 John Olney. Robert Horne. Godfrey Bullen. 1447 26 Sir John Gedney. William Abraham. Thomas Scot. 1448 27 Sir Stephen Brown. William Cotlow. William Narrow. 1449 28 Sir Thomas Chalton. William Hulin. Thomas Canning. 1450 29 Nicholas Wilford. John Middleton. William Dear. 1451 30 Sir William Gregory. Matthew Philip Christopher Wharton. 1452 31 Sir Geoffry Fielding. Richard Lee Richard Alley▪ 1453 32 Sir John Norman. John Walden. Thomas Cook. 1454 33 Sir Stephen Foster John Field. William Taylor. 1455 34 Sir William Marrow. John Young. Thomas Odgnav.
1456 35 Sir Thomas Canning. John Styward. Ralph Verney. 1457 36 Sir Godfrey Bullen. William Edward. Thomas Reynor. 1458 37 Sir Thomas Scot. Ralph Joceline. Richard Medham. 1459 38 Sir William Hulin. John Plummer. John Stocker. 1460 39 Sir Richard Lee. Richard Flemming. John Lambert. Edward the Fourth began his Reign the 4th of March, 1460. 1461 1 Sir Hugh Witch. George Ireland. John Lock. 1462 2 Sir Thomas Cook. William Hampton. Bartholomew James. 1463 3 Sir Matthew Philip. Robert Basset. Thomas Muschamp. 1464 4 Sir Ralph Joceline. John Tate. John Stones. 1465 5 Sir Ralph Verney. Henry weaver. William Constantine. 1466 6 Sir John Young. Jo. Brown, Hen. Brice, John Darby. 1467 7 Sir Thomas Oldgrave. Thomas Stalbrook. Humphrey Heyford. 1468 8 Sir William Taylor. Simon Smith. William Herriot. 1469 9 Sir Richard a Lee. Richard Gardner. Robert Drope. 1470 10 Sir John Stackton. John Crosby. John Ward.
1471 11 Sir William Edwards John Allen. John Shelley. 1472 12 Sir Will. Hampton. John Brown. Thomas Bledlow. 1473 13 Sir John Tate. Sir William Stocker. Robert Belisdon. 1474 14 Sir Robert Drope. Edmund Shaa. Thomas Hill. 1475 15 Sir Robert Basse. Hugh Brice. Robert Colwich. 1476 16 Sir Ralph Joceline. Richard Rawson. William Horn. 1477 17 Sir Humph. Heyford. Henry Collet. John Stocker. 1478 18 Sir Richard Gardner. Robert Harding: Robert Bifield. 1479 19 Sir Bartholom. James. Thomas Ilam. John Ward. 1480 20 Sir John Brown. Thomas Daniel. William Bacon. 1481 21 Sir William Herrot. Robert Tate, Richard Charey, Will. Wiking. 1482 22 Sir Edmund Shaa. William White. John Matthew. Edward the Fifth began his Reign the 9th of April. 1483. Richard the Third began his Reign the 22d. of June, 1483. 1483 1 Sir Robert Billesdon. Thomas Newland. William Martin. 1484 2 Sir Thomas Hill. Richard Chester, Tho. Brittain, Ralph Astry
King Henry the Seventh began his Reign the 22d of August, 1485. A.D.A.R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1485 1 Sir Hugh Brice. John Tate. John Swan. 1486 2 Sir Henry Collet. John Percival. Hugh Clopton. 1487 3 Sir William Horne. John Fenket. William Remington. 1488 4 Sir Robert Tate. William Isaac. Ralph Tilney. 1489 5 Sir William White. William Capel. John Brook. 1490 6 John Matthew. Henry Cote, or Coote. R. Revell, Hugh Pem∣berton. 1491 7 Sir Hugh Clopton. Tho. Wood. William Brown. 1492 8 Sir William Martin. William Purchase. William Walbeck. 1493 9 Sir Ralph Austry. Robert Fabian. John Winger. 1494 10 Sir Richard Chawril. Nicholas Alwin. John Warner. 1495 11 Sir Henry Collet. Thomas Kneesworth. Henry Sommer. 1496 12 Sir John Tate. John Shaa. Richard Hedon. 1497 13 Sir William Purchase. Barth. Rede. Thomas Windew, or Windout. 1498 14 Sir John Percival. Thomas Bradbury. Stephen Gennings 1499 15 Sir Nicholas Aldwine. James Wilford. Tho. or Rich. Brond. 1500 16 William Remington. John Haws. William Steed.
1501 17 Sir John Shaa. Lawrence Aylmer. Henry Hede. 1502 18 Sir Bartholomew Rede Henry Keble. Nicholas Nives. 1503 19 Sir William Capel. Christopher Haws. Robert Wats. 1504 20 Sir John Winger. Roger Acheley. William Browne. 1505 21 Sir Tho. Kneisworth. Richard Shoare. Roger Grove. 1506 22 Sir Richard Haddon. William Coppinger▪ T. Johnson. Will. Fitz-Williams. 1507 23 Sir William Brown. W. Butler. John Kerby. 1508 24 Sir Stephen Jennings. Thomas Exmuel. Richard Smith. Henry the VIII. began His Reign the 22d. of April, 1509. 1509 1 Tho. Bradbury. Sir William Capel. George Monox. John Doget. 1510 2 Sir Henry Kebble. John Milborne. John Rest. 1511 3 Sir Roger Acheley. Nicholas Shelton. Thomas Merfine. 1512 4 Sir Will. Coppinger. Sir Rich. Haddon. Robert Holdernes. Robert Fenrother. 1513 5 Sir William Brown. Joh. Daws, Jo. Bruges. Roger Bosford. 1514 6 Sir George Monox. James Yarford. John Mundy. 1515 7 Sir William Butler. Henry Warley, Ri. Gray. Will. Bayly. 1516 8 Sir John Rest. Thomas Seymour. John or Ri. Thurstone.
1517 9 Sir Thomas Exmewe. Thomas Baldrie. Ralph, or Ri. Symons. 1518 10 Sir Thomas Merfine, John Allen. James Spencer. 1519 11 Sir James Yarford. John Wilkinson. Nicholas Patrich. 1520 12 Sir John Burgh. John Skevington. John Kyme, ali. Keble. 1521 13 Sir John Milbourn. J. Breton, or Brittain▪ Thomas Pargiter. 1522 14 Sir John Mundy. John Rudston, John Champnies. 1523 15 Sir Thomas Baldrie. Michael English. Nicholas Jennings. 1524 16 Sir William Bayly. Ralph Dodmere. William Roche. 1525 17 Sir John Allen. J. Caunton, or Calton. Christopher Askew. 1526 18 Sir Thomas Seymour. Stephen Peacock. Nicholas Lambert. 1527 19 Sir James Spencer. John Hardy. William Hollys. 1528 20 Sir John Rudstone. Ralph Warren. John Long. 1529 21 Sir Ralph Dodmere. Michael Dormer. Walter Champion. 1530 22 Sir Thomas Pargiter. W. Dawsey, or Dancy. Richard Champion. 1531 23 Sir Nicholas Lambert Richard Gresham. Edward Altham. 1532 24 Sir Stephen Peacock. R. Reynolds, J. Martin N. Pincon. J. Priest. 1533 25 Sir Christoph. Askew. William Foreman. Thomas Kitson.
A.D.A.R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1534 26 Sir John Champneis. Nicholas Levison. William Derham. 1535 27 Sir John Allen. Humphr. Monmouth. John Cotes. 1536 28 Sir Ralph Warren. Robert, or Rich. Paget William Bowyer. 1537 29 Sir Richard Gresham. John Gresham. Thomas Lewin. 1538 30 Sir Will. Foreman. Will. Wilkinson. Nicholas Gibson. 1539 31 Sir William Hollys. Thomas Ferrer. Thomas Huntlow. 1540 32 Sir William Roch. William Laxton. Martin Bows. 1541 33 Sir Michael Dormer. Rowland Hill. Henry Suckley. 1542 34 Sir John Cotes. Henry Hobblethorn. Henry Amcoats. 1543 35 Sir William Bowyer. John Tholouse. Richard Dobbes. 1544 36 Sir William Laxton. John Wilford. Andrew Jud. 1545 37 Sir Martin Bows. George Barne. Ralph Allen, or Alley. 1546 38 Sir Hen. Hobblethorn. Richard Jarveis. Thomas Curteis. King Edward the VI. began His Reign the 28th, of January, 1546. 1547 1 Sir John Gresham. Thomas White. Robert Chertsey. 1548 2 Sir Henry Amcoats. William Lock. Sir John Ayleph. 1549 3 Sir Rowland Hill. John York. Richard Turk.
1550 4 Sir Andrew Jud. Augustine Hind. John Lion. 1551 5 Sir Richard Dobbs. John Lambert. John Cowper. 1552 6 Sir George Barne. Wi. Garret, or Gerard. John Maynard. Queen Mary began Her Reign July the 6th, 1553. 1553 1 Sir Thomas White. Thomas Offley. William Hewet. 1554 2 Sir John Lion. David Woodroffe. William Chester. 1555 3 Sir William Garret, or Gerard. Tho. Lee, or Leigh▪ John Machel. 1556 4 Sir Thomas Offley. William Harper. John White. 1557 5 Sir Thomas Curteis. Richard Mallory. James Altham. 1558 6 Sir Tho. Lee, or Leigh. John Halsey. Richard Champion. Queen Elizabeth began Her Reign the 17th of November, 1558. 1559 1 Sir William Hewel. Thomas Lodge. Roger Martin. 1560 2 Sir William Chester. Christopher Draper. Thomas Roe. 1561 3 Sir William Harper. Alexand. Avenon. Humphry Baskervile. 1562 4 Sir Thomas Lodge. William Allen. Rich. Chamberlain.
1563 5 Sir John White. Edward Banks. Rowland Heyward. 1564 6 Sir Richard Mallory. Edward Jackman. Lionel Ducket. 1565 7 Sir Rich. Champion. John Rivers. James Hawes. 1566 8 Sir Christoph. Draper. Richard Lambert, Ambrose Nicholas, Jo-Langley 1567 9 Sir Roger Martin. Tho. Ramsey. John Bond. 1568 10 Sir Thomas Roe. Jo. Oliph. Ro. Harding. James Bacon. 1569 11 Sir Alexand. Avenan. Henry Beecher. William Dane. 1570 12 Sir Rowland Heyward. Francis Barneham. William Box. 1571 13 Sir William Allen. Henry Mills. John Branch. 1572 14 Sir Lionel Duckes. Richard Pipe. Nicholas Woodroffe. 1573 15 Sir John Rivers, James Harvey. T. Pulloccel of Pullison 1574 16 Sir James Haws. Thomas Blanke. Anthony Gamage. 1575 17 Sir Ambrose Nicholas. Edward Osborne. Wolstane Dixie. 1576 18 Sir John Langley. William Kempton. George Barne. 1577 19 Sir Tho. Ramsey. Nicholas Blackhouse. Francis Bowyer. 1578 20 Sir Richard Pipe. George Bond. Thomas Starkie. 1579 21 Sir Nich. Woodroffe. Martin Calthrop. John Hart. 1580 22 Sir John Branch. Ralph Woodcock. John Allot.
1581 23 Sir James Harvey. Richard Martin. William Webb. 1582 24 Sir Thomas Blanke. Will. Roe. Jo. Haydon. Cuthbert Buckle. 1583 25 Sir Edward Osborne. William Mashaw. John Spencer. 1584 26 Sir Thomas Pulloccell. Stephen Slaney. Henry Billingsley. 1585 27 Sir Wolstane Dixie. Anthony Ratcliff. Henry Pranel. 1586 28 Sir George Barne. George House. William Elkin. 1587 29 Sir George Bond. Thomas Skinner. John Catcher. 1588 30 Sir Martin Calthrop. Sir Richard Martin. Hugh Offley. Richard Saltonstall. 1589 31 Sir John Hart. Richard Gurney. Stephen Some. 1590 32 Sir John Allot. Sir Howland Heyward Nicholas Mosely. Robert Brook. 1591 33 Sir William Webb. Will. Rider. Bennet, or Benedict Barnham. 1592 34 Sir William Roe. Jo. Garret, or Gerard. Robert Taylor. 1593 35 Sir Cuthbert Buckle. Sir Richard Martin. Paul Banning. Peter Haughton. 1594 36 Sir John Spencer. Robert Lee. Thomas Bennet. 1595 37 Sir Stephen Slaney. Thomas Roe. Leonard Hallyday. 1596 38 Sir Thomas Skinner. Sir Henry Billingsley. John Walls. Richard Goddard. 1597 39 Sir Rioh. Saltonstal. Henry Roe. John More.
1598 40 Sir Stephen Some. Edward Holmdon. Robert Hampson. 1599 41 Sir Nicholas Mosely. Humphrey Walde. Roger Clark. 1600 42 Sir William Rider. Th. Smith. Th. Cambel William Craven. 1601 43 Sir John Garret, or Gerrard. Henry Anderson. William Glover. 1602 44 Sir Robert Lee. James Pemberton. John Swinnerton. King James began His Reign the Twenty Fourth of March. 1602. 1603 1 Sir Thomas Bennet. Sir William Rumney. Sir Tho. Middleton. 1604 2 Sir Thomas Low. Sir Tho. Hayes. Sir Roger Jones. 1605 3 Sir Leonard Holyday. Sir Clem. Scudamore. Sir John Jlles. 1606 4 Sir John Wats. William Walthal. John Leman. 1607 5 Sir Henry Row. Geoffry Elves. Nicholas Style. 1608 6 Sir Humphrey Weld. George Bolls. Richard Farrington. 1609 7 Sir Thomas Cambel. Sebastian Harvey. William Cockaine. 1610 8 Sir William Craven. Richard Pyal. Francis Jones. 1611 9 Sir James Pemberton. Edward Barkham. John Smiths. 1612 10 Sir John Swinnerton. Edward Rotheram. Alexander Prescot. 1613 11 Sir Tho. Middleton. Thomas Bennet, Henry Jay.
1614 12 Sir Thomas Hayes. Peter Proby. Martin Lumley. 1615 13 Sir John Jolles. William Goare. John Goare. 1616 14 Sir John Leman. Allen Cotton. Cuthbert Hacket. 1617 15 Sir George Bolles. William Holyday. Robert Johnson. 1618 16 Sir Sebastian Harvey. Richard Hearn. Hugh Hammersley. 1619 17 Sir William Cockain. Richard Dean. James Cambel. 1620 18 Sir Francis Jones. Edward Allen. Robert Ducie. 1621 19 Sir Edw. Barkham. George Whitmore. Nicholas Raynton. 1622 20 Sir Peter Proby. John Hodges. Sir Hump. Hantford. 1623 21 Sir Martin Lumley. Ralph Freeman. Thomas Mounson. 1624 22 Sir John Goare. Rowland Heilin. Robert Parkhurst. King CHARLES the I. began His Reign the Twenty Seventh of March, in the Year 1625. 1625 1 Sir Allen Cotten, Thomas Westraw. Elias Crisp, died. Jo. Pool. Chr. Cletherow. after. 1626 2 Sir Cuthbert Hacket. Edward Bromfield. Richard Fen.
1627 3 Sir Hugh Hamersly. Maurice Abbot. Henry Garraway. 1628 4 Sir Richard Dean. Rowland Backhouse. Sir William Acton, Knight and Bar. 1629 5 Sir James Cambel. Humphry Smith. Edmund Wright. 1630 6 Sir Robert Ducie Bar. Arthur Abdy. Robert Cambel. 1631 7 Sir George Whitmore. Samuel Cranmore. Henry Prat. 1632 8 Sir Nicholas Raynton. Hugh Perry. Henry Andrews. 1633 9 Sir Rlph Freeman. Sir Thomas Mouldston Gilbert Harrison. Richard Gurney. 1634 10 Sir Robert Parkhurst. John Heylord. John Cordel. 1635 11 Sir Christ. Cletherow. Thomas Soame. John Gayer. 1636 12 Sir Edw. Bromfield. William Abel. John Garret. 1637 13 Sir Richard Fen. Thomas Atkin. Edward Rudge. 1638 14 Sir Maurice Abot. Isaac Pennington, John Wollaston. 1639 15 Sir Henry Garraway. Thomas Adams. John Warner. 1640 16 Sir Edmund Wright. John Towse. Abrah. Reynardson. 1641 17 Sir Richard Gurney. George Garret. George Clarke. 1642 18 Isaac Pennington. John Langham. Thomas Andrews. 1643 19 Sir John Wolaston. John Fowke. James Bunce.
1644 20 Thomas Atkin. William Gibbs. Richard Chambly. 1645 21 Thomas Adams. John Kendrick. Thomas Foot. 1646 22 Sir John Gayer. Thomas Cullam. Simon Edmonds. 1647 23 Sir John Warner. Samuel Avery. John Bide. 1648 24 Sir Abra▪ Reinardson. Thomas Andrews, in his Room. Thomas Viner. Richard Brown. King CHARLES the II. began His Reign the Thirtieth of January. 1648. 1649 1 Thomas Foot. Christopher Pack. Rowland Wilsen. John Dethick. 1650 2 Thomas Andrews. Robert Tichborn. Richard Chiverton. 1651 3 John Kendrick. Andrew Richards. John Ireton. 1652 4 John Fowke. Stephen Eastwick. William Ʋnderwood. 1653 5 Thomas Viner. James Philips. Walter Bigge. 1654 6 Christopher Pack. Edmund Sleigh. Thomas Aleyn. 1655 7 John Dethick. William Thompson. John Detherick. 1656 8 Robert Tichborn. Tempest Milner. Nathaniel Temms.
1657 9 Richard Chiverton. John Robinson. Tho. Chandler, died. Richard King. 1658 10 John Ireton. Anthony Bateman. John Lawrence. 1659/60 11/12 Sir Thomas Aleyn, Knight and Bar. Francis Warner. William Love, Esq 1660/61 12/3 Sir Richard Brown, Baronet. Sir Will. Bolton, Knt. Sir William Pek, Kt. 1661/2 13/14 Sir John Frederick. Francis Menil Esq Samuel Starling, Esq 1662/3 14/15 Sir Joh. Robinson, Bar. Sir Thom. Bludworth. Sir Wiliam Turner. 1663/4 15/ Sir Anthon. Bateman Sir Richard Food. Sir Richard Rives. 1664/ 16/17 Sir John Lawrence. Sir George Waterman Sir Charles Doe. 1665/6 17/ Sir Thom. Bludworth. Sir Robert Hanson. Sir William Hooker. 1666/7 18/9 Sir William Boulton. Sir Robert Viner. Sir Joseph Sheldon. 1667/ 19/20 Sir William Peake. Sir Dennis Gauden. Sir Thomas Davies. 1668/9 20/21 Sir William Turner. John Forth Esq Sir Francis Chaplain. 1669/70 21/22 Sir Samuel Starling. Sir John Smith. Sir James Edwards. 1670/71 22/23 Sir Richard Ford. Samuel Forth, Esq Patience Ward, Esq 1671/2 23/24 Sir George Waterman Sir Jonat. Daws, died. Sir Robert Clayton. Sir John Moore. 1672/3 24/25 Sir Robert Hanson. Sir Will. Pritchard. Sir James Smith. 1673/4 25/6 Sir William Hooker. Sir Henry Tulse. Sir Robert Jeffry.
1674/5 26/7 Sir Robert Viner, Knt. and Barronet. Sir Nathan. Herne. Sir John le Thuiler. 1675/6 27/ Sir Joseph Sheldon. Sir Thomas Gold. Sir John Shorter. 1676/7 28/9 Sir Thomas Davies. Sir John Peak. Sir Thomas Stamp. 1677/8 29/30 Sir Francis Chaplain Sir William Royston. Sir Thomas Becford. 1678/9 30/31 Sir James Edwards. Sir Richard How. Sir John Chapman. 1679/80 31/2 Sir Robert Clayton. Sir Jonath. Raymond. Sir Simon Lewis 1680/1 32/3 Sir Patience Ward. Slingsby Bethel, Esq Henry Cornish, Esq Having given a Catalogue of all the Mayors and Sheriffs that have been in London to this present year, we shall proceed to give a brief Account of this great Magistrate; for to give a full and distinct Account of all things, relating to that high Place, quadrates not with the intended bulk of this little Memorial. The Lord Mayor of London, upon the Death of the King, is the prime Person of England, and therefore when King James came to take possessi∣on of the English Crown, Sir Robert Lee, then Lord Mayor of London, subscribed before all the great Officers of the Crown, and all the Nobility. He is always for his great Dignity Knighted before the Year of His Mayoralty be expired, unless Knight∣ed before whilst Alderman, which of  hath been usual.
He keeps a Table so richly and plentifully furnish∣ed, (where all strangers or others that are of any quality are nobly entertained at all times of the year) that it is fit to receive the greatest Subject of Eng∣land, or of other Monarchs. Nay, it is Recorded that in the 31. E. 3. Henry Picard, Lord Mayor of London, Feasted Four Kings, viz. The King of England, the King of France, the King of Cyprus, and the King of Scotland, with other great Estates, all in one day; And their Present Majesties of Great Britain have been by some of the late Lord Mayors, Treated at their Table. There is also for the Grandeur of the Lord Mayor 1000 l. a year allowed for his Sword-bearer's Table in the Lord Mayor's House. His Domestick atten∣dance is very honourable; He hath Four Officers that wait on him, who are reputed Esquires by their places, that is, the Sword-Bearer, the Common-Hunt, the Common-Cryer, and the Water-Bayliff; there is also the Coroner, three Sargeants Carvers, three Ser∣geants of the Chamber, a Sergeant of the Channel, four Yeomen of the Water-side, one Vnder-Water∣Bayliff, two Yeomen of the Chamber, three Meal∣Weighers, two Yeomen of the Wood-Wharffs, most of which have their Servants allowed them, and have Liveries for themselves, &c. His State and Magnificence is remarkable, when he appears abroad, which is usually on Horse-back, with rich Caparisons, himself always in long Robes, sometimes of fine Scarlet Cloath richly Furr'd, some∣times Purple, sometimes Puke, and over his Robes a Hood of Black Velvet, which is said to be a Badge of a Baron of the Realm, with a great Chain of Gold about his Neck, or Collar of SS's with a great rich Jewel Pendant thereon, with many Officers walking before and on all sides of him. He is usually Chosen on Michaelmas-day, by the Livery-men, or Members of the several Companies
in London, out of the twenty-six Aldermen, all per∣sons of great Wealth and Wisdom, in which Electi∣on the Senior Alderman hath usually the precedence; yet in this particular the said Electors are at their li∣berty. On the 29th of October there is a most Magnifi∣cent Cavalcade, when the Lord Mayor (attended with all the Aldermen, all his Officers, all the several Companies or Corporations) rides to the Water-side, where they enter their stately Barges, with their Arms, Colours, and Streamers, and go to Westmin∣ster to be sworn to be true to the King, &c. in the Exchequer Chamber; after which he returns in the same manner to Guild-Hall, that is, the great Com∣mon-Hall of Guilds, or Incorporated Fraternities, where is prepared for him and his Brethren a most sumptuous Dinner, to which many of the Great Lords and Ladies, and all the Judges of the Land are invited; And the King and Queens Majesties, the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, did lately honour that Feast with their presence. The Lord Mayor on the Day of the King's Coro∣nation is Chief Btler, and bears the Kings Cup amongst the highest Nobles of the Kingdom, which serve on that Day in other Offices; He presents the King with Wine in a Golden Cup, having a Cover, of which the King Drinks, and the Lord Mayor re∣ceives the said Cup for his Fee. The first Lord Mayor that went by Water to Westminster was Sir John Norman Draper, Anno 1453. the 32. of H. 6. that is 228 years ago. The two Sheriffs of this City are also Sheriffs of the County of Middlesex, and are annually Chosen by the Citizens from among themselves, in the Guild-Hall, upon Midsummer-day, a high Priviledge among many others anciently granted to this City, by several Kings and Queens of this Kingdom, but they are not Sworn till Michaelmas-Eve, and then
are also presented at the Exchequer, to be allowed by the Barons, and Sworn, after which they enter upon their Office. If the Persons so chosen refuse to hold, they in∣cur a Penalty, unless they will take a Solemn Oath that they are not worth 10000 l. In the Year 1199. (that is 482 years ago) King John granted the Sheriff-Wick of London and Mid∣dlesex to the City, as King Henry the First before had done, for the sum of 300 l. a year, which is paid into the Exchequer to this Day. He gave them also Authority to Chuse and Deprive their Sheriffs at pleasure. In the 1. of R. 1. the Citizens obtained to be Go∣verned by two Bayliffs, which Bayliffs are in Di∣vers antient Deeds called Sheriffs, according to the Speech of the Law; which called the Shire Ballva; &c. which King also (as formerly said) gave the Ci∣ty liberty to be governed by a Mayor as their Prin∣cipal Governour, and their Bayliffs were changed into Sheriffs. The Sheriffs of London, In the Year 1471. were appointed each of them to have Sixteen Sergeants, every Sergeant to have his Yeoman; and Six Clerks, viz. A Secondary, a Clerk of the Papers, and Four other Clerks, besides the Under-Sheriffs Clerks, their Stewards, Btlers, Porters, and other in Houshold many. There are Twenty-six Aldermen, that preside o∣ver the Twenty-six Wards of the City, (of which more, when we speak of Wards) when any of these die, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen chuse ano∣ther out of the most substantial men of the City; If any so chosen refuse to hold, he is usually Fined 500 l. All the Aldermen that have been Lord Mayors, and the Three eldest Aldermen that have not yet arrived to that Honourable Estate, are by their Char∣ter
Justices of the Peace of this City. In the Year 1555. Seven Aldermen Died in less than Ten Months. The Recorder of London is usually a Grave and Learned Lawyer, that is skilful in the Customs of the City, who is to be an Assistant to the Lord Mayor. He taketh his place in Councels, and in Courts, before any man that hath not been Mayor, and Learnedly Delivers the sentences of the whole Court. The Present Recorder is Sir George Treby, an eminent Gentleman, and a Worthy Mem∣ber of our last Parliaments. The Chamberlain of London is, at present, Sir Thomas Player, a Gentleman that has deserved very well of this City, and the Protestant Interest in Ge∣neral, both in that Station, and as a Member for this Honourable City in the last Parliaments. The Chamberlain is Elected by the Commons, upon Midsummer-day, so are the Two Bridge-Ma∣sters; The Auditors of the City and Bridge-House Accounts, the Surveyors for BEER and ALE. There is also a Town-Clark, or Common-Clerk, and a Remembrancer, who are Esquires. The Chamberlain of London is an Officer very considerable in point of power, for without him can no man set up Shop, or Occupy his Trade without being Sworn before him; no man can set over an Apprentice to another, but by his Licence; he may Imprison any that disobeys his Summons, or any Apprentice that misdemeans himself, or punish him otherwise. On Munday and Tuesday in Ester-week, all the Aldermen and Sheriffs come unto the Lord Mayor's House before Eight of the Clock in the Morning to Break-fast, wearing their Scarlet Gowns Furr'd and their Cloaks, as also their Horses attending. When Break-fast is ended, they mount their Horses, and ride to the Spittle, (which is an ancient Custom,
not changed but once in 300 years, and that up∣on extraordinary occasion, till this year, when they went to S. Sepulchres,) the Sword and Mace being born before the Lord Mayor. There they hear a Sermon and then return to Dinner, and some of the Aldermen Dine with the Sheriffs, and some with the Lord Mayor. On Wednesday in Easter-week they go thither in the same manner, only the Lord Mayor and Aldermen wear their Violet Gownes, and sutable Cloaks: But the Ladies (on the former Days) wearing Scarlet, on this Day are attired in Black. On Whitsunday all the Aldermen use to meet the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs at the New-Church-yard by Moorfields, wearing their Scarlet Gowns lined, without Cloaks; there they hear a Sermon appoint∣ed for that Day, and so return to Dinner. When they chuse Parliament-men, all the Alder∣men meet the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs at the Guild-Hall, by nine of the Clock in the Morning, wearing their Velvet Gowns and their Cloaks, either furred or lined, according as the time of the year requi∣reth when they are to be chosen, and they sit in the Hastings-Court untill the Commons do make Choice of them. The last Honourable Members that ser∣ved for this Renowned City, were Sir Robert Clay∣ton Knight, that was Lord Mayor the last year, Thomas Pilkinton Alderman, Sir Thomas Player Knight, and William  Esq of whose real worth, courage, fidelity, and wisdom in the management of that great Trust, the City is very sensible, as ap∣pears by the publick demonstrations deservedly gi∣ven of it; and no less sensible was the last Parlia∣ment (but one) of the Cities Loyalty, Fidelity, and great care to preserve his Majesties Royal person and the Protestant Religion, that the thanks of the House was order'd to be given them, which was ac∣cordingly done by the Worthy Members aforesaid.
What the Office of the Constables in the City of London is, you may gather from their Oath, which is thus. Ye shall Swear, that ye keep the Peace of our Soveraign Lord the King well and lawfully after your power. And ye shall Arrest all them that make Contest, Riot, Debate or Affray, in break∣ing of the said Peace, and lead them to the House or Compter of one of the Sheriffs. And if ye be withstood by strength of Misdoers, ye shall rear on them an Out-cry, and pursue them from Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be Arrested: And ye shall search at all times, when ye be required by the Seavengers or Beadles, the Common Noysance of your Ward. And the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to Rear, and ga∣ther their Sallary and Quarterage, if ye be there∣unto by them required. And if any thing be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall them present to the Mayor and Ministers of this City: And if ye be letted by any person or persons, that ye may not duey do your Office, ye shall certifie the Mayor and Coun∣cel of the City, of the Name or Names of him or them that so let you. Ye shall also Swear, that During the time that ye shall stand in the Office, and occupy the Room of a Constable, ye shall, once at the least every Month, certifie and shew to one of the Clerks of the Mayors Court, and in the same Court, as well the Names as Surnames of all Free-men which ye shall know to be deceased in the Month, in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as also the Names and Sirnames of all Children of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphans, of this Ci∣ty. And thus ye shall not leave to Do as God you help, &c.
The Scavengers Oath is thus. Ye shall Swear that ye shall Diligently oversee that the Pavements within your Ward, be well and sufficiently repaired, and not made too high in Noysance of your Neighbours; and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes, be cleansed of Dung, and all manner of filth, for Honesty of this C∣ty. And that all the Chimneys, Furnaces, and Recedoes, be of Stone sufficiently made against Peril of Fire. And if ye find any the Contrary, ye shall shew it to the Alderman of the Ward, so that the Alderman may Ordain for the amendment thereof. And thus ye shall do, as God you help, &c. Before we leave this Head, it may not be amiss to give an Alphabetical List of the Officers and Rooms in the City of London in the Lord Mayors Gift. Alvegars, Searchers and Sealers of Woollen-Cloath. —Attorny-ship in the Sheriffs Court.— Baker of the Bridge-House.—Bayliff of the Hundred of Osalston.—Bayliwick of Southwark.— Beadle-ship of the Court of Request.—Bell-man. Clerkship of the Lord Mayors Court.—Clerk∣ship of the Papers.—Clerkship of the Chamber.— Clerkship of the Compters.—Clerkship of the Bridge-House.—Clerkship of the Works and Re∣paration-stuff. —Clerkship of the Court of Re∣quest. —Clerkship of the Commissioners for the Inlargment of Prisoners in Execution in the Com∣pters. —Clerk of Bridewell.—Clerkship of Blackwell-Hall.—Clerkship of the Commission∣ers for Inlargment of Prisoners in the Kings-Bench.— Common Sergeant-ship.—Common Pleaders.— Common-Hunt.—Common Cryers.—Com¦mon Comptroller.—Comptroller of the Cham∣ber.
—Collector of Scavage.—Collectors of Wheeladge on London-Bridge.—Conduit at Dow∣gate Drawing Water. Foreigntaker.—Gauger of Wines and Oyl.— Keeper of Blackwell-Hall.—Keeper of the Store-house in Blackwell-Hall.—Keeper of Worst∣ed-Hall. —Keeper of Bay-Hall.—Keeper of the Conduit at Newgate.—Keeper of Ludgate.— Keepership of Newgate.—Keepership of the Compters.—Keeper of the Compters in South∣wark. —Keeper of Bethlehem.—Keeper of the Sessions-House.—Keeper Clean of the Mar∣ket, and Market-House in Newgate-Market, and Collector of Duties there.—Keeper of the New Burial-place.—Keepers of the Wood and Coals for the poor in several places. Measurage of Silks, Cloath, and Linen.—Meal-Weighers. —Measurage of Cottons.—Measu∣rage of Bays.—Packership, Protonariship,—Portership of Blackwell-Hall.—Portership of the Bridge-House.—Remembrancer.—Rentership of the Bridge-House.—Rentership of Finsbury.— Sword-Bearer.—Secondariship.—Solicitorship.—Three Sergeant Carvers.—Three Sergeants of the Chamber.—Sergeants of the Chaunel.—Stewardship of Southwark.—Stewardship of Finsbury.—Town-Clerkship.—Under-Sheriff-wick.—Under Water-Bayliff. Weigher of Raw-Silks.—Water-Bayliff.—Two Yeomen of the Chamber.—Four Yeomen of the Water-side.—Yeomen of the Channel.—Six Young Men.
Au Abstract of the Charters of the Famous City of London. THe ROYAL CHARTER granted by our Gra∣cious Soveraign King Charles the Second, the 24th of June, in the 15th of his Reign, in confir∣mation of all the Charters of this City granted by his Royal Predecessors, recites them all verbatim, of which (that is the most memorable) we can only give a brief Alphabetical Abstract; the Reader that would read them at large, being referred to larger Tracts. By Charter of King H. 2. was granted Acquittal of Murder, within the City, and in Portsoken there∣of —confirmed by King John, ch. 1. By Hen. 3. ch. 4. & ch. 9.—By Charter of King John, ch. 3. there was granted an Acquittal of Duties in the Thames, claimed at the Tower,—confirmed by King Hen. 3. ch. 3. By Charter of King H. 1. an Acquittal of Toll, Tol∣lage, Custage, and Custome, that is,—that all the men of London shall be quit and free, and all their goods throughout England, and the Ports of the Sea, of all Toll, and Passage, and Lestage, and all other Customs. And by H. 2. that if any in all England, shall take any Custom or Toll of or from the men of London, after he shall fail of Right, the Sheriff of London may take Goods thereof at London. Con∣firm'd by King John, ch. 1. by King H. 3. ch. 4. by the same, ch. 8. by E. 3. ch. 1. King John ch. 2. The City Accompts to the King to be past in the Ex∣chequer. —See E. 3. ch. by King John. 2. Allowance of Sheriffs is to be in the Exchequer, and confirm'd by H. 3. ch. 7. Aids:—Citizens by Charter of Ed. 2. are not to War out of the City, and the Aids then granted to the King, are not (by that Charter) to be
drawn into Example.—None are to be amerced but according to the Law of the City, by Charter of Hen, 2. confirmed by R. 3. ch. 1. That the Sheriffs of London be as other Sheriffs by Charter of Ed. 1. and their amerciament is not to exceed 20. l. H. 3. ch. 1. By Charter of Ed. 4. Char. 1. Aldermen for term of Lives shall have this Liberty; that is to say, that as long as they shall continue Aldermen there, and shall bear the Charge of Aldermen proper, and also those which before had been Aldermen, and have al∣so with their great Costs and Expences born the Offices of Mayoralty, shall not be put in any Assizes, Juries, or Attaints, Recognizances or Inquisitions, out of the said Ciy, and that they, nor any of them, shall be Tryer or Tryers of the same. although they touch us (viz. the King) or our Heirs, or Succes∣cessors or other whomsoever.—That Aldermen of London are not to be made Collectors or Tax∣ers out of the City,—nor to suffer for Refusal of such Offices. By the same Charter, Aldermen past the Mayor∣alty are to be Justice. of the Peace. The Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder to be Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and the Mayor to be of the Quorum. By Charter of Hen. 1. All Debtors which do owe Debts to the Citizens of London, shall pay them in London, or else discharge themselves in London that they owe none: But if they will not pay the same, neither come to clear themselves that they owe none; the Citizens of London to whom the Debts shall be due, may take their Goods in the City of London of the Burrough or Town, or of the County wherein be Remains who shall owe the Debts. By Charter of E. 4. ch. 1. Attachments are to be made by the City Officers in Southwark. And by Charter of Ed. 6. The Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, that are Justices of the Peace in Lon∣don,
are to be Justices of the Peace in Southwark. All Forfeited Recognizances about Ale-houses, In∣mates, Bastard Children, Appearance at Sessions of Goal-Delivery, Fines, and Issues of Jurors (except Fines or Issues Royal,) &c. Granted to the City by Charter of King Charles 1. Chart. 1. That no Aliens are to keep Houses in London, nor be Brokers, by Charter of E. 3, ch. 5. That no Citizen shall wage Battel, H. 1. H. 2. R. 1. ch. 1. John. ch. 1. H. 3. ch. 4. ch. 9. No Stranger is to buy Goods before they be weighed by the King's Beam, H. 3. ch. 9. The In∣habitants of Black-Fryers to be exempted from Taxes and Fifteenths, King James, ch. 2. By Letters Patents of King Henry the VIII. Da∣ted at Westminstor Jan. 13. In the 28th Year of his Reign he did give and grant unto the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, the Keeping, Ordering, and Governing of the House and Hospital called Beth∣lehem, situate without and near Bishops-gate, and all Mannors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Reve∣nues, and Hereditaments whatsoever, and whereso∣ever lying and being, belonging or appertaining unto the said Hospital or House called Bethlem; and Made and Constituted by the same his Letters Pa∣tents, these, the Mayor and Commonalty and Citi∣zens of the City of London, and their Successors, Masters, Keepers, and Governours of the said House and Hospital called Bethlem, and of the said Man∣nors, Lands, Tenements, and other premisses be∣longing to the same House or Hospital, to have, hold and enjoy the said Custody, Order and Govern∣ment of the said House or Hospital, called Beth∣lem, &c. for ever, &c. London is by King James, (Char. 3.) stiled his Royal Chamber, who not only confirmed the Char∣ters of his Predecessors, but did give, grant and con∣firm
unto the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London, and to their Successors, the weighing of all Coals, called Stone-Coals weighable, Earth-Coals, and all other Coals weighable, of what kind soever, in or at the said Port of London, coming or brought up the said River of Thames in any Ship, Boat, or Barge, or other Vessel whatsoever, floating or being in any Port of the same Water of Thames, and upon what∣soever Bank, Shore, or Wharf of the same Water of Thames, from the Bridge of Stanes, to London-Bridge, and from thence to a place called Yendal or Yenland, towards the Sea.—For which the Du∣ties Payable to the Mayor, Commonalty and Citi∣zens, &c. is Eight pence for every Tunn,—none is to unlade Coals till the Mayor has Notice,—and of the quantity;—because the Mayor, &c. should be capable at any time, when required, to inform His Majesty, &c. what quantity of Coals of what sort soever, from time to time, is brought into the City, &c. and how the City and Adjacent places are sup∣plied.—No Markets of Coals to be in any Boats, Lighters, or other Vessel whatsoever, except in the Ship that first brought in the Coals; no Forestalling, Ingrossing, Regrating, upon pain of incurring such Pains and Punishments as the Law provides for con∣temners, and neglecters of Royal Mandates. By Charter of Ed. IV. ch. 4. In consideration of 7000 l. &c. was granted to the Mayor, &c. the Offices or Occupations of Packing all manner of Woollen Cloaths, Sheep-Skins, Calves-Skins, Goat-Skins, Vessels of Amber, and all other Merchan∣dizes whatsoever, to be Packed, Tunned, Piped Barrelled, or any wise to be included, with the over∣sight of opening all manner of Customable Mer∣chandizes, arriving at the Port of Safety, as well by Land, as by Water, within the Liberties and Fran∣chises of the said City and Suburbs, &c. And als the Office of Carriage and Portage of all Wool
Sheep-Skins, Tynn-Bails, and other Merchandizes whatsoever, which shall be carryed in London, from the Water of Thames, unto the Houses of Strangers; and contrariwise from the said Houses to the same Water, or of other Merchandizes which ought to be carryed, being in any House for a time.—And also the Office, &c. of Garbling of all manner of Spices, and other Merchandizes, coming to the said City at any time, which ought to be Garbled.—Also the Office of Gager.—Office of Wine-Drawers, &c. to be exercised by them or their Deputies.—The Office of Coroner to beat the Mayors (&c.) dispo∣sal.—Severed them from the Office of Chief-Butler, &c. Witness the King at Westminster, the 20th of June, Anno Regni 18. By Charter of E. III. ch. 1. It is granted thus:— Whereas in the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, it is contained, that the City of London may have all their antient Liberties and Customs, and the same Citizens at the time of the making of the Charter, from the time of Saint Edward, King and Confessor, and William the Conqueror, and of other our Progenitors, had divers Liberties and Cu∣stomes, as well by the Charters of those our Proge∣nitors, as without Charter by Antient-Customs, where∣upon in divers the Circuits, and other the Courts of our said Progenitors, as well by Judgments as by Statutes, were Invaded and some of them Adjudged: We Will and Grant for us and our Heirs, that they may have the Liberties according to the Form of the above-said Great Charter, and that Impediments and Usurpations to them in that behalf made, shall be revoked and Annulled, &c. That the May∣or be one of the Justices of Goal-Delivery of New∣gate, and to be Named in every Commission there∣of to be made.—That the Citizens may have Infangtheft. [This is a Saxon word, signifying a Li∣berty Granted to certain Lords of Mannors, to Judge
any Thief taken within their Fee.] And Outfang-theft, [that is, a Liberty Granted to the Lord to try any Thief taken out of his Fee,] and Chattels of Felons, of all those which shall be Adjudged before them, within their Liberties, &c. Citizens may Devise Lands in London, in Mort∣main, or otherwise,—Merchant Strangers to Sell Goods within Fourty Days,—and may not keep Houses, but are to be with Hosts, (that is, Lodg∣ers,) —The KING's Marshall, Steward, or Clerk of the Market of the King's Houshold, may not Sit within the City Liberties.—No Citizen is to be drawn to Plead without the Liberties of the City, about any thing that happens within the Liberties thereof.—No Escheator may Exercise that Office in the City, but the Mayor for the time being is to do it.—Citizens to be Taxed in Subsidies as other Commoners, not as Citizens.—To be quit of all Tallages, [this word is derived from the French word Taille, a piece cut out of the whole, signifying the paying a part or share of a Mans sub∣stance by way of Tribute, Tax or Toll,] and that the Liberty of the said City shall not be taken into the hands of us, or our Heirs for any Personal Trespass or Judgment of any Minister of the said City; Nei∣ther shall a keeper in the said City for that occasion be Deputed, but the same Minister shall be punished according to the quality of his Offence, &c.—No Purveyor of the Kings, &c. is to make any Prices of the Goods of the Citizens, without the Consent of the Party,—no Price to be made of the Citizens Wines against their Wills, &c. No Purveyor is to be a Merchant of the Goods whereof he is Pur∣veyor. —That no market is to be kept, nor after∣terwards to be Granted to any within Seven Miles in Circuit of the said City.—That all Inquisitions to be taken by the Justices of London, &c. shall be taken in St. Martins [le Grand] in London; but not
elsewhere, except the Inquisitions to be taken in the Circuits at the Tower of London, and for the Goal-Delivery at Newgate.—That no Citizen is to be Impleaded in the Exchequer, unless it concern the King, &c. By Charter of Henry the First, the Citizens to be free from Scot and Lot, and Dane-Guilt; [that is, a Tribute laid upon our Ancestors of Twelve pence, for every Hide of Land throughout the Realm, by the Danes, for clearing the Seas, as they pretended of Pyrates.] H. the II. R. the I. ch. 1. King John ch. 1. Henry the III. ch. 8. The Citizens may Traf∣fick with their Commodities and Merchandizes wheresoever they please, throughout His Majesties Kingdoms and Dominions, as well by Sea as by Land, without Interruption of him or his, as they see Expedient, quit from all Custom, Toll, Lestage; [that is, a Custom challenged in Fairs fer carrying of things,] and Paying, &c. and may abide for their Trading wheresoever they please, in the same His Kingdom, &c. as in times past they were Ac∣customed, &c. Henry the VII. Granted a Charter, That no Stranger from the Liberty of the City, may Buy or Sell from any other Stranger to the Liberty of the same City, any Merchandizes or Wares within the Li∣berties of the same City, upon pain of Forfeiture of the said Goods, &c. to the Use and Profit of the Mayor, Commonalty, &c. Strangers may Buy things in Gross for their own Use, but not to Sell again, &c. None is to take Loding in the City by Force, by Charters of H. the I. R. the I. ch. I. H. the III. ch. 4. H. the III. ch. 9. By Charter of King CHARLES the I. the Offices of Paccage of Cloaths, Wools, Woollfels, &c. Balliage of Goods, &c. Portage of Goods,
Seavage of all Goods, &c. Customable, granted to the Mayor, Commonalty, &c. with a power to Ad∣minister an Oath for the discovery of concealed Goods, &c. The Sergeants of London may bear Maces of Gold or Silver, Ed. III. ch. 4. By Charter of King Henry I. It was granted to the Citizens of London to hold Middlesex to Farm for 300 l. upon Account, to them and their Heirs; so that the said City shall place as Sheriff whom they will of themselves, and shall place whomsoever, or such one as they will of themselves, for keeping of the Pleas of the Crown, and of the Pleading of the same, and none other shall be Justice over the same Men of London, &c. This was confirmed by King John by Charter, da∣ted July 5, Anno Reg. 1. the City paying 300 l. as aforesaid, of Blank Sterling Money at two Terms in the Year, viz. at the Easter-Exchequer 150 l. and at Michaelmas-Exchequer 150 l. saving to the Citi∣zens all their Liberties and Free Customs, &c. If the Sheriffs offend so as to incur the loss of Life or Member, they shall be Adjudged (as they ought to be) according to the Law of the City, &c.—wherefore (says the Charter) we Will and Stedfastly Command, that the Citizens of London, and Middlesex, with all the said Sheriffwich belong∣ing, of us and our Heirs, to possess and enjoy He∣reditarily, Freely and Quietly, Honorably and Whol∣ly, by Fee Farm of 300 l. &c. All Fishrs, Vintners, and Victualers, coming to the City, shall be in the Rule of the Mayor and Al∣dermen, 7 R. II. cap. 11. Aldermen shall not be Elected Yearly; but remain till they be put out.— Ibidem, Cap. 11. Merchants may Sell Cloth, Wine, Oyl, Wax, or other Merchandize, as well by Wholesale as Retail, to all the KING's Subjects, as well as Londoners,
notwithstanding Franchise to the Contra, 7 H. IV. ch. 9. Citizens worth 400 Marks, in Goods or Chat∣tels may be Jurors in Attaint, and the Justices to sit only at the Guild-Hall, or within the City, not∣withstanding 23 H. VIII. cap. 3. The Mayor, &c. next Court after the first of Michaelmas, is to name Watermen Yearly, to be Overseers of Rowing between Graves-End and Windsor, the 2 and 3 Pbillip and Mary, cap. 16. Sect. 3. The Mayor, &c. to Assess the Fare of Watermen, and two Privy-Councellors to sign it, 2 and 3 Phil∣lip and Mary. chap. 16. Sect. 11. Citizens of London and other Inhabitants, Trades∣men, &c. for Debts under 40 s. may Summon in to the Court of Conscience; (that is, the Court of Requests,) and the Commissioners there to Deter∣mine the Difference, and to Register Orders. 3 Jac. cap. 15. Sect. 2. These brief Memorandums are produced, not as comprehending the full Abstract (much less the words at length) of the several Charters and Priviledges of thi Famous City, but as Guides to direct where they may read at large; to be more full, would be in∣consistent with the designed brevity of this small Tract, for it would make a Volume it self: yet what is here pointed at, with what's scatterd up and down the Book under particular Heads, (which to avoid repetition are not mentioned here) may inform the Reader of the most Memorable, which was the thing only intended. He that would consult them more largely, is referred to a Book Intituled the Roy∣al Charter of Confirmation, granted by King CHARLES the II. to the City of London by S. G. Gent. And Rastals Statutes at Large; from whence, with some others, these Memorials were Col∣lected.
Some brief Heads of the most memorable Customs or particular Laws of the City of LONDON. IN this place we shall only mention some of the most remarkable of these Laws, referring the Reader to a Book called the City Law, Printed 1658. The Mayor and Aldermen have always used to cause to come before them the Malefactors which have been taken and Arrested within the said City, for carry∣ing of Tales, and spreading abroad of News ima∣gined, in disturbance of the Peace, makers and Counterfeiters of false Seals, false Charters, and for other notorious Defects, and those which they have found culpable of such misdeeds by confession of the Parties, or by inquest thereof made, shall be punish∣ed by setting in the Pillory, or further Chastised by Imprisonment, according to their Merit, and ac∣cording to the Reasonable Discretion of the said Mayor and Aldermen. Men and Women by usage of the said City may Devise their Tenements, Rents, and Reversions within the said City, and Suburbs thereof, to whom they will, and of what Estate they will. And may also Devise a New Rent to rise from their Tenements, in manner as they like best. And those which are Free-men of the said City may Devise their Tenements in Mortmain. Infants within Age may not make a Devise, nor can Women-Covert Devise their Tenements by Li∣cense of their Husbands, nor in other manner, du∣ring the Coverture.—The Husband may not De∣vise his Tenements to his Wife for a higher Estate, upon pain to lose the whole. Neither may the Husband Devise the Tenements descended to his Wife, nor the Tenements which the Husband and
Wife have jointly purchased, but if the Husband and the Wife have Tenements Joyntly to them and to the Heirs of the Husband, the Husband may De∣vise the Reversion. All Testaments by which any Tenements be Devised, may be inrolled in the Hu∣stings Court of Record, at the suit of any which may take advantage by the same Testaments. And the Testament which ought to be inrolled shall be brought before the Mayor and Aldermen in full Hu∣sting. And there shall the said Testaments be Pro∣claimed by the Sergeant, and the same also to be proved by two Discreet men well known, the which shall be sworn and examined of all the Circum∣stances of the said Testaments, and of his Seal, and if the proof be found good and loyal, and agreeable, then shall the said Testament be inrolled in the same Hustings of Record, and the Fee shall be paid for the Inrollment, and no Testament Noncupative, nor other Testaments may be inrolled of Record except that the Seal of the Testor be put to the same Te∣stament. But the Testaments that may be found good and loyal are effectual, although they be not inrolled, nor of Record. The Testament within the said City ought by Cu∣stome of the same City to be adjudged effectual and Executory, having Regard to the Testators Wills, although that the Words of such Testaments be defective, and not according to the Common-Law, &c. The Mayor and Aldermen that are for the time, by Custom of the City, shall have the Wardship and Marriages of all the Orphans of the said City, after the Death of their Ancestors, although the same Ancestors do hold to them and the City of any o∣ther Lord, by what service soever. The Mayor and Aldermen ought to inquire of all the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, within the said Ci∣ty appertaining to such Orphans, and safely keep
them to the use and profit of such Orphans, or o∣therwise commit the same Orphans, together with their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to other their Friends, by sufficient Surety found of Record in the Chamber of Guild-hall, to maintain conveniently the said Orphans, during their Non-age, and their Lands and Tenements to repair, and the said Goods and Chattels safely to keep; and there∣of to render a good and Loyal Accompt before the said Mayor and Aldermen, to the profit of the same Infants, when they shall come to their Age, or when they shall be put to a Mystery, or shall Mar∣ry by the Advice of the said Mayor and Aldermen. And that in all Cases, except that it be otherwise ordained and disposed for the same Orphans, or for their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels by express words, contained in the Testaments of their Ancestors. No such Orphans ought to be Marryed without the Consent of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.— Where Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels within the said City are Devised to an Infant with∣in age, of one City, or of the same City, his Father living, that such an Infant is no Orphan; yet by usage of the said City, the said Lands and Tene∣ments, Goods and Chattels, shall be in the Custo∣dy of the Mayor and Aldermen, as well as of the Or∣phans, to maintain and keep them to the use and profit of the same Infant. Except that the Father of the Infant, or some other of his Friends, will find sufficient Surety of Record to maintain and keep the said Lands, &c. to the use and profit of the said Infant, and thereof to render a good and loy∣al accompt, &c. The Magistrates and Officers of the said City ought to obey no Commandment, nor no Seal, but only the Commands and Immediate Seal of the King▪ Nor ought any Officer of the King to make
Seizure or any Execution within the said City, nor the Liberties thereof, by Land or by Water, but only the Officers of the said City. The Sheriffs of London may make Arrests, and serve Executions in the River of Thames, from the East-part of London-Bridge untill the Return, and from the West-part of the said Bridge unto Stanes-Bridge. The said Sheriffs ought to have Forfeitures of the Chattels of all kind of Fugitives and Fellons, and of Deodands (that is in Latine, a thing forfeited to God, as if a Horse kills his Keeper, or a Cart run over a Man, such are forfeited to the King, to be di∣stributed to the poor) within the said City, and the River of Thames, in aid of their Farm, (viz. 300 l. per Annum) which they pay yearly to the King. If the Goods of a Free-man be Arrested, or wrong∣fully detained to pay Toll, &c. elsewhere, and wit∣nessed by men of credit, the Goods or Merchan∣dize of the party detaining, or of others of the same Village where the wrong was done, if found within the City of London, are to be Arrested by the City Officers, to be detained in the Name of Withernam [which word in the Common-Law, is the taking or driving a Distress to a hold, or out of the County where the Sheriff cannot come upon a Replevin to make Deliverance thereof to the party Distreined] untill agreement be made with the said Freeman for damages sustained, &c. The Lord Mayor (as was said before) being chief Buttler on Coronation Days, is to have a Golden Cup at the Coronation of every King,—as was gi∣ven when his present Majesty was Crowned; Baker's Chron. p. 748. Edit. 1679. If a Woman that hath a Husband, as a Woman Sole, hire any House or Shop within the City, she shall be charged to pay the Rent of the said House and Shop, and shall be impleaded and pursued as a
Sole Woman, by way of Debt, if need be, not∣withstanding that she was Marryed at the time of the Lease, the Lessor not knowing thereof. If a plaint of Trespass be made against a Man and his Wife, for a Tresspass done by the Wife solely, then the Wife shall answer sole without her Hus∣band, if the Husband come not, and shall have Plea as a sole Woman, and if she be attainted of Trespass, she shall be condemned, and Committed to Prison untill she hath made agreement. If Plaint be made against a Freeman resident with∣in the City, or by the Law of the City hath a Sum∣mons, because of the Franchise, if the Plaintiff come to the Sheriff, and bring with him six or four Freemen, credible persons, that will testifie that the Defendant is going to run away, withdraw, or ab∣sent himself, the Sheriff may arrest the Defendant by his Body or Goods, as a Foreigner, &c. When a Debtor in the said City is bound by Obligation in a certain sum to be paid at a certain time to come, the which Debtor was held sufficient at the time when he was bound, and after is become Fugitive, or not sufficient, then if the Creditor come before the Mayor and Sheriffs of the said City, making such a suggestion, and hath with him six or four credible Freemen of the same City, that will truly testifie that the Debtor will withdraw, and Convey his Goods out of the City, or that he is not sufficient to make Payment, then the Mayor or one of the Sheriffs, before whom the Suggestion is made, useth to Arrest the Debtor, although the Day contained within the Obligation be not yet come, and to keep the same Debtor in Prison, untill the Day of Pay∣ment be come, or otherwise that he shall find Pledges to attend at the same Day, and so to Ar∣rest for House-hire before the Day, if the Tenant be Fugitive.
If a Free-man of the City find his Debtor sud∣denly within the same City, which Deb∣ter hath absented himself before, or that he be Fugitive,City-Law. pag. 105. and the which Debtor will Escape away, before that the Cre∣ditor can have an Officer, the usage is in such Case, that the Free-man himself, with aid of his Neigh∣bours, without other Officer, may Arrest his Deb∣tor and carry him to the Office of one of the Sheriffs, and there make his Suit, as the Law requires. A Brief Account of the Courts held in this Honourable City. THe highest and most ancient Court in this fa∣mous City is that called the Hustings, a Sax∣on Word, Hus signifying a House, and Sthing, or Thing, a Cause or Plea, so that it is Domus Causa∣rum, a House of Causes, or Pleas, or Pleadings. This Court preserves the Laws, Rights, Franchi∣ses and Customs of the City.—There be handled the the Intricatest Accounts and Pleas of the Crown, and of the whole Kingdom. It is of great Antiquity, the Laws of Edward the Confessour much referring to it, where may be read these words,—Debet enim in London, quae caput est Regni & Legum, semper Curia Domini Regis singulis septimnis die Lunae Hustingis sedere & teneri, &c. That is, The Court of our Lord the King ought to sit, and be held every Week on Monday at the Hustings in London, which (City) is the head of the Kingdom and Laws, &c. But now it is held on Tuesdays, in the Guild-Hall of London, before the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen; every Week. All the Lands and Tenements; Rents, and Services, within the City and Liberties, are pleaded there, in two Hustings; one is called Husting de pla∣cito
terrae, Husting of Plea of Land, the other de Communibus placitis, of Common-Pleas: It is held on Monday to Demand the Demandants, and to a∣ward Non-suites, to allow Essoynes, and on Tues∣day to award the Default and Plead. For certain times no Hustings may be held by Custom of the City, viz. Husting of Plea of Land ought to be held a Week by it self, at the aforesaid days, but the Inrollments and Titles of the said Hustings make mention of Monday only. In Husting of Plea of Land, are Pleaded Writs of Right, Patents Directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, which Writs have this process, by Custom of the City, viz. The Tenant, or Tenants, shall first have three Summons at the Tenements Demanded at three Hustings of Plea of Land next ensuing after the Livery of the Writ, and of the Hustings, without Demanding the Tenements at any aforesaid. And after the three Summons ended, three Essoynes at three other Hustings of Plea of Land then next en∣suing; and at the next ensuing after the third Essoyne, and the Tenants making Default, Process shall be made against them by a Grand cape, or petit cape, after the appearance and other Process at the Com∣mon-Law. And if the Tenants shall appear, the Demandants shall Count against the Tenants in the Nature of what Writ they will, except certain Writs which are Pleadable in Husting of Common-Pleas, &c. without making Protestation to see in the Na∣ture of any Writ. And the Tenants shall have the view, and shall be Essoyned after the view, as at the Common-law. And the Tenant shall have an Es∣soyn after every appearance by Custom of the City. And although that such a Writ be abated after the view, by exception of Joynt-Tenancy, or other exception Dilatory, or other such Writ be evived, the Tenants, by the Custom of the City, shall have the view in the second Writ: Notwithstanding the
view before had. And if the parties plead to Judg∣ment, the Judgment shall be pronounced by the Re∣corder, and six Aldermen at least were wont to be present at the giving of every such Judgment. Every Beadle of the City, by the advice of the Alderman of his Ward against every Hustings or Plea of Land, shall Summon Twelve Men Free∣holders, being the best and most sufficient of his Ward, to come to Guild-Hall for to pass in an Inquest, if there be need, for the rest of the Free-hold∣ers of the said Ward. And if the parties plead and descend to an Inquest, then shall the Inquest be taken of the People Inheritors, having at the least Frank-Tenement of the same Ward where the Tenements are, and other three Wards next to the place where the Tenements are; so that four sufficient men of the same Ward where the Tenements are, shall be sworn in the same Inquest, if there be so many. No Dam∣ages by Custom of the City are recoverable in any such Writ of Right, Patent, and the Inquest may pass the same day by such common Summons of the Beadle, if the parties be at Issue, and the Jurors come.—Otherwise Process shall be made to cause the Inquest to come at another Husting of Plea of Land ensuing, by Precept of the Mayor directed to the Sheriffs, who shall be Ministers by the Com∣mandment of the Mayor to serve the Writs, and to make Execution thereof, notwithstanding that the Original Writ be directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs Joyntly. And it is to be understood, that as well the Tenants as the Demandants may make their At∣torneys in such Pleas, &c. See City-Law, p. 46. &c. In the Hustings of Common-Pleas are Pleadable Writs, called ex gravi querela, for to have Execu∣tion of the Tenements out of the Testaments which are Inrolled in the Hastings. Writs of Dower, unde nihil habet. Writs of Gavelkind, and Custom, and of Service, Instead of a Cessavit. Writs of Error of
Judgments given before the Sheriffs. Writs of Waste. Writ de Partitione facienda, between Co-partners. Writs of quid Juris clamat, and per quae erviti, and others; which Writs are close, and directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs; and also Replegiaries of things taken, and of Distresses wrongfully taken, are Pleadable before the Mayor and Sheriffs, in the same Husting of Cowmon-Pleas, by Plaint without Writ, &c. The Aldermen of London are summoned to the Husting, and they ought, by usage of the said City, to be summoned by an Officer of the Sheriffs, sitting upon an Horse of 100 s. price at least. Of the Court of Requests, or Conscience. THis Court was first Erected by an Act of Common-Councel, 9 H. 8. viz. That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being should Monthly assign two Aldermen, and four Discreet Commoners to sit twice a week to hear and Deter∣mine all matters brought before them (betwixt Freemen) where the Due Debt or Damage did not exceed 40 s. Afterwards the said Number of Com∣missioners were enlarged to the Number of Twelve, which continued till the end of Queen Elizabeths Reign, and 3 Jacobi cap. 15. confirm'd by Act of Parliament, where it was Enacted, That every poor Citizen and Free-man inhabiting in London, being sued for Debt under 40 s. may exhibit his suit in the Court of London called the Court of Requests, where shall be nominated Twelve Commissioners, three of which may send for any Creditor, who is complained of in suing such a Debt under 40 s. and if he refuse to come, or perform not their Orders, they may cause him to be Arrested, by any Sergeant of London, and Commit him to Prison, there to re∣main untill he perform the said Order, &c.
This Court was to continue by the first Act of Common-Councel but for two years, but being found Charitable and Profitable for the relief of poor Debtors, unable to make present payment, and to restrain malicious persons from proceeding in wilful Suits, and to help poor persons as had small Debts owing to them, and unable to prosecute Suits in Law elsewhere, it was continued by divers Acts of Com∣mon-Councel, as aforesaid. Of the Court of the Lord MAYOR and ALDERMEN. IN this Court the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, as also the Recorder and Sheriffs (who are usually Aldermen, or else constantly Chosen upon the next vacancy) sit; this is a Court of Record principally in∣stituted (among other causes) for the redressing and correcting the Errors, Defaults, and misprisions, which happen in the Government of the City; It is kept on Tuesdays and Thursdays. In this Court are comprehended several other Courts, as I. The Court of Orphans; for the Mayor and Alderman (as was said at large before) by Custom have the Custody of the Orphans within the City, &c.—The Chamberlain is a sole Corporation to himself and his Successors for Orphans; and a Re∣cognizance made to him and his Successours touch∣ing Orphans, shall by Custom go to his Successor. The Government of Orphans is so invested in the Mayor, that if any Orphans sue in the Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere for a Legacy, or Duty due to them, by the Custom, a Prohibition doth lie. 2. The Court of Wardmote, or of the Wardmote Inquest, for the whole City being divided into twen∣ty-six Wards, every Ward hath such an Inquest,
consisting of twelve or more, who inquire after A∣buses and Disorders, and present them to be re∣dressed inquiry is also made into all things that can conduce to the Regulating and well governing the City. 3. The Court of Hall-mote, or Hall-Court, or Assembly of every Guild or Fraternity, for Re∣dressing what belongs to the said Companies in par∣ticular. 4. The Court of the Conservation of the Water and River of Thames, which belongs to the Lord Mayor, from Stanes-Bridge unto the Water of Yendal, and Medway, of which we have spoke larg∣ly before, when we Treated of the River of Thames. 5. The Courts of the Coroner and Escheater, which both belong to the Lord Mayor; he being Coroner and Escheator by vertue of his Authority and Office. 6. The Court of Policies and Assurances to Mer∣chants that venture and Traffique on the Seas, where Ships and Goods are Insured at so much per Cent. where there is an Officer of good Quality who Re∣gisters those Assurances. 7. The Court of the Tower of London which is held within the Verge of the City, before the Stew∣ard, by prescription of Debt, Trespass, and other Actions; Now part of the Tower is within the City, and part in Middlesex, (viz the East part, but the West in London) whereof (as was formerly said when we spoke of the Tower, p. 14.) there was a notable Example in the Person of Sir Thomas Overbury, who being poysoned in a Chamber on the West part, the principal Murderers were Tryed before Commissi∣oners of Oyer and Terminer in London, and so was Sir Gervase Elways, the Lieutenant of the Tower at that time.
8. The Court of Common-Councel, consisting (as the Parliament of England) of two Houses, one for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and the other for the Commoners; In which Court are made all By-Laws, which bind all the Citizens of London; for every Man, either by himself, or by his Represen∣tative, gives his assent thereunto: wherein consists the great happiness of the English Subject, above all the Subjects of any other Prince in the World; that neither in Laws nor By-Laws, neither in Taxes or Imposts, any man is obliged but by his own Consent. The Oath of a Common-Councel-Man. YE shall Swear that ye shall be true to our Soveraign Lord the King, that now is, and to his Heirs and Successors, Kings of England, and readily ye shall come, when ye be summon∣ed, to the Common-Council of this City, but if ye be reasonably excused; and good and true Councel, ye shall give in all things, touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your Wit and Cunning: and that for favour of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the Com∣mon profit of this City; and after that ye be come to the Common-Councel, you shall not thence depart untill the Common-Councel be ended, without reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Mayors License. And also any secret things that be spoken or said in the Common-Councel, which ought to be kept secret, in no wise you shall disclose, as God you help. The Common-Councel-Men are chosen at the Wardmote-Inquest, for the respective Wards, and are to be of the most sufficient, honest, and discreet
Men of the Ward, to serve for the ensuing year, on St. Thomas the Apostles day. 9. The Court of the Chamberlain of the City, to whom belongs the Receipts of the Rents and Re∣venues of the City; And to his Court belongs the business of Apprentices, over whom he hath great Authority (as was said before.) This Officer is cho∣sen by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, He over-sees, and keeps, all the Books, Rolls, Re∣cords, and other Monuments, and Remembrances that ought to remain of Record, and the City Trea∣sure —to keep and maintain all the Rents and Te∣nements pertaining to the Chamber of London— His Office about Orphans we have shewed before: as also about Apprentices, to which we shall add, that he is to cause their Indentures to be Inrolled, and make those Apprentices to serve out their time. One may be a Freeman of London, 1. By Sevice, as in case of Apprentiship.—2. By Birth-right, as being the Son of a Freeman.—3. By Redemption, by Order of the Court of Aldermn: For such as are made Free this way, the Chamberlain of Lon∣don is to set the Fines of such Redemptions,—He is to take Fines of such as are rebellious to their Masters or Guardians, and for certain other De∣faults, &c. To shew the Piety of the honourable Governours of this great City, in ancient as well as modern times, I shall produce the Instructions Recorded for the Apprentices of London, out of Stow, p. 668. Edit. 1633. The Observation of which is heartily recom∣mended to the Youth concern'd. It is thus. YOu shall constantly and Devoutly on your knees, every day, serve God, Morning and Evening, and make Conscience in the Due hear∣ing
of the Word Preached, and endeavour the right practise thereof in your Life and Conver∣sation: You shall do diligent and faithful Ser∣vice to your Master, for the time of your Appren∣tiship, and Deal truly in what you shall be trust∣ed: You shall often read over the Covenants of your Indenture, and see and endeavour your self to perform the same to the uttermost of your power: You shall avoid all evil Company, and all occasions which may tend, or draw you to the same, and make speedy Return when you shall be sent of your Masters or Mistresses Errands: You shall avoid Idleness, and be ever Employed, either for God's Service, or in your Masters busi∣ness: You shall be of fair, gentle, and lowly speech and behaviour to all men, and especially to all your Governours. And according to your Car∣riage expect your Reward, for Good or Ill, from God and your Friends, &c. Of the Sheriffs Courts. THere are two Courts of Sheriffs, one for the Counter in Woodstreet, and another for the Counter in the Poultry, whereof there are two Law∣yers as Judges, well read in the Customs of the Ci∣ty, as well as the Common-Laws; but if an errone∣ous Judgment be given before the Sheriffs, the par∣ty griev'd may sue a Writ of Error, and remove it to the Hustings, before the Mayor and Sheriffs; if they yield no Redress, then shall certain Justices be assigned by the King's Commission, to sit at St. Mar∣tins le Grand, by Nisi prius, for to Redress the said Judgments, and if there be default found in the the Mayor and Sheriffs, they shall be punished for their Misprisions, by the form contained in the Sta∣tute of 28 E. 3. c. 10.
One taken in Execution in London upon a Con∣demnation in the Sheriffs Court, and Removed by Habeas Corpus into the Kings-Bench, shall be com∣mited there in Execution for that Debt; and having discharged all Causes in the Kings-Bench, shall be remanded. Then there is the Court of Sessions or Goal-Deli∣very held usually eight times a year at the Old-Bay∣ly, both for the City and Middlesex, for the Tryal of Criminals, whereof the Lord Mayor is the Chief Judge; and hath the power of Reprieving condemn∣ed Persons. The Prisons in London. OF Ludgate we have spoken in the Section of Gates, page 9. And of Newgate, page 10. The Counter in the Poultry belongs to one of the Sheriffs of London, and has been kept and con∣tinued there time out of mind. The Counter in Woodstreet belongs also to one of the Sheriffs, prepared to be a Prison-House, Anno 1555. and on the 28th of September that year, the Prisoners that lay in the Counter in Breadstreet were removed to this Counter; Both these Counters were burnt in the Year 1666, but Rebuilt since, much more stately and Commodious than they were be∣fore. There is also in the late Parish of St. Margaret Southwark a Prison, called the Counter, in South∣wark, &c. The Fleet is also a Prison, so called of the Fleet or Water running by it, now made Navigable, and called the Fleet-Dike. There was also in Southwark a Prison, called the Clink, on the Banks-side; also a Prison called the White-Lyon in Southwark, so called, because it
was formerly an Inn with that Sign, this being the appointed Goal for the County of Surry, Stow, p. 455. There are besides these, two Prisons more in South∣wark, viz. The Kings-Bench, and the Marshalsea; which last belongs to the Marshals of England. Lastly, there is the Gate-House in Westminster, a Prison likewise for Offenders, &c. Of the Watches in London. To speak in general terms, there cannot be found in the World, more Regular, Careful, and Orderly Watches, than are in this great City, which indeed is very needful; for where there is such a vast confluence of a sorts of People, it is of abso∣lute necessity to keep diligent Watch, to prevent Disorders and Mischiefs, which else would happen. William the Conquerour commanded, that in eve∣ry Town and Village a Bell (call'd Curfew-Bell) should be Nightly rung at Eight of the Clock, and that all People should then put out their Fire and Candle, and take their rest; which Order was ob∣served in his Reign, and the Reign of William Ru∣fus; but Henry the First revoked that Order. But Henry the Third, Anno 1253. Commanded Wat∣ches in Cities and Burroughs to be kept, in order to the preservation of Peace and Quietness amongst his Subjects, &c. There are in the Respective Streets convenient Stations for the Watchmen, who are Citizens, and obliged to perform that Duty in their turns with their Officers, and are to Examine all persons that walk in unseasonable hours, and to Apprehend Su∣spitious persons, or such as are Riotous, or otherwise mis-behave themselves, and secure them. At set and convenient times, they appoint a Party to go their
Rounds, and to apprehend such as they find Tip∣pling in Victualing-Houses at unseasonable hours, or in Houses of ill-name, or Night-walkers, or any o∣ther persons wheresoever that are uncivil, or cannot give a good account of themselves, and the Reason of their being abroad; and when any such are Ap∣prehended they keep them all night in safe Custo∣dy, on the Guard, or send them to one of the Coun∣ters, to be forth-coming before a Justice of the Peace the next day, who deals with them accord∣ing to the merit of their Cause. By this means an Infinite deal of Evils, as Murders, Roberies, Felo∣nies, Fires, &c. are prevented, which would other∣wise happen; it being certain, that in so great and populous a City, amongst the many good People, it cannot be avoided but that a great many wicked persons, capable of the blackest Villanies, do creep in, as daily and sad experience shews. Of the Military Government of London. HAving Treated of the Ecclesiastical and Tem∣poral Government of this Great City, we will give some brief touches of its Military Government, Ancient and Modern. In the 23 of H. VIII. 1532. At a General Mu∣ster in London, were first taken the Names of all Men within this City and Liberties only (which reach not far from the Walls) from the Age of 16 to 60. Also the Number of all Harnesses, and all sorts of Weapons for War; than they drew out of these, only such able Men as had White Harness, and them all to appear in White Coats, with Bree∣ches, and white Caps and Feathers, and because Notice was given, that the King himself would see them Muster, they all prepared to appear as splendidly as they could; and to that end, the Lord Mayor, Alder∣men,
Recorder, and Sheriffs, and all who had been Sheriffs, had all white Harness, and over that Coats of black Velvet, with the Arms of the City Em∣broidered thereon, each one a great Gold Chain, and Mounted on a goodly Horse, with rich Trap∣pings, on their Heads Velvet Caps, in their Hands Battle-Axes gilt; Each Alderman and the Recorder had four Halberdiers in white Silk, or else Buff-Coats, waiting on them with gilt Halberds; and the Lord Mayor and sixteen tall men, apparrelled in white Sattin Doublets, Caps and Feathers, Chains of Gold, and other Gorgeous Attire, with long gilt Halberds following his Lordship at a distance: But next to him he had four Footmen in white Sattin, then two Pages cloathed in Crimson-Velvet, and Cloath of Gold, riding on Gallant Horses richly furnisht, one of them carrying the Lord Mayors Helmet, and the other his Pole-Ax, both richly gilt and adorn'd. Most of the Citizens of any Quality or Office, were in white Sattin, or white Silk Coats, with Chains of Gold, and some with rich Jewels; what the Number of Men in Arms was, is not recorded, but it may be guessed at by what follows: They Mustered in Mile-end-Fields, and before Nine of the Clock in the Morning began to March, entring at Aldgate in excellent order down to Westminster, where the King and Court stood to view them, pas∣sing by; thence they Marched about St. James's-Park, so through Holborn up to Leaden-Hall, and there Disbanded immediately, and yet this was not done till five of the Clock in the Evening, which was Eight hours continual March. At His Majesties Return to his Government, there were in London and the Liberties, six Regi∣ments of Trained-Bands, and six Regiments of Auxiliaries, and one Regiment of Horse; these thirteen Regiments, about six Weeks before his Majesties arrival, Mustered in Hyde-Park, being
then drawn out for promoting and securing his Ma∣jesties Return. These twelve Regiments of Foot were 18000 Men compleat. Eight of these Regi∣ments had seven Companies in each, and the other four had six Companies in each, in all Eighty Com∣panies. The Regiment of Horse of six Troops, and 100 in each Troop, this considerable Army drawn together before the 20th of May, was Judged to be highly useful for facilitating that great Work. Some Months after the King sent to the City a Commis∣sion of Lieutenancy, appointing several persons as his Lieutenants in London, giving them the same pow∣er that the Lords Lieutenants have in their respe∣ctive Counties, and in pursuance of that Commis∣sion, the Regiments were new settled. There were six Regiments of Train-Bands, commanded by six Citizens, Knights, and their Lieutenant-Colonels were all Knights, and there were six Regiments of Auxiliaries. In all these twelve Regiments were 20000 Men; then were listed two Regiments of Horse, each consisting of five Troops, in all 800 Horse; these were all Drawn into Hide-Park, where His Majesty was pleas'd to take a view of them. But in case of need, it is certain that in London, and within the Liberty, there may in few days be raised 400000 Men; Besides Southwark one Regiment of Train'd-Bands, 1500 Men; The Hamlets of the Tower, two Regiments, in all 3000 Men; then Hol∣born Regiment, and Westminster Regiment, 2000 each, and in case of necessity they can raise 20000 more; that is in all 66500 Men; and in case of absolute need, they can double that Number, and yet leave enough to manage Trade, &c. To demonstrate this, we shall look back into former times, when London was far less populous, and of less dimensions then Now, and produce what we find Recorded of its Military power.
Stow in his Survey, p. 85. saith, that Anno, 1539▪ 31. H. VIII. a great Muster was made of the Citi∣zens on the 8th of May, at Mile-end, all in bright Harness, with Coats of white Silk or Cloath, and Chains of Gold, in three great Battels to the Num∣ber of 15000, which passed through London to Westminster, and round St. James's Park, and so home through Holborn. This was for the Midsum∣mer Watch, which custom was discontinued till 1548. 2 E. 6. and then revived with an Addition of above 300 Demi-Laces and light Horsemen, prepared by the City, for Scotland, for the Relief of the Town of Haddington, kept by the English. The like Marching Watch hath not been used since, though some attempts have been made in order to its continuation, as Anno, 1585. A Book was written by a grave Citizen, Mr. John Mntgo∣mery, Dedicated to Sir Thomas Pullison, then Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen; containing the Manner and Order of a Marching-Watch on the accustom∣ed way, wherein he used this Motive; That Artifi∣cers of sundry sorts were thereupon set to Work, none but rich men charged, poor men helped, old Souldiers, Trumpets Drummers, Fifes, and Ensign-berers, with such like men meet for the Princes Service kept in ure, wherein the safety and defence of every Common-Wealth consisteth. Armor and Weapons being yearly used thereby, the Citizens had of their own ready prepared for any need; where∣as by intermission hereof, Armourers are out of Work. Souldiers out of ure, Weapons over-grown withfoul∣ness. few or none good being provided, &c. Mr. Howel in his Londinopolis, Printed 1657. Writes thus p. 398. For strength Defensive and Of∣fensive, for Arms of all sorts, for Artillery, Amu∣nition, for Arsenals and Docks on both sides the River, for Castles and Block-houses, &c. London is not inferiour to any; she hath 12000 Trained-Band
Citizens perpetually in a Readiness excellent∣ly Armed, &c. The City of London hath sent out strong Fleets in former times, to scoure and secure the Four Seas from Depredations and Pyracy. Anno 1293 She was able to set forth a Fleet of 95 Ships— Another Record shews, that in King Stephens Reign, the City raised 60000 Foot, and 20000 Horse, for Land Service, which is about 500 years ago.—No place is better furnished with Magazines of Corn and Arms against a Famine; for besides that at Leade-Hall, and the Bridge-House, How many Halls have Store-Houses of this kind! By the Computation of humane Souls in this great City, may be guessed what Military force may be raised, of which the said Author says thus. In the year 1636. King Charles the First sending to the Lord Mayor, to make a Scrutiny what Num∣ber of Papists and Strangers were in the City, the Lord Mayor, Sir Edward Bromfield, took occasion thereby to make a cense (or computation) of all the people, and there were of Men, Women, and Chil∣dren, above 700000 that lived within the Bars of his Jurisdiction alone; and this being so long ago, viz. 45 years, 'tis judged by all probable compu∣tation, that London hath more by a third part now than at that time. Then the City of Westminster, and all the Suburbs without the Lord Mayor's Jurisdiction, and the contiguous Buildings that joyn with it, as an Intire piece on all sides, contain by all likely conjecture at least as many more; so that taking all together, the Number of humane Souls may amount to above one Million and an half; this computation was thus delivered by Mr. Howel, 24 years ago, and it is certain that the Number is vast∣ly encresed since, as may appear by the great Ad∣dition of Buildings even within these few years. At that time Mr. Howel Judged the Circumference of the City, &c. to be above twelve Miles, but it is
certain whate'er it was then, it is much more now: so that upon the whole, if the Number of Inhabitants be no more then as above, and allowing but the tenth part able to bear Arms, the City and Suburbs may raise 150000 Fighting-men, of which a third part is enough for a Brave Army, viz. 50000 Men, according to the Modern manner of War. Besides these Train'd-Bands and Auxilliary-men, before-mentioned, there is the Artillery Company, which is a Nursery of Souldiers, and hath been so threescore and odd years. The present King listed himself there, when he was Prince of Wales, and so did the Duke of York, who commanded that Com∣pany; But lately His Majesty was pleased to honour that Company himself so highly, as to tell them, when they were last February about a New Electi∣on, that he would Himself be their Leader, which was resented with the Universal Joy of the Compa∣ny, it being indeed an extraordinary honour, to be under the Immediate Commands of so Royal a Leader. Under His Majesty there is a Leader who exerci∣ses this Company every Tuesday fortnight, in the Artillery-Ground, (a spacious and delicate green Field, inclosed with a fair Brick-wall, near Moor∣fields, for that purpose.) And the other Tuesday the Exercise is performed by the several Members of the Company, who are there Trained up to Command. Of this Society there are many of the Nobility, also the Lord Mayor, and most of the Aldermen, all the Commanders of the Train-Bands and Auxilia∣ries here Exercise Arms. This Company consists of about six hundred men. Their Officers are a Leader, two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, two Ser∣jeants, a Provost-Marshal, three Gentlemen of Arms, &c. They have also a Court-Marshal, con∣sisting of a President, a Vice-President, a Treasurer, and Twenty four Members of the Company.
On the second Tuesday in February, at a Gene∣ral Rendezvouz every year, the Officers are Elect∣ed. So much of Government: which I shall shut with the Words of one of the great Magistrates of this famous City, viz. Slingsby Bethel Esq one of the Sheriffs, in a late Paper of his Just Vindication a∣gainst the malicious and lying Invectives of some base, ill-minded persons, that were so impudent to asperse him in his Honour and Reputation, upon occasion of the late Poll in Southwark, where he was one of the Candidates to serve for that Bur∣rough in Parliament; but the well known Worth of that wise and eminent Gentleman, is above the reach of such Detractors Tongues; for while they go a∣bout to sully his spotless Reputation, they render it (though against their minds,) so much the more il∣lustrious; all sober persons concluding that he must needs be a good man, because bad men hate him: for to be praised by such is ever esteem'd a kind of reproach; and so the Philosopher took it, when he exclaim'd (in some heat) for being praised by a scandalous person. Which is but by the by, as the impartial sense of one that has not the happiness of personally knowing that worthy person; Yet no stran∣ger to his due Character. This City is indeed, (saith he, p. 7.) a great and opulent City, full of People and Trade; a City emi∣nent for the great Charters, Priviledges, and Im∣munities with which it is invested; Renowned for its many Courts, and Councels, Companies and So∣cieties; and for the good Laws therein Instituted and Ordained for the better Government of the several Ranks and Orders of men amongst them, whereby they are enabled to obtain, their own Ju∣stice, maintain their own Peace, and pursue all the good and advantagious ends of Trade, with the bet∣ter success, and greater security.
And as the happiness and good estate of this City doth depend upon the right use and improvement of these advantages, and upon a Due and Righteous Execution of those good Laws, so the honour and esteem which this great City most justly finds from all men, both at home and abroad, doth principally result and arise from hence. I confess there is another thing that doth well be∣fit this great City, which we call State and Grandeur, which (though it is far below, and differs in the e∣steem of wise men, as much from that honour which I have before described, as my Lord Mayors Horse, accoutred with his richest furniture and trappings, doth from that Honourable Person that sits upon him cloathed with eminency of Power and Authority) is found nevertheless most necessary to attract that Reverence from the Vulgar and Common People to∣wards so August a Government; which they (giving Judgment of things more by outward appearance, then by intrinsick worth, and real value) would o∣therwise hardly give to the greatest Potentates. To this end the City hath its several Ensigns of Authority and Power, sitted to all degrees of Magi∣stracy, and shewing the place they bear in the Go∣vernment with a becoming Greatness. They have their solemn Processions and Cavalcades, set forth with Habits, Equipages, Attendants, and other Orna∣ments, sutable to the several Degrees and Orders of Men, for the greater State. They have also their Publick Shews and Triumphs upon set times and occasions, adorn'd with much splen∣dor, to Entertain and Divert the People with Gaze and Admiration.—And they have (besides these) their publick Feasts upon set times and solemn occa∣sions of assembling and rejoycing together for their refreshment. And I do agree, that as these being practised with that moderation, and within those limits which the Laws of the City upon great Rea∣son
have wisely Ordained, may be of good Ʋse to the ends aforesaid; so I have not been wanting in per∣forming my part therein, &c. CHAP. V. Of the Trade of LONDON. TO go about to Demonstrate the great Necessity and Benefit of Trade in General, in a Common∣wealth or City, were but (in re non dubia, uti oratione non necessaria,) in a matter which is undoubted to use a needless Harangue; it being certain that Wealth and Riches (which are acquired by Traffick and Indu∣stry,) are Subsidia Belli, & Ornamenta Pacis, the Sup∣ports of War, and Ornaments of Peace, by which the wants of one place, are supplyed by the plenty of another, and the Indigence of the Poor, relieved by Employments from the Rich; there being such a general dependance of one Calling upon another, from the Highest to the Lowest, that they cannot well Subsist without the mutual aid of each other; in which is manifest the Infinite Wisdom of the Sove∣raign Disposer of all things, who has order'd Human Affairs to so due and regular a Subordination to each other, and so necessary a Concatenation among them∣selves, that by a perfect Symmetry or Symphony of Parts, they conclude in a perfect Harmony of Ge∣neral Good to Mankind, which Superlative Blessing should be improved to mutual Advantage, and the Glory of the Supreme Author of it. In this Chapter we Design to produce some Re∣marks, with respect to Trade in some Particu∣lars; as,
1. The Particular Advanges of London, with Re∣spect to Trade. 2. Its Merchants. 3. Its Trade into the Country. 4. Its Trade to Foreign Parts. 5. Of the twelve Principal Companies, with their Coats of Arms, &c. 6. Of the other Corporations with their Coats of Arms. 7. Of the Custom-House. 8. Of the Post-Office. 9. Of Of the Rates or Fares of Watermen, Car∣men, Coachmen. 10. Of the Carryers, Waggoners, and Stage-Coaches, that come to the Principal Inns, with the Days of their coming in, and setting forth, to all the Principal Parts of England. SECT. 1. SOme of the Advantages of this great City were hinted, Page third and fourth, to which we shall add, that one of the Supreme Advantages, is by the goodly River of Thames, which, opening Eastward towards Germany and France, is much more Ad∣vantageous for Traffick, than any other River in En∣gland; and it may be said without Vanity, that no River in the World can shew a Braver sight of Ships than are commonly to be seen (like a Floating For∣rest) from Black-Wall to London-Bridge; which in continual Voyages Import all sorts of Goods, either for Need or Ornament, and Export our Superfluities, to the extraordinary Advantage of all sorts of Peo∣ple, high or low; of this see more in the Section of the River Thames.
Another Advantage that London hath, is its being Situate so farwithin the Land, that it is plentifully sup∣plyed with all necessary Provision from the Country, at easie and indifferent Rates, and the Manufactures of the Respective Counties, which the City disperses to Markets beyond Seas; in Recompence, the Coun∣try is supplyed by the City, with all sorts of necessary Merchandizes, wanting there, &c. Insomuch that London is a large Magazine, of Men, Money, Ships, Horses, Ammunition, of all sorts of Commodities ne∣cessary or expedient for the Use or Pleasure of Man∣kind. It is the mighty Rendezvous of Nobility, Gentry, Courtiers, Divines, Lawyers, Physitians, Merchants, Seamen, and all kind of Excellent Arti∣ficers, of the most Refined Wits, and most Excellent Beauties: for it is observed, that in most Families of England, if there be any Son or Daughter that Ex∣cells the rest in Beauty or Wit, or perhaps Courage or Industry, or any other rare Quality, London is their Pole-Star, and they are never at rest till they point directly thither; which vast Confluence, (be∣sides being the Kings Chief and Imperial Seat, where Parliaments, and the Principal Courts of Justice are held, where the Inns or Colledges of the Municipial Laws are Seated, with the Great Houses of the No∣bility and Ministers of State) must needs bring a vast Advantage and Increase to Trade, besides the most Exquisite Ornament and Gallantry that any Place in the World can shew.
SECT. 2. Of the Merchants of London. MErchandizing may be said to be an Art or Sci∣ence, invented by Ingenious Mankind for the Publick Good and Profit of all, supplying (as was said,) the Native wants of one Place, by the abun∣dance of others, that do not Consume their own Growths, Products, or Manufactures. Such as Ne∣gotiate and Traffick this way are called Merchants. The things Sold or Exchanged are two. First, Wares or Goods. And Secondly, Moneys or Coyn, which are usually Contracted or Bargained for, three ways. First, When Goods are Exchanged for Goods; that is, so much of one Sort, for like value of ano∣ther, and this is called Bartering, usual here in old times, and in many places of America, Asia, and Af∣frica in these days: but in Process of time, Men finding it too difficult and troublesom to carry about them, all things thus Bargained and Truckt for, from place to place, invented a common Standard, or Mea∣sure that should countervail, and be in Value as all other things, and be Accounted in Payments, Satis∣faction and Equivalency to all others: and this is called Money, of Gold Silver, or other Mettals. This Use of Money is as old as Abraham, but it was not then Coyned, but only in Pieces Unstampt; and since by Authority of Princes, it was divided into great and small Pieces, and into several and Distinct parts and Denominations, and Stampt or Coyned with se∣veral Characters, denoting the true Weight and Va∣lue of the same. This was done first by Servius in Rome, of Brass, whereon was Imprinted the Image of Sheep and Oxen, betokening the Wealth and Riches of those days; ten of those Pieces made a
Denier or Penny, and were called by Latines, De∣narii. This was the Original of Money, which after∣ward came to be Coyned of Silver and Gold. Secondly, The Second way is of Goods for Money, and this is Termed Bargaining, or Buying and Sel∣ling; this Facilitates Merchandizing, and to prevent the Inconvenience and Danger of the Carriage of Money about a Man, another Medium was found, and that was: Thirdly, Exchanging, which is the giving of so much Money in one Place to one, who should cause it to be again repay'd in another place by another for him. In all Exchanges there is concluded two Payments, two places, and four distinct Persons, viz. he that Payeth in one place, and Receiveth in ano∣ther; and he that Receiveth in the one place, and Payeth in the other, and so no Man can Remit, except there be another to Draw; nor can any Receive, ex∣cept there be another Authorized to Pay. The first of these ways was taught to Makind by Necessity, the second was found out to Facilitate the first, and the third to Facilitate the second. Thus was the Original of Exchanges, to Accommodate Com∣merce, which was first Practized without Benefit or Loss, or any other Consideration, they using to Pay the Value of the very Sum Received: but in time it came to be considered, that the Party Paying, loses time, and runs a hazard, and therefore it was held reasona∣ble that he should have some benefit. Hence Ex∣changes are converted to an Art or Mystery, Moneys being remitted for benefit, without so much respect to the end of its Original Institution. In the first sort, the Merchant ought to know the Commodities delivered and received, the present Va∣lue of both the quality, viz. whether lasting or pe∣rishable; the property, viz. whether of Natural growth, or Artificial; and lastly, the quantity, viz. whether plentiful or scarce, and in few Lands.
In the second sort, the same things are necessary, and also a knowledge how the things are bought and sold, whether by weight, as ponderous Goods; by con∣cave or long measures, as Commodities of length; or such as are Solid or Liquid. A knowledge of Weights and Measures of the Fineness, Goodness, and Currant Value of Money, &c. A Merchant is to know what to Bargain for, how to Bargain, when to Bargain, and with whom, which comprehends the knowledge of the Commodity, Weights and Measures, proper Seasons, and credit of the Party Bargained with. In the third sort there is necessary, a knowledge of the Fineness, Goodness, and Currant Value, of the Princes Coin, where the Remitter and Party Receiv∣ing abide,—a knowledge of the Currant Rate of Exchanging, of the Par, or Value for Value, both according to the Standard of the Country, and ac∣cording to the Valuation of the Currant Coin there passable. Then of the Usance of the Place,—and a knowledge of the Drawer and Receiver.—As also the due Manner, and Form of making of all Legal In∣timations, Protests, and other such needful Instru∣ments, Circumstances and Observations, as are requi∣site upon Default of Payment, according to the strict and Solemn Rules required in a Bill of Exchange. These General Heads are not to instruct Merchants, but to give a kind of a view of this Noble Calling to others that are strangers to it. More particularly in this Famous City, is a great Number of Merchants, who for Wealth, for Stately Houses within the City in Winter; and without, in Summer, for rich Furniture, plentiful Tables, Honora∣ble living, for great Estates in Money and Land, excel some Princes in some of our Neighbour Nations. A great many of whom have frequently born the Dig∣nity of the Chief Magistracy in the City, and have been Bountiful and very Liberal Benefactors to the Publick, and other Pious Uses.
The Merchants of London have been by divers Princes of this Kingdom Incorporated into So∣cieties and Companies, to incourage their En∣deavours, and in reward of the Discoveries of the Trade of those Countries, whereof they take their Name, they have Power and Immunities, granted them, do make Acts and Orders for the Benefit of Commerce in General, and of their Companies in particular. The Antientest of these, cal∣led the Company of Merchant Adventurers, have had their Original and Continuance since Edward the First, Grounded at first upon the Exportation of Woll only, as the Prime and Staple Commodity of En∣gland; but now upon Cloath∣ing, into which the Wooll is converted: that King Removed the Staple out of Flanders, and allured over some Flemings which taught the English to make Cloth, so that they are now the best Clothiers or Cloth-Workers in the World,—And to Encourage them, he Enacted in the twenty seventh of His Reign, by Statute, that it should be Felony to Transport Wools unwrought. This Staple was afterwards Removed to Callais, to Inrich it; afterwards to Antwerp, Middleborough, Stoad, Delph, Rotterdm, and Hamborough.—It now includes all Drapery, and is Govern'd be∣yond Sea by a Deputy and certain Assistants, and in England by a Governour, Deputy, and certain Assi∣stants. Stow says, that the Company of Merchants called the Staple, were Incorporated by Edward III. But the Merchant Adventurers by Edward IV.
The Company of Merchants of Levant, termed Turky Mer∣chants, were Incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, and had their Charter Confirmed and Enlarg∣ed by King James. They first made discoveries into the Traf∣fick of the Seigniory of Venice, and the Dominions of the great Turk, having then the priviledges of the East-Indi∣an Traffick,—the Navigation to us then unknown by Sea, but the Portugals knew it. Now there is a Great and Eminent Company, that Man∣age the East-India Trade, and by themselves Incorporated, in Queen Elizabeths time, Anno 1600. Imploying a Joynt Stock, they have a Great Capital, or House, called the East-India-House; by the said Trade and Stock they have Built many Warlike Ships, and brought all those Indian Commodities to our homes, which before were brought to us by other Nations; both which Companies, (viz. the Levant and East-India,) now supply our Land, and by their second Transportation many other Countries, with those rich Merchandizes which Veneria, Turky, Arabia, Persia, China, and India yeild; these have their respective Governors, to which are joyned certain Commission∣ers and Assistants. The Company of Merchants of Russia were Incor∣porated by King Edward VI and their Charter Con∣firmed and Enlarged by Queen Elizabeth. As also the Company of Merchants of Ebbing, the Eastland Company,—the Green-Land Company,—the Spa∣nish Company,—the French Company of New Ad∣venturers,— the Company of French .—
There is also the Merchants of Virginia, Bermudas or Summer Islands, the Affirican or Guiney Company, &c. These Companies, besides others not at all Incor∣porated, being encouraged by sundry Priviledges, Go∣vern themselves by setled Acts and Orders, under cer∣tain chosen Governors, Deputies, and a Selected Number of Assistants, which have been found to be so profitable to these Kingdoms, by Exporting the Na∣tive Commodities thereof, by setting the Poor on Work, by Building of many brave Ships, and by Im∣porting hither of sundry Necessaries, both for Use and Ornament, that the Benefit thereof cannot here be cer∣tainly expressed. But for a taste, I shall Transcribe one Instance from Mr. Lewis Roberts in his Map of Com∣merce, Written near Fifty Years ago, about the Levant Company in particular. It was found (says he, p. 295.) that in our last Voyage to Cales, and to the Isle of Rhee, they were the owners of Twenty great Sail of Ships, that served in both those Voyages, and it is probable that they are owners of Thirty Sail more, which one with the other, may contain 12 or 13000 Tuns of Burthen, 1200 Guns at least, and about 4 or 5000 Salers Yearly, besides Porters, Weighers, Bargemen, Lightermen, Carmen, which cannot be less than 2 or 3000 more, and they pay above 50000 l. Yearly Cu∣stoms to the King, partly by Exportation of Cloth, Tin, and other Goods, and partly Importation of Silks, Cottons, Galls, Grograms, Spices, Drugs, Currans, and other Levantine Commodities. Which shews the great Benefit of a well Govern'd Trade. And we may well Estimate, if it was so then, that 'tis much greater now, and that the Benefit of these, and the other Estinent Societies, to this City and Kingdom, is mighty considerable.
. Of the Trade of London into the Country. OF this we need say no more, but what is expressed already, it being so Universally known to the whole Land; The Londoners using to supply all the Trading places of the Kingdom, especially on great Fairs, to which they resort in great Numbers, and af∣ford their Goods at the best hand; to their own and their Countries great Benefit; and in Requital, the Adjacent Counties supply the City with all manner of Necessaries for Food, Hay, Fuel, &c. insomuch that Strangers have admired at the Prodigious plenty of all Sorts that are to be seen in the Great and well Furnish∣ed Markets of Leaden-Hall, Stocks, Milk-shreet, Newgate, Clare, South-hampton, St. Albans, Westmin∣ster, Hungerford and Brooks, with several others; so that here is a perpetual Mart, where any sort of Goods may be Purchased at a Convenient and Rea∣sonable Rate. Nor is there any Place in the King∣dom where Poor People (or such as would be very Frugal) may live Cheaper; or the Splendid Liver, Gallanter, &c. The Laws of the Market. Stow. p. 664. 1. IN all the Markets of this City, no Victual shall be Sold, but by the Price set by the Mayor of this City. 2. No Man shall Forestall any Victual coming to the Market; as for to Buy in any Inn or other prlvy place, or yet coming to the Market, whether it be found in the Hands of the Buyer, or of the Sel∣ler, under pain of Forfeiture of the same: And no Inn-holder shall suffer any thing to be Sold in his House, upon pain of Forfeiture of Forty Shillings.
3. No man shall regrate any Victuals which is in the Market, or buy any Victual to ingrate in the Market, so that the Commons can or may have any part of such Victual, as in especial such as be known for Hucksters, or other people occupying their Li∣ving by such Victual as they would so ingress, under pain of forfeiture of such Victuals so regrated: Pro∣vided always, that any Steward for any Noble Feast, may buy or ingrate such Victual as is convenient for the same Feast. 4. No Butter shall be sold but according to the Weight, for the time of the year allowed. 5. No Poltrers shall deceiveably occupy the Market, to sell any stale Victual, or such as be Poul∣terers of this City, for to stand in strange Cloathing so to do, under pain of forty shillings, and the for∣feiture of such Victual, forty shillings. 6. No Hucksters shall stand or sit in the Market, but in the lower place, and the ends of the Market, to the intent they may be perfectly known, and the stranger-market-people have the preheminence of the Market, under pain of three shillings four pence, if the Hucksters disobey the same. 7. No unwholesom or stale Victual shall be sold under pain of forty shillings, and forfeiture of the same Victuals. Of the Foreign-Trade of London. 4. AS to the Trade of London into Foreign Parts, we have almost prevented our self by what is delivered before; we shall therefore only add, that England abounding with many rich and useful native Commodities, as Woollen-Cloaths of all sorts, Broad and Narrow, called by several Names in several Shires, also Perpetuances, Bays, Says, Serges, Cot∣tons, Kersies, Buffins, Mocadoes, Grogams, Sattins,
Tabbys, Calimancaes, Camlets, Velvets, Plushes, Worsteds, Fustians, Durances, Tukes, Crapes, Flan∣nels, and infinite others.—Furrs and Skins, as Coney-skins, Squirrel-skins, Fitches, Calf-skins, Hides, &c. Mines, as Tin, Lead, Allom, Copper, Iron of all sorts, Sea-Cole, Salt, &c. All manner of Grain, as Oats, Pease, Bary, Rye, and Wheat in great plenty, &c. Also Linnen-Cloath, Flx, Hemp, &c. All Iron Wares, Tallou, Leather, Glasses of all sorts, and Glass; Venice Gold and Silver, Train-Oyl, Salmons, Pilchards, Herrings, Hke, Conger, Haberdine, Cod, Ling, Hops, Wood, Butter, Cheese, Beer, Cyder, Salt-Peter, Gunpowder, Honey, Wax, Alabaster, and other Stones, Woolls, Woolfells, Yarn, Fullers-Earth, Saffron, Liquoris, &c. and many other good and rich Commodities, too tedious to be enumerated; the Merchants of London do yearly export great Quanties of such of these Goods, as are not prohibited, to Foreign Mar∣kets, and make good Returns, and bring to supply the Kingdom, a great deal of Treasure and rich Commodities from all parts of the World, to the enriching of themselves, unspeakable benefit of the Nation, and credit of the English in general, who are generally as fair Dealers as any in the World, and of as active and undertaking Souls; and the Principal Seat or Emporium of this great Trade, is the great and famous City of London. Of the Corporations of London. 5. THe other Traders in London are divided in∣to Companies or Corporations; who are as so many Bodies Politique. Of these there are Twelve called the Chief Companies, and he that is chosen Lord Mayor, must be free of one of these Companies, which are
1. Mercers, 2. Grocers, 3. Drapers, 4. Fishmen∣gers. 5. Goldsmiths, 6. Skinners, 7. Merchant-Tay∣lors, 8. Haberdashers, 9. Salters, 10. Ironmongers, 11. Vintners, 12 Clothworkers. And if it happen that the Lord Mayor Elect, is of any other Company, he presently removes to one of the Twelve. All these Companies have Assem∣bly-places, called Halls, which are so many Basilikes, or stately and sumptuous Palaces, worthy to be view'd by all Strangers. It hath been the Custom of our Kings to honour some of these Companies by taking their Freedom thereof; and the present King was pleased to be made Free of the Company of Grocers, and the present Prince of Orange was not long ago made free of the Company of Drapers. Each Company or Mystery hath a Master annually chosen, from among themselves, and other subor∣dinate Governours called Wardens, or Assistants. These do exactly correspond with the general Go∣vernment of the City, by a Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councel; who are selected out of these several Companies, so excellent a harmony there is in this Government.
Of the Twelve Chief Companies out of which the Lord Mayor is to be annually Chosen. 1. MERCERS. The Mercers have been always allowed the first place, who were Incorporated into a Society 17 R. 2. Anno 1393. For their Arms, they bear Gules, a Maiden-head proper crown'd, Or, Wascot pur∣ple, issuing out of Clouds proper, within a Bordure Nebulee, Or. 2. GROCERS. The Grocers were at first call'd Pepperers, and Incorporated by the name of Grocers, Anno 1345. 20 E. 3. They bear a Chevron, nine Cloves Sable, with this Mot∣to, God grant Grace; Suppor∣ters Helm and Crest, granted by Clarencieux, in the Reign of H. 8. Anno 1562.
3. DRAPERS. The Drapers were Incorpora∣ted, 17 H. 6. An. 1430. The Arms first granted by Garter; Crest and Supporters by Clarencieux. The Coat Gules, three Triple Crowns, Or, Capt Gules issuing out of Clouds resting upon Sun∣beams; their Motto, Ʋnto God only be Honour and Glory. 4. FISH MONGERS. The Fishmongers were at first two Companies, to wit, Stock-Fish∣mongers, and Salt-Fishmongers; but 28 H. 8. They were imbodi∣ed into one Company; Their Arms Azure, three Dolphins in pale paper crown'd, Or, betwixt four lives Salterways Argent, all crown'd Or, on a Chief Gules, three Cross-keys Salterways Argent, the Motto, All Wor∣ship be to God only. 5. GOLDSMITHS. The Goldsmiths were Incorpo∣rated 16 R. 2. Their Arms quarter∣ly Gules and Azure, two Leopards heads, Or, two Golden Cups co∣vered 'twixt two Buckles Or, the Motto, To God only be all Glory.
6. SKINNERS. The Skinners were Incorpora∣ted 1 E. 3. Anno 1327. and made a perfect Fraternity, 18 R. 2. Their Arms Ermin on a Chief, Gules, three Ducal Crowns, Or, sin'd of the first, their Motto the the same with the Goldsmiths, To God only be all Glory. 7. MERCHANT-TAYLORS. The first Patent of these Arms were granted by Clarencieux, to the Company of Taylors and Lin∣nen Armourers, 21 E. 4. 1480. And Incorporated 17 H. 7. 1501. by the name of Merchant-Taylors. Their Arms Argent a Tent, two Robes Gules on a Chief Azure, a Lyon passant, regardant, Or; the Motto, Concordia parvae res crescunt. 8. HABERDASHERS. The Haberdashers, called of old Hurrers, were Incorporated a So∣ciety of St. Katharines 26 H. 6. Anno 1447. Confirmed 17 H. 7. by the name of Merchant-Haber∣dashers. Their Coat Nebulee Ar∣gent and Azure, on a Bend Gules, a Lyon passant, regardant, Or; the Crest and Supporters, grant∣ed by Clarencieux, Anno 1571. The Motto, Serve and Obey.
9. SALTERS. The Salters had the Arms of Society given them, 22 H. 8. Anno 1530. the Crest and Supporters by Clarencieux, 29 Eliz. Anno 1587. The Coat party per Chevron, A∣zure and Gules, three Salts covered, over-flowing, Argent, with this Motto, Sal sapit omnia. 10. IRONMONGERS. The Iron-mongers were Incor∣porated 3 E. 4. 1462. Their Arms Granted by Lancaster King at Arms, Marshal to Clarencieux, An. 1455. 34 H. 6. Their Coat Ar∣gent on a Chevron, Gules, three Lockets capted, Or, between three Steel Gads, Azure. 11. VINTERS. The Vintners were Incorpo∣rated by E. 3. by the name of Wine-Tonners, confirmed 15. H. 6. Anno. 1436. Their Arms first Granted by Clarencieux, 6 H. 6. 1427. They bear Sable a Chev∣ron, between three Tunns Ar∣gent.
12. CLOATH-WORKERS. The Cloath-Workers grew to be a Company, 22 H. 8. Anno 1530. Their Arms then Granted by Cla∣rencieux, Sable a Chevron Ermin in Chief, two Crabbets Argent in base, a Beazel, Or, Supporters and Crest granted by Clareucieux, An∣no 1587. The other Corporations, besides these Twelve, enjoy large Privileges by the King's Charter, and they have fair Halls to meet in, most of which were consumed in the great Fire, Anno 1666. but they are since rebuilt for the most part in a very state∣ly and magnificent manner: The Hall belonging to the Company of Dyers was a few weeks ago con∣sumed by an unhappy Fire that happen'd near, as were also some Houses in Thames-street. Of the other Corporations in London. 1. DYERS. The Dyers were first Incorpo∣rated by a special Charter of H. 6. 16 Feb. in the 49th of his Reign. Their Coat a Chevron Engrail'd between three Woolsacks.
2. BREWERS. The Brewers were Incorpo∣rated 22d February 6 H. 6. and confirm'd 13 July 2. Eliz. Their Coat is a Chevron Engrailed, Ar∣gent, three Tunns Sable, 'twixt 6 Garbes Salterways, Or. 3. LEATHER-SELLERS. The Company of Leather-Sel∣lers is ancient, for they were first Incorporated, 6 R. 2. Their Coat is three Bucks trippant regardant Gules. 4. PEWTERERS. The Pewterers were Incorpo∣rated in the Reign of E. 4. in the 13 of his Reign, Jan. 20. Their Arms Azure, on a Chevron Or, three Roses Gules between.
5. BARBER-CHYRƲRGEONS. The Barber-Chyrurgeons were Incorporated by Edw. 4. but con∣firmed by every King and Queen since, with enlargments. Their Arms are a Cross quarter'd Gules, a Lyon passant gardant, Or, in the first quarter a Chevron between three. In the second party, per pale Argent and vert, a Rose crown'd with an Imperial Crown, the first as the fourth, the second as the third. 6. ARMOƲRERS. The Armourers were Incorpo∣rated in the beginning of H. 6. the King himself being pleased to be Free of their Company. Their Arms Argent on a Chevron Gules, a Gantlet between four Swords in Saltire, on a Chief Sable, a Buck∣ler Argent, charg'd with Cross Gules, betwixt 2 Helmets of the first. 7. WHITE-BAKERS. This Company are of great An∣tiquity; they were a Company 1 E. 2. had a new Charter, 1 H. 7. confirm'd by H. 8. E. 6. Queen Ma. Queen Eliz. and King James. Their Arms Gules three Garbs, Or, on a Chief, an arm issuing out of the Clouds proper, holding a pair of Scales, Or, between three Anchors of the first.
8. WAX-CHANDLERS. These are also of ancient stand∣ing, and much used in times of Popery; they became Incorpora∣ted, Anno 1484. 2 R. 3. Their Arms Azure on a Chevron be∣tween three Lamps Argent, three Roses Gules. 9. TALLOW-CHANDLERS. This is a Society of great An∣tiquity, first formally Incorpora∣ed 2 E. 4. Their Arms a Pale counterchang'd Argent, and A¦zure between thee Doves Argent volant, with Ove branches vert▪ 10. CƲTLERS. Incorporated beginning H. 5. Their Arms six Swords Salter∣ways proper.
11. GIRDLERS. Incorporated 6th August, 27 H. 6. yet very ancient. Their Arms Azure, Or, and a pale be∣tween three Gridirons Azure. 12. BƲTCHERS. This Company came not to be Incorporated till the third of King James, then they were made a Corporation by the Name of Ma∣ster, Wardens and Commonalty of the Art and Mystery of But∣chers, yet the Fraternity is anci∣ent; their Arms Azure, two Axes Salterways Argent, between two Roses Argent, as many Bulls heads Cowped of the second attir'd, Or, a Bores head Gules, 'twixt two Garbs vert. 13. SADLERS. This Company is very ancient, as shewing their beginning in the times of E. 1. have continued in their Livery, and given Livery ear 400 years; what the said King and R. 2. H. 4. E. 2. E. 3. H. 5. H. 6. E. 4. R. 3. H. 7. H. 8. E. 6. gave, King James confirm'd. Their Arms a Chevron, between three Saddles, Or.
14. CARPENTERS. This Ancient Company were Incorporated by Letters Pa∣tents of Edw. 4. in his 17th year, the 7th of July, by the Name of the Master, Warden, and Com∣monalty of the Mystery of Free∣men of the Carpentry of the City of London. Their Arms Azure, a Chevron engrailed between three Compasses Argent. 15. CORDWAINERS. This Company of Shoomakers, called Cordwainers of old, were Incorporated 17. H. 6. and con∣firmed by all Kings since. Their Arms Azure a Chevron Or, be∣tween three Goats heads, erased Argent, attir'd Or. 16. PAINTERS. This Company having the Ad∣dition of Painters-Stainers are of high Antiquity, yet not Incorpo∣rated till Anno 1580. 23 of Qu. Eliz.
17. CƲRRIERS. These are also Ancient, but Incorporated, 12 June, 3 Jaco∣bi. Their Arms Azure, a Cross ingrailed, Or, between four Saws Salterways Argent. 18. MASONS. The Company of Masons, cal∣led Free-Masons, were a loving Brotherhood for many Ages, yet not regulated into a Society till 12 H. 4. Their Arms Sable, on a Chevron between three Castles Argent, a pair of Compasses of the first. 19. PLƲMMERS. Incorporated 9 Jacobi, yet a a very Ancient Fellowship,
20. INHOLDERS. Incorporated 6. H. 8. Their Arms a Chevron quarterly Or. and Gules counterchanged be∣tween three Garbs Or. 21. FOƲNDERS. Incorporated 18th Sept. 12 Jacobi; Their Coat, Gules, a Spoon-pot 'twixt two Candle∣sticks, Or. 22. EMBROIDERERS. Incorporated 4th Eliz. Their Arms Barry of 8 Argent, and Azure on a Fesse, Or, a Cup Argent, between as many Ly∣ons passant regardant.
23. POƲLTERS. Incorporated 19 H. 7. Their Arms are three Swans of the first, as many Herons of the second. 24. COOKS. Incorporated 12 E. 4. Their Arms a Chevron Sable, between three Burray branches proper. 25. COOPERS. Incorporated 16 H. 7. by the name of Master, Wardens, or Keepers of the Commonalty of the Freemen of the Mystery of Coop∣ers in London, and the Suburbs of the same City; Their Arms party per pale Gules, and Or, a Chevron between three Hoops in a Chief Azure.
26. TYLERS and BRICK-LAYERS, Though very ancient, yet not Incorporated till the 10th of Qu. Eliz. Their Arms Azure, a Chev∣ron, a Flower-de-luce, Or, in Chief, 'twixt two Gads of Steel of the second. 27. BOWYERS. This Company though of great Antiquity and Honour to the English Nation; yet their Incor∣poration was but 21 of K. James. Their Arms Sable on a Chief, three Mullets on the first, be∣tween three Saws of the first. 28. FLETCHERS. These are also a Corporation; Their Arms Sable, a Chevron Or, between three Arrows Ar∣gent.
29. BLACK-SMITHS. A very ancient Fraternity, In∣corporated 20th of Eliz. Their Arms Sable, a Chevron between three Hammers crowned Or. 30. JOYNERS. Joyners, or Seelers, were In∣corporated by Qu. Eliz. in her 13th Year: Their Arms Gules, a Chevron, 'twixt two Compas∣ses, and a Globe Argent, on a Chief pale Gules, charged with an Escalop, Or, between two Roses of the first. 31. PLAISTERERS. Incorporated in the Reign of H. 7. Their Arms Azure, an Eschutcheon, Or, a Rose between two Flower-de-luces Gules, two Hammers and a Brush Argent.
32. WEAVERS. The Company of Weavers were of very ancient Note, as having three several Societies of themselves, viz. the Woollen-Weavers, the Arras-Weavers, and the Linnen-Weavers. Their Arms Azure, three Leopards heads, with three Shuttles in their Mouths, Argent, on a Chev∣ron Gules, Or between. 33. FRƲITERERS. Incorporated 3 Jacobi; Their Arms Argent, the Tree of Para∣dise between Adam and Eve pro∣per. 34. SCRIVENERS. An ancient Society Incorpo∣rated 28 Jan. 14 Jacobi: Their Arms an Eagle volant, holding in his Mouth a Penner and Ink∣horn.
35. BOTTLE-MAKERS and HORNERS. As for these, the precedent times have remembred them to be of Antiquity, and two Di∣stinct Companies combined in one: But I find (saith Stow, page 638.) no Record that they were at any time Incorporated. 36. STATIONERS. This Company was of great Antiquity before Printing was invented: Their old Dwelling was in Pater-Noster-Row, and the parts adjoyning, yet not In∣corporated till 3 Ph. and Mary▪ Their Arms Argent, on a Chev∣ron between three Bibles Or, a Falcon volant between two Ro∣ses, the Holy Ghost in Chief. 37. MARBLERS. The Company call'd the Mar∣blers, or Sculpters, are in one Fraternity with the Masons, yet they have a different Coat, viz. a Chevron between two, and a Mallet Argent.
38. WOOL-PACKERS. There was a Company of Wool-packers in the time of the Hans, when the Staple of Wool flourished, their Coat Azure, a Wool-sack Argent. 39. FARRIERS. Had their rise from Henry de Ferraris, a Norman, who was Master of the Horse to the Con∣queror, who gave him the ho∣nour of Tutbury, the first pre∣ferment of the Ferrars. Their Arms three Horse-shoos Azure. 40. PAVIOƲRS. This is an ancient Company, their Coat Argent, a Chevron between three Rummers Sable.
41. LORINORS. Their Arms are Gules on a Chevron Argent, three Horse-Combs 'twixt three Roses Ar∣gent. 42. BROWN-BAKERS. Incorporated 19 Jacobi; their Arms Gules, a hand issuing out of the Clouds a chief Barry wa∣vie, Or and Azure, on a Chev∣ron Gules. 43. WOOD-MONGERS. Incorporated 3 Jacobi. Their Coat Argent, a Chevron 'twixt three Faggots Sable.
44. ƲPHOLSTERS, or ƲPHOLDERS. Their Arms Sable, three Tents Gules on a Chevron Or, three Tents of the second. 45. TƲRNERS. Incorporated 2 Jacobi. Their Coat Azure, a Katharine-wheel Argent. 46. GLAZIERS. Their Arms two Crosiers Sal∣terways Sable, four Sprigs on a Chief Gules, a Lyon passant Gar∣dant, Or.
47. CLARKS. The Company of Clarks, called Parish-Clarks, is ancient, and stand Register'd in the Books of Guild-Hall. They were incorporated 17 H. 3. Their Arms Azure, a Flower-de-luce, Or, on a Chief Gules, a Leopards head 'twixt two Books, Or. 48. WATER-MEN Have for their Arms barry waive of six, Azure, and Ar∣gent, a Lighter proper on a chief Gules, a pair of Oars Sal∣terways, 'twixt two Cushions, Or. 49. APOTHECARYES. This Company having separated themselves from the ancient Socie∣ty of the Grocers, grew so much in favour with King James, that he used to call them his Compa∣ny; and therefore gave them a Charter of Incorporation the 15th of his Reign. Amongst many wor∣thy Members of this Company, I may not forget Dr. Gideon De Laune, Apothecary to
King James, a man noted for many singularities in his time, a great Benefactor to to the Publick, and particularly to the Foundation of the Apothecaries-Hall in Black-Fryars, where his Statue, in white Marble, is to be seen to this day. And to whom I have the honour to be nearly related, which is not the Reason that I mention him, but to perpetuate his Memory as well as others, as his due desert; he liv'd piously to the age of 97 years, and worth (notwithstanding his many acts of publick and pri∣vate piety,) near as many thousand pounds as he was years, having 37 Children by one Wife, and about 60 Grand-children at his Funeral. His famous Pill is in great request to this day, notwithstanding the Swarms of pretenders to Universal Pill-making. This little digression, I hope, will not be offensive. 50. SILK-THROWERS. This Company was made a Fellowship of this Ci∣ty, 19 Jacobi; and Incorporated by the name of the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Commonalty of the Trade or Mystery of Silk-throwers of the Ci∣ty of London, 13 April, 5 Car. 1. Besides these there are several other Societies, of which more hereafter. These Corporations, or Bodies-Politick, have all their stately spacious Halls (as was said) with Clerks and other Ministerial Officers, to attend them when they meet to consult about the regulation of their re∣spective Societies, and for promoting publick Good, and advancement of Trade and Wealth, as also when they meet at their sumptuous and splendid Feasts. And in this London surpasseth all other Cities.
The Arms of LONDON To conclude our Heraldry, the Arms of this Illu∣strious City shall bring up the Rear, as well as it has been placed in the Front. It is Argent, Cross Gules, with the Sword of St. Paul, not Sir William Wallworth's Dagger, as some have conceited; for this Coat did belong to the City before the said Sir William Walworth, Lord Mayor, slew the Rebel Wat Tyler, as learned Antiquaries Affirm. The Oath of a Freeman. YE shall Swear that ye shall be good and true to our Soveraign Lord King Charles the
Second, and to the Heirs of our said Soveraign Lord the King. Obeysant and Obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises and Customs thereof, ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless in that which in you is. Ye shall be contributary to all manner of charges within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contri∣butions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot, and to all charges, bearing your part as a Freeman ought to do. Ye shall colour no Forreigners Goods, under, or in your Name, whereby the King or this City might or may lose their customs or ad∣vantages. Ye shall know no Foreigner to buy or sell any Merchandize with any Foreigner with∣in this City or Franchise thereof, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister of the Chamber. Ye shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this City, whiles ye may have Right and Law within the same City. Ye shall take none Apprentice, but if he be Free-born (that is to say) no Bondmands Son, nor the Son of any Alien, and for no less term than for seven Years, with∣out fraud or deceit: and within the first Year ye shall cause him to be inrolled, or else pay such Fine as shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the same: And after his terms end, within convenient time (being required) ye shall make him Free of this City, if he have well and truly served you. Ye shall also keep the King's Peace in your own person. Ye shall know no Gatherings, Conventicles, or Conspiracies made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power. All these points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep according to the Laws and Customs of this City to your power, so God you help, &c.
Of the Guild-Hall. PAge 160. The Reader was referred to what should be spoken about the great Guild-Hall, to the Chapter of Government, where an account has been given of the several Courts there, therefore there is no need of further addition here as to that, only we shall briefly remark its Antiquity. Fabian says, that this Hall was begun to be built New, Anno 1411. 12 H. 4. By Sir Thomas Knolles then Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, and made a large and great House. 1 H. 6. The Exe∣cutors of Sir Richard Whittington gave towards the paving of this great Hall, 20 l. and next year 15 l. more, to the said pavement with hard stone of Pur∣beck; they also Glazed the Windows thereof, and of the Lord Mayors Court, on every of which the Arms of Sir Richard Whittington were placed. The Foundation of the Mayors Court was laid 3. H. 6. and of the Porch on the South-side of the Court; Then were built the Lord Mayors Chamber, the Councel-Chamber, and other Rooms above stairs. The New Councel-Chamber (a very good and ho∣nourable Deed) with a fair Room over it, ap∣pointed for a Treasury for the Books and Records of the City, and another Room underneath for necessary use and Employment, was begun, Anno 1614. and finished Michaelmas 1615. at the charge of 1740 l. which was well well bestowed. The Kitchins, &c. were built about Anno 1501. for accommodation of the Lord Mayors Feast, by means of Sir John Shaa, Goldsmith, Lord Mayor, who kept the first Lord Mayors Feast there, which were wont to be kept before in Merchant-Taylors, or Grocers-Hall, &c. The adjoyning Chappel or College of Mary Magdalen, and All-Saints, was called London-Col∣lege,
built, Anno 1299. which had a Custos, seven Chaplains, three Clerks, and four Quiristers. Ad∣joying to this Chappel was a fair and large Library, pertaining to the Guild-Hall and College; but the Books (to the quantity of three-score Cart∣loadsHowel. p. 118.) in Edw. 6. time were sent for by Edw. Duke of Somerset, with promise to restore them, but they were never re∣turn'd. The Library was built by the Executors of Sir Richard Whittington aforesaid; and by W. Bury. This great Guild-Hall was destroyed by the great Fire, 1666, but very Magnificently rebuilt; In the great Hall, on the East-end, it is very Richly hung with the lively Effigies of His Majesty and the Duke of York, and round about on all sides, it is adorn'd with the costly and lively Pictures of the great Mi∣nisters of State, and Judges of the Land. There are many large and spacious Courts and Offices, where the Respective Affairs of the City are managed as before in the Section of the Civil-Government of London. Of Blackwell-Hall. THis place was purchased by the Lord Mayor and Commonalty, for 50 l. 20. R. 2. and employed as a Weekly Market-place for all sorts of Woollen-Cloaths, broad and narrow, brought from all parts of the Kingdom there to be sold. 21 R. 2. It was Decreed, that no Foreigner or Stranger should sell any Woollen-Cloath, but in Blackwell-Hall, upon pain of forfeiture thereof. It was Rebuilt, being decayed, Anno 1558. at the charge of 2500 l. to which Richard May, Merchant-Taylor, gave 300 l. at his Decease.
It was destroyed by the great Fire, 1666, but re∣built in a very capacious manner, and is the great∣est Market and Store-house for all sorts of Woollen-Cloath, &c. Of Leaden-Hall. ANno 1411. This Hall was confirm'd unto the City by Sir Richard Whittington, and others, who purchased it. Anno 1443. 21 H. 6. Sir John Hatherly, Lord Mayor, purchased License of the King to take up 200 fodder of Lead, for the build∣ing of Water-Conduits, a Common Granary, and the Cross in Cheap-side, more beautifully for the ho∣nour of the City. This Granary was built by the honourable and famous Merchant, Simon Eyre, (the words of the Grant be, Cum Nobilis & potens, vir, &c. Whereas the Noble and powerful man, &c.) sometime an Ʋpholsterer, and then a Draper, Anno 1419. He built it of square Stone, as it now shew∣eth, having escaped the fury of the great Fire, with a fair and large Chappel on the East-side of the Quadrant, over the Porch he caused to be Written, Dextra Domini exaltavit me; The Lords Right hand exalted me. Within the Chappel was written, Honorandus & famosus Mercator Simon Eyre, hu∣jus operis, &c. In English thus, The honourable and famous Merchant Simon Eyre Founder of this Work, once Mayor of this City, Citizen and Draper of the same, Departed out of this Life 18 Sept. 1459. 38 H. 6. He was buried in the Church of St. Mary Wolnoth, in Lumbard-street. He gave very many large and bountiful Legacies, to be read in Stow, page 163. This Hall was Burnt, Anno 1484. but Rebuilt again in a very stately and capacious manner. There were kept the Artillery, Guns, and other Armour
of the City.—The Store of Timber for the neces∣sary reparations of the Tenements belonging to the Chamber of London. It was a Free Market for Vi∣ctuallers. There were the Common Beams for weighing of Wools and other Wares, the Scales to weigh Meal, there were made the Pageants for the Midsummer-Watches. In other parts Woolsacks were stowed. Abovestairs the Painters workt upon the Pageants, the Residue were let to Merchants, &c. Now there is kept the greatest Flesh-Market about the City; And a great Magazine of Corn. In speaking of Halls it may not be impertinent to remember the Right honourable Baptist Lord Hicks, Viscount Cambden, who besides many noble and charitable acts of Piety in King James his time, re∣corded by Stow, p. 760, 761. built the Sessions-House for the Justices of Middlesex, in St. Johns-street, at the charge of 600 l. called after his Name Hicks's-Hall, which was a great convenience, they sitting before in a common Inn, called the Castle. As for the particular Halls of Companies, we have spoke of them Generally before, which is all that appears at present necessary. SECT. 7. Of the Custom-House. THe House where this great Office was kept a little below Billingsgate, was destroyed by the great Fire, but is Rebuilt in a much more magnifi∣cent uniform, and commodious manner by the King, which hath cost His Majesty 10000 l. Here is received and managed all the Impositi∣ons laid on Merchandize Imported or Exported from this City, which are so considerable, that of
all the Customs of England, (which amount to about 600000 l. a year) divided into three parts, the Port of London pays two thirds, that is about 400000 l. per annum. A great Number of Officers are here Employ'd, whereof divers are of considerable quality and ability. There are at present Five Commissioners, who have the charge and oversight of all His Majestics Customs in all Ports of England, Viz. Sir Richard Temple, Bar. Sir George Downing, Kt. Charles Cheney, Esq Francis Millington, Esq John Ʋpton, Esq The Sallaries to each of these is 1200 l. a Year, they have many Deputies or Waiters in the Port of London, and also in all the Out-Ports. Then there are Customers, Collectors, Comptrol∣lers, Surveyors, Searchers, Waiters, &c. Sir John Shaw Collector Inwards (and for the Act of Navigation, Fee 966. l. 13. s. 4. d.) Sir Nicholas Crisp Collector Outwards, Sallary 276 l. Alderman Edward Backwell Comptroller, Salla∣ry, 255 l. George Nicholas Esq Surveyor-General, Salla∣ry 500 l. The Searchers Office is managed by a Chief, and five Under-Searchers, Clerks, &c. Since the happy Restoration of His Majesty, there has been in all Eleven Persons Under-Searchers in that Office, viz.
Six who have all (ex∣cept one) disposed of their place by His Maje∣sties grace and favours. Mr. Daniel Colwall. Rob. Forster. Leonard Scot. Will. Dockwra. Tho. Hampson. John Seymour, Esq The Five Under∣searchers now in Pos∣session, are Mr. Tho. Burton. John Evans. Richard Goodlad. Charles Beauvoir. Richard Pierce. The Chief Searcher has 120 l. per annum. The Undersearchers have each 12 l. And sundry Fees settled upon them by Authori∣ty of Parliament, which are paid them by Masters of Ships, and Merchants, &c. Having always been Of∣ficers remarkable for their Industry and great Inte∣grity, who have a continual attendance incumbent on them from Morning to Night, and who discharge the Duty of their Places with a very clear Reputa∣tion; And Maugre all the Malice and Envy that has many times been making attempts upon them, their honesty has (verified the Proverb) proved the best Policy to defend them from all their open and secret Enemies. There is also Five Deputy Searchers under the Commissioners or Farmers for the time being, who do assist the Five Undersearchers, in Shipping goods, and doing other business by Bills and Copies of the Original Warrants, which are by Law directed to the King's Searchers. These Deputies, because there is no Fee due to them, have 80 l. per annum Sal∣lary, but are no Patent Officers.
Surveyors, Mr. Daniel Ford. Thomas Fownes. Tho. Cooke. Hew. Cheely. Sallary 150 l. per annum. Six Tyde Surveyors, Mr. Simon Tomlins. —Jones. —Tombes. Steph. Chusman Edm. Clark. —Sumpter. Sallary 80 l. per annum. 19 Kings-Waters, Sallary to each 80 l. 40 Land-Waiters, Sallary to each 80 l. 80 Tyde-Waiters in Fee, 5 l. per annum, and 2 s. 6 d. per Day. 50 Ditto Extraordinary, no Sallary, 2 s. 6 d. per Day. There are many other Officers, as Richard Kent Esq Receiver-General of the Revenue of the Cu∣stoms; Giles Lidcot Esq Accomptant-General; there is a Customer of Cloath, and petty Customs, Fee 277 l. Two Customers of the great Customs, Sallary 50 l. Comptroller of the Cloath and petty Customs, Fee 30 l. Register of the Seizures, Salla∣ry 106 l. Surveyor of the Out-Ports, Sallary 250 l. A Secretary, Ware-house-keeper, Surveyor of the Ware-house, &c. Besides there are several persons Commissioned to Seize Goods uncustomed, either inward or outward Bound; There are also Noon∣tenders, Watchmen, and several inferiour Officers. Note that the due perquisites belonging to these Officers are very considerable, and to some are much more than their Respective Sallaries.
Of Docks. THese Docks or Harbours are cut into the Land without further Current, and are useful for the convenient lying of Vessels, Hoys, Lighters, Barges, Boats, &c. in order to the convenient Delivery of Provision, as Victual, Fuel, &c. to the adjacent In∣habitants. They are in number very many.—Some of the chief are, Scotland-Dock, adjoyning to White-Hall. —White-Fryars-Dock: Puddle-Dock, at the West-end of Thames-street.—Queen-Hith-Dock, a place of much Trade for ground Corn, or Meal, which is brought out of the West Country thither in great Quantities; Billingsgate-Dock, a place of great Trade, and where ships of considerable Bur∣then may Harbour.—Sabbs-Dock, Tower-Dock, St. Katharines-Dock,—Hermitage-Dock,—Execution-Dock, which though it be of later years, fitted up re∣tains to this day the former name which it received, because it was the only place for Executing Pyrats, and Sea-Robberts, which is usually done by Hanging them on a Gibbet erected at Low-water-mark— Limehouse-Dock. And on the South-shore are Clink-Dock, and St. Saviours-Dock—There are besides these, many Docks for private use, as for repairing of Ships and Vessels, which we omit. Under this head of TRADE, and in this place, it may not be improper to give a Brief Account of the Porters of London, who are not incorporate Com∣panies, but Brotherhoods, whose Original and Go∣vernment are by Acts of Common-Councel.—They are of two sorts. 1. Ticket-Porters, who do take up, weigh, load, and ouse all Merchants Goods, as Cloath, Fruit, Sugars, Oyls, Wines, Mettals, &c. and have to their Governour Sir Thomas Allen: These are very nume∣rous; their Quarteridge is 4 d. each.
2. Fellowship Porters.—To these belong the sho∣ring, or landing, housing, carrying, or recarrying all measurable Goods, as Corn, Salt, Coals, &c. Their chief Governour is the Alderman of Billingsgate Ward, who is at present Sir John Peak. These are in Number about 700 and their Quarterige is 12 d. each.—These and the former have very good Go∣vernment and Orders among themselves, and before any is admitted to that Employ among them, they pay a Fine.—The Ticket-Porters give good secu∣rity for their Honesty and Fidelity, so that no more need be done, but to take notice of his Name, which is sampt on his Ticket that hangs at his Girdle, and repairing to their Governor, satisfaction may be had for any wrong or mis-behaviour, &c. There is a very remarkable Custom among the Fellowship Porters, as an Ingenious person that be∣longs to their Society informed me, which is thus: The next Sunday after every Midsummer-day, they have a Sermon preached to them, so order'd by an Act of Common-Councel, in the Parish-Church of St. Mary-On-the-Hill, preparative to which, this Order is observed, they furnish the Mer∣chants and their Families about Billings-gate with Nosegys or Posies over-night, and in the morning they go from their Common-Hall, or place of Meet∣ing in good Order, each having a Posie or Nose∣gay in his hand; They walk through the middle Isse to the Communion-Table, where are two Basons, and every one offers something to the Relief of the Poor, and towards the Charges of the Day. After they have all past, the Deputy, the Merchants, their Wives, Children, and Servants, do all come in Order from their Seats, and bestow their Offerings also; which is a Ceremony of much variety. I am certainly informed, that the very charges of their Nosegays cost them, in one year, not long ago, near 20 l.
Coal-Market. AT the head of Billingsgate-Dock is a square Plot of ground compassed with Posts, known by the Name of Roomland, which with the Adja∣cent part of the street hath been the usual place, where the Ship-Masters, Coal-Merchants, Wood∣mongers, Lightermen and Labourers, do meet every Morning, in order to the Buying, Selling, Deliver∣ing and taking up of Sea-Coals and Scotch-Coals, as the principal Market. This Coal-Market was kept on Great Tower-hill in the time of the Cities late De∣solation. Corn-Market. UPon Bear-key, between Sabs-Dock and Porters-key, is the usual place or Chief Market for Corn, which is bought and sold there every day, but principally Mondays, Wednesdays and Frydays, which are the Market-days, where great Quantities of all kind of Grain are bought and sold by small Exam∣ples, commonly called Samples, whether it be lying in Granaries or Ships, and, it (viz. Bear-key) is the principal place where the Kentish and Essex Corn-Vessels do lie. Fish-Market. THe Fresh Fish-Market is kept at Billings-Gate, Mondays, Wednesdays and Frydays.
Of the Navy-Office, where the whole Busi∣ness concerning the King's Ships of War is managed. FIrst there is the Treasure of the Navy, his Office is to receive out of the Exchequer, by Warrant from the Lord Treasurer of England, and to pay all Charges of the Navy, by Warrant from the principal Officers of the Navy, for which he had formerly Sallary, 220 l. 13. s. 4 d. besides 3 d. in the pound for all Money paid by him, but hath now an honou∣rable allowance certain from His Majesty in lie thereof. Next the Comptroller of the Navy, whose Office to attend and Controll all payments of Wages, to know the Market-Rates of all Stores belonging to Shipping, to examine and audit Treasurers, Victu∣allers, and Score-keepers Accounts, his Sallary is 500 l. yearly. Surveyor of the Navy, whose Office is Generally to know the state of all Stores, and see the Wants supplyed; to sind the Hulls, Masts and Yards, and estimate the Value of Repairs, by Indenture to charge all Boat-swains and Carpenters of His Ma∣jesties Navy, with what Stores they Receive, and at the end of each Voyage, to state and audit their Ac∣counts, his Sallary is 490 l. Clarks of the Acts, whose Office is to Record all Orders, Contracts, Bills, Warrants, and other bu∣siness transacted by the Principal Officers and Com∣missioners of the Navy, &c. the Sallary of the Com∣missioners of the Navy is 500 l. yearly to each. There are two Commissioners, whose particular work is to be at Portsmouth and Chatham, always in readiness to give Orders for the better Management of His Majesties Affairs in his Yards or Store-houses there; Sallary to each is 350 l. Yearly.
Each of these Officers above-named have two Clarks, and some of them more, all paid by the Treasurer of the Navy, all hold their places by Pa∣tent from the King, and most of them during plea∣sure. The King hath for his Navy Royal and Stores, four great Yards or Store-houses, (viz.) at Chat∣ham, Deptford, Woolwich, and Portsmouth, where his Ships are Built, Repaired and laid up after their Voyages. In which yards are Employed Divers Officers, whereof the six principal are Clerks of the Check, Store-keeper, Master, Attendants, two at Chatham, Master-Shipwright, Clark of the Control, Clark of the Survey. Note that the Charges of the Clarks and Instru∣ments are included in the afore-mentioned Sal∣laries. Besides these four Yards, his Majesty hath divers Rope-Yards, as at Chatham, Woolwich, and Ports∣mouth, where are made all his Cables and Cor∣dage for his Navy. Also in time of Sea-War, the King hath another Yard at Harwich, where there is, out of War time, continued an Officer at the charge of 100 l. yearly. The ordinary Charge of his Majesties Navy in times of Peace, continuing in Harbour, is so well regulated, that it amounts to scarce 7000 l. Be∣sides, all Charges of Building of Ships, &c. or setting forth any Fleets, which some years, even in peace∣able times, amounts to 12, or 13000 l. more, as may easily be conjectured by the Charges of Build∣ing and Rigging of Ships, and of one Months ex∣pence at Sea.
Of the Post-Office. THis Office is now kept in Lumbard-street, for∣merly in Bishops-gate-street, the Profits of it are by Act of Parliament settled on his Royal High∣ness the Duke of York. But the King by Letters Pa∣tents, under the great Seal of England, constitutes the Post-Master-General. From this General Office, Letters and Packets are dispatched, On Mondays To France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Flanders, Sweedland, Donmark, Kent and the Downs. On Tuesdays To Holland, Germany, Sweedland, Denmark, Ireland, Scotland, and all parts of England and Wales. On Wednesdays To all parts of Kent, and the Downs. On Thursdays To France, Spain, Italy, and all parts of England and Scotland. On Frydays To Flanders, Germany, Italy, Sweedland, Den∣mark, Holland, Kent, and the Downs. On Saturdays All parts of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ire∣land. Letters are returned from all parts of England and Scotland, certainly every Monday, Wednesday and Friday; from Wales every Monday and Fry∣day; and from Kent and the Downs every day: But from other parts more uncertainly, in regard of the Sea. A Letter containing a whole sheet of Paper is convey'd 80 Miles for 2 d. two sheets for 4 d. and an Ounce of Letters for 8 d. and so propotionably;
a Letter containing a sheet is conveyed above 80 Miles for 3 d. two sheets for 6 d. and every Ounce of Letters for 12 d. A sheet is conveyed to Dublin for 6 d. two for a shilling, and an Ounce of Letters for 12 d. This Conveyance by Post is done in so short a time, by night as well as by day, that every 24 hours, the Post goes 120 Miles, and in five days, an answer of a Letter may be had from a Place 300 Miles distant from the Writer. Moreover, if any Gentlemen desire to ride Post, to any Principal Town of England, Post-horses are always in readiness, (taking no Horse without the consent of his owner) which in other Kings Reigns was not duly observed; and only 3 d. is demand∣ed for every English Mile, and for every Stage to the Post-Boy, 4 d. For conducting. Besides this Excellent convenience of con∣veying Letters, and Men on Horse-back, there is of late such and admirable commodiousness, both for Men and Women of better rank, to tra∣vel from London, and to almost all the Villages near this great City, that the like hath not been known in the World, and that is by Stage-Coaches, where∣in one may be transported to any place, sheltred from foul Weather, and foul ways, free from en∣damaging ones Health or Body by hard jogging, or over violent motion; and this not only at a low price, as about a shilling for every five Miles, but with such velocity and speed, as that the Posts in some Foreign Countries, make not more Miles in a day; for the Stage-Coaches, called Flying-Coach∣es, make forty or fifty Miles in a day, as from Lon∣don to Oxford or Cambridge, and that in the space of twelve hours, not counting the time for Dining, setting forth not too early, nor coming in too .
The several Rates that now are and have been taken for the Carriage of Letters, Packquets, and Parcels, to or from any of His Majesties Dominions, to or from any other parts or places beyond the Seas, are as followeth, that is to say, s. d. MOrlaix, St. Maloes, Caen, New-haven, and places of like di∣stance, Carriage paid to Rouen— Single 0 6 Double 1 0 Treble 1 6 Ounce 1 6 Hamburgh, Colen, Frankfort,— Carriage paid to Antwerp, is— Single 0 8 Double 1 4 Treble 2 0 Ounce 2 0 Venice, Geneva, Legorn, Rome, Na∣ples, Messina, and all other parts of Italy by way of Venice, Franct pro Mantua,— Single 0 9 Double 1 6 Treble 2 3 Ounce 2 8 Marseilles, Smirna, Constantinople, Aleppo, and all parts of Turky, Carri∣age paid to Marselles.— Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Oun. 2 9 Ounce 2 8 And for Letters brought from the same places to England— Single 0 8 Double 1 4 Treble 2 0 Ounce 2 0 The Carriage of Letters brought in∣to England, from Calice, Diep, Bul∣loign, Abbeville, Amiens, St. Omers, Montrel— Single 0 4 Double 0 8 Treble 1 0 Ounce 1 0 Roven— Single 0 6 Double 1 0 Treble 1 6 Ounce 1 6
Genoua, Legorn, Rome, and other parts of Italy by way of Lyons, Franct pro Lyons— Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Ounce 2 9 Ounce 3 9 The Carriage of Letters Outwards. To Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nants, Orle∣ans, Bayon, Tours, and places of like distance, Carriage paid to Paris—Single 0 9 Double 1 6 Treble 2 3 Ounce 2 0 Letters brought from the same pla∣ces into England—Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Oun. 3 0 Ounce 4 0 The Carriage of Letters Outwards. To Norembourgh, Bremen, Dant∣zick, Lubeck, Lipswick, and other places of like distance, Carriage paid to Hamburgh—Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Oun. 3 0 Ounce 4 0 Paris—Single 0 9 Double 1 6 Treble 2 3 Ounce 2 0 Dunkirk, Ostend, Lisle Ipers, Cam∣brary, Ghent, Bruxels, Bruges, Antwerp, and all other parts of Flanders. She, Flushing, Middleburgh, Aster∣am, Rotterdam, Delph, Hague, and all other parts of Holland and Zealand—Single 0 8 Double 1 4 Treble 2 0 Ounce 2 0 All Merchants Accounts, not exceeding a Sheet, Bills of Echange, Invoices, Bills of Lading, shall e allowed without rate in the price of the Letters, and also the Covers of the Letters not exceeding a Sheet, to Mrseilles, Venice, or Legorn, towards Turkie.
The said Office is managed by a Deputy, and o∣ther Officers, to the Number of seventy seven per∣sons; who give their actual attendance respectively, in the dispatch of the business. Upon this Grand Office, depends one hundred eighty two Deputy-Post-Masters in England and Scotland; most of which keep Regular Offices in their Stages, and Sub-Post-Masters in their Bran∣ches; and also in Ireland, another General Office for that Kingdom, which is kept in Dublin, consist∣ing of Eighteen like Officers, and Forty-five Depu∣ty Post-Masters. The Present Post-Master-General, keeps con∣stantly, for the transport of the said Letters and Pac∣quets; Between Eng∣land and— France, two Pacquet-Boats. Flanders, two Pacquet-Boats. Holland, three Pacquet-Boats. Ireland, three Pacquet-Boats. And at Deal, two Pacquet-Boats for the Downs. All which Officers, Post-Masters, Pacquet-Boats, are maintained at his own proper Charge. And as the Master-piece of all those good regula∣tions, established by the present Post-Master-Gene∣ral, for the better Government of the said Office, he hath annexed and appropriated the Market-Towns of England, so well to their Respective Post-Stages, that there is no Considerable Market-Town, but hath an easie and certain Conveyance for the Let∣ters thereof, to and from the said Grand Office, in the due course of the Males every Post. Though the Number of Letters Missive in Eng∣land, were not at all Considerable in our Ancestors days, yet it is now so prodigiously great, (since the meanest People have Generally learnt to write) that this Office is Farmed for above 40, rather 50000 l. a Year.
Of the PENNY-POST. THis Ingenious Ʋndertaking being so extraor∣dinary useful in the facilitating of Com∣merce and mutual Correspondence, and consequent∣ly very serviceable to Traders, &c. shall be briefly handled; and, I hope, that what proceeds from me, who am no interessed Person, will be resented Can∣didly, and Examined, as to the Argumentative part, according to the Solidity and Strength of the Reasons produced. I have heard this Undertaking disparaged by some Censorious Persons, and have examined the Reasons, with the quality of the Objectors, and have found it all along opposed by none but the Ignorant, or such as preferred some particular Ends, before Publick Utility. To my knowledge I never saw nor corres∣ponded directly nor indirectly with any of the Un∣dertakers, till being very desirous to insert this Affair of the Penny-Post in this Book for Publick Infor∣mation, I made an Address to one of the Gentle∣men concern'd, who Courteously supply'd me with some particular Informations which I wanted, and for which I am beholding to him. This I speak, to sa∣tisfie the Objectors that I do voluntarily, and not by any inducement of theirs mention this Affair, which, in my opinion, is so far from being a prejudice, that the City, as well as the whole Nation, is beholding to them for their Ingenious Contrivance, and their Con∣stancy and Generosity in minding the Publick Good so much as they have done; for 'tis certain that they have been at very great Expence to hold it up, under the Discouragements that some Persons have thrown upon them, and the necessary Charge to support it is yet very considerable. But to be more particular: 1. I will give some Hints of what this Underta∣king is in Point of Practice.
2. Its general and particular Usefulness. 3. I will consider an Objection or two. 1. What I can say of this Undertaking in Point of Practice, is briefly what follows, only I would pre∣mise a few words as my opinion, and the opinion of impartial Persons of my acquaintance, as to the thing in general. This useful Invention is little more than a year old, being begun in April 1680. The chief Undertaker that introduc'd it into Practice, is one Mr. William Dockwra Merchant, a Native and Citizen of London, formerly one of His Majesties Sub-Searchers in the Custom-House of London, as in the List of those Officers appears. A Person, whose approved Repu∣tation for Industry and Fidelity was well known to all for above ten years in that Office: And to whom the Publick is obliged, he having, with his Partners, spent much time, and a great Sum of money, to bring this Undertaking on foot, wherein they encounter'd with no small Difficulties, not only by Affronts and Indignities from the Vulgar sort, who seldom weigh any Publick or Generous Designs, but at the Beam of Little, Selfish, By-Ends, but also by more dange∣rous Attaques; for there have been Attempts made, by some Persons, to persuade his Royal Highness the Duke of York, that it intrench'd upon the General Post-Office, and damnifi'd it; whereupon many Actions were brought, and a chargeable Suit of Law follow'd: But, questionless, the Duke is better in∣form'd now; for it is most certain, that this does much further the Revenue of the Grand Post-Office, and is an universal Benefit to all the Inhabitants of these Parts: so that whoever goes about to deprive the City of so useful a thing, deserves no thanks from the Duke, nor any Body else, but to be Noted as an Ene∣my to Publick and Ingenious Inventions. It is with all Humility submitted to the Considera∣tion
of all worthy Citizens that happen to peruse this small Tract, that it becomes not the Honour of the City to suffer any of its Ingenious Natives, especially Persons who have lived and do live in good Fashion and Repute, to sink under the carrying on of an Un∣dertaking so advantageous not only to the Publick, but also to private Persons, since their industrious Service to their Generation deserves encouragement from their Fellow-Citizens, and all others, viz. (1.) To discountenance petty Persons that would, for the profit of running of Errands, rob the Com∣munity (if they could) of this more than ordinary convenience for safe, cheap, and necessary Dis∣patches. (2.) To reject any INTRUDER that may at∣tempt to set up another Penny-Post; because, if the thing be hereafter profitable, all the Reason and Equity in the world will plead for the Inventers, viz. that they ought to reap the Benefit. And it is a Note of Consideration, That Mr. Dockwra has a nu∣merous Family of eight young Children; who being forsaken by some others soon after it began, and left to shift for himself, carried on this Undertaking sing∣ly, for above half a year at his own proper charge and hazard, against all the Difficulties, Oppositions and Discouragements that attended it, though now he hath several Citizens in partnership with him. But I am truly informed, that the Income does not yet amount to three fourths of the necessary Charge to support it; therefore I am persuaded that this Ho∣nourable City will employ the Inventers, rather than an Invader, if ever any such should be; And that 'tis much below such a Prince as his Royal Highness is, to desire the Ruine of such a Family. I am the more large upon this Particular, because it would be a general Discouragement to the Con∣trivers of useful and profitable Inventions, if others should be encouraged to reap the Crop of what they with so much charge and labor have sown.
This Penny-Post is thus managed. The Principal Office to which all Accompts, &c. are daily transmitted, is in Lyme-street, at the Dwel∣ling-house of the said Mr. Dockwra, formerly the Mansion-house of Sir Robert Abdy K.nt. There are seven Sorting-houses, proper to the seve Precincts, into which the Undertakers have di∣vided London, Westminster, and the Suburbs, situa∣ted at equal distances, for the better maintenance of mutual Correspondence. There are about 4 or 500 Receiving-houses to take in Letters, where the Messengers call every hour, and convey them as directed; as also Post-Letters, the writing of which are much increased by this Accom∣modation, being carefully convey'd by them to the General Post-Office in Lombard street. There are a great Number of Clerks and poor Citizens daily employed, as Messengers, to Collect, Sort, Enter, Stamp and Deliver all Letters, every Person entertained giving Fifty pounds security, by Bond, for his Fidelity; and is to be subject to the Rules and Orders, from time to time, given by the Undertakers, who oblige themselves to make good any thing deliver'd to their Messengers under the value of Ten pounds, if Sealed up, and the Contents Endorsed; And these Messengers have their Wages duly paid them every Saturday night. By these are convey'd Letters and Parcels, not ex∣ceeding One Pound Weight, nor Ten Pound in Value, to and from all Parts at seasonable times, viz. of the Cities of London and Westminster, Southwark, Red∣riff, Wapping, Ratcliff, Lyme-house, Stepney, Poplar, and Blackwall, and all other places within the weekly Bills of Mortality, as also to the four Towns of Hack∣ney, Islington, South-Newington-Butts, and Lambeth, but to no other Towns, and the Letters to be left on∣ly at the Receiving-houses of those four Towns, for the said four Towns; but if brought home to their
Houses, a Penny more in those Towns; nor any Letter to be deliver'd to them in the Street, but at the Receiving-houses. They now do use Stamps to mark the hour of the Day on all Letters when sent out from their Office to be deliver'd, by which all Persons are to expect their Letters within one hour, (little more or less, from the time marked thereon, excepting such Letters as are to be convey'd to the Out-Towns, and Remotest parts, which will be longer) by which the cause of delay of Letters may be easily discern'd, viz. whether it be really in the Office, or their own Servants, (or others) with whom Letters are left. The Marks they make use of for this purpose, are these: Of which the First, signifies Eight in the Morning, the Last, Four in the Afternoon, and the Middlemost, is the Letter of the chief Office in Lyme-street, each Office having its proper Letter, and an Acknowledg∣ment that the Penny-Post is paid, to prevent the giv∣ing of any thing at the Delivery. All Persons are desired not to leave any Town-Letters after Six of the Clock in the Winter, and Seven in the Summer on Saturday Nights, because the many poor Men employ'd, may have a little time to provide for their Families against the Lords-day, ha∣ving no leisure all the week besides. Upon three days at Christmas, two days in Easter and Whitsontide, and upon the 30 of January, the Penny-Post does not go.
To the most Remote places Letters go four or five times of the day, to other places six or eight times of the day. To Inns of Court, and places of business in Town, especially in Term or Parliament∣time, 10 or 12 times of the day. For better infor∣mation of People where the Receiving-houses are, there are great Numbers of Printed Tickets dispersed from time to time amongst the Neighborhood, and Advertisements in the Publick Intelligences, which all concern'd may take Notice of, so that any body may be by the Neighborhood immediately inform'd where a Receiving-house is. Carriers and Stage-Coach Letters are to have Two-pence inclosed to each Carrier or Coachman, because they often reject them for want of money; Hundreds of such being return'd, which any Inquirer may have again upon notice, for they lie Alphabetically disposed of in the chief Office for that end. On all Post-Nights due Care is taken to call for, and convey to the General Post-house in Lombard-street all Post-Letters, whether Foreign or Inland, left in any of the Penny-Post Receiving-houses, at or before Nine of the Clock at Night. And I could wish, for Encouragement of the Undertakers, that all Persons would so far contribute to the continuance of this useful Design, as to send their Post-Letters by this Conveyance to the Post-Office in Lombard-street, which they do not Convey by themselves, or Servants. If any Post-Letters be left without Money that should pay before-hand, they will be Returned to the Office, therefore such as send Money, are to indorse the Postage-money upon their Letters. Such as inclose Money in Town-Letters, are to Indorse the true Sum on the Outside, and to tye fast and seal up, under a plain Impression, all Parcels, which may be one way to prevent Disputes, in case any thing be lost. The Undertakers will not answer
for any Centents unseen, unless sealed fast, and the Value Indorsed plain to be Read. 2. Some brief Hints of the Ʋsefulness of this Office. 1. In and near this great and famous Empori∣um, is the usual Residence of our Kings, the High Court of Parliament, the fixed Seats of all the Courts of Judicature, and in it is managed a vast Trade, as was shew'd in the Chapter that Treats of it; now a cheap, frequent, and safe way of Correspondence, is very advantageous for all that are concerned in Com∣merce, or Business. The principal Trade of London depends upon Navigation, and therefore the City and Suburbs are situate along the River of Thames, extending in length, as was shew'd, pag. 5. from Lyne-house, to the end of Tuttle-street 7500 Geometrical Pces, that is seven Miles and an half; and from the end of Blackman-street, to the end of St. Leonard Shore∣ditch, 2500 Paces in Breadth, that is two Miles; and the whole Circumference (as by Demonstration can be made apparent) is above 20 Miles, taking in all the Contiguous Suburbs and Westminster, so that it is the longest, if not the greatest and most populous City in Christendom. This extraordinary Length, though it adds to its Splendor and Beauty, yet it renders speedy Communication and Intercourse in Business very uneasie, and much more troublesom, than in such great Cities as Paris, which is almost of an orbicular Form. Now to keep up a necessary Correspondence, the way formerly used, was to hire Porters at Excessive Rates to go on Errands, and to send Servants or Apprentices, who, in the mean while, lost that time that should be spent to learn their Trades, and benefit their Masters, and would often loyter, and get vicious habits, and evil company, &c.
(when they need not) to their own and Masters hurt; or else such as could not spare the Porter so much money, nor kept Servants, (as some poor Ar∣tificers and Labourers (have been forced to sweat and toil, and leave their work, for, it may be, half the day, to do that which now they may perform at the easie rate of a Penny. But now all these Inconveniences are remedied by the Penny-Post with great Safety and Celerity, for which the Contrivers really deserve the Thanks of all who reap benefit by it; and I may be bold to say, that all the Inhabitants in general, and their Fellow-Citizens in particular, are already very sensible of the great Convenience thereof: For, among the innu∣merable Benefits of this Penny-Post, which, for brevi∣ty we omit, Friends may converse with Friends, at any distance; Merchants, Shop-keepers and Tradesmen with their Customers, or such as deal with them; Clients may consult with Lawyers; Patients with Doctors; Poor Prisoners with Creditors, or Bene∣factors; and all Bills dispersed for Publication of any Concern; all Summons or Tickets conveyed; all Entries of Brewers to the Excise-Office; and many more, for One Penny. 3. The Objections I have heard of, are, 1. From some sort of Porters, viz. that it hinders their Livelihood. Answ. (1.) 'Tis certain that this is a mistake, for their Livelihood never depended upon going on Er∣rands, their Business being other laborious Work, and carrying of Burdens, &c. But some of the Free-Porters are now in the service of the Undertaking. (2.) Most Business dispatcht by this Undertaking, was formerly either not done at all, or performed by other hands, to save Charges, (Porters Rates being so dear) and Persons themselves, or their Servants, went on their own Errands.
(3.) If the Porters, who are an inconsiderable Number, in respect of the whole Inhabitants of this great City, should suffer some small loss of Petty Em∣ploy by it, yet vast Numbers of poor People, and others, are exceedingly eased and beenfited thereby, which deserve as much, or more pity, than Porters: And a general and useful Undertaking, should not in Equity or Prudence be discountenanced, for the peculiar advantage of some few, any more than all the Pipes or Water-Conduits of the City should be destroyed, meerly for the Accommodation of Tan∣kard-Bearers; Printing suppressed, to accommodate Writing Clerks; Guns, for Fletchers; Navigable Rivers, for Carriers; and  Trade of Jack-smiths, for Turn-spits, &c. Nor have Porters any Authority to monopolize to themselves the Delivery of Letters, it being by Law free for any Person to use what Con∣veyance they think good for their Letters, within or without the Freedom. And Coach-men, Car-men, Watermen, &c. may as well be put out of their Cal∣lings, as the Undertakers disturb'd in this Concern, because then the Porters may have more Burdens to carry. Neither is any prohibited or restrained by this Undertaking, but they may still employ a Porter if they please, so that this Objection is causless, and is level'd against the whole Body of Inhabitants, as well as the Undertakers in particular. 2. Others alledge, That their Letters are not spee∣dily answered, and therefore say they miscarry. Answ. That may be, because the Party is not at home, and his Servants do not produce his Letter as he ought, though punctually left by the Penny-Post-Messenger (this I have very often known to be my own Case, and some of my Friends.) Or the Party may not be at leisure, or not willing to write, or re∣moved, or would pretend he received it not, when Dun'd for money, which he cannot, or will not pay. And indeed I am also inform'd, that abundance of
Letters are so ill superscribed, or uncertainly direct∣ed, when frequently the particular Trade of the Par∣ty, the Sign, or what Noted Place is near, are omit∣ted, that it is impossible to deliver such, which is the fault of the Senders, and not of the Office. To conclude this Subject. The Reader may ex∣pect hereafter a small Tract by it self, Printed for the Undertakers of the Penny-Post. What I have here inseted being briefly Remarkt, as my own Notions, concerning so laudable a Design, by way of Speci∣men, and as a thing suitable to my present Work. The Rates and Orders of Coachmen. BY an Act of Parliament made in the Fourteenth Year of Our Soveraign Lord King CHARLES he Second, it is appointed, That no person or per∣sons, after May 1. 1662. shall presume to drive, (except Stage-Coaches) or let the Hire by the hour or day, or otherwise, any Hackney-Coach or Coach-Horses within the Parishes comprised within the Bills of Mortality, without an especial License from the Commissioners appointed by His Majesty for Licens∣ing and regulating Hackney-Coaches. That no Horse, Gelding, or Mare, to be used with such Coaches, be under 14 hands high, according to the Standard. That the Number of Coaches so Licens∣ed shall not exceed 400. That every Coach so Li∣censed shall have a Mark of distinction by Figure, or otherwise, as the Commissioners shall think fit, to the end they may be known, if any complaint shall be made of them. That no person shall be Licens∣ed to keep more than two Coaches, which Coaches shall have several Figures or Marks of distinction, as if belonging to several persons. That no person shall put that Figure or Mark upon his Coach which is appointed for any other, under the forfeiture of five
pounds. That no person shall be Licensed to drive or keep a Hackney-Coach, or Coach-Horses, that uses any other Trade or Occupation. That first such as have been ancient Coach-men, or such Coach-men as have suffered for their Service to His Majesty or his Father, or the Widows of such (that have Coaches of their own) be Licensed. That the Commissioners forfeit one hundred pounds for every Coach they License above the Number of 400. That no Hackney-Coach-man so Licensed shall presume to take for his Hire in or about the Cities of London and Westminster above Ten shillings for a day, reckoning 12 hours to the day; and by the hour, not above 18 pence for the first hour, and 12 pence for every hour after; nor for his Hire from any of the Inns of Courts, or thereabouts, to any part of St. James's or Westminster, (except beyond Tuttle-Street) above 12 pence, and the like from the same places to the Inns of Court, or thereabouts; nor from the Inns of Court, or thereabouts, to the Royal Exchange, more than 12 pence; but if to the Tower, Bishopsgate-Street, Aldgate, or places there∣abouts, 18 pence; and so from the same places to the said Inns of Court, as aforesaid. That the like Rates be observed from or to any place, at the like distance with the places before-named. That if any Coach-man shall refuse to go at, or exact more for his Hire than these Rates, he shall for every Offence forfeit Ten shillings.
An Alphabetical Account of all the Car∣riers, Wagoners, and Stage-Coaches, that comes to the several Inns in Lon∣don, Westminster, and Southwark, from all Parts of England and Wales, with the respective days of their Coming in, and Going out. A. Abington. WIlliam Perton Wagoner, comes to the Bell in Friday-street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Edward Perton with Coach and Wagon the same days, to and from the Sarazens-head in Friday-street. Aylesbury. John Christmas Wagoner, comes to the George by Holbourn-Conduit on Wednesdays, goes out on Thurs∣days. Mr. Webb Coachman, comes to the Crown in Hol∣bourn on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Mr. Fryer's Coach comes to the Black Swan in Hol∣bourn, on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, and goes out on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. Andover in Berkshire. Roger Bird Wagoner, comes to the King's-Arms in Holbourn-Bridge on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Haverhill in Suffolk. William Swan Carrier, comes to the Four Swans in Bishops-gate on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Mr. Ashton, Townes and Cole, Edward Onyou
Carriers, come to the Four Swans in Bishopsgate-street on Wednesdays, and go out on Thursdays. John King Carrier, comes to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Ashby-de-la-Zouch in Leicestershire. Thomas Richards Carrier, comes to the Axe in Aldermanbury every week on Saturdays, and goes out on Mondays. Ashbourn in Derbyshire. John Osbourne, Dabridge, Court, Dunkley, Car∣riers and Wagoners, come to the Castle in Wood∣street on Saturdays, and go out on Mondays. St. Albans. Joseph Marshall Coachmen, comes to the Cock in Aldersgate-street on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fri∣days, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Satur∣days. Widow Trotts Wagons come to the Cock in Al∣dersgate-street on Mondays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Godfrey Scofield Wagoner, comes to the Cock in Aldersgate-street on Mondays, and goes out on Tuesdays. Anthony Wilson's Coach comes to the Bell in Al∣dersgate-street on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. William Newels Wagon cmes to the Bell in Al∣dersgate-street on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Robert Carr Wagoner, comes to the Vine in Old-street on Mondays and Thursdays, and goes out on Tuesdays and Fridays. William Jones, John Cook Wagoners, come to the Vine in Old-street on Mondays and Fridays, and go out on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Amersham in Bucks. John Sells Coachman, comes to the Bell in Hol∣bourn
on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Matthew Reading Wagoner, comes to the White-Hart in High-Holbourn on Mondays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Thomas Browne Wagoner, comes to the White-Hart in High-Holbourn on Mondays and Fridays, and goes out Tuesdays and Saturdays. Absley in Huntingtonshire. Thomas Basse Carrier, comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Agham in Hampshire. Mr. Woodman Wagoner, comes to the White-Hart in Chring-cross n Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Arundel in Sussex. George Moore an William Deane comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Ashford in Kent. Philip Smith Carrier, comes to the Spur in South-wark on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. B. Brumly in Kent. Widow Ingerhams Wgon comes to the King's Arms in Barnaby-street in Southwark on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out Tuesdays, Thurs∣days and Saturdays. William and Daniel Woolfs Wagon comes to the same place, and uses the same days. Bristol. Robert Barrett, John Barrett, Samuel Wilkin, Robert Gaines Carriers, come to the Three Cups in Bread-street on Tuesdays and Fridays, and go out on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
Philip Woodroofe, Thomas Keene, Bernard Keene, Silvester Keene Wagoners, come to the White-Swan at Holbourn-Bridge on Thursdays, and goes out on Fridays. John Booth, William Baldwin, Robert Toby, their Coaches to Bristol and Bath, come to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Saturdays and Wednesdays, and go out on Mondays and Thursdays. Bradford in Berkshire. Widow Seywards Wagon comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thurs∣days. Bath. William Tyley Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Bread-street on Fridays, and goes out on Satur∣days. Basingstoke. Lawrence Wardner's Wagon comes to the King's Arms in Holbourn-Bridge on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Beckles in Suffolk. John Richardson's Coach comes to the Gross-Keys in Gracechurch-street on Thursdays, and goes out on Fridays. Bynfield in Berkshire. William Johnson's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate-street on Tuesdays, and goes out on Wed∣nesdays. Brentwood —Coach, comes to the Blue-Boar without Ald∣gate, in and out every day. John Hills Carrier, comes to the Crown without Aldgate on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and goes out on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Barnstaple in Devonshire. John Glowing Carrier, comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate every other Friday, and goes out the Saturday following.
Bleechenly in Surrey. John Russel Carrier, comes to the Half-Moon in Southwark on Fridays, and goes out on Saturdays. Bridgenorth in Shropshire. Edward Bradley Carrier, comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Fridays, and goes out on Saturdays. St. Edmonds-Bury. Robert Coak's Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Tuesdays, and goes out on Wednesdays. Robert Coak's Wagon comes in on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. John Barwick Coachman, comes to the Bull in Bishopsgate-street on Saturdays, and goes out on Mondays. Richard Nelson, Robert Cook, their Coach comes to the Green Dragon in Bishopsgate-street on Thurs∣days and Saturdays, and goes out on Fridays and Mondays. Burwash in Sussex. Nicholas Garrett Carrier, comes to the Queens∣head in Southwark on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Brentry in Essex. Arthnr Paulmer Coachman, comes to the Cross-Keys in Gracechurch-street, in and out every day. Mr. Bunting's Wagon comes to the Pewter-Pot in Leaden-hall-street on Thursdays, and goes out on Fri∣days. Mr. Robinson's Coach comes to the Ipswich Arms in Cullumstreet on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdayt, Thursdays and Sa∣turdays. Blakebourn, Bolton-berry, Ribchester, Coulney, Padcam and Preston in Lancashire. Thomas Cave Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Thursday, and goes out on Friday, once in three weeks.
Burford in Oxfordshire. Leonard Mill's Wagon comes to the Bell in Fri∣day-street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thurs∣days. Bakewel in Derbyshire. John Syms Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn on Thursday, and goes out on Friday once in three weeks. Bridgenorth in Shropshire. Hugh Garrett Coachman, comes to the Blue-Boar in Holbourn on Saturdays, and gons out on Mon∣days. Bridgenorth and Wenlock. Widow Jane Gower Carrier, comes to the Swan with two Necks in Lad-lane on Friday, and gs out on Saturdays, once in a fortnight. Barton in Oxfordshire. John Bryon Carrier, comes to the Bell in Wood∣street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Berkshire. Widow Sayward's Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in Woodstreet on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thurs∣days. Barnet. Peter Blackwel's Coach comes to the Bell in St. Johns-street in and out every day. Barfeild great in Essex. Christopher Johnson's Wagon comes to the Rams∣head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. Bedford. John Johnson Carrier, comes to the Cock in Al∣dersgate-street on Tuesdays, and goes out on Wednes∣days. Anthony Rush's Wagon comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays. The same man comes to the same place with a Coach on Tuesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.
Baldock in Hertfordshire. Thomas Maes Wagon comes to the Red Lyon in Redcross-street on Tuesday and Friday, and goes out on Wednesday and Saturday. John Hare's Wagon comes to the Sun-Dial near Swan-Alley in Old-street on Monday and Thurs∣day, and goes out on Tuesday and Friday. Bishop-Stafford. Mr. Reve's Wagn comes to the Kings-head in Leaden-hall-street on Tuesday, and goes out on Wed∣nesday. Brackley in Northamptonshire. Mr. Ralph Harlow Carrier, comes to the Mer∣maid in Carter-lane on Saturday, and goes out on Monday. Battle in Sussex. John Colstock Carrier, comes to the Spur in South∣wark on Wednesday, and goes out on Thursday. Buckingham Carrier. Philip Webster and his Son, comes to the George in West-Smithfield on Tuesday, and goes out on Wed∣nesday. Banbury in Oxfordshire. John Jordan's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Wednesday, and goes out on Thurs∣day. Bocking and Brantry in Essex. Thomas Robinson's Coach comes o the Ipswich Arms in Cullum-street on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Satur∣day. Bdley in Worcestershire. Thomas Freeman comes into the same Inn on Sa∣turday, and goes out on Monday. Barcomstead in Hertfordshire. Thomas Wilkinson Coachman, comes to the Bell in Holbourn on Monday, Wednesday and Fridiy, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
Bisciter in Oxfordshire. Richard Ewins's Wagon comes to the Bull in Hol∣bourn on Tuesday, and goes out on Wednesday. Burton in Staffordshire and Ʋtoxiter. Henry Ash and Matthew Bakewel Carriers, come to the Castle in Smithfield on Saturday, and go out on Monday. Bredhempstone. Thomas Blewman Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday, and goes out on Thursday. Bagworth in Leicestershire. Joseph Stowrer Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Saturday, and goes out on Mon∣day, once a fortnight. Billegray in Essex. Mr. Thresher Coachman, comes to the Blue Boar in Whitechappel on Tuesday and Friday, and goes out on Wednesday and Saturday. Thomas Barker's Wagon comes to the same place on Wednesday, and goes out on Thursday. Brill in Buckinghamshire. Robert Bedford Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in Smithfield on Tuesday, and goes out on Wednesday. Bunington in Hertfordshire. Flying Coach comes to the Dolphin without Bishopsgate on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Bushey in Hertfordshire. John Weeden's Wagon comes to the Angel in St. Giles's on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Thomas Mason's Wagon comes to the Maidenhead in St. Giles's on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. John Mason's Wagon comes to the Maidenhead in St. Giles's on Tuesday and Friday, and goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.
Billinghurst and Purbeck. Robert Cramber Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Thursday, and goes out on Friday. Bath and Bristol. Mr. Saunders and Drew's Coach comes to the Chequer near Charing-cross on Monday, and goes out on Tuesday. Robert Toby's Coach comes to the Swan near Somerset-house on Wednesday and Saturday, and goes out on Monday and Thursday. Thomas Balden, Robert Toby, and Mr. Booth, come to the Bell in the Strand in the Summer-time on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, and go out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Thomas Balden, Robert Toby, and Mr. Booth, come to the Talbot in the Strand on Wednesday and Saturday, and goes out on Monday and Thurs∣day. William Drew's Coach comes to the Angel on the Backside of St. Clements on Wednesday and Satur∣day, and goes out on Monday and Thursday. Beconsfield in Bucks. John Rolf's Wgon comes to the Bell in Warwick-lane on Monday, goes out on Tuesday. C. Chipton-warden in Northamptonshire. Richard Farbrother's Wagon comes to the White Swan on Holbourn-Bridge on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Chesham in Buckinghamshire. Gabriel Adam's Wagon comes to the same place on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Fri∣day. John Christmas's Wagon comes likewise to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.
Cherbury in Oxfordshire. Mr. Willis's Wagon comes to the Rose on Hol∣bourn-Bridge on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Coxell. Abraham Aves Carrier, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Cranfield in Bedfordshire. Stephen Parish's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Coddicote in Hertfordshire. John Fisher Coachman, comes to the George in Aldersgate-street on Monday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday. Cambridge. Mr. Andrew Hart's Coach comes to the Bull with∣in Bishopsgate on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, and goes out Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Mr. Andrew Hart's Wagon for Cambridge and Norwich, comes to the same place on Tuesday and Thursday, goes out on Wednesday and Friday. Mr. Stiles's Wagon comes in on Wednesday, and goes out on Thursday. Robert Greene's Wagon comes in on Thursday, goes out on Friday. William Martin Carrier, comes in on Saturday, goes out on Monday. All from the Bull within Bishopsgate. Joseph Wildman, Charles Tyne, Nathanael Sayer Carriers, come to the Green Dragon in Bishopsgate-street on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, go out on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. William Watterson Coachman, comes to the Green Dragon in Bishopsgate-street on Monday, Wednes∣day and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. John Day Carrier, comes to the Vine in Bishops∣gate-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday.
Thomas Eagleton Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday. The same man carries to several Parts in Cambridgeshire and Huntingtonshire. Thomas Sterne's Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in Gracechurch-street on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. Canterbury-Post. Brankerd Barnes and Gilbert come to the Dark-House at Billingsgate on Saturday and Wednesday, go out Monday and Thursday. Mr. Foster and Frelyton Coachmen, come to the George in Southwark on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, go out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Chesterfield in Derbyshire. Mr. Richard Merchant Carrier, comes to the Castle in Woodstreet on Wednesday, goes out on Friday. Cirencester in Glocestershire. Richard Shurle's Wagon comes to the Sarazens-head on Thursday, and goes out on Friday, once in a Fortnight. Chelton in Glocestershire. Thomas Kinnot Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Carter-lane on Friday, and goes out on Sa∣turday. Crandan in Buckinghamshire. James Butler Carrier, comes to the George in Smithfield on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Coventry in Warwickshire. John Mitchel's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. William Mitchel's Coach-Wagon comes to the same place on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Roger Roberts Wagon comes to the same place on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Copel in Bedfordshire. John Patenam Carrier, comes to the Red Lyon in
Aldersgate-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednes∣day. Coliasby in Northamptonshire. Edward Allein and James Rants Carriers, come to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Clapham. John Day's Coach comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street, in and out every day in the week. Crandon in Northamptonshire. Thomas Edwards Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Chelmsford in Essex. Shadrech Cooper's Wagon comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Monday, Wednes∣day and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Arthur Palmer's Coach comes to the Cross-Keys in in Gracechurch-street on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. And his Wagon to the same place comes on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday. Mr. Spicer's Wagon comes to the Blue Boar with∣out Aldgate on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wed∣nesday and Saturday. Thomas Robinson's Coach comes to the Ipswich Arms in Cullum-street in and out, every day in the week. Chipton-Norton in Oxfordshire. Robert Bridgeman Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Colchester. Abraham Vall's Wagon comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day.
Thomas Starchpoole Coachman, comes to the Kings-Arms in Leaden-hall-street on Monday, Wed∣nesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Cockthrop near Oxford. Mr. Whiting's Wagon comes to the Bell in the Strand on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Croydon. John Windham's Coach comes to the Greyhound in Southwark, in and out every day in the week. Henry Batchellor and Norwood's Coach, comes to the Katherine-Wheel in Southwark, in and out every day in the week. Chinord near Thame in Oxfordshire. Mr. Mallard, Samuel Bardal, comes to the Bell in the Strand on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Cramborough in Kent. John Botten Carrier, comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Clare. John Rash Carrier, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. Chichester. Mr. Barnes Carrier, comes to the White-hart in Southwark on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Mr. Tuff Carrier, comes to the same place on Wed∣nesday, goes out on Thursday. Cranbroke in Kent. William Woollett Carrier, comes to the Talbot in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Chittenstone in Kent. John Harrison Carrier, comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Crookhorne and Evill. Mr. Clark and his Son, and William Matthews Carriers, come to Gerrards-hall in Basing-lane on Friday, go out on Saturday.
D. Dusely in Glocestershire. Mr. Church's Wagon comes to the Rose on Hol∣bourn-bridge on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Little Didlington in Bedfordshire. William Curphe's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Denby, Rexham and Ruthen. William Harrison Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on Friday, goes out on Satur∣day, once in three weeks. Dreyton in Buckinghamshire. Joseph Sare Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Daventree in Northamptonshire. Thomas Moore's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Humphrey Barker Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Dstable. George Boswel Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate-street on Monday, Wednesday and Fri∣day, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Dunchurch in Warwickshire. Thomas Southam Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Derinton and Wellingborough in Northamptonshire. Mr. Cole's Wago comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday, once a fortnight. Dorset, Salisbury and Blandford. Edward Cooper, Mr. Minchel, and Michael Min∣chel come to the Castle in West-Smithfield, on Wednesday and Saturday, go out on Monday and Thursday.
Dover. Thomas and Stephen Gibben's Wagon comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Wednesday and Saturday, goes out on Monday and Thursday. John Gibbens Carrier, comes to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs- Darking. Widow Moore's Wagon comes to the Greyhound in Southwark on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Dulwich. Will. Hicks Coachman, comes to the Katherine-wheel in Southwark, in and out every day. Dorchester. William Cooper, Michael Minching Coachmen, come to the Bell in the Strand on Wednesday and Sa∣turday, go out on Monday and Thursday. Dunmore and High-Ruden in Essex. Peter and William Wescoat Carriers, come to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Monday and Thursday, goe out Tuesday and Friday. Francis Cramphorne's Wagon comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. E. Exeter. Mr. Whiffen's Wagon comes to the Rose on Hol∣bourn-bridge on Saturday, goes out on Monday. John Lowry, John Baker, Arthur Baker Wagoners, come to the Kings-Arms on Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Thomas Morris Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Friday, goes out on Satur∣day. Benjamin Flemen, John Booth, William Baker, John Smead Coachmen, come to the same place on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, go out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.
East-Ham in Essex. George Holloway's Coach comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate, in and out every day. Will. Golding's Coach comes to the Blue Boar with∣out Aldgate, in and out every day. Ely. Simon Jackson's Wagon comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Monday, goes out on Tuesday. Enfield. Robert Hockley's Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate, in and out every day. Edmonton. Thomas Boulton comes to the same place, in and out every day. John Blower comes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate, in and out every day, both Winter and Summer. Egham in Surrey. The Coach comes to the Black-Lyon in Water-lane on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Elstree in Hertfordshire. Mr. Moutague's Wagon comes to the Angel in St. Giles's on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Epsom. Thomas Wells Coachman, comes to the Kings-head in Southwark, in and out every day. Thomas Bird Coachman, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Satur∣day. RobertBird comes to the Cross-Keys in Grace∣church-street in and out every day. Eatonbridge in Kent. Thomas Saxby Carrier, comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Monday and Thursday, goes out Tuesday and Saturday.
Eversham in Worcestershire. John Robert's Wagon comes to the Castle in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Epping in Essex. John Cornish's Coach comes to the Nags-head without Aldgate on Monday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday. Richard Galor Coachman, comes to the same place on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. F. Fulham in Middlesex. Mr. Woodman's Coach comes to the White-hart in Charing-cross, in and out every day. Falkingham in Lincolnshire. Mr. Wentword's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Saturday, goes out on Monday, once a fortnight. G. Glocester. William Allen comes to Blossoms-Inn in Law∣rence-lane on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Mr. Fettyplace Coachman, comes to the Bell-Sa∣vage on Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. John Pinbury, Thomas Harris, Francis Batchellor Wagoners, comes to the same place on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Susanna Bowers, and John Wood's Wagon, comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Susanna Bowers, and Dorothy Cromwels Coach, comes to the Sarazens-head on Tuesday and Satur∣day, goes out on Monday and Wednesday. Gainsborough in Lincolnshire. William Plaster, Henry Brewmett Carriers, comes
to the Red-Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Grantham in Lincolnshire, Newark, and all places thereabouts. Henry Wayring's Coach-Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in Whitecross-street on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Godliman in Sussex. Will. Miller Coachman, comes to the White-horse in Fleetstreet, in and out every day. Thomas Hart Carrier, comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Guilford in Surrey. George Plummer Coachman, comes to the Bell in the Strand on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wed∣nesday and Saturday. Widow Kent's Coach comes to the Talbot in the Strand on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday. Richard Thore's Wagon comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Monday, goes out on Tuesday. Thomas Richard's Coach comes to the same place on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday. Grinstead in Sussex. Mr. Coster Carrier and Coachman, comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday. H. Henley upon Thames. Mr. Hatheway's Coach comes to the White-Swan Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, Thursday and Sa∣turday, goes out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Hooknorton in Oxfordshire. —Wgner, comes to the Rose on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.
Highworth in Wiltshire. Christopher Viner's Wagon comes to the George on Holbourn-bridge on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. Hempsteade in Hertfordshire. George Weeden Wagoner, comes to the George on Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Hadham in Hertfordshire. William Summers Wagon-Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Hertford. Mr. Bethel and his Partner, come to the Bull with∣in Bishopsgate on Monday, Wedsday and Friday, and go out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. James Moss's Wagon comes from Hertford, Ware, Hitchen, to the Katherine-wheel without Bishops∣gate on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Monday, Thursday and Saturday. John Smart's Coach comes to the White-Swan with∣out Bishopsgate on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday. Mr. Weeb Wagoner, comes to the Four Swans in Bishopsgate-street on Monday and Thursday, goes out Tuesday and Friday. John Laybee Carrier, comes to the same place on Monday and Thursday, goes out Tuesday and Friday. Hodsdon in Hertfordshire. John Cresp, and Robert Heard's Coach and Wagon, comes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Hatfield in Hertfordshire. Daniel Addison's Coach comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Monday, Wednesday and Fri∣day, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Hallifax in Yorkshire. Henry Rieves, Gabriel Hynes, Josias Smith, come to the White-horse without Cripplegate on Wednes∣day, goes out on Thursday.
Edward Polard, John Dison, come to the same place, go in and out the same days. Mr. Walker Carrier, comes to the Bell in Wood∣street on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Hereford. John Lane, Richard Hewlyn Carriers, come to the Cross-Keys in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Hurst in Berkshire. Mr. Wright's Wagon, and Mr. Cox's Wagon, come to the Windmill in Shoe-lane on Wednesday, go out on Thursday. Harrow on the Hill in Middlesex. William Summers Coachman, comes to the Bell in Holbourn every day in the week in and out. Nathanael Page Coachman, comes to the Red Lyon in Holbourn, in and out, every Monday, Thursday and Saturday. Hampstead in Middlesex. Daniel Lyon Coachman, comes to the Bell in Hol∣bourn, in and out, every day in the week. Mr. Taylor's Coach comes to the Kings-head in Grays-Inn-lane, in and out, every day in the week. James Neveld's Coach comes to the Cock and Dol∣phin in Grays-Inn-lane, in and out every day. Huntington. John Vintner's Wagon comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. The same man, to the same place, with a Coach, comes in on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. William Guy Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Harrold in Bedfordshire. Edward Edwards Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.
Hadnam in Buckinghamshire. Joseph Holyman Wagoner, comes to the Talbot in the Strand on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Hitching in Hertfordshire. John Scearle Carrier, comes to the Swan in St. Johns-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Horsham in Sussex. Widow Mussel's Wagon comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Hemingham. John Knap's Wagon comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. Harwich Coach comes to the Sarazens-head within Aldgate on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday. John Newton, belonging to the Pacquet-Boat, comes to the Ipswich Arms in Cullum-street near Fenchurch-street on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday. Hornchurch in Essex. Thomas Rayman's Wagon comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate on Tuesday and Thursday, goes out Wednesday and Friday. John Tiffin's Coach comes to the Three Nuns with∣out Aldgate, in and out every day. I. St. Ives in Huntingtonshire. Thomas Johnson Carrier, comes to the Cross-keys in Whitecross-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Ipswich. John Richardson's Wagon comes to the Cross-keys in Gracechurch-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.
John Richardson, and Henry King Coachmen, come to the same place, in and out every day. Ingerstone in Essex. Thomas Stretton's Wgon comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. K. Kendall in Westmorland. Samuel Briggs, Thomas Briggs, Richard Geyn∣wood, John Yeates, come to the White-horse without Cripplegate every week on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. Kempton in Hertfordshire. Thomas Hynde's Wagon comes to the Bell in Al∣dersgate-street on Monday, goes out on Tuesday. Kenton in Warwickshire. William Rickett's Wagon comes to the George in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Kettring in Northamptonshire. William Simpson's Wagon comes to the Rose in Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Kimbolton in Huntingtonshire. Nicholas Clark Carrier, comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wed∣nesday. William Jones Carrier, goes to Bedford, Wootton, and Elstow, and comes to the Three Cups in Alders∣gate-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Kilworth in Leicestershire. John Oswin Carrier, comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Saturday, goes out on Monday, once a fortnight. Kidderminster and Sawbridge in Worcestershire. Richard Fielder Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on Friday, goes out on Saturday.
L. Lempster in Herefordshire. Oliver Hacklet, Richard Rogers, come to the White-Swan on Holbourn-bridge on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Ludlow in Shropshire. Mr. Miles, Mr. Rogers Carriers, come to the George without Aldersgate on Friday, go out on Saturday. Louth in Lincolnshire. Mr. Baxter and Mr. Furnace Carriers, come to the George in Aldersgate-street on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Lyn. John Payne, Thomas Crispe Coachmen, come to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate on Saturday, go out on Monday. Leedes in Yorkshire. George Browne, John Chester, John Lupton Car∣riers, come to the White-horse without Cripplgate every week on Wednesday, go out Friday. Lancaster, Wiggon, Narington, Liverpoole, Bolton, and other Parts in that Countrey. Richard Abbott, William Abbott, George Glover, John Knowis Carriers, come to the Swan with Two Necks in Lad-lane on Thursday, go out on Friday; one of them every week. John Greene, Edward Knight, John Scott, Peter Greene Carriers, come to the Castle in Woodstreet every Thursday, goes out on Friday. Ledbury in Herefordshire. Thomas James Carrier, comes to the Castle in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out on Saturday, once in a fortnight. Luton in Bedfordshire. Mr. Marshal's Coach comes to the Cock in Al∣dersgate-street
on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Leicester. James Lee, John Swift, Thomas Bass, Thomas Swift Wagoners, come to the Rose in West-Smithfield on Saturday, go out on Monday. Littleworth in Leicestershire. William Perkins, Mrs. Elizabeth Pellins Wagon, comes to the Ram in West-Smithfield on Wednes∣day, goes out on Thursday. Lawford, Rugby, Dunchurch in Warwickshire. Henry Colledger's Wagon comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Leachsteed in Oxfordshire. Edward Varney Carrier, comes to the Bell in Hol∣bourn on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Lincoln, Barton, Stanford, Grantham, and other Parts. William Clark's Coach comes to the Crown and Coach and Horses in High-Holbourn on Friday and Saturday, goes out on Monday, once a fortnight. Robert Barnes, Benjamin Broomhead, John New∣comb Carriers, come to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Robert Barnes Coach comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate-street on Friday, goes out on Monday, once a fortnight. Luton in Bedfordshere. John Bridgeman Carrier, comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Tuesday and Friday, goes out Wednesday and Saturday. Loughborough in Leicestershire. William Henshaw, Matthew Smith Carriers, come to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Saturday, go out on Monday, in every other week. Litchfield in Staffordshire. William Olds Carrier, comes to the Castle in Smith∣field on Saturday, goes out on Monday, once in three weeks.
Lemsted in Buckinghamshire. Thomas Varney Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Lewes in Sussex. Thomas Talbott, Thomas Rawlinson, John Alsop senior, Carriers, come to the Talbot in Southwark on Wednesday, go out on Thursday. William Aldridge's Wagon comes to the same place in and out the same days. Linsfield in Surrey. William Hall, and William Edsol Carriers, come to the Half-Moon in Southwark on Fridays, go out on Saturdays. Lavenham in Suffolk. John Poole Carrier, comes to the Cross-Keys in Grace-church-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday▪ Low-Layton in Essex. Francis Greene Coachman, comes to the Crown without Aldgate in and out every day. M. Marlborough. Mr. Yarrent Carrier, comes to the White Swan on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Mr. Coleman's and Mr. Perdue's Wagons come to the Rose on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesdays, go out on Thursdays. Richard Hobb's Coach comes to the Angel on the Back-side of St. Clements on Tuesday, goes out on Thursday. Manchester. John Garnett Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Thursday, goes out on Friday, once in three weeks. Edward Homes, and John Lease Carriers, come to the same place, in and out the same days.
Mr. Banks, Mr. Ralif, and Mr. Goodyard, come to the Axe in Aldermanbury on Thursday, go out on Friday. Maxfield, Manchester, Congerton, Leake. John Beach senior, William Silito, John Beach ju∣nior, come to the Swan with two Necks in Lad-lane every week on Thursday, go out on Friday. Middlewich, Manchester, Boulton, Knulsford. Thomas Chantler Carrier, comes to the Axe in Aldermanbury on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Manchester Stopord. Thomas Banford Carrier, comes to the same place, in and out the same days. Monmouth. Robert Long, Thomas Bright Carriers, come to the Cross-Keys in Whitecross-street on Friday, go out on Saturday. Morlington in Oxfordshire. Thomas Wescor Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Carter-lane on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Marsh in Buckinghamshire. Thomas Cole Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Mansfield in Nottinghamshire. William Hurst, William Lacy Carriers, come to the George in West-Smithfield on Saturday, go out on Monday. Maidenhead in Berkshire. Mr. Rider's Coach comes to the Bolt and Tun in Fleet-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Melton Mowbray in Leicestershire. George Whitehead's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. Malmesbury in Wiltshire. John Speake Carrier, comes to the Bell in the Strand on Tuesday, goes out on Friday, every three weeks.
Mavill in Sussex. Anthony Page Carrier, comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Maidstone in Kent. Mr. Varnham's Coach comes to the Star on Fish∣street-hill on Monday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday. Malden in Essex. Mr. Webb's Coach comes to the Blue Boar in White-Chappel on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday. His Wagon comes to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. N. Newbery. Henry Gerle's Wagon comes to the Kings-Arms on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Newport in Buckinghamshire. John Williamson's Wagon comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Richard Tom's Wagon comes to the Bell in Al∣dersgate-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Norwich. Robert Cook's Wagon comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Mr. Philips's Wagon comes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. Thomas Southgate's Wagon comes to the Four Swans in Bishopsgate-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Roger Hurst's Coach comes to the same place on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.
Roger Hurst's Wagon comes to the same place on Thursday, goes out on Friday. John Becroft's Wagon comes to the Dolphin with∣out Bishopsgate on Wednesday, goes out on Friday. His Coach comes to the Sarazens-head within Ald∣gate on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, goes out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Newport-Dreyton. William Chetwood, Thomas Chetwood Carriers, come to Blossoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on Fri∣day, goes out on Saturday. Mr. Whitchurch and Weem Carriers, come to the same place, in and out the same days, once in three weeks. Newcastle Ʋnder-line, Litchfield, Stone, Stafford and Coventry. Thomas, and John Badely Carriers, come to the Swan with two Necks in Lad-lane. Northampton. Richard Cooper's Wagon comes to the Rose in West-Smithfield on Thursday, goes out on Friday. William Smith, and William Brandon's Wagon, comes to the Ram in West-Smithfield on Wednes∣day, goes out on Thursday. John Ashby Carrier, comes to the same place, in and out the same days. John and Richard Newcomb's Coach-Wagon, comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Wed∣nesday, goes out on Thursday. Nottingham. John Tuffin's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell-Sa∣vage on Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. Newmarket. Nathanael Hooks's Coach and Wagon comes to the Chequer in Holbourn on Saturday, goes out on Monday.
Newport in Essex. A Wagon comes to the Dolphin without Bishops∣gate on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. O. Oxford. Mr. Bartlett Carrier, comes to the White Swan n Holbourn-bridge on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Mr. Morgan's Wagon comes to the Windmill in Shoe-lane on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Mr. Buy Coachman, comes to the Chequer in Hol∣bourn on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Mr. Thomas Dye's Coach comes to the Crown in Holbourn o Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Thomas Jifft's Wagon comes to the Eagle and Child in the Strand over against Somerset-house on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Oldham, Aston Ʋnder-line in Lancashire. James Barsley Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday, once in three weeks. Ony in Buckinghamshire. John Kent's Wagon comes to the Red Lyon in Red-cross-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Oundell in Northamptonshire. Faulconer Griffin Carrier, comes to the Ram in Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Onger in Essex. William Stane's Wagon comes to the Crown with∣out Aldgate on Monday and Thursday, goes out Tues∣day and Friday. His Coach comes to the same place on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. John Goodibeard Carrier, comes to the White-Bear
in Lime-street ou Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday. P. Pool in Dorcetshire. Robert Buddin's Wagon comes to the Kings-Arms on Holbourn-bridge on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. Peterborough, Spalding, Horn-Castle in North∣amptonshire and Lincolnshire. William Browning Wagoner, comes to the Cross-Keys in White-cross-street on Monday and Wed∣nesday, goes out Thursday and Saturday. Pissey in Berkshire. Thomas and Jane Peacock Carriers, come to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Potten in Bedfordshire. John Merriday Carrier, comes to the Red Lyon in Aldersgate-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Papworth. Robert Wessington's Wagon comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Portsmouth. Roger Goldring's Wagon comes to the White-Hart in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. His Coach comes to the same place on Friday, goes out on Monday. Thomas Jaquis Coach comes to the George in Southwark on Friday, goes out on Thursday. His Wagon comes to the Queens-head in South∣wark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Mr. Battle Carrier, comes to the George in South∣wark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.
Pettworth in Sussex. Mr. Startup, Clarke and Roberts Carriers, come to the White-hart in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Petersfield. Mr. Jaquis Wagon comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Saturday, goes out on Monday. R. Royston. Jeremiah Pilgrame comes to the Vine within Bishopsgate on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Rachdale Carrier, Buxton, Basington, and Longnor, Come to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Wed∣nesday, goes out on Thursday. Richmond in Yorkshire. John Chambers, Christopher Burril, Robert Teas∣dil Carriers, come to the White-horse without Crip∣plegate on Saturday, go out on Monday, one of them weekly. Reading in Berkshire. Mr. Coats and Mr. Harris's Coach comes to the Bolt and Tun in Fleet-street, in and out every day. Widow Barnet's Coach comes to the White-horse in Fleet-street, in and out every day. William Walker's Wagon comes to Gerards-hall in Basing-lane on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire. Bryan Robinson Carrier, comes to the Grey-hound in Holbourn on Monday and Friday, goes out Tues∣day and Saturday. Rigate in Surrey. Thomas Woodward's Wagon comes to the Grey-hound in Southwark, in and out every day. Rumford in Essex. William Harris and Thomas Beaumont Coach∣men, come to the Red Lyon in White-Chappel, in and out every day.
Rudenhigh in Essex. William Westcoat Carrier, comes to the White-Bear in Lime-street on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday. S. Southampton. Mr. Syms and his Partners Coach, comes to the White-Swan on Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, Thurs∣day and Saturday, goes out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Robert Waldron's Wagon comes to the Kings-Arms on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Salisbury. Hugh King's Wagon comes to the KingsArms on Holbourn-bridge on Thursday and Saturday, goes out Monday and Friday. Mr. Mincham and his Partners Coach, comes to the Angel on the Back-side of St. Clements on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, goes out Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Saffron-Walden. William Meriday's Coach comes to the Blue-Boar without Aldgate on Monday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday. John Austin's Wagon comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. John Wakefield Carrier, comes to the Vine within Bishopsgate on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Mr. Falmouth's Coach comes to the Blue-Boar without Aldgate on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Sheffield in Yorkshire. Richard Merchant Carrier, comes to the Castle in Wood-street on Wednesday, goes out on Friday.
Sheffield in Yorkshire, Mansfield and Rotherham. Jarvis Flyman Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on Wednesday, goes out on Friday, once in three weeks. Shrewsbury, Welch-Poole, Ossestry, and other Parts. Richard Lloyd, Thomas Lloyd, Nathanael Jones, William Lloyd, Thomas Forster Carriers, come to the Bell in Wood-street on Thursday, go out on Fri∣day. Shrewsbury, and other Parts adjacent thereto. John Simonds, George Smith, James Davis Car∣riers, come to the Castle in Wood-street on Thurs∣day, go out on Friday. Stroud in Glocestershire. Josiah and George Hewland Carriers, come to the Kings-head in the Old-Change on Thursday, go out on Friday. Strayton-Harlow in Warwickshire. Thomas Wescor Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Carter-lane on Wednesd., goes out on Thursd. Stoke-Haven in Buckinghamshire. Thomas Taylor Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Strout-Water in Glocestershire. William Poole, and William Bailey Carriers, come to the same place on Thursday, go out on Friday. George Holder Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Bread-street on Thursday, goes out on Friday, once a fortnight. Lawrence Hewlin Carrier, comes to Gerards-hall in Basing-lane on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire. Richard Newcomb's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Wednesday, goes ou on Thursday. Swallowfield in Wiltshire. Nicholas Pembrook's Wagon comes to the Bull in Holbourn on Thursday, goes out on Friday.
Stanmore in Middlesex. James Allen Coachman, comes to the Blue-Bo in Holbourn, in and out every day in the Summer. Stoke-Bruen in Northamptonshire. Daniel Stephens Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Tuesday, goes out on Wednes∣day. Stony-Stratford in Buckinghamshire. Richard Crowch's Wagon comes to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Sturbridge and Broomsgroove in Worcestershire. Robert Cole Carrier, comes to the Bear and Rag∣ged-staff in West-Smithfield on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Stanes. Henry Barrs Carrier, comes to the Kings-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Shoreham in Sussex. Thomas Blewman Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Sunnock in Kent. Richard Cockett's Wagon comes to the Spur in Southwark on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday. Sydenham. Richard Clark's Coach comes to the Greyhound in Southwark, in and out every day. Seare in Surrey. Mr. Chitty Carrier, comes to the Katherina-wheel in Southwark on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Sudbury. Francis Dyer's Wagon and Stage-Coach, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Grace-church-street on Thurs∣day, goes out on Friday. Stow-Market. Mr. Sidney's VVagon comes to the Pewter-Pot in Leaden-hall-street on VVednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day.
Stanbourne in Essex. Thomas Fitch Carrier, comes to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Stansteed Mountfitchett in Essex. John, Thomas, and George Peacock Carriers, come to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Monday, go out on Tuesday. Sawbridge in Herefordshire. Thomas Browne's Wagon comes to the Nags-head without Aldgate on Tuesday, goes out on Wednes∣day. T. Tring in Bedfordshire. George Meade's Wagon comes to the George on Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, goes out on Wednes∣day. Taunton-Deane in Somersetshire. Philip Bridle, John Powel Wagoners, come to the Cross-Keys within White-cross-street. Mr. Stone's Wagon comes to the Bell in Wood-street on Friday, goes out on Saturday. John Booth, Benjamin Fleming Coachmen, come to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Monday, go out on Tuesday. Tociter in Northamptonshire. John Lymon's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Thomas Harris Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Texel in Warwickshire. Thomas Barnes's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage in Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Tamworth in Warwickshire. Mr. Sedgwick Carrier, comes to the Castle in
West-Smithfield on Saturday, goes out on Monday, once a fortnight. Thomas Boss's Wagon comes to the Bear and Rag∣ged-staff in West-Smithfield on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Thrapson and Bristock in Northamptonshire. Richard Stanyon Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Tunbridge in Kent. —Carrier, comes to the White-hart in South∣wark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Nathanael Field Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Tuesday, goes out on Wednes∣day. Tenderton in Kent. Francis Holmes Carrier, comes to the Spur in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Thame in Oxfordshire. Humphrey Cooke's Wagon comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. V. Ʋpingham and Hookham in Northamptonshire. Hawkins Bringhurst's Wagon comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Ʋxbridge. Henry Landon Coachman, comes to the Bull in Holbourn, in and out every day. W. Winchester. Thomas Waldren's Wagon comes to the Rose Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday and Saturday, goe out on Monday and Thursday.
Witney in Oxfordshire. Thomas Hucks Wagoner, comes to the George in Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Richard Chirles Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in White-cross-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Wing in Buckinghamshire. Edward Stephens Wagon comes to the George on Holbourn-Bridge on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Watford in Hertfordshire. Henry Gifford, William Alden Wagoners, come to the George on Holbourn-Bridge on Tuesday, goes out n Wednesday. Wickham in Buckinghamshire. Mr. Prestley's Caravan comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Monday, goes out on Wed∣nesday. Elias Lane's Wagon comes to the George in Al∣dersgate-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. William Norman comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Warrington in Lancashire. William Wood, Thomas Atherton, John Hlton with Pack-Horses, come to the Castle and Falcon in Aldersgate-street every Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. Woolverhampton in Staffordshire. Mr. Taylor Carrier, comes to the same place in Aldersgate-street every other Friday, goes out the Saturday following. Wallingford in Berkshire. Sylvanus Wiggan's Wagon comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate-street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday. Worcester. Mrs. Elizabeth Twitty's Coach comes to the Blue Boar in Holbourn on Saturday, goes out on Monday.
Richard Roger's Wagon comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Friday, goes out on Satur∣day. Mary Clare and John Fleet comes to the Bell in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out on Saturday. John Roberts, John Haurton Wagoners, come to the Castle in Woodstreet on Friday, go out on Sa∣turday. Wisbich in the Isle of Ely. John Bond, Thomas Bond Carriers, come to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Thursday, go out on Fri∣day. Whitchurch in Shropshire. Humphrey Swanwick Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Walthamstow in Essex. George Diggs Coachman, comes to the Crown without Aldgate, in and out every day. Waltham-Aby. John West Coachman, comes to the Green Drago within Bishopsgate, every day in the week, and re∣turns again the same day. Ware. Robert Heard's Coach comes to the Vine i Bishopsgate-street on Monday, Wednesday and Fri∣day, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Another Coach comes to the Dolphin withou Bishopsgate on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, go out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Weston, Weeden, Toceter. John Gibbs Carrier, comes to the Bell in West Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Weeden in Northamptonshire. John Amos, and William Cox Wagoners, come the Pewter-Platter in St. Johns-street on Thursday goe out on Friday, once a fortnight.
Westchester and Nantwich. William Perin comes to Blossoms-Inn in St. Law∣rence-lane on Friday, goes out on Saturday. Westchester, Newport, Dreyton, Rixham, Denby, Ruthen and Nantwich. Thomas Johnson's two Gangs of Horses comes to Blossom-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on Friday, goes out on Saturday, once in three weeks. Richard Haton's two Gangs of Horses comes to the same place on Friday, goes out on Saturday, once in three weeks. Westchester, Wrexham, and Oss-Westry. George Woolwoon Wagoner, comes to the Pewter-Platter in St. Johns-street on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday, not constantly. Woolon, Ʋnderidge, Dursely and Nibly in Glocestshire. William Pierce comes to Blossoms-Inn in Law∣rence-lane on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Robert Bedford senior, comes to the Bear and Rag∣ged-staff in West-Smithfield on Tuesday, goes out Wednesday. Wallingford in Berkshire. Richard Kerby Carrier, comes to the Bell in Woodstreet on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Wells in Somersetshire, and other places thereabouts. John Proviss, Worthington, Price Carriers, come to the Castle in Woodstreet on Thursday, goes out on Friday. Warwick. John Windmill, Anthony Bailey Carriers, come to the Rose in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Mr. Rothwel Carrier, comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Thomas Wilmotte, Francis Purden, Thomas Ousler, Daniel Swift's Coach-Wagon, comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Monday.
Windsor in Berkshire. Mr. Bennet's Coach comes to the White-horse in Fleet-street, in and out every day. Mr. Saunders Coachman, comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate-hill, in and out every other day. Robert Burridge, Samuel Bradford Coachmen, come to the Eagle and Child in the Strand, in and out every day. Samuel Bennet Coachman, comes to the Kings-head near Charing-cross, in and out every day. Mr. Hattox, Reader, Neal, and Burt, come to the Chequer-Inn near Charing-cross, in and out every day. Philip Best's Coach comes to the Unicorn in the Hay-market, in and out every day. Elias Gliss Coachman, comes to the Crown in the Hay-market, in and out every day. The same Man comes to the Black-horse near the Mews-gate, in and out every day. Mr. Burt's Coach comes to the George in Kings-street, Westminster, in and out every day. Wolverhampton in Staffordshire. William Woolley's Wagon comes to the Bell-Sa∣vage on Ludgate-hill on Saturday, goes out on Mon∣day. Watford in Hertfordshire. John Halsey's Coach comes to the Bull in Hol∣bourn on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Wiltopp in Hampshire. Mr. Garaway's Wagon comes to the Windmill in Shoe-lane on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Watford in Leicestershire. William Biggs Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thurs∣day. Wemington in Leicestershire. eorge Goodsn Carrier, comes to the Bear and
Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on Saturday, goes out on Monday. Woodford. Edward Lake Wagoner, comes to the Maiden-head in St. Giles's on Tuesday and Thursday, goes out Wednesday and Friday. Worcester. John Winslow, Thomas Winslow, Flying-Coach, comes to the Kings-head near Charing-cross on Tues∣day, Thursday and Saturday, goes out Monday, Wed∣nesday and Friday. Woodford in Essex. John Hinton's Coach comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate, in and out every day. Wonsted in Essex. William Humphrey's Coach comes to the Blue Boar witout Aldgate, in and out every day. Wadhurst in Sussex. James Reed Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday. Weam in Shropshire. William Chetwood Wagoner, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Friday, goes out on Satur∣day, once in three weeks. Wittham in Essex. John Summers Carrier, comes to the Cross-Keys in Grace-church-street on Thursday, goes out on Fri∣day. Y. Yarmouth and Norwich. Mr. Philips Coachman, nes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate every Wednesday and Friday, goes out Thursday and Saturday. York. Francis Gardner, Margaret Gardner, Henry Mol∣den's Coach, comes to the Black Swan in Holbourn on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
The Rates and Orders for Carmen. At a General Quarter-Sessions of the Peace holden for the City of London (the 10th of Octob. in the Twenty ninth year of His Majesties Reign, Sir Thomas Davies then Lord Mayor) at Justice-Hall in the Old-Baily, the following Rates and Or∣ders were appointed for Carr-men. Rates for Carr-men. ALL Carr-men Trading or Working with Carrs in the City of London, and Liberties thereof, shall and may demand and take for every Carriage or Load of the Commodities under-mentioned, the Rates hereafter following, that is to say, s. d. From any the Wharfs between the Tower and London-Bridge, to Tower-street, Grace-Church-street, Fen-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill, and places of like di∣stance up the Hill, with 18 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 20 Hundred Weight 2 2 And being above 20 Hundred Weight, for every Hundred 0 2 In which may be included. Two Pun2heons of Prunes, 2 Bales of Mather, 20 Barrels of Figs, 2 Fats of Fusti∣ans, 6 ordinary Sacks of Cotton-Wools of Smyr∣na, and 3 Cyprus Bags, a Butt of Currans, a great Butt of Oyls, 3 Chests of Sugar, 8 Bags of Alms, 1 Last of Flax, 1 Last of Hemp, and any other Goods herein not na∣med of the like Weight, for every Load 2 2
And for Sea-Coals, 14 pence the Load, every Load to be half a Chaldron; and for one Hundred Fagots the like Rate. 1 2 And from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Broad-street, Lothbury, Old Jury, Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Law∣rence- lane, Milk-street, Aldermanbury, Cheap∣side, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and places of like distance, for the like Weight of 18 Hundred, not exceeding 20 Hundred Weight, for the Goods aforesaid, and other Goods herein not named, of the like Weight, for every Lod 2 6 And being above 20 Hundred Weight, for every Hundred 0 2 And so. Sea-Coals, 16 pence the Load, eve∣ry Load to be half a Chaldron; and for one Hundred Fagots the like Rate 1 4 Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Smithfield-Bas, Holborn-Bs, Temple-Bar, or any of the Bars on the North-side of the City, and places of like distance up the Hill, with 18 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 20 Hundred Weight, for every Load 3 4 And going beyond the said places, the parties to agree with the Carr-men. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Tower-street, Bishopsgate within, Cornhill, and others places of like distance up the Hill, with 14 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 18 Hundred Weight. 1 10 In which may be included. Twenty pieces of Raisins, a Load of Rai∣sins of the Sun, 6 Bags of Pepper, 6 ordina∣ry Bags of Galls, 3 great Bags of Galls: 6 Bales and Barrels of Indico, 6 Bales of Grogram Yarn. 6 Bales of Turkie Silk, 5 Hogsheads of Cloves, 4 Bales of Callicoes, 3 Hogsheads of
Wines, 2 Chests of Sugar, or any other Goods of the like Weight, 5 Hogsheads of Tobacco, not exceeding 18 Hundred weight 1 10 Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Broad-street, Lothbury, Old Jury, Bassishaw, Colman-stret Ironmonger-Lane, St. Law∣rence-Lane, Milk-street, Aldermanbury, Cheap∣side, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and places of the like distance, for any of the said Goods of the same quantity and Weight, for every Load 2 0 Also from any the Warfs aforesaid, to Tower-treet, Grace-Church-street, Fan-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Corn∣hill, and other places of like distance up the Hill, with 8 Hundred Weight, not exceed∣ing 14 Hundred Weight 1 6 In which may be included All Bus and Pipes of Wine, or a Pipe of Oil, Packs of Canvas, 2 Hogsheads, or 3 Terces, a Fat of Fustians, and all other Goods of the like Bulk and Weight, for eve∣ry Load 1 6 And from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old Jury, Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Law∣rence-lane, Milk-street, Aldermanbury, Cheap∣side, Wood-street, Friday-street, and other places of like distance, for any other Goods of like Load or Weight, for every Load 1 8 Also from London-Bridge-foot, Westward to the Old Swan, Cole Harbor, the 3 Cranes, Queen-hith, Broken Wharf, Paul's Wharf, Puddle Wharf, the Wardrobe, and to all o∣ther places not exceeding the Poultry, Cheap∣side, or Newgate-Market, for 13 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 18 Hundred Weight 1 10
And for Sea-Coals, 14 pence the Load, e∣very Load to behalf a Chaldron; and for one Hundred Fagots the like Rate 1 2 And from all other Wharfs and places be∣tween London-Bridge and Temple-Bar, to the same, and places of like distance, for every Load of Coals 14 pence, every Load to be half a Chaldron; and 100 of Fagots the like Rate 1 2 And to all places Northwards of the Poul∣try, Cheapside, Newgate-Market, Holborn-Bridge, and Fleet-street, for 14 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 18 Hundred Weight 2 2 And from Tower-street, Grace-Church-street, Fan-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill, and other places of like di∣stance, for every Pack of 20 Cloths, for 6 Bales of Cloths and Kerseys, 6 Bales of Pep∣per, 6 Barrels of Indico, 5 Hogsheads of Cloves, and for other Goods not herein mentioned, of like Weight, to the Water-side 1 4 And from Broad-street, Lothbury, Old Jury, Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Lawrence-Lane, Milk-street, Alderman∣bury, Cheapside, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and other places of like distance, to the Water-side, for the like Weight 1 8 And for places nearer, or of less distance, the par∣ties hiring, and to be hired, are to make Agreement answerable or proportionable to the Rates before∣mentioned. Orders for Carr-men. THe Carr-men for the foregoing Rates are to help load and unload their Carrs. If a Carr-man exact more than these Rates, upon due proof  Lord Mayor, or any two Justices of the Peace, he  suffer Imprisonment for the space of 21 days, without Bail or Mainprise.
If any Merchant, or other person shall refuse to pay a Carr-man for his Hire after these Rates, upon Complaint made by the Carr-man to the President of Christ-Hospital, or any Justice of the Peace, the President or Justice may oblige them to do it. All Merchants, or others, may chuse what Carr they please, except such as stand for Wharf-work, Tackle-work, Crane-work, Shop and Merchants Houses, which are to be taken in turn. Every Carr-man standing with his empty Carr next to any Goods to be loaden, shall upon the first de∣mand load the same without bargaining for any o∣ther Wages than the Rates before-mentioned. If a Merchant, or other person, shall cause a Carr∣man to attend at his House, Shop, Ware-house, or Cellar, with his loaden Carr, above half an hour be∣fore he unloads, (the Carr-man being willing to help unload the same) he shall pay the Carr-man after the rate of Twelve pence for every hour after the first half hour, for his Attendance. Every Licensed Carr-man is to have a piece of Brass fixed upon his Carr, upon which is to be set a certain Number, which Number (together with the Carr-man's Name) is Registred in a Register kept in Christs Hospital; so that if any Carr-man offends, it is but taking notice of the Number of his Carr, and scarch for that in the said Register, and you will find his Name. Every Carr-man that shall not conform to these Rules, or Work without a Numbred Piece of Brass fixed on his Carr, may be suspended from his Em∣ployment. Complaints of the Abuses of Carr-men may be made every Tuesday, at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, to the Court sitting in Christ-Hospital.
The Rates or FARES of WATERMEN. As they were set forth by the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, Sept. 7. 1671. Oars. Skul. s. d. s. d. FRom London to Limehouse, New-Crane Shadwel-Dock, Bell-wharf, Ratcliff-cross 1 0 0 6 To Wapping-Dock, Wapping-New, and Wapping Old-Stairs, the Hermitage, Ro∣therhith Church-Stairs, and Rotherhith-Stairs 0 6 0 3 From St. Olaves to Rotherhith-Church-Stairs, and Rotherhith-Stairs 0 6 0 3 From Billingsgate and St. Olaves, to St. Sa∣viour's Mill 0 6 0 3 All the Stairs between London-Bridge and Westminster 0 6 0 3 From either side above London-Bridge, to Lambeth and Fox-Hall 1 0 0 6 From White-hall to Lambeth and Fox-hall 0 6 0 3 From Temple, Dorset, Black-Fryars Stairs, and Pauls-Wharf, to Lambeth 0 8 0 4 Over the Water directly in the next Skuller, between London-Bridge and Limehouse, or London-Bridge and Fox-Hall 0 0 0 2 OARS. Wh. Co Fare pany s. d. s. d. FRom London to Gravesend 4 6 0 9 From London to Graise, or Greenhive 4 0 0 8 From London to Purfleet, or Eriff 3 0 0 6 From London to Woolwich 2 6 0 4 From London to Black-Wall 2 0 0 4 From London to Greenwich or Deptford 1 6 0 3 From London to Chelse, Baerse, Wansor 1 6 0 3 From London to Puty, Fulham, Barn-Elms 2 0 0 4
OARS. Wh. Com Fare pany d. s. d. From London to Hammersmith, Chiswick, Mortlack 2 6 0 6 From London to Brainford, Thistleworth, Richmond 3 6 0 6 From London to Twickenham 4 0 0 6 From London to Kingston 5 0 0 9 From London to Hampton-Court 6 0 1 0 From London to Hampton-Town, Sunbury, and Walton 7 0 1 0 From London to Weybridge and Chertsey 10 0 1 0 From London to Stanes 12 0 1 0 From London to Windsor 14 0 2 0 Rates for carrying Goods in the Tilt-Boat, between Gravesend and London. A Half Firkin, 1 d. a Whole Firkin, 2 d. a Hogs∣head, 2 s. A hundred weight of Cheese, Iron, or any heavy Goods, 4 d. A Sck of Salt or Corn, 6 d. An ordinary Chest or Trunk, 6 d. An ordinary Ham∣per, 6 d. The Hire of the whole Tilt-Boat, 1 l. 2 s. 6 d. Every single Person in the ordinary passage, 6 d. What Waterman takes and demands more then these Rates, lies liable to pay Forty Shillings, and suf∣fer half a years Imprisonment. And if he refuse to carry any Passenger or Goods at these Rates, upon Complaint made to the Lord Mayor Court of Aldermen, he shall be suspended from Employment for Twelve Months.
An Historical Account of the most Me∣morable Wars, Tumults, Fires, Epi∣demical Diseases, Rarities, Acci∣dents, &c. that have happened in the City of London: Briefly abstracted from Ancient and Modern Writers. BBcause it may be no less Profitable, more Recreative, and less Tedious, to deliver what is to be treated of in this Chapter, ra∣ther in a Miscellaneous Method, then other∣wise, we shall not tie our selves to observe a strict Pe∣digree and Succession of Time, respecting these things as they lie in order to each other, but yet we shall omit no Account that we find recorded of the respective Seasons when they happened; keeping exactly to the Sense of History, and supplying the Shortness of one by the Fulness of another; paring off Superfluities, and fitting it with Language suitable to our Times, not with respect to Elegancy, but Plainness. Under the term of Wars, Tumults, &c. we in∣clude all Popular or Military Disorders, in which the City was any way concern'd. And in order to that, I will note by way of Preface▪ some few of the Martial Services perform'd by the City in Ancient Times. The first Passage I shall produce, shall be out of Polydore Virgil, Printed at Basil, 1534. 147 years ago. He saith thus:—Hoc  success Danus fero∣cior effectus, Londinum, quo  Etheldredum se recepisse mtu causa aggrediendum stituit Itaque, &c. Which in English is to this sence: The Dane be∣ing grown more fierce by the success of his Affairs, resolved to make his Approaches to London, where he
understood that Ethelred had retired; having there∣fore prepared all things necessary for his Expedition, he proceeds to beleaguer the City, and begirt it round; by this perillous Attempt either to terrifie the Enemy, or try their Strength and Courage: On the other side, the Citizens, although somewhat fearing the effect of so great a Storm, yet considering that upon their case depended the General Fate of their Countrey, and that this was the Principal City, defended themselves brave∣ly; some sally out, and others annoy the Besiegers from the Walls, every one in all places striving to excel others in Bravery of Courage, and Gallantry of Acti∣on: At last, though the Danes gave many stout and sharp Assaults, yet the Valiant Londoners in Defence of their King, notwithstanding the peril of such an Enterprize, gather into a Body, and set open the Gates, and ran upon the Enemy with great Fury and Courage. But the Dane, whilst he encourages his men, and was striving to compleat the Victory, which he thought he was almost in possession of, is incompassed and beset on all sides, and his men slain in great numbers, yet he breaks out through his Enemies Weapons, and with the residue of his before huge, but now Routed Army, (marching night and day) arrives at Bath in two days &c. So far he. This happened almost sixty years? before the Conquest, in the days of Ethelred, King Sweyne being then King of Denmark. After the death of this Sweyne, his Son Canutus, af∣terwards King of England, besieged London both by Land and Water, but after much dangerous labour, judging it impregnable by the obstinate Valour of the Defendants, he departed, but returned with greater Forces the same year, and besieged the City again; but the Citizens behaved themselves so gallantly, and de∣stroyed so many of his Souldiers, that he was forced to betake himself to a shameful flight. In the dissention between King Edward the Co∣fessor, and his Father-in-law Earl Godwyn, (which was
the mightiest Subject within this Realm) the Earl with great Army came to London, yet was by the Citizens resisted, till by means of the Nobility they were re∣conciled. Seventy years after the Conquest, Maud the Em∣press made War upon King Stephen for the Right of the Crown, and had taken his Person Prisoner, but by the Strength of the Londoners and Kentish-men, she was routed at Winchester, and her Brother Robert Earl of Glocester was taken, in exchange for whom King Stephen was delivered. In the year 1383, (but Polidore Virgil says Anno 1581.) about 4 R. II. and 298 years ago, there fell out an Accident which created much disturbance in the Kingdom, and particularly in London, occasioned (as I find Recorded in several Chronicles) through the Rudeness of a Poll-money Collector, who coming into the house of one John Tyler at Deptford in Kent, de∣manded of his Wife Poll-money for her Husband, her Self, their Servants, and Daughter; the Woman al∣ledges, that the Daughter was not of Age to pay: The rude Fellow said he would try that, and by force immodestly turns up her Coats, (having in several places, as was reported, used the same trial) the Mo∣ther makes an Out-cry, and Neighbours run in; her Husband being at work hard by, and hearing the noise, comes in with his Lathing-Staff in his hand (for he was a Tyler) with which (after he had reasoned a while with the Collector, who gave him provoking Language, and strook at him) he knock'd his Brains out; and making his Appeal to the People, who were apt to receive any occasion of Tumult, he so incen∣sed them, with the help of a Factious Clergy-man, one John Ball, that the Commons from divers parts drew together; and whether beginning in Kent or Essex, they drew into their Faction the Commons of Sussex, Hertfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Suffolk, Nor∣folk, and other Shires, and apprehending all Passen∣gers,
made them swear to be true to K. Richard, and never to receive any King that should be called John, which they did, for the Envy they bore to John Duke of Lancaster. Thus their Number still increased, that by that time they were come so far as Black-Heath, they were esteemed to be One hundred thousand. They took upon them to cut off the Heads of all that professed the Law, Justices of the Peace, the Countrey Jarors, and any person that they thought to be learned; especially if they found any to have Pen and Ink, they pull'd off his Hood, and with one voice cry'd, Hale him out, and cut off his Head; and it was immediately done. They resolved to burn all Court-Rolls and Records, with all old Monuments. Their Chaplain, John Ball, a wicked Priest, advised them to destroy all the No∣bility and Clergy, so that there should be no Bishop in England but one Archbishop, which should be himself; and that there should not be above two Religious persons in one house, but that their Possessions should be divided among the Laity, for which Do∣ctrine they held him as a Prophet. The King was at this time at Windsor, but removed, in all haste to the Tower of London, to whom repaired the Archbishop of Canterbury Chancellor, the Bishop of London, the Prior of St. John Treasurer, the Earls of Buckingham, Kent, Arundel, Warwick, Suffolk, Oxford, and Sa∣lisbury, and others of the Nobility and Gentlemen, to the number of 600. The Commons of Essex came on the other part of the River Thames. From Black-Heath the Kentish Rebels came to Southwark, and broke open the Prisons of the Marshalsea, and the Kings-Bench, with other Prisons, and let out the Pri∣soners. The Essex Rebels spoiled the Archbishop's house at Lambeth, and burnt all the Goods, with the Books, Registers, and Remembrances of the Chan∣cery, with several other Outrages. Then they came to London over the Bridge, and sent for one Richard
Lyon a grave Citizen, who had been Tyler's Master, and struck off his Head, carrying it upon a Pole in Triumph before them. The next day they came to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancaster's House, which they set on Fire, burning all the rich Furniture, breaking in pieces Plate and Jewels, to an extraordinary value, and then throwing them into the Thames, saying, They were men of Justice, and would not, like Rob∣bers, enrich themselves with any mans Goods. And when one of their Fellows was seen to convey a fair piece of Plate into his bosom, they took him, and threw him and that into the Fire. Thirty two of them were got into the Dukes Wine-Cellar, where they stay'd Drinking so long that they were not able to come out in time, but were shut in with Wood and Stones that immur'd up the Door; they were heard to cry seven days after, and then perished. From the Savoy they went to the Temple, where they burnt the Lawyers Lodgings, with their Books and Writings and all they could lay hands on. They broke up the Fleet Prison, and let the Prisoners go where they would. The like they did at Newgate; and made a most dreadful havock up and down. The house of St. Johns by Smithfield they set on fire, so that it burnt seven days together. After this they came to the Tower, where the King was then lodged: And though he had, at that time, 600 armed Men, and 600 Archers about him, yet he durst not but suffer them to enter, where they abused the King's Mother in a rude manner, offering to kiss her, &c. that she fell into a Swoon. And finding in the place Simon Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor, and Sir Robert Hale Prior of St. John and Lord Treasurer, and one Richard a Car∣melite Monk the King's Confessor, these they led to Tower-hill, and there most cruelly cut off their heads, as they served divers others. Indeed Polidore Virgil writes, That the Rebels
were not at all in the Tower, but that the King sent these three men to appease them, hoping that they would not offer to abuse such eminent Clergy-men: For (saith he) Si vulgus it a concitatus turrem ex∣pugnasset, non eos utique tres duntaxat, uti credere par est, sed & Regem & relquos ommes, quos impri∣mis ad supplicium petebat, interfecisset; that is, If the enraged Common People had taken the Tower by force, they would, in all probability, destroy not only those three, but the King also, and all the rest, whom first of all they demanded to be deliver'd to them or punishment. They drew Thirteen Flemings out of Austin-Fryers, and Beheaded them in the Streets. Seventeen more out of another Church. And Thirty two out of the Vintry, and several out of their own, or o∣thers, whom they Beheaded; yet after all these bar∣barous and bloody Outrages, the King proclaimed Pardon to all such as would lay down Arms, and go quietly home; which the Essex men did, but the Kentish men continued still with their Captain Wat-Tyler of Maidstone, a crafty Fellow, of an acute wit, but very graceless; Polidore Virgil says, He was Manibus promptus, ac Consiliis praeceps, of a ready hand, and hasty or precipitate in counsel. To this Ringleader of Mischief, the King sent Sir John Newton, to understand what his meaning was; Wat Tyler was offended, because he came on Horse-back, telling him, It became him to alight from his Horse in his presence, and therewith drew out his Dagger to strike him. The King perceiving this Noble Knight to be in danger, to qualifie the severity of Wat for a time, commanded Sir John to alight, which did not pacifie, but made Wat the more insolent, and would have the King's Sword, which Sir John carried, offer∣ing again to assault him. But the Lord Mayor of Lon∣don, William Walworth, with other Persons of Qua∣lity, being just come, affirm'd it to be an unheard-of
Indignity, and a most intolerable Disgrace, if the King should suffer so Noble a Knight to be basely murdered in his presence. Upon which the King commanded the Lord Mayor to arrest him, who did it to purpose; for being a man of an invincible Courage, and a brave Mind, he regarded not the ha∣zard that probably would follow, his attacking that Darling, and Leader of a Rude, Numerous, and Re∣bellious Rabble, but prefer'd his Duty to his King and Countrey, and the Generosity of rescuing an abused Gentleman, even before life. I insert this, as a Re∣mark due to this brave and memorable Action, which deserves never to be forgotten. The Mayor immediately rides up to Wat, and Ar∣rests him with such a salutation of his Mace on his head, that he tumbles him down, and then he was by some of the King's Servants (some say, by John Ca∣vendish Esq) run through in several places, many persons encompassing him, so as that he could not be seen by his Plebeian Army, and then caus'd his dead Body to be drawn into St. Bartholomews Hospital. But the Commons perceiving it, they cry'd, Their Captain was slain, and animated each other to re∣venge: Upon which the King, though not above 15 years of age, was so Couragious as to ride up to them, telling them, That now their Leader was dead, he would be their Leader himself; and if they would follow him into the Fields, they should have whatso∣ever they desired. In the mean time the Lord Mayor, Walworth, with one Servant, Rides speedily into the City, and raised One thousand armed Men, where meeting Sir Robert Knolls, a Citizen, by accident, got him to be their Leader, who coming into the Field where the Rebels were, so daunted them, that throwing down their weapons, they cry'd for mercy: so that it was a won∣derful thing to see how suddenly Fear overtook Pre∣sumption, and how quickly terms of the most servile
Submission, succeeded their insolent Brags, viz. That they had the King's life in their power, &c. and what else they would do. On the other side 'twas as strange, to see how quickly Boldness surprized Fear in those about the King; for a little before, they trembled at the sight of the Rebels, but now they are mad to be at them, which the King would not suffer, but commanded the Charter they had demanded to be scaled, and delivered to them, because these Commotions might have the speedier End, for the Commons in other places, were not yet quiet, and the King thought it more prudent rather to pacifie, than provoke them. The Rabble being dispersed, the King called for the Mayor, and Knighted him in the Field, as also five Aldermen his Brethren, viz. Nicholas Brember, John Philpot, Robert Lawnd, John Standish, Nicholas Twy∣ford, and Adam Francis. Some affirm, that the Dag∣ger was added to the City Arms for this Reason, but Antiquaries make out, that this Coat, with the Sword of St. Paul (not a Dagger) belonged to the City long before this hapned. The Mayor of London, after this, sate in Judg∣ment upon Offenders, where many were found Guil∣ty, and were Executed; amongst others, Jack Straw, John Kirby, Alane Tredder, and John Sterling, who gloried that he slew the Archbishop. Sir Robert Tresilian, the Chief Justice, was appointed to sit in Judgment against the Offenders, before whom above 1500 were found Guilty, and in several places put to Death, amongst whom was John Ball the Priest, their Incendiary. And thus ended that dangerous Rebel∣lion. About the Year 1450. 29 H. 6. there was another Insurrection in Kent, headed by one Jack Cade, who stiled himself John Mortimer, Captain Mend-all. He marches with a small, but well-order'd Number to Black-Heath, where he lay about a Month, exercising
his Men, and in the mean time presents several Com∣plaints to the King and Parliament of various Grie∣vances and Oppressions, but they were judged too in∣solent, and therefore rejected. The Privy Council sollicit the King to suppress this Rebellion by force of Arms, who thereupon draws his Army to Green∣wich, and appointed divers Lords to assail the Rebels; but the Lords could get no Followers to fight against them, who sought only for reformation of Abuses, and for punishment of such Traytors as the Lord Say, the King's Chamberlain was. Whereupon the Lord Say was committed to the Tower, the King and Queen retire to London, from thence, within two days, the King (being now 15000 strong) marches in person towards Captain Mend-all, who, politick∣ly, withdraws his Forces to Sevenoke-wood: Upon no∣tice whereof, the King retireth again to London, but the Queen, longing for dispatch, sends the two Staf∣fords, Sir Humphrey and William, with many Hot∣spurs in the Court, to follow the Rebels, who were soon cooled; for they found Captain Mend-all in good order ready to receive them, and in the first Encounter slew Sir Humphrey, and afterwards his Brother, with many others, and put all the rest to flight. The King's Forces being at Black-Heath, could neither by Threats not Intreaties be gotten to rescue them, but rather wished the Queen and her Favou∣rites in the Staffords Case, or that the Duke of York were in England to aid his Cousin Mortimer, (now first acknowledged to be of his Kindred) and many of them stole away to the Rebels, whose Number from ssex and Surrey daily increased, whom yet thei Captain restrained from all outrageous actions, with them to Black-Heath, where the King's Army lay the Night before, but now was fal∣len down to Greenwich. Then was the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Dake of Buckingham sent to expostulate with the Rebels about their Demands; to whom Jack Cade gave very good language, but said directly, That he would yield to no Cessation of Arms, unless the King in person would hear the Grievances of his Subjects, and pass his Princely Word for the Reformation of their Wrongs. This Resolution of his being made known to the King, who had no assurance of his own Soldiers, made him march presently to Killingworth Castle in Warwickshire, which he fortified. Cade marches to Southwark, commanding his men to commit no Outrage, and not to wrong any person, which they obey'd. The next morning he marches to London-bridge, and so into the City by London-stone, where he struck his Sword, saying, Now is Mortimer Lord of Lon∣don. He then commands all Lombards, Merchant-Strangers, Genoeses, Venetians, Florentines, and others, to send him 12 Harnesses complete, 24 Brigandines, 12 Battle-Axes, 12 Glaves, six Horses completely fur∣nished with Saddles and Bridles, &c. and 1000 Marks ready money, or he would cut off the Heads of as many of them as he could catch: All which was immediately sent him. The next day he causes the Lord Say's Head to be cut off in Cheapside, as also his Son-in-laws, Sir James Cromer, High-Sheriff of Kent, uext day he causes some of his Fellows to be Executed for some Disor∣ders against his Proclamation, fined Persons at plea∣sure, and beheaded others. But the Citizens finding his Insolency to increase intolerably, with a select Party encounter them on the Bridge, through whom Cade sorced his passage, and fired several Houses. In this Bickering several persons were slain, and in a little time the Citizens, by the aid of fresh Supplies, recover'd the Bridge again, and drove the Rebels be∣yond a place, then called the Stoop in Southwark
Cade set all Prisoners in the Prisons there at Liberty, as well Felons as Debtors. But the generality of the Rebels grew weary, so that upon notice of the King's Proclamation, and assurance of Pardon, they dropt away to their several Habitations. Cade after∣wards attempting to raise New Troubles, was (because he resisted when he was to be apprehended) kill'd by one Mr. Alexander Eden, a Kentish Gentleman, his Body was brought to London, where he was quar∣tered, and his Head set upon London-bridge. Of 800 of these Rebels that were found Guilty, eight only were Executed. The Story of Evil-May-Day, Anno 1517, 9 H. 8. is so remarkable, that old men, formerly, were wont to reckon their Age from that day. The occasion was briefly thus. Several Artificers of Foreign Parts repaired to London, which disgusted the multitude, who complaiued, That their Selling of Wares, and Exercising of Handicrafts, impoverished the Kings own Subjects, and were born out of England, and that they had offered many great Insolencies and Wrongs to the English, particularly one Williamson, a Car∣penter of London, bought two Pidgeons in Cheap∣side, and as he was about to pay for them, a French∣man snatcht them out of his hand, saying, They were no meat for a Carpenter. This begat a Con∣test, and by the French Ambassador's means, who aggravated the matter, the Carpenter was imprison'd, &c. These, and such like Insolencies, provoked one John Lincoln to draw them up in Form of a Bill, and persuaded Dr. Beale on Easter Tuesday, at the Spittle to read it openly in the Pulpit, which occasion'd these Foreigners to be very severely handled, and oftentimes knockt down in the streets. At last, one Evening, many Prentices and others assembling, rifled some Strangers houses, and much mischief was like to be done, but by the care of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, &c, many of ehe Rio∣ters
were committed to Prison, whereof Lincoln, and twelve others, were hanged; 400 more in their Shirts bound with Ropes, and Halters about their Necks, were carried to VVestminster, but crying Mercy, Mercy, were all pardoned by the King, which Cle∣mency got him much Love. To describe all the particular tumultuous Disor∣ders of Apprentices, and others, would swell this Ma∣nual too much; and I would rather they should be forgotten, than any more be brought into Example, and therefore, at present, they are omitted. In the Year 1629. 5 Car. 1. about the month of July, there hapned a great Fray in Fleet-street, upon the Rescue of one Captain Bellingham, an Officer in the Expedition to the Isle of Rhee, which was at∣tempted by some Students in the Temple, wherein some were hurt, and some carried to Prison; but this drew together many of the Gentlemen to rescue the Prisoner, who made a Barricade against St. Dunstans Church, and beat back the Sheriffs Officers, and re∣leased their Friends; of which the Lord Mayor be∣ing inform'd, he and the Sheriffs, with some of the Trained-Bnds, came thither to keep the Peace, and disperse the Causers of the Tumult who were increa∣sed by that time to the Number of 500, and armed with Swords and Pistols. The Lord Mayor made Proclamation That on pain of Rebelion they should dissolve themselves but prevail'd not. He then try'd other means, and the Soldiers fired their Muque them Charged wit Powder onely, but the Gentle∣men provoked at this, shot Bullets, and very furiously attaqued the Trained-Bands, killed five outright, and wounded near One hundred; yet the City Soldiers were so reinforced, that in the end the Gentlemen were subdued, and one Ashhurst and Stamford, two Captains, with some others, were taken and commit∣ted. The King was much offended at the Uproar, and immediately sent for the Lord Chief-Justice, by
whose advice a special Commission of Oyer and Ter∣miner was issued out, and about a Fortnight after the Malefactors were Arraigned at the Guildhall of Lon∣don, and Ashhurst and Stamford being found guilty of Murder, were Condemned and Executed at Tyburn. Much more may be said of these Tumults, but for necessary Reasons it is reserved to another place. In the Relation of FIRES we shall only give a brief account of the most remarkable. In the time of King H. 1. All the Buildings from Cheapside to Aldgate, which was a large Tract, was consumed by a dreadful Fire. Some of the Fires on London-Bridge we have already mentioned.—In the Year 1212, on the 10th of July, at night, there hap∣ning a great Fire in Southwark, a great Multitude of People going over the Bridge to see it, or help to quench it; on a sudden by blowing of the South Wind, the North part of the Bridge was set on fire, upon which the People on the Bridge would have returned, but could not; and it hapned that while they lingred too long, the South end of the Bridge took sire also, so that the People thronging between the two Fires, expected nothing but present Death. Then there came to aid them several Ships and Ves∣els, into which the Multitude so un advisedly rushed, that the Vessels were thereby sunk, or were overset; that by Fire and Water, there perished above 3000 persons. In the Year 1633, about Midnight, third part of the Houses on the Bridge were con∣sumed by a great Fire, to the Number of 42 Hou∣ses, with a great part of the Wares, Goods, and rich Furniture in them, before eight a Clock next Morn∣ing, and the Fire remained glowing and burning for a Week after in their Vaults and Cellars. Many Fires there were that damaged St. Pauls-Church, In the Conquerors time, Anno 1087, it was quite con∣sumed, together with the greatest part of the City,— This Fire is recorded to begin at the entry of
the West-gate, and consumed the East-gate. June the 4th, 1561, between three and four in the afternoon, the great Spire of the Steeple of St. Paul's was fired by Lightning, which broke forth two or three yards beneath the foot of the Cross, and from thence it burnt downward, so that in four hours the Steeple with all the Roof of the Church was de∣stroyed. To repair which, Queen Elizabeth imme∣diately gave 1000 Marks, and a Warrant for 1000 Loads of Timber to be taken out of her Woods, or elsewhere, &c. In the 27 E. 1. The Palace at Westminster and the Monastery adjoyning were consumed with fire. It would be endless to give a particular account of all the Fires by which this famous City suffered from time to time, especially of late years, which being so fresh in Memory, and so fully set forth in Narratives, I shall at present for bear to transcribe; as the Fires at Waping, Limehouse, Shadwell, the Temple, the great Fire that lately hapned in Southwark, Wednesday night the 8th of this instant June, the former great Fire that consumed several 100 Houses in the said Borough, but are now very gallantly rebuilt, &c. And for an Instance of all, we will give a brief and par∣ticular account of that Dreadful FIRE in Anno 1666, which laid the City in Ashes, and did (almost) in∣credible mischief. The City of LONDON within the Walls is seat∣ed upon abont 460 Acres of Ground, whereon was bilt about 15000 Houses, the Fire destroyed 373 Acres within the Walls of the City, and 63 Acres 3 Roods without the Walls; There were burnt 13200 Houses, 87 Parish-Churches, six Chappels, most of the principal publick Edifices, as the great Cathedral, the great Guild-Hall, the Royal-Exchange, the Cu∣stom-House, most of the stately Halls of Companies, whereof the whole Damage is (almost) incredible.
It was observed, as judicious Stationers compu∣ted, that in that one Commodity of Books was lost 150000 l. and the loss in other cumbersome Goods, as Wines, Tobacco, Sugars, Plumbs. &c. was extra ordinary, insomuch that one Person, Sir Robert Jeffe∣ry, Alderman, now living, lost of Tobacco to the value of 20000 l. It hath been computed by an Ingenious person, that the 13200 Houses burnt, valued one with ano∣ther at no more than 25 l. yearly Rent, and at the low rate of 12 years purchase, will amount to 3900000 l. Sterlin. The 87 Churches, the spacious Cathedral of St. Pauls, the 6 Chappels, the Exchange, Custom-House, Guild-Hall, the magnificent Halls of Compa∣nies, the several principal City-Gates, with other publick Edifices and Colledges, may be well valued a∣bove 2000000 l. The Wares, Houshold-Goods, Mo∣neys lost, and spoiled by the Fire, or pilfered away by those wicked wretches that made their gain of the Common Calamity, may modestly be computed above 2000000 l. The Money spent on a General removing of Goods, during the Fire, and bringing them back afterwards, in the hire of Boats, Carts, and Porters, may be rec∣koned at least 2000000 l. the Total whereof 9900000 l. Sterlin. This Dreadful FIRE began upon the Second of September, at two of the Clock in the Morning (be∣ing the Lords-Day) and lasted till Thursday follow∣ing, being the sixth of the same Month, it brok∣out in Pudding-lane, near London-Bridge, at one Fariner, a Baker's House, and spread it self, besides breadth, from almost Tower-hill to St. Dunstans-Church, near Temple-Bar, in Fleet-street. The Consternation of all persons was extraordina∣ry, (and no Wonder) for, that Raging and Masterless Element did more mischief in a matter of four days ime, than three or four Armies unresisted could ha easily done in twice the time.
Some Men were forced to pay 5 l. 10 l. 20 l. 30 l. for a Cart to carry away into the Field some choice Goods; and certainly they had little Conscience that exacted so much. He that would more largely pe∣ruse every Days progress,—let him peruse Mr. Vin∣cent's excellent Book, Intituled, Gods terrible Voice to the City, Printed, 1671, page 46. Who were the Authors, Contrivers and Promo∣ters of this prodigious Conflagration, may be read at large in Capt. William Bedloes Narrative of it, Print∣ed Anno 1679. to which I am forced to refer my Reader, only shall transcribe a few things, which he particularly advertises the Citizens to take notice of, First, The Ways taken by Papists to begin and promote FIRES. 1. BY Fire-Balls put in with Poles or otherwise through holes, or open places into Houses; as at Mr. Fariner's House, which began the great Fire. 2. By hard Fire-Balls thrown through Glass-Win∣dows, as at the Smiths in Black-Fryars. 3. By flinging the said Balls, or other Combusti∣ble matter fired, into Cellars, through the Bars on Grates, where they are left without Shutters, as a the Oly-mans in Southwark. 4. By firing their own Lodgings, as the French∣man did in Shoo-lane, in the time of the great Fire and likewise the two Peters near Saffron-hill. 5. By hiring Cellars in dangerous places, illing them with Combustibles, and then firing them, which (Mr. Bedlow says) was a course they much advise him to. 6. By firing Hay-lofts, as in Smithfield. 7. By strangers feigning Eirands, as in the Tem∣ple.
8. By untyling Houses, breaking Windows, &c. and there putting in their Combustibles. 9. By getting into empty Houses and setting them on fire, as in Budge-row, 1670. 10 By creeping into Back-yards, and firing stacks of Bavins, Reed, &c. as at Lime-House. 11. By going into Victualling-Houses and leav∣ing behind them Trains for firing, as at the Cooks in Fetter-lane, and in Southwark. 12. By Conederate Servants, as lately at the At∣torneys in the same Lane. Secondly. Their Instructions are 1. TO do it in Select places, amongst old Build∣ings, and where Engines cannot play. 2. To Fire the Water-Houses, and get the New∣river-water stopt, if they can for that time, near that place. 3. To have some of their chief Friends thereabouts, that may misadvise great persons, that they may blow up Houses where it is not necessary, or where rather it will do harm by opening a passage for the fire. 4. To have some of their active Instruments, who under pretence of helping may scatter Fire-halls in contiguous Houses, and break down the Windows, Roof, &c. to let in the fire more easily. 5. To have others attending that shall cry out a∣gainst French and Papists, and mightily pitty the People, thereby getting to be trusted with remo∣ving of Goods, and so to plunder and steal, or if they find an opportunity to fire Houses at a di∣stance. 6. Curiously to observe Wind and Tide, in all attempts, as likewise Frosts and very dry times, and chuse Sundays for doing the business, because then there is least Water.
Now whether those wicked Incendiaries have ob∣served these Rules in that monstrous and execrable villany before recited, is left at the Tribunal of the Readers Impartial Judgment, who may consider the Circumstances following, of which they (viz. the Papists) made a fatal use. 1. It was the dead time of the night, or rather a little before two in the Morning, when all persons gave themselves to their repose, and were in a dead leep. 2. The Dead time of the Week, being Saturday night, when Traders were retired to their Country-Houses, and none but Maid-servants or Apprentices to look after their Houses. 3. The Dead time of the Year, being then the long Vacation, when Tradesmen were generally in the Country to fetch in their Debts. 4. The Closeness of the Buildings there facilita∣ted the progress of the Fire, and hindred the playing of Engines. 5. The Houses were generally Wooden, or built of old Timber. 6. A very dry preceding Summer made the Tim∣ber very apt to take Fire. 7. In those parts were the greatest Magazines and Store-houses of the City, of Oyls, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Wax, Butter, Brimstrne, Hemp, Cordage, Cheese, Wine, Brandy, Sugars, &c. 8. An Easterly Wind, continued long before, and then blew strongly, a fatal help to spread the Fire Westward. 9. The Thames-Water-Tower was immediately burnt down, being near the place where the fire be∣gan, so that they could not be supplyed with Waters that way.
To conclude, The same several Testimonies and Depositions taken by a Committtee appointed for that purpose by the House of Commons Tuesday 25 Sept. 1666. viz. That this was acted by a Hel∣lish Combinaton of Papists, evidenced by the words of Papists before the Fire, by their actual flinging of Fire-balls, &c. and otherwise promoting the In∣cendium during the Fire, many of which were catch∣ed in the Fact, but conveyed away by some of their Friends, under pretence to secure them.—The free Confession of the French-man, Robert Hubert, who was hang'd for it, and the Witness of Capt. Bedloe, and others, who have made out that they were con∣cern'd in it; I say all these are enough to satisfie any that will not wink himself blind, that London was burnt by Romish Fire-balls, (which they were wont to call Tewxsbury Mustard-balls) thrown by Romish hands. But Renowned LONDON, notwithstanding those vast losses, and the Devouring-Plague the Year be∣fore, and the chargeable War we had then against three powerful Neighbour Nations, lay not long in Rubbish, but began Phenix-like to revive out of the ashes of its consumed Predecessor. This dismal Calamity gave His Majesty a sad oppor∣tunity of exercising hs Compassion and Care towards many distressed Families, who lay in the open Fields. His Majesty therefore issued Proclamations to Justi∣ces of the Peace for causing Provisions to be sent in∣to the Markets, and ordered his Sea-store to be o∣pened for a present supply of Bread in Ship-Bisket, &c. The King passed an Act of Parliament for esta∣blishing a Judicature, to take Cognizance of; and Determine all Differences that might arise among parties concerning burnt or Demollished Houses. And by Act of Parliament there was a New-Mo∣del of Building appointed, which may be worth the
Readers perusal; It was past, Anno 1666. 19 Car. 2. See Kebles Statutes at large, p. 1327, to 1335. but 'tis too large to be transcribed. Puruant to this Act, the Citizens betook them∣selves chearfully to Rebuild, and in four years time they erected in the same Streets 10000 Houses, and laid out for the same 3000000 of pounds Sterl. count∣ing but 300 l. a House, one with another, besides several large Hospitals, divers very stately Halls; 19 fair solid Stone Churches, that did cost above 100000 l. were all at the same time erecting, and soon after finished; And since that time they have gone on Chearfully to Rebuild, so that there is hardly a va∣cant place in the City; except such as are designed for other uses than Dwelling-Houses. And as if the Fire had only purged the City, the Buildings are become infinitely more Beautiful, more Commodious, and more Solid (the three main Ver∣tues of all Edifices) then before; Nay, as if the Ci∣tizens had not been any was impoverished, but ra∣ther enricht by that huge Conflagration, they may be said to be even rather excessive than otherwise in their Expences upon the stately Italian Faciata's or Fronts of their New Houses, Churches, and Halls, many of excellent Portland-stone, upon their richly adorn'd Shops, Chambers, Balconies, Signs, Portals, &c. The publick Halls which are so magnificent and richly adorn'd, with excellent and Curious Ar∣chitecture, Carved Work in Stone and Wood, with Pictures and Wainscot, not only of Firr and Oak, but some with sweet-smelling Cedar—The Churches beautified with excellent various Towers, and Fronts of true Roman Architecture. They have made their Streets much more large and streight, paved on each∣side with smooth-hewen-stone, and guarded the same with many Massy Posts for the benefit of Foot Passeugers; and whereas before they dwelt in low, dark Wooden Houses, they now live in lofty, light∣some,
uniform, and very stately Brick-buildings,— A great number of the Halls, stately Taverns, and magnificent Houses of Merchants and other Weal∣thy Citizens, being fit to receive the greatest Mo∣narch in Europe, with a brave Train, at an Entertain∣ment. Abundance of these are built backwards, for the advantage of Trade and Shop-keepers which are to∣wards the Street, whereas if they were (as is usual in Italy and elsewhere) built towards the great and principal streets, no City in the whole World could go beyond it for beauty and magnificence. Near the Bridge of London, where this Dreadful Fire began, is now erected (as was ordered by Act of Parliament,) a Pillar in perpetual Memory of that great Incendium. It is of the Dorick Order, 175 Foot high from the Superficies of the Ground, and 15 Foot Diameter, all of solid Portland-stone, with a fair Stair-case in the middle, of black Marble, and a large Iron Balcony at the top,—from whence a man may have a gallant prospect of all the City and Country, this is commonly called the MONƲ∣MENT, the Pedestal is likewise all of Portland-stone, and is 21 Foot square, and 40 Foot high, Carved with most exquisite and significant resemblances, or figures to the Street-side, and on the other sides it bears these Inscriptions, carv'd in large Letters. Anno Christi MDCLXVI Die IV Nonas Sep∣tembris. Hinc in orientem, pedum CCII interval∣lo (quae est hujusce Columnae Altitudo) Erupit de media nocte incendium, quod vento spirante hausit etiam longinqua, & partes per omnes populabundum ferebatur cum impetu & fragore incredibili XXCIX Templa, Portas, Praetorium, Aedes publicas Ptocho∣trophia, Scholas Bibliothecas, Insularum magnum Numerum, Domuum CM 00 00 00 CC, vi∣cos CD absumpsit. De XXVI Regionibus XV
funditus Delevit, alias VIII laceras & semiustas re∣liquit. Ʋrbis Cadaver ad CDXXXVI jugerae (hinc ab aree per Tamisis ripam ad Templariorum Fanum, illinc ab Euro Aquilonali porta secundum Muros ad Fossae Fletanae Caput) porrexit; adversus opes Civium & fortunas infestum, erga vitas inno∣cuum: Ʋt per omnia referret, supremam illam mun∣di exustionem. Velox Clades fuit; exiguum tempus eandem vidit Civitatem florentissimam & nullam. Tertio Die, cum jam plane evicerat humana Con∣silia & subsidia omnia, Caelitus ut par est credere, Jussus stetit fatalis ignis & quaquaversum elan∣guit. On another side. CAROLO II C. Mart. F. Mag. Brit. Fran. & Hib. Rex, Fid. D. Princeps clementissimus, mi∣seratus luctuosam rerum faciem, plurima fumantibus iam tum ruinis in solatium Civium & Ʋrbis suae Ornamentum providit. Tributum remisit preces ordi∣nis & popu li Londinensis retulit ad Regni Senatum; qui continuo decrevit uti publica opera, pecunia pub∣lica ex vectigali Carbonis fossilis oriunda in Melio∣rem formam restituerentur: Ʋti{que} aedes sacrae & D. Pauli Templum a fundamentis omni Magnificentia extruerentur; Pontes, Portae, Carceres Novi fierent: Emundarentur alvei, Vici ad Regulam responderent, Clivi Complanarentur, Aperirentur Angiportus, fo∣ra & Macella in Areas sepositas eliminarentur: Cen∣suit etiam uti singulae Domus Muris integerinis con∣cluderentur, Ʋniversae in frontem pari altitudine consurgerent, omnesque parietes saxo quadrato aut octo latere solidarentur: Ʋtique Nemini liceret ul∣ra septennium aedificando immorari. Adhaec, lites
de terminis orituras lege lata praescidit; adjecit quo∣que supplicationes annuas & ad aeternam posterorum Memoriam H. C. P. C. Festinatur Ʋndique. Resurgit Londinum Majo∣ri celeritate an splendore incertum: Ʋnum trienni∣um absolvit, quod seculi opus credebatur. Incepta Richardo Forde Equ. Praetore Lond. A. D. MDCLXXI. Perducta altius. Geo. Waterman Eq. Prae. Roberto Hanson Eq. Prae Guliel. Hooker Eq. Prae. Roberto Viner Eq. Prae. Josepho Sheldon Eq. Prae. Perfecta. Thoma Davies Eq. Prae. Urb. Anno Dom. MDCLXXVII. The substance of these Elegant Latine Inscripti∣ons is a brief account of the Fire and the Devasta∣tion it made, its swiftness and stop.—His Majesties gracious care for the rebuilding of it, the Tribute laid upon Coals for the building of Churches and o∣ther publick structures, &c. the regularity, unifor∣mity and Model of the New Buildings, And that all should build in seven years, the Act for erecting a Judicature (as before-mentioned) concluding that it is a doubt, whether the Resurrection of London be with greater elerity or splendor, since three years
compleated what was Judged to be the work of an Age. This was begun, Sir Richard Ford being Lord-Mayor, 1671—raised higher Sir Geo. Waterman Knight, Sir Robert Hansen Knight, Sir Will. Hooker Knight, Sir Robert Viner Knight, Sir Joseph Sheldon Knight, Lord Mayors; finished, Sir Thomas Davies Knight, Lord Mayor, in the Year of our Lord, 1677. So much for Fires, only amongst many that may be mentioned, I cannot forget a lamentable accident that happen'd to a Family to which I was nearly related, one Mr. De Laune, that liv'd in Lothbury, a Merchant, who above twenty years ago, with his Wife (who was then ready to lie in) the Daughter of Sir Thomas Allen of Finchly, and all their Family, were burnt in their House there, and no account but conjectures can be given how the fire came. In the first year of the Reign of K. H. 7. in Au∣tumn, towards the end of September (that is about 196 years ago) there began and reigned in the City and other parts of the Kingdom, a Diease then new, which of the accidents and manner thereof, they call∣ed the Sweating-sickness. This Disease had a swift Course both in the sick body, and in the time and period of the lasting thereof: For they that were ta∣ken with it, upon twenty-four hours escaping, were thought almost assured. And as to the time of the Malice and Reign of the Disease ere it ceased; It began about the 21st of September, and clear'd up before the end of October. It was a Pestilent Fea∣ver not seated in the Veins or Humours, for there followed no Carbuncle, no purple or livid spots, or the like, the Mass of Blood, or of the Body, being not tainted; only a malignant Vapour flew to the Heart, and seizsd the Vital Spirits; which stirred Nature to send it forth by an Extream sweat. And it appear∣ed by experience, that this Disease was rather a sur∣prize of Nature, then obstinate to Remedies, if it
were in time looked into. For if the Patient were kept in an equal temper, both for Clothes, Fire, and Drink, moderately warm, with temperate Cor∣dials, whereby Natures work were neither irritated by heat, nor turned back by cold, he commonly Re∣covered. But infinite persons dyed suddenly of it, before the manner of Cure and Attendance was known. It was conceived to be not an Epedemick Disease, but to proceed from a Malignity in the Con∣stitution of the Air, gathered by the predispositions of Seasons: and the speedy cessation declared as much. The Remedy of this Disease (which hapned again in the 9th of K. H. 8. Anno 1517. and of which vast numbers died, remarkable by this Circumstance, that Englishmen were taken with it in any Country, but no others, and therefore termed by Foreigners Sudor Anglicus, that is, the English-sweat) is given by Polidor Virgil, p. 561. Thus; Quibus Rebus ita usu venit, &c. by which means it grew to a Cu∣stom, that after a vast destruction of men (by this Distemper) this kind of help was found effectual. If any person was taken with this Sweat by day, he must go to Bed with his Cloaths on; If by night, and the party be in bed, then he must rest and not stir for 24 hours compleat, in the mean time, he must be so covered as not to provoke Sweat, but let it proceed of its own accord, he must neither eat nor drink any thing but what will just serve to keep him alive,—he must not so much as put forth hand or foot to be cooled, for that's death unavoidable— If the Patient observes this, he is certainly cured, else lost; and this Disease (saith he) invaded only Eng∣land (or English-men) which men at that time made portentous constructions of. This Mortal Distemper was succeeded by a rage∣ing Plague, which swept away many, so that the King was forced to remove his Court from one place to another. By that Sweating-sickness in H. 8's time,
infinite multitudes of People dyed in several places of England, especially in London, sparing neither rich nor poor, for even in the King's Court the Lord Gray of Wilton, and the Lord Clinton, and many Knights, Gentlemen and Officers, died of it. The like Sweat∣ing-sickness hapned in the 20th year of his Reign, which began in London, and afterwards spread it self into all parts of the Kingdom, so that the Term and the Assizes were adjourned. In the 20 E. 3. (as Baker says, p. 131.) there died in London of a Plague 57374 persons. In the 4th of Queen Mary, hot burning Agues and other strange Diseases, took away much People; So as between the 20th of October and the last of December, there died 7 Aldermen of London, namely, Henry Heard∣son, Sir Richard Dobs, Sir Will. Laxton, Sir Henry Hobblethorn, Sir John Champney, Sir John Ayleph, and Sir John Gresham, of which some were Lord Mayors, &c. I find that in the 8th of Qu. Eliz. there died in ten Months seven Aldermen of London, viz. Edward Banks, Richard Chamberlain, Sir Mar∣tin Bowes, Sir Richard Mallory, Sir William Hewet, Sir Thomas White, and Richard Lambert, one of the Sheriffs for that year. In the 36th of Qu. Eliz. there dyed of the Plague in London and the Suburbs 17890. besides the Lord Mayor and three Aldermen, and Michaelmas-Term was holden at St. Albans. The first of King James, viz. 1602 there died in London and Liberties 38244, whereof of the Plague 30578, yet the next year, though the City was increased with a great number of Strangers, there died of all Diseases but 4263. There broke out likewise a great Plague in the First of King Charles the First, whereof more died than in the beginning of his Fathers Reign. Many other Plagues have been in the City, but I shall conclude this subject with a brief account of the great Plague in 1665.
In the beginning of May, the Bill of Mortality mentions nine that died of the Plague, and decreas∣ed the next Week to three, then increased to four∣teen, next to seventeen, next forty three, and then great Persons began to retire into the Country. In June the Bill increases to 112, next 168, next 267, next 470, then do many Tradesmen go into the Country: and many Ministers take occasion to ab∣sent themselves from their Charge. In July the Bill rises to 725, then to 1089, next 1843, next to 2010, Now most Parishes are infected, a vast number of Houses shut up, no Trade at all, and the number of dying persons still encreasing, although so many thou∣sands left the City. In Aug. the Bill rises to 2817, next 3880, next 4237, and then 6102, all which died of the Plague, besides other Diseases.—Now there is a dismal solitude in London-streets, every day looks with the face of a Sabbath, observed with greater so∣lemnity than it used to be in the City, Shops are shut up, very few walk about, so that grass begins to spring in some places. A deep silence every where, no ratling of Coaches, &c. no calling in Customers, no London Crys, no noise but dying Croans and Fu∣neral Knells, &c. In September the Bill rises to 6988, the next falls to 6544, but then rises again to 7165, which was the greatest Bill. There were but four Parishes that were not infected, and in them few tarried. The next Bill falls to 5538, then to 4929, then to 4327, then to 2665, then to 1421, then to 1031.—First Week in November it rises to 1414, but falls to 1050, then to 652, then to 333, and so lessened more and more to the end of the year, when we had a Bill of 97306, which died of all Diseases, which was 79000 more than the year before, and the number of them which died of the Plague was reckoned to be 68596 that year; but others say that there died of that fatal Disease, in little more than a years space, near 100000
persons in London, and some adjacent places. I shall proceed to remark briefly some few things more, which are Miscellaneous Collections of my own from Divers Authors. In the time of Edward the Second, when the work∣men were digging the Foundation of a Work about Pauls, there were found more than 100 heads of Oxen, which confirm'd that opinion, that of old time it had been the Temple of Diana, and that there was the Sacrifice of Beasts. In the 3 H. 5. It is said that seven Dolphins came up the River of Thames, whereof four were taken. In the Fourth of Q. Mary, before Harvest, Wheat was sold for four Marks the Quarter, Malt at 44 s. the Quarter, Pease at 46 s. 8 d. Yet after Harvest, Wheat was sold for 5 s. the Quarter, Malt for 6 s. 8 d. Rye at 3 s. 4 d. In the Country, Wheat was sold for 4 s. the Quarter, Malt at 4 s. 8 d. and in some places a Bushel of Rye for a pound of Candles, which was 4 d. I have read that in the Third of King James a Whale came up within eight miles of London, whose body was seen divers times above water, and judged to exceed the length of the largest Ship in the Ri∣ver, but when she tasted the fresh-water, and sent∣ed the Land, she returned into the Sea. I find recorded by divers Writers, that the 17th of July, 1619, one Bernard Calvart of Andover, rode from St. George's Church in Southwark to Dover, and from thence passed by Barge to Callice in France, and from thence returned back to St. George's Church the same day, setting out about three in the Morning, and returned about eight in the Evening, fresh and lusty, being 184 miles, which was very strange. In the 14th R. 2. on Christmas-day, a Dolphin was taken at London-bridge, being ten Foot long, and a monstrous grown Fish. In the 37 H. 8. On Tuesday in Easter week, Wil∣liam Foxely▪ Pot-maker for the Mint of the Tower
of London, fell asleep, and could not be awaked with Pching or Burning till the first Day of the next Term, which was full Fourten Days, and when he Awaked, was found in all points as if he had Slept but one Night; and lived forty Years after. In the Second of King James a strange accident happened, to the terrour of all Bloody Murderers; A Woman called Ann Waters, inticed by a Lewd Persou she was wont to keep Company with, consent∣ed to have her Husband strangled, and then Buried him secretly under the Dunghil in a Cowhouse; whereupon, the Man being mist by his Neighbours, and the Wife making an extraordinary shew of won∣dring, with much counterfeit Sorrow for his Absence, she past on, unsuspected for a time: But it pleased God, that one of the Inhabitants of that Street Dream't That his Neighbour Waters was Strangled and Buried under the Dunghil in a Cowhouse; and upon De∣claring his Dream, search being made by the Con∣stable, the dead Body was found as he had Dreamed, whereupon the Wife was Apprehended, and upon Examination confessing the Fact, was burned. What hope therefore of Concealment can any Murderers have, when they are subject to be Discovered by any mans Dream? In the Fifth of Queen Mary, there fell Hail-stones that were fifteen Inches about, I my self saw Hail-stones that fell in London in May last was Twelve Month, some of which were Six, some Nine Inches about, and others say, they saw some that were more. About the Sixth of Edward the Fourth, one Wal∣ter Walker a wealthy Citizen, dwelling at the Crown in Cheapside, one day, when his Child cryed, did bid him be quiet, and he would make him Heir of the Crown; which words being subject to Interpretation, he was call'd in question about them, Arraigned, Condemned, and put to Death; which was an Act
of great Severity, for the Man had no other mean∣ing, than that he would make his Child Heir of his own House with that Sign. Anno One thousand five hundred ninety five, upon Digging for a Vault to be made in Cheapside, there was found at Seventeen Foot deep a fair Pavement, like unto that above ground, and at the further end of the Channel was found a Tree sawed into five steps, which was to step over some Brook running towards Walbrook, upon the edge of which, there lay the bodies of two great Trees, the ends wereof were then sawed off, and were firm Timber; so that the Ground of the City had been raised to that time above Seventeen Foot. In the Third of William the Second, anno 1090. On St. Lukes day, Six hundred Houses in London were thrown down by a terrible Tempest, and then it was, that the Roof of Bow-Church in Cheapside fell with that violence, mentioned page 46 before. In the time of Henry the First, the Thames so fail∣ed of Water, that between the Tower of London and the Bridge men, waded over on Foot for the space of two days. In the Seventh year of Henry the Sixth, November Eight, The Duke of Norfolk was like to have been Drowned passing through London-Bridge, his Barge being set upon the Ples was over-whelmed so, that Thirty Persons were Drowned, and the Duke with others that escaped, were fain to be drawn up with Ropes. The same year the Postern Gates of Lon∣don by East Smithfield against the Tower of London did sink by Night more than Seven Foot into the Earth. In his Eighteenth year, all the Lyons in the Tower Dyed. And in this present year three of the Lions in the Tower died. In the year 1623, Octob. 26. A Popish Priest Preached in the After∣noon at Hunsdon-house in Black-fryers London in an upper Chamber, where there were Assembled above
Three hundred Men and Women, when about the middle of the Sermon a great part of the Floor fell, with such violence, that it brake down the next Floor under it: In the Fall whereof, the Preacher and al∣most a Hundred of his Auditors were Killed, besides as many more hurt. About the Year, One thousand two hundred eigh∣ty two, through a great Frost and deep Snow, five Arches of London-Bridge were born down and car∣ried away. Anno One thousand three hundred ninety six No∣vember 30. The young Queen Isabel of about Eight years old, being to be conveyed to the Tower, such a Multitude went to see her, that Nine persons were crowded to Death on London-Bridge. In the time of Richard the First, for three or four years together, there was so great a Dearth, that Wheat was sold for Eighteen Shillings six pence a Quarter; and then followed so great a Mortality of Men, that the Living could scarce Bury the Dead. In the Seventeenth Year of Henry the Third, were seen five Suns at one time together; after which, fol∣lowed so great a Dearth, that People did eat Horses and Barks of Trees, and in London 20000 were starved for want of Food. Anno 1313. 7 Edward 2. The price set on Victu∣als was, for a fat stalled Ox twenty four shillings. A fat Mutton, twenty pence: a fat Goose two pence half penny: A fat Capon, two pence: A fat Hen, one penny: Two Chickens, one penny: Three Pi∣geons, one penny: Twenty four Eggs a penny. Yet the next year there was such a Famine and Mortali∣ty of People, that the Living were scarce sufficient to Inter their Dead Friends. And the next year again, there was so early a Harvest, that a Bushel of Wheat which had been sold for Ten shillings, was now sold for Ten pence. In the Fifteenth of King Stephen, Horses and
Carts passed over the Thames upon the Ice. An∣no 1609. 6 King James, A Frost began in December which continued till April following, with such vio∣lence, that not only the Thames was so Frozen, that Carts Loaden were driven over it as on dry Land; but also many Fowls and Birds perished, and also much Herbage in Gardens, especially Hartichoaks and Rosemary were destroyed. The like violent Frost happened in the Seventh of Eliz. That Men perform'd all kinds of Exercises upon the Thames. In her 35th. year, the River so fail'd that a Horseman might Ride over near London-Bridge. In 5 Q. Mary, There fell so great a Rain in Sep∣tember, that Westminster-hall was full of Water, and Boats were Rowed over Westminster-Bridge to Kingstreet. In the 9th. of Hen. 4. There was so sharp a Win∣ter, and such a bundance of Snow continued Decem∣ber, January, February, March, that almost all small Birds dyed through Hunger. In the time of Edw. 3d. A Frost lasted from the midst of September to the Month of April. In his Eleventh Year, there was so great Plenty, That a Quarter of Wheat was sold at London for two Shillings: A fat Oxe, for a Noble: A fat Sheep, for six pence: Five Pigeons for a penny; and other things after that Rate. But in his 27th. Year, there was great Scarcity, by reason there fell little or no Rain, from March to July, and it was therefore called, the dry Summer. In June Anno 1603, There was one Whipped through the City of London for going to Court when his House was Infected. December 22. 1607. Nineteen Pyrates were Ex∣ecuted at Wapping. These Historical Memorandums, with what is scattered up and down the Book, Comprehend the most memorable Tumults, Fires, Plagues, Rarities,
and Casualties, in which this Great City has been con∣cern'd. I confess, there are many more of less Re∣mark, but I must of necessity refer the Reader at present, to larger Tracts, if he be so Curious as to pe ruse them. An APPENDIX, Containing the Names of the Pre∣sent Aldermen of the City of London, and the respe∣ctive Wards they Govern: Also a List of the Officers of the Lord Mayors House, and the Offices belonging to the Two Compters. IN this Appendix shall be inserted some few things that should have been put into their proper place, could I have timely obtained distinct Information. The City of London is divided into Twenty Six Wards, each of which is Governed by its Respective Alderman; the Names of which are these that fol∣low, with the several Wards which they Govern. Aldersgate-Ward. Sir Thomas Bludworth, Alderman. Algate-Ward. Sir Thomas Bcford, Alderman. Bassishaw-Ward. Sir Simon Lewis, Alderman. Billingsgate-Ward. Sir John Peak, Alderman. Bishopsgate-Ward. Sir Joseph Sheldon, Alderman. Breadstreet-Ward. Sir Henry Tulse, Alderman. Bridge-Ward. Sir George Waterman, Alderman. Broadstreet-Ward. Sir William Pritchard, Alderman. Candlewike-Ward. Sir James Edwards, Alderman. Castlebaynard-Ward. Sir William Turner, Alderman.
Cheapside-Ward. Sir Robert Clayton, Alderman. Colemanstreet-Ward. Sir John Frederick, Alderman. Cordwayner-Ward. Sir Robert Jeffery, Alderman. Cornhil-VVard. Sir William Hooker, Alderman. Cripplegate-VVard. Sir John Shorter, Alderman. Dowgate-VVard. Sir Thomas Gold, Alderman. Farringdon-Ward within, The Right Honourable Sir Patience Ward, L. Mayor. Farringdon-VVard without. Thomas Pilkington Esq Alderman. Langborne-VVard. Sir Robert Viner, Alderman. Limestreet-VVard. Sir William Rawsterne, Alderman. Portsoken-VVard. Sir James Smith, Alderman. Queen-Hythe-VVard. Sir John Lawrence Alderman. Tower-Street-Ward. Sir John Chapman, Alderman. Vintry-VVard. Henry Cornish Esq Alderman. Walbrook-Ward. Sir John Moore, Alderman. Sir Thomas Allen, Alderman of Bridge-Ward without. A List of the Officers of the L. Mayors House. William Man Esq Sword-Bearer. John Wells Esq Common-Cryer. Ro. Cheney Esq Common-Hunt. Harvey Esq Water-Baily. John Robotham, Coroner.
Jo. Bancroft, R. Capel, Tho. Blenksop, Serjeant Garvers. John Clare, John Beverly, John Cole, Seeants of the Chamber. John Bradnox, Serjeant of the Channel. William Jones, Thomas Cross, William Page, Lee Sad∣ler, Yeomen of the Water-side. John Noyes, Yeoman of the Channel. William Shaw, Under Water-Bayliff. Daniel Man, and Samuel Boufoy, Yeomen of the Chamber. Francis Brown, Richard Ball, Thomas Hewit, Sydrach Denham, John Doley, Young Men. John Weightman, and two more, Meal-Weighers. William Cave, John Fickels, Yeomen of the Wood-Wharf. William Cave, Fruit-Meter. Daniel Man, Hall-keeper. Officers belonging to Woodstreet-Compter. Richard Normansel, Secundary. George Kingswel, Clerk of the Papers. Benjamin Woodworth, William Scot, John Mordent, and Marshal, Clerks Sitters. Longworth Cross and Robert Reves, Attornies. Serjeants. Wil. Newton Edw. Howard ohn Prigmore ohn East ohn Boyer no. Brown ohn Hill Wells ohn Costhust Ed. Thompson Fran. Bromley John Bell Andr. Lambeth Henry Lee Ralph Lewis W. Thorn dead Will. Keath John Rand Yeomen. Dan. Beverly Rob. Cooper Will. Bell, sen. Will. Jacobs John King Steph. Webb. Jos. Hill Tho. Stanton Na. Churchman Nath. Thwait Henry Witt Will. Bell, jun. Tho. Audley Geo. Cotterel Andrew Harris Edward Omans Tho. Crayford William Alcock Officers belonging to the Poultrey-Compter. Trotman, Secundary. William Pim, Clerk of the Papers.
John Normansel, George Dixon, Ger. Green, Gabriel Neve, Clerks Sitters. Dutton Seymour, Robert Brabon, Godfrey Woodward, Richard Dalling, Thomas Baynes, Lewis Newen∣ham, Attornies. Serjeants. Richard Cole Arth. Seth Taylor John Cushy Simon Snds Edward Cole Robert Cole George Benson Henry Linnet James Witham Edward Tudor Richard Ashby James Smith Thomas Bond Abraham New Tric Samuel Mabbs Archibald Sparks Yeomen. Fletcher Edward Hen Sheldon John Lson John Wescut Will. Trickle Tim. Cotterel Will therston Mab John William Philps William Parker Zach Gardner Edward Barber Joseph John Note, That though the several Attornies, Serjean and Yeomen belonging to the two Compters, are in a strict sence said to belong but to One Compter, yet do they do business in Both, as occasion requires, and as they happen to be Employ'd. FINIS. Advertisement. IF there be any defect or imperfection in the Accoun of the Carriers, Waggoners, and Stage-Coach it is really the fault of such Persons to whom was made in the respective Inns for a Perfect Ac∣count, to get which, there were six Persons employed Yet in many places, partly by the ignorance of some the discourtesie or suspitions of others, the Persons em∣ployed could not procure so Satisfactory an Account uld be wished. Therefore if any Carriers, Wagg, or Stage-Coachmen, will send their Names, Days, to the Booksellers for whom this , Care shall be taken for Common Benefit them in due place.
