E3505 12407568 61438
Iohn Evelyn Esqr
NUMISMATA. A DISCOURSE OF MEDALS, Antient and Modern. Together with some ACCOUNT of HEADS and EFFIGIES OF Illustrious, and Famous Persons, IN SCULPS, and TAILLE-DOUCE, OF Whom we have no MEDALS extant; AND Of the Use to be derived from them. To which is added A Digression concerning PHYSIOGNOMY. By J. EVELYN, Esq S. R. S. Effigies hominum non solebant exprimi, nisi aliquâ illustri causâ perpe∣tuitatem merentium. Plin. Nat. Hist. Lib. XXXIV. Cap. 4. LONDON, Printed for Benj. Tooke at the Middle Temple-Gate, in Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.
NOBILISSIMO JUVENI FRANCISCO GODOLPHIN, SIDNEII GODOLPHIN Baronis de RIALTON, &c. Nuper Fisci Regii Quaestoris Primarii, uniusque de Septem totius ANGLIAE Iustitiariis FILIO Unico & HAEREDI, S. P. D. IOHANNES EVELYN. NULLA mihi dubitatio erat, Dile∣ctissime FRANCISCE, cuinam hoc dedicandum foret de NUMIS∣MATIBUS Syntagma, quo Adolescentium nostratium animos ad haec Studia capessenda conatus sum accendere. Tu enim eo Patre natus es, quo Amicorum omnium usus sum & intimo, & integerrimo; qui, si quisquam alius in hoc Regno, de Antiquis Imaginibus jure gloriari potest; nec solum à Majoribus suis Splendorem arcessit; sed & illos vicissim suis ipse Virtutibus illustrat & cohonestat; summa Prudentia, consummato Judicio, maxima in rebus maximis Experientia; antiquis Moribus & Fide: Tu es, quem quotiescunque aspicio, toties in Te Matris tuae incomparabilis, in Coe∣licolarum numerum jam olim adscriptae (quam
animo vultúque quasi redivivam refers) & ag∣nosco, & tantum non veneror Imaginem. Quid, quod & Patruos habeas, Viros & mihi amicissimos, & omnibus bonarum Literarum Laudibus florentissimos? Tu facito, cum mox matura adoleverit aetas, Sis memor: & te animo repetentem exempla tuorum Et pater Aeneas, & Avunculus excitet Hector. Nefas vero esset non memorare, unáque hic tecum conjungere Nobilissimum illum CAROLUM SPENCERUM qui & Sidneios vestros inter Avos suos numerat, in eodem tecum Curriculo versantem, aequis∣que passibus antecedentem; ambos in Senato∣rium Ordinem cooptatos, ambos eleganti huic NUMISMATUM Supellectili, & lite∣ratis Divitiis, dignum pretium statuentes. Quare, accipe, mi suavissime FRANCISCE, Pignus hoc &  Amoris erga te mei, qui Pietatem tuam, Eruditionem, caeterasque exi∣mias praeclarae Indolis & Ingenii Dotes, colo & suspicio; quas etiam ut caeteri tui Ordinis Adolescentes aemulentur & studiose imitentur, semper erit mihi in votis. Vale, & nos ama. Wottoniae apud Reg. VII. Kal. Novemb. CI IC XCVII.
TO THE READER. IT is now almost five Years since, that finding so little written on this Subject of Medals in English, and so very much in the Italian, French, and the most Learned Languages; I imployed some hours in putting some Notes together, and into such Method, as might serve (I thought) for Institution: But whilst part of it was already ingaged, and the rest finish∣ing for the Press, I was told, the Learned, and my Wor∣thy Friend, Mr. O. Walker (than whom, none of our Country∣men, that I know, is better able) was publishing a Book upon the same Design; which caused me to deliberate, and leave it off, lest I should actum agere: But when I had perused that Excellent Piece, and Historical Part, and considered how many Authors of the Learned'st Nations about us, had notwithstanding the plenty of Treatises, published large and ample Volumes on this Subject (for I could reckon more than Forty) and that tho' there possibly might no wide and spacious Fields be left uncultivated; there were yet some Corners, and little Wasts, not altogether subacted, and so Improv'd, as to admit of no more dressing. Upon this Account, I have inserted all that I thought material, and so handsomly delivered to us by many others; especially, by the Anonymous Author De la Science, &c. published long since this was in∣gaged, but to which I acknowledge my self greatly, and almost only, obli∣ged. That therefore in this Discourse, I now and then seem to repeat what is already said; neither can, nor indeed, ought by any means to be omitted: All who write for Institution (of whatever Art or Science) commence with Principles and Postulata; Grammarians with Ele∣ments and Letters: The Mathematician (after five hundred Volumes published of that Study) begin with Points and Lines, and the simplest Figures: And tho' I therefore needed no Apology on that account; I have yet contracted very much I had prepared, and was necessary, out of Respect to what I found already so well performed: The Reader will yet find something New, and Entertaining, and I hope, not unuseful in this Essay; at least accept of my Good-Will,
which is all I ask, besides his Pardon (or Act of Oblivion indeed rather) of Typographical Errata, and my own Imperfections. In the mean while, as to what I have advanced concerning Modern Medals, and their Reverses (in Chap. III.) I do not pretend, much less affirm, that all, whose Types are there exhibited, were Stamp'd by Public Decree of the Prince or Magistrate (as neither were all of the Greek and Roman Medals yet extant:) But as they are such as relate to the Confirmation of some remarkable Matter of Fact, discover the Genius of the Age, and link the History of divers notorious Passages of the latter Centuries and Revolutions; and thereby incite others, who have better Store and Opportunities of Per∣fecting what I have first Begun, and to Supply my Defects. One thing more I am to acquaint the Reader, who may wonder to find that seeming Digression concerning the late, and (I wish I could not say) present Diminution of Money in the Chapter of Mints, as unseasonably Resumed after so many able Persons had already published their Thoughts upon it: But, as that was written when that Epidemical and destructive Villany was yet flagrant; so was it long since by me presented out of this Copy, to one of the Right Honourable the Lords of the Treasury, and which, since I could not retrieve from the Printer, will, I presume, justifie me, as well as what I have said Page 42. concerning the Duke of Savoy, with some other Passages: Which, with all the other Defects of the Book, and Errors of the Press, will, I hope, obtain the Favour of the In∣dulgent Readers.
TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS. INTRODUCTION. Page 1. CHAP. I. Of the Use of Medals, whether for Money, or to preserve the Memory of Worthy Actions; their Antiquity, Materials, Size, Model, &c. p. 3. II. Medals relating to several Nations, Civil and Barbarous. Of Heads and Effigies, and their Impressions: Of Ornament, Consular and Imperial Medals, p. 18. III. Of Reverses Antient and Modern, as they relate to Hi∣story, Chronology, and other parts of Erudition, p. 48. IV. Of other Persons and Things, worthy the Memory and Honor of Medals, p. 157. V. Of Inscriptions, p. 177. VI. Instructions how to Collect, and Procure such Medals, as are Antique, and Rare; and to Distinguish the True from the False, for the prevention of Frauds and Impostures, p. 198. VII. Of Mints, and of the most skilful Artists, Authors, Collectors and Collections: How to Methodize and Dispose of Medals for the Cabinet and Library, with some Reflections on the Modern Clipping and Diminution of Coin, p. 221. VIII. Of Heads and Effigies in Prints and Taille-douce; their Use, as they relate to Medals, p. 256. IX. A Digression concerning Physiognomy, p. 292. With a copious INDEX of the particular Matters.
EMENDANDA. PAG. 8. Line 17. dele more. 9. 1. lege which cost. 9. ullus. 32. Electrum. p. 10. penult. some such. p. 11. l. 36. dele by. p. 14. l. 8. CCCCLXXX Year. Q. O. Gallus. l. 28. Cities dele,. p. 15. l. 20. Prolemy passim. 32. Roman. 25. such, dele,. p. 16. l. 5. distinguish'd. 15 d'or dele of, and all the Commas of that line after Or. 18. was ample field. 25. dele, after Street. 36. r. happly. 37. Critic dele,. p. 17. l. 19. of Gold. 32. they exceed. p. 18. l. 27. r. Toinard. p. 19. l. 23. r. Charles the Fifth. p. 20. l. 38. other Revers'd, dele 15. 39. add the. p. 21. l. 5. Family Arania. 28. after all. 35. r. Camden passim. p. 22. l. 36. r. by Monsieur. p. 23. l. 13. r. that at any time. 18. stamp'd. 19. r. probable relation. p. 26. marg. add V. Ursinun in Gente Plotia & Aelia. l. 19. dele of. p. 29. l. 18. r. Crowns. l. 25. Victorius. p. 30. marg. r. Missons. l. 16. r. & permanent. p. 33. l. 16. r. Mitre. 17. Tiara. l. 21. r. simpulum. p. 35. l. 16. r. ingenuous. p 36. l. ult. r. in the Family. p. 37. l. . r. is vested. p. 38. l. 3. r. Tethys. 10. aerae. p. 39. l. 19. Pergamus. p. 40. l. 25. dele out. p. 41. l. 3. r. Popes from St. Peter. p. 42. l. 13. r. Dactyliothecae. l. 38. lsiaca. ult. consularibus, dele,. p. 44. l. 36. dele and Augustus. l. 37. r. him save Ap. p. 46. l. 6. r. serenóque. l. 16. Men, dele,. l. 30. is, dele,. p. 48. l. 29. Mone∣taries. p. 50. l. 7. r. Leat. l. 30. r. where we find. l. penult. r. Metropolis s. p. 51. l. 29. r. or Trib Pot. p. 52. l. 6. r. Dertosa. dele the rest of that, and the next line. l. 27. r. Lucullus. p. 53. l. 31. r. an Elephant. antepenult. r. mistaken. ult. Seguin. p. 54. l. 36. r. Capitel. p. 56. l. 3. r. Oassia, Papia, Coelia, Parthia. l. 36. r. GENITRIX. l. 29. r. for the Veneration. p. 57. l. 5. r. Sirenes. p. 58. l. 10. r. Osiris, Eumenithia. p. 61. l. 27. r. Asses head, or Dragon. l. 37. r. Sun, Pomegranade or Rose. p. 64. l. 28. Phialam. l. 29. Arcadas. p. 66. l. 18. r. flammam. p. 6. l. 19. r. Inclination and desire of being known. p. 70. l. 16. r. Curious; that. p. 72. l. 2. r. Julianus Csar. p. 74. l. 13. r. Reddition. p. 75. l. 9. dispersing. l. 30. dele Terrestrial. 34. Java. p. 76. l. 25. r. Without any lasting. p. 80. l. 11. r. licent. 23. Administrandum. p. 89. l. 22. r. Edward. p. 92. l. 19. r. Histories. p. 93. l. 1. after Reverse add Fecit VTRAMQVE. VNAM. 1558. l. 3. Scotland dele: r. with those of the Dolphin. p. 101. l. 11. r. falling Band. p. 103. l. 5. r. Hand and Sword, dele from Heaven holding. p. 126. l. 8. r. interlac'd. p. 152. l. 10. Empers. p. 153. l. 14. r. MONSTRIS. DANT. FVNERA. CVNAE. l. 15. after Reverse, add, The Princes Arms. FVLTA. TRIBVS. METVENDA. CORONA. 1688. p. 154. l. 8. IVNII. 1688. p. 157. l. 11. r. Medals there remain. l. 22. r. assert. p. 158. l. 24. r. they would not have been to seek of such as. S. F. D. p. 159. l. 2. above those hundred. p. 162. l. 29. r. Arts Illiberal. p. 165. l. 4. r. on the first. p. 167. l33. r. Orators Tiro. p. 180. l. 7. r. florid. p. 184. l. 31. dele the period between M R. p. 186. l. 4. r labarum. l. 39. r. ENATO or L for the nineth year the Numerals sometimes placed , the fifth year. p. 188. l. 6. r. Geni∣trix. 191. in the ad. Column, r. Juno, Sospita, Mater. p. 203. l. 36. r. where is found his own Head with that of Hercules. p. 211. l. 32. r. Palace at Rome. p. 218. l. 22. bedded in, dele in. p. 122. l. 27. and p. 223. l. 32. r. Camden. p. 226. l. 3. r. ingeniously. p. 232. l. 18. r. Paleologi. p. 234. l. 9. r. ever those. p. 238. l. 6. r. who are indulg'd. p. 241. l. 17. r. revive. l. 19. and above, dele and. p. 242. l. 9. Intaglia. p. 243. l. 28. r. of serious, dele the. p. 244. l. 38. r. Abbor. p. 245. l. 15. r. Sir. Thomas Fanshaw. l. 38. add after A Hill, Will. Kingsley of Canterbury Esquire, Mr. Thornsley of Leeds in York-shire. p. 146. l. 13. r. Types. p. 247. l. 9. r. look on. p. 261. l. 6. r. Thorius. p. 264. l. 22. r. Coadjutrix. p. 266. l. 6. r. è contra, Barkstead. p. 269. l. 9. r. Bourbon. p. 271. l. 10. Genebrand. p. 272. l. 8. r. as also I. Vitzeli with his indulgence, dele upon pre∣tence of. among the Names, r. Caelius, Drusius, Oecolampadius. p. 298. l. 25. r. 'tis the most perfect. p. 311. l. 10. r. los Moros. p. 326. l. 35. r. Picos. p. 323. l. 4. add Vol. XVIII. N. 20.
NUMISMATA. A DISCOURSE OF MEDALS. INTRODUCTION. EVERY one who is a lover of Antiquities, espe∣cially of Marbles and Inscriptions, may yet neither have the faculty to be at so vast a Charge, or oppor∣tunity of Collecting them at so easie and tollerable an Expence, as he may of Medals; which well and judicially chose, have always been esteemed (and that worthily) not only an Ornament, but an useful and necessary Appendage to a Library. And verily, if we consider Medals in respect of the Matter; they are, for ought appears, the most last∣ing and (give me leave to call them) Vocal Monuments of Antiquity. The Egyptian Pyramids are indeed vast and enormous heaps of Stones, burthening the ground on which they stand; but they are mute and dead, without any Soul, or so much as Character on them, to tell us by wh; or to what end they were erected. Wherefore among all the various ways that
men have sought Immortality and Freedom from Oblivion, by Marbles, Statues, Trophies, &c. Nay even by Books (Holy Scriptures, dictated and preserved by their Divine Author, only excepted) there is nothing in all this Tract of Time that has proved more lasting than these Nummi Memoriales, which we call Medals: Witness those inscrib'd AETERNITATI & PERPETVITATI AVGVSTI, ROMAE AETER∣NAE, AETERNAE MEMORIAE, and the like. Nay even the very Names as well as Actions of many famous Persons, had been long since as unknown as if they had never been at all, but for these small pieces of Metal, which seem to have broken and worn out the very Teeth of Time, that devours and tears in pieces all things else. We cannot without grief consider, that of once so many thousand Statues, nay (as Pliny affirms) in number almost e∣qual to living Men, there are hardly four or five at this day ex∣tant intire and unblemish'd. Neither could the Colossian magni∣tude of some of them secure them from decay. Marbles with their deepest Inscriptions crumble away, and become no more legible: Pictures and Colours fade. What's now become of all those admired Works of Apelles, Zeuxis, Phidias, Praxiteles, and the rest of those Celebrated Artists? What of so many antient Books as once filled those Noble and Royal Libraries at Pergamus and Alexandria? 'Tis deplorable even to consider, what irreparable loss the Learned World has suffered by so ma∣ny Conflagrations and other funest Accidents, as have not only dissipated, but quite consum'd infinite numbers of Volumnes; so as of all that Noble and Venerable Store, so very few in comparison are left us, that there is hardly to be found a Manu∣script in the whole World which can honestly pretend to above eight hundred, or a thousand years Antiquity, and to have so long escap'd the rage of Fire, Wars, or (what is worse) bar∣barous Ignorance, and Fanatick Zeal: whilst Medals (though even these likewise, as all other Sublunary things, be not wholy exempt from diminution, through the Avarice of some, who have melted down all they could get of them of Gold or Silver) have surviv'd, and out lasted the most antient Records, and transmitted to us the knowledge of a thousand useful things of twice a thousand years past. 'Tis on this account that there is lately an Academy of Medalists in Paris; where in the Royal
Palace, all those Gentlemen meet, whose Curiosity and Genius lead them to the study of Medals, Inscriptions, and like Anti∣quities. And indeed the advantages which Divines, Historians, Chronologers, Criticks, and other Learned Men (witness Scaliger, Lipsius, Salmasius, Peireskius, Vossius, Holstenius, Gottofredus, Signor Noris, (once Chief Library keeper of the Vatican, and now Cardinal) Antonie Pagi of Aix, &c. and some few of our Nation, as Camden, Selden, Sir Iohn Marsham, Sir Simon D' Ewes, Mr. Greaves, the late Bishops Walton, and Pearson, have deriv'd from the light which Medals have contributed to their Studies; and the benefit that may accrue by them even to the greatest Princes and Politicians (as the Learned Cuperus shews in that cu∣rious Dissertation concerning the Apotheosis of Homer, speaking of Inscriptions, and antient Marbles; but instar omnium the ex∣cellently Learned Spanheim) sufficiently discover for what Rea∣son they are and have been cherish'd and search'd after with so much Passion and Industry in other Countries; though so little understood or minded in this of Ours: where yet the Romans once fixed their Victorious Eagles, planted so many Colo∣nies, and left so many Monuments of their Residence. With the assistance then of many Learned Foreigners who have expresly written of Medals, as well in their own Languages as the Latin Tongue; that I might in some measure cultivate so useful and diverting a Study, and supply the want of Books in our Own, I thought a Treatise on this Subject might not be unacceptable. CHAP. I. Of the Use of Medals, whether for Mony, or to preserve the Memory of worthy Actions; their Antiquity, Materials, Size, Model, &c. I Shall not here detain the Reader with any prolix Discourse of the antient Moneys and their Value, so many Ages ago first used in Trafick, and succeeding that Original Barter, or Commutation of one Commodity for another, which Tacitus
and Pliny affirm was previous to Money (especially among the antient Germans) till some more precious Matter, as Metal, for its rarity and beauty, durable texture, and easiness of carriage, became the Price of things, as Aristotle shews us in his Politicks: But in all appearance the first Purchases were generally with Cattel, the Kishitah or Lamb; wherein consisted the innocent Riches of elder times, before there was any Money known or coin'd. Whence some Expositors for centum Nummis (Gen. c. 33. v. 19.) will have it read centum Agnis; though it will still remain a question, whether Agnus there do signifie proper∣ly a Lamb, or rather Money marked and stamped with the image of a Lamb. For Grotius thinks that the Patriarch Iacob being so great a Master in Cattel, and abounding in Flocks, might probably set that figure on the Silver or Money which he us'd. And indeed that Money was in use very early; the three and twentieth Chapter of Genesis and other Texts which men∣tion probatam Monetam, seems to make clear, both as to the Weight, Species, or both. And as among the Romans from the Figure of Cattel stamped and impressed upon the Metal, 'tis generally conceiv'd the name of Money obtain'd, à Pecore Pe∣cunia; of which see Varro, Pliny, Plutarch, and the Medal in Gente Rustia mention'd by Ursinus: so Iacob's Money might be call'd Keshitah from the Impress of a Lamb. So a sort of Coin was called Bos antiently at Athens, as now Corvus at Basil, from the Figures impressed on them; and not many Ages since Mouttons among the French, as bearing a Sheep on the Coin: and so  of old among the Athenians, Va∣lerians, Aurelians; as we Iacobus's, Carolus's, Horse-men from the Figure or Effigies they bear; nay sometimes from the Ar∣tist or Workman; as heretofore our golden Florens in the Reign of Edward III. coin'd by certain Florentine Moneyers, who were it seems imploy'd here in England. As to Copper or other Metal, used in Traffick, whether form'd into Vessels, Oeconomic Utensils, and Instruments of Husbandry, which those who had more than they need, might exchange for other necessaries, or afterwards cut and divide in∣to Plates, and value by weight or pound, not unlike to what is still familiar among the Sweeds rich in Copper (or when any Stamp or Devise was first set on it in the several Kingdoms and Republicks by Authority of the Magistrate, to render it more
Current, than otherwise its natural and intrinsic Value alone would amount to, and which apparently at first prevailed) I am not in pain about. But that at first it was plain, and with∣out Character, is the most probable and received Opinion, 'til that was added by those to whom belonged the Prerogative of Coining upon a Legal Account, for the ease and benefit of Com∣merce. This is certain, that among the Romans the first Species antiently minted, namely Brass, was without any mark at all, till the Reign of Servius Tullus, who stamp'd it nota pecudum from whence it was called Pecunia, as we have already observ'd. Before his time it was payed by Weight only; so as there was no Buying or Selling without the Scales. And the first design of Coining in every Country was to save the labour and trouble of Weighing; the Stamp being a publick Testimony, that such a piece was of such a Weight, and so might pass in Traf∣fick without the trial of the Scales. At first therefore among the Romans the As was adequately of a Pound or Twelve Ounces Weight; whence also it was called Libella: And thus it con∣tinued, till the publick necessity in that sharp and expensive War (the first against the Carthaginians) made them call in the old Asses, and Coin new ones weighing no more than two Ounces a piece; though of the same reputed Value and Name with the Old. These new Coined ones had on the front a double Ianus, on the Reverse a Prow of a Ship; the former Effigies of the Pecus being laid aside. The like Exigency re∣turning in the Second Punic War, reduced the As still lower; and new ones were stamped, weighing only a single Ounce: After this a Law was Enacted, to melt down those Ounce Asses, and set out new ones of half an Ounce. And at this last pitch they generally continued, during the time of the Republick. Be∣sides the As, other smaller Moneys of Copper were in use; as the Semissis, the Triens, the Quadrans, the Sextans; each having its appellation from the proportion it bore to the As. The Quadrans was of old called Teruntius; because it weigh'd three Ounces, as long as the As weighed an intire Pound: But when the As was reduced to half an Ounce, the Quadrans by degrees lost its old name, being diminished proportionably to the eighth part of an Ounce.
The first Silver stamped at Rome, was a little before the first Punic War: the Denarius, so call'd from its Primitive Value, which was Ten Asses of Brass; the Quinarius worth Five, and the Sestertius worth Two and Half. But in the Second Punic War, when there was a necessity of inhancing Mony to sup∣port the publick Extraordinaries; as in the First they had raised the Price of Brass Mony; so now the Denarius (though of the same weight as before) was made equal in Value to Six∣teen Asses, the Quinarius to Eight, and the Sestertius to Four. The Impress on the Silver Coin at first was a Chariot: After∣wards the Devises were varied, as the Mint-Master pleased. That Piece which bears the Head of Roma with a winged Hel∣met on, and frequently some Sacrificing Vessel, intimated (as some conjecture) that Rome had by her Arms, Diligence, and Care of Religion, been made Empress of the World: and S. Augustine himself has something to this Sense, in his City of God, speaking of the wonderful success of that Common-wealth. In these Moneys of Silver we sometimes meet, besides Figure and Device, with other Marks and Characters, denoting the Value of the Pieces: Thus X stamped on the Denarius signi∣fies denos aeris, and declares it to be worth ten Asses of Brass: V the mark of Quinarius, five Asses; and H S the note of the Sestertius, two and an half. But we meet with some few De∣narii marked with XVI, and Quinarii with VIII; an indicati∣on, that they were coin'd in those times, when the Value of the Denarius was inhaunc'd from its original Value of Ten Asses to that of Sixteen. In the Consulars of Brass the Price and Weight of the Mony is sometimes denoted by a certain number of Points, signifying so many Twelfths of the As: so the Sextans is marked with two points, the Quadrans with three, and the Triens with four: And thus remained the antient Mony with those Stamps and Emblems, whilst that glorious Repub∣lick continued; after which we find how the succeeding Em∣perors adorned them with their own Heads, Effigies, and De∣vises according to their several Fancies. But now after all we have said of Roman Mony, none is there so frequently and honorably mention'd, none so peculiarly de∣served
the name of Nummus, none has so much exercised the Criticks, as the Sestertius, wearing for its Badge, Castor and Pollux with the Head of Roma; marked by H S, and called Sesterti∣us quasi Semitertius, from its primitive Value, two Asses and an half of the Third. And here our Young Medalists must take notice of a peculiar way of speaking in use among the Romans; that is, whereas Sestertius signifies a single Sesterce, and Decem Sestertii, so many single Sesterces; yet Decem Sester∣tia (in the Neuter Gender) signifies ten thousand of them, and Decies Sestertium (in the Neuter Singular) no less than ten hun∣dred thousand. The last Metal that came to the Roman Mint was Gold, sixty two years after Silver, C. Claudius Nero, and M. Livius Salinator II Cos. stamped generally with the same Devices, as the Silver Mony, weighing two Ounces of Silver, and was valued at twenty five of them; the worth of Gold to Silver of equal Weight bearing then the Proportion of twelve and a half to one. Though in the earliest times Gold had only a decuple value of Silver, both among the Romans, and Greeks. This may suffice then for a tast of what antiently were the Products of the Roman Mints: Those who would be more accurately Instructed may consult the learned Budaeus, Agri∣cola, Hottoman, Iacobus Bontius, Scaliger, Snellius Capellus, Sa∣vot; our Country men Breerwood, Greaves; and for the mo∣dern of all Nations at present Trafficking through out the World; that useful, and excellent Account given us in Malin's Lex Mercatoria; the late Lexicographers and others treating ex∣professo of Coines and Mony; their Definition, Notation, Chara∣cter, Estimate, Fabrick, &c. together with the Notitia Imperii; where the Curious may find a full Account of these, and of the Procuratores Monetarum, of which every Mint had one distinctly to govern it, and (under the Comes Largitionum) to inspect these matters. I pass by some other Coins larger in bulk and shew, as the Majorana mention'd in the Cade of Theodosius, being of Silver debased with Copper; as I also do the Bezantines and others
counted by Weight and not by Pieces; as likewise those of the later Stamp and Empire, the Ceratia or Siliqua; Miliareuse, and the Follis, &c; and now proceed to Consular Coins, as Me∣dals; not as priz'd for the intrinsick worth of the Metal only, but for the Knowledge they communicate to the Learned, and such as on that account prefer them to sordid Gain; since it may happen, that a Medal of Copper may be of more Value to the Knowing, than its weight in Gold, as an Otho in the Grand Bronze. In the mean time I am far from being convinc'd, that what we call Medals did always pass for bare and simple Mony, as the name seems to import and challenge by the sound. The Problem is indeed learnedly discuss'd by Antonius Au∣gustinus, Sebastian Erizius, Aeneas Vicus and others, and con∣cluded generally in the affirmative; but I think all, except the Iesuit Hardoin make exception to Medalions, Imperials, and those of larger size. For these could not be design'd for ordi∣nary Mony, being evidently stamp'd (to me more especially) upon solemn and extraordinary Occasions and Events; as the more curious and elaborate Reverses, Legenda, and Inscriptions evince, as well as the Shape and Model, for the most part too large and thick for common Exchange and Use; Not to men∣tion their paucity, being rarely found in that great aboundance, and of the same Emperor and Percussion, as are daily the smaller Monies, more accommodate to Commerce. And though the Senat and People of Rome honoured their Caesars (as we shall come to shew) by decreeing their Effigies should be set on their Coins (as we may learn from our Blessed Savi∣our's Question to the Captious Iews) yet does it not, I think, infer, that where we find an Emperors or Consuls Head on a Medal, it must therefore be common Mony: Nor does the Rea∣son weigh light with me which was alledg'd by Cobergeus to the Noble Peireskius, consulting him about this matter; name∣ly, the impossibility of Medals being made for current Mony; forasmuch as the very Type, and Form of one single Stamp, would have taken up at least two months time of the most diligent Artist to finish it for the Hammer, and then not endure the Coining of above two or three hundred; which being great∣ly batter'd and impair'd (if for Mony) the Charge of Workman∣ship would far have exceeded the value of the Species. To this it being answered, that the Romans using the Industry of their nu∣merous
Slaves, (it cost them little or nothing) Cobergius re∣plies, that could not be, since Slaves and servile Persons, were by an express Statute prohibited the Painting any thing, or so much as Learning, or using the Art of Drawing and Design; without which address it could not possibly be ac∣complished: For that ingenuous Quality being taken into the Liberal Arts,Nat. Hist. l. 35. c. 10. it was, as Pliny tells us, defended Perpetuo In∣terdicto, ne servitia docerentur, neque in hac, nec in Toreutice ulus qui servierit opera celebrantur: So that it was never seen that any excellent Piece of that nature, was the Work of a Slave or servile Hand. But to proceed. Had Medals been look'd on as Pieces of Money only, they would not (as we said) have been held in that estimation, as we find they were; and by the Emperour Adrian, and other Princes, given and received as Jewels; Presents and Missilia made of them as marks of Honour. But not to a∣muse the Reader with these Researches, (which have already taken up large Volumes well deserving the perusal;) 'tis suf∣ficient for the Dignity of Money abstracted from Medals, that the Scriptures repeat the antient Use of it for the Purchase of Lands and Commodities; and that Gold and Silver, as most pretious, beautiful, and least obnoxious to rust and decay, (such as was proved and refin'd;) were the Matter, valu'd for its intrinsic Goodness, long before we hear of it in Pro∣phane Authors; however in after Times, not only all o∣ther Metals were imploy'd, but their purity debased, and alloy'd with ignoble Mixtures and Adulterations, as necessity and occasion requir'd: Of which Plutarch, Zondras, Xiphi∣lin, Paulus Diaconus, and other Historians afford many in∣stances. Thus we read, that Alexander Severus (tho an in∣comparable Prince) compos'd a Melange of a fifth part of Silver, and a fourth of Gold; (by Pliny call'd Electrum) Ca∣racalla dishonoured it with Lead; or to reckon better, the degeneration not of Money and Metals only, but of all the politer Arts, succeeded that Inundation of the Goths, not so much invading as invited in to their Destruction. Here then ended the lustre of Medals, Riches, and Glory of that renowned Empire, counting from the Dictatorship of Cesar, impress'd on the finest Silver; and so continuing till Se∣verus, or as some say, from Pompey the Great, to Caracalla (whom now we mentioned;) when after this Gordian made his Coin, half of Brass, till the Posthumi, and so down to Iu∣stinian,
who indeed restored it to some degree of splendor, both as to the Matter and Form again, until about the Reign of Phocas, when Church-Tyranny began with that of the Turk, and both East and Western Empire were Ruin'd, by the Ambition of the one, and Arms of the other. The truth is, after the first three hundred years of the Cesars, there was very little care of any Coins, preserving the Roman Majesty by Medals. For from thence to Theodosius, we meet with none but small, thin, despicable Pieces, without Re∣lievo; and from the Division of the Empire, since the death of that Prince, nothing save barbarous in Figure, Reverse, Character, Legend, &c. so as none looked any more after them: Nor recover'd they any sort of value for either their Beauty or Metal, for almost a Thousand Years; when Paint∣ing and Architecture began to revive, and rose as it were out of the dust. This first Resurrection one may reckon to be about the time of Ferdinand of Aragon, or the Reign of Iohn Emperor of Constantinople somewhat before, when there was struck a Golden Medal, representing the Council of Florence with some tolerable Art. As to other Nations, the Carthaginians Coin was first in Lead; that of the Lacedemonians Iron; and even some Me∣dals both of the Republick and Imperial, are oliated with Silver upon this sturdy and inflexible Metal; of which our Ancestors the Britains had not only Plates engraven with Flowers and Animals of hideous shape, but Chains and Rings of it instead of Money. Our learned Selden (speaking of the Bracteate Coin) seems to infer their beating it extremely thin a long while after, to prevent its being counterfeited; so as a Piece of Money which was then worth but a Penny, made square, and with Coins or Corners (as then they shap'd it, till Henry the First turned it round again) might easily be broken into two, or four parts for Half-pence and Farthings, as some of our worn-out and detrited HarryThe highest Piece of Sil∣ver Coin in the Time of Edward I. Groats, might now into Pence. Whether this magnificent Prince after those ex∣travagant Summs he Luxuriously lavish'd and consumed, descended to make use of Leather; it has not been my hap to see any of it. But one who made almost as great a noise in the World, Frederick Aenobarbus was forced to pay his Souldiers with such matter, Scorteis Nummis. But more remarkable is that which Martin Crusius tells us of another
Frederick, speaking of the Siege of Faventia and other Places, during the Wars of Italy: The Emperor, says he, (meaning Ferdinand the Second) Omni pecuniâ, caeterisque preciosis rebus consumptis, Monetam ex Corio fecit; in cujus una parte, Imperatoris Imago erat, in altera vero Aquila Imperii. Mandavit, ut durante hoc bello,M. Crusius Annal. Sue∣vior. lib. 1. par. 3. c. 15. ab omnibus in emendo & vendendo acciperetur, precio nummi aurei AUGUSTANI. Nam confecto bello, pro sin∣gulis Coriaceis, totidem aureos venientibus persolutum iri, &c. And Philip Comines says, that Money was so exceedingly scarce in France after the Ransom of King Iohn, Son of Phil. de Valois, that they did use Leather Money, through which a small Boss-nail of Silver was struck in the middle, as we now find a little piece of Copper in our Tin Farthings, to give them strength and value. The sum of the Ransom, it seems, was so vast (as Money then was precious) that their own Historians tell us, that besides several Lands, Territories and Seigniories, &c. Homage done by great Persons (re∣taining the Titles of Sovereignty both of Sea and Land) there was pay'd no less than Three Millions of Crowns, which is, One and Twenty Millions, Four Hundred and Twelve Thousand five Hundred Livers of their money at this day. In the mean time, if it be true, that Numa us'd Leather Money, a truly antient Piece were an extraordinary Rarity, and would speak its value. We read, and have seen of Paper Money, nay of baked and sigillated Earth; Purcelan, Coral, Salt, Linnen, Cot∣ton, Fruit, &c. in comparison of which Achate and Ieate (which have been also us'd for money) bear some intrinsic Worth. Mention is likewise made of Shells,  Pibbles (I rather think , or Aenei Calculi serving for Lots) nay Bones of human Skuls, (which if of an Enemy slain in War, were of great Value among some barbarous People) and other Bones are Traffick at this day among the rude Americans; but of what Animal we are not told, only that 'tis yet so great a secret with them, that the most industrious Nations Bartering with them, have not hitherto been able to impose upon them by any thing they have endeavoured to Counterfeit it by. In short, these base and inferior Materials, were among the civiliz'd Nations never made use of, save in utmost exigence, as was that on Card, or Paper, in the famous Siege of Leiden. Upon other occasions 'tis remarkable, that wherever the Species is much debased, the People are so too, and ever un∣der
grievous Oppressions. Thus that Tyrant Dionysius, and those of Sicily money'd Tin, and corrupted the Coin; and so our Chronicle tells us, that when there were in England, tot Reges, vel potius Tyranni, quot Domini (almost as many Kings or Tyrants, as Lords of Castles) they stamp'd what they pleased: But then (as Mr. Selden notes) was the whole Kingdom miserably torn in pieces, and the Rights of Ma∣jesty shattered, which obtains to it self no little lustre from Coining Money. Indeed the Cities of Canterbury, Rochester, and such as hadAs Arch∣bishop Ceol∣nothus, An. 831. before King Ethel∣stans Reign. been Garrisons of old, and some other Cor∣porations and Towns, Abbots and Bishops had before the Con∣quest, their Aedes Monetarii, with Privilege Flandi, Feriundi, &c. at pleasure; but we speak of those who had it not, but who abus'd it. The last I think among our Prelats was the great Cardinal Wolsey, of whom there are yet to be seen small Coins with his half Face Effigies, stampt at Dur∣ham; and some of Cutbert Tunstal, and there is a Piece of Archbishop Cranmer; I do not say from this Privilege. And now after all we have said of these Debasements of the barbarous Ages, there were, and still are extant of Lead both Consular and Imperial Medals, with some Greek ve∣ry Antient, nor less Authentick, and for that cause purchas'd now and then with Gold it self. 'Tis true, they were after∣wards prohibited by a Law express, which did but inhaunce their value among the curious; as did some of the noblest Metals that were call'd in, melted down, and abolish'd in detestation of Tyrants, and such as unworthily abus'd their Power; Nero, Tiberius, Commodus, Caligula, the obscene He∣lagabalus; that of our late Regicide and others. But as to that Metal (whatsoever it were) the debasers of Gold and Silver (tho mighty Princes) lost their Reputation, it being almost the only blemish of that virtuous Emperor Marcus Antoninus, for but covering his Coin with thin Plates of Sil∣ver. Be it therefore to the praise of our renowned Elizabeth (after it had been corrupted almost ever since Richard the First, and the Standard establish'd by K. Edward the First) who made this Reformation so great and shining a part of her Royal Care, tho something had been done in it before by the GermanBrought hi¦ther for their skill and Art in Refining and Coining; and the name Sterling from the East, or a Star, usually mark'd on the money. Others say, from the Saxon word, signifying a Weight. Esterlings, about the Reign of our Second Henry above Five Hundred Years since.
But however Money, and Medals of Gold and Silver, were ever had in highest Estimation for the Matter (as having those transcendent and essential Conveniences, Metallum, Pon∣dus & Figura) Those of Copper have no less been sought af∣ter for their egregious Form, Antiquity, and that commonly they bear the Figures and Reverses so accurately, as not sel∣dom to dispute it with the richest Ore. Indeed whatever we find in either of those precious Metals, is also found in Copper, but not Vice versâ: All is not to be met with in Gold and Silver which are often found in Brass and Copper. As for those other Materials mentioned, whatever cogent necessity might sometimes introduce, antient Moneyers own but those Three authentick Metals, usually mark'd by the Triumvir A. A. A. F. F. Auro, Argento, Aere, Flando, Feriundo, &c. Medals then à Metallis; for we allow the Name in this following Discourse to no other Material, distinguish'd (as we shall shew) from current Money and Coin, by several other Characteristics and Circumstances relating to the Workman∣ship, variety of Subject and Erudition, not frequent, or of any notable Use in common Money, Head and Effigies on∣ly excepted. Having thus dispatch'd the Matter, we come next to the Time when the several Metals came into Use; and I am in∣clined to think, that the hard and more vulgar Iron and Cop∣per, as most useful for the Field abroad, and House within-doors might be of the elder date; there being no question yet of the Antiquity of Gold and Silver next to those: The dif∣ficulty is, when first they began to Coin either, to our pur∣pose of Medal, &c. Homer says, the antient Achivi us'd no money stamp'd, but a rude mass of Iron and Copper, which they Barter'd as the wild Indians now do for Baubles, Knives, Glass-Beads, and as of old the Scythae, Seres, Sarmats, the Lu∣sitani, Lacedemonians, Bizantines and others: And, for ought I find, Aes Grave in the lump, and Bullion it self (as many Ages after they paid Sums in France by Lingat, as well as in Coin, to the time of Philip the Fair) continued without any elegant Form or Impression, till Servius Caepio, and Cn. Sempro∣nius being Consuls; or as others, from the beginning of the Building of Rome, to the time of King Pyrrhus, before they set any mark or stamp upon Silver: And their Copper at first was flat, without any Sculpture at all, until Servius Tullius
(I speak of the Romans) made on Ox or Sheep, or some such Animal be Coined on the Reverse. But still (as we said) the Matter was only Copper; whence the Quaestors or Trea∣surers of the Aerarium had their Denomination, and so con∣tinu'd it all the time that the nobler Metals were in use; which, as Pliny affirms, (speaking of Silver) was not till a∣bout the CDLXXV. year after the Foundation of the City, un∣der the Consulship of Q. Fabius Pictor, and R. Gallus, five years before the First Punick War; nor stamp'd they any Gold at all till the LXII. year that the other had been in com∣mon Use; some affirm above Two Hundred Years after: A good note to caution ones not being impos'd on by Me∣dals, tho of that precious Metal, pretending to have been struck by any King or Consul before that Date. In the mean while is it not strange, that in the late Discoveries of America neither Gold nor Silver, so greedily coveted, were thus made use of, where those rich and precious Metals do naturally grow? Now as touching Impressions (which as we observ'd, were very rude and simple at first) 'tis probable they began them with their Deities, and next with their Kings, whom they Worshipped and often made their Gods. Then appeared Roma Galeata, with her Helmet often wing'd Castor and Pollux on Horseback, the Figures of Victo∣ria in the double or triple Car; whence the Bigati, Trigati, Quadrigati, Victoriati, &c. on the Denarius, were of the ear∣liest stamp: Sometimes the Tutelary of the Place, Name and Effigies of the Prince, Magistrate, Cities, Foundation, De∣dication, or Monetarie Triumviri (who during the Consulat Go∣vern'd the Mints a long time as they pleas'd) for what use, of what Matter and Weight we have partly shew'd. Hence are sprung the Aeginates, Gigates, Staters of Croesus, Darics, Phi∣lippics, and other Denominations, known, as we noted, by the Heads, Places, Characters, &c. And tho doubtless at first (even among both Greeks and Romans, whilst that Repub∣lick Flourish'd) the Title, Note or Cypher express'd the sim∣ple weight of the Metal only, S. C. or some Consular Mark (as already shew'd) Yet as the Republick declined and the People became Flatterers of the haughty Conqueror; they easily submitted to whatsoever alteration might gratifie the ambitious Prince, by Engraving the Name, and celebrating
the Exploits of the aspiring Man: And then began their Ef∣figies, with the various Reverses, expressing their most signal Actions, Exploits, and Heroic Undertakings, to adorn their Coins and Medals; so very useful for the clearing of many obscure and recondit Passages of History, Chronology, and o∣ther parts of Erudition: Of which in the following Periods. To proceed then. Medals are in the first place to be consider'd, not only as to the Metal and Impression, but in relation to the Size and Mo∣del. We pass therefore from the Matter to the Form and Sub∣stance, which was antiently neither so thick nor large as af∣terwards, nor the Reverses of their amplest Medalions exceed∣ing three Inches Diameter, and thence diminishing to three quarters of an Inch, usually distinguished by their several magnitudes, which are Three. Of the first (suppos'd of Greek Original) were those of Copper (yet not excluding Gold) more frequently met with of the two later dimensions, de moyen Bronze, or middle size, some few excepted; as those of Philip Father of Alexander Magnus, Lysimachus, Arsinoe, Berenice, the Ptolomies, with some others; and those Coined by the infamous Elagabalus, (more rarely found) with such as Tiberius Constantine is re∣ported to have sent to Chilperic King of France (describ'd by Paulus Diaconus) and as were usually given to great Princes upon occasions extraordinary, and not seldom likewise scat∣tered among the Mobile and Spectators on days of Triumph, Jubilees, and solemn Processions; of which sort Caligula long since sprinkled a considerable Largess from the Palace of Iulia, which rendred them more common. Some of these were Medalions of the large size, de grand Bronze (as the French Term is) more substantial, and in higher Relievo, which are very rare; especially the Romans, by reason that the Inscrip∣tions, Heads, and Reverses are more legible and conspicuous, as having been struck on Publick and solemn Occasions, and Ceremonies of State; such, as Suetonius tells us, Augustus was wont to present to his Favorites during the Saturnalia; and we at this day see frequently stamp'd in Gold, as hono∣rary Tokens appendant to Chains of considerable value; and even to Orders of Knighthood, as that of S. Mark at Venice, &c. also to Soldiers, Seamen, Commanders, Masters of Ceremonies, Heralds, great Scholars, Poets; for such a Me∣dal,
tho but of Silver, the witty Ovid somewhere celebrates, Argentum felix, omnique beatius auro: For its bearing the Effigies of that Demy-God Augustus: And so famous Painters, Sculptors, and other Persons of distingui∣shing Merit wore Medalions. They were given likewise to Ambassadors, and sent to States-men, as was that to the Swiss by Henry the Fourth of France with his Effigies; the Reverse an Altar between two Columns, wreath'd about with Palms and Laurels, and supporting a Crown; the Exurge. E X. AURO. FRANCIGENA. ANNO. FOEDERIS. RENOVATI. EFFOSSO. and in the Circle this Chrono∣gram, M. DC II. RegIs SaCra FoeDera MagnI. But like to these truly antient, and of Gold, were a rarity inestimable, such a one as that Posthumus of the French Kings, that weighs Six Lovis d' Ors, and a Gratian, in the Imperial Cabinet, of above twenty, approaching the size of the largest Brass. Such, I say, were inestimable; forasmuch as besides the intrinsic Va∣lue of the Metal, there were ample field to contain the Sub∣ject, represent the Figure, Historical Reverses and Erudition in bolder Relievo (as that of Adrian, and some others) where∣of a Collection, tho of Brass or Copper, were precious indeed; but a perfect Series would, I fear, not only be very difficult to procure, but impossible to be met withal in any Cabinet of the best furnished Prince in Europe. He that arrives to four or five hundred such Pieces is Master of a great Trea∣sure. Those of the Greek consisting of all Metals, and of very moderate size, and little elegancy, are every where to be had; and the variously denominated Attic Obolus, with the Head of Minerva and Noctua, of as vulgar Use as our Farthings, but hardly by half so large as the Tokens which every Ta∣vern and Tippling-House (in the days of late Anarchy a∣mong us) presum'd to stamp and utter for immediate Ex∣change, as they were passable through the Neighbourhood, which tho seldom reaching farther than the next Street, or two, may happily in after times, come to exercise and busie the learned Critic, what they should signifie, and fill whole Volumes with their Conjectures; as I am perswaded several
as arrant trifles have done, and still do, casually mentioned in antient Authors. Another sort of Medalions (not altogether so ample, nor so skilfully wrought, and ever in Copper) are by our Anti∣quaries call'dThe Itali∣ans gave them a Ring or Circle of Hore. Contorniati, sometimes distinguish'd by a cer∣tain hollow bordure, or small shallow insculp'd Figures, sup∣pos'd to be about the date of Theodosius, or at farthest Seve∣rus, or not much before; rarely enough to be met with: But for this chiefly estimable, that they received their Impres∣sions whilst most of the antient Rome was yet subsisting; and for which Medalions of the largest Volume are ever to be va∣lued: For in those it is we sometimes meet the Heads of Ho∣mer, Solon, Pythagoras, Euclid, Socrates, Ap. Tyanaeus, Olym∣pic Victors, Palms and Charrioting; whether resembling the Persons or not, and therefore their Antiquity a little questi∣oned. Those in Silver, from Pompey downwards, are not so rare; relating chiefly to Kings and Cities, as of Syria, Ma∣cedonia, &c. Of which see the learned M. Vaillant. Medalions of Gold and greater volume, I think there are very few, if any at all, or of the rest larger than our new Half-Crown Pieces, and those (as I said) of Copper only, rarely of any other: But towards the lower Empire, there are fre∣quently found great and smaller, of which the largest are Gold, some equalling the weight of our five Pound Pieces; more or less estimable for the Stamp and Person. Next these we reckon Medalions of the larger Copper, somewhat broader and thicker than our Horsemen; and of Silver very rare. The Grand Bronze, after Posthumus (when, as we noted, the Coin was alter'd) is a Medalion; those of the middle size, and the same Species, are somewhat smaller. Next to these, being the very smallest, whether Copper or Silver, (and which perhaps might pass commonly for Money) exceed not much our new Mill'd Shillings, nor are some so large, especially towards the Bas-Empire. We frequently meet of the first in Gold and of more substance, till approaching the later Reigns they diminish'd extremely. Here it is they critically Note, as to the three dimensions of Copper Medals (namely the larger, middle, and smaller Bronze) that in case one of the first size for breadth and substance, bear a Head no bigger than one of the second or middle Bronze, it is to be reckon'd but one of the second Class; where∣as another, tho not so thick and substantial, yet bearing a
deeper and more extant Head, shall take place before one of the first Form: Tho there be Medals of the least size of much greater Value and Esteem, for their being rare, and chal∣lenging preeminence of the largest. To conclude, as to Model and Size of Medals; we meet with both Gold and Sil∣ver of not above half the Weight and Substance of the first; nor are the last we mentioned any thing so rare, as those of Gold. CHAP. II. Medals relating to several Nations, Civil, and Barbarous. Of Heads, Effigies, and their Impressions. Of Ornaments; Con∣sular and Imperial Medals. MEdals are farther considerable as to the State and Peo∣ple to which they relate; distinguishable and to be known by the Make, Fabric and Symbolums, whether He∣brew, Punic, Barbarous and Modern, and tho not so much sought after, are yet not altogether to be neglected; as we shall come to shew. Those of the Iews, or Hebraic, were the Sicle or Shekel, venerable, if truly genuine, which few are thought to be. The Drachma or Obolus (as we have noted) doubl'd, or di∣minish'd, as Exigences and Circumstances of the small Com∣merce that peculiar Nation had in the World requir'd: And therefore had they Coins both Silver and Copper of all sizes, specifying the value; but whether they stamp'd any of Gold is not so evident. To be sure, they Coined none for Medals upon any Historical account, whatever we derive from them, tho Monsieur Foinard be of another opinion; who from the date of certain Medals with Samaritan Inscriptions, illustra∣ting (as he thinks) that remarkable Passage in 1 Macc. iii. calculates the Time of Sions Deliverance there mentioned: But this I believe very rarely, since they would endure no Human, or Animal Figure at all, till the Romans had subdu'd that stiff-neck'd and refractory People; as may be observ'd in those frequent Reverses of Vespasian and Titus, represent∣ing a disconsolate Woman, leaning on her Arm under a Palm Tree (which was the Symbol of Palaestina) with Iudiaea Capta
in the Exurge, and not seldom with a Wheat-sheaf, a Cluster of Grapes, Vine-leaf or Lotus. In others we have a Crater, or standing Goblet, and now and then the Harp, Portico of a Temple or Sepulchre; most of which being long since their last and final Captivity and Dispersion, with Hebrew Cha∣racters, are looked upon but as modern, and for the most part of cast Metal; whilst the more antient (or at least so reputed) bear the stamp of the Pot of Manna, as some con∣ceive; or as others, the Censer or Thuribulum, casting forth a cloud of Incense, and not seldom Revers'd with a sprig of Opo Balsamum, or the Rod of Aaron, as is conjectured, for they do not all agree; only as to the Legenda, the Shekel in∣viron'd with Samaritan Letters (tho Kircher mentions Assy∣rian) is least of all suspected. But of these consult Velser, Hottinger, Conringius, and others, who give ample Accounts, besides that much commended and shorter Treatise of Henry Thulen of Erford, De Variis Siclis & Talentis Hebraeorum, and our learned Countrymen Brerewood, Mr. Greaves, and out of them the no less learned and industrious Dr. Walton late Bishop of Chester, in his Prolegomenon to the Polyglotte Bible. But, as we noted, these Medals, even the most reputed Ge∣nuine, reserv'd in the Library at the Escurial, collected by the Emperor Charles the First, have not the universal suffrage of being Authentick. We have spoken of the Greek, of which the largest and most valuable, (exceeding not our Silver Crown-Pieces) and they of Copper only, were by some thought to have been us'd only for weight, under the Names of Drachma, Stater, &c. others there are more common, and not so large by half, tho somewhat thicker both Copper and Silver. Finally, to these succeed Coins of all metals and sizes, diminishing (as we noted) to less than our ordinary single Pence: Such of the Greeks as we find of Gold in the smaller Pieces are most esteem'd: Of other Metals (tho for the most part Copper, if struck under the Emperors) there are not a few; for the vast∣ly spreading Conquests of that People, by the wonderful and successful Expeditions of the Great Alexander, had scattered innumerable Medals and Coins, wherever their Armies came, bearing the Effigies of their victorious Leaders, the Cities and Places they won, who had then obtained the Power.
We should now come to the Symbola, but we reserve it to the Reverse, and proceed to shew, that those Medals of Gold (tho of the most refin'd) are, as we noted, by no means the most estimable, excepting the ancient Greek of superfine Metal, and those of the higher Roman Empire, as pure as 'twas possible to render it malleable, for the intrinsic Value, and for that every one cannot go to the price of them: Such are those of the first Emperors, rare indeed both for weight and work; and so the Silver; but above all those of Copper, as far as Severus Alexander, as we have already shew'd; but thence from Caracalla to Dioclesian, both Stamp and Metal became despicable: Albeit we afterwards find Medals of the finest Silver from Heraclius to Pertinax, and of excellent Masters, but thence lamentably declining. Such Medals as have been struck in Spain, or any part of Africa subject to the Carthaginians, bearing the Effigies of Dido, whom they affirm to have first Coined Money among them, are to be reckon'd Punic, and pretend to great Antiquity: And there is yet in the hands of the curious (and which they have imitated in Spain) some that serv'd for Traffick: But whether the Medal stamp'd with the Head of that famous Queen, with a Reverse of an Horses Head, and inscrib'd with inexplicable Characters be authentick, is to be doubted. The like may be said of the Phoenicians (as of the same race) of which some we have of Copper, bearing a fair resem∣blance of the Samaritan Letter: Nor pass we by the Egyp∣tian and Arabian, nor Greek of the lesser Asia, even before the Conquest of Alexander; which would be well and diligently consider'd, as of great Importance to the clearing of several Historical Passages: Forasmuch as the Greek and Roman have hitherto taken up almost the whole Study and Application of the curious in this sort of erudition, exclusive to all the rest. To these in like manner belong the Persian or Daric, which being of Gold only, represent the Head of that great Prince, with sometimes a Sagittarius, or Bow-man on the Reverse; both these, and the Parthian bearing frequently a kneeling Figure, holding a Bow in one hand, and Dart or short Ja∣velin in the other; is Revers'd with a Rowing Galley. Last∣ly, to these we add Barbarous, whether Antient or Modern, whose wretched∣ly Ingraven work betrays their Pedigree, especially appearing
mute and without Inscription, or any relation to good Hi∣story. We do not forget the German, &c. with what Ursmus and others' have plac'd next the Consular, under the Families Afraniae, bearing Characters resembling the antient Hetrusci: Those of the Goths, Huns, Lombards, &c. belong to this Class; as of Atalaricus, Totila, &c. with the Reverses of a rustic Cart or Wagon drawn by a pair of Horses, in base Metal and ruder Sculpture, very little improv'd even to the Time of Charles the Great, and many Ages after. Olaus Mag∣nus, yet mentions divers of their Kings both in Gold and Sil∣ver, as well as Copper, and some very large ones, from the time of Heraclius, when that truculent and savage People first invaded that glorious Empire: But of these, as we observ'd, many bear no Letters at all, and therefore of no Use or In∣struction worth the looking after; but in the mean while, such as have, are not wholly to be slighted: For notwith∣standing the Roman Empire had after all its grandeur suf∣fered those deplorable Inundations, under the Gothic and o∣ther barbarous Nations, we shall find the City of Rome still preserv'd her antient Elogies of INVICTA and AETERNA, &c. in her Coins and Medals: Nor of all her insolent Con∣querors was there above one who so much as attempted to ra∣vish that honor from her. Atulphus going about to change her Name (as did Adrian once that of old Ierusalem) from ROMA to GOTHIA in the Publick Money, with a Reverse of the old City, and Inscrib'd MEMORIA GOTHIAE, and in∣stead of AUGUSTI, URBS ATULPHI. After all, could not the ambitious man obtain his end, her venerable Name emerg'd again, which she has kept to this day. Of the Saracens (who likewise are to be censed a∣mong the Barbarous) we meet with nothing, nor indeed of those we mentioned in any good Author who has made it his peculiar work. Coins purely British we find in our learned Cambden, and industrious Speed,Cap. 10. and many my worthy Friend Dr. Plot has mentioned in his Natural Histories of Oxford and Staffordshires; and I have seen a Series of our antient Moneys (I dare say no counterfeits) from Edward Confessor, to our present times, Richard the Third excepted, which it has not been my hap to light upon, and 'tis probable the Mint might not be
much imploy'd during the short Reign of that Usurper, which render them so rarely found. There is a small hollow Coin seeming to be Gold, but of a mixt or Obrize sort, which has on it a Horse, rudely design'd, with the Letters Conob, which some will needs have to signifie Constantinople; other, with good reason, some British Prince of ours: But as none of them pretended any Title (Constantine himself excepted, and British by his Mothers side) to the Eastern Empire, it is not agreed to whom it may belong: and what indeed if those who fancy it a British Prince have taken it for our Cunobelin? The very first of British Coin stamp'd Roman-like about the time of Augustus, representing two averse Faces, and in many of them an Horse: The mistake of one single Letter has often mislead wise Men into as great an error. Besides this, the renowned Voadicia, and sundry other Moneys (some without any Letters at all) are in the hands of the curious; since the British Kings, even under the Roman Government, were all along permitted to Stamp and Coin, which they sometimes made a little hollow on the Reverse; but wherein if any thing intitle them to History, it is the various Figures which one meets with of some Animal, Tree, or Plant, (par∣ticularly ears of Corn) for distinction, as may be conjectu∣red, according to the Nature or Species of the Tribute,Vide Cambd. Notar. ad by an Ordinance of Cesars:Brit. Numis. But those we mention not as Me∣dals, most of them being in so small a Volume, with Heads and Reverses so vilely bungled, as do not pretend to the name of Sculpture, till about the time of our Henry VIII. from whence forward, 'tis almost miraculous, how wonder∣fully it improv'd on the sudden by some Italians, Germans, and other Artists, who had been invited by that magnificient Prince, for the finishing of that sumptuous Tomb all of gilt Copper, design'd for Windsor, whereof you have the descrip∣tion, as I remember, in my Lord Cherbury: And to what degree of perfection it is since ascended by our Symons,Hist. Hen. 8. Raw∣lins, &c. of our own and other Countries, (and of Monsieur Roti especially) appears not only in our common and cur∣rent Moneys, but in sundry noble Medals and Medalions for Work and Elegancy, emulous of the most celebrated An∣tients; of which hereafter.
Of Saxons, Danes, and Normans, are extant many full-fac'd Princes, tho rarely with any tolerable or significant Reverse, yet sometimes endeavouring to present us the Gothic Front or Porch of some Church or Monastery, as one may see them pictured in King Alfreds Life with his Cypher, and in several of Charlemaines and his Successors. Hitherto we have spoken of the most refin'd and precious Metals, Gold and Silver, with those of Copper and other mixtures, whilst Medals, even of the basest Lead, are some∣times of good Antiquity, tho chiefly valued for, and during the Roman Saturnalia, at which times their Slaves kept holy∣day, and were of Custom indulg'd to play the Masters: But at that any time Lead was current Money, we find no great likelihood; tho a passage in Plautus, and another of the Poet Martial seem to hint some such matter. One Me∣dal indeed there is in Fulvius Pedaniae gentis, rarely any where else. But those Pieces which concern the Saturnalia have commonly stamp upon them a Swine, or some such Grotesque Figure, or odd Bird, without any profitable Relation to no∣bler History, all Royal Coins being prohibited, whilst this Mock-Reign continu'd. Nothing all this jolly time but Lu∣sus and Iocus; no body was to be serious, nor yet any thing spoken maliciously Abusive, or in cold and studied Railery, but ingenious Parodias and Wit upon the spot: And there∣fore both at Athens and at Rome there was sometimes a Prize and a Garland given to the Person who made the wittiest Jest, during this relaxation, as may both be gathered out of Sophocles, Horace and others. In these Liberatate Decembri, the Masters of the Family us'd themselves to serve at Tables, or at least sit Cheek by Jole with their Mancipia. Hence Lucian calls them Kings of the Table; of whose Election Arrianus on Epictetus, Lib. 1. &c. Bochartus (in his Phaleg) pre∣tends the Custom at least as antient as Noahs Malediction on Cham; that his Posterity should serve their Servants, and that the Usage was Universal. Nay Becanus says, 'twas begun in the Ark it self, upon the day of the Patriarchs first disco∣very of the tops of the Mountains: The Jubilation of the Iews resembling something of such a Festival Relaxation. But returning to our Medal, 'tis not altogether improbable their ridiculous King, to render it the more fantastical, might
be permitted to Mint this ignoble Money during his Reign, with the Name of his Patron, Office, Sport and Buffonry, somewhat resembling our Lord of Misrule at Christmas in the late Age of English Hospitality. A kind of Prince of the Grange, happening about the same idle Season of the year, when they were wont to sacrifice an Hog, as'tis still the chief∣est time of slaughtering that impure Animal. A great deal more there might be added here concerning these Saturnalia, and other times of indulgence and diversions; their various Symbols, and other extravagancies, of which Authors give large accounts; as that they were instituted in memory of the Golden Age, when there was an universal Parity among all Mankind. Of the Feast in Babylon, observ'd in honor of the Goddess Dercetha, which lasting five days, the Masters were under the Dominion of their Servants; and one among them call'd the Sorgan or Prince, was wont to be Royally Vested. Human Sacrifices were at this time also offered, in after-Ages abolish'd by Hercules, and changed into Bone-fires, Illuminati∣ons, and Properties made of wax, &c. Of the Synthesis or Garment the Masters wore, whilst they Feasted thus in com∣mon. The Custom of sending Presents, Strenae, and New∣Years Gifts, with a deal more which we pass over as foreign to our Subject. There is in the mean time this observable, that whenever we meet any Medal of this Grotesque and Biz∣zar sort, one may conclude it a Saturnalia, as sometimes the Letters S. C. Saturni Consulto, or Consilio shews; having, as we noted, at this time of Carnival and Libertinism, permission to play Rex; say and do all kind of ridiculous Impertinences. Now and then we likewise meet with the C before S, which may perhaps alter the Legenda to Consuetudine, or Convivio Saturnalium, as Monsieur Baudelot conceives, or something to that tune. But other Medals of this ludicrous Nature I find not, nor read I that those grave and heroical States imprest any, save upon grave and serious Occasions; Raillery in Medals was not then in use, however since degenerated, and serving to perpetuate as well all Acts of great Injustice and Inhuma∣nity, as Revenge and ynsults. Indeed Indatyrsus a Scythian King, is reported to have sent Darius a Bird, a Frog, a Rat, and a Dart, intimating, that unless he could fly like a Bird, swim the River like a Frog, and get home again like a Rat, he
not escape the Scythian Darts. And Boleslaus King of Poland sent one of his Palatines an Hare and a Distaff to reproach his Cowardise and Effeminacy. Of the same kind was that of the Dolphin of France, who sent to our Fifth Henry a Tun of Tennis Balls, as to a soft and idle Prince: But which he soon return'd with Bullets that made all France weary of the rude Play. But these were but transient Boasts, and for re∣proof; nor find we any such sharp and provoking instances, on noble Medals which were lasting, and had been of evil consequence, to the keeping up of eternal Feuds, and glo∣rying in Acts of Cruelty. Such as is that Medal of Pope Gre∣gory the Thirteenth, Revers'd with the representation of those inhuman Butcheries committed on so many Thousands of innocent and brave Persons as perish'd in the Parisian Massa∣cre; and another of like nature which we have lately seen, not only of the abolition of repeated Edicts against all that is sacred in Oaths and Obligations among Mankind; but the more savage Executions of the Dragoon Missions, expres∣sing the several Modes of Conversion to the Catholick Church, by an ample Medalion, In perpetuam Rei Memoriam. Those who may imagine us partial in exaggerating either of these instances, may do well to read the description of the first, by that most impartial and illustrious Historian Thuanus; and for the latter, the present and daily sufferings of so many Thousands more of Loyal, Valiant, Learned and Noble Persons, and others, who 'tis impossible should all agree (in this dispersion) or be able to make the World believe, that all is mere Fable and Invention (as we are told by many) and that they are burnt alive, drag'd through the Streets, expos'd to Dogs and Vultures, chain'd to the Gallies, stript of all they have of secular, and live in Exile, whilst there is no such things done or suffered at all; and glad I should be to find this solidly confuted, which I confess as yet I have not. Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy (the same who not long after attempted Geneva by Scalado) easily seiz'd on the Mar∣quisate of Saluces, during the Civil Wars of France; when elated with that success, the struck a Medal, which had in Reverse a Centaure trampling on a Gallic Crown, with this In∣scription, OPPORTUNE. The Broils and Troubles in France being shortly after compos'd, Henry the Fourth sends an Army into Savoy, and quickly stript the haughty Duke, not only of that he had taken, but of all he else possess'd
on this side the Alpes, requiting him with another Medal, on the Reverse of which was Hercules with his Club, treading under-foot the Centaure, with the word OPPORTUNIUS. These were noble and ingenious, and free from cruel and in∣human. To the Form of Medals belongs Impression and Figure of whatsoever kind. We begin with Heads, as best determi∣ning and guiding the Series; and tho there is likewise some∣thing to be expected on both Tables, and that now and then we find no Head at all, yet, for distinction sake, one side is call'd the Head, the other the Reverse. Medals without Reverse are never antique, but may without Head be good; as that of Augustus's Mint-Master, TRIB. POT. and ano∣ther of Vitellius which has only two hands joined, with FIDES EXERCITUUM. The Reverse a Figure with CONCOR∣DIA PRAETORIANORUM. The naked and simple bare Head, and unadorned, was most antient, which tho usually signifying the Son, or A∣doptive Heir, or of such as died before they came to Reign, (as Drusus, Germanicus, Aurelius, and others) yet we find some among them who were actually Emperors bare-headed: Nero, Galba, &c. and even Augustus himself, tho more fre∣quently with a Laurel or Diadem; but which few, if any of the Cesars or presumptive Heirs, presum'd to wear, ex∣cepting some of the Family of the Constantines; of which, and of several Coverings, more anon. Seldom does the Ectype or Effigies (humerorum tenus) reach below the brest, and the more antient Medals shew only a naked neck, as if Eras'd or amputated from the shoulders, if farther, not much below them, rarely to the middle in Bust, or dressed in Armour, unless an Emperor, or some great Cap∣tain, and that seldom, but more frequently with some small part of the Consular loose Garment, the Paludamentum, or Royal embroider'd Mantle, the Imperial Praetexta, or Mili∣tary Chlamys, &c. for they had of old no distinguishing Ha∣bit but the Purple Robe. Ladies have their Peplus, a sort of slight Scarf, button'd or hasp'd on the Shoulder or right Arm a little under the Pap, as we commonly find the Ephesian Diana, and other female Statues.
But as to the Face, seldom or very rarely meet we with the full Countenance, or so much as what Painters call the three quarter or Philip Face, but in Profile only, excepting in Reverses, where sometimes many small Figures meet, and where in the antient Greek, or modern Roman Medals we find them Bearded, as those of Brutus, Hadrian, first of all the Caesars (for they generally shav'd close before) Trajanus; two or three of the good Emperors following, and in some of Post∣humus; but Iulian Affectedly, I mean not nicely, but that he might appear like a Philosopher, for which he was de∣rided by those of Antioch, and afterwards sufficiently re∣venged himself. And indeed most of the antient Kings of Rome were barbati, nor left they off that grave mode, till a good while after, Barbers being interdicted and expelled the City. All the Parthian Kings were Pogonati, wearing pro∣lix Beards; so did several of the Greeks, Demetrius, and others of the Seleucid Family, tho with only a Lanugo about the Chin. Many of the Philosophers also Bearded, as we find Plato in a certain Reverse of Augustus. In some again we meet Capita adversa, Face against Face, as in that Medal of Severus, and the Empress Domna. Others Aversa, Poll to Poll, but more frequently Iugata, or Iuncta rather, as in that of Cleopatra and Antiochus VIII. Nero and Agrippina, as in some of our Kings and Queens formerly and at present: And the Dii Penates also were with two Heads, and some had Faces and Heads on both sides, as Antoninus Philoso∣phus; nay some were stamp'd with Three; for so we find Valerian with Gallious and his Brother; Otacilla with her Hus∣band and Son; but indeed these encounters are not frequent. Nor do they only give us Heads, but we likewise very often light on Medals representing the full length of the Bo∣dy and Person, in proportion to the Field or Table; such especially as represent some Deity, discovered by their Symbola and places of Worship, of which not a few among the Im∣perials and Cities born in the Reverse. Some of these are in the posture of sitting, Vested, and so exquisitely designed to the Life, as easily to be known; as in some of Hadrian, M. Aure∣lius, Severus: Others like Demy-Gods and Genius's, in honor of their divine Virtues; nay, two, three or more Figures, as in that Medal of the three famous Sisters Agrippina, Dru∣silla and Iulia, &c. but such indeed are hardly to be distin∣guished by their Effigies; and yet has Monsieur Roti (Gra∣ver
to his late Majesty Charles II.) so accurately express'd the countenance of the Dutchess of R— in the Head of Britannia, in the Reverse of some of our Coin, and especially in a Me∣dal, as one may easily, and almost at first sight, know it to be her Grace: And tho in smallest Copper, both for the Per∣sons represented, and performance of the Artist, such as may justly stand in competition with the antient Masters; to name only those which he has made Medalions, Gold and Sil∣ver of the largest Volume. Indeed such care was taken that no bungler, or but moderate Workman should be employ'd on these occasions heretofore; That tho some Emperors and Empresses did now and then affect to be dress'd and disguis'd like Deities, a skilful Artist (by comparing them with other Coins, the Descriptions and Characters in Suetonius, Plutarch and others, who have written their Lives) may without difficul∣ty know by their countenances, whether their Faces were done by Fancy, or (as Painters speak) after the Life. But of this see the learned Seguins Epistle to Gottofred, De Num∣mis Pompeianis. Whilst in my opinion (Monsieur Vaillant on∣ly excepted) his Sculptor has approach'd nearest to the Ar∣chetype and original Medal, of most I have seen; nor are those of AEneas Vicus, and De Bries Cesars far short. 'Tis pity there had not been the like care taken by other more gene∣ral Authors who have adorn'd their ample Treatises on this Subject with the Burin. We come now to the Greeks, of all others the most ve∣nerable for Antiquity, and long before Rome was a City, tho not at first the most elaborate; and therefore whether justly to the so perfect resemblance of the Effigies they present us with, I dare not stipulate, when they offer us Tmolus, Ar∣chelaus, and go beyond Amyntas, and the yet more antient Heros: But from thence arriving to that perfection of skill, as I doubt not but we may safely rely upon those of his Son Philip, and Grandson Alexander; the Seleucidae so accurately described, and set forth in stamp by the learned Vaillant, tho they pretend to Ages long before; nor need we much to question those which we find of the Republicks in general, and some particular Cities, with their Names and Characters, or their Kings and Magistrates, whose Heads are frequently Radiant like the Gods in whatever Metal, under the names of Drachma and Stater, or what other denomination we have al∣ready mention'd.
These Regal Heads with the word , are com∣monly dress'd with a Diadem, wreathed strap or fillet about the Temples, the ends of which usually (not always) hang dangling behind the knot; and some without any Diadem or Rays at all, but bearing some other Symbol; as in that Cidaris of Tigranes. Others we find Gemmated and Studded, as in that of Constantines, and sometimes with a Cask set with a rank of Pearl, being, I think, one of the first who wore Jewels in his Diadem, instead of the more antient plain Rib∣bon, or simple Launel (laid afterwards aside, as having rela∣tion to the Heathen Gods) and granted first to the first Ce∣sar, as a mark of the highest Honor, as well as to hide and shade the thinness of his hair. For the Kings of the Romans never wore a Diadem, but carried a Scepter or Spear; and there∣fore where we meet any of them Diadem'd, as Numa, An∣cus Martius, &c. to be sure they were stamp'd long after their decease. Others also of the Bass-Empire, and some of the Empresses, we also find with Diadems and Crown'd, (but not before) and set on their Heads with great and devout Ceremony, when they became Christian; as now at our Coronations. The younger Iustin being the first who put it on the day of In auguration, and therefore not at all essen∣tial to the Title of Soveraignty, several Kings using none at all. Other Victorial Ensigns were the Obsidional, Mural, Ro∣stral, Isthmian and Agonal; (usually held in their Hands) but indeed as Emblems rather in memory of some bold Exploit and military Service, than properly solid Crowns: And in∣deed naturally, and ab Origine, Garlands, and Chaplets, made of the Leaves of Trees, as of Oak (ob Cives Servatos) common Grass, Lotus, Smallage, &c. were of highest Repute; which, how plaited and made up, see in a Reverse of Nero, Hadrian, and some other Medals. In the mean time that which Augustus gave to Agrippa upon his naval Victory, was of massy Gold; and such as we find on the Heads of Deities, local Gienius's; Expugnators or Protectors of Cities, Castles, and the like, are Turrited, but none of them so antique in Medal as the naked and natural Head alone, without any ornament, till (as we noted of the Romans) fauning Syco∣phants began to flatter ambitious Princes, attributing Divine Honors and Titles to mortal men. For those Rayes we so
frequently find about their Heads, were doubtless marks of the splendor which they fancied to be Emanations invironing the Celestial Being, (whence Painters Radiate the Heads of Saints,) or from some Tradition of the lustre and shining of Moses's Face, after he was descended from his forty days Con∣versation with Almighty God. For however our Interpre∣ters, St. Hierom, nay Grotius favour the Cornuta facies; and thence our Painters represent this great Legislator with Horns; the mistake without question sprung from that Homonymia Vo∣cis, Karn,xxxiv. Ex∣odus 19.  (whence the Latin Cornu) importing a Ray or Beam of Light, Majesty, Strength, Power, &c. The thing indeed was the splendor and brightness issuing from the Countenance of that extraordinary Person; as we observe that the Rays of the Sun appear pointed, reflecting from any bright and polish'd Metal. But to put this difficulty beyond dispute, that they were real and solid Beams, (Horns in good earnest) 'tis reported, they not long since shew'd one of these very Horns of Moses in the Treasury of Reliques at St. Marcellus; and a yet more rare and illustrious Sight than this,Mons. Mis∣sions Voyage d' Italie, p. 38. namely, one of the Beams of that miraculous Star, which we read of, lighted and conducted the Three Wise Men to Bethlehem: But, it seems, they are both of them now va∣nish'd, so as the Controversie still remains undecided. But to be serious, be it one or other, Horn or Beams, 'tis not un∣likely this might be deriv'd by the Gentiles from the Hebrews, who grounded almost all their Fictions upon that obscure Nation, however disdaining to acknowledg their Plagia and Thefts from a People reputed so very despicable, and little known in the World. And 'tis observable, (not to insist on Meneves, by some thought to be this signal Prophet, ador'd by the Egyptians) that their Iupiter Hammon, and Bacchus, (both Compatriots) were the first which we find thus repre∣sented in antient Medal. Thus when Alexander the Great had subdu'd that Nation, we meet him frequently Diadem'd with two conspicuous Horns, denoting his Empire over the Oriental World. But this in Transitu. The Reader who has a desire to see more on this Subject, may be furnish'd with abundance of Erudition in the learned Spanhemius, and other Critics. I only note, that altho those radiated Circles have since been bar'd, and made to close at the top, covering the whole Head; to which the
Emperor Iustinian first added a Cross, and Phocas another to the Scepter (as now our European Kings do wear them) the Cu∣stom is yet altogether modern, nor at all so glorious and he∣roic, as when the simple Diadem or Laurel impal'd the Con∣querors Brows, unless out of reverence it were to leave the glory and beams of Light to God alone, the Author of it; For that they were first of all appropriate to the Deities; those of Rhodes, Tenedos, Trapezuntia, and divers capital Ci∣ties, radiated their Apollo and the Gods whom they worship∣ped; since most of the Syrian and Egyptian Medals represent these Beams darting up as it were out of their very Skulls, and through the hair oftentimes, without any apparent Cir∣cle, in which one must else imagine their Bases to be fix'd: But thus, as we said, it belong'd only to that God. Of this the most remarkable is that Medal of Antiochus Theos, whom they call'd God, and to whom accordingly they built and dedicated Temples, erected Altars, Statues, and ordained Priests, nay, and armed some of their Idoliz'd Princes with Thunder-bolts; as did the Athenians their Timon; and of late the egregious Flatterers of a neighbour King, whom they have resembl'd to the Sun in all his Glory, and that in no fewer than seventy seven Medals and Inscriptions. But to leave this blazing Comet a while:Ursinus in Fam. Rom. We find an Head in Gentle Plau∣tiâ whose Rays seem pointed and tip'd with Pearl, not un∣like the Coronets of our Earls; but the Custom was not as∣sum'd and taken up by the Romans till after they begun to court their Emperors with the Style of Divi, to whom not only upon Apotheoses and Consecrations after their decease,Florus l. 4. c. 2. (Nero being the first who assumed the Ray'd Crown before) but even during their Lives they us'd the same adulations and superstitious Rites: Nor these alone to their first Cesar (who suffered likewise the same Devotions to be paid him with the Gods; and his Radiated Statues to be plac'd both in Tem∣ples and Theatres) but to that affected Antoninus, Helagaba∣lus rather (as his Syrian Name imports) who call'd himself the Sun, and even to some of the ambitious Pro-Consuls, of which frequently we meet the first in Medals of Augustus, Tiberius and Caligula, tho not so generally before those divine Honors were arrogated DEO. AUGUSTO. NEPON. , &c. Nor did this Pagan Relique last but till the time of Constan∣tine the Great's Conversion, and that he totally abolish'd their
impious Rites; for until then we meet both that renowned Emperor and his Sons, with Radiations, and flattered with Consecrations: Nor truly was it since wholly so laid aside, but that several of his Successors made bold to put them on again, and wear them in their Medals and Medalions, as far as down to Arcadius, Honorius, and lower yet among the Greeks, where we meet them with a certain Nimbus or Glory about their Heads, as in Monkish Manuscripts and antient Altar∣Pieces we find the Saints depicted. It is indeed reported, as if Constantine (even after he had embrac'd the Christian Faith) ordered the Radiant Crown to be set on that famous Por∣phyritic Column, which he caus'd to be transported to his new Rome from the old; and I remember Philostorgius tells us, that besides Wax Tapers, there was both Victims and Sacrifices offered to it,Ex Vales. in Philostorg. excerp. even by some superstitious Christians; but the Credit of that Historian, we know, is not over-great. That they set up lights, nay and kneeling before it, implo∣ring help and healing of their Infirmities, both Photius, Theo∣dorit and Nicephorus affirm; whilst, as to the other, the mi∣stake has been discovered; that Statue having been made long before by the hand of the famous Phidias to represent Apollo, and by no means for that Religious Emperor, tho he hono∣red it with his Name, after he had caus'd to be inclosed within it (as they write) some of the Nails which his Mo∣ther Helen is, we know, reported to have miraculously dis∣covered with the real Cross, some time before. But to dis∣patch this matter; we do not only in Medals meet with Princes Radiant like Gods, but with all other circumstances of Deity. So Iulian was represented like Serapis, and others we find often in their company; Apollo in the Reverses of Augustus; Domitian with Pallas; with Commodus, Hercules; Hadrian with Romulus; Maximianus with Mars; Dioclesian with Iupiter &c. And as these haughty Emperors, so their Em∣presses, Daughters, Neeces and Misses to be sure, would come in for their share, affecting the Garb, Attire, and Symbola of Goddesses, and sometime Priestesses, as did Antonia the Wife of Drusus Nero. Pliny mentions an amorous Painter who drew all his Mi∣stresses to represent some Deess; for which Iustin Martyr re∣proaches the Pagans worshipping their Courtezans. What would that holy Man now have said to those Christians who
not only set up, and inthrone their Misses Pictures over their Altars, to represent the B. Virgin with the Babe in her Arms, but kneel and pay their Devotions to them. But so Painters with Poetic liberty, Quidlibet Audendi— set up, and inshrine these fair sinners as so many Idols. And thus we have Cleopatra dress'd like Diana, Sabina the Wife of Hadrian like to Iuno, Faustina with Venus; as in another rare Medal we see her mounted upon a Pegasus, carrying her up to the Clouds, and so of others, all of them marks of Deification; for such in Medals are those who appear veil'd, and with Stars, Altars, Temples and Eagles perching on them, Peacocks, the Phoenix, Elephants, Mules, and Chariots drawn by Lions and the like. Let us now descend again to the Barbarous: The Par∣thian, Armenian, and Persian Monarchs, had their distinct Crowns; some of which resembl'd the Episcopal Miter, or Thiara: Nor was it new, since there are Medals that present us Cesar, and others of the Emperors, arrogating pontifical Dignity, and sacerdotal Offices, with their veil'd Heads, us'd by both Sexes, and not seldom with the Lituus, Patera, Sistrum, Silphium, and other sacred Utensils and Characters of Priestly Function and Augurie; Mercuries Petasus was wing'd; Vulcan, and the Cyclops Caps were without brim; and Castor and Pollux had a Star by them. The Phrygian Bonet was what the Polonians use at present, or rather the Venetians Doge: Nor seldom meet we both sexes Headed (shall I say, or Hooded with the spoils of Lions, Wolves and Panthers; some with the Tusks and Promuscis of an Elephant; others in Casks cristed with the Horns of Rams, Goats, Bulls, and other Animals of the Herd, which now and then are wing'd, denoting fortitude, terror, sublimity of Mind, expedition in Affairs; or the Monsters they had subdu'd, which divers Hero's and Emperors would be represented by, in imitation of Alcides, the brawny Commodus fancying himself descended from him, Iupiter Hammon, and others of the Gods and God∣desses. For as to Horns, which at this day but to name alone in Spain, would indanger ones Life, (but which the most il∣lustrious of the German Families, and noblest, bear so fre∣quently on their Cimiers and Crests) it seems the Cornuted Head was no such Character and Mark of Ignominy, as the learned Spanheim shews in that Passage of his excellent Work, De usu, & Praestantia Numismatum, which tho not so very pertinent to our
Argument, is yet very entertaining, and worthy a curious Reader. To conclude, (and before we leave the Imperial Diadem) we shall find some, even among our Saxon Kings, wearing the Regal Circle after the manner of the Greeks. Edward the Confessor had of early days a Barr'd Crown; but most con∣spicuous is that of Edward the Fourth. How would a neigh∣bour Monarch have boasted this, whose Predecessor Lewis the Twelfth, had but a single Bar Arch'd over his Crown, a∣bout the year 1500, wearing only a Cap or Bonnet before (as testifie his Coins stamp'd at Milan, Genoa, Naples, &c.) till he Marry'd our Henry the Eighths Sister, who afterwards Espoused Charles Brandon. Henry the Third brought the clos'd Crown into Poland, soon imitated by the Swedes: Philip of Spain took it not till after his Marriage with Queen Mary of England; and Maximilian Grandfather to Charles the Fifth (and Great Grandfather of Philip) first wore an Arch over a Ducal Coronet. A little after which Iames the Fourth, upon his Marriage with Margarite Daughter to our Henry the Seventh, Barr'd the Crown of Scotland; and the Kings of Denmark not until after Christian IV. made his Brotherly Visit to our King Iames the First: But that of Portugal was first worn by Iohn Bragança, late Father to the most Serene and virtuous Queen Dowager. From all which instances it appears, that the Monarchs of England were of the First in Christendom that pretended to the Arched Crown. And as for the French, till their First Francis, they were for the most part contented with an open Flowry Bordure only, little different from the Ducal Coronet, which some of the Saxons had of Silver, and others wore the copped Helmet (as Cnutus the Great) Miter-like. But more of Crowns see in a Disseration of M. de Cange. Whilst by the way we cannot but take notice of what we meet with in the famous Donative, pretended to be from the Great Con∣stantine; wherein, among other particulars, which Impostors would obtrude on the World for authentic, (but which has unluckily discover'd the fraud) this is one; that from him it is the Bishop of Rome claims the Dignity of wearing a Crown of Gold, like to that of Kings and Emperors, &c. Whereas all the learned World who have any knowledge in Medal and good History can tell; that there was never any such Crown, nor any other us'd by the Emperor himself, till Theodosius; but they were content with a plain and simple Diadem or Coro∣net.
Nor is it likely, that the Popes who were then, and many Ages after, but Subjects to the Emperor, should be dignified not with one alone, but with a Triple Crown, which notwithstanding they did not yet presume to take up till near Four Hundred Years after; nor indeed so much as a single Crown, until about the Reign of Charles the Bald. But as they grew in Power and Usurpation, arrogated this proud Ensign to rank, nay to advance, themselves above all Kings and Emperors. Tis true, Constantine wore his Diadem or Fil∣let, studded with a double row of Pearls and precious Stones (not unlike some Hatbands which persons of Quality now and then yet wear) whilst the Princes his Predecessors, had more Majorum, but a simple Purple Ribbon, Strap or Infula tied about their Temples, as we have already shew'd. So much then for that Fourb of the Triple Crown and Donative, exploded by all ingenious Writers even of that Commu∣nion. But neither did the Heads alone of those great Princes bear the Ensigns of Imperial Majesty, but their Hands likewise; which we often see in Medals, holding as well the Orb or Mund, as the Sword and Scepter, upon the top whereof sate an Eagle, till, as we noted, Phocas plac'd the Cross; when arm'd with Helmet and Shield, they commonly held a Javelin in their Hand, or on the Shoulder, or that array'd in Consular Robes (as are most of the Constantinopolitan Em∣perors) they sway'd the Scepter, till the Bas-Empire exchang'd it for the  or Ferula, as did the antient Greeks; or a roll of Parchment, like to what we see in the hands of Con∣suls, tho really what it is, is not yet determined. But that the Scepter is seen in antient Coins, we find it in the hand of the Great Augustus, represented in his whole Figure, and so in that of Roma; and where Vespasian delivers, as it were, the Empire to his Son Titus; and in those more rare Medals of Pertinax, from Hadrian very often, even to Charles the Fifth, investing his Son Philip in that of Spain and the Netherlands. Now in collecting such Imperial Heads as presum'd to take on them the Marks and Ensigns of the chief, and major Deities; those of the minor Gods, and Tutelar Genius's, &c. are to be distinguish'd and plac'd after them. Next fol∣low (accompanied sometimes with some fierce or strange Beast, Elephant or Dragon) the reputed Demy-Gods, Hero's and
famous Captains, such as Alexander, Cyrus, Scipio, Hanibal, &c. The antient Legislators, Philosophers, and other renowned Persons, supposing we had the true Effigies of them (as I fear we have but few) distinguished for their Virtues, and the great Figure they made in the World: For it was not permit∣ted every body to have their Effigies honoured in Medal; they were scrupulously and nicely jealous of it, and so very frugal of prostituting that Privilege, that it was (like Crimen Pecu∣latus) almost capital for any, save the Prince and chief Magi∣strate, so much as to be seen in Metal without special leave and indulgence; so as even the Kings of Persia themselves were with difficulty permitted to stamp their own Effigies on Silver only. Hence are we told of Ariadnes, being punished by Darius, tho Praefect of Egypt; and that Commodus condemn'd Perennius; Severus Plautianus. Nor had the Consuls, or Roman Citizens themselves, this Immunity during their Magistracy, or whilst they were alive, till Iulius Cesar rather usurp'd than fair∣ly obtain'd it; and yet when Augustus after all this, us'd it mo∣destly, 'twas look'd on as a novelty: nor find we any of the first Cesars single and alone in the Grand Bronze and larger Medals; those of that great Princes Head in Reverse, being Coined after his decease, none among them all had any proper Medal save Agrippa only, that was struck in his life-time by order of the Senate, S. C. which indeed was done, tho he was neither Emperor nor Cesar: For that of Drusus Nero Son of Tiberius, was not Coined till after his Death, by his Son Claudius's command: And as to that of either Scipio's Tri∣umphs (if at least that which Benedictus Bacchinus has lately given the Type and Account of to Signior Magliabequo be a genuine Piece) it may happly pass for one of the very first, which for their great and extraordinary Services (even to the saving Rome it self) the Republick might give Indulgence to. And if any since had been so presumptuous (as where we find the Heads of Metellus, Lucullus, Regulus, Iunius Brutus, Sylla, Pompey, and some of the rest) one is not to imagine them struck in their days, but by stealth, and such as were of the Republick Party, or by some Descendant, or Relation who happen'd to be Master of the Mints, who frequently set their own Heads and Names, under protection of some Deity, with Reverses of their Actions, and as Monuments of their An∣cestors, and to do them Honor. Hence the Families of the
Aemilii, M. Lepidus, Pont. Max. Vested like a Consul, in the Action of Crowning the young Ptolomy. They durst not yet (as we observ'd) appear in Stamp till after their decease, when (perhaps being Coin'd in some o∣ther Country or Province) they thus stole abroad by degrees, and then too in a time of disorder,Ursini prae∣fat. ad Fam. Rom. during the Civil Wars, when the Laws were suspended, and every one did what they pleas'd. For whilst the Republick flourish'd (as now the United Netherlands represent their Commonwealth by a Vir∣gin holding a cap of Liberty, and a sheaf of Arrows) the Ro∣mans rarely made use of any Figure on their Coins, than (as we noted) that of their Tutelars, the Image of Rome like a Galeated Lady or Virgin in a flowing Vest, with Castor and Pollux, Victoria, &c. on the Reverse, as we see in those Consular Medals, (so nam'd because struck during the time of their Government) till Cesar (as we said) invaded all their Privileges, and brake the Rule, by impressing not only his own Effigies, but giving Licence to his Favourites and Mi∣nions, as well as to his Kindred, and even to Women, Wives, and Concubines. Thus we find (besides divers Empresses) Brutus with Ce∣sar, Mark Antony and Cleopatra, Lepidus and Augustus, &c. What were afterwards stamp'd by the Greeks and other Na∣tions, was out of pure Flattery to the Romans, now become their Masters; whilst in the mean time such Medals of theirs as we find in Gold, were for the most part the Heads of their own Emperors. I say, before the Roman Conquests, in∣stances of which were the Effigies of Abgarus King of Edessa, in complement to Septimius Severus, and some few be∣sides. Thus far of single Heads. There are some Medals which (as we noted) present us with Two Heads, either on the same, or opposite side; of which one of them is almost constant∣ly the Princeps Iuventutis, or design'd to Empire (excepting such as we meet with of M. Aurelius, and Commodus of the high Empire) distinguish'd easily by the word CAESAR, without addition of Augustus. Here then comes in that of Ianus Bifrons, or rather Saturn (by which the Romans seem to dispute with the Greeks for precedency in point of Medals) whom some will have to be the Patriarch Noah figur'd by Ianus, to whom they attribute the
first Coining of Money. The Romans indeed made a Ship the Symbol of Saturn, feigning him and his Wife Rhea to proceed from Oceanus and Thetis, and that they were brought into Italy by Sea. Others, that in recompence of his hospi∣table Reception he taught him (besides the Art of Hus∣bandry) the Use of Money; before which it had no Stamp or Impression upon it. In Recognition whereof, he joyn'd the Head of Saturn with his own in a Medal, Revers'd with the Ship which conducted him,1 Fastor. whence that of Ovid; Et bona posteritas puppim formavit in aera, Hospitis adventum testificata Dei. Hence Macrobius's double-fac'd Ianus, and the Caput and Navis, (the Cross and Pile, Heads and Women, of our Boys play) comprehending both Tables of the Medal: The truth is, 'tis rather a double Face, than a double Head, one Head serving for both, looking several and contrary ways. But why the antient Coin bare  and  on the Reverse and Adverse parts, Plutarch gives ample account in favour of Saturn,Plut:  & Quaest. Rom. for the ex∣cellent and useful Things he introduced: For there were others that came into Italy by Sea, as Evander, Aeneas, &c. who brought nothing with them relating to Arts or Manners, to be compar'd to what the Historian recounts of Saturn; which therefore some will needs ascribe to Noah, and the Ship to his Ark; which they deduce from that which the As∣syrians report of their King Xisutherus about the time of Sa∣turn, the prediction of the Flood, Fabrication of such a Ves∣sel, and other Circumstances; as namely the sending forth, and return of certain Birds to explore the temper of the Earth, &c. Add to this the Apamean Medal of Septimius Severus, whose Re∣verse was a Ship, with a Man and a Woman looking out of a Cabin Window, and a pair of Doves with Branches in their Bills; a considerable presumption at least of the Tradition of that dreadful Cataclysm, deriv'd to the Heathen World, doubtless from the true History thereof in Genesis, as is at large discuss'd by the learned Bochartus. I know there is another with almost the same Reverse,Phaleg. l. 1, c. 1. bearing the Head of the Emperor Philip, (concerning whose being a Christian there's no small dispute) with this only difference, of Four Persons appearing in the Vessel. But after all this, it is upon fair Conjecture thought
rather to represent the good Intelligence and Commerce which there was between those of Alexandria and the City Apamea, which Place, and Country all about it, receiv'd their supplies of Corn out of Egypt. The mistake of both (who would have it relate to the Patriarch) without question proceeding from the dividing of the Superscription  and as it were under-written; which when join'd together and read backwards, the  made , namely, those of Alexandria. As for the  signifying Apamea, it was (as we said) the Apotheca and Corn Magazine of the Country. The four Men representing the Inhabitants, or perhaps Merchants be∣longing to either City; and lastly, the Dove and Olive Branch, the Symbolum of Peace, Amity, and good Correspondence between them; which likely Interpretation vacates all Mr. Fal∣coniers Conjectures, and indeed all that is any where con∣tended for about it. Nor were the like Correspondences and strict Alliances at all unusual, bearing the word OMONOIA, as in that Medal of Sardis and Ephesus, Smyrna and Perga∣mo, &c. In the mean time to return to the Ship; this is remarkable, that the Romans us'd no other Reverse than the Ratis or Prow, as long as they continu'd to Stamp and Coin only Copper; that is, till they made use of Gold and Silver, which was (as we have shew'd) five hundred years after the Foundation of the City. But to dismiss this Pretence, and Challenge concerning An∣tiquity, and their Cythical Inferences. 'Tis certain the Roman Medals are most worthy our Collection, as not only easier to be obtained, but best understood, as they are commonly di∣stinguished by Consular and Imperial; and of which there are found Coins of all the usual Metals and Models. Among the Consular and Roman Families, a Series of the most Antient of the Latin (usually in Silver in the smaller Volume, but some in Copper of all sizes) appears to be of large extent, amounting to no less than fourteen or fifteen hundred, without comprehending any, tho since calld Con∣suls (even as far down as to Iustinian) having the Name on∣ly without the Power. The true and genuine Medal reaches no farther than to the Decadence of the Republick, and in∣deed have little remarkable in them till the Imperial began, as bearing only those badges we have already mentioned.
But among these (I mean the Consular) we sometimes meet with other Nations Diadem'd Kings, as of the last Macedonian Philips, Iugurtha, and several other famous Persons; both the Brutus's, Metellus, Marcellus, Regulus, Sylla, Pompey, La∣bienus, &c. for the most part Silver, with some Medalions both Greek and Roman. The like of the Imperial also, inscrib'd with both those learned Characters, and that as far as from Pompey to Posthumius of the Latin, or as some, down to the Thirty Tyrants, and of the Greek to Heraclius, about which time the most valuable Collections usually determine. How∣ever the curious may, if they please, continue their search e∣ven to the Reign of Bajazet, who set a period to that once renowned Empire: And tho they are in no sort comparable for Sculpture or Design, yet belong they to the History, and are on that account worth the small expence. I shall not need repeat, that under the Emperors there were also struck divers Medals in honor of other famous Men, who were not concerned in the Political Government; we have nam'd Pythagoras of Apulia, and more of that rank, not for∣getting the Impostor Apollonius, and several others; of which hereafter. But thus you may observe, and by what has been already spoken of the Origin and Progress of Medals, and from their rude beginnings, perfection, decadency and revi∣val, how they still kept pace with the Commonwealth, State and Empire; which falling out in the Gothic Revolution, or time of the Heruli, may from that Aera be reckon'd the Bar∣barous Period; of which the most Modern concern Europe only, (for we meet with nothing considerable elsewhere of this nature,) and are of recent Stamp: But thence indeed begin∣ning a fresh to discover some glimmerings of new Day, name∣ly, about the Fourteenth Century, when about fifteen Years after, were Coin'd and dispers'd, the memorable Effigies, Martyrdom, and Predictions of Iohn Huss, &c. from which time forwards were divers Medals made in France, and other Countries, on sundry occasions. But what we find more antient than those we first mention'd, are generally to be suspected, unless such as served for Money only, and of lesser model, till those of the Roman Pontif, which began to appear with Pope Martin, An. 1417. since which there are spawn'd innumera∣ble fry of Papal Medals and Medalions; for such I call those of the Cardinals, famous Bishops, and Ecclesiastick Courtiers,
Nepoti, &c. who have had the ambition of Medals. Cardinal Francis Barbarini (late Nephew to Pope Urban VIII.) design'd to have made a Series of all the Popes, from S. Pe∣ter in Medal, from whatever Image or Representation he could hear of in Statue, Picture, or Monument, to assist the Invention of the Sculpto; but the Favorite dying before it could be executed, that Collection remains imperfect. We have yet from P. Martin, and, I think, all his Successors since, to the present Bishop. But it was Paul the Second, who about Fifty Years after (others say Sixtus the Fourth) was the first who imitating, or emulating rather, the Roman Emperors, caus'd his Effigies to be Stamp'd in Medal, tho they Coined Money before. Lewis the Twelfth of France followed his Holiness; for 'tis certain, that before his Reign for near a Thousand Years, that is, from Charles the Great, there was very rarely found the Head of a French King so much as in Coin; and then came up the Testoons, (or Heads) as still they call them, tho, as if they endeavoured to supply that defect, they have ren∣der'd the present Monarch as cheap as Counters, every Stone∣wall and Sign post bearing the Head and Effigies of Lodovi∣cus Magnus, radiated like a young Apollo. And now that we have mention'd Counters (Computatio per Calculos) so denominated from their help in Supputation, and much in use about 400 years past, and still in constant Practice in France (especially in all transitory Reckonings among the Vulgar, besides what Gamesters use at Cards, &c.) so in∣credible has been the variety for the Subject and Emblem, as has amounted to at least Two Thousand several Designs and Fancies, bearing the Heads and Effigies, Arms, Cyphers and Devices of Kings, Princes, and other illustrious Persons; some in Silver, (but for the most part in Brass and blanch'd Metal) seldom in Copper; and others which I have seen accurately Printed in Horn, Tortoise shell, &c. This Spawn of Coun∣ters, or Mock Medals, began about the time of Francis the First, simple and without Figure, as serving for Calculation only; but afterwards they were curiously Mill'd, and some of them not without elegant Sculpture. Nor did the Spa∣niards long abstain from vindicating by Counters, the vast Do∣minion of that once fastidious, now declining Monarchy, when, according to the boasting Genius of that Nation, Philip the Fourth not long since vaunted in a Counter, what the Indies had
brought him, with his HIC. TAGUS. ET. GANGES. but which soon after Lewis the Thirteenth paid him in Kind and Coin, by a Reverse wherein there was an Olive-Tree em∣brac'd by a Vine, and ripe Corn growing underneath, with the same Motto, intimating, that the great Fertility of France, so far exceeded that of Spain, as brought not only all that the Indies produc'd, but preserved Spain it self from starving. Asking pardon for this trifling Digression. I shall not insist on any other Collection of this nature, tho I cannot but ap∣prove of any thing relating to good Antiquity and Art; among which come in Talismans and Sculps in Gemms, especially the Onyx, Sardonyx, Achat, Cornelian, &c. to be reckoned among Intaglia, and other precious Furniture of the Cabinet, Dacty∣lotheca, and peculiar Gazae of Princes, and curious Persons (such as was Iacomo Maria Favi, who, when he could not purchase the Originals themselves, procur'd the Impressions of innumerable choice Things, descending even to modern Seals, &c.) divers of them truly Antient, others pretending to Astrological Secrets, Names, and extravagant Figures, re∣puted to be of Magical Energy and Power, by vertue of their Character: Some of the great Elixir, and others to be worn as Phylacteries and Periapta, of high Veneration and Use among the Arabs, Egyptians, and other Eastern People; as sundry Incantated Medals and Baubles, are at this day among the no less superstitious and ignorant Christians: Populus vult decipi. And here, whilst that magnanimous Prince the Duke of Savoy is in danger of so unmerciful an Enemy, as burns and destroys wherever his Armies come (by a barbarity exceeding the most Savage Nations we have mentioned) I cannot but apprehend the possible Fate of that invaluable Collection of Pyrrhus Ligorius, containing in twenty six Folio's an Infinity of Draughts of Medals, Inscriptions, Relievos, &c. with innu∣merable other Monuments of both Greek and Roman Anti∣quities, besides six other Volumes Geographical, purchased by one of those illustrious Princes at the price of eighteen Thousand Ducats, together with the famous and original Mensa Isiac, which the learned Pignorius has Interpreted. Of this kind and subject are those four noble Volumes of Duke Alberts of Bavaria, bestow'd upon (and now kept in the Archives of) the Royal Society, by their late munificent Bene∣factor the Duke of Norfolk: De Consularibus, Numismatis, &c.
containing the Images and Effigies of the Roman Kings, Con∣suls, Dictators, Knights, Tribunes, and other great Officers, and Circumstances of Antiquity, from the Foundation of the City, to Iulius Caesar, so accurately Design'd, and in large, as may greatly conduce to the assistance and information of a studious Medalist. And now after all we have said of Heads and Effigies, what would one not give for the true Picture of the Hero's, Heroines, and other illustrious Persons whom we have men∣tion'd, and that have made such a noise in the World? What for Cecrops, Cadmus, Theseus, Evander, Agamemnon, He∣ctor, Ulysses, Priamus, Menelaus, Archelaus, Simonides, Ari∣stodemus, Aristides, Themistocles, Miltiades, Alcibiades, Critolaus, Agathocles, Epaminondas, Agesilaus? (who never would suffer his Picture to be drawn,Cic. Epist. ad Luccei∣um. nor Statue made of him, and therefore the more desirable;) What for Thrasybulus, Pelopidas, Codrus, Conon, Lysimachus, Lysander, Leonidas, Hannibal, I∣phicrates, Seleucus, and the rest of the Captains of the Great Alexander? What for Cimon, Pisistratus, Pyrrhus, Hie∣ron, Asdrubal, Hamilcar, Massinissa, Cassander, Sapor, Porus, Artabanus, Mithridates, Ariston, Epimenides, and the rest of the Archontes, &c. What for the Legislators, Lycurgus, Solon, Dra∣co, Charondas? For Antenor, Romulus, Numa, Tullus, Ancus, Scaevola, Duillius, T. Manlius, Regulus, Marcellus, Quintus Cincinnatus? The Fabii, Coriolanus, Aemilius? The Scipio's, Gracchi, Metellus, Caius Marius, Appius Claudius, the Cato's, M. Portius and Uticensis, Brutus, Crassus, Lucullus? What for Cicero, Q Hor∣tensius? What for Zoroaster, Trismegistus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates, Democritus, Zeno, Aristippus, Dioge∣nes, Chrysippus, Epicurus, Epictetus, Hierocles? For Aristarchus, Archytas, Hipparchus, Eudoxus, Archimedes, Euclides, Strabo, Thrasyllus, Ptolomy, Sostratus, Vitruvius? What for Demo∣sthenes, Theophrastus, Varro, Pomponius Atticus, Mecaenas? What for the antient Historians Sanchoniathon, Herodotus, Thucydi∣des, Xenophon, Polybius, Dion, Dionys. Halicarnassaeus, Diodo∣rus, Pausanias, Livie? &c. What for Hesiod, Homer, Pinder, Sappho, Epimenides, old Anacreon, Empedocles, Sophocles? For Plautus, Lucretius, Terence, Virgil, Ovid, Horace, &c. and in∣numerable more whom I mightSee those Heroes men∣tioned by M. Manilius in Sphaera. name; Kings, Consuls, Emperors, renowned Captains, Legislators, Philosophers, Historians, Orators, Poets, Mathematicians, Physicians, Per∣sons
famous for their stupendious Exploits, skill and dexte∣rity in Government, Learning, useful Inventions, and other signal and distinguishing Virtues? most of which, and ma∣ny more than I have assembled, the excellent Spanheim af∣firms to be yet extant in Medals. And if these so desirable, how much more would one part withal for the lively Effigies of Adam, and the Patriarchs Noah, Abraham, Ioseph, Ioshua, Iephtha, Sampson, David and his Worthies: Iudas Maccabeus, and his Brethren, Solomon and his who is greater than Solomon, whose Portraict no human Invention (let Demetrius and the Crafts-men, and those who are concern'd, talk what they please of S. Luke his num∣berless original Paintings, and the Veronica) could so well have preserved, as Medals, and as we find by those yet re∣maining of the Greek and Romans, especially the Caesars and their Successors; since as to the rest (namely those antient Hero's we have enumerated before them) nay even of the Consular, there is less credit to be given to most of them, being, as we said, made after their decease by their Friends and Relations. The same doubt occurs even of those cut in Gemms and Marbles, on which (whatever is pretended) we seldom find any of their Names ingraven; tho if in any (and such perhaps we may best rely on) those which have been design'd from the most antient Marbles and Gemms in Fulvius Ursinus, Leonardus Augustinus; and from them, as to the old Philosophers in the learned Menagius's Edition of Laertius. I do not say there are not some to be found even of the most antient; Romulus, Numa, Ancus, Tullus, or at least whoever may have liv'd within the compass of two Thousand Years, since there are Medals yet remaining, believ'd to have been struck so long ago, and Statues doubtless long before, from which they might be copied. But as to the Cae∣sars, and their resemblances to the Archetype in Medals, I think we have little reason to question, since they were (as we shew'd) so nicely delicate and suspicious in this particular, that we read Alexander and Augustus would suffer none toQuantum porro digni∣tatis à rege Alexandro tributum ar∣ti existima∣mus; qui se Pingi ab uno Apelle, & Fingi à Ly∣sippo tantum∣modo voluit. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 11. paint or carve them save Apelles and Lysippus; nor of later times Charles V. any save Titian, and such excellent and unerring Hands. And some Medals we have seen so accurately graven and wrought to the Life (as they call it) that I firmly believe, when we happen upon one that is perfectly fair and antient (suppose
it a Iulius, or Augustus) we may as safely affirm it like the Person, as any which our modern Coins present us with; —Sic vultus, sic or a ferebat: Which would raise ones indignation (as I haveHistory of Chalcogra∣phy. elsewhere complain'd) against the presumptuous Exposures, which Kings and Princes at this day suffer of their Effigies, by every wretched Dauber on every Sign-Post among Cats and Monkeys! By the way, as to the Images of our Venerable and Blessed Saviour (of whom I have seen many with Reverses fill'd with Samaritan Characters) there was not any stamp'd on Medals, till a thousand years after his Incarnation; that is, till that Age of almost palpable Darkness, in the Reign of the Em∣peror Iohn Zemisca, when the IHS did usually accompany it instead of the Cross, used from Constantine downwards with∣out any Effigies. But to proceed, 'Tis to be considered, as to the Resemblance in Medals of the same Person, different in several Medals; that it is not always an infallible Mark of their not being like; the seve∣ral Ages, and other Accidents, often and almost always somewhat altering the Countenance. This, for instance, is especially conspicuous in Coins of Charles the Bald, as be∣fore him, of the Great Constantine and others, as the learned Fresnius shews in Familiis Augustis Byzantinis; caused partly by the unskilful Graver, or, as we said, through the real Al∣teration of the Countenance it self; observing yet hardly any Age so far to change and confound it, as wholly to oblite∣rate the Master-strokes of Nature. In confirmation of which, there are extant Medals of Adrian, of all his Ages: How ea∣sily they are otherwise to be known by the Stamp, compa∣red with their Character and Descriptions, even beyond their supposed Busts and Statues (to which they so rarely left their Names insculp'd) let the curious (for example) judge by taking the Picture of one of the Caesars from those who often both saw, and convers'd with them, or liv'd so near the Times when so many of their Statues and Effigies were fresh and newly made, some in Marble, Copper, Wax, &c. wrought and moulded by the Life, nor need we go further than to Suetonius's Augustus.Sueton. lib. 1. Aug. Forma fuit eximia, & per omnes aetatis gradus venustissima, &c. He was (says the Historian) an extraordinary handsome and
beautiful Person, and continued so through all the Periods of his Age; yet so incurious and little nice, and far from tiffing and sprucing himself, that for haste he would now and then suffer two or three Barbers at the same time to be clipping and shaving him together. Vultus erat, vel in sermone vel tacitus, adeo tranquillo sere∣nôuqe &c. His Countenance was so open and serene, whe∣ther he spake or was silent; that a noble Person of France confess'd to some of his Country-men, he was so mollified and charmed with it, that it prevented a Resolution he had once taken, of breaking his Neck from a Precipice as he was passing the Alps and approaching him. Oculos habuit claros ac nitidos, quibus, &c. His Eyes were so bright and sparkling, as there appeared something divine and extraordinary in his Looks; so as he seem'd pleas'd to ob∣serve Men, he lookt fixtly upon, cast down their Eyes, as if dazzled with the Sun-beams. Capillum leniter reflexum, & subflavum, &c. His Hair and Locks inclined to Fair, decently buckl'd and curled at the ends.—Supercilia conjuncta, His Eyebrows met.— Mediocres Aures, Nasum & à summo eminentiorem, & ab imo de∣ductiorem, &c. His Ears were of a midling size, his Nose Aquiline, and bending towards the Top: in summ, a Per∣son he was every way proportioned. I mention only those who are commonly represented to us in Medals; other Descriptions were easie to be produced out of the same and other Authors, living in the times of the first Caesars, to justifie their Resemblances. Cardinal Borromeus (now Sainted) who was of a very hard favour'd and crabbed Look, is, by Painters and Statua∣ries, made of a very sweet and lovely Countenance. I do not therefore affirm that all the Masters of these voluptuary Arts were heretofore more free from flattering great Persons than now they are; but that sometimes they might impose upon future Ages, as 'tis reported of some Macedonians, that they made and buried Armor of enormous and gigantic Proportion, to make the World believe, what extraordinary Men they were by whom Alexander had vanquished them in his Indian Expe∣dition. But I am persuaded Medals are the least to be sus∣pected, in the Effigies of the Caesars especially, so perfectly agreeing with their Characters.
As for those Heads we have extant in Print and Taille-Douce, certainly those exhibited by Monsieur Vaillant of the Syrian Princes and other Medallists, seem to be most accurate, and would have been of more Authority, had he and the rest given us as many Heads and Effigies as they have of Reverses, and as we might yet hope from that numerous Collection which has been long expected from Monsieur Morel, who has been so ill, and so unjustly recompenced among the rest of his persecuted Brethren: I say, how desirable were it that the same Circumspection had been used by Ingravers in other Books of this Subject, as in that which the industrious Leonardus (whom we but now named) Antiquary to the late Pope Alexander VII, has set forth, designed from the best O∣riginals, any where to be met withal among the Curious; with the learned Preface, Explanation and Erudition of the excellent Gronovius, who has translated it into Latin. In the mean time I must not omit to give Notice, that such Medals as personated the Gods and Heroes, are commonly represented in florid and vigorous Youth, without Beards; excepting Iu∣piter, Neptune, Vulcan, Mars, Pluto, Hercules, who is yet sometimes represented as a young Child imberbis, strangling a Serpent, and by several Names of Places, Labours and E∣pithets: Bearded are also Pan, the Satyrs, Silenus, and some∣times Bacchus, the River Deities, and there is a Fortuna bar∣bata. And here, before we pass to the following Paragraph, I cannot but mention a Curiosity of Medals, and other Intaglia, painted in Miniature, to that perfection so extant, and bold∣ly swelling out, as would almost persuade one they were re∣ally stamp'd: of these I have seen (and possess a few) very accurately representing the Dead-Life (as our Painters call it) that is, the natural Metal wrought in Relieve; Achats, Corne∣lians, and other Out-Cuts; which, since a Series of them might be contriv'd in a Book, were a great and useful Curi∣osity, and worth the Value of some in Gold; but which I wish might be supplied by some learned and industrious Per∣son, and that such a Collection were more exactly designed and ingraven in Copper, after the best Originals; the several Ages compared, and not designed hastily at adventure, or negligently, as we find too many are. And this Assembly should be universal, well attested, and judiciously chosen,
and collated with the different Ages of the Persons as near as could be, for reconciling the Difficulties of the same Em∣peror, or Person, as we have noted above: I affirm such a Collection (the laudable Design and Purpose of Monsieur Morel) would not only be greatly assistant to such as have not the Faculty or Means of storing themselves with the real Medal, but acceptable likewise to those who have; and may thereby consider them at more leisure, than others who have but a superficial View; being commonly reserved in the Cabinets of great Princes, to which there is not so easie ac∣cess for modest Scholars. CHAP. III. Of Reverses Antient and Modern, as they relate to History, Chronology, and other parts of Erudition. HAving now finished what for the present I thought necessary to be said concerning Heads and Effigies; we turn next to their Reverses and Inscriptions, with Figure and Emblem representing Action; which are indeed to be prefer∣red, and for which chiefly Medals are so desirable, and enquir'd after by the Learned (not to say only for their sake) so in∣finitely fruitful and full of Erudition; that had we a perfect and uninterrupted Series of them, we should need almost no other History; such Fragments as yet remain, furnishing the Studious on so many Occasions. For we have in Reverses (besides now and then the Effigies) the Successions of the noblest and most illustrious Families, their Names, Titles, Impreses, Honors, Dignities, Crowns, Garlands, Marks and Rewards of Magistracy, &c. We meet there with Ceres, Saturn, and the Praefsectus An∣nonae, the Montaries, with Vulcan and his Forging Tools: They give us the Habits and Robes of Consuls, Kings and Emperors, Flamens, Vestals, and other Royal and Sacerdotal Garments; we are shewd by them what the Tripos, Lituus, Patera, Sistrum, Simpulum, Knife, Ax, the Lustral Sprinklers, and other Vasa, and Utensils of Sacrifice, Libations and Augury were. Their Chariots, Arms, Ancilia, Shields, Ensigns, En∣gines, Harness, and Weapons of War.
We have in Reverses the Forms of antient Gallies, and other Vessels, with their manner of Naval Combat: they shew us the Actions and Exploits of the greatest Captains; their Military Expeditions, Legions, Cohorts, Colonies, Discipline, Stations, Castrametations, Victories, Trophies, Triumphs, Largesses, Benefactions, Remissions, Confede∣rations, Truces, Cessations, Iudulgences, Relaxations of Tribute, Encaenias, Dedications, and Vows; their Ludi Se∣culares, Circenses, Cereales, Isthmian, Olympian, Nemeaean and divers others:  OECUMENICA, &c. hardly, if at all to be met with any where save in Medals only. To these add, the Lectisternia, Marriages, Births, Funeral Pomps, Pyrae, Apotheoses, and Consecrations, at which they often changed their Names (as now our Popes at their Inaugura∣tions) but not in Medals of the first Caesars. And so Families and Adoptions, and sometimes both, as Nerva Trajan, Titus Vespasianus; and when (as often) the Name remain∣ed, DIVUS was only added. They present us with the most magnificent and stately Buildings that ever stood upon the Face of the Earth: Basi∣lics and Royal Palaces, Temples, Altars, Asyla, Sacrifices, &c. In them we behold with Admiration, their stupendious Amphitheatres, Theatres, Forums, Thermae, Xysti, Portics, Nau∣machiae, Hippodroms, Mausolea, and Sepulchres: their goodly and useful Aquaeducts, Fountains, Bridges, Cryptae, Viae, Castra, Metae, Termini, Cippi, Bases, &c. They afford us the Prospect of their Triumphal Arches, Obelisks, Pyramids, Colossus's, and other Royal and Magni∣ficent Fabrics of venerable Antiquity, long since collapsed and buried in their own Ruines; but from out of which, by Re∣verses and Medals, have almost all the antient Orders and Ornaments of Architecture (well near lost or corrupted) been much revived, restored and vindicated from Gothick Barbarity; nay, and those yet lasting, after Charles the Great had put a stop to that prodigious and universal Inundation; since it is little more than a Century, that Building and other Arts began to emerge in good earnest, and to hold up their dejected Heads; as may be seen by what the Popes have done at Rome, (where these learned Ruines are chiefly extant) the Dukes of Tuscany at Florence, and at Ferrara, Parma, and
other Princes of Italy; Philip the Second in Spain; in France, Francis the First, whom they called the Father of Arts in that Kingdom; and lately yet in our own Country, where some part of Somerset-house in the Strand remains the almost only poor Attempt that I know of; not omitting the Earl of Salis∣bury's House at Hatfield; the noble Seat of the most noble Lord Viscount of Weymouth at Long-leet, and very few others which can pretend to any thing of tolerable: for the Ban∣quetting-House at Whitehal is of much later date; and the manner now in general Use, first introduced by the Encou∣ragement of that great Lover and Patron of good Arts, the Illustrious Thomas late Earl of Arundel and Surrey, who (tho neglecting his own Palace) incited others to build with Stone and Brick after the present Gusto, and which Inego Iones since pursued in that stately Pile at Whitehal now mentioned, the Church and Piazza in Covent Garden after the Model of that in Ligorne, &c. But which is at this day exalted (name∣ly Architecture) to a much greater (I might say, even to the highest Pitch of Perfection) by my most worthy Friend Sir Christopher Wren, Superintendent and Director of His Ma∣jesty's Buildings, who will leave more noble Monuments of his vast and comprehensive Knowledge in that and other useful Arts, than has any one Architect here these thousand Years. Moreover, what is learned from Reverses (since the Incur∣sions of the Goths, Turks, and other barbarous People, who chang'd and confounded the antient Names of things and places) other singular Aids to good History, Chronology, and antient Geography (to name no more) the Learned Scaliger in his Eusebius (when we find him to have recourse to Medals for the clearing many difficulties) gratefully acknowledges; and since the often cited Mons. Vaillant in his Syrian History, and the Works of Lucas Holstenius, late Library-Keeper at the Vatican, and other learned Persons give luculent proof of. To these add the Iesuit Hardouin in his Notes on Pliny, with several more, who, from the Reverses of Medals alone, have recover'd and illustrated the true Names of divers Re∣gions, Islands, Rivers, Mountains, Ways, Limits and Boun∣daries (and how by degrees they extended their Conquests) Colonies, Cities, Metropolis; their Founders, Privileges and Immunities; the Value of Moneys and Weights; the An∣nual
Fasti, Acta Caesarum, Aera's, Epocha's, &c. of such exceed∣ing use in computation of Time and Years, when several famous and memorable Things happen'd and were perform'd; others that had been quite forgotten; Writers having some∣times abolish'd the very memory of some Tyrants, and other unfortunate Princes (who are commonly but of short Reigns) Medals alone have preserv'd the Names of, and other Cir∣cumstances of great use in History; witness the famous Medal of Estimius King of London, whence our learnedBurt. I. Ant. p. 159. Antiquaries have asserted her Metropolitan Title, against all the Critics and Cavillers, tho she was no Roman Colony. Hence we may thus deduce many Claims and Titles in cases of Usurpation, &c. For instance, that signal one, wherein is found that from Charlemaine, Louis le Debonair, down to Lotharius, &c. those Princes had their Monies Coin'd at Rome, and other Medals, attesting and vindicating their Claim and Title to that City, as appears in that learned Disserta∣tion publish'd by Mons. le Blane, and subjoin'd to his History of the Moneys and Coins of France. In which he proves, that the Bishops of Rome were never lawful Sovereigns of any part of Italy, much less of that Capital City; but of old al∣ways Subjects, Govern'd, Elected, and (as occasion requi∣red) Deposed by the Emperors; together with an Account by what subdolous Arts they got footing in the large and vast Possessions they now enjoy, and usurp the present Power. But to return to Epocha's (wherein the Greeks were the most accurate and particular) we shall best reckon from Roman Medals by the Consulate or Tribunes; tho in that also there is difficulty, by not knowing the precise years of their respe∣ctive Offices when the Medal was struck; whereas the Greek gives the very year of the Princes Reign. Moreover Colonies discover their Epocha's in Medal; as in that under Philip, An. VIII. under Decius, An. XI. &c. which, 'tis said, some have so improv'd, as to be able to tell us the very Age of the Emperor by the Medal, of which more when we come to Inscriptions. In the mean while as to Colonies, we find them bear the Names of the Founders, or of such as either fortified or settled them; v. g. those call'd Iuliae were founded by Iulius Caesar, as was that at Berytus; Mu∣nicipium Augusta Bilbilis, by Augustus and the like; these by
single Persons: But when more were express'd, as some∣times two Names together immediately, and without di∣stinction, or any word between (and not else) one is then to reckon the first to be the Founder, and the second the Restorer. Thus in the Medal where we read Colonia Iulia Augusta Detrosa, there Iulius settl'd and planted the Colony, and Augustus Recruited it: But when Augustus is set before Iulius, there Augustus Repair'd only what Iulius Founded, as Monsieur Vaillant nicely criticises. By the way observe, that we meet with no Heads in any Italian Colonies, that ho∣nor it seems being allow'd to those Cities only which were Priviledg'd to stamp Money, which Immunity is mark'd upon the Medal, whether granted by the Senate alone, or together with the People, or solely by the Emperor: When by the first the mark is S. C. tho the Medal be Greek: If by the People . E. Upon Antioch of Pisidia S. R. of the same import. So Colonies when Priviledg'd by the favour of the Emperor, it is Permissu Caesaris, or Augusti, the Indulgence always express'd, &c. As to the now mention'd Antioch of Pisidia, 'tis observ'd to be the only City among sixteen of the same name, which affected to bear the Legend in Latin. We moreover learn of him, that such Colonies as were sent out by the Consuls before Caesars Usurpation, bare the Name of Roman. For example, that of Sinope in Asia, which struck a Medal in recognition of the young Gordian, C. R. I. F. S. Colonia Romana Iulia Felix Sinope, An. CCCVIII. the Epoche noting the year that Lentulus made it a free City and Colony, after he had vanquish'd Mithridates, and which Iulius Caesar considerably enlarg'd. Nor did Cities and Colonies only do honor to the Emperors, and Benefactors in Medals and Reverses, but whole Provinces also; as Syria to Trajan, Da∣cia to Philip, &c. We mention'd Dedication of Cities, the , or Conditor, as Romulo Conditori; and so the Foundations, as in that of Nicopolis by Augustus after the Victory at Actium; in which Medal there is noted its Privilege and Immunities: In that of Hadrian the Year and Date when the City Amisus reco∣ver'd her Freedom under Augustus: So that of the City Soli in Cilicia, chang'd to Pompeiopolis her Benefactor; in others Re∣staurator Urbis, who was esteem'd equal to the Founder: Such again for instance was that of Constantinople its Dies Natalitius,
supposed to be the very Day when that Medal or Coin was struck, like that of old Rome cum Urbis Imagine, tho as Zonaras. some think, the Dedication was not at the laying of the first Stone or Foundation (as now the custom is) but rather at the finishing and consummation of the Work; and these usually bore the Heads of the Founders, or such as rendred them famous; as the Tarentines and others. Thus the Island Coos had Hippocrates, Samos the Image of Pythagoras; Smyrna that of old Homer, &c. tho happly not stamp'd at the time when they flourish'd, but from such Pictures, or antient Statues as were doubtless thought to resemble them. Nor is Critica and Grammar (besides what concerns Reli∣gion, History, Jurisprudence, and other parts of the politer Eru∣dition) oblig'd a little to this delightful Study. The Di∣gamma F invented by Claudius we read in Medal, and much more inferr'd from that single instance of the learned Sigonius's Treatise De Nominibus Romanorum, subjoin'd to his Fasti Con∣sul. And to be gathered from the Dialogues of Agostino, Vossius's Etymological Lexicon, the Orthographic Abbreviations of Words, &c. so as they no longer wonder to find why Medals stamp'd so long since at Corinthus, spake Latin in their Inscriptions under the Roman Empire, seeing the Colo∣nies which that victorious People planted and sent forth, had so worn out and extinguish'd the natural Inhabitants and their Language, that the Greek was in a manner totally disus'd and forgotten. As to Names what more Vulgar, than that the Caesars was deriv'd ab utero Caeso (byVid. Graev. Animadv. in Suet. Tranq. Edit. 2. Solinu's mistake of Pliny, at∣tributed to the elder Scipio) but if that of Spartianus might pass, they would deduce it ab Elephanto Caeso, divers Medals bearing and Elephant, with the word CAESAR, and a Re∣verse fill'd with such Weapons and Instruments as the Romans made use of to kill and destroy them:Ae n. 1. And indeed Servius relates a story of that Emperors Grandfathers killing an Ele∣phant in Africa, that was so call'd in the Punic tongue, as if he had thence deriv'd his Name: Whereas doubtless it was from neither, but from Caesaries rather (and the Critics herein all mistake) the Instruments on the Reverse being only such as belonged to Sacrifice: Of which the learned Sequing. in Nominib. Rom.
We have already spoken of a Reverse in the Consular of Lepidus's being delegated by the Senate and People of Rome, to young Ptolomie of Alexandria. And in another, Marcus Antonius's caressing of Cleopatra. In a third, Marcus Brutus, with the Reverse of a Poniard and Cap of Liberty, deno∣ting his bold attempt to have freed the Commonwealth by the death of Iulius Caesar. But what is most singular and conspicuous in it is, the Notation of the very day, when that bold stroke was given, namely, on the Ides of March, of which he had fair warning before. In a Reverse of Trajan we have represented the manner of their restoring Kingdoms to a vanquish'd Prince; and so in others of the Imperial there might be produc'd abundance of Examples illustrating the like Histories; some of them (as we said) no where else to be met withal, others confirming things doubtful, &c. To return to Names, Historians had not known that the Son which Antoninus had of his Wife Faustina was call'd M. Annius Galerius Antoninus, but by a Greek Medal of that Lady; or that Barbia Orbiana was Wife to Alexander Seve∣rus; or Hetruscilla the Spouse of Trajanus Decius, and not of Volusianus. It is in the Reverse of Medal, that the know∣ledge of many antient Families are preserved, which neither Ursinus, or any other Author makes mention of; as among several more Alitia, Barbatia, Carrilia, Epira, Fabricia, Gra∣nia, Helvia, Iuventia, Menia, Nautia, Papilia, Sextilia, Trebonia, Vatinia, &c. enough to fill an Alphabet. It is in the Reverse of Medal only where we are shew'd in what manner that Statue of Coloss Magnitude, representing the noble Emperor Trajan, was clad and plac'd (which that egregious Painter Iulio Romano has design'd, and the learn'd Ciacconius describ'd) upon that stupendous Column, vested in his Imperial Robes, and holding in one of his hands a Golden Ball, in which were contain'd his own Ashes; in the other a Scepter, with the Cancelli of Copper about the Plinth of the Capital; it being the only Column in Rome which, I think, had any considerable Figure upon it. There are besides what this Pillar exhibits divers Medals of this Prince, whose Reverses shew us his Aquaeducts, Via, Forum, Circus, Tri∣umphal Arch, and the Bridge he made over the Danube, be∣sides those of his Reduction of Armenia, Mesopotamia, &c.
We learn from the Reverses of Medals, as well as by Sta∣tues, that of old they made use of no Stirups to get up, or ease their seat on Horseback, and other things of new In∣vention. Again, we gather from Reverses of Medals the extraordi∣nary care they took of the Sea and Navigation, as well as to celebrate their Victories. In that of Augustus, Neptuno Conservatori; Victoria Nep. in that of Gallienus; and especial∣ly that of Pompey the Great, with his Titles of Praefectus Classis, & orae Maritimae, together with a Trophy on the Prow; and in the Reverses of Augustus, whom we mention'd, fre∣quently with the Rudders, Rostra, Tridents, Ships and Gal∣lies, and other marks of Sovereignty. Moreover, we behold in Reverses of Medals the manner of Military Adlocutions, Congiaries, Liberalities, and Royal Dona∣tives to the People, taken, as they report from Callistratus, who, that he might incourage the People of Athens to come and frequent again the Courts and Publick Assemblies of the City (now during the Civil Wars in a manner quite de∣serted) caused Money to be flung and scatter'd among them in those Places: In imitation whereof great Princes do at this day disperse Coins, Nummi Augurales, and Medals at their Coronations, and other solemn Occasions; as was that at the Nuptials of Frederick Duke of Austria, with Ann Daugh∣ter to Uladislaus King of Hungary, An. 1515. Thus also the Pope, when he is Crown'd, scatters Money and Medals among his Adorers, which is first but of Brass, pronoun∣cing the words of S. Peter, Argentum & Aurum non est mihi, &c. Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have give I you; and then by and by (as soon as his Holiness is lifted up, and exalted in his pontifical Chair) he sprinkles Silver, with that of the Psalm, Dedit pauperibus, &c. He hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever. With this holy Rai∣lery sporting with Scripture after a pleasant manner. But to proceed, The Reverses of Medals gave intimation of extraordinary Laws and Ordinances; as that of Tenes against Adultery, stampt at Tenedos, and described by our learned Graves, who from a Medal of his own, recites the History at large out of Heraclides. For as it was accounted a glorious Thing to have enacted wholsome Laws and Constitutions revok∣ing
others; so was it often express'd in these more lasting Records; witness amongst the Romans, those Medals of the Families Cassiae, Papiae, Coeliae, Parthiae, &c. and in that fa∣mous one of Augustus de Maritandis Ordinibus; with other excellent ones of the Emperor Cocceius Nerva to the public Benefit; the generous Remission of this noble Emperors Right over the Vehiculation, and all the Carriages of Italy, which was so grievous an oppression to his Subjects, is, I think, made known to us from the Reverse of a Medal only, which the People caus'd to be stamp'd in Recognition of the Grace. To these add his establishing free Commerce, repressing Disorders in the Commonwealth; which procur'd him those deserv'd Titles of SALUS GENERIS HUMANI in his Medals, where commonly the Reverses express some Symbols of them; as in their due place. And now that we have mention'd Symbols in Reverses of Medals, they shew us, with the Images and Names of the Pagan Deities, Custodes, Auspices, Patrii, Genitales, Nutritores, &c. their Ensigns and Distinctions: Iupiter by the Eagle; by the Harp or Chelys Apollo, and sometimes a Gryphon; Neptune by his Trident and Rudder, sometimes on a Dolphin, but never on the Marine Horse, tho it be Consecrated to him; Pluto his Fork; by the Tyger or Panther Bacchus; Hercules by the Club and Lions Skin; by a Serpent Esculapius, &c. Venus by Cupid, or the Doves, Helm of a Ship, and sometimes VICTRIX by a Target, Cask, Bow and Arrow, to ex∣press the power and force of Love. Nor was that Symbol of the Doves attributed to their noblest Venus for their sala∣city, as the common mistake is, but too the veneration they acquired by the story of Semiramis, whom they report was fed by those gentle Birds, into one of which she was fain'd to be Metamorphos'd, and in that shape ador'd by the Sy∣rians under the Name of Astarte. There is yet a more vir∣tuous Goddess of the Name, the Celestial Venus, represented holding an Apple in one hand, and a Spear in the other; and if with a little Infant, GENETRIX or FELIX, betokening the fecundity of Marriage; Iuno has her Peacock; Diana her Crescent, quiver of Arrows, Dog, and sometimes we find her naked and full of Breasts, a Basket of Fruit on her Head, as they picture Nature, and not seldom also with a brace of Harts or a Doe standing by her: she is likewise
accompanied oftentimes with some Egyptian Deity, as Sera∣pis, Isis, or Apis, and now and then the Pharo's, for the Friendship between Ephesus and Alexandria. Others there are relating to Arcana Imperii, and Mysteries of State, Gryphons, Harpies, Syrenes, &c. requiring Study and Interpretation. And hence we now and then encounter with Sphinges in the Reverses of Augustus, signifying Prudence and Courage; and if plac'd before a Temple, the Mysteries of Religion. The Thunder-bolt according as 'tis plac'd, betokens seve∣ral Passions, as well as Regal Power, or that Sovereign Princes are more immediately under the Divine Protection: For Iupiter tho but one, we find, denominated from divers Places and Attributes, according to which he is benign, propi∣tious, displeas'd or offended; as where he is Capitolinus, Olympius, Conservator, Stator, Liberator, Optimus, Maximus, Ultor, Ful∣gurator, &c. In like manner for his Age, Crescens,Iove non∣dum Barbato. Juv Sat. 6. Iu∣venis. A naked Youth with a Glory about his Head, and holding a whip in his Hand, denotes the Rapidity of the Suns diurnal Course. Mercury wing'd Cap à pie with the Caduceus, intimates peace, diligence, and conduct in Enterprises. But to commence at the Head in this Recension also (besides what we have already mention'd) without insisting on the Laurel, which was the Symbol of Apollo (and of that Genius of the Senate  and ) every body knows, that Ears of Corn, Chaplets of Roses, and other Flowers; Ivy, Pine, &c. belong to Ceres, Flora, Bacchus, Pan, and their Companions: Casks and Helms to the God of War; and when with the Owl, to Mi∣nerva. The Phrygians wore a crooked Bonnet pointing backwards, the Persians forward, and sometimes upright, not unlike the Commodes affected by our Ladys at pre∣sent: The same was challeng'd by the Epicoene God Lu∣nus (as of either Sex) ever represented with the Crescent be∣hind his shoulders, in great Veneration among the Antiochi∣ans of Pisidia: Iuno is cover'd with a Flameum, and in the larger Veil is Pronuba: If in a Goats Skin, Horns and all, she is Sospita. Pantheons are coifed, and have their heads dress'd like several of the Deities; sometimes with a Bushel like Serapis, sometimes like the Sun with beams. Iupiter Hammon wears Rams-horns; and with these, and divers other Pagan Superstitions often adorn'd they their peculiar
Lares; nor were the Genii, Topic, as well as Personal, want∣ing in Reverses: They were figur'd by naked young Men, holding the Patera in one hand, and in another a Horn of Plenty, sometimes standing by an Altar pouring out of the Patera, and were as many as there were Places, Societies, or Per∣sons under their imaginary Guardianship. The Egyptians (whose  was a Serpent) had their Apis figur'd like a Bull with the Flower Lotus between his Horns, a white blaze in his forehead, under a Crescent: The same have Osyris, Isis, Canopus, and the Deess Eume∣nythia, with a Lily-form Flower, or as some, the Abroto∣nus. We likewise find Canopus in the shape of a large Ear∣then Jar or Pitcher, out of which there peeps an human Head; but the Bust of Anubis is a Dog's Head. Amazons carry the Battle-Ax on their shoulders, or a small Pelt or Buckler Crescent-fashion: In deeper Busts and the Reverses of larger Medalions, we meet some of these with Cask and Shield holding a bridl'd Horse, betokening Victory in Fight, or some Publick Shew. If the Figure have lying by it a Sledge, Hammer, Anvil, Tongs, &c. conclude it Vulcan, or some of his brawny Cyclops. As Heads and Busts in the Reverse of Medals (as before observ'd) so are Hands, and what they hold and carry in them to be consider'd. Thus the Hasta pura, or unpointed Javelin suits with all the Gods, denoting their universal Be∣nignity: So does the Scepter, rounded or blunt on both ends like a Generals Commanding Staff, or what they call Parazonium (frequently taken for a short Sword) found in some Reverses of the Emperors Galba, Domitian, Vespasian, and others, about which the Critics yet are not well agree'd; for in that of Antoninus Pius, 'tis a Javelin or half Pike arm'd at both ends. The Patera, or some such Religious Character, did usu∣ally accompany the Emperors, which sometimes they held in their hand, seeming to pour an Offering upon the Altar. Termini, are Figures without either Arms, Hands, or Feet, so represented, says Polybius, to shew that all qua∣rels and contests about the Limits were determin'd. Such is the Mercurius Herma in a Reverse of Augustus, standing upon a Thunderbolt, which some interpret to be in relation to that Emperors Device, Festina Lente.
A branch of Laurel in the hand of an Emperor, signifies Victory; of Olive Peace, and hand joined in hand Friendship and Unity, also Adoption, as in that of Trajan and Cocceius Nerva, where two figures take hands, inscrib'd Providentia Senatus. In whole and intire Figures are commonly represented the Vertues applied to the Roman Emperors by their Flatterers, as Piety like a veil'd Matron, holding a Temple, or box of In∣cense with a Stork standing by; but Vesta with a Taper; Pro∣videntia seems to touch a Globe with her staff; Pudicitia is modestly veil'd with one finger at her lips. If pressing them with two Fingers, taken for Silence; to this add Moderatio, Quies, Indulgentia, Religio, Utilitas Publica, , &c. Aequitas holds the balance, and so does Moneta, who is said to be a Deity, represented by three Figures with the Cornuco∣pia, and near them as many melting Furnaces, and a heap of Money, to note the three principal Metals, inscrib'd Ae∣quitas publica, or Moneta Aug. The Graces are also three naked and beautiful Virgins, holding each other by the hand; by the same number is symbolized Aeternitas shaded with a swelling sail over their heads, importing time past, present and to come, and some∣times by a single Figure holding the Sun in one hand, in the other the Moon. Lastly, the Eumenides and Furies, arm'd with a Torch, a Poniard, and a Serpent: Nemesis or Re∣venge is pourtrai'd with a Wheel, shewing that tho Divine Vengeance has long patience, it comes at last with speed: But the Wheel which we find at the foot of Fortuna, denotes inconstancy. She is also sometimes sitting, some∣times standing, and sailing, with her hand on a Rudder, or Cornu-Copia, distributing good and bad, and is but one and the same Deity. Security is typified by a woman leaning neg∣ligently upon a Chair. The four Annual Seasons are repre∣sented by as many naked Figures, one excepted, who is clad for winter. The other three have an Hare, a Basket of Flowers, and a Sickle. We sometimes meet a little Child bestriding a Dolphin, and such equally appertain to Melicer∣ta, Palaemon, Portumnus, three names of the same Deity. Fi∣gures cumbent upon Pitchers and Jars, represent great and famous Rivers, and sometimes the Bust only emerging out
of the Vessel. Nilus has several naked Boys playing about him, to signifie his many streams: Where we meet Figures lying along upon Beds, a Lectisternium is represented, on which they usually plac'd the Image of Apollo, Diana, Nep∣tune or some other Idol, with solemn Ceremony in time of calamity, or Epidemic Sickness, as well as upon more joyful and festival entertainments. To go on with things animate upon Reverses; the Phenix symboliz'd Consecration, and Immortality; the Stork Piety and filial Duty; the Bird of Athens Wisdom and Science, Vi∣gilancy and Providence, as one sees in a Medal of Constantine: the Cock is often with Mercury; the Horse feeding repre∣sents a Country in peace, rich and abounding; the Ele∣phant some Publick Spectacle, and sometimes Eternity; as the Serpent Aesculapius, or the Deess Salus, and is now and then the mark of a Genius, or some famous Hero, and there∣fore Victory if under foot: Nero had such a Reverse; a Ser∣pent within a Garland of ears of Corn and Poppy, import∣ing Plenty: the Ox signified strength and patience, and when accompanied with a veil'd Priest, some Colony; if for Victim destin'd, the Beast had Ribbons dangling about his Horn: Liberty of Commerce and Dominion on the Sea, were both represented by a Dolphin clinging about a Trident, &c. Characters of Inanimates on the Reverses of Medals were likewise frequent. Thus the Cap, or Hat and Wand, Pro∣claim'd Freedom, Slaves being uncover'd and under Disci∣pline; the Cornu-Copia, or Amalthean-horn was the Symbol of Plenty; as Serapis's Bushel was of Providence: the Port or Gate of a City, found in the Reverse of some Medals, with the word Providentia Augusti, shews a Magazine and Provi∣sion of Corn for the People; and if a Star appear over it, the City of Constantinople in particular: A fortified Camp is express'd by a sort of Calthorp; a Tripos with the Iackdaw and Dolphin, is the mark of the XV. Viri, deputed Keepers of the Sibylline Oracles; the Sacerdotal Cap or Miter, is known by the appendant Apex and Flamine, either alone, or with sacrificing Instruments, denoting Pontifical Dig∣nity. Bucklers and Votive Tables pro Salute Principis, and other Occasions, are very frequent in Reverses; a Wheel is the Cha∣racter of some famous Way made or repaired by the Em∣peror;
as in a Reverse of Trajan. In short, the Zodiac de∣scrib'd in all its Figures with the Moon in Center, was Emblem of the universal Happiness of a Princes Govern∣ment; such as we meet in a Reverse of Alexander Severus; and Augustus was fortunate under Capricornus. The Temple of Ianus shut proclaims an universal Peace thro all the Roman Empire: A Gally, or Vessel under Sail and in Course, betokens Joy, Felicity and prosperous Suc∣cess; but if we find it placed beneath a Figure wearing a Turrited Crown, shews it to be a Port of Commerce; if under a Victory wing'd, the vanquishing of an Enemies Fleet. But besides all these, Kingdoms, Countries and Provinces, are distinguished in Reverses by their respective Symbols; Europe by the Horse, or the Rape by Iupiter; some affirm there never was any Reverse at all appropriate to her: Asia is known by the Serpent and the Rudder of a Ship, as a Country of Commerce accessible by Sea, and the first of Na∣vigators; Africa is Cask'd with the head or spoil of an Ele∣phant, having by her a Scorpion: Of the European Provinces, Macedonia is represented by a Carter with a whip in his hand, as a Country of excellent Horses, and sometimes also by Hercules's Club; Achaia had a Flower-pot; Dardania a Cock; Spain a Coney, or Olive-branch, and woman in a Soldiers Cas∣sock, a small Target and two Javelins; Gaule is with a Spear, and in the close Military Coat or Sagum; Dacia is figur'd by a Woman with a Spear also, and sometimes an Asses Head; Pannonia by two Women warmly clad, with Military En∣signs, denoting the coldness of the Country, and courage of the Inhabitants; Italy is represented by a Royal Lady Crow∣ned with a Tower, sitting on a Globe and holding a Scepter with an Horn of Plenty; Germany by a goodly Dame with a long Shield, and holding a Spear; Britannia represents a Virgin in a flowing Vest, sitting on a Rock or I∣sland with a Spear in her hand, and leaning on the Rudder, the Prow of the Ship at her Feet; Boeotia has the God Bac∣chus's Thyrsus, or a Cluster of Grapes; Rhodes the Sun, or a Rose the Solar Flower; Sicilia shews three Thighs and Legs, issuing from a Man's Head in the Center, to signifie the three famous Promontories of that Island, and sometimes by a Sickle and Ears of Corn, denoting Plenty and Felicity; of
Asia, Iudaea is represented by the Palm-Tree; Arabia by a Camel; Persia by a Dart; Armenia by a Cap or Hood, Bows and Arrows; Parthia by a Woman in that Country Dress, with the like Weapons and a Quiver, to shew their extraordi∣nary dexterity in shooting; Cappadocia has a Woman wearing a Turrited Crown, and sometimes with the Mountain Argaeus in her hand or near her feet. And now we speak of Mountains, we find in the Reverses of some Medals a rude Stone in shape of a Mountain drawn in a Charriot, representing the Sun, as he was ador'd by Helagabalus his Priest, fancying that glo∣rious Planet an huge Ignite Stone with the Star or Phosphorus over it, preceding its Rising, to distinguish it from those of Cara∣calla: But Stones have other significations; as that in the form of Pyramis with a pair of Turtles plac'd in a Tem∣ple resembling that of Venus's worship'd at Paphos; and Iu∣piter was himself sometimes ador'd in the shape of a Moun∣tain; whence perhaps it is we meet Argaeus so frequently in Reverses. But to return to Countries: Mesopotamia is represented between the two famous Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, with a kind of Miter upon her head. In Africa, Egypt has the Crocodile and Ibis for Symbolum, and sometimes the antient Taber, an Instrument play'd on by their Priests, as was the Sistrum by those of Isis. With these a Medalist has notice of the most famous Rivers by their several Figures, Tiber, Rhenus, Danubius, Nilus, &c. With the Nymphs, Naids, Syrens, Satyrs and Sylvan Dei∣ties: The true Figures of the Hippopotamus, Crocodile, Rhino∣ceros, Elephant, Cameleopard, Panther, and other rare and exo∣tic Animals, usually led, and exhibited in Triumph, or prepared for Combat and the Amphitheater, are expressed to gratifie and divert the People, especially during the Secular Shews. Other Reverses present us with divers Flowers, Fruits and Plants, &c. And as Countries and Rivers had their several Emblems, so had their chief Cities: Rome her Romulus and Remus suck∣ing the Wolf; Corinthus, Pegasus and Bellerophon: the Sphinx and Harp, the City Gabala in Coelosyria; Constantinople the Thunny, and other places abounding with that Fish; Ty∣rus, the Spaniel with the purple Shell, the Shell is common a∣lone upon those Reverses, but the Dog is rare; Ephesus is re∣presented by the Hart or Stag, sacred to her Diana. But I
confess some of these belonged rather to their Coins as Money, which, as we noted, had denomination from these Badges; for so that of Ephesus was stampt with the Image of Diana; those of Creta, Iupiter; the Aegyptians with a Crocodile or Ibis, Nilus or Serapis; Lacedaemon with the Head of Lycurgus; Delphi,Lib. 4. c. 13. the Fish of that Name; of which see more in Alexander ab Alexandrio and other Authours. A Military Ensign plac'd upon an Altar, denotes a new Co∣lony of Veteran Souldiers, whose Felicity depends on the Gods. If there be many Weapons, it signifies their being drawn out of several Legions, but Military Ensigns alone, if more than one, sometimes import the Victory of some particular Legion, or betokens an Oath of Fidelity to the Emperour. Besides the Eagle, which is the Standard-Ensign of every Legion, the Rest are distinctions of Cohorts only, or Guidons and Cornets of the Cavalry. The Acroteria or , which is the ornamental ben∣ding Prow, gives notice of a Naval Victory, or some Ma∣ritime City: the Rudder of a Ship on a Globe with the Fas∣ces, is sovereign Power: so a Spear lying cross a Curule Chair, signifies a Consul, Aedile or some person of Pontifical Dignity, it is likewise a Symbol of Iuno and Consecration: By the way, there is an Ivory Chair at Somerset-house, said to be a Roman Curule, but the Shape of it does by no means answer; for they were not only plainer, but made with arched Legs and round-back'd, more resembling that easie Chair, which is wont to be plac'd under the Imperial or Canopy of State, at Court. The Cornucopia is common to all the Deities, Symbols of Beneficence and Abundance, especially where there are two, nor is the Caduceus always attributed to Mercury alone, but to Royal and Universal Power and Authority; for so 'tis found with a Horn of Plenty and the Pontifical Mitre in a Reverse of Iulius. Abundance is also symboliz'd by Ears of Corn appearing out of a Bushel, with the heads of Poppy, which of all Plants produces the greatest plenty of Seeds. Other Chara∣cters of Abundance and Fertility are Clusters of Grapes, Pa∣niers of Flowers and Fruits, &c. With the Augural Lituus, we oftentimes see two Pullets, or some other Bird which
they kept for Divination, and not seldom in their Coops and Cages, &c. And may these suffice with others enumerated by Mr. Walker and the late Author of the Science, and such as we have already named; where one has their descriptions more at large, but which for being so very necessary to be known and remember'd, ought not to be counted a needless Repetition: For Heads and Effigies may be easily distinguish∣ed by their Inscriptions, not so Reverses, which having rela∣tion to Symbol only, require particular Explication, as do other Emblems, Devises and Hieroglyphicks, inclosing Morals, recondite Mysteries and Actions; recommending and repre∣senting the most conspicuous Virtues of the Persons and things they relate to. And thus all that was heroical and great, peculiar and eminent, and properly regarding Antient History, its Circumstances and Accessories, is, we see, fetcht out of Medals and their Reverses,Cap. 13. ad 17. as Agostino amply, and Suaresius more contractedly have given us a Taste. Upon this account it is, that such Memoirs were consigned to the most lasting Materials; and that the Heroic Ages bore such Veneration to Antiquity and the Exploits of their Renowned Ancestors, that they hung up the Skins and Spoils of Lions and Serpents, and other destructive and furious Beasts as wasting whole Countries, had been killed and cleared by them. They adorned the Vestibules and Porches of their Temples, Halls and Palaces with Armour, Weapons, Trophies, Sta∣tues, Urns, Tables and Inscriptions, and all sorts of Antiqui∣ties. As among the Gaditani (for instance) they shew'd Pygmalion's Auream Olivam; the Argives, Atrei Phialum; the Skin of the Caledonian Boar apud Arcades; those of Delphi, Pindar's Chair; as did the Metapontines that of Pythagoras; the Parma Antaei made Tanger famous; Phalaris's Bull, those of Agrigentum; Leda's Egg, those of Lacedaemon; the Arca Cypseli, those of Olympus, &c. Others the Spear of Achilles; the Harp of Timotheus; Fair Helens Necklace; the Lamp of Epictetus. These, and the like (long since lost and decay'd, and not to be compar'd with Medal) rendred many Coun∣tries and Cities famous; and so fond they were of them, that Cicero tells us,In Verrem. Nulla unquam Civitas tota Asia & Graecia signum ullum, Tabellam pictam, ullum denique or namentum urbis, sua voluntate cuiquam vendidit, &c. They would not alienate or part with them for any price; as neither of late years
would they of Rome sell to that magnificent Collector of An∣tiquities, Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, the fragments only of a broken Obelisc which had lain neglected so many Ages in the Circ of Caracalla, since piec'd together, and erect∣ed on that goodly Fountain of Piazza Navona by the fa∣mous Bernini, a stupendious Monument of his admirable Talent. There are still at Rome, Florence, Pisa, &c. other Anti∣quities belonging to the Cities, and daily purchas'd and aug∣mented, Statues, Historical Columns, Trophies, Altars, Urns, Inscriptions and Pictures, which they keep to adorn, and for the honor of the Place and Nation, which I know not that they do in any other; for if they did, those Statues and other venerable Antiquities search'd out, and with so great diligence, affection and vast expence, brought from Athens, Delphi, Smyrna, and other parts of Greece by that noble Earl, would not have been dispers'd, as I find they were; those Inscriptions only excepted, which were frankly bestow'd on our Athenae (the University of Oxford) at my sole Request to the late illustrious Duke of Norfolk; and I had his promise of that Colossian Minerva to have follow'd, but his Grace's so unexpected Death prevented my timely getting it remov'd. I know not whether it was not since pur∣chased with many other Statues by the Lord Vicount Lemster, who for his great love of all that is magnificent of this kind, and for his no less civilities to me, I think my self oblig'd to mention with much regard; glad that they are fallen in∣to the hands of one who both knows how to value and preserve them. For by such Collections (as I said) Countries and Cities become Schools of Art, attracting learned Persons and many Strangers to visit their Antiquities, as now abroad to the Churches, Shrines, and reputed holy Places. Nor did all,In Verrem Orat. 4. or any of these Circumstances of old Smyrna, with the advantage of her famous Port and Haven, render it so celebrious as the antient Picture of Agathocles; nor the Ma∣mertines, as that one Collection of C. Hejus, of which the Orator (describing the Antiquities of his Palace near Messina in Sicily) Messanam ut quisque nostrûm venerat, haec visere so∣lebat: Omnibus haec ad visendum patebant quotidie; Domus erat non Domino magis ornamento, quam Civitati, &c. One nobly fur∣nish'd House was not, it seems, a greater Reputation to the
illustrious Owner, than to the whole City it self. And thus Thepsia for an excellent Statue of Cupid only (the work of Praxiteles) was visited by Travellers and Strangers, nam alia visendi causa nulla est: It had nothing else, says Cicero, in it worth seeing. Upon this account it is, that the Palaces and Studies of the Farnesi, Medici, Barberini, Pozzi, Angeloni, &c. at Rome; the Duke of Tuscany's at Florence; Septalius's at Milan, with their Cabinets of Medals, Statues, Inscriptions, and other Antiquities, &c. make Italy still venerable in her very Runis:Salust. And for what Use and End all this Cost and Curiosity we are told by that noble Historian (de Bello Iu∣gurth,) not for nothing or merely to look upon and delight the Eye with only: Nam saepè audivi Q. Maximum, P. Sci∣pionem, praeterea Civitatis nostrae praeclaros viros solitos ita dicere, cum majorum imagines intuerentur, vehementissimè sibi animum ad virtutes accendi: Scilicet, non ceram illam, neque Figuram tan∣tum vim in sese habere; sed memoria rerum gestarum, eam flumam egregiis viris in pectore crescere, neque prius sedari, quam virtus eorum famam atque gloriam adaequaverit. The very sight of their Effigies call'd to their minds the glorious Actions they had perform'd, and even inflam'd them with an Emulation of their Virtues; nor did it rest there till they themselves also had done something worthy their Ex∣ample. To this the incomparable Cicero again (pleading the cause of an excellent Poet) Quam multas nobis Imagines non solum ad intuendum,Orat. pro Archia. verum etiam ad imitandum, fortissimorum virorum expressas Scriptores & Graeci, & Latini reliquerunt; quas ego mihi semper in administranda Repub. proponens, animam & mentem meam ipsa cogitatione hominum conformabam, &c. And in good earnest, where there is no more Superstition paid, than what upon the sight of modest Pictures, Statues, Medals, and other productions of Art, these learned Pagans shew'd them for ought appears: I should be no Iconoclast and Demolisher, tho I abhor Idols, and cannot but wonder that Men of Reason and Power to Reform, should give and continue Scandal to so many excellent Christians, and to so many who are not Christians but would be so, were they either taken away, or (if left standing) their Cult abo∣lish'd, not the imitation of the Sanctimony and Virtues of those whom they represent. For thus (to return to Reverses) it seems they so inspir'd Men with their very looks, that
the noble Alphonsus us'd to say, he never beheld Caesar in Medal without some extraordinary Emotion, inflaming his breast with an Emulation of imitating his greatness of Mind and conspicuous Virtues. For the same reason of old, they plac'd and set up their Signa, Busts and Pictures in their Pinacotheca's and Repositories, especially in the Vestibules and Prima Aedium parte, Porches, Halls, and particularly in their Libraries, some of Marble,Valerius l. 5. cap. 8. ex∣emp. 3. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 2. others in Wax; nay says Pliny, Non solum exauro, argentove, aut certe aere in Bibliothecis dican∣tur illi, quorum immortales animae in iisdem locis ibi loquuntur; quinimo etiam quae non sunt, finguntur, pariuntque desideria non traditi vultus, sicut in Homero evenit; quo majus (ut quidem ar∣bitror) nullum est foelicitatis specimen; quam semper omnes scire cupere, qualis fuerit aliquis, &c. Celebrating those immortal Hero's, who seem to breath and speak to us as they stand. Thus things not really present, appear at least as if they were, inciting us with a desire of enjoying the absent Person: for instance, the Poet Homer; there being in my opinion (says he) no greater felicity, than this universal Inclination of knowing what manner of Man such and such a Person was. How strong a passion the sight of Alexanders Statue alone kindled in Caesar, when it made him shed Tears, out of An∣guish or Ambition, that such a stripling in comparison to his Age, should have so far exceeded his Conquests! having subdud the whole World almost, e're himself had yet been Master of a Province. And doubtless there is nothing does more stimulate a noble and generous Spirit than a Virtuous Emulation; and therefore Sir Thomas Moor allow'd the use of Statues also, in that ingenious Idea of his Republic (where otherwise we find him very sparing of unnecessary Pomp and Expences) when discoursing of Rewards and Punish∣ments; Non paucis (says he) tantum deterrent à flagitiis; sed propositis quoque honoribus ad virtutes invitant: Ideoque Statuas viris insignibus, & de Rep. praeclare meritis in foro collocant, in re∣rum bene gestarum Memoriam, simul ut ipsorum posteris majorum suorum gloria calcar & incitamentum ad Virtutem sit, &c. And therefore of old they never decreed those Honors of Statue or Medals, but to such as had perform'd some signal Exploit, or Invented some useful Thing. In this manner they Dig∣nified and made them Noble, as Aemilius and others: and
again, overthrew and broke their Images in pieces, and re∣call'd their Medals, when upon any vile Action, or notorious Treason they deserv'd ill, or betray'd their Country; of which Histories afford innumerable Examples. And indeed, when Men (be they never so great and well born) degenerate from their illustrious Ancestors, Stemmata quid faciunt? quid prodest, Pontice, longo Sanguine censeri, pictósque ostendere vultus Majorum, & stanteis in curribus Aemilianos, Et Curios jam dimidios,Iuv. Sat 6. humerosque minorem Corvinum, & Galbam auriculis nasó{que} carentem? Tota licet veteres exornent undi{que} cerae Atria; Nobilitas sola est at{que} unica virtus. —What is't our Ancestors to show In Paint or Statues? the Aemilii plac'd Intire in Chariots, Curii to the wast, Corvinus, that by th' shoulders less appears, And Galba wanting both his Nose and Ears? The House,Stapleton. why do so many Gen'rals fill Breathing in Marbles?— Fill all thy Courts with old wax Imag'ry, Vertue's the true and sole Nobility. They put them (as we have shew'd) not only in mind of those brave and glorious Persons they represented, but they look'd on them as yet alive, and observers of their Actions; and were so charm'd with their Conversation, that they car∣ried them in their Triumphs, and went with them to their very Funerals and Graves; nor would they at any hand sell or alienate them from their Families, but fixt them as House-Looms to the Inheritance. He that could shew the greatest number of them (as we now Coat-Armor and Pedigree) was reckon'd the Noblest. Tis really strange to what prodigious numbers the Statues and Figures of this sort should otherwise a∣mount, when in the little Island of Rhodes alone were counted above thirty thousand; those of Olympia and Delphi more; in Corinth innumerable. By a noble Contention (says Sir Henry Wotton) in Point of Fertility, 'twixt Art and Nature, and not only arguing an infinite plenty of Artists and Materials, but likewise of magnificent and glorious Thoughts, even
in the common Persons of those Ages, besides the Relation those goodly Monuments and Memoirs of well doing and meritorious Persons had to nobler Designs; not as a bare and transitory entertainment of the Eye only, or gentle decep∣tion of the Time, but that it had a secret and powerful In∣fluence, even towards the advancement of the best of Go∣vernments, by their continual representations of great and virtuous Examples; So as in that point Art became a piece of State. Remarkable for this sort of Magnificence, and one of the first was Marcus Varro (the most learned and knowing Person of the Age) who made a Collection of all the famous Men from the Foundation of Rome to his own Times. Cicero, Atticus and others, follow'd him to that height of Curiosity, as 'tis re∣ported of Alexander Severus, that he sought to have the Pour∣traits of our Blessed Saviour, the Patriarch Abraham and o∣ther extraordinary Persons, as well as of Achilles, Alexander, Plato and others of the Gentile Hero's and Philosophers. We have seen, how instead of Ensigns and painted Ban∣ners, they carried them in Pomps and Processions of State, stampt and cut in all sorts of Metal, Stones of price, Por∣phyry, and the most durable Marbles; and this they did for almost Two Thousand Years, especially in Money and Me∣dals innumerable, whereof much is yet remaining, much more 'tis probable than what is yet come to light, found here and there casually in single pieces, and often in heaps, full Urns and Jars, to shew the immense Treasure of that once flourishing State, and vast Extent of its numerous Colo∣nies, which not only inlarg'd their Conquests over Men, but (as in recompence of the Changes and Devastations which they made) Civiliz'd the Barbarous World by their Laws and Learning, useful Arts, and exemplary Virtues. And now after all we have produc'd in favour of Statues, Medals and other Collections of this nature; we are far from approving or encouraging that abandon'd and passionate love which some have shew'd, in a restless and expensive pursuit of these Curiosities, and that like Damasippus Insaniunt veteres Statuas emendo, as some ill advised, and, as I may say, Luxu∣rious Antiquaries have done, to the prejudice of their For∣tunes, or any nobler Parts of Life, ranging over all the world, and compassing Land and Sea to feed an unbounded Appe∣tite,
and turn that into Fault and Vice, instead of a lauda∣ble and useful Diversion: Est modus in rebus— I remem∣ber a French man (lover of Intaglia's) who told me he had for many years long'd for the death of a Gentleman, who having an Head of the Emperor Hadrian cut in an Onyx (an∣tique and very curious) which he would by no means part with; he hop'd that he might obtain it of his Executors, as at last he did. And I could tell of another  Person, who, when the Turks Invaded Candy, and alarmd the Ve∣netians, was wont (not without some secret pleasure) to reckon, at how easie rates Statues would be purchas'd, should the Turks set foot in Italy. Asking pardon for this digression, not altogether foreign to our Subject of Heads and Effigies, and the plenty of Sta∣tues, Medals, and antient Coins which may be yet extant in the hands of the curious. That which has been perverted by ignorant Mechanicks, and Avarice of others, may, for ought we know, be as much as what remains intire. Laurentius Pignorius,Pignor. Epist. writing to the Abbot Barisonus, tells us (with no small indignation) what a World of Antiquities lie buried, broken, and neglected. And as to Medals, of a Venetian Merchant that melted down abundance of rare Coins to make a Chain of Gold for his Wife to wear. And Schot∣tus, of a Spanish Apothecary who cast a Mortar for the use of his shop of an invaluable Collection of Medals, which had been left him by his curious Father: Dignus utique ipse pistillis; sed in grandiore Mortario Anaxarchi more tundi: Nay, my Au∣thor adds, that when, An. 1506. at Rome a Goldsmith was wont to cast little Shrines and Statues of gold and silver Me∣dals; he did often use to boast, that he made none but of such precious things. Such another encounter I remember the noble BusbequiusBusbeq. E∣pist. tells us he met withal in his Embassy passing through Amasia to the Ottoman Court: That enquiring of a Brasier whether he had any Medals (or as the Truks call them, Infidel Money, using them for weights only) the Pagan Tinker told him, he had a shop-full of them a day or two before, but that he had newly melted them all, to make Pots and Kettles. But this of old the nobler Romans (as if foreseeing it) took such care of, that besides a Law expresly prohibiting the melting down of any Coin or Medals; to preserve all other noble Monuments from being so much as
any ways marr'd or injured (expos'd as many of them were abroad in the streets and about the Cities) they had their Curator Statuarum, as well as their Tribuni rerum Nitentium; especial∣ly Libraries, Buildings of Magnificence, and other publick Decorations and Ornaments. The truth is (whatever care there was of old) 'tis not a∣bove an Age since they were even at Rome it self so negli∣gently Barbarous, that some Harpies would have demolish'd the Arch of Constantine, and so obliterated the Memory of that great Emperor and Revolution, as far as in these wretches lay, had not Pope Paul the Fifth taken care to prevent them: They had already pull'd down the Septizonium of Severus, so as there now remains no Vestigia of that noble and singular Antiquity, nor of many a Triumphal Arch besides (as that of Drusus over the Germans and others) except it be in the Me∣dal; and were proceeding upon the only remaining Amphi∣theater of Titus, miserably defac'd already; so as that renown∣ed City had by this time been hardly known so much as in her Ruins. To resume then our Subject, and at once, & instar om∣nium, to shew their incomparable Use, and how vastly they might contribute to the Universal Republic of Letters, were it possible to make a complete Collection, and uninterrupt∣ed Series of Greek and Roman Coins, as doubtless they have been stamp'd and distributed upon all signal Occasions, when great numbers were utter'd and dispers'd from time to time, besides those which were also frequently found under the Foundations of Public Edifices (on whose Reverses was usu∣ally the Model or Picture of the Fabric) I affirm, were such a Treasure to be met with, the learned World would be furnish'd and inrich'd with a World of rare Antiquities; vouchers subsidiary to good History, and of what there has past of Memorable, with far more certainty than from any other perishable Records whatsoever, since Medals are not justified by Books and Authors, but Books and Authors by Medals rather. I cannot (says the illustrious Scaliger) but admire how many noble Records, rare and recondit Myste∣ries are contain'd, and have been transmitted to us in Medals and Inscriptions, quae nos fugiunt, and of what we could never else have had such clear and perspicuous Testimony! But he who has a mind to see how Medals vindicate and support
antient History preferrable to Books, may consult the lear∣ned Spanheim's Preface and Notes on Iulius Caesar. And here I must acknowledg, that I have been more con∣firm'd by that Bass Relieve still extant on that Triumphal Arch of Titus, which at my being at Rome I caus'd to be most accurately Delineated by Carolo Morotti (since, for his incom∣parable Talent advanc'd to be the Popes chief Painter, and worthily now esteem'd the first of Europe) with all the La∣cunae and Detritions in so long a tract of Time, to prevent the being impos'd upon by most, if not by all those Sculp∣tors (not excepting Francis Perrier, esteem'd to be the most faithful) whose Prints I have ever seen, and who presume to supply what is quite worn out with their Conjectures. I say I have been more edified by this undoubted Antiquity, and by the Medals representing to us the sad and deplorable Eversion of that once glorious Temple, and Destruction of that obstinate People for their prodigious Ingratitude and Ma∣lice in putting to Death the Son of God, than by all that Iosephus, and other Historians of that time or since, have left us in their Books. I am not ignorant that many passages of moment have been falsely grounded upon these venerable Monuments; as from that known Inscription SANCTO. SANCO. SE∣MONI,Apolog. 2. &c. by the Holy Martyr S. Iustin and others since; whilst prejudice and superstition make others to mistake the most grosly; as the learned Dr. Spon clearly shews in his Let∣ter to Father Chaise, who pretended to derive and prove the Antiquity of the Popish Mass from a Medal stampt in the time of Constantine the Great; because forsooth, in a certain Reverse of that Emperor, one sees a little round thing upon an Altar, which being more heedfully inspected (without the aid of Microscopes) evidently appear'd to be a Mund or Imperial Globe only; but which the zealous Iesuit took for a Consecrated Wa∣fer: Thus quod volumus facile credimus. But the instances we have hitherto produc'd are Authentic and without Reproach, evin∣cing and establishing what is pretended from them beyond ex∣ception. And for the Historical Part, by what is already among the Curious and lovers of this Study; we cannot rea∣sonably question, but those Kingdoms and flourishing States who took such care to preserve and trasmit those noble and worthy Actions to Posterity, were not less diligent and
curious not to suffer any thing of Signal and Illustrious to escape them, than a very Modern State and Commonwealth near us, have to this day (to our reproach or neglect at home be it spoken) in their most laudable Imitation of the wisest, most renown'd and prosperous Commonwealth we find Ce∣lebrated for their Wisdom and Virtue. An egregious Instance of this may be seen in what Mon∣sieur Bizot and his Continuator have Publish'd, in the Histoire Metalique de la Rep. d'Holland (Printed first in Folio, since in three elegantly Design'd and Insculp'd Octavo's) where one has the intire History of whatsoever has passed of Public and Memorable by Sea or Land, in Peace or War of any sort, relating to that wonderful Commonwealth. All of it deduc'd, represented and supported by, and from the Records of Medals, Stampt and Publish'd in the year, and at the times when such and such Actions happen'd to be done and were fresh in memory; and that from the very Infancy of that State, and defection from the Crown of Spain to this day; together with apposite Devises and In∣scriptions both of Things and Persons, Monumental, and high∣ly conducing to divers Passages of our Modern Histories and Revolutions (abating of some Liberties which perhaps might decently have been pass'd by, not so well becoming the gra∣vity of Medal, but which are yet Matters of Fact) namely, their Wars, Sieges, Expeditions, Truces, Peaces, Alliances, Negotiations, Discoveries, Colonies, Adventures, Plantations, Companies, and Improvements of Arts and Manufactures. In a word, nothing Memorable has escap'd the Medal; nor what of other Countries that have had any relation to them: Sometimes to the Honor of their Nation, useful and full of profitable Diversion: Verily a Curiosity, together with the Historical Discourses upon them, worthy both the Collection and Cabinet of the Curious. To proceed therefore with their Reverses: We have there represented (besides Heads and Effigies) all that has fall'n out of Great and worthy the notice of History, frequent E∣vents referring to most Actions not of Europe only, but of both the Indies and the whole World, in any sort relating to (I think) the most Industrious People in it. For instance, They have Medals of the very first occasion of their Re∣volt and Emancipation from the Tyranny and Oppression of
Philip II. under which they groan'd, upon his endeavouring to introduce the Inquisition, and in order thereunto erect∣ing new Bishopricks and Tribunals, infringing their antient Immunities and Constitutions: And how from that con∣temptuous Name of Geux and Vagabonds, to High and Mighty; they in less than a Century asserted their Rights and Liberties against all the Power and Policy of then, the most potent and formidable Monarch of Christendom. We have in the Reverse of their Medals, their Original Confederation and Union with Utrecht; their early applica∣tion and submission to Queen Elizabeth for her Protection; the Cautionary Towns and Fortresses made over to, and Gar∣risoned by her, with their Rddition; their deplorable and cruel Sufferings after their first Governor Philip Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and Governes's Margarete Dutchess of Parma; Car∣dinal Granvil, under that fierce and truculent Alvarez de To∣ledo Duke of Alva; his Son Frederic, Don Lovis de Requesens; Don Iohn of Austria; the Arch-Duke Matthias; the Princes of Parma; Count Mansfield; Arch-Duke Albert; Clara Eu∣genia; the Cardinal Infanta; the late Fran. de Mela; Leopol∣dus; Monterey and the rest. They represent the Executions, and Catastrophes of Count Egmont and Horn; the several Massacres which follow'd; the Heroical Acts of Prince William of Nassau; his Assassi∣nation; the Effigies and Exploites of those who pursued that great Persons Victories; what was (or rather indeed what was not done) during the Government of the Duke of Alen∣son, and our Earl of Leicester; the wonderful Successes and Triumphs of Grave Maurice; Henry Frederic, William the Second and Third, the Renowned Princes of Orange, even to the late stupendious Revolution. We have in the Reverses of their Medals, the Surprizes of Brill (which was their first Exploit) and Harlem; the me∣morable Siege of Leyden; the Stratagem at Breda, Sluce, Ber∣gen-op-zoom, Bois le Duc, Venlo, Ruremond, Sas de Gand, Hulst, the later Siege of Maestricht, &c. the famous Leagures and Battles of Ostend, Newport, Seneff, with the Heads and Pour∣traits of Sir Francis and Horatio Veres, and other English He∣ro's their brave Exploits and Successes against Don Iuan, Parma, Spinola, and others the most renowned Captains and Commanders of that Age.
There is a Medal of Prince William the Second's March to Amsterdam, and of whatsoever else has fall'n out of Remarka∣ble for more than an hundred years past. But these, for being acted in their own Country, I mention together, not forgetting such Exploits as their Medals have Consecrated to their Renown abroad upon the Sea, and in other Lands; as a Reverse of the famous Battel of Lepanto; the bold Action at Damiata in Egypt; the Naval Fight in Eighty Eight, upon our dispersion of that Invincible Armada, with that other signal Combat in An. 1639. their surprizing of the Spanish Plate Fleet; several Contests with ours during the late Re∣bellion, with their Admirals Trumps, de Ruyters, Opdams, &c. Engagements with the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and Earl of Sandwich (worthy a kinder fate) and, to our reproach, their Insult at Chatham, and Action at Bergen; Relief of Denmark and Copenhagen, when streight∣ned by the Swedes: there is a large Medalion of de Ruyters Ex∣ploits in Sicily; Succours formerly yielded to other Princes their Allies, as during their Peace with Albert and Isabel, in the affair of Cleve and Iuliers; they stampt Medals of the late Incursions and Excursions of the French An. 1673. since the Peace of Nimegue, and several other Treaties and Conven∣tions since that general one at Munster, and what pass'd with that Martial Bishop; Groningen, Narden, Breda; the Triple League, and several others with Foreign Princes and Po∣tentates. There is a Medal asserting their Liberty of Commerce; of their Expeditions to the Eastern Indies by the Cape of Good Hope; in sum, of their Circum-Navigations of the whole Terrestrial-Terraqueous World, penetrating to the Anti∣podes, and even to the sight of both the Poles: Others of their Wars with the Indian Monarchs; the Establishment of both East and West India Companies; their Colonies, Ci∣ties, Forts, Factories in the Moluccas, Iavan, Ceylon, and o∣ther Spice Islands; their Fisheries and Adventures at Nova Zembla, and attempts on the North west Passages; of their Expeditions and Success of Prince Maurice in Brasile. In short, there's not a Discovery, Colony, Munition, Plan∣tation, Negotiation, Factory or Scale of Commerce, City, Citadel, State-house, Bourse, Church, Hospital, sumptuous Edifice, Harbor, Canal or the like Public Charge, but they
shew in Medal: Witness those struck of the Erection of Leiden, and other Cities into Schools and Universities; the Ef∣figies of their famous Professors and Countrymen, renown'd for their Learning, Souldiers, Statesmen; Medals of the Authors of several Inventions, Arrogating the Arts of Print∣ing, Painting in Oyl; Mills and Machines; their veliferous Chariot, and other great and useful Things. They struck Medals of several Triumphs and magnificent Pomps on sundry occasions, setting forth the Reception and Marriage of the unfortunate Frederic Prince Elector, and La∣dy Elizabeths Landing at Flushing; another, when the King and Queen of Bohemia took their sad flight after the decre∣tory Battel of Prague; they caused Medals to be made of the Refuge which they gave to Mary de Medices, Mother of so many Crown'd Heads when she had none to shelter her own: Of the Nuptials of Prince William the Second with the Daugh∣ter of England; another of the generous Entertainment which they gave our late King Charles the Second at Breda, and of his Transportation into England at his Restoration. To these succeed their Medals of the late Duke of Mon∣mouths Invasion; the Birth of the Prince of Wales; of our Bishops confinement in the Tower of London; as formerly I had found one in memory of the Gun-Powder Conspiracy; a delivery (for ought I know) wholly neglected by us who were most concern'd, with any lasting Record of this nature, or bare Inscription. The late stupendious Expedition, and Descent at Torbay is celebrated in a large Medalion; as is likewise the Recess of King Iames II. and the Coronation following. They stamp'd a Medal upon the memorable Siege of Lon∣don-Derry in Ireland, with sundry more relating to divers o∣ther Passages and Events extraordinary and worthy Record. I have seen a Reverse of the famous Synod at Dort; of the fortunate escape of the learned Grotius (Author of so many incomparable Works) convey'd out of a strong Prison, in∣stead of a Trunk of Books, whilst his unfortunate Compa∣nion Olden-Barnevelt lost his head; of which, as of the un∣happy De Wit and his Brother Cornelius there are Medals. They struck a Medal and several Medalions on the Viola∣tion of the solemn Edict of Nantes, and of the ensuing, and present Persecution of the French Protestants and severities ex∣ercised
upon them; another of the Prophetic Iurieu, and of that of the Count D' Avaux in contradiction to him; and to give them their due, they freely consign to the Record of Medals, as well their disasters as their Triumphs; the Inun∣dations of their Country, and several Conspiracies against it. All these, and many more which we pass over, elaborate∣ly and curiously Design'd, Engraven and Coin'd in Gold, Sil∣ver and Copper, together with apt Inscriptions and Symbols; so that none seem more laudably ambitious either of Im∣mortalizing their Actions, or for the benefit, incitation, and imitation of Posterity, or vindication of Authors and Inven∣tions than this Republique; none more addicted to Public Works and Improvements, therein emulous of, and in some things even transcending the antient Greeks and Rome hereself. It is true, that Iaques de Bie did, in the year 1646. set forth his France Metalique, beginning at Pharamond (accor∣ding to their Genius of Romance) to the Father of the present Monarch Louis XIV. exceedingly well Engraven and Ex∣plain'd, but with little of those fastidious, swelling and in∣sulting Titles, the Flatterers of late have publish'd in a more pompous Volume. But as it is intirely taken up in those sla∣vish Deferences, so to the dishonor of those excellent Uses we have celebrated Medals for; we should altogether have omitted the mention of what we do in this kind, were not some passages so notorious, and some of them so disinge∣nuous, and such as may serve to convince the present, as well as future Ages, that whatsoever impartial History shall here∣after record, of Actions the most inhumanly Barbarous that any Age has produc'd among Christians (or indeed the most Savage Nations) may be justified by the Medals and Inscrip∣tions both Stamp'd, and daily Publish'd to acquire the Name of GRAND, and establish it upon unheard of Ambition, Cruelty and Oppression, and the shedding of human Blood, Banishments and Desolations; which, methinks, is so far from deserving the Honor of Medal, Inscription and Triumph, as the best of Princes have merited them all, by the grateful and immortal Memory of true and lasting Glory; not by Titles only of Piety, Zeal and Justice, but by their Clemency and OB. CIVES. SERVATOS. From the year 1638. to this present, we have the Majo∣rity, Coronation, Marriage, Children; Education of this
Great Monarch; his Sieges, Conquests, Buildings, Acade∣mies, Treaties, Truces, Leagues, Conventions, Parliaments, Laws, Abolitions, Military Orders, Marishals, Colonies, Forts, Triumphs, &c. It would require a Volumne but to recite a little of them all; nor indeed am I willing to believe them half approv'd of by the Prince; tho by those Royal Flatterers Perault, Carpentier, La Chapel, and other Court-Wits they seem to be, who have labour'd those Inscriptions, divers of them appearing so boldly prophane, and with Attributes of Omnipotence; others so fulsomly Arrogant and Vain-glo∣rious, and some again scandalous; mean, and trifling; which, tho added to the French second Edition, are yet Historical of considerable Passages. To give a Specimen of but few. There is a Medal representing the King standing between the two Cities of Genoa and Luxemburg, holding the World on the point of his Sword: Victori perpetuo, ob expugnatas urbes ducentas. That is, Pyrgopolinices like, laying whole Cities and Coun∣tries in Ashes and Desolation. Another, Rheno, Batavisque una superatis 1672. upon that surprizing Invasion, and since more fatal one Ultimo Aditu Hostibus Germanis Galliae, &c. and actually, during all the Blood-shed and Violation of the solemnest Treaties, Pacatori Orbis; which brings to mind that Raillant Medal Galienae Augustae, with the Legend Pax ubique, when, through his negligent Government, the whole Empire was torn in pieces by Thirty Tyrants. Thus now, as of old, Ubi solitudinem faciunt, Pacem appellant. But what is most stupendious Ludovicus Magnus XIV. &c. The Re∣verse two Columns upon one Pedestal, one of which is thrown down, with the Edict of Nantes lying by on the ground upon the other is ingraven Romain ou Rebel, Papist or Re∣bel: On the Pedestal Edictum Nantesium, Nimesiumque abro∣gatum est mense Octob. 1685. In another Haeresis extincta E∣dictum Octobris 1685. And contrary to the most Sacramen∣tal Obligations and Acknowledgments of the good and great Services his Protestant Subjects had done the Crown, reward∣ed by Templis Calvinianorum eversis, with that Triumphal one of Vicies centena Millia Calvinianae Ecclesiae revocata, &c. For having converted Two Millions of Protestants by a Million of Dragoons; such terrible Inscriptions are extant of Dioclesian, (Nomine Christianorum Deleto, &c.) but of no Heathen Emperor else that I can learn.
I confess when I turn over Code Louis XIII. from An. 1598 for now almost an hundred years, comprehending at large all these Edicts with that solemnity Reiterated, Verified and Registred in several Parliaments, and other Sovereign Courts, confirmed and granted under the Hands and Seals of Henry the Fourth, and all his Successors since; together with the Oaths of the Supreme Magistrates, and Judges, to observe it as a Law perpetual and irrevocable, as if Enacted by the Medes and Persians, without any exception. I cannot, I say, but be astonish'd at what is since done, and made boast of not only in time of peace, but without the least provocation of his suffering, and (by his own confession) meritorious Subjects! But such is this Monarchs pleasure; —Stat pro Ratione, Voluntas. But the following are modest, Sufficit Orbi. They radiate the King with the Sun-beams (nor do they more in their Pictures of God the Father) as if alone suffici∣ent to govern the Universe; Non alio cerni Majestas se velit ore, Non aliud Mundus poscat habere caput. Comparing his Majesty to that illustrious Planet in no fewer than seventy five Devises and Inscriptions. To which add (what most of all they seem fond of) Nec pluribus impar. But which was indeed the Impress of Philip the Second of Spain (as already we have shew'd) written about a Globe of the World; which, how since from so glorious a Rise and Meridian it is declin'd and ready to Set, might be a Do∣cument, and shew how short and transitory all worldly Pro∣sperity is; but, to prevent that fate, we are told in another Reverse, Nec cesso, nec erro. And, Caesar-like, in another, Ut vidi, vici; nay, far exceeding all the Caesars, Satis est vidisse, kills with his very looks; and so does the King of Serpents the Basilisk: And in another Solo lumine terret, sending forth Rays not like the benign Sun to light and comfort, but to burn and destroy. Thus in another upon the Conquest of the Franche Compte, where the Reverse represents a Mountain of Snow dissolving at the Suns approach; and of the same kind that unsatiably Ambitious one, Nusquam meta mihi. I know no bounds.
Swallowing all under the pretence of Appennages; which re∣minds me again of another of the former Philips, Non suf∣ficit Orbis. The Reverse a Spanish Courser unbridl'd, and galloping round the Globe of the Earth. But we have seen how lamentably he was tired before he came to his Journeys end, within eight or nine years after. But what may not he do, whose Law is his Will? For so 'tis declar'd in the Medal Bombarding of Genoa: QUOD. LIBET. LICET. What I list is Law. Whereas in truth, Pauciora licet ei quàm ulli, cui licet omnia. These, and the like, exceeding all that's Modest, truely Great, and Christian, makes me with good reason question; whether these Medals were ever so much as seen, or approv∣ed of by Le Roy Tres Chrestienne, the most Christian King. Wherefore, after all, I cannot but impute them all to that bane of Princes, and worst of Subjects, Sycophants and Flatte∣rers; who, to shew what he has perform'd by Sea, as well as at Land, Tu Dominaris Potestati Maris: Ut Maris Imperium Virtute paratum, Religione tueretur, Seminarium Brestense extruxit: ET PATRIBUS SOCIETATIS IESU Administrandam commisit, An. 1685. Under whom to be sure it cannot but prosper, unless they chance to meet an English Fleet, which will not so easily part with this Dominion; 'tis however a glorious Boast, and should make us look about us, whilst we see in another Reverse Bello & Commercio Nautarum LX Millium Conscripto 1685. That he has Threescore Thousand Seamen in Pay, &c. We pass over the Sub umbra alarum Sueciae; the Sidera Lodovicia; Satellites, about Saturn, &c. but must not omit that glorious Medalion of the Adorations paid by the Ora∣tors Regis Siam, 1686. resembling that which we read, and see pictured of the Queen of Sheba, when she came from the utmost ends of the Earth, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, Ob Famam Virtutis, as tho a greater than Solomon were here. There are others representing the Juncture of the Ocean and Mediterranean; the mighty Aquaeduct he is leading through Rocks and Mountains to his Palace of Versailles; attempts
truly Great; and like another Alexander (which I do not reprove) VIRO IMMORTALI. We sum up all in that Epigraph on the Reverse of another illustrious Medalion struck in the year M. DC. LXXXVII. LVDOVICO. MAGNO. QVI. BATAVIS. DEBELLATIS. HISPANIS TOTIES DEVICTIS. HOSTIVM. CLASSIBVS. FVGATIS. ET. INCENSIS TOT. FERE. EVROPAE. CONIVRATAE. ET. FOEDERATAE. PACEM. DEDIT. IMPERAVIT. That is, in short, of mere pity, having vanquish'd all the Powers of Europe, he commanded her to accept of the Peace which he vouchsafed to offer, Regna superstat, Qui regnare jubet.Sidon. A∣poll. Paneg. Ant. Aug. Or, as another has writen under his Effigies, Nutu, Rex stabunt Regna cadentque tuo. —At his nod, all Kingdoms do stand and fall. Lovis quotorzieme, Roy de France, les delices, & la terreur du genre Humain. Lewis the Fourteenth, King of France, the delight (truly said of that incomparable Prince Titus Vespasian) and terror of Mankind: Which I think was never recorded or said in Pa∣negyric of any Christian Prince, or perhaps Pagan before, excepting Atila the Hum; which makes me persist, and still to doubt, and even to hope, that these flattering Titles are the product only of those abject and servile Parasites, the Pest of Courts and of Princes. And of this I am the more con∣firm'd, by the deserv'd Censure which I find given of the Bat. Relat. Hist. Relat. 2. p. 54. Publisher, to disabuse the curious Mons. Schermeier, who valu'd and look'd upon his Collection of a great deal of this stuff, as a Treasure to his Cabinet of Medals. And yet what is all this to the Medalion of the Statue E∣rected by the Duke de la Feuillade in the Place Victoire? The egregious Vanity of which (not to say Profaneness) with all that Herba Parietaria of Emblems, and Symbols and Adulatory Devices about it, is publish'd and makes up a whole Volume too long here to recite, as they are design'd by those great Masters le Brun, Mignard, Varin, Cheron, Roussel, Bernard, Molart, de la Hay, and the rest. Those who thirst to see, and would be entertained with abundance more of this kind of Pageantry, may please to peruse the History of Lewis the Great, set forth in a pompous Folio by the Iesuit Menestrier, 1691. whose De∣dication thus bespeaks him.
To Lewis the Grand. The Invincible, the Wise, the Conquerour, the Wonder of his Age, Terror of his Enemies; Lover of his People: Arbi∣ter of Peace and War: Administrator of the Universe, and Worthy to be its Master, &c. are offer'd with profound Submission, the Medals of an Accomplish'd HERO: Presenting him the History of a Reign Worthy Immortality, and the Veneration of all Ages. To which somebody has unhappily Subjoyn'd by way of Reprisal Les Heros de la Ligue, ou la Procession Monacale, conduite par Lovis XIV. pour la Conversion des Protestans, de son Roy∣aume, &c. In good earnest, who can seriously allow any Countenance to this Abuse of Medals and Inscriptions, which I look upon and esteem as the noblest Repositories of great and serious Matters? So as I have frequently wish'd, that we of this Nation had oftner imitated the laudable Examples of those Wise and Noble People, who (as we have shew'd) suffer'd nothing of truly Great and Worthy to pass, which they did not transmit to Posterity by Medals and Inscriptions; Modest and Pertinent, and far from that turgid Vanity and gross A∣dulation, as to the most perennial and lasting Records. Nor does this Excess of Flatteries reign among the Wits and Poets only, or such as Blaspheme for Bread; but is gotten among the Clergy too: nay and crept into the Monasteries and Cells of the very Minimi-Monks and self-denying Orders, without any Reprehension or Notice at all taken by their Su∣periours, to discountenance or repress it: Witness their late publick and famous Theses, in which Intrepidly and sans re∣serve, they compare a Mortal Prince, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, to the True and Eternal God, no fewer than twelve times; ascribing to him all those Attributes and Perfections, which the Holy Scriptures make only due to the Divine Majesty; thereby inferring, that the Transcendent Wisdom of the most Christian King, is Argument alone sufficient to Convince all Atheists of the Existence of the Deity, and of his Angels too:
which, whilst these meek and creeping Souls, who profess so much Evangelical Simplicity (and would above all others, be distinguish'd for their extraordinary Sanctity) presume to affirm; gives not only great scandal to others, but to some worthy Persons also of that Communion; wondering that the Bishops and Clergy (who are set to be the continual Pro∣tectors and Guardians of those Boundaries which are plac'd to se∣parate that which is due to God alone from that of Caesars) should suffer such Bold and Impious Theses to escape the Spunge and Index, so worthily perstring'd byLa Morau de Tacite de la Flater. Paris, 1686. Monsieur Amelot in his learned Treatise of Flatterers, upon the Morals of Tacitus, to which I refer the Reader: But so (as one well observes) the Great Alexander, by his Adulators, was made at last to believe, not only to be himself a God; but that he had power to make Hephestion a God also; so True is that, Nil est, quod credere de se Non possit,Iuven. Sat. IV. cum laudatur Diis aequa potestas. Once equal Men to Gods, there's nothing they Refuse to credit Flatterers can say. But of this Pagan and Slavish Adulation of Princes, see co∣pious Instances in Casaubon's Animadver. in Athenaeum, lib. vi. c. c. 14, 15, &c. In the mean time, let not yet the ill use which two or three Prodigies of Men, and their Parasites have made of them (for we read but of few exceeding that number, even amongst the Domitians and Pagan Emperors) who prevented those venerable Monuments of the bravest Actions; and were therefore noted with Infamy; had their Statues broken, their Medals call'd in, and Effigies defac'd: I say let them not discourage us from Imitating those Illustrious Princes and States, who have modestly deliver'd to us many brave and profitable Notices, by their Medals, which had else utterly, and perhaps irrecoverably been lost to the Learned World: For so the Lives, and worthy Memories of several Great Emperors are left and transmitted to us (as those of Iulius, Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Nerva, Trajan, Antoninus, M. Aurelius, Septimus Severus, &c. with innumerable Rare and Remarkable Things and Passages of their Reigns, by the Study and Industry of many learned Authors upon this Subject.
Since then the greatest Nations for Renown and Virtue have been thus celebrated, and incited to brave and glorious Actions, by having the Memories of them, among other last∣ing Monuments and Records, thus consign'd: It would raise Pity, with just Indignation, to find a Kingdom so fertile of Gallant and Illustrious Persons, so poorly furnished, to shew (by any accomplish'd History or Series hitherto extant) what has been done and atchiev'd by Ancestors truly Great, and permit me to add, worthy the Consideration in Medal; and whose Effigies alone were desirable for their Virtues, equalling many of them to the most Celebrated of the Antients, and deserving the stamp of the most precious and lasting Metals. I grieve to find so very few Medals of this kind among us, in an Age so polite and knowing, during all the Changes, Revolutions, and signal Events either of this, or foreign Countries, where we have been concern'd in Voyages and Discoveries, Conquests, Colonies and Plantations: So many prodigious Fights and Conflicts at Land and Sea, wherein those Heroes have signaliz'd themselves comparably with any which former Ages can produce: For what People of the Universe can boast of greater Men for Arms and Arts? But to name them, and yet neglect them, would be more to our Reproach. For besides some Coronation-Pieces and Medals stamp'd on the Births, or Nuptials of two or three late Princes, &c. We have ('till Charles the First of Blessed Memory) almost nothing to shew which can well pretend to Medal: 'Tis true (speak∣ing of the Barbarous Ages) we have summarily mention'd what British, Saxon and other later Coins remain among our Modern Collections, genuine, and of good Antiquity, as to this Island (exceedingly well engraven in Mr. Speed's Chronicle from the Coins themselves, collected by Sir Robert Cotton, and now augmented, and improv'd in the new Edition of Camden) without Reverse, Shield or Inscription; besides perchance a rude Cross, Name of a King, and sometimes of the Mint, with that vulgar Sentence Dieu & mon Droit, in use 'till King Iames the First, and the Union with Scotland made some little alteration; none of which are to be look'd upon, or consider'd as Medals, but as Money only. My worthy and learned FriendNat. Hist. cap. X. Dr. Plot tells us of a Coin, or Token rather, bearing the Head of Edward Con∣fessor, somewhere found in his Perambulation of Oxfordshire,
which by an hole or appendant Ring, he conjectures to have been given to wear about the Necks of such as had been touch'd for the King's-Evil; that Religious Prince being it seems, the first who had the Charisma and Sanative Gift, de∣rived to his Successors Kings of England: But this, tho' for its Antiquity, (and as it related to that particular Effect) it deserv'd our Notice; yet is it neither to be reckon'd amongst our Medals, as having neither Legend nor Reverse. To commence then with the very first and earliest that it has been my hap to see of Historical, and which may pass for Medal: A Golden Royal of Edward the Third, repre∣sents him standing compleatly Arm'd in the middle of a Ship at Sea; holding a Sword in his right hand, the Shield with the Arms of England and France, in his left: The Royal Standard arbour'd, and displaid at the Stern, &c. Justifying as well his Title to the Dominion of the Sea, as Soveraignty of France: This Medal, for so I call it (tho' it also pass for Money) being purely Historical, appears to have been struck about the time of the Treaty of Peace between that glori∣ous Monarch, and King Iohn of France, in behalf of them∣selves, and their eldest Sons; namely, Edward the Black Prince, and Charles Duke of Normandy, the French King be∣ing Prisoner. This Treaty, dated the 8th of May, An. 1360. near Chartres in Britany, was confirm'd at Calais in Picardy; whereupon Hostages were given us by the French King, who was himself obliged to come in Person, and pay the Ransom we have formerly made mention of. The Medal follows.
Medal 1. EDWRD. DI. GR. REX. NGL. Z, FRN. DNS. IB. Reverse, A Rose (whence also call'd the Rose Noble) with many Rays extending to four Lions passant; over them a Ducal Coronet, and as many Flour de Lyes in a Compartment of eight Gode∣roons, Inscrib'd, Which some Interpret Enigmatically of the Secret of the fa∣mous Elixir, by which the Gold was made: Others for an Amulet, superstitiously applying the Words of the Gospel, which tender'd the Wearer thereof Invulnerable. But this Remark is obvious, that we find no such Pretence by any Authentic Medal or Claim of the French Kings, or of any o∣ther Potentate: That Stamp in the late Wapen or Arms of Zeland, being nothing to this purpose; as Importing only the Si∣tuation of those few Islands: concerning which, and of all that is said of Allectus to corroborate our Claim and antient Right, see the Learned Selden's Mare Clausum, lib. II. cap. 25. There was another of Henry V. and Queen Mary of less Value, which likewise bare the same Shield and a Cross in the midst of a Ship; Reverse, St. Michael and the Dragon; but neither of these, or of the former have I seen in Silver. There was also Golden Money stamp'd at Paris, and in Normandy by the same Henry, bearing the Angel's Salutation of the Blessed Virgin; but for that they contain nothing of Medal, I pass them over. Another goodly Medal of the same Metal (as I am assured, but have not seen) and of considerable Value, bearing the Effigies of King HenryWho first  the Arms of France in Silver as Ed. III. did in Gold. VII. and his Queen joyning hands, with this Verse, Iungimus optatas sub Amico saedere dextras. the Reverse was not told me.
Medal II. His Son and Successors Effigies half Fac'd (which was neither usual in his Coins or Picture) arm'd in Bust; a flat Bonnet on his Head, a Ducal Coronet in a void Place behind. HENRICUS. VIII. ANG. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse. A pensile Cataracta or Portcluse and Coronet between the Chains. SECURITAS. ALTERA. with relation to his locking up the Seas; as was also after∣wards on the Coin made for the East-India Company. This Medalion was stamp'd both in Gold and Silver, at what time Henry had the Emperour Maximilian in Pay, and Militating under his Banner,Henricut Barlandus in Chron. Belg. at the taking of Tournay from Lewis XII. of France, Ann. 1513. as the whole Triumph is incomparably set forth, in that inestimable Painting of Hans Holbein, still fresh and at large among his Majesty's Pictures at Whitehall. Of the same date we find another of Iames IV. of Scotland.
Medal III. With his Effigies in Bust, Arm'd; about him the Order of St. Michael crown'd with a Crown of two Bars. IACOBVS. IIII. DEI. GRATIA. REX. SCOTORVM. Reverse. A Doric Column upon a Bank or Rock, near the Sea, having on its Capitol a Ianus, or two-headed Figure twin'd with Laurel, regarding opposite Capes or Promontories jetting into the Sea. Over the Biceps, VTRVNQVE. Which Medal was it seems coin'd in that fatal Year this young Prince was (together with a great slaughter of Scotish Nobility) slain, Invading England during the absence of our Henry, then upon that famous Expedition above-mention'd. A Fourth is indeed that truly Remarkable one, being a Medalion with the Effigies of Henry half-fac'd in his usual Bonnet, Furr'd Gown, and invaluable Collar of Rubies, sold since abroad to give the Royal Family Bread. Medal IV.
The Legenda taking up a double Circle. HENRICVS. OCTA. ANGLIAE. FRANC. ET. HIB. REX. FIDEI. DEFENSOR. ET. In the second inner Circle, IN. TERR. ECCLE. ANGLI. ET. HIB. SVB. CHRIST. CAPVT. SVPREMVM. Note, That the Circles made into four equal parts, have the Rose, Portcluse, Fleur-de-Lys and Harp crown'd. Reverse. Londini 1545. I omit the Henry Noble, little different from that of Henry the Third. Edward VI. Of King Edward VI. I remember not to have seen any Me∣dal, save that of his Money, which is indeed elegantly stampt; though I cannot but think some Memorial must needs have been of that hopeful and virtuous Prince; whilst in the mean time, other Countries did not fail of taking occasion to cele∣brate an Exploit of theirs against him, in a Medal struck by Henry II. of France, when Bulloin was delivered to him.
V. The Reverse was Andromeda's being freed from the Monster. The Words, upon the unexpectedness of the Surprise: But this for not be∣ing to our Honour (though it concluded in a considerable sum of Money, and a Treaty of Marriage intended to be be∣tween a Daughter of Henry and Edward) I only mention, as belonging to the History of his short Reign. VI Queen Mary. Of Q. Mary there was a very large Medalion struck upon her restoring the Roman Religion: her Head is dressed in
plain Coiffure (as she's commonly painted) with a Lace, or Fillet set with Pearls and Precious Stones, Inscrib'd, MARIA. I. REG. ANGL. FRANC. ET. HIB. FIDEI. DEFENSATRIX. Reverse. Represents Peace with a Radiant Crown, half-sitting on a Curule-Chair and kneeling on a Cube: in her Right hand a Torch setting fire to an heap of Arms and Trophies, before a Temple à l' Antique; in her Left, branches of Palm and Lau∣rel, as delivering several People out of a Dungeon covered with smoak and flames, under which runs a stream of Water; 'tis supposed in allusion to that of Psal. lxv. Transivimus per ignem & aquam, & eduxisti nos in refrigerium, which the Do∣ctors of that Church usually apply to Purgatory. CECIS. VISVS. TIMIDIS. QVIES. This Medalion is said to have been stampt Ann. 1553. soon after the Defeat of the Duke of Northumberland, and the Ri∣sing in Suffolk; upon which followed her Coronation, and at which Solemnity there were scatter'd Ryals of broad Gold, The Queen Vested in the Regalia and Inthron'd. VII MARIA. D. G. ANG. FRA. Z. HIB. REGINA. M.D.LIII.
About the Reverse, Which is a plain Escutcheon of the Arms of England and France quarter'd, and plac'd in the Center of a Rose full blown. A. DNO. FACTVM. EST. ISTVD. Z. EST. MIRA. IN. OCVL. NRIS. There are of this Queen divers Coins of Money, wherein she is join'd with her Husband Philip II, in some whereof he has the Title of Angliae Rex. The Reverse Bellerophon killing the Chimera, representing the Suppression of the Western Insurrection of Wyat and Carew Ann. 1554. as also that of St. Quintin, Ann. 1557. The Angelot of this Queen bears the Arms of England quar∣tered with France; the Shield fix'd to a Cross erected in the middle of a Ship at Sea, on each side of the Cross M 58. the Reverse, Michael and the Dragon. Queen Elizabeth. During the long, prosperous and prudent Reign of Queen Elizabeth, I find very few Medals; at which I the more won∣der, when I consider how many famous Exploits and signal Passages the History of her Life are full of: The very first which I have seen, and that I think may properly come into this Recension as it concerns the Story of that Renown'd Queen, is a Medal of Mary Queen of Scotland 1588. and her Hus∣band, whose Effigies are Face to Face, a Crown between them. VIII. FRAN. ET. MAR. D. G. R. R. SCOTOR. DELPHIN. VIEN.
Reverse. Assuming the Arms of England and Scotland: in another (which I could never light on) those of the Dolphin,Camden An∣nal. l. 1. which was laid as a Capital Crime to the Charge of that unfortunate Lady; another with those of France and Scotland only, and a Reverse of the initial Letters of their Names, &c. with these Words, Vicit Leo de Tribu Iuda. 1560. which because they little concern us I might pretermit; the other being in the Year of Q. Elizabeth's entring upon her Reign, but of which I find (as yet) no Inauguration Medal, or any besides, 'till the Year 1574. when there was made an ample Oval of her Majesty in Bust, and about a double Circle. IX ELIZABETHA. D. G. FR. ET. HIB. REGINA. HEIMIHI. QVOD. TANTO. VIRTVS. PERFVSA. DECORE NON. HABET. AETERNOS. INVIOLATA. DIES Reverse. A Phenix rising out of flames, over its head E. R. crown'd. FELICES. ARABES. MVNDI. QVIBVS. VNICA. PHOENIX. PHOENICEM. REPARAT. DEPERIVNDO. NOVAM. O. MISEROS. ANGLOS. MVNDI. QVIBVS. VNICA. PHOENIX. VLTIMA. FIT. NOSTRO. TRISTIA. FATA. SOLO.
This Medal is said to have been struck, to express the ex∣traordinary Affection of the People towards this incomparable Princess; but not by any publick Order, as was that ever memorable and Triumphant Piece of the Defeat of the Spa∣nish Armada (Anno Mirabili 1588.) which in its Antic and Fore-Table presents us with X. A formal Convention of the Pope and Cardinals, Bishops, Emperour, K. Philip II. and other Potentates in their Robes of State, sitting in Consultation; bound about their Eyes and Blindfold; the ends of the Fillets sticking up (mistaken by Monsieur Bigot for Asses Ears) on their several Heads, on which this Inscription. O. COECAS. HOMINVM. MENTES. O. PECTORA. COECA. and about the Circle, DVRVM. EST. CONTRA. STIMVLOS. CALCITRARE. In Postica. A Fleet of Ships dash'd against Rocks and sinking. VENI. VIDE. VIVE. 1588. About the Circle, TV. DEVS. MAGNVS. ET. MAGNA. FACIS. TV. SOLVS. DEVS.
This Medal weigh'd in Gold near three Ounces. Speed tells Chron. us there were several more stampt upon this signal Deliverance and Defeat, with the Words, Impius fugit nemine sequente. The next in order of time, is one which those of Zeland coin'd in Silver, with an English Inscription. Glory to God alone. The Reverse a Ship sinking: the Exerge, I Came, Went, Was. Ann. 1588. Besides this, there is that of the Confederate States of the Belgick Provinces, when the Queen received them into her Roy∣al Protection; the History whereof being so fully set down by our Learned Camden, I only present in Medal. XI Two Hands Manacled, and lifted up towards an Heart Crown'd, on each side whereof P. B. (Provinc. Belg.) and over the Chain between the Hands, SPES. About the Circle, COR. NOBILE. AFFLICTIS. OPITVLATVR.
Reverse, 1586. BELGIA. HISPAN. TYRANNIDE. OPPRESSA. PORTV. SVBITA. VI. OBRVTA. AVXIL. A. DEO. ET. SER. ANGLIAE. REG. EXPECT. We have in a Second, their delivering of the Sword (En∣signs of Sovereignty) to her Majesty seated on her Royal Throne, and receiving their Oaths of Fidelity and Allegiance, Represented by the Book, &c. XII. E. REGINA. EST. ALTRIX. ESVRIENTIVM. EVM. 1586. Reverse. Iehova in Hebrew Characters, with a Clowd and Flames about it, and a Naked Sword pointing up. SERMO. DEI. QVOVIS. ENSE. ANCIPI. ACVTIOR. Another bears the Arms of Zeland, representing a Lion e∣merging out of the Sea. XIII LVCTOR. ET. EMERGO. 1586.
The same, environ'd with the Ensigns of Eight more of the Provinces. AVTORE. DEO. FAVENTE. REGINA. This Medal stampt in Gold,R Dinothus Pet. Operar. Amstelodam in Opera Chronograph. was strow'd (says my Author) among the People, in Recognition of the Assistance they re∣ceived from the Queen. There were several more Stampt and Publish'd by that op∣press'd People of the Low-Countries; which because they have so ingenuously acknowledg'd in their Histoire Metalique, we do not repeat. These were coin'd Ann. 1586. with another, a∣bout Fifteen Years after, as appears by the Date, very elegant∣ly and curiously Ingraven, surrounding the Queen's Effigies with this Inscription, XIV. VNVM. A. DEO. DVOBVS. SVSTINEO. Reverse. her Majesty's Cypher Crown'd, 1601. AFFLICTORVM. CONSERVATRIX. Which I mention, for that it appears to have been stampt in England, by the Queen's express Order: for I willingly re∣ceive none for Genuine (and fit to come into this Series) save what had the Allowance of the Regnant Power, or were o∣therwise Notorious and Matter of Fact: Such as is that which Robert Dudley, the Great Earl of Leicester, caus'd to be made in Gold, and distributed among his Friends; representing the Complaints were made of him; at which, having born himself more Imperiously than his Commission from the Queen allow∣ed (and for which he was recall'd) he took high Offence;
presuming that the great Power they had invested him with, would have justified his Behaviour. That it was indeed ve∣ry ample, we have the Authority of an excellent Historian of their own. —Praefectura totius Belgicae,H. Grotius Lib. V. An. al. 1586. qualis Caroli temporibus fuerat, & omne Terrae, Marique Regimen, cum Pecuniae publicae Administra∣tione: Senatus ita illi additus; ut Adsessores è Nominatis ipse le∣geret, & quodammodo omnium suffragiis unus aequaretur. The Earl of Leicester (says Grotius) was look'd upon as the sole Restorer of their lost and divided Fortune,—So as the Belgians offer him the Government of the Low Countries in as ample manner, as in the time of Charles the Emperour; to∣gether with the Absolute Command at Sea and Land; the or∣dering and disposing of the Publick Fisque, and in the Senate, Power to Elect Assessors out of such as should be Nominated, with Definitive Voice in all their publick Suffrages, &c. But to our Medal. XV. The Earl's Effigies in Bust Arm'd; ROBER TVS. DVDLEVS. COM. LEYC. BELG. GVBER. Reverse, a Sheppard's Dog, looking disdainfully back upon the Flock he was leaving and going from: Under the Dog's Legs, Exurg. INVITVS. DESERO. About the Circle, NON. GREGEM. SED. INGRATOS.
Divers more of this nature were on both sides retorted a little Sarcastical, which I chuse rather to pass by, than that which follows; to show how wonderfully Interests and Poli∣ticks are chang'd in Europe, within less than an Age; and the House of Austria (which we now behold so despicably low) gave Terror to a Monarch, who is now culminating and growing up in its place. XVI The Medal of the Arms of England, France and Belgia u∣nited with a three-sold Knot, and let down by a hand out of the Clouds; represent a Tripe League against Spain, upon the Al' Arme menacing those three Nations, on the Surprise of Calais, which was Ann. 1596. RVMPITVR. HAVD. FACILE. Reverse. a Navy of great Ships at Sea, over which the Name Iehova, inviron'd with a Glory, and this Epigraph, QVID. ME. PERSEQVERIS. 1596. Nor may we forget that other most worthy of her Memo∣ry, for having reform'd the Money, and brought it to the present Test and Standard.
XVII. In gilt Metal, the Queen in full face, Crown'd and dress'd in her large Ruff, in Bust, as usually pictur'd, Inscribed, ET. ANGLORVM. GLORIA. Reverse, Moneta, sitting with a pair of Scales in her Right hand, and a Sword in her Left; Clouds and Rays over head, with a Star or Sterling between two Mullets in the Exerge: About the Circle, BENE. CONSTITVTA. RE. NVMARIA: by which appears what early care was taken of that, which by us has been so long neglected As for any other great Persons in this Queens Reign, (than which none, since it was a Nation, had greater and wiser men managing Publick Affairs) I find one onely Medal, with the Arms of Sackvil within the Garter, &c. Superscribed, T. SACKVIL. B. D. BUCH. Ang. Thes. Eq. Aurat. Reverse,There was a∣nother of R. Cecil, Ld. Treas. also, with a Re∣verse of his Arms only. a Lyon. SEMPER. FIDELIS. 1602. in which Year that most Renowned Queen departed this Life, and made room for her Successor,
King Iames I. The first Monarch of Great Britain, whom we behold in his Imperial Robes, Ihrone and Titles. JACOBVS. D. G. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, the Arms of Great Britain placed in the middle of a large Rose, just like to that we described already of Q. Mary, and with the same Inscription, which I therefore omit: it was coin'd in Gold only, and sometimes (though rarely) receiv'd as Money: Another in Silver. XVIII the King's Effigies depicted in a narrow taling Band, a Lau∣rel about his Head; Bust Arm'd. JAC. I. BRIT. CAE. AVG. HAE. CAESARVM. CAE. D. D. Reverse, a Lyon Rampant Crown'd holding a Beacon on fire in his Paw, a Wheat-sheaf in his left. ECCE. PHAOS. POPVLIQ. SALVS. This Medal is said by Scaliger, to have been scattered as a Largess at his Coronation,Scaligerand but was afterwards it seems call'd in and re-coin'd; whether for the Caesar Caesarum (which that Critic a little ridicules) or for what other Cause I pretend not to judge.
XIX. Effigies, JACOBVS. DG. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB REX. Reverse. HENRICVS. ROSAS. JACOBVS. REGNA. alluding to the Union of the two Houses of York and Lancaster; represented by the Red and White Rose, on which Iohn Owen bestows a Witty Epigram. Lib. 3. Effigies, JAC. I. TOTIVS. INS. BRIT. IMP. ET. FRANC. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse. The Kings Arms Crown'd, JVGI. CONCORDIA. FLORENT.
Another in Silver. XXI. The King on Horseback. JACOBVS. SEXTVS. REX. SCOTORVM. Reverse a Hand from Heaven holding a Sword pointing up to a Crown, with that Worthy Saying of the Emperour Trajan, delivering a Sword to the Pretor; PER. ME. SI. MEREOR. IN. ME. But this I suppose must have been struck in Scotland, as per∣haps might that which follows, being the only Medal I have seen of that Hopeful and Beloved Prince Henry. XXII. Effigies in full-Face, Arm'd to the Bust. HENRICVS. PRINCEPS.
Reverse, his Arms with the Label and Coronet over it, Beams out of the Clouds. FAX. MENTIS. HONESTAE. GLORIA. agreeable to his Magnanimous and Princely Mind. XXIII This Medal of his Mother Queen Ann, for the Elegancy of the Dress, and that it is Rare, &c. ANNA. D. G. REGINA. MAG. BRIT. FR. ET. HIB. FILIA. ET. SOROR. REGV. DANIAE. Reverse, the Arms of Denmark, with two Scutcheons of Pretence, under a Coronet. About the Circle, ASTVTIA. FALLAX. TVTIOR. INNOCENTIA. XIV
CHARLES the First. His Effigies Crown'd, Vested in the Garter, Robes, Collar, and Ruff. CAROLVS. I. D. G. MAG. BRITAN. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, An Arm out of the Clouds arm'd, and holding a Sword. DONEC. PAX. REDDITA. TERRIS. Exurge, CORON. 2. FEB. 1626. Being for ought I have seen, the onely Inauguration-Medal, XXV. The King's Effigies as in the former. CAROLVS. I. DG. ANG. SCOT. FRAN. ET. HIB REX. FIDEI. DEF Reverse. The Atchievement, or Arms of his Kingdoms in the same Es∣cutcheon. In another joyn'd to it, the Arms of France Crown∣ed; between the Points or Base of the Shield, the Queen's Cy∣pher Crown'd.
HENER. MAR. BORBON. D. G. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REG. XXVI. The King in his Ruff, George in a Ribbon about his Neck, looking on the Queen drest in her Hair curl'd up short, with something like a knot of Ribbons on the top: about her shoul∣ders a Band or Gorget plaited and standing up spred like a Fan; a Necklace of Pearl, another rope of Pearl above, hanging down before her Breast; Clouds and a Glory over their heads. CH. MAG. ET. HEN. MA. BRIT. REX. ET. REG. Reverse. Cupid strewing Flowers, Roses and Lilies, Clouds and Rays above. Exurge, 1625. About the Circle, FVNDIT. AMOR. LILIA. MIXTA. ROSIS. This appears to have been a Nuptial Medal. There is yet one more struck three Years after, which, since by the Date it might perhaps have been upon Occasion of an Expedition for the relief of Rochel, I here subjoin.
XXVII Effigies. K. Charles I. in complete Armor on Horseback, much like our fairest Half-Crown Pieces of his Reign, the Inscription alter'd. O. REX. DA. FACILEM. CVRSVM. Reverse. The Arms of England, Scotland, France and Ireland within an Oval Shield crown'd, the Year of our Lord 1628. About the Circle, ATQVE. AVDACIBVS. ANNVE. COEPTIS. upon a second Attempt to have reliev'd that City, fatal to the Great Duke of Buckingham. To this I subjoin another small Medal. XXVIII. The King, Bust, bare-headed in his Ruff. CAR. D. G. ANG. SCO. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse the Scepter and Trident lying cross, and bound together by a loose Knot. REGIT. VNVS. VTROQVE.
Another. XXIX. Effigies Naked to the Breast, crown'd with Laurel; his left Lock of Hair appearing, as then the Mode was to wear it long∣er than the other, and which Fashion his Majesty kept till the Civil War began. CAROLVS. I. D. G. ANGL. SCOT. FR. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, Three Crowns in a Knot of as many Bowes. VNIT AE. INVICT AE. Another. XXXI Effigies Crown'd in the Garter, Robes, wearing a Falling Band; which new Mode succeeded the cumbersom Ruff: but neither did the Bishops or Iudges give it over so soon, the Lord Keeper Finch being, I think, the very first.
CAROLVS. D. G. SCOTIAE. ANGLIAE. FR. ET. HIB. REX. In this Scottish Coronation-Medal are both the Orders, that of the Garter and of the Thistle. Reverse, HINC. NOSTRAE. CREVERE. ROSAE. by that prudent Match of Margarite Daughter of Henry VII. Married to Iames IV. of Scotland, Uniting the White and Red Roses. Exurge. CORON. 18. lunii. 1633. To this I add another, in whose Reverse is the Thistle only, as growing out of the Ground. XXXI After which returning out of Scotland, we see the King on Horseback, Crown'd, and in complete Armor, pointing with his Commanding-staff to a Providential Eye in the Clouds. CAROLVS. AVGVSTISS. ET. INVICTISS. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. MONARCHA. Reverse, The Sun in his Meridian over the City of London. SOL. ORBEM. REDIENS. SIC. REX. ILLVMINAT. VERBEM. 1633.
We do not Insert such Medals as were struck upon the Nuptials of the Lady Mary Daughter of England, and her Illustrious Husband, Son of the Valiant, Wife, and Fortunate Henry Frederic Prince of Orange, &c. hapning in those Intervals already set forth: But return to this Triumphant Medal, representing this glorious Cavalcade following, not many years after (which my self beheld) with the Universal Acclamati∣ons of then the Happiest People under Heaven: A short Par∣liament following, and a too long one after it, shewed quam breves Populi Romani amores; and how uncertain all worldly Prosperity is: For that unhappy War ensuing, soon chang'd the glorious Scene to the Miseries and Confusions, which wan∣tonly, and without all Reason, were brought upon a Nation: After which happy time (which had been much in Queen Elizabeths; all the Reign of K. Iames the First; and till our unnatural Divisions broke out, for almost a full Century of Years of a Golden-Age, and the greatest Tranquillity that any Nation could hope, or almost wish to Enjoy, whilst Men are not Angels, and the best of Men obnoxious to Passions and Infirmities) upon what Provocation the King found himself oblig'd to secure his Sacred Person and Character from a Violent, and Turbulent Party (by what Plausible pretence soever, some worthy, and well meaning Persons were unwa∣rily drawn into it) the many Declarations, Concessions, and gracious Offers published from time to time, sufficiently Testifie; and that he was not readier to Assert and Justifie his Own, and Sub∣jects Rights; than always disposed to Terms of Grace and Reconciliation. These taking no Effect, upon the first Signal Battel given by his Majesty (and in which he was judged to have had the Advantage) there was struck one of the most Comprehensive Historical Medals, that was made during all the War; which being casually found in a Field of mine, and very Rare, I have Caus'd to be Ingraven.
XXXII The Medalion represents King Charles the First compleatly Arm'd and Crown'd, sitting hand in hand with the Queen, the Sun over his head, the Moon over her's, and both of them Treading a Serpent under foot with this Circumscription, XIII. IVL. CAROL. ET. MARIAE. M. B. F. ET. H. R. R. IN. VALLE. KEINTON. AVSPICAT. OCCVRRENT. ET. FVGATO. IN. OCCIDENT. REBELLIVM. VICT. ET. PAC. OMEN. OXON. M.DC.XL.II. Those who are but a little Vers'd in these Devices, will readily Interpret Python to denote a Viperous brood; which the Union of Phoebus and Diana (the King, &c.) had undoubted∣ly crush'd and destroyed; had his Majesty pursu'd, and Im∣prov'd that one days Success, and marched directly to the Head of that perniciousDragons Supporters of the City's Arms. Dragon, instead of going a quite Contrary way; the fatal Consequence whereof I need not here inlarge upon. In the meanwhile, we cannot but take notice, how about this time, his Majesty alter'd the usual Inscriptions of his Coins (to which we may observe he was the first who put the Garter on it) to EXVRGAT. DEVS. DISSIPENTVR. INIMICI. And instead of the Shield of Arms in the Fesse-point of the Re∣verse (over which three Fleur de Lysses and value of the Piece)
RELIG. PROT. LEG. ANGL. LIB. PAR. 1642. Which in the larger Pieces coin'd at Oxford were in a Scroll: That he might by the most solemn, and universal Symbolum, Declare and Proclaim to all the World, how little Reason his Subjects had to be Jealous of what was so dear to him (namely, the Religion, and just Rights of his People) that to preserve them both, the Royal Martyr lay'd down his Life. After many gracious Overtures Rejected, yet still retaining his inclinations to Peace, I found this Medal. XXXIII Effigies Crown'd with a Laurel a la Romain, &c. CAROLVS. D. G. ANG. SCO. FR. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse. An Olive branch lying Cross a Naked Sword, on each side the Letters C. R. under Crowns. IN. VTRVMQVE. PARATVS. 1643. Appositely therefore here I next place the following noble Medal and Effigies, Incomparably the most Resembling his Serene Countenance when fullest of Princely Vigour.
XXXIV The Bust is in plain Armour. CAROL. I. D. G. M. B. F. ET. H. REX. & GLOR. MEM. Reverse in the Table, REX. PACIFICVS. VICTVS. VINCEBAT. HOSTES. VICTOR. TRIVMPHAT. IN. COELIS. For they had now taken away his Life, as Men of Blood had (among others) that of his Praecursors; who about four Years before, fell under the Displeasure of a furious and an∣gry Parliament. 'Tis a very fine Medalion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Ruff and Episcopal Vestments.
XXXV. GVIL. LAVD. ARCHIEPISC. CANTVAR. X. IAN. 1644. Reverse. Two Angels supporting a Crown and a Mund over the City of London; Another carrying up a Mitre and Crosier to Heaven, joining with other Angels and Cherubs. SANCTI. CAROLI. PRAECVRSOR. The Relieve is excellently perform'd. Upon this Occasion I am not to forget the Iubile, which the Sacrifice of this great Prelate caus'd among them at Rome; it being my hap to be in that City, and in Company of di∣vers of our English Fathers (as they call them) and Clergy of that Church, when the News of his Suffering, and the Sermon he made upon the Scaffold, arrived there: which I well remember they read and Commented upon with exceeding Sa∣tisfaction and Contempt, as of one taken off, who was an E∣nemy to them, and stood in their way; whilst one of the most Capital Crimes imputed to him here, was (as we may call to mind) his being Popishly Affected. There were many Brave, Worthy Persons, and Royal Confessors (besides such as devoted their Lives and Fortunes in this Manner) that underwent incredible Hardships and Losses upon the Cause of Loyalty, who deserve to be remember'd with Honour, and of whom I have seen some Medals, which
I cannot retrieve at present: but none of them more fair than a Medalion of Col. Strangways, which may serve as a Specimen. XXXVI. Effigies in Bust à la Romain, Inscribed, AEGIDIVS. STRANGWAYS. DE. MELBVRN. IN. COM. DORCEST. ARM. Reverse represents that part of the White Tower of London, called Caesar's Tower; the Royal Standard display'd, and the Sun darting light out of a Cloud. DECVSQVE. ADVERSA. DEDERVNT. Exurge, INCARCERATVS. SEP. 1645. LIBERATVS. APR. 1648. The Graving is of Roti. But to return a little back, and resume our Metallic History. The first Martial Leader of the Rebellion, was that Idol of the abus'd People the discontented Earl of Essex (and last of that Antient Family D'Evreux's) of whom I have seen a clum∣sy Oval Medal bearing his Effigies in Full-face, and arm'd Bust, holding a naked Sword in his hand, another over his head by an Arm out of the Clouds, with this Legend,
XXXVII. THE. SWORD. OF. THE. LORD. AND. OF. GEDEON. Reverse representing both Houses of Parliament; and about it, IN. THE. MVLTITVDE. OF. COVNCELLORS. THERE. IS. PEACE. To this follows another of his Successors, who likewise head∣ed the same Cerberus. XXXVIII THO. FAIRFAX. MILES. MILIT. PARL. DVX. GEN. Reverse, In the Circle, POST. HAC. MELIORA.In the Middle, MERVISTI. 1645. And now for Ten Years that the Rebels (under the same Godly pretence, New Models and Projects of Government
and Reformations) had perpetrated that execrable Parricide; and that through the Jealousie, Ambition, Avarice and Hy∣pocrisie of their Chiefs and Parties they could settle in nothing; a Bold and Crafty Man among them, snatches the Ball they had so long been tossing, from them all. Here then Enters the Arch-Usurper O. CROMWEL, XXXIX. Represented in Effigie Arm'd, and Inscrib'd THE. WORD. AT. DVNBAR. THE. LORD. OF. HOSTS. SEPTEMB. 1645. Reverse, The Iunto or Rump at Westmincter. It was but a little before this, that having prevail'd on the Weakness of Fairfax (who had been hitherto the Tool and Journeyman) he first made himself General; and by the same Arts of Dissimulation and Ambition still culminating, Usurps the Regal Authority under the name of Protector, and strikes Medals in the following Style:
His Effigies Caesar-like, Crown'd with Laurel. XL. OLIVARIVS. DEI. GRA. REIPVB. ANGLIAE. SCO. ET. HIB. PROTECTOR. Reverse, A Lyon supporting, or rather grasping the Arms of the New Commonwealth, (as then call'd). Inscribed, PAX. QVAERITVR. BELLO. In another. XLI. OLIVAR. D. G. ANG. SCO. ET. HIB. PRO. &c. Reverse, With the Usurper's Paternal Coat within a Scutcheon of Pretence, between St. George's, St. Andrew's Crosses and the Harp, under the Imperial Crown of England.
PAX. QVAERITVR. BELLO. 1658. And insolently about the Rimb, NEMO. HAS. NISI. PERITVRVS. MIHI. ADIMAT. For so Confident was this Bold Man of Establishing him∣self and Posterity (having now Killed and taken Possession) that his Presumptuous Son stampt another Medal, XLII. Representing his Father in Arms and Titles as above. Reverse. An Olive Tree, and a Shepherd with his Flock feeding under it. NON. DEFICIET. OLIVA. Sep. 3. 1658. But this Scourge being at last taken away, the rotten Foun∣dation quickly sinking (not able to sustain the incumbent weight) they fell into Confusion and Intanglements among themselves; when God Almighty call'd one from the North to revenge the Injured, and Reettle this disordered and miserably shaken Frame, on its genuine and steady Basis again. Let therefore the Memory of that Illustrious HERO live in the Annals of our History, and the Medal which presents us his Effigies.
No Inscription about the Head. Reverse GEORGIVS. MVNK. OMNIVM. COPIARVM. IN. ANGLIA SCOTIA. ET. HIBERNIA. DVX. SVPREMVS. ET. THALASSARCHA. Aetat. 52. And Worthily he Merited all the Honours that were Con∣ferred upon him, who had restored a Nation, with an Exiled and an Injur'd Prince. CHARLES the Second. During whose Reign, and Royal Brothers succeeding him, Medals and Medalions were struck, for Largeness, Design and Excellent Workmanship, equalling many that we have left us of the Antient Greek and Roman, by those rare Artists the Rotis. We do not reckon those Natalitian and Auguration Pieces of theirs, with several others struck upon Emergencies, whilst the Royal Family was Eclipsed, and during the Civil War; but as they are Estimable for the History, I begin with
XLIV. IN. HONOR. CARO. PRINC. MAG. BRI. FR. ET. HIB. NATI. May. 29. ANN. 1630. Reverse. The Arms of England, Scotland, France and Ireland in seve∣ral Shields, with the Star that then appear'd at Noon-day, radiating from the Centre of the Medal, Inscrib'd, HACTENVS. ANGLORVM. NVLLI. As indeed being the very first Prince (excepting one that died an Infant) that was ever Born Heir to Great Britain. There is another without a Star of the same, Inscrib'd with∣in a square: and a Third better wrought, wherein the Shield is Crown'd with a Prince's Coronet: Motto as above, but XLV. The Reverse differing. MEM. CAROLI. PRIN. MAGN. BRITANN. FRANC. HIBERN. NATI. XXIX. MAII. BAPTIZ. IVN. M.DC.XXX.S.
Another, XLVI. Charles I. in Honour of the Installation of our late Sovereign CHARLES II. caused some Emblematic Medals to be stamp'd, with the Royal Oak under a Princes Coronet, overspreading sub∣nascent Trees and young Suckers. SERIS. FACTVRA. NEPOTIBVS. VMBRAM. Reverse The Legend on the Table of the Medal, within the Garter of the Order. CAROL. M.B. REGIS. FILIVS. CAROL. PRINC. INAVGVRATVR. XXII. MAII. MDCXXXIIX. Another. The Prince in Bust full-fac'd, in the Garter, Robes and Cap. CAROLVS. PRIN. MA BR. NOB. ORD. GART. MILES. 22. Maii 1638.
Reverse, The Prince of Wales's Arms within the Garter, and on the out∣ward Circle, MAGNI. SPES. MAGNA. PARENTIS. XLVIII. There is yet one more, in which the King his Father in Bust Arm'd and Crown'd. CAROLVS. I.D.G. ANGL. SCOT. FR. ET. HIBER. REX. Reverse, The Prince on Horseback behind the Arms of the Prince of Wales, &c. ILLVST. CAROLVS. PRINCEPS. WALLIAE. Under the Horse, Two C's link'd together between Palm branches and Laurel. Besides these I find not any other Medals (though some there may have been) struck, 'til after his Royal Father's Martyrdom; when I meet with one Lozeng'd, and two Octogone Obsidional Pieces circumscrib'd,
The first. XLXIX. OBS. NEWARK. 1646. Reverse The Crown of England, and under XXX. The second, L. CAROL. II. D. G. MAG. B. F ET. H. REX. Under a Crown, HANC. DEVS. DEDIT. 1648. Reverse, Pontfract Castle, over which these Letters P. C. and on the side OBS. Epigraph, POST. MORTEM. PATRIS. PRO. FILIO.
LI. Another much like the former, with an Hand coming out of the Toures, holding a naked Sword; on the other side OBS. and under it 1648. Revers'd with a Crown over C.R. Inscribed, DVM. SPIRO. SPERO. For it seems Lieutenant Col. Morris and Cornet Blackburn had bravely held it out, as long as there were any Hopes of being Reliev'd. We proceed next to such as were stamp'd upon and after the stupendious Revolution of 1660. which his Majesty grate∣fully acknowledges, magnifying the Almighty Disposer in the following Medals. LII. The Arms of England Crown'd. PROBASTI. ME. DOMINE. SICVT. ARGENTVM.
Reverse. MAGNA. OPERA. DOMINI. 1660. A second. LIII. The Kings Effigies Crown'd with Laurel. CAROLVS. II. REX. Reverse. The Arms of the Four Kingdoms in separate Shields: The Kings Cypher interlaid and Crown'd with a Star in the Center. MAGNALIA. DEI. 1660.
LIV. And in a Medalion of the largest size, exquisitely designed, his Majesty's Effigies, Caesar-like to the Breast. CAROLVS. SECVNDVS. D. G. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, Iustitia holding the Fasces with the Balance in her left hand, and with her right delivering the Olive- branch to Britannia sitting under a Cliff by the Sea shore, with a Spear in one hand, and the Union-Shield in the other; Pallas, Hercules and Fame stand∣ing by: An Angel over all with a Palm, and beneath, FELICITAS. BRITANNIAE. 29. MAY. 1660. Alluding to that of the Royal Prophet, Mercy and Truth are met together, Iustice and Peace have kiss'd each other. The Effects of which express'd in the following Medalion.
LV. The Kings Effigies in short Hair à la Romain Antique. OPTIMO. PRINCIPI. CAROLO. II. D.G.M. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGI. Phil. Roti. Reverse, Incomparably representing a Matron half-Veil'd, sitting, and holding a naked Sword and Cornucopia in her right hand; in her left a Book opened, in which is written FIDES. Under her feet LIBERTAS. Inscription about the Circle, FIDEI. DEFENSORIS. RELIGIONIS. REFORMATAE. PROTECTORI. About the Rimb. ARCHITECTVRAE. NAVALIS. ET. MONETAE. INSTAVRATORI. Nor indeed could less have been said of a Prince the most knowing in Naval Affairs, and vigilant to Improve and Main∣tain the Safety and Glory of these Kingdoms in its highest and chiefest Concern, which is certainly its Strength at Sea; and appears to be the glorious Design now set on foot, of a truly Royal Foundation at Greenwich, deserving a Thousand Medals.
LVI. The King in Bust, Garter, Robes and Coller, Crown'd. CAROLVS. II. D. G. ANG. SCO. FR. ET. HI. REX. Reverse, The King sitting in his Robes and Crown'd, holding the Scepter; An Angel touching the Crown with his right hand, in his left a Branch of Olive. EVERSO. MISSVS. SVCCVRERE. SECLO. XXIII. APR. 1661. With another Coronation Medal. LVII. Effigies Crown'd, and in the Coller of the Order. CAROLVS. II. D.G. MAG. BRI. FRA. ET. HI. REX. CORONATVS. Reverse, The King at length in a Roman Sagum, standing with a Pa∣storal Crook like a Shepherd in the middle of his Flock feeding. DIXI. CVSTODIAM. XXIV. APRIL. 1661.
All things now secure and in happy Peace both at Home and Abroad, is expressed in this following Medal. LVIII. Effigies to the Shoulder, short Hair. CAROLO. SECVNDO. P.R. Reverse. A Lyon Couchant-dormant, over him QVIESCIT. Exurg. BRITAN. LIX. King in Peruke, Laureat, Bust à la Romain. CAROLVS. II. D.G.M. BR. FR. ET. H. REX. Reverse. A Ship under sail. NOS. PENES. IMPERIVM.
His Majesty had now Espoused the most Serene and Virtu∣ous Infanta of Portugal, who bringing the greatest Portion, both in Territories and Treasure, that did ever any Queen of England before, deserv'd the Celebration of the following Medal. LX. The King and Queens Effigies, &c. CAROLVS. ET. CATHARINA. REX. ET. REGINA. Reverse, A Terrestrial Globe, representing Europe, Africa, with part of Asia and America. DIFFVSVS. IN. ORBE. BRITANNVS. 1670. Another thus, LXI. His Majesty's Effigies, Laurel, &c. CAROLVS. II. D. G. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX.
Reverse, Her Majesty's Head, Inscrib'd, CATHER. D. G. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGINA, There is another of a larger size, rarely Insculp'd with the Queens Effigies. LXII. CATHARINA. D.G. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGINA. Reverse The Figure of St. Catharine at length, holding a Sword point down in her left hand, a Palm in the right, and standing by the broken Wheel. PIETATE. INSIGNIS. LXIII.
This Medal of St. Catharine standing on a Shield, with a Reverse of Fame holding a Branch of Olive; Inscrib'd PROVINCIA. CONNAGH. together with the next, seem to have relation to Ireland. LXIV. Where a Crown'd King is (as we picture David) playing on the Harp, over which the Crown of England. FLOREAT. REX. Reverse, A Mitred Bishop (or St. Patrick) holding a double Cross, and standing between a Church and a Serpent, which he seems to drive away. QVIESCAT. PLEBS. is, I think Irish Coin. LXV. The Kings Head without any Ornament. CAROLO. SECVNDO.
Reverse A Rose full-blown upon the growing Bush. ANTE. OMNES. Returning to the King. LXVI. A very noble Medalion in Bust, short Hair and Roman-like. AVGVSTISS. CAROLO. SECVNDO. P. P. Reverse Prudentia with Pallas supporting upon an Altar a Shield, in which there is represented Britannia; about whom stand Pax, Hercules, Mercurius and Abundantia, the last a cumbent Figure with this Inscription, NVLLVM. NVMEN. ABEST. Exurge BRITANNIA:
In another, LXVII. CAROLVS. II. D. G. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse. Pallas sitting on a Bank, with a Spear in her left hand piercing Envy under foot, and pointing with her right hand to this In∣scription, INVIDIA. MAIOR. But all these being Fruits and Productions of Peace and Pro∣sperity, were sometimes interrupted by those unhappy Mistakes and Disputes with our Neighbours; which caus'd his Majesty to turn his Thoughts on his Concerns at Sea, and to assert his Undoubted Title on that Element; according to the various Succes∣ses whereof there were struck the following Medals.
Head Crown'd with Laurel. Inscribed, CAROLVS. II. D. G. M. BR. FR. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, The King in a Chariot. ET. PONTVS. SERVIET. 1665. This appears to be at the beginning of the first War. Another noble Medalion of the largest size. LXIX. Head in Peruke bound with a Laurel, &c. CAROLVS. SECVNDVS. DEI. GRATIA. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, The King at length in the Roman Military Habit and Palu∣damentum, standing under a Cliff, with a Battoon or Com∣manding-staff in his right hand, and pointing towards the Sea; where a Fleet is represented ingag'd, and one of the Ships sinking.
Exurge, PRO. TALIBVS. AVSIS. Which Medal was doubtless for an honorary Badge, to such as had most signally behav'd themselves. There is another of the same design, in short Hair, and which I here subjoin. LXX. And towards the Conclusion of the War.
Effigies in Bust, Crown'd with Laurel. CAROLVS. SECVNDVS. DEI. GRATIA. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET. HIBER. REX. Reverse, Britannia sitting by the Shoar under a Rock, holding in her right hand a Spear, and the Arms of Great Britain in a Shield with her left hand; looking towards a Fleet at Sea, the Sun shining and dissipating the Clouds. FAVENTE. DEO. Exurg. BRITANNIA. About the Rimb. CAROLVS. SECVNDVS. PACIS. ET. IMPERII. RESTI∣TVTOR. AVGVSTVS. And indeed it is a most August Medalion, however less well perform'd by the Graver here. LXXI.
A fair Medalion of his Majesty's Head Laureat, &c. CAROLVS. SECVNDVS. DEI. GRATIA. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, The King in the Roman Military habit, standing on a square Pedestal, ascended by six round Steps, and holding a naked Sword with his left hand point downward, in his right a Commanding staff; the Sea behind him full of Ships sailing to and fro. REDEANT. COMMERCIA. FLANDRIS. 1666. Neither is a far less remarkable Medal, both in respect of the Stamp and Inscription, to be here omitted; struck about this time, & flagrante bello, contending for this glorious Dominion at Sea. LXXII. The Kings Effigies Crown'd with Laurel, &c. CAROLVS. A. CAROLO. 1665. Reverse Britannia sitting as usually represented. About the Circle. QVATVOR. MARIA. VINDICO. Underneath BRITANNIA.
It being therefore upon the greatest Importance of these Kingdoms Concerns at Sea, that his Majesty Founded a Semi∣nary at Christ-Church for the Institution of Children; who should be solemnly Disciplin'd, and made fit for the Service of his Royal Navy; this glorious Medalion was designed and struck. LXXIII. The King in Bust, short Hair, richly Arm'd à l' Empereur. CAROLVS. SECVNDVS. D. G. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse A Blue-Coat Boy with his Toaq or Bonnet under his arm (by the Sea side in view of Ships impell'd by Winds) is re∣presented as newly Examin'd by the Arts Mathematical; Arith∣metick laying her Hand on the Childs Head; Geometry, Astro∣nomia and Mercurius; Angels and Horae above in the Clouds, sounding Trumpets and pouring down Fruits out of the A∣malthean Horn. Epigraph, INSTITVTOR. AVGVSTVS. 1673
Upon what Occasion, or whom it does concern I need not inform the World, which has ever heard of the great and important Services Sir Samuel Morland did his Majesty from time to time, during the late Usurpers Power, by the faithful Intelligence he so constantly gave him. LXXIV. The Kings Head Laureat. CAROLO. II. REGI. INSTITVTORI. AVG. In the Table of the Reverse, IN. ADVERSIS. SVMMO. VITAE. PERICVLO. IN. PROSPERIS. FELICI. INGENIO. FREQVENS. ADFVIT Which he told me, his Majesty gave him leave to wear, as an honourable Badge of his signal Loyalty. There remains yet a Medalion bearing only his Majesty's Ef∣figies in Bust, which for the accurateness of the Work I add to the rest.
LXXV. CAROL. II. D. G. ANGL. SCOT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. Reverse, Displays the Atchievement or Arms of Great Britain, France and Ireland Quarter'd within the Garter, and usual Supporters, Helm, Crest and Mantling. DIEV. ET. MON. DROIT. For such and the like Medals were now and then given as Gratuities of Respect, appendant to Chains of Gold; which puts me in mind of what was made by the present King of Sweden, in Memory of his Installation; and the Honour he re∣ceived from his late Majesty Charles II. when he was present∣ed with the Order of the Garter, 20. May, 1671. LXXVI
CAROLVS. XI. REX. SVE. EQ. Nob. Ord. Perisc. Inaug. Reverse. The Garter pass'd through two Regal Crowns, with both these Letters  c link'd together; St. George's Cross and Blaze all within the Coller of the Order. About the Rimb. SALVS. POPVLORVM. CONCORDIA. REGVM. And indeed Medals were frequently given, and sometimes Knighthood, as honourable Presents and Rewards to those Kings of Arms, and others, by whom that Noble Order was brought to Foreign Princes;Ashmole In∣stitut. p. 303 311. of which see Mr. Ashmole, where we also meet with a Medal of the Cross of the Order, struck by K. Charles I. Ann. 1629. in the Robes of Installation, with the Cross of St. George Radiant in the Reverse, which I here subjoin. LXXVII. CAROLVS. I. D. G. ANG. SCOT. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. FIDEI. DEF. Reverse PRISCI. DECVS. ORDINIS. AVCTVM. 1629. To shew that the Glory issues from the Cross (as 'tis re∣ported to have appear'd to the Great Constantine) not from the Garter.Ashmole p. 216. We are come now in order of Time and Succession, to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, afterward King JAMES the Second.
LXXVIII. In a Medal within a Chaplet of Roses and Lilies. IACOBVS. DVX. EBOR. NAT. 15. Oct. BAPTIZ. 24. Nove. 1633. Reverse The Arms of England, with Label, &c. under a Ducal Coronet. NON. SIC. MILLE. COHORTES. Relating doubtless to the numerous Offspring God was Blessing his Royal Father with; that would more Establish and Secure the Crown, than a Thousand Guards and Armies; so short are humane Reckonings of the Event of Things. Upon the first Engagement with the Holland Fleet (in which his Royal Highness signaliz'd himself and gain'd a me∣morable Victory) there was struck the following Medalion.
LXXIX. The Dukes Effigies in Bust, clad in the Roman Mantle: IACOBVS. DVX. EBOR. ET. ALBAN. DOM. MAGN. ADMIRALIVS. ANGLIAE. &c. Reverse Represents the Admiral and whole Fleet in Conflict. NEC. MINOR. IN. TERRIS. 3. Iune 1665. And upon the same Action, another no less glorious Me∣dalion, in memory of (perhaps) the most dreadful Battel that any History has Recorded to have been ever fought up∣on the Seas.
LXXX. The Duke's Bust, short Hair, &c. IACOBVS. DVX. EBOR. ET. ALBAN. FRATER. AV∣GVSTISS. CAROLI. II. REGIS. Reverse. A Trophy and Ships in Fight. GENVS. ANTIQVVM. Meeting no Medal of his first Espousals (though I presume there may and ought to have been) of the Second we have the following. LXXXI.
The Dukes Effigies, &c. IACOBVS. DVX. EBORACENSIS. Reverse, The Head of her Royal Highness the Dutchess, &c. MARIA. DVCISSA. EBORACENSIS. 1680. The next and most Remarkable, is a Medalion struck upon his Royal Highness's wonderful Preservation; returning by Sea from Scotland, when so many perish'd in the sinking Vessel. LXXXII. IACOBVS. DVX. EBORACENSIS. ET. ALBANENSIS. G. B. F. Reverse, IMPAVIDVM. FERIVNT. When KING, There was Coin'd this Noble Medal.
LXXXIII. IACOBVS. II. D.G. ANG. SCO. FR. H. REX. Reverse A branch of Laurel upon a Cushion, with an Arm'd hand out of the Clouds holding a Crown. A. MILITARI. AD. REGIAM. Exurg. INAVGVRAT. 23. Apr. 1685. I next place the following Medalion, though almost the same that was stamp'd when he was Duke of York and High Admiral; the difference being only in the Style, and his Ma∣jesty in longer Hair.
LXXXIV. LXXXV. The King in Bust Crown'd with Laurel, &c. plac'd upon a large Basis or Altar; on the front of which the Arms of Eng∣land, &c. within the Garter, and over it the Crown. Exurge
ARAS. ET. SCEPTRA. TVEMVR: Upon the Altar lie four Sceptres, bearing on their tops the Rose, Lilly, Thistle and Harp; upon each side is Represented the Sea, with God Neptune holding the Trident, drawn in a Chariot by Marine Horses, with two Vessels under sail on the other side. Inscription, IACOBVS. II. D.G. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. 1685. Reverse Iustice (upon whose head the Sun darts his beams, and Light∣ning issues out of a dark Cloud) with Sword and Balance, holds in one Scale Mural Crowns which preponderate the other, in which there is a Scimiter, a Protestant Flail (as then call'd) with a Serpent; whilst she tramples on another Serpent near two headless Bodies, their Heads lying on two square Blocks on each side of Iustice; on that of the right hand, JACOBVS. DE. MONTMOVT. On the left, ARCHIBALD. D'ARGYL. Upon one side of the Carcases are Represented Soldiers rout∣ed and flying away; on the other a Castle with two Heads fix'd on spikes over the Gate, and on the Pedestal, AMBITIO. MALE. SVADA. RVIT.
In a Second, LXXXVI. We have the Effigies and Bust of the Duke of Monmouth him∣self, without any Inscription at all. Reverse Represents a young Man precipitating from a steep Rock in the midst of the Sea, upon which are plac'd three Crowns a∣mongst Branches and Shrubs. SVPERI. RISERE. IVLY. 6. 1685. Upon Occasion of the Spanish Silver Wreck, out of which great Treasure had been gotten from the bottom of the Sea, by our Bold and Ingenious Urinators (after it had lain submer∣ged for many Years) was the following Medalion struck, bear∣ing the Effigies of both their Majesties. LXXXVII.
IACOBVS. II. ET. MARIA. D. G. MAG. BRI. FRAN. ET. HIB. REX. ET. REGINA. Reverse, The Ship at Anchor which carried the Divers and Engineers. SEMPER. TIBI. PENDEAT. HAMVS. Exurge, NAVFRAGIA. REPERTA. 1687. There is another of the Queens alone, dress'd in her Hair, with a Laurel à l'Empperresse; a very fine Medal. MARIA. D. G. ANG. SCO. FR. ET. HI. REGINA. Reverse, A Lady sitting upon a Bank, Inscrib'd, O. DEA. CERTE. Alluding to that in Virgil; when Aeneas was surpriz'd at the Beauty of his Mother. Lastly, And indeed I think the very last which was struck by this King. LXXXVIII
The Arms of England, &c. in a Crown'd Shield, support∣ed by four Angels; one of them holding an Escutcheon with a Ducal Coronet; another the Feathers or Prince of Wales's Arms. Inscrib'd, HONOR. PRIN. MAG. BRIT. FRA. ET. HIB. NAT. 10. IVN. 1688. Reverse. Represents a naked Infant set on a Cushion near the Sea; two Angels sounding Trumpets, and holding a Crown over the Babe, and a Scroll in which one Reads. VENIAT. CENTESIMVS. HEROS. LXXXIX. To which we add another in the hands of few, where a little Child like another young Hercules, is made strangling a Serpent. Reverse, There were two or three Memorable and Historical Medals besides these, which were struck about this time, that are not to be omitted.
XC. Shews the White Tower of London, Standard display'd, Im∣prisonment and Delivery of the Seven Bishops, after their fa∣mous Trial at the Kings-Bench. PROBIS. HONORI. INFAMIAEQVE. MALIS. Exurge ARCHIEPIS. CANTVAR. EPISCOPI. S. ASAPH. BATH. ET. WELS. ELY. PETER. CHICHEST. BRIST. INCARCER. 5. LIBERATI. 15. IVNII. 1680. Reverse, A Balance let down from the Clouds, with the Sun in one of the Scales and the Moon in the other. SIC. SOL. LVNAQVE. IN. LIBRA. There was likewise another of the same Volume.
XCI. Representing the Archbishop of Canterbury to the middle in his Episcopal Robes. Inscription. GVILIELMVS. SANCROFT. ARCHIEPISCOPVS. CAN∣TVARIENSIS. 1688. Reverse, In smaller Circles six of the abovenamed Prelates, with the Bishop of London's Head in the Centre, plac'd among the Stars. Nor unlike to this was a Medal Publish'd in Memory of the like number of Iudges and Advocates, who Pleaded and gave Sentence for the Acquittal of these Venerable Pre∣lates. Finally in a lesser size this Emblematic. XCII.
A Iesuit on one side and a Frier on the other, undermining a a Cathedral Church, supported by an Arm from Heaven, with this Inscription in English: THE. GATES. OF. HELL. SHAL. NOT. PREVAILE. AGAINST. IT. All which Medals and Medalions (with a few more we shall have occasion to take notice of anon) being stamp'd and Published before the soon following Alterations, and pregnant of Matter of Fact and Popular Circumstances, I think fit to mention, as the very last which I have seen whilst King Iames remained in England. I should now proceed to those which have been struck since the late signal Revolution; were they not already extant in the late Histoire Metalique de Guillaume III. Published, and very Artistly Ingraven and Historically Illustrated by N. Chevalier, in Folio, Amsterdam, 1692. which will both deserve and re∣quire a Volume apart.
CHAP. IV. Of other Persons and Things, worthy the Memory and Honor of Medals. NOW albeit I will not Affirm that we can boast of such Numbers of Medals and Counters, as a Great Potentate does; We have yet you see, gotten together such a Collection, as with a few Links more, would serve to compose a Series Capable of furnishing an Historical Discourse with a Chain of Remarkable Instances, and Matters of Fact, without Fiction or Vain Hyperboles. In the mean time, what other Medals there remains of this Sort, relating to our Country in the hands of the Curious; I can give no farther Account of: I am yet well pleased to find those of his late Majesty (Charles the Second) his Return, and Restauration; Though I could have wish'd the Reverses had been more expressive of that signal Providence, as it concerned the Church and state of this Kingdom; having ever looked upon it as a Miracle (and since some there are who establish their Faith so much upon the frequency of them) next to that of the Babylonish Deliverance, rightly consider'd in all its Circumstances, extraordinary and rare Events; by far sur∣passing any thing that boasting Party can produce to Affect their Cause; since the Great Constantine, to this day. I have been the Longer in giving Account of what Holland alone has published in her Medals and Reverses (Memorial, Votive, Triumphant, Gratulatory, Inauguratory, Obsidional, &c.) because the Series is so Intire, and Historically Instructive, as may serve to shew what we have lost of the Antients; who as frequently we have noted, lest nothing Memorable in danger of being forgotten by Posterity, which might be per∣petuated in some more durable and noble Matter, than Egypti∣an Reeds, Skins of Beasts, Paper and Parchment. And we see with what Success the Learned and Curious have Improved their Diligence in this kind; by their being able to deduce and Justifie so much of the Greek, Roman and other noble History, even out of these few Medals alone that are come to light: Few,
I say in Comparison of the Numbers stamp't and which yet lie buried. To how much Greater Perfection then, and Cer∣tainty might it be advanced, had we intire, and un-interrupted Series's and Collections of those which were truely Antient (yet desiderate and Wanting) to supply these Chasms and defects! We should then have had our Caracticus, Cassibelan, Alfred, Athelstans; our Edgars, Arthyre, Riehards, Henries First and Fifth in frequenter Medals; Edward the First, Third, and Fourth, and the rest of our Renowned Princes. It is yet apparent, by what we have produc'd; that as our Kings have not been altogether Negligent of their Own, and consequently, of the Nations Honor, by preserving the Memories of Sundry Famous Actions; So there are Innumerable others, both of our own Princes, and even of their Subjects; whose Virtue, Courage, and noble Exploits (Emulous of the most Heroick and Brave of Antient times) merit the most lasting Records: So as when I again Consider how many Great and Memorable things, Illustrious Persons, Renown'd for Arms and Arts, worthy Consecration, these Nations have produc'd; I go on to Inquire (but without much satisfaction I confess) what Medals were Stamp'd from the Reign and Revolutions of our Seventh and Eight Henries time, to almost this Age of ours? Had such Actions and Events happen'd among the Rest of the Polish'd World; we should not be now to seek for the Heads of Sir Francis Drake, Cavendish, Hawkins, Frobisher, Greenvil, Fenton, Willougby, and the rest of the Argonauts; And surely they that first Circl'd this Globe of Earth and Sea (in whose Entrails so much Gold and Silver, and all other Metals are contained) might at least be thought Worthy the Honor of a Copper Medal, which yet I no where find. To these Gallant Mens further Atchivements and Merits we number the defeat of that Invincible Armada in Eighty Eight; in danger of being quite forgotten, as to any such durable Monument among us, when ever those Incomparable Tapstries that now Adorn the House of Peers (so lively Representing to the Eye both the Persons, and Circumstances of that Glo∣rious and Renowned Action) shall be quite worn-out; or by other fatal Accident, miscarry: I have therefore often wonder'd, that so many Great Princes, and Noble Lords, to whom that Ius Imaginum more especially belongs (divers of whose
Ancestors are found in the Bordures of those Rich, and well designed Pieces) should for about this Hundred years past; neglect the having them so much as Accurately Copied-out, and Publish'd by some skilful Graver: But much more, that they have not yet been Painted in their full dimensions, in the Galleries, and Romes of State of those Noble Persons (Builders for Magnificence &c.) instead of Idle Metamorphoses, and other Fictions and fruitless stories, as have of late propha∣ned the Walls of so many ample Apartments. Certainly, we might select as Choice, and Noble Subjects perform'd by our own Nation (and in which none were so much Concerned as the Progenitors of our Nobility) to Decorate and Adorn their Courts and Palaces. They will there∣fore pardon this Zeal and occasional Excursion. Of like Argument are those admirable Paintings of Holbein in his Majesty's Privy-Chamber at White-Hall; representing the Persons of the Two famous Henries and their Wives; together with those other Pieces (by the same hand) Histo∣rizing that Expedition to Bullogn: The Iust, and Triumph at the Congress with Francis the First; The Juncture with Maximilian the Emperor, Militating, and receiving Pay under the Banner of St. George; The Battles of Spurrs, though of an Inferior Pencil: those of Cressey, Poictiers, Floddonfield; The famous Cavalcade of Queen Elizabeth, when she went to the Camp at Tilbere, and that of the late Charles the Second through London, at his Restauration; than which there was nothing more August and Solemn, since the Triumphs of the Caesars, &c. with sundry more, whereof our Annals of former and latter times are full: And ah! what an Illustrious Table would the Conflict of Agincourt, fought by our Henry the Fifth against the whole Power of France, in the Reign of the Sixth Charles (as already depicted, and described in that noble Poem of Michael Drayton) produce; painted by the hand of a Rubens, or Verrto; as is the Apotheosis of King Iames the First in the Banqueting-House at White-Hall; and Inauguration of the Black-Prince in St. Georg's at Windsor, the magnificent Cavalcade of the Four Inns of Court. Anno 1633. described in S. B. Whitlocks Memoirs. His Majesty's Charles II. Entrance at his Restauration, 1660, and the Anabasis at Tor-bay? I say, how would these Out-shine the Stories of the drunken Lapithae, Sancho Panca, or the Golden Ass, &c. Things Ridiculous and Impossible, and that serve to no brave Thoughts.
But to return to such as deserv'd that of Medals for Exploits at Sea; I reckon not only those who found out New Worlds, Planted Colonies and Enlarg'd the British Empire: But even those Brave, though Unsuccessful Attempts to discover the Nor-West, and other hitherto impermeable Passages. I know not whether there were any Medals of the Earl of Essex's Expedition to Cales, and the Heroes who accompanied him; and what though Sir Walter Raleigh miscarried at Gui∣ana, he was a Person of extraordinary Merit for his Learning and Experience; and who is he that deplores not his being so unhappily cut off (and our since want of such as Raleigh was) to gratifie theConde Gon∣damur Crafty and Malicious? I have seen nothing of our taking Ormus in the Gulph of Per∣sia; nor of those famous Navigators Victorious Conflicts and Discoveries of our Owen Gwinedd and his Son Madoc; of Macha, of Sebastian Cabot, born at Bristol (whom we may therefore Challenge ours) nor of the brave Iohn Oxenham; for I have already mention'd Sir Fr. Drake, Hawkins. &c. But here come in again the Valiant Sir Richard Greenvill, Sir Iohn Summers, Sir Thomas Button, Bennet, Cherry, Carfeil, Edge, Sir Henry Middleton, Sir Hugh Willoughby, the Heroical George Earl of Cumberland; our Gilbert, Chanceler, Thorn, North, Ellis, Iones, Ponnet, Poole, Iacson, Iackman, &c. who were our Nearchus's, Theseus's, Iasons and Ulysses's, that did, and Graiorum Romanorum∣que Gloriae, quires olim suas Nava∣les per acies asseruerunt, non dubio tunc Anglo∣rum & for∣tuna, & virtus re∣spondit. Gro. Annal. l. 1. perform'd far greater Things and Actions in Truth and Reality, than all those put together were ever fain'd to have done: We have not mention'd the late Action at Bergen, let it be forgotten; not so the Bravery and Success of our daring young Capt. Har∣man, before Cadiz in the sight of innumerable Spectators yet alive. Have we any Medals of Blake, Lawson, Dean, Sprag, Mings, Munden, Allen, Kempthorn, Wetwang, Tyddiman, Young, Curtis, Haines, Haward and others, and of what was Acted on that angry Element? I say nothing of our Buccaneers, Morgan and the rest; because the most daring Exploits and Events, fa∣mous only for Spoil, Robberies, Cruelty and Injustice, ought to blot the Memory of their very Names were it possible: but when the Cause is Just and Laudable, Brave and Heroick Facts merit all Encomiums. And here may some perhaps perstringe me for Celebrating the several Bloody Conflicts during the late War, and diffe∣rence with our Neighbours of Holland, &c. I enter not into those Politicks, leaving them to such as were supposed to be
the Judges of Right and Wrong; whilst yet the Actions of those Great Captains and Sea-man in National Wars, not tainted (that ever I heard) with barbarous Cruelties are highly worth our Remembrance: And such in the first Rank, was his then Royal Highness the Duke of York, the Illustrious Prince Rupert, George Duke of Albemarle; the Noble Earls of Sandwich, Marl∣brough, Portland, Muskerey; Sir Thomas Smith, Ayscogh, Holmes and other stout Commanders, who signaliz'd themselves: Their Names are yet fresh, and both their Actions and Effigies due to Medal for what they did and suffer'd: Nor do I believe there were braver Men in all that numerous List of the ,Iliad. 2. (States-General of those Provinces) mentioned and celebrated by Old Homer, and now on Record above two thousand Years. Nor are we wanting of such as Honor'd their Countries, as well by Land as Sea: The Black Prince and his Glorious Fa∣ther, Humphrey Duke of Glocester, Richard Plantagenet, Thomas of Woodstock, Iohn of Gaunt, Charles Brandon, the Noble Talbots ter∣rible to the French; Sir Iohn Hawkwood (whom the Italians have honor'd with a Statue of Brass;) the Illustrious Veres, Sidneys, Cecil, Norris, Sir Charles Carlisle, Erpingham, Clifford Earl of Cum∣berland, the Ogles, Basset, Burrows, Cotton, Paulets, Chester, Gilbert, Pellham, Udal, Knolls, Broughton, Valvasor, Baskerfield, Harbert, Gerrard, Tyrell, Sutton, Bingham, Wilford, Ashley, Audley, &c. these and more abroad; the famous Wallworth, our Lindsey, Montross, Capel, Lucas, L'isle, Birons, Langdale, Hopton, Granvil, Stawel, Cavendish, Smith, and such as unspotted Loyalty ingag'd at Home; too many to ennumerate without Envy and Regret: Others, to be deplor'd for being the Occasions which depriv'd these Kingdoms of so many Generous and Magnanimous Spi∣rits, whose flagrant Courage, Performance and Behaviour in the Field (abstracted from the Cause) pretend to Records of Medal: But Cedent Arma togae— For how should one rejoyce to find in more lasting Matter than painted Cloth, the true Effigies of such as were Famous for both! Such as were our Sidney, Raleigh, Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, the Cardinals Poole, Allan; the Chancellor Cromwell, Burleigh, Cecil, Buckhurst, Leicester, Sir Fran. Walsingham, Sir Thomas Smith, Carie, Challoner, Isam, Wotton, Randolph, &c. with several others, who served their Princes and their Country with their Prudence
and Counsel, to the Envy and Reproach of the following times. Our late Discoveries of New Worlds, and Conflicts at Sea, the Sanglant Battels that have been fought at Land, the Fortitude and Sufferings of an Excellent Prince, the Restauration of his Successor, the Conflagration and Re-edifying of the Greatest City in the World in less than Twenty Years, (which had been near Two Thousand in Building, nor then half so vast, &c.) call aloud for their Medals a part: We yet see none of the Co∣lumn (erected in Memory of that dreadful Fire) the Biggest, and I believe, theTrajan's Col. 147. Roman feet. Antomne's 175. Lon∣don 29. English feet. Highest all Europe has to shew: And infinite pity 'tis, that it had not been set up where the Incendium and Burning ceas'd, like a IupiterStator, rather than where it fatally began; not only in regard to the Eminency of the Ground, but for the reason of the Thing, since it was intended as a grateful Monument and Recognition to Almighty God for its Ex∣tinction, and should therefore certainly have been plac'd where the devouring Flames ceas'd and were overcome, more agree∣ably to the Stately Trophy, than where they first took Fire and broke out, and where a plain Lugubrous Marble with some apposite Inscription had perhaps more properly become the Oc∣casion: But this was over-ruled, and I beg Pardon for this pre∣sumption, tho' I question not but I have the Architect himself on my side, whose Rare and Extraordinary Talent, and what he hasThe Thea∣tre at Oxon. St. Pauls. Chelsey-College. The Royal Palace at Hampton¦Court, &c besides so ma∣ny Churches. The Library at Trinity-College Cambr &c. perform'd of Great and Magnificent; this Column and what he is still about, and advancing under his Direction, will speak and perpetuate his Memory as long as one Stone remains upon another in this Nation. Here the Improvement of Arts Liberal (as they are call'd) and Mechanicks put in their Claim to Medal: For if Aristotle pronounc'dArchyts. him worthy of a Statue, that first invented , Rattles and Childrens Baubles, because they serv'd to busie and hinder their restless Spirits from spoiling better things: How just a Title to the Honor of Medal have they, who have at any time excell'd in Mechanical Works, useful and necessary to human Life, Ease and Refreshments? To this we might add the Example of Simon Coriarius, whose Shop the Great and Wise Socrates was us'd to frequent,Card. de Con∣solat. lib. 1. let us hear Cardan; Non contemnenda Eruditio Artificum, & caeterorum literis carentium, tanquam ab intellectu aliena; sed ut dici solet, Quantum ab Athenis Megara, tantum à Megaris Athenae: Sic quantum Eruditus loquendo Artificem vincit, tanto Artifex sua cognitione praestat Erudito, &c.
Scholars and Learned Men (says he) have no reason to de∣spise the ingenious Mechanick, because forsooth, they are not so profoundly Book-learn'd as themselves: For as the Proverb goes, Megara is as near to Athens, as Athens is to Megara: What our Doctor exceeds the Artist in Talk and Speculation; the other may go as much beyond him in the Knowledge and Skill of real and useful Things. Leo Africanus tells us, That in Cairo, the first Inventor of any Ingenious Devices, rides thro' the City in a kind of Triumph, vested in Cloth of Gold, accompanied with Musick and other circumstances of Ovation, the People throwing him Monies as he passes along; and we not only admire the Machinaments of Daedalus, Archytas, Cetesibius, Hero, &c. But Myrmecides and Callicrates's Pismire, little Ships and Chariots that a Flie might cover: Regiomontanus's Wooden Eagle, none of which (says Ae∣lian) a Wise Man would much commend but as triflers of time.Var. Hist. l. c. 17. Yet to these, and even to him who enclosed the Iliads in a Nut∣shel, I might oppose our CalligrapherSee CAP. VIII. Peter Bale, and Mark Scaliot's Flea, with the Chain of three and forty Links, Lock and Key made all of Steel, and weighing a single Grain only, and these Recorded by many grave Historians too; whilst to our Reproach, we have not so much as theLe or Leigh, a Cu∣rate in some obscure part of Sussex. Name (or very un∣certainly) of that ingenious Scholar, who Invented the Weaving or Knitting Machine, which with a pair of hands only, dispatches such variety of Work in so short a time, enough to Em∣ploy an hundred. It is about Sixty Years since, that the poor Man's Wife it seems, being fain to Knit for the Support of her Indigent Family, he turn'd his Head to find out by what ho∣nest way he might alleviate the continual Pains she took, and at last lighted on this wonderful Invention, which being by stealth gotten abroad, and now propagated thro' France, Italy and other Countries of Europe; earns the Livelihood of many, who would otherwise want Bread to sustain them: And does not this Person deserve a Medal of Copper, who merits a Statue of Gold?De Leg. Yea, and as Plato says (speaking of those that found out such useful things) to be look'd upon as of middle Natures between Gods and Men, and were sometimes number'd among the Deities. Who was the first Author of the so accurate dividing In∣strument, for the exact cutting the Teeth of Wheels, and Fuste Machine for Watches and Clocks? Sir Iohn Backhouse (Assistant with Sir Hugh Middleton for the bringing Water to the City)
produc'd (as 'tis said) the first Way-Wiser, an Instrument of so great Use and Pleasure, were it improv'd, that I have often wonder'd it has been so much neglected, and not applied to more sorts of Vehiculation and Measuring. Who does not admire Watson the Black-Smith of Coventry's late elaborate Piece of Clock-Work? Its intricate, regular, and irregu∣lar, Periodic, and yet constant Moions and Revolutions far ex∣ceeding the Silver Heaven sent by Ferdinand the Emperor to Solyman the Magnificent; and what a Reputation have our Tompion Watches gain'd for the Justness of their going, which give Sound, and are heard to the farthest parts of Europe! Works, I affirm, and Workmen, that would have been Celebrated by a Claudian, as was the Sphere of Archimedes. Nor may I here omit, without Injustice to his Merits, that IngeniousDockwry. Gentleman, who has brought to perfection the now so Useful, Cheap, Certain and Expeditious Intercourse of Letters by the Peny-Post; such likewise as first set on foot the late Ex∣pedient for the Extinction of Casual and Ruinous Fire, or that have Invented more convenient Lights in Cities, &c. Authors and Perfectors of whatsoever other Polychrests, Inventions and things of universal or multifarious Use: Such as these (how tri∣vial and mean soever the Instances may seem) would have had their Statues in my Lord Verulam's Solomons's-House. Nor let the Misadventure of the Double Keel in the least ex∣tenuate the Merit of the late Sir William Petty, whose accurate and expedite Survey of a large and ampleIreland. Kingdom, admi∣rable and comprehensive Genius, highly deserved the Honor of the richest Medal, for tho' in the first we name he did not succeed, —magnis tamen excidit Ausis. nor did it perish (for ought I can yet learn, or is believed) thro' any defect of the Machination, or rather Contignation, but where 'tis likely no Vessel whatsoever could have then escap'd, no fewer than Seventy Sail besides suffering in the same Misfor∣tune in a Sea reputed the most Tempestuous and Dangerous the whole World has upon its Surface, namely the Bay of Biscay, and that after it had already made a prosperous Voyage and Return before: I mention this the more particularly, and with the Circumstances of that brave Adventure, to stop the unkind Censures of such as would turn it to the Reproach of that extra∣ordinary
Person, and and discourage all Attempts that do not emerge upon the first Essay: But they who imagine and con∣demn for foolish and impossible all things which are not Ac∣complished, or Succeed not on est, incit. Sn. Q Nat. Iib. 6. cap first or second Trial, but which afterwards come to be the happy Products of Time and united Aids, may repair for Cure of their Prejudice to my Lord Bacon's Instauration,Quaest. Nat. l. 7. c. 25. remembring that of Seneca, Veniet tempus quo ista quae nunc latent, in lucem Dies retrahet, & longio∣ris aevi diligentia. We Read that Columbus was first Ridicul'd in England, and are told by Divines, that Noah was laught at for an hundred Years together, whilst he was building and preparing the Ark, and doubtless he was thought a bold and daring Man; —qui fragilem truciHor. Commisit Pelago ratem Primus— And yet five hundred Wrecks deter not from adventuring still to the remotest Indies: It is not therefore the Conceit or Fancy of Men alone, that is sufficient Authority to condemn the most unlikely things for Impossible, unless they have been often at∣tempted in vain by many Eyes, many Hands, many Instru∣ments, many Ages: Then Mischief,Hist. Royal Society, p. 24. and true Dishonor fall on those Who would to Laughter or to Scorn expose So Virtuous, and so Noble a Design; So Human for its Use, for Knowledge so Divine. The Thing which these proud Men despise and call Impertinent, and Vain, and Small; Those smallest things of Nature let me know, Rather than all their greatest Actions do. Whoever would deposed Truth advance Into the Throne usurp'd from it, Must feel at first the Blows of Ignorance, And the sharp Points of Envious Wit: So when by various turns of the Celestial Dance, In many Thousand Years, A Star, so long unknown appears; Tho' Heaven it self more beauteous grow,Cowley to the Royal So∣ciety. Stanz 8. It troubles and Alarms the World below; Does to the Wise a Star, to Fools a Meteor show.
Under this Head therefore I place the celebrated Naupegi of our late Monarchs: The Royal Sovereign, the Prince, Bri∣tannia and other Capital Ships, for the Nobest, most Useful, and in a Word, most Stupendious Creatures that mortal Hands produce: In the mean time I do in no sort put the late Reverend Author of the Real Cha∣racter among the unsuccessful, whose ample and generous De∣sign shall one Day find a more grateful Recognition, large and universal as was his Mind, and as is that incomparably useful Work, manuductory to no less Real Knowledge. Once more, and to Atone for all that may be thought Redun∣dant or Deficient on this Occasion, (and e'er we take leave of these Great Men) To whom is the Consecration of Medal, Statue or even Pyramid more justly due, than to our Sagacious Harvey, and the late Illustrious Boyle? the one for finding out the Circu∣lation of the Blood, the other for the happy Improvement of Otto Guericks Magdeburg Exhauster, and for his Profound and Noble Researches into all the abstruser Parts and Recesses of the most useful Philosophy, and his Generous communicating of them, both of them Celebrated by all the Learned World, with a world of more to be enumerated, with all his other Vertues and Performances, by that Learned Hand (for so it needs must be) who ever shall oblige the Publick with his Life. Other new and rare Discoveries, Instances both of Light and Fruit, have been made in Anatomy, Astronomy, Opticks, and other Parts of the Mathematicks, due to several of our Country: I might here also name the Author of the Medicina Infusoria, and that of the Transfusion of Blood, attributed to a Clergy-man somewhere about Wiltshire, now more than fifty Years past (improv'd by Sir Christ. Wren) however turn'd since into Ridicule by our Fat Buffoons, and late Virtuoso-Mastix: I conclude then with him, who ever the Person was, that first brought to so clear a Light, the late surprizing both Dry and Liquid Phosphorus and Nocti∣luca's,na. whether Extracted out of Blood (or that which flows from, and is tinctur'd with it) perfected from the Principles of the most Noble Boyle: Nor name I this bright Experiment with∣out Reflection on a Providence extraordinary; that it being found out, and so improved by Persons of much Integrity, it has escap'd the Hands and Heads of some who (before 'twas divul∣ged) might possibly have made strange and prodigious Use of it to Religious Impostures and Pious Frauds: Some more to this Glorious Class I yet might add, but I have named the Illustrious Boyle, and fix his Trophy here.
May these then suffice (for I am not transcribing Pancirollus) but confine my self to a few Instances instead of infinite others, the Product of our own Nation, inferior, as I said, to none for what they were wont to Deify their Antient Hero's and Demi-Gods, Patriots, Benefactors, and Persons any way Eminently ex∣celling, as who have just Right and Title to the Honor of Me∣dal; and even He, that Glorious Man among the most Illustrious (if I may predict without Offence to the Envious, and Tribe of Scoffers) who shall one Day emancipate from a yet precarious Station, and by Building, or some noble and ample Endowment, enlarge the Conveniences of that SOCIETY at Gresham College, will be the noblest Subject of Medal and Statue, and of all that I have hitherto said of Great and truly Honorable, to Crown the Memory of the most Munificent Benefactor of this or any Age: This Period, if to any obnoxious, they shall find it justified in the Preface to the last Edition of Sylva. And now let none of these Inventions here and else whereSee. cap. 8. ci∣ted, be the less Esteemed, because Modern, seeing the most An∣tient once were so; and therefore we should be Curious to Col∣lect, besides the Inventions and Improvers of other Arts; Print∣ing, Chalcographie; Painting in Miniature, Oyl, Fresca; in Glass, A∣mel; the stupendious use of the Magnet, Algebna, Specious Arith∣metick, Tactics, Engyscops, Microscops, and other Optick Glasses; Pumps, Quench Fires, &c. What our bold Urinators and Divers have excogitated and brought to that perfection for the taking up of Treasure, submerged Ordnance and other Wrecks from the bottom of the profoundest Seas; improvements in Shipping, Coaches, Plows, Mills, Barometers, Thermometers, Speaking-Trumpets, Dulcifying Sea-Water, Sheeting of Ships with Lead, and sundry o∣ther Polychrests, Machins and Instruments useful to humane Life, most of them due to the English and those of the RoyalSociety: To these add Tachygraphy and Short-Writing as they call it (so far exceeding the Orator Tiro, for its singular Use and Expedition) as of things, many of them altogether New, and unknown to the Antients; but by whom the Authors would have been Cele∣brated among the Minervas, Vulcans, Dedalus's, and as we said, even the Demi Gods, and should have Mercurius on the Reverses of their Medals, as by some of which (to name only Printing, Gun-Powder, and the Nautic Box, in Re literaria, Militari, & Navali) the whole Face and Frame of the World, (as my Lord Bacon observes) has almost quite been chang'd.
Nor this out of Vain-Glory, Oftentation, or Ambition of a Name (tho' Honos alit Artes and is its due) but for Encourage∣ment, aud the Benefit of future Ages, as well as of the present: For who can Divine (as all things are in continual Flux in this sublunary State, obnoxious to Changes and Vicissitudes) what, or when the Period of things, seemingly never so fixt and stable may be? since we our selves have seen, daily read, and have be∣fore us the Fate and Catastrophe of the most polish'd and civil Nations; the Greeks and Romans, that of China and other Fa∣mous and Antient Empires, over-run by barbarous People, who burnt and destroy'd all those goodly Monuments and re∣mains of Learning and Ingenuous Arts, subject to such Deluges, Invasions and Revolutions: I say, who can tell but Medals may yet revive, survive and out-live the Generations and Ages to come, as they have since done this of ours? For how many obscure Passages of History, Geography and other parts of useful Erudition have been, and still are illustrated and supplied from Medals and Inscriptions alone! They have we see (and is abun∣dantly made out) discover'd the Religion, Rites and Superstiti∣ons of the Antients, the Deities of the several Countries, the Ori∣ginals and Rise of Illustrious Families, Brave and Heroical Acti∣ons and Things as well Facinorous and Tragical, Events which have escap'd the Teeth of Time, and surviv'd all its Revoluti∣ons; they have given us the antient Names of many Cities, Si∣tuation of Countries, Rivers, Monuments, Temples, Solemn Feasts, and a thousand other useful Notices, no where else to be met with, or if nam'd, very corruptly, and so of divers Pontifs, Governors and Proconsuls, &c. not to be found in any Book: In a word, Medals (the truest Lydian Touch) have often prov'd the Best and Truest Comments on Authors, and are the most De∣lightful and Instructive Compendia's and Maps of the Antient World, in the most flourishing State. But to go on, or return rather to the modern and later Cen∣turies (which we left behind) one shall find, who among the most Curious and publick Spirited had begun the MetalickBizot tom 3d. p. 3. Au Lecteur. History of Holland antecedent to Bizot, namely the Antique-Mo∣dern Medals of the Famous Princes of Sicily, Milan, Florence, Ve∣nice, Genoa, &c. for the most part moulded, and in the large Volume and richer Metal; with these may Luckius and Typa∣tius be consulted as the only Authors (I conceive) that have taken any considerable Notice of the several States and Republicks, and as Molinet, those of the Popes; to which may be added other
Famous or Infamous Persons, celebrated or mentioned in later History, whether Princes or private Persons. The Studious therefore will sedulously inquire after the Me∣dals of Iohn Huss, and his Companion Ierom of Prague, Maxi∣milian, Francis the First, and Charles the Fifth his Expedition into Africa, Anno 1535. as before this of Solyman the Magni∣ficent's Siege of Belgrade, 1521. and that of Vienna Eight Years after; Philip Villier's de l' Isle Adam brave and strenuous Defence of Rhodes, Anno 1522. Of Charles Duke of Bourbon's Sacking of Rome, and Imprisoning the Pope, 1527. &c. Of the Smal∣caldian Famous Convention of the Protestants, 1530. &c. Of the Difference between Henry the Second of France, and our Sixth Edward when Bulloign was gotten from us already menti∣on'd. That of Charles the Fifth's (indisputable) Abdication and Recess, 1555. That remarkable one of the Use of the Cup in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist indulg'd to the People of Bohemia, 1564. Valetta's glorious Defence of Malta, besieg'd by the Turks, 1565. with the Reddition of Nicosia in the isle of Cyprus to Selymus, 1570. Of the Famous Battel and Victory of the Venetians at Lepanto, Anno 1573. and the Year before that of the barbarous, bloody and inhumane Massacre perpe∣trated by Charles the Ninth thro' France, inscribed, Virtus in Re∣belleis, the Reverse is two Columns, which was the King's De∣vise or Symbol, with this Inscription, Pietas excitavit Iustitiam: In another, round his Head, Carolus Nonus, Rebellium Domitor; the Reverse Hercules fighting against Hydra with a Flaming Torch and Club: But above all, Pope Gregory the Thirteenth Reversing his stern Effigies with a Representation of that base and Antichristian Murder of the Admiral, the words Hugonotorum Strages, so honestly and impartially described and detested (as we noted) by the Pen of the Illustrious and LearnedTunc e∣tiam, nequid ad summam insaniam de∣esset, aemula∣tione vete∣rum Imperatorum Laus in tam detestando facinore quaesita, nam cusi Numi Argente &  Regi{que} III. Non VII br. Oblati in quorum antica paxe Regis in Throno sedentis Effigies depicta erat, cum Inscriptione, &c. Thuan, Hist. Lib. III. Ao. M.ICLXXII. Thuanus; to which one may oppose that observable Medal of Lewis the Twelfth, upon his being interdicted by Iulius the Second. PERDAM. NOMEN. BABYLONIS. Moreover, there are Medals of all those signal Persons and Passages, Sieges, Battels, Treaties, Marriages and other remark∣able Actions (Argument of History) not only happening in Europe, but in other parts of the World, where Christian Princes have been concern'd: But before I dismiss this Paragraph, I
must not omit such as have on small Occasions, and unlikely Causes and Accidents, produced wonderful Effects, threatning the sudden Subversion of States and whole Kingdoms; besides some of antient Times, those nearer our own. Instances of these are the Medals which those notorious and truculent Enthusiasts, Iohn of Leyden, Knipperdolling and their Associates, stamp'd with their Effigies and Heads during the Siege of Munster, Anno 1534. whose Story you have in Sleiden. To this Series belongs Masinello of Naples, Sabbati Sevi, and such as like him have endeavour'd to make any sudden Changes among the Mobile. There is a Curious Medal (but very rare) struck with the Prince of Condi's Head, about which was inscrib'd, Premier Roy Chrétien des Francois. as Brantome affirms in his Hommes Illustres; but from what o∣ther Author Spondanus has it, I know not: Sunt (says he) Autores qui asserunt, Condaeum apud Sandionysium Regem à suis Co∣ronatum esse, Monetamque auream impressam cum hac Inscriptione, LODOVICVS. XIII. DEI. GRATIA. FRANCORVM. REX. PRIMVS. CHRISTIANVS. Monsieur le Blanc affirms that he found such a Medal in a Gold∣smith's Shop in London, which he could not procure for any Price. Lastly, Not to pretermit such as among us here at home have lately distinguish'd themselves (besides those already mention'd, and during our flagrant Broils and Exile of Charles the Second) un∣der several Denominations; Divines, Lawyers, Physicians and Soldiers; Mr. Prim, Dr. Bastwick, Burton, &c. The Loyal Judge Ienkins, Mr. Clement Walker Author of the History of Inde∣pendency, or Cromwell's Slaughter-House; to which may be added, Killing no Murder; and that Stout and Couragious Assertor the Famous Lilburn, who stood the no less Famous Tryal under the late Arbitrary Usurper, whose Medal is a Record.
XCIII. The Medalion Represents his Effigies to the Life, with this Remarkable Inscription. IOHN. LILBORNE. SAVED. BY. THE. POWER. OF. THE. LORD. AND. THE. INTEGRITY. OF. HIS. IVRY. WHO. ARE. IVDGES. OF LAW. AS. WEL. AS. FACT. Oct. 26. 1649. Reverse. In several Circles one within the other, a Rose in the Centre; MILES PETTY. STE ILES. ABR SMITH. ION KING. NIC MVRIN. THO DAINTY. EDM. KEYSAR. EDW PARKINS. ROL PACKMAN. WIL COMINS. SY. WEDON. HEN TOWLIN. Octob. 26. 1649. The sad Catastrophe of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, with the won∣derful Consequences following it, and the Part it is likely to take up in the future Stories of our Times, prompts me to the mention of some Medals that I find were struck concerning him. The Medal represents his Effigies in Bust, with two Hands appearing to draw a Cravat about his Neck.
XCIV. CER VICE. FRACTA. FIDEM. SVSTVLIT. ALTAS. XNS. 1678. Within the Circle. MORIENDO. RESTITUIT. REM. E. Godfrey. Reverse. The Pope holding forth a Bull, and a Man strangling ano∣ther on the Ground. TANTVM. RELIGIO. POTVIT. XCV. Another represents him at length, walking with a Sword thrust through his Body, and coming out at his Shoulder; Head and Neck bending down as broken.
Inscrib'd, Godfrey walks up Hill after he is Dead. ERGO. PARES. Reverse, St. Denis with his Head in his Hand. Inscrib'd, Denis walks down Hill carrying his Head. SVMVS. At the bottom upon one side PRO. on the other PA. de∣noting Protestant and Papist. There is another with the like Inscription, but the Reverse XCVI. presents one carried on Horse-back, held upright by a Man riding behind him; another leading the Horse near the side of an Hill, and pointing to these Words, EQVO. CREDITE. TEVCRI. And there follows yet one more Tragical, where in a large Medalion
XCVII. we have Sir Edmond strangling by two Friars; a rich Sedan conveying a Person in it; this between two Inscriptions; on the upmost of which, appears the Pope and Devil, with the Names of GRENE. KELY. HIL. & BERY. Under this, IVSTICE. KILLERS. TO. HIS. HO. beneath which Sir Edmond lies on the Ground with a Sword thro' him. On the Circle. ROMES. REVENGE. on SR. EDMVNDBERRY. GODFREY. MVRTHERED. IN. THE. POPES. SLAVGHTER-HOVS. 1678. I have seen nothing of Coleman. But It were yet a greater Wonder, the Famous Dr. Oates, and Mr. Bedloe, &c. should not appear in Medals, but of whom I have yet seen none save this Sarcastical one, XCVIII.
representing two Persons in Bust, with their Heads Ianus-like, looking contrary ways; the one in the Habit of a Minister, the other of a Shaveling, a Iesuit's Cap covering them both; the Words, WHY. SO. FICKLE. Reverse. A Group of Seven Heads, whereof one in full Face and Perruke, the other six half Faces, fain'd to resemble the Detectors of the late Popish Plot, Inscrib'd, BIRDS. OF. A. FEATHER. FLOCK. TOGETHER. Invented no doubt, to the Reproach of those who expectPranc, Dangerfield, Colledge, &c. distinct Memorials, and will have name in our future Annals. To conclude, The extraordinary Activity of the Person du∣ring this restless and jealous Period, suffers me not to omit the Medal which follows. XCVIIII. Effigies. ANTONIO. COMITI. DE. SHAFTSBVRY. Reverse, Is the Sun behind a Cloud, darting his Beams on the City of London.
About it. LAETAMVR. Under. 24. Nov. 1681. On which Mr. Dryden has been pleased to Comment in a Poem under that Title. And now after this Assembly, and those many others whom I have set down in the Catalogue of both Worthies and Unwor∣thies (and whom for many different respects, one would be glad to have remember'd) I do not as I said, affirm that there are Medals of one half quarter of them: But I mention the Names of those that are Conspicuous for their Virtue and Worth, as well as Notorious for their Villanies and Ambition; all of them Matter and Argument for Medal of great Use in good History, and by no means to be neglected or slighted of the curious and diligent Collector, as Occasion or Opportunity may one time or other present them, and for the Reasons I produce. And thus having now done with HEADS and Effigies, which are the Body, and chiefly affect the Vulgar with the Pi∣cture and outward Person, and given as succinct an Account of REVERSES as the copiousness of the Subject would admit (which with the Legenda is the Soul and Spirit that ani∣mates all the rest) we in the next place proceed to INSCRIP∣TIONS, and to what remains of this Discourse.
CHAP. V. OF INSCRIPTIONS. INSCRIPTIONS upon whatsoever Species, as they pass'd for Money, and were only valu'd as such, were doubtless, at first but very plain and simple things, bearing only some Mark or Character denoting the Weight and Worth of the Metal; but when ambitiously they began to set Heads and Pictures, and to blaze their Actions on the Tables and Reverses of them; it was then they became valuable, not only for the intrinsic Worth of the Metal as Money, but for the Light they afforded to the Learned; and that so much Superiour to the other, that a small piece of Coin, or morsel of Copper came to be estimated above its weight in Gold or Silver: This, as we shew'd, being first begun by the Monetarii, and follow'd by those Princes and Great Men who affected Glory; they often present us with their Names, Families and Titles, even before the Cesars durst so much as shew their Faces on a Medal; that is, till the aspiring Iulius usurp'd the antient Government: Nei∣ther yet did the Flatterers of those who succeeded him so far prevail, as that they used any Superscription about their Effigies, save that of the bare Name (and that with Caution too) or Quality of the Person for a considerable time. But here, before we pass any farther, there is an hypercriticism started by the late Author of the Science, concerning the Diffe∣rence between Inscription and Legenda, as to Propriety and nice Application; whether one to the Head and Effigies (or rather instead of Reverse where there is no Figure or Head at all) the other to them both. The First (according to this Learned Man) is properly where the Words or Epigraph are on the Table of the Reverse without any Figure or Emblem at all, as in that Medal of Antoninus, (besides the Head side) COS. IIII is all we can find on the Reverse; which nicely, and according to our Critic, is a lawful Inscription: That only allow'd to be the Legenda, where the Words are engraven about the Figure and explain the Meaning. In this Sense every Medal then may be said to have two Legends, one about the Head or Image, and another about the Reverse. The First notifies the Person by his proper or acquir'd Name, Office or Dignity; the Second
proclaims his Virtues, Memorable Exploits and Glorious A∣ctions: Such for Instance is another Medal of the same Prince, with the same Title on the Head-side, Antoninus Augustus. Pius, Pater Patriae. Trib. Pot. COS IIII: where we have his Name and Quality: On the Reverse three Figures representing the Emperor sitting, before whom stands a Woman holding an Horn of Plenty, and a Tablet marked with four Points; ano∣ther spreading her Lap in posture of Receiving; the Legenda, LIBERALITAS QVARTA, intimating the Fourth Act of Bounty confer'd by the Emperor on his Subjects, in distributing certain Measures of Corn among them. By this it appears that the Rule is not always constant, but that now and then, both Office and Names are mingl'd and interchang'd, part on the Front-side and part on the Reverse, with this Note, that the Title of Pater Patriae is most usually on the Head-Table, or that of Censor, Pontifex Maximus, Augur, &c. on the Table of the Reverse, together with the Symbols and Instruments of their Dignity, as may be seen in a Reverse of Vespasian and other Emperors. Nor are these Offices without their different Rela∣tions in Medals of Families, distinct from the Royal and Impe∣rial. In Medals of the First occur the particular Charge and Office only, whereas in the Imperial, mention is made of the highest Office and Dignity, as Sacred and incommunicable to any other, as we shall see anon. In the mean while the Legend is then properly turn'd into an Inscription, when (as we said) there fortunes to be a Reverse without any Head, as in that of Tiberius, struck in Memory of the Care he took in Re-edifying certain Cities in Asia, which had been subverted and ruined by an Earthquake. Here we find that Emperor on his Curule Chair, Civitatibus Asiae Restitutis; and upon the Reverse, a simple Legend, without any Head, Tiberius Caesar Divi. Aug. Filius. Augustus. Pont. Max. Tr. Pot. xxi. But these Examples indeed concern Imperial and Royal Me∣dals only: Those of Cities or Provinces bear commonly the Head of some Genius or Deity in particular Veneration among them; the name of the Place, Magistrate, or both for the Le∣gend; for the Reverse, some Emblem or Symbolum; and for the rest, the worthiest and most signal Action of the Person repre∣sented in it, whether by Figure or Device explained by the Le∣gend, and is therefore to be looked on as the Key of the Type, and as already we have shew'd in that of Trajans concerning the Parthian King. Rex Parthis datus; or by the Emblem, as where
Iulius and Augustus's Victories are symboliz'd by the Crocodile with Aegypto Capta; the like by Trophies, Palms, Asia Subacta, &c. determin'd by the Legenda, celebrating their Singular Vir∣tues and Actions of the Person, and that in a short and concise Mot, apposite to the Subject, proper and unaffected; yet Great, Noble and as Comprehensive as may be, reserving the longer ones for Publick Edifices, Columns, the Fronts of Temples, Tri∣umphal Arches, &c. where they are in their proper places, but in Medal would be impertinent, and instead of gracing, detract from Roman Majesty. Thus we meet the Name of an Emperor or Cypher only, and sometimes nothing more; other whiles that of the Magistrate, as Q. Aemilius. M. Agrippa. Cos. designatus: In another the Simple mention of the City or Inhabitants only. Caesar. August. Sagobriga, or perhaps an Epoch without any fustian or swelling Epithets: In a word, that one word , served to express whole Provinces assembling at publick Shows, and other solemn Occasions. For they did not then (no not in the time of their greatest Pride and Elevation of Empire) farce their Titles and Inscriptions with haughty and insolent Expressi∣ons, like the present Eastern Sultans, and some that are nearer to us: But as a Learned and IngeniousMr. Fleet∣wood's Sl∣loge Insr. p. 13. Author of ours ob∣serves, Licet veteres ingenio planò divino pollebant, elegantius ta∣men nimias laudes & numeros plusquam perfectos, semper consultò fugiebant, & in Inscriptionibus, brevitati, non obscurae studebant semper, &c. So extreamly mistaken in this point is Monsieur Perault in his late Parallel between the Antient and Modern Learning, so amply perstring'd by the Learned Mr. Wotton. What we have alreadyPag. 78. noted of a present Monarch's charging the Marbles with large and lofty Titles, seems here∣ditary to the late French Louises, but a remarkable Modesty in Louis le Grand's ascribing to himself the Expugnation of Ducen∣tas Civitates, Two Hundred Cities only, whilst we read in an Inscription (erected by Cardinal Richlieu) under his Fa∣ther's Statue, the taking of no fewer than Three Hundred Ca∣stles (in the Air) and Rochelle above all; in which Action, Om∣nia Mundi Elementa vicit. The Epigraph contains above Fifty Lines of this Stuff, but to which it seems, somebody has made an Antilogium with much more Truth. And now, tho' I do not affirm this Vanity to be only French, since 'tis reported that Francis the First, to whom Charles the Fifth sent a Letter fill'd with innumerable Royal and Imperial Titles (how many Kingdoms and Mighty Territories he was Monarch of) began
his Answer with only Franciscus Dei Gratia Franciae Rex, & Do∣minus Gonessae (which is one of the wretchedest little Villages in all his Dominions) I know not whether were the more Am∣bitious of the two. But however the Stile runs now a-days, it was then suf∣ficient so they open'd the Meaning of the Type without those horrid Sentences and Additions promiscuously used by the Bas Empire, and for the most part among the very worst of them (Commodus, Caracalla, Iulian, &c.) with the most flatttering Epithets, Publica Orbis & Temporum felicitas, that were the most unhappy and pernicious to the Ages they liv'd in: Of this sort are those with Saeculum aureum, &c. comparing them to Bacchus, Hercules, Serapis, Alex. Magnus, &c. but with∣out the least Title to those Vertues which render Princes truly Great and Grateful to their People, and which indeed are the most ordinary and familiar in Reverses, as that of Clement, Pious, Iust, which is sometimes join'd to their worthy Name: So Con∣stantia Augusti, Spes. Augusti, &c. So far, I say, were these Heathens from this turgid Exuberance of some in our days, that even thatTrajan so called from the great number of Inscriptions which were set us in his Reign. Herba Parietaria himself, is said to have gloried more in the Title of Optimus and Clemens, (Qualities of real Me∣rit (not as afterwards of Custom) which the Senate bestowed on that worthy Emperor) than he did in Magnus, Parthicus, Dacicus, and all those other lofty Attributes and Strains of the Flatterers of Princes, so as nothing was more short and concise, especially where any Benefit was express'd: v. g. Fundator Pa∣cis, Gaudium Reipublicae, Assertor Publicae Libertatis: Recogniti∣ons S. P. Q. R. Ob Cives Servatos, &c. and sometimes more di∣stinctly, Via Trajana, Restitutor Monetae, Vehiculatione Italiae re∣missa, &c. which were Graces, Concessions and publick Bene∣factions: To these add, singular and extraordinary Events, Victories and things highly monumental, distinguished by the Legend, as Victoria Navalis, Portus Ostiensis, Forum Trajani, &c. In a word, the shorter and plainer the better, and therefore fragments of Verse and points of Wit, were always rejected, and to be suspected wherever we meet them in Medals, and to∣lerable only in Devises and Emblems of Parade and Ca∣rouzels. As to other Adjuncts, that of Surname was given for distin∣ction of Families, and therefore continu'd Hereditary among the Romans, even after the Coalition with the Sabines; and such as they assumed were the Gentilitia, Cognomina & Agnomina (reser∣ving
still the Praenomen as we noted) as being deriv'd from the Place, Exploit, Vertue or what other Accident or Circumstance happen'd: Thus TITVS. QVINTVS. PVBLIVS, &c. Some∣times the Binomen, as SCIPIO AFRICANVS, who was the first that assum'd a Surname, affected and follow'd afterwards by others, as that of GERMANICVS by Commodus; by Severus PARTHICVS; and tho' rarely after this singly and alone, yet in Medals seldom or never exceeded three: But above all was the Name CAESAR AVGVSTVS taken up by all the subse∣quent Emperors as a Dignity, and AVGVSTA by their Wives, nor (more veterum) for any Noble Action or Vertue extraordi∣nary, but by whatever Art or Policy they obtain'd the Power, and since of Custom retain'd to this day. As to the Name of Caesar, one is sometimes to consider it as Successor to the Em∣pire, sometimes as Cognomen, and again, as denoting only the Family; and so Titus Caesar differs from IMP. Caesar Vespasian Aug. &c. After these came the Offices and Dignities frequently annex'd to the Family, as III. VIRI: Monetarii. A. A. A. F. F. Aediles, Quaestor distinguishing them from the Imperial, in which we only meet the most Eminent and Considerable, PONT. MAXI∣MVS. IMPERATOR. TRIBVNITIA POTESTAS. CEN∣SOR. PATER PATRIAE, which last was introduc'd with the Orator Cicero, upon his detection of the Catiline Conspi∣racy, tho' given at first to Iupiter only as Chief of the Gods: So COS. or COSS. Consul, Consules. Lastly, as to Families, we may not forget, that they often put the Effigies of some Emperor, as in that of Gentis Corneliae, Arriae and others, stamp'd by their Friends in Honor of their Relations. They had also their Cognomina, not only as an Adjunct, but , from some more conspicuous and superlative Ver∣tue, as was that of PIVS given to Antoninus; the Clemency, Moderation and pacific Disposition of other Princes, honoring them with those Epithets, as did that worthy saying of his, Malle se unum Civem servare, quam mille hostes occidere, which was indeed the brave Scipio's before him, as Capitolinus tells us. And in this manner were distinguish'd the Imperial Medals by their Legenda, from such as bare the Images of the Gods; to whom yet (as we shew'd) even some of the Emperors would be joyn'd: Others we have expressing their Devotion and Re∣cognitions to them as Patrons and Protectors: Hence that of Gordian IOVI STATORI. &c. The like among the Empresses
IVNONI LVCINAE for easy Travel, and VENERI GE∣NETRICI, &c. In the Inscriptions of Fortresses, Provinces, Rivers, and the like, we sometimes meet Tiberis, Danubius, Nilus, &c. and so of Dacia, Africa, Alexandria, Bilbilis, together with their Quali∣ties and Immunities, v. g. COLONIA IVLIA AVGVSTA FELIX BERVTVS: MVNICIPIVM ILERDA, &c. of which we have given Instances before. Moreover the Legenda acquaints us with the Names of the Military Ensigns, Legions, Cohorts, and indeed of whole Armies, as that Anthony had no less than xxx. by the numbers express'd, LEGIO. I. II. III. &c. together with their distinctions, whe∣ther design'd for Land or Sea Service: v.g. LEGIONIS PRI∣MAE ANTIQVAE. LEGIONIS XVII. CLASSICAE. LEG. xx. Hispanicae, &c. So in like manner COH. PRAETO∣RIANAE. Armies and Expeditions. EXERCITVS. BRIT. Expeditio Iudaica, Parthica, &c. And when the Emperour him∣self design'd to lead it, we read PROFECTUS AUG. AD∣VENTVS AVG. Trajectus Augusti, &c. To these add their Discipline, Adlocutions, Oaths of Fidelity, Publick Shows and VOTA, which rarely extended beyond xxxx. few Princes Reigns exceeding that number, tho' in their Muchios Annios, VOTA X. MVLTIS, and Acclamations, they flatter'd them with abundance more, of all which, consult the Learned Monsieur Cange. In like sort the Consular (whilst that Wise and Glorious Re∣publick flourish'd) are known not only by their Heads, Gar∣ments and Reverses, but by the mention of their respective Charges and Employments in the Legend. TRIVMVIR. AE∣DILE. QVAESTOR. PROCONSVL, &c. I say, whilst the Republick flourish'd, and some short time afterwards, especi∣ally during the two first Emperors Iulius and his Successor; for so long they retain'd indeed some sort of Credit, but soon it became a Title of Courtesie, till they quite lost them both. Great Light in the mean time would the Dates of the Consulates afford both to History and Chronology; and it were desirable Au∣tiquaries had oftner given us the Heads as well as the Reverses, since it is on that side is frequently found the Marks of Consulate, which reached down as far as to Iustinian: But this may be much supplied and assisted out of our Countryman Thomas Lydiat's Series Summorum Magistratuum, & Triumphorum Roma∣norum, or by the Tribunitia potestas, which does not seldom
make up the defect, by shewing the Year of the Emperors who since Tiberius usually assum'd the Title. I say usually, because not always, some for Years only, others refusing it, or confer∣ring it on others, yet for the most part, taking it upon them∣selves, so as one may reckon the Tribunitial Power to keep even pace with the Years of the Emperor. Thus Vespasian gave it to his Son Titus, with the addition of Augustus, two Years after he was made Emperor, and so X or XI. TRIB. POT. tho' he Reign'd but three Years after his Father. Other Examples occur in M. Aurelius, Caracalla, Geta, &c. mention'd by the Learned both in the Greek and Latin Medals. We have already shew'd how tenacious these Princes were of whatever venerable Title created any distinction, as that of High Priest, Censor, Tribunitial Power tho' usurp'd from the Com∣mons as the other from the Consuls, reducing that once Illu∣strious Character to a Cipher only; and yet with what ten∣derness they at first seem'd to take them up, especially that of King (nomen invisum) and odious only but to Name, and therefore wisely contenting themselves with that of Emperor, as then signifying no more than General of the Forces, till the Successors of Iulius, insensibly, and by little and little, assum'd all those Dignities and Degrees without controul: Augustus yet himself appear'd at first with Caesar Divi Filius only, after∣wards Imperator, and by Degrees, Triumvir Reip. &c. Domi∣tian being both the first and last who stiled himself Censor per∣petuus, and none before Aelianus or Aurelianus using that of Dominus, thence descending to Basileus of the Greek Emperors, who also afterwards omitted it, or very rarely bore any ex∣traordinary Title, or so much as the Sculps of their own Effi∣gies, to give place to that of JESUS CHRISTUS, or to some peculiar Saint, first begun by Zemiscus already mention'd. In Medals of the later Emperors of Constantinople, we read, , which (like that of Seignior or Dominus) was certainly an abatement and decadence from that of King, as in a manner answering what the Name of Caesar did to that of Augustus. For albeit the Greeks gave antiently the Title Ba∣sileus to the Caesars, yet they would no more indure the Name of Rex, than that of Tyrannus (which was at first a Glorious Title) to shew what malevolent Influence the abuse of Power has upon the best of things: Notwithstanding some they yet flatter'd with the most blasphemous Titles of , as so many God Almighties; nay,
which tho' 'tis said Augustus did not like, yet proceeded they to that height of Insolence and Pride, as that some of the Greeks would be call'd Kings of Kings, Eu∣patores, , Saviours (as in some Medals with Apollo and Aesculapius) Epiphanes, Theopatores, in short,  Gods; arm∣ing themselves with Thunderbolts, and other Symbols of Deity as already we have shew'd. With the same Adulation to the Romans (when under their Dominion) we find , with the Monster Nero, and tho' more frequently Divus only, yet seldom read we Deus in the Latin, tho' they often made too bold with his Divine Attributes, as Magnus, Maximus, In∣victus, Iustus, Felix, Beatissimus, &c. In summe, nothing was more false than the slavish and flattering Eulogies attributed to some of the very worst and most abandon'd Emperors and Empresses, auguring long and happy Reigns and many Years to them, whom they wish'd dead a thousand times, and pro∣claiming them Chast, Pious, Iust, &c. who of all others were the most vicious and impiously wicked, and this towards some of the later Emperors especially, whilst with more modesty the very Pagans were content with that of Pius, first us'd by that most excellent Prince Antoninus, and their Empresses, with Pia, Felix, Augusta, tho' by some indeed who were not of that De∣gree; nor was yet that well deserved Surname given and be∣stow'd upon him by the Senate, granted to his Successor on the same account, but as a peculiar Honor to him alone, as was Optimus to Trajan: The Name of Pius Felix usurp'd by Commodus and those who follow'd, being a mere Title only, and as such affected by their Wives, without the least Merit or Right to it. Other exorbitant Titles were Iulia Genetrix Orbis, Mater Se∣natus; and as Pater, so would they be also Matres Patriae too. In the lower Empire V. N. M. R Venerabilis noster Mater, we find on a Medal of an Apotheosis or Consecration, Coin'd by those of Naples in Honor of Constantine, with the Effigies of his Mother Helena: Nor indeed were Mothers honor'd in Medals only, but Kindred, Friends and Alliances, as in the  of Ariobarzanes, Philopator, Philadelphus, &c. The Names of Pater, Mater, Filius, Filia, Soror, Cognatus, &c. of no small light to Hi∣story. And here we may observe how the same Person now and then quitted their adopted Names, &c. for some other Com∣pellation: Instance of this we have in Trajan's taking that of Nerva (who indeed first advanced him) and not long after
leaving that off again; the like did Hadrian. Others ambiti∣ously affected Titles of such as had them both. Thus the pro∣per Name of Antoninus was usup'd by no fewer than six Empe∣rors, even down to Caracalla, and the Monster Elagabalus; that of Trajan assum'd by Decius, &c. which not seldom creates no small Difficulty among our Latin Medalists, as find∣ing, neither Date or Epoch to direct them, which one does commonly among the Greek, religiously exact in that particu∣lar; and it is indeed of great Importance, since but for that, all History would be imperfect, and hardly would Authors have distinguish'd the Antiochus's, Ptolomees, and other Princes fre∣quently found in them, without this Assistance to give Instance in no other. Of this, and much more which I am yet to say (as in par∣ticular of the Names of Magistrates both in Greek and Latin Medals) Authors afford plentiful Accounts. One thing as to Families (which I had almost forgotten) is to be observ'd, that among the latter Greeks, Comnenus and the following Emperors took the Title of , from that splendid Apartment or Chamber in the Royal Palace, which was pav'd and curiously inlay'd with that precious Marble, and in which it seems the Empresses were brought to Bed; the Heir when born being also wrap'd in purple Mantles. We have already noted, that the Title of Princeps Iuventutis, belonged to the young Heir Apparent, or so design'd, from the time of Augustus, tho' not found in the more antient Medals: Caesar with Augustus was afterwards taken up by the Emperors themselves; but neither Caesar given as a Title, but a Name only, 'til Adrian's Adoption of Aelius Verus. The young Philip Augustus was stiled Nobilis Caesar, a Title given afterwards to those who had part of the Government committed to them, such as were those four Caesars which Dioclesian created; much of which may be illustrated by that Noble Medal in which we find Adventus Severi & Filiorum, after the Conclusion of the Parthian War, in which their several Faces may easily be di∣stinguished, tho' in so small a Volume, as they sit Galloping in a Posture of Commanding, and tho' unarm'd; Severus in the middle, Caracalla on his right side Laureated as principal in the Expedition, and acknowledge'd Partner in the Empire; Geta on the left hand, with the Name of Caesar, bare-headed. Now as they were Concise and Frugal of the Legend on Re∣verses, in like manner were they no less sparing in the Inscrip∣tion
about Heads and Effigies, so as in some (and those no very modern ones neither) a Monogram oftentimes serv'd the turn, as we find in those of Martianus, Placidia, Valentinian and the Labrum of the Great Constantine, with divers of the lower Em∣pire, especially from Charles the Great (who 'tis said, could not so much as write his own Name) and thence down∣wards, tho' 'tis not always to be taken for a single Letter only, but many time for the Cipher or Character of the Prince (as now our Merchants use to mark their Goods and Embalments) as may be seen in some of Trajan; but of this,Lib. 11. c. 10. Mabillon de Re Diplomatica abundantly. In this manner we meet the Greek Ω in the Coins of the first Christian Emperors; and as for that ☧ of Constantine which is sometimes found upon his Cask and Banner; it had indeed been born long before, asSymbol. E∣pist. xxiv. Pignorius well observes in divers Medals of the Aegyptian Ptolomies, and might happily compendiously signifie the Name of the Monetaries, as Chrestus, Chrysogonus, Chremes, Chrysippus or the like, and yet be afterwards made use of for the Venerable Character of our Blessed Saviour, who first took away the Ignominy of the Cross; there being likewise several other things profan'd by the Pagans, which were afterwards introduc'd among the Christian Rites and Usages. Thus the Cross it self ✚ (decussated at Right Angles) forming a Stigma of Infamie (abrogated since by the same Constantine) and commonly branded on the Fore∣heads or Collars of fugitive Slaves, with the Names of their Patrons and Masters to whom they belong'd (as do now our Falkners and Masters of Field-Sports, on the Vervils of their Hawks and Dog-Collars) is now exalted to the sublimest part of the Papal and Imperial Crown. The very same Character we likewise meet with among the , Notes us'd by Criticks, as Loci Laudabiles, of which Plato seems to have made use of several, as both the Learned Casaubon and Menagius in their Comments on Laertius describe the Figure. Epoches are sometimes noted in words at length, as ΕΤΟΣ ΔΕΚΑΤΟΝ; but more frequently by the Cipher and Abbrevia∣tion, v.g. ΕΤ. Α. Β. Γ. &c. and usually too for the Year L. So ELNATON. N. L. E. for the fift Year; the Numeral some∣times placed thus, LE the ninth Year. So "Λ by the Greek for Annus, tho' as an ambiguous Figure rarely met with. Nor in any Authentick Medal the Number IV, but by IIII strokes. Epoches of
Cities began at the lowest Letter; for Instance, that Pompeiopolis, which bears the Heads of Aratus and Chrysippus. Θ. Κ Σ not Σ. Κ. Θ &c. And now we mention Cities, it was a piece of errant Flattery in Complementing the Emperor, to begin a new Aera or Epoch upon some signal Action, or extraordinary Benefit received, and in token of Recognition; as did they of Antioch upon Iulius Caesar's permitting them to be govern'd by their own Laws. And so in another Medal of Augustus after his Victory at Actium, of which see the LearnedAntirr. de Numis. An∣tiq. Col. & Municip. Hardoin Monsieur Vaillant believes that by one of these Antiochian Aera's (of which he reckons four) may be made out the certain Year of our blessed Saviour's Nativity, which according to his Com∣putation happen'd on the 749th. Year V. C. Lastly, In the Bas Empire of the Greek, we sometimes meet the Year in the Latin Letter, as in that of Iustinian thus, A x N x N x O III Caution is here given, that in Reading Inscriptions we mi∣stake not the Names of Letters, as HS. LL. &c. (which are the Marks of Sestertius, Dipondius, Bilibris, &c.) for the Le∣gend, and especially not to take them for Praetors, or Numerals for Provinces, and Vice versâ, as it seems some have done; and others that exceed ordinary Ciphers and cannot be reckon'd for Epocha, such as (tho' rarely) are met with in the Reverses of Families, and in the Lower Empire xxx. xxxx▪ xxxxv. &c. by none hitherto clearly explained. Lastly, Whilst we speak of Numbers, the Gift of Largesses and Congiaries in Provisions of Corn, &c. appearing in the Reverses of those bountiful Princes, by Figures specifying how often the People had been thus sup∣plied: Congiarium and Liberalitas Aug. II. III. IIII. V, &c. which is the true Reading: In like sort where one meets COL. AN. X. XII. XIII, &c. denoting how many Years that Colonie had been supplied under the Emperor named. In some Greek Medals, Letters are now and then plac'd sini∣strorsum, like the Phoenician; and in other Roman we sometimes find the Legend varied as to place: For Example, that of Optimo Principi in Trajan's is not constantly in the same Table: That of Felix Pius in Commodus's (which his Successor took up) is ever on the Head side: And such as betoken Victory over
Provinces, as Britannicus, Dacicus, Germanicus, &c. we meet sometimes on the Head, and sometimes the Reverse; but such as denote Grandeur and Power, always on the Reverse, as Genio Populi Rom. Restitutori Orbis Terrarum, &c. found in se∣veral Medals, unless it happen to be where the other Sex is con∣cern'd, as Genetris Orbis in that of the young Lady Faustina, Mater Patriae, &c. of which we have already spoken. The same alteration of Locality, may be also taken notice of in Me∣dals of Consecration, where we read Divus, Diva; , Me∣moriae aeternae, and the like. We have likewise shew'd how the Title of Imperator was given, or wisely taken up by Caesar and his Successors as a Surname, to decline the odious Name of King (tho' we some∣times find ) since it did the business as effectually as ; which is tant a mount Augustus, and Soveraign Power; albeit, given now and then by way of Acclamation, or otherwise, as Cognomen to a great Captain after some signal Victory, without other Epithete or Addition. The distinction to be heeded on this account is, by observing the Locality, and placing such Titles as we find before and after the Name of Emperor, and of the Figure or Number which often shews how the same Person merited both the Titles: Thus IMP. II. sometimes repeated in the same Inscription, speaks his having been more than once saluted Emperor. It is further to be heeded, that the Position of the Legenda distinct from the Superscription, is generally but since the Em∣peror Nerva within the Grand Circle; beginning to read from the left Hand to the right, which was usually the contrary in those Medals of the first Caesars; some on the Exerge only, others in parallel Lines one above the other beneath the Type, and some few Salterwise; others in Pale, or at the side of the Figure in the middle, and Fesse-point, (to speak in Heraldry Language) cut as it were by the Head or Figure; some in Bordure. In short, 'tis likely as pleas'd the Artist without any invariable Rule; nay, some Medals were without so much as any Legend at all, shewing an Head only, and consequently a Body without a Soul; for such are not only met with among the Consular, but Imperials, as before is noted. There are Re∣verses likewise that are but half animated; several Augustus's bearing no Inscription, and a world there be of stark Mutes, or speaking only the Mint-masters Name, or the simple S. C. of which sort there are three or four very rare Medals of Pompeius,
with very curious Reverses; two of Iulius Caesar's, and others of Galba, &c. all of them charg'd with several remarkable Figures and Historical Emblems: But the fatall'st Error is, when either Letters or Numbers are mistaken, which causes great Con∣fusion, especially in Epoches, and only to be rectified by com∣paring them with other Medals of the same Emperor: Those in the Orthographie are not so dangerous and material, tho' H be frequently omitted, as in Ercules, Abe for Aue, Bixit for Vixit, Benus for Venus; for Valens, Balens; Iubentus for Iu∣ventus, Renobatio for Renovatio, Fabe for Fave, and the like. The Capital REST, Restituit betokens some Renovation, or the Memory of some Famous Predecessor, v. g. Claudius's restoring certain worn out Medals of Augustus: Nero, Titus, &c. those of almost all their Royal Ancestors; Gallienus (without any Inscription) new Coining the Consecration Medals of the pre∣cedent Emperors. Now as above it was observed of the Latin, so have we likewise the Names of some Archon or Magistrate in Greek Me∣dals (of whomMarm. A∣rundeliani terminus. Diognetus was the last among the Athenians) as of the Roman Kings Romulus, Quirinus, Ancus, Tullius: Those of Mauritania, Numidia; Macedon; Philip Iuba, Iugurtha, and the rest. But of Nummi Iconici, such as represent Heads and Effigies only, without any History, and such as have neither Head nor Name to shew (for such there are) the Collection is little worth. In the Inscriptions of Christian Emperors of Constantinople, one is not seldom puzzled and perplex'd what to make of them, where one meets Initials only, as in that Medal of Constantinus Copronymus C. LEON. PAMVL.  (id est) Con∣stantinus Leoni Perpetuo Augusto, Multos Annos, at least as Mon∣sieur du Cange renders it; and in a Latin one of Antoninus Pius S. P. Q. R. A. N. F. F. Optimo Principi Pio; that is, Senatus Po∣pulusque Romanus Annum Nonum Faustum, Felicem. Here also note, that F standing with P, if in Elogie of some Legion, it should be read Fidelis, as LEG. II. PART. VII. Pia VII. Fidelis, &c. Lastly, One thing more is to be observed in Reading of Greek Inscri∣ptions, (not so in the Latin) that the Proper Names does for the most part run in the Genitive, as if  or  were under∣stood; so , the Effigies or Money of Alexander. In the Roman Medals we meet with almost all the Cases, v. g.
In the Good Fortune of Princes, Fortuna Augusta, Perpetua, Fortunae Felici, Fortuna Redux, Marti Ultori, Propugnatorem, &c. The same likewise of Names, as Caesar Augustus, Divi Iulii, Imp. Nervae; the Accusative excepted, or very rarely used among the Latin. Others there are more abbreviated, especi∣ally Roman Titles both Consular and Imperial, and accordingly give no small Interruption to the unacquainted; we will there∣fore borrow the Assistance of the LearnedHistor. Nu∣mis. C. xxiii. Patin for our Tyro with some few Additions. De Notis & Vocum abbreviationibus quae in Numismatibus Romanis occurrunt. A. A. Aulus. A. A. A. F. F. Aere. Argento. Auro. Flando. Feriundo. ACT. Actiacus, vel Actium. ADIAB. Adiabenicus. AED CVR. Aedilis curulis. AED. PL. Aedilis plebis. AEL. Aelius. ALBIN. Albinus. AET. Aeternitas. AFR. Africa, vel Africanus. ALIM. ITAL. Alimenta I∣taliae. ANT. Antonius, vel Antoni∣nus. AQVA. MAR. Aqua Marcia. ARAB. ADQ. Arabia Adqui∣sita. AVG. Augustus, vel Augur. AVGG. Augusti duo. AVGGG. Augusti tres. AVR. vel AVREL. Aurelius. B. BRIT. Britannicus. BRVT. Brutus. BON. EVENT. Bonus Even∣tus. C. CAEL. Caelius. C. Caius. C. A. Caesarea Augusta. Car∣thago Antiqua. C. vel CAE. vel CAES. Caesar. CAESS. Caesares. CEN. Censor. CENS. P. Censor perpetuus. CEST. Cestius vel Cestianus. C. G. I. HP. A. Colonia Gemella Iulia Hipponensis Augusta. C. L. V. Colonia Julia Victrix, vel VALENTIA. CIR. CON. Circum condidit, vel potius Circenses conces∣sit. CIVIB. ET. SIGN. MILIT. A. PARTH. RECVP. Civi∣bus & Signis Militaribus à Partitis recuperatis. CN. Cneus. COL. Colonia: COL. NEM. Colonia Nemau∣sensis. CONS. SVO. Conservatori suo. CONCORD. Concordia.
CL. V. Clypeus Votivus. COMM. Commodus. CLOD. Clodius. CL. vel CLAVD. Claudius. COS. Consul. COSS. Consules. CORN. Cornelius. CVR. X. F. Curavit Denari∣um faciendum. CARTH. Carthago. D. D. Decimus. DAC. Dacicus. D. M. Diis Manibus. DES. vel DESIG. Designatus. DICT. Dictator. DOMIT. Domitianus. D. N. Dominus noster. D. D. N. N. Domini nostri. DID. Didius. D. P. Dii Penates. E. EID. MAR. Idus Martiae. EX. CONS. D. Consensu Decu∣rionum. EX. S. C. Ex Senatus Consulto. EQ. ORDIN. Equestris Or∣dinis. EX. A. PV. Ex Argento pub∣lico, vel Autoritate publica. ETR. Etruscus. F. F. Filius, vel FILIA. vel Felix, vel Faciundum, vel Fecit. F F. Flando feriundo. FEL. Felix. FELIC. Felicitas. FL. Flavius. FORT. RED. Fortunae reduci. FOVRI. Fourius pro Furius. FONT. Fonteius. FRVGIF. Frugiferae (Cereri.) G. GERM. Germanicus. G. P. R. Genio Populi Romani. G. T. A. Genius tutelaris Aegypti, vel Africae. H. HEL. Helvius. HER. Herennius, vel Herennia. HEL. Heliopolis. I. JVN. Junior. JAN. CLV. Janum Clusit, vel Clausit. IMP. Imperator. IMPP. Imperatores. I. S. M. R. Juno Sospita Ma∣ter Regina vel Magna. ITE. Iterum. IVL. Julius, vel Julia. IVST. Justus. H. S. Sestertius. I. O. M. SACR. Jovi Optimo Maximo Sacrum. II. VIR. Duumvir. III. VIR. R. P. C. Triumvit Reipublicae Constituendae. IIII. VIR. A. P. F. Quartum Vir, vel Quatuorviri Auro, vel Argento publico feriundo. L. L. Lucius. LAT. Latinus. LEG. Legatus. LEG. PROPR. Legatus Pro∣praetoris.
LEII. Legio Secunda. LEP. Lepidus. LENT. CVR. X. F. Lentulus curavit Denarium faciun∣dum. LIBERO. P. Libero Patri. LIC. Licinius. LVD. SAEC. F. Ludos Saecula∣res fecit. M. MES. Messius. M. Marcus. M. Manius. MAR. CL. Marcellus Clodius. M. F. Marci Filius. M. OTACIL. Marcia Ota∣cilla. MAG. vel MAGN. Magnus. MAC. Macellum. MINER. Minerva. M. M. I. V. Municipes Munici∣pii Iulii Vticensis. MON. vel MONET. Moneta. MAX. Maximus. MAR. Martia (aqua) MAR. VLT. Marti Vltori. N. N. C. Nobilissimus Caesar. N. Nepos vel Noster. N. N. vel NOSTR. Nostri vel Nostorum. NAT. VRB. Natalis Vrbis. NEP. RED. Neptuno reduci. O. OF. Officina. OPEL. Opelius. ORB. TERR. Orbis Terra∣rum. O. Optimo. OB. C. S. Ob. Cives Serva∣tos. P. P. Publius, vel Pater. P. P. Pater Patriae. P. M. vel PONT. MAX. Pon∣tifex Maximus. P. F. Pius Felix. PAPI. Papius vel Papirius. PARTH. Parthicus. P. L. N. Pecunia Londinii No∣tata. PERT. vel PERTIN. Perti∣nax. PESC. Pescennius. P. R. Populus Romanus. PR. Praetor. PROP. Propraetor. PROC. Proconsul. PROQ. Proquaestor. POMP. Pompeius. PRINC. JUVENT. Princeps Juventutis. P. vel POT. Potestate. PERP. Perpetuus. PLAET. Plaetorius. PRAEF. CLAS. ET. OR. MA∣RIT. Praesectus Classis & Orae Maritimae. PRON. Pronepos. PROV. DEOR. Providentia Deorum. PRIV. Privernum. PVPIEN. Pupienus. PAC. ORB. TER. Paci Orbi Terrarum. Q. Q. Quintus, vel Quaestor Q. C. M. P. I. Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius Imperator.
Q. P. Quaestor Praetorius. Q. PR. Quaestor Provincialis. Q. DESIG. Quaestor Designa∣tus. R. R. P. Respublica. R. P. C. Reipublicae Constitu∣endae. RECEP. Receptis (signis) vel Receptus. REST. Restituit. ROM. ET. AUG. Romae & Augusto. S. SARM. Sarmaticus. SALL. Sallustia. S. C. Senatus Consulto. S. P. Q. R. Senatus Populusque Romanus. SEPT. Septimius. SER. Servius, vel Sergius. SEV. Severus. SEX. Sextus. SCIP. ASIA. Scipio Asiaticus. S. M. Signata Moneta. STABIL. Stabilita (Terra.) SIG. RECEP. Signis recep∣tis. SEC. ORB. Securitas Orbis. T. T. Titus. TI. Tiberius. TER. Terentius vel Tertium. TEMP. Temporum. TR. P. vel TRIB. POT. Tri∣bunitia Potestate. TR. MIL. Tribunus Militum. TRIVMF. Triumphator. TREB. Trebonianus. V. V. Quintum. VII. VIR EPVL. Septemvit Epulonum. VIB. Vibius. VIL. PVB. Villa Publica. VIRT. Virtus. VIC. Victoria. VESP. Vespasianus. V. C. Vir Clarissimus. VOT. X. MVLT. XX. Votis Decennalibus Multiplicatis Vicennalibus. X. X. Decimum. XV. VIR. SACR. FAC. Quin. decim-vir Sacris Faciundis. XIV. Quartum-decimum. XIIX. Octavum-decimum. With abundance more, assistant to the Reading of such and other Inscriptions, as either occur in Medals or antient Marbles; for which may farther be consulted Goltzius, Ser∣torius, Ursatus's Commentary de Notis Romanorum; or the Abbreviation of him subjoin'd to the end of Mr. Prideaux's Edition of the Marmora Oxon-Arundel. Mr. Fleetwood and o∣thers. But besides these, different are Languages and Inscriptions, according to the several Countries and Nations where Coins
and Medals receiv'd their Stamps and Impressions; especially those of modern Times, whether Medals or Money, of which there are some Persons as Curious in Collecting, as of the most Antient; tho' they be by no means of equal Consequence to the Learned upon that Account By the truly antient Medals (in what Countrey or Place so∣ever struck) we find the Greek and Latin Tongues still pre∣vailed, as the most Dominant and Universal; and as first be∣gun by the Greeks the Romans followed: and even after their having subdued that Nation, yet they seemed to submit in this, and do Honor to the Greek Language in their Medals, tho' stamp'd in Italy it self, and other parts of Europe out of Greece. It is true, we meet also with some Imperial Medals Coined among the Greeks and Gauls too, wearing Latin Inscriptions, but not frequently; for the Greeks in flattery to the Emperors, and indeed before they were subdu'd, would often imitate the Latin Inscriptions, as &c. for Concordia, Bona Fortuna, Providentia, &c. Medals are also found to speak the farthest Oriental Languages, Hebrew, Arabic, &c. but such as are liable to great Exceptions, as to their genuine Antiquity; tho' there may probably be many, which might perhaps have course among those Na∣tions with Hebrew or Samaritan Letter, as upon the Shekel and Half Shekel, and other Pieces of various Type, as already we have shew'd. Those in Arabic are not so rare, some of them bearing the Head of Roger King of Sicily, Saladin, and other Famous Mahumetan Princes wretchedly Insculp'd. But the Punic and Carthaginian (altho' Minted in Spain, and among the Moors and Saracens in Africa, whose Inscription Characters are much alike, and pity it is they are not legible) are not to be rejected; some of them being of good Antiquity, Coin'd by the Libyan Kings since Iulius Caesar; as that of Iuba, with a Reverse in Characters, not yet revealed; and others in the Punic Letter, as what we mention'd of Queen Dido, &c. con∣cerning which, Antiquaries are not yet agreed. We have also spoken of the Barbarous and Gothic, whereof some do yet retain obscure Footsteps of the Roman Majesty; as do those of Theodosius, Athalaricus, and a few of the Vandal Kings reigning in Spain and Afric, of which see Ant. Augustinus. For the rest, they are so frightful both in Figure and Letter, as betray an extream Stupidity: Very odd Inventions and extravagant Fancies we likewise sometimes meet with in divers of our
Saxon both Coins and Marbles; of the latter of which see Copious Types in the late Edition of Cambden's Britannia ex∣plained by Mr. Walker, where you have the Runic and other Alphabets out of Bouterovius, and an Account of Afred's changing the Old Saxon Letter near the Roman as then in use. Lastly, Those of the Turks struck since Mahomet, are by some thought worth notice, as of use for the History of the Caliphs and Saracen Emperors. And now tho' both the Greeks and Latins did certainly compose the most Noble, as well as the most Antient In∣scriptions, whether in respect to the Purity of the Language, or to the Proportion and Elegancy of the Letter: Yet as there is nothing under Heaven remaining long without change and alteration, so these had their Turns, Acme and Decadence at last also to a strange degeneracy. The Greeks (who as we said, struck Medals before Rome had so much as a Name in the World) us'd the large and ample Capital, without any considerable Mutation: Indeed the Letter  was unwrinkl'd into the smoother C after Domitian; but the Beauty of the Character lasted down to Gallienus; albeit, afterwds not al∣together so full and round. In some Medals we meet with Mixtures of Greek and Latin, as E for H. O for . Z for  and è contra, and sometimes even in the Colonies of the High Em∣pire we read SRF. for CP  (of which the Illustrious Spanheim) and therefore one is not always peremptorily to condemn such Encounters. Since the Reign of Constantine, for the space of Five Hun∣dred years, they made use of the Latin only, tho' the Medal were stamp'd in the City, bearing his Name; yet now and then with a mixture of the Greek Character on the Reverse, v. g.  K. for Focas, &c. Michael Curopalata, Master of the Pa∣lace, who came afterwards to be Emperor, being the First where the Legenda began to appear in Greek again; if so one may call the Tongue and Letter, both which then began to decline and be corrupted with the Latin; whilst yet the Latin Letter in its highest Perfection, Elegancy and Beauty had preserved it self as unmix'd, as it was in the Reign of Augustus: I say, till the Greek Empire it self fail'd and was no more. Tho' one might perceive it languishing, and by degrees decay from the Reign of Decius, when the Character was nothing so well shap'd and easy to be read, so that hardly one could distinguish the N from M; tho' it reviv'd again, and so conti∣nued
till Iustinian, after which it not only reapsed into Rude∣ness and Barbarity in Shape and Character, but the very Words and Language were corrupted: Not to insist on Orthogra∣phical Errors, because they are not always an infallible Sign of a modern or uncultivated Age; since we frequently meet with V for B. O for U. F for PH. as in Danuvius, Volcanus, Tri∣umfus, &c. all of antient use. Peireskius sent the Ectype of a Medal to Sir Robert Cotton, in which Britannia was with both a double and single N. To Medal-Inscriptions of the several European, &c. Nations both of the present and latter Centuries, their most considerable Actions and Exploits, as likewise concerning Counters and Mock-Medals (which usually have the Legend and Epigraph of the Language and Letter where they are Coin'd) we have already spoken. And of such of greater Antiquity, as have their Letters so mise∣rably defac'd, exeded and worn out by Tract of Time, or the Nature of the Metal, or other Accidents; that they either are not at all Legible, or with much Difficulty to be recover'd; there's nothing more to be said, but to deplore the common Loss, because there are many such; tho' there have been Attempts to restore them by Cunning Artists, with the Puntion, the use of Aquafortis and such like Corrosives; by the one to raise the Letter a new, and by the other, to take off the roughness of the Stroak, so as a Skilful Medalist shall not suddenly discover it: But when all is done, they will by no means bear a thorough Inspection, especially what they do by the Puntion. In the mean time, it seems as if some Inscriptions (tho' I remember not to have read of above one) have been very neatly Inlay'd, after the manner of Damaking in Relievo, as they heretofore raised Flowers and other Fancies upon our Spurs, Knives and Sword-Handles. For such a Piece, bearing the Effigies of young Augustus (when going under the Name Thurinus) Suetonius seems to say he himself presented the Emperor, who received it as a very precious Jewel; you may be sure he means to the Emperor Trajan or Adrian, whose Secretary that Noble Hi∣storian was. And now how infinitely more easy had been the Reading of thoseIt were to be wish∣ed that there were extant a yet better Alphabet of the various Characters and shapes of Letters met withal in an∣tient Manuscripts, Coins and Saxon Monuments, with an Explication of the Abbreviations. See Philos. Trans. N. 189. Anno 1687. Inscriptions which succeeded the Antient ones, had they still continued the Old Capital and Uncial Letter, which
the Barbarous Goths first deform'd both in their Coins, and indeed wheresoever they left their Cruel Marks. Thus we often meet the Micron or little o among the tallest Capitals, and so of other Letters both on Metal and Stone; and as to their Money (for one is to expect no Medal of Account from them) we sometimes find an Head with a Fillet or Coronet, without any Name at all, unless it be sometimes of the Mint: The same shew also several of our Saxon Coins, together with the Names of the Place, when struck, and Master of the Work, whereof in the Chapter following the next. In the mean while as concerning other Titles and Superscriptions, that of GRATIA DEI, &c. worn about the Head and Effigies of all Christian Princes (that of Russia, I think, excepted) how long our British Monarchs have successively Challeng'd it, is no part of our Enquiry here; and as for those we have spoken of above, let Monsieur de Cange be consulted; and for the rest (namely the genuine and truly Antient) farther facilitating the Interpretation of Titles and Inscriptions as they relate to the Topics of lawful Medal (besides Goltzius's Thesaurus, digested after the Method of Adversaria) the Learned and singular∣ly Judicious Adolphus Occo, as improved by his late Editor Mezzobarbi, is so instructive as little can be more desir'd, as far as concerns the Roman Emperors, Wives and Families; and were the Second so much expected Volume publish'd, doubtless the Greek likewise.
CHAP. VI. Instructions how to Collect and Procure such Medals as are Antique and Rare, and to Distinguish the True from the False, for the Prevention of Frauds and Impostures. AND thus we are almost arriv'd to the conclusive Part of this Discourse, to which after one Chapter more we shall put a Period, recommending here some brief and necessary Directions how to procure such Medals as are wor∣thy the Charge and Pains of Collecting; what to Choose, Reject, Avoid, be Cautious of, that one be not Impos'd upon, with some few other Observations not Impertinent to the Subject For the First of these: The means of Procuring the most Authentick and likeliest to be truly Antient, is frequently from Countrey People, who Labour with Plow and Spade, and such as are Employ'd in Digging about old Banks, Mounds, High-ways, Foundations and Ruins, where happly Stations, Castrametations have formerly been; where Legions have Quar∣tered, Battles been Fought,Under which they used to strew Medals, as did of latter times, Pope Paul II. who caused great store of Gold and Silver Medals stamp'd with his Effigies, to be laid un∣der the Foun∣dations of his Buildings, More Ve∣terum. Buildings and publick Works Erected, and the like. For as we noted, the Roman Wealth was dispers'd thro' all their Conquests, and that not in drib∣lets and inconsiderable Sums as casually drop'd and lost, but in vast Quantities: Full Jarrs, Urns and Vessels of large Ca∣pacity, being often sound deeply buried in the Earth, or left in places appearing more like deserted Caves, Vaults and Magazins, which probably were heretofore, parts of Stately Edifices, and where sometimes they might have Publick A Mint reported to be lately found at Valagnes near a large Theatre, not far from the the Sea in Bas-Nor∣mandy, where was taken up a great Treasure of antient Medals, both Consular and Imperial, and abundance more, said to have been found in Denmark by Labourers this present Year. Mints, and Coin'd Money; abundance of their Flasks and Casting-Moulds, made of the finest Clay, being not seldom turn'd up among the Rubbish of such Places. There is hardly City, Town or Castle, Port, Old Roman Fosse, Causeway or Remarkable Eminency near them, whether now or anti∣ently standing and appearing in any County of England,
where Medals and Coins, Roman, Saxon, Runic, Norman, &c. have not been found, and are daily yet discover'd: Nay, I have been told that in some such likely Places, they will give more by the Acre for Land in purchase, in hope of some lucky Chance. After this it will not be hard to satisfy some that I have known to wonder, how such mighty quantities of Treasure should be found thus buried here in Britain: It is to be con∣sider'd, that the coming of the Saxons upon the Romans (nine Years after the Sack of that dominant City) was so sudden, with such a Flood, and so unexpected, that running away into France with all the hast and speed imaginable, they had no leisure to transport and carry away their Riches a∣long with them, and that which they could not carry, they hid under Ground in several places, as carefully as the time would permit, not without hope that they might possibly one Day return again, as our Saxon Chronicle informs us:CHRON. Sax. Anno CCCC VIII, Hic Romani Thesauros omnes qui erant in Britannia (inventi) coacervaverunt, quorum aliquot in terra occultarunt, nè quis homo inde reperire possit, aliquot autem secum in Galliam abduxerunt, &c. I repeat this therefore, that Countrey People and Labourers should be encouraged to bring to Gentlemen what ever of this kind they commonly offer the next Market-day to the Gold∣smith of the Neighbouring Town, or to some Brasier, who for a trifling piece of White current Money, gets now and then a rich Prize under a rusty out-side. These poor People seldom come to Curious and Learned Persons here, as they do commonly in Italy, and other Foreign Countries, more Inquisi∣tive, and abounding in Anticaglia of this Nature: Goldsmiths, and other Shops, who expose Curiosities, and such as deal in Pawns and Brokage; Tinkers and Founders are often to be visited. Moreover, by Acquaintance and the Favour of Ambassadors, and Assistance of such Factors and Travellers as reside at Constanti∣nople, Smyrna, Aleppo, Alexandria, Cairo and other parts of the Levant: But above all, Inquiry is to be made, where any Cabinets or Collections of Medals are to be disposed of, whe∣ther by Auction or privatly. Since by this means (as he who would furnish his Library with excellent Books) more may happly be procur'd at once, and at tolerable Price, than one shall be able to find, and get together in many Years, by Collecting them one by one. And there is likewise this En∣couragement, that Traffic for Medals between Gentlemen and
the Curious, either by Money or Exchange, is ever esteem'd an honorable Commerce. Now as among the most Esti∣mable, the Choice and Rarity of a Medal consists in its Beauty, (for it cannot, as one observes, be affirm'd of them; what the Italians say of Military Ensigns, Quanto lacera più, tanto più bella, the more torn and ragged, the more honorable;) so does it in Excellency of the Design and Workmanship of the Person, with its Historical Reverse, Legend and Inscription, whether about the Figure, or upon the Exerge; some of which there are yet so fresh and well preserv'd, as after so many Ages to look as if but newly Minted, and who would not be glad to see the Faces of those Famous Princes of Macedon, Syria, Aegypt, Sicily, Pontus, Bithynia, Mauritania, &c. of what use and utility, see Monsieur Vaillant. One is also to consider the Composition well (or as Artists and Painters call it, the Groupe) that it be with Judgment; for the Antients do seldom crowd many Figures together, and in Clusters, but as they might stand loose and easy by one another, as one sees in Allocutions; where in one of Faustina's, tho' indeed we meet no fewer than twelve Persons, yet they are plac'd without the least Confusion. Such another is that ample and noble Medal of a like number, doing Sacrifice be∣fore a Temple,  B. with more of the like, as I find by a very Learned Persons taking occasion to speak of the we so often meet withal in Medals, frequently taken for those Assemblies usually resorting to the Temple of some famous and peculiar Deity: Such, for Instance, as was that dedicated to the Ephesian Goddess, xix. Act. 35. which City the Town Clerk tells the unquiet People, was the the devoted Editua or Cultrix of the Great Diana; such a∣nother also was that of Aesculapius at Pergamus, that of Venus at Miletus, &c. The like Consecrated Places they flatter'd some of their Emperors with, where Conventions, Feasts, Publick Shews, Vota, Panegyrics and Speeches were made and celebra∣ted upon Solemn and Festival Days; the Numerals B.  &c. now and then marked on the Reverse, denoting how often they had been held under such and such a Prince; the People, Inhabitants or Corporation to whom this Honor and Privi∣ledge, and the Title of  was granted as Guardians of those Shrines and Holy Places (as now our Ladies at Loretto, St. Iames's of Compostella, &c. not failing to set it forth
in publick Medal with all the Lustre,More of this see in a learned Passage of Clem. Ed∣monds, annex'd to his Observations upon Caesar's Commentary. Pomp and Magnificence imaginable, and with the most exquisite Sculpture: But this by the way only. With this of the Groupe, it is also requisite that a just Decorum (le Costume, as Italians call it) be duely observed, as, that the Persons represented be properly Arm'd and Vested after the Guise and manner of the Age: For Example, setting forth an Adlocution, or any such signal and solemn Occasion, that the Emperor or Tribune have on the Paludamentum;See Pet. Petit Dis∣sertat. de A∣mazonibus. that Amazons be Arm'd with their Pelta and Bipennis, and as these are clad, so that Genii be always represented naked and unclothed, &c. From what has now been spoken above concerning the Number of Figures in Medal, our best Painters (and in par∣ticular the Famous Annibal Carraci) would seldom or never represent above Twelve Persons in a Table or Picture, ex∣cepting such an History as the Rape of the Sabines, or some Battel, rarely I think, met withal in Medal. Painters there∣fore should be skill'd in these Antiquities, as well for the ac∣curateness of the Design and Draught, as that both these Arts were almost Coevous in Perfection and Decadence; the one, long before the Caesars, at its height in Greece; the other, al∣most totally extinguish'd, till within little more than Two Hundred Years, after it had so barbarously been abus'd and neglected for above a Thousand. Moreover, a perfect Medal has its Profile and out-stroaks sharp (Nummus asper) and by no means rugged; the Figures clean and well polish'd; the Contours neatly trimm'd, and ex∣actly round and carefully preserv'd; that the Extancy and Relievos correspond with the Ingraving, and have not suffer'd in Percussion; in all which, there is a certain Spirit of Anti∣quity and Excellency to be discern'd in Antient Medals almost inimitable. And forasmuch as some are with greater Difficulty to be met withal than others, 'tis to be observ'd, that those in Gold are most Estimable, not only for the Matter and intrinsic Value of the Species (which if truly Antique, is ever the more refin'd) but that almost universally, they are the best and rarest Medals, especially if the larger Size; those of Silver are more frequent, yet neither in abundance; for the Greeks being under the Roman Yoke, were very sparing of the more .
precious Metals, whereas there are plenty of Copper in the smaller Volume, and of the ordinary Form and Size innu∣merable, especially of the latter Empire down to Gratian, of which, store are daily found meanly sculp'd, not so thick and substantial, well finish'd and exactly round, as in the antient Medal, by any comparison. Of this sort, namely of the smaller Size, most of all Rare and Estimable (that we may give a Tast of some few) are the Greek, of which those are to be reckon'd, as bear the Heads of their own Emperors with Greek Inscriptions, equal, if not in Number more than of Latin, and for the Workmanship, some think Superiour. Alexander Magnus, clad like Hercules with his Club, Bows, Quiver in the Reverse. Alexander Theopator. Silver. Alliances. All Medals of Alliances are Good and Rare, as Cities with Cities, &c. seldom found in History. Amyntas, King of Macedon. Gold. Antoninus Pius with Hercules, or where Crown'd with a Victoria. Another with a Reverse of Plenty, offering the Cornucopia. Another Inscrib'd A. N. F. F Annus Novus, Fau∣stus, Felix. as some read: Also with Col. Caes. Antioch. &c. A Medalion; the Reverse, Orpheus, Beasts following him. And here we are to note, that there being so many of this Good Emperor's Name, 'tis no easy thing to distinguish them from those of Caracalla and Elagabalus, both affecting the Name of that Excellent Prince, without the least Title to his Vertues. But the Usurper, or Monster rather, may be discover'd by his blubber Lip, and Caracalla by his surley and ill natur'd look; tho' the surer Mark be the Star in those Medals of Elagabalus, as the Title Germanicus to the other; but in some there is neither: Those in Greek, M.  ex∣pressing the Name only, are the most obscure; the Heads are also less resembling. Rare is likewise this Prince with the three Goddesses and Paris. And so Antoninus and Faustina, as are all with Two or more Heads. Antiochus Eupator, a Medalion. Silver. M. Aurelius, a Medalion; Reverse a Temple, with . Artemisia with the Mausoleum in Reverse, a large Medal. Britannicus, Greek; very Rare.
Bruti Filia, Rare. The Caesars Heads Laureated before they came to be Augusti and Emperors. Caracalla with the Funamble: Also a Medalion, Reverse, the Ephesian Diana betwixt Castor and Pollux. Cities in general Rare, especially of the High Empire in Gold (few of the Antient being in Silver) if Coin'd in Italy, as were some of the Greek, and very few of the larger Copper, till Severus, but of all other Cities common: And here note, that many Cities derive their Names from Persons, and di∣vers Persons from Cities, which renders us as many Heads of Homer, as Places that contend for his Birth. Rare like∣wise are those Inscrib'd  Senatus or Conventus Senio∣rum. Colonies universally Rare, according to the Type and Hi∣story; the Reverses (for Colonies are without Heads) is com∣monly a single Ox, or a Yoke drawing a Cart, and led by a Priest, or with some Military Ensign, and sometimes the Cart is alone, importing that the Colony was planted by the People only; if accompanied with Soldiers, or with both Horse or Foot, the Standard shews it: Sometimes also the Legion is express'd, and now and then the Founder, v. g. Colonia Iulia Berytus, &c. of which see the Learned Vaillant. Lastly, There sometimes is the Epoch, and by the like Reverses we learn what Famous Cities had Privilege of Roman Denization, expressed by Romulus and his Brother sucking the Bitch-Wolf. Cleopatra; Silver, Rare, and as a New Goddess Gold. Commodus, with the word Magnificentia, or the Navis fru∣mentaria, as are all those Medals, where one meets it, de∣noting some extraordinary Shew; and so in general are all such as mention any antient Plays and Spectacles, Certamina, Floralia. The Nemeaean Agones &c. The Pythian in Honor of Latona Tripolitanorum. Those with  ce∣lebrating some Marriage, as that of Proserpina and Pluto: Also the Medalion where his own with the Head of Hercules, Ianus like, the Reverse, Tellus half sitting, four Figures about a Globe. Constantinus, with the Sun stamp'd before he was Christian. Consular, Medals in general. L. CL. Cornelius Cossus, Rare. And so is Crispina.
Didius. Decried. Dionysius Syriacus. Domitianus Princeps Iuventutis, with a Ram, or a Woman and an Elephantine Helmet, denoting Alexandria. Elagabalus; Medalion, in the Reverse a Chariot, [in it an Eagle] drawn by four Horses; many others of his decried and call'd in for his Infamous Life. C. Fabritius Luscinus, Silver, with the Head of Iuno Mo∣neta the Reverse Instruments of Coining; Inscription, Sa∣lutaris. Faustina; with Eternity, and sometimes like Iuno, Venus or Ceres; for as we noted divers of the Empresses would be call'd Deorum Comites and  thus the Two Cleopatras; yea and Saviors too, Brothers and Sisters to the Gods, as the Ptolemees and their Wives Berenice and Arsinoe; and indeed the Empresses were many of them Rare, especially with , as that of , leading to the Knowledge of the Emperors and Relations, as that Marciae Otacillae Severae, who some say was a Christian Lady: Such are also Rare with . Gallienus, with a Caduceus; on the Reverse joyn'd Hands, Eternity, &c. thereby signifying the long Reign of those Princes: But after these we meet few Medals of the Emperors, struck either in Greece, Cities of Colonies. It seems either that Privilege was taken from them, and other Provinces that en∣joy'd the same Prerogative, or the Disorders of the Times and Revolutions happening (being jealous and uncertain what Prince to please) they thought fit to neglect it. There is also a Gallienus of Gold with Pax Ubique very rare, and ano∣ther with Sagittarius. Germanicus, rare, as are all the Three Gordiani, especially the younger, with a Reverse of Mercury, and the Afric; Greek, exceeding rare: Also a Medalion where in the Reverse an Allocution. Hadrianus, with his Ganymed and Minion Antinous Heros, also a Medalion with Two Heads: Reverse, one sacrificing to his Genius. Herodes Antipas, very rare. Imperials. Iuba. Gold. Iulius Caesar, with the Star
Iulia Sabina, with Diana. Iulianus, with Anubis and Sistrum. Lucius Caesar, with a Greek Inscription. Macrianus. Macrinus, a Medalion, a Chariot drawn by Harts on the Reverse. Cl. Marcellus. Maximianus; Greek, rare. Maximin and Maximus, a Medalion with Castor and Pollux on foot; Reverse Mithridates. Gold. Nero, on whose Reverse the Farnesian Hercules, or Temple of Ianus shut. Nerva, that large one with the Figure of Liberty; Inscrib'd Octavia Aug. Filia. Otho, with a Reverse a Woman holding in her Right Hand Victory, a Trophy in her Left; Inscrib'd , Temperance and Moderation: in Copper with Serapis; and indeed thro' the whole Series of that Metal, but common in Silver: And here with Caution, that one be not surpris'd with the Reverse in Moyen Bronze. It has been long pretended that there was no true Otho at all in Copper, but Men are now convinc'd of the con∣trary by their Plenty, tho' most of them Coin'd in Syria and Aegypt, and some at Rome; but they do not resemble him so well as the Gold and Silver, which last is not so rare as those of the Grand Bronze, which are truly inestimable, and even those of the middle Size, not counted dear at the Rate of Forty Pounds Sterling. For some Medals and Medalions, like Unios of Pearl, for their being so very Rare and hard to come by, cannot be purchased too dear: For Instance, in this Em∣peror, an Otho on Horse-back; that of Agrippa Caesar, third Son of Marcus Agrippa and Iulia, adopted by Augustus with Tiberius, and other inestimable Medals; and on this Account, one may now and then with Glaucus prefer without Reproach. Pescennius, an ample Medalion, Greek, Silver; was lately in the hands of Mr. Falknier with us in England; but is now swal∣lowed up in the French King's Cabinet; who has by his Cu∣rious and Industrious Emistaries, gleaned an immense Trea∣sure of all that's Rare in this kind.
Pescennius Niger, with Apollo Sanctus, and Sanctus Pacifer. Papirius, Silver; Head of Rome arm'd with a Rostrum; Reverse, Victory drawn by four Horses; . Cursor. Pertinax, sacrificing, a Noble Medalion: His Reign of so few Years, makes all his Rare. Posthumius with his Son, two Heads; the Father sacrificing to Hercules in the Reverse. Pompeius, Legend Magnus Imperator; the Reverse a Scepter between an Eagle and a Dolphin, intimating his Soveraignty over Land and Sea. Philippus, Reverse ex Oraculo Apollinis, with a Temple of that God, exceedingly Rare, with another of his Reverse, a Dog and the Fish Phocas. Probus. Pylaemenes Euergeta, and an Ox's Head. Pyrrhus. Gold. Republics, those of the Greeks we have in Mr. Walker. River Deities, for bearing the Antient Names of good use, as in that Medal of Severus. Sabina Tranquillina, Wife to Gordianus III. with a Latin In∣scription, Concordia Aug. not long since found at the Famous Siege of Vienna. Serapis, Gold, of the smaller size. Severus, with the Amphitheatre of Titus (which he repair'd) held to be the only Medal of that kind, and never seen but in the Cabinet of Ginetti at Rome; with Geta and Caracalla, three Heads rare, and rarer yet where more. The same with Iulia Domna. Titus, Reversed with his Amphitheatre or Templum Pacis, an estimable Medal; as also is that with Trophies , and such generally as bear their own. Trajanus, with Ariadne carried up to Heaven, Silver; also that with Pax and Concordia joyning Hands; Ears of Corn and Cornucopia, to shew in what Tranquillity and Abundance the Empire flourish'd during his Reign. Tribonian, with Apollo Clarius. Trophies. Tryphon. Tigranes, very Rare.
Valerianus Son of Gallienus, and indeed all Medals with two Heads as before noted: That Medal likewise of his with the River Caystros. Vespasianus and Titus together. Volusianus with the Temple of Iuno Maritalis. Zenobia, Gold; small, rare, as are many others. For we give a touch only here, referring the Studious to good Authors, and to the Conversation of the more Learned and Experienc'd Medalists: Monsieur Baudelot, as generally those of Heads; and above all, Monsieur Vaillant, what are Rare in particular. It is moreover to be consider'd, that some Medals are very Rare, but in one Series, some in all, some common in certain Classes and no other; and Rare in some Countries and Places, which in others are common enough, v.g. Those of Posthumus in France, Rare in Italy. Aelius in the large Copper in France also, in other Places not so. In England there have been, and are every DayIn this Va∣luable, that we may be sure they are Authentic. Medals found of several of the Roman Emperors, especially Vespasian, Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus Pius, M. Aurel. Verus, Commodus, Gordianus, Alex. Severus and Septimius, Pertinax, Philippus, Vibius Gallus and Volusianus; Valerian, Gallienus, Constantinus Chlorus, Helena, Theodora; Constantinus Magnus, Licinius, Crispus, Constantia, Iun. Constantius; Gallus, Magnentius, Iulian, Valerian, Valens, Gratian, Valentinian, Arcadius, and several more; and that in great quantity and different from one another (a great Indi∣cation of some Legions being settl'd in those Places) I do not say all of them Historical, yet some with very useful Re∣verses: Besides these, many Saxon and Runic Coins, &c. found (especially of the Roman) about Old Sarum, Clarendon Park, Malmsbury, Comb-Bisset, Winchfield, Chippenham, Kembel and other Places in Wilts. At Oxenford, Craydown, Woodcot, Gatton, Godalming, Kingston in Surrey. At Arundel, Lewes in Sussex. At Richbo∣rough where more Ro∣man Coins have been found, than in any part of England. Reculver, Sheppy, Rochester, Milton, Dover in Kent. At Conquest in Huntington shire; and about Bridg-Water; Caerleon, St. Iulian, and plentifully about Bath in Somerset-shire; on Malvern Hills in Worcester-shire; about Winchester in Hamp shite; Cilcester in Berks; Old Verulam in Hartford-shire; Hog-Magog in Cambridge∣shire, in Cambridge Town and Castle; Ichworth in Suffolk; Bradburn and Dorchester in Dorset-shire; in Glocester-shire about the Cotswold; in Bartonfield and Mansfield in Hereford-shire; and
Northampton, Stony-Stratford; at Maldon, Colchester, in Essex; in, and about London and Middlesex; Llangmonas in Derby-shire; at Boverton in Monmouth-shire, where they dug up Coins of the thirty Tyrants very rarely found; at Chester; Aldburrow and Catarick in York-shire; Shawell in Leicester-shire, Braunston, &c. at Brougham in Cumberland, and farther North at Lancaster and about Severus's Wall. To which might be added those men∣tioned by the Learned Camden, and Dr. Plot in his Useful Hi∣stories of Oxon. and Stafford-shire; and as I doubt not but he would likewise have furnish'd us with abundance more of his Native Country, Kent, by his late Itinerarium, had he liv'd to perfect it; whilst I am (in the mean time) much oblig'd for most of those above-mentioned to Holinshed,Hol. Vol. 1. and to the Kind∣ness of Mr. Aubrie's Inquisitive and Laudable Perambulations: Here likewise would be consulted Mr. Burton's Tabula Geo∣graphica. Nor are yet the Antient Emperors, &c. the only valuable Medals, but divers likewise of the latter, whether of Gold or Silver; especially their Empresses, bearing Greek Inscriptions, ever observing (as more than once we noted) that those Me∣dals which in the High Empire are frequently found of the large Copper, are much more precious in the smaller, quite contrary in the Bas and Lower Empire; and such as are with Greek Inscri∣ptions, to be generally preferr'd whether Antient or Modern. And here may our Young Curioso and Collectors reckon and esteem those for Antique, which reach down to near the Reign of Valens, or at farthest, to about the Year four Hundred; the rest for Modern, or Antico-Moderni to Charlemaine, always ex∣cepting those which conclude the Greek Empire, which are Mungrels, and to be accounted neither Antient nor Modern, and next to Barbarous. Lastly, Of the middle Size, Store there are among such as carry the Effigies of Heads of the Antient Legislators, Hero's, Poets, Foun∣ders of Cities, Publick and Magnificent Works, Colonies, Reverses of Stately Edifices, Liberalities, Consecrations, and such other Subjects as we have already enumerated speaking of Reverses, importing any extraordinary Event or Expedition, which are Universally to be accounted Rare and worthy the Collection, especially of the Greek, of which there is no danger of being over-stock'd; only if you chance to meet any of the same Stamp (which not seldom happens) it may suffice to make Choice of such as are most perfect, and above the rest,
such as retain any Numeral Letters, for Reasons already men∣tion'd. There has been within this last Century, great Inquiry after this sort of Antiquity, which hath occasion'd the careful preser∣vation of innumerable Coins and Medals, that doubtless had else e'er this, been long since melted down, and converted to other Uses. And yet notwithstanding all this Store, such as have made the nearest Calcule and Guess by what they have observ'd among the Curious, and best furnish'd Cabinets, do not reckon above Five or Six Hundred of Gold; tho some af∣firm many Hundred more of Imperial; of Silver about Three Thousand; of Copper of the ordinary Size, Six or Seven Thou∣sand, all Imperial; and of Kings, Cities, &c. without number: In a word, such abundance as Lazius affirms himself to have seen, and counted no fewer than 700000 in his time; but this is without doubt a Cifer at least too much. And now after all this Travel and Diligence, Cost and Caution in this (as in most things else) one is perpetual∣ly in danger of being deceiv'd, and imposed on by Cheats, Falsaries, and Mercenary Fourbs: I do not mean our ordi∣nary Coiners of False Money by Mixtures, or Alchymical So∣phistications only (which among both Pagan and Christian Princes were by the severest Laws put to Torture, amputation of Hands and cruel Deaths) but by such as make a common Trade of Imposing upon the unexperienc'd in this particular of Medals; upon which occasion I may not pass by that extra∣vagant Piece of Forgery, related by Dr. Burnet (now Lord Bishop of Salisbury) in his Travels thro' Germany; that at the Siege of Bonne, clearing the Ground to plant a Battery, was found in a Vault, a Cart full of Medals (or Medalions rather) of Gold, to the Value of One Hundred Thousand Crowns, so big and ponderous, as one of them weigh'd Eight Hundred Dolars of the finest Ducat-Gold, bearing Impression of Roman Medals, but done so Coursly, as every body pronounc'd them Counterfeits; those which seem'd Truest, were Greek Medals. It is the Doctor's Reflection (as well it might) what should in∣duce a Man to make a Forgery upon such precious Metal, in so vast a quantity, and then to bury them under Ground? espe∣cially, in an Age in which Gold was near Ten-times the present Value; it being judged to have been done Four or Five Hun∣dred Years since.
We have mention'd Enquiry after Countrey-People, Day-Labourers, and such as dig about Old Foundations, that by their Simplicity, one would little suspect should deceive us; nor are we as yet, I think, arriv'd to that Subtilty practis'd in other Countries, where even those seemingly plain and boorish People have now and then impos'd upon the less wary Medalist; as frequently in Italy, and not long since, even in Holland, where there was a great deal of Trash brought about, pretended to have been casually found near the Arx Britannica, Catwick, and other places of that Coast. To obviate these Impostors, who do not only impose on us false Metal, but false and Counterfeit Medals too; some use∣ful Directions may not be unreasonable. For as the Best and most Genuine are most of all imitated, so the suspected are such as to Supply the Chasm, and Compleat the Series, Inge∣nious Artists have endeavour'd to Copy out from the Antients; obtruding them not only upon the Ignorant, but now and then even upon the most knowing. Thus where one meets Veni, Vidi, Vici, to fancy it a Iulius Caesar; or find this Empe∣ror on the larger Bronze; those which we meet on the Reverse, were Coin'd after his Death. Counterfeits, are the Dolphin ad∣hering to Anchor, with Augustus's Festina Lente; several of the Ptolemees; no Antiochus  but ; no Caesarion. Spurious is the Head of Aristotle with his hard Word : Artemisia, Priamus, and the Trojan Horse; Carthago Subacta; Victoria Cimbrica; Scipio Africanus for the most part, and in Truth for the greatest part most of the very Antient Greek and Roman Hero's; Pythagoras, Priamus, Aeneas; Socrates, Euclid, Dio∣genes, Apollonius; Cicero, Seneca, Salust; Homer, Virgil, Horace, &c. which some Contorniati present us with, and more deceitfully Aeneas Vicus, charg'd with Venerable Titles and Inscriptions, some ridiculous enough; uncertain when or where Stamp'd, tho' the likeliest of them, not before the Reign of Honorius, as some conjecture. Of this sort are those pretended Iewish Coins of Moses, David, Solomon, and other Hebrew Kings (unless of the latter Herods and their Successors, which now and then we meet) some of our Blessed Saviour in Samaritan Letters, importing Deus Homo factus est, &c. of all which see Iohn Reiskius, Exercit. Historiae de aginibus in Medals and Money. In short, all that have the Picture of any Animal (the Iews prohibiting all such Sculpture) reject as False, Spurious and meet Figments of Modern Rabbies.
Upon one of the Shekels there is sometimes found the Figure of a Cross (by leaving out the lower Stroak of the  Aleph) which Cross they pretend to have been the first Letter of the Hebrew Alphabet. The Shekel whereon Aaron's Rod with Leaves, suspected, where should be Fruit with Blossoms and Buds. There were yet many supposed very Antient Coins of the Iews which have been melted down by the Christians. But to return to Roman again, Counterfeit are Gordianus of Africa, Pescennius or Maximus of Gold: There's no Plotinus, Matidia, Didia Clara of the middle Copper; no more than Otho's with certain Reverses of that Size and Metal, and suspicious are those even of Gold and Silver of this Emperor, where they find not the Hair of his Head so compt and elegant: For tho' indeed one meets with one such Coin'd in Italy, they may yet be Authentic and True, unless one happens on a Padoan, who has so exactly imitated them on the larger Copper. It is therefore worth the while taking notice of both Metal and Size in Medals of so great Value and Price as are those of this Emperor. All Antient Medals of Gold, Greek or Roman, that are not of the very best Alloy, are to be counted Impostors, excepting some since Alexander Severus, and a few Old Gothic and Punic: To these add such as borrow the Head of an Emperor with some fantastick Reverse, or enigmatical Inscription, which has no relation to the Person, or that appertain to some other, or seem∣ing to Historize some New and Extravagant Thing, never heard nor read of in any good Author before; such also as present us tedious Inscriptions without Abbreviations, or that in Profections specifie the Place whither the Emperor is marching, &c. But those with the Labours of Hercules are not all to be condemn'd, many of them having been struck in the Reigns of Antoninus Pius, and very often after that incomparable Statue of Glycon, yet extant in the Farnesian Palace of Rome. These, I say, and such like, are generally to be suspected, and such we frequently encounter in Medals of the Lower Em∣pire, and about the Dominion of the Thirty Tyrants, agreeable enough to the Disorder and Confusion of those Times: And accordingly they now and then struck some New and Strange Head to an Old Reverse, which had no manner of relation to it; the Person in Authority being so often chang'd and displac'd, as there was no Care taken of New and fitting Ornament, every body doing what they pleas'd, as they ever do under all Anarchical giddy and unconstant Government, till they come to be sober and settled again.
Apocrypha are likewise Medals in Bust, and Effigies of any Popes before Sixtus Quartus; or of the Modern Emperors, Kings of Spain or France it self (what ever they Vaunt) before the Father of Charles V. Philip I. and Charles VII. the rest being all false, and yet greedily Collected by the Credulous and Un∣wary: Nay, and not seldom by the Curious and Knowing, to fill up (as we said) what may be wanting to perfect their Cabinets, until they light upon such as are unquestionably Antique. 'Tis true, that by the help of such Medals (or Money rather) one might procure a Succession even from Charles the Great to this very time. Nay, Strada has begun his Collection from Iulius Caesar without Interruption, but not without some (as 'tis thought) of his own Invention. And now, what if there be some so Nasute and of that Con∣fidence in their great Sagacity above others, as to undertake the discrimination of Antient Medals by the very Smell and Feel∣ing only? (for such we may read of) they should add all the rest of the Senses too, and all of them hardly sufficient. But to pass these fanciful Pretenders, Medals of Copper truly Antient (besides other Indications) frequently distinguish themselves from the Modern (as we said of Graving) by a certain and altogether (I think) inimitable Vernish and Politure, Green as the Emerald, and some of more Turcois Blue; others of a Red∣dish Brown, or Bronze Colour; but most estimable is the Greenish Blue: These whether Artificial, or Contracting that hue by long continuance of Time in certain Earths, is not yet determin'd; but an Antient Roman Sword here lately found, where it had been deeply interr'd, colour'd, and exactly po∣lish'd like to the Vernish we describe; and that upon tough sort of Copper mixture (for of such was the Romans, and such is the Metal of this Weapon, as is plainly discoverable by the Fra∣cture, which in Digging, the Mattoc or Spade has caus'd, by breaking the Blade in two Pieces) makes it very Evident; the rest being intire, and wanting only the Cross-bar and Po∣mel of the Capulum. This Polish so perfectly resembling that best of Vernishes, does almost command my Belief; that what we so Admire, is only the Effect of Age and Burial, which all our Falsaries are not able to accomplish with their Sal Armoniacs, Vinegar, Paper seinging and other Applications and Compositions hitherto attempted. There is indeed a Green Vernish ordinary enough, and very pretty, and only applicable to Brass, but it is so quick and fierce, that it betrays it self:
What of this sort they lay on Silver, serves only to Rust and Canker it the sooner, and is therefore to be cleans'd and gotten off with the Juice of Lemons, or well rectified Spirit of Vinegar; the Truth is, all other Vernishes succeed much alike, and very rarely hit. One is also to take notice of the Quality of the Metal: For instance, in those but lately mention'd of Gordian or Pescennius, Maximus, &c. For a Medal (as we have shew'd) shall be com∣mon in Gold, which shall be very rare in Brass, and another rare in Silver, yet very common in Gold and Copper. In like sort for Stamp, an Head or Reverse shall be very rare in one Species, and in another nothing more ordinary: Those Medals of the so much celebrated Corinthian Brass (not much unlike to our Prince's-Metal) and so call'd, as is pre∣tended, for being a certain fortuitous Mixture of several Metals accidentally meeting together at the Conflagration of that Su∣perb and Costly Ephesine Temple, are generally suspected; or if any true, very few. There were indeed many exquisitely wrought Vessels said to be of that precious Melange, but some expert in Separation, have ingenuously confessed, they never could discover one Grain of Gold in any of them, tho' PlutarchPlut. Defect. Orac. affirms there was. Several other sorts both of Brass and Copper made use of for Money and Medals, are easily distinguish'd of the Skilful by their Colour, as Red in Medals of ordinary Size; those of the larger, by the Yellow Bronze; and some that have been stamp'd upon two different Coppers, discoverable now and then by the depth of the Inscription, especially in some Medalions of Commodus, Hadrian, &c. But of Medals of the pure unmix'd Metal, there are many very Antient and Valuable, and of several other sorts of Brass and Copper Money there are enough, whereof some we find are Silver'd over, or Laminated only with a thin Foil of richer Metal, after they have first receiv'd the Impres∣sion, and of these some since Posthumius, or less Antient from the first Caesars, hardly discoverable without Incision, or a very nice and accurate Inspection, especially about the Rims where certain Notches usually appear: And for the better effecting this, Monetaries have melted old Coins, and taking a slight Proportion of Silver, cover'd the Copper, and new stamp'd it; these among Medalists are called Plated, or Furr'd Medals. In∣deed by Clefts, Rifts and lesser Cracks, one shall not perceive them, so insensibly and by degrees top terminate and loose
themselves in such curiously Small, and as it were Capillaries, hairy Lines and tender Rays, as in the genuine Antique, which may proceed from the force of the Hammer in the Percussion and Coining; but all such Accidents happening in Authentic Medals, are not for that to be presently rejected, provided the Type be tolerably Fair: Besides, 'tis good Indication that the Medal is not Moulded. There are likewise some Silver Pieces (Serrata Numismata) indented as it were, which Challenge good Antiquity among the Consular to Augustus, but rarely after. The track of the File is another Care, and which they are forc'd to use for the better smoothing of the Edges, which would else appear stain'd and slubber'd after they have been newly Cast, whereas a true Medal is either curiously Crennell'd, or finely indented and Cover'd over with a Polish that seems to be natural: Indeed a Medal may be found a little abated with the File, to adapt and fit it to the Nest of the Cabinet, and yet prove a good Medal still; but one had better widen and inlarge the place, than render such a Medal suspected, for an unnecessary piece of Nicety. But to return to Moulding; Medals are certainly more easily Counterfeited by casting off in the Flask, or in the Mould, if the Work-man be his Craft-Master, and have Judgment to Trim and Repair them well; giving the Profiles and Contours that Spirit, Life and Sharpness, which the Antients express'd in theirs, together with that Morbidezza and Tenderness, which we find in the truly Antient; neither can they be polish'd so accurately, but one shall detect some Freckles, which the finest Sand they can be moulded in, is apt to leave, and which, tho' they endeavour to hide and cover with Varnish, is nothing so hard, and consequently not so smooth, as the more durable Antient: And in case they polish the Fund with any Tool, 'twill then seem to have been trimm'd with more Niceness and Formality than is Genuine, which has a certain Firmness joyn'd with the Polish that distinguishes it: But this is a con∣siderable, and indeed peculiar Address, and so is the making them to hold Weight according to their appearing Substance, which is another Criterion. For they are commonly more lax and porous, and less close and pond'rous than what have pass'd the Stamp and Stroke of the Sledge or Press, which renders the Metal more compact: Nay, the very Counterfeit stamp'd, do seldom answer the Weight; some giving the Modern Pound
or Ounce weight to the Antient Roman, between which there is a considerable difference. There are yet some Antient Medals thought to have been Moulded and Cast originally in their Matrices; from all which 'tis evident, how difficult a thing it is, to light upon a Virgin Medal, and that never has been vitiated or re-touch'd. One shall now and then meet with Gilded Pieces, but they are usually such, as tho' haply Antient, are spoil'd and no∣thing worth: But by a like Fraud, were the Caracallae Nummi utter'd, with which that Emperour cheated the Senators. Almost as little valued are those also (tho' true as to their Antiquity) which the unsteadiness of the Die or Stamp has made, representing Two Heads for One; confounding and disordering the Inscription by the jumbling of the Letters toge∣ther; such as we frequently find among the Gothic Coins: We likewise meet with some Medals of Copper, both Consular and Imperial, which bear some emboss'd Effigies on the Reverse, and are as hollow as if they were a kind of Moulds to Cast in; and this happens when in working with the Balance, or other Ma∣chine of pressure, the Operator has forgotten to take and remove that away, which has already receiv'd the Stamp, and slid ano∣ther in between, which makes one in the Relievo Convex; the other inward, and so become Concave. Lastly, There are Medals (if so I may call them) that are quite plain, the Field without any Reverse at all, and some few of those Antient too, but frequently among the Modern, which are good for no∣thing; but a blemish on the Countermark in some Medals is in∣considerable (set as it is now and then upon one side, some∣times upon the other) nor detracts it any thing from the Va∣lue. Thus we find N.P.R.O.B.M. Nota Probatae Monetae, N.C.A.P.R. Nota Cusa à Populo Romano, &c. Others there be, which what they signify is not indeed so perspicuous; and some whose Countersign is some one Emperor's Head or more; others with the Amalthaean Horn. Moreover, there are as we noted, Medals both of Block-Tin, and of baser Lead, which being skin'd or incrusted rather with a sort of fine Varnish or harder Laccar (compos'd perhaps with some dissolution of Mastic or Amber in Spirit of Wine, as they do their Iapan Work nearty laid on) have deceived not a few. Others, one shall perceive to have been fil'd away, and abated at one of the sides so low, as to make it capable of receiving some other Head or Reverse new moulded and embossed upon
the old, and so closely adhering, as not soon to be espied: Nay, they will now and then Raise and Carve another Empe∣ror's Effigies out of some other Antique Head; for Example, an Otho out of Nero's; Pertinax or Pescennius out of a Severus's; and so Families, as of the Aemilii in Grand Bronze, they will usually disguise by the Philips, whose Countenance much re∣semble them, and extreamly inhaunces their Value: And what thus they do on Heads, they also as dextrously practise upon Reverses, by substituting some new and rarer Figure: Thus a Titus with a Reverse of his Father Vespasian; Diocletian with an Allocution; nay, beyond all this, they have the address to slit and divide asunder two several Medals, and with a certain te∣nacious Cement, joyn the Reverses of one to the Head of ano∣ther, and so repair and trim the Edges, that 'tis almost impos∣sible to discover the ingenious Fraud; yea, they can take off part only of a Relievo, and apply it to another by the same Artifice and Dexterity; as the Author of the Science gives In∣stance in a Domitian in aere magno, where the Reverse was in that manner separate, to make room for the Insertion of an Amphi∣theater, taken clearly off from one of Titus's; tho' a very saga∣cious Eye might perhaps espy some small disproportion or com∣misure, or upon suspicion, examine where they joyn by the point of a Burine or some fit Instrument. They are likewise able if need be, to alter and change the Title, especially where there happen to be but few Letters to accommodate them; thus a young Gordian has been Metamor∣phos'd into a Gordian of Africa, by giving a little Beard to the Chin, and by altering P.F. into AFR. or AFR instead of PIVS. which being all of them precious and rare Medals, many are deceived by, only the AVG on the Reverse, not at all agreeing with the Africanus (which is ever marked with GG.) is apt to betray the Cheat to the more knowing Medalists; so Aeternitas Aug. Aequitas Aug. Adlocutio, Securitas Aug. ever accom∣panying the Gordians of Africa. In this the Skilful Seguin was himself impos'd on by an Otho that had been form'd out of a Copper Nero, by turning NER. into , which one would think not so easily done, as in those Sororiae Literae (Sister-Letters as one calls them) C into G. M into N. P. R &c. which consist of half rounds, or down-right Stroaks. They have farther, the Art, not only of Repairing as we said, new Raising detrite and worn-out Letters, but of alter∣ing Inscriptions, where no Letters were at all remaining, by
resuscitating new ones, Masticking them over very Artificially, and polishing the Funds, that is, in defect of Metal sufficient (eaten away by the contracted Rust) to elevate both the Fi∣gures and Letters with the Vernish; nor is this soon detected without some sharp and well pointed Tool, which upon trial, they'll find to be softer and more brittle than the Metal: Besides, one shall perceive some places ruggeder, others deeper, and not of an equal evenness; but indeed, the too accurate forming of the Letters themselves does not seldom discover it; for the Antient Letters had their Stems less strait, and were not alto∣gether so beautiful as M for M, &c. Mr. Walker informs us (and that truely) how industrious the Iews (the best experienc'd at all Impostures) have been to put off such false Ware, and make Advantage of all these kinds of Frauds; but after all this, there's one Diminution, from which Medals are happily exempted, and for ever safe (but to which Current Money is at present more than ever, the most la∣mentably and shamefully expos'd) and that is, from Clipping, which utterly marring the Rotundity, and injuring the Legenda and Inscription, they cannot put in practice without discover∣ing and quite abating of the reputed Value and due Estimation of a Medal above the intrinsic Worth, of which more in the Chapter following. I had almost forgotten to speak of some who have endea∣vour'd to promote their Frauds by burying Medals on purpose, and out of Design, near the Ruins of some Roman Works, and then pretend to have found them there by Chance, and dug them up again, as 'tis reported a certain Statuary did, who cut that Pseudo-Hercules, yet standing in the Peristyle of Farnese's Palace (where the true Hercules is since placed by it) and Sold at a great Price, before this last so justly admired Statue was discover'd; whether the Tradition be True or not, I do not warrant: That the other is no infrequent Practice, I do no more question, than I do that which I remember Monsieur Felibien mentions in the Life of the Famous Michael Angelo. It seems that Noble Sculptor (as well as Painter and Architect) to try how far he could impose upon the Curious in that Art, and Judges of Antiquity, made the Statue of a Cupid, break∣ing off one of the Arms from the Shoulder, and burying the rest of the Body under a certain Ruin, where they were wont to dig in search of Marbles, which accordingly found, past among the most Learned Antiquaries, and Skilfullest Statuaries for an
Authentic and Unvaluable Piece of Antient Art, till Michael himself (after they all had spent their Verdict) produc'd and shew'd them the Arm which he had purposely broken off, and so exactly fitted the Fracture, as convinc'd them of their Igno∣rance (and how fallible the most confident and assured may sometimes be) to his great Renown. To conclude, 'Tis the Opinion of some Skilful Medalists, that it is almost impossible to meet with Two Medals of the same Stamp, which has not its Counterfeit attending it; nay, that when Two Medals of the same Impression be in every part alike, without any apparent Difference, one of them must be False, if not both, and that every Stamp was made by a several Workman, or particular Print; but I conceive (besides the vast Expence) this is not constant, there being so often found such great number of Medals of the very same Person and Coin, buried as we have shewed, in places where Old Banks of Ex∣change, Magazines and Mints have formerly been establish'd, and Treasure hidden. For Instance, above Two Thousand Silver Medals of Sabina the Wife of Hadrian found at one time in Germany; besides, the very quality of the Metal it self, and na∣ture of the Earth, impregnated with Niter and other Corro∣sives, in which they have lain bedded in so many Ages (espe∣cially that which had not been put into Jarrs and Pots accu∣rately close) must needs have considerably alter'd some of them more than others; and perhaps from the Gravers repair∣ing them afterwards, the sharpness being worn off; but what ever they be of truely Antique, provided any one of the Tables representing Head or Reverse be tolerable, a rusty and exeded Medal would not be utterly rejected: but such indeed as are al∣together , and so blurr'd by any accident, as to shew neither Figure, Letter or History undefac'd, are fitting only for the Tinker, but the smaller the blemish and defect is, the better. Here now might I set down some pretty Mechanical ways for the taking off any Medal or Relievo, hollow or extant, which (tho' Curious, and might happly Gratify the Virtuosi) I was thinking to omit; but since it may at one time or other be of Use to supply a Series from some Medal or like precious Intaglia (which one may sooner borrow of a Friend than purchase) I set down such as I have been taught.
I. CUT thin shreads of Parchment, steep them in fair water during twenty four hours, then wash them very clean, and put them into a clean Pipkin over a gentle Fire, till it become a clear and transparent Glew; dissolve Icthyocolla (Fish Glew) in water for two Days, and mingle it with the other over a soft Fire, stir∣ring with a Spoon or Spatal, till throughly incorporated, and of the consistence of Joyner's Glew, then percolate and strain all thro' a clean Linnen Cloth, and so reserve it in a Galley-pot for use; it will last good for eight or ten Days. The Medal or Intaglia you would make a Mould of, being ex∣actly clean and free from Dust, strike over with a gentle Cloth dipp'd in a little Oyl, so as only to render it somewhat slippery; then lay it on a small piece of Board, or wooden Trencher, and make a Bordure of Clay of an Inch high, and half thickness about the Medal, the Glew being gently melted, pour upon it to the brim of the Circle, and cover it with a Paper to preserve it from cleaving to any thing else; then place it where it may leasurely dry, but by no means in the Sun, and it will become very hard; the Medal slipping out, you will find (if on an In-cut) imboss'd, if upon an Out-cut, a Mould to cast in any sort of Paste or fine Plaster; or if you make your Mould in Plaster, you may cast therein a transparent Medal, ting'd with Brasile and Lime-water, Verdigrease, Saffron, strain'd, mix'd and temper'd with the Glew, which is much better than White-Lead or Oakers, which are too gross and not so clear. II. Another. Steep Gum Tragacanth five or six Days in fair Water, till it be very strong of the Gum; into this strew the Powder of Chalk, Smault, Red-Lead, Umber (or what other Colour you please) to∣gether with that super-fine Wheat-meal Dust, which usually sticks to the Hopper, and other places about a Corn-Mill; in this, being all well kneaded and impasted, mould off your Medal, first a little oyl'd as above, and it will become hard enough to polish or take any Vernish. III. Another. Take of the finest White-bread Crums, newly drawn out of the Oven, knead it with your Fingers, and pass a Rolling-pin over the
Dough, till it be as soft and pliant as soft-Wax warmed by the Fire, your Medal or Intaglia a little moysten'd, apply it thereon as you would with a Seal, and let it dry in the shade; you may mix a little Aloes in the Paste, to preserve it from the Worms. IV. Another. Take White Paper which is pretty strong and not too limber, dip and moisten it in fair Water, so as applying it to the Medal it fall gently into, and about every part and fold of the Embossment, there suffering it to dry (as soon it will) take off the Paper wa∣rily and 'tis done. To this I add, that it may afterwards be cut round, and neatly pasted down to a Card of fitting size. There are other Arts of Casting, Moulding and taking off Im∣bossments made with Wax, Sulphur, Plaster of Paris, and (which is more lasting, and indeed to be preferred) with Lead easily enough to be done and learned, together with the Bronzing a∣mong Sculptors; nay, the whole Mystery of Ingraving, making and tempering of the Stamp and Die, with the impressive En∣gine, mechanically describ'd by Monsieur Phelibien in his Principles of Architecture and Sculpture, to which accurate Piece I recommend the Curious.
CHAP. VII. Of MINTS, and of the most Skilful Artists, Authors, Collectors and Collections; How to Methodize and Dispose of Medals for the Cabinet and Library, with some Reflections on the Modern Clipping and Diminution of Coin. AMONGST the many admirable and useful Inventi∣ons of the Antients, the loss of the Mechanical Part of the Mint is to be deplor'd; but more, that since the breaking in of those barbarous People who were the Cause of this Loss, and of that glorious Empire, it was not restor'd to any tole∣rable Form or Regulation by any more honest and skilful Un∣dertakers, than such as were first Employ'd about the Money, especially in these Northern Parts, and here in England, at that time so little polish'd and so very ignorant, as not to discern how greatly they were abused and imposed on, whilst they totally committed the Coynage and Management of the Mint to certain cunning and avaritious Iews, Genoeses and crafty Italians not at all inferior to the Iews in all the Arts of knavery and dis∣honest Gain. It was by these that Princes were universally circumvented, and under pretence of bringing vast Advantages to the Publick, persuaded to admit of these many Alterations, Debasement of the Species and Advancement of the Coin above its genuine and universal Value, which never ended without the Loss, Impove∣rishment and Ruin of their Subjects, whilst those Miscreants grew excessively Rich by their Frauds and Extortions. It must therefore be confess'd, that we know little more of the Antient Mint, Greek or Roman; than that every Capital City of the Pro∣vinces had commonly their respective Mints, and some of them two or three (as OF. II. III. IIII. &c.) besides other peculiar Marks. For those of Old, the place of Minting we frequently find in the Circular Inscriptions at large, e. g. in that of M. Antoninus LVGDVNI. and in the Exerg. P. or S. TR. Signata or Percussa Treveris. P. AR. Arles, as in one of Helena (Mother of Constantine) CON. OB. Constantinopoli Obsignata.
M.S. ANT. Antioch, with the Numerals  &c. the like of other great Cities, as of the Latin MD. PS Mediolani percussa, and many besides, which, tho' carrying on them the Names of Spain, Germany, Aegypt, Arabia and other remote places, might yet for all that, be Roman Coins and Medals, not seldom bearing the Figure or Symbolum representing the Province, as that of the Cony did Spain, which the Learned Bochartus derives from Saphan in the Phoenician Tongue, to signify that little Ani∣mal abounding in that Country. These Monetariae Officinae had their Praefecti Aerarii (Instituted by Augustus) Quaestors, Treasurers and other Officers belonging to them; but the Great and Paramount Superintendent Magi∣strate of them all, was the Triumvir, Master indeed of the Mint, and of all the Flandi, Feriundi periti, having the sole Fabrication of all the three Metals, and was of such high Authority, that he frequently stamp'd Money and Medals, bearing his own Head and Effigies, Names and Titles like a King; but this Priviledge was exceedingly abated by that Emperor, who after he had divided the Government of the Provinces between him and the Senate, leaving to them the Coining of Copper only, reserved that of Gold and Silver as Royal Metals to himself; wherefore very rare∣ly or never, find we any of their Names after Tiberius, tho' the Roman Coin was a long time after current here. Those of Silver therefore, in which we sometimes meet the Triumvir, S.C. or in those Copper with TRIB. POTEST, &c. we may look upon as struck before Augustus's time. The like Offices we are told by Cambden were settled here at London by the Great Constantine, who, as appears, Coin'd Mo∣ney in the City in Honor of his Father, P. LOND. S. Pecunia Londini Signata, or P.L.N. under the Comes Largitionum, toge∣ther with the glorious Title of Praepositus Thesaur. Augustensium in Britannia. Since the Decadency of the Empire, the Antient Money bare ordinarily the Prince's Head, sometimes his Name only, and upon the Reverse a blunt Cross or like Figure, with notice of the Place where it was Coin'd, and in others, the Name of the Monetarie and none else (Triumvir-like) very frequent in our Saxon Coins, and those of the Franks, with sometimes a Me fecit, which perhaps might be that of the Graver. Procopius tells us that the Kings of France did not set their Pi∣ctures at all upon their Money, till they had first obtain'd Leave of the Emperor Iustinian, tho' le Blanc denies it; and even with
us, when most of the great and considerable Payments were made Honestly (that is by Weight) it was without any Head or Effigies, whether Gold or Silver. As in France, where they still employ divers Mints, Capital Letters A. B. C. &c. (without altering the Inscription) shew the place of Coining, as Paris, Lions, Tholouse, Aix, Amiens, Nants, Bourdeaux, Poitiers, &c. In like manner with us in England, there were divers Countries and Cities (besides London) where Money was Stamp'd; some upon Occasion for a Time only; others that had Ius Monetae, by peculiar Priviledge. We had a considerable Mint at Calais in Picardy, and in some places more than One, for London had no fewer than Eight; Canter∣bury as many within one, Five belonging to the King, the other to the Archbishop and Abbot. Rochester had Three, Two the Kings, One the Prelates. Dover, Reculver in Kent, in Essex, Chichester, Lewes, Hastings, One. York, Wallingford, Ipswich, Shaftsbury, Shrewsbury, Darby, Leicester, Worcester, Lincoln, Nor∣wich, Exceter, Chester, &c. and as Cowell tells us, there were Mints erected all over the Kingdom, and wherever the King's Council thought convenient; for those numerous Fabricks were always very chargeable and highly prejudicial to the Pub∣lick by reason of the Corruption, and therefore wiser Princes restrained them to as few, and as soon as possibly they could. King Charles the First, Coin'd indeed both at Oxford, Newark, Shrewsbury, and I think at York and Pontfract, but it was in case of Necessity, whilst the standing Mother-Mint was, and still con∣tinues at the Tower, where yet no Gold had been stamp'd be∣fore Edward the Third; some affirm him to have been the first who Coin'd Groats, tho' smaller Pieces were in use since Henry the First, and afterwards Half-pence and Farthings, of which, and all other obsolete, small and wretchedly minted Coins, British, Saxon, Danish, &c. see the Notes before Cambden already mentioned, and what we find in his Remains concerning our Mint at present in the Tower; the Author of England's Notitia, gives a particular Account, and of the several Officers and Esta∣blishments there, together with their Salaries (very accurately as I believe) which as to the matter, I have somewhere read, was heretofore a certain Portion of the Bullion; and in France (where they had Laws innumerable for the Reglement of their Mints and Money) the One and Twentieth Part; and the Offi∣cers elected by the Counts and Governors of the Provinces, who sware them about the Alloy, and sometimes stamp'd their own
Names and Effigies upon the Coin, with variety of Inscriptions and Reverses, especially in those of Henry the Third. And now we have mention'd Laws relating to the Mints, one cannot without just Indignation, but deplore the unsufferable Abuse of it, by that cursed Race and Swarms of Clippers, and their Associates in Iniquity, who with an Insolence unparallel'd, and such as perhaps no Age or Record of History (that of Henry the Third's excepted, yet not coming up to this Degree) ever mention'd, persist and go on still to justify their Practice (as if it were no Crime at all) tho' one of the most wicked, injuri∣ous and diabolical Villanies Men can be guilty of. For (as a Learned Person shews) Money being the common Pledge and Pawn between Man and Man,See Mr. Fleetwood's Sermon be∣fore the Ld. Mayor, 1694. becomes the Standard and Mea∣sure of the Worth and Value of every thing besides; as often, and as long as they stand in mutual need of any thing another doth posses, for a just and reasonable Compensation. For as to the Effigies and Image of the Prince, it ought not to be look'd upon as merely stamp'd for Ornament or Honor, or to pro∣claim and set forth Titles only, where or when they Reign'd, but as publick Vouchers of the real and intrinsic Value of the Species and Matter according to the constant and general Esti∣mation of the World; the Prerogative being in such manner concredited by the Subject to the Supream Magistrate and Reg∣nant Power, and to none else whatsoever, upon Trust and Confidence of his Justice and Integrity; so as he that either di∣minishes or sophisticates it,Cornelia Lex falsi, a∣gainst Cor∣rupters of Coins. does as much as in him lies, make the King as great a Cheat and Impostor as himself, by (as we said) a most ignoble, wicked and devilish Fraud, for which no Punishment seems too great to be inflicted. Indeed so scrupulously delicate were they of Old, to prevent these Practices, that to protect it from the least Diminution, and to shew how Sacred a Thing it was; the publick Treasures were usually kept in their Temples, as both at Delphi in Greece, Aede Saturni at Rome,Sacra M∣net. and even in that of Ierusalem it self, and in their most sumptuous Sepulchres, which they believed none would prophane and violate, making it highly Capital, and no less than Sacrilege, that what was dedicated to so noble and useful a Purpose (as the Subsistence and Intercourse of all Man∣kind) should be any ways abus'd; thus Dame Moneta became a Goddess, and even Omnipotent, as she still continues, and has innumerable Votaries, who still make her the only Deity they worship. The Romans (as we noted) decreed her a Temple,
accounting her so Venerable, that Tiberius (though dissolute enough) made it Death to carry or spend any thing stamp'd with his Image into the Lupanar, undecently, and to so scan∣dalous a purpose; whereas the Christian Pontif of that Famous City, 'tis said, indulges those infamous Places and Shops of Lewdness, for the Tribute they receive from the wanton Sex. Romana Scorta (says the10000 Du∣cats. Agrippa de Vanitat. Sci. Author) in singulas hebdomadas Iulium pendent Pontifici; qui census annuus nonnunquam viginti millia ducatorum excedit, &c. a pretty Sum for those times; for I would be loth to affirm it without good Authority. But now, whether it be afterwards Consecrated, how dispos'd of, or pu∣rified by Lustrations and Holy-Water, I do not inquire; only I think, that as the price of a Whore was not to be brought into the Sanctuary; so there's somewhere another Text which tells us, Evil is not to be done,Rom. 3. 8. that good may come of it. That now our current Mill'd Moneys have all this while been less obnoxious to this injurious Practice of Clippers, is certainly due to either a less degenerate Age, or the Contrivance of the Circumscription about the Tranchè or Edge of the thicker Pieces, and Crenneling of the small and thinner, which for ought I know, is Modern, and its Inventor (who ever he were) wor∣thy the Honor of Medal himself; whether due to Monsieur Blondeau, our Industrious Rawlins, or Symon (Brother to the late squalid Embosser) Gravers of the Royal Mint to King Charles the First and Second, or improv'd by the Direction of (Sir Ralph Freeman's Successor) Mr. Slingsby, to whom I suggested the Decus & Tutamen out of a Viniet in Cardinal de Richlieu's Greek Testament, printed at the Louvre, hinder∣ing his intended Addition (in Armis) which neither would have become the Impress, nor stood gracefully in the Circle. As to the Engine, Mill, Balance and Press now in use (by which not our Tonsors only, Clippers and False Monyers, but sometimes Great Persons among them were much defeated of their Practice in France) whether arrogated or justly chal∣lenged by Monsieur le Blanc, to have been the Invention of his Country Men, I undertake not positively to determin; since I find Hierom Cardan, speaking of one at Venice (where that Noble Mint, the Zeccha is Establish'd) who long since (he says) devised an Engine, which both Stamp'd, Cut and Rounded Money by one Operation only, for which he was Rewarded by the
State (as well he deserv'd) with an ample Pension: But that it was first of all set up, and practised here with us, before the French, is ingeniously acknowledg'd. The Combination of those concern'd, was it seems so power∣ful, as to engage, not only the Hammer-men, but the very Court of Monyers it self to decry and damn the Invention, so that Monsieur Briot, who pretends to be the Author, and had in∣deed given so many convincing Proofs of the perfections of it (superior to all others for preventing the Mischief of Diminu∣tion) being discourag'd, and despairing of Success, came over into England, where he set up his Machine, and made the No∣blest Money in the World: Nor had France, perhaps till this day, used the Invention, if (out of meer shame of their Mi∣stake and Reproach) their Great Chancellor Seguier had not ob∣liged them to re-call, and at the same instant erect it at Paris, which was about the Year 1645. when first they began in ear∣nest to leave the Hammer, and fell to stamping their Golden Lovises, and since that, to imitate our Circumscription about the Edge, of which I have already spoken. But this Abuse of Coin was it appears so universal, that in the time of Charlemain (tho' at no time so notoriously scandalous, as with us at this day) the Emperor order'd that no Money should thenceforth be made, but in his own Court (and there is a Piece inscrib'd Palatina Moneta) so as wheresoever the Prince removed, the Mint with all its Instruments and Work∣men followed; which calls to mind, how in almost the like Circumstance the late French King Lewis XIII. did not think his Mint secure from these wicked Practices, until he had hous'd it in the Louvre, which that great and worthy Minister and Vir∣tuoso, Monsieur de Noyers, plac'd in the same Apartment with the Royal Printing-House; that (as myMonsieur Freart. Author adds) he might allie together Two of the most universal and most per∣manent Monuments of Kings, Books and Money, spreading them∣selves over all Nations, and remaining for many Ages. The excessive Abuses found in the Years 1635 and 39. both in the Title and Weight of the greatest part of the Coin (as well of seve∣ral other Countries as France) which had been changed or de∣stroyed, stood in need of timely Reformation: Nor was it possible to remedy it on the sudden, without putting Commerce into very great Disorder, and was therefore for a while conniv'd at. But as this dexterous and publick-spirited States-man or∣der'd it, he well knew how to derive the greatest Advantage
to the Benefit of the People, and Honor of the King, by Poli∣tickly permitting, and indeed authorizing the Abuse, which could not else have been so easily encounter'd; whilst in the mean time, it invited those of all the neighbouring Countries and States in hope of Gain, to Transport into France all their Light Gold and Silver which they had, and which remained there, by reason of its being decried a few Months after, bear∣ing now the Arms of France, and Effigies of Lewis le Iust, by that noble Conversion which he order'd to be made of it. Whilst this strange Matter was united to ours, he also sought out and discover'd prompt and easy Expedients of giving it that excellent Form which since it bears, Curing at the same instant, and by the same Remedy, both the present Inconvenience, and that to come. Thus we see that its just and equal Roundness, the Grenetis which is about it, and the Politure which is on the flat of every Piece, not only defends it from the Clipping, the File, and Operation of Strong-Waters, but even renders its Imi∣tation in a manner impossible to our False Coiners; so as we may affirm of this Money, that it is the most Artistly contriv'd, and the most commodious that was ever us'd in Commerce, there being stamp'd in less than four Years time, above an Hun∣dred and Twenty Millions, and that after fifteen or sixteen Years that the War had lasted, and the Kingdom seemed to have been utterly exhausted, &c. Perhaps this Passage, of which I gave Account more than thirty Years since, in a Dedication to his late Majesty Charles II. might have been taken notice of, the Instance being so pregnant, and so like our present Case But as some Kings and Emperors were Famous for their Care in reforming these Abuses (Aurelianus calling in all the Coun∣terfeit Money, and giving out New, to obviate the growing Mischief and Confusion) so there were others as Infamous for their not only neglecting it, but for doing worse, in not only conniving at them, but who did themselves vitiate and debase their own Coin. Such of old among the Romans (after the Age of Commodus, whose excesses had so debauch'd the People) were those from Gordian to the Posthumi, when they began to pervert the Standard, which so long as that Wise and Glorious Empire religiously maintain'd it in all its Purity,Nat. Hist. lib. VI. C 22. Quod pares pondere denarii essent in ptiva pecunia, cum diversae imagines indicarent à pluribus factos. did infinitely prosper; so as Pliny speaking of the Island of Taprobane, tells us,
that the most Barbarous Nations at vast distance held friendly Commerce and Correspondence with the Romans, looking upon them as just and worthy People from the constant Value, Goodness and Integrity of their Money. But no sooner did they once give way to the adulteration or raising of their Money beyond its real worth; but the Government it self grew degenerate, and soon fell after it; Nor is there a more fatal Symptom of Consumption in a State, than the Corruption and Dimi∣nution of the Coin; under which denomination I comprehend all other Practices on the Species, however dignified by Names and Character. The very Truth is, to put a King's Title or Effi∣gies to unweighty Money, and not of authentic Value, is (as we said) to render the Prince himself a Faux Monoyeur, or as the LearnedRecher. L: VI. C. 21. Pasquiers Expression is, donner un souflet au Roy, and bouffet Majesty. Thus Henry VI. diverted, or perverted ra∣ther, by the mean and beggarly Shift of Alchymy and other So∣phistications, endeavour'd to supply his Extravagances, as after him another profuse Henry of ours, until his Renouned Daughter (by more wholsome Counsel reforming it) reduc'd the Stan∣dard to the Purity of Edward the Fourth. But it was our First Edward, who first of all establish'd the English Sterling from its ambulatory and uncertain Motion and Value, and which all the wiser States of Christendom did imitate afterwards. This calls to mind another Edward (that most hopeful and incom∣parable Prince the Sixth of that name) who having as yet hardly arriv'd to the Thirteenth Year of his Age (upon Consideration of the miserable Plight to which his profuse Father had brought the Coin) took such Care and Pains to inform himself of the State and Condition of the Mint, Exchange and Value of Money, and to Regulate those Matters, as (by turning over theOriginal in the Cotton Library, and now publish∣ed in Hist. Reformat. Book II. Part II. Iournal written in his own Hand) I find among other grave and serious Remarks he did, so far exceeding either the usual Capacity or Years of an Age so Immature, as it reproaches those who being much more Advanc'd, minded nothing but trifling, childish or vicious Diversions. To step a little back again to the History of these depraved Customs abroad; It was about the Reign of Charles the Simple, that most of the Great ones (especially Governours of Provin∣ces, Castles and principal Cities) took on them to Coin, and looked upon the Priviledge as it were hereditary and indepen∣dent (for so did they sometimes here in England too, tho' it lasted not long) but the Mischief became so insupportable by
reason of the Corruption, that when the King would have ab∣rogated the cause of the Abuse, he found it so very difficult, that he was fain to give it over, and content himself with a small proportion to discharge the Mintage, and this was thought not a little Progress. 'Tis in the mean time evident (as to that of France) they might thank themselves and their perpetual Quarrels with England, from the very Reign of their Famous St. Lewis (and above all, that of Philip the Fair and Charles IX. when we endanger'd France, as it now does us) which mov'd them to debase, and yet to inhance the Value of their Coin, to the unspeakable loss of the Publick, and dishonor of the Prince and Government; the mixtures being two third-parts of Copper to one of Silver, so as three Deniers of the New Money, was not worth above one of the Old, and the Effect was accor∣dingly, namely, an universal Decay of Trade throughout the Nation; and so very odious was the Practice, that within little above an Age past, there being but a very small part of Coin decried in Aquitain; the Detriment was so grievously resented by the People, that they no more computed from the Year of the Lord, but from their Decurtata Moneta, and debasement of the Coin. What prodigious Confusion this unworthy Shift, and false Polity of Raising and Sinking has several times wrought in Spain and Portugal (notwithstanding all that affluence of immense Treasure from both the Indies) the lamentable and astonishing sudden Ruin of that late formidable Monarchy shews, as well as of many private Persons within our remem∣brance, and may in great part be imputed to it; whilst their un∣satiable Avarice, Ambition, Cruelty and Injustice, may and ought to be a Document to other Princes and Potentates, who think to establish their Grandeur by indirect Policies, however for a time, they seem to flourish and carry all before them. But to return to those Corrupters once more. Henry the Fourth of France began to Reform this Evil, but soon they relaps'd, until the Father of the present King attemp∣ted the Regulation, and at last (not without exceeding Cla∣mour and seditious Commotions) hardly, and with difficulty, effected it. We meet indeed with some fair Pieces of Henry the Second (by some Invention imitating the Press) which were Coin'd in the Iardin des Estuves, An. 1553. But it never arriv'd to perfection, till Mons. Varin, Intendant of the Mint (whom I knew, and who was himself the most Excellent Artist any Age since the Greek and Roman has I think produc'd) took in hand, and
us'd the Mill effectually, as we had in some sort before, wit∣ness those Pieces of our Edward VI. and his Glorious Sister Queen Elizabeth, which we may esteem as Medals: And happy, happy I pronounce that State and Kingdom, whose Princes (as both these, especially the latter) make it their early Care to preserve the Standard, intrinsically valuable, by a Law as Sacred and Inviolable as that of the Medes and Persians. This le Blanc himself acknowledges to have been done in England only of all the Kingdoms, not of Europe alone, but of all the World be∣sides. And undoubtedly, Money, (which is All things in Power and Effect) should be made as near as is possible, of such proportion of Alloy, Weight, Value and Security from Di∣minution, as the Species is worth in Metal, what 'tis pretended to be in Payment, exclusive to the Fabrick, &c. as near as may be, and as when of old, it was cut from the solid Lingot; and then let Men in God's Name traffick freely with it, as with other Commodities, it will never prejudice the State. Where this is honestly observ'd, there will ever be most plenty of Money, and that State and Kingdom the most flourishing: What People then would defile their Fingers with their Monnoy Noire,Nigra Mo∣neta, Mart. and other fictitious trash, light and vitiate, however blanch'd with adulterate Mixtures, or endure the genuine Metal should be stretch'd beyond its real Value? The pernicious Consequences of which, is abundantly made out, by that our Learned and Judicious Antiquary, the late Sir Robert Cotton, both before Queen Elizabeth and King Iames the First, and the Lords of the Council; and since by Sir William Petty, whose Catechism (as I beg leave to call it) and Thoughts about this Matter, coincident with that of Sir Christopher Wren, and lately (since the writing of this) the incomparably Judicious and Learned Mr. Lock, with the worthy Author of the Review, I prefer to any thing I have hitherto met with, pretending to answer the present ill-boding Exigences under which we suffer. It were easie to deduce the Original and Cause, State and Progress of Money it self, from the Rising, Culminating and Meridian, to its decline and almost setting in our Hemisphere, as to Goodness and Integrity: For so it first shone brightest in the East, as we learn from Sacred Writ, when they dealt by Weight; and the most antient Records of History, where there is any Record of Credit from the first and middle Ages; and of the latter, for Species, Character, Value, Fabric, &c. out of Budaeus, Agricola, our Brerewood, Malines, Sir Thomas Roe,
Mr. Vaughan (an Excellent Piece) and Instar Omnium, the most laborious Klockius de Aerario, whither the Curious of An∣tiquity may resort for the Metal, Standard, Coin, Laws, Abuses and Remedies, together with the Charge of the Treasurer, and other both high, subordinate and Inferior Offices and Officers relating to Money; the Consultations of the most politick Princes and States upon the greatest Emergences, and in general, for whatsoever else falls under this ample Subject, in I think all the possible Difficulties which usually arise, incident to this imortant Branch and Nerve of the Power, Justice and Pro∣sperity of a Nation, Historically deduc'd, and that with German Industry. But as it suits not altogether with my purpose to compile a pompous Volume out of so many Authors, as have discuss'd this Argument (and which were easie to do by Men of leisure) so should I not have nam'd them here, but for this Observation, that by the universal Suffrage of them all (I am sure, of the most Learned, Judicious and Able of them all, I dare appeal to all the Politicks from Aristotle to Bodin, and so forth for Two Thousand Years) the raising of the Value of Money at any time beyond its real Worth, has been almost equally decried and condemned with the very worst of Sophistications, Debasing and Diminution of it, and from the constant Expe∣rience of the fatal and destructive Consequences which have ever attended it: One needs but to read the Story of Livius Drusus, the Disorder caus'd by those Practices until Marius Gratidianus, who had his Statue erected by the Commons, to which in Ve∣neration they burnt Incense, for his Care and Regulation about the Mint. On the other hand, how foul a Stain it left on the very best of the Roman Princes, as oft as they yielded to these false Expe∣dients, their best Historians have acquainted us; nor indeed was it at all to their Credit, that even in their greatest Extre∣mity of the Punic War, they had recourse a while to this ignoble Shift; seldom or rarely practised but by Tyrants, the negli∣gent, vicious and profuse of all that Government, and never failing fore-runners of Calamities ensuing both in the West and Eastern Empire also, from these  and debau∣chers of the Species soon after Constantine to so many Ages, until it was broken at last in Pieces like the Fragments of their antient Coin. The Divisions and perpetual Quarrels about Religion, be∣tween the Orthodox Arians and other Sects (as now afresh
reviv'd again amongst us) menacing a no less total Subversion, than what let into Europe that Inundation of Saracens, Turks, Goths and other barbarous People, are melancholy Prospects. Let us but compare the Times, Periods and Revolutions, pre∣sent Schisms and other Circumstances of this Degenerate, Fa∣natick and Self-Interess'd Age; and how little of generous and publick Spirit, moral Probity, sober Bravery and true Christian there is among us, with the Causes and Accidents of those De∣solations in the Eastern World (subject to that once Glorious Empire) and see if ever any Age did more resemble it, and whe∣ther something like to Turcism (besids Coffee) do not at last emerge and spring from this Cataclysis and Medly of Opinions abounding among us, and no Religion: Not let us imagine or flatter our selves with an Impossibility of falling into the like Circumstances. Those who lived in those yet flourishing Countries and brighter Days, among the most polish'd Greeks, doubtless as little dreamt it possible that the Successors of the Paaeologi, Cantacuzeni, Noble and High-born Porphyrogeneti should from their Illustrious Race (Heirs of Crowns and Scepters) literally now be keeping Sheep and feeding Camels in barren and sandy Deserts; that the whole Posterity of that once proud and conquering People should lose both their Religion, Country, Laws, Liberty, Ease and Splendor, nay, their very Language and Native Tongue (the most Learned, Copious and Universal under Heaven) in far shorter time than any Nation we ever read, or I think, heard of under it! Nor am I much departed from my Text by this Preachment or Prophecy (call it which you please) whilst I shew what dread∣ful Confusions naturally flow from, and attend the supine Ne∣gligence of so long suffering this Diminution of our Treasure (which a more timely Care and Thought might have pre∣vented) and extream difficulty of redressing and recovering it to its pristine Course and Value. Obsta Principiis is as infallible an Aphorism for healing of the Body Politick as any in Hippocrates for the Natural; the most dangerous Evils creep now and then insensibly, when if neglected, they oft become irremediable or desperate. The Source of ours is obvious Concisum Argentum in titulos— with other concurrent Circumstances;Iuv. Sat. XIV. and if the Ruin of the Athenian State was fore-told, because the Rats had gnawn and
eaten Plato's Commonwealth, what may these Vermin, Clippers, Corroders, Regraters, and vile Perverters of the Riches and vital Substance, not of an Ideal, but of a Real Commonwealth and Kingdom fore-bode! I wish at least, it may not prove a fatal Indication (among other Omens) of some surprising and pub∣lick Mischief, if not prevented for the future by some speedy and effectual Course; for 'tis not enough to Coin, Re-coin and make good the Faulty, without future Caution and Sanctions inviolable. In order to this, I was glad to find that so many able Per∣sons, had by the Prudence of the Lords of the Treasury, been encourag'd to take this Article into their serious Thoughts, and by the Search and Recital of many antient and pertinent Records (we should hardly ever have else inspected) given us the By Mr. Lounds out of the Red Book Ex∣chequer. See Iudge Hales's She∣riffs Ac∣compts, &c. History of our Mint and Coins; whilst tho' I own the great Satisfaction I received in Reading their Judicious Remarks, I must at the same time acknowledge, that I always wish'd there might some Expedient be found, which might (if possible) supply the Necessity of altering the Value and Estimation of the Species beyond its intrinsic Worth, which has (as I have shewed) in all Ages and Exigences proved so mischievous in the Event. In short, whatever pretends to add or detract from the Value of Money, must of necessity Influence, and insensibly Affect all that's necessary, not only to the well-being, but to the very Form and Essence of a Kingdom. All Pacts and Covenants, Bargains, Obligations, Estates, Rents, Goods, Credit and Cor∣respondences whatsoever (becoming dubious and uncertain) must sink and be at an end: If once People want wherewith to purchase Bread (which includes and comprehends all other Necessaries) the Fisque and publick Treasure supplied by the People suffers in all its Branches and Relations, as the most flourishing Tree does from its wither'd and dried up Roots; and that State and Nation becomes Defenceess and a Prey-Let France (as formidable as now it seems) be Instance; in the often named Philip the Fair's Reign, when it lay so dan∣gerously expos'd. 'Tis true that of early Days, even here in England, such things had been done: Richard the First corrupted the Coin al∣most Six Hundred Years since; and that after Henry the Second, the First Edward (a Wise and Prudent King) had in good mea∣sure fixt the Standard, and settled uniformity of Money; and
that Noble and Renowned Prince Edward III. stating its Value, did raise it also aliquousque; and that it has since frequently been vitiated, especially by the incontinent King Henry the Eighth; but all this while, to the infinite Detriment and Dishonour of the Nation, until (as we shewed) that Fortunate and well-consulted Princess Elizabeth, intirely restor'd it to its genuine Value and antient Dignity. And here again 'tis worthy Remark, that the most prosperous and glorious Potentates, and most beloved, were even those who took the greatest Care to preserve the Species chast and intemerate; Instances we have in Charles the Great, in whose time the Western Empire was in its highest Ascendant since the Roman Caesars; as on the contrary, how prodigiously it sunk and languish'd, as often as they fell to Tricks and ignoble Shifts, even to the late German Empe∣rors, upon which the learnedNot is in Klock: His words are these, Quae nunc i∣terum Mone∣rarumcorrup∣tio in Imperio nostro exi∣stat; & quam fru∣stra huic morbo me∣dendo hacte∣nus desuda∣verint viri etiam corda∣tiores, palam est. Peller (sadly complaining, for want of timely Remedy, suffering such wretched Leaches, that as with us, still persisted to abuse the Publick) breaks out into this pathetic Exclamation (and so may we) Morbum ipsum Deus curet (the Lord have Mercy on us) & ille qui eum in terris representat: For if his Majesty, and those in Power did not speedily take the Cure into their Hands, Conclamatum est, our Condition would be desperate, and the Nation ruined. What France has suffer'd we have shew'd in Philip, and from him till their Charles the Fifth, and therefore call'd the Wise for his Care in re-settling his Mint on a firmer Base; but after which it hor∣ribly relaps'd in Charles VII. and IX. and frequently since; but never without its pernicious and natural Consequences. But now since we are fall'n into this sore Calamity, the Dif∣ficulty is, how to heal the Wound, supply the present Deficiency, and not only seek whence to derive a timely Stream equivalent to that which is issued out, but to remove the Dams and Impe∣diments that obstruct the flowing Current, till which, to be sure, it must and will continually be sinking, and the very dregs and pittance of what rests, be raised, to a yet greater loss, be the prohibitions what Superiors please. There was a time (not long since) when spirited with Zeal and wanton Ease, the abused People, and of all degrees, spontaneously brought in their Plate: Many massively great and other Pieces of curiously wrought Vessels, I my self beheld, batter'd and defac'd to flatness, by the rude Sledge and crow∣ded into the Melting-pots in Guild-Hall (which was fill'd to to the Roof almost) upon the Credit of the publick Faith, to
ruin the best establish'd Church and Kingdom under Heaven; and I little question, but would they do so now to preserve what God has since restor'd and save from the Danger it is in, by a free and generous Oblation of it, without any future expectation of being re-imburs'd by so insupportable a Tax, as will be ne∣cessary to answer the mention'd Loss (but which must at last come out of their own Purses and Estates) it would almost, if not altogether, heal the gastly Wound: And who that were touch'd with a true Zeal and Affection to his Native Country, would not be ready chearfully to part with the most splendid Superfluities, and eat and drink with more Content and Satis∣faction in Earthen-Dishes and Wooden-Cups (as the brave Romans did whilst they were truly brave) rather than in the brightest Gold and Silver, to support a sinking Nation? Were this and all the imprison'd and undiminish'd Money produc'd, and none of it suffer'd to be Hoarded, Cull'd, Clipp'd, privately Melted down or Transported, or what is false Imported, upon any unjustifiable Account; and all Commodities necessary to human Life, Decency, and of daily Use, rated in some tolerable proportion to the present Exigences, and by no means left in an Arbitrary manner to be inhaunced by the Ingrosser and Re∣tailer, as inevitably it must, and will be unless prevented; and that Money rise not beyond its real Value (what ever Laws or Edicts be provided against it) it would go a very great way to our Relief in the present Circumstances. But if this be too hard a Chapter, and look more like a Platonic Notion, than pra∣cticable in this self-Interess'd and degenerate Age, let us acquiesce and leave it as becomes us to Superiors, and to Expedients justified by such solid Funds, as the collective Wisdom of the Nation shall think proper and most effectual, which upon no Pre∣tence, Stress or Occasion whatever, less than immediate Pre∣servation, imminent and inevitable Ruin, ought to be diverted, much less invaded. In a word, were there a round Imposition charg'd on all future Superfluities, with a total prohibition of other Luxuies of Parade and Shew, by standing, well-exe∣cuted Sumptuary Laws (yet with distinction of Qualities) as it would create a marvellous Change, and for the better, so would it soon compensate the parting with the want of many unnecessary and costly Trifles, which minister to our Extrava∣gances, and make Men eager to obtain them at any Price. Better, far better were it that a few Shops of Voluptuary Arts and Traders in Modes and fantastic Dresses, as well as—
and other Publicans, with the whole Tribe of Demetrius and the Crafts-men were reduc'd or confin'd to their former Shop-Trade only (and would in some States, and such Exigences be obnoxious) who evidently obstruct, garble and drain the very Vital of the Nation. I say, better they were totally abo∣lish'd, suppress'd and broken, than a whole Nation be undone, as unavoidably it must be, if such, and other unsatiable Gulphs be not stopp'd; and that God Almighty raise not up some Wise and publick spirited Patriots, to stand in the Breach, and set their Hands and Heads to prevent it, with all imaginable diligence. In the mean while, let these worst of Men (and as one calls them, Ultima Satanae Excrementa) beware the Fate of Stephen Barbet and his Fellows, who from the like sordid Gains (and from nothing of Family or conspicuous Vertue) rais'd themselves to Estates of Princes in so short a space, and by unknown Extorsions and Depredations on the Publick, made vast Purchases, rose to mighty Fortunes, and built sumptuous Palaces in the Reign of the so often mention'd Philip. The deserved Justice inflicted on him and his Complices, may be a timely Warning; that ill-advis'd and unhappy Prince, sadly, but too late, and on his Death-bed, attributing all his Mis∣fortunes and the loss of his Subjects Affection (the greatest Jewel on a Prince's Crown) to his remissness in this Important Concern. Farther Instances might be produced of the like Ca∣tastrophes (besides what befel in Turkey in the Reign of Amurath the Fourth, Brother to Osman) in other States of Christendom. But I am tedious and beg Pardon for the Liberty I have taken, with good Intention, since 'tis hoped we may, and shall find great Effects from his Majesty's great Care, the present and en∣suing Parliaments, and the Consultations of those Gentlemen of the Council of Trade. But to look for, and to carry it on, Cre∣dit must be restored, and the Reputation of our Exchequer by protecting of our ships and Mercantile Commerce abroad, which can only bring home those Effects to replenish it, and which would be of infinitely more Advantage to us (and far less chargeable) than all our Efforts on France, enrich'd by so many Thousands of our Vessels, and Millions of Treasure taken from us. And now after all, tho' I should expect but little Thanks of some for what I have said, yet, I comfort my self with the Sense and Suffrage of all, to whom the true and solid Interest of the Nation is dearer than their Lives. And if I fore-tell that what I have predicted spring from the natural
Consequences of the Premises; it is what I have fortified with undeniable Instances and irrefragable Truths, unless all Europe, and all the negotiating World besides, agree to Reverse all that their most prudent Ancestors have upon the long Expe∣rience of so many Ages and Turns of Governments, settled and built on, as the most reasonable and lasting, since there would otherwise be no boundary or end of Raising, Depressing and Cheating, till all fell to the Ground. In the mean time, of This I am morally certain, and must adhere to as a steady Maxim; that the only just and righteous Expedient must be to make our Money of equal Fineness and intrinsic Value, under whatsoever Denominations or Shifts we can devise as to smaller Pieces, &c. to serve the present Neces∣sity pro hîc & nunc, during the Coinage and Scarcity of greater Sums, which should hold and be paid in full Weight; since after all, 'tis not Vultus Imperatoris, Figura & Impressio; no, nor Proba Materia alone; but PONDUS and Weight which ren∣ders Money truly valuable to all intents and purposes. This effected, and Money reduced to its Primitive Institution (when Mankind dealt honestly and sincerely with one another) we may hope for a Blessing from Almighty God. But now è diverticulo in viam. From Mints and Money to Medals again, come in the Names of the most celebrated and experienc'd Artists who have not only approach'd, but almost exceeded the Antients. Cavino, the famous Padoan and Parmesano were of those who did Wonders in this kind with New Stamps: The first with great Force, the latter with more of the Delicate and Tender. They were these who skill'd to impress a New-cut Stamp upon an Old Medal, so as hardly to be discern'd from the Ori∣ginal, unless it were that their Works, tho, full of Spirit, yet the Relievo not altogether so bold and extant, render'd some of them the sooner suspected. Such in fine they were, as to this Day, and ever will impose sometimes upon the most confident and knowing, and such it seems as in Veneration of their Excellency, have their graving Tools and Instruments kept as great Rarities, amongst the Curiosities of the Library of St. Genevieve at Paris; for so are those of the Parmegiano as Reliques of no small Value. Of this Class was the Vincentino, Bellas, Leon Leoni, and ano∣ther, who, as I am told, being for a Capital Crime at Rome,
adjudged to suffer Death, is said to have pleaded, and obtain'd his Pardon, thro' the Favour of a certain extraordinary and par∣ticular Law, that whatever Criminal can prove himself to be the most excellent and consummate Work-man in any useful Art or Mystery (like some Felons here with us, obnoxious to the like Punishment, are indulg'd their Book in Favorem Vitae, and to incourage Learning) may Challenge (some Crimes excepted only, as in particular False Money) the Benefit there∣of in Favorem Artis, for the first Fault. Nor were the Antients without ingenious Counterfeits, injurious to the Public, since Pliny reports it of one who had Honors done him for his Sagacity in detecting Frauds of this nature. The best and choicest Medals for the Workmanship (Gold and Silver) were such as had been graven at Rome and in Italy, with S. C. by Order of the Senate, or upon the Place in the time of the Great Augustus: Nor were they in much less perfection when the Noble Hadrian caus'd Medals to be stamp'd with ex∣quisite Sculpture, and after him Commodus and other of the Em∣perors, for Presents and Largesses, of which already. The rest Coin'd in the remoter Provinces and Dominions, did nothing resemble the Originals, and became therefore the more easily discover'd; besides, that they frequently dress'd them in some odd unusual Habits or Ornaments not properly Roman, as like∣wise by the Substance and Fabric of the Pieces themselves, some of them being deeper, some shallower, nor in the same Metal. Roman Medals are more easily distinguish'd by their universal accurateness; the Aegyptian by their Edges; those of Syria by their thickness, as the Spanish by the contrary, shallow and slight Relieve. We have in George Vasaries's Lives of the most Famous Pain∣ters (wherein he mentions Sculptors) the Mechanic Part of Medal-cutting in any sort of Metal or Precious Stones, together with the Temper of the Matter;See Budetius Script. de Arte Cuden∣duc Monetae. the Machine, Tools and In∣struments to insculp and prepare the Mould and Matrices, but which is since exceedily improv'd by Monsieur Felibien whom we have already mention'd. There were some who thought that Medals were first Cast, and afterwards had the Stamp applied to make the Work deeper; but how this could be effected in Cast and molted Metal, which renders it exceeding brittle, I cannot well conceive. To return then to our Masters, Excellent in their kinds at present, are, if living, Hameranus, Bossier, Goujon, Carteron, and
above all Varin, of all the French Modern, the rarest Master, both for his Art and Improvement of the Mint whilst he go∣vern'd it. Engravers among us were Symons, Rawlins (already nam'd) and now Mr. Haris, Christian, &c. laudable for many Productions of their Skill and Ingenuity; whilst Mons. Rotie and his Sons continued their Fathers Travel, who have given the World such proof of their Abilities in performances of this kind, as may rightly paragon them with many of the cele∣brated Antients. After all, For the Honor of our Countrey-men, I cannot here omit that Ingenious Trial of Skill which a commendable Emulation produc'd in a Medal I have seen perform'd with extraordinary accuracy, by one I lately mention'd, who having been deser∣vedly imploy'd in the Mint at the Tower, was not willing to be supplanted by Foreign Competitors. To make this good, I need have given no other Description, if the following Type of the Piece it self had reach'd the Original (which indeed it has not) yet represents the Figure, and about the Rimb, the Artist's appeal to a Prince who was an exquisite Judge. C. Omitting the usual Inscriptions on the Tables, the Rimb is as follows. Thomas Simon most humbly prays your Majesty to compare this his Tryal-Piece with the Dutch; and if more truly Drawn and Emboss'd, more Gracefully order'd, or more accurately Ingraven, to Relieve him. This laudable Contention was it seems in the Year, 1663.
Of this Rank and Form (besides Giovanni del Cavino, and a Son of his; Gellini, Leone Aretino, Iacopo da Tresso, Fred. Bonzaga and the incomparable Giovanni Iacopo) Gio: del Cornivole comes in, who was so call'd for his rare Talent of working in Cor∣nelian, improv'd by the Milaneze Cameo, who first recovered the Art of Intaglio in the Onyx and other precious Stones, after the Antient manner had been lost and neglected 1500 Years. Next to these Pietro Maria de Pescia, Marmida and his Son Lodovic, Valerio Vincentino (already nam'd) who had been in England in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and left a Sardonyx, which I think he cut here, representing the Head of that Re∣nowned Heroine, inferior to none of the Antients. There was likewise Michelino, who with Lodovic and Vincent had gotten such Fame for Counterfeiting antient Medals; and such another was Luigi Arichini and Alessandro Caesari call'd the Greek, so highly Celebrated for that Noble Medalion of Pope Paul the Third; and the Head of Phocion the Athenian, which he cut in an Onyx, com∣parable by universal Suffrage to any of the Old Masters. To these might be added Antonio de Rossi, Cosimo de Trezzo, Fran. Raibolini, Philip Negarolo, Gaspar and Gerolamo Misaroni, Pietro Paulo Galeotto, Pastorino di Sienna; not omitting the Renowned Pharodoxus of Milan. Fran. Furnius, Severus of Ravenna, Trecia of Milan also, who is said to be the First, who with wonderful Success, cut the King of Spain's Arms on a goodly Table Dia∣mond, no Man hitherto having adventur'd to encounter that unconquer'd Stone. From what has been said, I shall only observe, that it be∣comes one that would be an accomplish'd Medalist, not only to be well acquainted with these great Masters, and their way of Design, but to be able also to perform something in the Manual part it self. For such were those Virtuosi and Ingenious Spirits, the Illustrious Giovanni Baptista of Sienna, Rosso Giugni of Florence, Gentlemen of Note; as at present, the no less Skil∣ful Monsieur Morelli, who both Designets and Ingraves the Medals which he publishes. But of this as to Gravers, I have long since given a fuller Account in my History of Chalcographie, to which add the Preface of Molinet, who has Recorded the Names of the Ce∣labrated Medal Cutters and others, for near these Two Hundred Years past, and by whom they were reform'd from Casting to Stamping after the Antient manner.
And now since to the perfect Understanding of Medals, not only in respect to the Beauty and Elegancy of the Workman∣ship, and discovery of Frauds and Impostures; but (for what this Discourse is principally intended) the Use and Benefit to be deriv'd from them; nothing can more conduce than the Study and Direction of such Authors as have with greatest Judgment and Success written on, and cultivated this Subject: I shall here present the Studious with the Names of the most reputed Authors and instructive Nomismatographi. Monsieur du Choule, a Noble, Curious and Learned French∣man, did about an Hundred Years since, publish a Discourse of the Religion of the Antient Romans, worthy perusal, as giving singular Light to this useful Science, which seemed almost to∣tally neglected till within about half a Century before, when certain Learned Persons in Italy, especially of the Illustrious House of Medices (as Bigotius tells us) began to cultivate and review the Study of Medals; chief among these were Andreas Fulvius Ursinus (augmented lately by Dr. Patin) for the Consulars and Roman Families, and above all, as most accurate of any for likeness to the original Sculps and Design. And for Institution, the most Industrious Hubert Golzius, whom we find dignified with the Honor of being made a Citizen of Rome for his extraordinary Talent in that his laborious and useful Work, for the Greek Cities especially, and for the Elements of this Study, as explain'd by Nonius; where also of the Fasti and Roman Triumphs, &c. Likewise Anthony de Pois, Gorlaeus, Wolfangus Lazius; the Dialogues of Augustinus (another fit Author to begin with) George Sambucus, Tristan à St. Amante, one of the first who treated of the Greek Imperials Learnedly; but in this to blame, that he fill'd Defects with some Medals design'd from such as were imperfect and drawn by Fancy, Possevin, Cuperus; Hemalarius of Antwerp for most of those in Gold, as Patin those of Silver; Falconerius, Peter Bellorius, Oyselius and Gevartius for ordinary Medals, Tenzelius's Selecta Numismata, &c. or as Alphabetically recited by Suaresius, not forgetting Monsieur Toynard, the late Dr. Spon (Companion in Travel and Inclination to these laudable Studies, with the worthy Sir George Wheeler) whose Learned Researches on this and di∣vers other useful Productions have exceedingly oblig'd the Cu∣rious. To these add Hulsius's Twelve Caesars, Panvinius's Fasti, Savotius for the Metal, Weight, Value, Type, Argument, &c. with such as have explain'd any particular Medals: As that Disser∣tation
of Chiflet de Othonibus aereis; Falconerius de Nummo Apa∣mensi; De Camps upon a Greek Medal of Ant. Caracalla; Segui∣nus de Nummo Britannico; Gronovius de Sestertiis; Conringius of the Iewish Shekle, &c. Dr. Patin, de Nummo Hor. Coclitis, and of that where the Emperor Augustus is with Plato, which minds me of the abovementioned Chiflet's Socrates, sive de Gemmis in∣sculp'd with the Image of that Philosopher, &c. Io. Macarius's Abraxas de Gemmis Basilidianis, and such others as have written Learnedly upon Intalia in Seals and Stones of Price, Iacobus de Wild his Nummi Regum, and of the Kingdoms, Regions and Cities illustrated by Medals; to these I add Albertus Rubens (Son of that late famous Painter) who has publish'd a Dissertation in Latin concerning Medals; Adolphus Occo's Imperials, with the Count Mezza Barba: The first, namely Occo, Alphabetically and Elegantly enough explained, of so universal use as may no more be wanting to a Medalist, than a Dictionary to the Learn∣ing of a Language. Besides, we have in that Industrious Work an Account and Series from the Great Pompey to Heraclius, which is as long as any Medals were tolerable, together with a just Character of their Persons, and a succinct History of their Lives and signal Actions out of the most approv'd Authors, with Historical and Chronological Notes, the Year when struck, and upon what occasion; in short, a Work acceptable to the Curious, and such as may serve for an ample Repertorie on many Occasions; 'tis pity we had not what was expected from him of the Greek. Since these, Authors of the first Class (and which are not to be pass'd by without a thorough Acquain∣tance) are Monsieur Vaillant's Seleucidarum Historia and Latin Colonies: Cange's Byzantine History and for those of the Bas Empire: The Jesuite Hardouin's Antirrhetic, and other Pieces on this Subject to be reckon'd amongst the most Learned that have written; together with the illustrious Spanheim, of whose absolute and incomparable Dissertation de praestantia & usu Nu∣mismatum, nothing can be said too much to recommend it for Fruit and the Advantages which it shews may be gathered from the Culture of this noble and useful Study. In expectation still of Monsieur Morelli's so long promised Work, an Account of which we have in his late Specimen, and of his wonderful Indu∣stry, to the delineation of no fewer than Twenty Thousand several Medals Rare and Antique, preserved or any where to be found in the Cabinets and Collections of the greatest Princes and curi∣ous Persons of Europe, and this above Twelve Years since;
How many then certainly by this time! All of them drawn and design'd by his own Hand, with the greatest accuracy, which is a peculiar Talent and Address, hardly to be found among our skilfulest Painters themselves, Medal Figures having a cer∣tain Air of Antique, free and easy, different from other De∣sign, be the Sculpture never so Curious, and better succeeding in the naked Contour, without hatching to set them off; but un∣der which the Medals in this Discourse have suffer'd to please the Bookseller, who was so much charm'd with the Hollandia Metallica, that I could not prevail with him to spare that Cost, during my almost continual absence whilst they were En∣graving; sed mitenda haec, and to conclude, Monsieur Morelle bringing up the Rear; there will be left little more behind to the full and intire Accomplishment of this part of Erudition. It is yet most true (after all we have spoken of those Excellent Authors for Knowledge and Direction) there have been mistakes sometimes made: Golzius, Occo, Mezza Barba and others not excepted, tho' perhaps in fewer Instances; and therefore worthy is the Undertaking of Monsieur Morelle in se∣parating the suspected Medals of Golzius and the rest, from the genuine and truly Antique: But as it were next impossible, that among so many Heaps and Numbers, the most Sagacious should not sometimes Err and be imposed on, so may it cau∣tion the most circumspect and critical Medalist in examining all the Circumstances hitherto mention'd, and that it requires no slight Industry and Skill as well as Learning and Modesty, before one does too confidently adventure to Build or Support any part of the serious History, or other weighty Matter upon the Reputation of Medals only; tho' of all Records (trans∣mitting to us antient things) they prove the most Authentic and certain Reporters, preferable to any other, whether Titles, Inscriptions, Fasti or Memories whatsoever; since albeit, these were also very numerous, set up and expos'd in all the re∣motest Parts and Provinces of that Vast and Extensive Empire; Medals, for being chiefly struck at Rome, the Capital City, and Mistress of the known World (to which from all its Domi∣nions, the knowledge of the greatest and most renowned A∣ctions came and were examin'd) must needs be of the greatest Credit and Estimation. I have only one more to mention (highly deserving for what he has lately published on this Ar∣gument) and that is the Learned Mr. Walker, whose Book, tho' printed some Years after this was first written, might
well have answer'd all that was necessary to the knowledge of this Science, had not this been engag'd to the Stationer, and in the Printer's Hands before. There now remains those of the Modern, whereof Luckius is one of the first, who set forth his Sylloge of many Illustrious Persons of the last Century; Typotius, Molinet and Bossier, Medals of the Popes, Cardinals and Ecclesiasticks; Iaques de Bie, la France Metalic; to him add the Iesuite Menestrier: But none who have taken any considerable notice of Countries and States Compara∣ble to what is wanting, besides the Abbot Bizot and his Conti∣nuator, in that of the Republic of Holland by a single instance, and of which we have already given a large Account. Some others there may be, but these I suppose may suffice to furnish the Metalic Library, and serve for Direction; in the mean time, as to the rest, such as travel abroad, will not neglect visiting the several Cimeliarcha and Repositories of those Noble Persons and others, whose Curiosity and Genius has inclin'd them to to the Cultivation and Adornment of so gentile a Study and Diversion, taking along with them the Advice and Directions of the Learned and Industrious Patin, (with Sir George Wheeler and Dr. Spon's Voyage into the Levant) who has given the Publick an Account of the Royal Gazas and Pricely Trea∣sures to be any where met with of this kind thro' all Europe, For such Eminent Collectors have been Charles the Fifth, Rudol∣phus, and indeed all the German Emperors since to this Day; Frederick King of Denmark, Queen Christina of Sweden, the late Charles Prince Elector, Prince Leopold of Florence, and all of the Medicean Family; Ranuccio Farneze gathered by the Cardinal Alexander his Unkle; the Cardinal C. Barberini, the Counts Soderini, de Maximis, Mascardi, Morosini, and Garzoni; Lazara at Rome, Venice, Verona, Padoa, &c. as indeed ever great and learned Person in Italy, who have to their Libraries, Cabinets richly furnished with Medals and the like Antiquities. So in France, especially among the great Officers and Ministers of State, not for Ostentation, but some of them as Knowing as Curious; such as Lomenie, Count de Brienne Secretary of State, Harlaeus Procurator General, Chancellor Seguire, the late Mon∣sieur Colbert, the Abbe Seguin, with others innumerable, which has caused the French King (who is doubtless Master of the greatest and best Collection of Medals in Europe) among other his indeed laudable Munificences for the encouragement and promoting of Letters, to erect an Academy where the Medalists,
Autiquaries and Virtuosi, meet and confer at his Palace of the Louvre. Now albeit among our own Country-men we are but some∣what thin of Writers on this part of Erudition; yet had we, and still have many Worthy and Illustrious Persons both Know∣ing and Curious, whose Collections have done Honor to them∣selves and to the Nation; Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl Marshal of England (that Great Mecaenas of all the politer Arts, and boundless Amasser of Antiquities) had in that rich∣ly furnished Cabinet I mentioned, as rich a Collection of Me∣dals gathered by Daniel Nisum; the like had the Great Duke of Buckingham the Marquis (afterwards Duke) Hamilton; Sir William Paston, Grandfather to the present Lord Yarmouth, who I sup∣pose, is still in possession of them, as of other his Choice Col∣lection of Rarities; Sir Simon Fanshaw of Ware Park; Sir Thomas Hanmer of Hanmer, whilst he lived, my most worthy Friend; the late Ralph Sheldon of Weston Esquire, now in the Hands of his Virtuous Kinswoman Mrs. Frances Sheldon, late Maid of Honor to the now Queen Dowager; Iohn Harvey Esquire, late Treasurer to her Majesty the Queen Dowager; Sir Iames Long of Draicut; Elias Ashmole Esquire, both lately deceased; and amongst our more liminently Learned Antiquaries, Sir Robert Cotton, Grandfather to the present Sir Iohn Cotton, who persist∣ing in the steps of that Illustrious Person, is still augmenting the unvaluable Treasure of Medals and Manuscripts, obliging the Learned World by his Generous Communication of what has been so left, and is so improv'd by him. What singular Use our Learned Cambden (whom next I am to mention) made of his Collection,Notae ad Brit. Numis.s to justify and adorn his Britannia, is to be seen every where in that Glorious Work, as also in that of Mr. Speed. Add to these Sir Henry Savil and Spelman, Sir Simon d Ewes, our Learned Selden, Sir Iohn Marsham, Mr. Iohn Greaves, Mr. Brere∣wood, &c. and at present living, the Right Honourable Earl of Peterborough, Dr. Sharp Archbishop of York, the Right Ho∣nourable Sir William Trumbal late Ambassador at Constantinople and now Principal Secretary of State, Sir Edward Sherburn; my most Honoured, Learned and Worthy Friend (and now Old Fellow-Traveller) Thomas Henshaw Esquire, Abraham Hill Esquire, Mr. Falkner, Dr. Iohnson, the Learned Mr. Laughton of Trinity-college in Cambridge, inferior I am told to few, Mr. Guillhard, cum multis aliis.
And that even the Ladys may not be defrauded of the Honor due to the Favourers of this Noble Diversion, the Lady Ann Boynton (Daughter to Iohn late Earl of Rochester) who I am told, has not only made a Curious Collection of Medals, but is herself very Knowing in them. There are doubtless many others whom I have not the Ho∣nor of being known to, and should have enrich'd this Catalogue with their Names and Merits; always reserving a more distin∣guishing Recognition, with infinite and particular Obligation to the present Earl of CLARENDON, whose most am∣ple Collection of the most Noble Medals, and Glorious Medalions, both for Number and Choice (together with what of Modern he has contributed to the Type here exhibited) is worthy the be∣ing reckoned amongst the most Illustrious, and his Lordship for many other singular Favours, to be ever mentioned by me with the greatest Regard. Nor may I (on this account) forget Mr. Charleton of the Middle-Temple, without signal Ingratitude and want of discern∣ment, who has (besides a Glorious Collection and Universal Series of the Rarest Medals) a Cabinet of other Natural and Artificial Curiosities, far exceeding for Choice and Perfection any that I have met withal Abroad, or believe will easily be found in Europe besides. To which let me add, not only his extraordinary Knowledge of the Treasure he possesses, but the Obligingness and great Civility of a most Generous Person. I conclude this Recension where indeed I ought to have begun, when I mention'd the Great and most Illustrious Persons of Eng∣land (emulating the most celebrated Cabinets of the Greatest Princes of other Countries) namely, that Royal Collection of Me∣dals at St. Iames's, begun by that Magnanimous and Hopeful Prince Henry, and exceedingly augmented and improved by his Brother King Charles the Martyr, from the Testimony of his own Learned Library-keeper Patrick Iunius (in his Notes on St. Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians) Quem locum (speaking of St. Iames's) si vicinam Pinacothecam, Bibliothecae celeberrimae con∣junctam: Si NUMISMATA Antiqua Graeca, ac Romana; Si statuas & Signa ex Aere & Marmore consideres; non immeritò Thesaurum Antiquitatis &  Instructissimum nominare potes, &c. To which add,Car. Patin Famil. Rom. that of another Learned Medalist, Carolus Pri∣mus ille Magnae Britanniae Rex, caeteris Europae Principes omnes hoc possessionum Genere, vincebat; which how at this Day impair'd, and miserably imbezel'd, not only by the Rebels during the late
Civil Wars, but even since, thro' the Negligence of others, is of deplorable Consideration; if any hopes yet remain of its re∣vival again to some tolerable degree of Lustre and Repair, we must be oblig'd to the indefatigable Industry of the late Super∣visor, the obliging and universally Learned (whilst he lived my excellent Friend) and lately deceas'd Monsieur Iustel; and from hence forward to the no less accomplish'd (in all solid Learning and severer Studies) Dr. Bentley, his worthy Suc∣cessor. This for the Books and Manuscripts, among which there are still many Choice and Inestimable Volumes, besides the Fa∣mous and Venerable Alexandrian Greek Bible of St. Tecla; but the Medals have been taken away and purloin'd by Thousands, and irrecoverable. Their late Majesties had yet a very rich and ample Collection, which I well remember were put in Or∣der, and Methodiz'd by Mr. Ashmole, soon after the Restaura∣tion of King Charles the Second, which I hope, and presume may be still in being and to be recovered. Let none therefore reproach our Country, look or speak de∣spisingly of Medals (those Immortales Chartae and Perennial Re∣cords) as Pieces of Canker'd Brass and Rusty Copper, without that Regard and Veneration due to Antiquity, and what the greatest Emperors, Kings and Famous Persons, Knowing and Learned Men have honour'd and cultivated with so much Cost and Industry for the Public Good: But (as of old, those who could shew the Heads and Busts of Renowned Ancestors) let us rather call the Lovers and Improvers of this so Noble Study (and with as much Right) Homines multarum Iniginum, with∣out reproach, and being brought upon the Stage. And now in the last place something should be said concer∣ning the Method of Ranging, Marshalling and Placing of this Learned Treasure. In Order to this, one may consider the several Sizes and Vo∣lumes; those of the Grand Bronze or Maximi Moduli ever in the first place, as excelling all the rest for the Excellency of the Re∣lieve and Historical Reverse; among which some yet thrust in those of a less Size, and on the contrary (according as they Fancy) ranging the larger among the Medii aeris for the sake of a rare Otho, Antoninus, a Drusus or Germanicus; every Size deriving its Estimation from the Learning and Instruction of the Reverse, preferable to the Head and Effigies.
Those of the second and next Model, take the next place as much more fruitful in variety of Reverses, Greek and Latin Colo∣nies, &c. than those of the first; and those of the very least Size, have their peculiar Value, as they greatly serve to supply the Chasms and Interstices of the other two, especially of the lower Empire. A Series of the first Volume in aere magno (as we long since noted) hardly reaches below Posthumus, and such as do are exceeding Rare, and as meanly wrought: But of the second Model, the Collection is not difficult, even as low as to the lowest Occidental Roman Empire, and Oriental Paleologues, or as far as down to Heraclius; not but that there were more Me∣dals of them, but that Men did not care to enquire after things so wretchedly design'd. A consequence of the small Copper and minimae formae, is yet more common and easily procur'd to furnish the lower Em∣pire, even to the last of the Greeks; but from Iulius Caesar, where usually they did begin (namely to the Posthumi) 'tis hard to compleat a Series, and in a manner, impossible from Theodosius to the Palaeologi, without a mixture of Gold, Silver and some ex aere Medio: In short, were it to be compassed, one should chuse not to mingle Sizes, or indeed any that were of different Metal. But this is a Curiosity for Great Princes to accomplish, and that with Difficulty too, as well as Charge; and there∣fore advisable to aim rather at a Series of either Species and Mo∣dels by themselves, and of what Metal soever in case of neces∣sity with these Insertions as occasion offers, and take them as they come to hand. Augustus is common in all Volumes and Sizes, so the Colonies in the middle Bronze (for they struck no Medalions) and are with others rare in the Greater; and thus assisted by them all, a Curious and Industrious Person may be Master of a very hand∣some Cabinet of Medals, without any considerable Interruption from the Period of that Glorious and Renowned Commonwealth by the ambitious Iulius, to almost the present Age, and Justify the History of near Two Thousand Years, which is more than any profane Historian or good Author extant, pretends to do upon the score of his own Authority. You now will ask, in what Method it were best to place this Learned and Venerable Assembly? Doubtless, the most Natu∣ral according to their Antiquity and Chronology, beginning with Heads and Effigies.
Now Heads (as our Authors shew) may be considered under Five Capacities. As first, Kings, Greek and Latin in general or particular, of which we have given us the History of some, and of their Successors, as in that Excellent Account of the Seleucian Potentates by Monsieur Vaillant: Under this Head come in others of the Greek, and even of the Iews, Nu∣midians, Punic, Parthian, Armenian, Arabs, Spanish, French, Goths and Barbariaus, all of them useful for Illustration in their turns. After these the Cities, Greek and Latin also, as well before as after the Foundation of the Roman Empire, to the number of above two Hundred only Greek: Here enter those Colonies and Municipia which give such Light to the antient Geography. Golzius, the above, named Vaillant, and especially the very Learn∣ed Hardovin on Pliny may be consulted, who gives us this Note; That the Heads upon these Medals (for some have none at all) are either the Genius of the Place, or some Deity which they had in Veneration there; but of this I think, I have spoken already. Under the Third Head are ranked the Consular or Roman Families, of which there be at present 1500 Medals. The Head of Roma, some Deity or Charrioted Victory on the Reverse, did first appear upon their Money. But after these (which are not considerable for their Erudition) entred the Monyers and their Relations who took their Liberty, as did the Triumvirs and others, to stamp what they pleased without control, until Iulius as we shewed, put an end to their freedom and antient Government, and set his own Effigies on the Coin. Here our Collector may have recourse to Ursinus and his Continuator Dr. Patin, who marshals them Alphabetically. Whatever else the number of these may be, there are counted a Thousand of Silver only. Next these come the Imperial, especially from the first Caesar as far as to the thirty Tyrants, thence to Constantine, and down even to Heraclius, decaying in Sculpture with the decadence of the Empire: For these see Occo improv'd by Count Mezzabarba. Noting, that they may be continued with both the Orient and Occidental Emperors, almost to the present, amounting to a vast number. Last of all succeeded the Deities in Head, Bust and whole Figures with their proper Symbols and Attributes, and these followed by the Heros, Heroines, and other Brave and Renowned Persons Greek and Latin, accompanied by the
Famous Legislators, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Physicians, Poets, &c. In seating them according to their Reverses (which are in∣deed the most Instructive and fullest of Learned Variety) they appear'd at first as meanly as their Heads: But no sooner did the Monetaries and Masters of the Mint begin to Illustrate and Adorn their Medals with their own Exploits (as sometimes) or of their Ancestors and Relations; but the Reverses became considerable, and sought after by the Curious Antiquary, espe∣cially such as afterwards the Roman Emperors themselves and their Flatterers caused to be Ingraven and Stamped with utmost Art, expressing the most signal Actions and Passages of their Lives, to the great Advantage of the Learned. Now these may be ranged either as they belong to their respective Emperors, according to order of time discoverable by the Consulate or Tribune; or as Oiselius has perhaps by a better method plac'd them, and more agreeably as they suit in some peculiar Curiosity and Variety of Subject. The Author whom last we named, in his Selectorum Nu∣mismatum Antiquorum Thesaurus (by way of Adversaria and Common Place) seems to have taken in and comprehended all in a very useful Sylloge, from Iulius Caesar down to Constantine the Great, for the ready and expeditious finding out the Histo∣rical and most useful part of the Reverses under Ten Localities, which I conceive may suffice, I. The Heads of the Emperors. II. Reverses of Regions, Pro∣vinces, Cities, Colonies, Rivers, &c. for Geographical Light. III. Deities and Genius's. IV. Virtues, Moral, Symbols and Em∣blems. V. Military Expeditions, Allocutions, &c. VI. Ludi Circenses, Liberalities, Adoptions, Marriages, &c. VII. Apotheoses and Consecrations. VIII. Edifices, Temples, Arches, Ports, Brid∣ges, Victories, Triumphs, Trophies. IX. Sacerdotia, Augures, Sa∣cred Utensils and thing belonging to Religion. X. Miscellanies that cannot so aptly be placed under any of these Chapters. I conclude with the Specimen of Monsieur Morelle, which per∣haps may appear more agreeable, by placing them according to their several Sizes, and which doubtless is most Beautiful, I say not the most Instructive without some proper Index. For this, see what he has exhibited in Sixteen Tables. Lastly, what I have lately been shewed of Mr. Wanley's Disposition in∣tended
for the Medals belonging to the Bodleian Library of Oxford, I cannot but much commend as very comprehensive and Ingenious. Thus, or by any other Method prescribed by Learned Me∣dalists, a Collection may be ranged and usefully disposed of for the prompt and easy finding out what one has at any time occasion for. The French King's Cabinet of Medals (who has doubtless one of the very best and most glorious Collections in the World) consists of no fewer than Twenty Thousand, which yet is no such mighty Boast, compared to what Peter de Medices had collected an Age since, which as Philip de Comines tells us, amounted to an Hundred Thousand of all the Metals, all which he yet lost at once, when he was Banished. Nay, and Scaliger says, Gorlaeus (a very ordinary Man, and far from being a Prince) had above Thirty Thousand rare Medals, whereof above Four Thousand of Gold, which exceeded the French-King's Collection by Ten Thousand. They are ranked according to the Dates, and kept in Cabinets of Cedar, the Drawers elegantly Gilt and Titled: Nor are his very Counters (which concern any parti∣cular Notice relating to History, as many do) neglected, or deemed unworthy of a distinct Repository. It will not I suppose be necessary (after all that has been said) to acquaint the Lovers of this sort of Antiquity, how re∣quisite some competent Knowledge in the Greek and Latin Tongues is to the Studious, and those who would indeed be profound in this Noble Science; tho' (to discourage no other∣wise Ingenious Person) we find by Hub. Golzius, and the above∣named Gorlaeus (both ignorant of either Tongue) how far ex∣ceeding Industry, Affection, and Application may attain to and arrive. To this appertains likewise some Skill in the antient Geography, History, Chronology, Pagan Mythology; Assistant to which of the Modern, may Rhodiginus, Rosinus, Ortelius be; Panci∣rollus's Notitia, Caesar Ripa's Iconologia, and such as Treat of the Images of the Gods and Goddesses, with other Subsidiaries. But I have now done as soon as I have shewed you how to prevent the often handling of your choicest Medals, as well as to facilitate the taking any of them out of their respective Nests and Localities (in which they are placed) by what I observed of Mr. Charleton's, who has very Ingeniously fasten'd one end of a small and narrow Label of Velume, or piece of Ribbon to the bottom of every Nich, so far under the Medal, as that
taking up the loose end of the Parchment or Ribbon (which is purposely left to appear a little beyond the edge of the Nest) one easily raises up the Medal, so as either to see the Reverse or Head, or take it quite out without pinching or digging it forth with one's Nails, which is inconvenient, and often sullies it. Upon every such Label, there is also (as I remember) noted with a Pen, what Medal it is, which being extreamly neat and ready, I recommend for others imitation. I had propos'd to conclude this Institution with a Cata∣logue (by way of Specimen) of both Antient Greek and Roman Medals, for the Ease and Benefit of Tyros, and such as are not yet accustomed, and so ready to Decipher their Inscriptions after the Method of Monsieur Baudelot, beginning with the Roman, and (after the Consular) with him, to whom after the decretal Battel at Pharsalia, the Senate permitted the Dignity of having the Victor's Effigies stamped on his Coin, and which (as we Read) render'd his own Sacred, and was indeed the most tran∣scendent Mark of Honor they could flatter him withal. But find∣ing my self prevented by that large and useful Account which Mr. Obed. Walker has already published; I wholly omit it, with the Addition only of those who succeeded Iovianus (where Mr. Walker has left off) who, tho' nothing so considerable as his Predecessor Emperors; yet since to assist that Collection, some may happly desire an Account of such as follow'd (and that there was any sort of Civility or tolerable Art remaining) I shall recite them down to Heraclius, which happen'd to be about the Second Century from Valens, the Seventy Third Em∣peror, about the Year 364 after the Incarnation. 73. D. N. VALENS. MAX. Aug. a Common Medal. Reigned 14 Years, Lived 50. Died 373. in Phrygia. Albia Dominica Aug. very Rare. D. N. PROCOPIVS. P. F. Aug. R. R. Reigned 1. 74. D. N. F. GRATIANVS P. F. Aug. Comm. Regnavit. 15. Vixit. 29. Mort. 390. FL. MAX. CONSTAN∣TIA. R. R. D. N. FIRMVS. P. F. Aug. R. R. A. Y. T. KAIC. EVC. CEB. K. 75. D. N. Flau. VALENTINIA∣NVS IVNIOR. P. Fel. Aug. C. Reg. 16. Vix. 26. Mor. 391.
D. N. MAG. MAXIMVS. P. FEL. Aug. Com. Mort. in Gal. 388. D. N. F. L. VICTOR. P. F. Aug. Rare Mort. in Gallia. 388. 76. D. N. F. L. THEODOSIVS. P. F. Aug. Com. Reg. 17. Vix. 60. Mor. 392. AELIA. FLACCILLA. Aug. R. GALLA. PLACIDIA. Pia Felix Aug. R. D. N. EVGENIVS. P. F. Aug R. in Gal. Ger. R. I. M. 39. 77. D. N. Fla. ARCADIVS. P. F. Aug. C. Reg. 13. Vi. 31. Mor. 405. Aelin, EUDOXIA. Aug. R. R. 78. CENT. V. D. N. HONORIVS. P. F. Aug. Com. R. 31. V. 38. M. 421. 79. D. N. Flau. THEODOSIVS. P. Fel. Aug. R. IMP. XXXII. COS. XVII. P. P. Rom. Reg. 48. Vixit 48. Mort. 449. EVDOXIA. Aug. Rare. P. PRISCVS. ATTALUS. P. F. Aug. Rare. D. N. IOVINVS. P. F. Aug. Rare. D. N. HERACLIANVS. P. F. R. R. D. N. PETRONIVS. P. Fel. Aug. R. R. D. N. IOVINIANVS. P. F. Aug. R. R. D. N. IOANNES. P. F. Aug. R. R. In Ital. 80. D. N. PLAC. VALENTINI∣ANVS. P. F. Aug. R. R. Mort. 432. EVDOXIA. Aug. R. 81. D. N. MARCIANVS. R. R. R. 6. V.—M. 455. FL. PULCHERIA Aug. R. D. N. FL. ANICIUS. MAXI∣MUS. R. R. R. I. V.— M. 454. 82. D. N. FL. MAECILIUS. AVI∣TVS. R. R. R.—V. M. 444. 83. D. N. FL. Val. LEO. P. F. Aug. Com. R. 18. V—M. 474. FL. IUL. VERINA. Aug. R. R. 84. D. N. FL. LEO IUN. R. R. R. 13. V.—M. 474. 85. D. N. JVL. MAIORINVS. RR. R. 4. V.—M. 460. 86. D. N. LIB. SEVERVS. P. F. Aug. R. R. R.—V—M. 465.
87. D. N. FL. ANTHEMIVS. R. R. R. 6. V - M. 467. FL. MARCIA Augusta. R. R. 88. D. N. RICIMER VS. Fl. Aug. R. R. 89. D. N. Fl. Anic. OLVBRIVS. R. R. Mor. 491. Fl. PLACIDIA. Augusta. R. R. 90. D. N. GLYCERIVS. Per. P. F. R. R. R—V—, Mor. 472. 91. D. N. LEO. IUN. P. Fel. Aug. R. R. 1. 92. D. N. Fel. ZENO. P. Fel. Aug. R. R. V—. 490. 93. D. N. Fl. Jul. NEPOS. P. Fel. Aug. R. Aliquot Menses. 94. D. N. Fl. BASILISCVS. R. R. N. 3. Abdicat. 477. 95. D. N. Fl. LIONTIUS. R. Sub Zeno. 96. D. N. Fl. MOMMILLUS. AU∣GUSTUS. R. R.—476. 97. D. N. Fl. Valerius. ANASTA∣SIUS P. Fel. Perpetuus. Aug. Com. R. 29. V.—. M. 517. D. N. Fl. LONGINUS. P. Fel. Perpetnus. Golzii. R. R. D. N. FL. VITALIANUS. Perp. Golzii. 98. D. N. JUSTINUS. P. F. Aug. Flavius. Anicius. Perpet. Com. R. 9. V.—M. 526. FL. EUPHEMIA. Augu∣sta. R. 99. D. N. JUSTINIANUS. Aug. Fl. Amio. Perpet. Pius Felix. Com. Fl. THEODORA. Aug. R. R. 100. D. N. JUSTINVS. Perpet. P. Fel. Aug. C. R. 13. V—. M. 578. Fl. SOPHIA. Aug. R. R. 101. D. N. TIBERIUS. Constan∣tinus. Perp. P. Fel. Aug. C. R. 7. V—M. 592. Fl. Anastasia. Aug. 102. D. N. Flau. MAURITIUS. Tiberius. Perpet. Aug. R. R. 20. V. 65. M. 602.
103. D. N. Fl. THEODOSIUS Per∣pet. P. Aug. R. M. 602. SECUL. VII. 104. D. N. Fl. FOCAS. Aug. R. R—V—Mort. 610. LEONTIA. Aug. R. 105. D. N. HERACLIUS. R. P. 33. V—640. Hic Terminus Esto. For after this, there's little worth Collecting, or at least very rarely; tho' now and then, and by Chance, one may perad∣venture light upon something which may serve to explain and fill up some part of later History in those dark Ages en∣suing, which will best be discovered by the Fabric of the Medal. AND now I have but a Word to add before I come to FINIS: And it is the Earnest Recommending to such Per∣sons as are Possessors of Medals, Intaglias, Inscriptions, Statues and other Rare and Curious Antiquities, Collections and pecu∣liar Treasure of Princes and Great Men (such as were King Charles the First, the illustrious Earl of Arundel, and the rest we have named) the Entertaining of some Learned and Know∣ing Person, who with the Library might have the Charge and Keeping of their Cabinets, Nummi Phylacia, and Curiosities of this Nature, and be qualified to Discourse pertinently upon, as well as shew them to Learned Strangers and others, whom the Fame of such Raities may invite with a Decency be∣coming Learned Men; and not (as too usually) leave and abandon them to the Custody of a Valet-de-Chambre, or some Ignorant Mercenary, who knows neither how to Value, Pre∣serve or shew them as they ought, and to the Credit and Honor of their Masters. Were this reformed, we should then, as in Italy, France, Germany, (and other Polite and Learned Nations) have fre∣quent Catalogues of what were most Rare yet extant, and in being of Antient and Useful Erudition, derivable from these Precious Remains in the Cabinets and Archives of the Cu∣rious, and of which the Learned Keepers of such Repositories would give Notice, and Exercise their Talents by publishing something of Use and Advantage to the Republic of Letters, as so many Antiquaries and Knowing Persons have done Abroad
to the Honor of their Countries (spreading the Reputations of those Generous and Noble Persons to whom they belong) for the Benefit of the Learned World, and not keep them so wholly to themselves, as few or none are the better for them. It is to this Sense, and without vanity, I would therefore apply that of Theognis and the Satyrist, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. —'Tis nothing worth that lies Conceal'd, And Science is not Science till Reveal'd. Mr. Dryden. CHAP. VIII. Of Heads and Effigies in Prints and Taille-douce: Their Vse as they Relate to Medals. I Have for these many Years been much importuned, and by many, to Publish a second and more ample Edition of my History of Chalcography, which indeed (being the very first of that Subject, written that I know of in any Lan∣guage) I might have exceedingly and usefully Improved: But having of a long time given over these Diversions, I cannot now oblige the Curious with any considerable Addi∣tions to my own Collection: The Lovers of Taille-douce may yet find wherewith to satisfy the utmost Curiosity, by consulting that large and ample Catalogue which has been published (since mine) of what the late Abbot Maroles part∣ed with to the French King some Years since, and which are now in his Library at Paris in divers large Folios, to the Value of many Thousand Crowns. Nor perhaps would it at all be difficult to add what may have since been set forth worthy the Collecting by our best
Artists and Ingravers, especially in Mezzo Tinto (as they call it) of which I gave the first intimation to the World, and which is now arrived to that height of perfection for its tender and delicate touch, as does sometimes contend with, and not seldom seem to exceed the Pencil of the most Excellent Minia∣ture Chair-'Oscuro. But that which I would chiefly bespeak to the Curious of Prints, should amongst the rest be a Collection of the Heads and Effigies of Famous and Illustrious Persons, such as were either done Originally from the Life, or from the best Paint∣ings that were so; and I do in particular recommend it to the Studious of Medals, as what may in great Part, and with no great Expence, supply what one cannot hope to procure and obtain in more rich and lasting Materials; as also in as much as besides the Heads and Pourtraits, they seldom or never ap∣pear without Inscriptions of the Names, Qualities, Virtues, most signal Works and Actions of the Persons whom they represent, which makes up the defect of Reverses. In Order to this, I had taken the Pains of Collecting the Names of the most Renowned, Famous and Illustrious of our own, and other Nations worthy the Honor of Medal, or at least of some Memory, as might in any sort upon one occasion or other, possibly contribute to the History of the Times and Persons under the Titles of Scholars and Divines; Historians, Chronologers; Antiquaries, Rhe∣toricians, Grammarians; Critics, Orators, Poets, and extraordinary Wits; Philologers, Philosophers; Physicians and Naturalists; Chy∣mists, Botanists; Mathematicians, Musicians; Iuris-Consults and Lawyers; Great Travellers and Discoverers; Worthy Benefa∣ctors; Persons Famous, or Pretenders to Curious Arts; Painters, Sculptors and Mechanitians of all Sorts; Sectaries, Enthusiasts, Impostors, Conspirators; bold Usurpers and Famous for any de∣sperate Villany of either Sex, Virtuous, Learned or Lewd; Co∣medians, Mountebanks, Iuglers and other Persons Remarkable for any Extraordinary Accident of Age, Stature, Strength, Shape, &c. but especially (and which indeed I should have named in the first place) the Heads and Effigies of Emperors, Kings, Princes and other renowned Persons, conspicuous for their Birth, Title, Courage, Counsel and Policy, or any Famous and Heroic Exploits by Sea or Land; in Church or State, &c. which amounted to a very considerable number of Prints, well chosen and properly dispos'd of in this, or some other
Method, and in Books; to which might be farther added, short Notes pertinent to the Persons. Whilst I am on this Topic (and for Reasons hereafter not to be contemn'd) give me leave to call over the Names of some of those Famous and Illustrious Persons, both of our own and other Nations, as I had Collected them for the Design I men∣tioned; I begin with the Reverend Clergy. Scholars and Divines, English, Irish, Scots, &c. In this Re∣cension of Names, thro all the fol∣lowing Clas∣ses, I do not oblige my self strictly to an Al∣phabetical Order be∣yond the I∣nitial Let∣ter, some al∣so are pur∣posely re∣peated as applicable to several Faculties. ABbot Georg. A. B. Cant. —Rob. Bp. of S. Alcuin. Ainseworth. Alexander ab Ales. Andrews, B. W. Armachanus. Balaeus, B. of Ossory. Babington, Ep. Wig. Bancroft, A. B. C. Barlow, Ep. Lin. Barrow. Becon. Bedel, Ep. Blanford Ep. Bradford, M. Bramhal, A. B. A. Brightman. Braughton. Burton. Cameron. Carleton, Ep. Cartwrite. Castel. Chillingworth. Chrighton, Ep. B. W. Collet. Columbanus. Cosin, Ep. D. Coverdale, Ep. Cox. Crakenthrop. Cranmer, A.B. C. M. Cudworth. Cumber. St. Cutbert. Davenant, Ep. S. Dod. Dolben, A. B. Ebor. Don. Downam, Ep. Duppa, Ep. W. Duport. Earle, Ep. Sal. Farington. Fell, Ep. Ox. Fern, Ep. Forbs. Fox. Fuller, T. Gataker. Gauden, Ep. Ex. Godwin. Gouge. Gregory. Grindal, A. B. C. Grosthed. Gunning, Ep. El. Hackwell. Hacket, Ep. L. C. Hales. Hall, Bp. N. Hammond. Harsnet. Hart. Hewet, M. Hooker. Holland. Holdsworth, Ep. Holiday. Hooper, Ep. Humphries. Iackson. Iewel, Ep. Sa. Ingulphus. King, Ep. Lo. —and Ch. Langhbain. Langham. Latimer, B. Lond. M. Laud, A. B. C. M. Lightfoot. Littleton. Livelie. Lyran. Major. Mede.
Montague, Ep. C. Morley, Ep. W. More. Morton, Ep. Nowel, D. P. Overal, Ep. Outram. Parker, A. B. Cant. —Ep. Ox. Parkhurst. S. Patrick. Pearson, Ep. Ch. Perce. Perkins Pocock, our Learned Philarab. Prideaux, Ep. Wig. Raynolds. Ridly, Ep. L. Rogers, M. Ross. Sancroft, A. B. Cant. Sanders, M. Sands, A. B. York. Saunderson, Ep. Sibbs. Sparrow, Ep. Spencer. Steward, D. P. Taylor, Ep. D. C. Thomson. Thorndyke. Tillotson, A. B. Cant. Tindal, M. Towerson. Triveth. Vaughan, Ep. Lon. Valentine. Usher, A. B. Ar. Walton, Ep. C. Ward, Ep. Sar. Warham, A. B. Cant. Warner, Ep. Roff. Wharton. Whitaker. Whitebread, D. D. Whitgift, A. B. Cant. Willbrode. White. Willet. Williams, A. B. York Wilkins, Ep. C. Wotton. Wren, Ep. E. Presbyterians, Inde∣pendents and o∣ther Dissenters. Ames. Baxter. Calamy. Clever. Dod. Goodman. Hinderson. Knox. Manton. Nye. Owen. Primerose. Sedgwick. Travers. Twisse, and other Smectymnians. Romanists. Alen, Card. Bonner, Ep. L. Carpenter. Cressy. Davenport. Durlaeus. Fox, Ep. Win. Gardiner, Ep. W. Garnet. Goff. Hadrian IV. Pap. Halcot. Harding. Howard, Card. Ocham. Parsons. Poole, Card. Raynolds. Ripley. Rupertus. Sanders. Sargeant. Scotus and Erig. Swisset. Tunstal, Ep. D. Vane.
Wainfleet. Walter Merton. Walsh. Warren. White ab Albiis. Widdrington. Wilfrid. Wolsey, Card. &c. Historians, Antiquaries, Critics, Philologers, &c. Ascham. Baker. Bale. Bayns. Ven Bede. Breerewood. Buchanan. Camden. Cambrensis. Capgrave. Cheeke. Cotton. Cuff. Cooper. Crighton. Dempster. D'Eves. Digs. Dugdal. Eliot. Fabian. Farnaby. Filmer. Fuller. Gildas. Grafton. Grimston. Hacklyt. Harding. Heylin. Hollingshead. Howel Iac. —William. Huntington. Knatchbull. Knolles. Leland. Lydiat. Littleton. Malmesbury. Marsham. Melvin. Moore. Merton. Nubrigensis. Pace Sir Rich. Pits Purchas. Raleigh. Reuchline. Rider. Rushworth. Sands Edw. —Georg. Sarisburiensis. Savel. Selden. Smith. Speede. Spelman. Spotswood. Stanihurst. Stow. Summer. Sumner. Turner. Twisden. Twyne. Verstegan Walsingham. Ware. Wendover. Westminst. Mat. Wheare. Whitlock, &c. Philosophers. Bacon Frier. —Verulam. Boile. Bonge. Caius. Digby. Flud. Fulk. Hobbs. More D. Hen. Lock Dr.Who living none will en∣vy the being named a∣mong the most learned and deser∣ving. Plat. White, &c.
Physicians. Alston. Anthony. Bate. Browne Sir T. Burrows. Butler. Caius. Charleton. Crook. Ent. Fraser. Glisson. Godard. Hamy. Harvy. Highmore. Holland. Ioylife. Linacer. Lister Sir. M. Lower. Meverel. Moufet. Prujean. Ray. Scarbrow. Short. Sidneham: Stanley. Thorice. Topsel. Turner. Wharton. Willis. Wotton. To whom add our Famous Botanists, Chirurgians, and Lithoto∣mists, Gerhard, Hollier, Iackson, Iohnson, Knight, Molins, Morison, Wiseman, Woodward, &c. Mathematicians. Bainbridge. Bond. Briggs. Brounker Ld. Cavendish Sir C. Colins. Dee. Dudly Tit. D. Northumb. Forster. Gascoygne. Gelibrand. Gilbert. Greaves. Gunter. Harriot. Heydon. Horrox. Humph. D. of Glocester. Lydiat. Moreland Sir S. More Ionas Napier. Neile. Norman. Norden. Norwood. Oughtred. Pecham A.B. C. Pell. Petty Sir Will. Ridgley. Rook Sacrobosco. Saxton. Ward, Ep. Sar. Wells. White. Wilkins. Wright, &c. To whom add those Viri  (highly meriting, and inferiors to none we have Celebrated) Sir Christopher Wren, Dr. Wallis, Newton, Flamsted, Hook, Hally, &c. Fellows of the Royal Society, whom none but the  and Ignorant, such as have nothing to Commend them, will envy the Honor of Medal, even whilst they are living, and their Works speak for them.
Lawyers and J. C. Bracton. Briton. Caesar. Cook. Cowel. Crook. Davis. Doderidge. Duck. Dyer. Finch, L. Ch. Fitz-Herbert. Fleta. Fortiscue. Glanvil. Grimston. Hales. Ienkins Sir L. Lambard. Latch. Littleton. Lindwood. Maynard. Noy. Plowden. Rustal. Reeves. Rolle. Selden. Thornton. Vaughan. Zouch. To these add Judge Ienkin, Mr. Prin, &c. stout Assertors of their Country's, Laws, against the late Usurpers. Poets and Great Wits. Alabaster. Barkley. Bathurst. Beaumont. Brown Will. Buchanan. Butler (Hudi∣bras.) Carew. Challoner Am∣bassad. Span. Author of that celebra∣ted Poem, De Repub. Angl. Instauranda. Chapman. Chaucer. Corbet. Cowley. Crashaw. Daniel. Davis. Denham. Don. Drayton. Drummond. Dyer. Edward E. of Oxon. Elderton. Fairfax. Fanshaw. Fletcher. Gascoine. Gaveston. Gower. Grevil S. Fulk. Harding. Herbert. Hoskins. Humes. Iohnson. Ioseph of Exon. Llewellyn. Lydiat. Marlows. Marvel. May. Milton. Nash. Ocland. Ogilby. Overbery. Owen. Randolph. Roscomon Ld. Sandys. Sedulius. Sherley. Shakespere. Sidny Sir Phil. Spencer. Stanley. Stephens. Suckling. Wake Sir Ia. Waller. Warner, &c.
Nor let any stomach Hopkins, Sternhold, Wiseman, Withers, Quarles, Pagan Fisher, honest Tusser and Io. Taylor, all of them Poetae suorum generum. And who would not have the Pictures of Allen (Founder of the College at Dulwich) Burbidge, Lowin, Pollard; the Ver∣sipelles—Lacy, Lee, Tailor, Tarleton, and other egregious Roscians and Pantomimes of our Theatres. Musicians. Berkinshaw. Bird. Bull. Butler. Campion. Carew. Deering. Dowlang. Euet. Humphry. Ives. Morley. Laniere. Laws. P. Philips. Purcell. Simpson. Willby. Young, &c. Great Travellers. Blount Sir Hen. Booz Sir Ier. Dampier, and the rest of the Buccaneers. Gage. Herbert. Knevet. Mandevil. Roe Sir Tho. Sandys Georg. —Edwin. Sherley Sir Ro. —Anthon. Vernon, &c. By no means forgetting our Renowned Leg-stretcher, Thomas Coriat of Odcomb, &c. Worthy Benefactors. Abbot. Balliol. Bathurst. Bodley. Chichley. Collet. Colwal. Gresham. Lambert. Laude. Mary Countess of Richmond. Middleton. Morley Agnes. Pindar Sir Pa. Pope Sir Tho. Price Hugh. Sheldon A.B. C. (Founder of the Oxford Theatre.) Smith. Sutton. Waddam. Wainlet. Ward. Warner. Wenman. Whitington. W. of Wicham. Wolsey, &c.
with the rest of those Royal and Munificent Benefactors, Founders of Churches, Colleges, Schools, Hospitals, (such as that of Chelsey already finished, and at Greenwich now erecting) Ports, Bridges, Repairers of High Ways, Publick Work-Houses, &c. for the Advancement of Learning, Relief of the Poor, Ease and Safety of Travellers, and other Pious, Charitable and Use∣ful Works. Lastly, To give some Instances of the Learned, Virtuous and Fair Sex. How should one sufficiently value a Medal of the Fa∣mous Heroina Boadicia Queen of the Iceni! The British Lady Cardelia; the Chast Queen Emma, Elfreda, Abbess Hilda, were it possible to meet with them, or at least their true Pourtraits, with that of Iulian Barnes who wrote a Poem of Hunting and Hawking, dedicated to Edward the Fourth: The Lady Iane Grey, Elizabeth Carew, the Lady Mary Nevil, so often celebrated by our Cambro-Britan Epigrammatist; Mrs. Roper and Learned Daughters of Sir Thomas More, and another of Sir Anthony Cook: Mrs. Weston, who besides other things, writ a Latin Poem in praise of Typography: Anna Ascue, Catherine Killegrew and her Sister, skill'd in both the Learned Tongues: Mary Countess of Pembroke (an extraordinary both Beauty and Wit) Sister to Sir Philip Sidney, and some say, Coajutrix in that Famous Arcadia. The Lady Arabella Stuart; Anne Cooke Mother to the Lord Chancellor Bacon, Learned in the Latin and Greek: Here then we celebrate the Incomparable Queen Elizabeth, knowing in all the Learned Tongues; witness her Magnani∣mous extemporary Speech in Answer to that of Sigismond the King of Poland's Ambassador.Scaliger. Beza, Thua∣nus, Ascham. Speede, &c. Scaliger says she spake five Languages, and knew more than all the Great Persons then Living. We have our Learned Camden (and others of undoubted Credit) telling us of her Visit to the University of Cambridge, Discedens (says he) Oratione Latina valedixit, &c. where he sets it down. And such was another Elizabeth (eldest Daugh∣ter to Elizabeth late Queen of Bohemia, Sister to Charles the Martyr) not long since deceased, to whom the great Philo∣sopher Epist. ad Princip. Phi¦losoph. Des Cartes dedicates his Works with this Account, (among other Perfections, and in Admiration of her extra∣ordinary Capacity of the most abstracted Sciences) Quod Te unam hactenus invenerim, quae Tractatus ante haec à me vulgatos, perfectè omnes intelligas, &c. That her Highness was the only Person of all that ever he yet had met with, who perfectly understood and comprehended what he had published.
Among those Royal and Illustrious Ladies, we do not for∣get the late Dutchess of New-Castle, either for her Learning, offer at, or Love of Learning; nor for both, Mrs. Philips, and our Sappho Mrs. Behn; Mrs. Makins, the Learned Sister of the Learned Dr. Pell; nor without the highest Ingratitude for the Satisfaction I still receive by what I read of Madam Astalls of the most Sublime: Besides, what lately she has proposed to the Virtuous of her Sex, to shew by her own Example, what great Things, and Excellencies it is Capable of, and which calls to mind, the Lady of that Protestant Monastery, Mrs. Farrer, not long since at Geding in Huntington-shire; the History whereof we have at large written byIn the Life of Bishop Williams Dr. Hacket. Not without my hearty Wishes, that at the first Reformation in this Kingdom, some of those demolished Religious Foundations had been spared both for Men and Women; where single Persons devoutly inclined, might have retired and lived with∣out Reproach or insnaring Vows; tho' under such Restraint and Religious Rules, as could not but have been approved by the most averse to Popery or Superstition, and as I have heard, is at this Day practised amongst the Evangelical Churches in Germany. And what should still forbid us to promote the same Example, and begin such Foundations, I am to learn more solid Reasons for, than any I confess, as yet I have. But whilst I am speaking of the Ladies, It would be an Omission unpardonable, not to Collect the Effigies of those Lords and Illustrious Persons, Favourites, great Officers and others, who had, and will have Name in the suc∣ceeding Histories of our late Civil War, for their Loyalty, Courage, Counsel, Imployments or Interest in the publick Affairs, (besides those already enumerated Chap. IV.) such as the Dukes of Albemarle, Buckingham, Hamilton, New∣Castle, Ormond and his Illustrious Son, the late and Valiant Earl of Ossory, by me never to be mentioned without the most grateful, and indelible Sense of a long and intire Friend∣ship, begun many Years abroad, and continued, till with ex∣tream Sorrow, I closed his Eyes. The Earls of Arundel and Surrey, Arlington, Ashley, Berkley, Biran, Bristol, Carlisle, Caer∣marthen, Capel, Cherbery, Clarendon, Cleveland, Cork, Darby, Devon∣shire Marquis of Dorchester, Earl of Essex; the Learned Lords Falkland, Goring, Marquis of Hartford, Lord Hatton, Earl of Holland, Lords Holles, Hopton, Huntington; Earls of Inchequin, Kingston, Langdale; Duke of Lauderdale, Earls of Leicester, Lindsey,
Loughborow, Manchester, Marlborough; Viscount Montague, the Re∣nowned Marquis of Montross, Hallifax; Earls of Mulgrave, Northampton, Northumberland, Norwich, Orery, Peterborough; Duke of Richmond; Earls of Rochester, Shrewsbury, Southampton, Straf∣ford; Lord Stawel, Earl of Sunderland, Lord Wentworth, Mar∣quis of Worcester, &c. Signal for their Service, or Remarkable for their Actions, whose Names will shine in our future Annals, as they deserve to do in Medal to their lasting Honor; as per∣contra, Bradshaw, Brackstead, Corbet, Cromwell, Cook, Dorislaus, Gar∣land, Goff, Hewson, Holland, Ireton, Lisle, Ludlow, Martin, Okey, Hugh Peters, Pennington, Scot, Tichburn, Whaley, Ven and other our Clements, Ravillacs and Lopezes, with the rest of those Infa∣mous Parricides, who deservedly suffered, or deserved to suffer to their endless shame. Lastly, Those who discovered the late Plots and Conspiracies, whe∣ther real or pretended, and such as miscarried in them before, and since the Revolution. Nay, I would not care if I had the Heads and Pourtraits of Pelagius, Robert Parsons, Stapleton, the Martin∣Mar-Prelates, Garnet, Faux, Catesby; the villanous Burgundian (who assassin'd the most Heroic Prince of Nassaw,) Iac-Straw, Tom Tiler, Simnel, Perkin Warbec, Tresilian, Emson and Dudley, Gaviston, Powel, Felton, Sindercum, Blood who made that bold Attempt on the Royal Gazophylacium in the Tower, and for a while robb'd it of the Imperial Crown, &c. To these add the French Ero∣stratus Hubert, who is said to have fired the City of London, after it had stood as many Thousand Years, as the Temple at Ephesus had been Hundreds in Building; and let this Rear be brought up with Hannum and Whitny, Clavel the learned Pad∣der, Dr. Lamb, Elizabeth Barton, Mal cut-purse, and the German∣Princess. I would see the Faces of Scoggin, Archee, Hobson the merry Carrier of Cambridge, and others ejusdem ordinis. In this Class enter the celebrated Misses and illustrious Strum∣pets; such as Rosamond, Iane Shore, Gratiana and other Thaises (of no mean Titles) as have debauch'd Great Princes, and contributed more perhaps to the Ruin of this Kingdom, than all the Warrs, Fires, Plagues and Plots which else have hap∣pened. Others again are Signal upon different and extraordinary Ac∣counts, Rare and Accidental; such as the late Stroker Gretorix, the Famous Irish Gastrimuth and Ventriloquus Fanning, our Milo, (and other Gastrimargi) Wood the great Eater of Kent, Marriot and other Philoxenus's.
Opposite to these, the Virgin Schreira, Eva Fleigen and Mar∣garite the Maid of Spire with the like Fasters and abstemious Ascetae: Farley, who slept fourteen Days and Nights; Calvert who went from London to Calais and back again to London in a Summer's Day, between Sun rising and setting; Here likewise may properly come in Babo Earl of Abensperg, who being Fa∣ther of Forty Children, brought Two and Thirty of them, (all alive, and at once) to wait upon the German Emperor; The prolific Mrs. Honywood of Marshham in Essex; but above all, Margarite Countess of Honeberg, who brought forth as many Children at one Birth, as there are Days in the Year, all uponErasmus Guicciardin. L Vives, &c. unquestionable Record. Then for Persons Remarkable for Age amongst us, Dame Kerton the late Abbess of Amesberry, who lived to an Hundred and Forty Years, married, and died long after the dissolution of her Monastery; Old Par, who survived above One Hundred Fifty and Two Years; and the antient Countess of Desmond, of whom it is reported, that she changed her Teeth three times;See Plin. Hist. Lib. VII. Cap. 56. as a Queen of Hungary recover'd her Youth and Beauty by Virtue of the Water that bears her Name: To these add Old Simson of Ellerton upon Swale in York-shire, (who dying within these Twenty Years) was judged to be Older than Par by Ten Years: Other Nestors and Macrobians of this, and other Nations,CAP. VIII. see in the Learned and Industrious Dr. Plot's Na∣tural History of Stafford shire; where likewise of Men of pro∣digious Stature, such as Bray of Cornwal, Parsons, Porter to King Iames the First, whose Picture I think, is yet, or lately was to be seen in the Guard Chamber at White Hall; Midleton of Lanca∣shire, &c. Next to these, Ieffrey Dwarf to King Charles the First, who grew to an ordinary Man's Stature after Fifty Years; Mr. Ramus (Pumilo to Thomas Earl-Marshal of En∣gland) who being Learned, and in the magnificent Train of that Noble Lord, when he went Ambassador to Vienna (about the Restitution of the Palatinate to the vanquish'd King of Bohemia) made a Speech in Latin before his Imperial Majesty, with such a Grace, and so much Eloquence, as merited a Golden Chain and Medal of the Emperor: Nor may we here forget the compendious Consort (yet living) of the late Mr. Gibson, whose Nuptials we find celebrated by our bestMr. Waller. Poets; and the Minute Man (of Stature suitable) deservedly numbered a∣mong our Tallest, and very best Miniature Painters of the Age; which kindly calls upon me to gratify an inclination I always
had to an Art so useful and instructive, as well as delightful; by celebrating some of our own Country-men, who have out∣done all the World in Water-Colours; such as Hildiard, both our Olivers, the inimitable Cooper, Carew, with the two Sons of De Clyne, &c. In Oyl, Dobson, Walker, Iohnson, Fuller, Greenhill, Streeter, Rylie, Pierce, &c. our Phidias, Praxiteles and Lysippus—Mr. Gibbon for the Statuary; our Raulins, Simons, &c. for Intaglias, &c. our Billingsly, Davis of Hereford, who wrote in Laudem Artis Scrip∣toriae, and taught the Noble Prince Henry to write; Coker, Gerin, Gething, Skelton, and mine own Monoculus Hoare; Compa∣rable for their Skill and Dexterity in Graving, Calligraphy and fair Writing, to the most Renowned of theCallicra∣tes wrote an Elegiac Di∣stic in a Se∣samum Seed. Aelian. Var. Hist. Antients. Hadrian Iunius speaks of him as a Miracle, who wrote the Apostle's Creed, and beginning of St. Iohn's Gospel within the compass of a Farthing. What would he have said of our Fa∣mous Peter Bale? who in the Year 1575. wrote the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, Decalogue, with two short Prayers in Latin, his own Name, Motto, Day of the Month, Year of the Lord, and Reign of the Queen, to whom he presented it at Hampton-Court, all of it written within theIn nuce in∣clusum Ili∣ada Homeri Carmen in membrana scriptum. Plin. Nat. Hist. Lib. VII. Cap. 21. Circle of a Single Peny, inchas'd in a Ring and Bordure of Gold, and covered with a Chrystal so accurately wrought, as to be very plainly legible, to the great Admiration of her Majesty, the whole Privy-Council, and several Ambassadors then at Court: I think, he was also the Inventer of the Art of Brachygraphy, Cyfers and other Notae furtivae now in such use among us—Sed manum de Tabula. For I should never else have done to think of finishing this Piece thro' all its dimensions and varieties, as we did expect to find it in what Mr. Turner undertakes, Sed quanta de spe! I descend therefore to other Nations, producing Men of Name or Merit for something Extraordinary and Conspicuous, whose Effigies in Medal or otherwise, were desirable upon the Ac∣count we shall hereafterConcerning Physiognomy. mention in favour of this seeming Digression. Alphonsus, the Learned King of Leon and Castile, and a Duke of Ferrara of that Name; Andrea D'Oria, who signaliz'd himself at the Battel of Lepanto; Alexander Farneze; Albert Marquis of Brandenburg; Alonzo Perez de Gusman Duke of Medina Sidonia, General of the Armada (Surnamed Invincible) against England, Anno 1588. &c.
It would be tedious but to Epitomize their several Exploits and Famous Atchievements, which every body conversant in modern History, will call to mind upon the recital of their Names only, which I therefore run over, and as I am Writing. Belizarius the fortunate, and unfortunate General under Iustinian; Godfry of Bulloin; the Noble Baldwin and other Heros of the Holy War; Carolus Magnus and Quintus; Charles Duke of Burbon, and Charles Duke of Lorain; Charles the Ninth of France; Carolus de Cosse; Matthew Corvinus; Assaldus Longus, Aloisius Mustus, Antonio Prospero Colunna; Cosimo di Medicis, Lorenzo, and Peter; Iohn casmire; Don Iuan de Castro and Austria; the Cardinals of Lorain, Richlieu and Mazarin; Lovis de Bourbon Prince of Conde, and his Father Henry; the Chevalier Bayard; Gaspar Colligny the Admiral, assassin'd in the Bloody Parisian Massacre; Rosny Duke of Sully; Charles Son of King Philip the Second of Spain, put to Death by his Father, suspected of favouring a Reformation; Christiern the Second and Fourth Kings of Denmark; Ericius and Gustavus Adolphus the Victo∣rious Kings of Sweden; Frederic King of Bohemia; Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania; Isaac Conyno Emperor of Trebe∣zond; Sebastian Zsni Doge of Venice; Bartol Covillon; Fagio∣fanus Busonius; Castruccio Castricani; Darellus, the Waivod Draculus; Ioseph King of Morocco; Taffalet; Benjamin Bucher; Hamar Essain the Turk; Isaac King of Tombut; Demetrius, and the truculent Vasilovits Emperor of Russia; Christ. Bernard of Munster; the Famous Pyrate Barbarossa: I have seen Pictures of Montezuma Emperor of Mexico; Athabaliba the Ynca; Pa∣raccussi King of La Plata; Oran Zeeb, Zaga Christi, Tomabes the last Soldan of Egypt; Simon the Georgian Prince; Geo. Castriot; Sahach Abba Sophy of Persia; Sultan amurad, and Mahumed Se∣cond and Third; Selymus, and the Magnificent Solyman; Alsie∣rius Cham of Tartary; Ferhates Bacha and Chuseines Bacha of Carmania, Zeriff of Fez, Muleasses King of Tunis; the late Vi∣zier Cuproli, Io. Cigala, &c. To which may be added other extraordinary Persons, former, and later Ambassadors from India, Morocco, Russia (done by our best Painters) Hamet Ben Hoddu Ottor; Raia Nebee, Naie Wi-Praia his Collegue; Abi Iaga Sedana, and Peter Io. Potemkin of Mosco; Pawhatan Emperor of Virginia and Matoaka his Daughter, Wife to Esq Rolff, with the painted Prince Giolo lately shew'd in Public. To return to Christendom.
Ferdinando Gonsalvo de Cordova and Soto; Fiesco of Genoa; Fer∣dinand Gaspar de Gonzaga; Guatimala; Gasp. de Gusman Conde de Olivares; Guidantonio Guidobaldi Duke of Urbin, and Fra. Maria, Marquis Galeatius; Gastion de Faux; the great Duke of Guize; Francis the First; Marishal de Gassion; the Duke of Bohan; Anna Dutchess of Memorency; Henry the Fourth of France; Blaise de Monluc; Mich. Hospitalis; Fran. Lesdiguieres, the late Henry de la Tour Marishal of France; the Princes of Conde and Conti; Armand de Biron; Ludov. de Trimouille; George Cardinal l'Ambois; the Count de Dunois; Io. Boucicault; Simon de Monfort; Scevola de Chastillon; Olivarius de Clisson; Bertrand de Gueslin; the late Count de Rochfacault; Io. Huniades; Hercules Duke of Ferrara; Raymundus de Ponto first Master of the Order of Malta; George Elector of Brandenburg; Iohn Frederic of Saxony great Patron of Luther, &c. Io. Burgundus last Master of the Knights Templars; Cardinal Hugo; Malatesta; Don Iuan d' Oquendo Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, Anno 1639. Io. de Wert; Buquoy; Count Tilly; Walestine Duke of Fridland; Pepin King of France, and Father of Charles the Great; Phocas, who murdered his Master the Emperor Mauritius, and was Founder of the Papal Primacy, Anno 602. Tol the Brave Swiss; the Noble Alonso Peresus; Piccinino; Fran. Pezaro; Clara Eugenia the most Prudent Governess of Flanders, &c. Peter Fulgosus, Assaldus Piso, Phil. Longus; George Ragotzius; Io. Ranzovius; Randolphus Adornus; Chr. Radziuil; Peter Serini; Marquis Spinola; Diego Sarmiento de Acunna; Sebastian King of Portugal; Sigismond King of Poland; Count Staremberg who so bravely Defended Vienna; Th. Strozzi; Ludovic. and Fran. Sforza; Canis Scaliger Princes of Verona; Iacobus Trivultio; Martin Turriano; Virgilio Ursini; Simon Vignotius; Villiers and Valetta, Great Masters of Malta and Rhodes; Vasques de Gama; Farinata Ubertus; Zisca; Zamoschi Chancellor of Poland; Henry à Brederode; the Most Illustrious and Heroic Princes of Orange, William the First; Maurice, Henry, Frederic; William the Second, and Third his  M. DC LXXXIIX. &c. and amongst the most Worthy to be for ever Celebrated by that State, in Medals of Gold; that Brave, and Courageous Patriot Offe, who with his second Hassenaer, saved his Fellow Citizens and Country, from being tamely given up to the French before Amsterdam, 1678. Fathers and Divines, as many as can be recovered with any appearance of Resemblance, which I fear will be very few; tho' the Monks in some old Greek and Latin Manuscripts, pretend to
present us not a few, especially of the later School-men and Theologues of Note: Such as, Alphonsus a Castro. Aquinas. Abbas Urspergensis. Altingus. G. de Saint Amore, Angl. Anastasius. Anselmus. Arius Montanus. Armachanus Angl. Baconthorp Anglus. Balsamon. Baronius. Bellarmin. Berengarius. Bessarion. Bertrm. Biel. Bonaventura. Bradwardin Angl. Casa, Ep. Benevent. Cajetan. Canus Melch. Capgrave Angl. Cassander Geo. Cusanus Card. Delrio. Dionysius Exig. M. de Dominis. Dossat. Drexelius. Dubravius. Ducaeus Fronto. Durandus. Drusus. Escobar. Espensaeus. Faggius Paul. Fonseca. Fulgentius. Gaza Theod. Genebrand. Gerson. Goranus Angl. Granata. Grosthed Angl. Hampolus Angl. Heresbachius. Hincmarus. Hugo Cardinal. Hosius Cardinal. Iacobus de Vorag. Iansenius, Ep. Iper. Iccoltus Cardinal. A Kempis Tho. A Lapide Corn. Io Lascaris. Lessius. Pet. Lombard & Fra∣tres P. Comestor. Gratian. Lyra Nich. Angl. Maldonat. Mapus Angl. Molineus. Mont—Luc. Necham Angl. Nigellus Angl. Ocham Angl. Paguinus. Pagnigarola. Pamelus. Pascastus. P. Paul Sarpi, Au∣thor of the C. of Trent. Pallavicini Card. his Antagonist. Perotus Nic. Perron Cardinal. Rhabanus Maur. Rhenanus Beat. Ribadineira. Rigaltius. Sa Emanuel. Sadolet Cardinal. Salignat. Salmeron. Savanerola. Schelstrate. Serarius. Soto Dominic. Stapulensis Fab. Suarez. Tapperus. Tolet Cardinal. Torretius. Tostatus. Tossanus. Valentius Greg. Valesius. Vasquez.
Vatablus. Vives Ludovic. Vulcanius. Valeria Cyprian. Hugo Des. Victore Angl. Ximenes Cardinal. Zabarella, &c. To these add the Founders of Monastical Orders, especially St. Dominic, Francis, Ignatius Loyola, Xaverius, S. Bruno the Car∣thusian, Philip Neri, &c. And were it possible, Peter the Fa∣mous Hermit and zealous Preacher of the Crusado, exciting the Christian Princes to undertake the Holy War; as did Iohn Vetzeli Indulgences, upon pretence of another Pious Fraud in the time of Luther; together with the contemplative Men St. Anthony, Paul, Sym. Stylites, &c. Protestants and Reformed. Amyraldus. ARMINIUS. Aubertin. Becanus. Berenger. BEZA. Bibliander. Blondel. Bochartus. BUCER. Bullenger. CALVINVS. Calixtus. Cameron Angl. Capellus. Castalio. Colerus. Curio Caelias. Curcellaeus. Daille. De Dieu. DIODATI. Donellus. Drelincourt. Drusus. Episcopius. L'Espine. Fagius. Farell. Geraldus. Gomarus. Iunius Fran. Iunius Hadr. —Patr. A Lasco Io. Marlorat. Marnixius. Martyr Pet. Mercerus. Mestrizat. MOLIN Pet. MORNEUS (Phil. Muersius. Munsterus. Musculus. Oeculampadius. Paraeus. Pelicanus. Piscator. Rivet Andr. Schichardus. Scultetus. Simlerus. Sturmius. Tilenus. TREME∣LIUS. Tussanus. Viretus. Voetius. WALDO of Lyons. Wollebius. Zwinglius, &c. Of the Augustan Confession. Beaummanus. Brentius. Calovius. Chemnitius. Cruciger. Diazius! Eckhartus. Gerhardus. Groninger. Hutterus. Illyricus Fla. Kruger.
LUTHER. Major. Martinus. Meisner. MELANC∣THON. Osiander. Pfeffinger. Quistorp. Salmuth. Schibler. Schmidius. Vergerius Paul. Volkmarus. Ursinus. Wegelin. Zimmerman, &c. Historians, Philosophers, Philologers, Critics, &c. Agricola Geo. Alberti LeoBap. Allatius Leo. Aldus, A.P.F. Alex. ab Alexan. P. de Alliaco. Alvarez. Alstedius. Appianus. Aretin Pet. —Fran. Argyropylus. Aubespin. Aventine. Augustinus Ant. D'Avila. D'Avity. Barbarus Her. —Dan. Baudius. Bayius. Bembus Pet. Berigardus. Bertram. Bignon. Blondus. Bonamicus. Bongarsius. Borrichius. Boterus. Brissonius. Brodaeus. Broulartius. Burgersdicius. Buxtorf. Cagnolus. Chalcondylas. Calderinus. Calepin. Calvisius. Camerarius. Campanus. Canterus. Caninius. Castalio. Carpzovius. Caro Hanib. Casaubon. Castelvetro. Catanaeus. Comes Natal. Du Chesne. Chifletius. Chrysoloras. Ciacconius. Clemengis. Colerus. Commandinus. Columna Hier. and Fab. Comenius. Comines Phil. Conringius. Contarenus. Cunaeus. Cremoninus. Crinitus Pet. Decius Phil. Delrio. Despauterius. Deusing Doletus. Donatus. Dousa Ianus. Drusius. Dudithius. Elmacinus. ERASMUS. Erpenius. Everardus. Eustathius. Faber Honor at. —Nicolaus. —Petrus. —Tanaquil. Faernus. Ferrarius. Fenestella. Ficinus. Freinshemius. Froissard. Garci-Lasso de la Vega, who writ the Hi∣story of the Incas. Garz. ab Horto. Gauricus. Gaza. Gemistus. Gesner. Gifanius. Goclenius. Godescalcus. Golius. Gorlaeus. Gruter. Grynaeus. Gronovius. GROTIUS. Graevius. Gravius. Gruchius. Guillandinus. Gulielmius. Gyraldus. Du Hamel Helvicus.
Heraldus. Heereboord. Hermann. Contr. Hermolaus B. HEINSIUS. P. F. Holstenius. Hortensius L. Le Iay. Imola Io. Imperator. Iovius. Iunius Hadr. Iustellus Pat. —Fil. Keckerman. Kirchmannus. Laet. Lambinus. Laetus. Landinus. Leunclavius. Lascaris. Latomus. Leopardus. Leti Greg. Leo Africanus. Leunclavius. Licetus Fortun. Ligorius. Linschoten. Lindenbrogius. LIPSIUS. Longolius. Madrusius. Maimburg. Majoragius. Malbranch. Manutius Pat. —Fil. Mariana. Martinius. Masius. Massonius. Meibomius. Menagius. Menochius. Merula. Meursius. Mezeray. Molinaeus. Monardus. Morhovius. Munster. Muretus. Musurus. Nannius. Naudaeus. Nannesius. Olaus Mag. Oldorpius. Paecius Iul. Palmerius. Pancirollus. Panvin. Onup. Paruta. Pascal. Passeratius. Pasquier. Patricius Fran. Paulus Venetus. Piereske Fabr. Pellison. Percheymer. Perottus. Petavius. Petitus Sam. Philander. Philelphus. Picolomini. Pictorius. Io. Picus Miran. Pierius. Pighius. Pignorius. Pinellus. Pithoeus. Platina. Du Pleix Scip. Poggius. Politianus. Pontanus. Portus Cretensis Puteanus and Frat. Ragusaeus. Ramus Pet. Ramusio. Raphelengius. Riccobonus. Rittershusius. Rutgersius. Rocca Angelus. Robortel. Rosinus. Reinesius. Sabellicus. Sadoletus. SALMASIUS. Salmeron. Sambucus. SCALIGER. P. F. Schottus. Scioppius. Scriverius. Scultetus. Schindlerus. Sigonius. Simlerus. Siri Victor. Sleidan. Speronius. Spondanus. Stephanus Hen. —Rob. —Char. Stobaeus. Stuckius. Sturmius. Sylburgius. Tartagnus. Telesinus. Thevet. Thevenot. Thomasinus. THUANUS. Thysius. Tilenus. Tiraquellus. Torrentius. Trapezuntius. Turnebus. Tusanus. Trissinus. Valla. Valesius. Varenius. Varillas. Velserus. Verdier. Vergerius. Victorius. Vignier. Virgil Polyd. Vlitius. Ulphila.
Voetius. Volaterranus. VOSSIUS P. F. Ursinus. Wendelinus. Wicquefort. Wierus. Wolphius. Wower. Xylander. Xiphilin, &c. Juris-Consults. Accursius. Alciat. Baldus. Bartolus. Becanus. Bonavitus. BUDAEUS. Covarruvias. Cujacius. Decius Phil. Fenestella. Fulgosus. Genilis. Hottoman. Hottinger. Imolensis Alex. Menochius. Minsinger. Pacius Iul. Panormitan. Papinian. Paulinus. Paulus de Castro Puffendorf. Selva. Tiraquellus. ULPIAN. Widmanstade, &c. Physicians, Naturalists, Chymists and Botanists. Indeed we sometimes meet with the Heads of Aesculapius himself, Hippocrates, Theophrastus, Mithridates, &c. in Gems and antient Marbles: But I remember not to have seen any of Galen, Celsus, &c. tho' 'tis not unlikely there may perhaps in Spain be some true Pictures of Averroes, Avicen, Azoth, Mesue, Rhasis, Serapio, &c. as I make no doubt but there is of Acosta. Aquapendente. Argentarius. Asellius. Alpinus Prosper Bartholin. P. F. Bauhinus. Bellonius. Beverovicius. Borrichius. Borellus. Bontius. Capivaccius. Caesalpinus. Crato. Crollius. Clusius. Dalechampius. Dodonaeus. Duret. Etmullerus. Fallopius. Fernelius. Fierovantus. Forestus. Fracastorius. Fuchsius. De Graff. Godartius. Heurnius. Iohnstonus. Vander Linden. Lemnius. Laurentius. Lazius. Leonicenus. Malphigius. Mercurialis. Mizaldus. Mollerus. Mayern. Mathiolus. Niphus. Pareus. Patin, P. F. Platerus. Plempius. Pontanus. Pighius. Piso. Paludanus. Quercetanus.
V. Rheed. Riverius. Riolanus. Rulandus. Rondeletius. Ruellius. Regius. Sala. Sambucus. Salvianus. Salvatico. Sanctorius. Sennertus. Sinibaldi. Spigelius. Spon. Steno. Sylvius de Boe. Schrevelius. Septalius. Severinus. Tragus. Veslingius. Wierus. Wormius, &c. Other famous Persons, Adepti, Rosi-Crucians, Empirics and Pre∣tenders to curious Arts, and extraordinary Secrets: Arnoldus de Villa Nova, the Abbot Ioachim, Trevisanus, Trithemius, Artephius, Cornelius Agrippa, Basilius Valentinus, Iacob Behmen, Campanella, Cardan, Cosmopolita, Dr. Faustus, Nicolas Flamel, Geber, Glauber, Van Helmont, Iohn de Indagine, Kelly, Lullius, the Merlins, Nostradamus; the two Famous Monte∣banks Orvietano and Iohn Puntaeus, Paracelsus, Baptista Porta, Rupescissa, Weckerus, Wyerus; the Noble Despagnet Author of Enchirid. Phys. Restitut. and other Novators; the more Learned Iews, Abrabanel, Benjamin, Manasses Ben Israel, Maimonides, R. David Chimci, Leon Modena, Leo Iuda, Elias Levita. Besides other Impostors, Heresiarchs and Heterodoxi, &c. Arius, Barcocab and the Pseudo-Messias's; Barcold, nor more expect we to meet either in Medal, Marble or Picture Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Manes, Pelagius, Donatus, Lucian, Porphyrie, Celsus, &c. Mahomet, Sergius, Haly; tho' perhaps Adam Pastor, Abbas Ioachim, Sartor, Erastus, Calderinus, Vaninus, Gordianus, Bruno, Pomponatius, Pomponius Laetus, Socinus, Crellius, Anthony Urceus, Schlictingius, Vorstius, Servetus, Martin Gondisalvo, Gualter Lollard, Munster, David George, Hessling, Waldemar, Iac. Heraclides; the Visionary Postellus, Iohn of Leyden, Knipperdolling, Sabbatai Sevi; the false Sebastian of Portugal, Rustan, Muggleton, George Fox and Berkeley our Princes of Quakers and Pensilvanians, the Quietist Molinos, Anthoneta de Borignon, &c. Next to these enter the Famous Viragos, Iean la Pucelle d' Or∣leans, of whom there was long since a Medal struck, and divers Pictures; the Papissa Ioane or Iohn the Eight. Add to these Massanello of Naples, and others of remarkable Note. Persons likewise distinguishable for any Rare and Extraor∣dinary Accident or Quality; such as were the two Famous
Philophilists (the modern Pylades and Orestes of the late Age) Nicolas Barbadicius, the Marquis Trevisanus, who so Nobly contended to die for one another. To whom add, Ioannes de Temporibus Standard-bearer to Charlemain, who is reported to have lived Three Hundred Years; Battadeus the Wandring Iew; any of the Seven Sleepers; the temperate Cornaro; George of Fronsberg the Swedes; Nic. Klanker; Potocaeva of Poland; Burgo the Spaniard, with the Zelander so tall and strongly limb'd, as at the Nuptial of the French King Charles the Fair, he brought into the Festival Hall two Tuns of Beer, in either Hand a Tun: The Noble Silesian so strong, as with his Hands could break the thickest Horse-Shooe, and held at the same time three Men, two under his Arm, and one by his Teeth; and who hunting a vast Wild Boar, taking him by the Snout, kill'd him with his Sword, and could at a Dinner quaff off a whole German Ohm of Rhenish. And now we speak of Germans and Boars, I read of a Boor or Country-Fellow of that Nation, who upon a Wager, devoured an entire Hog, Entrails and all, raw and alive, beginning at the Tail. Other Athletic and Gigantic Men were Quaniambe the American Prince; but none of these came near Don Pedro a Spanish Gentleman; who tho' but of a just Stature, did atSee Io. B. Porta Phy∣siog. Lib. IV. Cap. 12. Naples perform things so prodigious for Strength, as well may Justifie all that we find reported of Samson, Milo, Titormus and other Heros of old; nor these the Stories of suspected Authors, but as Eye-Witnesses, recorded by Maiolus, Cardan, Camerarius, Thuanus, Scaliger, Fazel, Goropius and others of sufficient Credit. To these add Lazarus the Italian, whose Brother grew out of his side; but above all, those Scotch Twin Monsters, who living both to be Men, often discoursed and disputed with one another, and sometimes wrangled and fell out. To these be∣long Barbara the hairy Maid, whose Picture we have from the Life by Hollar, and the Cornuted Woman; the little Manikin lately carried about in a Box, and the prodigious fat Child. To this Class belong extraordinary Zanis and Farcers, Scaramuccios, Trivelin, Harlequin, Pulchinello and such as excel in slight of hand; the late Famous Funamble Turk, Iack-Adams, and the Dutch-Woman Tumbler; by no means forgetting our late Proteus Clark, who tho' gross enough of Body, was of so flexible and subtile a Texture, as to contort his Members into several disfigurati∣ons, and to put out of joynt almost any Bone or Vertebra of his Body, and to re-place it again. Lastly, Thomas the German,
who performed any thing with his Feet that others could do with their Hands, celebrated by the Excellent Poet Posthius, &c. Eminent Travellers and Discoverers were, Paulus Venetus, the Jew Benjamin, Leo Africanus, Postell, Fernandus Pinto, Busbequius, Bellonius, Io. Maria Favi, Le Blanc, Bernier, Monconis, Mandelslo and Olearius, Rauwolf, Thevenot, Tavernier, Sir Iohn Chardin, my most worthy Friend; Vanslebe, with the late Famous Missionaries, Riccius, Adam, Semedo, Mar∣tinius, Magalian, the Jesuit Le Compt, Trigaultius, P. de la Valle, and above all those ever Renowned Discoverers of the New World, Vespusius, Columbus, Vertamannus, Iohn Major, Sebastian Consalvo, Gomez, Nigno, Fogesta, Vasc. Nunez, Peter Covilan, P. Alvarez, Almeida, Alvaredo, Zanches de Huelva, Zeno, Ubbon, Sylvanus, Piccolomini; our Owen Guynedd, Annius Hemiskirk, Barenson, Car. Rip. Machero, Gonsalvo and Tristan de Vaz, Pigafetta, Spileberg, Schouten, L'Eremit, Bathencourt, cum multis aliis, whose Pourtraits are to be found. Much desirable were certainly the Heads and Effigies of the antient Sophists, Rhetoricians, Critics, Men Renowned for their ex∣traordinary Learning, &c. Such as Varro, Demetrius Phalereus,See for many of the Greek Philosophers Wetstein's late Edition of Diog. La∣ertius, or ra∣ther those of Bellorius, design'd from the best Ori∣ginals yet re∣maining. Plotinus, Hierocles, Longinus, Quintilian, both the Plinies (of whom I wonder we see neither Authentic Medal or Statue) Solinus, Maximus Tyrius, A. Gellius, Athenaeus, Pyrrho the Sceptic, Lucian, Libanius, Censorinus, Themistius, Severinus Boethius, and others whom we have named, not omitting the Witty Aesop, and incomparable Phaedrus, &c. Nor remember I to have seen any Medal (one could confi∣dently rely on) of the Father of History Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Plutarch and the rest of that Venerable Class; or indeed of the Latin Writers (Caesar excepted) or very few of the Ages succeeding; but which yet might have been done as to the Effigies in their Manuscripts, by the Pens of those who in their Author's Life-time copied their Works, and had been skilful in designing with the Pen, as many have done in later times.
Mathematicians. What should one not give for a genuine Medal of the Divine Archimedes, Archytas, Aristarchus, Callisthenes Diophantus, Euclides, Eratosthenes, Hipparchus, Mela, Ptolemee, Strabo, Apollonius Per∣gaeus, Pappus, Pyrrho the Lydian, Sesostris, &c. of the Antients? Ulugh Beigh Nephew to great Tamerlain; Alhazen, Almansor, Geber, Isr. Abulfeda, &c. Radolphus the Second: With no great Pains we may find the Effigies and Stamps of the Noble Tycho, Copernicus, Galilaeus, Kepler, De Cartes, Gassendus, Vieta, Scheiner, Hevelius (of whom I have seen a very fair Medalion.) To these number, Apian Pet. Areolus, Des Argues, Auzout; Benardinus Baldus, Bertius, Bettinus, Borellus, Bullialdus, Cassini, Cavallerius, Clavius, Commandinus; Eichstadius, Eustathius de Divinis, Fermat, Orontius Finaeus, Fournier, Fermantius; Galilaeo, Gemma Frisius, Guido Ubal∣dus; Herigon, Hondius; Ianellus, Iubertus; Kircherus; Ludovicus à Ceulen, Lubin; Ger. Mercator, Maurolycus, Mersennus, Mercurialis; Nicero; Ortelius; Paschal, Pena, Pequet, Peutinger, Purbachius; Rhamusius, Rudbeck, Ragusius, Rohault, Ricciolus; Snellius, Stadius, Schotti, Stevinus, Stouffler; Tacquet, Torricellius, Tartaglia, Turrianus; Vitellio, De Wit, &c. Despairing of Hippias the Tyrant, Pisistratus, Tiphys, Theseus, Daedalus, Palamedes, Icarus, &c. Worth in the mean time were the procuring the Effigies of Virgilius Bishop of Salisbourg, condemn'd as an Heretic, for affirming there were Antipodes; Regiomontanus, Flavio Goia of Amalphi, who found out the Pyxis Nautica; and of that Devil in a Coul, the Monk Anklitzin, or Schwarts of Friburgh, who invented Gun-Powder and Artil∣lery: But above all, the Famous Costar of Harlem, or who∣ever else he was, that brought the stupendious Art of Typo∣graphy into the World, of which 'tis yet believed, the fore∣named Regiomontanus gave the first hint; the Heads of both the Learned and Industrious Improvers of it, deserving indeed, not only their Medals, but Statues of Gold, and would doubt∣less have been so honored in a more grateful Age: How much more than he, or they, who first invented Letters, and the Symbolical Magic of Writing, for the Communication of our Thoughts to the Absent of the farthest Antipodes; Nay, of the Dead, by joyning of those Elements together?
Famous Printers were Oporinus, Raphelengius, Plantin, the Stephens, Aldus, Moretus, Gryphius, Froben, Morelius, the Elze∣viers, Bleau, Vitre, our Day, Winkyn de Worde who Printed here, if not first of any, yet the second, 1496. in the Reign of Hemry VII. Caxton, Rastal who married a Sister of Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor; Thomasius, Bee, not forgetting Iohn Tate, who made excellent White Paper so long since, for Iohn Caxton here in England: The Invention of the Rolling-Press, (how cer∣tainly I know not) is ascribed to the Learned Iustus Lipsius, but I believe it was long before. To these add Ioannides, Iac. Mesius, Lippersein, Vitellio, Gravius, Galilaeo, Sir Paul Neile, &c. all of them contending to have been the first Inventors, or who wrought or brought An∣no 1300. Spectacles, Perspective and other Optic and Telescopic Glasses to that perfection we now have them, and see their Effects as in that prodigious System, reducing the irregularities of Saturn, with other wonderful Discoveries. Here come in Leeuwenhoek, Swammerdam, &c. Discoveres of such Wonders and Magnalia Dei in Minimis by their Mi∣croscopes, after our Sagacious Dr. Hook, had shewed the way. To these add, Paulinus Bishop of Nola, who 'tis said, invented Bells, or ra∣ther brought them first in use to Congregate the People. Stirrups to Saddles are modern; so is the polishing of Armour, mill'd Lead and sheathing of Ships with it, drawing of Wire, and slitting Steel and Bords by Mills; Refining, and indeed Inventing Sugar, and other such like Works; as making of Hats, improving Paper and Figuline Ware by Palissy's White Glaze; with the great Improvements of that antient and use∣ful Art, by our Mr. Doit; the finding out of several sorts of Stuffs, Calandring and Chambletings, Cements, Vernishes, Pasts and Lackers, artificial Marbles, and the way of staining and colour∣ing it. The Monks who brought out of Persia into Europe the first Eggs of the Silk-Worm to Iustimian, and other faelici∣tates hujus Saeculi (as one calls them) which may be reckon'd among the Nova reperta of the latter Ages, in number and use, far superior to any of the former. Cornelius Drebble was Famous for his perpetual Motion; the Noble Hunniades Inventor of the Scarlet-Bow Die, since the loss of the antient Purple; Stevinus, who (besides several Geome∣trical Instruments) framed the Veliferous Chariot, celebrated by the Learned Grotius; Baniger, who made a sailing Plow, and built a Vessel to row it self, and another to pass under the
Seas; nor must Guil. Buchildius be omitted, who Anno 1347. found out the way of Curing Herring, bringing in that im∣mense Wealth to those of Holland, that the Great Emperor Charles the Fifth went on purpose to where he lay obscurely buried, and caused a Noble Monument to be erected over him. Our Baylie for his Engine to deepen obstructed Rivers, does here come in; those also who have of late perfected the way of Diving and Urination, carrying Light, Writing, send∣ing Letters and Working under Water in the profoundest Seas, by which great Treasures and Wrecks have been recovered. And here Cola Pesce the Famous Sicilian is not to be forgotten. Those who likewise first excogitated, or improved Calcula∣tions of Automata: The Equated Isocrone Motion of the Weight of a Circular Pendulum, in a Paraboloeid, and as applied to Clock-Work, who brought them to repeat the Hour, and added the Spring-Balance to Watches. The Laws of Motion and Geo∣metrical streightning of Curvelines are due to Sir Chr. Wren and Mr. Neile; and what we have mentioned above, to the Fa∣mous Oughtred, Hugens of Zulichum, Dr. Hook, Mr. Barlow, &c. As formerly to our Robert Norman and W. Burrows, the finding out of the Variation and Inclination of the Needle. To our Harriot, the Area of Spherical Triangles, and Quantity of Solid Angles. The Periphery of Right Tangents and Secants, which we have of Regiomontanus and Napper, were shewed us by Erasmus Reinhold, &c. The Detection of the way of Epheme∣rides (unknown to the Antient) is ascribed to Purbachius; and Ludovicus à Culen is Famous for his Geometrical Problem. And now what New and Nobler Flights, our Learned Newton has made in these sublime Studies, worthily Advancing him to the Trust he is in, and where without Envy, he may stamp his own Medal. Torrecellius and Otto Geric claim those useful Experiments about the Air. Among the most Ingenious Mechanicks may be reckoned, Gil. Norrison, who about Thirty Years since, made that Famous Clock of St. Iohns at Lions in France, with whom we would compare our present Coventry Black-Smith, and Richard Wallingford Son also of another Black-Smith; who made such another Master-Piece almost Four Hundred Years past, as our Chronicles tells us. William, and Thomas Bleau, Iohnson, Sanson,Of Antient Inventors, see Plin. Hist. Lib. VII. Cap. 56. Tavernier and other Excellent Composers of Maps, Charts, Globes, Spheres, &c. Our Mr. Blagrave both In∣ventor and Maker of his Mathematical Iewel. The Plowing,
Sowing, Setting and Harrowing Corn at one time, with several more Ingenious and useful Inventions (which we shall here∣after speak of) deserve a mention. Among these may come in the Diligent and Curi∣ous Such as those of the Dukes of Branden∣burgh at Munic, of Saxony, Ba∣varia, &c. Collectors of both Artificial, and Natural Curiosi∣ties, Types, Models, Machines, &c. such as were Favi, Adrovandus, Imperanti; Mascardi, Septalius, Wormius, Paule Contant, Calceolarius, Piso, Caval. Pozzo, Ferdinando Gospi, Io. Tradescant, and above them all, the worthy Mr. Charleton, &c. And now whilst we speak of Heads and Pourtraits, the most celebrated Modern Painters, Sculptors and Architects challenge their Place, such were the great Restorers, Cimabue, Geddi, Giotto, Mich. Angelo Buona Roti, Raphael d Urbino, Titian, Iulio Romano, Paulo Veroneze, Leonardo Da Vinci, Pet. Perugino, Correggio, Caraccio, Polidoro de Caravagio, Parmegiano, Bassano, Georgione, Rosso, Andr. Mantegna, Del Sarto, Perin del Vagua, Gentile (a Son of Bellino) Famous for his Journey to Constanti∣nople, to draw the Picture of Mahomet the Second, and the Re∣proof that Tyrant gave him, for leaving a Neck too long and out of proportion, in a Piece of the decapitation of St. Iohn Baptist, by taking off the Head of a poor Slave before him, to shew him a demonstration of his Error. To these add Iulio Clovio, Scavoni, Salviati, D'Arpino, Domini∣chino, Baroccio, Palma, Bandinelli, Zucchero, Tintoret, Lanfranc, Cortone, Peruzzi, Porcellus, del Piombo, Pordonon, Franco, Maze∣voli, Guido Rhene, Pantormo, Salviati, Beccafumi, Lomasius, Pet. Testa, Vannius, Dolci, Maratti, Albert Durer, Holbein, Luc. Van Leyden, Breugel Udine, Rubens, Van Dyke, Morus, Le Brun, Poussin, Bourdon, Lely, Bronkhorst, Culemberg, Gentilescus, De Crete, Florus, Honthorst, Meytens, Polenburgh, Syndere, Paul Brill, Snellinx, Vo∣sterman, Rimbrand, Brower, Bavor, Boll, Dankers, Eilcheimer, Eix, Eyck (Iohn, and Hubert especially; who invented the Use of Oyls in Colours, Anno, 1410.) Guttembergh, Hemskerk, Kessel, Levins, Reysseus, Van Ort, Peters, Segars, Swarts, Voerst, &c. Nor was all the praise due to Men alone, as of old were celebrated Timarete, Irene, Calypso, Lala, &c. Famous Pictrices in, and near our times, were Artimisia Gentileschi, Christina Pop∣pinch, Marietta Tintoreta, Magdalena de Pas, Susanna de Sandrac, Lucretia Mirandulana, Propertia of Bononia, the Abbess Plautilla, the Learned Anna Maria à Scurman, and another Anna of Nieu∣burg, Phonisba of Cremona, and Propertia Rossi, who was both
Pictrix and Sculptrix; not forgetting the Virtuous Lady of the Chevalier Charles Pattin (so well deserving of the Medalists) skilful in the Latin Tongue: But above all, the Princess Lovise, Daughter to the late Queen of Bohemia, who had that rare and extraordinary Talent of drawing the Effigies to the Life, of an absent Person, by Memory only. Eminent Chalcographers were Durer, Sadeler, Cort, M. Antony, Pet. Pontius, Bolsvert, Nantevil, Natalis, Vosterman, Melan, which calls to mind the late Melanochalcographer N. de Seigen; who in the Year 1648, first produced the Mezzo-Tinto Graving (of which before;) Calot, Bosse, De la Bella, Blomaert, and innu∣merable more: But among all we have recited, the never to be forgotten Hub. Golzius, whilst we write of Medals. Renowned Architects and Sculptors Were divers of the Painters nam'd above; M. Angelo, Pri∣maticius, Pantormo, Iohn de Bollogne, Francis Flemingo, the two last celebrated for the Statue of the Duke of Florence erected in the Piazza at Ligorne; Henry the Fourth of France stand∣ing on the Pont-Noeuf at Paris; and the Sancta Veronica in St. Peters at Rome; but above all, Dominico Fontona, who ele∣vated the Obelisc before that sumptuous Pile; Bernini, who built the Cupola; Bramante, Vignole, Scammozzi, Alberti, Del' Orme, Serli, not forgetting Iohn de Vdine, Inventor, or Restorer of the Art of Stucco; with blind Sculptor of Florence, who cut, and moulded Faces, and made them to resemble by his Feel∣ing only. Lastly, Francisco Tadda, who after the cutting and working in Porphyrie had been lost many Hundred Years, found out a certain Juice, wherewith he hardened and gave Temper to his Tools and Instruments, by which the Fa∣mous Iusticia, there is said to have been his first successful Essay in Statue, after the Fountain of fifteen Foot Diameter, which he made for Cosimo di Medices, who, 'tis by some reported, gave the Receipt to Tadda, now lost again, to the reproach of such as either out of Sloth or Envy, neglect, or refuse to discover any profitable and useful Secret; suffering it rather to Die with them, than Benefit the future Age, by which many Noble, and Rare Inventions have perished with their ill-natur'd Authors. Other skilful Architects and Mechanicks, Bellou, Ramelli, Caus, Zonca, &c. whose Books are commonly adorned with their Ef∣figies; especially, such as contain the Lives of those Artists,
Geo. Vassari, Baglioni, &c. but by none so amply, as by Monsieur Phelibien, and the late Cavalier Sandrart; where one may find them altogether, both Antient, and Modern most ele∣gantly Engraven. In the mean time is it not strange that among all those Glorious Artists, famed for their incomparable Pieces; and who took such pains to Paint and Cut the Statues of so many Princes and Heros of old (some of whose Works are still in being) there should be neither Medal, Picture or Statue of either Polygnotus, Telephanes, Phidias, Praxiteles, Lysippus, Zeuxis, Apelles, Micon, Apollodorus, Callimachus, Parrhasius, Glicon and Cleomenes, (who still live in the Farnesian Hercules and Medicean Venus,) Timantes, Euphranor, and a Thousand more, cultivated and honored as were those Artists, by the greatest Persons of all Ages; Fabius, Hadrian, Severus, Valentinian, di∣vers Philosophers, many of the Poets managing the Pencil, with the same Hand they held their Scepters and Pens? Poets, Wits and Romancers. Ariosto. Aretine. Auratus. St. Amant. Barlaeus. Baudius. Bartas. Bellay. Boccacio. Balzac. Boilean. and Scarron the French Hu∣dibras. Calderon. Calprenade. Capilupus. Casmir. Celtes. Cervantes. Collenutius. Corneile. Dantes. Desports. D'Urfe. Fabritius G. Fracastorius. Gemma Cor. Grafferus. Guarini. Marini. Mantuan. Marolles. Marrot. Molliere Marullus. Muretus. Melissus Paul. Palingenius. Passeratius. Perrerius. Petrarcha. Pibracius. Poggius. Politianus. Pontanus. Quevedo. Quinctinus. Rablais. Ransovius. Rapinus. Ronsard. Sammarthanus. Sanazarius. Sansovinus. Saracin. Savedra. Secundus Io. Scriverius. Taffo. Theophile. Tissanus. Valerianus Pet. Victorius. Vida. Voiture. Of the Antient Bards, Greek and Latin, we sometimes meet in Medal and Statue (whether true or not) the Heads of Old
Homer and Ovid, and I have seen Virgil and Terence, but very rarely Plautus, Lucretius, Horace; of Iuvenal and Persius, whose Effigies the Writers of Lives present us; none of Martial or the rest, save what are copied from Intaglias. Musicians. Guido Aretine, who devised, or improved the Scale, and set the first Gamut. Prince Maurice, and William Landgraves of Hesse, Lud. Victoria, Orlando di Lasso, Alphonso Ferabosco, Horacio Vecchi, Giovanni Croci, Luca Marinese, Mazzochi, Meibonius. Il Prencipe Vennosi, Cherubini, Lorenzo Corsini, &c. for of any others I find none, or very few, whose Compositions excel, excepting of the French, Gaultier, Mercure; Du Pre for the Lute. Lastly, We bring up this glorious Train with those incomparable Ladys, the Images of whose more beautiful Minds were not seldom Engrav'n in their very Countenances. What a charming Object would it then afford, had we a Series of the Learned Sex alone among them, such as were Disciples ofIamblic in Vita Pythag. Pythagoras and other of the Philosophers! For not only he, but Epicurus and the Divine Plato had divers Scholars, of whom some became Teachers themselves; for so Socrates (the Wisest of Men reputed) took Lesson of Aspasia. Of the School of Plato were Ariotheca, Lasthenia, and others skill'd in Mathema∣ticks and other Sciences. Aristippus, instructed by his own Mother, had the Name of Stromat. Lib. X. Clemens Alexandrinus in the Tenth Book of his Tapisseries, reckons up abundance more; not could Rome the Mistress of the World, be without conspicuous Examples of this kind, be∣sides Ovid's sweet Corinna, who is said to have surpassed Pindar himself, and published Fifty Books of Epigrams; Martia, Portia; the Emperess Fulvia, Cossutia, Pompeia, Calphurnia, Scribonia, Livia Drusilla, Agrippina, Alba Terentia, Sextilla, Petro∣nia, Galeria Fundana, Vespasia Pollia, Flavia Domicilla, Arricidia, Domitia Longina, Martia Wife of Severus, Plotina of Trajan, Aeria Fatidilla the Mother of Antoninus Pius, and his Consort Faustina, Hadrians Sabina, Domitia Cavilla, Crispa the Wife of Commodus; but above all, that Illustrious Matron Cornelia, Sister to Scipio, and Mother of the Gracchi; the Wife of Varus Sister of Cornificius; Actia Iulia, Hypsicratea the Noble Consort of Mithridates, who followed him in all his Conflicts; Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra, who wrote the History of her Country;
Hispilas Mother-in-Law of the younger Pliny, and his Learned, and Excellent Lady, whom he acknowledges to have been the delightful Assistant of his Studies; the Beautiful Mariamne, Wife of the Cruel Herod; Amalasunto, Queen of the Goths in Italy; Pulcheria, Daughter to the Emperor Arcadius; Hypatia, Miracle of the Reign of young Theodosius, and his Emperess Eudoxia; Hildegarda, Wife of Charlemaine; Gunegunda, who vindicated her Chastity by the Fiery Ordeal. For the Christian School flourished also with the Learned Sex, especially that of Alex∣andria under the Famous Origen. 'Tis reported of St. Catharine, that at the Age of Eighteen, she baffled, and put to silence Fifty Philosophers at once. How Learned the Noble Eustochium, and her Religious Daughter Paula were in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Tongues we learn of St. Hierom; Anna Comnena Daughter to Alexius the Emperor compiled her Father's History; Maria Cunita Learned in the Mathematicks, dedicated her Urania Pro∣pitia to Ferdinand the Emperor. But to come nearer home, and the Ages since: (For of the Antient of all the Philosophic Sects, let the Curious consult what the great Menagius has pub∣lished of their Lives and Works, at the end of his Learned Notes onEdit. Whetsten. Diogenes Laertius; where he dedicates above an Hundred more to the incomparably knowing Lady Anna Faber D'Aciere.) Isabella Queen of Castile, and Wife to Ferdinand of Arragon (of which Bed came Charles the Fifth and a New World) was the Mother of four Learned Daughters; whereof one was the Wife of our Eighth Henry, frequently celebrated by Ludo∣vicus Vives; Lucretia'd Este of the House of Ferrara, Dutchess of Urbin, a profound Philosopher; Vittoria Colonna, Wife to Ferdinand d' Avila, Marquis of Pescara, whose extraordinary Vein in Poetry was equal with Petrarchs; Hippolita Strozzi, Daughter to Francis Duke of Milan; and another Hippolita called Taurilla, espoused the Learned Balthazar di Castalio; Iulia Gon∣zaga, the greatest Beauty of Italy; Mary of Arragon Marques de Vasco; Angela di Nugarola and Isota; Cassandra Fedele; Hip∣sicratea Amonte; Fabiola Marella; Fulvia Olympia Morata, cele∣brated by Gr. Gyraldi; Isabella Audreini, Clara Cerveda, Proba Falconia, Modesta Pozzo praised by Phil. Tomasini; Laurentia, Countess of Susa; Torna, Wife to Peter Medices, who translated part of the Bible into Italian Verse; Aurelia Freddi the Famous Italian Comedian and Poetess; Theresa-Maria d' Escobar; Loisa Sigea, and her Angela de Toledo; then comes Margarita de Valois
Sister to Francis the First, and Grand-Mother of Henry the Fourth, whose Novels equal Boccacios, and another Margarite, Wife to that great Prince; Lodovisia Saracennia a Physician's Daughter of Lyons, who at the Age of Eight Years understood, and spake Hebrew and Greek; Catharine de Roches of Poitieres, an Eminent Wit; Claudia de Clemente Dutchess of Retz; Silvia Moliere; Maria Gournay and Molinea, who frequently correspon∣ded in the Learned Tongues with Maria à Scurman, whose Works are both in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and has written a Treatise of the Excellency of her Sex; as has likewise Lucretia Marinella, and of the Defects in Men, Anna Althuyfent, &c— What shall I add more to oblige the Virtuous and Fair? Who has not been in Admiration of what's reported of the late Christina Queen of Sweden, not only for her Knowledge in the Learned Tongues; but for her Love of Letters and Lettered-Men! (witness De Cartes, Salmasius, Blondel, Bochartus, Vossius and the incomparable Grotius, &c.) and amongst other her rare Talents to be celebrated here especially, both for her Glorious Collection of Medals, and profound Knowledge in them. To these add Seigniora Rondanina, both rich, and in Medals exceed∣ing Skilful; Donna Maria Zaxas; Madam Guillaum, who has composed a Treatise of Illustrious Women; shewing how far they surpass the Virile Sex in all sorts even of Martial under∣dertakings and Affairs. The late Seignora Cornaro, Daughter of that Illustrious Family, not long since honored the Doctoral Degree at Padoa, where she kept a Solemn Act; and where there now flourishes the Learned Consort of Chevalier Patin, Professor of Physic there, of whom we have already spoken. In summ, we have the Memoirs of the Princess Maria Mancini Colunna, Sister to the Illustrious Dutchess of Mazarin, with se∣veral more great Wits of the beautiful Sex. We would now bring up this glorious Proceeding with Medamoiselle de Scuderi, read, and admir'd by all the Ladies for her happy Successes as long as the Illustrious Bassa Gran Cyrus, Clelia, and Almaide live in their good Graces, and for which, this last, has newly been proposed, and admitted Solemnly into the Academy of the Ricovrati of Padoa: I say, I would close this (tho' long) shining Paragraph, with this diverting and extraordinary Wit; but for Mademoiselle d'Acier (Daughter of the Learned Tanaquell Faber) whose masculine Talent in all the parts of the politer Erudition (and as Menagius stiles
her, feminarum quot sunt, quot fuere doctissima) worthily distin∣guishes her from any, I suppose, this Age is likely to produce among her bright Sex; not for incapacity of either equaling, or exceeding her; but for want of Application. Not but as Foils to set them off, and make them shine in greater Lustre, should I so much as vouchsafe to name the wanton Sempronia, the debauched Thais, the amorous Sappho, the shrew Zantippe, Iane Queen of Naples; no, not the most beautiful Helen (who set all Greece in a flame) or the Amazo∣nian Thalestris, who went so far to Court the Great Alexander; Artemisia, Penthesilea, Hippolita, Semiramis, Theomiris, Cleopatra, &c. tho' I could be content to posses any true Medal of the Chast Penelope, Lucretia, Marpessa, Clelia; much more of Debora, Iael, Iudith, Susanna; the Magnificent Queen of Sheba, who tra∣velled so far a Country to hear the Wisdom of Solomon; the Prophetic Sibyls, and the rest of those Sacred Heroines; not forgetting the Famous Alcestis, Clara Cerveda, Petrarch's beloved Laura, Valdura, Hildegardis, Irene, and such as like these, have excelled in Conjugal Love and Affection. I have seen a good Picture of Catharine de Boren Wife of the Famous Luther, for whom she left her Sanctimonia; Medals there are more than enough of the Blessed Virgin (tho' one exactly resembling were inestimable) St. Ann her Mother; of Mary Magdalen and other Scripture Saints, pretended to be copied from Originals, painted by St. Luke the Evangelist, by those who have a mind to be deceived. Lastly, Of our Blessed Saviour's Head, there were many Coined during the Bas Empire; until Isaac Comnenus left it off, for which Zonarus is much displeased: But of this enough. Those who would enlarge, and amplify this Catalogue with more Illustrious Names, Persons, and their Characters, may turn over Plutarch, Laertius, Paulus Iovius, Thevet, Gesner, Philip Thomasinus, Thuanus, Thissier, Brantome, Ger. Vossius, our Country∣Men Leland, Balaeus and Pits with the rest of the Biographers Antient and Modern, and yet perhaps not find such an As∣sembly. And now I confess it may be wonder'd, why I should call over so extravagant a List of Names, and what my meaning is? since it were madness but to fancy that there should be found Medals of the hundredth part of all this Bead-roll; or that after all this, I would prostitute the Dignity of Medal (so much celebrated) with the Effigies of every rich Clown, or impertinent, who was able to be at the Charges of a Stamp;
tho' I find (as Damasippus) they did of old insanire veters statuas emendo and were universally so ambitious of Inscriptions, that they set them up, and left their Marble Titles in every Corner; as at this day upon the Marriage, Birth of Children, &c. every Brewer, rich Burgher and even Mechanic in Germany, usually strikes a Medal. To this I answer, my Meaning is very far from it; but by this Recension, I endeavour to point out, how some of all Ca∣pacities, signal for any Thing or Action extraordinary, and that possibly may enter into any part of History, may at some time, or upon some occasion or other, fetch Matter and Sub∣ject proper for Use, out of an universal Stock of Medals and Stamps, tho' they be not all Heads and Reverses of Hers. Let my Reader therefore know, that it is for their sakes who are making Collections of Prints in Taille douce, and would fur∣nish themselves with the Heads and Pourtraits of Famous Per∣sons, which in Medals they never hope to obtain. The great Amasser of this innocent and useful Curiosity (since the Noble Atticus, and the most Learned of the Romans Plin. Nat. Hist. Lib. xxxv. Cap. 3. see the Passage. M. Varro) was the late Abbot d Villeloin already mentioned; whose numerous Collection the French King has purchased for a very considerable Sum, to entich his incomparable Library with; so as no Author or Person almost whatsoever, Renowned for Letters, Arms or Arts; but may be seen in his lively Effigies amonst that prodigious Assembly of Prints; a fuller Account whereof is given in the Abbot's own Life written by himself. Next to this Curious Man, Cornelius Beughen, has (upon a like Design) gotten together a very great Number of Stamps, and pub∣lished his Museum, or Syllabus Iconum Illustrium, wherein he gives an Account of them, and of the Excellent Order he has marshal'd them in, with this Introduction as it relates to Medals: Extra ullum est dubium, quod ad cognitionem Numismatum & Hi∣storiarum, non ultimum locum sibi vendicent Icones, & Prosopographiae Virorum, tam Marte, quam Arte illustrium; quam frugiferum hoc sit stu∣dium, non meum erit haec multis Encomiis referre, quippe qui in praesens, non Oratorem sed Collectorem agere constitui, &c. Doubtless, says he, the Images and Pourtraits of Persons Famous, and Conspicuous as well for Arms, as Arts, do not a little contribute to the Know∣ledge, and Understanding of Medals and good History: How Advantageous the Study thereof is, I purpose not to celebrate with many Encomiums here, who recommend them at present but as a Collector, not as an Orator, &c. To these add Lorenzo Crasso, Galeazzo, Gualdo Priorato, Boissardi Icones, &c. Thevet acquaints us where he had most of his;
and De l'Asne, has himself Graven Three Hundred Pourtraits to the Life: And the Plenipotentiaries of the Famous Treaty at Munster are also in Stamp, and so are likewise all the great Generals and Commanders of the Imperial and Swedish Armies from the Year 1630. The Popes, and Cardinals by Augustinus Oldorpius, besides a newer Set of them by a later Hand; as in those above named, the Effigies of all the Learned, as well as other Illustrious Persons of Italy, and other Countries. To these may be added Peter Laurembergius de Pulchritu∣dine, Philippus Thomasinus's Illustrium Virorum Elogia; where you have not only the Effigies of all the Learned Persons then in Italy, from about the Fourth Century to the Twelfth; but several Medals also that were struck in Honor of them. Besides these, Philip Gallus of Antwerp, 1577. published in Stamp the Heads of all the Italian Modern Poets, and such as among the Greek, revived that Tongue in Europe; and the often named Imperialis in his Museum Historicum, presents us with the Icons and Elogies of sundry other Famous, Great and Learned Persons, after the manner of Paulus Iovius. Ianus Strada (a Mantuan Antiquary) has in Taille-douce, the Pourtraits of the Twelve Roman Caesars, together with many of their Relations; and with great accu∣rateness, the Learned Graevius, in his Thesaurus Antiquitatum Romanarum (besides innumerable rare Things) gives us the same Effigies, from Iulius to Constantine the Great, designed from Medals. But above all (besides what is already published of Leonardus Augustinus, Antiquary to Pope Alexander VII.) That which the Curious may expect, from the Incomparable Gronovius, of the Heads, and Effigies of the most Illustrious Greeks, possibly to be found in Medals or Statues, and to be Ingraven by the most fa∣mous Artists; together with other pretious Antiquities, relating to the Subject, inrich'd with the Notes, and Discourses of this Learned Professor, in three large Volumes inSee the Pa∣per, published by the Printer Peter Van der Aa, of Levden, gi∣ving a large Account of this Work, with the Conditions to the Subscribers. Folio. The Heads of the Roman, and German Emperors from Charles the Great, are set forth by Gualdus, Engraven by Kilian, and Dominicus Custos, together with those of the Dukes of Bavaria; the Heads, Stems and Genealogies of the most Renowned Princes of Germany; Count Palatines of the Rhine; divers of the French, Spanish, Danish, Swedish, and Polish Kings; the Arch-Dukes of Austria, Venice, Florence, Savoy, Parma, Mantua, Ferrara, Bur∣gundy, Lorain, Brunswic; the Princes of the Illustrious Houses of Nassau, Conde; Generals and great Captains; with sundry Mahumetan Princes, and other Famous Persons, not forgetting that pompous Volume of those Noble French, which Cardinal
Richelieu caused to be painted at length, and set up in his Palace-Gallery at Paris, Ingraven with great accurateness by Hience and Bignon; to which the Cbevalier Wolson has subjoined an abstract of their Lives and Actions, with many Heroical Emblems. After these, Henry Hondius presents us the Effigies and Elogies of such Divines, as have most signally opposed the Errors of the Church of Rome, under the Title of Antichristian, Ingraved by Iac. Verheiden. And lastly, for the English, Per∣sons Renowned for Birth, Learning, Arms and Arts; from Anno 1500. to the beginning of the present Century, are published by Crispin Passaeus, a very accurate and diligent Graver: But for the Excellency of the Draught, and Resemblance to the Life, there's none in Competition with those designed, and some of them also Etched, by the Hand of the Famous Van Dyke, without Controversie the most incomparable Morpho∣grapher and Painter of this, or perhaps any former Age; most of them Cut by the best Chalcographers then Living, and set forth in a large Folio, containing the Icons of an Hundred Per∣sons of the greatest Quality among us. To conclude, The Curious Monsieur Began, Intendant de la Marine de Roch∣fort, is now publishing the Heads of all the Literati, and Illu∣strious Persons of the present Age, which he is causing to be Engraven with their Elogies, and that from the best Originals he can any where procure; and gets many to be designed and drawn by Stealth, and Privately, from several to whom he is not known, and that know nothing of his intended Work; as in particular, the Effigies of the so much talked of Varillas, who would never suffer his Picture to be taken, ashamed perhaps to shew his Face to the World, which he has egre∣giously abused by his Romantic Histories and Mercenary Pen; as the late more worthy Monsieur Menagius acquaints us, whose Pourtrait, with abundance of other Learned Men, we shortly may expect; together with the two pompous Folios, said to be already finished by Monsieur Perault, upon a like design. Among those of our Nation that have made this any part of their search, and for the same purposes, I know of none who merits more Regard, than my Worthy Friend Samuel Pepys Esquire, (late Secretary to the Admiralty) as he is a dili∣gent, and laudable Collector of this, and of whatsoever else is Curious, and of solid Benefit to the Public; as it will undoub∣tedly find, if God spare him Life, Health and Repose, for the perfecting of that Noble, and truly useful Work, the Nautics, under the Hand of the most Able to accomplish it, not only
of England; but, as I am persuaded, of any one in Europe. Finally, To return to Prints and Taille-douces, where Medals cannot be expected, especially of our Modern Heros, and Persons wor∣thy of Note; let the Reader cast his Eye upon what the most LearnedDissert. de praestantia & usu Numis. ab Imag. l lustrium. Spanheim has published of the incomparable Use of Medals upon this very Account, where they are to be pro∣cured, and apply it to what we have said concerning Prints, which may be had. CHAP. IX. A Digression concerning Physiognomy. WITH such a Collection, as we have mentioned in the precedent Chapter, did Vincent Pinelli, and Pignorius (Learned Venetians) adorn their Famous Libraries; so as when the two great Cardinals Bellarmin, and Baronius (whom Pinelli had never seen before) came to give him a Visit incog∣nito; he readily saluted them by their Names, to their no small Admiration: Nor was it a New; but (as we have already shewed) an Antient, and Noble Decoration (not only to fill whole Volumes with the Names, but) to set up theImaginum amore fla∣grasse quon∣dam testes sunt Atticus ille Ciceronis edito de his Volumine, & Marcus Varro benignissimo invento, insertis Voluminum suorum fecun∣ditati, non nominibus tantum septingentorum Illustrium, sed & aliquo modo Imaginibus, non passus intercidere figuras, aut vetustatem aevi contra homines valere, inventione muneris etiam Diis invidiosi, quando immortalitatem non solum dedit, verum etiam in omnes terras misit, ut praesentes esse ubique, & cerni possent. Plin. N. Hist. Lib. XXXV. Cap. 2. Pictures and Images of Learned and Famous Persons, in Places Conse∣crated to the Muses, and the Study of those Authors, whose Effigies they delighted to Contemplate. But besides the Curiosity and Diversion, how would such a Collection, in defect of more costly Medals, Statues,See Dr. Spon Dissertat. 24. how much the Art of Iudg∣ing from Me¦dals and Heads, con∣duces to that of Physiog¦nomy, and inclinations of the Mind. &c. whether to be procured in Painting or Stamp (which last would be of no great Expence as now Improved, and En∣graved from the best Originals, or from the Life it self) con∣duce to the Spirit of History, and Satisfaction of the Studious Reader of Lives and Actions? and by fixing the Ideas of the Person, and comparing Lineaments, Improve our Studious Physiognomist, among whom there are some of no small Re∣putation; who have undertaken to discover, and make out by the different Countenances of Men, not only the Resemblan∣ces they carry to the several species of brute Animals; but to their very Natures and Dispositions also: Man being not
only all the Creatures in Synopsi and Compendium (for what is singular in them, is in him united) but in whom all the Imperfections, as well as Perfections, centre: Nor doubt I (as Aristotle has at large, and in particular instanced in his Trea∣tise .) but that those parts of Men, which are like to those of Brutes, shew naturally much alike Conectu∣ram dm∣ribus & li∣neamentis Corporis, &c. Vide Plin. H. Nat. Lib. II. Cap. 1. Inclinations; considered always in those Characters only, which are peculiar to their kind, not such as are common with others, and this is Plato's Opinion also; nor perhaps was the knowledge by the very Countenance of the Nature of Brute Animals, unassistant to ourGen. ii. 19. 20. First Parents, in giving them such apposite Names. Thus, some are conspicuous for their Aquiline Noses; and look like Hawks and Eagles, are of sublime and towring Spi∣rits; others are Sheepish, Hog-jaw'd, Rabbet-mouth'd; some Bird-fac'd, as well as witted, whom my Lord Verulam would have fixed by studying Mathematics; and there are who resemble Owls, Buzzards, Storks, Wood-Cooks; &c. some are errant Foxes, sly and crafty; there be whose Eyes and Looks are Serpentine; there are remarked the Goat, and Buffle-headed, and they are li∣bidinous and stupid; and I well remember the Master of an English Ship at Venice, who had the Grimness of a Lion, Hair, Nose, Eyes, &c. so like that King of Brutes; that the Italians would know him by no other Name, than Capitano Lione; such without question were those Valiant Gadites, who repaired to David: The Text says,1. Chron. xii. v. 8. Men whose faces were like Lions; such as Benaiah one of David's Champions, who slew,2 Sam. xxix. a Lion∣like man of Moab; and I could point to one or two, that have the Faces and Muzzels of Cats, and Leopards, and many who resemble Apes and Monkeys, nor much unlike in Dispositions and Apish Tricks; for so also the Skilful in Metoposcopy ob∣serve; that they participate as much of their Manners, as of their Shape and Lineaments, as Plato instances abundantly; and therefore not without reason, have some named the Coun∣tenance, the Mirror of the Soul, as reflecting all our Passions and Affections, Love, Jealousy, Hatred, Shame, Sorrow, Fury, &c. unless (as Socrates made good to Zopyrus) where Edu∣cation, and Philosophy have uperinduced a Change, or the Christian Institution interpose, undertake, and effect the Cure, as Da mihi Virum ira∣cundum, cu∣pidum, avarum; da timidum, &c. Lactant. de falsa Relig. Lib. III. Cap. 20. Lactantius has made the Challenge.
But before we pass any farther, I am sufficiently sensible, that to judge, and pronounce from Externals, is very liable to great Mistakes, and consequently to Censure: That I may therefore obviate this Prejudice (and for the Instruction, and Diversion of our diligent Collector of Heads in Taille-douce and Prints, in favour of this Digression) give me leave to say; that the Gravest Authors, Learned, and Wisest both of former, and later Ages, have almost unanimously consented in the same Ob∣servations. To commence with the Head (which with the Face or rather, presents to us the most beautiful, and conspicuous Part) it is byIn Timaeo. Plato, Apuleius, and others reckoned for the whole and intire Man; the most divine Member, in summ, the Intellectual World, or universal Orb, composing the most com∣prehensive, and perfectCum caput videris, homi∣nem agnoscis. S. Ambros. Hex. Lib. V. Cap. 9. Arx formae facies. Figure resembling it: Most aptly here then, have the rest of the Philosophers, by as it were an universal Agreement, placed, and inthroned the Intellectual Soul as Sovereign Princess, for the Government of all the possible Ha∣bitudes, Dispositions, Passions and Affections, natural ingenit Powers, and Impotences, discernable by the Physiognomist, from the various Phaenomena, Characters, and Indices legible in the Countenance. To Anatomise it therefore a little, the general Rules are as follow. From Heads, as they are more or less Globular, Oval, Flat, Copped and, said of Thersites, Il. p. Fastigiat, Gross Capitones, or such as the Italians call Testalini, &c. Conjectures are made of Capacities, and In∣capacities for Memory, Learning, Wisdom, Craftiness, and their contraries; little and small Heads, little Eyes, little Nose and Mouth, and all remarkable Diminutions of the Countenance, are evil Signs; as well as over-large and great; the mean Proportion (as in all things else) is best. From the Fore-head, that Templum Pudoris (and as Cicero calls it, Animi Ianua) as it happens to be Exporrecta, Spacious and Clear; Obducta, Cloudy and Lowering; Corrugata, Retorrida, Wrinkled,Frons bre∣vis com∣mended. Hor. Od. 11. Contracted and Close; Perfrict, Prominent, Flat, &c. Judgment is made of an Ingenuous Openness, and Se∣renity of Mind; Liberality, Clemency, Modesty; Moroseness, Severity, Impudence, Stupidity, Folly and Distraction. So very particular is that part of the Countenance, and remark∣able above the rest; that tho' the common saying be Fronti nulla fides, our Metoposcopist pronounces nothing more perem∣ptorily,
than from the structure, and shape of the Fore-head; that it being too much swelling, fleshy and Ox-like, it betokens Hebetude; the lean more Subtilty; the over-narrow, Indocile; the too round, Unsteady; the convex and Asinine, Folly; de∣pressed, Effeminate; the square and ample Lion-like, Courage: Pompey is said to have had a foreward out-face, a note of Va∣lor and Ambition: Plutarch commends the long, and some∣what like a Dog's, for Sagacity above others; and that such was Plato's, a little Gibbous before, and behind moderately pressed towards the Ears, and rather oblong than round; and that so was Pericles Dog-headed and never the worse; that Animal being of the most various kinds, having the most dif∣ferent shap'd Head, and consequently, some exceedingly Crafty, as the Fox, which is of the same Tribe; others of rounder Heads, stark Fools, Indocile, Shie, Churlish and Treacherous; others again, Flattering, Loving, Faithful, Sagacious, of great Me∣mory and Courage; as may likewise be discerned by the very Eye and Countenance of that Creature; and therefore the Ae∣gyptians made their Anubis a , resembling him to Mercurius for his Nimbleness and Sagacity.Entretiens de Balz. I remember Balzac speaking of Birds of the same kind, affirms some Nightingals to be much more Scavans les uns que les autres; there's as great a difference (says that Famous Wit) between Nightingal and Nightingal, as betwixt Poet and Poet, and a Man does no more differ from an Ass, than Man from Man; there being some so insuperably stupid and heavy;Varro ex Cleanthe. that (as Chrysippus said of Swine) their Souls seem to have been given them instead of Salt, to keep them from putrefaction. But speaking here of Dogs, and their Capacity by the various Structure of their Heads (applicable on this occasion) brings to mind what I have sometimes heard from the Mouth of the late Queen (Mother to Charles the Second) who exceedingly delighting in those Melitenses and little Bolognian Spaniels, had made many, not vulgar Observations of them. She had some, which her Majesty told me, were stark Fools and Idiots, that would be taught nothing in comparison with others, which were wonderful docile and apprehensive; and this she imputed to the Depressions, which they usually make in their tender Skulls, by flatting of their Noses when Puppies; in which the Ladies (who have these Animals in deliciis) take to consist their Beauty, tho' in my Opinion, quite the contrary; and sure I am, it corrupts their Breath, and renders it very unsavory. But
I must go no farther on this familiar Animal; tho' (were it not foreign to my Discourse of Humane Countenances only) I have good Authority from Aristotle himself, who not only brings in; but all along compares this Theriologic Physiognomy, and resemblance of Brutes, to the Heads and Faces of Men, as a secundary part of the Science, and which some extend even to things inanimate also, by the Doctrine of Signatures. But to return to our Conjecture of Foreheads, modify'd by the more conspicuous wrinkles and furrows, which if long ways, go for a Mark of Eloquence and Judgment; such was Iulius Caesar's, and that of Cicero, as may be seen in all their Statues. If curv'd and bending, of Wrath and Displeasure. If ri∣sing Arch-wise, Pride and Disdain. Over early wrinkles in Youth, betoken serious Cogitation; to have none at all, Free∣dom from Care and Perturbation; and such is by Sidonius Apol∣linaris, attributed to the Philosopher Epicurus. If the stroaks decussate and cross one another, a solicitous Tristitiam. The chearful Forehead is explicit and smooth, such as Plutarch tells us was that of Scipio Africanus always Serene. In a word, moulding of the Head, like that of a Ship, equally built for Stowage and Sailing, Capacious, and Nimble (and there∣fore of that Model) is of that vast Importance to the Intelle∣ctuals and other Abilities; that Mid Wives, and Nurses are se∣riously admonished and instructed how in their Operations, they handle Infants newly extracted from the Womb; and as to the placing and laying them in their Laps, when they bind, swath and dress them; that it be not in too prone a posture, or too much and long upon their Backs, with the like Care when applied to the Breast, which cuts, flattens, and is apt to depress both the fore, and hinder part of the yet tender Head and Seat of Memory; endeavouring to shape it rather mode∣rately Oval and Oblong, than Round and Spherical. The Poet Dantes had such a shaped Head, and so had that incompa∣rable and consummate Prince,De Praeno∣tione. Lib. VII. Cap. 25. the Learned Count of Mirandula, and our most hopeful, and for his Years, extraordinarily qua∣lified, King Edward the Sixth. From the Brows we have already these Signatures out of the Naturalist;Plin. Nat. Hist. Lib. XI Cap. 53. And so Galen both out of Hipporates de Aq. Aer. & locis; and especially Aristotle's Hist. Animal. Lib. I. Cap. 8, 9, 10. , &c. Quibus porrigitur in rectum, quibus juxta Nasum flexa; quibus juxta tempora inflexa, quibus in totum demissa, &c. As they happen to be smooth and even, farther asunder
or nearer; more or less arched and bending, listed up or de∣pressed, &c. notes of Effeminacy, Chearfulness, Envy, Wrath, Gravity, Application, Care and Thoughtfulness, and according as they are exalted or frowning, Fastuosi, Tristes, Severi, super∣cilious and inclined to Pride, which, tho' born, as he acknow∣ledges in the Heart, hic sedem habet, has its Throne, and domi∣neers in the Face and Forehead. From the Nose (that honestamentum faciei, as Scaliger calls it, and of all in most variety either for Grace or Deformity) if Aquiline or Adunc; long, short, sharp, flat, simous, obese and blunt, &c. Characters of Magnanimity, Prudence, Ambition (such as had the great Sforza, Scanderbeg, Cyrus, Demetrius, Pyrrhus, &c.) as the Emunct Judicious; theNon cuiquc datum est ha∣bere Nasum. Nasute witty and facetious; the Suspense, subdolous and given toIrrisores dicti. deride: If over grown, thick or much deformed (like that of Tonglianus's in the Epi∣gram) heavy and dull; and there are signs of Incontinence, Impudence, Avarice, Curiosity and over-Business, and the like of Wrath and Choler,Pers. Ira cadit Naso, &c. Nostrils, if wide, Generous, Bold, and sometimes Pertinacious and Cruel. From the Mouth, that Vestibulum animi (as Apuleius elegant∣ly) narrow, (such as Dares ascribes to Helen) mark of Es∣feminacy, long, wide, round; and so for the Lips, as the fuller Chilones, Labiones, Brochi and blubber-lip'd, furlily sailing-over, or pouting, the under-Jaw thrust out, the thin Lip, Carp-mouthed, &c. usual signs of Voracity, Vociferation, Garru∣lity, Irrision, Disdain, Timerousness, Resolution, Conceited∣ness, Negligence and their contraries: For there is the Os Pro∣bum, such as wasPlutar in Pomp. Mag. observed of Pompey betokening a noble mixture both of Gravity and Clemency, with an universal amiableness, as indeed his Medals shew. There is another smiling decorous composure of the Lips, which are seldom wanting in Persons of great Eloquence and Elocution, as I have frequently noted, which calls to mind what is reported of the FamousSand. de Scrip. Fland. Lib. I. Raphelengius, Forma ipsa faciei, aliquid etiam prae se ferens; that one might discover had was a Linguist by his very Countenance. Alexander had an out-Chin, a mark of Promptness, Magnanimity and Courage; the double Chin'd ever indulgent and good natur'd, such was M. Antoninus's. Nor forget we the support of all, the Neck, most conspi∣cuous in Medal; the thick Bull-Neck imported a dull and heavy understanding, such as was noted in Claudius; Caligula's was short and very thin; Iulius's long, and so was Cicero's,
but slender withal; the extreamly small was a mark of Ra∣pacity, Fraud and Pusillanimity. The fat, Cholerick, such was Nero's. Then for the Posture and Inclination: if to the right side, Prudence and Courage, if to the left, the contrary; which makes me wonder atIn Vita Alexand. Plutarch's describing Alexander's bending to the left. The Protuberance, Node, or Knot under the Throat was held a mark of Discretion, Caution, Meditation and Subli∣mity of Thought. We proceed to the Ear, that Organ of Instruction (not above one being usually seen either in Medal or Picture) as it is broad, fleshy, long, Asinine and Midas-like, sharp and Satyr-like: Thin, short or round, and Ape-like; oval and well∣shaped, &c. Presages of Dulness (Stultitiae notae, says Pliny) Sloth, Impertinence, Incontinence, Avarice; and on the con∣trary, the stiff Ear and erect, of great Ingenuity, Acuteness of Wit andA Mihi Cyn∣thius aurem vellit & ad∣monuit. Virg. Ecl. Memory. In like manner from the inflation and turgidness of the Cheeks, as well as from the sinking, depres∣sion and hollowness; Pride, Anger, Malice, Peevishness, Me∣lancholy, &c. As from their comely Fulness, giving a grace∣ful turn to the Countenance; the charming Gelazin and dim∣ple of the Cheek and Chin, ever a sign of that we call Good Nature; the lean are Curious, the too round Delusory, the contracted foolish, &c. all which being yet but the Objects of a single sense (for this Vaticination as to our purpose, pretends to no farther tho' namedOculos po∣stremos in bo∣mine forma∣ri, and of all Animals of the most va∣riety of Co∣lour. last of all) is the most per∣fect, consummate and remarkable of all, and indeed, in which (above them all) all these Characters meet as in their Focus and Center, namely the Eyes, those  and Nuntii Cordis; whether round, oval, large, wide, swelling out, sinking in, &c.Ut vultus a nimi imago, sic Oculivul. tus indices. giving notice of a thousand Passions, so as Galen will have the whole Head to have been made for the Eyes alone, In quibus totus conspicitur animus. Let us hearNat. Hist. Lib. XI. Cap. 37. Pliny in his own excellent Language: Neque ulla (speaking of this admirable Organ) ex parte major a animi indicia, cunctis animantibus, sed homini ma∣xime; id est moderationis, clementiae, misericor diae, odii, amoris, tri∣stitiae, laetitiae: Contuitu quoque multiformes, truces, torvi, fla∣grantes, graves, transversi, limi, summissi, blandi; profecto in oculis animus inhabitat. Ardent, intenduntur, humectant, connivent: Hinc illae misericordiae lachrimae: Hos cum osculamur, animum ipsum videmur attingere; and indeed what not? For soAthenaeus Deip. Lip. VIII. &c. The Eyes are All, and in them the most in∣fallible
Indices of our Passions and Affections,Iohn i. 3. Eccles. xv. 12. and therefore 'tis observed by Plutarch, that tho' Wantoness and Lubricity be attributed to no other part save the Eye only,2 Pet. ii. 24. the Virgin and the Prostitute lie there in the same Bed together. They have besides this, a peculiarHabent e∣nim Oculi, Frons & ipse Vultus, suum Sermonem. Plin. Language of their own, which no Tongue can so naturally express. O blandos Oculos & inquietos, Et quadam propria nota loquaces, &c. And in earnest, such Weapons, as no Darts, no Arrows pierce so deep; such are those irresistible Emanations, that in a mo∣ment wound and transfix the Hearts of Lovers, and conquer at first sight; create Veneration, dispose to Alacrity; others that strike a damp into whatsoever Company they come: Such was Caesar Borgia's Viperine Aspect, which affrighted those who looked on him even when he most seemed to be pleased; and all this without speaking a word. Such a Paradox is the Eye. The very much contracted Pupil Shews Acuteness; the over-large, Dulness; the too small, servile, covetous and un∣certain. I intend not here that inconstant tremulous Eye, by Nature timerous, whose Motions are not to be described in Picture; nor the Lusci or Pur-blind, tho' so admirably ex∣pressed in the Effigies of the Learned Blondel by the incom∣parable Nantueil: But that they are commonly prudent, Mercu∣rial, sagacious, looking into themselves and others: I have rarely found Strabo's without Judgment and Understanding, or those whose Eyes are hollow and deep: Hector's were so distorted, and Menander's the Witty Comedian; and tho' they usually pass for invidious and sale (especially if sunk far in)—Nusquam recta acies:Ovid. Some yet I knew of great Learning and Probity who were my School-Fellows; but I speak of the more no∣torious and deformed Thersites's, quos natura signavit, and whom I would not so readily trust, as the fix'd and steady Eye. I know there are some of these, and other Marks jocularly cen∣sured, and many times without Cause. Crine ruber, niger ore, brevis pede, lumine luscus, Rem magnam praestes, Zoile, si bonus es.Mart. Lib. XII. Epigr. 54. And so from a White Spaniard, a Black German, a Red Italian, Libera nos Domine.
And in England we say, That The Red is Witty, the Brown Trusty, The Pale Peevish, the Black Lusty. And therefore, To a Red Man read thy Read, At a Pale Man draw thy Knife, With a Brown Man break thy Bread, From a Black Man keep thy Wife. All which were yet sufficiently safe as the Italian has it, Se l' huomini piccoli fossero patienti, E' l' huomini grandi fossero valenti; E'gli rossi fossero leale, Tutt' il mondo sarebbe uguale. If little Men but Patient were, The Tall of Courage free, And Red Men trusty and sincere, The World would soon agree. I know 'tis easily said that all these are but Proverbs, trite and vulgar Sayings. Be it so, and therefore by no means to be slighted, as gathered from the long and constant Obser∣vations of so many, confirmed by much Experience, and founded upon the most infallible Reasons and Philosophical Resolutions. There is indeed no Rule so general, but has its Exception; and we have shewed upon what account in this Science of the Countenance: But as denominations take place from the plurality of Instances; Proverbs are still, and ever will remain in Force, for as to what we have cited from them, how rarely does that of Facetus fail? Inconstans animus, oculus vagus, instabilis pes, Haec tria signa viri, de quo mihi nulla boni spes, &c. And again, Rare breves humiles vidi, rufosque fideles, Albos audaces, miror magnos sapientes.
In a word, gaudeant bene nati; 'tis an Happines and a Bles∣sing to be of a comely Personage, whence we are bid à sig∣natis cave, and  (spoken of the White∣liver'd as we call them) were early Cautions.Eccles. xix. 26, 27. A Man (says Siracides) may be known by his Look, and one that hath Un∣derstanding by his Countenance:Gen. xxx. 15. Nor it seems did the Orator all neglect these Signatures; Non deceperunt me oculi tui, super∣cilia, frons denique totus, qui sermo quidem tacitus mentis est;Prov. vi. 13, 14. his very Looks betrayed him, and in truth I think one needs be no great Conjurer to divine.—xv. 13. Petronius. Sat. Vides me (cries the little Slut) nec auguria novi, nee Mathematicorum Coelum curare soleo; ex vul∣tibus tamen hominum mores colligo; & cum spatiantem vidi, quid cogites scio; for so the wanton guessed of Encolpus without gazing on, or consulting the Stars. And I question not at all of the Witty Plautus's being well seen in this Art, so un∣luckily describing the manners of Persons by their Looks and which seems to have made both him and Iuvenal so expert in Characterizing their several Humors. But to descend to In∣stances. We have long since produced that of the great Augustus, and the Person who would have broken his Neck off the Alps as he was walking along by him. Pythagoras is reported to have been of so awful an Aspect, as made a young Man (whom he sharply reproved) to hang himself. Such a fierce look had Pyrrhus. But what a Light∣ning must needs be shot from the passionate Eyes of that Woman, who caused an hungry Lion broke forth of his Grate at Florence, and seizing a Child in the Street, to let it go at the sight of the Mother, and run away affrighted! Such (but indeed by another Aspect) were the Looks of Caius Marius, Catiline (as Salust sets him out) Attila of the Hunns; and of later times Laelius Ursinus, Alphonsus d' Este se∣cond Duke of Ferrara, and others I might name, who by what∣ever unaccountable Fascination, or other material Quality of Mastring Spirits, have created Friends of deadly Enemies, and looking others Dead,Insanos sa∣nant, sanos insanire co∣gunt. who came with intentions to Murder or do them Mischief, have preserved themselves more by their Looks, than by all their armed Troops and attendant Guards: On the contrary, others were said to have a sanative Vertue, even in their very Countenances; as Aurelinus, Vespasian, &c. Others again malign and plainly Venomous; and such a Person Borellus speaks of,Borell. Cent. 3. Obser. 90 that (conscious of the Effect) was
wont to give notice where he came, that they should keep little Children and Women with Child from coming where he was, whilst the Vertue (shall I call it) or Property was of a long time unknown to himself. No wonder then that some (perhaps innocent poor People) have been accused for Witches and Evil-lookers as they call them;Nescio quis teneros oculis mihi fascinat agnos. Virg. whiles in the mean time, who can tell but that there may possibly be as much danger in the Glances and Emissions of some Bilious, as of Icterical Per∣sons? or of such as Monsieur Chauvin (a Parisian Gentleman dwelling in Diep) who,See concern∣ing the Cau∣ses of such strange Ef∣fects. Mar∣sil. Ficin. Comment. in Plut. convi∣vium. Cap. VIII. the same Author affirms, he knew to have so Lyncean and penetrating a sight, that using Spectacles, such acute and keen Vapours darted from his Eyes, as in a short time, excavated and wore out the very Glasses themselves, piercing the Crystals thro', and rendering them useless, so as he was fain to be often supplying them. Prodigious there∣fore must needs be those Aporrhoea's, and Emissions that could pervade and pass thro' a Substance which is capable to re∣strain the most rectified Spirits even of Aquafortis it self from the least avolation. 'Tis reported of the Emperor Adrian, that he was so great a Proficient in this Science, as to discern by the Countenance whether a Witness summoned to give his Testimony upon any doubtful Matter, spake true or falsly; and we find in Aristo∣tle's Dedication, that it was recommended to the Great Alexander as a Princely Quality, fit for Ministers of State, and therefore kept among the secret Mysteries of the Pythagorean and Socratic Philosophers;Pro Roscio. and I remember Cicero speaking of the Art Di∣vinandi ex Facie (whichDe Sapient. Lib. II. Cardan prefers so much before Astrology, Chiromancy, Prediction from Dreams, which says he, Impostoris artem aliquo modo redolent, smell of the Cheat) ad∣vises that Kings and Princes should above all others cultivate this Study. I have been told that Philip Earl of Pembroke, who had not only a Collection of Rare and Excellent Pi∣ctures (as has still that most Noble Person who now inherits his Titles, and what is greater, his Virtues) but great Judg∣ment in Painting likewise, had so wonderful a Sagacity in diving into, and discovering the Intentions of Men by their Countenances, that he could shrewdly guess at the very se∣cret of their Negotiation; so as King Iames the First made no small use of that his extraordinary Talent on the first arrival of Ambassadors at Court. To this per∣haps may be applied that passage of my Lord Bacon's, speak∣ing
of that Prince's usual saying;Lingua au∣res ferit, ge∣stus verò o∣culos alloqui∣tur. That indeed the Tongue spake to Mens Ears, but it was the Gesture which spake to their Eyes. Etenim lineamenta Corporis animi inclinationes, &c. The Linea∣ments of the Body (says this noble Philosopher) discover the In∣clination and Proclivities of the Mind in general; but those of the Countenance do not only so, but farther declare the Ac∣cesses, Seasons and Indications of the present Disposition, and of the very Will it self; and therefore a number of old, sub∣tle and crafty Persons, whose Eyes dwell upon the faces and Fashions of Men, observe it diligently, and can turn it to their own Advantage, as being a main part of their Abi∣lity and Wisdom. Neither indeed can it be denied, but that there is a great discovery of Dissimulation in another, and a principal Direction for the chusing of Seasons and Opportuni∣ties of approaching to Persons; which (as he observes) is not the meanest part of Civil Prudence. But let no Man think that such a dexterity may somewhat perhaps avail in respect to some particular Persons, but cannot be comprehended un∣der any certain Rule; for we all laugh, and weep, and blush, and frown much after the same manner; and so for most part in other more subtle Motions. Thus far myDe Aug∣ment. Scient. Lib. III. Lord. In a word, it appears to have been in so universal use among some, that Zacharia the Arab tells us, they heretofore trusted to nothing more for the chusing of their Slaves and Servants by. Upon these and the like Remarks, we read of that Famous Egyptian Physiognomist, who cautioned M. Antony to avoid and beware of Octavius, as Plutarch tells us; and so it was fore∣told the Noble Germanicus, that he should come short of the Crown, however likely to succeed, by the Villany of his Uncle Tiberiu; and by another Artist, that Titus should be Emperor, long before there was any great appearance of it. I remember Epist. ad Ian. Dos. Ioseph Scaliger speaking of his Father Iulius, describing his goodly Personage, Corpus, Incessus, Gestus, and stately Meen, so as every body who beheld him was ready to cry out, he looked so like a Prince, adds (a∣mongst other his incomparable Endowments)  in colli∣gendis ex vultu hominum moribus, his skill and dexterity of Read∣ing the Dispositions of Men in their Faces; that he would di∣vine likewise of their Fate and Fortune, instancing in what be∣sel the little Audectus, a Child he was so infinitely fond of, for the Sweetness of his Countenance; but which he never
used to look on without trouble and emotion. This his Lady taking notice of, with much Importunity, he plainly told her it would be over-laid, as it unhappily came to pass; tho'to prevent it, they took it immediately from the Nurse, weaned, and committed it to the Care of a young Maid, in whose Bosom it was soon after found dead with its Mouth on the Face of the drowsie Wench. Now as to Passions and natural Inclinations, there is no doubt but much may be conjectured, and that upon a Physical ac∣count, as both Theophrastus, Galen and others frequently shew; and therefore the Study of it, especially recommended to those of their Profession. 'Tis storied of the Famous Hippocrates, that one day passing by a brisk young Maid, he saluted her by the Name of fair Virgin, whom meeting again the Morning after, he bid good morrow Woman, discovering by her looks she had play'd the Wanton, and been vitiated the Night be∣fore. But as to these and the like Encounters and Instances of Prediction, fore telling particular Events, there seems more in the Artist than one would think should be detected by bare inspection of the Countenance only. Cicero is indeed very peremptory in what he says of Cheraea, impleading his Client Roscius, from what he observed in his Face: Nonne ipsum (says the Orator) Caput, & supercilia illa penitus abrasa, olere malitiam & clamitare calliditatem videntur? he spied Knave in his very Looks. The like we find him pro∣nounce of Verres, Vatinius, Piso, Gabinius and others. But still I say, to be able to tell of future Events, and what shall be∣fal one in his Life, if not beyond the Skill of Metoposcopie, is certainly very Extraordinary; and therefore tho' when we read and Consider how wistly the Prophet Elisha settled and2 Reg. viii. 11, 11. fixed his Countenance upon Hazael (who was sent to consult him about the recovery of his sick Master Benhadad King of Syria) until it drew Tears from the venerable Man; one would almost think he saw something in the Traytor'sOstendens severitatem, & feritatem in vultu. Cajetan. in Loc. Face, which moved that tender Passion. Yet it is said, That the Evil which he told him he should do to the Children of Israel, was revealed to him from God. And so was likewise the Destinies of Pharaoh's Chief Butler and Baker to Ioseph, who yet we find took special notice of their Countenances, as did his Fa∣ther of Laban's, of which the FamousPet. Apo∣nensis. Conciliator.
I might have produced many other Examples, but to shew that these were not the Observations of Heathens only, but of Christians too; and among other, one of the greatest Fathers of the Church;Orat. 2 cont. Gent. Gregory Nazianzen fore-telling of the Apo∣state Iulian, from something remarkable in his Looks and Meen (which he had observed) what a Plague he should prove to the Roman Empire. Such, 'tis likely were the Cha∣racters found in the Countenance of the short-Chin'd Nero, and the narrow Maximinus; Iuba was cruel; but above all the Modern, that merciless and truculent Moscovite, Iohn Basilides, described by Oderborn, who has published the Life of that sa∣vage Tyrant; and such was the fierce, and austere Bajazet the First, Tamerlan, Charles Duke of Burgundy, and others. In the mean time, much we confess is to be attributed to Age, Infirmities, cruciating Pains, macerating Studies and Elu∣cubrations; hard, and bodily Labour; to outward Losses and Afflictions; inward Remorse, religious Severities; to Want, Poverty; much to Diet, and other Usages: All of them Abate∣ments in these Conjectures, and without prejudice to the Vir∣tue, and worthy Inclinations of many Persons, whose Looks may seem to bear the Characters of vitious and immoral Men; when all this while, they spring only from Impressions caused by unavoidable Accidents; besides such adscititious Habits, as may possibly be contracted by Institution, Discipline and Custom: One is therefore first to inquire into the Conver∣sation, Education, Condition, and other Circumstances of their Lives; before we give hasty Sentence of their Natures and Dispositions. Every hard-favoured Man should not presently be concluded a Cruel and Ill-natur'd Person; since the Linea∣ments even of Majesty, and such as create both Love and Ve∣neration; tho' there be something of more reserv'd and less tender; are yet extreamly different from those of Fierce and Cruel, as was observed in Titus Vespasian, and is seen in the Medals and Statues of Trajan, Antoninus, Severus; and in the Modern Emperors, the two first Maximilians, Radulphus; and more remarkable yet. in the Countenance of our late King Charles the Second; wherein serious Majesty was attemper'd with such strokes of Debonaire, as won Love, and Reverence from all who approached him, by a certain rare, and singu∣lar Interposition of qualifying Lines. The same Modifications of otherwise Stern and Severe, are also plainly conspicuous, and to be seen in his Brave, and Heroic Grand-father, Henry the
Fourth of France; than whom, never were two Princes more resembling one the other, comparing their Pictures, abating the Beard and Peruke only. 'Tis reported of Ismael the Persian Sophy, that he had evi∣dent Marks in his Face, of a Great and Noble Soul, endow'd with many Virtues, quite contrary to those of Solyman the Magnificent (of both which we have seen Medals and Pictures) who had all the Signs of Haughtiness and Cruelty; such re∣pugnant Strokes, and Figures there are Ingraven in the Coun∣tenance: For as we have noted in our Charles, Majesty does not consist in a grim and crabbed Look, such as perhaps might be Sylla's,Manilius. Stricti Catones, and the Censor; but in a grave, staid, and unelated amability, and thus —in una sede morantur Majestas & Amor.—Metam. 2. something like what my Lord Bacon describes to be in one of the venerable Governors of Solomon's House (in his pretty At∣lantic Utopia) praeseferens quasi miserantis; that his Gravity had something in it, which looked as if he pitied Men, the Ex∣pression I confess pleased me. And thus have we briefly shewed, how the Proportion, Harmony, and Discord of Parts, variously configur'd and dispos'd, give notice of our Inclinations, and support the Conjectures by frequent Examples. What likewise our Opi∣nion is of such as (like to that Race of Scottish Divines, or Second-sight-Men, as they are called) Prognostick of Events to come: I say briefly, because it were Argument of much longer discussion, than this Digression will allow. But here comes now a Question;Rara est con∣cordia for∣mae, atque pudicitiae, Juv. Sat. X. How it happens, that we often find so many of the fair, and beautiful Sinners of the Sex, in divers of whose Countenances there appears to dwell so much Innocency, Sincerity, Modesty and Goodness; and such perhaps as was in Helena's, Lais's, Faustina's, &c? To this is answered; That the Perversion does not spring from any of those Signatures,V. Platonis convivium pnlcher ani∣mus etiam in vultu appa∣rere. which if truly such, do really, and naturally dispose to all those perfections and virtuous Habitudes ac∣cordingly; but take their Rise from some other external, ad∣ventitious Cause and Corruption; such as neglect of Educa∣tion, early and religious Principles and Institution, Want, Po∣verty, and above all, from the evil Examples of the Age, and Conversation with others so tainted; for so inficitur terrae
sordibus unda fluens, the clearest, and most chrystal Streams passing thro' a Sink, are soonest stained and poluted; and in this Case indeed, the Proverb takes place,Aristot.  Cap. VI. Vide Sener∣tum de signis & de cubitis Infirm. Prog. ex Mathe∣mat. Scient. ascribed to Galen. Fronti nulla fides; God alone being the infallible  since they are all of them Accidents sufficiently capable of exposing their frail∣ties to Temptation; corrupt and spoil the sweetest Nature; not that I believe (with some) that there is any essential Per∣fection of Souls among Individuals of the same kind, what∣ever difference we find in personal Endowments; tho' I con∣fess, there may yet for ought we know, be various degrees of Capacities, as among the very Angels themselves. But the Countenance does for the most part, discover it at one time or other; and corporeal Habitudes may lie conceal'd, and the Proverb verified, Fair and Foolish, &c. But as Beauty does not consist in Complexion only (as we call it) but in Symmetry, Features, and a certain Elegancy of Motion; so the Defects of the greatest Beauty as to Morals, or Intellectuals, may spring from internal and hidden Causes in the Organic Body; else, wheresoever there is indeed universal Symmetry, consent of Parts, Natural, Vital, Animal (in aetate media & florente, as Physicians speak) there must result from them all other Graces and Per∣fections, according to that ofPh. Pinel∣la Nat. Phi. Plan. Cap. . Symmet. V. Pinella, Ubi est pulchritudo formae quae rationalis est anima, consequenter materia debet formae respondere formositati; and wheresoever it falls out otherwise, like Saturn, or Mars in the Seventh, or Ninth House, malevolent to the Radical Promissors of the Geniture (tho' with them, there may be other fortunate, and lucky Signs) there would some thing be discover'd to be amiss in the Scheme, andO quam difficile est, crimen non prodere vul∣tu. Counte∣nance of the most charming out-side of a wanton Hypocrite, by one who were a Graduate, throughly skill'd in Metoposcopy. Besides, that I do hardly believe, there ever was any Creature so transcendently, and in quarto modo perfect, since the very first of the Sex,Notam in∣ter duo su∣percilia ba∣bentem. Da∣res Phryg. de Excid. Tro. Petronius. the fair Helen, Venus, Cynthia (Goddesses them∣selves) had their Moles and Spots: The same is also to be said of Learning, Wit, Eloquence, and other shining Talents; that they are not always found in the comliest Figures, Raram facit mixturam cum sapientia forma; nor had Socrates his Wisdom; Nor Aesop, Galba, andIngenio for∣mae damna repetendo meae. Ovid. Epist. Ecclus. xvii 5, 6. Sappho their Wit and Ingenuity from their beauteous shape and out side: L. Metellus had the Looks of a Fool; nor was Ulysses's Eloquence seen by his Counte∣nance, and the plicatures of his Face,
But when once he began to speak, there was nothing so fluent, nothing so charming: In a word, the most inestimable Jewel looses nothing of its Value, for not being kept in a Velvet Case. An illustrions Instance of this have we in an old Ac∣quaintance of Seneca's,Epist. LXVI the whole Passage is worth reciting. Claranum condiscipulum meum vidi, post multos annos, non puto expectas, ut adjiciam, senem: Sed mehercules viridem animo ac ve∣getum, & cum corpusculo suo colluctantem. Inique enim se natura gessit, & talem animum male collocavit: aut fortasse voluit hoc ipsum nobis ostendere, posse ingenium fortissimum ac beatissimum sub qualibet cute latere. Vicit tamen omnia impedimenta: Et ad caetera contemnenda à contemptu sui venit. Errare mihi visus est qui dixit. Gratior est pulchro veniens in corpore virtus. Nullo enim honestamento eget: ipsa & magnum sui decus est, & corpus suum consecrat. Certe Claranum nostrum coepi intueri; for∣mosus mihi videtur, & tam rectus corpore, quam est animo. Po∣test ex casa vir magnus exire: Potest ex deformi humilique cor∣pusculo, formosus animus ac magnus. Quosdam itaque videtur mihi in hoc naturales generare, ut approbet virtutem omni loco nasci. Si posset per se nudos edere animos, fecisset. Nunc quod amplius est, facit. quosdam enim edit corporibus impeditos, sed nihilominus per∣rumpentes obstantia. Claranus mihi videtur in Exemplar editus: ut scire possemus,Plato in Phaed. non deformitate corporis foedari animum; sed pulchritudine animi corpus ornari. I met (says Seneca) my old School-Fellow Claranus, whom of a long while before I had not seen: I suppose I need not say an Old Man: But in good Earnest, Spriteful and Vigorous, striving to get the better of his little Boy. Nature I confess, has dealt a little unkindly with him, in lodging so great a Soul in so homely a Cottage, unless perhaps it be to shew us, that the greatest, and happiest Wit, may lie under any the coursest out-side. In the mean time, he has overcome all Impediments, and by vanquishing first himself, triumphs over all things else; so as methinks he's mistaken who said, Virtue's more graceful in a beautious Body. Certainly, she needs no becoming dress, who is an ornament to herself, and renders her very Body a consecrated Place:
Really, I began to look earnestly upon him, and to me he seem'd as amiable, and upright in Body, as he is in Mind: A great Man I see, may come forth of a little Hovel, and a bright and magnanimous Soul, from a mean, and ill-fram'd Body. Thus Nature seems to bring forth some on purpose, to shew, that Vertue may be born any where, and that if it were possible to produce Souls stark naked, she would have done it: She has now done a greater thing, brought forth some clogg'd with Body, that yet surmount, and break thro' all impediments: Claranus, I think, was born on purpose to let us know, that the Soul contracts no sullage from the deformity of the Body; but on the contrary, that the Body becomes much more beauti∣ful by a fair, and vertuous Soul. So true is that of Avicen, Natura supplet ingenio, ubi deficit corpus: The great Apostle St. Paul is described little of Stature; Agesilaus, nay the great Alexander. himself, and his Learned Praeceptor, Aristotle, were but little Men; the innate and vital Spirits, becoming more close and vigorous (as having a more easy and quick inter∣course by the nearness of the Heart and Brain) and there∣fore Naturalists observe Bees, Ants, Spiders and minutest Insects to be the most Ingenious. Abating for these, and some other Accidents, it must be confess'd, that the Countenance is not always an infallible Guide, no more than a gilded, and finely graved Dial-plate, in∣dicates the Goddess of the Motion, and Contrivance within a Watch: Plumbed machara in aurea vagina; whilst the unsuf∣ferable Pride of Antisthenes, was plainly seen thro' his tattered Mantle. Many who appear like Angels of Light, have cloven Feet; and such were the Sirenes, and Harpies, those Volucres Puellae that had Fishes Tails, and Vultures Tallons. But this does not prohibit that a great regard should be had to remark∣able Externals, to which Apuleius attributes so much; that (as if some Divinity were to lodge in it) he thought the most beautiful Youths were to be chosen, as most proper for Divi∣nation. Alcibiades was in all his Ages from a Child, to his End, of incomparable Beauty; and so was Demetrius, whose Coun∣tenance Plutarch describes to consist of such a charming mixture of Gravity, and Mansuetude, Serious and Sweet, as no Painter could ever express; and indeed the Charms of Beauty are so Powerful and attractive, that as Socrates calls it, brevem tyran∣nidem; so where joyned with Virtue, and Knowledge (as in some of these it was) it is a transcendent near Perfection,
such were Alexander, Cyrus, Hiero, Scipio Africanus, and Augustus of old; Persons (tho' not without their Faults) of great Ex∣cellency; and of our latter Age, that Phoenix (of perfection both of Mind and Body) the Illustrious Picus Prince of Miran∣dula; but they are rare. And after all, it has been much ob∣served, that very beautiful Persons have seldom met with lucky Destinies; hence the Tragedian, in Hipp. Rara forma Viris (saecula prospice) Impunita fuit; of which might be produc'd divers Instances of our own Country, beside the great Duke of Buckingham, his Son Francis; the late Duke of Monmouth, and others, of which, see Muretus, Cantarus, &c. In the mean time, where we meet with an ample Head, a spacious Fore∣head, a fulness about the Temples; the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, rather large than contracted; the Features in general Manly, and Serious, and the rest of the Parts well proportion'd; there seldom failes a strong, and capacious Memory, solid Judgment, with a stock of Industry and Prudence, in rebus agundis. In a word, very serious, and thinking Persons, have commonly serious and composed Looks; and the Light, the Trifling, and the Wanton, is discovered in the Face, whilst not the Fair and Effeminate; but that the noblest Beauty in Man, which creates neither Contempt, nor Wonder. Samuel was forbid to look on Eliab's Countenance,1. Sam. xvi. 7, 12. and Chap. xvii. 42. or height of Stature (such as the unfortunate Saul and Absalon were conspicuous in) for that the Lord sees not as Man sees; for Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the Heart, &c.See Aristot. Polit. l. 3. The mistake of the Prophet was, that he took Comliness of Person, to be the only Character of Royalty; such as was the Kings whom he had anointed before; for the same History tells us after a few Verses, that David was Ruddy, cum pulchritudine oculorum & decoro aspectu, of a beautiful, or rather manly Countenance, and goodly to look to. And now after all that has been produc'd, it is likewise to be consider'd, what Judgment, and Conjectures are to be made with regard to other Nations, Countries, Climates and Customs, which not only change the Shapes of Brute-Animals of the same species, but exceedingly alter the Countenances, Complexions, and Characters of Men and Women also. To instance only in the Head and Face (without straying from our present Subject) the more Northern Inhabitants of Europe, incline to Fair; our Faces are more oval; our Eyes upon the grey and blew; our Hair bright, or brown; I speak
for the most part. Those of Russia, Poland, Germany, Hungary, People of manly Aspect; their Noses blunter, and moderately arched; and so the Italians, but longer and more tapering, espe∣cially about Tuscany and forwards. The Venetians are of a juster Proportion, and generally well favour'd: The Swiss, and dwellers among the Alps, have acciden∣tally strumous Throats, which draw their Faces a-wry, imputed to their drinking Snow-water. Remarkable for Copped, and Sugar-loav'd Heads, are those of Genoa. In Spain and Portugal (not Limpos de la Sangre de les Moros) they draw towards the hew, and form of those People whom they so inhumanly, as well as impoliticly, banished, and yet retain a mixture of. Greece, and the lesser Asia, afford well featur'd Persons, and we are told of the most charming Beauties about Georgia, and Mingrelia,See Sir Io. Chardine's Travels. until farther North West of the Euxine, and where they mingle with the Tartar (as if Nature delighted in con∣traries) the Race degenerates to narrow Eyes, broad and bony Faces, (I speak of the Men) even to frightful ugliness. From these have the Chineses (according to their various and ex∣tended Climates) much of their Figure, tall and gross, square Visage, large Ears; flattish small Noses; long, narrow Eyes; thin Lips; middle-siz'd Mouths, and above all, little Feet, especially the Women, whether Naturally or by Art, Authors differ. For a Majestic Comliness, the Persians and Armenians have been remarkable, in the Aquiline Royal Nose; which with other virile Features, seems in a manner Gentilitian, and no where else so universal.Vide Iusti∣num Dar. Phryg. Suc∣ton. Zona. &c. Plutarch tells us, Artaxerxes had an Eagle's Nose; but so had Demetrius, Gryphus, Neoptolemus, Augustus, Galba, Constantine the Great, Scanderbeg; the brave Solyman Son of Selimus, Emperor of the Turks, who were all Warlike, Liberal, and of Heroic Spirits; and antiently it was called the Roman Cognizance, but they have no more pre∣tence to it now, than some other Europeans. Those of India have naturally high Fore-heads and out-Noses, unless such as are blended with the Portugueses, and others not so far South. The vaster Tracts of Lybia appear in some of them, to be inhabited by a Race of Drills; the Neger Africans have their Fore-heads, Nose and Faces extreamly flat; great Heads; large, and full Eyes; blubber Lips cover'd with a lanuginous, woolly hair: Those of North-Africa bordering on the Mediterranean, mingled with the Spanish-Moors, sufficiently resemble them,
until one comes almost to Aegypt, where they are more swar∣thy, rounder Visag'd and hollow Ey'd, which dash runs thro' Arabia also. The North-Americans, as to the fabric of their Mouths, bony Faces, large Ears, and slaggie Hair, are like the Upper Tartars; the rest Southward, as blended with the Olivaster Spaniard and other Nations, who having planted Colonies among them, partake of their likeness; whilst the Native, and truly In∣digin, are generally very well shap'd, yet varying in other Climats. Mountains and Alpestral Sierras, breed Men for the most part robust, and of manly Countenances, as well as Sta∣ture, and fewer deform'd than the Plains and Vallies, which as they are situated low, or near the Marsh, vary both in Colour, Growth, Shape and Constitution; to Pale, Low, Fleshy, Weak and Effeminate. Imperialis (who of all the Peripatetics, has best discussed this Subject) attributes all to the degrees of Heat and Cold, Dry and Wet. That in ex∣cessive hot Countries, the Inhabitants are commonly foolish, or of no great reach; Heat dissipating the Spirits, as Cold on the contrary, hinders them from due Motion. Moisture obnubilates, and condenses Humors, and is inimicous to all Ingenuity, great and heroic Thoughts: of such Consequence is the Clime, and Situation to the Disposition of a People. The Sea-Air being warm and dry, thro' the freer Operation of the Sun-beams, drawing up the cherishing Vapour; the bordering Dwellers are usually more crafty than others about them; as was observed of those of Carthage, Calabria, Sicilia, and so generally near the Southern Islands, where the Heat is benigne, and not so intense. Hence, Insulanos esse malos, Si∣cilianos autem pessimos grew a Proverb; but when the Ex∣halation is over-thickned with Cold, 'tis followed with con∣trary Effects. In like manner Diet, and Nourishment by Meats and Drinks is to be consider'd; and therefore great Care should especially be had of it, as to young Children, and to the Manners and Disposition of Nurses. 'Tis report∣ed that Puppies which have been suckl'd with Milk of Bitch-Wolves, or Foxes, become abundantly more fierce, and Crafty than other Dogs. Scotus tells of a Boy, nourished with the Milk of a Sow, that could never be reclaimed from running into Ditches and dirty Puddles; and of another to whom a Goat gave suck, that instead of walking, was always leaping
and climbing. The Stories of Romulus and Remus, Lycaste, Parrhasia, Telephus, &c. are well known, and therefore curious Hunts-men take great Care, not only of the Breed, but of the Diet of their youug Whelps; How much more ought we then of Childrens Dispositions suck'd in with the Milk of their Nurses? Let us hear poor Dido imprecating her deserting, and hard-hearted Gallant. Non tibi diva parens generis, nec Dardanus Author, Perfide, sed duris genuit te cautibus horrens Caucasus,Aen. IV. Hircunaeque admorunt ubera Tigres. Thou, nor of Venus art, nor Dardan's Race, Thee, on some Rock did Caucasus beget, Perfidious Man, fed at a Tyger's teat. And indeed,A. Gellius, Lib. XII. Cap. 1. Phavorinus the Philosopher, Avicen and others, give special Caution of the Inconveniences that spring from Milk vitiated by their Passions and natural Inclinations, whe∣ther prudent, sober, foolish, fearful or furious; of such impor∣tance was the Election of a well temper'd Nurse. And then again, as to Diet, that Food of the lightest Digestion, is aptest to generate the best Blood, and consequently the refined'st Spi∣rits, to strengthen the Memory, and sharpen the Fancy. Let∣tuce, Tabacco (as Narcotics) dispose to drowsiness; Coffee, and Tea to the contrary:Vide Impe∣riaelem de Qualitati∣bus, seu sig∣nis Ingenio∣rum. In like sort, Riches and Dignities, Prosperity, Misfortunes, Religion; the Nature and Subject of our Studies, have their several Operations upon us, as already we have shewed. But to return to the Make, and Figure of the Countenance, one soon discovers in whatVid. Sand∣raertum A∣cad. parte prima de Af∣fecttib. & Perturb. A∣nimi, Cap. V. Cordis index per quam homi∣nes & nati∣ones ab invi∣cem discern &c. Countries mould Men are cast, and may give a shrewd Guess to what Nation they respective∣ly belong, and thence conjecture of their Inclinations, Ani∣mal, Rational as well as Natural, with regard as we said, to the Disposition and Temper of the Air and Region. was, we know, a constant ob∣servation; whence Hippocrates de Aere, Aquis, & Locis attri∣butes so much to the Effects of those Elements, and the Situ∣ation of Countries (as Ptolemy to the vertue of the Stars) and that from thence, the Scythians are all so alike to one another, and so very unlike to other Nations. The same was remarked by Strabo, in the Manners and Inclinations of
the Medes and Armenians; of such Importance are Coelum and Solum,See Bodin Repub. Lib. V. as not only appears in Horses, Dogs, Cocks, Hawks, and other Animals, but is plainly evident in the virtue of Plants, and other productions of the Earth, which are found to vary exceedingly both in their Texture and Operations; so as what is large, procere, goodly, and beautiful to look on; sourain, and sanative; gentle, and benign in one Country, is in another Clime a low, dwarf, repent, and dwindling Plant; disagreable, churlish, and of noxious Quality. In like manner, some Nations are totally Barbarous, Ignorant, Slothful, Luxu∣rious, Effeminate, Slavish and Unfaithful: Others again, more Civil, Humane, Wise, naturally Sagacious, Active and Indu∣strious; Temperate, Valiant, Sincere and Generous: In a word, where Peace, and Liberty is prudently managed, Men excel in all the Moral Improvements; where Tyranny reigns, Ignorance, Sloth, Dejection of Spirit, and Superstition a∣bound. The Asiatics (who Hippocrates says, are the tallest, and best proportion'd in the World) are now justly noted for Luxury, and Slavishness, under the Barbarous, Thievish Arab, and In∣solent Turk. Those of China, under the former Politie, a Steady, Regular, Prudent, Industrious, Witty and Ingenious People, now more Soft and Effeminate. The Armenian Un∣constant; the Scythian Sad and Austere; those of Aegypt Wise and Subtile; the Phrygians Light and Vain; Syrians Covetous, as of old, the Phoenicians naturally intent on getting Wealth; the Babylonians Prudent; the rest of Persia, India, Iapan, Siam, Idle, Proud, Crafty, False, Cruel. The various Tracts of Africa, which heretofore bred divers great Wits, and excellent Persons; as now corrupted by the haughty, and injurious Mahumetan, more than by Pagans, are become Ignorant, Ser∣vile, Rash, Perjurious, Superstitious. The Negers accordingly, are in general Fearful, and consequently Cruel, Treacherous, full of Revenge; and like the wandring Nomades and Aethiops, Foolish and exceeding Bestial: Those of America less expos'd to the Sun, less Passionate, nor so Luxurious and False, where they are unmingled, and remain yet uncorrupted. Those of Europe, by natural Temper of Air and Soil, War∣like, Industrious, Liberal, Plain, less Subtile, Tenacious of Li∣berty, and Lovers of Change; This for the general. In particular, as the far North gives check to the Blood, the People are Dull and Unactive; the rest, like the Bear (under
whose Influence they dwell, and where that fierce Animal abounds) partake of a rigid and surly Ferity. Hence the Sauromats, those of Tartary and Russia are more brutish, rude, slavish and fraudulent, nor so Couragious as we are made be∣lieve, by their oft, and numerous Inundations; Conquering more with Numbers, than by Valor; and compelled thro' extream Poverty, to seek new Seats, and make Incursions South∣ward; not out of Military Glory, or for Empire, but of pure Necessity; and therefore it is, that we seldom or never read, that those of the South, or East invaded the North or West upon these accounts. The Polander is very Imperious, Haghuty, Unquiet, Liberal, Superstitious. Those of Hungary, bellicose, brave, impatient of restraint. On the contrary, the Greeks in a more benign Clime, heretofore naturally dispos'd to all the perfections of Mind and Body, Learning, Wisdom, Courage, Politie; great Legislators and Assertors of Liberty; by accidental and barba∣rous Revolutions and Mixtures, become at present the most ignorant, rustic, abject, false and universally degenerous. We call the Spaniard Proud,Iactabundi Maternus. Ostentous, Formal, affecting Gravity, Slow, Deliberate, Patient, Constant, Valiant, Loyal, but extreamly Bigottish and Superstitious, which renders them Cruel: The Italian is naturally Cautious, Prudent and Fru∣gal, Temperate, Polite, of an acute refined Wit, Amorous, Jealous and Vindictive of Injuries. Contrary now to both (and almost to all other Nations of Europe besides) the French,Gentem in varios tu∣multus na∣tam. Liv, Lib. I. Dec. Lib. V. Cae∣sar de Bell. Gal. L. 3, 4. Ammianus Marc. Lib. XV. Versatile, Unconstant, Loud; Lovers of Noise, Ceremonious, Prompt, Confident, soon fa∣miliar, busie in all places, and ever imposing upon, and mo∣lesting their Neighbours, elated with the least Success, and as soon dejected upon the first repulse. That great Wit, and polite Scholar Mothe le Vayeur (late Praeceptor to Monsieur, Brother to the present Monarch) who has published an express Treatise of the Contrariety of Humors; observing the different Situations of Countries, and particularly that of France and Spain, naturally separated by the Pyrenean Mountains; the first, exposed to the East, and North; the second, to the West, and South Spain, Hot and Dry; France, Cold and Moist, (comparatively speaking) replenish'd with Rivers, and Streams: Spain seldom disturb'd with Winds, but at proper Seasons; France, perpetually agitated with them: Spain, not subject to Wet and Rain; France obnoxious to both
(together with several other Antitheses, he there enumerates) so little wonders at the Contrarieties, and Repugnances of their Natures (to which he also adds their Statur Shape, and Com∣plexion) that to shew how little Injury I have done them in the Picture I here Copy, he gives this Character of his Country-men, That they are Mutable as the Air they breath in;La Francoise aussi changeant que son Air, & aussi legere que les Veuts: Volages, pleins de boutades; Causeurs, Medisans de lour Com∣patriots chez les Estrangeres; Iurants, & tempestans, &c. of which see a great deal more, with divers pleasant Reflections, and infinitely Witty, in Garcias's Antipa∣tia de los Françeses y Espagnoles. Light, as the Wind that blows; Giddy, Unconstant and Sudden; Everlasting Talkers; Cen∣sorious, even to the speaking ill of their own Country-men to Stran∣gers; Impatient, Contending more with Strength of Body, than Force of Wit; and Fighting with more Fury than Counsel or Discretion; Terrifying People with horrid Oaths, and Storming where ever their Souldiers come. In short, that their Humors are so widely different one from the other; as one would almost question, whether they issued the same way out of their Mother's Womb: In a word, that a French man is a Spaniard Revers'd, turn'd in∣side outward. And certainly, much of this is true, as to their natural Temper, resulting from those Causes; whilst ci∣viliz'd by Arts, and good Education (in both which they are extreamly happy) no Nation exceeds them for Wit, Learn∣ing, Invention, Diligence, and Conduct in Affairs; Huma∣nity Courtesie, Gallantry and the Noblest Atchievements. And thus our Physiognomones is throughout, and all along to be understood, as distinguishing Inclinations in general, and in puris Naturalibus; and not such as are improved by Custom and Institution, which is a second, and better Nature. We have spoken of the Manners and Properties of some Na∣tions, how nearly they approach to the Ferity, and other Qua∣lities of those brute Animals, naturally bred among them: But this the Learned Scaliger endeavours to refute,Jul. Scalig. Exercit. X. vid. & Exer. CCLXXIV. instancing in those of Epirus, where the numerous Flocks, and Herds of other Cattel, are extreamly tame; the People of all other, the most Rude and Barbarous; and by the way, bestows no little Mark of his Kindness on our Nation too, for our excessive Eating and Devouring; tho' our Country he confesses, breeds no greedy, or Voracious Animal whatsoever: That those of Savoy, Swisserland, and many parts of Germany, which abound in Foxes, &c. are the dullest, simplest, and most uncautelous of all their Neighbours; not considering, as to our Country, that
the Plenty, and Hospitable Nature of the English above all other People, deserved a civiler Character; and that tho' there be not so many Foxes in those other Countries, there are Bears, and Wolves, and Wild Boars among those Stern, tho' less Crafty Inhabitants he mentions. Moreover, that in Liguria, and other parts of Italy, which rarely breed any Foxes, the People are the suttlest, cunning, and over-reaching in the World; and thinks that Nature or∣dain'd Brute Animals in other Countries, rather to reform the Manners of the Inhabitants among which they are bred; But left none in Liguria, Genoa, &c. because she could create none so very Brutish and Wicked, as might represent the prodi∣gious Impiety, Avarice, Perfidiousness, and Vanity of those People. As to Climat and other Accidents, Cardan observing that where Trees take but slender, and shallow Roots, or the Country is subject to furious and tempestuous Winds; the People are unconstant and unstable also. To this, his Learned Adversary opposes the unconstancy, and unsteadiness of those about Cremona, one of the richest, and most fruitful Spots of all Italy; and where the Trees are most profoundly rooted; magnifying the Steadiness, excellent Temper, and other Feli∣cities of those of Iava, obnoxious to the most impetuous Storms; and so the Circassians, Thracians, Macedonions and other expos'd, and perflatile Countries, affirming withal, that these continual Winds, do rather serve to attemper and alloy, than cause these pretended Verticities; for that ex mistione fit Con∣stantia, and by the same Logic, thinks to have confuted that Universal Maxim of Men's Manners, corresponding with the Tem∣per of their Bodies; because (as he persists) the Dog, which of all other Animals is the most Testie and Choleric Crea∣ture, is of so very cold, and chilly a Constitution: Indeed vicious Habits are found under all Tempers, Climes and Countries. But these are Paradoxes, and we must not be angry at the Great and Learned Man, whilst in the Heat, and Spirit of Contradiction to his subtile, and acute Antago∣nist: But a single Witness and Opinion against the con∣stant Experience of all the World beside, is of no great mo∣ment. To proceed then; The Swedes are Warlike, Rapacious; the Danes, Honest, Civil, less Crafty; the German Slow, Pa∣tient, Hardy, Valiant, Resolute, Plain, Sincere, very Labo∣rious,
Chast, Friendly and Hospitable, but sometimes exceed∣ing in Free, and Genial Compotations. Those of the Belgic Provinces and Lower Germany, Dili∣gent, Industrious; not very Ambitious; stand not on Puntillos; Frugal, Vigilant; Intent on their Interest; Signal Patriots; ex∣tream Lovers of their Country, and other Virtues of Republic Politie. Islanders and Confiners, are to be Censed among the Bordu∣rers, or next Continent, from whence they are commonly first Peopled: In a word, , as all Virtue consists in the middle between the Extreams; so those of the middle Climats, are thought to be the most Prudent, Virtuous, and accomplish'd Persons, of which those who dwell some∣what Northerly, are the more Martial and Active; and there∣fore Vegetius advises, that Souldiers should be chosen thence; but for Counsel, and Prudence, the more Meridional, agreeable to that of the Poet. Quicquid ad Eoos tractus,Incanus. mundique teporem Labitur, emollit gentes clementia coeli: Omnis in Arctois populus quicunque pruinis Nascitur, indomitus belli est, & mortis amator. And to the same Cause, Ovid attributes the Salacity of those of Thrace, —pronumque genus regionibus illis In Venerem— But these are Regional;See Lucius's Universal Characters of Regions and Climats. Alexand. ab Alex. Genial Dies, Lib. IV. Cap. 3. there are Topical Inclinations likewise, Idiosyncratical and peculiar. Hence the Genoeze are of all others reputed the most Crafty and Subtle-pated. The Venetians Grave, Deliberate, extreamly Circumspect, Jealous, Sedate, and Mo∣derate, Friendly, Constant to their Maxims. Those of Flo∣rence (where the are Air is very pure and dry) have sharp, de∣fecate, and polite Wits, and are generally Couragious, Inven∣tive, and as we said, of refined Understandings. The pre∣sent Romans are Grave, Courteous, and Affable, as more ac∣custom'd to Strangers. The Neapolitans Generous, Superb, and Stately like their Cities; Subdolous, Luxurious from their Clime and Plenty. Those of Sicily, Acute, Suspicious, and as the Calabrian, not much to be trusted. In short, Graeca
Fides grew Proverbial, and those of Carthage had the like Cha∣racter: Nor were these Attributes of late Imposition, or hasty Censures; but the Antient, and Constant Observation of Wise and Considerate Men. Polybius says of the Athenians, that they wereSee Philo Jud. in his Book intitu∣led, Quod omnis Po∣bus Liber. Wittiest of all the Graecians; and yet Melecides was but a Fool. Cicero reports of Thebes, that it bred none but Block-heads. Abdera in Thrace,Horat. . was Foggy, and so was Boeotia, imputed by the Poet, to the Grossness of the Vapours, as from another Poet, the Apostle himself, —Aratus. That those of Crete were always Liars,Titus iii. Evil-Beasts, Slow-Bellies. And this Testimony not at randum, but St. Paul says, really True. But after all, that Learned and Gallant Men, may yet be produc'd in the thickest, and worst of Climes, Ana∣charsis the Scythian, Democritus, and several others sufficiently evince. Summos posse viros,Juven. Sat. X. & magna exempla daturos Vervecum in patria, crassóque sub aere nasci. Of which Buchanan, Barkeley, Creighton, Erasmus, Grotius, Heinsius, Barlaeus, De Wit, &c. are pregnant Examples near home. Nor is it all this while to be understood, that where ever we observe any eminent Resemblance of an exotic Counte∣nance (suppose an acuminate Head, narrow Eye, or promi∣nent Fore-head) the Person must needs be as subtle as a Genoeze; since with us the copped Pate is look'd on as con∣trary Sign, or foolish, and faithless as the Negro, because the Nose is flat; or that the Eagle-shap'd, and Persian-nos'd are all of them Cyrus's and alike magnanimous, &c. since we every day find Persons of the most unpromising Counte∣nances, Men of extraordinary Talents, and no less Virtuous, as has been instanc'd in Claranus. Diogenes says, Aristotle him∣self had narrow Eyes, and no very advantageous Looks; and others, that Cicero's Head was of the smallest Size, supported with a long and slender Neck. But of the Wise Socrates 'tis said, that People could hardly forbear laughing in his Face, he was of so odd a Figure; Simis naribus, recalva fronte, pilosis humeris, & repandis cruribus, as St. Herom describes him. And so others of the Philosophers, whose Pictures hung in the
Prytaneum at Athens with Aratus, Zeno, Epicurus, Xenophon, Chrysippus, Cleanthes, &c. as Sidonius reports. This as to the Person; but what is meant here is to shew, that every Na∣tion has for the most part, certain evident Characters, and Impressions on their Countenance, by which they are distin∣guishable from others, peculiar to, and generally reigning among them, which frequently dispose them to those different Pathemata, and Inclinations we have spoken of. In a word, so various, and uncertain are the Effects of Climats, that 'tis observed, People of the same Latitude and Distance from the Aequator, nay even of the same City, as the Ground on which it stands, lies high or low, are more or less in∣clin'd to Sedition, as 'twas noted in Rome, as Famous for in∣testine Divisions, as for her seven Hills; nor therefore was it wonder'd, that in Athens there were so many different Fa∣ctions. The upper part of the City would have a Popular Government; the lower Town an Oligarchy, and that next the Piraeeus an Aristocracy.Republ. Lib. V. Cap. 1. So Bodin speaking of the sturdy Swiss (tho' for the common Safety knit in the closest Confederacy of any Nation) observes the Grizons, and those of the Moun∣tain Cantons, to be of Humor so untractable, and different from the Vallies; that with much ado and difficulty, they hold together.Forociores Aetoli quam pro ingeniis Graecorum, Liv. What a world of Difficulty did the Aetolian (whom, Livy, Arianus, and others, make to be very like the French) give the Conquering Romans; and so long, and with such obstinacy, those of the craggy Apennines, and Genoezes held out against them; that nothing but a transplantation of them into the plain Grounds, and gentle Air,See Servius, Aen. VI. how such Translation alters Na∣ture. would tame, and make them governable. And no doubt, Alpestral, hilly, and barren Countries, obnoxious to cold and turbulent Winds, hardening fierce People, gives them great advantage over those who being bred in the rich, more benign, and milder Climes, are more dispos'd to Ease and Luxury, which renders them unactive and effeminate, and fitter for the Study of Arts and Sciences, than for Arms and painful Expeditions; and there∣fore seldom make they any Conquests which they hold. Thus Philosophy, Mathematics, and contemplative Studies first began, and came to us from the warm, and more Southern East. Mechanical Inventions, and such as require more Patience, In∣dustry and Application, than Speculation, flourish among the Germans, and Northern Climes; whilst the depths of Policy, Iurisprudence, Eloquence, Oratory, Logic, and the Arts of Wran∣gling
(by which the Greeks, and Demagogues pretend they go∣verned, and subdued the World) Aristotle attributes to the Ef∣fects of the middle Situation of his Country, between the ex∣treams of North and South; which 'tis confessed, is the most likely to compose a benign, and harmonious Temper, and might contribute to their good Fortune, whilst Wise Men governed. And yet for all this, we find, that what at any time they got by their Craft, and Arts of Policy; the ruder, undisciplin'd, ignorant and unarmed North, soon over-ran, vanquish'd and subdu'd both Greek and Roman (fortified as they were, with the strongest Holds, and armed Legions) possessing their goodly Countries to this day; so as they are no more what they were, either as to their Persons, or Incli∣nations; such an Ascendent has the change of Climat. Comines indeed does well observe, that what the English obtain'd by Battel of the French, they lost again in Treaty; and the same Advantage had the Spaniard and Italian, who being of a more Melancholy, Contemplative and Sedate Temper, still out∣witted the Bilious, and Impatient French; who all upon the spur, staid not to digest Matters as the other did: Notwith∣standing we have seen, that being North of Spain, to what a low and despicable pass, they have now reduc'd that late formidable, and redoubted Nation. Nor do I question, but did the English heartily Unite, and vigorously make Use of those Advantages, the Site and Nature of our Country affords both by Sea and Land, she might yet answer their Politics, and encounter all their Stratagems, by which they aspire to an universal Monarchy. It must be granted, that the French are a brisk, active, and industrious People: But I know not whether amongst other their Encomiasts, they are much ob∣lig'd to their Country-man Bodin, when he tells us, that Italy, and Spain swarm with them, to perform those servile Offices among them, which it seems, they are too Proud and Lofty to condescend to themselves, how poor soever. To Conclude, when all is said, I find Writers are so Par∣tial to their own Countries, and that Nescio qua natale solum— so governs and prevails upon our Judgments, that 'tis hard to meet an Ingenuous Character among us all, when it once comes near our home. Aristotle, magnifies the Greeks; Cicero, the Romans; Iulius Scaliger, Italy; the Lawyers, Bodin and Contius, France, &c. Nor are we more Just in imputing Vices, or Virtues to the Nature and Constitution of the People, with∣out
considering the accidental Causes. Continence, less Jea∣lousy, Abstinence and Temperance in Eating and Drinking, Amours, &c. are really and truly attributable to the Effects of Heat and Cold, and such other Qualities, as more or less incite, or bridle the sensual Appetite, and make the Person more Liberal, Indulgent to his Palate and Inclination: And accordingly, an Italian or Spaniard (much more any further South) coming into England, where the external Air, and cooler Clime, creates a warmer Stomach, will find it neces∣sary to feed, and drink more plentifully; as an English Man travelling into Spain, or Italy, where the outward Heat dis∣sipates the Spirits, and calls that forth, which was before with∣in, will be satisfied with as temperate a Meal, as any of the Natives; which plainly shews, that the Abstinence, and Tem∣perance they so much boast of (to the reproach of the Nor∣thern People) does not proceed from any personal, or innate Vertue, abstracted from those Causes; but from what we have alledged; wherefore Inhabitants dwelling near Maritime Coasts, observed to be more salacious, perfidious, crafty and over-reach∣ing, than other People farther off (and therefore no fit Situa∣tion for a Platonic City, for fear of corrupting the Manners of those Utopians) do not contract those Vices from any other, than such adventitious Causes; namely from the irritation of a saline Air; their continual huxtering with cunning Mer∣chants (and such as frequent Sea-Ports for Gain and Traf∣fic) rather than from any Vice inherent in the Person, as above is noted. We have already spoken of the Effects of Institution, Philosophy, Poetry, Painting, Musick, and other voluptuary Arts of the warmer, and more genial Countries: Nor after all, are we wholly to regard these Contrarieties, without great respect to a Wise and peculiar Providence, whereby is kept an even (at least a tolerable) Balance among all the Nations of the ha∣bitable World; that the Crafty, and Circumventing (who would else Usurp, and get all by their Wit and Policy) may receive a Check, by the Plain, Honest Force and Courage of others; and the Progress of the Insolent, prevented, by the more Prudent, tho' inferior, and less in Power: And accor∣dingly, 'tis worth observing, that God does commonly so order this Oeconomy, that the Wisest Kings and Princes, reign much at the same time; and those of weaker Parts, and less Policy in another Period, of which it were easy to pro∣duce sufficient Instances, both from former and latter times,
were it agreeable to my present Subject, from which I may be deemed to have wandered too far already, having said no∣thing yet of England: Nor let me be thought to pass a Complement upon my Country-men, if I affirm (and that without Par∣tiality) that as the fairest Garlands, sweetest Nose-Gaies, are cull'd and compos'd, not from any one single Beauty of the flowry-Parterre, but from the Rose, and the Lily, the Iasmine, Tuberose, and the rest of the fragrant Tribes; so the Inclinations of the English, seem to result from the great Variety of the People; which as so many glorious Flowers from time to time, have been transplanted into our British Elysium: Few Nations that I know of under Heaven (in so short a time) consisting of so many Ingredients, by Revolutions, and Successions; Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, Belgians, &c. which certainly, as it ought to incline us to be the most hospitable, and debonair of any Nation, which is a Virtue; so it evidently does, to be the most unsteady, humourous, peevish and morose, which is a Vice; where (as we have shew'd of others) better Edu∣cation, Religious and Sober Principles, do not intervene, pre∣vent, and rectifie Nature, with some more than ordinary Force and Energy. This being truly so, of all those Nations, and People about us; there would, I am perswaded, none be found, that could afford so spacious a Field for our Metoposcopist, wherein to ex∣ercise, and improve his Talent. Our Countenances, Air, Eyes, Hair, Complexions, Stature, and other Agreements, consisting and compos'd of so charming a Variety, divided from the World, divided from our selves; the most unlike, and yet the most amiable, and agreeable, A true English Man has the true British Courage, the Roman Bravery and Civility, the German Probity, the French Politure, the Belgian Industry; to which add (as flowing from them all) innate Courage, Liberality, Mercifulness. Good-Nature; is soon reconciled, Chast, Generous, a Lover of Liberty and Religion to some extreams. 'Tis not is the mean time to be denied, that the Climate, insulary and unconstant Air (tho' seldom in excess) does generally dispose to Commotion, Melancholy, Moroseness, and a certain peculiar Strangeness, which often sowers the Conversation, mistaken oft for Pride: But then the Plenty, the Freedom, our just and easie Laws, correct, sweeten and
reconcile again, which else would be very inconvenient. The sole, and indeed, the only Desiderate therefore to be wish'd for, to render us the most consummately happy People, and Na∣tion Under Heaven (since we cannot all be Angels) were (com∣paring Circumstances with the rest of the World about us) a constant Steadiness, and a true Discernment when we are Well, and at our Ease, to endeavour to keep our selves so: But this must be the Effect of Sound and Steady Religion, more public Spirit, solid and united Counsels, and acquir'd Virtue; and not to be expected from the Nature, and Temper of the Clime, and Elevation of the Pole, which are evidently averse, and less benign. But I am straid too far again, and to enlarge much far∣ther on this Subject, would require as large Discourse, and per∣haps not be so agreeable. What I have produc'd being only to shew, that the Art of Divination from the Countenance, is a Science of as large, and wide Extent, as the Face of the Earth, which we inhabit, and is not to be confin'd to one Part, Pro∣vince, or people of the World, but to All in general; establish∣ing its Canons and Conclusions upon more than Fancy, or mere Conjectures only; namely (as all along we have shewed) upon the Conjugation and Concurrence of divers serious Causes. It may after all this perhaps be said, that these are only ge∣neral Opinions, or if true, are yet but such as you confess are drawn from the Effects of the several Climes, and Situa∣tions of Countries; as Men happen to dwell nearer to, or more remote from those powerful Influences, which according∣ly intend, or remit their Operations on the Inhabitants, as to Colour, Feature, Stature and those other Inclinations you have mention'd. But still you tell us nothing upon what Principle (as every Art requires) you advance, and ground you Judg∣ment of Particulars; and how it comes to pass, that the same Country, nay almost every Family, produces Persons so dif∣form, and unlike to one another? For 'tis suppos'd you will not affirm, that the being Born in the Garret, middle, or lower Floor of the House, signifies any thing to the Structure of the Body, or Elegancy of the Countenance. To take off this Objection, I was once beginning to frame a Table of Proportions, drawn (as from Polycletus's Canon) not only from the Medals of Alexander, Hiero, Pompey the Great, Augustus, Germanicus, &c. but likewise from their Statues,
as those of the Medicean Venus,Consule Guil. de Regn. Dissertat. de Physiog. Cleopatra, Apollo, Antinous, Me∣leager and other, famous (and yet extant) for their exact Sym∣metry and signals Beauty, as their Measures Stand in that very Curious, tho' little Piece, publish'd about forty Years since, by Abraham Bosse a French Chalcographer; compared with those of Albert Durer, Lomatius, Leon Baptista Alberti, and other Artists of the Moderns. And according as the most conspicu∣ous Parts of Men's Countenances, &c. remarkably deflecting from these standard Proportions; subjoyn'd the natural Causes of their unconformities; as near as might be to the Rules, and Maxims of Physiognomists; taking in the Assistance of Sigismund Elsholt, who has in his Anthropometria, done some∣thing of this Nature with extraordinary accuracy of Judgment; to shew, that their Sentiments were far from being the bare Conjectures, and Speculations of Men of more Leisure than Judgment; but the Results of Rational, as well as Natural Causes. Every Body will consent I presume, that an ample, and well form'd Head, which is neither too great, nor too little; (broad, round, square, flat or too copped and turbinated) has likely the Advantage of the rest we have mention'd, as well in regard to the due Situation of the Ventricles of the Brain, and intercourse of spirits, Animal, and Vital; whether carried thither from the Heart, by the Carotides and Arteries of the Neck; or degenerated, and exalted in that Receptacle, which being over-much compressed, straitned, dilated, or otherwise obstructed, must needs have influence upon the understand∣ing Faculties, and other Functions of the Body also. But how then happens it (say they) that you judge of those Effects and Habitudes from such other Irregularities, as have less Commerce with the more Vital, and Nobel Parts? For what has the long, or shorter Nose; full or narrow Eyes; thin, or more fleshy Ears, &c. which may accidentally be lost, quite cut off, or mutilated (without the loss or dimi∣nution to the Understanding, in the least) to do in this Case? I might once for all, Answer to this Question, with the constant Doctrine, for near Two Thousand Years, of the Great Hippocrates, Galen, Famous Physicians, Peripatetics; the whole Turba Philosophorum of old, building their Hypotheses's on the various Temperaments, and Humors arising from the natural Actions, and Passions of Prime and First Qualities, and
their Effects; according as they happen to be equally mixt, or predominate in the Body, more eminently visible in the Countenance, Upper Regions, and inner Man of the Head: So as He, in whom those Perfections are found ad Pondus, as they speak (which is Proportion Arithmetical) or what is nearest to it, ad Iustitiam (which is the Geometrical) where neither Cold nor Moist, Hot nor Dry domineer, but amicably meet in equal Poise and Measure, or at least in Temperament suitable to the several Functions; that blessed  must needs ren∣der the happy Person, as Beautiful in Mind as in Body: For every Part being furnish'd with so just and benign a mixture of Heat and Moisture, perfectly contemper'd, giving motion, and spritefulness to the Blood; a due, and just proportion of the whole must of necessity accompany it, with Vivacity in the Eyes, Colour in the Cheeks and Lips, a decent Elevation of the Nose, and more prominent Parts; a smooth, and serene Forehead, chearful composure of the Mouth, a tender plump∣ness of the Visage, &c. in short, where nothing is in excess, nothing deficient in the outward Structure; there will be found a natural Affability, Generosity, Courage with Discretion; quickness of Apprehension, great Ingenuity and Invention; Eloquence in the Tongue; a facetious Easiness in Conversa∣tion, with aptness to the softer Passions of Love and Friendship, and a sincere Candor in all his Actions. On the contrary, where any of these (vulgarly nam'd) Humors, jar, and hap∣pen to disagree,1. Met. and as in the Poets Chaos Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis, Mollia cum duris— are at Variance with one another, notice will soon be given of it by the contrary Effects; as (to speak with the Peripa∣tetics) where Choler, Heat and Driness domineer over the Cold and Moist, &c. the Parts are apt to be distended, and thrust out, as more conspicuously in the Nose, Forehead, Chin and other eminences of the Face; as Subterranean Fires and Erup∣tions, raise Pics, and inequalities on the Surface of the Earth: And such are commonly Slender, Lean and Tall; their Heads and Faces oval; their Veins large, &c. naturally Iracund, Am∣bitious, Contumacious, Conceited, Prompt, Vigilant, Subtile, Curious, Impatient, little Constant, and sometimes Petulant; unless corrected with some Quality attempering the Bilious
Heat with a due Moisture, which makes a wonderful altera∣tion, turns Ambition to a Generous Courage, and Magnani∣mity of Mind; Resolution, to a steady Prudence; Reserved∣ness, to Deliberation in Affairs; with Temperance, Modesty, and all other Heroic Virtues. And as here these Characters in the Face, are remarkably stronger and higher; so, where we find them notoriously con∣tracted and shrunk; for Instance, the Nose less vaulted, ben∣ding in, shorter, &c. the Eyes narrow, the Skins corrugated; Cold and Dry are in excess, and they betray it in the sadness of the Countenance, by a Saturnine, silent, monkish, morose Hu∣mor; they are Passionate, Peevish, Envious, Suspicious; not easily reconciled, yet Friendly and Chearful by fits; Con∣templative, extreamly Fansiful, and full of odd Imaginations; in short, Deus aut Daemon: But being a little spirited with the brisk and airy Sanguine, allaying its adust Mordacity, as of all Tempers soonest affected with the rest of the Humors; so we see it alter both the Shape, and Inclinations according∣ly; and sometimes to that degree, as none become more Active, Modest, Abstemious, Discreet; less Splenetic; Jocund, and better Company. Melancholici (says Cicero, and he out of Aristotle) omnes ingeniosi: Plato, Socrates, Seneca the gravest, and greatest Philosophers of them all, Politicians, Wits, and Poets were obliged to a more than ordinary dash of this otherwise, unsociable Humor. We might proceed to the Pituitous, pallid, Phlegmatic and very worst of Constitutions, rendring the parts Obtuse, Fleshy and Gross, thro' the want of a generous discussing Warmth; so as where this is Ascendent, it disposes to Sloth, Drowsi∣ness, Timidity, Despondency, Unactivity, and an whole Train of other Infirmities, supported with great Patience, and an over-Easiness of Nature: And might here inlarge into an ample, and spacious Field of Qualities, by repeating what Iohn Baptista Porta has so copiously written concerning the natural Causes of all these Effects, under their several Titles, scatter'd thro' his Treatise, and summ'd up in his Fourth Book upon this Subject; besides the Suffrages of innumerable more, as Famous for their profound Knowledge, as the World has any, if Number, and mighty Names would carry it. But now comes a set of New Philosophers, introducing as New a Theory of Primordia, which plainly overthrow all that our old Masters had establish'd, and hitherto maintain'd
by so long pscription, without their being able to ally any considerable  to oppose them; quite exploding out of the Schools,  real Entities, positive Qualities, and particular separated Substances, as constituent, integral Parts of that pure Elixir the Blood, variously denominated in their Doctrine of Humors, according to its Consistence: And all this at once, by that happy, and noble Discovery of its Circulation, substi∣tuting a Consistence but of one Homogeneous, simple Humor; and attributing all those Causes, Effects, and Operations (we have been so long question'd about) to the Motion, Figure, Texture, various Schematisms and other Modifications, and Mechanical Affections of the parts of Matter only. To these, I cannot say as Auxiliaries (but still agreeing in their design of destroying the old Humorists) come in a Troop of Spagirits, with their Sal, Sulphur and Mercury; which tho' differing Principles, have not yet all this while been able to change the Terms; nor indeed that of their Causes, which still go under the Name, and common Notion of Qualities, Habits, and Elements, falsly so call'd: Nor is it denied, but that this exalted Liquor being oftentimes fired, over-heated by ferment∣ing Aporrhoeas; sometimes too much diluted, clogg'd, invisca∣ted, distemper'd and vitiated (by whatsoever Change or Mo∣difications of the Particles) does little differ in Operation from what they call Choler, Melancholy, Pituit, and the rest, not resi∣ding in their proper Vessels; when at any time they grow Mutinous and Exorbitant, affecting the Animal Spirits; whe∣ther (as we said) made and elaborated here, or transported from the Heart to the Head; or specified in the Brain from that Mass of Blood, and carried to the Medulla oblongata, and Seat of common Sense, by whatever Impressions upon the Nerves, which terminate there, and thence into the Spinal Marrow, for the performing all those Actions of Sense and Motion, by which all external Objects are transmitted to the Soul it self. In a word, 'tis plainly the Modification of those Particles of which the Blood consists, which produces those Qualities we call Humors and Constitution; provided the Defect be not in the organical Structure of the Organ, and in that Case, à privatione ad habitum non datur regressus: A natural Fool can never be made a Wise Man, but the naturally Dull, Sluggish, Bashful, and Timerous; Irresolute, Stingie, Ill∣natur'd, Fierce, Silent, Morose, Pensive, Indifferent, and the like; we find to be Artificially (and in few Moments) made
as it were other Men than they were before; and this, not by the invisible Charms, or Modes of Music; the Eloquence of Demagogues, and power of Oratory, the fascination of Beauty; all which have wrought strange and wonderful Effects: But by the Virtue and Operation only of some generous Wine, or spirituous Liquor, which (by a noble Hyperbole) is said to chear both God and Man.Iudg. ix. 13. Psal. civ. 15. 1 Esdras iii. 18, &c. Did we but perfectly understand the giving, or taking of it in the just Dose and Proportion; and could with that Temper, and Command of our selves, be sure to stop at the right Nilotic Mark; skrew, and keep it up to the just pitch and Tone between flat and sharp, like a well∣tun'd Instrument. What Music, what innocent Harmony would it not afford our Conversations! What a newHinc Bac∣chum veteres pueri imagi∣ne pingebant, quod vinum uberius po∣tum, curas adimat, & senibus ju∣ventam red∣dit; dum hi∣lariores facit ac formosio∣res. Mun∣sterus. Life does it not as it were give to the drooping Soul! What Cou∣rage to the timerous! What Motion, and Activity to the dull and indispos'd! The silent and morose, become Pleasant, Witty, and Eloquent even to Rapture. It creates Confidence and Assurance in the over-bashful; it changes the sower and surly into good Nature, and disarms the Furious, whilst it inspirits the Irresolute; chases away Self-Interest, and inlarges the narrow Heart, and all this without danger; provided, I say, Men knew to adjust the Measure, stop in due time, and could command it as God does the unruly Waves, Hither∣to shalt thou come and no farther. And from whence all this, but from the putting the same Blood, with the Blood of the generous Grape, into a due and benign Ferment, without damage to the Health of the Soul, or prejudice to the Body. The danger only is in Excess;Prov. xxiii. 32, 33, &c. when once indeed we look on this noble Vehicle, and admire its Colour, quando splenduerit in Vitro, and sparkles in the Glass; tho' it go never so smoothly down; in novissimo mordebit ut coluber; it bites like a Serpent, and diffuses its Venom like a Cockatrice. 'Tis then indeed that the Eyes are apt to wander, and the Heart to utter perverse things, when Men stay long at Wine, Et student (as the Wise King says) calycibus epotandis. GiveInebrian∣tem, if in excess. Strong-Drink to him that is ready to perish, and Wine to those that be of heavy Heart; let him drink, and forget his Poverty, and remember his Misery no more, is the charitable Advice of the Mother of Lemuel, and should not perhaps be condemned in some, whose natural Apprehen∣sions and Fears, do oftentimes betray them to act or suffer unbecomingly in a just and worthy Cause; nor doubt I, but upon this account it is, that the Dutch are said to allow a
Whet of Brandy to their Sea-men, and others, previous to a solemn Engagement with an Enemy. It brings at least to mind, what I have been told of an English Merchant residing (if I mistake not) at Aleppo, who having a bold, but just Complaint to make to the Bacha, offered his Interpreter a con∣siderable Reward to carry it to him; I dare not attempt it Sir, says he, for my Head. Tempted yet at last with the Money, and after many persuasions taking a Dose of Opium, he comes to the Merchant again: Now Sir (says he) I am ready to serve you, and not only to tell the Bacha what you say, but to give him a Box o'th Ear too, if you command me. Was this then the effect of Choler only, or his Refusal and Fear from Phlegm or Melancholy, as a peculiar and Heterogenous Quality? Certainly not at all, but purely from the Motion and Modification we have assigned, putting him into a temper apt to incline and excite the Undertaking of a bolder Action, than naturally he was disposed to: Nor does this give the least incouragement to Intemperance, but to that just Mediocrity, which between Extremes, is the Seat, and Soul of all the moral Virtues, as the Ethics teach us. Other Examples, and Argu∣ments of no small Weight, might be produced; but let these suffice. Nothing here is dangerous, but what is so in all things else, whilst the most Golden Temper, and even all that's Great, and Good in our Actions, is in a sort acquirable from the just Constitution, and Harmony of this single Principle; call it Humor, or what you please. And therefore whatever it be, which begets any of those pernicious, and ill Impres∣sions in the Universal Vehicle; (diffus'd by the Veins, and Arte∣ries through the whole Body, by Adustion, acrimonious Gall, sharp, or acid Juices; feculent and slimy Dregs, or other noxious excrementitious Matter, which manifestly obstructs, or any ways disorders and impedes its Function; and where∣by the Animal and other Spirits become degenerate, slow, or over-Active and ungovernable.) It may justly be imputed to what they still continue to call, the Four first Qualities, as producing the like Effects and Symptoms, hitherto (tho' falsly) attributed to them; and taking Denomination from the several Degrees of Motion, instead of Composition, and so all Parties reconcil'd. Lastly, To these there are others who are calling in the Assistance of Genitures, and erecting Schemes (which would also fain put in their Claim) attributing all sublunary Changes,
and Temperaments, to certain Aspects and Configurations of thePhil. Finel∣lae Natural, Physiog. Pla∣nosarum. Stars and Celestial Signs; as the short and thick Neck, like that of Nero's; the great and buffle Head (like Vitellius's) long and slender Parts to Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and so the rest of our Bodies and their natural Tendences, to the Energy, and Operation of those Chimaeras in the Zodiac: Not that I totally reject the Power and Vertue of those celestial and glo∣rious Bodies (the Planets especially) their Effects and Influences upon those Countries and Climes, lying under their Triangles; to whose Dispositions and Energy they are subject, and may consequently operate on the Humors and Inclinations of Men: Herodotus celebrating the Wit, and Civility of the Egyptians, and that famous Astrologer Ptolemy (in his Quadripartite) at∣tributing it to their Verticals, being so near the Circle under which the Planets move; those of the farthest North, must needs be more dull and heavy, remote from the quickning Sun, tho' of stronger Constitutions, fair and tall, the effects of Moisture, which in those hotter Regions is dried up, and thence the Inhabitants swarthier, low of Stature, and shorter liv'd. I dare not I say, peremptorily reject the Doctrine al∣together; but leaving this point to be discuss'd by theSee Sr. Chr. Heydon's Defence of Astrology. Cap. XXIII Learned, and those Extravagances to the Figure-flingers; it may not im∣properly be yet consider'd, how the Cardinal Virtues have been held to spring (as far at least, as Nature contributes to our best Inclinations) from the perfect Congruity, and Combina∣tion of the Qualities we have enumerated. Prudence, consisting in a great deal of Coolness, with the other Humors; and therefore more often found in Persons of years, who are usually more deliberate, wary, and slow in determining, and wisely consulting before-hand; such are com∣monly pituitous, with a portion of Bile. Iustice is humid, with an equal Ingredient of Sanguine, uniform∣ly flowing, and diffusive; which that it may not exceed, is fix'd with a little Melancholy, which by its driness moderates and cools. Fortitude (as in Lions and Cocks, and other generous Animals) consists in Heat, moderated with an allay of Pituite and Phlegm; and therefore 'tis observed, that true Courage does not so much proceed from pureness and spritefulness of the Blood (as Wit and Fancy do) but from that which is some∣what fibrous, disposing to a more compos'd and steady Temper; whence it isHonoratus Niquetius's Physiog. human. Lib. 1. Cap. 6. Niquetius thinks those of the North, so much exceed those of the South in Valor. Lastly,
Temperance, the result of a drier Composition, is of an ab∣stemious Nature, necessary for the moderation of Appetite; and therefore Melancholy being Cold and Dry, quickned with a dash of Sanguine, (which is hot -and moist) inspirits it with a decent Activity, which indeed ought to be an Ingre∣dient in all other Virtues. In all these still (as has all along been said) understanding the several Aetiologies, Causes and Effects; not as proceeding from any disparate, contrary, or opposite Substances and primary Qualities, as they are call'd: But as the Operations of the various Texture, and Modifica∣tion of the Matter, which according to its Motion and Fi∣gure, disposes to those several Passions, Virtues, and Affe∣ctions; by impressing them with the Idea of the Imagination, whereby they insinuate themselves into the Brain, &c. as we have already shewed. And thus one sees from what Indications Judgment is made concerning all Moral Actions, and Dispositions, Habits, and inconvenient Customs; by applying such Remedies as are to be found in the Conversations, and Discourses of Divines, Philosophers, and Physicians; by which the perversest Natures, and greatest Difficulties are, and have been surmounted and overcome. Other Advantages might be likewise made, by di∣recting what Calling, or Profession one should chuse, and ad∣dict ones self to, by considering what Quality is most apt to bear the sway. Socrates, who was so profound a Philosopher, would perhaps have made but a bungling Sculptor; or Ovid, who was so excellent a Poet, not so good a Lawyer, to which Profession his Parents design'd him; it being so extreamly difficult to eradicate Habits, or the bent and ply of Nature so perfectly, but that it will incline, and now and then recur, without con∣tinual Watchfulness and Resolution. Those therefore who are of a drier Constitution, commonly emerge in the Studies of Theology, Mathematics, and the abstruser Sciences; others of more Heat, succeed in Eloquence, Poetry, Music; others of colder Tempers, prosper in Mechanics, & sic de caeteris. To conclude, 'twas the saying of Menander, , that it was not so well said by the Wise Man, Know thy self, as Know others. Yet certainly, if that be the best Philosophy, which best teaches us to know our selves (without which it is impossible to know, or do any thing as we should) the Study of that which instructs us to know both our selves, and others, is to be pre∣ferr'd
to all other, and to be esteem'd no inconsiderable part of Moral Wisdom. Let me conclude all, with the Suffrage of the Learned Dr. Gwither (Philos. Transact. Num. 20.) discoursing on this Subject: That whatever Impostors, and ignorant Pretenders may have done to the prejudice of this Doctrine; a sober and diligent Artist, he doubts not, but may discover suffi∣cient Truth in Physiognomie, which may be useful to the well solving of all its Phaenomena intelligibly. Soft Wax, says he, cannot receive more numerous and various Impressions, than are printed in Mens Faces, by Objects moving the Affections; and not only the Objects themselves have the Power, but their very Images and Ideas also, viz. any thing that puts the Animal Spirits into the same Motion, that the present Object did, will have the same Effect with the Object To prove the first, Let one observe a Man's Face looking on a pitiful Object, then a ridiculous, then a strange, then a terrible or dangerous Object, and the like. Or for the second, That Ideas have the same Effect with Objects real, our Dreams confirm too often, and Virgil's Verse can in a little time make one's Face represent Shame, Fear, Love, Anger, Sorrow, &c. the Animal Spirits being moved in the sensory by an Object, continuing their Motion in the Brain, and propagating it to this, or that part of the Body, as is most suitable to the Design of its Creation; having first made an alteration in the Countenance by its Nerves, espe∣cially the Pathetic and Oculorum motorii, actuating its nume∣rous Muscles, as the Dialplate to that stupendious Piece of Clock-work, which shews what is to be expected from the striking part; not that he thinks the Motion of the Spirits in the Sensory continued in the Impression of the Object all the way, as from a Finger to the Foot (as being too weak, tho' the enseness of the Nerves favour it) but as effected in the Medulla of the Brain, where the common Stock of Spirits reside, as in an Organ, whose Pipes being opened and uncovered, admit the rushing Air, until the Keys be∣ing dismiss'd and let go again, they are stopp'd and silent. Thus by repeated Acts, or frequent Entertaining of the Ideas of a favorite Passion or Vice, which natural Temper hurried, or Custom dragged one to; the Face is so often put into that Posture, which attends such Acts, that the Ani∣mal Spirits find such open, and easy Passage into the Nerves,
that it is sometime unalterably fixt (as the Religious Indians are by continuing their strange Postures in their Pagods:) But most commonly such an Habit is contracted, as to fall insensibly into that Posture, when-ever some present Object does not obliterate that more natural Impression by a new one, or some dissimulation hide it. Hence it is, we see great Drinkers with Eyes generally set towards the Nose; the addu∣cent Muscles being often employ'd to shew them their be∣loved Liquor in the Glass whilst they are drinking, and therefore called Bibitory. Lascivious Persons are remarkable for the Oculorum mobilis petulantia, as Petronius calls it. From this also we may solve the Quakers expectingFace, awaiting the pretended Spirit, and the melancholy Face of Sectaries; the studious Countenance of Persons of great application of Mind; revengeful and bloody Men like Executioners in the Act, and tho' silence in a sort may a while pass for Wis∣dom, yet sooner or later, Sir Martin peeps thro' the Disguise to undo all: Not that what has been said, is always with∣out exception; great, and virtuous Souls absconded now and then under unpromising externals, like to that of Claranus in Seneca; but speaking for the most part, and as commonly it falls out. Thus far the Learned Doctor. And thus have we at last gon thro' the Causes, and Princi∣ples of the Physiognomical Divination, as they concern the Face and external Countenance (our Artists peculiar Province) deducible not only from Effigies, in Taille-Douce and Prints, but from antient Medals also; as Samuel Fuchsius has in particu∣lar exemplified in his Metoposcopie, from that of Pertinax, Maxi∣minus and others, without expatiating upon Colours and Comple∣xions as they call them; the Tone of the Flesh, and other par∣ticulars, whether tender, hard, coarse, fair or swarthy; and so of the Hair, as to its being gentle, harsh, thick or thin, not so perfectly discernable, whilst yet the long and prolixer Beard was ever a mark of Gravity and Wisdom in Men; but a Woman with an hairy Chin, was saluted as a Monster, by a Peal of Stones at her. Of the thin and whey-colour'd Beard, 'twas usually said, Poco barba, è men colore, Sotto'l cielo non è peggiore. Dares says, Achilles's Hair was curl'd, and ever a sign of Courage, so was Pompey's; but the leviter inflexa was that of Augustus. Depressed and flat to the Fore-head, a mark of Cruel, &c. but those manly Distinctions being now no more the Mode, chang'd universally into the Peruke; our Physiognomist goes no far∣ther,
tho' it must (I think) be acknowledged, that the na∣tural Covering was not given to be used altogether as an Ex∣crement, but ordained for a natural, decent, and becoming Discrimination; let us hear St. Ambrose elegantly, Caesaries reve∣renda est in Senibus, veneranda in Sacerdotibus, terribilis in Bella∣toribus, decora in Adolescentibus, compta in Mulieribus, dulcis in Pueris. Hair (says the Holy Bishop) is reverend in old Men, venerable in Priests, terrible in Soldiers, becoming in young Men, elegant in Women, sweet and lovely in Children. But of these Accessaries only in Medals, and Picture in Prints; tho' a Physiognomist can take little notice, so as to make any certain Judgment, for want of Colour; they may yet from other likensses, make almost the same Conjectures, as from the Life it self; as 'tis reported of that Artist, who from a Picture only drawn by the great Apelles, predicted by what Accident the Original should perish. And I have been told, of the famous Architect and Statuary, the late Chevalier Bernini, who cut that rare Bust of Charles the First at Rome in white Marble, from a Picture painted by Van Dyke (yet extant, and to be seen in one of His Majesty's Apartments) that he fore∣told something of funest and unhappy, which the Countenance of that Excellent Prince fore-boded. We have said nothing of the Voice, the Object of another Sense, whether shrill, loud, hoarse, broken, small, harmonious and agreeable, &c. by which much might be discover'd, as appears by that of Socrates, who, tho' so skilful in Metoposcopie, bid the Boy (whom they brought him) to speak,Eloquere ut te videam.s that he might see what was in the Youth: This, I know, was meant of the Wit and towardliness of the Boy; But what if the Voice alone assist the discovery of that too? and yet even without the Voice, Et fronte, & vultu, etiam in ipso oris silentio natura sequitur, as Adamantius. For tho' Picture be not vocal, the Eyes and Countenance often supply the Tongue, and speak the very Passions, and interior of the Soul; to which add that of Porta, Est enim similitudo, Pictus sermo, & Pictura loquens, quae quovis sermone, quibusve notis valentior. And now we mention Picture, since the Po∣sture, or Stroak of one single Line, does often discover the Regnant Passion; De Frenay (so elegantly published by Mr. Dryden) forgets not to recommend the Art of Physiognomy to the study of Painters. One thing more (whilst we are discoursing of Heads and Faces) who can but take notice of that Wise, and Wonderful
Providence, which has ordain'd such variety of Looks, and Countenances among Men, whilst the other Parts and Mem∣bers of our Bodies are in comparison so little different, much less the Heads and Faces (as I may also call them) of other Creatures, of the same Species? since were it otherwise, and that Men had been made all like one another, the whole Go∣vernment and Politie of the World, must long since have run into Confusion and sad Disorder. For who could have distinguish'd the True-man from the Thief? There would be promiscuous Amours, and innocent Adulteries as well as injurious: For the Wife could not know her Husband (so like Alcumena in Amphitryo) the Son would mistake his Father,Gen. XXVii. 22. the Father his Son; the Friend his Friend, and there would be no more Justice, no more Commerce, no more Living in the World: For Evil Men would deny their Crimes, and Good Men be often punished for the Faults of the wicked. For tho' in a Flock of Ten Thousand Sheep, 'tis said, an Ewe will know her Lamb;Plautus in Menechm. Parents would many times mistake their own Chil∣dren, as it is often seen among Twins, where Brothers, and Sisters have so resembled one the other, as to have been cor∣rected for Faults they did not commit; but which neither their Voice, nor any other natural Mark could discriminate. Nay, I read of some who were Strangers to one another, as the two Slaves of Mark Antony, tho' born in several Countries vastly distant;Plin. Nat. Hist. Lib. VII. Cap 2. Arist. Hist. Nat. Lib. XVII. Cap. 6. the one in Egypt, the other in Asia. Persons exceed∣ingly resembling, were Henry the Fourth of France, and the Miller of Languedoc; Malatesta Duke of Bavaria and Marche∣sinus a Mimic; nor without admiration have I sometimes con∣sidered a poor Hedger and Day-Labourer of mine, so extreamly like the renowned Emperor Charles the Fifth, as no Flesh could be more, if the best Pictures of that Mighty Prince, be truly represented by the best Painter, that perhaps has ever been, the Famous Titian. Erythraeus, says the Poet Stephanius, was like Virgil; Antoninus Pius, resembling Numa Pompilius; and the Great Chancellor of France Mic. Hospitalis, in Countenance like Aristotle. But as these happen rarely, so a Physiognomist's Judgment is not at all ingaged to pronounce of their Fortune or Advancement, referring various Events to the bold Astro∣loger; or rather indeed, to the Providence of God alone; and as to Qualities, to their different Education, and other Cir∣cumstances. In short, so has the Wise Creator tempered and formed Mankind, that tho' we are all of us, composed of
Members and Parts alike, no Man is alike. Sic & similes universi videmur,Minutius in Octav. & inter se dissimiles invenimur, and with the Poet, —Facies non omnibus una est, Nec diversa tamen.— To what concerns the Voice, so near of kin to the Counte∣nance, Vox in homine magnam vultus habet partem &c.Agnoscimu eum, prius∣quam cerni∣mus, non a∣liter quam o∣culis; toti∣demque sunt cae, quot in rerum naturae mortales, & sua cuique, sicut facies. Plin. Nat. Hist. Lib. XI. Cap. 51. We know a Man (says Pliny) by it, e'er we so much as see him, tho' they be as different and unlike as their very Faces all the World over. And thus have we attempted the Reputation of aPhysiogno∣mia est Sci∣entia divi∣nandi de ab∣ditis animo∣rum moribus, affect ionibus∣que, praeordi∣nata sensu∣que percepta judicia & signa. Gocl. Cap. XIIX. Science not altogether, we see, so vain, fallacious and uncertain, as some imagine: One has (as we said) but to read, and con∣sider what the great and most Learned of the Antients, and other sober and judicious Authors have written upon this Sub∣ject; Aristotle, Plato, Hippocrates, Ptolemy, Galen, Theophrastus, Cicero, Seneca, Pliny, Quintilian, Dares Phrygius, Adamantius and Palaemon; besides what we daily learn of great Travellers and Geographers, describing foreign Countries and Climes; the Na∣ture, and Morals of the People; with what we find in the Sfortianae quaestiones, in Niphus, Camillus, Baldus'sIn Aristot. Commen∣taries; Cocles, Peter Montuus, Albertus Magnus, Michael Scotus, Rhasis, Melitensis, the Conciliator; Bap. Porta, Cardan, Campanella, Niquetius, Tiraquellus, and several more; not to insist upon those who have made Divinations by Gelotoscopy as has In Legib. Connubiali∣bus. Lib VII. Num. 14. Prosperus Aldovisius; and Onychomantia from the Spots upon our Nails; and so de Naevis, Moles and other vain Fansies, of which, and of old, Hali Abenragel the Arabian: Melampus Graecus, and some Books passing under the Name of our famous Merlin, and more lately by Ludovicus Septalius, the above nam'd Cardan and others, especially the ingenious Author de l' Arte de Cenni, which concerns the Actions, Motions, and Postures of the Body. Our Design being in this Treatise only, to give a brief Account of the Conjectures which are made (tho' some as very probable only, temporal and transitory, others almost infallible, fixt and inherent) and the Reasons they exhibite, upon the long Experience, and diligent Observations of Learned Men from the Countenance, and from the Structure, Symmetry,
and Composure of those Parts and Members the most conspi∣cuous in the Face, exposed to sight. For as Aristotle in his Books on this subject, divides the Body into three Regions, and the Notes, and Characters of this Art to be chiefly gathered from the most conspicuous and principal Parts, , &c. the Eyes, Head and Face as most in sight and expos'd; so are they those , which shew the most likely marks of Wisdom and Beauty, together with these Attributes given them upon all their Semiotics and Configura∣tions, as well to discover the Affections, Passions, and Inclina∣tions of the Mind, as the Crasis, and Constitution of the Body. Not yet as the same Author well admonishes (and as already noted) that one is to pronounce any sudden or rash Sentence, denominate the whole, from any one single or solitary Mark (unless when it happens to prove some notorious, generally over-ruling one) but by collating, and duely comparing the several Notes together, how they consent, agree with, or thwart one another, or over-vote in number and weight. And therefore we determine nothing Dogmatically, but as they use to speak of Constellations, that tho' they Compel not, they shrewdly Dispose; where (as we said) Education, Religious Principles, and Virtuous Habits do not timely interpose, which we daily find to work stupendious Effects,Cic. de Nat. Deor. Lib II. even in the most averse, and brutish Natures, cross and peevish Disposi∣tions. So true it is, that all the sensitive Idolas andIn usu pi∣ctorio Sculp¦torius Mus∣culorum la∣cunas, juxta Pathematum diversitatem variantes, eorumque dis¦crepantiam in Foeminis, Maribusque, Infantibus & Adultis no∣tassem: Ut juxta Phy∣siognomiae Leges, uti hae ad Anatomi∣cae procederet delineatio: Ut crederetis etiam animorum posse dari Picturam. And again, Quadrat cum pictorio Sculptorius & Caelatorius usus. See more Dissertat. Physiog. Guil. de Reyne. Appe∣tites (denominated Passions) as far as they agitate and concern the Mind, move and vellicate the Body also: If the Tongue belie the Heart, the Face commonly betrays the Tongue; and our Passions are almost as well discovered in the Eye, and Air of the Countenance, as in the Soul her-self, were they as visible: So obsequious are they to her Motions, that what the Object forms in the Fancy, and transfers to the Appetite, is soon discovered by some action, or alteration; as by the Pro∣gress and Motion of an Index, the Time and Hour of the Day. Wherefore (to wind up all in the Sense of that Excellent Phi∣losopher, as well as Physician, Dr. Willis) If so it be, that the Fibres of the Brain extend to the Heart, and even to the very remotest Parts of the Body, so as there is not a Sensory,
or the least Muscle but is affected: 'Tis not at all hard to comprehend, whence, and how our Inclinations, and Passions discover, and betray themselves in our Countenances. There being no Stroak, or Motion so tender and delicate made upon those subtile Strings, but immediate notice is given of it to the Soul,Vid. Corne Giraldam in Cephl Physiog. De∣cad. 1. which shews the Consent that there is betwixt the Praecordia, and the parts of the Mouth and Face, from a peculiar conformity of the Intercostal Nerves. I repeat it therefore again (in Justification of our Hypo∣thesis) that by collation, and comparing the Effigies and Coun∣tenance in Medals and Pictures, and by intently framing one's own to them, upon occasion of Writing, or Speaking; I will not say with Cardan, orGaffar. Cu∣rios. Cap. VI. § 1. Cum quis ho∣minem videt statm ima∣ginars opor∣tet se nasum habere ut al∣ter habet, & pilum & vultum, & frontem, & locutionem; & tunc qui affectus & cogitationes ill obrepunt, judicat ho∣mini illi es∣se proprios, quem ita i∣maginando contuetur. Hoc non abs∣que ratione & experientia, Spiritus enim format corpus, & juxta affectus innatos, ipsum figit exprimitque. Campanlla de sensu rer. & Magia. Campanella (as the Passage is pleasantly related by Monsieur Gaffarell) that it were enough to inspire one with the very thought of the Person it repre∣sented; but very much with the same disposition of thinking, and other Qualities. For who does not see the adductum vul∣tum (as Suetonius notes) the close and surlie Looks of Tiberius, even in his Medal? The austere Countenance of Severus and Caracalla, as in that of Geta the quite contrary? Socrates was bald, and Camus resembling a Silenus more than a grave Phi∣losopher; nor was the Physiognomones at all mistaken by that great Man's ingenuous Confession, as to his natural Temper and Inclinations: Nor Philemon's Judgment, by the Picture of Hippocrates, for which his Scholars were like to knock him o'th Head, had not their Master stopp'd them, with the same Confession of Socrates. Dominatur autem maxime vultus, as Quintilian truely observes; speaking of the Countenance of an Quintil. Lib. XIII. Cap. 3. Orator, how it expresses, and speaks his Mind equally with his Tongue. To give a few Instances of our own, and others: Let him that would Write and Read the History of the late Times, particularly that of the late Usurper Cromwell, but seri∣riously contemplate the Falls, and Lines of his ambiguous and double Face (as accurately stamp'd in his Medal by Symmons, or engrav'd in Taille-Douce by Lombard, from a Picture of Walker's, the most resembling him) to read in it, without other Comment, Characters of the greatest Dissimulation, Boldness,
Cruelty, Ambition in every touch and stroak; so like to his, of whomTacit. in Vit Iul. Agric. de Domittano. 'twas said, Saevus ille vultus & rubor, à quo se contra ruborem muniebat. In the Noble Earl of Strafford, painted by Van Dyke, and en∣graven by Lucas Vosterman, a steady, serious, and judicious Countenance. In Henry the Seventh, painted by Holbein, a close, dry, wise, and careful Effigies, as in that of his Predecessor Richard the Third; a twisted Face, and not a Line but what bespeaks Hypocrisie, Craft and Cruelty. In that of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, by the Hand of Titian, a stout, hardy, resolute, wise and determin'd Prince, as that of a stiff, bigotted, and formal Look in his Son Philip the Second. In the Duke of Alva, of whom there are a Thousand Pi∣ctures (not on Medals only, but upon every Iugg-Pot and Tabacco-Box) shewing a most malicious, stern, and merciless Apect, fringed with a prolix and squalid Beard, which draws down his meager and hollow Cheeks, Emblems of his Disposition. In Count Gondamar (which I have seen well painted, and in Stamp) Craft, with a certain pert, and piercing Air, as lying upon the Catch, not much unlike to the late Lord Treasurer Cottington; but with a greater mixture of morose, and warines in the latter. In Erasmus (of Holbein) Quickness, with an easie, pleasant facetiousness, and honest Gravity. In Sir Thomas More (by the same Pencil) great Probity, un∣der a steady and ingenuous Mind, an extraordinary Chearful∣ness. In my Lord Chancellor Bacon; a spacious Fore-head, and piercing Eye, always (as I have been told by one who knew him well) looking upward; as a Soul in sublime Contem∣plation, and as the Person, who by standing up against Dog∣matists, was to emancipate, and set free the long and mise∣rably captivated Philosophia, which has ever since made such Conquests in the Territories of Nature. In Ben. Iohnson, a surly Pride, positive and humorous. In the incomparable Cowley's Countenance, all that could in∣dicate a most candid, ingenuous, and agreeable Nature, with a great Wit, and great Modesty. Those who remember Mr. Hobbs, as I perfectly do (and whose Pictures are perfectly like him) might discover in his
very Looks, a supercilious, Saturnine Opiniatrety, pleased with himself: as on the contrary, in the famous Mr. Oughtred (whose Picture etched by Hollar, and placed before his Clavis, extreamly resembles him) that calm and placid Composure, which seemed to proceed from, and be the result of some happy and Invention; such as was that of Archimedes, when he discovered the adulterate mixture in the Sicilian Prince's Crown; or that of Pythagoras, demonstrating the equality between the sides of a rectangular Triangle, and the square of its Base, for Joy whereof, he paid an Hecatomb to the Gods. And such another was that of our Renowned Harvey's, but with stroaks of more serious and application. I will end in the late Lord Bishop of Chester, Dr. Wilkins, of whom (tho' I cannot say, I ever saw Picture so like him, as I wish) all who knew him, must acknowledge to find in him a judicious un∣affected Gravity, tempered with extraordinary sweetness; a serene calmness, and openness of Countenance, becoming the freedom and great Ingenuity of Nature and Disposition. The lateA cast of whose Effi∣gies is in the Repository at Gresham-College. Sir Robert Murray should be the next in whom, with a manly Presence, and serious Aspect, there met a disinteress'd, gentle, and debonair Temper, with great Affability and Goodness. Several others I might shew you, but I confine my self to such alone, whose Effigies I have seen breathing-like, and painted by the most celebrated and skilful Pencils; and many more are there yet before me, and in my Eye, of our own Country, whose Countenances justify this Paragraph: But I speak of such as are no more among us, save in their Works, Merits, and profitable Inventions, leaving Argument of im∣mortal Fame. For to have enumerated such as at present flourish and remain, trace and pursue the Progress daily made by those great Genius's, in some part or other of the universal Cycle, will be the Work of a steadier hand, and is reserved for Him, who shall one day write the History of this Age of Wonders. Were, I say, my Talent rich enough to be their Encomiastes, there are many (quibus ego nominibus semper assurgo) in my ken, of extraordinary Merit, for what they have written, published, and improved of the most useful, expe∣rimental Learning; and which (after all a-do) is really, and indeed, of all human Knowledge, the only true, and valid Learning. Persons, I say, of equal Desert, with any which past, and former Ages have produc'd. In a word, we have
had some as great, and conspicuous Subjects, fit to have been stamp'd, and worn in Medals of Gold, and carv'd in Marble, as ever Greece or Rome, or any present ambitious Potentate had any where, for extending their Dominions by Slaughter, Blood, Fire, and Desolation, which disturbs the Fruits and Labours of the most useful Studies. The great Archimedes (whom but now we mentioned) was barbarously stain by a rude and common Soldier, in the midst of his Speculations, whose Life was of more Value, than a Thou∣sand Syracusa's, and all the Conquests of Marcellus. FINIS.
INDEX. A. ABBOTS in England had jus Monetae. Pag. 12. Abbreviations, 190. Abgarus K. of Edessa, 37. Abraham, 69. Acad. of Medalists, 2, 244. Actions, Motions and Postures, 337. Adepti, 276. Adoption, 184. Adultery, 55. Aedes Monetarii, 12. Aeginates, 14. Aera, vid. Epocha Aer thick and foggy often produces sharp and great Wits, 319. Aerarium, 14. Vid. Mint. Aes grave, 13. Africans, their Character, 311, 314. Agencourt Battel, 159. Agnus, 4. Alexander Magnus, 19. Alexandria supplys the Romans with Corn, 39. Altars erected to Emperors, 31. Ambassadors had Medals presented them, 16. Ambitious Princes, and Tyrants unworthy the Honour of Medals, without some Mark of diminution, 342. Americans Character, 312. 314. Abound ing in the richest Metals, made no use of them, 14. Ancestors, 66, 67, 68, &c. Angels, whether of different Capacities, 307. Ann, Queen of England her Medal, 304. Antiochus would be called G O D, 31. Antiquaries, 260. Antiquities, 65. The Care the Romans had to preserve them, 70. When most neglected, 71. Demolished, by whom, ibid. Vide Ruins. Antiquity of Medals, 3, 44. V. Medals. Apamea, 38. Dispute about the Medals, ib. Apotheosis, 31, 33. Vid. Consecrations. Arches Triumphal, particularly of Titus, 72. Architects, 283. Architecture in England, 10, 49, 50. and other Countries, 71, 283. Aristotle had no very promising Counte∣nance, 319. To whom like. 336. Ark, 38, 39, 165. Armada Spanish, M D LXXX VIII. 94, 159. Artists celebrated for Ingraving and Cut∣ting of Medals, 237, 240. Arts Liberal and Illiberal, 9, 162, 237. Contest of Skill between two Gravers, 239. Arts Voluptuary, 235, 32. Constitution proper for the attaining different Arts and Professions, 320, 332. Vid. Pro∣fession. Arts improved by the incouragement of King Charles II. especially Naval. His Institution in order to it, 128. Arundel Earl, a great Patron of Arts and Antiquities, 50, 65. As, of what Value, 5. Asia, 61. Asiatics, Characters, 311, 314. Aspect of some, its wonderful Effects, 301, 302. Astarte, 56. Astrological Genitures, 330, 331. Auction, the speediest way to funish a Cabinet with Medals, 199. Augural Instruments in Medals, 33. Augustus, Title when first taken, 188. Authors writing of Medals, 7, 14, 245. and how to read Inscriptions, 190. Authors writing of Physiognomy, 337. Automata, 163, 164.
B. BARBARIANS, 20, 33. Barbers expelled Rome, 27. Barter, 4, 11, 13. Beards, 27, 47, 3 4, 335. Vide Hair. Beasts, and Birds in Mens Countenances, and Heads, 293, 295, 296, 311. V. Heads. Beasts, and Exotic Animals in Medals, 35. Beauty, in what it consists, 307. Its mighty Power, 300 Persons of excel∣ling Beauty seldom Fortunate, 309, 310. Belgians, their Character, 318. Acknow∣ledge Queen Elizabeth, and offer So∣vereignty to her, 95, 96, 99, &c. Vid. Holland. Bells, by whom invented, 280. Benefactions and Benefactors, 263. Bernini's ominous Prediction upon sight of King Charles I. Effigies, 335. Bishops Medal upon their Acquittal, &c. Anno M DC LXXXIV. 154, 155. Bloods insolent attempt to steal the Im∣perial Crown and Regalia, 266. Blood, its Circulation, and Modification, destroys the Doctrine of Humorists and positive Qualities, 328. The stu∣pendious Effects of its various Temper, 329. &c. Bonfires, 24. Books, 2, 7. Of Medals, 73. V. Authors. BOYLE Robert celebrated, 166. Bos, 4. Brachigraphy, vid. Short-hand. Brass, 5, 6. When first Stamped at Rome, 13. Corinthian Brsas, 313. Britains antient Coin, 22. Britannia, Medal, 28, 61, 134. Brute Animals of the same Species, vary with the Climat, 314, 316. Some re∣sembling Men, vid. Beasts. Brutus Med. 54. Buccaneers, 160. Buildings, 162. Vid. Architecture. Bullion, 13, 223. Vid. Mints. C. CABINETS of Medals, 209. How to furnish, methodize and order, 251. Caesar Julius's Name, 53. Ambition, yet Caution in assuming the Title and En∣signs of Empire, 36, 37, 183, 185. Calais surprized, 99. Calligraphy, 268. Campanella, and Cardan's Conceit how by the posture of the Countenance, to divine of another Person's Thoughts, 339. Canterbury's Archbishop Medal, 113. Capita adversa, aversa, jugata, &c. 27. Capital Letters, vide Letters; Inscri∣ptions. Caps and Bonets, 34. Vid. Crowns. Cardan 317. V. Scaliger. Cardinal, and Ecclesiastics Med. 40, 41. Vid. Pope. Casting Medals, 214, 238. Vid. Moul∣ding. Castor and Pollux, 14. Catalogue of Greek and Roman Medals, from Jovianus to Heraclius, 252. and for a Collection of Heads and Effigies, 257. Caution required in purchasing and chu∣sing of Medals, 209, &c. 338. Caution in judging of Inclinations, 338. Vid. Physiognomy. Cecil Lord Treasurer's Medal, 100. Celestial Signs, vid. Zodiac. Ceratia, 8. Chalcography, and Chalcographers, 256, 283, 240. Vid. Gravers. Characters in the Countenance which sel∣dom fail the Physiognomist, 310, &c. Characters general of Nations, ibid. Charles I. King of England his Medals, 105. &c. Fate predicted, 335. Charles II. his Medals, 121, &c. Like Hen. IV. of France, 305. Charles the Great, 49. Chineze their Character, 314. Clamys, 26. Choler, vid. Constitution, Temperament. CHRIST Effigies in Medals, 44, 183, 288.
Chronology advanced by Medals, 48, 50, 52, 182. Vid. Epocha. Chymists, 275. Vid. Spagirist. Cicero, 319. His Person described, ibid. Cidaris, 29. Cities should not sell, or alienate their Statues and Antiquities, 64, 66, 68. Medals of Cities rare, 203, 249. Foun∣dation, Dedications, 52, &c. Claranus, Seneca's School Fellow, 308. Cleopatra, 54. Climate alters, and influences the Man∣ners and Countenances of People, 317. and affects the Government, 320, 323. Vide Situation. Clipping, and Diminution of Coin, vide Mint. Coining, Stamps and Impression, 6, 10, 12. Vid. Mint. Collection and Collectors of Medals, and other Antiquities commended, 65, 66, 246, 247, 255, 282. Excess of Curio∣sity reproved, 69, 70. Duke of Savoy's Collection, 42. Colonies Roman, 51, 52, 203. Colours, 334. Vid. Painters. Columbus ridicul'd in England, propo∣sing the Discovery of the Spanish In∣dies, 165. Colona Trajana, 54. Columns Historical, erected in London, Rome, &c. 162. Comedians, 263, 277. Commerce, Barter, Traffick, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 13, 139. Comes Largitionum, 7. Complection, 338. Vid. Humor. Conflagration, 2. Of London, 162. See London. Concubines and Favorites Stamp'd in Med. 37. Vid. Strumpets. Congiares, 187. Conjecture, 337. By what to be made, 294, 310. Conob. what, 22. Consecration, 49. Conspirators, and notorious Villains 226. Constantinople, 22. Constantinus Magnus, his Cipher, Sym∣bol, 31, 32, 186. Pretended Dona∣tive, &c. 34, 35. Constitution, how it disposes to the choice of a Profession, 332. Consular Medals, 8. Mark, 14, 37, 44, 99, 182. Rank in the Cabinet, 249 Consul, Name and Dignity eclipsed, 39, 183. Contorniati, what, 17. Vid. Medalions. Copper, 4, 13, 39, 213. Corinthian Brass, vid. Corinthian. Cornucopia, 60, 63. Corvus, 4. Council of Florence Med. 10. Countenance, often failing the Physiogno∣mist's Conjectures, why, 306, 307, 319. Oftner agrees with them, 304, 306, 339. How alter'd by one stroke of the Pen∣cil, 335 and by many Accidents, 305, &c. 310. Counters, 41, 196, 251. Vid. Mock∣Medals. Most Men partial to their own Countries, 321. Courtezans worshipped for Saints, for∣merly, and at present, 32. Craft, who excede in it, 321. Crasis, vid. Temperament. Cretans, 319. Critics, 16, 53, 260, 273. Cromwell's Medal, 117, 118. His Cha∣racter, 339. Cross, 31, 32, 35, 143. Vid. Crown In∣scription, 186. Other Ciphers and Characters, 187. Cross and Pile, 38. Crowns Obsidional, 124. Naval, Rostral, &c. Agonal, &c. 29. Radiant, 28, 31, &c. Crowns not used by all Kings, 29, 30. Nor Essential, 29. Mitred, Tiara, 35. TripleCrown, 34. Cross on the Crown, 31. Cidaris, 29. Crown of the Saxons, En∣glish, before France, Swede, &c. ibid. Bold attempt to steal it. Vid. Blood. Curule Chair, 63. Custom, vide Tribute. D. DANE, Crown, 34. Character, 317. Darie, 14, 20. Debasement and Diminution of Coin, 9. Vid. Mint. Decorum, 201.
Defender of the Faith, vide Title, 89. Deformity, no sign of Vice, 305, 307 308. Deities, 14, 56, 57, 249, &c. Denarius, 6, 14. Des Cartes, 264. Devise, 6. Diadem, 26, 29. Diamond, when first Ingraven by modern Artists, 240. Dido, 20, 194. Dignity, vid. Offices. Discoveries of the English, 162. Dispositions imprinted in Mens Countenan∣ces, 320. Vide Passions. Divi, 31. Divination by Physiognomy, 298, 301, 302, 303, 304, 324, 334, 335, 337, &c. Divines, 258. Dogs of cold Constitution, 317. Diffe∣rence in their Sagacity, 295. Shape of their Heads, advantagious in Men, 295. Dominus, by whom first us'd, 183. Dove, why Symbol of Venus, 56. Drachmae, 18. Dragoon-Missionaries, 25. Drake, Sir Francis, 158. Dudly, Earl of Leicester, recall'd from the Low-Countries, his Medal, 97, 98. Duke of Monmouth's Defeat and Decol∣lation; Medal, 149, 150, &c. Duke of Norfolk, Munificence to the Royal-Society, 42. Duke of Savoy's Medal, how answered by Henry IV. of France, 25. Collection of Medals and other Antiquities, 42. Duke of York. Vid. King James II. E. EAGLE, 33, 35, 56, 63. Vide Symbol. Ears, 298. East-India Company, 87. Edge-Hill Battel, III. Education alters Nature, and disposes to different Inclinations, 306, 316. Its Effects, 293. Edward Confessor, 21. Edward IV. 89. Edward VI. 228. Effigies in Medal, 15, 36, 45. Resembling the Originals, ibid. Vide Heads, Statues, how they create Emulation to brave Actions, 66, 67. In Taille∣douce how they relate to Medal, 257. Catalogue for a Collection, 257, &c. Effigies of the Blessed Virgin, Saints, &c. 288. Not permitted every one to stamp their Effigies in Medals, 36. When first to the Roman Emperor and others, 37. Effigies of famous Persons desirable and useful, 44, 45. On com∣mon Sign-Posts, reproved, ibid. Elagabalus, 12. Medal, how to di∣stinguish from those of Antoninus, 202. Electrum, 9. Elizabeth Queen, how Learned, 264. Reforms Money, 12. Assists the Low-Countries, 92, 97, 98. Defeats the Spanish Armada, 94, 95. Is offer'd the Sovereignty of the United Nether∣lands, 96, 97. Emblems, 6, 156. Vide Symbol. Emperors, and Empresses, 131, 180. English defective in Medals of Ancestors, 44, 84. Medals of their late Kings, from Edward III. Henry V, VII, VIII, & seq. 86, 87. King James IV. of Scotland, 77, 78. Henry VIII. Vide Kings. Sovereigns of France, 85. English, Inventors of many useful things, 163, 164, 166 Expeditions and Exploits worthy the Honour of Medal, 159, 160. And to be painted in Palaces, Courts, and Rooms of State, rather than the Fictions of Poets, 159, 160. Enumeration of famous English, 163, 265. English over-reach'd in Trea∣ties, 321. Character of English, 323. their Happiness, and what wanting, 324. English formerly, and now living, cele∣brated, and meriting the Honour of Medals, 341, 342. Enthusiasts, 170. Epochs exact in Greek Medals, 51, 185, 187, 189.
Erudition in Medals, 51, 168, &c. vide Reverses. Essex Earl, first General in the late Ci∣vil War of England, Med. 115. Europeans Character, 314. Example, 69. Externals, how a Physiognomist is to judg by them, 294, 309. Eyes, signification in Physiognomie, 298. their wonderful Power and Effects, 301, 302. Vide Aspect. F. FACE, 27, 294. of Augustus, &c. de∣scrib'd by Suetonius, agreeable to his Medal, 45, 46. Abuse in other Medals, not so in the Antient, ibid. Wonderful Variety of Mens Faces, and Importance of it, 335, 336. Faces resembling one another, v. Twins, and Countenances. Faith vide Defender. Fairfax, General of the late Rebellion, 116. Families, 39, 54. Famous Persons besides Emperours and Heroes of both Sexes, 257, ad 292. Farthings, 223. v. Tokens. Fascination, 301. V. Eyes, Looks. Feature, V. Beauty. Figure, 6, 26. How many allowable in one Medal, 200, 201. v. Group, Effigies, Image, Statue. Figures intire in Med. 27, 59. Flatterers of Princes, how pernicious, 14, 59, 77, 81, 83. In their Statues, 46. Fleets, v. Ships, Navigation. Flood, vide Noah. Florens, whence called, 4. Follis, 8. Fore head, 278. France-Metalique, 77. France, Climate different from Spain, 315. French, their Character, 315, 316, 321. Adulation, Vain-glory, Tyranny, Cruelty, Perfidy, Persecution, 77, ad 83. French King, when first using a Crown, 34. and Effigies in Stamp, 41. Priso∣ner in England and Ransom, 85. Pre∣sent King's Cabinet of Medals, 51. Abus'd by Flatterers, 81, 82, 83, 184, 188. In what commendable, 226, 244, 286, 316. Friends and Friendship, 277. Fronti nulla fides, when, 307, 309. G. GALEATA Roma, 14. Garlands, 29. Garments, vide Robes. Garter, 143. vide Knighthood. Gelotoscopy, 337. Geography in Med. 52, 168. Geometry, 50. Germans, Character, 311, 317. Medals struck upon sleight Occasions, 289. Gigantes, 14. Gods, 31. Dii Majores, Minores, Tute∣lares, Genii, &c. 35. Godfry, Sir Edm. Medal, 171, 172, 173, &c. Gold, when first used among the Rom. 7, 14. Not always eligible for the Matter in Medals; but for the most part, 20. especially the Greek, 201. Golden Age, 24. in England, when, 110. Government how balanc'd, 322. Gratia Dei, 197. v. Title. Gravers, 28, 237, 238, 240. None save the most exquisite formerly employ'd, 28, 44, 47. Emulation among them, 239. v. Sculpture. Greek and Grecians, Medals, 16, 19, 28. Exact in Epoche, 185. Character, 315. Gr. Tongue worn out by the Lat. 53. Deplorable Condition of that Nati∣on at present, whence, 232. Greenwich Marine College, a most Royal and necessary Foundation, worthy of Medal, 128. Groats, 10. Group what, 200. v. Painters. Gun-powder, by whom invented, 279. Treason Med. 76.
H. HABITUDES, 307. How cor∣rected and regulated, 332, 338. Habits, 26. Vid. Robes. Hair, v. Beards. Hands in Med. 35. Hasta Pura, 58. Head of the Church of England, in Med. 89. Heads, 26, 39, 47, 57. Of Illustrious persons, vide Heroes. How resem∣bling, 28, 29, &c. To whom Con∣cession of Stamping Heads in Medals and Coins was granted, 36, 37. Heads of one Emperor carved out of an∣other, 216. Heads in Med. how to place in the Cabinet, 249. Heads, their various Coverings, 33. Two, or more Heads in the same Medal, 27, 37. Heads join'd, 38. Heads of the French King, 34. v. Crown. Heads without Ornament, 29. Heads horn∣ed, 30, 33. v. Moses. Heads in Taille Douce, relating to Medals, 256. Con∣jectures from Heads, 311, 319, 325. Vid. Capita. No Heads in Med. of Roman Colonies, 52. Heart, known by God only, 310. How discovered by the Countenance, 338. Henry VIII. his Medals, 89. Henry IV. of France in Countenance re∣sembling King Charles II. 306. Henry Prince of Wales's Medal, 103. Hercules imberbis, 47. Heresiarks, 276. Herring, Fishing, and Inventor of Cu∣ring, how honored by the Emperor Charles V. 281. Heros, Heroines, and renouned Persons, 43, 269, 278, 286 ad 292. Hieroglyphics, vide Symbol. History advanc'd by Knowledge in Medals, 56, 158, 182, 243. Historians, 260, 273. Historical Columns, 162. Vid. Columns. Hollandia Metallica, 73 ad 77. contain∣ing the History of that Repub. 97, 98. Holbein, 87, 159. Vid. Painters. Horns, 30, 31. By whom born, not always reproachful, 33. Moses painted with Horns, 30. Where yet to be show'd, ibid. House of Peers, 158. Human Sacrifices abolished, 24. Humors, Doctrine of Humorists and Qualities, 325, 326, 327, &c. Vide Temperament. Hungarians Character, 315. I. JAMES, vid. King. Janus, 5, 38. Idols Popish, 66. Jews Medals and Coins suspected, 210, 217. Their Frauds, 217. V. Shekel. Ilanders, Characters, 312, 324. Images of Ancestors, 64, 67. Vid. Pictures, Statues, Libraries. Imperial Medals, 181. How long excelling in Workmanship, 39, 40. Their Rank in the Cabinet, 249. How far they reach, 249. Imperator, 188; Vid. Emperors. Impostors, 198, 201, 209, 210, 216, &c. Impressions of Coin and Money, when first, 6, 14. Vide Mint. Inanimats in Med. their Signification, 60, 61, 67, 68, &c. Incantated Med. vid. Med. Inclinations discovered by the Countenance, 303. Of several Nations, 310, &c. Regional, Topical, 318. Inscriptions, 3, 8, 10, 177, &c. Hebrew, Samaritan, 18. Greek, 189. In∣scrip. relating to no knowledge to be rejected, 211. About Money, 225. About the Theatre at Oxford, 65. Should be concise, 179, 185. How al∣ter'd, 216, Mingled, conterfeited, cor∣rupted, 195, 196, 219. Should be mo∣dest, not turgid and fastigious, like the French, 77, 179, 180, 184. What proper, 180, 182, 184. What they Discover of Antiquity, 182. Modern Inscrip. 208. Abbreviations, 186, 190, 191, 192. How to be read in Medals, 189, 190. and in different Languages, 193, 194, 195. Vid. Legends, Ortho∣graphy. Insects, Ingenious more than greater Ani∣mals, why, 309.
Images, see Pictures, Statues, 67, 68. Imperial Med. 181. Impostors, 276. Inanimats, 60, 61. Inscriptions, what they acquaint us with; They should be Concise, not Insolent or Boasting like the French, 180, 185. Modern Inscript. 208. Intaglia, 42. Invasions, see Armada. Inventors and Inventions, how honoured, 163. Inventors of Polycrests and things of Vse, 164. What Medals due to them, 167. Some enviously suffer their Talents to be lost, and dye with them, rather than to impart them, 283. Iron Coin and Money, 10, 13. Iudgment upon outward Appearance only, 310. Requires great Caution, ibid. Instances remarkable, 308, 339, &c. Julian Apostata judged by his Countenance and Miene, 301, 305. K. KING, Name odious to the Romans, why, 183. Kings of England their Medals, from Edw. Confessor, Edw. III. Henr. V. VII. VIII. 21, 86, 87. Title Defender of the Faith; Head of the Church, 89. Edw. VI. defe∣ctive of Medal. King James IV. of Scotland, Medal, 88. King James I. of England, 101, &c. Charles I. and II. Medals, 105 ad 126. James II. 148, &c. King William III. Medal, 156. Vid. Queen. King's-Evil, Med. 85. Kings and Emperors, Painters, 284. vid. Painters. Kishitah, 4. Knighthood and Military Order, 15, 16. Vid. Garter. L. LADIES and Women Learned, En∣glish, and other Nations, 264, 265, &c. Languages, 193. Latin, Greek Perfe∣ction and Decays, 195. Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury's Medal, rejoycing at his Death at Rome, why, 114. Largess, 15, 16. Vid. Missilia. Laurel, 26, 29, 59. Vid. Crown. Lawyers, 262, 275. and Laws, 56. Leaden Money, and Medals, 12, 23. Leather Money, 10, 11. Legenda, 177, 178, 188. Vide Inscrip∣tions. Letters, 279. How placed, 187. Capi∣tal, Uncial; how altered and corrup∣ted, 195, 196. Vid. Abbreviations. Leiden Siege, 11. Vid. Paper Money. Libation, 48. Libella, 5. Library, Medals necessary, 1, 2, 19, 244. The Royal Library at St. Jame's, 246, 247. Lilburn John, Medal asserting Trials by Juries, 171. Lines and Strokes in the Countenance, 335. Lituus, 63. London, 162. Metropolis, no Roman Colony, 51. Conslagration, and by whom fir'd, 266. Looks, 301. Vid. Aspect, Face, Coun∣tenance. Luke St. 44. M. MAIORANA, 7. Manuscript, 2, 247, 278. Marmora Arundeliana, 65. Marolle Abbot, his Collection of Prints in Taille-Douce, 289. Mary Queen of England setting up the Popish Mass, 91. Med. repressing the Rebellion, 92. Mass, proved by antient Medal, a ridi∣culous mistake, 72. Massacre at Paris, &c. 25. Detested by honest and learned Papists, 169. Mathematics, and Mathematicians, 166. 279, 281, 320. Maximilian Emperor received pay under Henry VIII. 87. Mechanics, 162. Mechanical Inventions, 280, 281, &c. Natural to the Germans, why, 320.
MEDALS, 8, 10. Name; neglected, 10, 13. Antiquity, 43, 248. Erudi∣tion, and great vse, 49, 69. In Hi∣story, Chronology, &c. by learned Per∣sons cultivated, 3, 8, 13, 15, 17. The most Authentic Records, 243, 248. Monuments, surviving all Accidents and Revolutions, 2, 3, 71, 83, 168, 243, 248. Acquaint us with the most signal Per∣sons, Families, Actions, and Exploits; Wars, Victories, Triumphs, Coun∣tries, Colonies, Cities, Temples, Dei∣ties, Religion, Laws, Government, Kings, Consuls, Emperors, and other Magistrates, &c. 40, 48 ad 198. Vid. Reverses. Medals, relating to several nations, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 210. On what occa∣sion scatter'd among the People, 15, 19. Medals not to be struck on slight Subjects, 289. Nor dishonoured with Railery or Boasting, 24, 25, 42. Whether com∣monly in use as Money, 8, 85. More precious some of Copper, than Gold, and in what more Rare, 8, 13, 15, 39, 202, 213, 238. Sizes, 16, 17, 19. In what vast Quantity found, 19, 69, 70, 189. Of whom to enquire. 199. And Places where, 11, 207. Many of the same Stamp, 218. Roman Medals best worth Collecting, why, 39. How far the most valuable reach, ibid. and 208. Medals without Heads, 26. With Two or more, 27, 206. Men and Women in the same Medal, ibid. Medals Incantated, 42. Medals how best to collect, understand, and distinguish true and antient from false, and to detect Cheats and Impostors, 208, 209, 210 ad 221. Medals only of all Coins free from Clip∣pers, why, 217. Who have the best furnished Cabinets of Medal, 244, 245, 246, 251. How far a Series may reach, 212, 248. Peter de Me∣dices numerous Collection exceeding the French Kings long since, 251. Medals Cast, Moulded and Stampt, 212, 213, 214. Sophisticated, 238. Of the Vernish whether Artificial, 212, 217. Difficulty in meeting with genuine Me∣dals, 215. Fraud by burying Medals, 217. Medals when in perfection for the Matter and Sculpture, 200, 238. When de∣clining, 9, 10, 20, 40. And again Re∣viving, 237 ad 241. Prints of Med. 243. Medalions, 8, 15, 16, 22. Contorniati, 17. Made honorary Presents of to Princes, Ambassadors, Knights, Com∣manders, Doctors, egregiously Learned, deserving Persons and Officers, &c. 15, 16, 137, 142. Medals and Money scatter'd among the People, 15, 19, 55, 91, 97, 101. How to take off the Impressions of Medals, 219. Medals in Miniature, 47. And Taille-Douce, ibid. Qualities most requisite to a Student of Medals, 240, 251. Authors, who have best written of Me∣dal Erudition, 241, 245. How to di∣spose of Med. in the Cabinet after the best Method, 247 ad 257. Vid. Cabi∣net. Who ought to have the Charge and Custody of Medals, and other An∣tiquities, 255. Modern Medals, too much neglected, 157. What worth collecting, 40, 169. How far a Series of them may reach, 208. Medals of King Charles I. Coronation, Nuptials, Relief of Rochel, Expediti∣on to, and Return from Scotland, Kien∣ton Fight, Martyrdom, &c. 105 ad 120. Natalitial of the Prince of Wales, 121, 123. Star appearing at Noon, ibid. Natalitial Med. of Jacob. D. of York, 144. Med. on the Restaura∣tion of Charles II, 152, &c. Coro∣nation, 129. Care of the Sea and Navy; Institution of Sea-Boys; Ti∣tle to the Dominion of the Sea; War with the Dutch; Peace and Commerce restored; Installation Medals, &c. Med. of Queen Catherine, 121, 311, &c. 172 ad 144. Medals of King James I. see King; and James II. his Birth, made Admiral, Return from Scotland, Escape at Sea; Beheading Monmouth, Spanish Wreck, &c. Med. of Queen Mary, &c. 144, ad 153. Medals of Effex, Fairfax, and the Vsur∣per Cromwell; General Monk, &c. 116 ad 121.
Medals of Sir Edm. Godfrey, and Popish- Plot Discoverers; of the Imprison'd Bi∣shops and Deliverance, Lawyers, &c. 154 ad 157. Medals of the Popes, Cardinals and o∣ther Ecclesiastics, vid. Pope. Medalists, vid. Academy. Mock-Medals, vid. Counters. Melancholy, see Temperament, Humor. Men of low Stature, 309. Men of prodi∣gious Growth, Strength, and other Abili¦ties, 267, 277. Faces like Brutes, 292. Metallick Library, 244. Metoposcopy, vid. Physiognomy. Mezzo Tinto, its Excellency, 257. Midwives and Nurses, how they should handle new-born Infants, 296, 298. Mills and other Machins, 226. Milk, vid. Nurses. Milliarcuse, 8. MINT, 7, 12, 14, 17. First in En∣gland, 221. Where, and how many; by whom of old governed and manag'd since, 222, 223. Mint-Masters stamp'd their own Effigies on Money, 36. Priviledge of Coining in England, and Recall'd, 12. Villany, and Abuses in Counterfeiting, Clip∣ping, Diminishing and Sophisticating Money; the Mischief it produces, 12, 231 ad 237. Punishment of the Crime, 234, 235, 236. Rewards to the De∣tectors of fraud, 238. Mint, ambulatory with the Court, 226. Laws of the Mint, 224. Money call'd in, 14. Moneta Goddess, 59, 224. Her Sym∣bol, 100. Miserable and unfortunate, those Princes who neglected the Money, 227. Fatal to Princes, People and States, 229, 232, 234, 236. Prospe∣rous, who made it their Care, 12, 228, 230, 231. By what Policy drawn in∣to France, and secur'd from diminu∣tion, 226. Corruption of Money, its History, 228, 229. Moneta Nigra, 230. Aedes Monetarii. Treasures kept in Temples as Sacred, 224, 225. Monyers, 249. and Officers, 4, 12. Mills, Hammers, Press, Balance, &c. by whom used and invented; set up first in England, then in France. Contre∣versy about it, 226. Money first, 3, 4, &c. Money without Heads and Figures, 6, 13, 14. English Sterling, 228. Money of several Ma∣terials, Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Leather, Paper, &c. 4, 11, 12. Who taught the Vse of it first, 38. Raising and Sinking the Value of Mo∣ney pernicious to a Kingdom, 229, 233. Abuses in the Mint and Money, re∣dressed by Edward VI. and Queen Eli¦zabeth, 228, 230. Expedients for the discharging Publick Debts, and pre∣venting the Ruin of a Nation, 235, 236. Authors and Writers on Coins, and Money, 7, 230, 231. Missilia, 9, 15, 16. Vid. Largesses, Con∣giares, &c. Mixtures, 213. Monogram, 186. Monastery of Protestants, and Reformed Convents desirable, 265. Relation of that at Geding, ibid. Monk General Duke of Albemarle, 119, 120. Monmouth Duke, Med. 151. Monsters, and Men of extraordinary Qua∣lities, 277. Vid. Men. Money, vid, Mint. Morells's Specimen, Industry, and much expected Work relating to Medals, 242, 243. Morland Sir Sam. Med. 141. Mountains worshipped, 62. Mountoone, 4. Musicians, 263, 285. Mysteries of State and Religion symbo∣liz'd in Med. 57. N. NAILS of our Blessed Saviour's Cross, 32. Names and Surnames, &c. 54, 118. When, and by whom changed, 49. Narcotics, 313. Narthex, vid. Scepters. Nations, whence of such various Disposi∣tions, 310. Natural, and Artificial Curiosities, 282.
Navigation, 55, and famous Navigators and Discoverers, 160, 161. Naupegi, and Naval Architects, English, 166. Vid. Ships. Nautic-Box, 279. Neapolitans Character, 318. Neck, 297. Neglect of the English, not celebrating sig∣nal Actions and Persons by Medal, 158. Negros, 314. , 200. Newark Siege, 124. Nightingal, 295. Noah, 37, 38, 39, 165. Vid. Saturn. Nobility, wherein it consists, 68. Nobilis Caesar, 185. Norfolk Duke, 42. Northern People, 314. Their Incursions, 315. Noses Aquilin, &c. 297, 311. Nummi Iconici, 189. & Memoriales, 2. Numismata Serrata, 214. Nummus asper, 201. Nurses, of what importance their Temper and Dispositions, 296, 312, 313. O. OAK Royal, 122. Oats Dr. and other concern'd in Discovery of the Popish Plot, 175. Objections against Physiognomy, Answer∣ed. 324, 325. Obolus Attic, 16. Obrizum, 22 Obsidional Med. 124. Offices and Dignities Roman, 181. Onychomantia, 337. Opobalsamum, 19. Orange Princes, vid. Anabasis. Orb, Royal Symbol, 35. Ormus, 160. Orthography, 189, 196. Vide Inscip∣tion. Otho, Medal rare, 8, 205, 211. P. PAGAN Deities, 56. Painters, 10. Their Liberty, 33. Should be skill'd in Physiognomy, 335. and Medals, 201. Famous Painters, English, 268. and others, 282. Who first Invented Oyl-Colours, 282. Paludamentum, 26. Paper, 11, 280. Partiality to ones own Country natural, 321. Parazonium, 58. Passions and Inclinations, 304. Pecunia, 5. Pembroke Earl, 302. Penates, 27. Peplus, 26. Persecution, 25. Vid. French. Persons worthy of Medals, 157, &c. ad 177. Famous for Age, Stature, Strength, Shape, &c. or any extraordinary Qua∣lity, 226, 256, 266 ad 292. Petty Sir William double bottom'd Vessel, 164. Phanatics, 276. Philip IV. of Spain, and Lovis XIII. of France, 41, 42. Philologers, 260, 273. Study of Philos. 320. What best: New Theory, vide Humor. Phlegmatic, vid. Constitution. Phocas, 10, 31. Phoenicians, 20. Phosphorus, how it may be abused, 166. PHYSIOGNOMY, 292. Principles, 334, 335. A Science, 337. Asserted by Learned Men, 338. ad finem Cap. IX. Physiognomy may have been assistant to Adam in giving Names to Brute- Animals, 293. Iudgment by the seve∣ral Parts of the Head and Face, 294. and Countenance, 304. &c. ad 341. How applicable to Medals and Prints, 339, 392. Physicians, 261, 275, 291, 295. They should be knowing in Physiognomy, 304. Pile, vid. Cross. Plots, and Discoverers of them, 266. Poets, Romancers, and great Wits, 262, 284. Polanders Character, 315. Policy, 321. Pontsrait-Castle Siege, 124. Pope, Cardinals, and other Ecclesiastics Medals, 40, 41, 169, 212. Revenue received by the Pope for permitting
Courtezans, &c. 225. Popes, no right Title or Claim to Rome, or any part of Italy, 51. Porches, vid. Vestibulum. Porphyrogenitus, why so called, 185. Praetexta, 26. Presents made of Medals, 143. Princeps Juventutis, 37, 185. Princes, who make unjust, and ambitious Wars, unworthy the honor of Medals with Elogy, 342. Their Fates and Di∣spositions read in their Looks, 305, 335, 340. Princes Idolized, 31. Princes should not suffer their Heads to hang on Sign- Posts, 45. Princes of Wales, 103, 121, &c. Printers famous, 280. Printing and Gun powder have alter'd the face of the World, 167, 279. Prints in Taille-Douce; 256, &c. 289. How they supply Medals ibid. Who have the best Collections, 290, 291. How they assist a Physiognomist, 335. Priviledges, 52. Procuratores Monetarum, 7. Prophaness of some Emperors, 31, 32. and of the French King's Flatterers, 85. Profession to chuse, 332. Prognostics, 306. Proposers of useful Things, tho' not at pre∣sent certain, should not be discouraged and rejected, 156. Protestants and Reformed, 272. Proverbs their Importance, 300. Providence admirable in the variety and difference of Faces, 336. Punic, 5, 6. Pyramids, 1. Q. QVAESTOR, 14. Quadrans, 5. Quadrigati, 14. Quality, the four first of the Peripatetics, 325, 326. & seq. Quatuor Maria Vindico, Med. 339. Queen Ann, 104. Mary 91, 92, &c. Elizabeth, 93, 94, 95, 96, 98. Queen Ann, 104. Queen Mary, 106. Ca∣therine, 132. Mary, 152. Quinarius, 6. R. RAILLERY in Medals improper and dangerous, 24, 25, 42. Raleigh Sir Walter, 160. Ratis, Vid. Ship. Real Character of Bishop Wilkins, 166. Records by Medals, 243. See Reverse. Reformation of Money, 12. Vid. Mint. Religion, how indanger'd, 232. The Pro∣testant Religion and Property asserted in a Coin of Charles I. 112. Reliques Popish, 30, 64. Resemblance of divers great Persons one to another, 336. REVERSES of Greek and Roman Medals full of Erudition, 3, 14, 15, 23, 24. Cap. III. 48, &c. The most Authentic Records and best Commen∣taries, shewing the most renowned Acti∣ons of the Greek, especially the Roman State; Families, Names, Titles, Dig∣nities, Royal, Consular, Imperial, Mi∣litary Offices, and Discipline, Allo∣cutions, Armies, Legions, Ensigns, Sym∣bols, Weapons, Habillaments, Pro∣cessions, Expeditions, Stations, Castra∣metations, Naval Combats, Victo∣ries, Trophies, Triumphs, Crowns- Rewards, Largesses, Congiares, Bene, factions, Privileges, Truces, Tributes, Remissions, Commerce, Confederates, Cities, Colonies, Amphitheatres, Thea∣ters, Thermae, Circus's, Hippodroms, Naumachias, Fora, Portics, Columns, Obelisks, Aquaeducts, Bridges, Ha∣vens, Ways, and other sumptuous Edi∣fices, and publick Works, especially. Temples, Altars, Deities, Statues, Co∣lossus's, Ludi, Pub. Spectacula, Vota, Funeral Pomps, Consecrations, and Apotheoses. In summ, The Religion, Laws, Polity, &c. of the most Heroic, Learned, Wise, Prosperous and Accom∣plished Monarchy in the World. Reverses present the figure of Exotic Ani∣mals, Inanimates, Vertues, Celestial Signs, and give light to History, Chro∣nology, Geography, Critics, &c. 48 ad 73. and of the Modern, 73 ad 177. Vid. Inscriptions.
Reverses without Inscriptions, and Me∣dals without Reverses, 188, 215. Reverses most Instructive, 250. Reverses of the French King's Med. faul∣ty, 80, &c. Restaurations, 126, 127. Revolutions, 156. Richard III. little Coin of his, 21. Robes, 26, 35, 48. Rochel Expedition to Relieve, 106, 107. Romans dispersed their Wealth every where, 190, 198. Much found in Britain; why not convey'd away, 199. Roman Empire delivered to Vespasian, 35. Emperors represented like the Gods, 32. Romans at present, their Chara∣cter, 318. Rome, her Vertues and Success, 6. Con∣tinues its antient Name, 21. Roma Galeata, 14. Rome, and other Cities and Countries expressed in Me∣dals, 37. Roman Pontifs pretended Title, 51. Vid. Donation. Rose Noble, 86. Roti, and other excellent Medal-Sculp∣tors, 21, 28, 44, 47. Vid. Sculptors. Royal Oak, vid. Oak. Ruffs, when left off, succeeded by Bands, 108. Ruins, 70, 71. Vid. Septizonium. Russians Character, 311. S. SACERDOTAL Utensils, 33. Sackvill's Med. 100. Saints, vid. CHRIST. Sanguine, see Temperament. Saturn, 38, 39. Vid. Noah. Saturnalia, 23, 24. B. Saviour's Effigies, 288. Scaliger Jul skill'd in Physiognomy, 303. Contest with Cardan, 316. Scal. Joseph. Esteem of Medals, 71. Character of Queen Elizabeth. 264. Censure on a Medal of King James's, 101. Scepter, 35, 58. and Spear, Symbols of Em∣pire, used before Crowns, 29. Schools of Antiquities and for Med. 65. Scriptures abused by the Pope, 55. Sculps in Medals and Gems, vid. Ta∣lismans, Taille-Douce. Sculptors, and Sculpture in perfection, Decay'd, Reviv'd, 22, 283. Vid. Ar∣chitects. Second sight, 306. Sea-Dominion asserted, 85. Security of the Sea asserted in Med. 87. Semissis, 5. Septizonium and other noble Ruins and Antiquities, by whom demolished, 71. Sestertius, 6, 7. Sextans, 5. Shekel, 18, 19. Ships, Gallies, &c. 39. How long Stamp'd on the Roman Coin, ibid. Shipping, 166. Signatures, 296. Siliqua, 8. Silk-worms first brought into Europe, 280. Silver, when first stamped and coined by the Romans, 6, 14. Simpulum, 48. Sistrum, 62. Situation, and Clime how disposing to the Inclinations and Manners of People, 312, 313, 322, &c. Vid. Climat. Slaves, 23. Might not be Painters, 9. How Branded, 186. And Chosen, 303. Society Royal, 167. Socrates, 319. Souls, whether any difference, 307. Sovereignty of the Seas, 55, 130, 135, 139. Spagyrists, 328. Vid. Principles. Spain and Spaniards Character, opposed to the French, 315, 321. Invasion, 94. Spanheim celebrated, 3, 242. & passim. Spear, 58, 63. Vid. Scepter. Stamp or Die, 215. Vid. Taille-Douce, Sculpture, Prints. Stater, 14, 19. Statues, 2, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 284. M. Angelos deceit, 217. Statues de∣molished, why, 68, 83. Staff, 58. Stirups, a new Invention, 55. Strangeways Col. Medal, 115. Strumpets and Misses how pernicious, 266, 288.
Study, and Studious of Medals, how to be qualified, 240, 241, 251. What Authors to Consult, vid. Authors. Studies and Arts Contemplative, and Practical, who succeed in best, 320. Sumptuary Laws expedient, 235. Sun, represented by a Stone, 62, 79. Superstition, 65. Where most abounding, 72, 314. Surnames Cognomina, &c. 181. Swedes, Character, 317. Queen Christina, 287. Swiss, Character, 311, 320. Symbols, of Deification, 39. Vertue and Vices, 59. Of Rivers, 60. Of King∣doms, Countries, Provinces, Colo∣nies, &c. 61, 63. Symbola, 18, 56, 60, 63, &c. Of Alli∣ance, 39. Vid. Emblem. Symmetry, what it signifies, 307. Vid. Beauty. Synthesis, 24. T. TAILLE-DOUCE, 256, 269, 289, 291. Tachygraphy, 167, 269. Vid. Short∣hand. Talisman, 42. Vid. Sculps. Tapestry in the House of Peers, 159. Tartar, Character, 311, 315. Telescopes, and other Mathematical In∣struments, 280. Temperament of Body, how it affects the Mind, 317, 325, 326. Vid. Humor, Constitution. Temperate Climats produce great and learn∣ed Men, 320. Temple, Vid. Reverses. Teruntius, 5. Theatre Oxon, 65. Thoughts, how to discover, 339. Tin, Block-Tin, 215. Title, see Inscriptions. Lofty Titles af∣fected by the French, 179. Titles, In∣solent, &c. 183, 184. Merited and un∣deserved, ibid. Title to Dominion of the Seas, 130, 135, 136, 139. Vid. So∣vereignty. Titles and Claims asserted by Medals, 51. Tokens, 16. Trajan, why called Herba Parietaria, 180. His Column, 54, 162. Margin. Travellers, 263, 278. Treason Gun-powder, 76. Treasurer, 14. Vid. Quaestor, Mint. Triens, 5. Trigati, 14. Triumviri Monetarii, 14. Marked the three Metals, 13. Triple Crown, 34, 35. Triple League, 99. Triumphal Arches, 71, 72. Turcism and Atheism advancing apace in England, 232. Turkish Coins of what Use, 94. Twins how resembling, and others (not Twins) of distant Countries, 336. Typography, 279. Tyranny, 314. Tyrants, 12, 183. V. VAILLANT, Learned Medalist, 28, 47. Varillas, would not be painted, 291. Venetians, Character, 311, 318. Venus, 56. Vernishes of Med. 212. Vertue, not always in the most beautiful, 308. Vertue and Vice attributed to the Cli∣mate, 322. Vertues Cardinal, 331, 333. Vestibula and Porches, how adorned, 64. Victoriati, 14. Victories famous of the English worthy Medals, 159. And to be painted, vide Picture. Virgin Mary, 288. Vid. Saints. Voadicia, 22. Voice, what it signifies in Physiog. 335, 337. Urinators, 281.
W. WALES Princes, vid. Prince. War with Holland, 160. Watches and Clocks, 281. Weaving Machine, 163. Weight of Med. and Money, 56, 223, 230, 237. Vid. Mint. William III. his Medal, 156. Wilkins Bishop Real Character, and his own, 166, 341. Winds, 317. Witches, 302. Wine moderately used, its noble Effects, 329, 330. Wolsey Cardinal, stamp'd Money, 12. Women Learned, vid. Ladies. Wreck, Treasure taken out of it, Med. 151, 152. Wren Sir Christopher, 40, 162. Y. YORK, vid. Duke. Z. ZODIAC, 61. ERRATA. PAG. 39. line 2. read Mythical, p. 103. l. 2. dele the King on Horseback, p. 343. l. ult. r. Sy∣racuses, p. 118. Med. XLI. should be XL: and placed above the other. FINIS.
