E3705A R218236 99829847 34293
Martis 14 die Novembris. 1693. ORDERED, THAT the several Courts in Westminister Hall, the Clerks of the Peace for the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, and the Clerk of Assize of the Home Cir∣cuit, do on this day Sevennight, present to this House a Table of the several Fees belonging to their several Courts and Offices, esta∣blished in the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth: And also a Table of such Fees as are now taken by them.
AN EXACT Table of Fees, OF ALL THE COURTS AT WESTMINSTER, As they were Delivered in Parliament by the Persons following. Viz. The CHANCERY, by Sir Miles Cook, Samuel Keck, Esquire, and others. The KINGS-BENCH, on the Plea-side, by W. Turbill and Nicholas Harding. On the Crown side, by R. Seyhard, and Richard Horton. The COMMON-PLEAS, by W. Farmerie, Silv. Petyt, and H. Clift. The EXCHEQUER, on the Plea-side, by R. Beresford. Tho. Arden, &c. On the Equity-side, by Butler Buggins, Esq; The Second Edition, Corrected. With the Additions of the Fees of the Clerks of the Peace of Middlesex and Surrey, the Clerk of Assize of the Home Circuit, the Fees of the Cursitors, and the Abstract of the Act of Vellum and Parchment, &c. LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires; for John Walthoe, at his Shop in Vine-Court Middle-Temple, MDCXCIV.
THE TABLE. Fees in the Court of Chancery. TO the Masters, and their Clerks, p. 91 To the Six Clerks, p. 92 To the Registers, p. 96 To the Petty-Bag Office, p. 98 To the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, p. 101 To the Examiners, p. 104 To the Register of the Affidavits, p. 105 Fees due in the Kings-Bench. TO the Prothonotary, p. 51 To the Secondary, p. 52 To the Clerk of the Papers, p. 53 To the Clerk of the Rules, p. 54 To the Clerk of the Bails and Postea, p. 55 To the Clerk of the Docquets, ibid. To the Custos Brevium and his Clerks, p. 56 To the Philizers, p. 58 To the Marshal, p. 60 To the Deputy Marshal and Clerk of the Papers, p. 62
To the Tipstaves, p. 64 To the Ʋnder-Clerk, to the Custos Brevium of the Kings-Bench in the Inner Treasury, ibid. To the Ʋnder Clerk of the Outward Treasury to the Custos Brevium, p. 66 To the Clerk of the Declarations, ibid. To the Seal Office, p. 68 To the Lord Chief Justices Clerk of the Errors, ibid. To the Keeper of the Seals of the Bills of Middlesex, p. 69 To the Cryer and Porter, p. 70 To the Clerk of the Fines, p. 71 Ʋpon Trial by Nisi prius at Guild-Hall, p. 72 Ʋpon Trials by Nisi prius in Middlesex, p. 73 To the Clerk that Draws up Special Verdicts in London and Middlesex, p. 74 To the Crown-Office, p. 75 Fees in the Common-Pleas. TO the Lord Chief Justice, pag. 1 To such of the Judges as do perform the Business, pag. 2 To the Lord Chief Justice and the rest, by way of Dividend, pag. 4 To the Puisne Judges only, pag. 5
To the Judges Clerk, pag. 6 To the Custos Brevium, pag. 8 To the Prothonotaries, for Entring of Decla∣rations, Pleas, &c. pag. 11 To the Prothonotaries, for Making and En∣tring of Writs, &c. pag. 20,—28 To the Prothonotary's Clerks, pag. 23 To the Prothonotaries and their Clerks, for Informations, pag. 25 To the Secondaries of the Prothonotaries, pag. 26, 27, 28 To the Philizers, pag. 29 To the Exigenters, pag. 30 To the Clerk of the Inrolments, Warrants and Estreats, pag. 31 To the Chirographer, pag. 32 To the Clerk of the King's Silver, pag. 33 To the Clerk of the Treasury, pag. 34 To the Ʋnder-Clerks of the Treasury, pag. 36 To the Four Cryers, ibid. To the Marshal, Ʋsher and Chief Proclaimor, pag. 38 To the Alienation Office, in Term and Vaca∣tion, ibid. To the Clerk of the Inrolments of Fines and Recoveries, pag. 39 To the Outlary-Office, ibid. The Ʋnder-Clerk's Fees, pag. 41 To the Clerk of the Juries, ibid. To the Clerk of the Essoyns, ibid.
To the Clerk of the Office of Supersedeas, to the Exigent, pag. 42 To the Porter, pag. 43 To the Keeper of the Treasury, ibid. To the Court-Keeper, pag. 44 To the Serjeants at Law, pag. 45 To the Attorneys, ibid. To the Warden of the Fleet, and his Officers, pag. 46 To the Clerk of the Fleet, pag. 49 To the Tipstaff, pag. 50 To the Seal-Office, ibid. Fees in the Court of Exchequer. In the Office of Pleas. TO the Attorneys for Writs, p. 106 For Entries, Drawings, Ingrossments, and Exemplifications, p. 107 On the Equity-side. To Their Majesties Remembrancers Office, p. 111 To the Sworn Clerks of Their Majesties Re∣membrancer, p. 114 For Drawing of all Informations Orders, Decrees, &c. p. 114 For Amerciaments of Sheriffs, p. 116
An Exact TABLE OF FEES Of All the COURTS AT WESTMINSTER, &c. Fees due to the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas. FOR Allowance of a Writ of Error upon the Outlawry before Judgment, 1 l. For Bail taken upon an Outlawry upon Mean Process in Debt, if the Debt be 20 l. or above, 2 s. 4 d.
For Allowance of a Writ of Error upon a Judgment, 1 l. For Bail taken in Case of Debt, after Judg∣ment, 12 s. For Allowance of a Writ of Error upon a Judgment and Scire facias, and Outlary, after Judgment, 1 l. 15 s. For the Marking of the Roll, that the Writ of Error is allowed, 2 s. For every Supersedeas, 3 s. For the Transcript of a Record, being a Process, 6 s. 8 d. For every Process more, 6 s. 8 d. For the Retorn of every Certiorari, 14 s. 9 d. For the Seal of every Record of Nisi prius, 2 s. 1 d. For the Seal of every Writ sealed in the Court, 1 d. For the Seal of every Exemplification, 2 d. Fees belonging to such of the Judges as do perform the Business. FOr the Acknowledgment of a Fine, or War∣rant of Attorney, for a Common Reco∣very out of Court, 6 s. 8 d. For Signing every Writ of Priviledge, to re∣move any Cause, Habeas Corpus, Procedendo, or a Supersedeas upon a Procedendo, 4 s. For every Bail taken out of Court, upon any such Writ of Priviledge whereon one Cause is only Retorned, 9 s. 8 d. For every Cause more than one, which is Cer∣tified, 2 s.
For every Confession of a Judgment out of Court, 9 s. 8 d. For every Philizer's Bail taken out of Court in Term, 1 s. 10 d. For every Philizer's Bail, and other Bail, taken out of Term, 9 s. 8 d. For acknowledging of a Satisfaction out of Court, 9 s. 8 d. For acknowledging out of Court a Deed to be Inrolled, 9 s. 8 d. For the admission of an Infant to his Guar∣dian out of Court, 9 s. 8 d. For the Proof of a Suggestion out of Court, for every Witness, 9 s. 8 d. For a Warant for Passing of a Fine, where there are more than three Cognizors, or three parties Cognizees to the Fine, 4 s. For every Affidavit taken out of Court upon a Foreign Plea, or upon a Rescous, 2 s. For every other Affidavit taken out of Court, 8 d. For the Exhibiting an Information out of Court, 4 d. For a Bill of Costs signed to award an At∣tachment, for not appearing upon a Sub∣poena, 8 d. For granting Licence to Compound upon a Penal Law, 2 s. For Assessing of the King's part of the For∣feiture upon a Penal Statute, after Compo∣sition with the Informer, 2 s. For the Commitment out of Court of a Pri∣soner to the Fleet, charged with one Cause only, 9 s. 8 d. For every other Cause, 2 s.
For every Reversal of an Outlary out of Court, 9 s. 8 d. For every Bail taken out of Court upon an Outlary in Debt, upon Mean Process re∣versed, if the same be 20 l. 2 s. 4 d. Fees due to the Lord Chief Justice, and other Judges of the Court, by way of Dividend. FOr the Confession of a Judgment in Court, 6 d. For acknowledging Satisfaction in Court, if the Debt or Damages do not amount to 100 l. 6 d. If the Debt or Damages do amount to 100 l. 12 d. and for every 100 l. more, after that Rate, 12 d. For admittance of an Infant to his Guardian in Court, 1 s. For the Reversal of an Outlary in Court for Error in the Exigent, or the Retorn, 1 s. For the like, for the Insufficiency of a Procla∣mation or Retorn, or for want of a Procla∣mation, 2 s. For every Common Recovery acknowledged in Court, 6 d. For a Fine acknowledged in Court, 6 d. For a Bail taken in Court, or a Recognizance acknowledged in Court, 1 s. For a Deed acknowledged in Court to be In∣rolled, 1 s. For a Discontinuance, 1 s. For every Prohibition granted, 9 s. 4 d. For every Wager of Law, or Non-suit upon a Wager of Law, 6 d.
For the admission of every Attorney, to be an Attorney of this Court, 1 l. Fees due to the Puisne Judges only. FOr every Fine drawn at Bar, 1 s. For drawing a Recovery at the Bar with single Voucher, 1 s. 6 d. For every Voucher more, 6 d. For the Reversal of an Outlary in Court, 4 s. For taking of Privy Verdict to that Judge which taketh it; which they do in Turns, 6 s. 8 d. For taxing of Costs upon every Judgment, 1 s. From the Clerk of the Warrants every term to every Puisne Judge, 2 l. 4 s. For every Attorney whose Name is recorded in the Roll of Attorneys every Term, 4 d. For Inrolling and Examining the parts of a Fine and Writs upon a Common Recovery, by the Statute 23 Eliz. 6 s. 8 d. For the Exemplification and Examination of the parts of a Fine, and Writs upon a Com∣mon Recovery, by that Statute, 5 s. For Search made for an Inrolment upon that Statute, 4 d. For Drawing and Entring a Rule for Amend∣ment upon that Statute, 1 s. For a Copy of a Fine, or Writs Inrolled upon a Common Recovery Inrolled by that Sta∣tute, for every Sheet, 4 d. For the Retorn of every Writ of Covenant brought, to Levy a Fine upon, 10 d.
For the Retorn of every Writ of Entry, to suffer a Common Recovery, every Writ of Summons and Writ of Seisin thereupon, 10 d. An ancient Fee of 6 s. 8 d. for Signing of a Dedimus potestatem, paid to that Judge who doth Sign the same, 6 s. 8 d. Fees due to the Clerks of the Lord Chief Justice, and other Judges of the Court. TO the Judges Clerks of the Fines, for taking a Fine or Warrant of Attorney, 3 s. 4 d. For the Certifying of a Fine or Retorn of a Dedimus potestatem, 1 s. 4 d. To the Judge's Clerk of the Bails, for taking every Bail, 1 s. For Entring a Caveat, to give Notice, That good Bail may be taken, 1 s. To the Judges Clerk, for acknowledging of Satisfaction out of Court, 1 s. To the Judges Clerk, for acknowledging a Deed to be Inrolled out of Court, 1 s. To the Judges Clerk, for the admission of an Infant to his Guardian, out of Court, 1 s. To the Judges Clerk, for the Proofs of a Sug∣gestion out of Court, for every Witness, 1 s. To the Judges Clerk, for an Affidavit taken out of Court, 4 d. To the Judges Clerk, for Entring into his Book an Information exhibited out of Court, 4 d.
To the Judges Clerk, for Entring into his Book a Bill of Cost signed, to award an Attach∣ment, for not appearing upon a Subpoena, 4 d. To the Judges Clerk, for Entring into his Book a License granted to Compound upon a Penal Law, 6 d. To the Judges Clerk, for Entring into his Book the King's part of the Forfeiture upon a Penal Law assessed by the Judge, after Composition with the Informer, 6 d. To the Judges Clerk, for Entring into his Book a Commitment, out of Court, of a Prisoner to the Fleet, charged with one Cause only, 1 s. To the Judges Clerk, for Entring into his Book every Reversal of Outlary out of Court, 2 s. To the Puisne Judges Clerks of the Inrolments, for Copying, Inrolling and Examining the parts of a Fine, and Writs upon a Com∣mon Recovery, by the Statute of 23 Eliz. 8 s. 4 d. For the Exemplification and Examination of the parts of a Fine, and Writs upon a Com∣mon Recovery, by the Statute of 23 Eliz. 8 s. 4 d. For a Search made for an Inrolment upon that Statute, by the Year, 4 d. For writing of a Fine, or Writs Inrolled upon a Common Recovery, Inrolled by that Sta∣tute, by the Sheet, 4 d.
Fees belonging to William Thursby, Esq; Custos Brevium of the Court of Common-Pleas at Westminster, viz. IMprimis, for Filing of any Writ or other Record, coming after the Day of the Re∣turn thereof: Except Writs of Priviledge, de Veniendo & Rediundo, and Writs of Privi∣ledge, being Propriums, and also Writs of Habeas Corpus upon Commitments and Bails, being Writs sine die, 4 d. Item, for Filing any Writ or other Record (except before Excepted) coming after the Term, wherein it was Returnable, called a Post Terminum, 1 s. 8 d. And, for Filing any Writ or other Record, coming after two Terms or more, called Post Terminum's, for every Term that is past, 20 d. apiece; (except Exigents Utlawed) which Writs pay but 20 d. a Post Terminum be they never so long after, quia pro Domino Rege, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for the Search of any Writ or other Record, being under five years, for every Return 5 d.: Except such Writs, as where the whole Term is used to be Filed toge∣ther, which pay likewise 5 d. for the Term, 5 d. Item, for the Search of any Writ, or other Record of five years Antiquity, and under ten years, called a Temple-Search; for the first Return 2 s. 9 d. and for every Return afterwards 5 d.: Except such Writs as where the whole Term is used to be filed together,
which pay likewise for the first Term Searching 2 s. 9 d.; and for every Term after 5 d. 2 s. 9 d Item, for the Search of any Writ, or other Record of ten years Antiquity and up∣wards, called a Westminster-Search, for the first Return 9 s. and 9 d, and for every Re∣turn after, 5 d.: Excepting such Writs as where the whole Term is used to be filed together; which pay likewise for the first Term searching 9 s. and 9 d. and for every Term afterwards, 5 d. 9 s. 9 d. Item, for the allowance of every Writ of Certiorari, directed to the Custos Brevium, 14 s. and 9 d.; and for the Return and Certifying thereof, secundum Longitudinem, and according to Reason, 14 s. 9 d. Item, for the allowance of every Exemplifica∣tion made out of this Office, of any Writ or Writs, or other Record or Records, 5 s. and 4 d.; and for Writing and Examining thereof, secundum Longitudinem, and accord∣ing to Reason, 5 s. 4 d. Item, for carrying any other Writ or Record to the Court for a Reversal, or for other Occasion, 2 s. 9 d. Item, for filing any Common Recovery, Writ Super Disseisinam en le Post, and for entring the same in a Book kept for that purpose only, 1 s. Item, for the Passing of every Fine, 3 s. 8 d. Item, for the Amendment of any Writ or other Record, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for every Non est factum pleaded in this Court, 2 s.
Item, for every Sheriff's Bundle of Writs, Re∣turnable, of the precedent Term, and com∣ing before the Essoin-Day of the Second Return of the New Term, 8 d. Item, for the post Terminum of a Fine 20 d. and for the post Terminum, if any be, for every Term that is past, 20 d. apiece, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for every Ne Recipiatur coming under a Judge's Hand, or Order in Court to the Clerk, for Entring the same in a Book, 1 s. Item, for every Note of the Jurors Names, for the Clerk of the Juries to make further Pro∣cess by, 8 d. Item, for every Note of an Exigent, for the Clerk of the Utlaries to make further Pro∣cess by, or for a Note of any other Writ of the like kind, 4 d. Item, for the Copy of any Writ, or other Re∣cord, for every Sheet 8 d. apiece, 8 d. Item, for the Search of any Books of Entries of any Writs, for every Term searching, 4 d. Item, To the Bag-bearer of the Office, being always the Common Vouchee of the Court, for every Common Recovery which is suffered in the Court 4 d. apiece, 4 d. Item, to the Bag-bearer of this Office, upon the Swearing of every Attorney of this Court, 6 d.
Fees belonging to John Cook, Thomas Winford and William Tempest, Esquires; Protho∣notaries of the Court of Common-Pleas, at Westminister, for Entring of Declarations, Pleas, and Judgments, in their several Offices. IMprimis, for the Entry of every Common Declaration, Common Plea in Bar, where∣in no Freehold is pleaded; Common Re∣plication or Rejoynder in Actions Personal, 1 s. For the Entry of every Special Declaration, Special Plea in Bar, or in Abatement, in Free∣hold, Replication, or Rejoynder, and Pleas subsequent in Actions Personal, not exceed∣ing three Sheets, every Sheet containing twelve Lines at least, and every Line ten Words, 2 s. And for every Sheet so exceeding, 8 d. For every Declaration in an Action upon the Case, Ejectione firmae, Accompt, Annuity, Conspiracy, Covenant, Disceit, Partition, Plea, Acquietand', Debt upon Statutes, Plaint in Assize, and the like Special Actions, and in all Real, Mixt and Popular Actions, if the Declaration or Plaint, exceeds not three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet so exceeding, 8 d. For the Entry of every Bar, Replication, Re∣joynder, and Pleas subsequent in every of the Actions last above-recited, and in the like Actions, not exceeding three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet so exceeding, 8 d.
For the Oyer of every Bill, Obligation, In∣denture, Record, Retorn or Certificate, or the like, Entred in haec verba, not exceeding three sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet above that length, 8 d. For Recording every Appearance by the Court, 2 s. 4 d. For the Entry of every Recognizance with∣out Condition, Challenge to the Sheriff or Coroners, or to the Array, or other Special Averments, 2 s. And for the Entry of every Recognizance with a Condition, 4 s. For every Judgment in Debt, Trespass, and Detinue, without a Tales, for the Protho∣notary, 2 s. For the Entry of every Adjornment in Per∣sonal Actions, 4 d. For every Judgment with a Tales, besides the Fee above-recited, 2 s. For every Remanet and Judgment for Costs given the Defendant by the Statute, besides the Fee above-said, 2 s. For every Judgment in all other Actions, as well Personal as Mixt and Real, and Prohi∣bitions, and the like, 4 s. For every Satisfaction, Recordat', Discontinu∣ance, Retraxit, Relinquishment, Nolle Prosequi, and the like, in Actions Personal, 2 s. And in Real Actions, 4 s. For the Entry of a single Recovery, and the Writ of Seisin thereupon, 10 s. 6 d. For every Voucher more, 4 s. For the Entry of every Mittimus and Dedimus Potestat', for a Common Recovery, 6 s.
For Entry of a Summons ad War' for a Com∣mon Recovery, and the Writ of Sum' ad War', 4 s. 6 d. For the Entry of a Certiorari, to Certifie the Warrant of Attorney for the Tenant or Vouchee, 4 s. And if for both, then 6 s. For every Foreign Voncher sent to the Com∣mon-Pleas to Summon the Vouchee, if the Record be not above three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet more, 8 d. The like Fees are to be paid when the Record is remitted back again, after the Voucher determined, 2 s. 8 d. For the Entry of every Special Verdict, where∣upon a Cur' Advisare vult is Entred, it being not above the length of three Sheets written, as aforesaid, 2 s. And for every Sheet exceeding that length, 8 d. For the Entry of every General Verdict, with a Cur' Advisare vult without a Tales, 2 s. And with a Tales, 4 s. For the Entry of every Remittitur of Debt or Damages, 1 s. For the Entry of every Information upon any Penal Law, not exceeding three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet more, 8 d. For the Entry of every Surmize, for a Prohi∣bition to be granted, not exceeding three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet above that, 8 d.
For the Entry of every Audita Querela, not exceeding three Sheets written, as aforesaid, 2 s. And for every Sheeet more, 8 d. For the Entry of the Oath of every Witness, to prove the Surmize in a Prohibition, or Audita Querela, brought by an Infant, and the Entry of the Proofs de morte & vita viri in Dower, and the like Actions and Suits, 2 s. For the Releasing of any Default in a Real Action, 2 s. And for the entry of the Recital of the Grand Cape, 2 s. For Examining of every Record of Nisi prius, 1 s. For making the Record for trial of an Issue in any of the Counties Palatine, for the first three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet after, 4 d. For the Exemplification of any Record, not exceeding six Sheets, 5 s. And for every Sheet exceeding that rate, 1 s. For the Entry of Seisin in Dower, and dying Seised; if the Retorn of the Seisin exceeds not three Sheets, 4 s. And for every Sheet exceeding, 8 d. For the Entry of Writs of Exemption, de non ponend' in Jurat' & Patents de libertatibus allocand' Protectiones Cognizance de Pleas, and the like, according to the Rates abovesaid, if they exceed not three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet exceeding, 8 d.
For the Entry of the Default upon Distress in Wast, Quare Impedit, and the like, and Judgment thereupon; if the Title or Count do not exceed three Sheets, 6 s. 4 d. And for every Sheet more, 8 d. For the Entry of a Quo Waranto, if it ex∣ceeds not three Sheets, 2 s. And if it exceeds, then for every Sheet more, 8 d. For the Entry of every Plea thereupon, ac∣cording to the same rate, 2 s. 8 d. For the Entry of any Plea in Accompt, pleaded before Auditors; if it be not above three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet more, 8 d. For the Entry of every Summons, Severance, and Aid Prayer, 2 s. For the Admission of an Infant to his Prochein Amie, or Guardian, 2 s. And if it be by Commission, 4 s. For Entry of the Defendant's Discharge upon a Capias pro Fine, or of a Contempt, 2 s. For the like, upon a Rescous retorned and ad∣mitted to his Fine, 4 s. For the Traversing of a Rescous, and the Issue thereupon, 6 s. For the Entry of the Allowance of every Ge∣neral or Special Pardon of an Outlary be∣fore Judgment, and after, 5 s. 4 d. For the Entry of a Dies dat', in Debt, Detinue, and Trespass, 1 s. And in all other Actions, 2 s. For the Entry of the Receipt of a Feme Covert, Tenant in Tail, Lessee for years, or the like, 2 s.
And for the Entry of a Plea, if it exceeds not three Sheets, 2 s. 8 d. And for every Sheet exceeding, 8 d. And if the Receipt be by Writ, then for En∣tring the Writ, 2 s. For the Entry of Assize, delivered into the Common-Pleas by the Justices of Assize to be Inrolled, for every Sheet, 8 d. And if the Assize come into the Common-Pleas, by Certiorari, then more for Entring the Certiorari, 2 s. For the Entry of every Abridgment of the demand in Dower or Assize, Wast, or the like, 2 s. For the Entry of every Pone to Remove a Plea by Writ out of the County-Court, there holden by Justices; and for the Re∣torn of the Pone, 4 s. For the Entry of any Record sent into the Common-Pleas, by Mittimus, or otherwise; and likewise for the Entry of every Rege Inconsulto, or such like, if it exceed not three Sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet exceeding, 8 d. For the Entry of every Certificate of Bastardy certified by the Bishop, the Awarding the Writ, and Judgment thereupon, 6 s. For the Entry of the License of the Court, to purchase a New Writ by Journies Accompts, 2 s. For the Entry of every Original Writ, deli∣vered of Record in Real and mixt Actions, 2 s.
For the Entry of every Sheet above three sheets, of every Challenge to the Sheriff, or Crowners to the Array or other special A∣verments, or the like, 8 d. For the Entry of every Remanet in Real Acti∣ons, 4 s. For the Entry of every Remittitur in Real and Mixt Actions, 2 s. For the Entry of every Sheet above three sheets, of every Aid Prayer. 8 d. For the Entry of the Admission of a Guar∣dian, if it be by Commission and Mittimus, 6 s. For the Entry of the License of the Court, to Compound upon Penal Statutes, 2 s. For the Entry of every Warrant of Attorney, made by the Tenant in Common Recove∣ries, or the like, after their appearance at the Bar, 2 s. For every Judgment by special Confession of the Title in Quare Impedit, or the like, if it exceed not three sheets, 4 s. And for every sheet after, 8 d. For the Entry of every Special Imparlance, 2 s. For the Entry of every Committitur of a Pri∣soner to the Fleet, by the Roll, being brought to the Bar by Writ, and every Tender of the Body in discharge of the Bail, 4 s. But if it be without Writ, then in either Case but 2 s. For the Entry of every Demand of a Priso∣ner to appear, and Remanding the said Pri∣soner, 4 s.
For the Entry of every Essoin in the Plea-Rolls, as upon Wagers of Law, 1 s. For the Entry of Bail upon every Reversal, for Insufficiency of the Exigent, or of the Re∣torn, 2 s. 4 d. For the Entry of every Declaration upon a Bill Penal, Debt upon a Demise, or the like special Declaration, if it exceeds not three sheets written, as aforesaid, 2 s. And for every sheet exceeding, 8 d. For the Entry of every several Count upon one Original in Debt, Detinue, Trespass, and the like, 1 s. And for the Entry of every several Count in Actions upon the Case and Accompt, and the like, upon several Days, if the Accompt exceeds not three sheets, 2 s. And if more, for every sheet exceeding, 8 d. For the Entry of every Special Condition, or Indorsment of any Obligation entred in haec verba, not exceeding the length of three sheets, 2 s. And for every sheet so exceeding, 8 d. But if the Condition be in Debt, for the pay∣ment of Mony at one day, or under the length of two sheets, then for the Entry thereof but 1 s. For the Entry of every Mittimus or Certiorari, and the Retorn thereof, 4 s. But if the Retorn thereof exceedeth three sheets, then for every sheet so exceeding, 8 d.
For the Entry of the Count in a Prohibition, and Pleadings thereupon after the Appear∣ance of the Defendant, not exceeding the length of three sheets, 2 s. And for every sheet above that length, 8 d. For the Entry of every Writ of Attaint, or False Judgment, 2 s. For the Entry of the Retorn thereof, and the Assignment of Errors or False Oath, not exceeding three sheets, 2 s. And for every sheet more, 8 d. For the Entry of every Sheet above three sheets, of the Oath of every Witness exa∣mined, to prove the Surmize in a Prohibi∣tion, or Audita Quereba, brought by an Infant; and the Entry of the Proofs de morte, and vita viri, in Dower, and the like Actions and Suits, 8 d. For the Entry of every Adjornment in Real Actions, 8 d. For the Entry of every Bail upon a Wither∣nam and Accompt, Audita Querela, Attach∣ment of Priviledge, and the like, 2 s. 4 d.
Fees appertaining to the aforesaid John Cook, Thomas Windford, and William Tempest, Esquires; Prothonotaries of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas at Westminster; for Making and Entring of Writs in their several Offices, and for other Dues belonging to them. FOr every Writ of Prohibition or Consulta∣tion, not exceeding four sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet so exceeding, 4 d. For every Withernam, Retorn' Habend', after Appearance, Second Deliverance, Writ of Priviledge, Habeas Corpus, Procedend', Certiorari, Summons and Resummons, Petit Cape, Venire fac', Scire fac', Elegit, Extent, Supersedeas, Subpoena, Writ to the Bishop, Attach', Distringas, Distring' in Assizis, and Attaint, and the like; Habere fac' seisinam, Habere fac' possessionem; Writs of View, Mit∣timus, Indempnitat' Nominis, and every other Special Writ, 2 s. For the Entry of every such Writ which re∣quireth an Entry, not exceeding four sheets, 2 s. For every Sheet more, 8 d. For every Ca. sa. and Fieri fac', 6 d. For every Testat' super Ca. sa. and Fieri fac', Distring' ad deliberand', and Writs to enquire of Damages in Trespass and Replevin, 1 s. For Writs to Inquire of Damages in Covenant, Ejectment, Actions upon the Case, and the like, 2 s.
For every Capias pro fine, 6 d. For the Exigent upon a Capias pro fine, 10 d. For the Entry of the Retorn of every Writ in the Prothonotary's Roll, other than the Ca. sa. Returned Non est Invent', and the Fieri fac' Returned Nulla habet bona, where∣upon any further Process is awarded, not exceeding four sheets, 2 s. And if more, then for every sheet more, 8 d. For the Entry of every Writ of Priviledge, or Habeas Corp', with the Bail, for one Cause, 6 s. And for every Cause more, 2 s. For the Entry of every Committitur upon a Habeas Corpus, unacum die & causa, 2 s. And for every other Cause, 2 s. For every Reversal of an Outlary, for default of Proclamation for one Name, and the Bail, or Nolle prosequi, 4 s. 4 d. And for every Name more, 2 s. For every Reversal, for the Insufficiency of the Writ of Proclamation or Retorn for one Name with Bail, or Nolle prosequi, 6 s. 4 d. And for every Name more, 2 s. And for every Reversal for Insufficient Exigent, or Retorn for one Name, 8 s. 4 d. And for every Name more, 2 s. For every Ca. sa. and Fi. fa. after a Devastavit, 2 s. Whereof (by allowance from the Protho∣notary) the Clerk hath had, 8 d.
For every Sheet exceeding four sheets of Writs of Inquiry of Damages in Covenant, Eject∣ment, Actions upon the Case, and like Actions, 4 d. For every Writ of Libertate, or the like Spe∣cial Writ 2 s. whereof (by allowance from the Prothonotary) the Clerk hath had 8 d. For the Entry of every such Writ, and the Entry of every other Special Writ which requireth an Entry, not exceeding four sheets, 2 s. And for every Sheet so exceeding 8 d. For every Distringas in Detinue, 1 s. Whereof the Clerk (by allowance from the Prothonotary) hath had 4 d. For Writs to Inquire of Damages in Covenant, Ejectment, Actions upon the Case, and the like Actions, if they exceed not four sheets, 2 s. Whereof (by allowance from the Protho∣notary) the Clerk hath had 8 d. For the Entry of every Committitur upon a Habeas Corpus, unacum die & causa, with one Cause Retorned besides the Entry of the Writ, 2 s. For the Entry of the Writ, 2 s. For every every other Cause Retorned, 2 s. For every Distring' nuper Vic', & non Omittas, 2 s. VVhereof (by allowance from the Protho∣notary) the Clerk hath had 8 d.
Fees due and belonging to the Prothonotaries Clerks, of the Court of Common-Pleas, at West∣minster, in their several Offices. INprimis, for the Copies of Common Decla∣rations and Pleas, for every Sheet con∣taining twelve Lines, 4 d. For every Sheet in Real and Mixt Actions, and Actions upon any Statute, and the like, 8 d. For Drawing every Special Declaration and Plea, for every sheet, 8 d. For every Continuance, every Term, of every Issue, Writ, Imparlance, Demurrer, or Special Verdict or Adjornment, 4 d. For Exemplifying of every Recovery with a single Voucher, 4 s. 6 d. For Exemplifying of a double Vaucher, 6 s. And for every Voucher more, 1 s. For Exemplifying any Record, not exceeding eight sheets, 5 s. And for every Sheet more, 6 For Drawing every extraordinary long Writ, after the rate of every sheet, 8 d. For the Entring of every Writ, and the Re∣torn thereof into the Prothonotary's Re∣membrance, for Drawing up a Judgment, if it exceeds not three sheets, 6 d. And for every Sheet after, 4 d. For the Entry of every Writ that requires an Entry, for every sheet, 4 d. For the Copy of a Judgment, for every sheet, 8 d.
For Entring every Common Rule into the Bill of Pleas or Common Remembrance, 4 d. For the Entring and Ingrossing of every Sum∣mons for a Recovery, and making the Writ of Summons, 2 s. For the Entring of every Mittimus and Dedi∣mus potestatem for a Recovery, 2 s. 6 d. For the Ingrossing of every Nisi prius, after the rate of every sheet, 4 d. For the Entring of every Testat' sur Ca. sa. & Fi. fa. 4 d. For the Search of one Term in the Prothono∣tary's Office, in his Docket or Remem∣brances, 4 d. For the making of every long Writ, as Prohi∣bitions and the like, for every sheet, 4 d. For the prosecution and suing out Process, for the King to bring in the party to make fine for his Contempt, until the party render himself, or be Outlawed, besides the Fees of the Court, 3 s. 4 d. And if there be cause of Prosecution after the Exigent retorned, then more 3 s. 4 d. For the Copies of a Suggestion, to grant a Pro∣hibition, for every sheet, 8 d. For Drawing every Surmize, to have a Prohibi∣tion, Special Verdict, and the like, for every sheet 8 d. For all Mony issuing out of the Court, for every Pound 1 d. 1 d.
Fees for the Prothonotaries of the said Court, and their Clerks, touching Informations only. FOr the Entry of every Information, and Signing of the Subpoena only to the Pro∣thonotary, 2 s. 8 d. And for Signing of every other Process to the Prothonotary, 1 s. 4 d. For Ingrossing of every Information, to the Pro∣thonotaries Clerk, 8 d. For the Copy of the said Information, if it amount to the number of five sheets of Pa∣per or upwards, to the Prothonotary's Clerk, 3 s. 4 d. And if it be under the number of five sheets, then for every sheet 8 d. For the Making of every Capias pro fine upon an Information, 6 d. For the Entring of the General Issue upon the Roll, where the Information was first Entred in the Term it was first exhibited to the Pro∣thonotary's Clerk, 8 d. For the Registring of every License to Com∣pound in the Office-Book, to the Prothono∣tary's Clerk 4 d.
Fees belonging to Richard Cook, Charles Cox, and George Walker, the Secondaries of the Prothonotaries. FOr the Copy of every Common Rule, 4 d. For taking a Note of the Rule of the Judges in Court, upon a Motion of a Serjeant, for drawing the same Rule in Paper, in Latin words, and Entring it in the Bill of Pleas, and the Copy thereof, the Draught not ex∣ceeding six Lines in Paper, 8 d. If the Rule exceeds six Lines, 1 s. For every Wager of Law in Court, or Non∣suit of the Plaintiff upon a Wager of Law, 1 s. For the Entring of a Committitur of a Defen∣dant to the Fleet in Execution of a Judg∣ment, or otherwise, in Court; and for ma∣king a Copy thereof for the Warden of the Fleet, containing the Cause of the Commit∣titur, 1 s. For the Entring of every Commitment to the Fleet, of any person yielding himself in dis∣charge of his Bail, and for the like Copy, 1 s. For attending the Judge from his Chamber to Westminster, to take any private Verdict Tried at the Bar, 3 s. 4 d. For Reading the Record of a Demurrer or Special Verdict in Court, 1 s. For taking of Bail in Court, 1 s.
For Entring an Admission of an Infant to his Prochein Amie, or Guardian, in the Prothno∣tary's Remembrance, 1 s. For the Copy of the Issue and Jurors Names, to be delivered to a Jury upon a Trial at Bar, 1 s. For the Reading of the Evidences upon Tri∣als at the Bar, of each party, Plaintiff and Defendant, 3 s. 4 d. For Entring of every Satisfaction by Special Warrant, Recordatur, and Discontinuance, 8 d. For every Satisfaction by General Warrant, 4 d. For the Entring of every Will, and the Letters of Administration, to enable an Executor or Administrator to acknowledge Satisfaction, and the Entry of the Satisfaction, 1 s. For every Copy of Interrogatories and Depo∣sitions of persons Examined upon interro∣gatories by Order of the Court, for every sheet 8 d. A Fee due to the Secondary of the Chief Protho∣notary. FOr the Swearing of every Attorney in Court, 1 s.
A Fee belonging to the Secondary of the Second Prothonotary. FOr Recording every Fine acknowledged at the Bar by Writ, and Moved by a Serjeant. 4 d. Other Fees claimed and usually taken by the Pro∣thonotaries. FOr the Entry of every Bail upon an Au∣dita Querela, Withernam, Attachment of Priviledge, or by Tenant by Receipt, or the like, for the Entry of the Bail only, 2 s. For the Entry of the Fore-judger of an At∣torney, 2 s. For Copies in Prohibitions, Audita Querela, Scire fac', Special Verdict, and the like, for every sheet 8 d. For Drawing and Entring the Reversal of an Utlary, for the Insufficiency of the Exigent or Retorn, 3 s. 4 d.
Fees belonging to Andrew Philips, Esq; Thomas Stringer, &c. Philizers of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas at Westminster. IMprimis, for every Capias, Alias, and Plures Capias, in Debt. Detinue, or Trespass, not having more than four Names in a Writ; and for the Entry thereof 6 d. And if above four Names, 1 s. For the Delivery of every first Capias upon Record, 4 d. For a Testatum upon any of the said Writs Pone and Distress, where it lieth, Pone in Replevin and Summons, 1 s. For every Capias, alias Capias & Plures Capias in Accompt, Covenant, Annuity, Ejectione firmae, and upon Penal Statutes, with their Entries, 1 s. For every Writ in an Action upon the Case and Entry, and more, according to the length, 1 s. For every Retorn' Habend', and Second Deli∣verance, before Appearance and Entry thereof, 2 s. 6 d. For every Non Omittas and Capias in Wither∣nam, and the Entry, 2 s. 6 d. For every Pone in Partition, Warrantia Chartae, Quare Impedit and Wast, with their Entries, 1 s. For every Writ of Inquiry of Damages in Real Actions, Scire facias, and Supersedeas, 2 s.
For every Grand Cape, alias Summons, Pet Cape, and Entry thereof, 2 s. 6 d. Of the Demandant for every Writ of View and Entry thereof, 2 s. 6 d. For every Copy of the Entry thereof, 8 d. For the View Prier, 2 For every Writ of Seisin, the Judgment and Entry thereof, 4 s. 6 d. For every Writ of Habeas Corpus, Duces tecum Distring' nuper Vic', Distring' Ballivum, and their Entries, 2 s. For every Writ of Rescous, and Entry thereof, 2 s. For the Entry of every Adjornment, Conti∣nuance, and Resort, 4 d. For every Special Bail, and the Entry thereof 2 s. 10 d. For every Appearence upon Writs to Arrest and Entry thereof upon Record, 1 s. For the Appearance of every Defendant, no Entred upon Record, 4 d. For Searches, Copies, Number Rolls, and giving of Rules, 4 d. Fees belonging to Charles Broughton, &c. Exigenters of the Court of Common-Pleas. IMprimis, for every Exigent, 1 s. More, according to the length, For every Proclamation, 6 d. More, according to the length,
Fees due to Edward Mills, Clerk of the Inrolments, Warrants, and Estreats, in the Common-Pleas. FOr the Inrolment of the shortest Deed, 6 s. If it contains Three quarters of a Roll, 7 s. 6 d. If it be a full Roll, 10 s. If it be a Roll and an Half, 15 s, And so according to that Rate, Every Warrant of Attorney in Debt, Trespass, and Detinue, 4 d. Every other Warrant, called Double Warrants, 8 d. For a Post Terminum, 4 d. The Sheriff's Warrant, 1 s. The Lord Mayor of London, his Warrant, 6 s. 8 d. For a Warrant upon a Writ of Covenant, per Ordinem Cur', 4 d. The Secondaries of the Counter, in Easter Term yearly, 13 s. 4 d. The Entring of an Attorneys Name in the Roll of Attorneys, 3 s. 4 d. Paid to the Clerk by every Attorney, 4 d. a Term, called the Roll-Groat, which is paid to the Box, 4 d. Also paid to the Clerk, by the Prothonota∣ries 12 d. upon every Recovery, which is likewise paid to the Judges, 12 d.
To the Clerk, when an Attorney is first Entred into the Roll, 1 s. For the Search for a Recovery, for a Term 4 d. For the Search for a Deed Inrolled, for a Term, 4 d. For the Search for a Warrant, 1 s. For a Ne Recipiatur for Warrant of Attorney, 1 s. 4 d. Fees of Francis Lane, Esq; Chirographer of the Common-Pleas. IMprimis, The Ancient Fee limited by the Statute of 13 Ed. 1. for every Fine, 4 s. Item, from 4 H. 7. for the New Service for Proclaiming the Fines, 8 d. Item, by the Statute of 23 Eliz. for Writing the Rolls, 4 d. So the Chirographer's Fee for every Fine, is 5 s. For Exemplifying of a Fine the same Term in which it is Ingrossed, 2 s. 8 d. For Exemplifying of an Ancient Fine, 13 s. 4 d. If it be Exemplified with Prolamations, then 16 s. 8 d. For every Sheet of every Fine, of Twelve Lines, Copied out of the Records, 1 s. For the sight of every Record, taking no Copy, 1 s. For the Sight of every Record, being very Ancient, from Hen. 8. upward, 3 s. 4 d. For the Search of every Fine, from Hen. 8. to this present, for every year, 8 d.
For the Search of every Fine during the Reign of Hen. 8. and so upward, for every year. 1 s. For Certifying of every Record by Writ of Error, 12 s. For a Quid Juris clam' quem reddit' reddidit, and Per quae servitia, 6 s. For Entring a Claim upon the Record, 5 s. For allowing of Proclamations of a Fine brought into the Office after the Term is ended, 6 d. For the Post Terminum of a Fine, 1 s. 2 d. For the Clerks, for Ingrossing of every Ordi∣nary Fine, hath been Anciently paid 2 s. 6 d. and for above Twenty years last past 1 s. more, in all 3 s. 6 d. And for longer Fines, they have been always paid according to length. Fees belonging to Henry Ludlow, Esq; Clerk of the King's Silver, in the Court of Common-Pleas. IMprimis, for every Fine taken by the Lord Chief Justice of the Court, or any Judge of Assize, 10 d. For every Fine taken by a Special Commission, over and above the former rate, 4 d. For every several Caption of a Fine in a Special Commission, 4 d. For every Fine of the Western Circuit, over and above the former rates, 8 d.
For a Fine certified by Certiorari, after the Death of any Judge or Commissioners, over and above the former rates, 6 d. For the Post Terminum of a Fine brought in the next Vacation, after the Retorn of the Writ of Covenant, 6 d. For every Search of every Term of a Fine, 4 d. For the Copy of the King's Silver, for every sheet 8 d. For the Post Terminum of a Fine brought in the next Term, after the Retorn of the Writ of Covenant, and for every other Term, 3 s. 4 d. For the Fee of a Ne Recipiatur of a Fine, either by Order or Warrant of the Courts or Judges, 1 s. Fees paid to the Clerk of the Treasury, John Green Deputy. FOr the Copy of every Issue or Imparlance, in Debt, Trespass, or such like Personal Actions, for which the Prothonotaries Clerk receive but 4 d. the sheet, the Clerk of the Treasury hath only 4 d. and for all Copies of Books to be Exemplified, 4 d. the Sheet; the Moiety whereof he alloweth to the Under-Clerk that writeth it, 4 d. For all Copies of Judgments, and of all Real Actions, Recognizances, Informations, and such like, for which the Prothonotaries Clerks receive 8 d. a sheet; and also Copies of Deeds Inrolled, the Clerk of the Treasury
receiveth for every sheet 8 d. the Moiety whereof is likewise allowed to the Under-Clerk that writeth it, 8 d. For the Search of every Term, above Ten years past, 4 s.; whereof there is paid to the Under-Keeper of the Treasury Eight pence, 4 s. For every Exemplification, not exceeding three sheets, 7 s. 6 d. For every Sheet exceeding three sheets, 1 s. For every Record of Nisi prius, not exceeding three sheets, 2 s. For every Sheet exceeding 4 d.; whereof is paid to the Under-Clerk, for as much as they Ingross, for every sheet 4 d. For the Key of the Treasury, for Searches and Copies when the Court shall not be Sitting, 1 s. 6 d. For Exemplifications of Verdicts issuing out of the Prothonotaries Office, assigned by the Clerk of the Treasury, he hath excepted by Agreement, out of the Prothonotaries Fee, 2 s. For every Record, to be carried out of the Treasury into the Exchequer-Chamber, or to the King's-Bench, 6 s. 8 d.
Fees due and usually paid to Thomas Weddal, Richard Boycott, &c. Under-Clerks of the Treasary, Writing in the Office. FOr Examining every Old Record for the Assizes, not exceeding Twelve sheets, 12 d. and so according to that Rate, as they are in length, 1 s. For Examining and Ingrossing every Record of Nisi prius, not exceeding three sheets, 12 d. and for every sheet exceeding, according as the Prothonotaries Clerks receive in the like case, 4 d. For every Jurata, 4 d. For every Copy of a Praecipe, made out of the Rolls, 4 d. For Examining all Paper-Books in the Trea∣sury, not exceeding Twelve sheets, 12 d. and so according to that rate 1 s. For Ingrossing all Exemplifications, for the first five sheets, 4 s. 4 d. And for every Sheet after, 4 d. Fees belonging to Edward Horwood, William Holmes, &c. the Four Cryers of the Court of Common-Pleas. IMprimis, for every Affidavit and Oath Sworn in Court, 4 d. For every Roll brought into Court, 6 d. For every Bail taken in Court, 1 s.
For every Guardian admitted in Court, 1 s. For every Wager in Law, 4 s. 4 d. For every Attorney admitted upon Record, 6 s. For every Nisi prius in Middlesex, 4 s. For Calling a Jury at the Bar, 2 s. For Keeping a Jury at a Trial at the Bar, during the time of the Sitting of the Court, 13 s. 4 d. For Keeping a Jury all Night more, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For the Chamber in which the Jury is kept, 4 s. For every Nonsuit at the Bar, 4 s. For Calling out of every Scire facias, 4 d. For Calling out of every Grand Cape, 4 d. For Calling every Bill upon a Fore-judger, 4 d. For every Serjeant at Law, at the Terms end, 4 s. For every Serjeant at Law called to the Bar, 2 l. For every Judge that cometh to the Bench, his Robes that he is Sworn in, For every Officer Sworn in Court, 2 l. For every Prothonotary, at the end of the Term, 2 s. For every other Officer at the end of the Term, 2 s. For Summoning any Attorney or Sheriff by the Direction of the Court, or Petition to any Judge, 2 s. 6 d.
The Fees of John Walker, Esq; Marshal-Usher and Chief Proclamator of the Court of Common-Pleas. FOr every Judgment, 4 d. For every Nonsuit, 4 d. For every Recovery, 8 d. For every Fine proclaimed, 8 d. Fees due and taken at the Alienation-Office. In Term time. TO the Master in Chancery, upon every Writ 4 d. To the Receiver 6 d. To the Clerk that Enters the Writ, 6 d. To the Clerk that Indorses the Writ, being a Writ of Covenant, 4 d. To the same Clerk, for Indorsing every Writ of Entry, 6 d. In the Vacation. To the said Master, as above, 4 d. To the said Receiver, as above, 6 d. To the Clerk that Enters the Writ, 1 s. To the Clerk that Indorses the Writs, both Covenant and Entry, each 6 d.
Fees due and taken by the Clerk of the Inrollments of Fines and Recoveries. IMprimis, The Fee due to the Judges by the Statute of 23 Eliz. for Inrolling of every Fine and Recovery severally, 6 s. 8 d. For Exemplifying of every Inrolment to the Judges, due by the same Statute, Five shil∣lings, 5 s. For the Search of every Fine Inrolled, by the Year 4 d. For Copying any Fine Inrolled, by the sheet 4 d. For the Clerk's Fee for Inrolling, by the Roll 8 s. 4 d. For Exemplifying, after the same rate, 8 s. 4 d. For every Rule upon Amendment, 3 s. 4 d. For Retorning of Writs of Covenant upon Fines, Writs of Entry, Summons and Seisins upon Common Recoveries as Deputy upon Record for Sheriffs, appointed by the Court, the Ancient Fee of 2 s. to the said Clerk, and the Party who prosecutes the same, 2 s. Fees of the Outlary-Office in the Court of Common-Pleas, Charles Franklyn, Esq; Deputy to Mr. Attorney-General. FOr all General Writs that are no Proprium, Ten-pence apiece, 10 d. For all Propr' General Writs, Six-pence apiece, 6 d.
For all Special Writs of all kinds, but Propr', Two and four-pence apiece, 2 s. 4 d. For all Propr' Special Writs, Fourteen-pence apiece, 1 s. 2 d. For Transcribing of Writs and Inquisitions of Lands or Goods, seized upon Outlaries, into the Exchequer, and of an Exigent and Re∣torn thereof, when they are required by Plaintiffs, for their benefit, Eight shillings apiece, 8 s. If it be Commanded by the Lord Treasurer of England, the Chancellor or Barons of the Exchequer, or by the King's Attorney, or Solicitor General, then no Fee is paid or demanded. To the Under-Clerk, for Ingrossing it on Parchment, 2 s. For Transcribing the Outlary, and Reversal thereupon, into the Exchequer, Five shillings apiece, 5 s. For a General Certificate of an Outlary, or Reversal thereupon, Two shillings apiece, 2 s. For Entring the Discharge of an Outlary when it is Reversed, or a Writ of Error sued forth thereupon, that no Process be made afterwards, Two shillings and eight pence apiece, 2 s. 8 d.
The Under-Clerk's Fee. FOr writing General Certificates, 4 d. For Entring an Outlawry upon the Rolls (which is very seldom) 8 d. For Searching an Outlary, 12 d. a Year, 1 s. For Entring an Exigent, pying and filing it, when no Process is made thereupon, 4 d. For a brief Copy of an Outlary, 4 d. The Fees of Thomas Simpson, Esq; Clerk of the Juries. IMprimis, For the Writ of Habeas Corp' Jur' in Actions of Debt and Trespass, 10 d. For the Writ of Habeas Corp' in other Actions, 1 s. 4 d. For a Distring' Jur' cum decem tales, 2 s. 4 d. For the Copy of a Jury, a Term-Search, a Number-Roll, and Continuance, for every of them 4 d. apiece, 4 d. The Fees of William Hall, Clerk of the Essoins. IMprimis, For every Essoin and Exception, 6 d. For every Adjornment and Copy, 6 d. For every Idem dies, 4 d.
For every Rule, 4 d. For every Copy, 4 d. For every Nonsuit in Actions Personal, for want of an Adjornment, 2 s. 4 d. To his Clerk, 1 s. For every Nonsuit in Actions Real, 4 s. 4 d. To his Clerk, 1 s. For the Exemplification of every Essoin, and Nonsuit thereupon, 7 s. 6 d. To his Clerk for the Copy thereof, 3 s. 4 d. For putting in of a Roll after the Part is bound up, 3 s. 4 d. To his Clerk, 1 s. For several Fees from several Officer of the said Court of Common-Pleas, towards the Numbring and Marking their Rolls every Term, 4 l. 9 s. Also of every Officer, for every Roll not brought to the Clerk of the Essoins to be bound, according to an Ancient Order of the said Court, Twelve pence, 12 d. The Fees of Philip Parry, Clerk of the Office of Supersedeas to the Exigent. FOr the Signing of every Writ, if brought ready written, 1 s. 6 d. For the making of every Ordinary Writ, not brought ready written, 6 d. And if the Writ exceed six Lines, then for every four Lines so exceeding, 4 d.
The Fees of William Smith, Porter of the Court of Common-Pleas. FOr a Fine, if a Woman be examined, 4 d. For a Bail taken in Court, 4 d. For a Guardian, 4 d. For the Jury at the Bar, 5 s. For every Attorney that is made, 1 s. For a Wager at Law, 6 d. For every Nisi prius, 2 s. For every Serjeant that is made, 5 s. For every Writ of Entry, 4 d. The Fees of Edmond Clench, Keeper of the Treasury of the Court of Common-Pleas. FOr a Term that is above Ten years, 8 d. For Seven years, under Ten years, 4 d. For Three years, under Seven years, 4 d. For a Plea Roll that is carried into Court, 6 d. For the Search of a Plea-Roll, 4 d. For making up of the Rolls every Term, of the Clerk of Essoins, 2 s. 6 d. Of him for Records and Labour, 3 s. For every Attorney that is Sworn, 1 s. For every Jury at Bar, 1 s. For every Nisi prius in Middlesex, 1 s.
For his Key, for a Search or a Copy of a Prae∣cipe, after the Term, 1 s. 6 d. For every Warrant of Attorney entred in the Treasury after the Term, 4 d. For every King-Silver that is Entred in the Treasury, 4 d. Given by every of the Prothonotaries at the end of every Term, 2 s. 6 d. Given by every other Officer at the end of every Term, 1 s. Given by the Clerk, for Inrolment of Deeds, at the end of every Term, 2 s. Given by every New Officer that is Sworn, 5 s. Given by every Serjeant made, 5 s. Given by the Clerk of the Treasury at the end of every Term, 5 s. The Fees due to Edward Horwood, the Court-Keeper. FOr every Wager at Law, 1 s. 10 d. For a Jury at the Bar, 1 s. Given by every Officer Sworn, 5 s. Given by every Serjeant made, 5 s.
The Fees of the Serjeants at Law. FOr a Motion, or Setting of his Hand to a Special Plea, or to a Demurrer, 10 s. For a Trial at Bar, or an Argument upon a Demurrer, 1 l. For Drawing a Recovery at the Bar, 3 s. 4 d. For Declaring upon a Fine at the Bar, 3 s. 4 d. The Attorney's Fees. THe Fee for every Term in every Real Action, and Prosecution of a Fine, 6 s. 8 d. For Prosecution or Defence in any Prohibi∣tion, Action of Debt upon Judgment, or other Record, Action of Accompt after a Capias ad Computand' awarded; and in all Popular and Mixt Actions, and Actions grounded upon any Statute; the Attorney's Fee is for every Term, for every such Cause during the Prosecution and Defence, 6 s. 8 d. And for every Action Personal, for every Term, 3 s. 4 d.
The Fines, Commons and Fees claimed to be d and belonging to Richard Manlove, Esq; Warden of the Fleet, and other Officers there. Of an Archbishop, a Duke, or a Dutchess. FOr the Liberty of House and Irons, the first coming, 10. For the first Weeks Commons, 5. The Dismission, 3 l. 5. For the Ordinary-Commons Weekly, with Wine, 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Clerk's Fee, for making the Obligation 10. For Entring the Name and Cause, 5. The Porters Fee, 10. The Gaolers Fee, 10. The Chamberlains Fee, 10 s. For Wine, 1. Of a Marquess Marquess, an Earl, a Countess Viscountess. FOr the Liberty of the House and Irons, a at the first coming, 7 l. The first Weeks Commons, 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Dismission, 2 l. 10 s. For the Ordinary-Commons Weekly, with Wine, 2 l. The Clerks Fee, for making the Obligation, 7 s.
For Entring the Name and Cause, 3 s. The Porters Fee, 7 s. The Gaolers Fee, 7 s. The Chamberlains Fee, 7 s. For Wine, 13 s. 4 d. Of a Lord Spiritual or Temporal, a Lady, the Wife of a Baron or Lord. FOr the Liberty of the House and Irons, at the first coming, 5 l. For the first Weeks Commons, 2 l. The Dismission, 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. For the Ordinary Commons Weekly, with Wine, 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Clerks Fee for making the Obligation, 5 s. For Entring the Name and Cause, 2 s. 6 s. The Porters Fee, 5 s. The Gaolers Fee, 5 s. The Chamberlains Fee, 5 s. For Wine, 10 s. Of a Knight, a Lady, the Wife of a Knight, a Doctor of Law or Divinity, and other of like Calling, having Two hundred Marks a year Living. FOr the Liberty of House and Irons, at the first coming, 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. For the first Weeks Commons, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Dismission, 12 s.
For the Ordinary-Commons Weekly, with Wine, 18 s. 6 d. The Clerks Fee for making the Obligation, 2 s. 4 d. For Entring the Name and Cause, 4 d. The Porters Fee, 1 s. The Gaolers Fee, 1 s. The Chamberlains Fee, 1 s. For Wine, One Gallon— Of an Esquire, a Gentle-man or Gentle-woman, that shall sit at the Parlour-Commons, or any other person or persons under that Degree, that shall be at the same Ordinary-Commons of the Parlour. FOr the Liberty of the House and Irons, at first coming, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For the first Weeks Commons, 16 s. 4 d. The Dismission, 7 s. 4 d. For the Ordinary-Commons Weekly, with Wine, 10 s. The Clerks Fee, for making the Obligation, 2 s. 4 d. For Entring the Name and Cause, 4 d. The Porters Fee, 1 s. The Gaolers Fee, 1 s. The Chamberlains Fee, 1 s. For Wine, One Gallon—
Of a Yeoman, or any other, that shall be at the Hall-Commons, Man or Woman. FOr the Liberty of the House and Irons, at first coming, 13 s. 4 d. For the first Weeks Commons, 6 s. 10 d. The Dismission, 7 s. 4 d. For the Ordinary-Commons Weekly, with Wine, 5 s. The Clerks Fee, for making the Obligation, 2 s. 4 d. For Entring the Name and Cause, 4 d. The Porters Fee, 1 s. The Gaolers Fee, 1 s. The Chamberlains Fee, 1 s. For Wine, One Pottle— Of a Poor Man in the Wards, that hath his part at the Box. THe Dismission, 7 s. 4 d. Of every Prisoner (that he may lawfully License abroad) for his Liberty of going abroad with a Keeper, for every Half-day, Ten-pence, 10 d. For every Whole-day, with a Keeper, Twenty-pence, 1 s. 8 d. The Fees due to the Clerk of the Fleet. FOr the Allowance of every Writ of Ha∣beas Corpus, or Attachment, 2 s. 4 d. For the Retorn of every Writ of Habeas Cor∣pus, or Attachment, 2 s. 4 d.
For the Retorn of the first Cause upon a Ha∣beas Corpus cum causa, 4 s. For the Retorn of every other Cause, 2 s. For Allowance of every Supersedeas, or other Discharge, 2 s. 4 d. The Tipstaffs Fees. FOr Safe-conducting of every Prisoner to and from the Court, and from the Judges Chambers, 5 s. The Seal-Office Fees, of the Court of Common-Pleas: The Duke of Northumberland, Master. FOr the Sealing of every Writ, 7 d. For the Sealing of every Exemplification, 2 s. 2 d. For the Sealing of every Writ at an Outlaries, or Clerk's Suit, 1 d. For the Sealing of every Outlary, 1 d. These are the Ancient Fees, according to the best Information we can get, and as we believe. Dec. 1689. W. Farmerie. Silv. Petyt. Henry Clift.
We have no Authentick Table of the Ancient Fees belonging to the Plea-Side of the Court of Kings-Bench, which we can Pre∣sent upon our Oaths; but have heard upon Inquiry, That such Ancient Tables of Fees, as remain'd in the Rings-Bench-Office, were burnt in the great Fire of London. We have therefore sent to the several Offices and Clerks be∣longing to the same Court, for Tables of their respective Fees, who have Return'd them to us, and are as followeth: Fees due to Sir Robert Henley, Chief Protho∣notary of the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr the Latitat, which is the first Process, 1 s. 10 d. For every Habeas Corpus, Certiorari, Scire facias, Supersedeas, Procedendo, Elegit, Restitution',
habere facias possessionem & seisinam, Prohibi∣tion', for each, 1 s. 8 d. For Signing and Entring every Judgment in Debt, by Default, 3 s. 8 d. For longer Entries on the Rolls, of Issues, De∣murrers, &c. for every Roll 6 s. 8 d. For every Special Bail upon a Cepi Corpus, 2 s. 6 d. For every Special Bail upon an Habeas Corpus, 4 s. 10 d. For every Common Bail, 1 s. 2 d. For every Commitment in Execution, 3 s. For every Satisfaction acknowledged, 2 s. 6 d. For Entry of every Judgment upon Demurrer and Special Verdicts, 2 s. 6 d. For Admission of every Clerk into his Office, 1 l. 1 s. 6 d. Fees due to Mr. Richard Aston, Secondary, a Deputy of the Chief Prothonotary of the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr Signing Costs upon all Paper-Rules for each, 1 s. For Marking Rolls, when Judgments are gives by the Court on Demurrers, Special Ver∣dicts, and Writs of Error, each 1. For Keeping Mony brought into Court, for every Hundred Pound, and so per R 1. For Drawing of Special Verdicts at the Bar per Sheet, with three Copies, 3 s. 4 d. Upon Swearing every Attorney, 1 l. 1 s. 6 d.
For Returning Juries to Try Causes at the Bar, each Party give what he pleases. For Clerks Dockets, each 1 s. Out of Common-Bails, each Term, 4 l. For Turning over every Prisoner in Court, 1 s. For acknowledging every Deed to be Inrolled in Court, 1 s. For Signing every Bail in Court, 1 s. For Calling every Cause upon Trial, and Wa∣ger of Law, 2 s. For allowing every Writ of Error, and Audita Querela, 1 s. Fees belonging to Mr. Clerk and Mr. Stone, Clerks of the Papers of the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr Copying every Special Plea, Replica∣tion, Rejoynder, and other Pleadings, every sheet 4 d. For making the Paper-Book, either Issue or Demurrer, every sheet 8 d. For Entring into their Book every Record, to be Read in Court, 1 s. For Entring into their Book every Cause, to Hear Counsel on both sides, 1 s. For Entring every Trial at Bar, 2 s. For making a Bill of the Issue, for every Judge, on a Trial at Bar, 1 s. 8 d. For Reading the Record and the Evidence, upon every Trial at the Bar, both Parties pay according to the number of the Evi∣dences, and length of the Trial.
Fees due to Mr. Robert Pugh, Clerk of the Rules in the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr Entring every Rule given to Plead, to Reply, to Rejoyn, to joyn in Demurrer, &c. 4 d. For Drawing and Entring every Rule made in Court, 8 d. For every Rule by Consent, and every Admit∣tance of an Infant by an Infant, 1 s. For every Order of Assize made a Rule of Court, 1 s. For every Rule upon Postea, Writs of Inquiry, Scire fac', Proviso, Retorn' Habend', Certiorars, 4 d. For every Rule to Amerce Sheriffs, Procedend', Certiorar', &c. 4 d. For every Day Rule for Prisoners, Signed by one of the Judges, 8 d. For the Copy of every Rule in Term time, and until the Continuance-Day, 4 d. For a Copy of every Rule after the Continu∣ance-Day, 8 d. For the Copy of every Affidavit, not exceed∣ing three sheets, 1 s. If longer, for every sheet 4 d. For Marking the Evidence in Court, as well for the Plaintiff, as the Defendant, and ta∣king the Charge of them upon Trials at Bar, both Parties pay according to the number of Evidence and length of the Trial.
Fees due to Mr. Thomas Thacker, Clerk of the Bails and Postea's, in the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr every Post Termin' Bail, 4 d. For Deliberatur upon every Postea by him, 4 d. Fees belonging to Mr. Robert Walker, Clerk of the Docquets. FOr every Term, Attorney or others, Searching in the Docquet of Judgments, Issues, or other Entries, pay to the Clerk of the Docquet, for each Term 4 d. For the Search of all Files of Writs in the said Office, for each Term, 4d. For the Copies of all such Writs and Special Bails as are in his Custody, pay the Clerk of the Docquet, for every sheet 4 d. Item, The Marshal of the Kings-Bench payeth for the Making and Copying of a Docquet of Committiturs, for each Term, 11 s.
Fées paid to the Custos Brevium, and his Clerks. IMprimis, for every Record of Nisi prius in a short Action of Trespass, 4 s. 6 d. For every other Record, how short soever, 5 s. For every full Process of Nisi prius, Mittimus, or Certiorari, 6 s. For every Nisi prius on the Crown-side, 6 s. 8. d. For every full Process there, 6 s. 8 d. For every Nisi prius upon an Indictment for Murther, for every Name that pleadeth to Issue, 6 s. 8 d. For every short Exemplification in Trespass, 10 s. For every Exemplification containing a large Skin, 1 l. For the like on the Crown-side, 2 l. For every Exemplification in Ejectione firmae, 13 s. 4 d. For Filing a Writ, being a Post diem upon the Angl', 4 d. For a Post Terminum at any time after the first Week ended in the Second Term, 1 s. 8 d. For every Warrant of Attorney in Murther, 1 s. For every Sheriffs Warrant, 8 d. For every other Warrant of Attorney, 4 d. For every Search for a Roll, for Ten years last past, 6 d.
For every Search for a Roll above Ten years last past, 3 s. 4 d. For every Search for Rolls for the six last Terms, For Search for every File of Declarat', Bail, Judicial and other Writs, after ten years. 1 s. 4 d. For the Copy of every Sheet between party and party, 4 d. For a Copy of a Deed Inrolled, for every sheet 8 d. For a Copy on the Crown-side, for every sheet 8 d. For a File of an Angl', for every Term after one 4 d. For the Copies of every Writ of Appeal, per sheet, 8 d. For Attending with the Keys of the Treasury, for the Search of Records above 10 years past, 3 s. 4 d. For Attending sedente Curia, The Clerks Fees. FOr writing every Nisi prius, Mittimus, or Certiorari, being but one Process, 1 s. 6 d. For every Process more than one, 1 s. And for every Process of Nisi prius on the Crown-side, 1 s. 8 d. For Writing every Exemplification in Trespass or Ejectment, 3 s. 4 d. For Writing every large Skin exemplified, 6 s. 8 d. For the same on the Crown-side, 13 s. 4 d.
Fees belonging to the Philizers of the Court of Kings-Bench. IMprimis, for every Capias, Al', Plures, Exigent, Proclam', and Distring', in Trespass, 6 d. For every Exigent and Proclamation in Replevin, 6 d. For every Pone, Cap', Alias, Plures Testat', in Replevin, 6 d. For every Supersedeas upon the Mean Process aforesaid, 2 s. For every Cap', Al', Plur', Testat', and Exigent in Trans. super Casum, Action on a Statute-Stap', Custod', Transgr', contra formam Conditionis, Ejectments, and such Special Writs, 1 s. For Proclamation thereupon, 1 s. For the Distringas thereupon, 1 s. For every Cap, Alias, and Plur' in an Appeal of Mayhem, 1 s. For every Name in every Cap', Al', & Plur', in every Appeal of Murther, 2 s. For every Proclamation in every Appeal, 2 s. For every General Cap' utl' & deliberatur de Recordo, 10 d. For every Special Cap' utl' & deliberat' de Re∣cordo, 2 s. 4 d. For every Resummons, Habeas Corpus, and Distring', in Attaint before Appearance, 2 s. For every Deliberat' de Recordo, 4 d.
For every Writ of Withernam, Second Deli∣verance, and Retorn' habend' before Avowry, 2 s. For every Venire fac', 6 d. For every Distring' Jur', Deliberat' de Recordo, & Jur', Nisi prius, 1 s. 2 d. For every Subpoena upon Issue, by Original, 2 s. For Entring of Declarations in Trespass, by the Original, 1 s. For Entring Not Guilty thereupon, 1 s. For Entring every Ejectment and Action upon the Case, not above three sheets, 2 s. If longer, for every sheet 8d. For every General Imparlance, 4 d. For every Special Imparlance, 2 s. Copies of Writs of Attaint before Appearance, per sheet 8 d. For Entring every General Appearance, 1 s. For Entring every Special Appearance, or Special Bail, 2 s. 10 d. For every Writ of Allocatus in Trespass, 1 s. For the like, in Case, 2 s. For every Writ of Inquiry of Damages, not above three sheets, 2 s. If longer, for every sheet (and so in all other Writs) 4 d. For every Warrant of Scire fac', Elegit, Exigent, Post Cap', or the like, 2 s. For every Writ of Fieri fac', Ca. sa. or the like, 1 s. For every Duces tecum, Distring' nuper Vic', and Distring' Ballivum, 2 s.
For every Distring' reciting the Statute of Hue and Cry against the Hundred, 5 s. For every Testat' Distring', Testat' Pone, Testat' Cap. in Withernam, being long, per sheet 4 d. For the Inrolling of the Indenture, per sheet 4 d. For Continuing every Process, per Term 4 d. For Ingrossing a Special Outlary, with the Inquisition thereupon, to be sent into the Exchequer, 8 s. For Entring all Reversals of Outlaries, accord∣ing to their length, per sheet 4 d. For Searches, Copies, Number-Rolls, and giving the Rules, 4 d. And if more than four Defendants in any Writs or Process, except Baron and Feme, then double Fees; and if above five, then treble, and so on. Fees due to the Marshal of the Court of Kings-Bench. IMprimis, for Commitment of every Priso∣ner, 15 s. Thus Distributed: The Marshal, 4 s. To the Parson, 2 s. To the Chamberlain, 4 s.
To the Turn-Key, 4 s. To the Under-Chamberlain, 6 d. To the Watchman, 6 d. To the Chamberlain, for Sheets, 2 s. To the Marshal, for Dismission Fee of every Prisoner of the Kings-Bench, 18 s. Thus Distributed: To the Marshal, 10 s. 4 d. To the Steward of the House, 4 s. To the Tipstaves, 2 s. To the two Porters, 1 s. 4 d. To his Clerk, 1 s. For Chamber-Rent of every Prisoner which lieth with a Bed-fellow, Weekly 2 s. 6 d. For Lodging of every Prisoner, who desires to have a Chamber to himself, or lye alone, agreeth with the Marshal, as is accustom∣ed. To the Marshal, for every Prisoner Commit∣ted in Court, or at a Judges Chamber, tho' not sent over, 10 s. 4 d. To the Marshal, for every Person arraigned for Felony, Murther, or other Crime, and Bailed, and not Committed, 10 s. 4 d. To the Marshal out of every Action com∣menced in the Court of Kings-Bench, where∣in the Marshal is mentioned; viz. upon every Judgment, Bail, Committitur, Dimutitur and Satisfaction; out of each 4 d.
To the Marshal, for every Prisoner charged in Execution, per Pound 3 d. For every Prisoner charged upon Action, per Pound, 1 ½ d. To the Martial for a Fine, for Irons for every Prisoner, Committed upon a Criminal Mat∣ter, 5 l. To the Marshal, for Discharge of every Pri∣soner out of the Common-Side, which by the Marshal's permission is received by the Turn Key of the Common-Side, for his Fidelity and Encouragement in executing of the Office, 10 s. Fees due to the Deputy Marshal, and Clerk of the Papers, of the Court of Kings-Bench. UPon Discharge of every Prisoner, upon Action, Execution, or other Charge, 11 s. 6 d. Out of which; The Deputy-Marshal is to have, 6 s. The Clerk of the Papers, 5 s. 6 d. For every other Action, Execution, or other Charge, 2 s. 4 d. The Deputy, 2 s. The Clerk, 4 d. For the Allowance of any Writ of Habeas Corpus, or other Writ against any Prisoner, 2 s. 4 d. The Deputy, 2 s The Clerk, 4 d.
For the Return of every Writ of Habeas Cor∣pus and Attachment out of the Chancery, to the Clerk 3 s. 4 d. For Discharge of Prisoners on a Criminal Ac∣count, 6 s. 8 d. To the Deputy, 4 s. The Clerk, 2 s. 8 d. To the Deputy, for Commitment of a Pri∣soner in Court, or at a Judges Chamber, 2 s. To the Clerk, 1 s. For the first Cause, for any Prisoner Returned to the Fleet, or any other Prison, by Habeas Corpus, 4 s. To the Deputy, 2 s. The Clerk, 2 s. For every Cause following, 2 s. To the Deputy, 1 s. The Clerk, 1 s. To the Deputy, for every Trial at Westminster by Nisi prius, 2 s. 6 d. To him, for every Trial at Bar, 10 s. To him, for every Cognizance taken in Court, 2 s. To him, for Pardon pleaded in Court, 10 s. To him, for every Bail taken in Court, on the Plea-Side, 2 s.
Fees due to the Tipstaves of the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr bringing every Prisoner, Committed by the Court, or at a Judges Chamber, 6 s. For Carrying every Prisoner to the Kings-Bench Court, or any other place, by Writ of Habeas Corpus, Rule of Court, or other Command, 6 s. To them, for the Arraignment of any person, or Pardon pleaded in Court, 8 s. 6 d. For every Bail taken in Court, 2 s. To the Tipstaff that attends Trial at the Kings-Bench by Nisi prius in Middlesex, for Keeping the Jury, 3 s. 6 d. Fees belonging to Henry Bolt, Gent. Under-Clerk to the Custos Brevium of the Kings-Bench, of the Inner-Treasury. FOr every Copy of a Plea-Roll between party and party, of every Attorney of the Court, per sheet 2 d. For the same of every Attorney Solicitor of any other Court, 4 d. For Attending with the Keys of the Treasury, for a Search of the Records above six Terms past, and within ten years, 6 s. 4 d. For Attending always sedente Curia, For Sewing on every Rider to the Record, 6 d.
For every Search of a Term in his Docquet, for any Attorneys Entries, 4 d. For Attending the High Court of Parliament, upon a Writ of Error, or any private Busi∣ness, 10 s. For Attending the same Court upon publick Business, For Entring every Sheriffs Warrant, or War∣rant in Appeal, 4 d. For Indorsing every Return on a Writ of Cer∣tiorari, 2 s. For attending my Lord Chief Justice, for his Hand to the same, 3 s. 4 d. For writing the first Process, Returned upon a Certiorari, 1 s. 6 d. For every other Process of the same, 1 s. For discharging every Issue returned by the Sheriff upon Distring', &c. 2 s. For Estreating such Issues, For amending a Record by Rule of Court, and for Copying and Filing the Rule, 1 s. For filing every parcel of Post-Rolls, above six Terms past, the Clerk uses to be paid for his Trouble by the Attorney, 3 s. 4 d. For every Trial at Bar upon an Issue entred above six Terms past, 2 s. 6 d. For the Search of every File of Indictments, for every Term, 6 d
Fees due to William Tully, Gent. Under-Clerk of the Outward Treasury to the Custos Bre∣vium, in the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr every Copy of a Plea-Roll between party and party, per sheet, of every Action of the Court, 2 d. For the same, of every Attorney or Solicitor of any other Court, 4 d For Attendance (prout) 3 s. 4 d. For Attendance sedente Cur', For sewing on Rider, 6 d. For Search of every Term in the Docque for an Attorneys entry, 4 d. For attending the High Court of Parliament (prout) 10 Attending the same (prout) For amending a Roll by Rule of Court, and for Copying (prout) 1 s. 6 d. For Filing (prout) 3 s. 4 d. For every Trial (prout) 2 s. 6 d. Fees belonging to John Sclater, Keeper or Clerk the Declarations in the Kings-Bench; wi an Account of the Fees due from the Clerk Attorneys, and Filizers. THat no Clerks, Attorneys, or Philize pay any thing for Searches at any time but have liberty always to Search th Books and Files, and take out what Copi they please, gratis, if  write the
themselves; in lieu of all which each Clerk, Attorney, or Philizer pay to the Clerk, 2 s. Likewise, if any Attorney or Philizer refuse to pay the Clerk, he may refuse to file his Declaration, or suffer him to Search, or see any Book or Record in the Office, unless he pay for every Term (as aforesaid) 2 s. That the Clerks, Attorneys, or Philizers have six days in the second Term to file their Declarations gratis; but afterwards they pay (unless they Compound, as some Attor∣neys in London do) for every Declaration they bring to be filed, they pay for each, 4 d. If any Private person, or Attorney of another Court, come to Search, he payeth for every Term he searcheth for, 4 d. If any Attorneys of another Court, or Private person comes for a Copy of a Declaration, he pays per sheet 4 d. If any Attorney desires a Certificate upon an Action, that a Declaration is filed or not filed, he pays for such Certificate, 4 d. If any one desires a File to be brought into Court, he taketh for carrying it, and his attendance and pains, 3 s. 4 d. If any one desires him to bring a File to the Secondary, to make a Discontinuance, 1 s.
Fees due to the Seal-Office, in the Court of Kings-Bench: GEORGE Duke of Northumber∣land, Master. FOr every Writ sealed with the Seal of the Kings-Bench, except at the Suit of a Clerk of the Office, 7 d. For the Seal of every Exemplification, 2 s. 6 d. For the Seal of every Outlary, 1 d. For the Seal of every Writ, at the Suit of Philizer, 1 d. Tho: Waldron, Sealer. Fees belonging to the Lord Chief Justice's Clerk of the Errors, in the Court of Kings-Bench. UPon the Allowanne of every Writ Re∣turn'd into the Exchequer-Chamber, for the Supersedeas thereupon, and towards Transcribing the first Process, 2 s. If the Writ of Error be, Tam in redditione Ju∣dicii, quam in Adjudic' Execution', or retorn'd in Parliament, the Fees are double. Upon the acknowledging and entring of every Recognizance, 19 s. 10 d. For the Transcribing every Record for every Process, except the first, 8 d. For Signing of every Nonsuit. 5 s. For a Rule, to Certifie a Record, 1 s.
Upon the Carrying up of every Record into the House of Lords, the Lord Chief Justice Fee is 1 l. The like to the Clerk of the Errors. Fees due to the Keeper of the Seals of the Bills of Middlesex in the Court of Kings-Bench. FOr Sealing every Bill of Middlesex: 6 d. In Term time, — 6 d. In the Vacation, 10 d. For the Seal of every Alias, Pluries, Distring as, and Habeas Corpus super Cepi, &c. 2 d. The like in Vacation, 2 d. There is an Office that receives Fines, upon Filing of Declarations in the said Court of Kings-Bench. Also another Officer, called Porter, or Cryer of the said Court, whose Names we do not know, neither have they given us any Table of their Fees. Will: Turbill. Nich: Harding. 7 Dec. 1689.
Fees Claimed by the Cryer, and Porter, of the Court of Kings-Bench. As Cryer. FOr Calling a Jury, 2 s. For every Oath given in Court, 4 d. For taking a privy Verdict, 4 s. For every Argument in Law, 2 For every Wager in Law, 2 For every admission to Guardian, 6 For a Bail taken at the Bar, For calling a Nonsuit, 4 For calling the Record, 1 For calling a Default, 1 s. When a Pardon is pleaded, 2 s. As Porter. For every Trial at Bar, 5 s. For every privy Verdict, 2 s. For Summoning the Wager-men, 3 s. For a Bail taken at the Bar, 2 s. For a Record called, 6 d. For a Default called, 6 d. For a Pardon pleaded, 2 s. For the Discharge of a Rescous, 4 d. For a Bail taken in Court, 6 d.
Fees due to the Cryer and Porter. As Cryer. FOr Calling a Jury, 1 s. For Swearing every Witness, 4 d. For a Wager of Law, 1 s. For a Nonsuit, 1 s. For a Default of a Record, 1 s. For a Defecit de Lege, 1 s. As Porter. For Summoning the Wager-men, 3 s. Also the Porter receiveth more for the Wager∣men, where the Defendant wageth his Law or is ready to wage it, 1 s. Clerk of Fines. There was an Office invented and erected about 6 Jacobi, whereby was taken, upon the Filing of every Declaration in Debt, where the Debt amounted to above 40 l. and not above 100 Marks, 3 s. 4 d. And above 100 Marks, and not above 100 l. 5 s. And after the same Rate.
And also in every Action on the Case, and Trespass for Goods, where the Damages were laid above 40 l. the like Rates: So that the Plaintiff or Defendant were not a person Priviledged, nor the Defen∣dant in Custod' Marr'. Whereas before 6 Jacobi, no such Moneys were paid or demanded. An Account of Fees as they are taken upon Trials by Nisi prius at Guild-Hall, London. TO the Associate, for Entring a Cause in the Lord Chief Justices his Book, 11 s. 8 d. To the Sheriff, for Returning the Venire, 4 d. To him for Allowing the Distringas, 2 s. 4 d. To the Clerk that Reads the Records and Evi∣dences, 1 s. To the Associate, 1 s. For every Default, 2 s. 4 d. To the Cryer, 1 s. For Swearing every Witness, 4 d. The Marshal, 2 s. The Foot-Cloth, 1 s. The Green-Cloth, 1 s. 6 d. The Door-Keeper, 1 s. The Hall-Keeper, 1 s. The Jury-Men, 8 s. Oyer-Men, every one, 4 d. For Summoning and Keeping the Jury, 4 s. 4 d. Lights, 1 s.
Bar-Keeper, 1 s. Return of the Postea, 2 Also the Associate taketh in every where the Plaintiff's Attorney is not pre∣sent; and of every Defendant which ap∣peareth, and hath not his Attorney in Court, for a Warrant of Attorney. If the Verdict pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be Nonsuited, then there are these Fees taken for the Defendant again: TO the Marshal, 2 s. To the Cryer, 1 s. To the Foot-Cloth, 1 s. To him that Reads the Record, 1 s. An Account of Fees paid upon Trials of Nisi prius in the Court of Kings-Bench, in Middlesex. TO the Associate, for Entring the Cause in my Lord's Book, 11 s. 8 d. For Return of the Venire, 2 s. For Allowing the Distringas, 12 s. To the Judge's Marshal, 2 s. To the Cryer, 1 s. To him for Swearing every Witness, 4 d. To the Sheriff, for a Talis, 2 s. 4 d. To him for a Nonsuit, 2 s. 4 d.
To the Keeper of the Jury, 1 s. To the Porter, 1 s. To the Jury, 12 s. To the Associate, for Return of the Postea, 2 s. To him that Readeth the Record, and taketh the Verdict, 1 s. To the Judge's Foot-Cloth and Horse-Keeper, 1 s. Fees due to the Clerk that Draweth up Special Verdicts in London and Middlesex. FOr Drawing up a Special Verdict, per sheet 1 s. For Indorsing it, per sheet, 8 d. For Copying it, per sheet, 4 d. Fees paid for Drawing a Special Verdict at Bar. FOr Drawing, per sheet 1 s. For Copy, per sheet 4 d.
The Fees of the Crown-Office, in the Court of Kings-Bench. IMprimis, For the Plea of every Pardon of Course, and Entry of the Pardon, 13 s. 4 d. And for Gloves, 13 s. 4 d. Item, for the Entry of a Writ of Error in Fe∣lony, 2 s. Whereof to the Clerk, for Entring, 2 d. To the Secondary, 2 d. For Entry of the Indictment, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for Entring 6 s. And for every Error assigned, 2 s. Whereof to the Clerk and Secondary, 4 d. For the Entry of the Exigent, and the Return, 2 s. Whereof to the Clerk and Secondary, 4 d. And for every Bail upon a Writ of Error, 4 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Master of the Office, 1 s. 8 d. To the Box, 1 s. To the Secondary, Marshal and Cryer, 1 s. To the Clerk, for making the Bail, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. And for Entry of the Judgment of Reversal of every Outlary in Felony, 6 s. 8 d And for Gloves, 13 s. 4 d. Item, For the Entry of the Indictments in Trespass, 4 s.
For the Entry of the Writ of Error, Exigent, Return, Assignment of Errors, Reversal and Bail, the Fees as before in Felony. Item, for the Clerk's Pains in Drawing of Er∣rors, according to the length thereof and the Labour bestowed therein. Item, for every Imparlance upon Indictment, or other Causes, except Quo Warranto, for every one 4 s. Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary and Clerk, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 2 s. For every Imparlance upon a Quo Warranto, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk for Entring, 6 d. And the Attorney, towards the Cause, hath for his Fee 6 s. 8 d. Item, for the Dismission of every Person, upon Indictment for Felony, for Insufficiency, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof for the Entry, to the Clerk 6 d. Item, for the Dismission of every Person, upon an Indictment for Riot, for each Entry of Trespass, and such like, 4 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary and Clerk, 4 d. To the Marshal and Cryer, 8 d. For Entring the Rule, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d.
Item, for every Person Indicted upon any Offence, as well Criminal, as other, for his Plea of Not Guilty, 2 s. And upon Information for the like Plea, 2 s. Whereof, in either Case, to the Master of the Office, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 2 d. To the Clerk, for entring the Plea, 2 d. For every Venire facias upon such Plea of Not Guilty, 2 s. Whereof to the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, for Signing thereof, 1 d. To the Clerk, for making the Writ, 3 d. And for every Person, for Continuance of every Matter upon Indictment, or Informa∣tion, after Issue joyned, for every Term, 2 s. Item, for every Inrolment in a Quo Warranto, for every Roll 13 s. 4 d. And as much for the Exemplification, if the Party desire to have the same Exemplified the same Term that it is Entred; and if to be Exemplified after the Term, the Fee be∣longs to the Custos Brevium, and not to the Clerk of the Crown. And out of every Mark received by the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk for Entring is al∣lowed 1 s. Item, for every Traverse that cometh out of the Court of Chancery, and is Inrolled, for every Roll 13 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk for Entring, as aforesaid, 1 s.
Item, for every other Inrolment of any Patent, Grant, or otherwise, for every Roll, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for entring of every Roll 6 d. Item, for all Special Pleas pleaded unto an In∣dictment or Information; also for all Re∣plications or Rejoynders, for every Roll 13 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for every Noble, 6 d. For every Special Pardon pleaded and al∣lowed for Felony, for Entring of the In∣dictment, 6 s. 8 d. For Entry of the Plea, the Pardon, the Writ of Allowance, and the Judgment thereupon, for every Roll 13 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for every Noble, 6 d. And for Gloves, 13 s. 4 d. But Persons of Quality, use to give Gloves of such value and goodness as they please. Item, for every Fine the Party maketh upon an Indictment, 4 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary 4 d. The Marshal and Cryer 8 d. To the Clerk, for making the Fine-Bill, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for a Fine upon an Information, for the King's part, where the Informer hath Com∣pounded for his part, 11 s. To the Master, 9 s. 8 d.
To the Clerk, for Drawing the Protestation, 1 s. Warrant of Attorney, 4 d. Besides the Attorneys Fee of 3 s. 4 d. Item, for every Entry of any Cognition, for High-ways and Bridges, made, for the Writ of Constare fac' thereupon, 9 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 6 s. 8 d. The making of the Writ, and Signing, 4 d. For making the Fine-Bill, 4 d. To the Secondary, for giving over the Judg∣ment, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for Entring every Postea which cometh from the Judges of Assize, and the Judg∣ment thereupon, 8 s. Whereof to the Clerk for Entry, 6 d. If more Defendants than one, 3 s. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. And the like, for every Verdict and Judgment upon every Trial at Bar. Item, for the Entry of Submission, for every Re∣cusant, his Plea and Judgment thereupon, 13 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for Entry 1 s. Item, for every Person bound by Recognizance for the Peace, Good-Behaviour, or Felony, who dieth before the Day of Appearance, upon which his Sureties plead his Death: For the Plea, drawing, entring Judgment, and the Clerk's Fees, 13 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for Drawing and En∣tring the Plea, 4 s. 8 d.
And to the Clerk of the Crown, who is the Kingls Attorney in that Court by Patent, for his Confession, upon Deposition of Wit∣nesses, 6 s. 8 d. Item for every one that is discharged for any Debt due to the King, for any Deodand and Felons Goods, and such like, 4 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 4 d. To the Marshal and Cryer, 8 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 2 s. And where the Debt is discharged by any Letters Patents, or allowance upon a former Quo Warranto, 6 s. 8 d. Item, for Exhibiting every Informatian of Qui tam, 3 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Master, 2 s. 4 d. To the Clerk, for making the Information and Writ, 1 s. Item, For Appearance upon Information Qui tam, 2 s. 10 d. Whereof to the Master, 4 d. To the Poor, 1 d. To the Bag-Bearer, 4 d. To the Secondary, 1 d. Item, for every Copy of any Information, or any Pleas, the Party pays for every sheet, 8 d. Item, for a Copy of every Quo Warranto, 6 s. 8 d.
Item, for every Copy of Indictment, in Tres∣pass, Riots, Force, or the like, if above two sheets, 3 s. 4 d. Item, for every Copy of Indictment in Felony, 6 s. 8 d. Item, for the Inrolment of every Writ of Exe∣cution' Capiendo, 2 s. 4 d. To the Master, 2 s. To the Secondary, 4 d. To him that is Attorney in the Cause, 3 s. 4 d. Item, for every Capias sued out upon Writs of Excom' Cap', 2 s. 6 d. All which is paid to the Master of the Office; and the Clerk hath the Attorneys Fee of 3 s. 4 d. in regard the Writ is very long, 3 s. 4 d. Item, for every Writ of the Peace, or Good-Behaviour, 4 s. 7 d. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Maker of the Writ and Warrant, 8 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Th the Secondary, 1 d. To the Clerk of the Office, 6 d. Item, for every Supersedeas for the Peace or Good-Behaviour, 6 s. To the Master, for the Recognizance, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 4 d. To the Master, for the Writ of Supersedeas, 1 s. 8 d. To the maker of the Writ and Recognizance, 7 d. To the Secondary, for signing the Writ, 1 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d.
Item, for any Attachment of Contempt against any person, 4 s. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. To the Under-Clerk, for writing the Warrant and Writ, 7 d. To the Secondary, 1 d. Item, for every Bail taken for Appearance, 4 s. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 4 d. To the Clerk, for making, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for Discharge of every person upon any Bail of the Peace, Good-Behaviour, Con∣tempt, or any other Bail, 4 s. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 4 d. To the Clerk, for making the Warrant, to discharge, 4 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for every Certiorari, for removing Indict∣ments, Informations, Presentments, or any other Record, 4 s. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 1 d. To the Under-Clerk, for Warrant and Writ, 7 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for every Certiorari in Felony, the same Fees; only the Attorney hath over and above his former Fees, his Fee of 3 s. 4 d.
Item, for every Writ of Habeas Corpus, for every Name, (divided as before in Certiorari) 4 s. Item, for every Supersedeas for the Peace com∣ing out of the Chancery, to be allowed in Court, 4 s. 1 d. Whereof to the Master, 2 s. To the Secondary, 5 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for the Bail of every Person who is brought in upon any Habeas Corpus, 4 s. 10 d. Whereof to the Master, 3 s. 10 d. To the Secondary, Marshal and Cryer, 1 s. Item, for every Cap' Utlegat' Specially sued out against any person, 4 s. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the maker of the Writ and Warrant, 7 d. To the Secondary, for Signing, 1 d. To the Clerk, towards the Cause, 1 s. 8 d. Item, for every Writ to remove Prisoners out of one County, to receive Trial in another, (Divided as Certorari, and Habeas Corpus;) but most of these are made without Fees pro Rege, 4 s. Item, for every Writ of Procedendo upon Cer∣tiorari and Habeas Corpus, (Divided as Certiorari and Hab' Corp'.) 4 s. Item, for every Writ of Duces tecum, upon the Return of the Sheriff, that the Party is Lan∣guidus, (Divided as Habeas Corpus) 4 s.
Item, for every Writ of Gestu & Famâ, (Divided as Habeas Corp') 4 s. Item, for every Supersedeas granted upon any Indictment, or other Matter or Cause, where any person is in Exigent, to the Keeper of the Kalendar, if the party make Fine, 6 d. If he make no Fine, then the Secondary is to have 6 d. Item, for every Supersedeas, for any person, upon any Indictment of Felony, where the Party is in Exigent, 1 s. 8 d. To the maker of the Writ, 3 d. To the Secondary, 1 d. Item, for every Writ of Restitution, to restore a man to his Lands, Goods and Chattels, upon any Cause, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof, for making of the Writ, 6 d. Item, for every Writ of Supersedeas, upon a former Restitution, wherein the Lands are to be Re-seized again upon Insufficiency of the Indictment; the Master of the Office hath 13 s. 4 d. Of which the maker of the Writ hath 1 s. Item, for every Writ of Seizure of Liberties, 13 s. 4 d. Whereof to the Clerk, for making the same, 1 s.
Item, for every Writ of Mittimus of a Record Transcribed into the Court of Wards, or the Exchequer, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. And for the Transcript, according to the length of the Roll. Item, for every Writ of Execution, namely, Cap' ad satisfac', Fieri Fac', or Elegit, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. Item, for every Writ of Non molestando, granted upon Pardon pleaded, or Outlary reversed, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. Item, for every Scire fac' sued out by any per∣son, for the breach of the Peace or Good-Behaviour, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. Also, to the Clerk for Drawing of the Surmize of the Breach, besides the Attorney's Fee of 3 s. 4 d. in this Case, 2 s. Item, for every Scire facias in Felony, Dominis, mediate and immediate, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. Item, for every Sup' ad testificand', Attachment upon Information, or other Ordinary Writ, (Divided as Habeas Corpus) 4 s. Item, for every Venire facias de Novo, upon a Traverse out of Chancery, which is very rare, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. Item, for Entring every Rule given in Court, 4 d. And no more for the Copy, unless it be extra∣ordinary long, which is very rare.
Item, to the Examiner, for every Person Exa∣mined for any Contempt, 3 s. 4 d. And for the Copies of Examination, for every sheet, 8 d. Item, for entring and making a License to the Informer to Compound with the Defen∣dants, upon any Penal Law, 1 s. Item, for every Distr' upon a Plea of Not Guilty, upon Indictment or Information, 2 s. 4 d. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 1 d. To the Clerk, 3 d. For delivery of the Writ upon Record, 4 d. The Master of the Office hath from Their Majesties only the Annual Sum of Ten Pounds. Also, the Attorney that appeareth or doth any Act in Court for any Defendant, or doth attend a Judge at his Chamber, for the granting any Writ, or any Discharge, or for any other Act; and for Discharge of any Defaulter's coming in upon an Exigent, or that hath continued long in Process, as in all Cases at the Common Law, for his Fee, 3 s. 4 d. And in a Quo Warranto, Traverse of Lands, Writ of Error in Felony, being extraordi∣nary Cases, and but rare, 6 s. 8 d. Item, for every Information exhibited in the Office of the Clerk of the Crown, and in the Name of the King's Attorney of the Court, 6 s. 8 d.
And to the Clerk for Drawing the same, for every sheet, 8 d. But most of these are Exhibited pro Rege, and no Fees paid at all. Item, for every Nonsuit of an Information in the King's Attorney's Name of the Court, for his Hand to the Non-Process of the said Information, 6 s. 8 d. For Entring the same and Judgment thereupon, for every Name 6 s. 8 d. For Drawing of the Non-Process, 1 s. For Copying it, 8 d. Item, for Entry of every Disclaimer to a Quo Warranto, 13 s. 4 d. And the like for a Non-Pros. Item, to the Secondary, for Reading a Record in a Writ of Error, 2 s. Item, for every Demurrer entred, to the Master of the Office, 4 s. Item, for every Exam' of a Recognizance, 4 s. And for a Resp' of a Recognizance, 4 s. To the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 4 d. To the Clerk, 2 s. Item, for every Plea of Non debent reparare, wherein a Repl' is required, upon an Indict∣ment or Information, for not Repairing of a Bridge or Highway, 4 s. To the Master,
Item, for a Special Imparlance to a Writ of Right, or Quare Impedit, for every Name, 2 s. And for Pleas in a Writ of Right, for every Name, 2 s. And for Pleas in Quare Impedit, according as in Quo Warranto. Item, The Attorney shall in these Cases, which are very rare, have his Fee, as at Common Law, 6 s. 8 d. Item, for the Discharge of every Defect in an Inquisition, 4 s. 8 d. And the Kalendar-Keeper hath, for taking out the said Defect, 1 s. Item, for Post Diem, for every Writ on the King's File, 4 d. Item, for every Imparlance upon a Scire fac' pro Pace, vel bene gerend' fract', to the Ma∣her, 6 s. 8 d. Whereof to the Clerk, 6 d. Item, for every Plea of Not Guilty, or Son Assault demesn to the said Scire fac', 6 s. 8 d. Whereof, to the Clerk, 6 d. Item, for entry of Amercement Estreated, be∣tween party and party, to the Secondary, 1 s. Item, upon any Writ of Error upon Outlawry or Judgment, when the party hath his Dis∣charge in the same Term that he bringeth the Writ of Error, the Attorney hath for his extraordinary pains, 6 s. 8 d.
Item, for every Warrant of Attorney, 4 d. Item, for the Discharge of Process against the Defendant, 4 d. Item, for every Imparlance to any Declaration, at the King's Suit only, for every Defen∣dant, 4 s. Whereof to the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Secondary, 2 d. To the Clerk, 2 s. To the Clerk for Entring the Cause, But these are very rare. 2 d. Item, for every Plea of Not Guilty to the same Declaration, 2 s. Whereof to the Master, 1 s. 8 d. To the Clerk, 2 d. To the Secondary, 2 d. Item, the Clerk of the Rules hath for the Copy∣ing of every License for the Informer, to Compound with the Defendant, 4 d. Item, for every Writ of Melius Inquirend' after the Death of one that is Felo de se, or Per Infortunium interfect', 4 s. Item, for Entring of a Dismission of a Rescous for every Name, for the Insufficiency of the Retorn of the Sheriff; (Divided as the Fees upon a Dismission of an Indictment for Trespass) 4 s. 8 d. Item, for every Person that maketh a Fine upon a Rescue or Contempr; (Divided as Fines upon Indictments for Trespass) 4 s. 8 d. Item, every Clerk of the Crown-Office, and every one of their Clerks, have the Sealing of one Writ gratis at the End of every Term, which is called the Jeo vous Prie, cometh to 7 d.
Item, the Book-bearer of the Crown-Office, hath for carrying to the Hall in Term Time, of every Record, being after four Terms past, 4 d. And for every Record he bringeth from the Treasury of the Kings-Bench to the Office, 4 d. Item, to the Custos Brevium, for every File of Indictments or Writs delivered out of the Lower Treasury, to be brought to the Crown-Office, in the Term time, 6 d. And in the Vacation, 1 s. 4 d. And if out of the Upper Treasury, in the Term time 1 s. 4 d. And in the Vacation 3 s. 4 d. Item, the Marshal of the Court hath for every Bail taken in Court, 2 s. Item, the Clerks of the Crown-Office, in the Courts of Kings-Bench, do take in every Cause which they are towards, on the Pro∣thonotary's Side of the said Court, for every Term, as Attorney, the Fee of 3 s. 4 d. We do humbly Certify upon our Oaths, That the Fees above mentioned, we do verily believe have been received in the Crown-Office of the Court of Kings-Bench Anciently, and Time out of Mind: R. Seyhard, Rich: Horton.
Fees due and paid to the Masters in the Court of Chancery, and their Clerks. IMprimis, for every Summons, 2 s. For Copies of Charges and Discharges brought in before the Master, for Scheduling Wri∣tings, and other things, for each side, 6 d. For every Report or Certificate, to be made in pursuance of any Order made upon any Hearing of the Cause, 1 l. For every other Certificate or Report made upon Petition or Motion only, 10 s. The Clerk's Fee, for writing every Report or Certificate, 5 s. For every Affidavit, 1 s. For Drawing and Ingrossing of Deeds, each Skin 10 s. For the Master's Hand to the Allowance of every Deed, 2 s. 6 d. For the Allowance of every Recognizance, Affidavit, &c. to be acknowledged and taken in the Country, 2 s. 6 d. For the Acknowledgment of every Deed to be Inrolled, 2 s. For an Examination Fee, 2 s. 6 d.
For every Exhibit Signed by a Master, 2 s. 6 d. For Copies of Depositions, for each Sid 8 d. For the Caption of every Recognizance, 2 s. The Clerk's Fee, for writing the Recogni∣zance and Condition, as the Order directs, 2 s. 6 d. For every Exemplification Examined by Two Masters, to each of the said Masters who shall Examine the same, for every Skin of Parchment, 2 s. For every Bill of Costs, to be Taxed by a Master, for the Plaintiff's not putting in his Bill, or not proceeding to Reply; or for the Defendant's not appearing in due time, 2 s. 6 d. Miles Cooke, Sam: Kecke. 26 Dec. 1689. Fees due and paid to the Six-Clerks of the Court of Chancery. FOr every Attachment, with a Proclama∣tion, 11 s. For every Supersedeas for the discharge of any Commission, or other Writ made in the Six-Clerks-Office, 6 s. 8 d. For every Supersedeas of Priviledge, pro Prove∣nientibus, Rediuntibus ad vel à Cancellar', 6 s. 8 d.
For every Special Certior' ad Procedend', Corpus cum Causa, or Habe as Corpus, 6 s. 8 d. For every Bail, upon every Writ of Corpus cum Causa, or Matter of Priviledge, 2 s. For all manner of Certiorari's or Procedendo's of course, 2 s. For all first, second, or other Copies of all Bills. Answers, or other Pleadings what∣soever; as also of all Certificates and Exa∣minations made or taken by virtue of any Commission out of this Court, and of the Interrogatories therewith Returned; and also of all Declarations or Pleadings by English Bill, or according to the Course of the Common Law; and for Copies of Re∣cords, Rolls, or Evidences brought in to be Copied, or remaining in the said Court, for every Leaf of Paper containing 15 Lines, 8 d. Of every Client, for every Term the Cause is in agitation, the Termly Fee of 3 s. 4 d. If there be 20 Plaintiffs in the Bill, or more, they all pay but one Fee for one Term; but for every 3 Defendants, accounting the Husband and Wife but for one Person, there is the Fee of 3 s. 4 d. due for their first Ap∣pearance. And upon the first Appearance, if every Defendant appear severally by him∣self, he is to pay the Fee of 3 s. 4 d. But every Term afterwards, during the Continu∣ance of the same, there is only the Fee of 3 s. 4 d. a Term, to be paid for all the De∣fendants that appeared in any Term, or Vacation before, in the same Cause, 3 s. 4 d.
For Ingrossing every Bill in Chancery-Hand, where an Answer is to be made by Com∣mission, for every Leaf 6 d. For every Commission of Rebellion, 10 s. For every Commission to take an Answer, or Examine Witnesses, 6 s. 8 d. If the Commission to Examine Witnesses be ex parte, there is but one 6 s. 8 d. paid. If the Commission be joynt, there is 6 s. 8 d. paid to each Attorney. For every Special Commission upon Order of the Court, 10 s. For every Writ of Execution upon an Order, 6 s. 8 d. But if the Order be longer than ordinary, there is usually taken proportionably, ac∣cording to the length. For the Drawing and Inrolling of every De∣cree and Dismission, 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. But if the same be above the length of a Skin of Parchment, there has been used to be paid to the Clerk for Drawing the same, after the Rate of 8 d. per Leaf, and to write in every Leaf 16 or 17 Lones, and 8 d. the Leaf for the Inrolling. For every Writ of Execution upon a Decree, after the Rate of every Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For the writing of every Sheriffs Patent, Writ of Assistance, Writ of Discharge, Dedimus Potestatem, the Attorney's Fee, the Warrant of Attorney, and writing the two Oaths, 1 l. 10 s. 8 d. For Drawing and Ingrossing every Injunction, 13 s. 4 d.
For the Inrolling of all Warrants, whereby any Patents, Commissions, Licenses, Par∣dons, Leases, or other Grants whatsoever, do pass by under the Great Seal, after the Rate of every Skin so passing the Great Seal, 1 l. For the writing of every Exemplification of all Records, after the Rate of every Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. There hath been an Allowance out of the Fees above mentioned, for the Under-Clerks, who dispatch the Business of the Client in that Of∣fice; and by a Decree made by the late Lord Keeper Bridgman, and the Master of the Rolls, the 18th Day of June, 20 Car. 2. the same are settled between the Six Clerks and the Under-Clerks, and have been ever since observed. Richard Derbyshire. John Slater.
Fees due and paid to Thomas Lord Jermyn, Register of the Court of Chancery. FOr Drawing all Orders, each Side 3 s. whereof 2 s. per Side to the Master of the Office, and to the Deputy for his Atten∣tendance in Court, taking the Minutes and drawing up the Order, 1 s. 3 s. For Entry of each Order per Side, 6 d. But for all Orders, not by Motion, Petition, or Hearing, but by Consent of parties, 6 s. per Side, viz. 3 s. to be paid by the Plaintiffs, and 3 s. by the Defendants, 6 s. For Entring all such Orders 1 s. per Side, 1 s. For Filing a Report, 4 d. For Copies of all Orders and Reports, 6 d. per Side to the Deputy, 6 d. To the Master of the Office, for Signing of all such Copies 12 d for the first Side, and 6 d. for every Side after, 6 d. For Entring a Cause for Hearing, 1 s. For making of notes of the Causes that stand for Hearing, for grounding the subpoena to hear Judgments, 8 d. For every Decree, to the Master 5 s. For every Dismission, 5 s. For all Certificates, 6 d. And to the Master of the Office, for his Hand thereto, 1 s. For Filing every Election, 4 d. For a Search into the Old Books for any Or∣der or Decree, for every Year, 4 d.
For Entry of all Attachments and Proclama∣tions, for each 2 d. For all Rules of Court to Answer, Reply, pro∣duce Witnesses, and for Publication, &c. for each 4 d. For Entry of all Rules of like Nature by Con∣sent, 8 d. For Entry of all Amercements. 1 s. For Entry of all Appearances in Contempts, 2 s. 10 d. For all Bills of Costs, for want of a Bill filed in time, 4 d. For Entry of all Dismissions, for want of Re∣plications by the General Rule, 1 s. For all Copies of Attachments, Proclamations, Commissions of Rebellion, Rules, &c. for each 4 d. For Entry of all Demurrers, 1 s. Geo: Edwards, Deputies. Carewe Guidott, Deputies. Edward Goldsbrough, Deputies. Richard Price, Deputies.
Fees due and paid to Aron Pingry, John Floyd, and John Dawling, Officers of the Petty-Bag-Office. IMprimis, for Drawing and Ingrossing all Declarations, according to the length, for each sheet 8 d. For Entring the Rule to answer with the Six Clerk, and upon the Roll in the Petty-Bag, 2 s. For Entring every Peremptory Rule to answer, Rule to reply, re-joyn, or joyn in Demur∣rer, 1 s. For Entring every Common Imparlance with the Six Clerk, and in the Petty-Bag, 1 s. For every Special Imparlance likewise entred there, 2 s. For Drawing and Ingrossing every Confession of a Judgment, 2 s. For signing, entring, and making up the Re∣cords of every Judgment, 10 s. And otherwise, as it may be in length propor∣tionably, for each Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For Ingrossing the Record of an Issue or De∣murrer proportionably, for each Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For every Continuance, 1 s. For every Venire Facias, to the Master of the Rolls, 6 s. 8 d. For the Writ and Seal, 10 s. 6 d. For every ordinary Scire facias and Seal, 5 s. 6 d.
For all Speciall Commissions of Inquiry, Scire fac' to Revoke Letters Patents, Scire fac' ad Computand', Audita Querela, Re-extent', and all other Judicial Writs, 12 s. 6 d. And otherwise, as may arise in length, for each Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For every Liberate upon a Statute-Staple, to the Master of the Rolls, 13 s. 4 d. For Drawing and Ingrossing the Writ, entring and filing the Extent and Statute, and for the Seal, 1 l. 3 s. 6 d. And if very long, after the Rate for every Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For Drawing of all Special Writs, Commissi∣ons, Records upon Issue, or Demurrers and Pleadings; as Traverses, Monstrans le Droit, and such like, for every sheet 1 s. For Entring the Vacate of every Judgment or Statute-Staple and Search, 11 s. 4 d. For every Writ of Dedimus potestat', to take the acknowledgment of Satisfaction of such Judgment or Statute in the Country, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For ingerossing, acknowledging, and filing eve∣ry Bail, 6 s. 8 d. For taxing every Bill of Costs, 2 s. For every Certiorari, to remove Acts of Par∣liament, 10 s. 6 d. For every Certiorari, to remove Records out of another Court, 7 s. 2 d. For every Mittimus, to send such Records into an Inferiour Court, 7 s. 2 d. For the Transcript of such Records, as it may arise in length, for each Skin, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d.
For filing all Judicial Writs, Special Commis∣sions, Writs de Viridar' & Coronator' eligendo, Commissions to Swear Justices of the Peace and Sheriffs, Decrees upon the Statute of Charitable Uses, and such like, and for the Entry 2 s. 6 d. For the Search of every Record 1 s. and ta∣king of it down, 1 s. 4 d. For the Copies of all Records, for each sheet 8 d. For Copies of all Commissions of Lunacy, Ideocy, and Post mortem, for every sheet 8 d. And if not filed before, for the Transcript thereof for each sheet, 8 d. The Officer's Hand to the Examination of every Record, 2 s. For Drawing and Signing every Certificate under the Officer's Hand, 2 s. 6 d. For the Writ of Execution of an Order or Decree upon the Statute of Charitable Uses, 10 s. 6 d. And as it rises in length proportionably, for each Skin 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For every Attachment of Contempt, or Pro∣clamation, 2 s. 10 d. For every Commission of Rebellion, 18 s. 8 d. For every Injunction, 1 l. 2 s. 6 d. For every Commission to Examine Witnesses, 7 s. 10 d. For every Rule for Publication, and entring it on the Roll, 1 s. For every Decree of Confirmation upon the Statute of Charitable Uses, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d.
If long, then for Drawing each sheet, 8 d. For Inrolling thereof, each sheet 8 d. For every Examination of every such Decree, 6 s. 8 d. And if long, for Drawing and Inrolling (as for a Confirmation.) For every Term, for every Cause, while de∣pending, 3 s. 4 d. Aron Pingry. Fees due and paid to the Clerk of the Crown, in the Court of Chancery. FOr a Commission of Peace, for any under Degree of a Baron or Custos Rotulorum, 1 l. 15 s. For any over and above that Degee, more 10 s. For a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for any City, Town or Liberty, 1 l. 16 s. 10 d. For a Commission of Gaol-Delivery, 1 l. 16 s. 10 d. For a Commission of Sewers and Writs, 3 l. For a Commission of Charitable Uses, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For a Commission of Policies of Assurance among Merchants, 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. For a Commission of Lieutenancy, 3 l. 10 s.
For a Special Pardon, to the Clerk of the Crown, 1 l. 10 s. 4 d. To the Under Clerks for Writing, according to length of the Pardon, for each Skin 10 s. For several other Special Commissions, for every Skin 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For the Clerks for Writing, according to the length for each Skin, 10 s. For all Pardons in Forma pauperis For the Creation of a Duke or Marquess, to the Clerk of the Crown, 10 l. For an Earl or Viscount, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. For a Baron, 5 l. To the Under-Clerks for Writing, according to the Bounty of the Noble Person and length of the Patent, usually about half so much. For a Baronet, 3 l. For a Writ of Summons to the Upper-House of Parliament, for any Lord Spiritual or Tempral, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For a Writ of Election, for the Choosing a Member of the House of Commons, 13 s. 4 d. For Retorn of the said Writs, for a Knight of the Shire, 4 s. For a Burgess, 2 s. For a Certificate, 2 s. 6 d. For a Writ, to Call a Serjeant at Law, 13 s. 4 d. For a Master in Chancery, Extraordinary, 13 s. 4 d.
For Writs of Extent, and several other Writs of inferiour Nature, 6 s. 8 d. For Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, of Gaol-Delivery, of the Assize and Associa∣tion, &c. for the several Circuits, being about 60 in number, Renewed twice every year, to the Clerk of the Crown Nothing. Only 12 d. each Circuit, paid by the Clerk of the Assizes, to the Under-Clerk for Writing, 1 s. For Extraordinary Commission pro Rege, by Bill allowed and signed by the Lord Keeper of the Great-Seal, and paid out of the Han∣naper, for every Skin 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. Several other Commissions and Businesses, which anciently passed in the Crown-Office, have of late years been discontinued, where∣by the said Office is much lessened, as Com∣missions of Purveyance, many of which used to pass in every Year, but are disused by taking away of Purveyance, Commissi∣ons of Inquiry, Writs of Appeal, and other things, which are not therefore necessary to be here mentioned. Henry Barker.
Fees due and paid to Francis Twisden and Wil∣liam Adderly, Examiners in the Court of Chancery. FOr the Examination of every Deponent, 11 s. 6 d. For the Certifying of any Deed or other Writing shewed to the Deponent at his Ex∣amination, and for Certificates, 2 s. 6 d. For Copies of all manner of Depositions, for every Sheet containing 15 Lines, 1 s. For the Exemplification of Depositions taken by them as Examiners, after the Rate of 26 s. 8 d. for every Skin of Parchment, 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. For the Examining of all Copies as are to be given in Evidence in other Courts, with the Originals thereof, if the party do require the same, 10 s. For the Examination of every Deponent a∣broad, unto whom the Examiner is required to Travel, 10 s. There is an Allowance out of the Fees above-mentioned to the Sworn Clerks, who dispatch the Business of the Client in that Office.
Fees due and paid to Samuel Poynton, Register of the Affidavits in the Court of Chan∣cery. FOr Filing every Affidavit, 4 d. For Registring every Affidavit, for each Side, 4 d. For the Copy of every Affidavit, for each Side, 4 d. For the Register, or his Deputies Hand to every Copy of an Affidavit, 1 s. For every Certificate, with the Register or Deputies Hand to it, 1 s. Geo: Edwards.
Fees taken in the Office of Pleas of the Exchequer, for Writs, Entries, and other Proceding, &c. Writs. THe Writ of Quo minus, and Seal, 4 s. 1 d. The Alias and Plur', Quo minus and Seal, 2 s. 6 d. The Distring' nuper Vic' and Seal, 2 s. 6 d. The Habeas Corpus, Cepi and Seal, 2 s. 6 d. The Writ of Venire facias and Seal 1 s. 7 d. The Writ of Distringas, Al', Plur' and Seal, 2 s. 7 d. The Writ of Scire facias; to the Officer 4 s. to the Attorney 1 s. and to the Seal 7 d. 5 s. 7 d. The Subpoena ad Testificand' and Seal, 2 s. 7 d. For every Habeas Corpus and Seal, 4 s. 7 d. For every Procedendo, 4 s. 7 d. For every Injunction Concess. per Curiam, 2 s. 7 d.
For every Subpoena for Costs, 3 s. 7 d. For every Attachment thereupon, 3 s. 7 d. For every Fieri facias, upon any Assignment by an Accomptant, 2 s. For every Fieri fac' upon a Tally, 6 d. For every Fieri fac' upon an Allowance had in the Exchequer, 2 s. For a Supersedeas, 4 s. 7 d. For a Writ of Restitution, 2 s. For a Prohibition, 2 s. For a Commission De quorum nomina, 4 s. 4 d. For every Supersedeas upon a Cap' or Fieri fac', or Writ of Error, 4 s. For every Writ of Execution, wherther Cap. ad sa. Cap' ad computand', Fieri fa. or Elegit, Officiar', 6 d. For every Al', Execution', Plur' and Testat' Officiar', 2 s. The Attorney, for each of them, 6 d. For a Subpoena out of the Remembrancer's Office, 3 s. 7 d. Entries, Drawings, Engrossments, and Exemplifi∣cations. FOr Recording of every Appearance upon the Roll, upon a Cepi Corpus, 2 s. For Entring every Appearance in the Paper-Book, 6 d. For Entring every Declaration, Answer, Re∣plication, and Rejoynder, containing more than half a Roll, 6 s. 8 d. For Ingrossing every Declaration and Bill, after the sheet, 6 d.
For the Entry of any Pleading, containing a Roll, 6 s. 8 d. For every Entry containing half a Roll, 3 s. 4 d. For Drawing all Declarations and Pleadings, after the sheet, 8 d. For Copies of Pleadings, after the sheet, 4 d. For every Continuance on Record, and Im∣parlance, 6 d. For every Special Imparlance, 1 s. For the Entry of Nil dic', Non sum' inform', or Confession upon every Action, 2 s. For Entry of the Judgment thereupon, 2 s. For every Warrant of Attorney 8 d. whereof 4 d. to the Officer for filing, and 4 d. to the Attorney for ingrossing, 8 d. For every Record of Nisi prius, containing half a Roll, or less, 6 s. 8 d. whereof 3 s. 4 d. to the Officer, and 3 s. 4 d. to the Attorney, 6 s. 8 d. For every Record of Nisi prius, containing a Roll, 13 s. 4 d. whereof 6 s. 8 d. to the Officer, and 6 s. 8 d. to the Attorney; and so after that Rate every Roll, 13 s. 4 d. For the Entry of the Jurata, 1 s. For the Commission ad Assizas, with the Re∣cord of Nisi prius, 6 s. 8 d. viz. to the Attor∣ney 3 s. 4 d. and to the Officer 3 d. 4 d. 6 s. 8 d. For the Entry of the Postea, to the Officer 2 s. For the Entry of every Judgment thereupon, to the Officer 2 s.
For the Exemplification of every Record, containing half a Roll, or less, 6 s. 8 d. whereof to the Officer 3 s. 4 d. to the At∣torney 3 s. 4 d. and so of larger Extent, 6 s. 8 d. For Entry of a Nonsuit, Discontinuance, or Retraxit, to the Officer 2 s. For Entry of any Special Verdict, after the Roll, 6 s. 8 d. For Copies of Demurrers and Special Ver∣dicts, for the Barons after 4 d. per sheet, to the Attorney 4 d. For every Bail and Recognizance entred, to the Officer 4 s. For taking the Bail, to the Secondary or Re∣cognizance 8 d. For Damage Clear in all Actions, &c. For Inrolling a Writ of Error, to the Officer 6 s. 8 d. For the same, to the Attorney 3 s. 4 d. For Certifying the Record upon a Writ of Error, after 6 s. 8 d. the Roll, 6 s. 8 d. For Ingrossing the Warrant for an Innovat', 8 d. For the Entry, to the Officer 2 s. For the Attorney's Fee, 3 s. 4 d. For the Entry of a Certiorari out of the Chan∣cery to Certify a Record, to the Officer 3 s. 4 d. For Certifying the same Record, after the Rate of Record of Nisi prius and Exemplifi∣cat', by the Roll. Forevery Rule, 4 d.
For Drawing and Entring every Order of Court, after the length, for every sheet 8 d. For acknowledging every Satisfaction upon Record, to the Officer 2 s. For every Release, 2 s. For Inrolment of any Recognizance cum Con∣ditione, 4 s. For Inrolment of every Recognizance without Condition, 2 s. For Commitment of every Prisoner, 2 s. For Entry of every Suggestion, after the length of every Roll 6 s. 8 d. Richardus Beresford, Armig', Clericus Placitorum. Thomas Arden, Armig'. Carolus Haynes, Attorn' Cur'. Samuel Anderson, Attorn' Cur'. David Feilder, Attorn' Cur'.
Fees due to Their Majesties Remembrancer, in the Court of Exchequer. IMprimis, for a Customer's View and Ac∣count of Bridgwater, Chester, Newcastle, Plimouth, Fowy, Pool, Berwick, for each of them 3 s. 4 d. For the like in the rest of the Ports, 6 s. 8 d. For every General Issue with one Name, 2 s. For every several Name in the General Issue, more than the first, 2 s. For a Special Plea, for every half Roll, 3 s. 4 d. For every several Name in a Special Plea, 2 s. For a Plea upon a Compertum, 6 s. 8 d. For Writs of Priviledge, Injunction, Supersedeas, Extent, Scire facias and Certiorari, under the Exchequer Seal, 2 s. And if an Extnt, Scire fac', or Supersedeas be awarded with a Schedule, then for every Debt after the first, 2 s. For every Nisi prius, 6 s. 8 d. For every Commission and Dedimus potestatem, 6 s. 8 d. For every Writ of Mittimus, Certicrari, under the Great Seal, every Writ of Error, 6 s. 8 d. For every Recognizance and Obligation of 40 l. and under, 3 s. 4 d.
For every Recognizance and Obligaions of 50 l. and above to 100 l. 5 s. For every Recognizance and Obligation of 100 l. 6 s. 8 d. and for every 100 l. more 6 s. 8 d. For every Obligation discharged and deli∣vered for the Record thereof, for half a Roll, 3 s. 4 d. For every Obligation for payment of Rents, and performance of Covenants, for ordinary Leases for himself 2 s. and for his Clerk 8 d. 2 s. 8 d. For every Day to an Accompt, 1 s. 8 d. For the Entry of every Order, 2 s. For setting his Hand to every Copy or Constat desired by the Suitor, 3 s. 4 d. For the Inrolments of Letters Patients, Escripts Confessed, and other Inrolments, after the Rate for every half Roll, 3 s. 4 d. For Examplifications, for every Inspeximus, 6 s. 8 d. For a Particular, 6 s. 8 d. For every Particular containing more than 2 Press, for every Press 6 s. 8 d. For every Fine, 2 s. For every Exemplification containing more than a Skin, for every Skin 6 s. 8 d. For every Confession made for the King's Attorney, 2 s. For every Judgment, for the Party 3 s. 4 d. For every Bill of Bail, 2 s. For Cancelling a Recognizance, 2 s. For Cancelling a Recognizance of the Aug∣mentation Court, 3 s. 4 d.
Forevery Warrant, for a Composition upon any of the Dorment Privy-Seal, 6 s. 8 d. For every Statute, Recognizance, Bill and Bond assigned, 6 s. 8 d. For every Revocation of an Assignment, 6 s. 8 d. For the discharge of every Amerciament, 3 s. 4 d. A New Fee, allowed by Decree, since primo Regis Caroli. FOr every Exchequer Account, allowed by a Decree of this Court, made Anno primo Regis Car. 3 s. 4 d. For receiving and paying out of Monies de∣posited in Court, allowed by an Order made 3 Febr', Anno 1 Jac. upon every Pound when it is paid out, 2 d. For Copying of an Order, for every sheet to the Clerk that Enters them, 8 d. For Entring of an Order, for every sheet to the Clerk that Copies them, 8 d. For examination of every Certificate, for double Tax of Subsidy, 4 d. For a Certificate out of the Subsidy-Book, 1 s. Fora Constat to discharge a Supersedeas in the Pype, for Supersedeas after the Account is past, 3 s. 4 d. For a Constat made out of the Custom-Books, to discharge a Port Bond, 2 s.
Fees due to the Sworn Clerks of their Majesties Remembrancers Office, in the Court of Exchequer. THe Attorney's Fee, for every Client that he is towards every Term, 3 s. 4 d. For Entring every Defendant's Appearance, 4 d. For every Warrant of Attorney, 4 d. For every Bill of Bail, 8 d. For making every ordinary Information, 3 s. 4 d. For Inrolling every Information, and every Compert', not exceeding half a Roll, 3 s. 4 d. For every Writ of Subpoena, Attachment, Ap∣praisment, Venire fac', Attendance, 2 s. For a Subpoena, to appear in the Office of Pleas, 1 s. 6 d. Distring' ad respondend' Cap' Duces tecum, and such like Writs, 2 s. For Drawing all Informations, Orders, Decrees, Commissions, Writs, Particulars, and other Matters, for every sheet 1 s. For Copies of every sheet, 8 d. For Ingrossing every sheet 8 d. For all Inrolments, for every Roll 6 s. 8 d. For every General Issue, 3 s. 4 d. For Joyning up the Issue upon Record, 2 s. For every Press of Nisi prius, 3 s. 4 d. For every Writ of Distring' Jur', 4 s. For making the Warrant of Nisi prius, 2 s. The Divident of every Nisi prius, 8 s. For every Commission of Nisi prius in the Country, 6 s. 8 d. For every Information upon seisure, 6 s. 8 d. For Entring the Writ of Appraisment upon Record, 3 s. 4 d.
For Drawing an Order, or giving a Rule for a Day to Plead or Appear, 1 s. For Entring every Continuance of the Term, 4 d. For every Motion the Attorney makes for his Client, 3 s. 4 d. For Conveyance of the Writ of Common Ad∣jornment upon Record, 1 s. For every Writ of Injunction, Habeas Corpus, Priviledges, Supersed', Amoveas man', Prohibit', Consultac', Certiorari, Extent, Fi. fac', Scire fac', Procedend', Delivery, Constat, Vendic' Expon', and every such Special Writ, 5 s. 4 d. For every Patent-Commission, 12 s. For every Dedimus potestatem, 9 s. 6 d. For every Judgment entring upon Record, 3 s. 4 d. For Entring a Tally, 1 s. For entring and inrolling every Recognizance, 5 s. 8 d. For entring every Bill, Answer, Replication, Re∣joynder, Surrejoynder, &c. and filing it, 2 s. For making a Licence, and Entring it, 3 s. For reading the Clients Evidences at the hear∣ing of a Cause, and reading of a Record for a Demurrer, 3 s. 4 d. For making a Bill of Costs, 2 s. For ingrossing a Warrant for a Composit', for every Press of Parchment, 6 s. 8 d. For inrolling a Statute, Bond, Bill, or Recogni∣zance assigned, 3 s. 4 d. For Exemplifications, for every Roll, 6 s. 8 d. For inrolling every Writ of Error, 6 s. 8 d. For inrolling a Replication, Rejoynder and De∣murrer, not exceeding half a Roll, 3 s. 4 d. For ingrossing a Particular, every Press, 6 s. 8 d.
For the Search of any Ancient Record at West∣minster, 3 s. 4 d. For every other Search, for every Term 4 d. For entring and delivering every Indenture discharged by Order of the Court, 6 s. 8 d. For every Amerciament of Sheriffs, discharged by Warrant or Order of the Court, 3 s. 4 d. For drawing and making every Bond for Ac∣comptant's Debtors, 5 s. 4 d. For delivery of every Bond, 1 s. For every Super and Longe upon the Accompt∣ant's Account, for making the Particulars of the 15 Books, after the rate of each Roll, 2 s. 6 d. For entring the Cofferer's Account, 13 s. 4 d. For every other great Account, 6 s. 8 d. For carrying the Record Book, for removing of a Suit commenced against a Person privi∣ledged in the Court of Exchequer, 6 s. 8 d. For making a Bill for Certificate into the Chan∣cery, or into the Pipe, for a Sheriff, or other Occupant's-Recognizance, 1 s. For making a Fine, 2 s. The Dividend-Mony, 5 s. For pleading the Privy-Seal, 6 s. 8 d. For inrolling the same and finishing the Re∣cord, 6 s. 8 d. For making the King's Attorneys Confession, 2 s. For discharging of Process after it is made, 1 s. To the Attorney for filing of every Eschea∣tor's Account, allowed by the Decree of this Court, made Anno 1 Regis nunc Rotulo, 3 s. 4 d. For making a Deed of Assignment, 6 s. 8 d. For Inrolling the same, 6 s. 8 d. For making a Revocation, 6 s. 8 d. For Inrolling the same, 6 s. 8 d.
Books lately Printed for, and sold by John Walthoe, at his Shop in Vine-Court, Middle-Temple. THE Law of Obligations and Conditions, or an Acurate Treatise, wherein is con∣tained the whole Learning of the Law con∣cerning Bills, Bonds, Conditions, Statutes, Re∣cognizances and Defeasances; as also Declara∣tions on Special Conditions, and the Pleadings thereon, Issues, Judgments and Executions, with many other useful Matters relating thereunto, digested under their proper Titles. To which is added a Table of References to all the De∣clarations and Pleadings upon Bonds, &c. now extant: Also another Table to the Forms of Special Conditions which lie scattered in our President Books. Being a Work necessary for all that study the Law, or follow the Practick Part thereof. With an Index of the Principal Matters therein contained. By J. A. of Grays-Inn, Esq; 2. Observations Historical and Geneologi∣cal: In which the Originals of the Emperor, Kings, Electors, and other Sovereign Princes of Europe. With a Series of their Births, Matches, more remarkable Actions and Deaths: As also, the Augmentations, Decreasings and Pretences of each Family, are drawn down to the Year 1690. Written in Latin by Anthony William Schowart, History-Professor at Frankfort; and
now made English; with some Enlargments relating to England. 3. Reports of Cases Taken and Adjudged in the Court of Chancery', in the Reign of King Charles I. and to the 20th Year of K. Charles II. Being Special Cases, and most of them De∣creed with the Assistance of the Judges, and all of them referring to the Register Books: Wherein are settled several Points of Equity, Law and Practice. To which are added Learned Arguments relating to the Antiquity of the said Court, its Dignity, Power and Juris∣diction. 4. A Compendious and Acurate Treatise of Fines upon Writs of Covenant; and Recove∣ries upon Writs of Entry in the Post. With ample and copious Instructions how to draw, acknowledge and levy the same in all Cases. Being a Work performed with great Exactness, and full of Variety of Clerkship. The Third Edition; wherein the former are reviewed, corrected and enlarged. With an Addition of several Presidents, and many Observations, Rules and Cases concerning the effect and ope∣ration of Fines and Recoveries. 5. The Young Clerk's Guide: In IV. Parts. Or an exact Collection of Choice English Presidents, according to the best Forms now used for all sorts of Indentures, Letters of At∣torney, Releases, Conditions, &c. Very useful and necessary for all, but chiefly for those that intend to follow the Attorney's Practice. Com∣piled by Sir R. H. Counsellor; and Revised by an Able Practitioner. The Sixteenth Edi∣tion.
6. The Court-Keeper's Guide for the keep∣ing of Courts-Leet and Courts-Baron, wherein is largely and plainly opened the Jurisdiction of these Courts; with the Learning of Man∣nors, Copyholds, Rents, Herriots, and other Services and Advantages belonging unto Man∣nors, shewing the Lord's Due and the Tenant's Duty; useful for all Persons concerned in Copyhold Estates. The Seventh Edition. By William Sheppard, Esq; Whereunto are added Precedents of Copies of Court-Rolls, with other Additions, by William Browne. 7. An Abridgment of the Lord Coke's Com∣mentaries upon Littleton. Being a brief Expla∣nation of the Grounds of the Common Law. Composed by that Famous and Learned Lawyer Sir Humphry Davenport, Kt. sometime Lord Chief Baron of the Honourable Court of Ex∣chequer, at Westminster. With a Table of the most remarkable things therein contained. 8. Modus Intrandi Placita Generalia. The Entring Clerk's Introduction; being a Col∣lection of such Precedents of Declarations and other Pleadings, with Process, as well Mesn as Judicial, as are generally used in every days Practice; with Notes and Observa∣tions thereupon. Composed for the benefit of the Students of the Common Law of England; as also of the Attorneys, Entring-Clerks and Solicitors of the Court of Common-Pleas and Kings-Bench; acquainting them with the Ru∣diments of Clerkship, and such General Plead∣ing and Process as are used at this day in the Courts of Record at Westminer. The Second Edition altered and amended with Additions
of the true Directions of Writs, according to the style of the latest Grants to each Corpo∣ration in England. By William Browne, Gent. Author of Formula bene Placitandi. 9. The Clerk's Grammar Enlarged; where∣in are laid down plain and easie Rules for the making any Bond or Bill, Obligatory or Single; with the several Conditions in most Cases: Also Instructions, how to place the Names, Sums and Dates of the same in true proper Latin. Likewise an exact Method of Drawing all manner of Deeds of Common use; with Instructions, how to raise any Con∣sideration, Habendum, Reddendum, Reservation or Covenant used therein. Made more plain and intelligible to the meanest Capacity, than any Book of this Nature hitherto extant in Print. The Second Edition, with many Ad∣ditions. FINIS.
Midd. ss. A TABLE OF FEES Now taken, and which have been anciently taken in the Office of Clerk of the Peace and Goal Delivery of the County of Mid∣dlesex. FOR every Recognizance entred into in the Court, 02 s. 4 d. For the discharge of every Recogni∣zance for the Peace and Good Behavior, 02 s. 4 d. If for Bruising, Wounding, Felony or suspi∣cion of Felony, 04 s. 8 d. For the Respiting of every Persons Recogni∣zance from one Sessions to another in case of Sickness or other Just Cause, 02 s. 4 d.
For the discharge of every Recognizance for Felony, where an Indictment hath been preferred to the Grand Jury and returned Ignoramus, 09 s. 4 d. For the Copy of every Regnizance, 02 s. 4 d. For Entring and Recording the Appearance and Plea of Guilty or not Guilty of every Person on every Indictment, 04 s. 8 d. For Recording the Acquittal or Conviction of every Person upon Trial of Traverse on every Indictment of Trespass, and for the discharge of the Recognizance, 10 s. 4 d. For Recording the Plea of Conformity of every Person Indicted of Recusancy, 09 s. 4 d. For the Allowance and Recording of every Warrant of Nolle Prosequi, or Cessat Pro∣cessus from the Attorney General for every Person in every Indictment, 06 s. 8 d. For the allowance of every Writ of Certiorari to remove an Indictment, 06 s. 8 d. For the Return thereof, 02 s. 0 d. For every other Indictment removed by the same Writ, 02 s. 0 d. If there be more Persons than one in the In∣dictment or Indictments, then more for every Person after the first Name, 01 s. 0 d. For every Bond taken for the Defendant to pay Costs upon the allowance of a Certio∣raeri to remove Indictments for Riot, As∣sault or Forcible Entry, 02 s. 6 d.
For the allowance of every Writ of Proce∣dendo, 06 s. 8 d. For the allowance of every Writ of Error, which rarely happens, 13 s. 4 d. For Drawing, Engrossing and Copying the Return eight Pence per Sheet. For the Copy of every Indictment for Riot, Rout or Forcible Entry, 06 s. 8 d. For the Copy of every Ordinary Indictment of Trespass, 03 s. 4 d. Or eight Pence per Sheet, according to the length thereof. For Drawing, Entring and Copying of eve∣ry Record in Trespass, eight Pence per Sheet, For Drawing every Ordinary Indictment to the Clerks for themselves, 02 s. 0 d. For every Special Indictment, 03 s. 4 d. If above five Sheets, according to the length thereof, eight Pence per Sheet. For every Certificate, 02 s. 6 d. For Drawing, Entring and Copy of every Order of Sessions, 05 s. 0 d. For every short Order of Summons to attend the Court, 01 s. 0 d. For every Venire Fac' duodecim', Distringas, At∣tachm', Capias, Fieri Fac' and Subpoena, 02 s. 6 d. For Attending, Taking, Recording and Re∣gistring every Recognizance before the Justices of the Peace at their yearly Ge∣neral Renewing the Licenses of Ale-house-keepers, and for a true Copy of the Re∣cognizance and Condition for every Ale-house-keeper, 10 s. 6 d.
For Recording and Registring, and for a Co∣py of the Recognizance and Condition for every Ale-house-keeper Licensed between the yearly general Renewing of Licenses, 02 s. 6 d. There is paid more to the Clerk of the Peace's Clerk for the Licenses last mention∣ed, 01 s. 0 d. For Registring and Recording the Name of every Person that takes the Oaths of Fide∣lity to their Majesties, pursuant to the Sta∣tute, 01 s. 0 d. For Registring the Name of every Protestant Dissenting-Minister, who in pursuance of the late Act for that purpose takes the said Oaths, and subscribes the Articles of Religion. 00 s. 6 d. For every Certificate thereof, 00 s. 6 d. For making out the Estreat of every Fine set upon a Presentment made upon the view of a Justice of Peace for not repair∣ing the Highways, pursuant to a Statute made 2 & 3 Phil. & Mar. for every 20 s. 01 s. 0 d. For attending a Special Session for inquiring of forceable Entries and Deteiners, &c. 06 s. 8 d. For Drawing the Inquisition, 06 s. 8 d. For the Writ of Restitution, 06 s. 8 d. For the Courts discharge of every Prisoner out of New Prison, where there is no Pro∣secution, 02 s. 0 d. For the discharge of every Person committed to the House of Correction, that is dis∣charged in Court, 01 s. 0 d.
Fees taken upon Informations, which very sel∣dom happen in Middlesex. FOR Drawing or Filing the Informati∣ons, 03 s. 4 d. For every Appearance upon an Information, 02 s. 4 d. For every Plea not Guilty, 02 s. 4 d. For every Special Plea per Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For every Rule made after Appearance, 01 s. 0 d. For Engrossing & Entring up the Record per Sheet, 00 s. 4 d. For Entring the Judgment thereupon, 04 s. 0 d. For the Copy per Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. Fees taken at the Goal Delivery. FOR taking every Recognizance entred into, in the Court, 05 s. 4 d. Out of which there is eight Pence paid to the Sword-bearer, and eight Pence to the Cryer. The like Fee is taken for the discharge of every Recognizance. For every Prisoner discharged by Proclama∣tion in the Court where there is no prose∣cution, 02 s. 0 d. For the Appearance and Plea, and Record∣ing the Conviction or acquittal of every Person indicted, 04 s. 4 d.
Out of which there is 4 d. paid to the Cryer, and 4 d. to the Sword-bearer. For every Copy of an Indictment for Felony, which very seldom happens, there being none granted without the Attorney Gene∣rals Warrant, 13 s. 4 d. If long then 12 d. per Sheet, according to the length thereof. For the allowance of every Pardon pleaded for Felony or Treason 13 s. 4 d. For the Draught, Copy and Inrollment of every Pardon, or other Record in Felony or Treason 12 d. per Sheet, according to the length thereof, 01 s. 0 d. For the allowance of every Writ of Certiora∣ri in Felony or Treason, 13 s. 4 d. For the Return thereof, 06 s. 8 d. For Swearing the Witnesses on Trials, Nil. For every Writ of Restitution, 06 s. 8 d. For drawing the Affidavit and Swearing the Party to the due Service of the Writ of Restitution, 01 s. 0 d. For Filing every Special Plea, 02 s. 0 d. For the Certificate of Conviction, Drawing and Engrossing the Bill for a General Par∣don, and for the allowance thereof 13 s. 4 d. For Drawing and Certifying of Records of Outlawry into the King's Bench pro Rege, Nil. For the allowance of every Writ of Error in Felony or Treason, 13 s. 4 d.
For Drawing, Entring and Copy of the Re∣turn 12 d. per Sheet, according to the length thereof, 01 s. 0 d. Simon Harcourt Cleric' Pacis & Gaol' Deliba' Coi'o Com' Midd'. Nov. 22. 1693. Surry ss. A Table or Particular of the Fees now taken by the Clerk of the Peace of the County of Surry, and which have been taken by his Predecessors in the said Office. FOR Entring the Appearance to every Indictment or Presentment, 02 s. 0 d. For Entry of every Plea, if not Guilty, 02 s. 4 d. For every Recognizance to prosecute a Tra∣verse, 02 s. 4 d. For the Copy of every Ordinary Indictment 03 s. 4 d. For the Copy of an Indictment for Perjury, Forgery, and all other long Indictments, 8 d. per Sheet, For the Venir' Fac', 02 s. 4 d. For discharging the Recognizance, and draw∣ing up the Record, and Entring every Ac∣quittal, 08 s. 8 d.
For drawing up and Recording every Con∣viction, 08 s. 8 d. For the Appearance, Copy, Recording and Entring every Confession, 08 s. 8 d. For discharging every Recognizance, for the Peace, 02 s. 4 d. For discharging every other Recognizance, 04 s. 4 d. For respiting every Recognizance from one Sessions to another, 04 s. 8 d. For the Copy of a Recognizance, 02 s. 4 d. For every Recognizance entred into in Court, other than to prosecute a Traverse, 02 s. 6 d. For the Allowance and Recording a War∣rant of Noli Prosequi from the Attorney Ge∣neral against every Person in every Indict∣ment, 06 s. 8 d. For the allowance of every Cessat Process' from the Attorney General, and Recording the same in every Indictment, 06 s. 8 d. For the allowance of every Certiorari, 06 s. 8 d. For the Return thereof, 02 s. 0 d. For every Indictment after the First, if there be more than one, 02 s. 0 d. If more Persons than one in the Indictment, then every Person after the First, 01 s. 0 d. For every Bond taken upon the Allowance of every Certiorari upon Indictments of Forcible Entry, Riots and Battery, 02 s. 6 d.
For the Allowance of every Writ of Proce∣dendo, 06 s. 8 d. For the Allowance of every Writ of Error, 13 s. 4 d. For the Return of the Record 8 d. per Sheet. For drawing every Ordinary Indictment, 02 s. 0 d. For drawing Indictments for Riots, Forcible Entry and other Special Indictments, 03 s. 4 d. For every Special Indictment, as Perjury, For∣gery, or the like 8 d. per Sheet. For every Subpoena, 02 s. 6 d. For every Distringas, 02 s. 6 d. For every first License of Badger, Kidder or Drover, 05 s. 0 d. For every License after the First, 02 s. 6 d. For every Order for choosing a Petty Consta∣ble or Headborrogh, 02 s. 0 d. For every High Constable's Order, 03 s. 0 d. For every Pentioner's Order, 02 s. 6 d. For Drawing, Entring and Copying all Pa∣rish Orders, and other Special Orders, 05 s. 0 d. For every Writ of Restitution, in Forcible En∣try or Deteiners, 06 s. 8 d. For Licensing and Registring every Alehouse-keeper and Victualer within the Burrough of Southwark, 01 s. 6 d. For making out the Estreats for levying Fines for not repairing Highways on a Record made in the View of a Justice of the Peace, 12 d. in the Pound per Statute.
For Registring and taking the Oaths of Al∣legiance and Supremacy on a Certificate of receiving the Sacrament, 01 s. 0 d. For every Special Certificate thereof, 02 s. 6 d. For Entring the taking the Oaths, and ma∣king and subscribing the Declaration by every Dissenter, 00 s. 6 d. Certificate of the same, 00 s. 6 d. For Registring and making Certificate of the Place of holding every Conventicle, 00 s. 6 d. Fees upon Informations. FOR drawing the Information, 03 s. 4 d. For every Appearance to an Information, 02 s. 4 d. For every Plea of not Guilty, 02 s. 0 d. For every Special Plea 8 d. per Sheet, For every License to Compound, 04 s. 0 d. For every Rule made after the Appearance, 01 s. 0 d. For Engrossing and Entring the Record 8 d. per Sheet. For Entring Judgment thereon, 04 s. 0 d. For the Subpoena to Answer, 02 s. 6 d. For the Copy 8 d. per Sheet. For every Fi' Fa' or Ca' Sa', 02 s. 6 d. There is no Table or Particular of what Fees were taken belonging to the said Office at any time in the Reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, as can be found out or discovered amongst the Re∣cords of the said Sessions or other∣wise. Delivered in by me, Will'us Smythe Cler' Pacis Com' Surr' pred'. Nov. 20. 1693. Fees taken by the Clerk of the Assize of the Home Circuit: Such also be∣ing anciently received by his Prede∣cessors. Fees in an Assize. These Proceedings are out of use, and but one Assize brought in thirty years. FOR the Assize upon putting it into Court, 02 s. 0 d. For arraigning the Assize, 06 s. 8 d. For drawing the Plaint, 01 s. 0 d. For Recording the Appearance of every Te∣nant, 02 s. 0 d. For Entring the Default, 02 s. 0 d. For every Adjornment of the Plaintiff, 02 s. 0 d. Of the Defendant, 02 s. 0 d. For Entring every Warrant of Attorney, 02 s. 0 d.
For Entring of the Plaint, if it be not above three Sheets, 02 s. 0 d. If it be more, for every Sheet, 01 s. 0 d. For the Copy of every Plea, for every Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For making up the Book when it is at Issue, for every Sheet, 01 s. 0 d. For the Copy of the Issue, for every Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For Entring every Judgment, 04 s. 0 d. For Entring every Discontinuance, 04 s. 0 d. For the Writ of Seizin, 02 s. 0 d. And if it be with a Fieri Facias for Costs, 04 s. 0 d. For Entring the Seizin returned by the She∣riff, 02 s. 0 d. For every Writ of Resum' Hab' Cor' and such other, 02 s. 0 d. For every Writ of Resum' with a Reattach' 04 s. 6 d. To the Clerk for writing every such Writ, 00 s. 6 d. Fees upon the Nisi Prius FOR Entring every Record of Nisi Prius with the Marshal, the Fee received by the Marshal and accounted for the Clerk of Assize, 02 s. 0 d. If the Attorney appear not, then for the Warrant of Attorney, 00 s. 8 d. For calling the Cause and Copy of Issue, 02 s. 0 d.
For every default, Non Pros', Confession or Verdict for the Defendant, & tales, for every of them 02 s. 0 d. For every Challenge, 02 s. 0 d. If the Challenge be tried by Verdict, 04 s. 0 d. For every Privy Verdict received by the Mar∣shal, and accounted for to the Clerk of Assize, 02 s. 0 d. To the Associat for attending and taking the Pivy Verdict, 02 s. 0 d. For drawing every Special Verdict at the equal Charges of Plaintiff and Defendant, for every Sheet, 01 s. 0 d. For Ingrossing it, for every Sheet, 01 s. 0 d. For the Copy of every Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For every Subpoena, 02 s. 6 d. For the Clerk of Assize his hand to every Or∣der, Certificate or other Business, 02 s. 0 d. For Reading an Evidence, 01 s. 0 d. For returning the Postea, 02 s. 0 d. For every Issue after the first, 01 s. 0 d. For Indorsing the Certificate in some cases of small Trespasses, that the Battery was well proved, or that the Title came in question, 02 s. 0 d. Fees in the Gaol Court. IMprimis, every Prisoner in the Gaol, de∣livered by Proclamation, paid formerly for his Discharge 8 s. 8 d. out of which the Judges, Marshal and Cryer had 1 s. each, but of late the Marshal and Cryer take their own Fees, and the Clerk of As∣size
size takes 06 s. 4 d. Item, every Person Convicted, Burnt in the Hand or Whipped, payeth, 04 s. 8 d. Item, every Prisoner being Indicted and Ac∣quitted of Felony, paid formerly 11 s. 4 d. out of which the Marshal had 2 s. 4 d. and the cryer 12 d. but of late they take their own Fees, and the Clerk of As∣size takes, 08 s. 0 d. Item, every Person coming in upon Bail to Answer for Felony or Wounding, paid formerly for the Discharge of his Recog∣nizance 8 s. 4 d. Out of which the Mar∣shal and Cryer had 1 s. each, but of late they take their own Fees, and the Clerk of Assize takes, 06 s. 4 d. Item, for the Peace or Good Behaviour, paid formerly 6 s. 8 d. out of which the Mar∣shal and Cryer had 1 s. each, but of late take their own Fees, and the Clerk of As∣size takes 04 s. 8 d. Item, for taking every Recognizance in Court to Answer, &c. 6 s. 8 d. out of which the Marshal and Cryer had 1 s. each, but of late they take their own Fees, and the Clerk of Assize taketh 04 s. 8 d. Item, for making every Ordinary Indict∣ment, to three Clerks amongst themselves 02 s. 0 d. If Special, according to the length, for eve∣ry Sheet 00 s. 8 d. For Ingrossing every Sheet 00 s. 4 d. Item, for the Copy of every Indictment in Felony with the Caption of the Court, and the Names of the Grand Jury, whereof
none can be made but by Warrant from the Attorney General, or by the Judges Order, which seldom happens, 13 s. 4 d. Item, for pleading every Special Pardon and Allowance, 13 s. 4 d. And Gloves to each Officer. For Inrolling the Pardon and Copy of the Inrollment, for every Sheet 01 s. 0 d. Item, for the Allowance and Return of a Cer∣tiorari in Felony, being very seldom grant∣ed, 13 s. 4 d. Item, for the Allowance of a Certiorari in Trespass, for the first Name 06 s. 8 d. For every Name, after the first Name there∣in, 02 s. 0 d. For the Return of the Writ, and therewith certifying each Indictment, 02 s. 0 d. Item, for a Copy of every Indictment in Trespass, if not above five Sheets, 03 s. 4 d. And if above five Sheets, for every Sheet 00 s. 8 d. For Recording the Appearance in Trespass, for each Person 02 s. 4 d. For every Plea of not Guilty, 02 s. 4 d. For every Recognizance to prosecute a Tra∣verse, 02 s. 4 d. For Drawing and Entring the Issue, 02 s. 0 d. For every Venire Fac' xij, Habeas Corpus or Di∣stringas, 02 s. 6 d. For Recording the Acquittal or Conviction, 06 s. 8 d.
For every Person submitting to every Indict∣ment after Appearance, and Copy, 06 s. 8 d. For making and discharging the Process of every Capias or Distringas, 02 s. 6 d. For Drawing and Entring on the Roll, every Record of Conviction or Acquittal, for every Sheet 00 s. 8 d. For the Copy of a Record in a Traverse, for every Sheet 00 s. 8 d. For every Writ of Restitution, 06 s. 8 d. These Proceedings are little in use. For Filing every Information, 02 s. 0 d. For the Subpoena ad Respondendum, 02 s. 6 d. For the Appearance of the Defendant, 02 s. 4 d. For the Copy of every Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For every Plea of not Guilty, 02 s. 4 d. For every Special Plea, for every Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For Ingrossing and Entring the same on Re∣cord, for every Sheet 00 s. 4 d. For Entring and Recording every Judgment thereupon, 04 s. 0 d. For every Fi' Fa' or Ca' ad satisfaciendum, 02 s. 6 d. For Recording every Submission of a Recu∣sant, and Certifying it into Exchequer, 10 s. 0 d. For Drawing, Entring and Copying every Order 3 s. and Signing it by the Clerk of Assize 2 s. in toto 05 s. 0 d.
For the Copy of the Calendar of the Judg∣ments and Orders of all the Prisoners in every Gaol, 05 s. 0 d. For a Bond for the Defendant to pay Costs in case he be Convicted after Allowance of the Certiorari in such perticular Cases as the Statute requires, 02 s. 6 d. For Allowing every Writ of Error, 08 s. 8 d. For Certifying the Record thereupon, for every Sheet, 00 s. 8 d. For Allowing every Certiorari out of Chance∣ry for the Record of Manslaughter per Infor∣tunium, & in order to a Pardon of Course 08 s. 8 d. For Certifying the Record thereupon, for every Sheet 00 s. 8 d. For Filing, Allowing and Entring, a Nolle Prosequi or Cesset Process' from Mr. Attorney General, for every Person Indicted, 13 s. 4 d. For Respiting every Recognizance, 06 s. 8 d. For every Defendants Verdict upon a Tra∣verse to the Associat, 02 s. 0 d. The Fee of 2 s. for every Tales is taken away by an Act made in the last Session of this present Parliament. Eldred Lancelott Lee Clerk of Assize and General Gaol Delivery, &c.
The Ancient, Ʋsual and Allowed Fees of the Cursitors, with the Seals of the Writs, and other Duties in∣cluded. AUdita Querela upon Judgments gi∣ven in the Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas, 10 s. 6 d. Accedas ad Cur̄ 02 s. 6 d. Attach Quilt, 07 s. 2 d. Admensuratio Pasture 05 s. 6 d. Ad quod dampnn, 07 s. 2 d. Annuo reddit, 02 s. 6 d. Assis̄ cujuscun{que} Generis 05 s. 6 d. Attincr, 07 s. 2 d. Averijs Rescuss̄, 02 s. 6 d. Attorn Faciend, 02 s. 6 d. Admensuratio Dotis 02 s. 6 d. Associacio Assis̄ & Redisseis̄, 07 s. 2 d. Avo {per}avo & consanguineo quilr, 02 s. 6 d. Appeal Murdr̄, 07 s. 2 d. Appeal Felon & Burglar̄ 07 s. 2 d. Ballivo amovend {per} War̄, 07 s. 2 d. Alias Plur̄ & Attach inde quilr, 02 s. 6 d. Cerciorar̄ Special, 07 s. 2 d. For Signing thereof, 03 s. 4 d. Cerciorar̄ su{per} tenorib{is}, 02 s. 6 d. Cerciorar̄ ad certificand finem vel recupac, 02 s. 6 d. Cessavit, 02 s. 6 d.
Conspiracio 05 s. 6 d. Convenc̄oe, 02 s. 6 d. Coīa Plita non tenend in Sccīo, 07 s. 2 d. Coronatore eligend, 07 s. 2 d. Supersedeas inde, 07 s. 2 d. Compur, 02 s. 6 d. Cui in vita, 02 s. 6 d. Cur̄ claudend, 02 s. 6 d. Caucione admittend, 07 s. 2 d. Custos Terre & Hered, 02 s. 6 d. Consuetud & Servic, 02 s. 6 d. Cui ante Divorcin, 02 s. 6 d. Casu cujuscun{que} generis, 02 s. 6 d. Cerciorar̄ su{per} Attach in London, 07 s. 2 d. Cerciorar̄ in Insula Elien, 07 s. 2 d. Dedimus potestatem sp̄ial sup bre de con, if it be in one County, 1 l. 04 s. 2 d. Out of which paid Fine to the King 6 s. 8 d. and a Fee of 6 s. 8 d. to the Judge that Signs it in the Term, and the General Seals before and after every Term, and to the Great Seal the rest of the Vacation, 13 s. 4 d. Paid for the Signing thereof, 01 s. 0 d. If in more Counties, for every County a seve∣ral Fee, paying the Fine and Fees aforesaid. Dedimus Potestatem general su{per} bre de∣con, if it be in one Shire, 09 s. 2 d. Out of which paid Fine to the King, 06 s. 8 d. If in more Shires, several Fees as aforesaid. Dote, 02 s. 6 d. Dote Paten, 05 s. 6 d. bre de Deb & Detencon, 01 s. 0 d.
Ded & Detencon continen sepales causas Acc̄ois, 01 s. 6 d. Decepc̄oe 07 s. 2 d. Ejecc̄oe Firme, 02 s. 6 d. Ejecc̄oe Custod, 02 s. 6 d. Error coram nob residen, 07 s. 2 d. Error in London, 07 s. 2 d. Error in Barwico, 07 s. 2 d. Error in Ely, 07 s. 2 d. Error sup loquelam tantum, 02 s. 6 d. Error su{per} judicin & utlagar̄ supinde, 05 s. 6 d. Error in Banco Regis scdm Statur xxvij. Elizabeth Regine, 10 s. 6 d. Error in Scc̄io, 07 s. 2 d. Error in omnib{is} Com Palatinis, 07 s. 2 d. Error in Wallia, 07 s. 2 d. Error in Hibernia, 10 s. 6 d. Error su{per} finem & recupac̄oem, 07 s. 2 d. Error sp̄ial {per} Waran Attorn General quilr, 07 s. 2 d. Exc̄oicar Capiend versus tres Personas, 07 s. 2 d. For every three Names more, or two Causes, 06 s. 8 d. Alias Plures & Attach inde quilr, 07 s. 2 d. Exc̄oicar deliband 07 s. 2 d. Execuc̄oe judicij. 02 s. 6 d. Exonerac̄oe decime & quinte decime, 07 s. 2 d. Alias Plur̄ & Attach inde quilr 02 s. 6 d. Expens̄ Militum, 07 s. 2 d. Estrepament, 02 s. 6 d.
Escaet, 02 s. 6 d. Error su{per} Attach {per} Garnishee in London, 10 s. 6 d. Commission su{per} inde, 10 s. 6 d. Error su{per} bre de deb ex post ca, 07 s. 2 d. Falso Judicio, 02 s. 6 d. Forisfactur̄ Maritagij, 02 s. 6 d. Forma Donac̄ois, 02 s. 6 d. Hered capr, 02 s. 6 d. Homine repleḡ, 07 s. 2 d. Hutes̄ & Clam, 10 s. 6 d. Heretico comburend, 02 s. 6 d. Ingress̄ in om̄i casu, 02 s. 6 d. Injunc̄oe {per} non soluc̄oe finis, 07 s. 2 d. For Signing, 06 s. 8 d. Iusticies, 02 s. 6 d. Indicavit, 02 s. 6 d. Intrusione, 02 s. 6 d. Leproso amovend, 05 s. 6 d. Libtar allocand, 02 s. 6 d. Contribuc̄oe faciend, 02 s. 6 d. Moderata Misericordia, 02 s. 6 d. Manutenenc, 02 s. 6 d. Mittimus 07 s. 2 d. for the Transcript there∣of after the rate of 1 l. 6 s. 3 d. the Skin, 07 s. 2 d. Mittimus & tns̄ su{per} significavit in omnib{is} Com Palatinis & Wallia, 10 s. 6 d. Monstravit, 02 s. 6 d. Medio, 02 s. 6 d.
Nuper obijt 02 s. 6 d. Ne exeat Regnn, 07 s. 2 d. Non Molestand, 07 s. 2 d. Nativo habend, 07 s. 2 d. Non ponend in Assisis, 07 s. 2 d. Ne admittas, 02 s. 6 d. Ne injuste vexes, 02 s. 6 d. Ne amoveas, 05 s. 6 d. Officiar̄ non faciend, 05 s. 6 d. Ordinac contra Servientem, 02 s. 6 d. Onerand scdm ratam, 02 s. 6 d. Parco fracto, 02 s. 6 d. Pardon se defendend & ex infortunio, 06 s. 8 d. The drawing 3 s. 4 d. if it be of an extra∣ordinary length, then according to the In∣rollment. Partic̄oe faciend, 02 s. 6 d. Paten su{per} bre de errore in Assiss̄ & At∣tincr, 07 s. 2 d. Perambulac̄oe faciend, 05 s. 6 d. Pleḡ acquietand, 02 s. 6 d. Pone, 02 s. 6 d. Pontib{is} re{per}and, 02 s. 6 d. Post disseīa, 05 s. 6 d. Precipe in ca{per}ite, 02 s. 6 d. Procedend cujuscun{que} Generis, 02 s. 6 d. Prohibic̄oe, 07 s. 2 d. Proprietar {pro}band, 02 s. 6 d. Premunire, 07 s. 2 d. Quare ejecit infra Terminn 02 s. 6 d. Quare impedit, 05 s. 6 d.
Quare incumbravit, 02 s. 6 d. Quare non admisit, 02 s. 6 d. Quod ei deforc, 02 s. 6 d. Quod ei {per}mittat, 02 s. 6 d. Recr Claus̄, 02 s. 6 d. Recr Paten, 05 s. 6 d. Redisseīa, 05 s. 6 d. Repac̄oe Pont, Dia{rum} & Domor{rum}, 02 s. 6 d. Repleḡ de averijs, 01 s. 0 d. Alias inde, 01 s. 6 d. Plur̄ inde, 02 s. 6 d. Recordar̄ 02 s. 6 d. Ron̄abili {per}arte Bono{rum}, 02 s. 6 d. Ron̄abili divis̄, 02 s. 6 d. Statur Northr, 07 s. 2 d. Statur Ric̄i sc̄di, 07 s. 2 d. dria de Statur, 02 s. 6 d. Omnia bria de su{per}sed su{per} aliquib{is} brib{is}, 07 s. 2 d. Statur Henr̄ sexti, 10 s. 6 d. Secta ad Molend, 02 s. 6 d. Statur Mercar, 02 s. 6 d. Supsed in bri de Ded, 07 s. 2 d. Transgressione, 01 s. 0 d. Tns̄ sup casum, 02 s. 6 d. Tolner, 07 s. 2 d. Halore maritagij, 02 s. 6 d. Hasr, 02 s. 6 d. Hicis & venell mundand, 05 s. 6 d. Hi Laica amovend, 05 s. 6 d. Hiridario eligend, 07 s. 2 d.
Hia obstrucr & re{per}and, 05 s. 6 d. Warrancia Carte, 02 s. 6 d. Warrancia Diei, 05 s. 6 d. Withernamin, 05 s. 6 d. All Actions of Debt, Detinue, Trespass, Hue and Cry Annuo reddir Deceipr & Iusti∣cies, if the sum exceed 40 l. do pay Fine to the King, according to the sum demand∣ed in the Writ. And also every Recordar̄ Pone Acced ad Cur̄ (except de Averijs & Catallis) Attincr Conspiracy, False Judgment, & Ded Po∣testatem, do pay Fine to the King, 06 s. 8 d. Several of the Writs herein mentioned are ta∣ken away by Acts of Parliament, particu∣larly that for abolishing the Court of Wards, and several more of them by the alterati∣on of the Practice of the Law, particularly most of the Writs in Real Actions are dis∣continued. Nov. 20. 1693. ERRATA. PAge 2. (in the Common Pleas Fees) line 11. for Process, read Press. p. 8. l. 24. r. Term. l. 31. r. Term. p. 30. l. 1. r. William, East Esq; l. 6. r. prayer. p. 50. l. 15: r. At∣torneys. p. 54. l. 1. add to declare. l. 6. r. Guardian. p. 55. l. 6. r. Warter. p. 57. l. 23. r. Press, and so all along there. p. 59. l. 9. r. thereto. l. 26. r. Writ. p. 60. l. 16. r. eight. p. 65. l. 14. r. Press. in both. p. 66. l. 2. r. Attorney. p. 68. last line but two r. Press.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE ACT Made in the 5th and 6th Years of Their Majesties Reign, for granting to Their Majesties several Duties upon Vellum, Parchment, and Paper, for Four Years, towards carrying on the War against France. We do Approve this Abstract. EDW. WARD. THO. TREVOR. By Order of the Queen and Council. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Tho. Newcomb, deceased; Printers to the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesties: And sold by J. Walthoe in Vine Court, Middle-Temple, 1694.
At the Court of Whitehall, the 31st of May, 1694. Present the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty in Council. IT is this Day Ordered by Her Majesty in Coun∣cil, That the Commissioners appointed by Their Majesties for putting in Execution an Act of Parliament, Entituled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesties several Duties, upon Vellum, Parchment, and Paper, for Four Years, towards carrying on a War against France, Do forthwith cause an Ab∣stract to be made of the said Act: And when the said Abstract shall be approved of, by Mr. Attorney, and Solicitor General, That they cause the said Abstract to be Printed and published And the Right Honourable the Lords Commissio∣ners of the Treasury are to give all necessary Di∣rections accordingly. Rich. Colinge. LET the Commissioners for putting in Execution the Act above-mentioned, take care, that He Majesties Pleasure signified in the above-written Or∣der of Council, be duly complied with. Whitchal Treasury Chambers, the First of June, 1694 Godolphin. Ste. Fox. Cha. Montague.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE ACT Made in the 5th and 6th Years of Their Majesties Reign, for granting to Their Majesties several Duties up∣on Vellum, Parchment, and Paper, for Four Years, towards carrying on the War against France. It is Enacted, THat from and after the 28th of June, 1694. there shall be throughout England, Wales and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, llected and paid to their Majesties for ur Years, for what shall be written or grossed upon Vellum, Parchment, or per, within that time, above what is now e to Their Majesties or any Person, or dy politick, the Rates following, viz. For every Skin or Piece of Vellum,Letters Pa∣tents. or rchment, on which any Grant or Letters
Patents, under the Great Seal of England, Seal of the Dutchy or County Palatine of Lancaster, or of any Honour, Dignity, Promotion, Franchise, Liberty, or Privilege, or any Exemplification of the same, shall be Written, 40 s. For every Skin,Pardons, Re∣prieves, Relax∣ations. or Piece of Vellum, Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which any Pardon of a Crime, or of a summ of Money, or Forfeiture, or any Warrant, or Reprieve, or Relaxation from any Fines, Corporal Punishments, or other Forfeiture shall be Written, 40 s. For every Skin of Vellum, or Parchment, or Sheet of Paper,Grants of Mo∣ney by their Majesties. on which any Grant from Their Majesties of any Sum exceed∣ing 100 l. which shall pass the Great Seal or Privy Seal (not directed to the Great Seal) shall be Written, 40 s. Or on which any Grant of any Office or Employment,Grants of Offi∣ces, or Em∣ployments above 50 l. per An∣num. which shall be above th value of 50 l. a Year shall be Written, 40 s. For every Skin of Vellum,Grants of Lands in Fee, or for years, or other Grants of Profit. or Parchment on which any Grant of Lands, in Fee, o for Years, or other Grant of Profit, no herein particularly charged, which shall pass the Great Seal, Seal of the Exchequer or of the Dutchy, or County Palatine Lancaster, or the Privy Seal, (not directed to the Great Seal) shall be Written, 40 s. For every Piece of Vellum,Ecclesiastical Promotions. or Parch∣ment, or Sheet of Paper, on which an Presentation or Donation which shall pa the Great Seal, or on which any Collation to be made by any Arch-Bishop, or Bishop
or any Presentation or Donation to be made by any Patron, to any Benefice, Dignity, Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Pro∣motion shall be Written, 40 s. Provided such Benefice, Dignity, or Promotion be of the yearly Value of 10 l. in the King's Books. For every Skin, or Piece of Vellum,Certificates of Degrees in Ʋ∣niversities, or Inns of Court. or Parchment, Sheet or piece of Paper, on which any Register, Entry Testimonial, or Certificate of any Degree, taken in ei∣ther of the two Universities or four Inns of Court, shall be Written, 40 s. For every Skin, or Piece of Vellum,Dispensations and Faculties. or Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which any Dispensation to hold two Ecclesiasti∣cal Dignities or Benefices, or a Dignity and a Benefice, or Dispensation or Faculty from the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, or Master of the Faculties, shallbe Written,Admittances into College of Physicians, of Attornies, Clerks, Advo∣cates, Proctors, Notaries, or other Officers, into Courts. 40 s. For every Skin, or Piece of Vellum, or Parchment, Sheet, or Piece of Paper, on which any Admittance of a Fellow of the College of Physicians, or of any Attor∣ney, Clerk, Advocate, Proctor, Notary, or other Officer in any Court, shall be Written, 40 s. For every Skin, or Piece of Vellum,Appeals from the Admiralty, Arches; and Prerogative. or Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which any Appeal from the Admiralty, Arches, or Prerogative Courts of Canterbury, or York, shall be Written,Conveyances, Surrenders of Grants or Offi∣ces, Releases, or Deeds enrol∣led.40 s. Or on which any Conveyance, Sur∣render of Grants, or Offices, Releases, or other Deeds, which shall be enrolled of
Record in any Court of Westminster, or other Court of Record, or by any Cu∣stos Rotulorum or Clerk of the Peace, shall be Written, 5 s. For every Piece of Vellum,Writs of Entry and Covenant. or Parch∣ment, on which any Writ of Covenant for levying Fines, or any Writ of Entry for suffering any Common Recovery, shall be Written, 5 s. For every Skin of Vellum,Exemplificati∣ons. or Parch∣ment, on which any Exemplification, which shall pass the Seal of any Court, shall be Written, 5 s. For every Skin of Vellum,Decrees and Dismissions. Parchment or Sheet of Paper, on which any Decree, or Dismission, made by or in the Court of Chancery, Exchequer, County Pala∣tines, or Dutchy of Lancaster, County Pa∣latine of Chester, Durham, or other Courts o Equity, shall be Written, 6 d. For every Skin,Institutions, and Licences. or piece of Vellum Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which any Institution or Licence, which shall pass the Seal of any Arch-Bishop, Bishop Chancellor, or other Ordinary, or any Ecclesiastical Court, shall be Written, 5 s. Or on which any Writ of Error,Writs of Error and Certio∣rari. Cer∣tiorari, Habeas Corpus, or Appeal (except to the Delegates) shall be Written, 5 s. Or on which any Significavit pro Corporis deliheratione, shall be Written, 5 s. For every Skin,Sentences, At∣tachments and Relaxations in the Admiral∣ty and Cinque-Ports. or Piece of Vellum or Parchment, or Sheet, or piece of Paper on which any Sentence which shall be gi∣ven in the Court of the Lord High-Admi∣ral
of England, or Cinque-Ports, exerci∣ing Admiralty-Jurisdiction, or any Attach∣ment issuing out of the said Courts or Re∣laxation of such Attachment, shall be Written, 5 s. Or on which any Licence for,Licences, Certificates of Marriage, Let∣ters of Mart. or Certifi∣cate of Marriage, or Letters of Mart, shall be Written, 5 s. Or on which any Probate of a Will,Probates of Wills, and Letters of Ad∣ministration. or Letters of Administration for any Estate above 20 l. Value, shall be Written, 5 s. Or on which any Recognisance, Sta∣tute-Staple,Recognisance, Statutes. or Statute-Merchant shall be Written, or entred of Record in any Court or Office, 5 s. For every Skin, or piece of Vellum,Record of Nisi prius, or Po∣stea. or Parchment, on which any Record of Nisi prius, or postea shall be Written, 2 s. 6 d. For every Skin, or piece of Vellum,Judgment in any Court at Westminster. or Parchment, or Paper, on which any Judg∣ment which shall be Signed by the Master of any Office, his Deputy, or Seconda∣ry, Prothonotary or his Secondary, De∣puty, or Clerk, or any other Officer of any Court at Westminster, usually Signing Judgments, shall be Written, 2 s. 6 d. For every Skin, or piece of Vellum,Commissions in Ecclesiastical Courts. or Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which any Commission issuing out of any Eccle∣siastical Court not herein otherwise parti∣cularly charged, shall be Written, 2 s. 6 d. Or on which any Warrant, Monition,Warrants, Mo∣nitions, Perso∣nal Decrees in the Admiralty, and Cinque-Ports. or Personal Decree in any Court of Ad∣miralty, or Cinque Ports, or any benefici∣al Warrant, or Order, under Their Maje∣sties
Sign-Manual (except Warrants or Orders for the Service of Their Majesties Navy,Beneficial War∣rants and Or∣ders under Sign Manual. Army, and Ordnance) shall be Written, 2 s. 6 d. For every Piece of Vellum,Special Bails. Parchment, or Paper, on which any Special Bail to be taken in any Court at Westminster, or be∣fore any Judge of the said Courts, or in any other Courts, which shall be filed in the said Courts, or any Appearance on such Special Bail, shall be Written, 1 s. For every Skin,Bills, Answers, and all other Pleadings in Courts of E∣quity, and Depositions ta∣ken by Com∣mission. or piece of Vellum, or Parchment, on which any Bill, Answer, Replication, Rejoynder, Interrogatories, Depositions taken by Commission, or a∣ny other Pleadings in the Courts of Chance∣ry, Exchequer, Dutchy Courts, and County Palatine Court, or other Courts of Equity, shall be Written, 1 s. For every Skin,Admissions into Corporations, Companies, Ʋniversities, Inns of Court, and Chancery. or piece of Vellum, or Parchment, and for every Sheet, or piece of Paper on which any Admission into a Cor∣poration or Company, or Matriculation in either University, or Admission into any Inns of Court or Chancery, shall be Written, 1 s. For every Piece of Parchment,Affidavits. or Pa∣per, on which any Affidavit shall be Writ∣ten (except Affidavits taken, pursuant to Acts made in the 30th and 32d Years of King Charles the Second, for burying in Woollen, and such as shall be taken before the Officers of the Customs, Justices of Peace, or Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament, for Assessing or Levying
Aids, or Duties granted, or to be granted to Their Majesties, and which Affidavits shall be taken by the Officers of the Cu∣stoms, Justices, or Commissioners, by vir∣tue of such their Authority, and not other∣wise, 6 d. Or on which any Copy of such Affidavit as is herein before charged,Copies of Affi∣davits. that shall be filed or read in any Court, shall be Writ, 6 d. For every Skin, or Piece of Vellum,Indentures, Leases, and Deeds-Poll not Enrolled. or Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which any Indenture, Lease, or Deed-Poll, not herein or otherwise charged, shall be Writ∣ten, 6 d. For every Piece of Vellum, or Parch∣ment,Original Writs, on which no Capias issues, and all other Writs, Process, and Mandates not otherwise charged, brought for 40 s. and up∣wards. or piece of Paper, on which any O∣riginal Writ (except such whereon a Ca∣pias issues) Subpoena, Bill of Middlesex, La∣titat, Capias, Quo minus, Dedimus potestatem, to take Answer, examine Witnesses, or ap∣point Guardians, or any other Writ, Pro∣cess, or Mandate that shall issue out of, or pass the Seals of any the Courts of West∣minster, or of the Great Sessions in Wales, or of Courts in County Palatines, or any Court holding Plea, for Debt or Dama∣ges, or thing in demand of 40 s. or above, shall be Written, 6 d. Or on which an Entry of an Action in the Mayors or Sheriffs Courts in London,Entries of Acti∣ons in inferiour Courts. or in any Corporation, or other Courts out of which no Writs, Process, or Mandates issue, holding Plea for Debts or Damages to the value of 40 s. or more, shall be Written, 6 d.
Or on which any common Bail to be filed in any Court,Common Bail, and Appearance and on which an Ap∣pearance shall be made on such Bail, shall be writ, 6 d. with Appearance or common Bail, the Defendant shall cause to be En∣tred or Filed in Eight Days after the re∣turn of the Process, on which he was Ar∣rested, on pain of 5 l. to be paid to the Plaintiff, for which the Court shall imme∣diately give Judgment, and the Plaintiff take out Execution. Or on which any Rule or Order made or given in any of the Courts at Westminster,Rules in the Court at West∣minster. either Law or Equity, shall be Written, 6 d. Or on which any Copy of such Rule or Order entred,Copies thereof. or Copy of other Re∣cords or Proceedings in any the Courts at Westminster, not hereby otherwise Char∣ged, shall be Written, 6 d. For every Skin,Citations, Mo∣nitions, Libels, Allegations, Depositions, An∣swers, Senten∣ses, Decrees, Inventories in Ecclesiastical Courts, Admi∣ralty, and Cin∣que Ports, and Copies thereof. or Piece of Vellum, or Parchment, or Sheet of Paper, on which shall be Written any Citation or Monition in any Ecclesiastical Court, or any Libel, Allegation, Deposition, Answer, Sentence or final Decree, Inventory exhibited in the Ecclesiastical Court Courts of Admiralty, Cinque Ports, or Copies of them, shall be Written, 6 d. Or on which any Charter-Par∣ty, Policy of Assurance,Charter-Parties, Policies, Passports, Bonds, Relea∣ses, Contracts, Obligatory Instruments, Protests and Procurations, Letters of At∣torney and Notarial Acts. Passport, Bond, Release, Contract, or o∣ther Obligatory Instrument, or any Protest, Procuration, Let∣ter of Attorney, or other No∣tarial Act, shall be Written, 6 d.
Or on which any Declaration, Plea, Re∣plication,Declarations and other plea∣dings at Com∣mon-Law. Rejoynder, Demurrer, or other Pleading in any Court of Law, or Copy thereof, shall be Written, 1 d. Or on which Depositions in Chancery,Depositions in Courts of Equi∣ty, not taken by Commission, and Copies of all Pleadings, and other Proceed∣ings in Chan∣cery. or other Court of Equity, except Paper Draughts of Depositions, taken by Com∣mission, they are Ingrossed, not herein be fore charged, or upon which any Copy of Bills, Answers, Pleas, Demurrers, Repli∣cations, Rejoinders, Interrogatories, Depo∣sitions, or other Proceedings in any Court of Equity, shall be Written, 1 d. Or on which a Copy of a Will shall be Written, 1 d.Copies of Wills. That from and after the said 28th Day of June,Officers to mark Writs, with the Day they issue forth, and keep Memorandum thereof. every Officer or Clerk in the Court of King's-Bench, Common-Pleas, or Exchequer, who Signs any Writ or Process before Judgment, to Arrest any Person, shall at the Signing thereof, set down thereon the Day and Year he Sign'd it, which shall be entred upon the Remem∣brance, or in the Book where such the Ab∣stracts of such Writ or Process shall be en∣tred, on pain to Forfeit 10 l. for every Offence, or Neglect, to be recovered by such as shall sue for it in any of Their Ma∣jesties Courts of Record, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information. The Act doth not extend to charge any Bill of Exchange, Accompts,Bills of Ex∣change, &c. not Chargeable. Bills of Par∣cels, Bills of Fees, or any Bill or Note, not Sealed, for Payment of Money at Sight, or on Demand, or at the end of certain Days of Payment.
Nor doth it charge the Probate of Wills,Nor Letters of Administration or Probates of Wills, for com∣mon Sea-men, and Soldiers. or Letters of Administration, of any common Sea-man, or Soldier, who shall Die in Their Majesty's Service, a Certifi∣cate being produced from the Captain he served, at his Death, and Oath made of the Truth of it, before the Officer, who grants such Probate, or Administration, which he is Authoriz'd to Administer, for which no Fees shall be taken, nor shall any of the Duties be paid, or payable by any Persons Admitted to Sue or Defend in For∣ma pauperis. That Their Majesties may from Time to Time under the Great Seal,Commissioners to be appointed by their Majesties, and they to ap∣point under Offi∣cers. appoint Commissioners or Officers for the Pur∣poses in the Act mentioned, who shall keep their Head Office in London or Westminster; who, or the major Part of them, may ap∣point other Inferior Officers for Marking, or Stamping the Vellum, Parchment, and Paper, or for Collecting the said Duties; and Thirty Days before the said 28th Day of June, shall provide six several Stamps or Marks, differing from each other, for the several Duties, with which all Vellum, Par∣chment, and Paper, shall be marked re∣spectively, as the same is charged with Du∣ties, as aforesaid; the Stamps to be publi∣shed by Proclamation, a convenient Time before the said 28th of June, and shall be altered as Their Majesties shall think fit, so as publick Notification thereof be given, as aforesaid.
That the Commissioners shall take care,Stamps to be durable. that the Impression of each Stamp shall be durable, and least liable to be Counter∣feited. That all Vellum, Parchment, and Paper,Parchment and Paper to be stampt before Written. intended to be charged, shall before it be Written upon, be brought to the Commis∣sioners, or Officers, to be Stamped, who on demand, are to do it, the Person bring∣ing it, paying the Duties without other Fee, and the Stamp shall be a good Dis∣charge of the Duties. That if any Commissioner or Officer Stamp any Vellum, Parchment, or Paper,Penalty of stamping be∣fore Duty paid. before the Duty paid or secured, he shall forfeit 100 l. One Moiety to Their Maje∣sties, the other to him which shall inform or sue for the same in any Their Majesties Courts of Record. If any Person shall Write upon Vellum,Penalty of writing before stampt. Parchment, or Paper, any the things for which it is to pay the said Duties before Stamp'd, or not having some Stamp re∣sembling it, or that shall be Stamped for a lower Duty than what is appointed by the Act, the Offender shall Forfeit 500 l. One Moiety to Their Majesties, the other to him which shall inform or sue in manner aforesaid. If any Clerk, Officer, or Person, who,Penalty of o∣ther Offenders. in respect of any publick Office, or Im∣ployment, shall be entrusted to write any Records, Deeds, or Writings by the Act charged to pay a Duty, shall be guilty of any Fraud or Practice, to deceive Their
Majesties of any Duty by Writing, or causing to be Written, any such Record, Deed, or Writing, upon Vellum, Parch∣ment, or Paper not Stamp'd-according to the Act, or not having some Stamp, re∣sembling it, or upon any Vellum, Parch∣ment or Paper, Stamp'd with any Mark which he knows to be Counterfeit, or by Writing the same on Vellum, Parchment, or Paper Stamp'd for a lower Duty, every such Clerk, Officer, or Person, guilty of such Fraud, and thereof Convicted, shall above the said Penalty, Forfeit his Office or Employment, and be disabled to hold the same. And if any Attorney of any Court shall be Guilty of such Fraud, and thereof Convicted, he shall be disabled to Practise as an Attorney. And if any Deed, Instrument or Writ∣ing, charged with the Duty, shall be Writ∣ten by any Person, not being a known Clerk or Officer, (entituled to the Writing the same) upon Vellum, Parchment, or Paper, not Stamp'd, or Stamp'd for a low∣er Duty, there shall be answered to Their Majesties (above the Duty) for every such Deed, Instrument, or Writing, 5 l. And no such Record, Deed or Instrument, shall be pleaded or given in Evidence, or admit∣ted in any Court, until the Duty and 5 l. be paid, and a Receipt produced for the same,☞ under the Hand of the Officers ap∣pointed to receive the said Duties; and until the Vellum, Parchment, or Paper, on which the same shall be Written, shall be
Mark'd or Stamp'd with a lawful Stamp, or Mark. And Their Majesties Officers are required by the Act, on payment of the Duty and the 5 l. to receive the same, and give a Receipt for it, and Mark the Vellum, Parchment, or Paper, with the Stamp pro∣per for the Matters thereon Written. And if any Counterfeit the Marks,To counterfeit the Stamps, Felony with∣out Clergy. or sell, or utter Vellum, Parchment, or Paper, Marked with a Counterfeit Mark, know∣ing it to be Counterfeit, it shall be Felony without Benefit of Clergy. The Commissioners may appoint some Person to attend in any Court or Office,Commissioners to appoint Per∣sons to attend the Courts, and Judges, to make Orders for the better collecting the Duty. to take notice of any Vellum, Parchment, or Paper on which any the Matters afore∣said shall be Written, and of the Marks or Stamps thereupon, and of other the Matters relating to the Duty. And the Judges at their Request, shall make reasonable Orders for better securing the Duty. And every Commissioner, and Officer under them, for Marking and Stamping, before he Acts, shall take the Oath in the Act mentioned. That the Commissioners and Under Of∣cers,Commissioners to observe Or∣ders of the Lord Trea∣surer, Lords Commissioners of the Treasu∣ry, and Trea∣surer of the Ex∣chequer, and to furnish the Kingdom. shall observe such Rules and Orders as they shall receive from the Commissio∣ners of the Treasury, or Treasurer of the Exchequer for the time being; and shall take care to furnish several Parts of England and Wales and Berwick, with Vellum, Parch∣ment, and Paper stamp'd, so that it may be in the Election of the Subject to buy what are Stamp'd, or to have their own Stamp'd.
That all ords,All Matters to be written as usual Writs, Pleadings, and other Proceedings in Courts of Law and Equity, and all Deeds, Instruments, and Writings charged, shall be Written as they usually have been, and are now Written. That if the Stamps shall be altered,If Stamps be altered, new Parchment to be Stamp'd gratis. then Persons having Vellum, Parchment, or Pa∣per Stamp'd, and not Writ on, shall with∣in Sixty Days after the Alteration of the Stamp intended, shall be proclaimed, bring it to the Commissioners, or Officers, who shall give them in Exchange a like Quanti∣ty, and as good in Quality Stamp'd with the new Stamp, as what so brought, for which nothing shall be taken or paid, on pain to forfeit an Hundred Pound to be sued for, recovered, and divided, as afore∣said; and if they do not bring it in within that time, such Vellum, Parchment, or Pa∣per, is declared to be of no Effect, and to be as if never Stamp'd, and Persons Wri∣ting thereon, shall Forfeit and Suffer if as they Writ on what was not Stamp'd, and the Directions and Penalties to extend to the New Stamps, as were to the Old. As often as there shall be a Proclamation for altering the Stamps,Notice to be gi∣ven of Altera∣tion of the Stamps. the same shall with∣in Twenty Days after the Date thereof, be sent to the Mayor, or Chief Officer of e∣very City, Corporation, Borough and Mar∣ket-Town, of England, Wales, and Berwick, who shall cause the same to be published the next Market Day or next Sunday in Church, immediately after Divine Service on pain of 200 l. to be divided and sued for, in manner aforesaid. FINIS.
