F2165 12685994 65770
Imprimatur, Decemb. 27. 1692. Edmund Bohun.
SELECT ESSAYS Tending to the Universal Reformation OF Learning: Concluded With The Art of War, Or a SUMMARY Of the MARTIAL PRECEPTS Necessary for an Officer. By William Freke, Esq; LONDON, Printed for Tho. Minors, in the Inner-Temple-Lane. 1693.
THE AUTHOR'S Apology. DEo, Patriae, tibi, seems a Com∣mon Motto, that all Mankind are equally fond, and ambiti∣ous of; I will not say, that they all Answer it▪ alike: But the Character which is so universally approv'd of, surely▪ needs no Apologies for its Entertain∣ment: And yet, after all, I know a Censure that will as naturally, as unjustly, follow it; What! Saul among the Prophets, or a Man attending Business in Print? And so, O Sir! you are an Author! And why not? What is the shame of it? Is not a good Au∣thor a Master of as great Charity as an Al∣moner?
An Author not Licens'd by Common Vogue, as well as Authority▪ looks like one with the Plague-sore upon him; and every one that pas∣ses by him, is ready to Write, Lord have mercy upon him on his Door; and not a Man-Gossip, but what is for passing his Verdict upon him. But, whatever others imagine, for my part, I am none of Captain Tom's Fol∣lowers, nor ever will be: I shall never think any Man, for that Reason alone, to be Reflected upon in his Business, because withall, he is a Master in Science, and Notion also. Besides, it is no more agreeable to my Con∣stitution than my Inclinations, to glide away insensibly, and leguile my self of half my Time at a Tavern: I know there are a great many petty Arts full as advantagious, as real Skill in Professions; but use them who will, I am re∣solv'd not to n-man my self for Interest: and I neither can, nor will buy▪ Favour at the rate that 'tis beneath me, to purchase it at; if it come in a more regular wy, 'tis welcome. 'Tis a much more pleasant Exercise to me, thus to bestow my leisure hours in curing the se∣veral Errors of my Mind: And, whatever o∣thers may fancy, I shall never think it loss of
time, nor barely a diversion, pertinently to im∣prove my Vnderstanding: True Sense is a Sword to him that Commands her; and he's an ill Master of her, that having once got her, is not able to turn her to all Advantages upon Occasion. I know 'tis a prudent Rule in Life, not to ramble out of the way in needless Excursions: Nor do I think that in this I have transgrest it; it is my design but to perfect my Notion, and in what is absolutely useful, and not to run to either Folios or Trifles: Nay, and even this is not a VVork as of to day with me. The Pa∣pers I Present the Reader with, are not new, I have had them Years by me; and what I have done of late, has been only to Correct and Revise them a little for the Press. But, Do I seem too Pert, or Pragmatical in what I Write, in pretending so Confident∣ly to Instruct our Seniors and Masters? why I have just the same Excuse that all other Au∣thors have had before me: You may be sure, I had never Wrote what I have, had I thought it had been, Impertinence and Arrogance only; and, after all, VVill you say I am deceiv'd? truly I have no other Answer for you neither, than that Authors seldom call a Council, to know
whether what they Write, be all just Orthodox or not. So, Do you think, in Humility, I ought to have forborn presuming thus? Why truly, and as to the Point too, I am a little conceited, I must confess it; nay, I were an Ass for Printing what I have done, if I did not think it to the purpose. But what! after all, I am mis∣taken in my mighty Imigination; and it may be so: but surely then also, I have done no more, than what a whole heard of Fools has done before me. And yet, after all, the World may be deceiv'd, and find my matter better than they expect it: All Perfections are entail'd on no Man, and there is many an excellent Spokesman that makes a bad Writer, as well as there are a great many good Writers, That, as St. Paul and Moses Write▪ of themselves, are neither of Voluble Tongue, nor Extraordinary Pre∣sence. It may be too, you think my Stile too light; and truly if you do, I shall not alter it, nor quarrel with Nature for not giving me ano∣ther Genius, or Disposition: Alass! our Stile is like our Stature, no more to be altered by our Thought, than our Bodies: suppose, with the
same Reason, you should quarrel with the Fea∣tures of my Face, or the Gate or Meen of my Body; And why may not I, with as much Rea∣son, Complain, and be aggriev'd at the sight of yours? After all, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Rimer's Mettled Stiles to me, look with full as much Native Beauty as ever a slow-pac'd Don's in the Ʋniverse: Every thing in its way; 'tis as natural for the Cholerick, and the Sanguine, to be daring and sprightly, as 'tis for the Melan∣choly and Phlegmatick to be heavy and dull. But will not all this please you neither? Truly, I shall not cramp my self to a Spanish Cutt to do it; if it won't, I have wrote what I have, and I have thought it worth Publish∣ing: accordingly, I have publish'd it; and I hope, I have no need to be asham'd to Father it; I have deliver'd it in my own way, for I am resolv'd never to turn fool by an unna∣tural Imitation. After all, I have made my Title, Apolo∣gy, and Book, all of a piece; if thou likest it, 'tis at thy service; if not, I am resolved not to be melancholly upon it: I won't say, Ad captum Lectoris habent sua fata Li∣belli;
for I am willing to submit the Judg∣ment of my Book to the Readers, and to al∣low it no greater weight than he is pleas'd to standard it at: but surely, I might add also, That a great many good things have been lost in the world, because men have not known the value of them. And, however the World may rellish it, yet surely, I think, I may say too, That there is a Gift of Thinking and Digesting, as well as Flourishing and Bantring, or writing tedi∣ous Tomes or Volumes either; 'tis not every tall Boy that can jest with flashy Wit and Thought at random; nor every Author that can appear in Folio, that can either speak, write or judge of Good Sense, or true Wit; and though even such may prove Master Criticks in a Coffee-House, or Well-Titled in a Booksellers Shop; but then, Ne sutor ultra crepitum. In plain terms, the haughtiest Combatants through the meer dint of Extempore Natu∣ral Parts only; and the greatest Mounte∣banks disguis'd with the false Paint of Learn∣ing, prove but as Pigmy Drolls to a moderate Man at Arms, and one truly accoutred with the Weapons and Defence of good Thought and Literature.
Non Cicero, Cicero, nec Appelles, na∣tus Appelles; Id, quod uterque fuit, fecit utrumque Labor. After these, I know no other considerable Apology, but that thou pass by some roughness. Perhaps thou mayst be offended at too frequent∣ly in my Stile: I tell thee before-hand, 'tis greatly collective; In the Temple Church there are Stones that they say are cast, and many compos'd out of one; alass! we have lost the Art: And when thou considerest there∣fore, that the Building I am rearing, lays it's Foundations as wide as all the Knowledge of the Ʋniverse, thou needst not wonder that every stone in it is not melted or cemented as into one, or carv'd, or gilded and adorn'd, like bawbles in Ladies Closets. Surely, he's a good Workman in such case that joints his Building well, and that hand∣somely pursues his Draught and Designs: If therefore the sense and sincerity of my Work has been full and just, I think I may well
leave the Fretwork and Chequering it to an after part. Perhaps I know as well as ano∣ther Man, what it is to have my Stile hea∣vy, bodg'd, and incoherent; but he must be more than a Man, yea an Angel, that can perfect so laborious a Task as I have design'd, without such faults. To be short; As to the substance of my At∣tempt, I hope I have answer'd it to the full; as for the rest, Reader, use thy pleasure; thou seest I undeeive thee before hand; and there∣fore if it displease thee, be angry at thy self, and not me: And yet, I hope, I shall not vex thee so much neither by it; for I have not taken a little pains in the matter, to make my coherence as polish'd as needful. To shut up all; Are you offended that I write so little of Logick, and so much of Cen∣sure and Reputation? Heads that seem to be but as Trifles, when compar'd with a Science; and so in many other the like cases. Why truly, at present you must consider, That you are with one that sets up for a Reformer, and perhaps at last, thou mayst be convinced by him too; not only that too many of our Sciences are trifling, but that there are many other Subjects that re∣quire far more of our care than any of the
little Kick-shaws, that the Schools have dress'd up for us; if not, I can but again tell you, the Reformer may err as well as the Science-maker. To conclude; after these, I might add, I expect a whole Troop of petty Carpers, Criticks of the most noise, but just of as much judgment as to be able to make Errata-men for the Press; and truly, as for these, the Author is willing to let them applaud themselves in their Kack∣ling; their Censure is not likely to do either much harm or good; if it were, he would tell them, he does not pretend to be able to correct every Comma, Letter, or little Variance in his very sense, by the Press from his Copy: But, as for these Men, the Author is rather of Opini∣on, That they want an Apology for what them∣selves do, than he in Vindication of himself a∣gainst them. And so he bids all Farewell.
THE ENTRANCE OR THE Digester. THE Turkish Spy tells us, the Arabi∣ans say, That a Man must forget twice, and learn thrice, e're he can expect to be perfect. If that be a good Rule, I am persuaded these Essays will please; for if to perfect and lay by, and then to mend and lay by, and then to cor∣rect again and lay by, be the way to render a Book compleat and useful, I am sure these Essays cannot be defective; which like the Venetian Vessel, have suffered through time, so many Corrections and Alterati∣ons, that the Author himself hardly knows, whether there is ever an Original Piece lost in them. Painters ordinarily present
you with your Picture after twice or thrice sitting. Books are the draughts of our Souls; and why then should we be less curious in the Pourtraictures of our Souls than our Bodies? Some Men again think it enough, if their Porch be well adorn'd, and their Reader when first usher'd in by a brisk Sally, wheedled with the hopes of an Entertain∣ment accordingly; but surely, how agree∣able soever such Methods are for the inte∣rest of the Bookseller, the Author gets no Reputation by such Arts: For my part, I declare, there is not an Essay herein, that to the best of my knowledge, has not cost me full as much pains as this Entrance; and I don't know of one thought that I have in∣serted throughout, that I would not have expunged, if I thought it would nauseate with my Readers; that in some cases I am a little larger in explaining my self, surely may be very well allow'd: Are all Mens Capacities either equal to receive In∣structions, or their Prejudices easy to be rooted out? As for the design of my Book, it may seem to interfere with a great many lately publish'd. We have every day Journals of Abridgments, and the Philosophical Transac∣tions, the Authors of the Ʋniversal and Hi∣storical
Bibliotheque, together with the A∣thenian Society, have obliged us with large Volumes of Abstracts; but none of all these is what I have here propos'd and de∣sign'd. They abridge Books, I Subjects; they refer you to Authors at large, and A∣nalize several on the same Subject; I on the contrary have endeavour'd to extract the Marrow of all, by all to render each Subject entire, and to trouble the Reader with neither Catalogues of Authors, nor Quotations, but purely the very heart of his Subject entire, or Reflections in what is useless in it. And shall any one after this, acquaint me, that my Performance is short, that my Design is large; alass! he forgets what I propose is but in Essay, nay, that the Per∣fection of Knowledge is more than human; and that more than Essay is not modest. If therefore by these short Essays, I can prove a faithful Remembrancer to the Learned, of the present State of Know∣ledge, and a happy Guide to the Student, through the several useless Labyrinths, in∣troduced by Pedantry into human Know∣ledge, to keep him from those unhappy Rocks, that have Shipwrack'd many Ex∣cellent Parts, I think my brevity in it will be the more acceptable, and my design
such, if well answer'd, as all the World must cherish. For my part, I could wish I were even yet shorter than I am, 'tis the bane of good Books, when their length makes them te∣dious: But to be more brief, I as much despair at, as to be more perfect. The whole Field of Wisdom and Science is my Subject. What Man so vain, as to think to contract it in a Sheet? So that Body of Knowledge that has puzzl'd whole Ages of the wisest, who is so weak as to arro∣gate the Masterdom of it alone in himself? Surely, one might as well expect to de∣cipher a Court in a Cottage, as Universal Science in a little Tract; nay, the Bounds of Universal Wisdom are such, that the best of us know but in part; and GOD has made it one of the Bonds of the Uni∣verse, that we mutually rely on one ano∣ther in our Imperfections. But to pass by all further Apologies, and to descend into the very reasoning of our Methods, both of our Writings and Stu∣dies, let us consider a little: We Study, but why? that our Knowledge may be profitable to our selves and others, and be∣nefit Posterity. But instead of this, and for want of a due Method, what do we do, but intangle our selves in the Cobwebbs
of nicer Notions, and even confound all that follow us? Alass! the very Source of Wisdom is al∣most corrupt amongst us; and a Learned Man is a Chimera we have now no Idea of. Shew me one in a million that can tell you the Bounds of Learning, that can tell you Abstract from Pedantry, how much is fit to be known, and that can sa∣tisfy the mind, that all further Enquiries will be needless? A Youth that is now bred a Schollar, is like a Vessel launch'd at Rovers, and in the midst of the Ocean, without either Pilot or Rudder; he may do well or not; but if he does succeed, 'tis through the Vi∣gour of his own Parts: For, as for the Directions and Helps he is to expect, they will rather amuse and distract, than lead him right. We enter upon Languages, and their Criticisms are infinite; so we proceed to Sciences, and there we are lost in a Wil∣derness of Subtilties; our Metaphysicks puzzles us, our Logick fetters us, and our nice Mathematicks is a Field, where even our greatest Masters are lost. Nor is even our Morality better; our Vertues and Vices are lost in endless Schemes and Subdivisions; and our Divi∣nity
is wrangled to Pyronism, so that when we look about us, we know neither where to begin, nor where to end; and when we would proceed, we do not know where we are. Hence also, if a Man be Learned, yet he is never known; there is no Standard to try him by. And hence it is, that there is no Encouragement for real Wisdom; all that the World looks for, or knows how to esteem, is but the little Cant of Pedan∣try; and if a Man leave that, tho' on ne∣ver so good grounds, he is more likely to get the Name of a proud illiterate, than of a Schollar or Wiseman. But where is all this while then our real improvement of Wisdom? Alass! this is but a more perplex'd and subtle Igno∣rance, and a Chaos of Literature. And what does not this Lumber require a Di∣gester then? Indeed a Man of Vigorous Parts himself may dispose it some way to his use; but how many become meer Schollars, and are lost in the Confusion, and that dare not so much as look out of this Cloud? What a shame 'tis, that Man that was made to be as a Lord of the Creation, should thus be lost even in his Dominions over his own Notions! And what shall
we call this Art that leads us thus? no, 'tis a laborious Distraction. Were this an Art, 'twould facilitate our Actions; where∣as, instead of that, it clogs them, and im∣pedes our natural Force. A Bird that's wild, sings better than one ill taught. Besides, can that be an Art for the use of life that would require even two Ages of us, if we had them to attain them? Or shall we ever esteem that as an helpful Speculation that must drown us in the Theory, before we can come to Practice? And is not this too true in the common Circumstances of Learning? Is not what we call a moderate competency of Know∣ledge, now become almost even a work for our Lives? Who can almost enumerate, much more think to peruse the infinite Volumes of Science? Nay, let us but state any one of the Arts and Sciences in the whole Enci∣clopaidion, and let us see who has the command of all her Branches, and to whom we may not add; nay, let us see, how many are imperfect Plagiarys, and how much is wanted in the best, that might be added on the perusal of all. Let us see likewise what vast Bodies the Sciences even contracted compose, is Al∣steds Epitome, in his Enciclopaidion, fit to be
enlarged: Or can we reduce the School∣men to a Nut-shell? Nay, or can we com∣plete the usual Tables, much less an abso∣lute Curses Mathematicus, in one managable Volume? And what then! Are all these fit for a Schollar to study? or can we not obtain a competent Idea in these things without our Leaders melancholly Schemes and Ni∣ceties? Alass! if we Cant, we had better banish Studies, and burn our Books, and live like true Philosophers altogether, Se∣cundum Naturam. The mischief of it is, we have a sort of men Title and Table learn'd, who be∣cause they can manage the inconsistent Scraps of Authors, to get themselves a Re∣putation by it, cry up, and endeavour to support this Gallimaufry; and without one had a 1000 mouths to out-cry the little Beagles, that these men raise up to support their Reputation, one had as good save ones Breath as speak, tho' with never so just a Cause. I must confess for my own part, I have not been wanting to study, and may be as much as the best of them, and that in the whole Body of Learning too; and whatever Mountains others can espy in it, I declare, I am unfortunate and thick-sighted,
for I can find but few. This I find indeed, that the weight of Universal Learning, as it now stands, is too great for mortal Shoulders, too long for their perusal, too nice for their Memo∣ry, too various for their Imagination, and too confus'd for their Judgment; but this I must declare withal, I see not why it may not bear a rational Contraction; for the most part of it is meerly curious and impertinent, or at least it seems so to me. So curious may I say, that could any Man foresee the fruitless Labour that our Pedantry would cost him, before he would be able to lay by her Spectacles, as he should do, he would as soon go into an House of Correction, as undertake so irksom a Task, as to be a Schollar, and so impertinent. That in the most of his Studies, could he but judicially see what he was doing, he would as soon busy himself in catching of Butterflies. But the Matter is, when a man enters thus amongst the Crowd of Learned Fools, 'tis a Thousand to one, if ever he keep his Senses longer for to be able to bring him back again. And hence it is, that we have few or none to lead us from it, whilst we have almost infinite Examples to encou∣rage us in the Dotage.
And thus when I first begun my Stu∣dies, I could quickly see that there was a World of Pageantry that ought to be laid by, that our Books were even compos'd of a specious Empty Vein, and which beguil'd us with Appearance in stead of Substance: but how to separate this Dross from the Finer Oar, or how to cut off the Excres∣sence, and preserve the Body, that seem'd a work almost as difficult even as Alexan∣der's in Conquering the World, I may say Herculean, and harder than to cleanse the Augaean Stables. I plainly saw also, that as the Present State of Learning was a Vail for the Hy∣pocrite, being too dark to let Men really Ingenuous, be otherwise than Modest, and leaving full room for Confidence and Ignorance to vent their pretences; so I saw plainly that there was a sort of Men in the World, that would oppose any such attempt, were it only to keep their own Blindness from being expos'd. But as withal I saw, that if such a Work were finish'd, it would even force its own way in the World, and illustrate its self; and, through its use, turn its own Advocate in proving so Beneficial to Man∣kind; so I was resolved to see what I could do about it; and as I was satisfied
of the Lawfulness and Charity, nay, and I may add, Goodness of my attempt, so I durst trust the Success of it to God, in duty to whom I design'd it. As for my Method in it, I have not exact∣ly followed the excellent Des Cartes, I never yet engag'd my self to a Nine years Obli∣vion of what I formerly Read, nor have I tied my self to any Principles whatever, absolutely, whether Divine or Moral; I always thought both those courses of lit∣tle advantage to him that studies Wisdom, in truth rather Obstacles than Assistants. Indeed in this I have imitated him, I have Meditated most freely; but withal, I have both Read and Heard too: for my part, I have neither fear'd Errors, nor been jealous of my Genius; but I have trusted it freely, as it were upon a Pro∣mise, in my Judgment, that at all hazards 'twould be sincere to me, nay, and in all ca∣ses, and against all prejudices whatever. And to this purpose I perus'd all the Books I could come near; nor did I care on what Subject, so they were Excel∣lent; for my Designs were after an en∣tire Reformation of Learning; and tho' I design'd, in a manner, to Re-build all a-new, yet I did not think to be so ill an Husband, as to tear up all the Old Foun∣dations,
where I found them sound and ready before me. So that, by this means, I Collected al∣most without end; I took the Notion, and left the Dress; nay, and I carefully sepa∣rated what I thought might be of use, and left what I saw as needless: I did it but in Sentences indeed at first, because I look∣ed for only Matter, and not Form: but then I did it carefully, that if possible I might not leave any thing material that I should not reduce to its proper Head. Indeed, in my Method how to deliver it to the World, I was not a little con∣founded; for as I saw that to heap up Precepts without Order, were to make them useless: so on the other hand, I ob∣serv'd, to tye my self to a clear coherence, were a burthen intollerable; and besides▪ not consistent with those perpetual Ad∣ditions that would be necessary to a grow∣ing Idea. I chose therefore a Mean for my Dige∣ster, and as such a loose Essay, a Body that could either Retract or Dilate, so I chose al∣so rather to deliver my Essays in Confusion than Order; for since so vast a Subject could not rationally seem to bear an or∣derly coherence; I did not see why I should affect it, especially when I consi∣der'd,
that such a careless change and va∣riety, would not only ease and delight my self, but my Reader also. To be short, Wisdom, in full perfecti∣on, is too great for Man: and, as one would reduce that useful part of her, that is within our capacities, to an apt and per∣tinent brevity for use, so withal, one would not arrogantly think to force her to Bounds too exact for the reach of Mor∣tality: as I despair'd therefore of ever at∣taining any preheminence in her, by the vigour of any single attempt, so I rather chose to leave my Method freely to an easie loosness, that might be apt for any Addition or Amendment. Whether what I have now done, may be ever done fuller or better, I cannot tell; I am sure it has mine own full Vi∣gour in it, and I should have been glad with all my heart, could I have met with a Companion, to have improv'd and as∣sisted my Designs: but 'tis generally the Misfortune of Men, who are Chari∣table in so great and laborious Underta∣kings, to be forced to walk alone. I have no more to trouble thee with in this place, except it be that thou excuse the Roughness of my Stile; remember 'tis Collective, and though by pains I
might make it more Correct, yet I hope already 'tis sufficient for Use, if not for Ornament. Oratory was never agreea∣ble to the rigidness of my Genius, I could never yet leave Matter to catch at Butter∣flyes, and gather Flowers. Besides, the Niceties of Curious Dis∣course are infinite; and I am sensible, that after my greatest care, I must Write with a Style and Method imperfect, or not venture at Five Words a day: Pure Per∣fection in all things in only God's; and when a Man has once atchiev'd in any thing the full strength of his Genius, what he attains after, is but by Sallies, and at best makes but Abrupt, Imperfect, and Inco∣herent Efforts. But why should I Court thee thus with Apologies? if thou art Ingenious, thou canst not but follow thine own advan∣tage; If thou art Humoursom, I had as good endeavour to embrace the Wind, as to move thee. Whether therefore thou likest me or not, I am not deceived in thee: That Man must think of Re∣conciling Contraries, yea Impossibilities, that aim at Captivating all Men, the Perverse and Tractable, the Contradic∣tious and the Modest, the Virtuous and Vicious, Pious and Wicked, Learned and Ignorant, with the same Discourse.
Of BOOKS. A Good Author should have the Stile and Courage of a Captain, the Inte∣grity of a Dying Man, and so much sense and ingenuity, as to impose nothing, either weak or needless on the World. Some Men thrust out their Bratts a∣mongst us, e're they are at the Stature of Wisdom; and not knowing the present growth of Learning, oblige Men with Crudities instead of Discoveries: But who suffers most by it? the Reader can easily lay them by. So some even Fire the State to get Books suppress'd, and they'r in the right where they are Seditious; or else sure Man has an equal Right to Writing as Speaking; or, if not, Why one more than another? Does the Variety of Books offend you? surely it has at least this good in it, it hits all Humours. Do they overwhelm you with their Number? Certainly you mis∣take; and rather want Judgment to dis∣cern what are proper for you. So, Does an Ignoramus present you with Mushrome Thoughts, and cannot you lay them by? Must none but Civit-Cats have leave to sh—? and, if not, Who shall se∣ver the bad, without endangering the good?
Nay, I may add, The best of Authors are not without their Faults; and if they were, the World, I fear, were too purblind to entertain them, as they would deserve. Enoch's, the first and best of Books, are lost. Thus one, by a long Preface, cools the Fan∣cy e're he entertains it; a second frights his Reader by his Voluminousness. Alass! we must consult the weakness of Man, as well as the Meer extent of our Subjects. Nay, did the real dignity of our Subjects lead Books, they would be short enough, while sprightly hints would more delicate∣ly pourtraicture our Minds than the largest Circumlocutions. And surely therefore I may add, there is an empty Wantonness in all the profuse Embroideries of Authors. And what are our Legendaries, our varnish'd Compari∣sons and Explanations, but a beggarly and tedious Tautology in a better dress? Thus the pedling Canter never wants a Nosegay of Vertue or Religion, be his Text never so barren; and there is not a Subject that he shall not screw in his whole stock of Knowledge upon it. On the contrary, your finer Poets have made but six Verses a day, and a late fa∣mous Author would return back to his Study again, but to secure some more excel∣lent Notion from Oblivion; and yet there is an Error even in this also.
One keeps his Book Seven years by him ere he Prints it, as if it ripen'd by lying, and not Care, Examination and Peru∣sal. A Second cites Euclid, to prove a Circle Round; and a Third condemns the whole Body of Wisdom for some little pedling Nostrum. A Fourth Enamour'd with the Whim∣seys of the Ancients, had half his Book Quotations, and creeps along by the Shore of Authors, as if he were afraid to trust himself to the free Compass of Reason∣ing. Surely I would no more Quote Authors by Tables thus, than slight their Assistance altogether, by laying New Foundations. When thou Readest my Book therefore, I expect thou look for my Sense, not Ari∣stotle, or St. Austin's. So shall I Write nothing that is not purely my own: alass, there is nothing New under the Sun; nay, And why have not I as much right to my Thoughts, as he that Wrote them a 1000 years ago? Should I say, I borrow nothing from no Man, Who could gain-say me? I have the same circle of Creatures, and I must needs therefore track after others, and surely therefore our invention about them is e∣qually ours also.
Succeeding Ages feed upon one another; and the Sense and Flesh I have digested, are as much mine, as they have been o∣thers before me, or else may be I cannot say I have either Sense or Flesh at all. VVe have all our appointed seasons to enjoy VVisdom, and the Sun in; our An∣cestors have but beat the Track before us, where our Posterity would follow of course; And who can claim a Common Road? VVhere then is the injury of Plagia∣rism, does an Author deserve his Merits must preserve him, nay and they will too, if he has them: VVho shall add to a Pic∣ture of Apelles? Ex pede Herculem. At worst, is Honey the worse for being gather'd from many Flowers? Indeed to theive meanly is ungenerous, and to follow Parties, corrupts all; or else is not my diligence in Collections to be preferr'd? But alass, after all, the Fountain Errour of Authours is vanity; and that which puts them upon the Tenters, is, that they seek Eternity; but surely 'tis one thing to have it, and another thing to deserve it. You think your Truths will make the World commend you whether they will or no; alass, you must prostitute you ho∣nour to obtain the common Vogue.
A Man had as good be a common Hang∣man, as an impartial Moral Monitor: and as for Speculative Knowledge, the Man that found, but that the World was round, was treated, even by St. Austin, as an He∣retick. As my Lord Bacon rightly says, the World, like a River, bears up things swoln and empty, while Gold and Jewels sink; and thus Vain-glorious and Romancing Ovid no doubt survives many a better Au∣thor.
Of CRITICKS. A Critick to a good Author, like the Refiner's Fire, but Purges his Imper∣fections to make him shine the brighter, whilst the Answerer, like Don Quixot, ex∣poses himself with post-absurdities. Shall we say of a Garrison'd Army of Thoughts, that'tis taken, because the enemy has defac'd the Walls with dirt, when the truth is, the Answerer like the Viper, by gnawing the File, has but bit his own Teeth away. Criticks, like Bald-pate Boxers, while they attack others, generally take care to Print nothing of their own, they maliti∣ously root up all they can, thought they Plant nothing in the World of Learning themselves. Criticks, the Robbers, are only excel∣lent in a Plunder, and in which case, their onely Game is to Magnifie themselves by Exposing others; their Armory the whole Field of Malitious Rayling and VVrang∣ling. Surely if our Brother is weak, we ought rather to pity him, than abuse him; nay, is he Perverse and Fallacious? yet can it ei∣ther
become us, or our Cause, to Confute him otherwise than with Humanity: that Conquest is to our Credit, where our Ad∣versary is duly Magnified. What says the Scripture of Pious Frauds? Will it let us hold the Truth in Unrigh∣teousness? No, we may not do ill that good may come; if we do, we are assur'd our Damnation is Just. Some Men indeed are so linked to their Errors, that Charity, which loves to An∣swer all with Tenderness and Softness, would be glad to part them; he that errs, through Frailty, is at least out of the harms-way of Errour; but he that of∣fends Presumptuously and Obstinately, must need fall together with it. But the meaner Critick that even hunts for Slander, and delights in Contumely; the generous Mastiff should teach us to scorn such Currish Yelping; indeed 'tis a Reflection on a Man of Sense, to give a Common Rayler but the hearing.
OF DIVINATION and ASTROLOGY. THere are certain Truths enough in the VVorld surely, to improve our Understandings by, that we need not con∣found our selves so much by Conjectural ones as we do; 'tis true, the Influence of the Sun and Moon might tempt one to an Essay in this matter, but when it has been so long successless, I don't know whether the prosecuting it further will argue ra∣ther a Madness and a Folly, than a Pre∣sumptuous Contempt of God's Com∣mands, in prying into those things he has so designedly conceal'd. Nay, did Men understand themselves aright, the very vanity of these things were enough to make them hate them, and they would sooner be idle then squan∣der away their time so impertinently; but above all, had they any Conscience, they would regard God's VVrath against our deluding Diviners, if they had not the VVit to see how they were imposed up∣on by them.
'Tis full time now to sweep away these Cobwebs of Superstition, and Relicks of Paganism; were we to contract with the Devil, then these Little Blinds might be wisely set to Disguise the Predictions he acquaints us with, and to seem to tell that little Fore-knowledge he hath, by our own Skill; but for us otherwise to dive into Senseless, Groundless, and Irrational ways of Prediction, I declare, in my O∣pinion, is such a meer stupidity and weakness, that we had much better cast the Dye for our Fortune▪ So, would not a Man of Moderate Thought be asham'd to imagine, that God has given an Extraordinary Power of Conjuring by his Name Tetragrammaton Adonay Sadai, &c. So, Who but a Madman would think the Number Five Cabalistically sanctified, because a Man has Five Fingers, Five Toes, &c. And so who but one that has more Fancy than Judgment would mind the Climacterical Years, when indeed the year is since much lengthened? yea, several days since that Whymsey was first broach'd, so that 61 now would have been 63 then. So, that shall I say of our Common Crosses and Charms? the Devil fights
with us, like a Parthian, flying; pre∣tends himself to be vanquish'd by us▪ that he may the better Conquer us through Superstition by his flight? So what shall I say to your Set-form of Words, the Seeve and Sheers, and your other Trifles and Gewgaws? If words do any thing really, it must be through Faith, and if Faith be once so power∣ful, it can easily effect without a Set-form, like Conjuring; but if Words prove powerful without Faith, Latet anguis in herba, we have all the Reason in the World to apprehend some Delusion from our Common Enemy the Devil. Nor indeed, with all the Power of the Devil himself, are we likely to do or know much, whatever our Corrupti∣on and Rebellion may promise us; Alass; the Devils are under perpetual Chains of Darkness, the best of their Oracles were al∣ways doubtful; and if God has denied the Foreknowledge of things even to the good Angels themselves, as Christ as∣sures us, How is it likely he should shew a greater Favour to the Wicked Apostate Spirits? So we are curious in other Predictions; we are desirous of an exact Fore-know∣ledge; alass, Shall we never be content∣ed
with the plainer Dispensations of Pro∣vidence? Is God obscure and mystical in his Prophesies, even to lead his Church its self? And shall we desire presumptu∣ously a Prerogative he has not vouchsafed even to the Universal Church; nay, and when all the Pious and Learned Men of Ages have not been able to unfold those Holy Prophesies that in the Revelations, and otherwise he has given us? Can we be so mad to expect, or rely upon more certain Predictions of their own? In short, if there be any Divination law∣ful, it must be through the signs of Na∣tural Causes; thus Christ himself allows to Divine by the Face of the Sky. Sero rubens coelum cras indicat esse serenum. Si mane rubescit ventus vel pluvia crescit; and so we may guess when a Western wind blows, or that a Rain-bow looks pale, that Rain is likely to ensue; and that when the Rain-bow looks clear, that it is going away; but what is beyond this, must be either Sin or Delusion.
But to proceed a little to particulars, and so first Of Astrology. Our Astrologers pretend, that the Bo∣dies above are the Male, the Terrestri∣al the Female; and the Creatures on Earth are the Off-spring engender'd be∣tween them: But pray, who shall de∣clare their Generations? I do not doubt but that there is such a Art as Astrology▪ in some degree; But who is the Artist? What are the set-Bounds of influence? And how are we to gather it? How far does Providence and its Free-Agents in∣terrupt it? And what Stars are more particularly eminent in their influence. Let our Star-gazers alledge what they will, the Reviewing Histories past in the Stars would have perfected this Art abso∣lutely before now, if it had been attaina∣ble by the Wit of Man; when alass, consult but your Astrologers, and you shall not find two to Prognosticate alike: Af∣ter all these advantages, Read but their Books, they agree not in their Methods; nay, if they foretel the Weather, which is more immediately under the influences of the Stars, and which Grace cannot be sup∣pos'd
to alter their influence in, to give them their old Sham, Astra regunt homi∣nes sed regit astra deus: yet you shall find that they as often miss as hit, and which, in my Judgment, in plain terms, declares meer Chance. St. Austin's Confessions give us an excel∣lent passage of the impertinency and fal∣laciousness of this Science: It seems the Mistress and the Maid were both with Child by their several Husbands at the same time, and an Astrologer being wil∣ling to Predict the several Fates of their Children, order'd care to be taken of Marking the exact time of both their Births; now so it happen'd, that Mistress and Maid were both brought to Bed at the same instant, and their several Messen∣gers met at the just half-way, to give each other accounts of it; And what think you then ought to be the success of this Chance, ought not these two Sons, as they then happened to be, to have equal For∣tune and Success in the World, at least with respect to their several Circumstan∣ces? yes surely: but alass, the Stars fail'd their Artist, the Servant was born and di∣ed a Servant; whilst, as St. Austin observes, the young Master afterwards became vast∣ly advanc'd in his Fortunes.
But I give Astrologers too much ground when I trifle thus upon Experiments; let me hear them reason a little; thus what par∣ticular virtue is there in a Sextile or Trine, before the Quartile or Opposition? besides, if there were, like Blockheads, they take the Trine of appearance, and never mind the real one; thus a Retrogradation shall imaginarily give you two Trines of Sa∣turn and Jupiter, when, in reality, neither of those is the true Trine; so what stuff your direct Retrogade stationary and swift are, when, in reality, the Planets have no such imperfections; and all that Trumpery we conceive, forsooth, because we will follow the blind Mazes of our An∣cestours, and their Errors in Astronomy, and which made them make them in their Astrology also. Further, how ridiculously they have fram'd and order'd out their Twelve Houses, and attributed their several Pow∣ers to them, according to the two old Latin Verses, 1 2 3 4 5 6 Vita lucrum fratres genitor nati valetudo, 7 8 9 10 11 12 Ʋxor mors pietas regnum benefacta{que} Carcer.
What Nonsence 'tis to give the Ascen∣dant most power, which can scarce have any Operation for Distance, and vapours upon the Native, whereas, in truth, the Mid-heaven, and the Planets most Sou∣therly, and the Stars in the Zenith, ought to have the greatest Operation in all rea∣son; and so in case of their being Perige∣on, and Apogeon; so, how absurd 'tis to give Saturn a greater influence on the Na∣tive, than even the Sun, that in truth is the very Earthly giver of Life. Besides too, were Astrologers▪ true to their Rules, and Examin'd all Significa∣tors, Planets, Houses, and Fix'd Stars, with their several Aspects, Applications and Transits, they would find themselves so confus'd, that they would never be a∣ble to pick out a Judgment: And what if you add to all this the part of Fortune, the part of Honour, and several other parts that Nice Astrologers order to be Calculated, as well as the capat & cauda Draconis▪ all Castles in the Air; Where could you and your Judgment be able to be fix'd amongst such almost innumerable significators and their Applications. Nay further, one tells you your Fortune by a Horary Question, another by a Revo∣lutional Figure, another by your Nativity,
another by Profections: Now if you ex∣amine it, all these Figures shall, nay must be different, and yet your Artist, from the Latitude of Fore-telling, I before descri∣bed, must by one Significatour or another▪ serue them all up to one Tone, and whe∣ther the Devil may not sometimes in∣spire them in this Chance to their Delu∣sion, I very much Question. Hence also if you consult them, one shall cast up your Significatours stronger, another weaker; one measures the time of Accidents one way, and another a se∣cond; a third Person does not like your Common Tables of Houses, and yet for∣sooth all these must speak, and write as in∣fallible in their way, although no Reason can reconcile them, or shew one more in the right than the other, nay, though they contradict one another; yet alass we must believe them all, as the Infallible Oracles of Truth; H quanta fides Hominum▪ I have Studied this Art my self, and I have flatter'd my self often in Chance pre∣dictions; but when I have consider'd that in all things there is but a wrong and a right, and that all Men naturally favour, and even Deifie Divination, I cannot but see, and detest my own Weakness in re∣garding it; indeed, if Astrological Pre∣dictions
were certain, they would by their fatal necessity destroy and consume Religi∣on, and all the Arts and Sciences with it. To be short, if Men must have their Prognosticating Whimsies, were it not bet∣ter rationally to frame them from the No∣ble Hypothesis of Des Cartes, than from such meer Maggots as our common Artists do? Thus Spots growing in the Sun rationally would foretel ruine to his Sphere, and Co∣mets Prognosticate a Disorder, would fol∣low in Nature; but to lay such weight on meer Chymera's, as the Imaginary Houses▪ Nodes and Fancies of Astrologers are, at best favours of a little tincture of either Melancholly, or Imposture, judge which you will. Of the Dependants of Astrology. But besides its self, it's scarce conceiva∣ble what a pack of Brats and Monsters A∣strology brings forth with it; it marks you out Natural Magick by Planetary Influen∣ces, and Characters on Herbs; it tells you Mens Fortunes by Figures, the Planets make through Moles, Lines, and other Marks; and hence it teaches you Chi∣romancy, Physiognomy, Metaposcopy, nay Au∣gury depends on the same Root; and not
a Bird that flies to the right, but portends Ill-luck, though to a Thousand Specta∣tors: indeed, there is not a Man, either Mad, Bewitch'd, or Prophesies, but streight the Astrologer will give you a Reason for it; though by and by again, to save him∣self at a Fault, he will tell you, a Good Man is above the Stars. Thus Telesmes, or Talismans also, and our Divining Rods, are a Spawn of Astro∣logy; but, in my Judgment, of just as much force as Powder of Post, without the as∣sistance of Witchcraft, and then I don't know but a Man may do feats, like the Egyptian Magicians, but by the power of the Devil, and not by our little Conjectu∣ral Blind Arts, unless Ceremonially; for my part I once made a Telesme of Venus my self in Silver, but found no more effect in the Mettal than before. So Brown in his Vulgar Errours, says, he tried the Di∣vining Rod, but he found it all Cheat and Deceit. Further, Geomancy is another Off-spring of Astrology, indeed her very Ape, for she follows her into her Divisions and Parti∣tions of Houses, &c. Cornelius Agrippa wrote a Book of this; and in his Treatise of the Vanity of Arts and Sciences tells you, he believes it as good as the best; but with∣all,
that it is all Lyes. And indeed, What an odd Chymera Foundation this Art has, that Men, by making Points backwards, with their Left-hands upon the ground, should fancy the Stars should lead them, by drawing those Points into Figures, to Predict by them; a Man had better by half bestow less pains, cast a pair of Dice, or dip a Leaf in Virgil, if he is resolved to be Superstitious, and so discover his Fortune that way, rather than run himself to the Niceties of Geomantick Houses, and Fathers, your Laetitia, &c. for it. So I cannot but wonder too, what In∣telligence, and of what Planet it was that taught us the Jurisdiction of Plane∣tary Days and Hours? 'twas very happy the Natural Day was not divided into Twenty Hours, as it is now into Twenty four; for if it had, our Divinors had been forc'd to have made a New Computati∣on; besides, that as it is, every Planet has not his equal share in the day, And why should he not have it in the Day, as well as he has it in the Week? Astrology therefore, if it serves for any thing, it is to be as the Devils Lure into the more obscure and black Recesses of Ma∣gick: I my self remember too well, what
Studies it wheedled me into, when I gave it the favour of my Thoughts; as first, to seek to the Planets intelligences for my Knowledge, and after to other Spirits: Now, though I resolv'd to pay an exact deference to the Duty I ow'd to God all the while, yet I could not, in a long time, perswade my self, but that such Arts, as in the case of Balaam, might be lawfully attainable, though at length I was con∣vinced they were presumptuous. But where shall we end the further Whimsies of Predictions? Pythagoras's Lot, Predicting by the Number of our Names, the Jewish Caballa telling Mysteries, and Prognosticating from Titles, Numbers and Letters; your Rosacrucian Figments, what shall I say, Do not Men deserve to be deceiv'd, when they imploy them∣selves to catch such shadows of Wisdom? indeed, 'tis their due reward, that they miss and lose the substance by it. So what shall we say to Hydromancy, Puromancy, and Aeromancy, nay and Alect∣romancy, that fore-tells by the pecking up of Corn by a Cock, Are they not trumpery, that scarce deserve the naming? So of Palmestry; How shall we reconcile the giddy and senseless contradictions and va∣riations of Authors about it? So in Phy∣siognomy,
Who but one that had it from some Spirit, or Star-Intelligence, could be brought to think any useful or certain ground in it? Only Man that runs a Whoring out of the Ways of Truth, seeks to, and believes every thing he should not. Or else who would fancy, that Mars must be thrust into the Palms of the Hand, while little Venus and Mercury have the honour to possess in chief, with the grand Planets, the Thumb and little Finger? But besides these, there are Omens also, the weakest of all Fore-tellings; but how often of fatal consequence, not from the Prediction I mean, but from the deadning the spirits of them that superstitiously be∣lieve them, I need not mention; indeed they are so uncertain, that their very In∣terpreters are forc'd to fly to the Mind of the Person Omen'd, and what conception he had of the accident, to Construe it; and which is, in short, to make Mens Thoughts and Fancies Predictions. William the Conqueror was an evident confirmation of this Truth; at his first Landing in England, his Foot slip'd, and he fell flat on the Earth; and the Morning he fought, his Esquire put on his Back∣piece before, by mistake. Now these O∣mens daunted some, but the Conqueror
Interpreted them best, who merrily said, the Fall shew'd the Earth was willing to be acquainted with him; and the change of his Armour shew'd, he was to change his Dukedom for a Kingdom, as it after hapned. As for Prophesies, when they relate to State-Affairs, they are dangerous; and have deservedly drawn down many good Laws to suppress them, not that they are so for∣midable in themselves neither; but that which gives them credit, is, First, That Men mark when they Hit, and never when they Miss. Secondly, The Nature of Man, which loves to turn all to Divination, calls even probable Conjectures, and obscure Traditions, Prophesies; And Thirdly, and lastly, that almost all of them being near infinite in number, have been Impostures, and by idle and crafty Brains, meerly con∣triv'd and feign'd, after the event past, with some evil design and influence on the present times. But why do I stay so long upon Particu∣lars? Where shall we end the more noxi∣ous Methods of Deluding and Superstiti∣ous Theurgy, Devillish Geocy and Necro∣mancy? as if the Devil could not personate a Ghost: So where shall we conclude, with the Faeiry Sisters, the Invisible Ring
Witchcraft and Conjuration, the use of Christals, Pentangles, Circles, and an Hun∣dred other little Devillish Machinations, wherein, though the Devil does not Im∣mediately, as in Witchcraft, draw Men to Express Covenant with him, yet as by ma∣ny sad Experiments has appear'd, he gra∣dually sinks them into all manner of wick∣edness, and in the end drowns them in E∣ternal Despair; and thus he tempted our Saviour at first, only to fall down and Worship him: He is a subtle Enemy, and knows very well how to bait his hook suitable to the Persons he intends to catch by it.
Of MEEKNESS. SUrely Meekness needs no Praises: Meek∣ness is the Moral Paradise, nay, Meek∣ness is the only Cement to the Faults and Errors of Humanity; VVhat can we do without bearing with one another? Meekness was the Perfection of Christ, and Peace is the very Attribute of God himself; and can any thing be wanting then to make them amiable? Alass! Do not we every day, without thinking, commit a Thousand little faults against others? And will we not give the Charity we cannot but desire? And yet after all, the Subtilty of the Ser∣pent must be mixed with this Dove-like Innocency; 'tis a strange Temptation Men have, that see they can wrong us with Impunity; And why should I, by a too great softness, proclaim my self a prey to all? The World may call such Submission, Vertue and Clemency; but, alass! 'tis Facility and Fear that lead to such Cow∣ardize, and not Meekness. True Vertue is a streight Line, that neither virges for La∣ziness nor Glory.
So the Imperious Commander, the Dogma∣tical Opinionatre, and the Morose Cynick, who desire all to be enrol'd among the Virtuous, are Men that would seem too perfect to be born with; but, alass! who want the Meekness and Patience of others more, who err more, and yet preserve the Peace less? I have not an Interiour Peace in a uni∣on of Thoughts and Opinions with my Brother; But must I therefore in Self-con∣ceit break the Exteriour Peace in the De∣voires of Humane Civility? Does my Brother err? And why may I not as justly quarrel at the Diseases of his Body, as the Imperfections of his Mind? nay, Why am I not as angry at the imper∣fect variety of the Weather? To reform others perfectly, is as impos∣sible as vain: What have we to do then, but to despise all little Capricious Hu∣mours, and to amend our selves? Do I hazard the Peace in rebuking my Brother? And why may not he be as rough to me? at least, may he not as justly resist so unjust an Imposition? I am obliged to love my Brother; And how may I then make him look coldly on me, through my crossing him; is this my Humility, in doing as I would be done un∣to?
I. S. has different Opinions from me; And what then, ought I not to have all the Consideration that Truth or Charity will permit me for them: Indeed is it fit that I should cavil with him about them? I have condemned my self in Errors of∣ten; but I cannot say so of my Brother; Is it not just then, that I rather humbly and submissively prefer his Judgment be∣fore my own, than be angry at the Vari∣ance? Of CONTENTION. A Contentious Spirit is both Barbarous and Bruitish: What is the benefit of Humane Reason, unless in Humanity? And are not Humanity and Contention contraries? Contention either Infects us to a Like∣ness, or Cankers out our Spirit with Cowardize: What, all the day in Bat∣tel, and neither Fly nor Fight? Christ says, to call our Brother Fool Contentiously, is as Damnable as Mur∣der; Can he that delights in Provocati∣ons be assur'd what will follow them?
The least Evil of Contention is, that it abates our Virgin Respect, and Civility for one another; And is it a slight mat∣ter for us to traduce each other to Con∣tempt? My Contention is in Revenge; And what then? Is Revenge, either a Christian or Moral Apology, or is there not a just and modest Vindication of my self without it? Do we think, through Contention, to back every Wild Colt we meet with? nay, And can we otherwise then expect some time or other to meet with such Swine, as will turn again, and rent us? Surely, gentle and soft Applications are best for Conviction; and as a Contempt passes to our Persons through Contention, so to our Instructions also. Does Seneca wrangle with a Fool? he degrades his Philosophy by the equality of the Contention; But does Seneca advise, and is the Fool stubborn? Indigna est Caesa∣ris Ira.
Of CONTRADICTION. DOes my Brother Contradict me, he has as much right to it, as I to speak to him? And why then am I con∣cern'd? but he does it, you say, unjustly; And are you as assur'd that you do not as unjustly provoke him to it, by requiring too hard things of him? I have a right to hold my Tongue, and be silent at all times; but if I speak to my Brother, I have not right to make him Answer me just as I please. But my Brother is Cross and Perverse you say, and will unjustly contradict me; And what then? Whose fault is it that he is uneasie to me? Am I Mad to dispute him when he is out of Humour? Or do I want to see how he can Cross me, or I vex my self? Besides, Alass! there is no end of some Mens Perverseness, and 'tis in vain to expect to cure it; Should even God him∣self Write or Speak, he would no more want an Answerer, than the Devil in the like case, an Advocate. And yet after all, and for all this, though I can see my Brother is in an Error, and I
am obliged to use agreeable means to set him right, yet can I discern his heart to say, He lies, is false, or that he is per∣verse? Surely God only, who fearches the heart, can lay such charges to my Brother; and what though in such case I may con∣tradict him, yet, in Charity, I wrong him, to say, he is either false, or lies? I see but the Mistake. Thus, though I have the strongest Na∣tural Duty on me to Reprove my Brother, and nothing but his Malice for it can dis∣charge me of it; yet does that give me either power to Judge, or Force him in his Actions? The Wise and Good indeed have a right∣ful Dominion and Empire in reigning o∣ver Mens Thoughts, and we are bound in Conscience to submit to it; but surely every confident Contradictor has not the same Reason for our Submission?
Lapis Errantium; or the Stray-office: For all manner of things Lost, Found, or Mislaid within the Weekly Bills of Mortality of the CITY of Lon∣don. IT is not my business at present to run out upon the Antient Use of this Of∣fice in other Kingdoms, which, by its very Name, I am perswaded a great many Learned Men are not unacquainted with; I shall wholly confine my self therefore to shew, of what a General and Great Bene∣fit such an Office must needs be to this present City; and, in doing that, I shall fully Answer my End in this Little Trea∣tise. And that I may the better do that, therefore, First, I shall, briefly as I can, give the particular State of such an Office. Secondly, I shall Answer all manner of Objections against it: And Thirdly and lastly, I shall shew the wonderful Conve∣niences of it; And in all these I shall be the shorter, because the very hinting at the Great Uses and Conveniences of it, will be sufficient to excuse all need of o∣ther Apologies for it.
The State of the Office I shall Repre∣sent briefly thus; First, In a Set-Table of Rates and Fees, to be Paid and Allow'd to the Finder and Office; And, Secondly, in some few Reflections on them.   l. s. d.   l. s. d.   l. s. d. If the Thing Found be Valued at 0 0 6 Then the Finder to have of it for his Honesty and Care in Bringing it, 0 0 2 And the Office to have for their Keeping it. 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 4 0 0 2 0 2 6 0 0 8 0 0 4 0 5 0 0 1 0 0 0 6 0 10 0 0 1 6 0 0 8 0 15 0 0 2 0 0 0 10 1 0 0 0 2 6 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 9 0 0 3 0 8 0 0 0 16 0 0 4 0 100 0 0 10 0 0 2 10 0 My Reflections upon this Table, are these, First, That all things Found shall be Valued, at a Rate, by Appraisement, and that if any Difficulty arise between the Finder and Loser, so it shall be decided, each of them choosing an Appraisor, and if they shall not agree, nor find an Um∣pire in two days, that then the Office shall do it for them; and that shall be Decisive.
Secondly, If either finder or looser, or the Lord on Escheate, in two days notice re∣fuse to appoint their Appraisors; that then the Office upon both or either of their De∣faults, shall be able to get Appraisors to set a value, and to give the finder his due thereon, and to keep the Goods, or sell them, if perishable, and keep the Mony till the Looser, or the Lord of the Royal∣ty shall allow him both his, and the finders Fees. Thirdly, That all things enclos'd, as Writings in a Box, Mony in a Bag, or Cloaths in a Trunk, shall not be open'd till the Looser come, or the Lord of the Royalty claim them; but that then the Finder may have them to be open'd, to be Apprais'd, or otherwise as he shall de∣sire it, before they be deliver'd out of the Office. Fourthly, That all things of real value, the Office shall be ready on bringing in to receive, and to give the Finder his due immediately; but for Dogs Pocket-Books, and Keys, it shall reserve them to give an account of them, or else make an Entry where they are to be found, as the case shall reasonably require. Fifthly, If Goods, perishable are found, that then the Finder and Office shall have
power in convenient time, to sell them by Appraisors, and so to be answerable for the Mony only. Sixthly, That if any thing above 20 s. value be found, that it remain in the Of∣fice at least a Week, that the Right Own∣er be not cheated by a Collusion of the Finder; So if Goods, or Money, above 20 l. value be found, that they remain in the Office a Months, before they be De∣livered, except the Pretended Loser give in Security for their Forth-coming; but af∣ter a Month, that they be delivered him only on a Note of the Losers place of a∣bode and quality, to inform after Claim∣ers. Seventhly, That all Pocket-books, or Dogs that are found, shall be valued as at 5 s. and Keys of all sorts, as at 12 d. to avoid all Disputes; and that Bills of Ex∣change, by which the Mony might be re∣ceiv'd, shall be valued as Mony. Eighthly, That all things under 20 s. value shall be forfeited to the Lords of the Royalty, if not called for in six weeks; and all things under 10 l. value, if not cal∣led for in a Quarter of a year: As for all things, of a greater value, to remain a Year and a day, as the Law directs before, the Lord to have them.
Lastly, Let no Man think that to al∣low to the Finder and Office, in this case, 12 l. 10 s. in the Hundred, is too much; for, as when he is in hazard of all, it's well if so little will procure it; so indeed, less will not be sufficient, either to incourage the Finder, to bring in what he has dis∣cover'd, or to Answer the trust and hazard of the Office in Keeping and Regi∣string it. The Objections that seem likely to be made in this Case, are these; First, That such an Office will destroy Royalties. As to that I Answer; 'twill rather vast∣ly promote them: For, as now, all Find∣ings are Conceal'd; so, by this Means, they being Discover'd, they will be as∣sur'd of them: indeed in this case they will be forc'd to make some allowance to the Office and Finder for their Care; but that surely will be Reasonable, when 'tis no more than is required of the Lo∣ser. Secondly, That the Gazette will be wrong'd in their Publications. But as to that I Answer; It must needs be very inconsiderable; For Publications
there are generally of Dogs stolen of Va∣lue, and of Horses, and of other things lost in the Country; and, as to those, you see, this Office gives no diversion. Thirdly, That this may be apt to en∣courage Thieves; but, as to that, I say, on the contrary, that it cannot but be the greatest disincouragement to them imagi∣nable; for when they who have lost, or been rob'd of their Goods, shall repair to this Office, and make their Entry of them there, not only the Office will be ready to seize them, but every one that happens on such Suspicious Goods, will know speedi∣ly where to repair to know whose they are, and whereupon a Discovery must ne∣cessarily follow. Fourthly, That we shall want power to make the Losers, and Lords of Royalties allow the Fees of finding, and the Fees of the Office; but, as to that I propose, we may be effectually help'd by an Act of Par∣liament; if not, by the King's Patent. Fifthly, But you will say, What Se∣curity shall the Loser and Finder have, not to be wrong'd by the Office? I say, they shall have a Publick Security given in by him that keeps the Office, to see that what ever is left there shall be forth-com∣ing, and the Office-Books lying always
Publick, they shall make their Entries, if they please themselves; and if Goods of Value be found, the Office shall be respon∣sible to the Finder, that it give him no∣tice to have a just Appraisent, if he de∣sires it, before the Goods are deliver'd to the Loser; and in the same manner shall the Lord's Right be secured also. Sixthly, But you will continue to Ob∣ject, that Finders will still conceal their Goods and Mony notwithstanding: I say, to prevent that, a Clause in such an Act of Parliament, That if the Finder bring not in the Goods or Mony within a Week after they are found, he shall not only lose the Profit of such his Finding to the Informer, but be liable to an Action of Trover, with treble Damages on Con∣viction; I say, such a Clause would make it almost impossible that any thing should be conceal'd from the Office. The Benefits of such an Office, would be such as these. First, You see this Office will be as a General Place of Notice for seizing all manner of Suspicious Goods. Secondly, This Office will as well En∣courage, as Threaten a return of Found
Goods; For when Men see they may have honestly a good Reward, they will scarce, by being dishonest, hazard the lo∣sing all, and paying for it too, by an In∣former, which, in the present Case, they will be in great danger of, especially when we consider, that Finders have ge∣nerally too much Joy to be Silent. Thirdly, An Informer, in this Case, would be so far from a contemptible and servile Office, that it would not be too mean, even for a Gentleman to under∣take; and, though he might give his Re∣ward to whom he would, yet, in honour, he might assist any one, when so basely and meanly injur'd. Fourthly, As nothing is so inconsidera∣ble, that some People have not a Fancy for; so nothing scarce can be of so little a value, that this Office would not draw to it, a little, sure, and honest Profit would tempt thither, even things of Six pence worth; and he, that in such case, will not care to carry the thing to the Office him∣self, will not want some one or other, that he might oblige by it. So that the benefit of such an Office must needs be, I may almost say, past Ex∣pression; in short, 'twill make this Great City and Suburbs to have the Corres∣pondence
almost of a Family; and it should be no small Recommendation of this Office, to a considering Man, that it has been in another Nation before, and therefore consequently to be presum'd to be of success, as well as of most conside∣rable publick benefit to this. In short, if Use and Innocency can re∣commend any thing, this Office has all the advantages possible; and I shall say no more of it, because no Man can look into his own Thoughts, and not be convinc'd of it, and that even in many things not here mentioned. The PROJECT; or, The Method of putting this Office in Practice. First, That for the ease of Finders, there be four or five places appointed for the Receipt of Found Goods; As at, 1. Charing-cross. 2. Temple-barr. 3. Leadenhallstreet. 4. Southwark. And Secondly, That for the ease of the Loser, these be only places of Receipt; and that one Chief Office being appointed, as at Temple-barr, that all Found Goods and
Mony be fetch'd daily from those places of Receipt, about the hours of 8 and 12 each day; So that Goods left in the Morning shall be ready for the Owner, for a certainty in the Afternoon; and those left in the Afternoon, the next Morning at the one Principal and only Office of Delivery. Thirdly, This Method to continue all the Week, and all the year round, Sunday excepted. Fourthly, That several Books for En∣tring such Goods and Mony be kept as well at the several places of Receipt, as the Principal Office, and that they be in four Columns, and under four Heads in manner and form following. Things Lost. Place where. Finder. Loser. Fifthly, That when such Goods are fetch'd from the said several places of Receipts, that then a Duplicate be brought with them of all their several Entries, to be Recorded in the General-Office; of all, which Duplicates, the General-Office may once a Week, take an Account, by compa∣ring them with the several Books of Re∣ceipts.
Sixthly, All the Office-Books to be Mark'd; and lye Publickly; so that if the Finder see but the things Entred, 'tis im∣possible but that they must come to the Losers knowledge; and 'tis as impossible that any Lords of Royalties should be able to lose their Rights. Seventhly, The Goods being thus re∣mov'd to the General-Office, the Finder may receive notice when to meet at an Appraisement, if he has not receiv'd his due before; and the Loser may know what his demands are; so that, if he agree to them, there will be no more, but that the Office receive the Mony. But as for the Entry of Suspicious Goods to be seiz'd, that as it ought to be in a di∣stinct Book, so for the Readier Recourse, it should be only done at the Principal Of∣fice at Temple-barr; so the like for a Cau∣tion Entred for Goods Lost, that the Owner may have Notice sent him if they come to this Office; and for this the Of∣fice is to be particularly paid, according to the length of their Entry; but where the Goods are found, no other Fees are to be paid for the Entry, than in the Table be∣fore.
Of CƲNNING. THe Cunning Man and the Wise Man differ not only in point of Honesty, but Ability. He that can pack the Cards does not always play well. Cunning Men, like Juglers, are only vers'd in two or three Little Tricks, while Wisdom excels in the whole Ring or Cir∣cle of Action. But is Wisdom to be despis'd, because others sculk through their Cunning? Shall a General abandon all Discipline, because his Parthian Foe fights flying? No; rather discovering his petty shifts, let him destroy him in his Wiles. Surely, Cunning Men are too weak for Council; for Practice, and Understanding Men, indeed, they may do well enough; but he abuses himself that turns them out of their Channel, and trusts them. Were Men always Skilful, they would never use Craft or Treachery: Alass! that Men are Cunning, is from their little Minds, which, if it can conceal its self in one place, quickly discovers its self in ano∣ther. Hence the Cunning Man is as ridicu∣lous
as odious; while the greatest art of such Subtile Men is, to conceal their Skill; the wiser sort of them know therefore their in∣terest, and are Subtile only on some great Occasion, and for some great Advantage. Besides, he that is out of the plain way to deceive others, has not so ready a prospect of the Cheats design'd against him; so that not only a Man is soonest deceiv'd, when his conceit of Cunning beats him from his Guard; but Cunning Men are afraid of us, when they see an exact sim∣plicity. And thus 'tis the Perfection of Wis∣dom, to seem to fall into Snares laid for us, for fear of worse, and yet to avoid them; but, by Subtilty, 'tis as easie to deceive ones self, and not perceive it, as 'tis difficult unperceiv'd to deceive others. Usual Tricks of Cunning, are, to sur∣prize, and fascinate with the Eye, to pro∣pose in business, when our Friend is in hast, to surprize with bold Questions, and to foyl, by Ungrateful and Unseasonable De∣sires, the thing we would not have done.
Of WISDOM. MAN is not more above a Brute, than the one above the other, through the advantage of Wisdom. Plus posse, sure∣ly is also Nobilius Esse. Wisdom as from a Tower, gives us the true prospect of things. Where the high∣er we climb, the clearer we see, and the fairer is our View. And yet Wisdom consists not in trifling Curiosities and nice Speculations. Wis∣dom not only solidly pourtraictures Vertue, but gives it practick Life also. The Fool hates Wisdom as exceeding his reach; the Sluggard envys, instead of attaining it, while the wicked Man abhors it, as the Touch-stone to his Actions. But surely he that hates Wisdom: hates his own Soul with it. Wisdom is as our guard assign'd us by God. Wisdom clears our mind of undi∣gested Thoughts and Resolutions, while she looks down with Contempt and Un∣concernedness on the little tumults of Fan∣cy and Passion below. Reason hastned in the digestion by Fan∣cy and Passion, the giddy Apes of Judgment
and Courage, like Fruit gather'd unripe, sets the Teeth on edge, whilst Wisdom leads us without Repentance. Our Saviour tells us, Qui sequitur me, non ambulat in tenebris: And surely, not with∣out the justest cause; if the fear of the Lord cannot be the beginning of Wisdom, what else can move us to act or judge im∣partially? Surely, 'twas by Wisdom, that holy men approach'd to God, and became Prophets, Wisd. Sol. cap. 8. Can we think, we shall not answer to God for it then, if we omit to improve our Reasoning? Was it nothing, that Moses was skill'd in all the Learning of the Aegyptians? Surely, God had neither gather'd his Pro∣phets into a Colledge at Bethel, nor made the Learn'd St. Paul, the chiefest of the Apostles, if he had not regarded even our industrious self-improvements? But alass! what are all our improve∣ments without the grace of God, and sin∣cerity? Solomon tells us, Wisdom will not enter into a malitious Soul, Wisd. 1. The perverse, be he never so ingenuous, yet by degrees will he vitiate his Prin∣ciples by his Practice; the corrupt Man may shift and be a good Sophister, but never reason well; to be wise and good, are re∣ciprocal.
The Seeming WISE. REason has not more Admirers than there are Hipocrites; who admiring only the Profits of Wisdom, approve just so much of her, as can be agreeable and serviceable to their ends. Some indeed see but the Appearance of things, their Thoughts and Resolutions, perpetually tripping up one another; and they deserve our pity. But how many set up the Hypocrisy of a formal Gravity, a∣bove all the Reasoning of Man? How many through a wild Banter and Paradox, content themselves in meer end∣less and giddy Extravagances? A decay∣ing Merchant has not more Tricks for his Credit, than such Persons for their Sufficiencies. Sometimes they are so close and so re∣serv'd, that they will not shew you their wares, but by a dark Light, hinting as if somewhat more weighty were conceal'd; and they'd at least have you think, that they understand more. So sometimes they are shrew'd by Coun∣tenance, and wise by Signs; while they
bear it out by speaking a great Word, and being Peremptory. Is any thing beyond their reach? 'tis easily exploded as curious or impertinent; and then even their ignorance seems Judg∣ment. But alass! Can such shuffling ap∣pear otherwise than ridiculous to any Man of sense? Some are never without a difference, and so amusing Men, by a subtilty blanch the Matter; so they find it easy in deliberati∣ons to affect the negative side: When Pro∣positions are denyed, there is an end of them. But certainly, this affecting of objecting and foretelling Difficulties wholly, is the very Bane of Wisdom. There is an harder work indeed in perfecting our Contri∣vance; but surely for that reason alone, a Man somewhat absur'd, is better either for Business or Counsel, than one either over-formal or exceptious.
Of LOGICK. IF any thing can excuse the superfine∣ness of our present Logick and Argu∣mentations, it must be the depth of their Wisdom, and the state of the Universities in using them; and yet even then in my sense, they were better laid aside, or at least more regulated, and more pains spent in the exact definitions of Words, and setling ultimate Principles and Maxims, than the meer Forms of Reasoning. In truth, the Schools have render'd the Niceties about Syllogisms almost infinite: So that when we have lookt for the Puri∣ty and simplicity of truth through their Disputes, we have found our selves maz'd by our own Forms, and Rules in our search, and instead of being help'd out in our dif∣ficulties by them, we have discover'd our selves sunk deeper by the weight of our Guides: And when we should consider about the substance of our Argument, we are taken up with thinking whether we may say properly, Negatur Minor, or no. I shall not therefore descend into the little Niceties of Logical Propositions, their Categoricks, Hypotheticks, Disjunctives,
Universals, Indefinites, &c. nor into their Formalities of their several Argumentati∣ons, their Enthimems, Inductions, Exem∣plum's, Sorites, Dilemma's, and Syllogisms. Let them that have a mind to catch But∣ter-flies pursue them if they please, for my part I will not. So, what shall I say of our ordinary Lo∣gical Fallacies, as Quod emisti edisti, Carnes crudas emisti, ergo, &c. so Duo & tres sunt par & impr, quinque sunt duo & tres, ergo, &c. Would not a Man of any judgment be a∣sham'd to think, that one should be put to a formal distinction in terms to answer such trifles, to be forc'd to have set Topicks to discover the Mystery of Nonsense: In truth, were most of their Arguments but reduc'd to writing, nothing would be more ridiculous▪ they are nothing but a few empty Catches in meer Words at best. And the Excellency of a Sophister, as I find, is not to fly to Principles of Truth, but Quirks. In short, therefore in my judgment, and I think I iudge right, this Sophistry is so far from an improvement of the Under∣standing, that 'tis as a Crop of Thorns and Weeds in our Ingeny; and tho the forms of Argumentations, and their several Rules, as Barbara Celarent, &c. may have a great deal
of Art in their Regulation and Compo∣sure; yet, no one, at best, can deny, but that they are rather curious than useful; that a Disputation may be very well brought to a just Crisis without such formality; and consequently, that the great study and labour about it, might be better spar'd about something more ma∣terial. Its Parts. But to descend more particularly into its parts; And so, first, as to its Predica∣bles, Predicaments, and Ante-predica∣ments: Would not a Man think, that those Termini comprehended some Di∣vine matter? Surely one would: But, when it comes to the Test, 'tis all Trifles. Thus what a ridiculous and obvious di∣stinction is Ʋnum vagum ut aliquis lapis, u∣num determinatum ut Johannes, unum Demon∣strativum ut hic arbor, & unum Hypotheticum ut hic filius Senior: Is this Quibling, in trifling distinctions, worthy of a Philo∣sopher? if it is, let my riend peruse Dr. Wilkins's Ʋniversal Character, and he shall have enough of them, though by that Ingenious Author design'd for a far better purpose.
So for your Proprium's quarto modo; As, 1. Proprium soli non omni ut hominem esse doctum. 2. Omni non soli ut hominem esse bipedem (Plato's Goose.) 3. Omni & so∣li sed non semper ut ridere. 4. Omni so∣li & semper ut risihilitas in homine: Is not this pretty stuff, that a Man must be bound to tell another he talks Nonsence, by the Rule of Proprium 4to. modo? What is this but Pedantry? indeed but a kind of Brutality, and unworthy of the liberal and generous search of a Rational Soul. Indeed, the Rule of genus, species, and difference, might be of excellent use, were it in proper place, as in a Treatise of Me∣thod, or Analysis, but disguis'd in such Cant, with a summum subalternum simpli∣citer; or, secundum quid; in truth quite defaces it, and makes it to become all of a piece with the rest. So further, What shall we say to the Ante-predicaments, the Equivocum, Ʋni∣vocum, Analogum, and Denominativum? And why may not we as well bring in the Metaphoricum, Ironicum, and an 100 more? And so for your Voces abstractae, concretae, simplices, complexae: Why may not you as well add, finitae, relativae, and infinite others? In short, Is not this meer Trumpery, and fitter for a Dictio∣nary,
or a Castaneus's distinctions at best; but surely, not worthy of a Philosopher, to strut up a Science withall. Indeed it makes Logick appear like a Gouty Leg, in re∣spect of the Body of Wisdom. So the Predicaments in new Philosophy, are: Mens, mensura, quies, motus, positura, figura, Sunt cum materia; cunctarum exordia re∣rum. And why may not these do as well as Aristotles 10. Substantia, Quantitas, Quali∣tas, Relatio, Actio, Passio, Ʋbi, Quando, Situs, Ha∣bitus: Ludovicus Vives is of opinion, that you may add many more; and for my part I think 'twere no hurt there were none at all; indeed if they are of any use, 'tis to help invention: and as for invention it ought to be treated of distinctly, at least it belongs more to Rhetorick than Logick. So also, what Predicamental Distinctions we have got, as Quantitas Entitativa, & quantitativa? So that there are five intel∣lectual Habits under Quality, viz. Intelligen∣tia, Sapientia, Scientia, Prudentia, & Ars; whereas they may as rationally make fifty, and by the same reason distinguish every
several Object of Wisdom into a several intellectual Habit. And to shut up all I have to reflect of this nature, I shall add, what has Logick to do with Definitions? She is only to teach men to reason: Let the Vocabulary help them to Terms, particular Sciences to Principles, and Definitions; her business is only to cast up the Account. So what hath she to do with Divisions into Univer∣sals, Essentials, Integrals, Subjects, Acci∣dents, &c. Let her leave all to their proper places, to Analitica and Method, and the Principles of the Subjects she disputes of. Of Arguments. But as we would thus take away our too formal University Disputes, as the Mo∣thers of Quibling and Wrangling; so on the other side, one would leave so much to Art as might be able to lead a Dispute to a Crisis. Thus we ought to let our Descrip∣tions, Definitions, Genus and Differences, be laid down as Postulata or Principles; and if they be denied, prove them from the Fountain Topicks of Sciences. So we ought to skill, how to run an Ar∣gument to a Contradiction or Absurdity; not I mean a Nice and Logical Contra∣diction and Contrariety, than which no∣thing is more Pedantick; but to a real and
obvious Contrariety and Inconsistency, and under which every one ought to sub∣mit, and not to dispute on, as if he aim'd at Victory, and wrangle, rather than to search for Truth; and therefore, in since∣rity, we ought to desist, as if we had no further Reason for what we first affirm'd: Where we are sensible, we are not able to make any thing further appear. But as for your common Logical Con∣tradictions, as I have said nothing, is more impertinent: Thus, that two Negatives make an Affirmative, can only be from custom. Indeed, did Men follow the true Concatenation of Thought, and were they not more Artful than Wise; two Negatives were Nonsense. So what need have we of the puzle of Contrary, Sub∣contrary, Subaltern, and Contradictory; is it not to maze us? So when two Dispute, is it not much easier to bring all to the Test of a plain Contradiction to find Truth, than to stand quibling, Quidam homo est doctus, quidam homo non est doctus? Indeed, as Cornelius Agrippa well reflects, Logical Terms and Niceties are like the Trojan Horse, which tho not powerful enough to enter by force of Reasoning, yet when once admitted, and taken for granted, will at least
baffle and destroy your Cause, by their starch'd and empty Formality. And yet this we must needs grant of Arguments in general, that they are as much better for the growth of Wisdom, then Lectures as many Heads are than one. As the Understanding is more lively when whetted and sharpned by Contention, than when flat in its self; but yet your single Discourses are better than Disputes, when debauch'd to a perverse Wrangling: And hence, how often have our wisest men reflected on the Formality of Syllogysms? In the infancy of Philosophy indeed, such a shew of Wisdom were tolerable; but such Pedantry at these days, that the two or three first Years of a University Students time, should be spent on such Trash, as I remember too well, is intollerable. In short, therefore as nothing but Per∣verseness and Malice can come from Con∣tention and Wrangling; so if you dispute, let nothing provoke or confound you. Is your Adversary hot? be calm and slow; measure your Words as it were by the Pen∣dulum of a Clock. Is he interrupting and violent? Let him alone; 'tis easie after an hours Discourse by three or four words quite to confound him, if he is in an Error; and remember there is a way to Answer short and smart.
But as in Set-Disputes, for the better pro∣gress, we ought to limit each ones share to a proposition or two at a time. Thus suppose it were only by Enthymems, that we entertain'd our Disputes; so we ought never to admit of Metaphors or Similes in a rigid Argument; to let a man dispute us so, is to let him fight in a Cloud, when he ought to appear on equal Terms, and nak∣ed; and so to grant the least point in dis∣pute wrongfully, is a confusing Folly; and so not to be able to reduce your Argument to particulars; what is it, but to make it recoyle in its self? Are you in a Dispute therefore, and do you find your Adversary perversly through a Spirit of Wrangling, to withstand you in clear and evident Principles of Truth? Never suffer him to move you to further Argument after that. If you have no Mo∣derator, cease for good and all, standing firmly and eternally on the first Error. He that admits the least corner of a false Foun∣dation, forgets that his whole Building will surely fall by means of it; and besides, that Sophistry in its self, is Divelish; and when it has other ends than a fair and candid search for Truth, is to be hated and avoided by all.
Further in Arguments: Without you are sure to speak alone, and not to be in∣terrupted, as in the Pulpit, never multiply Reasons; for since one or two is enough for Conviction, and sufficient most times for an honest Mind; to alledge more, what is it but to leave room for Perverse∣ness, and to give the better opportunity for Wrangling? But above all, in Disputes you must re∣member to proceed from Words to Sense; for 'tis in vain to argue, when you do not understand one anothers Terms: Nor is it less necessary in your method to proceed first to some Fundamental Principles, such as Self-Preservation, Demonstration, &c. To think of arguing otherwise, is weak and foolish; and tho one would explode and banish the Formality of Syllogisms, yet if one takes away the method of Reason∣ing of clearing first Terms, and granting first Principles, one had better never speak than argue; for it must be endless. I proceed to the last part of Logick or Method. Of Method. Several Subjects and several Genius's de∣light in several Methods; in which case,
what is clearest and easiest to all, is un∣doubtedly the best. 'Tis a fault in Me∣thod to give more Labour than Benefit. Method is for Matter, and not Matter for Method. I must confess, as to general Learning, I wholly esteem Essays, first, as by their short and pithy fulness, they are more apt and assistant to a complete Judg∣ment: And, Secondly, as by their looseness, they are most ready for Corrections and Additions. To write too largely of a Subject, scat∣ters and distracts the Sight, and to write too little of it, leaves determination to a Lot∣tery: The best method therefore is to be short and full, to give most large and am∣ple general Directions, and to leave the judgment to manage lesser Corollaries, Particulars, and Consequences; and as for the advantage of such good Methods, 'tis scarce expressible; you will not think how gently, and with what ease, even the dif∣ficultest parts of Wisdom well rang'd, will lye in our minds by it. And in this one may justly say of Know∣ledge, the Diamond or Jewel is not imme∣diately ready so soon as it is got; it wants polishing and trimming, yea, and beautify∣ing, and setting at last also: And even so in Wisdom, the Labour is not inconsidera∣ble,
even after it is gotten and obtain'd, by exact Method and Order, to address it, and set it out to the best advantage. In truth, Method is not much less con∣siderable than Matter its self; 'tis obvious every day to observe how much deliberate and orderly proceeding, confounds even truth when irregular. Indeed, Method is a sort of Truth, and Confusion a Lie, and as generally Men judge of the Cause by the Proceedings, by a kind of precipi∣tancy and haste in Judgment; so those truths had need be very bright, that can shine and command attention, under the vail and disguise of Disorder. As for the form of Method in General, 'tis best to pursue the Order of Fact, and to connect all the parts of the Discourse duly; thus to acquaint Men first with the Informing, or Explaining part, that they may know the better how, and to what to bind their Attention, and then to pro∣ceed to the several Parts of Discourse, as they best agree together; and there to take care that nothing be either wanting or abound, but to make every part of the Discourse agreeable and suitable to the Main End.
Of Genesis and Analysis. But that you may the better Skill how to form a Subject into exact method, I shall here present you with the Pattern of an exact Genesis and Analysis; in which case, the right forming of a Subject in Dis∣course, is call'd, the Genesis; and the A∣natomy or Dissolution of it to its prime Heads the Analysis; the Head dividing we call the Genus; the Heads divided till they come to Particulars Species; but when Particulars, as Peter, Paul, John, &c. In∣dividuals.
Notions. Abstracted. Ideas Pure Relative. Words, Discourses. Real. Ʋniversals of GOD, creature, Body, Spirit. WORLD. Particular Substance, Animate,— Rational. Peter, Iames, Iohn. Sensitive, Exanguious. Insects. Sangui∣neous. Beast, Bird, Fish. Vegetative. Imperfect, as Stone, Mettal Perfect. Herb, Shrub, Tree. Accident. Quantity Magnitude, Space, Measure. Quality, and so either Habit, Manner, Natural Power, Sensible quality, Sickness. Action Mixed, Simple. Corporeal, Spiritual. Relation, Private, or Oeconomi∣cal i Possession, Provision. Publick Ecclesiastick, Civil Judicial, Military, Naval.
As an Ingenious Author well observes, Algebra is the Pinacle of Argumentation, and Analitica is the Gage of Mens Parts; and, in which case, though several Dis∣courses may be equally adorn'd in being Florid; yet 'tis only by the Analysis, or Anatome, that you are able to discern the Wisdom, and the Solid Matter, and Composure of a Treatise. Nota, If you would see the exact Di∣stribution of such an Analysis, through all Subjects, you must peruse Dr. Wil∣kins's Ʋniversal Character, and Alsted's Encyclopaidion, where you have an un∣speakable Variety in it.
Of ANGER. THere is an Anger from Pride, and an Anger from Complexion more ex∣cusable, but surely neither tolerable when raised to a Passion. The Picture of a full Passion'd Anger is a Tiger bath'd in Blood, assailing, fierce, cruel and inexorable: And can any Pro∣vocation then justifie a Vice so inhumane, and barbarous? As Seneca says, Anger appears like ru∣ine, which breaks its self upon all it falls. While the Man in Anger is out of posses∣sion of his own Mind, he's like the vext Bee, that stings all, nay equally the next unconcerned Person, as his Enemy: An∣nimamque in vulnere ponit. But above all, Malice and a setled Ha∣tred are most pernicious. If Anger is able to endanger our Quiet and Safety; What must Malice do? Surely a setled Anger, or Malice, must needs tear up the very Roots of Humane Society. Besides, Anger leaves neither room nor mercy for failty or mistake. Be there but a possibility that the Adversary is in the right, yet is the Angry Man in a tem∣per
to consider and do him Justice. The Scripture says, Be Angry and sin not. Learn to turn the course of your Anger therefore, and instead of shewing a bitterness, and an irrevocable resentment of Indignation, learn the Courage to change it to Pity. Above all, beware of revealing Secret, and of Bitter Words, whether Rayling or Satyr in your Anger; For why should you be perfidious in the one case, and add need∣less fuel to an unreasonable fire in the o∣ther? Alass! Man is such a touchy thing, and yet so unconstant, that almost all his Pas∣sions depend upon his opportunity and temper. To day he bears Abuse, without measure; and, to morrow, every circum∣stance of Contempt and Reputation whets the Edge of his Resentment. Undoubtedly therefore, Anger is the Child of Weakness and Baseness. Is it a∣greeable to a well-ballanc'd temper and courage, and a due resolution, to make even desperate efforts of resentment for trifles? Women, Children, Sick Men, and Old Folks, we may justly allow them to be Angry, as fit Subjects for the Weakness of Passion; but Men should be above it, and learn to make others tremble, while
themselves stand unmov'd: The Super∣lative Courage answers to Aquila non ca∣pit muscas. To be short; Are you provoked? there∣fore Repeat the Alphabet; nay, rather bite off your Tongue, then let him make it a Bil∣linsgate-Scuffle for you; not only for the un∣generousness of it, I mean; but when you begin with evil words, Do you know what actions they may lead you to? Of MƲRDER. HE that intends to avoid Murder, must shun violent Anger also, or else he may set his Guard too late. Can you reasonably expect to stop the stream, that you are not able to keep within its banks? The Scripture says, He that hates his Brother is a Murderer. And you see, not without a cause; if we once let Vice get the Reins in managing our Actions, Need we wonder that we are to Answer for all the Consequences thereof?
The Laws of God and Man allow us even to kill another in our own defence; nay, whether Chastity, or a Limb be only threatned; yet even then we are excusa∣ble: But shall I destroy my Brother for a Blow, or an Affront only? What though mine Enemy is despe∣rate in his Malice, yet shall I mean∣ly distrust the Providence of God in my Protection, so as to kill him for it therefore? But above all, the Self-murderer is the most stupidly presumptuous. What, shall I fly in the Face of my Maker, be∣cause of his Trials of Patience, and o∣ther Virtues, nay, and for which he has Promis'd to Reward me in another World? What, now that I am as Gold in the Furnace to be tried, will I rather Rebel against his Will? nay, and if I do, What can I think my God to be, either Ratio∣nal or Just, and not expect but that as he at first gave me a Talent of Life, so he will Resuscitate it again to an unhappy Immortality for my contempt of him? The World, I know, has Sainted some Self-murderers, as for Chastity, and o∣therwise: But can the World excuse such shuffles to the Masculine Trials of
God's Afflictions? Are we to live and die to God, or to Fantome Honour, and Humour? To be short; 'Tis easie and light to die: The Women in some Countries burn in Complement, with their Deceas'd Hus∣bands; And what then, shall we be less grateful to the Lord of Life, who pretend to be of the Nobler Sex? OF REVENGE. REvenge is to be Rooted out as Wild Justice. A first wrong does but offend the Law, but Revenge puts the Law out of Office: Surely when Government is once established, Revenge belongs to none but the Law and God. And yet the Vice of Revenge shall not keep me from a lawful Resentment; nay, I am as strongly bound to Self-preserva∣tion, as against Revenge; and even St. Paul would not refrain Appealing to Caesar to Redress his Injuries. So the same Christ that bid us turn the one Cheek when the other was smitten, yet could himself Whip out those that
defiled the Temple: And even so I, while I bear anothers Injuries, through mistake or frailty, surely I may well choose to re∣fuse to let him slave me by it. 'Tis true, Providence can reign in even the furiousest Tyrants, to Protect us, but shall that Enthusiastically make me sur∣render my self a Prey to corrupt Men? But has my Brother, as I have said, in∣jur'd me through inadvertency, or re∣pents? 'tis noble to forgive him; Re∣venge would equal us, but Pardon makes me Superior; and besides, is it prudent to rub a Sore to keep it from healing? So, Does your Enemy Vow to be re∣veng'd on you? Answer him, I Vow I will perswade you to be better Minded if I can. Whatever others are, Can that excuse you of your invincible Christian Charity? To conclude, I will dread Revenge where I have injur'd my Brother; but when I have offer'd him Reparation, I'll force my self through a Christian Mag∣nanimity to Satisfaction and Content, and only be sorry my Brother has so much Ma∣lice as to be my Enemy.
OF REFORMATION. ARt thou sorry, my Friend, that Chri∣stians have such Variances and dif∣ferent Ideas? Thou art sorry then because they are not Angels: for, as we are Men, we cannot but Err; and if we Err, 'tis impossible but that we must differ. What remains then to Reconcile us, or preserve Peace, but Charity? Divine Charity! let us follow that therefore, and not seem to quarrel with God, because he has not made us otherwise. In truth, Were the Apostles themselves ever free from little Animosities, Acts 15. 38, 39. Think of this therefore, my Friend, and pity Mankind in their Weakness; do not enter into Contention, but bear with a Mercy like God's; nor despair, but do all that thou canst to Reform them; nor be angry if they are not exact, for 'tis more than Human to be so: Nay, if thy De∣signs miscarry, be not discourag'd, for thou must do thy best always, and yet expect still that God work his own way. Re∣member what Luther said to Melancton, when he was too anxious about the suc∣cess of the late great Reformation, Desi∣nat
Melancton esse rector mundi: Why should Melancton take upon him the Cares proper to God? For though Man may Reason even Divinely, yet 'tis only God that can give Conviction, and dissolve the stubborn Heart. Besides, as a Rational Man, I may mo∣destly give my Advice to Reform the World, as 'tis every Man's Duty, where he lawfully may and can: But I am pre∣sumptuous against all the Laws of Na∣ture, if I seek to Impose it on others. Is the VVorld Corrupt? why, and even my very Knowledge of its Corruption is un∣certain: And how dare I then presume too freely to be its Reformer? I may do well to Pray to God to Inspire apt Persons in a lawful way therefore, or else I sin; that with my known weak Performances I encrease the Confusion. You think what you would enforce thus, may be of use and benefit; and it may be so; But will you on the hazard of that presume on all the Consequences of your Proceedings, and how far you may stir up others to disturb the Peace by it? Nay, speak from your Conscience, Do not you often vary even in your own thoughts, and with your self? And can you expect then to set up a better Sect
than some already are? Or if you can, Can you assure your self the benefit will exceed the Blood and Divisions that may be occasion'd by it? Alass! our best and only method to reconcile these our Differences in Religi∣on, is, by setting up, or imposing nothing on no hand, but reassuming the Antient and Apostolick Liberty; more especially a com∣pliance is fairly and humbly to be desired, where most likely, and where there is most Judgment; and therefore I may add, that if the Magistracy to whom we ought to address in this case, and who ought to be the strong Trespass on their weaker Brethren, by imposing on them, though never so innocently, the People will hardly ever be induc'd to a submis∣sion to it, though never so reasonable, be it almost only for the very Imposition sake. But for Private Reformers, and Quacks in Religion, Who shall set any bounds to their Giddy Methods? In truth, one may say of all such Men, that they have rather Essay'd than proceeded in any thing like a Reformation, while the Im∣perfect Embrio has turn'd to a Monster in the Womb: Alass! the best of them have not said sufficient Fundamental Pre∣cepts
to support or continue it by; and, in truth, when I consider this, I wonder not that their Flocks go astray, when even as the Poet Sings, Their Guides themselves know not the Way. Besides, I have a fair System, says one, and a second sets up another, and so infi∣nitely, &c. And pray what must the State do in this Matter? She is in equal Peril if she disregard either, and all have an equal right to her Hearing: Nay, one tells her, she is Jure Divino; a Second, That she has the Spirit; A Third, The Dominion is founded in Grace; And a Fourth, tran∣slates the Supremacy: In short, all would fain make the State a Property, and Res∣cue the Sword out of her Hand. If She accept one, She's Damn'd by the rest; and if She accepts none, like young Vipers, rather than fail of their Birth, they'll eat through their Mothers Womb: And what then, ought She not to crush such Cockatrices Eggs in the Embrio, and confound their Sanctified Treasons for God's sake? And so, if She suffer them to Clamour each other, She's in danger even by that also. So that till you can convince us Mankind will never disagree in Reasoning these Methods and Principles of Reformati∣on so apparently against the Peace of States;
must needs be Seditious and Unlawful, and after that I need not add Irreligi∣ous. You say, alass! what you do or pro∣pose has none of these Evils in it; you do not think to give any General Distur∣bance, or to offend the State: But why do you Write then what She will not bear, and Publish Doctrines without Her Li∣cence? Either you Write to be regarded, or not; you are not so ridiculous I am perswaded, as to say the latter; if not, can you assure your self to Rule all your Followers, to say, thus far you shall go, and no further? or, if you are so ridiculous to think so, Is the State bound to believe you, and sit still while you Sowe your Seeds of Discord in her Bowels? No, from a small Spark may rise a mighty Flame: And they who will not destroy the Lions Whelp, may strive in vain when the Lion's Grown. Besides, we forget our Saviour's Advice, That we ought first to cast ought the beam out of our own eye, before we can expect to see how to cast out the mote out of our Brother's: And hence, methinks, considering the Corruption of the World, 'twere hard to expect a Reformation Perfect, semel & simul, especially without the Immediate
Power of God; and yet, methinks, we might all have had the Wit in Com∣mon, not to be offended at Trifles, and to have Joyn'd against the Roman Wolf: But alass! our New Reformers are Re∣form'd into as great Errors of their own, and our Corruptions will not let us U∣nite. But you will Object then, What, is it never lawful to Reform Publickly, but when the State will give you leave? No, surely: And, in truth, Can you justly de∣sire it? Can you value your little pri∣vate Opinions before the Publick Good? you see plainly, that if this Liberty of Zeal be allow'd, it must Destroy the State: The case then is, Which must stand, Religion or Government? I mean your little Model of Religion, or the State? Surely, as Populous as the World now is, we had better have none of your Religion, than no Government: And therefore if we consult the Good of God's Creation, we ought rather to omit our little Speculations, than Disturb the State with them. Besides, if every Prejudic'd Reasoner were allow'd of himself to Disturb the State, and to set up a New Religion, Would it not rather Distract than Help
the VVorld? But, no, you say, you are sure you are in the Right: No, you are Proud: VVhat! Did you never err? and if you did, VVhat Assurance have you that you do not now? Nay more; were you sure you had even the Standard of Truth; yet ought you not to take this Liberty? Not, I mean, that any Man can reach that Perfection; but to Anti∣cipate all Proud Thoughts, I say, we ought to forbear such a Liberty: For what, Might not many Men think they might justly leave your Standard Truth, and yet follow your Presumption. Nay, and if I undertake to reform Men, and know I can do it but Imperfectly, What do I do by it, but give Offence? Christ refrain'd Doctrines, because Men could not bear them, though he knew how to Instruct them: And what shall we Es∣say then to Teach, what not only Men cannot bear, but what we know not how to instruct? I would Reform the World therefore, but I would not put it into a greater Confusion: I would put my Neighbours House in Order; but, I would not Fire it about his Ears. And what do I do otherwise, if I so much as Countenance every little Reasoning to be able Saucily to Disturb the State? Fare∣well
Government! farewell every thing! If this may be allow'd, who shall stint how high such Liberty may arise, and what Ef∣fects it may produce? Nay, may be at last, even to resist the Government its self, on pretence of unlawful process against such Reasoning, and consequently to A∣narchy? Nor is it enough in such case to say, that the State is bound to see, that they prohi∣bit nothing but what is unlawful; for as Good and Evil in this case is doubtful, so the State ought therein to have an entire Power or Liberty given them, or else you had as good take all Power from them whatever; when alass! in truth, as I have said, 'twere better there were no Printing than no Government; and no hu∣mane Teaching, or religious Instruction, than no Laws. Government is the great and only hu∣mane Foundation of Religion: To destroy Government therefore, or to disturb it, without a particular Revelation to ad∣vance Religion, What is it but to tear up the Foundation for Materials to raise the Building? nor is it enough in such case, to say, that you have a Charity for mens Souls, and that such Opinions are damna∣ble. For pray, how come you to judge so
of Opinions? or what, have you got a par∣ticular Warrant to shew us, That God has flung all the Care of the World on your Shoulders? If Christ's, or any others Revelation, have threatned the wilfully ignorant or perverse, yet where is your Warrant either to limit exactly their Damnatory Sentences, or to raise new ones of your own? If you modestly and peaceably offer your sense in such case, you oblige Mankind in reforming them, and they are engag'd to you for your Charity. But if you endea∣vour either by Might or Calumny to force them, may they not most justly ask? And why have we not the same Right of force on you also? But you say, your Zeal to God moves you; Does it so? And how are you sure that it does not move others as well as you? Besides, that's strange too; Can the God of the World be better pleas'd that you destroy his Creation, than that you omit every little Speculation that you think will tend to his Honour? And what do you do otherwise, when that you but endea∣vour so dangerous a Work, as thus violent∣ly to innovate either in State or Religion, against the leave of the Government?
You say, God has wrought Deliverances by such Reformers; sometimes 'tis true, and so he has by Tyrants and Usurpers al∣so: But must that justify their Methods? or what think you, that God cannot stir up Reformers where he sees good, with∣out our presumption? Men should therefore think it enough, that they are so happy as to have freedom in themselves, and thank God that they have the Truth; and if they have a Cha∣rity for the World, they should shew it re∣gularly, and in Prayers, that God might send as lawful & real Reformers; and not thus pragmatically confound us by such unaccountable Presumptions of their own. And besides, scarce one in the hundred of such Reformers, but what have miscar∣ried; and if ever any have got Success in remedying Evils, they have too often pro∣moted new ones, and as bad of their own, if not degenerated again to the first State; so that at best, generally they have done more hurt than the good propos'd. And, thus we see how many have reform'd of their own heads, and we see the effects of such Reformations, instead of reducing the Church to a Primitive Purity; by them they have but rent her into uncharitable
and senseless Divisions, worse I may almost add, than even Popery her self. In short, Can I expect to prevent all Cor∣ruptions in my self? or if I am so proud as to think, I can, am I able to do it in my Followers? if I cannot, therefore before I hazard the mischief of a Change, let me consider to what degree of good I can ex∣pect to Reform? nay more, may not God be willing, that this Generation should have just such a Dispensation of Knowledge? and what, shall I cross Providence then, or destroy my self to reform Mankind, whe∣ther they will or no? God allows you to reprove personal Vi∣ces where ever you see them provided, but consistent with your safety; and so natio∣nal ones also, where you are not in danger. But when a Man or Nation becomes so un∣happy as to turn again, and rent you for your kindness, methinks you might rejoyce that you are quit of your Office, in leaving them to reform themselves. And thus also, there is a lawful Liberty for Writers, and there is an abuse of it; and there is a convenient Liberty of suppressing Books by a State, and a pernicious one: And thus it is either the misfortune or the wicked∣ness of a State to suppress those Books that might give them good Advice. But if it
is either, who shall call the State to account for what it does? But to turn the method of mine Argu∣ment a little: Am I not presumptuous to go before God sends me? And who has re∣quir'd these things at mine hand? And in∣deed, were God resolv'd to have such a Reformation, might not I as rationally ex∣pect he would impower some person order∣ly in his Providence towards it, as he has done before, through Moses and Christ, without my presumptuously going of my own head? And indeed, were not this God's insti∣tuted method, Why should God complain, that men came that were not sent, and threaten them for it, as he does by his Pro∣phets, if it were no Offence? and the common mission of the Law of Nature were suffi∣cient, in truth a warrant that needs no more to confute it, than to consider: Should every man take the full liberty of it, what a World it would make? Not that I would mean from hence, Nei∣ther that the Law of Nature is not suffici∣ent to direct every man privately in his Duty: I am not so much a Pyronist as that comes to neither. Nay, I think, that by the light of Nature, and the common Assistance of God's Spirit in our Consciences, we may
very justly take the liberty to advise and reprove one another; yea, and more that publickly too, when the Law prohibits not. But as I have said, Shall this gene∣ral Commission only Authorise us to be idle to other things, to teach others, or en∣danger the Publick Quiet or Peace by it? Surely we need a Warrant from God, like Christ and his Apostles, as well as a bare Conviction of Consciences, to proceed thus far? But you will say, this is cowardly, and not to the bravery of a Martyrdom. I say, it is: For tho' every man is bound to stand to the truth, and confess it, even to death; yet no man is bound to preach it, or spread it to this degree, till he has a Call to it; nor is it enough to say in this case, That because Christ would not let him be silenc'd, that preach'd in his Name, that therefore we may follow him without some order; for if God will not destroy our Trials, so as forcibly to obstruct us in our Ignorances, yet he does not therefore require us to continue in them. Thus even Christ, did not go about pur∣posely to preach publickly, till he had the Warrant and Protection of a Mission; nor did Moses or Elijah hazard themselves till God commanded them: And what, would
I seem braver than they? Would God have chosen Moses, if his flight for being a De∣liverer, had been Cowardize and not Du∣ty? Surely not; and that because the Apostles lived and continued in this hazard, was withall, because they were sent. In short then, should I not be a Self-murderer to run my self into the fire? and should I not forfeit God's Protection from Enthusiasm, to arrogate Spiritual Power, and to pretend to be a Guide where I am not? What, can God order me to live by Miracle without express notice? nay, and am not I an Enthusiast, to run my self even into the very jaws and pit of Destruction, in hopes of his Help, and that even in inevi∣table Dangers? And indeed, what has made God let so many well designing Men be sacrificed in this case, but Presumption? And if I at∣tempt any such thing therefore of my self, can I expect either to fare better, or have other success? In truth, if I do, thus I go of my own Errand, and I must not expect the protection of God to bear me out; nor will it be enough for me to suggest in such case, that such an Error is considerable, or not; for if we admit that, we admit all; for all Immoralities are equally perni∣cious, and the least were no more to be born with than the greatest.
Nor indeed is the Vice of such a seditious Practice worse than the Vanity of it: Am not I an unstable doubting thing my self? and how can I expect then that I, as the Blind, should be able to lead the Blind? When I am commission'd from God in∣deed, I may justly presume on his War∣rant, or else my Fallibility will make me a Deceiver, tho never so sincere. It is the real Duty of every man there∣fore to say, I will not move an inch be∣yond private Advice, till God shall give me Authority; nay more, no faint Dream or Vision shall impower me, and all the presumptions of this nature, that I have been guilty of before, shall remain as Monuments in my Memory, to keep me from the like for the future. Indeed, may I say, is it not a ridiculous thing, to see a little petty Reformer fond of his trifling imaginations, and really ig∣norant of the true state and nature of Re∣ligion; neither knowing of what nature Catholick Communion is, nor what is the guilt either of Heresy or Schism, blindly to run himself and others into amaze, that he no more knows how to get out of a∣gain, than how first he got into it: Alass! what a miserable Spectacle may I add it is, when such men take fire into their Zeal,
and lay a necessity, either that they de∣stroy the State, or the State them. But this ESSAY being on a Subject some∣what singular, I have thought fit to add a Passage of the Incomparable Arch-Bishop of Canterbury's, much to the same effect; to confirm it, see Tillotson's Sermons, Vol. the 3d. p. 372. AND to speak freely in this matter, I can∣not think (till I be better inform'd, which I am always ready to be) that any pretence of Conscience warrants any Man that is not ex∣traordinarily commission'd, as the Apostles, and first Publishers of the Gospel were; and cannot justify that Commission by Miracles, as they did, to affront the Establish'd Religion of a Nation, tho it be false; and openly to draw men off from the Profession of it, in contempt to the Magi∣strate and the Law. All that persons of a dif∣ferent Religion can in such a case reasonably pretend to, is to enjoy the private Liberty and Exercise of their own Conscience and Religion; for which they ought to be very thankful, and to forbear the open making of Proselytes to their
own Religion (thou they be never so sure that they are in the right) till they have either an extraordinary Commission from GOD to that purpose, or the Providence of GOD make way for it, by the permission or connivance of the Magistrate; not but that every man hath a right to publish and propagate the true Religi∣on, and to declare it against a false one: But there is no obligation upon any man to attempt this to no purpose; and when without a Mira∣cle, it can have no other effect, but the loss of his own life, unless he have an immediate Command and Commission from God to this purpose, and be endued with a Power of Mi∣racles, as a publick Seal and Testimony of that Commission which was the case of the Apostles, who after they had receiv'd an immediate Com∣mission, were not to enter upon the Execution of it, but to stay at Jerusalem till they were endued with Power from on high. In this case a man is to abide all hazards, and may reason∣ably expect both extraordinary Assistances and Success, as the Apostles had, and even a mi∣raculous Protection till his work be done; and after that, if he be call'd to suffer Martyrdom, a supernatural Support under those Suffer∣ings. And that they are guilty however of gross Hypocrisy, who pretend a further Obligation of Conscience in this matter: I shall give this
plain demonstration, which relys upon Conces∣sions, generally made on all Hands, and by all Parties; No Protestant, that I know of, holds himself obliged to go and preach up his Religion, and make Converts in Spain or Italy; nor do either the Protestant Ministers, or Popish Priests think themselves bound in conscience to preach the Gospel in Turky, and to consute the Alchoran to convert the Mahometans; and what is the reason? because of the severity of the Inquisition in Popish Countreys, and of the Laws in Turky; but doth the danger then al∣ter the obligation of Conscience? no certainly; but it makes men throw of the false pretence and disguise of it: but where there is a real ob∣ligation of Conscience, danger should not di∣vert men from their Duty, as it did not the A∣postles: which shews their case to be different from ours, and that probably this Matter was stated right at first; so that whatever is pre∣tended, this is certain, That the Priests and Jesuits of the Church of Rome, have in truth, no more obligation of Conscience to make Con∣verts here in England, than in Sueden or Turky, where it seems, the evident Danger of the Attempt hath for these many years given them a perfect Discharge from the Duty in this particular.
Of WIT. THE common abusive Wit, what is it but the crude Digestion and Excrement of Reasoning? What can I call a Talking Thing, when the truth and sincerity of it's Judgment is gone, but a Parrot at best? To Ridicule, to Droll, to Banter, &c. what, are all such Contentious Railleries, either to be commended or us'd for? is the best of them agreeable either to Sense, Ju∣stice, or good Manners? In short, Raillery is a false Theatre Jewel; and whereas true Wit stirr'd up, does Wonders, and becomes as a Cordial to alleviate the Cares of humane Life. Raillery confounds and embitters all. Besides, such little pedling Satyrists can't shew themselves without the company of Blockheads, and yet not but that they will rather sometimes be speaking evil, even of themselves, and their best of Friends, than not talking. But are not all such Scoffers then taken deservedly as common Enemies? nay, and are any more ridiculous than such, to men of sense, especially when they are un∣masked,
or as the Player, e're he is in his Disguise? But as for real Wit, there are undoubt∣edly many pretty things, which the mind searches not, and yet finds in its self; it seems they are hidden there, as Gold and Diamonds in the Bowels of the Earth, and which when produc'd, even dazle and enamour all Mankind with their lustre. And yet, there is a general Revolution of Wit, that changes its Fashions, as well as the Fortunes of the World; and whilst all her little Idolaters to magnify them∣selves, support her in them, they too often sacrifice their very judgment in comple∣ment to her. Politeness of Wit in general, is a frame of Mind, as always presents us with things genteel and delicate; and gallantry of Wit, what is it but an easy way to please, whilst as for its deceits, they are as many and various? Thus, 'tis not fruitfulness of Wit, which makes us find out many Expedients in one Affair; but 'tis rather a darkness in the Understanding, which makes us lay hold on all that Imagination presents, and hin∣ders us from seeing presently what is pro∣per for us.
To be short, 'tis the Character of a great Wit, to make a great many things be un∣derstood in a few words; and in recom∣pence of it, I may say, the little Wits have a Talent of talking much, and saying no∣thing. To conclude, the general Excellency of Wit is in diversion, and on a ready turn, while its mischiefs are, that its Delicacy is too often apt to destroy the laborious∣ness of Consideration, and its lightness to offend in Seriousness and Business.
Of REWARDS. GOD has put it in the power of Prin∣ces to encourage us by Rewards: Punishment and Revenge whets but on one side of the Edge of Vertue, unless Re∣wards be added to sharpen the other. Nor is it less the duty than interest of great Men, in such case, to bestow such Rewards duly. Surely, neither an Aesop nor Socrates should be neglected, if we would encourage Goodness and Vertue truly. You give your Pimp his hire, & he in grati∣tude, like Timon's Friends, seeks thy ruine to be rid of the Obligation; had he any real worth, he would rather starve than pimp for thee: Can he be faithful to his King, that is not so to the King of Kings? So surely, to give for a Jest or a Trifle also, is to be prodigal, and not reward; but alass! how often are true Abilities and Merits supprest, lest their Lustre should eclipse the false Lights and Deceits of the World?
Of PEDANTRY. THere is a common and lazy Asilum in Learning, Ars longa vita brevis; Mens Judgments are so dazled with the Curiosity, the Fine Dresses and Excursi∣ons of Authors, that they think Learning as bad as infinite; and lazily and sluggish∣ly rest in a confus'd view, in despair of all Perfection. But why? because they know not how to separate the Gold from the Dross, and to encumber themselves only with what is really material. I must confess my Genius is too hardy to approve of Trifles; and as I hate all Superfluicies, so such little Formalities have been of no annoyance to me: I have flung aside all such Embroidery of Sci∣ence as Nonsence; I cannot bear what cannot be digested to use; my Reader therefore must excuse my freedom, if I have laid aside all such looser Thoughts, as Deluding Chicanery and Speciousness, and presented him only with the main and solid Substance. But to proceed: Among the rest therefore, 'tis the par∣ticular work of this present Essay, to shew
wherein such trifling Pedantry consists, and that is it I am now to Write of. Now, First, As the Chief among these Disguises may be reckon'd our Terms of Art, the Cant of Learning, that makes Trifles Mysteries, and obscures even com∣mon Sence, the rise whereof, one may just∣ly say, is all Hypocrisy; we would mag∣nifie our Reasoning, and we would ra∣ther, like Gipseys, be shrew'd for our Gib∣berish, than nothing. So for our Distinctions also; how pre∣posterous it is to set up Terms of Art par∣amount to Sence; Terms to Sence ought to sit like Cloaths to the Body, Usefully and Ornamentally; but never so as to cramp its motion; So, What a Senceless thing 'tis to Explicate by Distinction that, that is obvious to every Reason? An admira∣ble way to reduce Learning to Studied Ignorance and Trifling, but the only course to divert the real growth of Wis∣dom. For my part, Words are my Counters, and I make my own Criticisms on them; surely if a Notion make me wrest a word a little, Terms may well bear a compliance to Arts: If besides the weight of Sence, you bind an Author to the nice and end∣less Criticisms of Words, you are unrea∣sonable;
if my Meaning be good there∣fore, surely you may well enquire a little into my peculiar Sence of Words, and then you leave me a freer liberty for In∣vention, and to digest my Matter. Nor were even the Teaching of Arts and Sciences in this matter difficult nei∣ther, were they but reduc'd from Pedantry, a little time would suffice; while 'tis the Weight and Formality of our Rules, that not only ruines the Perfection of our Ideas, but obstructs their Communication also. Thus, what but this has made Cornelius A∣grippa and many others rayl at their vanity in General; not that I think them in the Right neither; for surely, that Abusus tol∣lit usum is a most Barbarous Maxime, and we should rather Reform Wisdom, than fling her quite aside for it. So amongst the rest, one of the great∣est Blemishes of Learning is, that Men have made her stoop to Trifles; so that when a Man comes and expects to find something, as it were Divine, instead of Philosophy, he is entertain'd with their Picking of Straws, Notions so idle, and yet so particular and superfinely nice, that they seem rather design'd for petty Jugling-Tricks, to puzzle idle Wits withal, than to be of any real use or benefit.
And from whence but hence comes that common, but too true Reflection, that the most exquisite Folly is made of Wisdom spun too fine; and we are never made so ridiculous by the Qualities we have, as by those we affect to have; and indeed one may justly add, that Pedantry is the very Plague and Contagion of Learning, that diverts and mortifies all good Parts, with the pretence of assisting them. 'Twere an Heroick Act therefore, would some Prince dissolve these Cobwebs in our Voluminous Rubbish Libraries; and by a select Committee, collect, perfect, gell'd, and reduce them into a manageable and usefull form: I should rejoice, could this my little Rationale be subservient to so excellent a purpose: But, alass! I am a∣fraid this is a matter we must rather range under the desideranda studii, than really ex∣pect. And, in truth, the Fault is rather in the Will than the Understanding; alass! Men will not reduce their Sciences to Purity, and to Sincerity and Truth, their Prejudices will not let them; they are afraid of the Light, because their Deeds are Evil. Our Sciences indeed ought to repair the pure Image of God that we have lost, and they would too, did we pursue them right; but
we make use of them only to lead our selves into greater Darkness. You see therefore I have the Fire of the greatest Charity to spur me on herein; nor is there any difficulty to demonstrate the usefulness of my Design: How many inge∣nious Men would not only have been good Schollars, but exceeding serviceable to their Country also, were but Learning to be atchiev'd with a due case; whereas, as it is now, in a despair, they leave it to a pack of Perverse and Wrangling Sophisters to make their ends of it, while Mankind suffers equally by their Villany and Ig∣norance? Like a good Physician; An honest Man cannot pretend to that Knowledge he has not; while the Quack, that knows little or nothing, will Swear you, he is infalli∣ble: the one, if you converse him, shall acquaint you, Learning is at her Perfecti∣on; whilst the other modestly shall let you know, that his industrious Labours have found it imperfect; nay, so far, that he questions almost in Conscience, whe∣ther he may use the little Skill of his Pro∣fession. So if you examin Men of integrity, the common Idea of the Arts and Sciences, as they now stand, is a Sea of Learning, and
hardly ever to be Fathom'd; they'll tell you, Our Books run in Formal Tracks in Quest of them, but never take care of their full and true Reasoning; that's a Gulph that few or none have been so har∣dy as to dive after. And yet even this has not discouraged me; I have resolved to hint at least, at the Leading Substance of all Arts and Sciences, not only towards the better com∣pleating a Body of Wisdom, but that I may be the better able to Censure what is impertinent in all. I hope my Reader will excuse me therefore, if when I see a Science drawn even Cobweb-fine, I en∣quire her Merits, as what portion of our Memory, or Judgment she really deserves; and that we may no longer imprudently squander away our pains in dividing Frac∣tions, and Atomes to Infinity. Nor need a Man be accus'd of Satyr, to say, almost all our Sciences are Pedantry; indeed Science and Wisdom ought to be re∣ally one; but as Learning is now degene∣rated, 'tis as unnatural as uneasie; and he that will reduce it to its full power and substance, must envigorate it with brevity, and by docking it from its super∣fluous Pedantry.
In truth, 'tis the Sphere of Wisdom on∣ly to give a general and clear Idea, and a Universal Prospect of the Sciences; fully to trace their nice particulars, were not only to be tedious and volumnious, but to cloud your clear and brighter leading Truth; whereas the general and leading Ideas, well fix'd, will lead, of course, the lesser Corollaries. When a Prince gives an Ambassadour Instructions, he only gives him General Orders; and even so Wis∣dom, whom she enlightens, she Teaches General Precepts; and Accidents, as too many for Instruction, for fear of a greater Confusion she leaves to Discretion. To be short; Both Arts and Sciences are then only good, when they are useful; when they Answer to our Service, and the Circle of Creatures about us; and even as a Watch, though it have Wheels, yet if the Teeth are not fit, and plac'd apt for Motion, is good for nothing: So Arts and Sciences not dispos'd for Practice, become, not only a Burthen, but an idle Evil; nay, and indeed, as Piety is the only Rule for Arts, so, whatever is purely curious, is evil also: And what shall we say then to those, who Write Volumes about Genealogies, and whole Libraries of Notions purely Speculative? Do they not rather deserve
an House of Correction, than a Reward for their Encouragement? As Hobbs well Notes, we have now but one true and real Science, to wit, the Mathematicks, that begins well, lays down Principles sure, and proves its self, as it proceeds; and yet not, but that were o∣ther Arts and Sciences manag'd, as they should be, we should not let their Prin∣ciples neither be so precarious as they are; but, founding them on Undoubted Truths, give them a certainty, at least, near equal to Demonstration. Nor is this little Cant less pernicious in our Languages and Schools, than our Sciences; I may add almost to turn our Reason to Madness. If Ovid does but cry, Omnia vincit amor, though the Sence and Words were but worthy of a School-boy; yet streight, by Pedant Spec∣tacles, we are Ravish'd by an Elaborate and delicate Adage, with a lofty and in∣comparable stile, and purity of Language; nay, and a Mystery shall supply the Sence, rather than fail; and, as if the Sentence were deliver'd Personally by some God, and Mortals durst do no other than com∣mend it. And thus also, Who can Write a Poem, but he must streight invoke the mighty
Nine, the Muses, and by and by, we must have some Heathen Gods, Bacchus, Mars, Vulcan, or some one or other to Agran∣dize our Stile, when, in truth, the surer Reason why they are brought in, is not so much in Conceit of the Elegancy, but that they are as lazy Topicks to supply the imperfection of our Invention. But in Reality, What is it but to drive away Richer Notions from our Heads, to fill up our Discourses with such Formalities of the Furies, as Fatal Sisters, and the Graces, &c. we were pardonable, did we do like Hackney-letter Scriveners, who Write all Epistles in one Form, for that were to confess a Downright honest plain Sence: but we forsooth would strive to be Elegant, and to Charm the World by our Wits, when, at the same time, we ride none but the Hackny-fancies of Thousands of years standing. So, our Gods, Victory, Musick, and such Hieroglyphical Statues and Emblems, are fit enough to set out the Great Mock-Prince at Versailes; but to imagine them Learning, or to think to get much out of their Story or Moral, surely is an imperti∣nency too great for a Philosopher; or, at best, if we must value this petty Sapientia veterum; Can't we take the Substance of
the Advice, and spurn away the little fairy Stories of their Gods. Nor do I think it a less Vanity, though more common, that Men, at every turn, must confirm what they say, with Stan∣za's from Virgil, &c. to make Men think they are skill'd in the Poets; Alass! What is my Opinion the better for bringing sen∣tentiously every Man's Fancies to support what I Write? I say, let every Man's Work stand and fall by Reason, and by the meer dint and force of Justice, Since∣rity, and Truth. So in Sciences also; What are your com∣mon little formal Analysses, wherewith they are Patch'd up, but Pedantry? And what your little set, and cramp Forms in them, but so many Mysteries and Blinds, to keep the Understanding from Truth? 'tis true indeed, such trifles hardly deserve to be taken notice of; and yet even tri∣fling, when it appears in Formality and Method, deserves a Censure, nay, and that even to a Ridicule, lest at Weak times they prevail upon us, and by their meer Spe∣ciousness byass our Judgments; and yet not that they deserve to be Carp'd at, or An∣swer'd, so much as Laugh'd at. I have perus'd Alsted's long Enciclopai∣dion, sincere 'tis true, but besotted to all
the little forms of Pedantry: there you have even all Mechanism reduc'd to Sci∣ences; indeed Arts infinite, and Definiti∣ons and Niceties without end: in his Me∣thod seemingly short, yet too full for a ready recourse; nay, so Voluminous with Distinctions, Glosses, Philosophick Notes and Quotations, that to peruse him or∣derly, would, at least, require two years Work: And, is this, think you, a fit Bo∣dy of Wisdom for use? Nay, I will say more for Alsted, though he handles all Subjects in General, yet in most particulars he is so excellent, that I know few single Treatises that exceed him, even at their own Mark; but espe∣cially in his Rhetorick; and yet for all that, they that can bear Pedantry in Piece-meal, will be even sick when they peruse his Masse of it, though never so Correct. To be short; his heaps of Analysses's, and his incoherent Florilegiums, would even Distract a Man to Comprehend, or reduce them to use: I would as soon think to reduce the Ocean, as to bring in Order every one of his little Notions: Indeed, a Wisdom so nicely pursu'd in an Angel were somewhat, but in a Man, 'tis as if we would try to carry a Mountain
on our backs, besides the Impertinency of it in a great many Parts: What, if a Me∣lancholy Genius, Hag-ridden by an Art or Science, dwells, and raises Castles in the Air on it, Must I be bound to follow the Dance of his Frenzy? Nor would I be thus Uncharitable to quarrel at the Body of Learning, had I not, at the same time, essay'd to make it more perfect; but now I hope I may be excus'd, that I endeavour to display its giddy confusion: Alass! What a Scene 'tis to see? here lies one Man confounded and sinking into Sceptism; another satia∣ted like Cornelius Agrippa; sits down and spews up all that he has Read again, be∣cause he cannot digest it: Another Rails at, and Undervalues all, because 'tis so Intricate he cannot reach it. Hence nothing in the World confounds Wisdom like Pedantry; nay, and when Men are once season'd with it, 'tis as hard for them to unlearn it, as it is to learn what is Real Knowledge; nay, to root out a rotten Leven of Principles, and to rectifie formal Errors, is more difficult than to dive into Simple Knowledge; Natural Folly is bad enough in Man, but when he has got Letters and Sciences to main∣tain his Madness, his Frenzy is intollera∣ble.
But, alass! I am afraid, after all, I Write in vain; Men are so bewitch'd to the borrow'd Counterfeit Ornaments of Learning, that when the Devil Pedantry is cast forth, they will be even offended at the Innocent Simplicity of Wisdom, and slav'd to their old Pageantry, they'll not be able to rellish, even Substance, with∣out their old Forms. Men delight to continue in the Maze they are Educated in, they hate to come to the Light of Truth; So that I may justly say, this One Accursed Knot of Pedantry has baulked all the Improvements and A∣mendments of Learning: So that when Men have once laid this rotten Foundation, be∣cause they are unwilling to bestow the pains to New-lay it, as Wisdom and Fol∣ly can never Piece together, so they run, like Sheep in a Flock. I have known Men following Meditation, hit of Truth ex∣actly; but Pedants, like Wild-geese, fol∣low one another in Trains, for fear of lo∣sing themselves; the Reason is, they have not Truth, nor any other Method to keep themselves in a Body, but to tread in one anothers steps only. And hence all those that have pursued the Natural Powers of Reasoning sincere∣ly, have even done Wonders; whilst Pe∣dants,
sneaking Pedants, whatever blind Path the first happens to enter, you shall see Ingenious Men, and even Men of Parts, afterwards make up the Specious Train of Fools. Nay, and I do not know whether I may not iustly add, that as such Blun∣derers wander on, our Learning as we ge∣nerally have it now, rather corrupts and disables, than helps or assists a Wise and Active Life of Imployment: and I think, the Turks are the only Wise Men in this, in rejecting all our petty Sciences, since they are clog'd so far with Artful Vice. And, to shut up all; Whence but from hence is it, that one cries Learning is in∣finite, and will trouble himself to know nothing: A Canter comes, and will only know Christ; he Rails at Archime∣des for Dying in a Study; as if Man were not made to be Charitable and Servicea∣ble to his Country, as well as to Wor∣ship God; and so all have Racked against one Rock or other, and not one in a Mil∣lion has had the Courage to reach after the Haven of a True Humane Competen∣cy, or Perfection of Knowledge.
Of PITY. WHat is Pity, but the sense of our own Miseries in another Subject; while we lament others, only to engage them to succour us on the like Occasion: Surely Pity therefore, for the most part, is but as a good turn done before-hand to our selves. And thus, alass! an Hypocrisy is in all our Afflictions; we lament our dead Friend, But why? we weep for our selves; we bewayl the loss of our Plea∣sure, and Esteem, in the Person Deceas'd; So that I may truly say of most of our Tears, that they fall for them that shed them. At best, we are apt to respect the Mis∣fortune more than the Cause or Person; the sad Spectacle prevails on us, and we Weep as Men Laugh, or Yawn for Com∣pany: But, deserves such a Pity as this then to be call'd a Virtue? So, some Weep to get the Reputation of a Tender Heart, others to avoid the Shame of not Weeping, or to be Weep'd for a∣gain, while others aspire at Glory, through
an Eminent and Immortal Grief; away with all these Deceits. Give me the Friendship that is not so weak as to be Soft-hearted, that has a ten∣derness as Lasting as Moderate for me: if I Dye, yet let my Friend be happy; Can his Anxiety bring me back from the Grave again? We can easily hear of others misfor∣tunes, when at a distance from us; nay, and time abates the greatest of our pro∣per Griefs; And why should we then, either through VVeakness, or Hypocri∣sy, support that Concern and Passion that is manifestly so unaccountable and unreasonable?
Of PARDON. HAs my Brother offended me? 'twas one he took for me; he's misin∣form'd of me; And, What shall I leave no room for his Misunderstanding? No surely, I will have Mercy to the last: what shall I Condemn, where I am not sure that God does? Nay, nor is it less Christianly and Ge∣nerous, than Prudent, to Pardon our Ene∣my: Christ could say, even on the Cross, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. And it makes Men Desperate, while we leave them no hopes of Forgive∣ness. Besides, Is it not Cowardize, either to have Malice, or seek for Security through Vicious Means? Have I Rivals? I have So∣ciety then worthy of my self. Have I E∣nemies? let my very good Behaviour re∣duce them to an esteem of me. But shall we forgive no body that of∣fends us, either through surprize or mis∣take? Surely, then we shall no sooner for∣give our selves than others. St. Peter de∣nied his Master, and St. Paul was a great Persecutor, and yet both the greatest A∣postles.
Certainly, God the Prototype may be our best of Examples in this. I will have mercy therefore to the last, but I will not destroy my Justice by passing by the Injuries I have receiv'd without Repen∣tance; but who shall charge his Brother on mistakes? To forgive before Repentance, indeed is never to take offence; if such had been Christ's Doctrine, why should he have ad∣ded, That if our Brother offend us, we should tell the Church of him? and that if on that he repent not, he be to us as an Heathen or a Publican. I may add, in this it is to be harmless as the Dove, and wise as the Serpent, to guard our selves from known ill men; and yet, were mine Enemy the bitterest Vil∣lain on Earth, I would not only love him, but trust him again, were I assur'd of his Conversion. But shall I pardon out of necessity, or save a Murderer to cut my Throat? alass! 'tis Cowardize, not pardon, to pretermit without Repentance. To pardon in general is to encourage Vice; while there are Laws indeed, I will pass by Revenge, but the least escape of due punishment is unjust; and how can we forgive, where Mankind has the right
of Vengeance against a Villain? Christ bids us indeed, to part with our Coat, and to go two Miles where com∣pell'd one, but to regulate a contentious Claim, and to preserve Peace, and not to destroy either Property or Justice. So the same Gospel that bids us love our Enemies and forgive our Persecutors with∣all, forbids us casting Pearl before Swine, and not flying from City to City to avoid them: But do I fly my Persecutor, while I repose too dangerous a Trust in him? To be short, I love my worst of Ene∣mies; he shall not want the common Dues of Humanity from me; nay, and I forgive him too, as to private Malice and Re∣venge; but I owe to my Self and Family, to sue for Reparation for the Injury he has done me. Nay, and if I have Reparation, I have but my own again; indeed, if I sue for Trifles, I have Malice, and I forgive not my Brother: but in weighty Injuries, I am no more obliged to pass by my amends, than to trust him that deceiv'd me again.
Of RHETORICK. RHetorick is the Art of speaking de∣lightfully, and pretily tickling and pleasing mens Passions by our Discourse; its Instruments are quaint, active, and mo∣ving Figures and Modes of Speech, but the greatest Skill lyes in managing them, some∣times lowring our selves, and sometimes a∣gain raising a more lively Imagery to con∣tinue always in the same strain; be it what it will, at least cloys and satiates, if not lulls the Auditors attention asleep. And hence, we should have a graceful Embroidery, not a daubery in Expression; the Crisis of an Affection should be gently touch'd, and not over-worded, lest we cor∣rupt it. The best Mean in this case there∣fore indeed were, to intermix Sentences; the first material, the second only diverting and circumstantial; the first weighty and deliberate, the second easy and voluptu∣ous; and thus to continue through the whole Speech. For why should we pall the edge and sense of what we intend to recommend? and yet even in this I would not be superfluous neither.
True Eloquence consists in saying all that ought to be said, and nothing but what ought to be said, and in giving every Sen∣timent a several Tone of Voice, Meen, and posture of the Body, which is proper to it: Nay, I may add, 'tis this Agreement that makes good or bad Comedians; and other persons please or displease us in their Dis∣course: And thus there is an Eloquence in the Eyes, and the Air of the Person, which persuades as much as that of words; and there is as much Elegance in the Tone of the Voice, as in the choice of words themselves. The common Error in Rhetorick, is to make every Quirk in Speech a Figure; now the best method is, to have a few & choice Figures, Precepts sufficient to a∣dorn our Speech, and yet not to burden our Use or Idea: So for our speaking, a compos'd Discourse by Memory may have a more set and formal stile than another; but it will want much of the lively cohe∣rence of a Discourse deliver'd Extempore; the one commands all the helps of Inven∣tion which happen during the Discourse, whilst the other, besides the insipidness of Formality, quite cutts off all Advantages that of nature.
To be short, a Man would no more use himself always to repeat a Form, than he would to walk with a Staff; when I am either too young or too old, I will support my feeble parts with props: but when I am Adult, tho I will never speak with∣out a condign deliberation, yet will I not too far confine my Speech neither: I will remember my Method and Analysis, but I will not manacle mine Imagination; I will rather with a generous Freedom, keep it ready against any new Emergency. Of Delivery. And even so for my Delivery also, I will not think to excel by Loudness; were I in a Dispute, should I be willing to put the Crisis of my Controversy on scolding, an Expedient excellent for him that is fool∣ish or in the wrong, but madness in a wise or good Man? Indeed, an Emphasis some∣times answers to a rise and fall in Musick, and carries a kind of Charm on mens Passions, but a continu'd Baulling can have no Original or Sourse from Wisdom. Men are like Violins; if you strike the Note right in one, the other immediately answers you, and the Affections and Pas∣sions move together with the Musick; but
if you lay too much Emphasis on your Words, and more than the Affection will bear, what do you do but viciate your De∣livery to a Cant? A Man may have a zeal without knowledge, as well in Wisdom as Religion. By the same reason also, it is not good to be short or abrupt in our Speeches, as Lo∣quacity is, like a noysom Fistula in the mind; So short Speeches are like Stabs, and seem by their fierceness and quickness too near a kin to fire: Besides, as by a long Famili∣arity and deadness of Speech, we level our selves too much to Censure, by abating too far the edge of Men's Respects; so by a Speech too abrupt and short, we let men answer us before they duly weigh the de∣ference and esteem they owe to us, and the Truths we deliver. Above all therefore, we ought to keep a Mean in our Discourse, neither to let Fancy run us a-drift from one Subject to another where ever she pleases, nor to let our De∣livery run a gallop, too swift for the care of our Thoughts (like School-Boys that long to be at the end of their Lesson;) but ra∣ther, as we ought to avoid a Poynancy, so we ought to regulate our Fancy by Discre∣tion, and our Celerity by a due presence of Mind: Nay, is our Discourse like to be
long? 'Tis a pretty skill in Speech to re∣fresh our Hearers by Pauses. Such little Rests revive Mens apprehensions; and not only give leisure for their Refreshments, but pre-occupy a season for their Concep∣tions also. So 'tis of excellent use in our Discourses, to condescend to the Customs and Capacities of our Hearers; the Vulgar admire their own Phrases, and applaud no truth so much as what is in their own Dialect; just as when we talk to Children, to please them, we lispe, and bring down our Voices in imitation of theirs, to persuade them we are rather going gently to lead them, than violently to force them on with the harsh and manly Voice of Authority; and yet a Voice loud, clear, and distinct, is of excel∣lent use, where we talk to men of Courage and Judgment. As for our Method in this matter, I think our old way of Rhetorick is well e∣nough: Thus, first, to begin and enquire demonstratively An sit, and when we are fully satisfied of the reality and considera∣bleness of our Subject, and have satisfied our Hearers withall, then we should pro∣ceed to deliberate, Quo modo sit, an bonum fa∣cile aut necessarium; and if bonum, an jucun∣dum utile aut honestum; and after we have
done this regularly and perfectly, we may boldly speak our judicially, and cry, Sic sit. Of Persuasion. I shall now proceed to Persuasion, in which case as 'tis most successful and safe to sayle with the Tide, so 'tis a singular Art in Persuasion, where we find our Audi∣tors Affections engag'd against us in what we are about to speak, first to plead for a candid Audience, and to stay the entring on our Subject, till we have moved a convenient stream of Affection in them, to carry and entertain our Discourse: For why should we labour in vain? And indeed, who but one besides himself, is so hardy as to engage, when he hath both the Wind of Passion, and the Tide of Inclination to oppose him? In truth, one may say the Passions are the only Orators, which always persuade, they are a kind of Art of Nature, whose Rules are infallible, and which once mov'd, are strong both in Hearer and Speaker; the veriest fool mov'd to a true pitch of Passion, persuades more than the great∣est Orator without; so that, could men at all times command such accidental Advan∣tages of their Passions, they would never be without them; but the matter is, we
are fearful to do those things in Temper, that in Passion we make light of. But to proceed a little more particular∣ly: to persuade to a thing unknown, first insinuate your self by things known, and and yet doubtful, and then without Hy∣perboles, relating what you would have be∣liev'd, urge it with a meet confidence; and yet, taking care as you do it, first to shew a due caution, That you be not taken for a Babler; secondly, to shew your grounds for your 'diffidence, that you be not judg'd as credulous; and lastly, to fix all, yet with so meet a confidence, that you be not taken for a Dissembler. And besides this to persuade, we ought to skill how to lay hold of mens particu∣lar Passions, and so to know to which they are most obnoxious: Thus the Miser was cured of his Lethargy, by being made jealous and watchful of his Gold; and thus the Mile∣sian Virgins were cur'd of the Humour of hang∣ing themselves, by dragging the dead Bodies of the like offenders through the streets; and thus Selenicus took away Womens gorge∣ous Apparel, by an order, that no one should be allow'd to be a Whore, but she that was so and so dress'd, and had such and such Atten∣dance.
But, if you would persuade one that is obstinate, and that neither Sense nor Argu∣ments can immediately prevail on, streight turn your Reasoning, and seem to fol∣low and admire his Methods, and then by pursuing them on as his friend, run him as at unawares on absur'd conse∣quences, and so fright him by those Rea∣sonings in you, that in himself he will not admit to be examin'd. Thus the Mobile in a certain Common Wealth, being enraged once at the Senate, yet voluntarily put themselves into the hands of a Friend, to be judged by them; and he thereon advising the Mobile first to choose a new Senate for fear of mischief, before they proceeded to the cutting off of the old one, streight thereby he begun to shew them the consequence of Upstarts; so that they immediately agreed, to conti∣nue their old Senate on again. And yet, as when we have not mens Passions of our sides, we must thus by Preambles, Apologies, Preparatories, Mol∣lifiers, and other Topicks of Argument, endeavour to root out the old Biass of mens Prejudice, and to implant a new and truer Idea in their stead; so on the other side, when we have mens Inclinations on our sides, we may avoid this prolixity, and
begin freely, triumphantly, and openly, or else, till we have engag'd a party of thought and Passion of our side, we are imprudent to launch too freely into the Ocean of Dis∣course. And yet even in all Cases, we ought to know, how to limit our persuasions too: Thus I would not seem too fond, lest I make men believe the interest I persuade them to, is more mine than theirs, as ap∣pears by my concern; and yet I would neither want Fancy nor Vigour enough to express a thing fully, nor to illustrate what is more rare and singular to the life; but yet then, no more than is fit; for why should I seem either so interested or poeti∣cal, as to deaden the Edge of my persuasi∣on. Nay, and tho abruptness generally be a Vice, yet sometimes little hints are of excellent use in Persuasions; it sets men to beat out our Notions in themselves, and they are ever more fond of Bratts of their own Brain than others: Besides, that setting men so upon such a Scrutiny, makes them engage in a Party for us, and nothing obliges men more than to let them seem to be their own contrivers. So further, 'tis good to know the force of every Argument and Figure: Thus
for instance, a Repetition or Recommen∣dation by Figures and Allegories, can com∣mand the Affections, and charm the Passi∣ons; but only Reason without Art, and with Sincerity and Truth, are able to move a durable and steady Resentment and Cou∣rage: Indeed, Figures are but for Orna∣ment, and he mistakes their very end, that makes them Substance, or that disguises his Discourse by using them too far. Or∣naments are to recommend and beautify, and not to blind or deform, if we have not skill enough to apply our Ornaments therefore, we had better neglect them al∣together. But above all Ornaments and Figures in Speech, there are none so useful as Para∣bles, Fables, Metaphors, and Allegories; when Reasoning will do no good, when the mind is quite blind and deaf with Pre∣judices, Allegories and Parables can revive it, and by Paralels confirm it. Thus Na∣than convinc'd David's sin in Ʋriah, and humbled him, and brought him to Repentance, by the Parable of the poor man's Lamb, when the bare sense of the Action alone could never do it. But indeed after all, as I have said, no Rhetorick is like Honesty, and no Speech like Reason; if we have Truth on our side,
that's all, and enough, if we take but care to illustrate that sufficiently; only this we ought to remember in prudence, to let our last Words be most forcible, as they are most likely to be of the most lasting Im∣pression: And indeed, to leave truth and follow Colours too much, is like Aesop's Dog, by catching at the Shadow to loose the Substance. I will not rely therefore on Fancies or Figures of Speech; but if I use them, it shall be as by the by; but my main Weap∣on shall be clear sense and reason; if men have either any judgment or truth, my very Sincerity shall force their Attentions; and while Flowers only dally to delight the mind; by a lively apposite Expression with Notion, I'le even strike to the Quick. So 'tis an Error in Persuasion also, to multiply Reasons, and aim at Conquest by Numbers; the best arguing is from few Topicks and from general Heads, the re∣treat of the Discourse the easier, and the Management the better; nay, and the Memory and Passions of the Hearers are the more easily captivated by it, whilst as for Figures they may be us'd but seldom: 'tis better to be regarded for Matter than Form, Reason than Words, and yet it is
not convenient neither to let our sense want a suitable Dress. Parts of Discourse. But as it is the misfortune of a great ma∣ny persons to make a good Cause ridicu∣lous by their ill Proceeding, so 'tis good to know also, what order is decent in an Oration; and if it be written, to mark it as it proceeds, for the greater clearness with your Topicks in the Margent: Nay, and not only so, but to be sure not to neglect the Cogent Topicks of Recommendation, as praising your Judges, or at least assuring your self, that they have so much Honour, that they would not hear you, if they were not resolv'd withall to give you an impar∣tial Sentence. And thus in an orderly Discourse, I may say, there ought to be five parts: First, A Preface pertinent and short, to open your design, and to prepare the minds of the Hearers. Secondly, The Narrative true, & well circumstantiated to instruct them. Thirdly, A Confirmation, and that solid, to convince them. Fourthly, A Refuta∣tion nervous and strong, to refute all Co∣lours for them. And Fifthly and lastly, A Conclusion pathetick, and forcive to move them.
But if we extend our Discourse beyond an Oration, that is, if we write a Book, then a more perfect Method ought to take place, and we ought to proceed by the ex∣actest Rules of a compleat Genesis; our very method ought to be so conspicuous as to supply the part of an Index; and every Clause, Sentence, Chapter, and part of our Discourse, whether greater or less, ought to be fram'd so naturally, as to fall into a beautiful Body, and joint its self, so as to be able even actually and orderly to force the Readers Conviction. And when I consider this, I cannot but reflect, that had men either any Reverence for themselves or others, were they cauti∣ous of their own Reputation or others Trouble, they would not thrust out their shapeless Cubbs upon the World as they do, but would lick them into some order before they did it; when alass! were some Discourses but dissolv'd to their first Prin∣ciples by Analysis, what would they con∣tain too often? scarce a Chapter, nay, or a Sentence to the purpose, that the Authors seem to be blind, or they could never pub∣lish what they do. What you enter their Book, their Title speaks you fair, and makes you fancy they'll perform as well as promise; but
when you come to peruse their Substance and Solidity, you find your self fool'd and ne're the wiser for the Subject; and our Author who has a world of Humour and Fancy, when may be not three grains of Digestion, gives you a broad-side of Mag∣gots; and if he confounds and mazes your Reason by them as bad as his own, he is satisfied and is wise in his own Conceit, because he is a fool in Company. I shall add no more, but that our Fable and Emblem Writers deserve no better Censure: 'Tis true, an Example or Me∣taphor occasionally in Precepts, is of excel∣lent use; but 'tis an Elaborate way of mak∣ing Learning intricate and confus'd, to turn her in pursuit of such laborious and disor∣derly Excursions and Trifles, as far from the clear sight of Knowledge, as a Cloud, or a Maze, or a Veil.
Of Invention, I proceed to Invention in Rhetorick: Now to help that; our best Method is, to have recourse to General Topicks; Examples whereof I shall give you as follows. Topicks Intrinsick. 1. Definition. 2. Destribution into parts. 3. Etymology. 4. Conjugates. 5. Kind, Genus species. 6. Form. 7. Similitude. 8. Dissimilitude. 9. Contraries. 10. Adjuncts. 11. Antecedents. 12. Consequences. 13. Repugnances. 14. Causes Efficient Material Formal Final Instru∣mental 15. Effects. 16. Comparison. 17. Possibility. 18. Bonum Hone∣stum. Ʋtile. Jucun∣dum.
Topicks Extrinsick. 1. Prejudication. 2. Report. 3. Laws. 4. Oaths. 5. Torture. 6. Witnesses. 7. Scripture. 8. Learned Men. 9. Circum∣stance. Time. Place. and Person Predicamentals, as 10. Substance and Person. 11. Quantity, and Demonstration. 12. Quality ordina∣ry, or not. 13. Relation. 14. Action. 15. Passion. 16. Place. 17. Time. 18. Scituation. 19. Habit.
Of Figures. Figures of Rhetorick are either in Words or Sentences; the Usual are as fol∣lows; Figures of Words. Metaphor, as Vir gregis. Irony, as O bon vir. Epizeuxis, as Vicimus, Vicimus. Anaphoras, as Nobis voluptati, nobis solatio. Epistrophe, as Ibimus, pugnbimus, triumphabimus. Epanalepsis, as multa promittis, presta∣re teneberis multa. Climax, hoc animum, animus virtutem addit. Epanados, Non vivo ut edam, sed edo ut vivam. Polyptoton, as qui memorat, quod ille meminit. Conversion. Complexion. Conduplication. Disjunction. Equality of Cadence Numbers. Adjunction. Gradation. Paranomasia. Repetition. Synonime. Syncohdoche.
Figures of Sentences are, Augmentation, He Beat him, he Murder'd him, he Crucifi'd him. Apostrophe, as audite O cali, vos eritis mihi testes. Concession, as sit humilis ortu, at est probus. Correction, tacebo? Imo loquar. Diminution, He Beat him, he Fillup'd him, he Touch'd him. Exclamation, as O Tempora, O Mores! Interrogation, Sicoine fieri opportet? Preoccupation, dicat aliquis, sed re∣gero. Prosopopeia, as Egone Sol luceo, ut vos dormientes altum stertetis? Reticence, as plus possum dicere, sed de his tacebo. Allegory. Antithesis. Communication. Deprecation. Distribution. Dubitation. Ethopeia. Expolition. Hypotiposis. Imprecation. Interpretation. Irony. Licence. Preterrition. Sermocination. Subjection. Sustentation. Transition.
Thus, you see, I have given you here a Catalogue of the more Eminent Figures of both sorts; but I have not given Exam∣ples but of some few that I thought more Useful: indeed, whoever peruses Alsted's Enciclopaidion, will see such a multitude of Figures, that they are not only almost without number, but that there is not a Quirk in Speech scarce, but what that by one Author or other, is reduced to some Fi∣gure: So that indeed this Exuberancy now seems to require some Limitation. Lastly, For the use of such Figures, I shall only say this, one would Read them sometimes cursorly, as so many several Patterns to form one Speech, and as so ma∣ny Moulds to be committed to our Me∣mories in Reading, to shape our Utterance and Delivery by; but to think otherwise, to force our Thoughts just to such a pre∣cise Form, or Cut, is to make them more unacceptable in being unnatural, then all the Ornaments of Art can add to them.
Of JƲDGMENT. WHatever intuitive Knowledge, or Divine Ideal Truth Adam had, his Posterity are forc'd to Plow the Soul for Wisdom, as well as the Earth for Fruits. We must track Truth step by step, and weigh as well Ideas as Propositions to at∣tain her: He that takes Truth by the Gross, or Jumps into her without a due Comparison of things, at least knows not in Judgment, whether he is right or wrong. The true Judgment is Mathematical, Rea∣son's the Scale, and Propositions are the things weigh'd, while Judgment, like Justice, favours the heavier Scale. Where there is most Consideration, therefore there are likely to be most Propo∣sitions, and consequently the more assur'd Decision of Judgment; while to Judge with∣out Propositions forethought, is like weigh∣ing with the Scales empty, and Shooting at the Mark Blindfold. As for the Errors of Judgment, they are either want of Consideration, or Irre∣solution: The inconsiderate Man leaves
all to happy Chance; while the Irresolute is like a ruffled Skein of Silk. In Truth, Judgment, like an Army, ought to March slow, with full Trains of Imaginations, and not a Concatenation of Thought ought to be unconsulted for fear of the Ambushes of Error. To conclude, were Poets as happy in hold∣ing the Scale, as in their sprightly and vigo∣rous Sallies of Fancy, Poets assuredly would have the best Judgments, and according∣ly make the best Philosophers: but our ex∣perience shews us the contrary, and where they fail.
Of HAPPINESS. FOr all the difference of Estate and Quality among Men, there is not∣withstanding such a common allay of good and evil, that all, in the main, are equally happy. Felicity, alass! is in Content and Opini∣on, not the things we Possess. Thus 'tis what I Love, and not what another Con∣ceits, that makes me happy. And thus, indeed, what but our Pride makes us Miserable, and restlesly Ambiti∣ous? Our great concern, in truth is, to shew, that a Man of Desert is unfortu∣nate. 'Tis not to be disputed, but the Bles∣sings of Health, Wealth and Friends are valuable; But are they comparable in the making of us happy, to Vertue and Con∣tent? The best of such Enjoyments are casual, momentary, and disgusted by Conscience and Passions; But can any thing rob us of Vertue? Pleasures enjoy'd with innocence in∣deed, are real; But can there be any
satisfaction with regret, to catch at the baits of Sin and Vice. Nay, were there no Hell, the Epicure should be moderate for his Gusts sake; so that we are doubly bruitish, to pall our Pa∣lates by Luxury. The Vertuous enjoy Pleasures truly, and can thank God for the Refreshment, while neither Satiety nor Passion annoys them. Besides, a vertuous Soul, I may say, is as a Rock against the Waves and Storms of the World, while she looks down with pity on Giddy and Mudling Mankind be∣low. I want to Coach and Dainties; And what then? Are not Walking and Tem∣perance wholsomer? But Oh, I love Fine Cloaths; And what am I not asham'd to be so like a Peacock? Prithee Friend tell me; Can thy Gold or Purple keep out Diseases? Or thy Guards, Garrison'd in Iron, repel bold fears and despair? Virtue, indeed, as she is indifferent a∣gainst such Trifles, so is she hardned to evil; Vertue turns all Misfortunes to Martyrdom. What though mine Enemy Rage? Can he move a foot beyond Providence?
Does he intend to kill me? And can't I rejoyce to be so soon with God? Does he torment me? And have I not God and a brighter Crown of Martyrdom to support me? Nay, or can my despon∣dency relieve me? I will allow a Man Groans to relieve his Spirit, and an honest Submission to ap∣pease his Enemy; But shall I surrender my sincerity to him, and give him oppor∣tunity to destroy both Soul and Body too? But, alass! thou art Griev'd to Dye so soon; And what art thou afraid to be with God? The Apostle could desire to be dis∣solved: And, Art thou, on the contrary, so unwilling, as to repine at the call of his Providence? Surely, faithfully to love God, and ob∣serve his Laws, therefore as they are the great end of Man, so are they his greatest and best Methods to happiness also; and in which case, the quicker & sharper our pas∣sage in prospect, the more desirable; with∣out we think there is no God, or future State, to reward us in what we do and suffer.
Of PRESENCE of MIND. WHat good will all the Precepts in the World do whilst a Man wants his Presence of Mind, the necessary clue to lead him through them. Surely our Senses ought always to keep due Centinel, and our Understandings as readily to attend their summons: Can he Fence well that is not on his Guard? Ar∣chimedes died for being too busy to give an Answer. Carelessness and Disattention there∣fore undoubtedly are the Daughters of Folly: Certainly the Judgment ought to be in readiness for every new Object that approaches. I may add, What is Madness but such a Debauch of Thought, to a greater degree, and when an Idle Soliloquy disjoynts the whole Reasoning of the Man? We ought therefore to avoid all such Violence of thought, as Poyson; at least the Plow of Thought, Clogs and Cuts but heavily, that's never sharpned by rest.
Nay, even for the very unseemliness one would avoid such flurts in Reason∣ing; for surely 'tis as disagreeable to o∣thers, as pernicious to our selves. And yet after all, certainly there are Diseases in the Mind, as well as the Body; and after our best endeavours, our Sense will slacken, and our Styles vary, do what we can: What! Are we not Men?
Of SECRETS. THe Mind, like the Body, exposes its self, by appearing naked; it disco∣vers its weaker parts, and lies more liable to Injuries; undoubtedly therefore Secrets ought to be embrac'd as Armour, and ad∣mir'd as Soveraign Prudence; but yet then, we ought to remember also, that we cannot be too wary in them; our Looks of∣ten speak as well as our Tongues, and we must be careful our Nakedness appear not through the little Vail of its Cloaths. So, though Secrecy and Silence thus be undoubtedly Vertues; Dissimulation, whe∣ther in Words or Actions, is the furthest from it imaginable: Dissimulation is an act with an intent to deceive, a down∣right Lye; Dissimulation is the weak art of those, who have not judgment enough to manage a concealment. As for the difference between Simula∣tion and Dissimulation, it appears in the Old Latine Verse, Quod non est simulo, dis∣simuloque quod est; their Benefits are these,
First, They lay Opposition asleep. Secondly, They leave a room for Retreat. Thirdly, By their Lying, they draw out Secrets. Their Mischiefs are; First, They spoil business through Fear∣fulness. Secondly, They barr the Assistance of others. And, Lastly, They take away all trust and belief, while, as for secrecy, it has all the Prudence, and none of the Vice of ei∣ther of them. But to return; if we would keep a Se∣cret, we are bound, in pain of Indiscreti∣on, to discern who we trust with it; indeed, How can we hope another should keep our Secrets, if we cannot keep them our selves; So we ought also to stand in Guard, even of our Servants, and not to make others jealous of us, by being too busy; on the
one side Cardinal Richleiu took care wise∣ly to turn away that Man that he found looking into his Letters; and, on the other side, How can we expect that others should not enquire after, and guess at our concerns, when we seem to busy in our jealous inquisitiveness at theirs? But, besides this General prudence of Secrecy; Secrecy is a Sacred Obligation, even in Discourse also: thus, when Two Discourse, they render each other mutual Depositors or Thoughts, and which they trust one another withal; so that, let it be that we require Secrecy, or not, in such a Case, our Discourse is always as a Pawn, which ought never to be dispos'd of but according to the intentions of him that trusted it. And yet the Rule of Secrets seems to be this also; though what I am told, I am bound to keep as a Secret; yet if I knew it before, that cannot make that a Secret to me, that was none before; though with regard to the Relator, that I make not him the Au∣thor, it is, and yet not, I fear, but that this Liberty has been often abus'd; and many that have not known a Secret before, yet have pretended they have, to salve their Reputations in breaking it.
But then, 'tis an undoubted Exception from all the Laws and Obligations of Se∣crecy, when any one acquaints us with a wicked or criminal design; for Friendship loses its Obligation in Wickedness, and there can be no tye between God and Be∣lial; a Man ought therefore to have wit and honesty enough to discern of what he speaks, before he requires Secrecy, or else 'tis at the peril of his Imprudence to be∣tray his own wicked Intentions. To be short, unless in case of these few Exceptions, when we enter into a Discourse with a Man, we begin a Friend∣ship with him, and which, at least, in∣cludes the Obligation, not to abuse his con∣fidence; now, though this Friendship con∣tinue but for a Minute, or for an hour, year, or years, under greater or lesser Trusts, yet the Obligation to Secrecy is still the same, and all one, whether in an hourly, or a perpetual Friendship. In truth, a good Christian is not on∣ly no Man's Enemy; but in this, he loves all Mankind equally; that he shews more kindness to one than another, is from the Providence of his Association, his out∣ward Compact, or Friendship; but this general tye of Humanity to Secrecy, is, what nothing can dispense with in us.
To attain Secrets. As for the particular Methods to obtain Secrets, there are several: Thus some have gotten them by frightning with a contrary dangerous design; and thus the Priest that would know whether such a man frequent∣ed the Church or not, got it out of him by accusing him of a Contempt of the Service. So have you employ'd Informers to find out Secrets; and would you know whether they deceive you or not? employ such as can have no manner of Acquaintance with each other, and then in what they all agree, you may be assur'd, they are in the right. Some have attain'd a Secret by pretend∣ing, they knew in part of it already; and thus men to save their own Bacon, jealous of others treachery, have been the first In∣formers themselves. Some, when they have not been able to attain the Secret desired, have fish'd for some other, and by that tempted the per∣sons Friends, as by Tokens to reveal the other: And thus the Grand Seignior, by asking a Prisoner when he lay with his Wife last? by that as with a Token, drew the Confession of the Prisoners Guilt from his Wife.
Nor is that other Method less certain of obtaining a Secret by a Secret, for men when they think they have possession of o∣thers Secrets, presume that they have so much advantage of them, that they may safely trust them with their own: And thus by Dissimulation and Trifles, sometimes the weightiest Matters have been discovered. Sober men you may fathom by obsti∣nate and reproachful Controversies; by which means their very Passions will open them, and as for their Tempers you may know them by what they were at School; but as for Drunkards the only way to fa∣thom their Speeches, is to examine them by their other Frolicks, whether they have not been for a constancy foul-mouth'd or Lying, &c. So, to know whether a suspected per∣son be guilty or not; do but charge him with things false and true at the same time, and you shall see it quickly by the different manner of his Vindication; for as sound sleep, a compos'd mind, & careless behaviour, are great presumptions of Innocence; so you will easily discover him as not concern'd at the fictitious Forgery. A King of France being willing to de∣stroy a Treacherous Noble that was in company with him among others, if he
could get the consent of the rest, put forth the Nobles Treachery in a Parable like Da∣vid's Lamb; whereupon understanding all their Resolutions, he made the Applicati∣on of it as it were by all their consents up∣on the Lord that offended him. And now I have wrote thus much about the Discovery of Secrets, I shall add a little also about the management of them, and occult Writing, and conclude. Occult Writing. If to be Secret be lawful, which indeed the strictest Morallist and Religious can∣not deny; for, in truth, Secrecy is one of the considerablest Branches of Wisdom, and we are taught to be subtle as Serpents, as well as harmless as Doves: If Secrecy I say therefore, be not only lawful, but a Ver∣tue, besure unsearchable ways of Writing must be of excellent advantage, since by such occult Writing, we can communicate Secrets to whom we please, and conceal them from every body else. Now to enumerate the several Methods of secreting our Sense in Writing, were a work as frivolous as endless: I take it therefore for granted, that if I describe some of the best Methods, and leave them to be
improv'd, alter'd and chang'd by every man's own invention, 'twill be far better than to tire him with all particulars; for when once the Mystery of an Art is unra∣vell'd, there is no difficulty to copy it a Thousand ways by our own Invention. Some make a new Alphabet, and alter only the Characters of the Letters, as sup∣pose I wrote English with Arabick Letters, not understood in this Country; others al∣ter only the signification of Letters, and use the common Characters, as suppose I should all along write a for b. b for c. c for d, &c. Thus for Example, were I to write the word (and) it must be by z mc. for z goes for a. m for n. and c. for d. being all the im∣mediate Letters before them, and conse∣quently ought to take their places as so; but this method is easily discover'd by the Vowels and short Words; and yet it may be blinded too, by inserting insignificant Letters, and multiplying the Characters of the Vowels. Some will invent a peculiar Cant like Jipseys, which is indeed like making a new Language; others will cover their designs in a dark Metaphor; as suppose I treated of a Common Wealth of Bees to reflect on Government, or cited some anitent Histo∣rical
Passage to represent the present Scene of Affairs, and the correspondence between them: And this is the method us'd by the Prophets in Scripture. Some will write with common Letters, and in common English, but alter the plac∣ing of the Letters; thus suppose I wrote Moses said, I write the Odd Letters in the first word, and the even Letters in the second; and so it will be Mssad Oesi; and so I go on with every two words till I end what I write. Others dispose every 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, or 12. successive Letters, according to a Table of Chimes for Bells, and then di∣vide them into words at their pleasure; and after all to make it the more intricate, you may dispose the words in Sentences by the Rule of such Chimes, as you did before the Letters in the words; so that without you Key, the Table of Chimes, 'tis impos∣sible to read what you write, since at this rate by double Chimes you may vary your Letters a Thousand, nay, I may say, Ten thousand ways, if you please. But all or most of these ways are imper∣fect; for as they cannot but infallibly breed a jealousy and suspition, so many times they are as mischievous and dangerous, as if they were reveal'd: And therefore those
methods of Secret Writing are most bene∣ficial, that cast a Blind before Mens Eyes, and by giving them a fair and seeming Sense to read, take away all Imagination of their being a Secret couch'd under it. Thus some will write you a common and civil Letter, but do it by the Key of an Alphabet of Synonemas for every word; so that when you examine it by your Key, every word in the Epistle shall give a Se∣cret Letter, which being collected in or∣der, shall give you a secret Sentence; but if you read it in the ordinary and currant sense, you see a plain familiar Letter, with∣out either doubt or difficulty in it. a g n t b h o u c i p w d k q x e l r y f m s z
Some again will write by Muscial Notes, and so make love by a Song; thus the words shall be what you please, but the Notes shall carry the Secret: For in this case the six Spaces or Lines shall signify the Letter you desire to write, according to your pleasure; and the Notes of time which shall distinguish them, being Four, make just 24. the Alphabet, being multi∣plied by 6. the Spaces, as above. Note, You may prick your Notes or put them on the Line or Space at your plea∣sure. Others, will make the first word in the first line; the 2d. in the 2d. & the 3d. in the 3d. &c. to contain the Secret, while the other words in the several lines are ingeniously contriv'd, with the significative words, to make a good and common sense for the dis∣guise sake. Others will cut Papers in Figures, and then all that is not wrote within the com∣pass of such Figures, is superfluous; others will write what they would have read with Black Ink, and reserve the Secret to be written in a by-place or corner of the Let∣ter,
with a white Ink, &c. others again will refer through Numbers to the Letters, or Words in a known Page and Line of a particular Book, and so endite. But in short, the best and least suspiti∣ous way, is to reduce your Secret to one or two words, and then having several Keys to write it by, to intimate to your Friend by what Key you write, by the manner of Writing your Name: And thus you may make a few such Letters blacker or big∣ger than ordinary in several lines, or make seeming accidental Blotts, and so discover your Sense.
Of COLLECTIONS. SUrely, it can avail us nothing to quote Authors in Catalogues, and to raise large Folio's with Recitals. What is Wis∣dom, if too long for use and recollection? or what are Precepts good for, when scatter'd in Libraries? Good Precepts 'tis true, are like Rocks and Anchors to the instability of our Thoughts. The perfection of Vertue in∣deed, consists in the Uprightness of the Will; but what is the Will without an Under∣standing accordingly? Nay, what will the most excellent Un∣derstanding avail us, without agreeable Precepts, and those ready and at hand? The best of us dose, dote, and slumber at times; and among huge and numerous Volumes, where shall we find what we want, unless in the Meridian of our Reason we store up Precepts for Old Age? Alass! we have seen the force of an Extempore strain, in its imperfect Essays towards it, often enough; we see how far the Waves of proud Fancy can reach; nay, we are not ignorant even of what Enciclo∣paidians can do.
But what! Can a little whifling Trea∣tise command Respect? Surely, a Body of Philosophy and an Army of Thoughts much more; nay, what is even a Library, but an undigested Rubbish, to pure and select Precepts? Has man leisure to peruse or pursue eve∣ry current of Thought nicely? Surely, he cannot even survey all the Books that are, and are not the Extracts and Spirits of Thoughts then, far more eligible than your flat and endless Corollarys. No doubt, a general Body, if so prepar'd, were of admirable use, the Universal View would clear our Prospect, and lead and direct our Notions and Actions; nay, and Error and Vice would appear through their dissonancy to the whole Body of Knowledge. To conclude, Reasoning like figur'd Silks and Cloaths, is only truly to be judged of in the whole piece, while the composition of our Precepts, like a Garison, should be for strength, and use only, each place defend∣ing its self, and defended by another.
Of PRECEPTS. THere are several methods to Vertue; but surely Precepts excell all. Can an Harrangue make you good; and why not the Precept in short? Examples are lively 'tis true, but time alass! will allay all their Emulation; while as for the close Reasonings of Precepts, can they ever fade? The Man's a false Proselyte that does not love Vertue for Vertues sake; and are long Examples then comparable to brief and wholsom Precepts? What avails it, as I have said, to have Volumes of Cautions one knows not where to find? By Precepts I will store up Wis∣dom against Age; nay, I will fortify my Vertue by Reasons impregnable, the Quin∣tessence of Wisdom. Our first▪ Thoughts are too crude for Wisdom; Nature does not give Vertue: And 'tis a kind of an Art to become good. Nay, without Precepts our Wisdom is bruitish, and our Vertue, Constitution and Inclination, not judgment. While petty Vertues sink in their Trials, Precepts will level every wrinkle that di∣sturbs
the Tranquility of the mind. Pure Precepts will smell sweet, when the little Gusto's of Fancy shall fade. I know the World love to hide their Vices under the broken Fragments of Morality; but are not wilful Ignorance and Disobedience equal, as well in Morals as Divinity? Besides, Can any thing excel good Pre∣cepts? or is any thing more desirable? Nay, is not Wisdom the Unchangable Good of God himself? True Precepts will compose thy Spirits beyond Musick, and lull thy Passions asleep. True Precepts are a perfect Antidote to Vice, if thou but use them duly. The true Philosophy is clear and self-evi∣dent; it leaves neither Difficulties nor Scruples, but chears the Mind, enlightens the Understanding, and confirms the Cou∣rage, where e're it comes. Some admire Precepts; but why? they want Variety and Change. Alass! they want but diverting Strains: True Pre∣cepts are one, and eternal. Can true Vertue be ever out of fashion? Surely then, 'tis a defect in God, that he is not vicious for Variety; if not, I will not be giddy in my Precepts, lest I become giddy in my Morals also.
In truth, Is Vertue such a Trifle as to be sacrificed to Novelty and Curiosity? or am I so wretched as to think so of her? No: let her be as unchangable in my Breast, as she is pure and chaste in her self. Neither Reading nor Meditating, neither Study nor Discourse, neither Passion nor Zeal, therefore shall give me that advan∣tage, that I will not secure by Precepts; but then to perfect, not to change my Ver∣tue. To conclude, I may add, 'Tis even ridi∣culous to see what slight Passions can dis∣compose us, when Reason does not Rule. Surely therefore, good Precepts are as Ar∣mour, and the only way through which to attain the Perfection of our Nature.
Of SINCERITY. I Am sorry, I may say too often, our heart by habit is apt to cheat our Reasons, while our Sincerities become but as a more curious Art, to draw a Religious Respect to what we say. The true Sincerity is good without a witness, and can love unfashionable Ver∣tue? The true Sincerity never fails: Is it frail? yet at least it keeps in the Track of Vertue. A pure Integrity has no Reserve; she dreads not the Scrutiny of the best of men; she will not do evil even that good may come: her Loyalty for Goodness can serve her without either Livery or Dower. Wilt thou be good therefore? let no Temptation impurify thy Will: or if thou wouldst be wise, let not the least Error blemish thy Judgment. Is a Castle ever easier maintain'd, than when without Breaches and Disunion! Alass! the exactly Sincere is so be∣tween God and himself only: the World has but the Colour of Integrity; The true Sincerity would not be hired from the Paths of Vertue.
How earnestly do some men seek Ex∣cuses to be corrupt? But can we say, that man is good, that does not wish and en∣deavour to be better? Surely, God and Vertue elect by our Wills, and not by our Powers or Actions. Pure Vertue is even in the bottom of the heart: Christ says, He that lusts after ano∣thers Wife commits Adultery with her. In∣deed, why should I tantalize my self so with Lusts, did I not love the Tempta∣tion? When I reflect on the integrity of Sene∣ca and Marcus Antoninus, and other Hea∣thens, methinks I am asham'd to hear cor∣rupter Christians say, That such Divine Men are damn'd. Are we the better for knowing or be∣lieving only? and, Why not the Devils also, who tremble with it? Are we rich in grace? alass! we forget that God ac∣cepted the Widows Mite. To be short, the true sincerity will even in this life benefit us; it leads us to Truth, and it gives us credit; nay more, 'twill add us respect also. 'Twas Christ's sincerity that made him speak as with Authority. Nay our sincerity will benefit us, tho in a mistake: Thus what but Integrity could
bring St. Paul from the greatest Persecutor, to be the greatest Apostle. Surely, both Piety and Vertue lye only in sincerity; if Action without Intention were valuable, we should even make Bruits vertuous also. And if any thing be Vertue, or there be any Vertue, 'tis mixed with sin∣cerity; for Sincerity is really the great and only Touchstone both of Religion and Mo∣rality.
Of VOWS and OATHS. ALl Vows, of that which is unlawful, are void; Nor availes it in such case, whether the thing Vow'd be a great∣er or lesser evil, since nothing can oblige a Man to what is really evil: 'tis as unlaw∣ful to tell a Lye to fulfil an Oath, as it is to Murder a Man: And as it is impossi∣ble that God should love to have ill done, so it is impossible that he should engage us to it, purely because we have Vow'd or Promis'd it. I may add, the Nature of Good and E∣vil, still remains, notwithstanding the in∣fluence of any Vow, Oath, or Promise whatsoever, and is in the eye of God and Reason only Obligatory; and therefore ac∣cording to Scripture, and the best Casuists, it is, that it happens, that the Vows of a Servant, or Wife, may be good in part, or void in part, as consistent with their Prior Duty; and so also where there are two Oaths, the Prior ought only to take place. And, in this Case, that the Superstitious Notions of Vows and Oaths have been wrong, ought not therefore to make us to follow them: 'tis true, in the Reformati∣on, we ought to preserve Piety, and not to
contemn what is really Sacred; and yet we ought to examine matters so sincerely also, as not to leave our selves partial, blind, or confus'd in the Search. What shall not a Man pay his Debts, because he has Vow'd he will not? And must a Man Starve, or Murther himself, because he has Sworn it? This were for him to set up a New Law in opposition to God's Sacred Law of Nature; and, by Artifice, to subvert the most holy Will of God: And thus I may add also, Humani∣ty and Charity are as great Debts even as a Bond; and therefore if I Vow not to pull off mine Hat to another, that is e∣ven void also. Upon this therefore, I conclude, that no Vow can change our state, or bind our li∣berty; to confine our selves against a pro∣spect of Good, is an ill; and it is the only power of a Vow to bind us to a known Duty, from a known Evil, or in a thing indifferent; nay, if any thing be indiffe∣rent, if the confinement fret us to the injury of Body or Mind, from that in∣stant it becomes ill, and ceases to obliege us as not indifferent also. And thus a Vow may engage me to the greatest self-denial, so as consistent with my duty, but not to the least evil,
though even but of imprudence: A Vow to fling away my Wealth into the Sea, is void; but I may well Vow all I gain to the Poor, and yet even then I must re∣serve me Maintenance, and bestow it with Discretion. So I may bind my self from Wine and Flesh; but if so, their want impairs my health, I must use them: And so I may bind my self from going into the Coun∣try, till my Health, or a better service from God and my Country require it; but I may never thereby obstruct the ad∣vancement of any greater Good or Ta∣lent: And so, though I Vow to go to Rome, if I cannot propose some good by my Journey, the imprudence of it makes it void, in idly neglecting my Business; and so also, though it were but to go half a Mile, the evil is the same. So also to serve a Man's Country in the best imploy he is capable of, is every Man's Fundamental Duty; and to neglect it, is to bury our Talents: For any Man there∣fore to Vow such a Vow, as engages him from his best capacity of Serving his Coun∣try, as to lead a Monks Life, &c. is of it self unlawful, and, ipso facto void, as it for∣bids an apparent Duty, and renders us lit∣tle better than Drones in the Common∣wealth we live in.
Nay, and such breaches of Oaths and Vows, in such case, like that of Corban, are no sin; that we need not fear not to keep them, they being of themselves void; the rash making of them indeed was a sin, but they have not the guilt of a black and wil∣ful Perjury, as the World too often mis∣takes, but rather a rasher resolution only in them. A False Witness is guilty of a wilful Contempt to God, and Injustice to Man: but, in this, we have nothing more to re∣pent of, then that we called God too light∣ly to Witness to a Resolution not well weigh'd and understood: And, if this were a sin, How could the Jews leave their Vows to the Law on Christ's Con∣verting them? Or how can the Hus∣band break his Marriage-bond, by Di∣vorce, as even Christ gives leave for Adul∣tery, and be guiltless? So, if I make a Vow, it does not bind mine Heir; Or if as an Officer, it does not bind me as a Private Person; So, Are you a Prince, and would you know how far Your Parliament-Oath engages? all the Power not transfer'd to You remains, the Law of Nature makes all States compleat in themselves, though by Compact it may be limitted.
So also, as 'tis impossible to think of all necessary Conditions, as Life and Capaci∣ty of the Parties, &c. so we must have an Implicite regard to such Conditions, in whatsoever Vows we make; and yet on the other hand, Christ Teaches us, That though I Swear but by my self, yet am I as much bound, as if I Swore by God; so though I Swear by false Gods, yet my Ob∣ligation to Verity and Sincerity is still the same. But to return; Though there may be many things that may thus make a Pro∣mise void, although confirm'd by an Oath, witness Adultery in Marriage, &c. yet Justice, in many Cases, will bind a Pro∣mise much stronger than a Vow, because of the Expectance and Dependance there∣on, and it's necessity in Commerce and Conversation; and yet little pety and de∣liberative Promises to ones self only, as, I'll go to London to Morrow; or, I'll buy such an Horse, have no Obligation at all, but leave the Speaker free to his discre∣tion. So also a Mutual Promise is not valid till accepted; and yet even so, I am bound steadily to my offer as a Proposer; but if Matters after change upon my Promise, and before acceptance, I am not then
bound, till you make my first Terms good: Thus if a Person be offer'd, and I accept to Marry, if she fail me, I am Re∣leas'd of my Promise; if not, I must stand to it: And thus God resolv'd to destroy Nineveh, when, on their Repentance, he Revok'd their Sentence. Further, I am bound by the Promise of my Ambassadour, Deputy, or General, to the utmost of their Commission, and that though against private Instructions; and yet if by their Commission I leave them the Power only to Treat for me, none but the Sponsers are engag'd beyond ex∣press Order; so I am bound, by my League, though even to an Heathen, so far, as to preserve him: But, as wicked Leagues are void, I may not fight for an Heathen to destroy Christians, for that is to add more sin to rash Swearing, like the Death of John the Baptist to Herod's Foolish Oath. So also, no Promise can engage me a∣gainst Self-preservation; 'tis not lawful for me to lay down my Life even to save my Friends; I owe my Life only to God; and yet I may joyn with my Friend even to Death in a good Cause; but then I must Martyr for the Cause of God, and not my Friend: So, though I Promise to go a Journey, yet I may not go if there
happen a Dangerous Tempest at the time to endanger my Person. But indeed, a Man has generally little need to add all these Cautious Limitations to Promises; we are too apt to promise according to our hopes, and perform ac∣cording to our fears, without these En∣couragements; but surely, in truth, all our Promises, whether confirm'd by Oath or not, ought to be equally Sacred: and though, in one Case, we are in danger of Perjury only; yet ought not that to be∣guile us into a conceipt that a Lye is of a weaker Guilt; and yet not but that tho' I may neither Equivocate, nor strain the Words, I promise, or declare, if they are propos'd me knowingly doubtful, I may justly take them so. Where ever therefore we have made Pro∣mises, and we have reason to Judge them faithful with whom they are made, we ought strictly to observe them; but when they are made with persons false, either by Practise or Principles, they are void, though confirm'd by Oath, as being con∣trary to the most Sacred Law of Self-pre∣servation; and yet, in such Case, I offend God, by Treachery, indeed Black Perjury, by offering to engage my self falsely where I cannot.
Thus, for Instance, 'tis impossible to make a League with a Papist, who cannot onely, by Principle, Swear what he in∣tends not, but disengage himself from Oaths by Equivocations, or otherwise, at pleasure; for, as Leagues and Promises are mutual in their Obligation, and are o∣therwise of no force; so is it impossible that there be Faith Oblig'd to, with such Men; and if there be any Method there∣fore to make Agreements with them, it must be by Securities and Hostages; wit∣ness the late Persecution in Savoy. So also, if a Man has been known to be false to his Promise by practice, or o∣therwise, no Mutual Obligation can tye us to Fidelity with him; and yet even then, if there be no danger of Life, but only of some Temporal Damage, and I make a Single, not Mutual promise, I am bound to Fidelity. So in a Mutual promise, if the false person has actually perform'd his part, without he give me a Release, and then I am Discharg'd, though on Oath.
Of CENSƲRE. THe better to deliver what I have to Write concerning Censure, I shall distribute my in Discourse into Four Parts; The First Part of my Essay, to shew the Nature of Praises; The Second, to shew us what Contempt is; The Third, to add a few Words concerning Libels and Satyrs; And, the Last, to add some Reflections on all manner of Rash Judgments and Re∣ports whatever: But First, as for Prai∣ses. Of Praise. We Censure others to be Commended our selves; and, in truth, it is rather to exalt our own Judgments, than the Me∣rits of those we Praise, that we enlarge in their Commendations; so that at the bot∣tom we Praise our selves, when we would seem to Praise them. In plain terms, one might almost conclude, That neither Vice is blam'd, nor Vertue commended, but out of Interest; and, that for Interest we can admit any Praise: and so also, the Modesty which seems to refuse Praise, is
indeed, nothing else but a desire to have it in a way less visible, and more delicate. Thus also we do not love to give Prai∣ses, nor do we bestow them but rarely, ex∣cept for Interest. Indeed, I may say, Praise is a conceal'd and delicate Flattery, that satisfies differently him that gives it, and him that receives it; the one takes it as a Recompence of his Merit, and the o∣ther gives it as a Mark of his Equity and Judgment; and yet Praises have at least this good, that they serve to fix us in the Practice of Virtue; and the Approbation that is given, to Wit, to Beauty, or to Cou∣rage, at least augment and perfect them, and make them do more than they were able to have done of themselves. But, besides this, some Men too often use poyson'd Praises, and which shew, by a side-glance, the Faults of those they Praise, and which they dare not to dis∣cover otherwise; thus they exalt the glory of some, thereby the better to lessen that of others; and give Men a little Com∣mendation, that they may be the better able to Accuse them also. And thus it happens sometimes, that there are Praises that Reproach, and Re∣proaches that Praise; and yet there are few people that are wise enough to love
the Reproof which does them good, bet∣ter than the praise which betrays them; and yet▪ they shall refuse praise too; but yet then 'tis as with a desire to be dou∣bly prais'd. Upon the whole, he that always prai∣ses me, is undoubtedly a Flatterer; but, he that sometimes praises, and some∣times reproves me, is probably my Friend, and speaks his Mind: And yet in such case, did we not flatter our selves, others would do us no hurt; but, when Men take shelter under the Arch-flatterer ones self, then it is that they injure us. And as Men are thus apt to be fond of praises, so are they no less inclin'd to be avers'd to contempt: In truth, I may say, nothing makes Men greater slaves than Mockery; yet not but that Flattery is more dangerous than Contempt, though less acceptable: Contempt at least keeps us in the Methods of Plain-dealing; whilst Flattery carries multiply'd Mis∣chiefs in it, and not only cheats and cozens us, but eats out and destroys the very fountains of Truth in us. To be short; Well might Augustus la∣ment for Varrus's death, because, said he, I have none in my Country that dares tell me Truth: And, if any thing upon
Earth can make us miserable, surely it must be to be fool'd and cheated by the false Lights of flatterers: I do not mean your little common flatterers, that seek no deep∣er than into a few General pleasing Attri∣butes only; but your Arch-flatterers, and such as are too common in Courts, and who, perverting the whole course of Sin∣cerity and Truth, aim at nothing else but scruing up all things, just to please and delight the party Courted. Of Contempt. But on the other side, as for Contempt, one may say, the Rich and the Poor have the same appetites and passions, only diffe∣rently express'd and disguis'd; and all peo∣ple, nay even the meanest, are alike im∣patient of Discountenance or Contempt, be the person never so great from whom they receive it. Nay, and we all agree further in this, that we are more impatient to have our Understandings reflected on, than our Manners; and we can better bear the im∣putation of Vice than Folly; the reason is, we value our Credit and Interest more than our Honesty, and we had much ra∣ther save our Estates and our Pleasures, than our Souls.
But indeed, had we courage enough to be wise, we should regard Resentments only from their Reason, their Depth and Weight, and not from Popularity and O∣pinion: Now, should we do so, I say, not only our greatest concern would be at Vice and Sin, when they reproach us, but, as 'tis evident, that Contempt, Scurril and Laughter, are but as the Froth of Reason∣ing, and have no other bottom, but Va∣nity and Folly; so they ought not to be regarded in no sort, but as the effects of Weakness, and want of Judgment. Wisdom bids us be Charitable, and bear with others; nay, and not only so, but assist them in their Infirmities: How contrary then must this Malitious Resent∣ment of Contempt be, which Delights and Rejoyces in others Misfortunes, and endeavours all it can, to advance them? Besides, Contempt is a set, stubborn, and resolute aversion and hatred: Now, I say, as this can neither with Justice or Charity be paid to any thing but Vice or Sin, so we are unjust to give it to any thing else: And hence, What though a Man be Vicious, and his Crimes deserve all the Contempt in the World; yet his Person, and as he is our Brother, he rather deserves our Pity?
And, in truth, we are Rash Fools to hate any thing that God does not; he only and wholly ought to be the standard of our Affections; and besure as he nei∣ther does nor can hate us for our Misfor∣tunes, as indeed it were to hate us for be∣ing his very Creatures to do it, and which is impossible; so the only occasion of his contempt of us, is our Misaction, and our Aberration from his Law; and yet even then also he has Mercy: and we, if we will be like him, surely ought not to be without it. Nay more; Is any one weak and foo∣lish, 'tis my positive duty to pity him, and, in Charity, where I can, to advise him, much more not to despise him? So, Is there any one Wicked, 'tis my duty to Reform him, and not harden him by Scof∣fing at him? And, indeed, Christ, by his Example, shews us, That we ought to Pray for, and Advise, not only our Ene∣mies, but our Murderers also. And, With what Arrogance then shall we presume to leave our Stations, as Creatures I mean, in continuing in invincible Brotherly Love; and, to take upon us, like God, through a rash and peremptory Contempt, to Judge, Censure and Condemn, as our little Fancies shall lead us?
Of Libels. But, above all things, in this matter, our Personal Satyrs and Libels are the most Pernicious, the most Vicious and Uncha∣ritable: I might say, nothing deserves Satyr, but Sin and Satyr. And if a Man would ask the Question, When a Wick∣ed Man most resembles the Destroyer of of Mankind? 'Tis when he is Maliciously dipt in the Barbarous Guilt of Satyr, and flinging Fire-brands about him, to the Di∣straction and Confusion of all he Con∣verses. Nor know I any Remedy against this Pest, but such a scorn and contempt as it deserves. Some have prescrib'd Hu∣mility; and say, a Flint is easiest broke on a Feather-bed: Others, to avoid it, like Sir John Sucklin, have Laugh'd at them∣selves first; but, my sense is, they de∣serve none of this care. What a Wasp, a Child, or a Fool fleers at my Actions! and he understands no more a true Reason for his Censure, than a Parrot; only he is well-skill'd at the Elegancy of Rayling; and, for prevention, cries Blockhead first.
And, hence it is as a Secret belonging to the Wise, to give full liberty to the Malice and Envy of such, the baser sort, and to let them vent themselves in Calumnies, and false Reports; so that when they have spoken very ill of brave and worthy Men, at length finding their own Reputation and Fortunes to lye at stake, for fear of Re∣venge they may be brought to forbear. And, indeed otherwise, the only Reme∣dy against Satyrs and Libels, is a Con∣temptible Silence: Nor can you half so much vex their Authors, by a Witty Re∣tort, as such a Neglect: By the first, you at least acknowledge their Power, and you may be sure they will not be without hopes or endeavours to be even with you again; for, they have seldom that Chari∣ty as to forbear abusing you, while, by the latter, you shame them, and irre∣trievably condemn them as Billinsgates. Upon the whole, our best Lesson that we can learn from hence, that I see, is to know the true Value of Contempt, and Reputation: Now, as the only benefit of a good Name therefore is like Cloaths to defend us from outward Accidents, and the only real mischief of Contempt, the Impediment of our Affairs; So, Why should we value it further? Alass! What
is a Name when we are dead? were it not to advance our Children and Posterity? the Honour otherwise that is not paid us in person, vanishes into idle Air: And what, tho' our Names remain, our little tickling and fond Vain Glory, which is the only itch we aim to satisfy, perishes with our per∣sons. Of true Satyr. And yet after all, not but that there is a Satyr as excellent and profitable as inno∣cent; a true Juvenal shall lash men out of Vice as fast as ten serious Sermons; but then withall, it ought to be against Things and Causes, and not Persons; against Vices and Errors, and not their Subjects or Pro∣fessors: Thus, like Elijah, we may inno∣cently droll at Ahabs false Gods, and say, they are sleeping, talking, or gone a journy, and therefore they cannot hear us; while our Cha∣rity at the same time, shews all tenderness for our Erring Brethren, and that we are ready with him even to a Miracle, if in our power, to reform them of their Errors: But otherwise, who can write or speak Satyr, and be guilt∣less? And just so in our ordinary Writings al∣so, when we take care to give all the Dues
of Charity to our Brother; 'tis a modest sheepishness not fully to rescue Truth from his Clamours; Vice and Errors deserve their true Characters; and 'tis false Rea∣soning, not genteelness, to speak easily and smoothly of Wickedness, to sooth men in their Corruptions: Give me the man that dares give all Subjects their proper Colours; I hate the stile that nautiates with too ma∣ny broad Words; but the mincing Frenchi∣fy'd stile that Complements all things, and ruines the Partition Wall of Truth, what is it but lying and impertinent, in that it wants the true and opportunely life of Sa∣tyr in it? I might add, to what end do we let such harsh words pass like current Coyn a∣mongst us, if they have not perfect Ideas? if they are Chimera's, in God's Name, let us fling them quite aside; but if we must hate the word Poyson for the thing, if we must not speak a word that is not Alamode and Agreeable, for fear of grating dainty Ears, let us also for the same Reason, nei∣ther see nor converse, lest we meet with those very Objects themselves that are more disagreeable. In plain terms, these finical Sir Courtly Nice Wits want Judgment, not Elegancy for their Apology: Alass-a-day! we must not speak out broad Vice and
Whoring, for fear of touching their guilty Consciences. This I grant, I would not rip up un∣known Vices, lest their very Repetitions should breed Contagions: In that indeed, there is some Vertue in being modest and obscure in our Discourse; but in known and every day practic'd Crimes, to lose the vividness and force of half our Notions, by a tedious circumlocution, and beating of the Bush; is in plain terms, no other than a mean and cowardly sneaking to a world∣ly false idea'd Honour, a gilding the way to Hell, and right Devil-Advocate like, a means to destroy all those true Ideas of Horrour, which genuinely and naturally quadrate to the setting forth of the odious∣ness and deformity of Vice. If any one think I write too bitterly in this case, let them know, I think, even this very sheepish Insipidness as great a Vice as reigns in our Age; and let them not won∣der then, that I treat it accordingly: Our Saviour, and the Apostles, and Prophets of Old, treated their Generations of Vipers in Stiles answerable to their demerits; but we forsooth are afraid, in genteelness to own their Whore of Babylon, as Monsieur Ju∣rieu well reflects; tho' all the Scriptures re∣quire it at our hands, to brand her for her
Fornications and Adulteries: But let such Cowards and Lukewarms (that the holy Revelations sufficiently threaten) do what they will; for my part, I shall always con∣demn Vice and Sin, in as gross and harsh Characters as the monsters deserve. To me 'tis no wit either to lye, or write insen∣sibly; and what do we do else, when we do not pourtraicture all the things and noti∣ons we treat of to the full life? Should a Painter draw the Picture of a Bear, and omit his Claws, or his Brawny Muscles; or should he Decipher a Tiger like a Lamb, or slim the Wild-Boar to a Grey∣hound, and omit his Tusks? Should we value the Pictures for their insipid genteel∣ness? No: the grace of the Bear were in his Terrour, the beauty of the Tyger in his active Fierceness, and the whole Life of the Boar in his Horrour and Deformity: And even so in the Pictures of Sin and Vice also; 'tis all the Art in a true Morallist and Religious, exactly to delineate their Tusks, their Claws, and their Jaws; nay, 'tis the object of Elegancy, to be nice in those Parts; and not to be afraid to display them for fear of offending silly Women, weaker Men and Children. The Vulgar indeed, like unskilful Dawb∣ers, spoil this Liberty, and are so bewitched
to painting Bears through their Malice and Railing, that they can hardly draw a Man without some Bestiality; either they add Claws to him, and make a Beast of Prey of him, or Gay Feathers, and turn him to a Peacock, or add him a Tayle, and turn him to a Monky: But what! must their Blunderings make us paint nothing but Beauties, their Deformities make us deal in nothing but Angels? Surely, after all, and in all cases, the true good Picture an∣swers the Life, and neither Humour nor Fancy can change their Natures; and, if on the one side we will avoid the Billins∣gate Colours of the Mob, on the other the Proverb, Stulti dum fugiunt vitia in contra∣ria current; will certainly hit us, if we do not draw the Owl and Batt to the life, as well as the Dove and Eagle. Of Rash Judgment. But to return, and proceed a little more particularly to false Judgments and Re∣ports. Most people see nothing in others, but the Repute that they have in the world, and what their Fortune merits; and yet they are as confident in their Censures of them, as if they had Windows into their
Hearts. Indeed, we are perfectly known only by our Friends, and yet our Enemies and Strangers will judge us most, and who know least the truth of what they Cen∣sure. And one might say in such case, our rea∣diness to be evil without examining, is pride and laziness in a Medley. We would wil∣lingly find persons guilty, but will not give our selves the trouble to examine their Cases: But alass! had we no Faults in our selves, we should not be so apt to ob∣serve them in others: I may say, we are naturally apt to disapprove in others what we think in justice, others may disapprove in us. To cure this rash Judgment therefore, I may add, We should take care as well to rectify our own Faults as our Reasonings: In our Reasonings we should be rather slow to speak, and considerate, than fiery and precipitate. In our Errors, should we but have perpetually Memorandums of the Failings of our selves before us, we should not be so apt to have so little mercy for o∣thers; but alass! we are neither so just as to reflect on our own Faults, or the Ex∣cellencies of the Persons we would con∣demn. And hence indeed, I may add, were our
principal Quarrel at Reports for the In∣justice of their rash Censure, and not from Self-love, we should be equally cautious and concern'd at their Injustice to others as our selves; but really our general Grie∣vance is, when our selves are the Object of them; and so in truth, all our Judgment of them is partial. Nay, and we are the more concern'd at such rash Censures, as if we fancied our selves the only Objects of them; and where∣as indeed, we are not: but all the World in general, are apt to judge by Appearan∣ces; and whoever has such and such Ap∣pearances, or where ever they happen, just such a Censure follows, whether in our selves or others, of course. So that, I may say, till we can hope to rectify this common, but unjust Judgment, by Appearances, and which to me seems next to an impossibility, we had as good fancy, that common Robbers had a particu∣lar design upon us, that meet us, & rob us, with all that they meet in such a Road: For just so Men censure such and such, that they find mark'd with such offensive Qua∣lities. Nay, and it is even Ridiculous therefore to expect to be the only Person the World will spare, since Christ himself was nor
priviledg'd in this case: Can you walk the Streets and not expect to be dash'd? Surely, if such Judgments can put us out of Humour, we shall never be pleas'd. So also, suppose that any man tell thee of such a Censure; what is it, but that a whisper is reveal'd to thee, and a giddy Re∣port Published? for thou art beside thy self, if thou expect there should be no Cen∣sure of thee; and if so, no wonder that some of them happen to be Publish'd, of thee, and to thy disadvantage. And besides, do we expect an Univer∣sal Love? we are unjust, and there is none of us that deserves it; nay, and as there is nothing more free than Love, so we ought not to pretend to purchase it by Complaints and Reproaches, but Love and Complaisance: Nay, and suppose we deserve not this Love, yet would we put a force on Mens Passions, and make them to love us whether they will or no? Nay, and indeed suppose we really de∣serve to be lov'd of Men, but some light appearances make them Censure us, we ought rather to complain of their weakness and lightness, and of the frailty of Hu∣manity than of their Injustice; 'tis not he that mistakes, but he that wilfully Censures wrong, that is Unjust.
Besides, some love us not so much that we deserve their Love, as that they fancy an Idea we have such Qualities as they esteem amiable, and which possibly we have not: Suppose then that Truth were setled in Censure, we should lose as much Love as Hate; for Mankind is giddy and unsteady, and has not set the sure grounds of Pie∣ty and Vertue for their Censure; for in∣deed those Qualities are only really ami∣able, and all other Friendship unstable and fleeting. But to proceed, if such rash Judgments and Censures of any sort really injure us, 'tis more that they join with our imagina∣tion, and by them affect us and disturb us, then that they have any real Power in themselves; alass! in themselves generally they are but Air, and their Love and Flat∣tery is more hurtful than their Spite and Mischief; for that too often poysons our hearts with a mortal sweetness; while as an indifferency leaves our Journy to∣ward God with more liberty. And besides, if others are faulty in their Censures, their injury is to themselves and not to us: It deserves our pity, not our complaint. When we do our Duty to o∣thers, we do it for God's sake, and frust∣rate our ends; when we expect our Re∣ward,
and return from Man, we should be glad, that God gave us the opportunity therefore; and we should dread a recom∣pence from the World, lest our hearts should accuse us, and say, This was not done purely for God's sake. In short, when you are charitable to the poor, Do you expect they repay you? and so, when you are charitable to the Slander∣ed, to the poor in Fame, must be return your Complement? Well may God, may I say, punish us by their ingratitude, when we so basely translate the true end of our Actions from himself to his Creatures; and indeed, what Fools are we to value a Complement and Trifle, before the great Rewards of an All-sufficient God. Of Reports. Therefore, I think, that by this time, we may very well conclude that. Lastly, As for Reports, 'tis a common, but grievous Error among Mankind, that Justice should let Mens Tongues loose to a full liberty, in respect of them, more than in the more solemn distributions of Meum and Tuum; whereas certainly, in truth, and if Men would but duly consider their Duty, they would find, that Justice and Charity engage them equally in Reports as in Com∣merce.
And thus, suppose any person of Credit inform'd me, that such an one was a Cheat: I say, I have no Title hereby to condemn or call him so, no more, than to hang a Fellon through common Fame: and yet I may justly refuse thereby to give him any great degree of Credit; nay, and to indemp∣nify my Friend from him, I may acquaint him with the just grounds of my Jealousy, but then it must be to preserve his real in∣terest, and not malitiously; and therefore, I am bound in Justice not to add to the Sto∣ry I have heard. Nor is it a less Vice in Reports, to com∣mend wicked Persons more than they de∣serve, than to defame and blemish the Re∣putation of the Innocent; for thereby we Authorize and make an Example of what is abominable: And surely, nothing can be more pernicious than such a Course! Thus we ought not to praise the Devoti∣on of a Man that is a known Cheat, nor the honesty of a Robber or Pyrate: Can we assure our selves how far the influence of such our Commendation shall ex∣tend? But to strike at the Bottom of Reports; Did we proceed with Justice, we should do like Judges; and not condemn one side, till we have heard t'other, till we have ex∣amined
Witnesses and Proofs, even scrup∣lously on both sides. I am sure, no man but would think himself hardly us'd with other Measures in a Court of Justice; and why not in Reports also, when we pre∣sume with confidence to affirm groundless Scandals of one another? I may add, How often are the Sense and Coherence of Men's Words wrested, quite contrary to their Primitive Intention? And who is more apt for such an Injustice than a captious and idle Tale-bearer? So, how often are the best and fairest Actions repre∣sented even as Vices? And if so, What care can we take sufficient in our Censures and Reports? or what real value can one place on Reputation, when one considers the Inconstancy and Injustice of the World? To conclude, When Reports therefore are faulty of us, we ought rather to pi∣ty the World in their Weakness, than to be angry at them: For is it not a spect∣acle full worthy of our Compassion, to see men love to ruine one anothers Re∣putation? and if they entertain an esteem of any one, 'tis as it were against their Wills, and in spight of them, and they are glad of every little Scandal to blemish the fair Character.
Upon the whole, defame not good per∣sons, tho' for accidental Blots in their Actions, in justice to the rest; and for evil persons, tho' never so mean, do not too easily defame them, in justice to thy self, and left they be reveng'd upon thee, remember Aesop's Beetle could fling down the Eagles Eggs; and though 'tis true, In∣nocence is a Breast of Steel against Malice and ill Fame, yet only in our own Con∣sciences; for it will not preserve us from outward Mischiefs.
Of POETRY. THE Traffick of Poetry is but in the froth of Reasoning, and the colours of Morality. I must confess, for its Light and careless Touch to the Mind, like Musick, 'tis an excellent Recreation some∣times; but for any Man to set his Ge∣nius upon it, is to Trade in Cockle-shells, and to catch at meer empty Noyses and Shadows. Give me the Diamond that is true Bril∣liant cut in its self, and that needs nothing of the Golden Caskanett, to set it off, or adorn it: I may say, 'tis a kind of Whor∣ing of true Wit, to dress it in Poetry; and if a true Poet hates to see the Plot, and turn of his Play fum'd away by Ope∣ra into Shew and Noise; much more may genuine and vigorous sense, scorn to be cramp'd and manacl'd by Verse, for the sake of a little paultry Rhime and Metre, to set it out with. And to me therefore, it appears no o∣ther, than a Reflection on Mr. Hobbs, who would otherwise seem a Philosopher
to translate Homer; not that I would so much undervalue Homer neither, as the imployment of his Judgment, and that he should squander away so much time in a meer Diversion, and the endless gingle of Words. Would you know why Poets are poor; I think it is their due Reward; for when men weakly are too much enamour'd with Butter-fly Fancy, 'tis fit, as a piece of na∣tural Justice, that Poverty, as an arm'd Man, should come upon them, and force them to Reason, and to worldly and hea∣venly real Cares to imploy them better. And yet, to shew the Vanity of Man∣kind, 'tis wonderful to see how they are bewitched to the Charming Rhymes of Verses; but more especially, if they are Satyr, men are naturally envious, and love to admire themselves, chiefly, in the degrading of others: And hence 'tis, that you shall find a Lord R—maliti∣ous Wit, cry'd up for a Miracle, when may be a fifty times greater or diviner in a good Man, is scarce discernable. But above all, what infinite Lies and Fables our Poets, Ancient and Modern, have fill'd the world with? Who can end the Stories of their Gods, their Ryots, and Metamorphoses, &c. the most pernici∣ous
means in the Debauch of the Old Hea∣then Morals; and so even now, Who looks into a Poem and expects truth? And a∣lass! What is it but our common Plays and Poems that paint Vices for Vertues, and turn even the Devil to an Angel of Light? And what, shall we call these Poets Pro∣phets then? No: if their Rage be inspir'd them, 'tis by the Devil; if they deal in History, they sophisticate it; or if in Mo∣rality, they rhodomontado it: So that in truth, Poetry may very properly be call'd Vinum Daemonum, and deserve no manner of respect with men of Judgment; for tho' the Subject be good and pious, yet who delights to see it strain'd beyond truth? Surely, Poetry when it is excessive, deserves rather to be called a Madness than an Art. As for the Laws of Poetry, 'tis idle to set fixt Forms or Bounds for Rhymes or Metre either, since the only Rule for Poetry, is the adding the Delight as it were of Chyming Words to the Sense; nay, and that may be as well without Rhymes as with. Witness Milton's Paradise Lost, and the Latine Poets, or without set Metre, as Horace and Cowleys Pindaricks, or indeed, any other way whatsoever.
And, so as to the Feet of such Meter, whether Dactils, or Spondees, &c. and as to the bounds of such Meter, whether Jam∣bicks, &c. the search is both idle and end∣less: Indeed Alsted reckons up no less then 124. several Feet; so that Custom is only able to limit them, and Pleasurable∣ness is their greatest Excellency. Smooth∣ness even in Oratory is necessary, that its Roughness may not interrupt Attention; and more even in Poetry, is idle. So, What shall I say to our several sorts of Meter also; your Acrosticks, your Anagrams, and an Hundred other little Bawbles; as Ecchoes, Riddles, Meter, com∣pos'd in the shape of Pots and Crowns; so your Verses that are to be Read backwards, and that contain the Year of the Date in Roman Letters? Are not these endless and innumerable Trifles, and fitter for a Toy-shop, than a Wise Man's Head? So also, What a sputter we have to know the Long, and the Short of a Sylla∣ble! forsooth, we must have Whole Vo∣lumes for the sake of such a Trifle: So, What a Noise we have to know the due Bounds of a Poetica Licentia, as if there were some Mystery, or Divinity in the Impertinencies of Poets; Risum teneatis amici?
And yet after all, not but that Poetry not abus'd, may be both pleasant and useful too, in its time; but then it ought precise∣ly to follow Truth in Story, and not be cramp'd in the Meter: To be short, the two great Faults, in my Sense, and that generally destroy the Air of most Poetry, are, when Men either cripple it with too Nice Rules, like Aristotle; or, in stead of presenting us with an even current of Thought in it, patch it up to us as with an endless Fardle of Fancies.
Of Preface and Dedication. OUr common Preface-makers tell us, That a Book without a Preface, is like a Face without a Crevat; But, sup∣pose a rugged Spaniard is avers'd to this little Alamode de Paris; I hope the true English-man will not refuse to Converse with him therefore. Just so, if the Preface be the Crevat, surely Dedication is the Beaux-string; and the Man is as no Body, that cannot prosti∣tute himself Genteelly and Delicately to Rhodomontade and Flattery in it. In plain terms, Men use their Books like Begging-passes, more to procure them∣selves good and easie means by the way, than to hasten themselves really to the truer ends of Life by them. So our Dedications also run in a strain, as if they were to beg a Protection to our Books; but alass! consult the Authors re∣al Sence in the Matter, and he'll tell you, he has rather done an honour, than ex∣pects such a favour by it. I won't say, That all our Prefaces and Dedications are Compos'd of such a Med∣ly as this; but surely too many of them are
so impertinent, and so luscious, that the Authors have often spoil'd a good Book by them. The Zealous Puritan, that will not so much as Smoke a Pipe of Tobacco without a Grace; yet, when more so∣lemnly he comes to make a Publication to Instruct the World, his Interest shall make him Sacrifice all his Cant to some profitable Brother or Sister. God smote Herod for taking the Ho∣nour of his own Speech to himself: A∣lass! we are infinitely more Arrogant than he. We Dare so great a Property in such our Glory, that we can presump∣tuously transfer it to another; 'tis well we live not among the Primitive Dispen∣sations of Judgments. What a delicate medly it is; a Book full of Raptures of Devotion, and a De∣dication as vile and wicked, as Un∣manly and Ungenerous in its Flatte∣ries. Did you approach, by a gracious per∣mission, the Presence of a King? And would you be so Sawcy, as to make the Noble favour and honour done you, only the occasion to Complement some little petty Courtier before him?
Much more, dare you appear in the Presence of the King of Kings, in so∣lemnly presuming to declare and deliver his Laws, and at the very Footstool of his Throne, presume to exalt the Merits of any Mortal Man? Surely, if e're we take God's Name in vain, 'tis then; and when we rob the Divine Majesty of a suitable Reverence; But who has the loss by it? And who suf∣fers by our bringing the Sacred Deity in∣to contempt? surely our selves: If we reverence him not duly, 'tis we shall suffer for it: Alass! he himself stands in need of none of our honour. Some Heathens have never deliver'd the Name of GOD but in Great Letters; nay, others have never Printed any other Word in the same Line, least the hasty Reader should heedlesly pass it o're; but, Can this be to the honour of us Christi∣ans, who thus care not how we treat him? Were we to Write the Life of Alexan∣der the Great, and after some singular Praises and Encomiums, should Dedicate it to some illustrious, over-grown, and sin∣gularly well qualified Mouse; Would not this redound, by way of Matchless Ho∣nour, to Alexander?
Even so, when we treat with the Great God of Heaven, Is it decent to magnifie even Princes in his Presence? nay, Is there any Parity between Finite and Infinite? and the dishonour to God and Alexander in such case? Surely, all our private Dedications are, at best, but an Injustice to God there∣fore; but such as these a manifest Contu∣mely to him: VVe ought not to Name the Name, much less to treat any thing relating to the Divine Being, without the greatest sence of his Majesty. VVhen we Name therefore the Invi∣sible, Infinite and Eternal Maker of all things, Is it suitable, even to Aggrandize the whole Earth in his Presence? and to whom the whole Globe is but as a drop of the Bucket? VVhen we deliver his Truths, Is it suitable to any sence of Providence to crave the Protection of any Man on Earth for them? Good God! How great is the vanity, as well as the Impiety of these flatteries? He that alone endures for Ages, that disposes of Kingdoms at his pleasure, and in whose hand, are, and have been all the Mightiest Men upon Earth; Needs he an Assistant, least his eternal
VVill should fail? And, if 'tis not his VVill, VVho shall support it? To be short; I wish what I VVrite could Perswade Men to a more truly Religious frame in this Matter; if not, I yet shall be content, that I have done my duty in VVarning them, and to the VVill of God be left the Success on it. But, for my own part, I declare, were I either to lose or gain the Indies by such Methods, I would sooner burn my Self and Papers, than stoop to so mean and corrupt a Practice. I will not say, that like the Apostles, we may not justly write Epistolarly to a Church, or Brother; for certainly, so long as we preserve the due Decorum of Decency and Verity, that must be most Innocent; but surely, whatever exceeds that, must savour either of Vanity or Evil.
Of STƲDY. STudies serve either for Delight, for Ornament, or for Ability; for De∣light in Retirement, for Ornament in Dis∣course, and for Ability in Judgment, and Disposition of Business; and yet to spend too much time in Study, is sloth; to use them too much for Ornament, is Affecta∣tion; and, to confine our Judgment too precisely to their Rules, is Formal and Pedantick. And thus likewise, Reading makes a full Man, or copious Notion; Confe∣rence a ready Man, and a temper Con∣versable; and Writing an exact Man, or a Complete Idea. Indeed, there is no stond, or impediment in the Wit, but that may be wrought out by fit Studies: And if there be any knot, that I cannot by Stu∣dy work off at one time, Meditation shall do it at another. But he buyes himself but a melancho∣ly slavery, who Studies more than neces∣sary: Now, such our necessity appears by this, either in attaining agreeable ac∣complishments, or in preparation for bu∣siness, or in a Charitable instruction of
our Brother: But rather than Study be∣yond these ends, we ought to confine our selves even to set-hours, and to times and seasons. To be short; Crafty Men contemn Stu∣dies, as the longest way about, and, as true Wisdom is too laborious for them; simple Men admire them, as it is their very Exaltation to be in Wonders; and Wise Men use them: they perfect Na∣ture, and are perfected by Experience: for Natural Parts, like Natural Plants, are the better for Pruning and Grafting. The Method of Study. But, as we love to do nothing in vain, and are not willing to bestow pains, where it will not make us any return; so, no Prudent Man will venture on any course of Study, till he has first throughly setled the exactest Measures of his Method. And thus, if you Read, observe nicely to do it deliberately, choosing your times, when you are not likely to be disturb'd; but, above all, be sure to maintain a conti∣nued and steady apprehension in whate∣ver you do; and whenever you find that disturbed, or destroy'd, never distract your self further, but cease Study, least you lose
as much in the Confusion and want of Method, as you get in the Quantity. Indeed, I may add, to Study more than four or five hours a day, except it be purely in Copying Writings, is too much; it precipitates our Judgment, and sowrs our proceedings; And, what Improve∣ment can you expect then, when as you increase in the Mass, you lose in the Di∣gestion; nay, and may be, for want of Consideration, indiscernably engage your self in nothing else but Trifles. Nay, and besides, What is it that makes our Studies uneasie to us, but when we are thus careless in Examining their Cir∣cumstances? if we are too violent in them, well may we be confounded and fatigued; and if we Thoughtlesly set about them, in the midst of Interruption, Can we justly charge it on the Nature of Study, when we complain of its uneasiness? So in Reading, Can you think that when you gallop over a good Author, you do not flatten him, and lose half his Life and Substance? surely you do: Alass! if you intend to be a Student to effect, you must learn to pursue your Subject with Patience, and Discipline your self to a la∣borious constancy; but, above all, if you intend to Study much, rise early, and have
time before you, For why should you im∣pair your Health by it for want of Exer∣cise? Nor be discouraged, that thou canst not succeed in thy Studies immediately, or at the first engagement; if thou aimest at Perfection, thou must not Mushroom-like, think to spring up in a day, no, nor a Year; no, alass! thou must cut thy way even through Mountains of Errors and Prejudices: And, though thou mayst patch up a Cottage in an hour, yet a beau∣tiful City of Thought, a new Rome, fit for an Humane Soul to reign in, is not to be hew'd out of the Rocks, rear'd and adorn'd in a day. And, in this case, had the World been as diligent in a sincere and impartial Medita∣tion, as they have been in their Pedantry, I am perswaded that by this time, Know∣ledge had been Quadruple to what it is; not that I would have Men wholly fling a∣side all former helps neither; but I would have them make their Reading as sub∣servient to their own digestion; for my part there's nothing that I have either re∣ceiv'd or borrow'd, that I have not re∣duc'd to my own Method and Dispo∣sal.
Hence some Books are to be Tasted, o∣thers to be Swallow'd, and some few to be Chewed and Digested; some Books may be Read by Deputy, that is, by Ex∣tracts: But, in all our Methods we ought never to Read, to Contradict and Confute only; nor to believe, nor take for granted, nor meerly to find Talk and Discourse; but duly to Weigh, Consider, and Digest also. And, in this Case, I may add, that, as an ill Stomach craves for more than it can digest, so 'tis an irregular Student that Reads more than he Considers how to Command: and, as he that in such case, eats more than he Digests, breeds Hu∣mours; so, surely, I may as justly add, that a Reader, beyond the true Capacity of his Comprehension also, breeds Er∣rours. And, to carry the Simile a little further. As the soundest Meats prove the best nourishment, though they are often diffi∣cult to digest, so the Intricatest Notions commonly prove the Students best In∣formers, though for a little time they may amuse his Conception; for, as Marrow lies in bones, so Valuable Secrets lye gene∣rally wrapt in Difficulties; besides that, any one Difficulty left unconquer'd, is
enough to cloud and confound the whole Idea of our Studies and Notions that fol∣low it. As for Collections in Writing, and with∣out which, to Study by Reading, is but to try to fill Proserpina's Seeve: Think first with your self, what will be really material and substantial in them; and learn to distinguish Dressing from Subjects, and Ornaments from Things; the first may be Abridg'd, and Compris'd in short, while the latter is various, nay infinite, and con∣sequently impertinent: Thr first is the composure of solid Judgment, the lat∣ter but the Froth and Wantonness of Fancy. As for your Method in Collecting there∣fore, let it be clear, short, and well-advis'd; clear, that you may make an easie recollec∣tion, and easily continue your course; short, that you may not bestow more pains in Shadow than Substance; or Method than Matter; and well-advis'd, that you may proceed without Repentance, and that you may not be perpetually imploy'd in laying of New Foundations, but be a∣ble cheerfully to build your Superstruct∣ure on.
For my part, till I purified thus my Method, the more I studied, the more I was confounded; but thus I have not on∣ly preserv'd my Idea entire, but one part of my Study has help'd the other, while my whole Body lies easie for me, either for Correction or Improvement, and as here∣after I shall see occasion. But besides this, we ought to consider to keep our Stu∣dies within the bounds of a due Limi∣tation also. The true Limitation of Studies. And thus, first, we ought to limit our Studies to our use, and to fit them to sup∣ply our defects; Thus Histories will teach us Wisdom, through Experimental Pre∣cepts: Poets will make us Witty, but Light and Flashy; the Mathematicks will make us Subtile and not Credulous; Natu∣ral Philosophy Deep and Reasoning; Mora∣lity Grave and Good; And Logick and Rhe∣torick will teach one Faction, and make one able to Contend. Hence also, if a Man's Wit be wan∣dring, let him Study the Mathematicks; for if in Demonstrations he go never so little aside, he must begin all again; so if he be not apt to distinguish, Read
the Schoolmen; or if he be not apt to beat our Matters, or to call up one thing, to prove and illustrate another, let him Study the Lawyers Cases, and so every de∣fect of the Mind may have a special Re∣ceipt. So if he be apt to be Idle, let him borrow the Books he is to Study, for a time, and that will make him either diligent, or want; nor let him, in Studying, only Me∣ditate or Read, for that is but to see his Face in a Glass, and to leave fleeting Cha∣racters in the Memory only, and that will instantly be blotted out; whereas by Wri∣ting also we draw a more lasting Pic∣ture. So likewise Reflection on Conversation is far better than crude Books, and too much Reading; in Truth, one may say, Not only that Book-learning is commonly too Pedantick and Formal to benefit; but indeed, that Books, in themselves, are al∣most as idle as infinite; and so that, in Truth, 'tis a matter greatly worth our exa∣mining, how far to Study, and what to Read; and also, what to fling aside as su∣perfluous. And thus the knowing what's fit to be Studied, saves half the pains; and, in such case, just enough in Charity and Necessi∣ty
is sufficient: We are not here to get Knowledge for the other World, as some idly have imagin'd; our sincerity indeed will stand us in stead there, but our know∣ledge not in the least. Alass! the Present state of our Nature and sences is Probatio∣nary, and not to last. Before therefore we descend into the se∣veral branches of Humane Learning, it were the highest prudence first to discern between Knowledge, profitable and useless, curious and solid; and in which case, in ge∣neral, as I have said, 'tis equally vain and foolish, to think to arrive at a nice perfecti∣on of Wisdom, the prerogative of God; and we should confine our selves there∣fore, as well to what is rationally with∣in our powers, as to what is useful. And thus the Philosophers Stone, suppo∣sing it acquirable, yet it were both lazy and an unindustrious encroaching on the publick property to attain it; and there∣fore, deservedly punishable by Laws. And thus, there are some things also more di∣rectly unlawful to be studied, as I have already shewn, and which will much shorten an Universal Idea, as Witchcraft, as Rebellion to God, and superstitious Ma∣gick, as tempting him.
But, besides these greater Evils, How many may I add, spend their time about Words, and never dive into Sense? How many please themselves rather with the slight imaginations and fancies of other than trouble themselves to look for truth? I say, we need only reflect, how easily we may dispence with these, and many others sorts of Knowledge, and not envy the Possessours of them; and indeed, what but such Exuberances in Studies, make our present Philosophy a meer idle Chimera and Vanity? To be short, the true end of Study, as of all things else, is the glory of God, and the good of his Creatures: Now, as we cannot say, we pursue either of these ends, when we study Trifles, so are such imploy∣ments sinful; and tho' I would obtain a complete Knowledge, and raise its Banks too high for the Storms of raving Wit and trifling Error, to be able to destroy; yet withall, I would not bestow the least pains on what might look either unnecessary or evil. Of the Choice of Books. And thus also we pity our loss of Books; alass, fond Fools that we are!
What is lost that occasional industry and necessity cannot retrieve? Besides, we are mistaken to seek for Wisdom in the multi∣tude of Authors; we had as good look for it in the Mobile, where some are moon∣ey'd, some purblind, some confident, as Mountebanks, and others, perverse even as Devils. Nay, when we consider the meer mul∣tiplicity of Books, tho' I would allow my self to consult the choicer for my Assist∣ance, yet in general, I would as soon hear every Man's Dream as read his Works; and I ought therefore, rather first to con∣sider what Books I ought to read, and next, what may be convenient for me by way of resort. Now, as for the Election of Authors, I know no other method than the Vogue of the Learn'd; in Morality and Divinity, those whom Time and Antiquity have commended, and who have stood the Cen∣sure of Ages, are to be chosen; and not every Modern Author, whose gawdy Ti∣tles and popular Prejudices make him bet∣ter at Noise than Reasoning: But as for experimental Wisdom, as interest is like∣ly to improve the World with her Age, so the latter Authors are there to be prefer'd before blind Antiquity.
But wouldst thou know a more particu∣lar Test for good Books, I mean moral ones; they are such as have Learning and Sincerity, but more especially Sincerity: And hence the Scriptures which no one can esteem, to exceed in regular Learning; yet as being most pure and transcendant in sin∣cerity, infinitely exceed all other Books: Alass! 'tis not Notion but bright Sincerity, that duly and justly gives the Preference. Indeed, what good can a sinister, cunning, or Pedantry do us? Upon the whole, 'twere too tedious for me here to give you long Catalogues of Books; and besides, my designs is rather towards a general Advice; if the Student want particular Authors Names there∣fore, let him consult the proper Artists, and the perusal of Books themselves; and yet let him even then rather choose a few and choice Books than a Library; for a mul∣titude will confound us, where a moderate Quantity will assist and help us; and in truth, Masters of great Libraries too com∣monly like Booksellers, deal no deeper than in Titles. As for the encouragement of diverting needless Studies, I shall only say this, 'tis fit a Gentleman should have at least an in∣sight into all things; he need not aim at
being a Master in all, and yet he may take a slight View or Lanskaf of all: for tho' he intends but one thing as his business, yet he may justly make the Survey of all, the Ring of his Recreation and Diversion: For who can distinguish things better than he that has the largest prospect? And yet in such looser Studies, I would not read a mean Book: Suppose he help thee to a good Notion or two, will that a∣vail thee for thy pains and loss of time? Nor needst thou doubt in such case, but that if thou readst the choicer Authors upon the same Subject, that they will give thee the same thing, and in much better order, than a little pretender shall. I may say, our dozing our selves with an unprofitable reading, What is it, but like poysoning and cankring our minds, and which indu∣ces us to dote away our time in perpetual maze and confusion? When thou hast therefore tryed some few pages in an Author, and canst not like him, reject him: for as 'tis impossible for a man to read all Books, so 'tis enough if he do the best; and 'tis our Unhappiness if a Pearl lye scatter'd in an unproper Soile: and if a good Notion be lost, because deliver'd by an ill Author, I say, 'tis a mis∣fortune in discretion inevitable; for the
Man is mad that thinks to read all Books: and yet, if an Author lye in a good method, a little pains may serve to Examine him. Further, there is a weak and cowardly prejudice in men, I mean, when the dread of being seduc'd by ill Books, makes them afraid to read good ones, if they have but a bad Name: But why so, I say? If what an Author write be true, Why should I be Bug-beard from an opportunity of being wiser? if false, Am not I a fool so to que∣stion the integrity or strength of my Rea∣soning? and thus is it not a shame, that an Hobbs should fright an University worse than a Monster? I am afraid, the too common and Fond∣ling Notions of the World are a little rotten at the heart, or else methinks their Abettors need not be put to these shifts and burn∣ings, to confute their Adversaries: Alass! Truth, like the Sun, of its self, and with∣out force, is able to cleer all the Fogs of Fallacy and Sophistry; and nothing but Error and Prejudice need dread the Com∣bate of Argument, and the Test of Exa∣mination. An affected singularity indeed in all co∣lours, is odious; but this Perverseness in the popularity of the World, makes it, that
if ever we intend to study Truth, we must be singular sometimes, and dare converse with Men and Books that are so; or else at last, we may find to our loss, that we shall explode Truth and Sincerity too often with such Authors. I shall add a little in general of Speculation and Practice, as the main rule of our Study, and conclude. Of Speculation and Practice. Our Speculation in general, ought to be so far subservient to our Practice, that I may say, we profane Precepts as well as Piety, when we take their words into our mouth, or transcribe them with our Pens, and do not live and act accordingly. In Divinity nothing is more dangerous than Knowledge without Obedience: Christ tells us, That he that knew his Masters Will, and perform'd it not, should be beaten with ma∣ny stripes: And he that pretends to Vertue no otherwise than in Notion, is no better than an Hypocrite, or at best a Chymera Book-worm. 'Tis true, we ought not to neglect Spe∣culation; and yet as Practice is the end of Speculation, surely no man will prefer the means before the end. Practice without Speculation at worst, makes us but impru∣dent;
but meer Speculation renders us un∣profitable, and drones: And in truth, Ver∣tue, by meer Speculation, is confounded, and only ripen'd by Action. Nay, Knowledge without Practice, is but a Lust of Curiosity; and the man that cannot propose a good Moral End in his Studies, had as good divert himself with the Purling of Brooks and Pibles, as the meer change of Words and Notions; and yet 'tis the curse of your dreaming Specu∣latists, that they not only have no taste of real Wisdom, but mispend the time that should lead them to it. Wisdom is Folly, and Prudence Madness, in such a man; and yet, Hypocrite-like, he shall read their Precepts even with delight, as long as their Novelty lasts. The measure therefore of our Specula∣tion, ought to be this; sufficient to advance our Practice, and not impede it, of things useful, and not of unprofitable Whimseys, of bettering Life, as Vertue and Religion, and not turning men into thinking, and reading Melanchollists; 'tis a Vice to pro∣cure that knowledge that is not of advan∣tage when had; and we misemploy our method of thinking, if we engage it pure∣ly in a puzzle of Thoughts: Indeed, the Mind working on matter, produceth wor∣thy
Notions, but on its self nothing but Cobwebs and Trifles. And thus also, there are some men so weak as to look for Morality even in Plays and Romances; but alass! they but flat∣ter themselves, and seek but for the Co∣lours of Vertue, while they dare not the Brave and Nobler Self-denial of her purer Precepts: Poor Pretenders! Why do they shuffle so? a courageable Enemy is better than a Bastard Friend: Think you ever to reconcile Good and Evil, or God and the Devil? Surely, the man that even ca∣rouzes in his Lusts, is an innocent to such as Hypocrite. Upon the whole therefore, you see I may make my self learneder by reading, but only wiser by moderating and regulat∣ing my Actions: I will not therefore spend all my Vigour in Discipline, in the Dressing Room of my Soul: I must live as well as think; and yet, as I know Error is too of∣ten to strong for me, I will always leave room for Repentance, Amendment, and new Precepts. And, as our Speculation therefore ought not to be continual, so at length, I would have a man say, Lectum, consideratum, & Scrip∣tum est, & nunc vivam; when once I have made my Rule to live by, I'le see how I
can draw my Life and Actions by it; Wisdom was never intended to be acquir'd only, but enjoy'd; and that Knowledge is Folly, not Wisdom, that does not apply its self to the uses of Man. And to conclude; the only Reason that makes Speculation and Practice differ so much, comes from the vicious and chi∣mera Prejudices of Mankind: indeed, were our Knowledge reduc'd sincerely to the due bounds of Wisdom, we should find our Precepts would be like to Demon∣stration; and a man would no sooner read them, but he would be convinc'd beyond all doubt, to act by them.
Of CONSTANCY. ONe may say, the Sun, the Air, and all things about us, contribute to make us what we are in every respect; but our minds, and the purity thereof, so that indeed, who ever loves us on any other ac∣count than that, their love must needs be transitory; for being made what we are by our circumstances, and they changing as they perpetually do, we become others than we were; so that in such case, it can∣not be justly called an Unconstancy, to change our Affections, when the Objects themselves have chang'd. And hence it is, that our Constancy in Love, What is it but a perpetual Incon∣stancy, and which causes our hearts to en∣cline successively to all the Qualities of the Person that we love, giving sometimes the preference to one, and sometimes to ano∣ther? So that, in truth, the best of our Constancies, except to God, want a Foun∣dation; and really, what are they but our Inconstancys limited, and unreasonably bound up in one Subject, by an unaccoun∣table Obstinacy? And thus, What but this is it, that
makes us seek for new Friends, and fresh Faces every day, and yet not but that that which makes us love new Acquaintance, is not always so much a weariness of our old, or the pleasure of Change, as the Distaste which we have, that we are not enough admir'd by those that we know too fami∣liarly, and the hope we have to be more admir'd by those that know us but a little? But to return; there are two sorts of Constancy in Love; the one is, because we find perpetually in the person we love (as in an inexhausible Fountain) new Causes to love; the other is, that one holds it disho∣nourable to change or break ones word; and so also, there is an inconstancy which comes from a Levity of mind, and which changes every moment its opinion, or out of weakness, which makes it receive all the Opinions of others: and so there is a∣nother Inconstancy, which is more excu∣sable, and which comes from the things themselves, through their losing their relish. Nor is such an Inconstancy, except in Vertue or Friendship to be discom∣mended; for why may not I justly follow my Inclination, and the change of Things? But he that is false to his friend, or that complains of his friend, that he
may be able before hand the better to ju∣stify his own levity, is guilty of a perverse Treachery; or else, I may say, our perse∣verance deserves neither praise nor blame; for indeed, 'tis no more than a continuance of our Taste and Thoughts, and which we may as innocently as justly be able to re∣move from us, or change at pleasure. But as for our constancy in Goodness, Sincerity, and Truth, it is the chief and crown of all Vertues, and even the best of Vertues: Vertues themselves degenerate to a Vice without it; if we have either Bravery or Goodness therefore, let us re∣member to crown all such endeavours with Constancy. Constancy will make even condemn'd Innocence glory in her Vertue; and Patience and penitent Guilt submit and co-operate with Justice. Whilst I am constant to the Tracks of Vertue, my Breast shall be immovable and easy, and neither Crowns shall make me proud, nor Rags asham'd. Nay, and while I thus mix Constancy with Wisdom, my Affairs shall be in or∣der, and Prudence shall cut out their sea∣sons: I'le foreknow the variety and diffe∣rence of business, and neither Accident nor Novelty shall confound or surprize me; in∣deed that man ought not so much as to
presume at the name of prudence, that by a steady perseverance in Stly and Medita∣tion, has not strengthned and garison'd his Reason, and given it an entire prospect a∣bove the common little Mountains of Pre∣judice and Inconstancy. To be short, I would even hate my mind till I make it speak the same thing to mor∣row that it does to day; my certainty and my faith shall be the same, and I will have an equal regard for them at all times. Cannot human Frailty bear this? purified Reason and Precepts shall. My Ideas shall not be fleeting and changable at every blast of Reasoning, nor my Resolution wavering; I will know the certainty of Piety, Vertue and Truth; if they have no bottom, I'le never hamper my self with them; if they have, if pos∣sible, I will follow them; nay, and I hope by the help of God, by the same rule, to be able to reduce my Notions to Principles that shall last as long as the Sun shines. Have I misfortunes? and what then! does not the same reason of things always continue? or was I ever so weak as not to expect Accidents? if not, Why is my Mind and Resolution chang'd? is not my Rea∣son the same still? or what! must I com∣mit my self to the Wind, and be as change∣able
as the Weather-cock; be a Philoso∣pher to day, a Fidler to morrow, and eve∣ry day find some new Whimseys for my Entertainment? No, Constancy is the most potent and crown of all Vertues; and through Con∣stancy I will, nay I doubt not, but to con∣quer all things. Constancy even in drops wears Stones away, while nothing is more weak than a Pretender; if we have never so great an Appearance in our Actions ei∣ther of Vertue or Courage, yet if we want Constancy and Perseverance, our Profession is idle, and our Pretences are vain; nay, and they reflect more upon us, than if we were absolutely negligent. And yet, tho' nothing can recommend its self more to us than Constancy, yet it ought to be with this Limitation, in what is good, and truth only; and not in a lie, or evil. Constancy in Vice enhances our Guilt, and Perseverance in Error after Convicti∣on, be it on any pretence whatever, is the sure method of Folly and Ignorance. In∣deed, Constancy is only in good things; and 'tis Obstinacy that fixes us in evil, and that makes Sin and Vice eternal, and that forbids Repentance for fear of Change.
OF THE Art of War. Of the Lawfulness of WAR. TO God alone belongs the Prerogative of Life and Death; and who art thou, who presumest to assume it? Art thou a King? even a King ought to be a Father to his Subjects, and not a Slaugh∣terer: but is that for Trifles, to drown them in Blood? Surely, they forget King Phil∣lips Monitor; Remember thou art a Man therefore, who can too easily engage themselves in War? And yet tho' hence we ought to abhor War, yet we ought never to forget it, no, not even in time of Peace: if the rigour of our Discipline cease, yet at least our Mili∣tary Precepts should be preserv'd pure;
for nothing surely can Disengage us of our Self Preservation. And yet not that, not to be backward in just Wars, should forward us therefore to Rapine or Murder neither; God certain∣ly has Plagues and real Causes of Wars enough to ease the World of being over-peopled by, without our Presumptious, Murders and Desolations: Have I there∣fore the justest cause of War, if possible, I will stifle it. Thus, Is my Merchant injur'd? I will satisfie him by reprisal. And, have I wrong'd my Neighbour? I will acquit my self be∣fore God, in tendring him satisfaction. Indeed, Princes should consider the hard∣ship of an unjust War upon their Subjects, before they begin it. I might add, Is the Right doubtful? And what, will not an Arbitration serve and save humane Blood? In truth, War without Cause is preda∣tory and bruitish, and a meer Souldier is worse than an blangman; a Generous Of∣ficer sure would die rather than fight without a good Cause declar'd. In doubt∣ful cases indeed, I'le obey my Prince; but shall he make a Man-Butcher of me? Not but that War undoubtedly may be most lawful too; for even the same Christ that could abolish the rule, of an eye for an
eye, &c. in forbearance and mercy; yet himself could once think a Sword necessa∣ry, Luke 22. 36. and Lash the Thieves out of the Temple. To be short; God has given us a Being, And shall we not value his kindness, by all the lawful ways of self-preservation? And what, may we not then justly resist all vio∣lent Aggressors, and avenge our selves of our secret Enemies, to incapacitate them in their evil designs? Nay, and if this be the Law of Nature; Pray where is't abolish'd? and surely, it is such, nay, and to that degree, that a Peo∣ple may lawfully Raise a War of Self-de∣fence of their own heads, and without the Authority of their Prince, where 'tis ne∣cessary, even as all Casuists allow. And yet, not but that I may wickedly Prosecute the Justest War too; War should be manag'd, as by a Judge, to Pay the O∣riginal Debt, and not as by a Robber, to Murder and Plunder. Thus I have a just occasion of War, when I see another assault me, nay, when I have a good Ground of Jealousie and Sus∣picion, I am not bound to wait the first Blow: But are my Suspicions weak, and his Preparations trifling? Peace and Chari∣ty commands me to entertain no ill opini∣on of them.
So, Do I see my Neighbour's Subjects miserably distrest? 'tis my Duty not to see Piety, Honesty and Innocence discou∣raged; and yet, though to Relieve the Opprest for Religion, may be a good cause of War, yet, to propagate it, can be none. So, Is my Brother Ignorant, or an Hea∣then? Charity will let me advise him, but not force him: But does my Brother Sacrifice his Children? Is he a Sodomite, or a Murderer, as Benjamin? surely I, with Israel, may War with him, to bring him to a better temper. So Papists, by their Principle, That no Faith's to be kept with Hereticks, give an Immortal cause of War: We sight a more generous and open Enemy, And are not we Bewitch'd to forgive one, Bloody, Bar∣barous, and Inveterate, as the Devil him∣self is then? 'Tis pity, indeed, we don't Indulge their Tender Consciences, and let them Murder us; 'tis their Principle and Reli∣gion: If it be their Religion, I say, 'tis from the Devil, and let us fight them till they alter it: What! Profess our selves Sheep for the slaughter? I don't know whether Protestant States may not An∣swer for't to God, as Self-murderers, that they have tender'd such Vermin-Princi∣ples so long.
So, surely, I have a right to take a Sword from a Mad-man, to Arbitrate my Neighbour's Popular Commotions, and to interpose towards setling the Peace of my Neighbours. Thus, If my Neighbour begins a War, though with another Neighbour; the Wolf shall not think, by my standing Neuter, to devour me next; and yet I will not help a too Potent Prince abus'd nei∣ther; For why should I assist him to de∣stroy my self? Thus 'twas the War of Righteous A∣braham to reduce those Conquerors that carried away his Brother Lot. And yet, if the War for my Brother be too despe∣rate, I am not bound to fling away my Life for his sake. But are only my Merchants Injur'd, and by private Persons? I have no cause of War, if either satisfaction be tender'd, or the Offenders deliver'd up; but such an Injury, by a Commission'd Subject, is a compleat cause of War. So I may Naturalize a Subject of my Neighbours without offence; but if I of∣fer to Naturalize a Town, or to encroach but one foot on his Dominions, he has a just Cause of War against me; and yet even then he ought not only to demand a Reasonable Satisfaction, but solemnly to denounce it, e're he begins with Acts of Hostility.
Of Generals in WAR. ONe ordinary General is better than two excellent ones; for nothing is more pernicious than Confusion and Irre∣solution: And yet 'tis hard to trust the courage of one General only; the Mean seems the appointing Three several Com∣manders, for Van, Main Body, and Reer; and changing their Commands each Week; and so you may not only be assur'd of a General on all hazards, but as well secure their Fidelity, as relieve their Courages. Nor were it amiss also, for the same rea∣son, once a Year for a General to make all his Under-Officers change their Com∣mands; and which, to avoid offence, he may do by Promotion; for so he will not only instruct all, and make Military Disci∣pline familiar, but hinder all Corruption in False Musters, and prevent all Factions in his Army whatever. As for the Skill of a General, it has two advantages, Duty and Stratagem; Duty, to know the force and order of Military Discipline, and therefore a General must be a Souldier; and Stratagem, to prevent and secure future Accidents to his advan∣tage;
and, in this, 'tis his own ingenuity; and a Council of War must aid him. Nor is any thing more worthy a Gene∣ral's care in this case, than the choice and management of his Council of War: Does he fear Treachery in it, and can't he talk of what he will, though he never resolves on it then, and seem to doubt in what he most intends? But above all, a General ought to e∣steem his Life as the whole Armies; in∣deed, he acts the greatest publick good in preserving it; nay, he ought in this, to be so nice, as to be always in temper, and ne∣ver suffer himself to be harrass'd out; he is the head of the Army, and therefore ought never to be without vigorous Thoughts and Counsils for every oppor∣tunity of Stratagem, or Service that may offer. And, in this, a General ought to remem∣ber also, that in all extremities he has a Commission from the Law of Nature, as well as his Prince; not, I mean, but that in affronts and trifles, he should choose to let Time give him satisfaction; but, in imminent dangers, his own discretion, as well as his Princes words, ought to be his Rule. Further, a General ought to be most se∣vere,
and yet most just also; severe, to awe his Enemies, and preserve his own Disci∣pline; and yet just, that he provoke nei∣ther to hatred: And, indeed, in this mat∣ter, nothing is better than that the General be belov'd: and yet, for a Prince to permit his Army to choose their own General for their Loves-sake, is to Dethrone himself. But, Does a Prince see the Army hate their General? he will do well to choose them a better: So, does a General see his Army jealous of him? let his Friend head the jealousie, and expostulate satisfaction, who, besure, will be more tender than if his Enemies were to Judge him. But, Does a General find his Prince jea∣lous of him? his only way to anticipate it, is, by laying down his Commission; and when he is so ingenious, he need not fear further mischief. Princes know the evil consequence of ill-treating such great Of∣ficers: if he punish one too easily, the next he may expect to secure himself, by going over to the Enemy.
Of VVAR in General. WAR is the decision of a Right too high for Judicature; wherein, Arms is the Trial, and Conquest the Judgment. To begin a War after Con∣quest perfected, and Mercy shewn, is a piece of perfidy, that deserves no Quar∣ter. Are you a private Man, and have re∣ceiv'd Mercy, through yielding up your Right? surely, you Merit a Thousand Racks if you ungratefully reassume it a∣gain: you might have died in the Field, or now continue Neuter; but, Is it no∣thing to fight against that Benefactor, that has given you your being, and so spill innocent blood? So to allow Quarter, when ask'd, is both a Christian and a Humane duty; while to execute Men by Law-Civil, forgiven by Quarter Military, is most barbarous. But does some Hen-roost Garrison with∣stand a Royal Army? they deserve no Quarter, or at least they ought to be de∣cimated; 'tis not Generosity, but Mad∣ness, that makes Men prolong Wars, and
destroy one another without prospect of Relief. So, Is mine Enemy perfidious? 'tis his fault that our slaughters are endless, who, by his Treachery, has put it out of our power to believe or trust him. Not that Stratagems are disallowable, or that Victory is the less honourable for them neither; 'tis Jesting, not Fighting, to pro∣claim every blow we intend. 'Twas a generous Custom of the An∣tients indeed, to give notice of Battel by the sound of a Bell; the course of late is more wary, but not less bloody, to secure Frontiers by Garrisons, and spin out Wars by the Tricking of Armies. Wars are usually of two sorts, either of Conquest, or like Moses's, to root out the Inhabitants. In a common dispute▪ the Decision of a Goliah, or Horatii, may save blood; but, an extirpating War, and such as Papists and Protestants at this day are, can safely admit of a Peace on no Terms. Thus, Am I entred into a War, and am I like to engage with a stronger State? by Garrisons I will stop mine Enemy, till either by Diversion or Assistance I can withstand him; but if neither my self, nor Allies, can probably resist him, I will
rather generously fling my self under some agreeable Protection, than stand with a silly Sullenness to be destroy'd. But are your Forces equal? and are you well fortified? Admit the War in your own Country, where you may command both Men and Provisions upon a loss, and which abroad may be fatal to your Army. Thus the Suiss that can fight an 0000. at home, strain hard to maintain but 40000 men when abroad; and yet without Forts, your whole Country's destroy'd. So, is your War with a Trade-State? pen them but in, and stop their Course, and you make them ruine themselves: But is such a State too powerful for you? Either buy your Peace, make in with its Enemies, or distract him by some intestine Commo∣tions; perhaps some of the Royal Family have a Claim to be assisted. Would you delay a War? Send an Am∣bassador with Proposals of Peace; but with such perplex'd Terms, as may judicially require some time to deliberate them. But are you resolv'd on a War, and in the mean time would blind your Enemy while you are preparing? Amuse your Enemy by Secret Counsels and close Am∣bassadors; nor need you be wanting in Congratulatory Complements and Civili∣ties.
Must I presume, my honest Demands will create a War, and may not I wait till I am duly enabled to make them? So, Is a War begun? Invite your Ene∣my by mercy, and fright him through se∣verity. Have you two Armies? By the one block up Forts, while the other en∣ters on the Enemy. So also, are you forc'd to proceed by Sieges? Blood will save Blood, and by de∣stroying every Man in the Garrison, where there is not a Surrender on Summons, you will make a quick dispatch of the War. So also, to manage Secrets well, is a great point in War; and so for Precepts and Orations, to bear up mens Courages. One General on his Death, for this very cause, order'd a Drum to be made of his skin, only to hearten his Souldiers. So, as for punishing Warlike Offences, nothing deserves a greater care: Cowards alass! are not worthy of Death; let them rather live to expiate their Disgrace: but as for the false and treacherous, let them be no sooner discover'd, than sent to the Fa∣ther and promoter of Perfidy, lest it prove too late for you to destroy them in their second Wiles.
Of CONQƲEST. A Pious Conqueror ought but exactly to do Justice and Right to himself; if he acquires new Dominions, it should not be out of ambition but necessity, and because that his Enemies are perverse and implacable. As the Pirate notably answer'd Alexan∣der the Great, What are great Conquests but great Robberies? So surely, one might as justly be guilty of a Robbery as a Conquest, unless one had the justest cause of War to move one to it. For my part, had I the Empire of the World through Conquest, yet like Lycur∣gus with Sparta, it should be but to settle their States the better by it: Did I root out a Tyrant, yet like the Old Romans, would I not rob his Heirs; or should I subdue a Common-Wealth, t'should be but to reinstate them in their Ancient Pu∣rity. Surely, I but pretend to War for my Neighbours Relief, while I make a Prey of him. Indeed, if a State be so corrupt, as not to be able to bear to be reform'd, I will rather take the Conquest into my own
protection, than leave it weltring in Anar∣chy and Blood. To be short; Robbers and Murderers of thousands in Corruption and Flattery, we admire without regret, while the more innocent Rogues from necessity we de∣stroy in this World, and damn in the next; but surely, God will be more just to them. But to proceed, Would you secure a Conquest? you must root out the antient Governours, or the Mobile in Faction will reinstate the worst of Tyrannies: so, would you transform a corrupt Common-wealth? you must either raise their chief Cities, or transplant their principal Heads, or else the first advantage that offers them will con∣found your Establishment. Thus also, a Conquest where there are NOBLES, is easier than where all are SLAVES; the Turkish Vassals will be forc'd unanimously to withstand you, tho when subdued, your Conquest is entire and secure; while English NOBLES, that may assist your Victory, will withall by the same Hereditary Power, render your Conquest as ticklish. To preserve a Conquest therefore: First, Reside personally sometime upon it, the better to prevent all Plots: And, Second∣ly, On pretence of kindness, take some of
the NOBLES Sons as Hostages with you when you depart: Thirdly, Continue Titles of Honour to the Natives, but keep all Offices to your own Servants: Fourth∣ly, Let your Ministers be only seen in harsh things: And Lastly, take particular care of all popular Meetings, on any pretence whatever. To be short; All alterations naturally leave a toothing for new Changes; and therefore the best way to secure what you have got, is like the generous Romans also, to make one law of Nations: And so, if you let Humanity Crown your Peace, as Valour has adorn'd your War, you need not fear but to govern without dan∣ger. When your Conquests find themselves united to you by Marriages, their Taxes eas'd and remitted, and their whole States chang'd for the better; when you change not the customs of their Provinces, and your impartial Justice gives them not the least jealously of their Rights, you will find men are not mad to embroyle themselves. And yet, Are your Conquests in different Languages? your vigorous beginnings must not end in too supine a negligence; you must have a jealous Eye on Neigh∣bours, least they joyn the discontented Na∣tives;
and in this Case, if you cut off Se∣ditious Heads, yet withall you must pardon and reward as generously, but especially your NOBLES. But lastly, Are you so necessitated, and would you secure your Conquests by force? Do it rather by Colonies, than firing them against you through standing Forces; he that by right of Conquest is Master of all, surely may command any little particu∣lar part, and dispossess the Natives of a few convenient fortified Towns for Co∣lonies. Are a few dispossest, do you obiect? 'tis for the good of the whole, and they be∣come too poor to be formidable; and as they are, you may make them satisfaction in another place, if you please, and which is best; or if not, others injoying their Rights justly, will never assist them.
Of Stratagems of WAR. THere are many advantages of Strata∣gems; but above all, that they breed confidence in your own Army, and dis∣may your Enemy: He'll dread to take the advantage of your Miscarriages, while he fears the Reputation of your Designs. Nor is it the least Excellency of Strata∣gem, to alter at every turn your methods. Thus, if sometimes a Cap on a Staff be made the Signal of Battel, as well as the Sound of the Trumpet, &c. how can your Enemy measure your intentions? So, to encourage your Army, print sometimes a hearty Speech to your Soul∣diers, with the promise of Rewards; so do they dread your Enemy? Skirmish him with some of your best men, to make him familiar to them. So, Would you make your Souldiers unanimous? let them do but the Enemy some considerable mischief before they Mu∣tiny, and fear will do the work. Hannibal finding his Souldiers desert, in a Speech told the rest that staid, That those that had left him had leave, and went as Spies to the Romans; the Romans hearing of
this, cut off the Deserters right hands, and sent them back to Hannibal again. So by Letters or chance words in Em∣bassies, to insinuate that the Eenemies Ge∣nerals or Officers are false, will give just the same jealously and distrust as if they were so. Above all, Spyes are greatly to be feared; are they run-aways? command but every Man to his Tent, and they are discovered immediately; but Spyes near your Coun∣sels are most pernicious; if an inconsiderable Enemy can so far undermine you, you may justly dread at last, least he destroy you by Stratagems also. Some to feel an Enemies Pulse, send Ambassadours often with good Souldiers in disguise; while others to blind such disco∣veries, continue their number of Tents, and draw their parties out of the whole Ar∣my. To obtain your desire on your Enemy, counterfeit but that you fear or desire the contrary, and you need not doubt his rea∣diness to cross or disappoint you: But would you avoid fighting him? besure keep at least 50 Miles from him. So, does he streighten you? amuse him by some Truce or Stratagem; Thus some have driven Oxen with combustible mat∣ter fir'd on their horns before them, and so escap'd.
Nor, is it inconsiderable, the skill and Command of Posts and Passes in this case, and yet not but that to repose your whole trust on them is as ruinous. But has your Enemy distressed you al∣ready in Stratagems? use the following or like Remedies. Thus, does your Enemy encompass you gather your self close and break through his weaker sides; does he press you between two Hills? make but a Trench behind you, and you may fight which half of him you please: does the other half come round up∣on you? a wooden-Bridge made, and laid cross the Trench, frees you of all. So, does he stop you at a River? either privately send out a Detachment to make a Bridge cross to secure your passage at a∣nother place, or divert the Channel, and so make it fordable; some have laid combusti∣ble matter in their Trenches, while others have turn'd the River and drown'd their Enemies with it. Some have counterfeited preys and fears to draw an Ambush, while others have set up Sayles on sticks, and shewn their Bag∣gage retinue on an Hill, to terrifie their Enemy with the approach of Succours. Some by favours to Captives, have divi∣ded
their Enemies, and by little Messages, sooth'd them in their divisions; but then remember, that to attack them too soon upon it, is to unite them; and here a Ge∣neral's dispositions and passions are to be regarded. Some also have let their Enemies enter, and take Towns, and assaulted them when weakned by garrisoning; others have wai∣ted only for some advantage over him, as his passing a River, &c. but in all cases, a General had better fight than baulk his men by too much caution. But to proceed; Is your Army at leisure? ravaging is the best employ: Seiges are un∣certain, Conspiracies loss of time, storm∣ing Towns is dangerous, and Battels more hazardous; but the best Plundering is under the Enemies Colours. But above all, the Reputation of a Gene∣als justice, his clemency and severity to perfection are most useful; he that is gentle to all but the stubborn, and implacable to the obstinate, has a double force to beat his Enemies with. And yet, after all, a possibility of Re∣treat, and a Back-door to Cowardize, ought to be left to the most Obstinate; 'twill influence your own Souldiers with Fear, to deal with an Enemy, desperate,
and beyond all power of escape: And thus Caesar would not let his Souldiers see, that a Town they besieg'd was reduc'd to a Bread of Herbs. To reduce your own Men to a necessity therefore, were much the rather to be cho∣sen. Thus, I would Burn my Ships, if I Invaded an Island to make my Men despe∣rate: But, if I storm'd a Town, I would Proclaim, not to kill a Man that laid down his Sword, rather than to suggest I intend∣ed no Mercy. So also, 'tis dangerous after a Battel, to fall upon the Conqueror, unless he has had a very hard Victory of it. Slaughters are generally in the flight, and not in the field; and 'tis therefore no little disadvantage to attack a flush'd Victor, and one just prac∣tis'd in ready fighting. To conclude, Histories may teach us more and better Stratagems than these; But where shall we find them? Has a Ge∣neral leisure to consult Volumes for the re∣sult and occurrence of an hour? Surely therefore, even in this, Precepts exceed Hi∣story also.
Of Plunder and Slaves. NOt only the Goods, Slaves, and Lands of the Conquer'd, but their very Persons also, by the Laws of Conquest, are at the discretion of the Victors; and yet, not but that at worst, they owe them all the freedoms and duties of Humanity; no∣thing can excuse us of Rapes, of putting Women or Children to death, or Men, ex∣cept Souldiers, or actually in Armes. Nay, if even Souldiers become your hum∣ble Suplicants, and surrender on discreti∣on, only the Principal Guiltists among your Enemy ought to suffer Death, I mean in Prudence, as well as Justice; for sure, the Mercy that can soften your Enemies, is highly to be esteem'd of. In the partition of Plunder, 'tis not a∣greeable the State should have all; surely the Soldiers deserve the price of their blood: but then let an Oath be Administred▪ for every Souldier to bring in his Plunder to be divided; or else, not only they may lose the day, through the Avarice of Plunder, but the worst of Souldiers will get most; while the General, and other Officers, that deserve best, will want even an equal di∣stribution.
In the Roman Distribution, the State had the Lands, Houses, and Goods Royal of the Conquer'd, while other Goods were di∣stributed to the Merits and Dignity of the Officers and Souldiers; a share being al∣ways reserved, as a Reward for all sin∣gular Bravery. But Free-plunder is most Barbarous, and, of all Military Offences, deserveth Death: Nor is the Maxim less Bruitish, of spoyl∣ing Countries where we come, to stop the progress and advantage of our Enemies, to destroy dangerous Castles and Fortifica∣tions, and the Fruits of the Earth, has some Sence in it; but, to Burn Houses, and ru∣in Temples, and Plantations, What is it but a Cowardize, and a Malicing the very good of Mankind? Does mine Enemy overcome me? there∣fore let me bravely let his Valour have such fruits of his Conquest, as may reward it; and, if it be my own happy lot, is not a Country Dress'd and Civiliz'd, better than Ruine and Destruction?
Of SOƲLDIERS. NOthing more Embroyls a State, than a Standing Army; if they have not Work, you'll quickly find they will make it, tho' even as in Turky, by Domineering over their very Princes: Besides, Is there any truer Method to Barbarisme? Could Ex∣perience ever shew us, that Souldiery did not destroy Property, and corrupt all Vertue? And yet, nothing is more unsafe than to Disband a great Army all at a time; it oftentimes creates a New Disease in a State; the better way therefore to move, is by degrees, and to Casheer those that can live without pay first, and the other after. But, Are you to Raise an Army? choose your Officers of the Gentry, and, if possible, Volunteers; yet still, provided they be not profligate, or dissolute; for such Men are no fitter to be Officers, than of any other Employment. So, let your Souldiers be hardy, your Horse from the City, and your Foot from the Countrey; their Age between 17 and 40. As for their Strength and Activity,
you would do well to Exercise them be∣fore you List them. To choose an Army of your common Volunteers, and Miscreant Fugitives, is the most imprudent; an Army ought rather to be a Body of Martyrs: Debauch'd Men are fitter for an House of Correction, than to be of an orderly and designing Body, tho' in an Army. So a mean Militia and Army of your own, is much better than a great Merce∣nary Force: By good and constant Dis∣cipline, you may inspire the worst of Men by degrees, while Forreigners damp the Courage and Estimate of your own. Besides, How many States have felt the Ruine of Auxiliary Forces? if you trust them, they either give up your Cause, or Prey upon you; at least they are interest∣ed but to Fight in Jest for you; as in Italy, they shall not suffer your sawcy Bombs to disturb their rest at night in their Sieges. Further, Forces of your own you may Command at your pleasure; while For∣reigners will be only desperate for their own ends. Are you necessitated to For∣reigners therfore? front them in your Ar∣my, or mix them so as to force them to Fight.
As for the breeding Souldiers, liberty only can give us good hearts: The old Roman Peasants durst face Kings, and make Generals in the Field: their Country was as worthy their Love, as their Courage; while Men cow'd, can slave to all Ty∣rants alike. Hen. the Seventh therefore, po∣litickly settled Farms of such a Size, &c. to breed good Boors by. As for the sorts of Souldiers, your Grana∣deers are a Body of Men design'd for any extraordinary occasion; they wait at the Flank of your Army, as the Dragoons do; and they are often as well Horse as Foot; and on sudden and desperate Emergen∣cies very needful. As for Horse and Foot in a well-disci∣plin'd Army, experience has shewn, Foot doubly to excel Horse; indeed, Foot with Pikes have often beat double their num∣ber of Horse. Horse, 'tis true, at a Rout, or, as Scouts, or to raise Contribution, or to confound a weak Enemy, are excellent; but, to think a Spur can force an Horse upon a Pike, is as absurd as dangerous. So, What are Pikes, or Muskets ei∣ther, without defensive Arms, for Head, Breast, Arms, Thighs and Legs, with a Buckler? Men thus Arm'd, put by your Pikes, and come in with ease upon your
Men with naked Swords; nay, if such Men Ride but as Dragoons, they attack you more speedily, and even just where they please. Nor is this a Fiction neither; the Ro∣mans, who by use, made such Defensive Arms tolerable, withall Conquer'd the World with them: And if either the best Politicians, or the best Historians be to be credited, this sort of Men, for all our Fire-arms, are not even yet to be despis'd. Of MILITIA. THat Souldiers are Voluptuous is not always so much from their Corrup∣tion, as that Perils ask to be paid by Plea∣sures: To dye a Souldier, surely is a kind of Martyrdom; and he that blames the Profession for the Abuse, forgets, that on sudden approaches of Enemies, and Inva∣sions, 'tis every Man's duty to be a Soul∣dier; but more especially the Young, and Ʋnmarried, Luke 3. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 7. But then I would rather be a Volunteer, than a Listed Souldier: Surely it can never be lawful to kill Men purely at the Call of the Ambition of Princes.
Souldiers in War, are Sinews to the Bo∣dy-Politick, in Peace its Feaver: Not that it is safe neither; quite to lay aside your Warlike Discipline in Peace; But think you there is any Justice for one Man to live sluggishly on the Labour of ano∣ther? The justest Mean therefore must be, a well-manag'd Militia; and if we are for Teaching Warlike-discipline in Peace, Why do we not also turn our University Specu∣lative Mathematicks to the more useful Improvements of Fortification and Engi∣nery? But, in a Militia the Disciplining a few Men, and they every time strangers, and drawn, with Charge, from remote parts, to meet in a Body; surely, such a Martial-discipline can avail little or nothing. Let it rather be, that every Man of such an Age, and Stature, be a Souldier; that every Parish be a distinct Body of them, having its proper Officers in it's self; and, that no one, capable on any account, be exempt from Discipline. This would force our Gentry, as their Officers, into esteem; and, if by any means, make a Nation Invincible: And surely, 'twould rather be a delight, and a diversi∣on, than a Charge, for such a Militia,
(like as at our Ancient Wakes) to meet and Exercise an hour or two in a Week. And, do you fear in such case such Disci∣plines being superficial? How easie is the Cure, by the Examination of Commissio∣ners for Hundreds and Counties, &c. And, Do you want an Army? How quick does every Parish proportion you a Supply? Nay, and such an Army you may easily Disband with a Donative; and, every Man knowing his home, is welcomely receiv'd; while you are out of danger of being pe∣ster'd by Vagabonds, indeed if any such should happen to be disabled, 'twould be a Generous Charity in the State to provide Hospitals for them, or else they are provi∣ded for, with a kind welcome to your hand. Donatives to Standing Armies are most pernicious, even to make them at last, State-robbers; but Donatives here would be the justest reward of our Brethrens Blood. Besides, such an Army would have Hu∣manity and Christianity; nor need we doubt but that their constant Exercise would make them brave, as Souldiers by profession; besides, that Souldiers thus rais'd, would know truly how to value their Liberty.
To conclude; The constant and uni∣versal Exercise could not but whet their Spirits and Courages in Emulation, and make them familiar to Force and Arms, while every Souldier imploy'd, would, like the Romans of old, know how to Fight heartily for that Peace he knew what 'twas to enjoy; and especially, if when Maim'd, they were assur'd of a comfor∣table Subsistence in their several Parishes. Of BATTEL. ARe you suddenly to give Battel? Publish a Speech against Cowardize: Alass! Are not all our great slaughters made, when Men run away? And can you want Topicks? So, if possible, before you fight also, give your Men, from some Hill, the prospect of your Enemy; by that you may deride their Discipline, and expose them to the Contempt of your Army: Fear is seldom so considerable, as when of something unknown. So, when you Fight, make their En∣signs carry their Pay, and that will make your Souldiers vigorously defend them: Nor be without Rewards or Punishments;
Thus, to kill a Captain, so much; a Ge∣neral, so much; and, to Mount a Breach, so much, &c. Does a Regiment offend? Decimate them. Are they Cowards? Mark them with a C. and let them live to the Dis∣grace: Are they Treacherous? give them the death they deserve. And yet, to avoid Sedition, let the General but give them a little blow with a Wand; for when you make a Souldier pass the Pikes, the Army are their own Executioners. As to Figures, Armies are generally drawn into Three Lines; and the Turkes use the Crescent; but surely, the Ground and Circumstance ought, in this Case, to be considered. Thus, Is your Army biggest? fight in open field, and try to compass your ene∣my? Is it little? flank your self with Tren∣ches, and fight close. Have you no Horse? seek to enclosures; but, above all, beware of the Wind, or Sun, in your Faces. So, Are you assaulted in a Wedge, to distract you? become a pair of Sheers, to cut off your enemy. Are you enclin'd to compass him? equal his breadth, advance gradually your Wings, and retreat your Front; but this is a dangerous Work. When the Battel begins, Generals, by Drums and Trumpets, Order their Souldi∣ers
to the field, and Great Guns attempt the first Execution, while the Dragoons Attack them; and e're a second dis∣charge, the fight begins, and they become useless. Thus, Are the Guns in the middle of their Battalions? divide your Army, and you avoid them; the first shot is distant, and goes over, or under; or your Infantry, by their wide ranks avoid them, while your Horse are secure in their Reer. After this, Shouts joyn both your Dra∣goons; who, bearing the first shock, make room, by retiring to your Flanck and Reer, and while more silent Orders join the Battel. And now the Pikes advance to keep off the Horse; while the Armies once join'd, the Pikes withdraw within the Bucklers, and your Bucklers worsted within your Pikes. Musquets serve a shot or two, till the Fight is clos'd, but then your Man at Arms, with Sword, Buckler and Armour, does all; who, if the first Rank but kneel, their very Bucklers keep off the Bul∣lets; But, What can fence your Rapier with Armour? The wise Romans had their Ranks wide, their Hastati, or Young Men, bore the fu∣ry of the Battel; if worsted, they retired
among their Principes, or strong Men, and they again among their Triarii, or Old Souldiers. Your Horse, in the mean time, engage at the side of your Army, while your Dragoons retire to take care of your Camp: the proportion of your Foot is; Have you Ten Battalions? Five Hastati, Three Principes, and Two Triarii; the benefit of such Orders is, your Men are refreshed by the new support of your best Men at last; while a square Army runs, and is defeated, before half can fight. But now, Why do I stay? the fight's begun, Stratagems follow, Pits, Am∣buscades, False Allarums, Surprizes of Novel Words, Engines, Shouts, and Ap∣pearances of Succours. Officers fling their Colours among the Enemy, to reward the Souldiers that fetch them again; while the General minds Intelligence, and Orders Succours to the side that is oppress'd, and the Dra∣goons refresh'd; return to try to flank the enemy. After all, Have you worsted an une∣qual enemy? either perfect the Victo∣ry, or snap at his disheartned Terms of Peace: The only time of slaughter is,
when Men are disorder'd, and lose their Confidence in one another; to let them Rally, spoils all. So, Was your flight doubtful, and parted by Night? carry off some Dead, to dismay your enemy, through their few∣ness next morning; such a Night can∣not but be a Night of Dread, and the least push will be likely to give the Morn∣ing's advantage. But are you beat? to hinder pursuit, fight where you may retreat; at worst, retreat part of your Army orderly first; and so your Enemy not daring to divide, appoint a common place for the rest to meet at: but are your Souldiers forc'd to fly? yet at worst, let them detard their Pursuers, and save their Lives by scattering their Treasures. On the whole, in a pitch'd Battel to be first in the Field, is of great use; you choose your Ground, and you hearten your Sol∣diers by it; but even on this, nay on Victo∣ry, beware of a too careless Success; for that almost ever ruines the day, and too often sacrifice all, (while the Souldiers are careless, merry, or plundering) to some trifling Reinforcement. To conclude, As for Engines, surely Archimedes's Arrow-Engine must needs,
even at this day, gall Horse worse than any Guns whatever. Arrows not only are of equal execution, but fret Horse doubly more than Guns can; but as for your Scithe Charriots, they are now be∣come of no use, being so readily stopt by Stakes. Of Military Discipline. I Shall not trouble you with the me∣chanick Rudiments of Discipline, as Shoulder your Musket, advance your Pike, &c. a Formality not without its use; for how can men charge together otherwise! But this I shall say, You should keep your Rancks at 6 foot distance, your Files at 3. lest you cramp your Motion; so your Col∣lours and Drums between your Muskets and Pikes, your Captain with the Pikes, and your Lieutenant with the Muskets. So, the general order of Martialling Soul∣diers, is to every Squadron, or Ten, a Ser∣jeant or Corporal to head, hearten, and command; to every 100. a Captain; to every 1000. a Collonel; and to the whole Body a General. Or, in Battalions of 6000. thus, 10 Companies in a Battalion,
450 in a Company; and which making 4500. the remaining 1500. are to be 1000 Pikes, and 500. Velites extraordinary. So the proportion of a good Army, should be in 6000 men, 3000 with Buck∣lers, 2000 with Pikes, and 1000 with Musquets; as for your Ranks, the closer the better, as not so easily broken; yet still provided, that they leave convenient space for motion, and that their Files be so con∣stant that their Souldiers never want to find out their Post again. If your Company contain 400 men, you may draw them up 5 in a File, and 80 in a Rank; or, if you'd reduce them to a square for fighting, 'tis but casting your first File into your second, your third into your fourth, &c. and then there will be 40 Files of 10. and so you may bring them to 20. of 20. if you please, to be ready to an∣swer which way soever attack'd. And, as inferiour Officers ought to re∣duce Souldiers to a readiness in such Dis∣cipline, to be able to answer their Generals Commands upon occasion; so ought they to enure their Souldiers to hardship also, that they be not dismay'd in extremity. Thus, to let them carry their own Corn, will not only help, but strengthen them; so for them to learn to swim, may save
them on occasion; while to drown them in luxury and ease, What is it but to soften and effeminate their very Courages with∣al, to their Destruction. As for your disciplining Dragoons, there needs not so much care; they being de∣sign'd rather upon extraordinary occasions than in any thing like a regular fight. Your Horse indeed should be more order∣ly; thus, suppose 300 in a Battalion, of which 150 to be men at Arms, and 150 to be Light. Your Pikes are to front the square of your Army, and as 5 Ranks of them is as many as can well charge at once; and as the Fight begun, and the Army secur'd from the Horse, they fall to make room for the Men at Arms; so 7 Files of Pikes, that is, 1 or 2 to be ready to supply fal∣ling men, is as many as you can have oc∣casion to front with. The manner of Commanding an Army, is, the Souldiers follow the Colours, and they the Drums; the inferiour Officers command the Centinels, and the Superi∣ours them, while the General governs all. A bad General, or a bad Army there∣fore, are equally dangerous. On the whole, an 100 men in Military Discipline, and convenient Arms, are a
match for two in confusion; the one helps each other; the other promotes but one another's destruction, while the cull'd An∣gular men of Officers and Corporals in an Army, bind and hearten the whole regu∣lar Number as into a Body. Of Marching an Army. TO march an Army through a Fo∣reign Country, observe these Rules. First, that the Prince have due notice, that Quarters may be provided, and a sufficient pay prescrib'd. Secondly, That the second Body go the same way that the first did, and that if they are in great Bodies, they march not every day. Thirdly, That damage done by Soul∣diers be made good. Fourthly, That they approach no prohibited place within a Mile. And lastly, That they do not quar∣ter in Cities or Towns that are intrench'd. The usual method is, your Dragoons march first to scower the Road, then your right Wing and Carriages are to follow; then your Body with its Carriages, and after those your left Wing with its Car∣riages,
and after all your Cavalry. And, thus withdrawing a little your Carriages, you are ready for the Enemy any way, and he cannot well attack you in your march if you are circumspect, but that he will be at as much disadvan∣tage as your self. Your Dragoons who scower the Road, guard your Pioneers also, who are to plain your ways, and make Entrenchments for your Camp; and in this, not to multiply Men needlesly, your own Souldiers may serve as Pioneers, and who, when an Ene∣my approaches, may retreat to their Arms; your Spades and Pick-axes being carried by for them in Carts. If you march where you may be streightned in Provisions, have at least a Months necessaries before hand, and take continual care for Supplies; and to this end you may have a Market with Sutlers in the middle of your Camp, while your Cattel laden with Corn, are driven by your Ba∣kers, Butchers, and Cooks, after them. Above all, take care to march in exact order; and if a few Men assault you, and flye, or a Prize of Cattle appear, do not let them decoy you into an Ambushment; a General must anticipate Stratagems as he marches.
So, Do you fear surprizes or ambushes? beware of Hills, of Woods and Hedges, and you need not fear but that either Scouts, Dust, or Birds, will give you notice, that you may at least provide your self of Ad∣vantage against their attack. Further, when you march, never ac∣quaint your Army with the enterprize, lest it perish through the discovery; but rather getting a Chart, pick up some Coun∣trey Guides, and make them yours through threats and rewards to conduct you. As for the size of your Army, the Ro∣mans by their Conquests seem'd best Judg∣es of fighting, and they thought 24000, or at most 50000 Men a double Army enough; indeed, more not only confounds and devour one another, but are not well manageable, nor can they conveniently march in the Field. Of Treachery, &c. IS an Enemy Treacherous or extream Bloody in his Wars? Does he break his Word, or lay Countries waste cause∣lesly? He has flung up his Right ei∣ther
to Treaty or mercy from thee, and the mildest Quarter that he can expect upon it, is, that he be decimated. Now the Treacherous are not only such as are faithless, and observe no Treaties, but those that War like Robbers with∣out the least apparency of cause to justi∣fy it, or those that abuse our Embassadors, or any other way violate the sacred Laws of Nations. Not, but that the just right of War leaves me all the liberty of Stratagems to bribe or divide mine Enemy whatever; nay, I may send Spyes to Assassinate him, as well as Parties to Plunder him; but if I am once either false or perfidious, my Enemy has no tye of mercy to me till I am naked in his Power. So I may use all the honest means of simulation; thus I may justly seem to fly, to draw mine Enemy to an Ambush, and so I may plunder under mine enemies Colours, and make fals Alarms; alas 'tis not fight∣ing, if I am not allowed by false Passes to draw mine enemy from his Guard, the better to make a real one. The true Rule therefore is, all known signs of Treaty, whether by Flag, or o∣therwise, I am bound in veracity to stand to; but in other matters, even Christ him∣self
gave us another Example, after he was risen from the dead; and set his Face as if he were going where he was not. Nay, Does even a Nest of Pirates reform to a Government, and our Treacherousest Enemy begin to leave his Perfidy? I will not too far hazard the Wiles of the Fox, but after a moderate self-justice and repri∣sal for my injustice, I am bound to treat both and either as my Brethren. But, above all Treachery, beware of trust∣ing Exiles too far, in leading your Expediti∣ons; consider how dearly such Men may value their own Countrey, and how re∣dily they may be apt to purchase their liberty at thy expence.
Of Fortification and Sieges. FOr a Fortification, take some Rocky Nap in a Plain, that is neither blind∣ed by Hills nor Woods; the Walls if pos∣sible, are better natural than rais'd; for if cut out of a Rock, neither Batteries nor Mines can destroy the Hill. As for the thickness or height of Walls, or the number of Redoubts, they are Mat∣ters wholly at discretion. Can you make a Castle like a City? Surely, your works ought to be suited to your own size and proportion of Ground, and to the Ene∣mies approach, and not a Figure. A Fort of two or three Angles only, is of no value; but after that, the more the better, provided if not like Babylon, too big for Intelligence: But the silly imagi∣nation, that the strength of a place depends on every Mathematical Figure, is trifling. A Fort not strong by Nature, cannot receive much by Art; Now by Art the Walls ought to be three yards thick at least, and Towers built at every 200 Yards. For Ditches, two are best, without and within; if you have one only, 'tis best with∣in,
and that of 30 Yards broad at least, and 12 deep, with Artillery to scour them at every 200 Yards; and so 'tis better with∣out Water than with; if your Water freeze, the Town is gone at an instant; and if not, a Bridge of Boats is easier made than another. Is your Ditch to Water, or Rock? there is no possibility of mining your Wall. Is it in the inside? there is no way to come to fill it up; your Wall in Battery will fall the other way: and so that your Ditch will be good when your Wall is flat. Further, in Forts, let your Houses be low, so as not to hinder your prospect; let your Gates be secured by Ravelin and and Portcullis, and let your free passage be secur'd by Draw-Bridge, or at worst by a Timber-stand from the bottom of the Bridge, and which you may command by Cannon of your Inner Redoubt. Little Entrenchments without the Walls are most mischievous, the losing and re∣treating from such little Bastions, are per∣fect Baits of Cowardize to your Souldiers; and surely, 'tis no good Lesson to teach them to give ground. Further, in founding a Fort, the Air and Water are greatly to be regarded, as also an agreeable Country, and Roads near it;
if built in too fertile a Land, it may luxuri∣ate it; if in too barren, not be able to pro∣vide against a Siege. The beauty of Forts in Buildings, or other∣wise, is not much to be regarded; but Fron∣tiers that are like to be disturbed by War, will require all the encouragements imagi∣nable: Now such are, 1. Free-trade, 2. Easy Justice, 3. Asylum, &c. A Fort thus setled, the Inhabitants by the Law of Nations, owe the Government a Right to defend her; and in which case, tho' a single person may desert it, a Prince may justly withstand a general de∣parture, provided he fear not their Trea∣chery. But is a Siege begun? Due order is to be observ'd: Let Women and Children keep their Houses to avoid disturbance; and the men be distributed into three parts, 1. to be on the Guard, 2. ready as a reserve, and a 3d. taking their rest. Some add, a Ma∣stiff Dog to their Centinel, full as service∣able as a Man. Nor let your Discipline be neglected on any Account; Towns have been storm'd even at Dinner time; and yet not but that in such case, when they have, the Besieg∣ed sometimes by Showers out at their Win∣dows, and sometimes by firing the Town,
have made their Walls good again against the Besiegers. Some on the other hand, have seem'd to leave the Walls, as if the Town were fired by some Bomb, only by a false Fire, the better to draw the enemy to a disadvantag∣ous Attack; and while at the same time, the Walls have unseen, been doubly guarded. But does the Siege proceed? and would you avoid mining? Digg holes every 10 Yards, like Wells by your Walls, and they will give vent; or sound the Mine, and countermine it. So, is your Ditch in the out-side, and your Wall flat? make but a Ditch within of 30 Yards broad, and the Breach is as easily kept as the Wall. Some, when a Siege has been drove hard, have shot in empty Bombs those proposi∣tions, that the Officers would not ac∣quaint their Souldiers with, while others seeming only to march near a Town, have fallen upon it at unawares, and so surpriz'd it in Disorder. Some have seem'd to fly, and leave their Camp, and so drilling out the Enemy, sur∣priz'd the Town; while others poyson∣ing their Camp-Victuals, have de∣stroy'd the Enemy that way.
So, Where a Town has stood doubtful, t'has been secur'd by begging to receive some sick Men, while the stoutest men have been sent in disguise into it. So some have poysoned Waters, others drove in the Besieged's Friends, to consume their Victuals, while some have been re∣liev'd by Nutts floating down a River. Caesar made a Bread of Herbs for his Souldiers; and Londonderry fed on Starch for Bread, and Leather boyl'd soft for Meat. But are the Besieg'd come to a Treaty? 'Tis neither honourable nor safe for a Go∣vernour to parly in a Siege, nor to accept other Terms, than at least to go out Arm'd, and in order. Surely, He's mad that can trust himself naked with a Triumphant and Revengeful Army. Nor is't a little imprudence for a Gene∣ral to divide himself to destruction in be∣sieging little Henroosts before a Royal Army; and if there be no such Army, Forts alone cannot hinder your Army from ra∣vaging your Enemies Country. To conclude, Forts are only of use a∣gainst Enemies & on Frontiers; 'tis a Self-destructive Policy to think to retain Sub∣jects in Obedience by them: the wise Romans chose rather to demollish them;
but while you have Forts, Military Disci∣pline is as necessary; for your Garrisoners in their Sallies, as your Field Souldiers in their March. Of the CAMP. THE Order of your Camp ought to be, as if you were ready to charge your Enemy; only you may stand a little wider, for the conveniency of Streets and Air, and for the benefits of reintrench∣ments, but always in the same manner, that the Souldiers may naturally know their home, and the whole seem a moving City, constantly with the same Gates and Lodgings. Nor ought your Camp, if near an Ene∣my, to want either Water or Provisions; nor if your stay be long, a good Air; above all, streighten not your march by want of securing Passes; nor lye too near to Hills, lest your Enemy incommode you. Your Ditch ought at least to be 6 Yards wide, and 3 deep, together with Half-Moons for your Artillery, to flanck your Enemy as he approaches; and so your
Camp may be better for conveniences, than either as on a Hill or by a River. Further, While you are encampt, be∣ware of Surprize; and while your enemy is near, besure watch all comers and go∣ers; nay, a third part of your Souldiers ought to be continually Arm'd; and a fourth of those, perpetually on the Watch, some at the corners, and some on the Pat∣roll or Search, lest your enemy either Stratagem or Besiege you in your Camp. Lastly, In decamping, the usual order is, the General Sounds his Trumpet thrice the first time, to give notice to take down Tents, and pack them up; the second, to load their Sumpters; and the third, to march away. FINIS.
THE TABLE THe Entrance, or the Digester. P. 1. Of Books. p. 15. Of Criticks p. 20. Of Divination, &c. p. 22. Astrology p. 26. —Its Dependants p. 31. Of Meckness p. 38. Of Contention p. 40. Of Contradiction p. 42. Lapis Errantium p. 44. Of Cunning p. 55.
Of Wisdom p. 57. The Seeming Wise p. 59. Of Logick p. 61. Its Parts p. 63. Arguments p. 66. Method p. 70. Of Anger p. 76. Of Murder p. 78. Of Revenge p. 80. Of Reformation p. 82. By A. B. Tillotson p. 97. Of Wit p. 100 Of Rewards p. 103. Of Pedantry p. 104. Of Pity p. 118. Of Pardon p. 120. Of Rhetorick p. 123. Delivery p. 125.
Perswasion p. 128. Parts of Discourse p. 134. Invention p. 137. Figures p. 139. Of Judgment p. 142. Of Happiness p. 144. Of Presence of Mind p. 147. Of Secrets p. 149. To attain Secrets p. 153. Occult Writing p. 155. Of Collections p. 161. Of Precepts p. 163. Of Sincerity p. 166. Of Vows and Oaths p. 169. Of Censure p. 177. Praises p. 177. Contempt p. 180. Libels p. 183. True Satyr p. 186.
Rash Judgment p. 189. Reports p. 194. Of Poetry p. 198. Of Preface and Dedication p. 203. Of Study p. 208. Method p. 209. Limitation of Study p. 214. Choice of Books p. 217. Speculat. and Practice p. 222. Of Constancy p. 226. The Art of War. Of the Lawfulness of War p. 231. Of Generals in War p. 236. Of War in General p. 239. Of Conquest p. 243. Of Stratagems in War p. 247. Of Plunder and Slaves p. 252 Of Souldiers p. 255.
Of Militia p. 257. Of Battel p. 260. Of Military Discipline p. 265. Of Marching an Army p. 268. Of Treachery p. 270. Of Fortifications p. 273. Of Camps. p. 278.
ERRATA. PAge 34. Line 17. read, together with your Rosacrucian figments. P. 64. l. 1. r. quatuor modis, for Quarto modo. P. 85. l. 13. r. That dominion, for the dominion. P. 112. l. 12. r. with such formalities, and the like as. P. 124. l. ult. r. of That nature, for that of nature. P. 130. l 14. r. Judged by him, for judged by them. P. 189. l. 17. r. currunt for current. P. 193. l. 2. r. fancy and Idea, for fancy an Idea. 23. r. their indifferency, for as an indifferency. P. 224. l. 15. r. Hypocrites, dele as.
