F2106 12607639 64273
THE ROYAL MESSAGE FROM THE PRINCE OF ORANGE TO THE PEERES AND Commons in England, To advertise them of some dangerous Plots of forraigne Enemies, undertaken by Don Keevalo Caris, and others, to invade this Kingdome. With his desire, that all the Ports and Cinque Coasts be fortified with strong Armes and Ammunition. As also how he freely proffer'd himself to resist both them and the Irish rebels. Prnted for Tho. Powel. 1641.
A Royall Embassage from the Prince of Orange to the well affected Subiects in England. WEE having maturely considered of the disloyal opposition, which have been reflected on our Fa∣ther, the manifold endeavours of your unwea∣ried vigilancie, and the obstacles that interrupt the same, with the multiplicity of distractions wherein your Kingdome is dangerously involved did forthwith according to our indulgent affec∣tion, think it expedient to premonish and adver∣tise you of the numerous perils which are immi∣nent and impendent over you; it strooke a re∣percussive griese and carefull sollicitation into our Princely minde, as soone as we had intelli∣gence concerning the same; and that their Stra∣tagems might prove abortive, for the prevention thereof wee thought good to shew our zealous duty to his Maiesty, our respective affection to his Parliament▪ and the future security of his Royall Throne and Realme.
And first we predictate unto you the obscure∣ly hatched conspiracies of the King of Spaine, the object of whose sole intents have principaly aimed at the destructive ruine of your Nation: Wee have had credible intelligence, that hee is suddenly resolved to raise a strong and formi∣dable Navie (scarce inferiour to that almost In∣vincible Armado) and with a rushing and unex∣pected throng invade the Land. Don Pedro affir∣med this to be true, and hath conducted many paper-messengers to Us concerning the absolute ast pulation and credible assertion of the same. Don Pedringano likewise (my singular and inti∣mate Friend) did certifie the same unto mee: Wherefore we lovingly, yea and obsequiously too, premonish you to be circumspective and cautious: For to our certaine knowledge Don Keevalo Caris is in great preparation to ruse and augment his Fleet, as appeared by the Notions of our dearest Friends, But besides this trap, there is likewise a dangerous snaredistended a∣gainst your Kingdome, which both doe vio∣lently threaten a most precipitious destruction; My intent is not mysterious or enigmaticall, but rather very perspicuous to be interpreted. I mean ths Frenchmen, who, like the Egyptian Locusts who are resolved to swarme in the realme sud∣denly, and so imbrew their inhumane hands in the offsive bloud of the Protestants. These with the auxiliary assistance of the re∣bels
in Ireland, being link confederates, and once conioyned in the cruell concatenation of Ty∣rannicall conspiracies are able to to precipitate the whole Kingdome at one stroke, if Gods om∣nipotent and doe not avet it, and your vigilant endeavours prevent it. Sed mal orae speramus, wee hope and expect a more happy, favourable, and propitous event t Yet notwithstanding with∣out any  procrastinatin wee humbly be∣seech for yor owne safety particularly, and the Epidemicail security of the whole Kingdome, that you would with Judicious maturity of Coucel seriousy csider the perillous pre∣cedent  and you may then clte, that the  very dangerous. Werefore  spct our humble our hum∣ble advice that you woul bee grciously pleased to  the chief Coasts and Cinque Ports with Military Armes, and strong Ammuni∣tion in defence of the Kingdome, for otherwise nothing can be expected but ruinate and precipi∣tate destruction. Likewise, that you would gravely consider and appoint, that the City of London be strongly provided, and the Tower soundly searched, least any intestine plot should be somented at home. As also, that all Military Ammunition be provided, and it be forthwth or∣dered, that the Traine Bands should daily waite for prevention of any conspiracie that should ensue. Thus as we have presented our pre∣sent care and indulgent sollicitation for the safe∣tie
and welfare of the Kingdome: so likewise we presume to commend respectively our peti∣tionary desire to your Honours: First, that your Honours would be graciously pleased to conde∣scend to his Maiesties pleasure and Just Com∣mand, without repugnance and opposition; for a distracted varience betwixt a King and his Sub∣iects, is the first Ground and principium of con∣fusion to a Nation. Therefore we humbly im∣lore your honours to conioyne with his Maiesty in a reciprocall concord, that the knot of peace and tranquility may be tyed so securely fast, that all the hell-guided Conspiracies of Forraigne Enemies may be annihilated and abolished. That you would likewise endeavour to concatenate the affections of the people to his Majesty, that his Royall Prerogative and Imperiall Throne be not violated, and trampled downe by the ma∣licious aspersions of such as are ill affected and dangerous persons in the Realme. That the divisions and distractions in the Kingdome may be allayed and asswaged, to the comfort of his Maiesty, the honour of his Parliament, and the perpetuall peace and prosperity of the Realme. In the meane time my diurnal prayers assiduous Supplicaions shalbe invocated upon the mighty and Almighty assistance and auxiliation of God that all your deliberations and determining Councels may be directed to the right obiect, And for my part I will confirme my resolutions, and am fully intended to assist you with my full
power and Forces; and I shall likewise diligent∣ly endeavour to repel and detrude those forraign Enemies: And for the Irish rebels wee shall la∣bour to qualifie, and by Gods divine providence assisting us we shall crowne England with an O∣live Branch of Victorious Tranquility in the Kingdome. His Maiesties Consent for the Princesse Maries going to HOLLAND. And her Maiestie to accompany her thither. HIs maiestie being very much pressed by the States Ambassador to send the Princesse his Daughter im mediately into Holland: And being likewise earnestly desi∣red by his royall Consort the Queene, to give her majestie leave to accompany her Daughter thither; hath thought fit to consent to both de∣sires, and to make this his Maiesties resolution known to his parliament. FINIS.
