F2378A R215798 99827567 31989
A Full True and Particular ACCOUNT Of the GHOST or Apparition of the late Duke of Buckingham's Father, which se∣veral Times appeared in Armor to one of the Duke's Servants; and for about half a Year before foretold the DUKE's Death. man in bed, another man standing nearby Printed by F. C. in the Old Bailey.
Extract a Monsieur d'Ablancour, le Vie le Grand Due de Buckingham. THERE were many Stories scattered A∣broad at that Time, of several Prophecies and Predictions concerning the Duke's untime∣ly and violent Death. Amongst the rest there was one, which was upon a better Foundation of Credit, than usually such Discourses are founded upon. There was an Officer in the King's Wardrobe in Windsor-Castle, of a good Reputation for Honesty and Discetion, and then about the Age of Fifty Years or more: This Man had in his Youth been Bred in a School, in a Parish where Sr. George Villiers the Father of the Duke liv'd; and had been much Cherished and Obliged in that Season of his Age by the said Sr. George whom afterwards he never saw. About Six Months before the Miserable End of the Duke of Buckingham, a∣bout Midnight, this Man being in his Bed at
Windsor where his Office was, and in very good Health, there appeared to him on the side of his Bed, a Man of a Venerable Aspect, who drew the Curtains of his Bed, and fixing his Eyes upon him, ask'd hm, if he knew him. The poor Man, half dead with Fear and Ap∣prehension, being ask'd the second time, whe∣ther he remember'd him? And having in that time called to his Memory the Presenc of Sir George Villiers, and the very Cloaths he used to wear in which at that time he seemed to be habited▪ he anser'd him, that he thought him to be that Person. He reply'd, he was in the Right, that he was the same, and that he ex∣pected a 'Service from him: wic was, that he should go from him to his Son the Duke of Buckingham, and tell him, if he did not some∣what to ingratiate himself to the People, or, at least to abate the Extream Mallice they had a gainst him, he would be suffer'd to live but a short Time'. After this Discourse he disap∣pear'd; and the poor man, if he had been at all waking, slept well till morning, when he be∣lieved all this to be a dream, and consider'd it no otherwise. The next night, or shortly after, the same Person appear'd to him, again in the same Place, and about the sam Tim of the Nght, with an Aspect a little more severe than before, and
ask'd him, whether he had done as he required him? And perceiving he had not, gave him very severe Reprehensions; and told him, he expected more Complyance from him; and that if he did not perform his Commands, he should enjoy no Peace of Mind, but should be always pursued by him: Upon which he promised to obey him. But the next Morning wakng out of a good Sleep, though he was exceedingly Perplexed with the Lively Representation of all parti∣culars to his Memory, he was willing still to perfwade himself that he had only Dreamed: And consider'd that he was a Person at such a Distance from the Duke, that he knew not how to find any Admission to his Presence; much less had any hope to be believ'd in what he should say. So with great Trouble and unqui∣etness, he spent some Time in thinking wht he should do; and in the End resolving to do nothing in the Matter. The same Person appear'd to him the Third Time with a Terrible Countenance and bitterly reproaching him with not performing what he had promis'd to do. The Poor Man took Cou∣rage to tell him; That in Truth he had defer'd e Execution of his Commands upon considering how Difficult a Thing it would be for him to get any access to the Duke, having Acquaintance with no Person about him; and if he could attain Ad∣mission
to him, he should never be able to perswade him, that he was sent in such a manner: But he should at best be thought to be mad, or set on and employ'd by his own or the Mice of other Men to abuse the Duke, and so he shoud sure to be undone. The Person reply'd is hehad done before, that he should never find Rest. 'till he should perform what he requir'd and therefore he were better to dispatch it. That the Access to his Son was known to be very easy; and that few Men waited long for him; and for the gaining him Credit, he would tell him Two or Three Particulars, which he charged him never to mention to any Person living, but to the Duke himself, and he should no sooner hear them but he would believe all the Rest he should say, and so repeating his Threats, he left him. In the morning the poor man more cofirm'd by the last Appearance, made his Journey to London, where the Court then was. He was very well known to Sr. Ralph Freeman, one of the Masters of Requests, who had married a lady that was nearly a lyed to the Duke, and was himself well receiv'd by him. To him this man went, and, though he did not acquaint him with all Particulars, he said enough to him to lt him know there was something extraordinary in it, and the knowledge he had of the Sobriety and Discretion of the man made the more Im∣pression in him. He desir'd that by his means
he might be brought to the Duke to such Place and n such a manner, as shou'd be thought sit, affirming, that he had much to say to him, and of such a nature as would require much pri∣vacy, and some time and Patience in th hear∣ing. Sr Ralph promis he would fist speak with the Duke of him and then he shoud understand his Pleasure: and accordinly in the fist Opor¦tunity he did inform him of the Reputation and Honesty of the man, and thn what he desir'd, and of all h knew or th matter. The Duke ac¦cording to his wanted Oenness an Condescen¦tion told him 'That he was the next day Early to hunt with the King hat his Horses should attend Him at Lambeth Bridge where h woud Land by five of the Clock in the Morning, and if the man attened him there at that Hour, he 'would walk and speak with hm as long as should be necessry. Sr. Ralph carried the man with him the next Morning, and presented him to the Duke at hi Landing who receiv'd him courtiously; and walk dalie in conference near an Hou, none but his own Servans being that Hour in that Place and they and Sr Ralph at at such a Distance that they could not hear a word, tho' the Duke at some times spoke, and with great Emotion; which Sr Ralph the more easily observed and perceived because he kept his eyes allways fix'd upon the Duke having procured the Conference, upon somewhat he
knew there was Extraordinary: And the man told him in his return over the water 'that when he mention'd 'those Particulars, which were to gain him Credit the Substance where of 'he said he durst not impute to him, the Duke's Colour changed and he swore he could come to that knowledge only by the Devil: For that those Particulars were known only to himself and to one Person more, who, 'he was sure would never speak of it. The Duke pursued his purpose of hunting, but was observ'd to look all the morning with great pensiveness, and in deep thoughts, with out any Delight in the Exercise he was upon: and before the Morning was spent left the field and alighted at his Mohers Lodgings in White-Hall, with whom he was shut up for the space of Two or Three Hours: the noise of their dis∣course frequently reaching the cars of those who attented in the next Rooms; And when the Duke left her his Countenance appear'd full of Troubles with a Mixture of Anger. A Countenance that was never before observed in him, in any Conversation with her, to∣wards whom he had a profound Reverence, and the Countess herself (for though she was marri∣ed to a private Gentleman Sr. Thomas Comp∣ton, she had been created Countess of Bucking∣ham, shortly after her Son First assumed that
Title) was at the Duke's leaving her, found o∣verwhelmed in Tears, and in the highest Ago∣ny imaginable. Whatever there was of all this, it is a notorious Truth, that when the News of the Duke's Murther (which happen'd within few months after) was brought to his Mother, she seemed not in the least Degree sur∣prized but received it, as if she foreseen it; nor did afterwards express such a Degree of Sor∣rows, as was Expected from such a Mother, for the Loss of such a Son. FINIS. man visited by a ghost?
