G373A 99829080 33516
THE Whole Duty OF A Communicant: BEING Rules and Directions for a worthy re∣ceiving the most Holy SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S Supper. By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN GAƲDEN, Late Lord BISHOP OF EXETER. He being dead yet speaketh. The second Edition with Additions out of the Reve∣rend Prelates original Copies. LONDON, Printed by E. R. for L. C. and Hen. Rodes next door to the Bare Tavern, near Bride-lane in Fleet-street. 1685.
depiction of angels THE ANGELLS ADMIRE THE DIVINE GOODNES
TO THE Truly Honourable THE LADY RICH. Most honoured. Lady, THE Confidence of your Nobleness and Piety makes the least intimation of your De∣sires to have upon me the force of Com∣mands, being assured that your Piety and Judg∣ment directs you to what is good, and your No∣bleness and Ingenuity will favourably interpret what a mind truly honouring you, doth intend to answer your desires. Such is this small Tract, occasioned by a motion your Ladyship once made, of having some Preparatory Form, written with such brevity, yet fulness and perspicuity (three rare qualities in one Subject) as might neither dull nor confound, nor yet leave unsatisfied à Mind studious to inform its Judgment, and devoutly to prepare its Affections, so oft as it re∣ceives the Holy Sacrament and great Mystery of the Lords Suppee. These Notions do not presume, nor pretend to have attained such a Compleatness, as may ei∣ther satisfie your Ladyship's desires, or add any thing to your Knowledg, which is fitter to judge
of the consent of these with your own, than needs any information by them; such they are, and their Author seeks to appear, as may rather de∣serve the censure of Devout, than Curious; in an Argument of so mysterious a Depth, good Affe∣ctions are rather to be raised and inflamed than Subtilties searched and disputed; what I come short in Depth of Knowledge, I endeavour to sup∣ply in belief of the Truth, in love to the Goodness, in thanks for the Benefit, in admi∣ration of the Mercy and Dignation, the less I reach to its height, the more I retire to my own Heart, which I can sufficiently prepare by Humi∣lity, for the receiving of that, whose divine Ex∣cellency, though I cannot comprehend, yet the Be∣nefit and Happiness by it I may obtain. It will be easie for your Ladyship at your leisure to add or amend, what my defects or haste have failed in or omitted: Nor do I present this as a Copy to be imitated, so much as inlarged and corrected by you; it is enough for my design, if either I do or receive good, the one may shew how willing I am, the other may make me▪ abler than I am, to express that willingness and pious Ambition I have to appear worthy the honour and esteem of, Madam Your Ladyship's humble Servant, J. Gauden
THE WHOLE DUTY OF A Communicant OF THE SACRAMENT IN GENERAL. THE ever Blessed Testator (as the Author to the Hebrews doth fit∣ly call him: Heb. 9. 16.) hath left us two Sacraments only, as generally and necessary to Salvation, Bap∣tism, the Sacrament of Initiation, and the Lords Super, the Sacrament of Confirmation; the first admitteth us into Christs visible Bo∣dy the Church, the second feedeth and strengthneth in the same, and this happy op∣portunity being offered me of coming to the most holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I will joyn with the Church in the celebration of this great Mystery and endeavour to put in practice that duty which the Command of
God and just reason requires, in preparing my self for that great Solemnity and Ange∣lical Feast. I. Which is by setting apart some hours three or four several daies before Receiving: with∣drawing my thoughts from worldly and tem∣porary business, and placing them upon seri∣ous and devout Meditations, of my souls good and eternal happiness, being fully per∣swaded of its Immortal Estate after this short life, and the happiness of that state only to consist in the vision and fruition of God the chiefest good, and only satisfactory to an Intellectual and Eternal Being: among all o∣ther means appointed to men by the wisdom and goodness of God for the attaining that happy state, this of the blessed Sacrament is one of the most eminent for Comfort and Ef∣ficacy. II. A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible Grace, a holy Seal ordained of God, to strengthen our Faith in his promises in Jesus Christ, for the free remission of our sins: which God therefore annexed to his word to confirm us by representing the sufferings of Chirst to our sight and tasting, as the Gospel preacheth it to our ears, and it is called the
Lords Supper, because Christ ordained it at his last Supper, Math. 26. 26. Wherein to fulfil the Law he eat the Paschal Lamb; and to shew the determination and change of the Levitical Law and Priesthood, he ordained for this new Covenant of Grace, a new Sa∣crament and seal thereof, that it succeeding the Passover might declare him to be the Lamb of Go which taketh away the sins of the world: John 1. 19. to shew and represent his death until his coming again: to leave his Church a Badg of distinction from Infidels, and a parting token and pledge of his great love, assuring the faithful of his continual care of them. III. The visible signs are bread and wine, the thing signified is the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, the benefits of whose Death and Passion being apprehended by Faith accrew to us, as, our mystical Union with Christ, our Incorporation into him, our recon∣ciliation with God, and the nourishment of our most precious souls to eternal life, John 6. 54. Who so eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at tht last day; and this Sacrament if we do receive truly and faithfully, God hath promi∣sed to accept us and to give us all those be∣nefits in this, which he was ready to bestow in
the Sacrament of our Baptism, had we not forfeited them by our transgressions, and the renewing of our Covenant at this time is very necessary. That we may rightly understand the mercies promised on God's part, and the Duty on our own, seeing this is a matter of so high Concernment it importeth every Christian, First, To Consider the End for which it was Instituted. Secondly, The Author by whom it was Instituted. Thirdly, The outward Means suitable to that end. Fourthly, The mystical Ʋnion by which they effectually attain and convey to us that end and benefit which is propounded. Fifthly. How we ought to Prepare our selves. Sixthly, How to Receive it worthily. And Lastly, How to Live well a righteous, godly and sober Life after Receiving this most holy Sacrament. First, The End for which it was Institu∣ted. I. For its End which in every action is the first in the intention of the agent, and that hath proportion and influence into all the means used for attaining it, this I conceive to be a
Divine, spiritual, and supernatural end, e∣ven the highest God hath, or man can pro∣pound to himself; namely, the glory of God in the eternal life and happiness of my body and soul, which consists in my union with, and fruition of, God in heaven for ever, which is effected by the Spirit and grace of God through the merits of Jesus Christ, drawing my soul through faith in the Son of God made Man, to himself, who by the evil of sin, both original depravation and actual Com∣missions am removed at an infinite distance from the love of God the fountain of happi∣ness, and placed in a state of Guilt, liable to the justice and wrath of God, and by consequence to eternal misery and Damnation. II. A State, not more miserable in it self, than unavoidable by me, unless the free grace & im∣mense goodness of the Almighty which brings sinners to repentance, had prevented both my desert and desire, by an eternal purpose of offering pardon, life, and salvation to sin∣ful mankind, which good pleasure and pur∣pose in himself God hath clearly revealed ac∣cording to the divers dispensations of his wis∣dom and providence, even from the first pro∣mise of Christ, made to the first sinners, to the personal coming of the Son of God into the World, to bear the Name and Office of
the Saviour of Sinners, and hath▪ fully accom∣plisht and▪ clearly reveal'd unto Mankind this undeniable truth▪ of the eternal purpose of God to give pardon, life, and salvation through faith in Jesus Christ his only Son, who became Man, and died for the sins of the World, and so satisfied the Justice of God for them, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life. III. That great saying, and most comfortable Truth, Preached by Christ, witnessed by the Apostles, Dictated by the Spirit of God, writ∣ten by the Evangelists, Confirmed by many Mi∣racles, delivered by the Church by constant Tradition, and believed on in all ages, this God requires me to believe as a certain and infalli∣ble truth in it self, and by faith it becomes to me saving and comfortable. It brings my soul to see by the law its own sinful and des∣perate estate, it calls me off from my self and all Creatures, and assures me of immortal hap∣piness for ever, by adhering and relying up∣on Christ, and that free grace of God in him, and through him bestowed upon my soul. IV. This faith and trust in the free Grace through Jesus Christ, as it is first wrought by the word
of God and his holy Spirit in my soul, which is the beginning of this spiritual and eternal life; so that it may be further nourished and strengthened to a farther degree of comfort and assurance, God hath out of a wonderful Indulgence to our weakness and difficulty of believing, annexed to his word these holy Sa∣craments, as visible and most manifest Seals of this Covenant of Grace and Mercy, that the soul might in no sort doubt of it, nor be discouraged at the sight of it's own sin and unworthiness, when it sees the love of God and its pardon confirmed and assured to it, by all its senses, and his Saviour the great wor∣ker and teacher of this salvation, by these sensible means lively set forth in his death and sufferings, and himself with all his merits per∣sonally offered and conveighed to its self in particulars. V. This then is the End to which this holy Sa∣crament, as other means of grace is especially directed, that it may be to the souls spiritual life of such efficacy, as Food is to the Tem∣poral life of our Bodies, a means to maintain life, to encrease strength and inward com∣fort, to enable holy actions and cheerful obe∣dience, to assure our hopes and affiance in the great truth of God, for the pardon of sins, and bestowing the Son of God Jesus Christ
our great Redeemer, who is the Fountain and conveigher of life, through these Conduits of the outward means to the penitent and be∣lieving soul. Secondly, The Author by whom it was In∣stituted, I. Was the Lord Jesus Christ the Saviour of the World? who being the Lord of power, and the Jesus of Mercy, is both able and wil∣ing to make this holy Ordinance the means of that Mercy and Grace which he promiseth to us, which means are effectual to this superna∣tural end, not by any proportion of innate vertue, or Physical efficacy of themselves, as food hath to our temporal life by the com∣mon rule and ordination of Providence, but by a Spiritual, Divine, and most Mysterious appointment, Instituted by our God and Sa∣viour himself, whose Authority only could Institute, and whose power only can make effectual his Institution, by uniting earthly sensible, so small and unproportionable means to so heavenly spiritual and excellent an End. II. So that in this great mystery, though reason
assures us in the general assent, that the Om∣nipotency of God can make effectual whate∣ver means he pleaseth in his wisdom to or∣dain, to an end though never so unpropor∣tionable; yet for the particular demonstra∣ting of the matter of efficiency, whereby such means do certainly convey to us so great an end and benefit, Reason is quite dazl'd and blind, having no ground to fasten upon, but devolving all the work of this holy mystery to faith, which relies upon the truth, power, and love of the Institutor Jesus Christ, who while he was yet on Earth by a Corporal and Natural presence conversing with men, but chiefly with his choice and Domestick Com∣pany the Twelve Apostles, a little before his death, Instituted this Sacred Mystery, after his last Supper which he made with them. III. By the evidence of this Sacrament, exhibi∣ting himself to them and all beliving souls, in such an extraordinary and eminent degree of comfort and personal assurance, as might greatly establish their faith and hearts, in the near and dismal Times of his sufferings shortly ensuing, and after his Ascention, might be a continual memorial and Seal of the Covenant of Grace established in the death of Christ, a support of the faith of Belivers, & a lively to∣ken & pledge of his spiritual presence with his
Church, during his bodily absence, till his se∣cond coming, as also a badge of the profession of the Christian Religion and that mutual love and charity of Believers, who are all uni∣ted by▪ faith to one and the same Saviour, of whom they are all partakers in this one Sacra∣ment, as well of the invisible Grace, as the outward and visible signs the bread and wine. Thirdly, The outward Means suitable to this end. I. The choice of which familiar signs made by our Saviour for the outward means, disco∣vered a wonderful wisdom and no less love and condescention to his Church, while he made choice of such things for the Repre∣sentation of his greatest Grace and our com∣fort, as best sitting this stae of Senses and In∣firmity, such as for the Community may be had of all Nations and in all Countries, either by native Commodities as in most, or by cheap and easy Commerce with others, whose abundance may spare, though where the pro∣per species of bread and wine cannot be had, those means of nourishment which are pro∣portionable may be used, so that no Nation or man may think himself excluded, from the use and comfort of this Sacrament of the Lords Super.
II. For their necessity, such as no man in an ordinary way of living can dispence with the want of them, and live long healthfully, im∣plying that Food is not more necessary, for sustaining this present life and strength of the body, than the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is for the supporting the life and well-being of the soul to all eternity. III. For their plainness and simplicity, it is such as may take off Christians minds from placing Piety and the Mysteries of Grace and Religi∣on in any external pomp and vanity, which doth but dazle the eyes and amaze the senses and detain vulgar and common minds by the outward glory of the senses Objects, from that inward retiring of the Spirit and Soul to its proper and comfortable Objects, which are Spiritual; Invisible, and Intellectual, and far re∣mote from the Senses, and abstracted from them. So that Christians cannot easily be so grossly and stupidly sensual as to imagine any efficacy in these small and simple elements of themselves, no more than in Wax or Parch∣ment, which not of their proper virtue, but only of the will of the conveigher have pow∣er to convey an estate to the Receiver of them.
IV. For their proportionable suitableness and familiar correspondency of Virtues and Effici∣ency; first, the bread and wine being apt to nourish the body by common ordination of Providence; the body and blood of Christ, fit to nourish the soul by special ordination of Grace. Secondly, the bread and wine at a di∣stance will not feed us, but must be personally applyed, by taking, eating, drinking, and digest∣ing; The body and blood of Christ, looked on only by knowledg and Historical speculation, will not profit the soul, except by a lively Faith, which is the hand, mouth, and stomach of the soul, it accepts and takes hold on Christ, and applies his merits to it self for Salvation. V. The Bread after it passeth much violence of the Mill, hand, and fire, is made whole∣some for Food, and the Wine after it hath endured the torture of the Press is prepared for drink; the body and blood of Christ, not whole, entire and unsufferable, but Crucified and Broken in his Passion, when he did undergo the burthen of the sins of the world, and was un∣der the pressure of the Justice of God, and Sacrificed for the redemption of mankind, under this consideration is received by the believing
Soul, for its life and comfort: looking on all these sufferings of Christ, not as his own demerits, whose innocency was without spot or blemish, but as the satisfaction of the Justice, and appeasing the wrath of God for the sins of them that shall believe in his name; which work of reconciling Heaven and Earth, God and Man, as Christ willingly undertook, so he fully performed, and is fully performed, and is by God accepted in full discharge, whose mercy to man designed his only Son for this great End. VI. For the facility of the performance, both in respect of cost and labour: the Indulgence of Christ seeking to render Christian services to God and the Offices of the Gospel as easy and as cheap as might be, that neither the cost nor the pains might deter any from the frequent partaking of these Mysteries, the comforts of which are the free gift of God, and cost us nothing but acceptance; for the evidence and perceptibleness of them falling under the perception of four several fenses, by whose joyt testimony of their proper Ob∣jects, our minds and reason, naturally gains the certainty, and infallibility of natural truths, whose Testimonies now by Christs institution are raised higher to give evidence and witness to Faith of the truth and certain∣ty of its Objects.
VII. The Body and Blood of Christ broken and shed in his death and sufferings, which by these sensible signs are clearly represented, and the merits and efficacy of his death as truly per∣ceived, and as really conveighed by faith to the soul and person of a Believer, for life and happiness, as the nutritive power and virtue of the Bread and Wine is perceived, approved and applyed by the Senses to the Body, that as by one sense of Hearing, faith is begun, so by the other four Senses in this Sacrament, it might daily be encreased and strengthned, there being not a greater Physical certainty given into our common Sense and Reason by our senses of the Truth of the bread and wine which the body receives, then there is a Theological and Sacramental certainty given into Faith (depending upon the Authority, truth and power of the Institutor) of a real and most effectual perception of the body and blood of Christ for the nourishment of our souls and bodies to eternal life, that as our souls are here helped by the senses of the Body, and its food in the way of a natural and momentary life, so the body may at last be saved by the souls perception of its Spiritual Food to Glory and Immortal life. Fourthly, The Mystical Ʋnion by which they
effectually attain and convey to us that end and benefit which is propounded. I. For the Sacramental Union of the outward signs, which are the proper Objects of our senses, to the body and blood of Christ, which are the proper Objects of our Faith, this I conceive to be not by any Physical or natural Union as the Fruit to the Tree, or the effect to its proportionate Cause, nor yet by any Miraculous working of Omnipotency, in changing the substance of these Elements, into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood, which makes the Judgment of Faith contradict the Judgment of the Senses, which the will of God hath appointed by the Law of Nature, to give a true Testimony of their proper Ob∣jects, rightly dispos'd, and withal do wit∣ness these to be indeed true bread and wine, and the same for Substance after Consecration as they were before, though wonderfully dif∣ferent from their use; neither is faith ever commanded by any Divine will, to deny or contradict the truth of Senses, for the substance and nature of things. Though it raiseth us far above them, and bids us look infinite be∣yond them, in a Divine and Supernatural relation and use annexed to them.
II. Nor may Omnipotency, (the common re∣treat and subterfuge) be so far extended by Human fancy and imagination to maintain them, as to imply a necessary contradiction in the Will of God, about one and the same subject (which Will is but one and regular, setting bounds to Omnipotency agreeable to it self) which cannot be avoided here, if we say that God's Will is in the way of nature, that the Senses judge truly of their Objects, which They do here, and tell us jointly that they are bread and wine; and yet his Will is at the same, and about the same thing, that Faith should contradict the Senses Testimonny, and believe truly that they are not bread and wine, but substantially flesh and blood, besides in∣numerable monstrous and most absurd Conse∣quences and Contradictions which follow that Opinion, which all do infinitely perplex and torture the minds of Christians: If the Opi∣nion, were granted, and all these absurdi∣ties swallowed by a wide and enormous Faith, yet were there no advantage of Efficacy or Comfort gained to the Receiver by a gross and Carnal Eating and Drinking the body and blood of Christ. III. If those which Crucified him had done so, or they who then believed in him, when he
was slain, yet would they not any way have furthered their souls good, and life, which can no more be fed with carnal and sensible Ob∣jects, than the body with light and truth, which are of a Spiritual nature, nor doth this first violent act of faith which they require of a Receiver, in believing the essential change of the Bread, and Wine, into the body and Blood of Christ make a worthy Receiver, except his Soul by a further act of Faith, apply the vir∣tue and merits of Christ's Death and Passion; which is done effectually, (without the thought of Transubstantiation) by that Faith which we say is necessary for a worthy Receiver, which doth as clearly perceive, and as really receive its proper Objects, the Truth and Merits of Christ's Death and Sufferings, (to which no distance of place or time, can be a∣ny impediment) as the Sence doth its sensible Objects, which requires a fit time and distance for perception. IV. As for the Sacramental words given in the name of the Body and Blood of Christ, to the consecrated Bread and Wine; I believe them to be most true in the sense and meaning of our Saviour; which sense I do not only guess at, or implicitely believe; but easily and plainly gather and understand by the like expressions, both of our Saviour himself, and the stile and
phrase of the whole Scripture; which never make such substantial predications of one thing to be another, by way of transmutation of one into the other; but by allusion, relation, similitude, proportion, designation of use, and Sacramental Union, or application; no more than the Paschal Lamb, which was a Type and Sacrament of Christ and his Suffer∣ings was the very substance of Christ, or that Rock, on which St. Paul affirms it was Christ, or that Christ is to be thought a natural door, way, vine, light, &c. all which he affirms to be himself, by a like manner of speech; or more nearer, the Cup to be the New Testament &c. So that Reason, Religion, and the Rule of Faith, the Holy Scriptures, teach Christians to give (commodam interpretationem) a fit and agreeable interpretation. V. Nor can we have a truer interpreter of Christ's meaning than himself, who tells us, that the Flesh profiteth nothing, (that is, in that carnal and gross acceptation,) but his words are spiritual, and must have a spiritual sense, which is suitable to the Nature and Capacity of the Soul; the dignity of Chiristan Religion and the sacred Mystery, the Propriety of the object of Faith and the stile and tenour of God's Word, which never enjoyns us any car∣nal thing, horrible or inhumane: For though
the Letter may sound so, yet the Figure in the words doth relieve our Faith, and accom∣modate a fit and true meaning to such words and expressions; nothing being more usual than for the Spirit of God to set forth Spiri∣tual things and duties by corporal notions. VI. So that as the Bread and Wine, by their na∣tural qualities and vertues, are fit to represent the spiritual efficacy of the Body and Blood of Christ, yet by a natural power, are no whit able to impart to a Communicant the Body and Blood of Christ, with the benefits of them to the Soul: so that our blessed Saviour hath made choice of them for the First, and hath given to them a Sacramental Virtue, and a supernatural efficacy for the Second, which they truly do as Remembrancers, as Signs and Seals really conveying to the believing and prepared Soul, by the concurrent Spirit and Power of the Institutor Jesus Christ, that which in their nature they do fitly represent. VII. Which is all that I conceive, I need beleive of, or expect from, this Sacrament, which is appointed only to strengthen and confirm that Faith in us by which we believe in Christ cru∣cified, for Life and Salvation; which Faith
grounded on the Word, and wrought by the Spirit, is first confirmed and sealed by Bap∣tism, and may be true and sufficient to save a Christian, who never lives to come to the Supper of the Lord; nor hath any thought or use of Transubstantiation in this, no more than of the substantial change of the Water in Baptism into the Blood of Christ, which was never yet dreamed of: yet our Saviour tells us, Joh. the 6th. Except a man eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, he cannot have Eternal Life; which many have, who never eat of the most holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, yet dye believers, and by Faith, have eaten and drank the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually; yet really without which they could not be saved. VIII. Neither to secure children of Salvation, in case they dye before years of discretion, need we resume the antient, but erroneous practice of the Church now long since abolished by all sides, viz. to put the Eucharistical Bread and Wine into the mouths of Infants; which Er∣ror sprang from the gross and corporeal inter∣pretation of our Saviour's words; not consi∣dering that every Believer either in the inter∣nal disposition, which is secretly wrought by the Spirits sanctifying Power, in Baptism,
according to the capacity of the Subject; or in the real exercise and actuating of his Faith which comes by Hearing in his riper years, must necessarily, and doth effectually and really Eat and Drink the Body and Blood of Christ to Salvation, though they never come to receive in the Holy Supper; so that it is but one Christ, his Body and Blood, the same Cru∣cified Saviour which is received in both Sacra∣ments, and but one Faith for the kind, that layes hold and feeds on Christ, in them all, only it receives degrees and addition of strength in this of the Supper, the Word be∣ginning the Life of Faith, and by it the Believer into Christ; the other maintaining and encreas∣ing it to a further strength and assurance. IX. We deny not a true and real presence and perception of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, which reality even they of the o∣ther gross Opinion do not imagine is to Sence, but to Faith; which perceives its Objects as really according to the manner of Faiths perception, as the senses do theirs after their manner. I believe therefore, that in the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper, there are both objects presented to, and received by, a Wor∣thy Receiver; first the Bread and Wine in their
own nature and substances distinct, do remain as well as their accidents, which are the true objects of our sence; and fit signs to represent by them, the inward Grace. X. Also there are the spiritual, invisible and credible, yet most true and really present ob∣jects of Faith; the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, Christ Jesus himself, whom by Faith I consider as suffering for my sins, and cast my Soul, by the Mercy offered me, by the merits of his Death: these two materials of the Sa∣crament are so united, that it may truly be said (not in a Gross and Physical, but Divine and Sacramental sence) the Bread and Wine are the Body and Blood of Christ, and Christ's Body and Blood are Bread and Wine; Joh. 6. Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, not by trans∣mutation of Nature, but by a similitude of vertues, and proportionableness of effects, by a Sacramental Union and Relation depen∣ding upon the Truth, Authority and Divine Power of the Institutor, Jesus Christ. XI. Whose appointment of these Elements to such an use or end, and uniting them in this near Relation to his Body and Blood by the so∣lemn Consecration of them, makes up the firm and true Being of a Sacrament, Which
requires a Truth and Reality, both of the signs and symbols, and that which is by them represented and signified; also a Truth and Certainty of relation and connexion one with another: so that I receive, not only Panem Domini, the Bread of the Lord; but also Panem Dominum, my Lord Jesus Christ, the true Bread of Life Eternal to my Soul and Body; this latter as truly and really as the former, together with all the benefits which flow from Christ. XII. On the other side, whoso unpreparedly and irreverently, and so un vorthily receives the one, contracts a guilt of Damnation for neglect, indignity and irreverence offered to the other; that is, the Body and Blood of Christ, which Faith only discerns and receives in this great Mystery, and whoso violates and con∣temns the Seal and authentick Letters of the King, becomes guilty of indignity and offence to the Authority and Majesty, which is not only restrained to his Person; but also in separably anexed to any sign or token by which he is pleased to manifest his Royal Will and pleasure, thus rightly informed, as I hope in the nature of this Sacrament, what it is in it self, what it may be to me, of how Divine a Mystery and dignity it is in it self to my Soul, either of Comsort and Salvation in a worthy receiving, or of Guilt and Damna∣tion in an unworthy receiving of it,
Fifthly, How we ought to propare our selves. I. Which is by laying my hand upon my heart, and feeling how the pulse of my Soul beats; whether doth it move as quick now I am think∣ing of my Maker, as it doth when my thoughts are upon the World, that which God and my Conscience requires of me, is that I consider my self, the state and condition of my Soul for what is past, of my will and affections for the present, of my purpose and intentions for the future; to all which it is necessary that I have a regard; and by a self-examining, see what fitness there is in me, answerable to these holy mysteries, and the Grace of God by these offered to me, and most effectually con∣veyed, except the unpreparedness, and indis∣position of my heart do frustrate and put an obstacle. II. In the contemplation of my self I may not, nor can avoid, the sight of that which makes me unworthy of God and my self; that is, my sin, and that evil both of my inclinations, to which I am conscious, I know by long and miserable Experience that in me dwelleth no Good of my self, but a Proness to sin at the
best, oftentimes a violence and power of sin, which makes me not only passive, as in Temp∣tations; but active in the will to do and de∣light in sin: this my Conscience witnesseth with so much truth, in so many unhappy instan¦ces and with so many just aggravations, that nothing appears to me more numerous, more unreasonable, more to be abhorred than my sins, nor more miserable than my self. III. I know by an inward and undeniable Dictate; that since I have my Being from, and dependance upon, a higher and better Be∣ing than my self, it is most just I should be at his Will and disposing, whose power is not grea∣ter above me, than his goodness is abundant towards me, and his wisdom perfect in giving laws to me for the ordering my Being accord∣ing to his Will and Word, the perfect rule of holiness, and the only, and certain way to happiness; that nothing can be more inju∣rious, injust, ingrateful, than for a Creature to offend against the will of its Creator who as he is the highest and happiest Good; so on the contrary, sin in me must needs be the low∣est Evil, and sink me to the deepest Misery, by setting me at an Eternal distance from the Love and Favour of God (which is Life it self) as an object of his hatred and Eternal dis∣pleasure.
IV. So that when I look upon the deformity of my heart and life, comparing them with the Beauty of Reason and Religion, wherein the Image of God infinitly appears in Holiness and goodness; I have cause to admire that infinite Patience, which hath so long witheld the hands of Justice from punishing and damning a Creature, doing and deserving so much; and to deplore my own depraved and dam∣nable Estate, over whom sin so far prevaileth and exerciseth its Tyranny, that neither my thoughts, words nor actions, natural, civil nor religious, do escape the brand or blemish of it: so that it is not only ignorance, forget∣fulness or suddenness, that gives sin advantage against me in many Vanities, Passions and O∣missions; but a Predominancy and high Hand, wherewith oftentimes I am led away Captive to sin with such violence, that neither the force of Reason, nor better Resolutions and Purposes are sufficient to rescue my Soul from the Speculation and Practice of that which should not be thought, much less done with the least delight and pleasure, since it is dis∣pleasing to God. V. So that I see not only a habitude and pro∣pensity
to any sin, which is often restrained through want of matter or occasion to make it flame into action; but an Empire and rule of some whose power excites by innate dis∣position, and comfirm'd by custom, seems to have made an utter conquest of me; and does compel me against all my Knowledge, Pray∣ers, and Vows to exchange my Souls happi∣ness in the Love of God and Christ in Heaven for a moment of earthly content, for a sensual imaginary pleasure which when the dream of this Life is past and vanish'd, and by that immutable Law of mortality, I am compell'd to leave the World and all things in it; will betray me to endless and irrecoverable misery. In the mean time, it estranges my heart from that care, intention, and delight, which I ought to have in holy duties, and conversation with God and his Holy Spirit. It robs and deprives my Soul of all that joy, peace, hope and assiance I might have in the service, love and favour of God, detaining my mind in such degrees of ignorance, as may render my sin less odious to me, and make me less sensible of my misery, and want of Mercy; hardning and consirming my will against those Pious and Good motions by which the Spirit of God oftentimes attempts to soften it to an ingenu∣ous submission to God and his Will, disor∣dering my affections, and diverting them from those right Objects, which Reason and Re∣ligion propound, and my own Conscience cannot but approve.
VI. Which makes my sin out of measure sinful and dangerous, so that in the shame and con∣fusion which this sight of it self casts upon my Soul, I have enough to do, to see and weigh my own unworthiness, and fill my Conscience with that fear of the Wrath of God, and horror of Eternal Judgment, which I confess, might justly punish all my sins with despair; and it, as the greatest of all sins, with Dam∣nation: And beyond these thoughts I could no, I durst not go in this gulfe of sin, and the apprehensions of my misery, should I sink, not daring to send up the least thought to Heaven for a better Estate, nor apply my self to the means of any Use or Happiness. VII. If I did not see by a Divine and Glorious Light of Truth, a Hand of Mercy, and means of recovery and Salvation stretched out to me and assuring me by the unerring and undecei∣veable veracity of God, and the infallibility of his Promises; that his Thoughts are thoughts of Mercy and Pardon to sinful Mankind, that he hath graciously found a way of satis∣fying his Justice and taking off the Guilt and Punishment of our sins from our Souls by the sufferings of Jesus Christ, God and Man transferring the Guilt and punishment of our sins to him, and imputing the Merits of his Righteousness to us, upon condition we be∣lieve
on him and cast our Souls, how sinful soever they be, into the Arms of his Mercy, and by the serious apprehension of this infinite Love and Goodness, be won from the Love of sin to Repentance and Amendment of Life. Upon this Truth and Grace, revealed by God to his Church, and my Soul in particular, I lay hold and cast my self, with all the Guilt and Burden of my sins, what aggravations soever for number or quality they admit, be∣ing assured that they are infinitely less than the Mercies of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ. This wonderful Truth of God, which I dare not, I cannot deny, this Mercy which above all things I need, adds new Mer∣cy to my dead and languishing Soul, this re∣presents God to me in the face of Jesus Christ, as the highest Good, most to be de∣sired, loved and admired. VIII. This shews me my sin in the true colours of ingratitude, vileness end unworthiness against that Mercy, which offers Pardon for my sin against a Saviour who hath died for me. This stirs up a hatred and resolution against sin, out of a principal love and apprehension of a wonderful desert, and obligation of love and unspeakable Kindness to me: that as I have the greatest cause that can be to be humbled, in the sight of my sin and self; so that the
surest ground that can be, whereon to settle my Faith and Comfort, is the Truth and Mer∣cy of God, which by the Word, Spirit, and Son of God, is assured to me; that although by my sin I have highly displeased and disho∣noured God Almighty; yet by my trust and believing in his Truth, and Promises of Par∣don and Salvation through Jesus Christ, I shall greatly please and honour him, giving him the Glory of his Grace and Mercy, by seal∣ling to his Truth, which to question, or deny, or not to believe, is to make all my other sins unpardonable, and add a sin of a higher nature than any I have yet committed; that is, un∣belief, or giving God the lye, and its insepe∣rable companion impenitency. IX. Won therefore, and melted by this great, certain, and preventive Kindness and Love of God, which in no sort I could deserve; yet cannot deny or doubt of, I grow dayly to see more clearly, and embrace more firmly, affe∣ctionately the Goodness of God to my Soul; and from thence to a more tender sense, and greater detestation of sin; not so much now daring to sin, as not willing to sin; denying the motions and occasions to sin, not so much out of fear of punishment, as a love to please, and an extream secret shame of returning evil to such wonderful Goodness; abhorring sin,
not so much for the evil which follows it, as for the evil which is in it, and deformity and vileness of it, which I see by the glymps of that Beauty and Loveliness, which I discover in Holiness and Vertue, the Image of God, the highest Ornament and Happiness of the Creature. X. Thus in some degrees freed from the Fear and Love of my sin, Holy desires and good affections (as followers of the Sun's Accession in the Spring) begin to arise in my heart; and though they suffer a great allay by the Earth of the Body, in which the Soul is planted; yet they assure me that the Spirit of God hath moved upon that Chaos (the deadness and barrenness of my Soul,) and by a secret, but most effectual influence hath made me a New Creature, by ingrafting me into the Tree of Life, Jesus Christ; and washing me in that pure Fountain of his Blood which was shed for the Remission of my sins. Thus now, I desire nothing more than daily to attain a fuller Sight and Capacity of this admired Mercy: that as my knowledge in the Greatness and Truth of it increaseth; so my Faith in the applying of it may be strengthened, my Affe∣ctions in the thankful return of my self may be enflamed; my Charity and Virtue towards others may be excited, glad to have occasions
really to express my Love, Pity and Forgive∣ness of others, that grateful Sense I have of God's Love to me in Christ. XI. And that the whole course of my Life may be so ordered, as becomes one who is united to the Son of God not only by the Community of the humane Nature, but by the efficacy of the same Holy Spirit, and raised to the hopes of the same Glory and Happiness; that now nothing is more acceptable to me, than to meditate of this great Mystery of man's Salvation; nothing more delightful, than the thoughts of God reconciled to me in Jesus Christ; nothing more welcom, than the use of those means, by which God doth further confirm and assure this Mercy and Truth to my Soul, whose many failings, though they often shake my confidence and obscure my comfort; yet the sight of the Promises, and the seals of the Sacrament annexed to them, in which I behold Jesus Christ crucified, does again establish my heart, and assure me that the All-powerful Love and Grace of God will not be overcome by the sin and wickedness of man; but will effectually repair the breaches of my dayly infirmities and satisfie the doubt∣ings of my misguided Conscience, and fur∣ther assure me of the pardon of my sins, and interest in his love and favour, by the renewed use of his sacred Ordinances.
XII. To which he calls and invites me, both by the outward overture of fit occasions, and in∣ward incitation of good and earnest desires, to pertake of them as the pledges and condu∣its, of my greatest comfort and happiness; which happiness I esteem and seek after, not only in a freedom from the punish∣ment, and misery of my sin, but from the power of, and the pleasure that seems to be in, sin; nor do I count it a less degree of Grace and Mercy which enables me to serve and love him, than that which saves me from Hell Torments, nor do I come to the Sacrament, only to quit the score of my sins, but to get strength and grace against them, to deny, mortify and overcome them, which above all things that the World ac∣counts, will I most abhor, and desire to avoid, and am most grieved if I do not, I make new and reinforced vows and resolutions, between God and my Soul, against my sinful self, which although I have often failed to keep, as I in∣tended, yet I am not quite overcome, while I truly desire, pray, and endeavour to get the victory, and am never more displeased, than when I fail of it. XIII. Thus having tryed and renewed my repen∣tance
by my sighs, sorrow and humiliation for sin, my serious purpose, and earnest pra∣yer against sin, my faith by my love of God, dependence upon him, submission to him, de∣sire to please him, arising out of an apprehen∣sion and perswasion of his love to my Soul, my love to God and my Saviour, by my ha∣tred of sin, fear to, and greif for, offending, by my love of his Servants, delight in his word, zeal for his truth and glory, an earnest desire and stedfast hope to enjoy him, and by my particular appetite, and desires to this holy Sacrament, as a special means of communion with my God and Saviour, and pertaking of his Grace. My charity and love to others, by my care and endeavour, by all means to further their Souls good, by my affe∣ctionate prayes for them, though they have deserved ill of me, by my tenderness of giving offence, my slowness to take offence, by my grief when any arise, by my proneness and joy in reconciling; and though I find all these graces in me, but in weak and small de∣grees, with mixture of much infirmity and many imperfections, nay a contrary power daily opposing and with much impatience, striving to break the Cords of pious and solemn resolutions, (I am, as well becomes me,) humbled and emptied of all opinions of my self. XIV. Yet am I not discouraged from coming,
since what did most deter me in it self from coming to Christ, my sin and unworthiness, is by the operation of faith made as the grea∣test incitement to provoke me to come, being one, whose great wants, and unworthiness will afford a fit subject, whereon to magnifie the Riches of that free Grace and infinite mercy which becomes the majesty of God, and may answer the merits of our Saviour, from whom, as a principle of a new life, I expect all the grace, comfort, strength, and happi∣ness which I want, and to whom I give the glory of all that I enjoy, who as the head derives to every part of his body the Church, life, motion, health, and whatever is in his own fullness and perfection, whose love and compassion to my Soul to all Eternity will be too little to comprehend and magnify. XV. Which that I may more fully discover, I have a more lively assurance of, be more thank∣fully affected, and live more worthy of it. I repeat again this sacred memorial, and seal of his love and mercy, having first sought by frequent, earnest and humble prayer, and in some measure obtained the assistance of his holy Spirit, which by its preparatory Grace stirs up earnest and hungring desires to re∣ceive, renew its habitual graces planted in my heart, Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
love of God, charity to others, and thank∣fulness by actuating a new; before I receive assistance in receving by Sacred, devout and pertinent Meditations, seals and testifies to my Conscience my acceptance and efficacy of receiving, by increase of holiness in my heart, and care of better obedience in my life after the surest evidence, and truest I can have or expect, of my worthy receiving. XVI. Having thus faithfully discharg'd my Duty and Conscience in the way of preparation to the Sacrament, though still conscious to, and humbled in, the consideration of my own un∣worthiness, in any proportion to the great good I aim at, yet I will not deprive my self of so ner and inestimable a comfort, by re∣fraining, nor dare l so far distrust the mercy of God and dignation of my Saviour, who propounds not my personal worthiness, (in a strict sense,) as the object of my comfort, and hopes in coming, but his gracious acceptance, and merciful indulgence, such indeed as becomes the infinite goodness and honour of the Christians God and Saviour. XVII. The same holy frame and devout temper of Spirit I labour to continue in my receiving,
carrying my Faith by the visible Represen∣tations before me, and given to me, to behold its invisible, but most credible object Jesus Christ crucified, and dying for my sins whose love and merits I consider with as great an ob∣ligation of love, thankfulness and obedience, upon me, as if he had laid down his life for me alone: these meditations raise me to thankfulness, to admiration to exaltation of the love of God my Saviour above all. XVIII. Finally, so I endeavour to receive this bles∣sed Sacrament, as if each opportunity were my last, as if I were to appear before God in Judgment, that in the power of that grace I there receive, I may live the remainder of my short life, virtuously, and holily, in the hope of its reward, and perfection in Heaven, I may die willingly and chearfully in the Merit and Righteousness of it, I may attain to the Resurrection of the just, appear justified before God at the last and great day, and obtain the Consummation of all in that glorious estate of Immortality with God and Christ in Heaven. XIX The Duty of examining my self is by pre∣cept clearly enjoyning me by the Spirit of God; let a Man therefore examine himself and so let him eat of that▪ Bread, and Drink
of that Cup, 1. Cor. 11. Chap 28. verse, which alone were enough to exact my perfor∣mance, but since all the commands of God who is the most perfect reason to rational Creatures are most reasonable, though oft times ignorance or blindness doth not, or will not, discover it, to the equity of this injunction my own reason must needs subscribe; for knowing that every thing is received accord∣ing to the capacity and disposition of the re∣cipient, and that a worldly, sensual and meer humane mind is unapt to receive things in∣tellectual, Spiritual and Divine, and perceive objects, the Soul receiving no more of its objects, what ever they be, than it doth by intention and design apply himself to them. XX. It must needs be that unpreparedness through ignorance or inconsideration, of what I do, cannot but frustrate my Soul of the good end of any action, and most of all in so sacred and solemn a one as this is, which concerns my Souls good in so high a nature, and the negligent performance of it must needs render me guilty of a great sin of pro∣phaneness, and irreverence towards the Ma∣jesty, of ingratitude towards the mercy of my God and Saviour, whose ordinance this is, and with whom in it I have to do; besides I am conscious to my self, that although for
the habits of grace and general purpose of my heart, I may be, or strive to be, at no time ut∣terly indisposed, to the service of God in ho∣ly duties, as they are presented to me in pri∣vate or publick occasions, yet I see, not with∣out some degree of sorrow and humiliation, that through the variety and distraction of secular affairs, and the cares that attend them, the commotions and suddenness of passions and irregular affections, the common but then of humane and corporal infirmities, the multi∣tude and vanity of sensual objects and desires, sin daily prevails upon me, and my mind is much taken off from that constant regard and delight which I would and ought to have of God and his commands, and becomes indis∣pos'd to holy duties. XXI. By all which my faith and hope in God my Saviour is much weakned, and undermined, while my understanding grows dim and clou∣ded, in the knowledge of them, my memory is blotted and defaced in its notions and im∣pressions of them, my will is declined & wrap∣ed from its conformity with them, and my de∣sires are cool and indifferent to them, as objects of a pure and remote nature, of a sublimer spe∣culation & pleasure, than these which are pre∣sent and fall under the senses, to which our Souls have a daily nearer and more easy access, so that my Conscience tells me by the light of na∣ture, that it is necessary for me to recollect my
Soul, by a special and renewed preparation when ever I approach these holy and extraor∣dinary duties, to recover the lost and forgot∣ten notions to clear that dimness, which the light of knowledge hath contracted, to recti∣fy the swervings and obliquities of my will, to compose the levity and extravagancies of my thoughts, to reinflame the coolness and deadness of my affections, to reinforce my vows and resolutions against sin; in a word, by unfeigned repentance and renewed sorrow by a serious meditation of God my Saviour, my self and the means of Communion between us, by frequent and servent prayer, to settle and reestablish my faith and hope in the mer∣cies of God, and merits of Christ, to wind up and raise my Soul judiciously, to see seri∣ously, to intend earnestly, to desire succesful∣ly, to obtain the hope and comfort of my E∣ternal happiness, which is that great and high∣est end to which this as all other holy actions are by Divine ordination appointed. XXII. This then being the present state of my Soul in this vale of mortality, both of its self by an innate burthen, alwaies sinking and declining towards the Creature, and besides wanting not many temptations which daily seek to quench, depress and indispose it from aspiring to Heaven, and a supernatural end
and happiness, it is necessary for me, before I use these means which may advance me to∣wards that end, to take a survey of my heart, by examining both the register of my Consci∣ence for sins past, and the present state and disposition of my will, as, also my after pur∣pose, and intentions how they stand inclined to good or evil, to God or the Creature, to things of this life or that to come, that so I may recover what I have lost, renew what I am decayed in, repent what I have offended in, and reform what I have failed in, obtaining what grace and power I want, and daily ad∣vance to what high measure and ability I can, till I attain the end of all my prayers and en∣deavour the glory of God in the salvation of my Soul. XXIII. I examine my understanding, what thoughts and conceptions I have of this holy Sacrament, for if in this I am either grosly ignorant or damnably erroneous, I must necessarily mis∣carry in my receiving, and fail of my duty and its end, nor will the goodness of my Intentions or Devoutness of my affection, which cannot be lively and hearty, but flashy and languishing, true and sound knowledge being the fuel which feeds the flame of good and constant affections; those I say countervail so gross defects in my Judg∣ment, but as in physick, misapplying in the
use, must needs follow mistaking in the doctrine and nature of it, although I do not aim or presume to attain a full and exact compre∣hension of this great mystery in the manner of its being and working, which is most secret, divine and spiritual in the cloud and dimness of mortality, this knowledge then of this great mystery I conceive, necessary to be had, and I hope to be true and agreeable to the nature of the thing and the Will of God re∣vealed concerning it. Rules and directions to a weeks preparation. I. When thou hearest the warning read in the Church by the Minister, consider and contemplate with thy self, that God Almigh∣ty hath sent forth his servant to bid thee to this great Supper, where not his fat Oxen are killed, but his only beloved Son and thy dear Saviour (who was crucified on the Cross, for thine and for the sins of the whole World) is offered to thee to feed upon in thine heart with faith and thanksgiving; therefore to fit and prepare thy self for this royal Feast, thou must put on the Wedding Garment, and cast off those filthy rags thy sins from thee, and desire of God that he would remove them as far from thee as the East is from the West, and to remember them no more.
II. Thus by a serious and narrow search into thy heart, thou mayest become a worthy re∣ceiver, and eat and drink this spiritual Food with comfort, to the benefit and improvement of thy immortal Soul, but if on the contrary, thou receive it unworthily, thou eatest and drinkest thy own damnation, not discerning the Lords Body; therefore examine thy heart, and search and try thy ways and turn unto the Lord. How canst thou tell but this is the acceptable time, of working out thy own Sal∣vation? therefore work now while it is day, for the night cometh wherein no man can work; use all possible means and endeavours to receive the same worthily, and endeavour to purge thy Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, and so will I conclude this Section in the words of St. Paul, Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. Morning Devotions. MOnday morning and the rest of the week, when you first awake, lift up your Eyes to God and say, I lift up mine Eyes to the Hills, from whence cometh my help:
Open thou mine Eyes O Lord, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. My voice shalt thou hear betimes, O Lord: Early in the morning will I direct my Prayer un∣to thee and will look up. At your up-Rising. In the name of God the Father, who Crea∣ted me, God the Son who Redeemed me, and God the Holy Ghost who Sanctifieth me, Amen. I arise from my Bed of rest to praise and glori∣fie him, the Preserver of all the World. He of his infinite mercy and goodness, Bless and keep me this day and for ever, Amen. I laid me down, and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord hath sustained me. Then kneel down and say this Prayer. Prevent me O Lord in all my doings, with thy most gracious favour, and further me with thy continual help, that in all my works begun, con∣tinued and ended in thee, I may glorifie thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy obtain Everlast∣ing life, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Saviour, Amen O Lord my heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God who hast safely brought me to the beginning of this day; defend me in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this
day I fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that all my doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that which is righ∣teous in thy sight through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen. O God who art the author of peace and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom standeth my eter∣nal life, whose service is perfect freedom: defend me thy humble Servant in all assaults of my Ene∣mies, that I surely trusting in thy defence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen. Almighty God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, who knowest my necessity before I ask, and my igno∣rance in asking, I beseech thee to have compassion upon my infirmities and those things which for my unworthiness I dare not, and for my blindness I cannot ask, vouchsafe to give me for the worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen. Almighty God, who hast promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy Son's name; I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine Ears to me that have made now my Prayers and Supplica∣tions unto thee, and grant that those things which I have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained, to the relief of my neces∣sity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen O Almighty God, behold me a wretched Sinner here prostrate before thee, do with me as seems best in thine own Eyes; only give me a penitent
and a patient Spirit to expect thee, and make this my service acceptable to thee while I live, and my Soul ready for thee when I die. Amen. Our Father, which art in Heaven, &c. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with me and remain with me, this day and for evermore. Amen. Read the Psalms appointed for the Morn∣ing Service, and the First and Second Lesson. Devotions for the Evening for every day in the week. Evening Ejaculations. O Lord let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the Incence. And the lifting up of my hands as an evening Sacrifice. My trust and hope hath been in thee all the day long, and under the Shaddow of thy Wings shall be my Refuge day and night for ever. Lighten mine eyes O Lord, that I sleep not in death. Almighty God who hast made the day for la∣bou and the night for rest, let thy Sons blood cleanse me from this days Guilt that I may sleep in thy peace, and rise again refreshed and pre∣served by thy favour, through Jesus Christ my Crucified Saviour. Amen.
O Eternal God who hast preserved me this day from many sins and dangers, for which I humbly magnifie thy Holy Name, for thy Grace and goodness towards me, beseeching thee to forgive me all the Errors of this day, whereof my Conscience doth, or may accuse me, and grant that those things which by my frailty I have committed, may be by the help of thy Spirit more carefully avoided; that I may ever walk in thy favour, and under thy Protection; and now rest and lye down in thy peace, and at last come to thy heaven∣ly Kingdom: through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ. Amen. O God, from whom all holy desires, all good Councels and all just works do proceed; give unto me thy Servant that peace wich the world cannot give, that my whole heart may be set to obey thy Commandments, and also that by thee I being de∣fended from the fear of my Enemies, I may pass my time in rest and quietness through the merits of Jesus Christ my Saviour. Amen. Lighten my darkness, I beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend me from all perills and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son my only Lord and Saviour; Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. The peace of God, which passeth all un∣derstanding keep my heart and mind in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ my Lord: and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, be with me this Night and all the days of my life, at the hour of my death, and at the day of Judgment. Amen. When you lye down say. I will lay down my head in peace, and take my rest; for thou only O Lord makest me to dwell in safety. Into thy hands I commit my Soul and Body keep me for thy mercy sake. Amen. On Monday morning and every day in the Week, use these Ejaculations. Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou regardest him? Thou madest him lower than the Angels, to crown him with glory and worship. Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin hath my Mother conceived me. Thou shalt purge me with Hyssop and I shall be clean; thou shalt wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow. Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds. Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. O give me the comfort of thy help again, and establish me with thy free spirit.
Let the words of my mouth, and the medita∣tions of my heart, be now and evermore, accep∣table in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer. A preparatory Meditation upon the most Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. I. O who will give to my head Water, and to my eyes a fountain of Tears, that I may weep day and night for my sins and ingratitude towards God my Creator! Consider (O my Soul,) the multitude of Gods benefits bestowed upon thee, and be thou confounded and ashamed of all thy iniquities; consider who thy Creator is and who thou art; how he hath behaved himself towards thee, and what ungrateful returns thou hast made in requital to him. Thou hast made me O Lord when I was not, and that according to thy own Image, and from the very instant of my being hast been my God, my Father, and my Deliverer, and with the benefits of thy providence, hast preserved my life even till this present moment. II. But because these things, O Heavenly Father, cost thee nothing, to bind me more fast to thee, thou hast given me a present which cost thee dear, thou didst come down from Heaven to seck me, in
all those ways in which I had lost my self, by thy captivity thou hast loosed my bonds, and by de∣livering thy self into the hands of sinners, thou hast delivered me from the power of the Devil, and by taking upon thee the form of a sinner, thou hast destroyed my sin, these things thou didst to allure and bind me unto thee, and to strengthen my hope, to make me detest and abhor sin, by be∣holding what thou hast done and suffered, to o∣ver throw the Kingdom of sin; O how can I with∣out tears call to remembrance, how oft times thou mightest justly have bereaved me of my life: how many thousand Souls now peradventure burn in Hell, who have less sinned than I, and yet I burn not there; how then can I be so ungrateful, as not to prize the large extent of that mercy which cannot be comprehended. Monday morning a Preparatory Prayer to the Holy Sacrament. O Almighty Lord God, thou hast called me to thine holy Table, and hast set out a part of consecrated Bread and Wine for me; I acknow∣ledge my Ignorance, that I must be instructed by such means as thou in thy bounty hast appointed for me and I acknowledge thy divine goodness, that thou vouchsafest me to be taught, by those  of Grace, whereby I may come to that of . I do hear thy word, and thy dear Son is  my r; I receive this Sacrament ffered unto my eye, in the testimony
of these two witnesses, this truth is established in my heart, that my Saviour suffered death for my sins. II. As it hath pleased thee thus to offer me thy fa∣vour, so I beseech thee give me that grace where∣by I may walk worthy of it. Am I thus invited to the heavenly Banquet, to the Table of the King of Kings; O let me not go without my wedding Garment, last the Bridegroom of this Feast say unto me, how comest thou in hither, without thy richest vestments, which are suitable to this great solemnity? thou hast now commanded me to ex∣amine my self, and let me now try and examine my heart and be acquainted with it, where∣by I may find out all my spiritual wants and neces∣sities, and look how I stand in thy sight, by making a severe scrutiny into my self. The Jews would not eat with unwashed hands, dare I eat with an unwashed heart? they would not drink, but their Vessels must be purified, and dare I now drink and my soul not purified? before the passover they sanctified themselves, and before this Sacrament, shall not I now prepare my self? I desire to do it, Lord help my desire, lest eating and drinking un∣worthily, I eat and drink my own damnation. A Prayer before examination. O Holy Jesus, who art a merciful embracer of true penitents, but yet a consuming fire to obstinate offenders, I am now preparing my self
to come to thy holy Table, unfeignedly confessing my own unworthiness committed against thy divine Majesty, I have sinned against thee many ways, and that since I last received this most holy Sacra∣ment; I have not known thee in thy word, beheld thee in thy works, apprehended thee in thy Son, served thee in the Spirit, applyed thee by Faith, frd thee for thy Justice, nor admired thee as I ought for thy great mercies. I have not fre∣quented thine House, heard thy word, laid it up in my heart, nor practiced it in my life as I ought to do  even I, by the lusts of my eyes, the lusts of th flsh, and the pride of life, have dishonoured thy great and glorious name, and when thou hast forgiven me ten thousand Talents, I would not forgive my Brother a hundred Pence. II. As one deep calls upon another the depth of misery upon the depth of mercy, what shall I say unto thee O thou Preserver of all men, much more what shall I do to inherit eternal life! I will arise and go unto God my Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, but thou hast said that he which hideth his sins shall not pro∣sper, but he which confesseth them shall obtain mercy I confess and am truly sorrowful I have sinned, Lord do pardon and forgive me all my sins, and grant that in the whole course of my life hereafter, I may live to the honour of thy great
name, and to the comfort and salvation of my own Soul. III. O Lord give unto me now a broken heart, a contrite spirit, a sorrowful soul, and a mind hungring and thirsting after Jesus Christ and his righteousness; give me I beseech thee grace to know thee the only true God the Creator and pre∣server of all mankind; O give me grace now to feel the burthen of all my sins, and that thou wilt speak peace unto my soul, and say unto it, thou art my salvation; O let me be eased of this lump of sin, by washing it away with the Blood of thy dear Son; I do believe, Lord help my unbelief; I am sorry for my sins, make me to be heartily and un∣feignedly sorrowful, I promise to live nearer to thee than ever I have done, give me power to per∣form my promise. I forgive all that have wrong∣ed me, even as thou for Christs sake hast for∣given me; let this forgiveness of mine be with∣out dssimulation, and Lord grant that I may humble my self under the sense of my ignorance, and dulness and weakness, and wickedness, and spiritual deadness of heart, and having emptied my self of my self, I may receive of thy fulness, and grace for grace, in whose name I put up these my imperfect prayers. OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth, as it is in Heaven, give us
this day our daily Bread, and forgive us our tre∣passes, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen. Still upon your knees say. ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid, cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that I may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name, through Christ our Lord. Amen. Some heads of self examination by the X. Commandments to be expressed on your knees. God speak those words and said, I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt have none other Gods but me. Lord have mercy upon me and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the first Command∣ment, If I have not absolutely denied Gods being or in a gross manner renounced him by Apostacy; yet, Have I not been angry with the Almighty, murmuring and complaining against him, in an adversity or trouble which he hath been pleased to lay upon me, as though he were not both just and merciful? Have I had such a confidence and trust in God, as I ought to have had, together with
such a strength and consolation, as ordinarily a lively confidence brings with it? Have I not put all my confidence in the world, and on the things which belong to it, fearing man who can only kill the body, more than God who can cast both Soul and Body into everlasting torments? Have I not denyed my Maker, by refusing to wait on him in his holy ordinances; or if I have been there, have I not been guilty of irreverence and cold devotion? Lord have mercy upon me and pardon the breach of this Commandment. II. Commandment. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing which is in Heaven above or in the Earth beneath, or in the water under the Earth▪ thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thou∣sands, in them that love me and keep my Com¦mandments. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the II. Commandment. Though I have not set up a graven Image nor fallen down to worship any; yet, Have I not been troubled with the Fool in my heart, in laying up treasures which a
liable to Corruption, and idolizing the vain pomps and vanities of this wicked world, by covetousness which is I do latry? If I have abhorred Idols, have I not been guilty of Sacrilege, robbing of God in his Tithes and Offerings, not extending my cha∣rity to the poor as I ought to do, but fixing my mind more on the Creature then on the Creator? Have I not made a God of my belly by luxuriousness, indulging my self with carnal delights and sensual appetites, and have been hurried away by every wind of Doctrin? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the III. Commandment. If I have not blasphemously profaned Gods nm▪ yet, Have I not taken his holy name in my mouth with much irreverence, and jestingly and scoffingly abused his holy ordinances? Have I not taken many false Oaths and Protestations, and have been guilty of too frequent and customary swearing, cursing by the dreadful name of God, which is only to be mentioned for blessing and adoration. Have I been careful to keep those lawful
Oaths I have taken, as my Baptismal vow, or any other Oath, which was administred law∣fully to me without being guilty of the breach of them? Have I not neglected to call upon that name whereby alone I must receive salvation, and have turned the grace of God into wan∣tonness to the destruction of my own Soul? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this commandment. IV. Commandment. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt do no manner of work thou, and thy Son and thy Daughter, thy Man servant, and thy Maid-servant, thy Cattle, and the Stranger that is within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the se∣venth day; wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the IV. Commandment. If I have not actually ossiciated on that day my worldly calling or employment; yet, Did I spend my time in the House of God, as I ought to do, to praise him for all his mercies bestowed upon me? Have not I omitted Prayers and Sermons and followed my own idle imaginations, not
caring at all for the Church, but being weary of the Lords day, like those in Amos 8. 5. who ask when will the Sabbath be gone that we may set forth Wheat? Have I not invented ways to draw others from the service and worship of God, by vain sports and idle discourses not remembring to praise God on this day for the Creation and joyful Resurrection? Have I at home instructed my Family as I ought to do, but on the contrary have neg∣lected those duties of prayers reading and meditation? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment. V. Commandment. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the V. Commandment. If I have not grosly abused my parents by cursing or swearing at them, yet, Have I not spoken meanly and lightly of my superiors, and instead of obeying them, have made it my study to oppose and con∣tradict them? Have I not been undutiful to them, in se∣veral respects, as not hearkning to their Counsel, not taking their reprooss with meek∣ness
and humility, but have despised and mocked them, refusing to practice their exhortations, not remembring the words of the wise Man. Pro. 30. 17. The eye that mock∣eh his Father, and despiseth to obey his Mother, the Reavens of the valleys shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Have not I wisht my Parents death out of greediness of gaining their possessions, when rich, and have I not when they were poor, been so unnatural as to turn my back upon their necessities? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment. VI. Commandment Thou shalt do no Murther. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the VI. Commandment. If I have not actually committed Murther; yet, Have I not drawn many to intemperance, and other vices, which cause diseases or bring death, or have I not made strife among men, by which means they have engaged themselves in quarrelling, and in the encounter come off maimed or killed? Have I not out of malice and revenge strove to shorten many ones life; or have I not taken a delight to grind the face of the poor making them work of necessity for that which can never maintain their Families?
Have I not been guilty of much intempe∣rance in eating and drinking, and have I not been guilty of the death of several by not relieving their necessities in due time? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment. VII. Commandment. Thou shalt not commit Adultery. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the VII. Commandment. If I have not actually committed Adultery or Fornication; yet, Have I not pleased my sancy with loose and wanton imaginations, and suffered unchast thoughts so long to dwell in my heart, till by the corrupt bent of its concupiscence, have grown into unruly lusts which war against the Soul? Have not my eyes betrayed my heart se∣cretly to lust, and sinfully to enjoy that which was unlawful, and have I not made use of those provocations which lead to chambering and wantonness? Have not I used my self to filthy and ob∣scene talking; to all manner of effeminacy and unchast behaviour, forgetting those threat∣nings which are pronounced in Scripture, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the
breach of this Commandment. VIII. Commandment. Thou shalt not steal. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination. by the VIII. Command∣ment. If I have not been guilty of robbery and burglary, yet, Have I not been guilty of theft by negli∣gence and prodigaity, wasting both the E∣states of my self and others by contracting of debts, without taking care to pay▪ them? Have I not broke my promises in not pay∣ing for what I agreed for, and have I not kept back the wages of the servant and the hireling, forgetting the strict command in this matter, Deut. 24. 14, 15. Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, at his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor and setteth his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto thee? Have I not been guilty of pilferring and fil∣ching, cogging and lying, couzening and de∣ceiving, and have I not been guilty of defrau∣ding and circumventing in buying, selling, and lending to the loss of the borrower? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this commandment.
IX. Commandment. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy Neighbour. Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law. Self examination by the IX. Commandment. If I have not been guilty of perjury against my neighbour; yet, Have I not blasted their reputation, by railing, whispering, and encouraging others, in slandering them, and have I not harboured uncharitable thoughts, and spread abroad false reports which have been the product of lying, envy, malice, and great unworthiness? Have I not been injurious, churlish and proud, froward and peevish in conversation, using bitter and reproachful language, and have not I rejoyced when any evil and mis∣chief hath befaln them? Have I not strove to betray into ruine many innocent persons, by laying traps and snares for them; and have I not accused any falsly of that which they were never guilty of? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment, X. Commandment. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours Wife, nor his Ser∣vant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.
Lord have mercy upon me, and write all these thy Laws in my heart I beseech thee. Self examination by the X. Commandment. If I have not been guilty of covetousness in a very gross manner; yet, Have I not had an evil eye, and a greedy mind in coveting that which could not law∣fully be purchased, and have I not envyed ma∣ny, so as to grieve at their prosperity and re∣joyce in their losses? Have I been content with my present estate & condition in this world, how mean soever, without roring after the exterior consola∣tions of the Creature abroad, which is the only way to loose contentment in my self at home? Have I not with too much vigour pursued after the riches, honours and pleasures of the world, and have neglected that one thing ne∣cessary, the working out my own salvation with with fear and trembling? Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this and all thy Commandments; I be∣seech thee. A Prayer for pardon and remission of sins. O Most mighty God and creator of all things, when I think with my self how grievously I have offended thy divine Majesty with my sins, I wonder at my own folly; when I consider what a loving and bountiful Father I have forsaken, I
accurse my ingratitude; when I behold how I am faln from such a noble liberty, into such a mi∣serable bondage, I condemn my self for my un∣worthiness in sinning against thee, and without thy tender mercy and compassion can expect no∣thing but Hell and Damnation. II. O whether can I fly, but thy justice will find me out, and make my Conscience display the em∣blem of guilt in my face? but when I consider the words of the Kingly Prophet that thy mercies are over all thy works, then do I feel afresh and plea∣sant air of hope to refresh and strengthen again my weak and sorrowful soul, wherefore then should I despair the tender mercies of my God, but endea∣vour to get such a trust in him as I may never be ashamed, neither to confess his name, nor manfully to fight under his banner, (who is the Captain of my salvation,) against Sin, the Flesh, the World and the Devil; thou hast promised O Lord, that thou wouldest not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickhedness and live. III. O Lord I beseech thee turn my heart, that I may sin no more against thee, so will not iniquity be my ruine; and grant that I may repent me of all my sins before I come to that holy Table, to tast of thy precious body and blood, and to receive it with the
eye of faith and thanks-giving, alas I am unwor∣thy to lift up my eyes towards thee, or to call thee Father, but thou art a Father indeed, O look upon me then with thy Fatherly eyes of compassion, for thy sight raises the dead, and can raise me which am dead in trespasses and sin, when I went wandring a far off from thee, thou didst vouchsafe to look down from Heaven upon me, and didst open the eyes of my understanding, that I may see my self to be vile, wretched and naked, and to take a ful view how full fraught I was with sins. IV. And now O Lord thou comest to receive me a∣gain▪ O fetter me with thy chains that I may never run away from thee; and grant that nothing may ever be able to seperate me from thee, hearken therefore unto me I beseech thee O merciful Fa∣ther, aad cleanse my heart throughly, by the in∣spiration of thy holy word that I may receive Je∣sus Christ with all the benefits of his death and pa∣sion, as a true token and pledge that he suffered for my sins, and rose again from th dad for my justification, and now sitteth at the right hand of God the Father making intercession for me, to whom be all honour, power and glory, adoration and subjection from this time forth and for ever more Amen. Our Father, &c.
Meditations for Monday Evening on the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper Shewing the necessity of receiving of it. I. OUR Blessed Saviour the wise Physitian, having felt the Pulses of our weak∣nesses, ordain'd this must Holy and Divine Sacrament: and for this purpose hath he in∣stituted the same in form of food, that the very form wherein he did institute it, might declare unto us the effect it worketh, and withall the great necessity our Souls have of it. II. O most wonderful Sacrament, what shall I say of thee? thou art the life of my Soul, and a Medicine to heal all my Wounds; What Tongue is able to express the Excel∣lency of this most blessed Sacrament which thou O Lord, invitest me to, who am a vile and miserable Sinner, when I consider who thou art, and what I am, how rich and ex∣cellent the benefits are which thou preparest for me; and how little I am dispos'd to re∣ceive them, my Soul is in trouble, and I tremble to draw near to thy glorious Ma∣jesty. III. Thou art O Lord, without quantity great,
without quality good, without measure wise, and without time Everlasting the Stars are dimn'd in thy presence, the Pillars of Heaven quake before thee, the highest of the Sera∣phins do gather in their Wings, and account themselves as it were little Flyes when thou art present. How then dare so vile a Creature as I am approach unto thy holy Table, if St. John Baptist whom thou filledst with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers womb, thought him∣self not worthy to stoop down and unloose the Lachet of thy Shoos. Shall I who am loaden with Sins, dare to present my self to that holy Banquet, where Angels wait as Mini∣string Spirits, sent out for the good of those who are to receive the earnest of Salvation. Shall I with lascivious Eyes full of wanton looks, behold that Lamb without spot or blemish with my polluted looks and lying Tongue, shall I touch the bread of Angels? or shall I lodge the King of Kings in a heart filled with foul concupiscence? IV. I am in a strait, O Lord, on both sides, for if I absent my self from this Holy Table, I am disobedient to my Saviour, who commands me to set forth his death till he shall come again; I keep at a distance from the Fountain of Life; I renounce the seals of the Cove∣nant, and the pledges of thy love: and if
I come to it unworthily, I am affraid I may Eat and Drink my own Damnation, and draw upon my self thy heavy Judgments, if thou Lord shouldst mark iniquities O Lord who shall stand but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared, mercies and forgiveness are from the Lord our God; for we have rebelled against him. But where sin hath abounded thy grace hath much more aboun∣ded, O Lord my whole trust is in thee, as by thy goodness thou givest me thy blessing, so by thy wisdom thou wilt instruct me how to receive them to Salvation. A Prayer for Monday Evening on the Holy Sacrament. O Lord, I take the boldness to approach unto thee, O receive me according to thy tender mer∣cy; Banish from my mind all those Earthly and Carnal thoughts which disturb my Devotion, affect my Senses with a Pious veneration. Give unto me such Humility and Repentance, such fear and reve∣rence, as so high a Mystery does require, I come not O Lord to excuse, but accuse my self, I trust not O Lord in my own Righteousness neither have I any merits to be puft up with, nor do I extol my self with the proud Pharisec. II. But O Lord I come to thee, as the poor Publi∣can with Eyes cast down, as being ashamed of my
own unworthiness, and laying my hand on my breast saying Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, I come to thee with poor Bartemeus that I may re∣ceive my sight, who am blind and lame, I come as naked to thee, the Father of Compassion, as hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, to thee, O Lord, who art the bread of Life and the fountain of living VVater, springing up from the Wells of eternal Salvation. III. Thou didst O Lord accept of Mary Magdalens tears, the faith of the Thief on the Cross, the Repentance of St. Peter, and the Prayers of the poor Publican; accept now of this my humilia∣tion, confirm my pardon, seal my Redemption, cleanse me from all my pollutions, support my weakness, and cover my nakedness, O send me not away empty, lest I faint by the way, but sa∣tisfie my Soul with the food of thy heavenly ban∣quet, that thereby it may receive nourishment unto eternal life. IV. Grant O Lord, that I may receive thee, with pure lips and a penitent heart, that thou dwelling in my heart by Faith, I may find my self strengh∣ned, comforted, and my heart inflam'd with the love of thee, then shall I prostrate my self before thee, and acknowledge in the Assembly of thy
Saints, that it is thou alone who hast comforted me, and that there is no Salvation in any besides thee. V. As thou preparest a Table in the midst of mine Enemies, and fillest up my Cup, and dost anoint and wash thy poor Guests; pour upon me I beseech thee, thy most fragrant oyl, wash not only my feet but also my hands and my head, that I may have part with thee, make me not only partaker of the Seals of thy Covenant, and of the pledges of thy love, but also that I may receive thy self, with all the benefits of thy death and passion, let my preparation which I now make be sincere, and without lukewarmness that I may become a worthy receiver at thy holy Table; Our Father, &c. Meditations for Tuesday Morning on the Holy Sacrament. THe true knowledge of the will of God is the gracious manifestation of his goodness. He is good in the Graciousness of his Promises, and upright in the truth of his performances; and this Grace and Truth which is the Habitation of his Throne, is the Refuge of the Sinner, and the Sanctuary of the Penitent.
II. And where, O my Soul, canst thou better taste the goodness of the Lord, then in this blessed Eucharist, the sacred Feast of the Lords Goodness? And as his Goodness does invite thee, so let his uprightness encourage thee; for that faithful is he who hath pro∣mised, faithful to give according to his pro∣mise; healing for thy wounds, strengthening for thy weakness, comfort for thy sorrow, and will give that which is the Compendium of all Spiritual good things; peace of Consci∣ence and joy in the holy Ghost. III. Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul? And why art thou so cast down within me? Is it because thou hast broken the Covenant of thy God, even the Covenant of Reconcilia∣tion, Seal'd thee by the Sacrament, and that thus by thy Sin thou art at enmity with thy Maker? Be it so, yet will not the Lord, who is good, be as gracious to his enemies, as he requires us to be to ours? It is his own Law, Exod. 23. 4. If thou meet thine Enemies Ox, or his Ass going astray thou shalt surely bring it back to him again; now God meets us Sinners, and all Sinners, as such are his Enemies; he meets us straying like the Beast without understand∣ing;
and what? will he not bring us again unto himself, the sole proprietary, by that first right of Creation, and that more firm right of Redemption. IV. Read his Commission, Luke 4. 18. He comes to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, to recover sight to the blind, and to set at liberty, them that are bruised, to this, to all this is he Sealed of the Father, John 6. 27. and that he will do it, he seals unto us in this holy Sacrament, make hast my Soul and approach to the Throne of Grace in this blessed Ordi∣nance, let my accusing Conscience tell me, I am a Sinner, and therefore not worthy the knowledg of God, or the quicknings of his Grace, not worthy a Communion with Christ, a participation of his fulness; yet to this shall my afflicted Soul reply, in the returns of Faith that God even teaches Sinners in the way, so they be humble and penitent Sinners; and from hence know I, that the Lord teacheth Sinners, even from hence that he is both good and upright. V. Thus then does God give Grace to the humble; to the humble not so properly said to be humbled; for humbled we may be, when
prest down under the weight of punishment, but humble we cannot be less laid low in the sense of Sin, without this sense of Sin, we shall be as far from being humble, as from hav∣ing Grace: but, oh the languishings of my Soul under the weight of my Sin! My Sins are gone over my head; and are become a sore burden too heavy for me to bear; too heavy not only in their punishment and their wrath, but even in their pollution and guilt. VI. If so, yet though humbled, be not rejected, O my Soul, but rather comfort, O comfort thy self in this holy Sacrament of thy Jesus, through faith in the promises of his Grace, for that by how much the more thou art hum∣bled for thy sin, by so much the more do those promises of Grace and Glory belong to thee in the Gospel, which are peculiarly made of God in Christ, and by Christ conveyed unto us in this Sacrament. VII. And all those who thus come unto Christ, in this holy Ordinance, they shall find rest to their Souls, and though we cannot keep the Covenant and Testimonies of our God in an Angelical purity yet may we do it in an Evangelical sincerity; though not in a full per∣fection; yet in a sincere endeavour of holy o∣bedience,
that Mercy and Truth being met together, Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other; even in him my blessed Mediator, will I trust, which hath wrought out my everlasting Salvation. Tuesday Morning, a Solliloquy on the blessed Sacrament. I. O Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World, grant me thy peace, and take not thy holy Spirit from me, grant that I may run the ways of thy Commandments, and keep them with my whole heart; that being now called to thy holy Table I may become a worthy receiver of thy pre∣cious body and blood, which was offer'd up for me and for the Sins of the whole World. II. O Lord God, who art the wise disposer of all things both spiritual and temporal, who livest in that light unto which no mortal eye can approch, and yet humble thy self so far, as to behold me, and all other thy unworthy Servants; more espe∣cially thou hast engag'd thy self by promise, to draw nigh unto▪ to dwell with, and to be in the midst of thy poor people, when in sincerity of heart they shall appear before thee.
III. I therefore the unworthiest of all thy Servants, sinful dust and ashes, a worm and no man do here in all humility prostrate my self before thee; desirous to have my thoughts and meditations fix'd upon thine omnipresence, which beholdest me and all that is within me, even the intentions and disposi∣tion of my heart in coming to thy holy Table; as also with a confidence of thy gracious presence, that thou art with me to assist and enable me, in the performance of this thy holy Ordinance, that I may become a worthy receiver of thy precious Body and Blood. IV. Lord, I confess I am unworthy to come before thee, to draw nigh unto thee, or to receive any fa∣vour from thee, and that because of the rebellion of my nature, I have just cause to cry out with the Leper I am unclean, I am unclean. unclean by O∣riginal Corruption, which like a Leprosie hath o∣verspread all the powers and faculties of my Soul, unclean by those numberless number of actual tran∣gressions, which throughout the whole course of my life I have committed against thee. V. I come unto thee, O God, at this time disclaim∣ing
my own righteousness, and abhorring my self for all my former wickedness, and only in the name, for the merits, and through the mediation of my dear Redeemer Christ Jesus the righteous: Am I bold yet to implore thy mercy, to seek thy face, to sue out a pardon from the guilt of my iniquity, to de∣sire thee to be reconciled, and to be well pleas'd with me, O Lord do thou forget my sins, but let me re∣member them; do thou cast them behind thy back but let me have them always before my face; I must confess, O Lord, that thou maist glorifie thy self in my confusion, and I must needs acknowledge that in the severest of thy dispensations thou art righteous; but let my God rather glorifie himself in the remis∣sion of my sins, in the converting of my nature, and salvation of my soul. VI. O thou father of mercy, have mercy upon me, and let all my iniquities be cast into the Sea, even into the red Sea, of my Saviours blood, that so they may never rise up in judgment against me, O thou God of all Grace, send down thy Spirit of Grace into my heart to sanctifie it to thy service; humble me for my sins past, and establish me against sin for the time to come, let me every day grow in grace, that the house of Saul may grow weaker and wea∣ker, and the house of David stronger and stron∣ger.
VII. O put thy fear into my heart, that▪ I may never depart from thee, and do thou never leave me, that so I may walk on from strength to strength in this valley of Tears, until I appear before thee, O God; give me a sanctified use of all thy dispensations to∣wards me, that sickness and health, crosses and mercies, may serve as so many steps in that Ladder that may carry me to Heaven, mind me of my latter end; and teach me so to live, that I may not fear to die, that when I die I may be sure to live; in the mean time, O Lord, assist my weakness, and streng∣then my faith, that I may receive with comfort that heavenly Feast which thou hast prepared for me and all that believe and call upon thy holy name, in whose blessed name and word, I conclude my weak and imperfect prayers saying, Our Father, &c. Meditations for Tuesday Evening on the holy Sacrament. I. BY means of this divine food, the Soul is united to Christ, and receives that strength and vigour which continually sets it forward in its spiritual ascension. Who can give wor∣thy thanks for so great a benefit? Who will not be altogether resolv'd into Tears, when he sees Almighty God united to him? the more we go about to consider the excellency and vertues of this Soveraign Mystery, the
more do we want words to express it, and the more doth our understanding fail us. II. What pleasant sweetness, and delightful Savours of a good life, doth the Soul of the just man feel, when he receives this divine Sa∣crament, there is no other sound heard at that time but the musick of the heart, which are vehement bursting out of holy desires, and yielding of thanks all tending to the praise of the ever blessed institutor; there the devout Soul through the vertue of this most holy and blessed Sacrament, is altogether renued, and replenished with joy unspeakable, and fully sa∣tisfied with those good things, which the rich∣ness of his mercy hath found out, and doth bestow upon all true penitents. III. Such are thy gifts, O sweet Saviour, such are the works and delights of thy love, which thou art wont to communicate to thy friends, by the means of this divine Sacrament: and this thou dost to the end that we being filled with these heavenly delights, should despise all vain and transitory pleasures. Now what glo∣ry can be greater then this? What gift more precious? What benefit of more value, or what greater token of love; let all the works
of nature keep silence; let all the works of grace give place; for this is a work exceeding all works; and a singular grace above all graces; it is the burning Coal from the holy Altar to enkindle the fire of the love of God in us; the means whereby to receive grace; the pledge of everlasting felicity; and the treasure of a Christian Life. IV. Our blessed Redeemer of the World in∣tending to restore man unto his former digni∣ty, and to raise him up by grace as he had faln by sin; did ordain and leave, as his last Le∣gacy, this most divine Sacrament of his Body, and Blood, whereby man might recover his lost Estate and be made partaker of the di∣vine nature; we have it express'd in his own words, Joh. 6. 56. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me and I in him. Now when the time drew near that Christ should be betrayed, and delivered up to death, he communeth with his disciples after this manner, Luk. 22. 15. I have an earnest desire to eat the Passeover with you before I suffer; hav∣ing so said, he took Bread and blessed it, in like manner he took the Cup in Consecrating the Elements of Bread and Wine, his Prayers ascended to Heaven, but his benefits remain with his Church here on Earth; the visible E∣lements
declare two things, the one that he was to offer up himself an oblation for the re∣demption of the whole world; the other that he would become unto the faithful, by his means, a divine sustenance for their Souls. V. Consider what great care our Saviour hath shewed towards us, in instituting this Sacra∣ment; seeing nothing could be given more excellent, more dear; when he loved his, which were in the World, he loved them unto the end, he hath given us of his own Bread, and of his own Cup; nay he hath given us his own Body as Bread, his own Blood as Wine for the nourishment of our Souls; had he bestowed this so great a gift on Saints and Angels it had not been so wonderful; but bestowing it on poor Sinners was love unspeakable! O what shall we render unto the Lord, for all the be∣nefits we have received at his hands, let us me∣ditate on his Love, and pursue that holy reso∣lution with the Prophet David, to take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. VI. Who is there now, that will neglect com∣ing to this holy Table; nay neglect their own Salvation when they may purchase it at so easie
a rate, O Lord, if to obtain this benefit, thou hadst ordain'd hard Fasts, long Pilgrimages, shedding of Blood, and other sharp usages; all these labours and afflictions ought worthily to have been suffer'd, to tast even but once thy sacred Body: but, O Love unheard of, that hadst rather make the entrance easie and delectable, that I might the oftner receive this great benefit. O Adam, how much bet∣ter is the condition of thy posterity, than thine own was, which is now brought to pass by the means of our loving and liberal Jesus? thou wert driven out of Paradise; and that thou shouldst not return thither to eat of the Tree of Life and live, one of the Cherubims armed with a fiery Sword was set by the righte∣ous God to keep it. VII. We thy Children living in the Paradise of the holy Church are not only driven away by an Angel, with a fiery Sword, but are invited of the Lord of Angels by the fire of his Love, to taste often the fruit of the Tree of Life; yea to receive him, who hath given all strength to it, and that giveth us a blessed and everlast∣ing life, for so he inviting us hath promis'd; he which eateth of this Bread shall live for ever, Joh. 6. 58.
A Solliloquy for Tuesday Evening. I. O thou only begotten Son of Almighty God, great and wonderful are the benefits, O Lord, which I have received of thee, thou hast raised me from the mire and dust of the Earth, and hast created my Soul of nothing after thine own Image and likeness, and hast made it eapable of thy glo∣ry; thou hast given me understanding, memory, will, free choice, with all my other Members, and Senses, to the end that with them I might know thee, and love thee: thou hast preserv'd me even while I was yet in my Mothers womb, thou hast pa∣tiently born with me a long time, after so many sins committed even until this present hour, where as others having less offended then I, are now per ad∣venture tormented in Hell fire. II. Besides all this, it was thy pleasure to become man, and to be conversant among men for my sake: and for me, to be afflicted, punished, troubled, and covered all over with a bloody sweat, to be ta∣ken, bound, buffeted, and spit upon, to be dispised, blasphemed, reviled, and apparelled in mockery, with white and red garments: for my sake thou wast contened to be torn with whips, crown'd with thorns, smtten with a reed, and to have thine eyes
covered with a Veil, to be condemn'd to death, and to be led to the place of Execution with that heavy cross upon thy shoulders, whereon thy bles∣sed hands and feet were nailed, thou wast crucified between two Theeves and reputed amongst the wicked, thou hadst Vinegar and Gall given thee to drink, and in the end put to a most shameful and cruel death. III. In this manner, O Lord, with so many intolle∣rable troubles, pains, and agonies hast thou re∣deemed me: but I a most vile and wretched sinner have shewed my self unthankful for all these be∣nefits, and have so often by my sins crucified thee afresh; that without hearty contrition, humilia∣tion, and repentance I can expect nothing but thy wrath and damnation, I have loved vanity more then truth, and have esteem'd the Creature more than the Creator, it is high time; O Lord, that I should now begin to weep and bewail for those hainous sins I have committed against thee. IV. This sorrow and grief for my sins is the thing which thou hast so long look'd for at my hands, even from the time thou first gavest me life, thou hast often called me, and I have like the deaf ad∣der stopped my ▪ and would not hearken to thee:
thou hast given me a long time to repent me of my sins, and I have consumed it in pride and va∣nity, the more I have been chastised and cherish'd by thee, the more hath mine heart been hardned: shew∣ing my self unthankful towards the one, and re∣bellious towards the other: But yet for all this, O Lord, since thou hast suffered for my sake so many things, and hast commanded me never to despair nor mistrust thy goodness: I therefore re∣fer my self wholly to thy mercy, and do beseech thee, to grant me grace to amend my life, that from henceforth I may serve and please thee, in holiness and newness of Life, and continually re∣main in thy grace and favour, world without end, Amen. Meditations on Wenesday morning on the most holy Sacrament. COnsider after this what troubles our Sa∣viour suffer'd in that doleful night; when the Soldiers had him in Custody, mock∣ed, and laughed him to scorn, Luk. 22. 63. and used as a means to pass away their drowsi∣ness, to scoff, and jest at the Lord of Majesty. Consider, O my Soul, how thy sweet Saviour is set here as a mark, to receive all the strokes and buffets, their malice could invent. O cruel! and unquiet night! in which, O sweet Saviour, thou tookest no rest, nor thy adversa∣ries any repose, but accounted it even a pas∣time and recreation to vex and torment thee.
II. The night was ordain'd for this end, that all creatures should therein take their rest: and that the Senses and Members that are wea∣ried with toils and labours of the day might be refresh'd and reliev'd: but these wicked men use it now as a fit time to torment all thy Members and Senses; striking thy Body, af∣flicting thy Soul, binding thy Hands, buffet∣ing thy Cheeks, and spitting in thy Face: that at such time as all Members should be at rest, all thy Members were in great pain and anguish. III. Now let us Consider the denial of Saint Pe∣ter, who was so familiar a friend of our Savi∣ours, that he chose him to see the glory of his transfiguration: yet not once but three se∣veral times, even in the very presence of his Lord and Master sweareth and for sweareth that he knows him not. O Peter is he that stands by thee so wicked a man, that thou account'st it so vile a shame, only to have known him? Consider that this is a Condemnation of him by thee, before he is Condemn'd by the High Priests: since by this denial, thou giv'st the whole World to understand, that he is such a man, that even self dost
great reproach and dishonour to thee, ever to have known him. IV. Our Saviour hearing this denial, turned back and beheld Peter, and cast his eyes on the lost sheep with a look full of vertue, mystery and signification, Peter understood right well the voice and language of that look: and al∣though the Crowing of the Cock was not a∣ble to awake his Spirits, yet was this able as indeed it did; for the eyes of our Saviour, do not only speak but also work, as it plainly ap∣pears by the tears of Saint Peter, which though they gush'd from the eyes of Peter, yet did they much more proceed from the look and eyes of Christ. V. Wherefore when thou art at any time a∣wak'd out of thy sinful life, and dost with grief and sorrow call thy sins to remembrance, wherein thou hast offended Almighty God, think with thy self, that the merciful eyes of Christ looks upon thee: the Cock had already crowed, but Peter remembred not himself, be∣cause our Saviour had not as yet look'd on him, but when Christ look't upon him, then he remembred himself, and repented, and be∣wail'd his offences; for the eyes of Christ do
open ours, and awake such as are asleep. Lord, let my eyes then be for ever open, that I may behold those heavenly gifts which thou hast prepared for all those who love and fear thee. VI. O then receive me a poor sinner at thy holy Table this most holy Medicine cures all the wounds of Sin: this quickning flesh overcom∣eth all mortal sin: this is the most holy Seal of divine Promises, which we may shew be∣fore Gods Judgment Seat; having this pledge we may glory, and be secure of eternal Life: if Christs Body and Blood be exhibited unto us, assuredly all other benefits by that most holy Body, and most blessed Blood are prepared for us; how then can he that hath given us great∣er things deny us the less? He that hath given his Son to us, how shall he not give all other things with him? Rom. 8. 32. Let the Spouse there∣fore be glad and rejoyce for the time is at hand when she shall be called to the Marriage Sup∣per? Rev. 19. 7. Let her put on precious ap∣parel, let her put on her Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 12. That she be not found naked; this Garment is the Bridegrooms righteous∣ness, which we put on in our baptism; but our righteousness is so far from being a Wed∣ing Garment, that it is nothing but filthy rags, O let us endeavour to cast them of, and not bring them with us to this great Solemnity.
A Litany of Confession of Sins to Almighty God before the holy Sacrament. O Lord, I have committed many grievous sins against thee: I have not piously frequent∣ed thy house with that filial fear, and holy re∣verence which becometh thy Child, but have too often sinfully absented it; so that mine attendance upon thee in thy Service of the day hath been formal, my Devotion hypocritical, and my Expectation of a blessing deceitful. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. All the faculties of my Soul, all the Mem∣bers of my Body, which thou hast giv'n me for thy Service, and ought to have been in∣struments of holiness, I have daily made wea∣pons of iniquity; mine understanding, which should daily have delighted in thee, and thy law, hath been daily busied in the search of sin: mine affections, which I should have wholly fixt upon thee, the highest, holiest, and most happy object, in whom is alsufficiency, have been foolishly and falsly bestowed on the em∣ptiness, and vanity of the Creature; in which I have found nothing else but shortness, and uncertainty, falshood and flattery, weariness and misery. Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
I have not wisely, nor timely considered that the grace of repentance is thy heavenly Gift, and ought to be early begg'd of thee by Prayers and Tears; but have sinfully imagin'd it in mine own power to repent when I would; when I have been neither sure of time to ask it, of hope to obtain it, grace to receive it, or of mercy to enjoy it. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not only turned thy grace into wanton∣ness, but even thy choicest of thy gifts bestow∣ed on me into wickedness, by being spiritually proud of my endowments so that while I have pharisaically seemed in mine own eyes to be much better than others, I have in thy ight been far worse, and have thereby lost the bles∣sed presence of thy holy Spirit, who resist∣eth the proud and givest grace to the humble Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not daily and duly (as I ought) exa∣mined my Soul by each particular of thy Com∣mandments, that so my Conscience might be throughly convinced of my sins, and I thereby (with holy fear) might heartily bewail them, utterly forsake them, perfectly hate them, and (together with thy Justice) condemn my self for them; but have only looked on them with a carnal eye, as common spectacles of mans misery, and proper objects of thy Mer∣cy: from whence it is, that I have not died
unto sin daily (as I ought) that this my sor∣rowing for sin hath been but superficial, my hope of thy pardon deceitful, and e∣ven my very mortification to sin, exceeding sinful. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have readily remembred that there is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus; but sinfully forgotten that it is to those only which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: thus have I wretchedly put of the punishment of sin, from the guilt of it, and am thereby become guilty of thy double pu∣nishment; that for the committing of evil, and this for denying thee (in Christ) to be the rewarder only of good. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have willingly believed, that it is the blood of God which cleanseth me from all iniquity; and that if I believe in thee, although I were dead yet shall I live, and that if I live, and be∣lieve in thee, I shall never die: but I have wilfully forgotten, that by my daily sinning, I have daily trampled on thy precious blood, and am therefore dead while I live; and may therefore justly fear, that (without mercy) I must live in endless torments when I am dead. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sometimes promised the general
amendment of my own evil ways, by my thorough Mortification to Sin, and Sanctifi∣cation to Righteousness, in my more frequent watchings, fastings, Prayings, holy strivings against my corruptions, and holy hungrings for thy heavenly graces; but all these, to my Souls grief, were soon forgotten by me, and my sinful affections instead of drawing nea∣rer to thee, alienated every day more and more from thee. Lord be merciful to be a sinner. I have missed many happy opportunities of going to thy holy Table, under the false pre∣tences of unfitness to receive, want of Cha∣rity to forgive, and of Faith to believe; whereas these sinful wants (which have all proceeded from my want of grace) ought much rather to have been graciously repair'd with earnest prayers, and truly repented of with daily tears. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not so freely, and so fully forgiven, and forgotten those injuries which man hath offer'd unto me; as I ought to have done, but have too often come unto thy holy Table with reproach in my mouth, and malice in my heart: Thus, O Lord, have I had sinfully to do with malice, that stood in so grea need of mercy; and by refusing to forgive my brother upon Earth, may justly fear
to be denied forgiveness by thee in heav'n. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. From these my sinful inconsiderations, un∣due preparations, ungracious absentings, and more ungodly frequentings of thy blessed Ta∣ble, have proceeded these my declinings in grace; and decayings in goodness; so that without thy rich mercy unto me in Christ (whose precious blood thou hast spilt for me) and by this thy blessed Seal confirm'd unto me I may justly fear I have received unworthily, and thereby eaten and drank unto my self mine own damnation. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. A Prayer (after Confession of sins) to Al∣mighty God. I. ALmighty God, I have sinned and I desire to repent: I am heavy laden with the bur∣then of my sins, and can find none on earth to re∣leive me; to thee therefore, O thou father of mer∣cies, and God of all consolations, who invitest weary Souls to come unto thee, and easiest them when they are come; do I apply my self for mercy and forgive∣ness. O thou blessed fountain of eternal good, who hast freely given me thine only Son to dye for me, and in him thy self to be for ever reconciled to me; who desirest not the death of me▪ a miserable sin∣ner,
but rather that I should repent and live, have mercy upon me, O thou blessed Shepherd of my Soul, who aimest to seek and to save those that were lost, that findest all whom thou seekest, and looseth none of those whom thou hast found; have mercy upon me. O thou sacred and for ever blessed spirit, who visitest and cherishest the drooping Souls of thine Elect, assist and comfort me; Lord save me or I perish, Lord help me or I faint. Lord seek me or I am lost for ever. II. With all humility of soul I humbly acknowledg, that I have too long sinfully depended on the vain shadows and deceitful shews of mine own imperfect holiness; and have too sinfully neglected the im∣provements of thy heavenly graces, whereby I have too long deluded my own Soul with hopes of my heavenly assurance; and have then thought my self to be spiritually rich, when in thy sight I have been wretchedly poor, sinfully blind, wilfully naked distressedly miserable. III. Lord open thou mine eyes by thy precious Eye-salve of thy Sacred Word, that I may clearly see the sadness of my mine own con∣dition, in these my sad mistakes, by this the great deceit of my own deluding heart; enrich
my poverty with the gifts and graces of thy ho∣ly Spirit, cover my nakedness with the precious robes of Christs righteousness, swallow up this my great misery, in thine endless mercy; of carnal, make me spiritual, increase thy graces daily in me, and for thy mercy sake remove all vain pretences of a false assurance from me; give me that sincerity of heart in thy ser∣vice, that constant holiness, and gracious per∣severance, that makes my Calling and Election sure. IV. O thou glorious and for ever blessed Spirit who eternally enjoyest blessedness in the sweetness and fulness of thy self, and yet most graciously com∣municatest happiness to us thy sinful Creatures, that we might thereby spiritually know thee, love thee, e thee, and eternally enjoy thee; vouchsafe me, I humbly beseech thee, the blessed pe of thy holy Spirit, that I may thereby become iritual, that I may no longer live af destruction but daily mds of the flesh by the S may thereby joyfully at∣tain unto .
V. Suffer me not, O Lord, any longer to delude my self with the shews and shadows of devotion; but so guide me by the blessed motions of thy holy Spirit, that I may dye truly and daily unto sin, and live hourly unto righteousness. Lord thou seest all my desires, and my groanings are not hid from thee; O! grant me this mercy, and take from me what thou wilt; even life it self without thee is bitterness unto me; unglew my heart from the World, and fix it wholly upon thee and thy service; that so I may spiritually rejoyce in thee, be graciously accepted of thee, and ever blessed with thee. Amen. Meditations for Wednesday Evening, a pre∣paration to the Holy Sacrament. I. AFter all these injuries. Consider what Scourgings and Whipping our Saviour suffered at the Pillar, for when the Judge perceived, that he was not able to pacifie the furious rage of those his most cruel Enemies, he determin'd to punish our Saviour with such a severe kind of punishment, as might suffice to satisfie the malicious outrage of such cruel hearts, that they being content
therewith, should cease, and seek no more after his death. II. This was one of the greatest, and most wonderful fights that was seen in the World, who would ever have thought, that lashes should have been laid on the shoulders of the Almighty? the Prophet David saith, the place of thy habitation (O Lord) is most High, and that there shall no evil approach near thy Tabernacle, if the Blessed Angels, fill'd the Air with high lauds and praises, up∣on the day of his Nativity, when as yet they had only seen him in swadling cloaths, and in the Manger where he was laid, what did they think, when they see him so malici∣ously and cruelly handled. III. Whither, O Son of God, whither hath thy humility descended? Whither hath thy charity, pity, love and compassion extend∣ed? For I have done wickedly, and thou art punished; I have committed the offence, and thou art chastened with revenge, the tree carried me to unlawful desire, and per∣fect charity led thee to the tree of thy Cross, teach me. O Lord, to mortifie my world∣ly affections, and all vices, that reign in this
mortal body, O pour into my wounds the Oyl of thy goodness, that I may come with that health unto thy holy Table, as becomes a worthy receiver. Let nothing be sweet, I pray thee unto me without thee, let all other things be vile and of no account, but troublesome unto me, which is contrary to thy good will and pleasure, let tears be my bread day and night, let thy law be better unto me, than millions of gold and silver, and let it be delightful unto me, to walk in the ways of thy Commandments unto the end. IV. As there is no greater incentive of divine wrath than sin, so there is not any greater obstructive of devout Prayer, in removing that wrath, than impenitence; impenitence clogs, yea clips the wing of devotion, so that it cannot mount aloft, it cannot reach the throne of grace, and of this David him∣self gives us his profession, from his experi∣ence, saying, Psal. 66. 18. If I regard ini∣quity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me; look how far our lives are from Gods pre∣cepts, to obey them; so far are Gods Ears from hearkning to our Prayers, (saith Ter∣tul.) the person then must be excepted be∣fore the petition; and so a sincere penitent, is the best suppliant; for that our Lord Jesus
Christ being the Priest that offers, and the Altar that sanctifies all our services, there can be no acceptation, without his mediati∣on; and sure I am, he will not be our Ad∣vocate, unless he be our Lord, he will not be our Priest, unless he be our King; he will not present God our Prayers, unless we present him our persons; and whom faith and repentance consecrates through the Spirit, him grace and mercy accepts through Christ. V. In this Blessed Sacrament; here we have an unmovable Centre to rest on; God our portion, Christ our fullness, an object larger than the Heavens. Oh that our Faith were now suitable to its object! the firmness of our trust, to the fulness of our God, our Jesus! had the Widow of Sarepta prepared more Vessels, she had receiv'd more Oyl; and that we receive less, in the supplies of grace, and bounties of love, from God and Christ; it is because we are straightned in our Faith, not God or Christ straightned in his bounty; we less capable to receive, not he less willing or able to give; the Widows vessels are all fill'd, and here each humble Soul shall be replenished, according to the measure of their capacity.
VI. Not according to the riches of Christs fulness; who, as the Sea can fill the vessels, though never so large; and therefore where the measure is but little, there the vessels are but small. Enlarge we then the thirst∣ing desires of our Soul, that the Fountain of Christs fullness, here set open in this Ordi∣nance may satisfie and fill them; here be∣hold the promises of life sealed, here feel the riches of grace Communicated, and here see the earnest of Salvation and Glory Con∣firmed, O then let us hasten to these wells of Salvation, for in them we shall find eter∣nal life▪ while we are here we shall find rest to our Bodies and Souls, but in the life to come joy everlasting. A Prayer for Wednesday Evening prepa∣ratory to the Holy Sacrament. I. To thee, O thou blessed Centre of my Soul, mine inward and mine outward Conso∣lation, my blessed quietness, and richest rest; with all humility of Soul and prostration of Spirit, do I apply my self for mercy and for∣giveness; Lord pardon (in the Blood of Christ) all my offences; and for the time to come, with∣draw
my heart from worldly vanities, and fix it wholly upon thee and thy Kingdom; that so I may sincerely love thee, joyfully delight in thee, and be both now and ever happy with thee. II. O God most Holy, O Lord most Righteous, O Father most Merciful, who in thy tender bowels of compassion towards me, hast freely given me thine only Son to perform that in mercy for me, which thou in justice requirest of me; look not upon me, I meekly beseech thee, as I am in my self, in my frailties of sinful nature, but graci∣ously behold me in the beauties and perfections of thy blessed Son; Lord give me that holy hun∣gring and thirstings after thee, that my longings may be earnest for thee, let thy holy Table be de∣lightful to me, and sweeter than all outward enjoyments, that I may truly love it, and joy∣fully possess thy Heavenly comforts by it. III. Almighty God who so perfectly hatest sin, that thou hast most severely punished it in thine only and beloved Son, whom thou freely gavest, not only to dye for sin, but also to condemn it, and to call sinners to repentance for it: have mercy upon me, I humbly beseech thee, thy vile, sinful, and most unworthy servant: Who have not only foolishly, and sinfully imagined
that thou wouldst cherish that in me, which thou hast so sharply punished in my Saviour, but also wickedly divided thee in thine own es∣sence, and there by my self from thee in the loosing of thy gracious presence: have pity up∣on me, and release me from these misty fogs of sin and ignorance, and lead me by thy blessed light of grace to those thy blessed paths, which lead to glory. IV: Lord I have sinned, and I desire to repent; I tremble at the greatness of my sin, and hum∣bly beg thy pardon for it in the richness of thy mercy; O let thy sweet saving, and prevent∣ing grace, make this my humiliation, effectual unto me: O let me no longer vainly think the guilt only of sin to be mine, and the punishment my Saviours; but let me faithfully believe, that untill by thy grace, I am made truly conforma∣ble to him, I have no part nor portion in him; but am yet in my sins, and thereby liable to thy sorest punishments. Lord, give me a saving Faith to believe in him a sanctified life to be a true follower of him, and a Blessed death to live for ever with him. Amen.
Meditations for Thursday Morning, on the Holy Sacrament. AFfliction is the proper object of Com∣passion, misery the proper object of mercy: and therefore we read how Pilate, willing to release Jesus, he brings him forth having his back surrowed with the Whips, his Head harrowed with the Thorns, and his derisive purple stain'd, yea, drencht with blood; and presents him thus ghastly a spe∣ctacle to the Jews, with an Ecce homo behold the man supposing so sad a sight would have moved malice to mercy, and envy it self to Compassion, now what Pilate did to the Jews, with Christ, Christ in a fit resemblance and apt allusion does with the penitent to his Father; he brings him forth in the Court of Conscience, having his heart wounded with sorrow, his Spirit broken in Contrition, and his Soul fainting in Languishments of repen∣tance, and presents him so sad a spectacle to the Father with an Ecce homo, behold the max. II. Behold the man, once so lofty in his pride, now so lowly in his penitence; once so hard∣ned in his rebellion, now so humbled in his contrition; once so obstinate a Sinner, now
so pittifull a Penitent, and oh! whilst this man of sorrows mourns in affliction, how does the Father of mercies melt in Compassion? when the wounded sinner is presented by the wounded Son, and the penitents tears cry aloud with the Mediators Blood, how must the Fathers compassion needs melt into sins remission. III. This affliction and pain, is either that of the penitent sinner, or that of the devout Saint, that of the penitent sinner, who hav∣ing withdrawn himself from the World, and retired into the secret closet of his consci∣ence, how does he with Hezekiah, even o∣verturn the Annals of his life in the bitter∣ness of his Soul? and after a strict survey, having faithfully observed the sins which he hath committed, and the several circumstan∣ces by which they are aggravated, he then summs them up into a Catalogue, which is no sooner in his eye, but sorrow is in his heart, endeavouring to blot our those letters of guilt with his tears of repentance, through faith in the Blood of Christ. IV. And whilst he sets his sins in order before him, oh how does a secret affrightment chill
his blood, and make his heart to tremble, in apprehension of their loathsom filth and dreadful curse! yea, in beholding himself un∣der the heavy sentence of the Laws condem∣nation, oh how, is he wholly encompassed with terror, and amazement! when he looks within him, oh the terrors of an accusing conscience, and a killing guilt! when he looks without him, oh the horror of a deserved death, and a tormenting Hell! when he looks above him, oh the dread of an offended Ma∣jesty, and an avenging Judge! oh whither then shall this poor penitent fly for succour? where, oh where, shall his affrighted, and afflicted soul seek for shelter? where, but at the Cross of his Redeemer. V. And when Christ, so full of pity, so full of love, when he beholds the humble suppliant, and sincere penitent, in the lowest depths of his humiliation, pouring out his complaint at the foot of his Cross; when he hears his mournful sighs, his painful groans, the ear∣nest messengers of his asslicted soul, it is then as impossible for Christ, to forget the passions of sorrow which he suffered, as not to com∣passionate this poor penitent for whom he suffered; he who stopped not his ears at the Jews blasphemies, will certainly not stop his ear at the penitents complaints, he that
turned not away his face from his enemies buffetings, will not turn away his Eyes from the suppliants tears, though the Devil hath bereav'd the sinner of his purity, yet can he not deprive his Saviour of his pity, Christ doth not, Christ cannot so remember the sins that man hath committed, that he forgets the soul which himself hath purchast; his eye, and nothing else indeed can do it, but his eye of mercy, that looks through the guilt of sin, to behold the sorrow of the sinner, and that affliction moves his compassion. VI. The sorrow of affliction, and pain in the penitent becomes destructive of sin, through the power of faith in the blood of Christ; for that, God will be sanctified in all them that come nigh unto him; and therefore he being a consuming fire in the fury of his vengeance; when we humble our selves before him, tho with the deepest of afflictions, unless it be by faith in Jesus Christ, as the Mediator, God will be a just Judge to condemn, rather than a merciful Father to forgive, for it is not our tears without Christs blood, not our sorrows without his sufferings, not our affliction with∣out his passion, that can quench the fire of Gods wrath, satisfie the severity of Gods Ju∣stice, and move the tenderness of his mercy, when therefore acted by love, and strength∣ned
by faith, we pour out our complaints un∣to our God, in a sincere repentance, our af∣fliction and pain shal become the proper ob∣ject of his divine mercy. A Prayer for Thursday Morning prepara∣tory to the Holy Sacrament. O Lord who weeled for me, as a Lamb to the slaughter: and as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so thou opened'st not thy mouth, thou did'st good to thy Enemies, and pray'dst earnestly for thy persecutors, O plant in my heart gentleness, patience and meekness, that I may not be transported with the violent passion of anger, disorder'd by peevishness, or thoughts of revenge, but patiently bear all crosses, and with charity may return blessing for curs∣ing, keeping peace with all men, and loving my Neighbour as my self, and thee more than my self, and more than all the World, I may at last come into the regions of peace and Eternal Charity where thou livest, who lovest all men and would∣est have none to perish but all men to be saved through thee, O most merciful Saviour and Re∣deemer. II. O thou who sitteth between the Chérubims, and whose throne is in the highest Heavens, purge me from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit that
I may perfectly love thee, and worthily mag∣nifie thy holy Name all the dayes of my life. For thou art gracious and full of Compassion, and givest meat unto them that fear thee, and drink from the wells of Eternal Salvation, thou pre∣parest a table for us, and anointest our heads with thy heavenly Ʋnction, and our Cup run∣neth over, let thy precious blood which was shed for me, and the water which gushed from thy side, wash me clean, that I may with a pure heart, and a clean soul come to Eat of that best Sacrifice, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World. III. O Lord in the wonders of this holy Sacrament thou givest thy self to be the food of our souls in the faith of thy word, in the blessings and graces of thy holy spirit; perform that in me thy un∣worthy Servant, which thou hast prepared and effected in thy Son▪ enkindle in my heart a bright devotion, Extinguish all the fires of Hell, par∣don all my sins, and fill me with thy holy spirit, that by obedience and love, I may adore and ho∣nour thee all the days of my life. IV. Thou hast opened unto me the fountains of thy mercy, and hast invited all penitent sinners to come and receive pardon, the oppressed to be eas∣ed,
and the sorrowful to be comforted, admit me O Lord to this great Celebration of thy loving kindness, that I may be comforted in all my griefs; healed of all the wounds of my Soul, and the bruises of my Spirit, and finish my Journey through this valley of Tears, unto my portion of thy Heavenly Kingdom, Amen. Meditations for Thursday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament. O Lord, thou not only art good and gra∣cious, but thou wilt also be so acknow∣ledged, so declar'd; yea, as such worship∣ped and adored; that thy name then be not dishonoured, let me though a sinner be ac∣cepted; pardon mine iniquity, that it may not be said, thou ever rejectedst a poor pe∣nitent, and thereby loose the glory of thy name, whose name is merciful, Exod. 34. 5, 6. a merciful clemency is a royal virtue, and honourable in every Soveraign Majesty; thou then, O Lord, who art the King of Glory Psalm 24. 7, 8. make this thy Holy Sacra∣ment to be the Broad-Seal to my pardon, and this for thy Names sake, even for thy mercy sake. II. I plead not, Lord, my merits, who am less than the least of thy mercies, and as I look
not upon my merit, do thou not look upon my demerit; as I do not view my worthi∣ness, do not thou view my unworthiness; but be merciful unto my sin; of which, I cannot say as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? no, it is great, for that it is against thee so great a God, and so good to me; great, for that my place, my office, my calling is great; the Sun, the higher it is, the less it seems, but my sins, the higher I am, the greater they are, even in thine, and others eyes. III. My knowledge of thee, and thy ways is great, I knew thy will, and did it not; my conscience checked me, and yet I obeyed not, thy Spirit moved me, and yet I yielded not; the number of my sins is numberless, those I know and confess, are few in compa∣rison of what are unknown and hidden from me. Wherefore, O Lord! hide not thy great mercy from me, who hide not my great sins from thee; and the greater is the guilt of my sin, the greater shall be the glory of thy mercy to pardon it; let it be the glo∣ry of thy mercy then to pass by my offences, so shall the greatness of my sins make the glory of thy mercies more conspicuous, for that where sin hath abounded, there grace doth much more abound▪ Rom. 5. 20.
IV. And thus, though I went against mine own knowledge in sinning▪ yet do not thou Lord, go against thine own nature in punish∣ing, who hast promised, if we believe and re∣pent, 1 Cor. 10. 12. thou wilt forgive; and now, as my sins teach them that stand to take heed least they fall, so let thy pardon of my sins, teach them that are fall'n, upon their repentance, not to doubt of thy mercy and so giveness; which mercy and forgiveness do thou seal unto my Soul, and to each hum∣ble penitent, through Jesus Christ, in a re∣turn of peace unto our consciences by this Blessed Sacrament. A Prayer for Thursday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament. O Most blessed Fountain of Eternal love! who hast tender bowels of Compassions, and multitudes of rich mercies, for all those sinful Souls that cry to thee for mercy and forgiveness; forgive the sinful failings, wilful Errors, and most dangerous mistakes, of my wretched life past; and grant me that true repentance for the time to come, which may truly convert me unto thee.
II. Lord, where Sin hath abounded▪ there let thy grace abound much more; Let my degrees of Sin, be truly answered with my degrees of sorrow; my measure of pollution, with my measure of Sanctification. Lord hear my Prayer, and let my cry come unto thee, for thy Names sake, for thy promise sake, for thy blessed Son Christ Jesus sake, Amen. III. O most sacred and for ever blessed being, who hast therefore Commanded me to be holy, that I might be happy; look not upon me I meekly beseech thee, as I am in my self, in the deceitful∣ness of mine own heart, falshood of mine own wayes; but in the Righteousness of Christ, in whom alone thou canst not but be well pleased. Lord open my sinful Eyes, that I may see the folly of my great mistakes; unvail the faces of my close Corruptions, that I may thereby see the foulness and deformity of Sin, and apprehend the greatness of thy wrath against it; that so I may truly and timely repent, and gain thy gra∣cious pardon for it. IV. Search me throughly, O Lord, and try me;
that none of those false ways of wickedness may hereafter be found in me; that so my heart may be clean, my Conscience pure, my Conversation upright, my life Holy, and my death happy, be merciful to me thy frail and sinful Creature, who have daily been so far from abstaining from the least appearance of it, that I have daily ran with greediness into it, and hourly studied vain Ex∣cuses for it. V. Grant dear Lord, for thy mercy sake, that these my daily diminutions of Sin, may now daily increase in me the Augmentations of sorrow; that so I may truly and heartily bewail mine of∣fences, thou may▪st graciously forgive them, and (by thy grace assisting) I may perfectly abhor them: grant this dear Father for thy mercy sake in ham who dyed for Sin, and had no Sin in him. Amen. Meditations for Fryday Morning on the Holy Sacrament. HIs Guards are strong, his Fence is sure, whose Salvation is Christ, which Salva∣tion is Communicated to us in the promises of grace, exhibited in the Ministry of the word, and more plentifully conveyed, yea more ef∣fectually confirmed in the Ministration of the Sacraments. Now to spoil us of the trea∣sure,
to rob us of the comfort of this Salva∣tion, is Satan's grand design in his temptati∣ons unto sin, and his suggestions of distrust; for by these he labours to withdraw us from our God, and deprive us of Communion with Christ, who is our love and our life. II. But when the bird is mounted on the wing, it is safe from the Fowlers net; and the soul raised in Communion with Christ is preserv'd from Satan's snare: and if through infirmity the soul flag and fall to the Earth, and so be∣come intangled in carnal and worldly affe∣ctions; yet keeping the eye fixt upon Christ, looking to him in his ordinances to receive the quickning power of his grace; though corrupt affections may intangle, yet shall they not inthral the soul; which becomes restored by the Power of Christs Spirit, a Spirit of life and liberty, a Spirit of grace and holiness, delivering from the Power of Satan, and from the Dominion of sin. III. Who art thou then, O thou afflicted soul, who in thy spiritual desertions walkest in darkness clouded with sorrows? oh in the greatest dejections lift up thine eyes unto the Lord, that when the rising Sun appears thou
mayest see his refreshing light; and how e∣ver now by reason of thy present anguish, thou canst not serve God in alacrity of per∣formance, yet do it in sincerity of obedience; and this, this will be a cranny to convey some beams of light, even in the lowest dungeon of thy spiritual distress. IV. Psal. 27. 14. Wait upon the Lord, having the eye of faith still towards him; and so shall comforts be redoubled, in a life recovered; and thy difficulties of obtaining, shall the more sweeten thy delights of injoying, even of injoying God and Christ in the refreshing comforts of the Spirit, conveyed and Con∣firmed in his Blessed Sacrament, in which Blessed Sacrament especially, let thine eyes be still towards the Lord, in his merits, in his grace, in his benefits, in his love; let him have thy fixed heart, and thine intent eye, yea, let him have thy whole man, for to this end it is, that he here gives thee his whole self. A Prayer for Fryday Morning of consession of sins to God before the Holy Sacrament. O Most holy Lord God, I thy unworthy ser∣vant do here prostrate my self before thee, in all humility, acknowledging and confessing my
manifold sins and wickedness; my whole life has abounded with actual transgressions, against every one of thy Commandments. I have O Lord lived in contempt of thy providence, committing Idolatry with thy Creatures, taking thy glorious name in vain, prophaning thy most holy Sabbath. I have not regarded my superiors, as I ought to do, I have envied my brethren, defiled my soul with unchast desires, laboured to be rich by un∣lawful means. I have slandered my Neighbour, and have coveted after his wealth. I have heard thy word O Lord, but have not believed it. I have known thy word, but have not practised it, I have come into thy house without reverence, and approached to thy holy Table without repen∣tance, I have practised many sins without re∣morse, and when I read thy sacred Scriptures, it is not sweet to me as the Honey Combe, but my de∣light is more in ungodliness, prophaneness and atheism. II. I have by gluttony and drunkenness pampered my body, I am guilty of pride in my apparel, I am negligent in my calling, by mispending my time, I have used vain discourses at my Table, and have sinned out of measure against all those means of grace which thou hast been pleased to afford me from time to time I have wandering eyes, wanton lusts, and ambitious mind, and co∣vetous desires, which have no bounds nor limits.
I have lascivious ears, unsavory speeches, and censorious reproaches [Here name thy parti∣cular sins.] I am still adding sin unto sin, and transgression unto transgression,* and am alto∣gether unfaithful in my life, and forgetful of my death, and of the day of Judgment. III. My abusing of thy mercies, and despising of thy judgments, is testified against me, yet O Lord, I am not ashamed, nor confess my self guilty, but still run on in a course of sinning against the moti∣ons of thy holy Spirit, and the checks of my own conscience; and have refused thy calls, and my own purposes and vows of amendment, O what shall I say, or how shall I open my mouth, O thou that art the preserver of all men! I know that the wages of sin is death, but thy gift O God is eter∣nal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord; O enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord for in thy sight is no flesh righteous. Be merciful O Lord, be merciful unto my sins for they are great, out of thy abundant mercy forgive me all that is past, and be gracious unto me in prevent∣ing sins to come. IV. Correct me O Lord, but with mercy, not in thy Judgment, for then shall I be consumed and brought to nothing, destroy in me O Lord the
cursed works of the Devil, increase in me dayly the gifts of thy Spirit, fit me for that calling in which thou hast, or wilt place me, and make me to refer the strength of my body▪ the gifts of my mind, and whatsoever grace thou hast already or wilt hereafter bestow upon me, to the glory of thy holy name and the eternal salvation of my own Soul; and Lord grant that the remainder of the time which I shall live in this present evil World, that my conversation may be in Heaven, and that whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do else, I may hear always this voice sounding in my ears; arise you dead and come to judgment: many other things, O Lord, I have to beg that my ignorance knoweth not how to ask, or my for∣getfulness does not remember, but accept O Lord, this my humble confession unto thee at this time, and whatever else thou knowest needful for me, supply it with the merits of thy dear Son, my only Lord and Saviour. Amen. Our Father, &c. A Prayer after Confession. O Almighty God whose nature and property is always to have mercy and to forgive, receive these my humble petitions made unto thee at this time, and though I be tyed and bound by the chains of my sins, yet let the pittifulness of thy great mercy loose them, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Saviour. Amen.
A Prayer for Faith. O Almighty God, whose nature is above our reach, and whose secret operations no hu∣mane reason can conceive▪ give me that faith without which no man can know thee, and with∣out which no soul can please thee, Lord I be∣lieve, but to believe unto righteousness, O God, increase my Faith Concerning the great Sa∣crament of thy precious body and blood, I believe that in the same night that thou O Lord Jesus wast betrayed thou didst give to thy Disciples Bread and Wine, which thou didst call thy Body and Blood, with a charge to eat and drink, and do the same in remembrance of thee; for as thou wast upon thy departure, thou wouldest leave them and me a sign of thy Body, a figure of thy Blood, and a memorial o thy bitter Death and bloody Passion, lest I should forget thee, who wast ready to lay down thy life for me, who am the worst and vilest of sinners. II. Therefore I take these Elements of Bread and Wine, for holy signs of thy Body and Blood, be∣lieving, that though they remain after the Con∣secration, in their substance both Bread and Wine, yet they are more than common Bread and Wine, being made by prayer and thy holy word, the figures of thy Flesh and Blood; which in
the action and use of the Sacrament are really and effectually taken by the faithful: So though I feel and tast Bread and Wine, yet by the eye of Faith I eat thy Body and Drink thy Blood, in remembrance that thou didst die for me, and for all mankind. III. O then let the operation of thy blessed Spirit apply to my Soul, the merits of thy Death and Passion; and O Lord I beseech thee, let me love and die in this faith, and never be ashamed to confess thy holy name, who hath suffered such an ignominious Death for my redemption; O let my Soul live, and it shall praise thee, and magnifie thy all glorious name; thou hast said that he that eateth thy Flesh and drinketh thy Blood hath eternal life, and thou wilt raise him up at the last day; O Lord, I beseech thee confirm my faith, and grant that it fail not, either concern∣ing this or any other point of holy mysteries, for thine alone sake my only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. Our Father, &c. Meditations for Fryday Evening on the Holy Sacrament. GOD alone, who is the author of our life, is likewise the object of our trust, as being the Fountain and fulness of all our com∣fort
and strength, all our grace and holiness, all our glory and happiness. Wherefore, O my God, I trust in thee, as a Creator to su∣stain me, as a Lord to govern me, as a guide to direct me, as a rock to defend me, and as a Father to succour me; all which relati∣ons thou hast taken upon thee, in a merciful regard to my weakness and wants, that thou mightest the more manifestly declare thy goodness and love; which goodness and love, now seal unto my Soul, by a Communion with thee in the Lord Jesus. II. And the best way to strengthen our trust in God is by renewing our resignation, and when can we more seasonably do it than at our re∣ceiving the Blessed Sacrament? in which we have exhibited the fulness of Christs me∣rits, as the propitiatory Sacrament, and a∣tonement for our Souls, by whom we have access unto the Father, to receive a blessing of pardon and peace, of life and salvation from him, do we then with all humble devo∣tion make this sincere resignation at the Ta∣ble of the Lord, even offer and present unto God from our hearts, as we profess with our tongues, offer and present our selves, our Souls and Bodies, as a reasonable, Holy, and lively sacrifice unto him, casting our selves upon him, in the mercy and truth of his pro∣mise,
in the wisdom and power of his pro∣vidence. III. And upon this total resignation, he seals us this assurance, that he will exercise those his properties, imploy those his attributes for our comfort and protection, for our sup∣port and salvation; and this, beyond what our wits can design, our wishes can desire, or our thoughts can conceive; and let not any penitent, though a languishing Soul, be discouraged from this Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there to renew his resignation and strengthen his trust. IV. And here this treasury is open; in this Blessed Sacrament, come and receive of this mercy of thy God, dispensed by the bounti∣ful hand of thy Jesus, who with that mercy gives his merits, his benefits, his spirit, his whole fulness even himself, wherefore rouse up thy Soul to receive the bounty of thy God, and of thy Saviour; with an humble; a thankful, and a devout heart; not forget∣ting the price Christ gave for thee to re∣deem thee from the slavery of Sin, and Sa∣tan.
A Prayer for Fryday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament. BLessed for ever be thy holy Name, O thou God of Infinite Compassions, who art both truth and holiness it self in thine Essence, and therefore strictly requirest truth and sincerely in the hearts of thy Children, and holiness and righ∣teousness in their lives and Conversation; look not upon those sinful failings of my Corrupt heart; but graciouly behold me in the righteousness of Christ: forgive me my many sinful Complances with nature, abberations from grace, and de∣viations from goodness, which have caused these my sinful Errors; which might thereby deprive me of present grace and hopes of future Blessed∣ness. II. Lord, suffer me not any longer thus wretch∣edly to delude mine own Soul, but make me tru∣ly such as thou would'st have me to be, a zea∣lous and sincere Christian; that so my Spirit which (for those my Sins) thou hast much broken by afflictions, may much more abundantly rejoyce in thee by heavenly Consolations. Lord accept of these my sinful desires, and let my loss of tears repair my loss of truth; and loss of time in thy service, assist my weakness, accept my willing∣ness: forgive my sinfulness, cherish the blessed
motions of thy holy Spirit daily in me, and for thy mercy sake, remove the danger of my own Corruption from me. III. O Lord, to thy glory and my own deserved shame, I willingly confess that I am most im∣pure and sinful, even in the very best of all my holy performances; I therefore humbly beg of thee, that as thou hast graciously afforded me the light of thy sacred word, to discover me unto my self, so thou wilt also give unto me, the Sword of thy holy Spirit, to deliver me from my self: de∣liver me from the evil man (O Lord) even from the close Corruptions, and secret Abominations of mine own evil and Corrupt heart. Lord par∣don and pass by the many secret and unknown Errors of my sinful life past, and graciously pre∣vent the failings of that to Come. IV. Make me truly and sincerely holy, and to im∣brace it, neither for fear of punishment, nor hope of reward; but purely for thy sake, who art holiness it self: O let me never think my self holy enough, but press still forward in thy holy Race, until at last I have attained unto that full measure of holiness; which (by thy gracious Acceptation of it in Christ) will End in Endless happiness, Bless these my holy desires with hap∣py
performances; for his sake whose perfect Righ∣teousness, thou both graciously acceptest for me, and willingly imputest to me. Amen. Meditations for Saturday Morning on the Ho∣ly Sacrament. NOw to keep the Soul in an even temper, we must observe these following dire∣ctions; first, for the best ordering our lives, as to the safety and peace of our Souls; be the more servent, the more importunate in your Prayers, when your lusts are most ea∣ger and vehement in their desires, for this we have St. Pauls example for our imitation, when he proportions the vehemency of his devotion to the violence of his temptation; and by how much the messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Doth the more furiously reiterate his buffetings, the more zealously doth he re∣new his Prayers; and at length he receives this comfortable answer, to his sorrowful complaint, my grace is sufficient for thee; suf∣ficient to cure thy wound, and to pardon thy guilt; sufficient to strengthen thy weak∣ness, and to perfect thy deliverance. II. Secondly, entertain we no parley no trea∣ty with our lusts have no commerce or com∣pany with them; silence their suggestions,
or if they will needs be suggesting, give them not the ear, lest they make that the passage to the heart, we betray our selves to sin, whensoever we treat with our lusts; conference with them, is the way to be en∣snared by them, we must flie sin as a Serpent; not let in the head, lest it draw in its body; not yield to the first motion, lest we be en∣gaged in its full Commission. III. Thirdly, set we up the law of spirit and life in our hearts; Rom. 8. 2. and by how much the law of sin will be stirring in our thoughts, by so much the more let this royal law of Christs Spirit, and life bear sway in our souls, and to that end, especially now in the solem∣nity of the Blessed Eucharist, renew we our purposes, our vows, our Covenants; renew we our self denyal, our total resignation, thereby to obtain a further quickning in grace, a further strengthning of the inward Man, and all by a nearer Communion of Christ in his fulness, thus this Holy Sacra∣ment shall seal unto our hearts the comfort of this assurance, that he will never leave us nor forsake us. IV. Let us offer up to God, the Sacrifice of a
broken heart and a contrite spirit; which sor∣row of contrition, must be like that of one Mourning for the dead, a funeral sorrow, the deepest of Mournings; like that of one Mourning for her only Son, the saddest of Funerals, and for our sins deep humiliation is  necessary, whereby we confess the gult of our sins, bewail the bitterness of di∣stress, deprecating Gods wrath, and implo∣ring his mercy, for a full, and free pardon of our sins. A Prayer for Saturday Morning on the Holy Sacrament. O Thou blessed Fountain of Eternal sweet∣ness, who art infinitely sweeter to my wea∣ry soul, than all earthly enjoyments, in whose presence is the fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore! forgive the follies and infirmities of me thy sinful servant, who have foolishly preferred these transitory drops of insufficient joys, which have been wearisome and burthensome unto me, to those thy rivers of Eternal pleasures, in which thy Blessed Saints do sweetly bathe their happy Souls, where ever∣lasting jy is on their heads, and thine Eternal comforts in their hearts. II. Lord open mine eyes now at last, that I may
clearly see the vanity of the Creature, and the fulness, sweetness, and all sufficiency of Christ; withdraw mine affections from the World, and fix them wholly upon thee and thy Kingdom: Lord sanctifie my heart, to believe that there is no true sweetness but in goodness; and that there can be no true goodness in that pleasure, which is not subordinate to this sweetness, which alone is in thee my Lord and Saviour, the comfort of all Earthly Comforts, and Heavenly Consolati∣ons. III. Almighty God, when I look upon thee out of Christ, as thou art in thy self, I can there see nothing else, but destruction to my body, and a∣mazement to my soul: in thine essence, light in∣accessible, unto which no mortal eye can approach; in thine attributes terrour unutterable, from which no Creature can escape; thy wisdom try∣ing my corrupt heart, and searching my sinful veins; thy Justice most severe fearful in the pronunciation, dreadful in the Execution; thy truth admitting no alteration, no judgment pro∣nounced by thee, but most precisely fulfilled: yet such, O Lord, hath the folly of my false heart been, that I have sinfully depended on thy mercy, in Christ, without either faith to receive thee, hope to enjoy thee, or love to delight in thee.
IV. Lord, whither wilt thou suffer me to stray from thee? How long, Lord, wilt thou leave me in this sleep of sin? Lord, seek me thy stray sheep, or I am lost for ever; open my sinful eyes, that I sleep not in death; make me wisely to re∣member that then only there is mercy with thee, when thou art truly feared, grant therefore dear Father for thy mercy sake, that I may no longer dally with my precious soul, by this my security in sin; but sorely upon thy mercy, as to have a filial fear of thy justice; and from security in sin, good Lord deliver me. Amen. Meditations for Saturday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament. O Thou great Creator of Heaven and Earth, I am ashamed of my self, to see in what a posture I am in at this present, I am cast down, when I look into my self, and make enquiry into my own unworthiness, I cannot but behold my own vileness and baseness; but thou O Lord dost receive sin∣ners, else how dare I approach to thy Holy Table, thou art he that sayest come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and that the whole have no need of a Physician but they that are sick; O Lord I am weary and heavy laden and come unto thee for ease
and refreshment; I am sick of sin, be thou my Physician and my Medicine; I am wound∣ed hungry and weak, be thou my soveraign balsome, nourishment and strength; I am sorrowful, poor and foolish, be thou my comfort, enrich me and enlighten me; I am fall of dross, unclean and dead, do thou re∣fine me purifie me, and quicken me with thy Heavenly grace unto salvation. II. O that I were now with an humble heart at the Holy Table of my Lord, there are all mercies conveyed and sealed, all graces are confirmed and exercised, there repentance is employed and quickned, faith is actuated and strengthned, devotion and charity en∣flamed and kindled, peace and concord is established; there is the universal medicine for all our diseases, and an ark of safety a∣gainst all dangers; there, O my Soul thou mayest by the eye of faith behold thy cruci∣fied Lord and Saviour, shedding his most pre∣cious Blood upon the Cross for thy sins, and burning with an unspeakable desire of thy salvation. There thou mayest look upon him whom thy sins have pierced, and on him whom thou dost still crucifie afresh by thy sins dayly and hourly. In the sufferings of thy Saviour; O my soul, thou mayest see as in a glass thy own vileness and deformities,
thy Saviours being mocked, scorned and contemned, discovers thy evil speaking, ly∣ing and slandering; his blessed Face being besmeared with spittle, remembers thee of all thy unclean lusts and filthy communicati∣ons; that blessed Mouth which was guilty of no deceit, was embittered with gall and vi∣negar, which should mind thee of thy luxury and drunkennes, his being scourged, of thy stubbornness and disobedience. III. O my soul, dost thou not wonder, that the King of glory, should wear a Crown of thorns, and for his Majestical Robes, a little linnen for to cover his nakedness, and thou to be guilty of pride and vain glory, and affected with the pomps and vanities of this wicked World? The Crown of Thorns which was platred on his Head, with that rage and in∣dignation, should put thee in mind of the im∣moderate cares of the World, with the sharp and piercing vexations issuing thence, which eat up the consolation of the heart, and all true sincere devotion of the spirit; O let scorns r thy sake be my glory, and injuries and affronts my Crown; lift up I pray thee upon thy Cross my miserable Soul, which lies groveling on the ground, out of this vale of misery; O that thou would'st purge and thoroughly heal me with thy most precious
Blood; let thy wounds be a salve for my sin∣ful soul, and by thy stripes let her be healed of all her distempers; let all thy pains grief and sorrows, captivity humiliation and cross, deliver me from Hell, and purchase for me those joys and pleasures at thy right hand for ever, and thy Death my life for evermore. Amen. A Prayer for Charity. O Eternal God thou hast said that without charity we are nothing, give me, O Lord, I beseech thee that Christian love and perfect charity, that I may love thee O Lord my God, with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength, doing always in sincerity that which is pleasing in thy sight, not returning evil for evil, or raling for rail∣ing, but loving my Neighbour as my self, and being ready at all times to assist him in time of need, administring to him according to his seve∣ral necessities; that at the last and great day, I may give an account of my Steward ship with joy and not with grief; grant this O Lord, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. Our Father, &c.
A Prayer for Saturday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament. O Almighty God, I beseech thee to seal unto me the pardon of all my sins, and to grant all those petitions, which I have asked in thy Sons name, and let me now consider how transi∣tory are all things, how wicked is the World, how impure is the flesh, and how my self am deceit∣ful; grant that so I loose my affections from all such unworthy objects here below, and then let me know, how Eternal is thy nature, how per∣manent is thy glory, and how infinite is thy love, bring me, O bring me to morrow to thy royal feast with the badge of love; and with the wed∣ding garment, so shall I be a welcome guest, unto thee, that eating thy flesh and drinking thy Blood, I shall for ever dwell in thee my glorious Creator, and thou in me thy blessed Crea∣ture. Our Father, &c. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, with the sweet and comfortable fellowship of God's Holy and Blessed Spirit, bless, preserve, conserve and keep me this night, and all the days of my life, at the hour of death, and in the day of Judgment. Amen.
Sixthly, how to receive it worthily. The Morning thou art to receive after thy usual devotions, breath forth this Meditation. Sundays Meditation. WIsdom hath killed her beasts, mingled her wine, and furnisht her table; Man's folly wrought his fall by a bit, and wisdom repairs it by a feast; a fruit did corrupt us, and flesh and blood do preserve us, a Lamb is slain for the Goat, the just for the unjust; the Son of God for the Children of Men; and is this day offered as meat for the life of many? I will go to that feast, to eat of that bread, and drink of that wine which is mingled for me, the fruit of the vine with the blood of Gods Lamb; O then good Lord, let me be found in that purity, thou desirest in them, that approach thine Altar; wash thou my feet and cleanse my heart, that I may be clean, and have part with thee for ever. Amen. A Prayer for Sunday Morning before thou goest to Church. O Lord prepare my heart to Prayer. O Most glorious Lord God, behold a misera∣ble and wretched sinner is now approaching
to thy most holy Table, to feast my soul upon thy precious Body and Blood, at the primitive eat∣ing, thou said, the day that thou eat est▪ thou shalt surely dye, but here in the day which I eat I shall surely live. Joh. 6. O Lord, I e∣steem my self unworthy of the least crum that falls from thy Table; must the Childrens bread be given unto dogs, must such a vile wretch as I sit at thy Holy Table, who am laden with sin and over pressed with iniquity? But I come O Lord to ease my self of sin, and to cast off the burden of iniquity, and to bury them all at the foot of thy Cross; I come O Lord to be purged throughly from my iniquity, and to be sorry for my sins, which are without number, but not more than my dear Saviours blood can expiate! II. O thou brightest Morning Star, arise now with healing in thy wings, and say unto my soul I am thy salvation; O do thou now arise and let thy Enemies be scattered, which are my lusts and vile affections, and let them that hate thee flee before thee which is the Devil, envy, hatred, malice and all uncharitableness, make clean my heart O my Redeemer, and pull down every strong hold and bulwark, which opposes thy hea∣venly will, and make me a fit guest at thy Holy Table, to receive thee with a pure heart, and strengthen me that I may have such a lively faith to pass through the vale, and confidently look
into the holy of holies, this I beg for thy alone sake, my only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. When thou art at Church before divine ser∣vice begins; upon thy knees use these e∣jaculations. 1. This is the day which the Lord hath made, I will be joyful and glad in it, 2. He hath redeemed my soul from death, my eyes from tears, and my feet from fall¦ing. 3. Thou shalt prepare a Table before me against them that trouble me; thou hast a∣nointed my head with Oyl, my Cup shall be full. 4. But surely thy loving kindness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. 5. I will wash my hands in innocency O Lord, and so will I go to thine Altar. 6. That I may shew the voice of thanks∣giving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. 7. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place were thine honour dwelleth. 8. O shut not up my soul with the sinners, nor my life with the Blood thirsty. 9. My foot stand th right, I will prase the Lord in the great congregation.
A Meditation to be used at the Lords Table, when there are many Communicants. O What a Heavenly sight is this, to behold such an Assembly of Christians meeting with one accord, at this great mystery! how joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell toge∣ther in unity, and to worship the Almighty in Spirit, and in Truth! I feel my heart is more raised, and my devotion kindled by their zeal, and all lukew armness is passed away, my spi∣rits are refresht and have taken new life by seeing such an appearance in the House of God. II. This is the perfection of Religion, to seek Gods Face while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near, which none of us can do too often, to have him in remem∣brance, who so oft remembred us; here we receive spiritual things, and taste and see how good the Lord is, which food, O Lord, I beseech thee let me never want, but give it me as my dayly bread, for Jesus Christ his sake my only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.
A Prayer before the Sacrament. O Dear Saviour, how excellent is thy good∣ness and loving kindness to me and to all thy Creatures▪ thou art pleased O Lord, to vouch∣safe me this opportunity in the waiting upon thee in thy solemn Ordinance, where thou dost com∣municate unto me thy precious Body and Blood, and dost give me that interest in thee and peace which the World cannot give, nor none can take away; this is that treasure which moths cannot corrupt nor thieves break through and steal. II. O then, where my treasure is let my heart be there also; away fond World and all the vanities thereof, for the God of holiness hath touched my heart, I do now purpose to return from my evil ways, and as long as I live to renew those purposes daily; O then dear Lord fit me I beseech thee for thy self, that I may receive with that joy and spiritual comfort this thy body that was broken and thy precious Blood which was shed for me, whereby I may partake of all the benefits of thy bitter Death and Passion, and become one with thee, in receiving all that either my soul doth need or desire, for thy alone sake my only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.
When the Minister is saying the Offertory, use this Meditation at thy offering thy Alms. O Almighty God, what I offer is but what thou lentest me here for a time, and what I now give to my poor Brethren, thou hast promised to repay it, but I have receiv∣ed more at thy all-merciful hands, than my heart and tongue can ever express; O that I could have given ten thousand Talents, in∣stead of this poor mite, my charity thou hast no need of, but for as much as I have done it to my poor Brethren (whose souls thou hast redeemed with thy most precious Blood,) thou ownest it to be done to thy self; O what can I give thee O Lord, or render unto thee for all the Eàrthly comforts and benefits I have received from thee: I can give thee no∣thing but what is thy own, and no Earthly thing can bear proportion with thy Majesty; therefore in all humility I resign my soul up into thy hands, who art my faithful Crea∣tor, and who sent thy Son to save me a lost sinner, to whom be all praise honor and glo∣ry, now and for ever. Amen. Then say after the Minister, the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church mili∣tant here on Earth, and be very attentive to the exhortation which follows, beginning with these words. Dearly beloved in the Lord. Then hearken diligently to the invitation,
and when the Minister expresses these words, draw near with faith, and take this Holy Sa∣cramint, then use these Ejaculations. 1. I am unworthy O Lord, to appear be∣fore thee. 2. But thou art able to save them to the uttermost that come unto thee, and doth live for ever to make intercession with God the Father for us. 3. No Man cometh unto thee except the Father draw him, and thou wilt raise him up at the last day. 4. O have compassion upon my penitent soul, who draws near to thy throne of grace, that I may obtain mercy and find grace to help me in time of need. Then joyn with all your heart with the Mi∣nister in the general consession, absolution, and sentences, lifting up your heart unto the Lord, blessing and praising his holy name in these Ejaculations. 1. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. 2. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man. 3. The Lord is my strength and my song, and is become my salvation. 4. I shall not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord. 5. This is the gate of the Lord, the right∣eous shall enter into it.
6. Thou art my God and I will thank thee, thou art my God and I will praise thee. 7. I will lift up my heart and my hands unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the Heavens. 8. My help standeth in the name of the Lord which hath made Heaven and Earth. 9. The Lord hath done great things for me, whereof I rejoyce. 10. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of Heaven, I will laud and glorifie thy glorious name, evermore praising thee, saying holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory, Glory be to thee O Lord most high. Amen. Then joyn with the Minister in the address which begins thus: We do not presume to come to this thy Holy Table, O merci∣ful Lord, &c. At the time of the Consecration, fix your eye upon the Elements, and at the actions of the Ministers in ordering the Bread and Wine, we ought joyfully and thankfully to meditate after this manner. O Who can but admire and wonder, that the Son of God should become food to the Souls of Men, and to humble himself so low as to be represented by bread, which is the poor mans food, though necessary for the rich, it is the staff of our life, and signi∣fies
that body of thine, which thou gavest for the life of the World; thou hast by thy holy Mystery made this Bread and Wine spi∣ritual food, as well as temporal: O Lord, I beseech thee let the operation of it be such as to strengthen my soul, that it may withstand all Temptations whatsoever, and evermore serve thee in spirit and in truth. Amen. When the Minister breaks the Bread, and pours out the Wine, use these Meditations. O Holy Jesus thy Blessed Body was torn with Nails upon the Cross, and thy pre∣cious Blood was inhumanely spilt by the Cru∣cifiers; but I an unworthy Wretch, by my manifold sins have occasioned more torments to thee; they Crucified thee but once, but I crucifie thee dayly, they Crucified thee be∣cause they knew thee not, but I have known thee, what thou art in thy self, the Lord of glory, and what thou art to me, a most ten∣der and Merciful Father, and yet I have still continued to Crucifie thee afresh: O do thou work in me, first a great sorrow for my sins past, and then a great hatred, and a firm resolution against them for the time to come. When the Minister receives in both kinds him∣self, say 1. Thou that hearest Prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come.
2. Blessed is the Man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee, he shall dwell in thy Court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy Holy Temple. 3. Thou shalt guide me with thy council, and after that receive me with glory. 4. The Lord hear thee in the day of trou∣ble, the name of the God of Jacob defend thee. 5. Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen the out of Sion. 6. The Lord remember all thy offerings, and accept this thy Sacrifice. 7. Grant thee thy hearts desire, and ful∣fill all thy mind; the Lord perform all thy pe∣tions, which thou hast made at this time, both for thy self, for us, and for all persons. 8. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, World without end Amen. When the Minister is drawing near thee with the Elements, say. I adore thee, O must righteous Redeemer, that thou art pleased to convey unto my soul thy precious Body and Blood, with all the benefits of thy Death and Passion; I am not worthy O Lord to receive thee, but let thy Holy and Blessed Spirit, with all his puri∣ties, prepare for thee a lodging in my Soul, where thou mayest unite me to thy self for ever. Amen. Ejaculations before the Bread. This is that Bread which came down from
Heaven, whosoever eateth shall never hun∣ger▪ Thou dealest thy bread to those which hunger after righteousness; O feed my faint∣ing soul with this bread of life. O strengthen my heart and hand by a live∣ly faith, and open my mouth with fervent desires, that I may eat, not for bodily suste∣nance, but for spiritual relief, and the refresh∣ment of my soul. O let my soul feel the spiritual efficacy of thy grace, that I may not eat unworthily, or to my condemnation. O Lord, I beseech thee enable and direct me by thy holy and blessed spirit, to receive it worthily. Amen. When the Minister gives the holy bread say softly with him. The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for me, preserve my body and soul unto everlasting life. Here take the bread with reverence then proceed, I take and eat this▪ in remembrance that Christ died for me and will feed on him in my heart with faith and thanks-giving. Then answer audibly. Amen. After the bread say. I give thee hearty thanks, O Lord most Holy, that thou hast refreshed my soul at this time, by my feeding upon thy Body which was broken for me; If I had lived innocent∣ly and had kept all thy Commandments, yet could I have had no proportion of merit, to so transcendent a mercy; but since I have so
loved sin, and added transgression to trans∣gression, thy mercy is so glorious and infinite, that I stand amazed at the consideration of its immensity; O let me not throw off▪ this Wedding Garment, or stain it with pollution of deadly sin, but let me be wholly united to thee, being transformed, according to thy ho∣ly will and life, who livest and reignest for e∣ver. Amen. Or this. O Blessed Jesus, sanctifie this bread to me, that it may be to my Soul the staff of strength whereby I may vanquish and overcome all the assaulis of the Devil, the World and the Flesh, and continue thy faithful Soldier and Servant to my lifes end. Amen. Ejaculations before the Cup. 1. The Lord himself is the portion of my Inheritance and of my Cup, thou shalt main∣tain my lot. 2. The lot is fallen unto me, in a fair ground, yea I have a goodly heritage. 3. I have set God always before me, for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. 4. Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea our God is merciful. 5. What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits he hath done unto me? 6. I will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.
7. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living. When thou receivest the Cup say after the Mi∣nister softly. The Blood of my Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for me, preserve my body and soul unto everlasting life; I drink this in remem∣brance that Christ's Blood was shed for me, and am thankful. Amen. After the Cup, say. O how delightful is this Cup to me Blessed Jesus, which was so heavy to thee, it was thy Agonies and Bloody sweat, thy bitter Death and Passion, which afforded me this Cup of chearfulness; thou didst find it bitter, when thou wast appeasing an angry Father, but thou hast sweetned it by a reconciliation, and hast wrought out my Redemption and Salva∣tion. Or this. I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorifie thee, O Lord most Holy, that thou hast at this time so refreshed my soul, and filled me with ho∣ly desires; O let thy tender mercy always keep me in this happy temper, that I may ne∣ver err nor stray from thy Commandments▪ but keep firm that Covenant, which thou hast sealed with thy most precious Blood for my redemption, and direct me O Lord, and guide me so here, that I may be a fit member for thy Heavenly Kingdom hereafter. Amen.
Whilst others are Communicating say.. I. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name. What greater gift O Lord, couldst thou bestow upon me, than to give me thy Body for meat, thy Blood for drink, and to lay down thy life for the price of my redemption? What greater mercy than that thou shouldest now enter into me, and dwell with me, as thou hast promised? II. I yield thee humble and hearty thanks most Merciful Father, and desire to magnifie thy name for ever, for the Holy Death and bitter Passion of thy Son, and that great Re∣demption thou hast wrought for me in him, and hast heaped upon me, from time to time thy unspeakable favours and loving kindnes∣ses in feeding me at this time, with the spiri∣tual food of the Body and Blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Saviour. Amen III. O Eternal God, who vouchsafest to send thine only begotten Son into the World for my redemption, and to deliver him up even unto death; in remembrance whereof, un∣til his second coming, he hath commanded me to eat his Body, and drink his Blood, to the end, (by Faith) I should be united and knit unto his Body, and being washed from all my sins, lead a new life, vouchsafe I hum∣bly
beseech thee for his sake, to indue me with thy Holy Spirit unto my lives end. Amen. IV. O Almighty God, grant I may cast away all the works of darkness, and walk in the true light of thy Holy Gospel: Vouchsafe me O Lord, an unfeigned desire in being a parta∣ker of this thy Holy institution, and that I may lead my life according to thy Heavenly will in all things, keeping my body undefiled, as a fit receptacle for so Heavenly Food, that my soul may enjoy the benefit of the Myste∣ry thereof by Faith according to thy Hea∣venly providence, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer for all the Communicants that are present. O Let us now all magnifie the name of the Lord, from the rising of the Sun to the set∣ting of the same. Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord, and are fed, though it be but with the Crums that fall from thy Table. We have all now tasted and seen how gracious the Lord is; for he hath heard our Prayers and graned our requests, and redeemed us from the slavery of sin and death. O that we might never depart from thee, but be unwearied in thy service; let not our stedfastness which is now fixed, pass away as the Morning Cloud, or our Devotions fly away as a shadow which hath no continuance; but arm us, O good Lord, against all manner of sin, that we may all say with the Kingly Prophet, I have
sworn, and am stedfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments. Direct and guide us O Lord with thy Holy Spirit, thy All seeing eye, and thy Heavenly hand, that though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we may fear no evil, for thou art with us. Amen. Meditations out of the Psalms. O praise the Lord with me, and let us Magnifie his name together. I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of all my fears. O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him do lack nothing. The eyes of the Lord are over the righte∣ous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them, and delivereth them out of all their troubles. The Lord is nigh unto all them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such as be of an humble Spirit. Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of all. He hath not dealt with us after our sin, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. For he knoweth whereof we are made, he remembreth we are but dust. The Lord delivereth the souls of his ser∣vants; and all they that put their trust in him shall not be destitute. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c.
A Concluding Prayer. I Thank thee, O thou great Creator, that thou hast at this time given me such a supply of thy Grace whereby I may come to thy Eternal Glory, thou hast now entertained me at thy Holy Table, and received me with that fatherly affection, by speaking peace unto my conscience, and saying to my soul thou art my salvation; O what reward can I return for these unspeakable mercies! I will rejoyce and be exceeding glad, admire and celebrate the love of my Saviour, O ye Almighty powers it is my duty to extol him, to whom you pay all these praises; let me for ever Magnifie thy Holy Name O Lord, and thy praises for ever shall be in my Mouth; for thou only art Holy, and it is thy peace alone which passeth all under∣standing. O let it keep my heart and mind in the knowledge and love of thee, and of thy Son Jesus Christ my only Lord and Saviour, and let thy favour and blessing O merciful Father, with thy Son my only Saviour, and the Holy Ghost my only sanctifier, remain with we alwaies. Amen. A Prayer at home the same day. O Thou Fountain of everlasting happiness, strike my soul with an Holy admiration of thy Divine goodness; thou hast of thine infinite Pitty and Compassion to me a poor wretched Sin∣ner, received me into the bosom of thy Mercy, and art reconciled unto me by the Blood of thy
Son Jesus Christ; thou hast issued forth a free and full pardon unto me of all my sins and trans∣gressions, from that great office of Mercy thou hast opened to thy Church and People; and I have now again renewed my Covenant of Love and Allegiance unto thee my God, and an again consecrated unto thee in the Holy Blood of the Lord Jesus: O let the Holy sense of this thy great goodness and loving kindness rest for ever upon my Soul, and oblige my heart for ever un∣to thee; and I beseech thee that thou wlt never leave me, nor forsake me, but let me walk in the light of thy countenance to my lives end. Amen. Lastly how to live well a righteous godly and sober life after receiving this most Holy Sacrament. Psal. 50. 23. Whoso offereth me thanks and praise, he honoureth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I show the Salvation of God. I. And the better to attain these directions, let us follow what the Kingly Prophet layeth down to eschew evil, and do good: seek peace and ensue it, which is the banishing from the Soul all kind of Vices, and adorning it with Vir∣tues, and this is by becoming a new creature, destroying of the image of old earthly Adam and reforming it with the Image of the new Adam, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
II. By this means we attain to that supernatural end for which we were created: (which is to see Almighty God in his own glory and excellency) which that we may all do, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. As soon as you a∣wake in the Morning give the first fruits of thy reason to the Divine Majesty, let your memory, understanding, will and heart, dis∣charge their duties, let your tongue and mouth, hands and arms, contribute in offer∣ing up this Morning Sacrifice to thy great Creator. Which thou mayest do in this manner. A Prayer for the Morning. O Most Powerful Lord God, which sittest upon the Cherubims, and stretchest out the Heavens like a Curtain. I adore thee my God from the centre of my Nothing, with all the Creatures of the Ʋniverse; and come unto thee upon the bended knees of my heart, humbly be∣seeching thee in thy mercy to look upon me, and fully to remit unto me all my sins and trans∣gressions whatsoever, and give me unfeigned re∣pentance and newness of life for the time to come: as thou hast now awakened my body from sleep, so I beseech thee, awake my soul from sin and carnal security: as thou hast caused the light of the day to shine upon my bodily eyes, so (good
Lord) cause the light of thy Word and Holy Spi∣rit to illuminate my heart, and give me grace to walk in all holy obedience before thy face this day; teach me to fear thee continually wheresoe∣ver I am, to neglect all things in regard of thee, to love thee, and my Brethren for thy ske; let whatsoever I do this day be pleasing in thy sight, who art my alone Creator, let not any temptati∣ons this day delude me, (but O Lord my God) be thou ever near me, with me, and about me, to protect, preserve, and defend me from this time forth, and all the days of my life, now and for evermore. Amen. Our Father, &c. A Prayer for Noon. O Eternal God every hour of the day will I lift up my heart unto thee, stop not thine ear, O Lord, but hear me, and that right soon, let me not nourish the disease of sloth in my blood, but spend my life as the clouds execute their offices, to be still in motion; quench and kill, O Lord, in me the weed of Covetousness, and let me not be over careful for my self, but pittiful and mer∣ciful to those that want. Keep my hands clean from touching riches unlawful, last with Ahab and Jezabel, I commit Murder, and shed Na∣both's blood, to wring from him his Vineyard, or with Achan, be stoned to death for taking goods that are to me forbidden; give me grace to be content with what portion thou hast allowed me, and to remember that this is no continuing City,
but I must seek one to come, in which Heavenly Kingdom of thine, thou art my portion for e∣ver, which God grant me for his Mercy sake. Amen. Our Father, &c. A Prayer for the Evening. O Almighty God, the only keeper of Israel, who neither slumbrest nor sleepest, behold me thy servant who by reason of my sin, and the corruption of my nature, am wholly subject to sloth, and am now even ready to ease and rest my self upon my Bed: I know not whether thou wilt this very night make my Bed in the dark, and the hour of my visitation be this present Evening, my years are but a span long, my age is nothing unto thee, my days pass like a Weavers shuttle, and my life is brought to an end as it were a tale that is told, this hour may be my last hour, and my next sleep my last and long sleep; therefore I beseech thee let me every Evening seriously pon∣der and meditate, and though my eyes sleep, yet let my soul continually watch to attend thy com∣ing; keep me this night both in body and soul from all mine enemies both visible and invisible now and for evermore. Amen. Our Father, &c. FINIS.
