G814 12067321 53397
To the much Honoured and Ingenious Francis Willoughby ESQUIRE. SIR, TIs likely you will no lesse wonder at this unexpected sally of my pen; than at my ha∣ving presixt your name to a Trifle, that owns no Au∣thour. Of the former, you
will receive an account in the Preface. And the lat∣ter, if the considerations following; are not of weight, to attone for; I know you have goodness enough to pardon, what I have not reason sufficient to excuse, or vindicate. Well meaning intentions are Apology enough, where candour, and ingenuity are the Judges. I was not induced then to this Ad∣dresse, because I thought I could oblige you; Worth
describes it self in the fair∣est Character. But refle∣cting upon that delight & satisfaction, that I have received in discoursing with you on such matters; and knowing that your noble genius is gratified by such kind of speculati∣ons; I thought I could not make more suitable payment for my content, or better acknowledge the favour I receive in your acquaintance, then by pre∣senting you a Discourse a∣bout
Praeexistence; & giving you a peculiar interest in it, as you have in its Au∣thour. Not that I would sug∣gest, that you are a Favour∣er of any strange opinions, or hold any thing in this particular, or any other, that is fit to be discounte∣nanc'd. But I know you love to be dealing in high and generous Theo∣ries, even where your self are a dissenter. Nor is it the least evidence of the greatnesse and heroick
nobleness of your spi∣rit; that amidst the flowing aboundance of the world's blessings with which you are encircled, you can yet dedicate your self to your belo∣ved contemplations; and look upon the furniture and accomplishments of the mind, as better riches, than the largest doals of fortune, and the wealth and Revenues of an am∣ple inheritance. And me∣thinks vvhile most others
at the best, do but use the Donatives of Providence; you enjoy them. And by a nobler kind of chymistry extract from them a pleasure, that is not to be met with in all the trivial sports of empty Gallantry. To be review∣ing the Recesses of Nature, & the beauteous inside of the universe, is a more man∣ly, yea angelick felicity, then the highest gratifications of the senses; an happinesse, that is common to the youthful Epicure, with his
Hounds and Horses, yea your ends are more Au∣gust and generous, then to terminate in the private pleasure you take, even in those Philosophical Research∣es; For you are meditating a more general good, in those careful & profound inquiries you are making into Animals, & other con∣cerning affairs of nature, which I hope one day the world will be advantag'd by. But I must not ingage in an Encomium, in which
I cannot be just, but I must be troublesome. For your modesty is no more able to bear it, then my Pen can reach. Wherefore I shall dismisse your eyes from this tyresome Atten∣dance; and only begge, that you would assure your self that no man is more your servant, then The Authour of Lux Orientalis.
THE PREFACE. IT is none of the least commendable indul∣gencies of our Church, that she allowes us a latitude of judging in points of Speculation. And ties not up mens conscien∣ces to an implicit assenting to o∣pinions, not necessary or Funda∣mental; which favourable and kind permission, is questionlesse a great obligation upon the inge∣nious, submissively to receive & observe her pious appointments for peace and order. Nor is there lesse Reason in this parental indul∣gence, then there is of Christian
charity and prudence; since to tie all others up to our opinions, and to impose difficult and di∣sputable matters under the No∣tion of Confessions of Faith and fundamentals of Religion, is a most uncharistian piece of Tyranny, the foundation of persecution, and very root of Antichristianisme. So that I have often wondred, that those that heretofore would have forced all men to a compliance with their darling notions, and would have made a prey of them, that could not bow down before the Idol of their new-framed Or∣thodoxy; should yet have the face to object persecution and un∣christian Tyranny to our Church Appointments; when them∣selves
under a deep and crimson guilt of those very same miscari∣ages, which they endeavour to af∣fix upon those more innocent constitutions. For is it not a far more blameable and obnoxious imposition to srame systems of disputable opinions, & to require their admittance into our Creeds, in the place of the most sacred, necessary, and fundamental verities; Than it is to appoint some harm∣lesse orders of circumstance and ce∣remony, which in themselves are indifferent and innocent. And let any equal man be judge, which is the greater superstition, either to idolize and place religion in things of dispute and meer opini∣ons; or conscienciously to ob∣serve
the Sanctions of that Au∣thority we are bound to obey. But how all those ill applyed re∣proaches of the Church of En∣gland, recoyle upon those that discharge them, I have fully proved in a Discourse on this subject, which in its due time may see the Light. But for the present I go on with what I was about; Therefore I say, 'tis a most commendable excellency in our Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which with all due regard ought to be acknowledged; That they in some few matters of opinion, but such, as are of important concernment, or very meridian truthes, which I mention not to this purpose, as if men might
therefore indulge themselves in what conceits and dangerous o∣pinions soever their phancies might give birth to; This were an unpardonable abuse of that noble and ingenious Liberty that is afforded us. But that they might see the beauty of those well temper'd Constitutions; and that the mouth of obloquy might be stopped that slaunders our Church, as if it yielded no scope at all for free inquiry; when I dare say there is not a Church in Christendome, that in this re∣gard is lesse Criminal. As for the opinion of Praeexistence, the subject of the following Pa∣pers, it was never determined against by ours, nor any other
Church that I know of; And therefore I conceive is left as a matter of School Speculation, which without danger may be problematically argued on either hand. And I have so great con∣fidence in all true Sons of our common Mother to think, that they will not fix any harsh and severe censures, upon the inno∣cent Speculations of hose, though possibly they may be Errours, who own the Authority, Articles, Canons, and Constitutions of that Church which they are so deser∣vedly zealous for. Therefore let me here premonish once for all, that I intend no Innovation in Religion, or disturbance of our established and received
Doctrines, by any thing I have undertaken in this little Treatise; But only an innocent represen∣tation of an Antient and Proba∣ble opinion, which I conceive may contribute somewhat to∣wards the clearing and vindica∣ting the Divine Attributes, and so representing the ever blessed Deity, as a more fit object of Love and Adoration, then the O∣pinions of the World make him. And what ever may be thought of the thing it self, or the ma∣nage of this affair, I'me  the end and design is concerning and important, and deserves at least a favourable construction of the undertaking. For there is no∣thing more for the interest of
religion, then that God be repre∣sented to his creatures as amiable & lovely, which cannot be better done, then by clearing up his providences and dealings with the sons of men, and discovering them to be full of Equity, Sweet∣nesse and Benignity, so that though I should be mistaken in the opinion which I endeavour to recommend, yet I expect the candour of the ingenious being betray'd into an errour, if it be one, by so pardonable an occasiō. If it be excepted against this un∣dertaking, that the Doctrine of Praeexistence hath in a late Dis∣course been purposely handled; besides what the learned D. More hath written of it; and therefore
that this labour may seem a su∣perfluous, unnecessary Repeti∣tion. I answer, that that very Treatise, viz the Account of Origen, made some such thing as this, expedient. For though the proof and management of this affair be there unexceptionable, as far as the Authour is by his design ingaged; yet, he being consined to the reasons of Origen, and to the answering such obje∣ctions, as the Fathers urged a∣gainst him; hath not so fully sta∣ed and cleared the businesse, but that there was room for af∣er-undertakers. And 'tis a reat disinterest to so strange and nusual a Doctrine as this, to be  partially handled: since so
long, it will not be understood, and consequently be but expo∣sed to contempt and ignominy. Nor can we hope that the world will be so favourable to a Para∣dox, or take so much pains for the understanding of that which they think a gross absurdity, as to collect those Principles that are scatter'd up and down the wri∣tings of that great & excelent Re∣storer of the Platonick Cabbala, and accomodate them to the interest of this opinion. So that I thought that till the Reasons, Answers, Prin∣ciples, & particular State of the Hypo∣thesis were brought all together to talke of Praeexistence in arnes were but to make a mans self ri∣diculous, and the Doctrine, the
common Ludibrium of fools and ignorants. And yet I must con∣fesse my self to be so much a con∣temner of the halfe witted cen∣surers of things they know not, that this Reason alone could not have moved my pen the breadth of a letter; But some ingenious friends of mine, who were wil∣ling to do their maker right, in a due apprehension of his Attri∣butes and Providences having read the Letter of Resolution, and thence being induced to think favourably of Praeexistence, were yet not fully satisfied in the proof, nor able to give stop to those objections, which their im∣perfect knowledge of the Hypo∣thesis occasioned: wherefore
they desired me to draw up a more full & particular Account of that Doctrine, which they had now a kindnesse for, and which wanted nothing more to recom∣mend it to them, but a clear and full representation. For their satisfaction then, I drew up the following Discourse, intending at first, that it should go no fur∣ther then their hands, whose in∣terest in mine affections had com∣manded it; but they being more then I could well pleasure with written Copies, and perceiving others of my acquaintance also, to whom I owe regard and service, to be in the like condition with these; I was induced to let this Little Trifle tread a more publick
Stage; and to speak my mind to them from the Presse. If further reason be expe∣cted for mine undertaking a bu∣sinesse in which others have been ingaged, I would desire them to consider what an infi∣nite of books are written upon almost all subjects can be na∣med. And I am confident, if they turn 'ore Libraries, they'l find no theam, that is of any con∣sideration, lesse traced then this is. So that no body hath reason to call it a Crambe, who considers, that there are multitudes, even of Schol∣lars that have never seen or heard of any thing of this na∣ture; And there is not, that
I know of, any one book extant in any language besides this, that purposely, solely, and fully treats of Praeexistence. Wherefore who ever condemns this as a superflu∣ous ingagement, if he will be just, must passe the same censure upon well nigh every Discourse the Presse is deliver'd of, for hee'l meet with few written on less∣handled subjects. I might urge also if there were need on't, that various representations of the same thing, fit the variety of phansyes and gusts of perusers; and that may have force and pre∣valence to perswade in one for me, which signifies nothing in a∣nother. But 'tis enough; he that will judge me on this account,
must passe the same award on e∣very Sermon he heares, and eve∣ry Book he looks on; And such a censure will do me as little hurt, as him good, that passeth it. Besides this exception, 'tis not unlikely that some may object, that I use Arguments that have already been pleaded in behalf of this opinion; which rightly understood, is no matter of dis∣repute; since every one else doth it that deals in a subject formerly written of. And I would have him that commenceth such a charge against me, to consult di∣vers Authours who have handled the same subject; and if he find not the same Arguments and
Reasons infinitely repeated eve∣ry where, let him call me plagiary, & spare not. 'Tis true therefore I have not baulk't the reasons of Origen, Dr. More, or the Au∣thour of the Letter of Resolution, because they had been used alrea∣dy; but freely own the assistance of those worthy Authours; how∣ever I think I have so managed, fortified, & secured them against exceptions, especially the most considerable, that I may reasona∣bly expect a pardon, yea and an interest in them also. For 'tis the backing of an argument that giv's it force & efficacy; which I have done to the most weighty of them, at my proper cost & charges. Nor should I have been faithful to my
cause, had I omitted any thing that I thought confirm'd it, upon any pretence whatever; since pos∣sibly this discourse may fall into the hands of some, who never met with those other Authors. And my design being a full proof, defence, & explication of Praeexistence, it had been an unpardonable defect to have permitted those weighty reasons by which it's learned As∣sertours have inforced it. If any yet should criminat me (as I know some did the account of Origen,) for using many of the same words, and some of the same phrases & expres∣sions, that those others; who have writ about those matters have made use of; I am not very care∣full to answer them in this mat∣ter; and I doubt this engagement
against those little seruples, will be importunate to the judicious. For no body blames the frequent usage of words of Art; or those which the first Masters or Resto∣rers of any Doctrine have been wont to express their notions by since that such words and expres∣sions are best understood, as have by custome or the Authori∣ty of some great Authours been appropriated to such Doctrines, as they have imploy'd them in the service of. And should eve∣ry man that writes on any sub∣ject, be obliged to invent a new, all the termes he hath need of, and industriously to shun those proper, expressive words and phrases that are fitted to his hands, and
the business he is about; all things will be fill'd with impertinency, darkness & confusion. It must be ac∣knowledged then, that most of the peculiar words & phrases that either I, or any body else that will speak properly & intelligi∣bly in this matter, make use of, are borrowed from the judicious and elegant contriver of them, the profound Restorer & Refiner of almost-extinct Platonism: whose invention hath been so happy in this kind, that it hath served up those notions in the most apposite, significant, comprehensive and expres∣sive words that could well be thought of, where fore 'twere an humoursome piece of folly for a∣ny man that deals in these matters
industriously to avoid such termes and expressions as are so adopted and fitted to this purpose, and so well known among those that are acquainted with this way of Lear∣ning; when without vanity he could not think to be better sur∣nish't from his own phancy. If in the following papers I have u∣fed any expressions of others, which these considerations will not warrant; I must beg pardon for my memory which doth not use to be so serviceable. And where I writ this Discourse, I had not one of my books within my reach, that treated of this, or in∣deed any other subject. Nor am I at leasure now to examine, them and this, to see whether I can find
any such coincidences; which a mans phancy dealing frequently in such matters, might insensibly oc∣casion. If any there be, let those that find them out, pardon them, as the slips of a too officious imagi∣nation or however else they treat them, they shall not much dif∣please the Authour. And now that this Discourse may pass with lesse controul among those that shall light on it, I find my self in∣gag'd to speak a little to a double sort of Readers, who are like to be offended at my design & averse to the Doctrine asserted in these Papers, And (1) some will bog∣gle at Praeexistence, & be afraid to entertain it, upon an apprehensi∣on that the Admission of this o∣pinion will disorder and change
the Frame of orthodox Divinity, which, were there cause for such a jealousy, were but a commen∣dable caution; but there's hope this may prove but a panick fear, or such a needless terrour as surpriseth children in the dark, when they take their best friends for some bug-bear that would car∣ry them away, or hurt them. For 'tis but supposing (as I have some where intimated in the discourse it self) that God created all souls together as he did the Angels That some of them sinned and fell with the other Apostate spirits; and for their disobedience were thrust into a state of silence and insensibility; That the Divine goodnesse so provided for them,
that they should act a part again in terrestrial bodyes, when they should fitly be prepared for them; And that Adam was set up as our great Protoplast and Repre∣sentative, who had he continued in Innocence and Integrity, we had then been sharers in that happi∣nesse which he at first was insta∣ted in; but by his unhappy defe∣ction and disobedience we lost it; and became thus miserable in our New life in these earthly bodyes. I say the Doctrine of Praeexistence thus stated, is in nothing that I know of, an enemy to common Theology: all things hence pro∣ceeding as in our ordinary Sy∣stems; with this only difference, that this Hypothesis cleares the diine Attributes from any sha∣dow
of harshnesse or inequality, since it supposeth us to have sin∣ned and deserved all the misery we suffer in this condition before we came hither; whereas the o∣ther which teacheth, that we be∣came both guilty and miserable by the single and sole offence of Adam, when as we were not then in being; or as to our souls, as much as potentially in our great Progenitour; beares somewhat hardly upon the repute of the Divine perfections. So that if the wary Reader be afraid to ven∣ture upon the Hypothesis, that I have drawn up at the end, (which I confesse I would not give him the least incouragement to med∣dle with) yet, without danger he may admit of Praeexsistence as
accommodated to the Orthodox Doctrine. Nor should I indeed have medled with the other scheam, which is built upon the Principles of meer reason and phi∣losophy; but that those friends who drew the rest of the Dis∣course from me, ingag'd me to give them an Account of the Philosophicall Hypothesis. In which, I know I have not in eve∣ry particular, followed the mind of the Masters of the Origenian Cabbala; but kept my self to the conduct of those Principles, that I judged most rational; though indeed the things wherein I dif∣fer, are very few and inconside∣rable. However for that reason I thought fit, to intitle no body to the Hypothesis that I have made
a draught of, least I should have affix't on any one, what he would not have owned. But for the main, those that understand it, know the Fountain; and for others, 'tis no great matter if they be ignorant. Now if any one judge me to be a proselyte to those opinions, because I call them not all to nought, or damn those, that have a favour for them; I know not how to avoid the doom of their severe displeasure; ha∣ving said as much in the place where I treat of those matters, to purge my self of such a suspition as I thought necessary to cleare me, in the opinion of any compe∣tently ingenuous. As for others, let me say what I can, I shall be what their wisdomes think fit to
call me; And let that be what it will, I am very well content to bear it. I'le only adde to take off the ground of this uncharitable jealousy, that among thefavou∣rers of Praeexistence, I know none that are adharers to those opi∣nions; & therefore for me to have declaim'd against any, on this ac∣count, had been a piece of Knight-Errantry; And those Donns that do so make Gyants of the Wind-mills of their own Imaginations. But, (2) There are another sort of Readers that I have a word to say to, who contemne & laugh at every thing that their narrow noddles comprehend not. This I confess is a good easy way of con∣futation; & if we may take every fool's smile for a Demonstration,
Praeexistence will be routed. But the best on't is, to call things by their right names, this is but a vul∣gar childish humour arising from nothing but a fond doating on the opinions we were first instru∣cted in. For having made those the standard of truth & solidity, those praepossest decerners pre∣sently conclude every thing that is a stranger to their ears and un∣derstandings, & of another stamp from their Education-receptions, false & ridiculous; just like the common people, who judging all customes and fashions by their own, account those of other na∣tions absurd, and barbarous. 'Tis well for those smiling Confuters, that they were not bred in Mahu∣metism, for then without doubt
they would have made sport of Christianity. But since they are so disposed, let them laugh at the o∣pinion I have undertaken for, till they understand it; I know who in the judgement of wise men will prove Ridiculous. It was from this very principle that the most con∣siderable truthes, that ever the world was acquainted with, were to the Iews, a stumbling block, and to the Greeks, foolishness; and 'twas such a spirit as reigns in these chil∣dren of self-confidence, that call'd S. Paul a babler. And methinks till these narrow scul'd people could boast themselves infallible, and all their opinions, an unerring Canon, common modesty and civility should teach them better man∣ners, then at first dash to judge
that a ridiculous absurdity; which the greatest and wisest sages that inlightned the antient world, accounted so sound and and probable a Conclusion. Espe∣cially it being a matter not de∣termin'd against, but rather countenanc't in Scripture, as will appear hereafter. But opiniative ignorance is very weak & immoral. And till those slight and vulgar decerners, have learn't that first principle of true wisdome, To judge nothing till they throughly understand it, & have weighed it in the ballance of impartial Reason; 'tis to no pur∣pose to spend ones breath upon them. Courteous Reader, in the Authours absence, you are desired to correct the Printers Errours.
Lux Orientalis. CHAP. I. The opinions proposed concerning the original of Souls. IT hath always been found a matter of discouraging diffi∣culty, among those that have busied themselves in such In∣juiries, To determine the Soul's original. nsomuch that after all the contests and disputes that have been about it, many of the wisest Inquisitors have concluded it undeterminable; or, if they have sate down in either of the 2 opinions, viz. of it's immediate Creation, or Traduc∣tion
(which of later ages have been the only competitors); they have been driven to it, rather from the absurdities of the opposite opinion, which they have left; then drawn by any rational alliciency in that which they have taken to. And in∣deed, if we do but impartially consider the grand inconveniences which each par∣ty urgeth against the others Conclusion, it would even tempt one to think, that both are right in their opposition and neither in their assertion. And since each side so strongly oppugns the other and so weakly defends it self, 'tis a shrewd suspicion that they are both mi∣staken. Wherefore if there be a third that can lay any probable claim to the truth, it deserves to be heard to plead its cause; and, if it be not chargeable with the contradictions or absurdities ei∣ther of the one or other, to be admit∣ted. Now though these later ages have concluded the matter to lye between im∣mediate Creation, and seminal Traduc∣tion; yet I find that the more antient
imes have pitcht upon Praeexistence, as more likely than either; For the platonists, Pythagoreans, the Chaldan Wise men, the Jewish Rabbins, and some of the most learned and antient Fathers were of this opinion. Wherefore I think we owe so much at least to the Mentory of those grave Sages,  to examine this Doctrine of theirs, and if neither of the later Hypotheses can ease our anxious minds, or free themselves from absur∣dities; and this Grey Dogma fairly clear all doubts, and be obnoxious to no such contradictions; I see no reason but we may give it a favourable admittance: Till something else appear more concin∣nous and rational. Therefore let us take some account of what the 2 first opini∣ons alledge one against another, and how they are proved by their promoters and defendants: now, if they be found una∣ble to withstand the shock of one ano∣thers opposition; we may reasonably cast our eies upon the third, to see what force it brings to vouch its interest, and how it will behave it self in the encoun∣ter.
CHAP. II. Daily creation of Souls is inconsist∣ent with the Divine Attributes. THe first of these opinions that offers it self to Tryal is, that God daily cre∣ates humane souls, which immediately are united unto the bodies that Gene∣ration hath prepared for them. Of this side are our later Divines, and the ge∣nerality of the Schoolmn. But not to be born down by Authoritys, Let us consider what reason stands against it. Therefore, (1) If our Souls came immediately out of the hands of God when we came first into these bodies, Whence then are those enormously brutish inclinations, that strong natural proclivity to vice and impiety, that are exstant in the chil∣dren of men? All the works of God bear his image, and are perfect in their kind. Purity is his nature, and what
comes from him, proportionably to its ca∣pacity partakes of his perfections. Every thing in the natural world bears the su∣perscription of his wisdome and goodness; and the same fountain cannot send forth sweet waters and bitter. Therefore 'tis a part of our alleagiance to our Maker to believe, that he made us pure and innocent and if we were but just then framed by him when we were united with these terrestrial bodis, whence should we con∣tract such degenerate propensions? Some tell us, that this impuity was immedi∣ately deriv'd from the bodies we are uni∣red to; But, how is it possible, that purely passive insensible Matter should transfuse habits or inclinations into a Nature that is quite of an other Make and Quality? How can such a cause produce an effect so disproportionate? Matter can do no∣thing but by motion, and what relation hath that to a moral contagion! How can a Body that is neither capable of sense nor sin, infect a soul, as soon as 'tis uni∣ed to it, with such vitious debauched dispositions?
But others think to evade by saying, That we have not these depravities in our natures, but contract them by custome, education, and evill usages. How then comes it about, that those that have had the same care and industry used upon them; and have been nurtured nuder the same d scipline and severe oversight, do so vastly and even to wonder differ in their inclinations? How is it that those that are under continual temptations to vice, are yet kept within the bounds of vertue, and sobriety? And yet that o∣thers, that have strong motives and al∣lurements to the contrary, should vio∣lently break out into all kinds of extrava∣gance and impiety? Sure, there is some what more in the matter than those gene∣ral causes, which may be common to both; and which many times have quite contrary effects. (2) This Hypothesis, that God conti∣nually creates humane souls in these bo∣dies, consists not with the honour of the Divine Attributes. For, (1) How stands it with the goodness
and benignity of that God, who is Love, to put pure and immaculate spirits, who were capable of living to him and with him, into such bodies as will presently desile them, deface his image, pervert all their powers and faculties, incline them to hate what he most loves, and love what his soul hateth; and that, with∣out any knowledge or concurrence of theirs, will quite marre them as soon as he hath made them, and of dear Chil∣dren, render them rebells or enemies, and in a moment from being like Angels transform them into the perfect resem∣blance of the first Apostates, Devils? Is this an effect of those tender mer∣cies that are over all his works? And (2) Hath that Wisdome that hath made all things to operate according to their natures, and provided them with what ever is necessary to that end, made my∣riads of noble Spirits capable of as no∣ble operations, and presently plunged them into such a condition wherein they cannot act at all according to their first and proper dispositions, but shall be nece∣ssitated
to the quite contrary; and have o∣ther noxious and depraved inclinations fatally impos'd upon their pure natures Doth that wisdome, that hath made all things in number, weight, and measure, and disposed them in such exact harmo∣ny and proportions, use to act so ineptly? And that in the best and noblest pieces of his Creation? Doth it use to make and presently destroy? To frame one thing and give it such or such a nature, and then undo what he had done, and make it an other? And if there be no such irregular methods used in the fra∣ming of inferiour Creatures, what rea∣son have we to suspect that the Divine Wisdome did so vary from its self in its noblest composures? And (3), Is it not a great affront to the Divine Justice, to suppose, as we are commonly taught, that assoon as we are born, yea, and in the Womb, we are ob∣noxious to eternal wrath and torments, if our Souls are then immediately created out of nothing? For, To be just is to give every one his due; and how can endless
unsupportable punishments be due to in∣nocent Spirits, who but the last moment came righteous, pure, and immaculate out of their Creators hands; and have not done or thought any thing since, con∣trary to his will or Laws, nor were in a∣ny the least capacity of sinning. I, but the first of our order, our Gene∣ral head and Representative, sinned, and we in him; thus we contract guilt as soon as we have a beeing, and are lyable to the punishment of his disobedience. This is thought to solve all, and to clear God from any shadow of unrightesness. But what ever truth there is in the thing it self, I think it cannot stand upon the Hypothesis of the souls immediate Creation nor yet justifie God in his proceedings. For, (1) If I was then newly created when first in this body; what was A∣dam to mee, who sinned above 5000 years before I came out of nothing? If he represented me, it must be as I was in his Loins, that is, in him as an effect in a cause. But so I was not, according to this Doctrine; for my soul ownes no
Father but God, its immediate progeni∣tour. And what am I concern'd then in his sins, which had never my will or consent, more then in the sins of , or Julius Caesar? Nay, than in the sins of Belzebub or Lucifer? And for my body, 'tis most likely, that never an Atom of his, ever came at mee; or, if any did, he was no cause on't. Besides, that of it self is neither capable of sense, sin, guilt, nor punishment: or, (2) Admitting that we become thus obnoxious assoon as in the body, upon the account of his default, How doth it com∣port with the divine Justice, in one mo∣ment to make such excellent creatures, and in the next to render them so misera∣ble, by thrusting them into a condition, so fatally obnoxious; especially since they were capable of living and acting in bo∣dies more perfect, and more accommo∣date to their new undesiled natures. Cer∣tainly, could they have been put to their choice whether they would have come into being upon such termes, they would rather have been nothing for ever. And
God doth not use to make his creatures so, as that, without their own fault, they shall have cause to unwish themselves. Hitherto in this second general Arg. I have dealt against those that believe and assert the original depravity of our na∣tures: which those that deny, may think themselves not pinch't by or concernd in; Since they think they do no such dishonour to the divine Attributes, while they assert, that we were not made in so deplorable and depraved a conditi∣on, but have so made our selves by our voluntary aberrations. But neither is this a fit Plaister for the sore, supposing our souls to be immediately created and so sent into these bodies. For still it seems to be a diminutive and disparaging apprehen∣on of the infinite and immense Goodness of God, that he should detrude such ex∣cellent creatures as our souls into a state so hazardous, wherein he seeth it to be ten thousand to one, but that they will corrupt, and defile themselves, and so make themselves miserable here, and to eternity hereafter. And certainly, be we
as indifferent naturally to good and evill as can be supposed; yet great are the dis∣advantages to virtue that all men unavoi∣dably meet with, in this state of im∣perfection. For considering, that our infant and growing age is an age of sense, in which our appetites, and passions are very strong, and our reasons weak, and scarce any thing but a chain of imaginations, 'tis I say great odds, but that we should be caryed to inordinacy, and exceed the bounds the divine laws have set us. So that our lower powers of sense and passi∣ons using to have the head, will grow strong and impetuous; and thus 'tis an hundred to one but we shall be rooted in vice, before we come to the maturity of our reasons, or are capable of the exer∣cise of virtue. And wofull experience teacheth us, that most men run so far before they consider whither they are a∣going, that the care and diligence of all their lives after, will scarce reclaim them. Besides, the far greatest part of the world are led into wickednesse and all kinds of
debauchery, by corrupt and vitious edu∣cation. And 'tis not difficult to observe what an inormous strength, bad education hath to deprave and pervert well dispos'd inclinations. Which things consider'd, this way also methinks reflects a Dispa∣ragement on the Divine Attributes: Since by creating souls daily and putting them into such bodies, and such parts of the world as his infinite Wisdome sees will debauch them, and pervert them from the ways of righteousnesse and happinesse, into those of vice and misery; he deals with them lesse mercifully then a parent among us would with his Off-spring. And to suppose God to have lesse goodnesse then his degenerate creatures, is to have very narrow apprehensions of his perfec∣tions, and to  him of the honour due to his Attributes. (3) It hath been urged with good probability by great and wise Sages, that 'tis an unbecomming apprehension of the Majesty on high, to suppose him assi∣stant to unlawful and unclean coitions, by creating a soul to animate the impure
foetus. And to think, It is in the power of brutish lust to determine Omnipo∣tence to create a Soul, whensoever a couple of unclean adulterers shall think fit to join in their bestial pleasures; is methinks to have a very mean apprehen∣sion of the divine Majesty and Purity. This is to make him the worst of Ser∣vants by supposing him to serve his crea∣ture's vices, to wait upon the vilest acti∣ons, and to engage the same Infinite Power that made the world for the per∣fecting what was begun by dissolute wan∣tons. This Argument was used of old by pious and learned Origen, and hath been imployed in the same service since, by his Modern defendents. But I fore∣see an evasion or two, that possibly with some may stand for an answer, the re∣moval of which will clear the busi∣nesse. It may be pretended that God's atten∣ding to create souls for the supply of such generations, is but an act of his justice, for the detection, and consequently pu∣nishment, of such lawless offenders; which
therefore will be no more matter of dis∣paragement then the waiting of an Officer of justice to discover and apprehend a Malefactour. But this Subterfuge cannot elude the force of the Argument, for it hath no place at all in most adulteries; yea great injustice and injury is done many times by such illegitimate births; the child of a stranger being by this means admitted to carry away the inheritance from the lawful off-spring. Besides, God useth not ordinarily to put forth his Almighty pow∣er to discover secret miscarriages, except sometimes for very remarkable and mo∣mentous ends, but leaves hidden iniqui∣es to be the objects of his own castiga∣tions. And if discovery of the fault be the main end of such creations, methinks that might be done at a cheaper rate, that should not have brought so much incon∣venience with it, or have exposed his own innocent and harmlesse off-spring to undeserv'd Reproach and Infamy. But further it may be suggested, that it is no more indecent for God to create
souls to furnish those unlawful Generati∣ons, then it is that a man should be nou∣risht by meat that he hath unlawfully come by, or that the Cattle which he hath stoln should ingender with his own. But the difference of these instances from the case in hand is easily discernable; in that the nourishment and productions spo∣ken of, proceed in a set orderly way of natural causes, which work fatally and necessarily without respect to morall cir∣cumstances; And there is no reason, it should be in the power of a sinful crea∣ture to ingage his Maker to pervert or stop the course of nature, when he plea∣seth. But in the case of creating souls, God is supposed to act by explicit and immediate Will, the suspending of which, in such a case as this, is far different in point of credit and decorum, from his alte∣ring the setled Laws he hath set in the Creation, and turning the world upside∣down. I might further add (4ly), That it seems very incongruous and unhandsome to sup∣pose, that God should create a souls for
the supply of one monstrous body. And of such prodigious productions there is mention in History. That's a remarkable instance in Sennertus, of a Monster born at Emmaus with two hearts, and two heads; the diversity of whose appeites, perceptions and affections, testified that it had two souls within that bi-partite ha∣bitation. Now, to conceive the most wise Maker and Contriver of all things, imme∣diately to create two souls, for a single body, rather then suffer that super-plus of matter which constitutes the monstrous ex∣crescence to prove effoete & inanimate, is methinks a derogatory apprehension of his wisdome, and supposeth him to act more ineptly in the great and immediate instan∣ces of his power, than in the ordinary course of nature about less noble and ac∣curate productions. Or, if it be pretended, that Souls were sent into them while the bodies were yet distinct, but that after wards they grew into one: This, I say will not heal the breach that this Hypo∣thesis makes upon the divine Wisdome; it acitely reflecting a shameful over∣sight
upon Omniscience, that he should not be aware of the future coalescence of these bodies into one, when he made souls for them; or at least, 'tis to sup∣pose him, knowingly to act ineptly. Be∣sides, that the rational soul is not created till the body, as to the main stroaks of it at least, is framed, is the general opini∣on of the Assertours of daily creation; So that then there is no roome for this evasion. And now one would think that an opi∣nion so very obnoxious, and so lyable to such grand inconveniences, should not be admitted but upon most pressing reasons and ineludable demonstrations. And yet there is not an argument that I ever heard of from reason to inforce it, but only such as are brought from the impossibility of the way of Traduction, which indeed is chargeable with as great absurdities, as that we have been discour∣sing of. 'Tis true, several Scriptures are prest for the service of the cause; but I doubt much against their intent and in∣clination. General testimonies there are
to prove that God is the Father and Cre∣atour of Souls, which is equally true, whe∣ther we suppose it made just as it is uni∣ted to these bodies, or did praeexist, and was before them; But that it is just then created out of nothing when first it comes into these earthly bodies, I know not a word in the inspired Writings that speaks it. For that saying of our Saviour, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work, is by the most judicious understood of the works of preservation and providence. Those of creation being concluded with∣in the first Hebdomade, accordingly as is exprest in the History, that God on the seventh day rested from all his works. Nor can there an instance be given of any thing created since, or is there any pretended, but that which hath been the subject of our inquiry; which is no in∣considerable presumption, that that was not so neither; since the divine way of working is not pari colour or humoursome, but uniform, and consonant to the laws of exactest wisdome. So that for us to suppose that God, after the compleating.
of his Creation, and the laws given to  things for their action, and continuanc to be every moment working in a quit other way in one instance of beings, tha he doth in all besides; is methinks a som what odd apprehension, especially whe no Reason urgeth to it, and Scripture silent. For such places as this [the  of the Spirits of all flesh, the Father  Spirits. The spirit returns to God  gave it. The souls which I have mad We are his off-spring. Who formeth  spirit of man within him, and the like signifie no more, but that our souls  a nearer relation to God then our bodies as being his immediate workmanship made without any creature-interposal and more especially regarded by him But to inferre hence, that they  then produced when these bodies  generated, is illogicall and inconsequen So that all that these Scriptures will ser for, is only to disprove the Doctrine  Fraduction, but makes not a tittle for the ordinary Hypothesis of Daily Creation against Praeexistence.
CHAP. III. (2) Traduction of souls is impos∣sible, the reasons for it weak and frivolous, the proposal of Praeexis∣tence. THus then we have examind the first way of stating the Soul's original, that of continual Creation; and finding no sure resting place for our inquiry here, we remove to the second. The way of Traduction or seminal Propagation. And the adherers to this Hypothesis are of 2 sorts, viz. either such as make the soul to be nothing but a pu∣rer sort of matter, or of those that con∣fess it wholly spiritual and immaterial. He dispatch the former, briefly strike at the root of their misconceit of the souls pro∣duction, and shew it cannot be Matter, be it as pure as can be conceived. Therefore (I) If the soul be matter, then whatever perceptions or apprehensi∣ons it hath, or is capable of, they were
let in at the senses. And thus the great Patron of the Hypothesis states it, in his Leviathan, and other writings. But now clear it is that our Souls have some con∣ceptions, which they never received from external sense; For there are some con∣genite implicite Principles in us, without which there could be no sensation; since the images of objects are very smal and inconsiderable in our brains, comparative∣ly to the vastness of the things which they represent, and very unlike them in multitudes of other circumstances, so that 'twere impossible we should have the sen∣sible representation of any thing, were it not that our souls use a kind of Geometry, or mathematick Inference in judging of external objects by those little hints it finds in material impressions. Which Art and the principles thereof were never received from sense, but are presuppo∣sed to all sensible perceptions. And, were the soul quite vold of all such implicit no∣tions, it would remain as senselesse as a stone for ever. Besides, we find our minds fraught
with principles logical, moral, metaphy∣sical, which could never owe their ori∣ginal to sense otherwise, then as it gives us occasions of using them. For sense tea∣cheth no general propositions, but only affords singulars for Induction; which being an Inference, must proceed from an higher principle that ownes no such dependence on the senses as being found in the mind, and not deriv'd from any thing without. Also we find in our selves mathematical notions, and build certain demonstrations on them, which abstract from sense and matter. And therefore never had them from any material power but from somthing more sublime and excellent. But this Argument is of too large a consideration to be treated of here and therefore I content my self with those brief Touches, and passe on. (2) If the soul be matter 'tis impossi∣ble it should have the sense of any thing: for either the whole image of the object must be received in one point of this sen∣sitive matter; a thing absurd at first view, that such variety of distinct and orderly
representations should be made at once upon a single atom; or the whole image is imprest upon every point, and then there would be as many objects as there are points in this matter; and so every thing would be infinitely multiplyed in our delusive senses. Or finally, every part of the soul must receive a proportionable part of the image; and then, how could those parts communicate their percepti∣ons to each other, and what should per∣ceive the whole? This Argument is ex∣cellently managed by the great Dr. H. More, in whose writings this fond Hy∣pothesis is fully triumpht over, and de∣feated. Since therefore the very lowest degree of perception, single and simple sense, is incompatible to  body or matter, we may safely conclude, that the higher and nobler operations of imagi∣ning, remembring, reasoning, and willing must have a cause and source that is not Corporeal. Thus therefore those that build the souls traduction upon this ground of its being only body and modified matter, are disappointed in the foundation of
But (2) Another sort of assertors of traduction teach the Soul to be spiritual and incorporeal, and affirm that by a ver∣tue deriv'd from the first benediction, it can propagate its like; one soul emitting another as the body doth the matter of Generation. The manner of which spiri∣tual production useth to be illustrated by one candles lighting another; and a mans begetting a thought in anothers mind, without diminishing of his own. This is the most favourable representation of this opinion, that I can think on. And yet, if we nearly consider it, it will appear most absurd & unphilosophical For if one soul produce another, 'tis either out of nothing or something praeexistent. If the former, 'tis an absolute creation, which all philosophy concludes impossible for a Creature. And if it be pretended that the Parent doth it not by his proper natural virtue but by a strength imparted by God in the first blessing, Increase and multi∣ply, so that God is the prime agent, he only the instrument: I rejoin, that then either God hath thereby obliged himself
to put forth a new and extraordinary power in every such occasion, distinct from his influence in the ordinary course of nature: Or else (2) he only concurres by his providence, as he doth to our other natural actions, we having this Ability be∣stowed upon our very natures. He that asserts the first, runs upon all the rocks that he would avoid in the former Hypo∣thesis of continual Creation, and God will be made the cause of the sin and misery of his spotless and blameless creatures; which absurdities he cannot shun by say∣ing, that God, by interposing in such productions, doth but follow the rules of acting, which he first made while man was innocent. For certainly infinite good∣nesse would never have tyed up it self to such Laws of working, as he foresaw would presently bring unavoidable in∣convenience, misery, and ruine upon the best part of his workmanship. And for the second way, it supposeth God to have no more to do in this action then in our eating and drinking. Consequent∣ly, here is a creation purely natural. And
methinks if we have so vast a power to ring the ends of contradictorys together, omthing out of nothing, (which some deny to Omnipotence it self) tis much we cannot conscrve in being our creature  produced, nor our own intimate selves, since conservation is not more then crea∣tion. And tis much, that in other thing we should give such few specimens of so vast an ability; or, have a power so di∣vine and excellent, and no faculty to dis∣cerne it by. Again (2) if the Soul be immediately produced out of nothing, be the agent who it will, God or the Parent, it will be pure and sinlesse. For, supposing our parents to be our Creators; they make  but as natural agents, and so can only transmit their natural qualities, but not their moral pravities. Wherefore there can no better account be given from this way how the soul is so debauched and infected assoon as it comes into the body,  in the former, and therefore it fails in the main end it is design'd for. Thus we see then that the traduction
of the soul supposing it to be produced out of nothing, cannot be defended. Nor doth the second general way, yield any more relief to this Hypothesis. For if it be made of any thing praeexis∣tent, it is either of matter or spirit. The former we have undermin'd and over∣thrown already, in what was said against those, that hold it to be body. And if it be made out of any spiritual substance, it must be the soul of the parent, (except we will revive the old enthusiastick con∣ceit of its being a particle of the divine essence) which supposition is against the nature of an immaterial being, a chief property of which, is to be indiscerpible. Nor do the similitudes I mention'd in the proposal of the Hypothesis, at all fit the businesse; for one candle lights another, by separable emissions that passe from the flame of that which is kindled, to the ieke of the other. And flame is a body whose parts are in continual flux, as a iver. But the substance of the soul is stable, permanent, and indivisible, which quite makes it another case. And for
a mans informing anothers mind with a thought which he had not conceived, it is not a production of any substance, but only an occasioning him to exertan ope∣ration of his mind which he did not be∣fore. And therefore makes nothing to the illustrating, how a soul can produce a soul, a substance distinct and without it self; Thus we see how desperate the case of the soul's original is in the Hypo∣thesis of Traduction also. But yet to let it have fair play, wee'l give it leave to plead it's cause; and briefly present what is most material in its behalf. There are but two reasons that I can think of, worth a naming (1) A man be∣gets a man, and a man he is not without a soul, therefore 'tis pretended that the soul is begotten. But this argument is ea∣sily detected of palpable sophistry, and is as if one should argue, a man is mortall therefore his soul is mortall, or is fat and lusty therefore his soul is so. The absurdity of which kinds of reasoning lyes in draw∣ing that into a strict and rigorous affir∣mation, which is only meant according
to vulgar speech, and is true only, in some remarkable respect or circumstance. Thus we say, A man begetts a man, be∣cause he doth the visible and only sensi∣ble part of him; The vulgar, to whom common speech is accommodate, not ta∣king so much notice of what is past the ken of their sences. And therefore Body in ordinary speaking is oft put for Person as here man for the body. Sometimes the noblest part is us'd for the whole, as when 'tis said 70 souls went down with Jacob into Egypt; therefore such arguments as the assertours of traduction make use of, which are drawn from vulgar schemes of speech, argue nothing but the despe∣ratenesse of the cause, that needs such pi∣tiful sophistries to recommend it. Such are these proofs which yet are some of the best I meet with, The seed of the wo∣man shall break the serpents head; 66 souls descended out of Jacobs loins; Adam be∣gat a son in his own likenesse, and such like. According to this rate of arguing the scripture may be made speak any thing that our humoursome phancies
please to dictate. And thus to rack the sacred writings, to force them whether they will or no to bring evidence to our opinions; is an affront to their Authori∣ty that's next to the denying on't. I might adde (2) that begetting also hath a lati∣tude, and in common speech signifies not a strict and philosophical production; So that a man begets a man, though he only generates the body, into which fitly prepared descends a soul. And he that doth that upon which another thing ne∣cessarily follows, is said to be the cause of both. (2) The adherents to traduction use to urge, that, except the whole man soul and body be propagated, there is no ac∣count can be given of our original defile∣ment. And scripture gives evident testi∣mony to that early pollution; for we are said to be conceived in sin, and trans∣gressors from the Womb. We have already seen that indeed the way of daily creating souls, cannot come off but with vilely aspersing the divine attributes. And it hath been hinted, that
neither can Traduction solve the business: for if the Parent beget the soul out of nothing, it will be as pure and clean as if God himself were it's immediate crea∣tour; for though a clean thing cannot come out of an unclean, when any thing of the substance of the producent is impar∣ted to the effect; yet where 'tis made out of nothing the reason is very different, Yea, the soul in all the powers that are concern'd in this production is now as clean and pure as ever 'twas; for it is suppos'd to do it by a capacity given, at its first creation while pure and innocent; in which respect it is not capable of mo∣ral contagion; this being an ability meer∣ly natural and plastick, and not at all un∣der the imperium or command of the will the only seat of morall good and evill. Or, if our souls are but particles and de∣cerptions of our parents, then I must have been guilty of all the sins that ever were committed by my Progenitors ever since Adam; and by this time, my soul would have been so deprav'd and de∣bauch'd, that it would be now brutish,
yea diabolical. Thus then we see, that even upon this reason 'tis necessary, to pitch upon some other Hypothesis, to give an account of the pravity of our natures; which both these fayl in the solution of. And, since the former com∣mitts such violence upon the honour of the divine Attributes, since the latter is so contrary to the nature of things, and since neither can give any satisfaction in the great affairs of providence and our natures, or have any incouragement from the Sacred Volume; 'Tis I think very ex∣cusable for us to cast our eies abroad, to see if there be no other way, that may probably unriddle those mysteries, and relieve the minds of anxious and con∣templative inquirers. In which search, if we light on any thing that doth sweet∣ly accord with the Attributes of God, the nature of things, and unlocks the in∣tricacies of Providence; I think we have found, what the two former opinions aim at, but cannot make good their preten∣ces to. And may salute the truth with a joyfull . Wherefore from the mo∣dern
disputants, let us look towards the antient Sages, those eastern Sophi, that have fill'd the world with the same of their wisdome; And since our inquiries are benighted in the west, let us look to∣wards the East; from whence 'tis likely the desired light may display it self, and chase away the darknesse that covers the face of those theories. Therefore it was the opinion of the Indian Brachmans, the Persian Magi, the Aegyptian Gymnoso∣phists, the fewish Rabbins, some of the Graecian Philosophers, and Christian Fa∣thers, that the souls of men were crea∣ted all at first; and at several times and occasions upon forfeiture of their better life and condition, drop't down in∣to these terrestrial bodies. This the lear∣ned among the Jews made a part of their Cabbala, and preten to have recei∣ved it from their great Law-giver, Mo∣ses: which Hypothesis, if it appear but pro∣bable to an impartial inquiry, will even on that account be preferrible to both the former, which we have seen to be des∣perate.
CHAP. IV. (Praeexistence) Praeexistence cannot be dispro∣ved. Scripture saith nothing a∣gainst it. It's silence is no preju∣dice to this Doctrine, but rather an Argument for it, as the case standeth. Praeexistence was the common opinion of our Saviour's times. How, probably, it came to be lost in the Christian Church. THerefore let us see what title it can shew for our assent, or whether it can prove it self worthy of the Patro∣nage of those great Authors that have owned it. (1) Then, Whether this Doctrine be true or no, Im'e confident it cannot be proved false: for if All souls were not made together, it must be, either be∣cause
God could not do it; or because he would not, for the first, I suppose very few have such narrow conceptions of the divine power, as to affirm that omni∣potence could not produce all those be∣ings at first, which apart he is suppos'd to create daily; which implies no contra∣diction, or as much as difficulty, to be con∣ceived; and which de facto he hath done in the case of Angells. Or, if inconsist∣ence with any Attribute should be pre∣tended, that shall be prov'd quite other∣wise hereafter; And the amicable con∣sistence of this Hypothesis with them, yea the necessity of it, from this very consi∣deration of the divine Attributes, shall be argued in the process. Therefore, whoever concludes that God made not all souls of old, when he produced the world out of nothing, must confesse the reason of this assertion to be, because he would not. And then I would ask him, how he came to know what he affirms so boldly? Who acquainted him with the Divine Counsells? Is there a word said in his revealed will to the con∣trary?
or, hath he by his holy penmen told us that either of the other waies was more suitable to his beneplaciture? In∣deed, 'tis very likely that a strong and rea∣dy phancy, possest with a perswasion of the falshood of this Hypothesis, might find some half phrases in scripture, which he might suborne to sing to the tune of his imagination. For, in such a Miscel∣laneous piece as the Bible is, it will not be difficult for a man that's strongly re∣solv'd against an opinion, to find some∣what or other that may seem to him to speak the language of his phancy; And therefore it shall go hard, but that those whom their education or prejudice have ingaged against this Hypothesis, will light on some obscure pieces of texts, and broken sentences or other, that shall seem to condemn what they disapprove of. But I am securely confident, that there is not a sentence in the sacred volume, from end to end, that ever was intended to teach, that all souls were not made of old; or that, by a legitimate consequence, would inferre it. And if any there be
that seem to look another way, I dare say they are collateral, and were never de∣signed by the divine Authors for the pur∣pose they are made to serve, by the ene∣mies of Praeexistence. Wherefore not to conceal any thing that with the least shew of probability can be pretended from the sacred volume in discountenance of the Doctrine of Praeexistence, I'le bring into view whatever I know to have the least face of a Testimony to the contrary, in the divine Revelations. That so, when it shall appear that the most specious Texts that can be alledg'd, have nothing at all in them to disprove the souls prae∣existence, we may be secure that God hath not discovered to us in his written will, that 'twas not his pleasure to create all souls together. Therefore (I), It may be pretended, that the Doctrine of Praeexistence com∣ports not with that innocence and inte∣grity in which the Scripture determines Adam to have been made. Since it sup∣poseth the descent into these bodyes to be a culpable lapse from an higher and bet∣ter
state of Life, and this to be a state of incarceration for former delinquencies. To this I answer. (1) No one can object any thing to purpose against Praeexistence from the unconceiveablenesse of it, untill he know the particular frame of the Hypothesis, without which, all impugnations rela∣ting to the manner of the thing, will be wide of the mark, and but little to the businesse. Therefore, if the objectour would have patience to wait till we come to that part of our undertaking, he would find that there was but little ground for such a scruple. But however to prevent all cavillings, in this place i'le shew the invalidity of this objection. Wherefore, (2) There is no necessity from the Doctrine of Praeexistence to suppose A∣dam a delinquent, before his noted trans∣gression in a terrestrial body: for consi∣dering, that his body had vast advanta∣ges above ours, in point of beauty, puri∣ty, and serviceablenesse to the soul, what harshness is there in conceiving that God
might send one of those immaculate Spi∣rits that he had made, into such a Tene∣ment, that he might be his steward in the affairs of this lower Family; and an overseer, and ruler of those other crea∣tures that he had order'd to have their dwelling upon earth. I am sure, there is no more contrariety to any of the Di∣vine Attributes in this supposition, then there is in that, which makes God to have sent a pure spirit, which he had just made, into such a body. Yea, (3) Supposing that some souls fell, when the Angells did (which the process of our discourse will shew to be no un∣reasonable supposition) this was a mer∣ciful provision of our Maker, and a ge∣nerous undertaking for a Seraphick and untainted Spirit. For by this means, fit and congruous matter is prepared for those souls to reside and act in, who had rendred themselves unfit to live and injoy themselves in more refined bodyes. And so those spirits that had sinn'd them∣selves into a state of silence and inactivi∣ty, are by this seasonable means, which
the divine Wisdome and Goodnesse hath contriv'd for them, put once more into a capacity of acting their parts anew, and comming into play again. Now if it seem hard to any to conceive how so noble a spirit in such an advantagious body, should have been impos'd upon by so gross a delusion, and submit so im∣potently to the first temptation; He may please to consider, that the difficulty is the same, supposing him just then to have been made; if we grant him but that pu∣rity and those great perfections both of will, and understanding, which orthodox theology allows him. Yea again (4) I might ask What in∣convenience there is in supposing, that Adam himself was one of those delin∣quent souls, which the divine pitty and compassion had thus set up again; that so, so many of his excellent creatures might not be lost and undone irrecoverabiy: but might act anew, though upon a low∣er stage in the universe: A due conside∣ration of the infinite foecundity and ful∣nesse of the divine goodnesse will, if not
warrant, yet excuse such a supposition. But now if it be demanded, What ad∣vantage Adam's standing had been to his posterity, had he continued in the state of innocence; and how sin and misery is brought upon us by his Fall, according to this Hypothesis: I answer, that then among many other great priviledges, he had transsmitted downwards by way of natural generation that excellent and bles∣sed temper of body; which should have been like his own happy crasis. So that our apprehensions should have been more large and free, our affections more regu∣lar and governable; and our inclinati∣ons to what is good and vertuous, strong and vigorous. For we cannot but observe in this state, how vast an influence the temper of our bodyes hath upon our minds; both in reference to intellectual and moral dispositions. Thus, daily expe∣rience teacheth us, how that, according to the ebb or flow of certain humours in our bodies, our witts are either more quick, free, and sparkling, or else more obtuse, weak, and sluggish. And we find
that there are certain clean and healthy dispositions of body which make us cheer∣ful, and contented; others on the contra∣ry orose, melancholly, and dogged. And 'tis easie to observe how age or sicknesse sowres, and crabbs our natures. I might instance in allmost all other qualities of the mind, which are strangely influenc and modifyed according to the bodie's constitution. But none will deny so plain a truth; and therefore I forbear to in∣sist further on it. Nor need I mention any more advantages; so many, and such great ones, being consequent upon this. But our great Protoplast and representa∣tive, falling through his unhappy diso∣bedience, besides the integrity and recti∣tude of his mind, he lost also that blessed constitution of Body, which would have been so great a priviledg to his off spring: so that it became now corrupt, weak, and indisposed for the nobler exercises of the soul; and he could transmit no bet∣ter to us, then himself was owner of. Thus we fell in him, and were made miserable by his transgression. We have
bodies convey'd to us, which strangely do bewitch and betray us. And thus we all bear about us the marks of the first apostacy. There are other sad effects of his defection, but this may suffice for my present purpose. Thus we see how that the derivation of original depravi∣ty from Adam is as clear in this Hypothe∣sis, as can be pretended in either of the other. And upon other Accounts it seems to have much the advantage of both of them. As will appear to the unprejudiced in what is further to be dis∣cours'd of. Finally, therefore, If the urgers of the Letter of Genesis of either side, against this Hypothesis, would but consider, That the souls that descend hither, for their prae∣varication in another state, lye in a long condition of silence and insensibility, be∣fore they appear in terrestrial bodies; each of them then might, from the doctrine of Praeexistence thus stated, gain all the ad∣vantages which he supposeth to have by his own opinion, and avoid all those ab∣surdities which he seeth the other run
upon. If the Assertours of daily Creation think it clear from Scripture that God is the Father of Spirits, and immediate ma∣ker of souls, they'l find the same made good and assented to in this Hypothesis. And if they are unwilling to hold—any thing contrary to the Nature of the soul, which is immortal and indiscerpible, the Doctrine of Praeexistence amicably clo∣seth with them in this also. And if the Patrons of Traduction would have a way, how sin and misery may be propagated from our first Parent without aspersing the divine Attributes, or affirming any thing contrary to the phaenomena of Providence, and Nature; this Hypothesis will clear the businesse; It giving us so fair an Account how we all dye in Adam, without blotting the Wisdome, Justice, or Goodnesse of God, or affirming any thing contrary to the Ap∣pearances of Nature. I have been the longer on this Argu∣ment, because 'tis like to be one main ob∣jection; And we see it is so far from pre∣judicing, that it is no inconsiderable evi∣dence
of the truth of Praeexistence. And now, besides this that I have na∣med, I cannot think of any Arguments from Scripture against this Doctrine, con∣siderable enough to excuse a mention of them. However, if the candid Reader will pardon the impertinency i'le present to view what I find most colourable. Therefore (2), It may be some are so inadvertent as to urge against our souls having been of old, that, Sacred writ says We are but of Yesterday; which expres∣sion of divine Scripture, is question∣lesse to be understood of our appearance on this stage of Earth. And is no more an Argument against our Praeexistence, then that other phrase of his, Before  go hence, and Bee no more, is against our future existence in an other state af∣ter the present life is ended. Nor will it prove more the business it is brought for, then the expression of Rachels weeping for her Children because they were not, will inferre, that they were, absolutely nothing. Nor can any thing more be made. (3) Of that place in Ecclesiastes, Yea
better is he than both they, (meaning the dead and living) which hath not yet been; since, besides that 'tis a like scheme of speech with the former, it seems more to favour, then discountenance Praeexistence for what is absolutely nothing can neither be worse, nor better. Moreover, we com∣ming from a state of silence and inactivi∣ty when we drop into these bodies, we were before, as if we had not been; and so there is better ground in this case, for such a manner of speaking, then in meer non-appearance; which yet scrip∣ture phraseth a Not being. And now I cannot think of any place in the sacred volume more that could make a tolerable plea against this Hypo∣thesis, of our souls having been before they came into these bodyes; except (4) Any will draw a negative Argu∣ment from the History of the Creation, concluding that the Souls of men were not made of old, because there is no men∣tion there, of any such matter. To which I return briefly, That the same Argu∣ment concludes against the being of An∣gells
of whose creation there is no more say'd in the first story then of this inferi∣our rank of spirits, souls. The reason of which silence is commonly taken to be, because Moses had here to do with a rude and illiterate people, who had few or no apprehensions of any thing beyond their senses, and therefore he takes notice to them of nothing but what was sensible and of common observation. This reason is given also why minerals were omitted. 'Twere an easy matter, to shew how the outward cortex, the Letter of this Histo∣ry is adapted to mean and vulgar appre∣hensions, whose narrowness renders them incapable of sublimer speculations. But that being more then needs for our pre∣sent purpose, I shall forbear to speak further of it. I might (2) further adde, that great and learned Interpreters tell us, that all sorts of spirits, angels, and souls are sym∣bolically meant by the creation of heaven, and light. And, if it were directly in the way of our present businesse, it might be made appear to be no improbable con∣jecture.
But I referre him that is curious in this particular to the great Restorer of the antient Cabbala, the Learned Dr. H. More in his conjectura Cabbalistica. And now from the consideration of the silence of the first History, we descend to the last and most likely to be urged scruple, which is to this purpose. (5) We are not to step beyond the divine Revelations, and since God hath made known no such Doctrine as this, of the Souls Praeexistence any where in his word, we may reasonably deny it, or at least have no ground to imbrace it. This is the most important objection of all the rest, and most likely to prepos∣sess timerous and wary inquirers against this Hypothesis; wherefore I conceive that a full answer to this doubt, will prevent many scrupulous Haesitations, and make way for an unprejudic'd hearing of what I have further to alledg in the behalf of this opinion And (1) I wish that those that urge Scrip∣ture silence to disprove praeexistence would consider, how silent it is both in the case
of Daily Creation, and Traduction, we have seen already that there is nothing in Sacred writ to warrant either, but only such Generalls from which the re∣spective Patrons of either Doctrine would inferre their own conclusion, though indeed they all of them with bet∣ter right and congruity prove Praeex∣istence. (2) I suppose those that argue from Scripture-silence in such cases mistake the design of Scripture, which is not to de∣termine points of speculation, but to be a rule of Life and Manners. Nor doth it otherwise design the teaching of Doctri∣nals, then as they have a tendency to promote the divine life, righteousnesse, and Holinesse. It was never intended by it's inspired Authors to fill our Heads with notions, but to regulate our disor∣derly appetites and affections, and to di∣rect us the way to a nobler happinesse. Therefore those that look for a systeme of opinions in those otherways-designed writings, do like him that should see for a body of natural Philosophy, in
Epictetus his moralls, or Seneca's Epistles. (3) Christ and his Apostles spoke and writ as the condition of the persons with whom they dealt administred occasion, as did also the other Pen-men. Therefore doubtlesse there were many noble theo∣ries which they could have made the world acquainted with, which yet for want of a fit occasion to draw them forth were never upon Record. And we know, few speculative truths are deliver'd in Scripture, but such as were call'd forth by the controversies of those times: And Praeexistence was none of them, it being the constant opinion of the Jews, as appears by that Question, Master, was it for this man's sin or his Fathers, that he was born blind, which supposeth it of the Disciples also. Wherefore (4) There was little need of more teach∣ing of that, which those times were suffici∣ently instructed in: And indeed, as the case stands, if Scripture-silence be Argumenta∣tive, 'twil be for the advantage of Praeex∣istence; since it being the then common o∣pinion, and the disciples themselves be∣ing
of that belief 'tis very likely, had it been an errour, that Saviour Saviour or his Apostles would have witnest against it. But there being not a word let fall from them in disapprooval of that opinion, though sometimes occasions were admi∣nistred (as by the Question of the Dis∣ciples, and some other occurrences) 'tis a good presumption of the soundnesse of it. Now that Praeexistence was the com∣mon opinion of the Jews, in those times might be made good with full and con∣victive evidence, were it worth our la∣bour to insist much upon this Inquiry; but this being only a by consideration, a brief touch of it will suffice us. One of the great Rabbins therefore, Mr. Ben Is∣rael in his Problems de Creatione, assures us, that Praeexistence was the common belief of all wise men among the Jews, without exception. And the Author of the Book of Wisdome, who certainly was a Jew, probably Philo, plainly sup∣poseth the same Doctrine in that Speech, For I was a witty Child, and had agood
Spirit, wherefore the rather being good, I came into a body unfiled. As also did the disciples in their foremention'd Que∣stion to our Saviour; For except they supposed, that he might have sined be∣fore he was born, the Question had been senslesse and impertinent. Again, when Christ  them, whom men said he was they answered, that some said John the Baptist, others Elias, others Jeremias or one of the Prophets, which sayings of theirs suppose their beliefe of a Metem∣psychosis & consequently of Praeexistence. These, one would think, were very pro∣per occasions for our Saviour to have rectified his mistaken followers, had their supposition been an errour, as he was wont to do in cases not more considerable. Therefore if the enemies of Praeexistence will needs urge scriptures supposed silence against it; they have no reason to take it amisse if I shew them how their Argu∣ment recoyls upon themselves, and des∣troies their own cause, instead of their Adversaries.
(5) Besides, there were doubtlesse many Doctrines entertain'd by the Apo∣stles and the more learned of their fol∣lowers, which were disproportion'd to the capacities of the generality, who hold but little Theory. There was strong meat for the more grown and manly Christians, as well as milk for babes, and weaker constitutions. Now Scripture was design'd for the bene∣fit of the most, and they could little un∣derstand, and lesse make use of a specu∣lation so remote from common conceit, as Praeexistence. Among us, wise men count it not so proper to deal forth deep and mysterious points in Divinity to common and promiscuous Auditories. Wherefore the Apostles and others of their more im∣prov'd and capable disciples might have had such a Doctrine among them, though it were never expresly defined in their publique writings. And the Learned O∣rigen and some other of the Antients af∣firme that Praeexistence was a Cabbala which was handed down from the Apo∣stolick ages, to their times; and we know
those were early, and had therefore bet∣ter advantages of knowing the certainty of such a Tradition, then we at so vast a distance. Nor need any wonder how it came at length to be lost, or at least kept but among a few, who considers the grossnesse of succeeding ages, when such multitudes could swallow the dull and coorse Anthropomorphite Doctrines; much lesse, if he reflects upon that black night of barbarick ignorance which spread it self over this western world, upon the incursion of those rude and unciviliz'd Nations that 'ore-ran the Empire: out of which darknesse, 'twas the work of some Centuries to recover the then obscured region of Civility and Letters. Moreover, it would allay the admiration of any one inquisitive in such researches, when he shall have taken notice of the starting up and prevailing of School-Divinity in the world, which was but Aristotles Philo∣sophy theologiz'd. And we know that Philosophy had the luck to swim in the ge∣neral esteem and credit, when Plato∣nis and the more antient wisdome, a
branch of which, Praeexistence was; were almost quite sunk and buried. So that a Theology being now made, out of A∣ristotelian principles, 'tis no wonder that Praeexistence was left out, nothing being suppos'd to have been said of it, by the great Author of that Philosophy; and his admiring sectators were loath to borrow so considerable a Theory, from their Ma∣sters neglected Rival, Plato. But  at once to remove this stone of offence out of the way, I think Scrip∣ture is not so silent in this matter as is imagin'd. And I'me confident, more can be said from those divine writings in be∣half of Praeexistence, then for many o∣pinions, that it's opposers are very fond of, and think to be there evidently asser∣ted. And had this been a commonly re∣ceived Doctrine, and mens witts as much exercis'd for the defence on't, as they have been for the common dogmata, I nothing doubt, but that Scriptures would have been heaped up in abun∣dance for it's justification, and it would have been thought to have been plainly
witnest to, in the inspired volume. For, as mens phancies wil readily furnish them with a proof of that, of whose truth they are strongly prepossessed; So, on the contrary, they'l be very backward to see any evidence of that which is strange to them, and which hath alwaies been re∣puted an Absurdity. But my Scripture∣evidence is not so proper for this place, I intending to make it an Argument by it self. Therefore if the urger of this ob∣jection, will but have a little patience till I come so far on the way of my dis∣course, I hope he may be satisfied that Praeexistence is not such a stranger to scripture as he conceits it.
CHAP. V. Reasons against Praeexistence answe∣red. Our forgetting the former state is no argument to disprove it: nor are the other Reasons that can be produc'd, more conclusive. The proof of the possibility of Praeex∣istence were enough, all other Hypotheses being absurd and contradictious. But it is prov'd al∣so by positive Arguments. NOw therefore to proceed, let us look back upon our progresse, and so en∣ter on what remains; we have seen, that God could have created all souls at first had he so pleased, and that he hath revea∣led nothing in his written Will to the con∣trary. And now if it be found also, that he hath not made it known to our Rea∣sons
that 'twas not his will to do so, we may conclude this first particular, That no one can say, that the Doctrine of Prae∣existence is a falshhood. Therefore let us call to Account the most momentous reasons that can be laid against it, and we shall find that they all have not weight enough in the least to move so ra∣tional and solid an opinion. (1) Then, 'tis likely to be urged, that had we lived and acted in a former state, we should doubtlesse have retain'd some remembrance of that condition; But we having no memory of any thing backwards before our appearance upon this present stage, it will be thought to be a consi∣derable praesumption, that Praeexist∣ence is but a phancy. But I would desire such kind of rea∣soners to tell me, how much they re∣member of their state and condition in the womb, or of the Actions of their first infancy. And I could wish they would consider, that not one passage in an hun∣dred is remembred of their grown and ri∣per age. Nor doth there scarce a night
passe but we dream of many things which our waking Memories can give us no Ac∣count of; yea old age and some kinds of diseases blot out all the images of things past, and even in this state cause a totall oblivion. Now if the Reasons why we should lose the remembrance of our for∣mer life be greater, then are the causes of forgetfulnesse in the instances we have produced, I think it will be clear, that this Argument hath but little force a∣gainst the opinion we are inquiring into. Therefore if we do but reflect upon that long state of silence and inactivity that we emerged from, when we came into these bodies; and the vast change we under-went by our sinking into this new and unwonted habitation, it will appear to the considerate, that there is greater reason why we should have forgotten our former Life, then any thing in this. And if a disease or old age can rase out the memory of past actions, even while we are in one and the same condition of Life, certainly so long and deep a swoon as is ab∣solute insensibility and inertnesse, may
much more reasonably be thought to blot our the memory of an other Life, whose passages probably were nothing like the transactions of this. And this also might be given as an o∣ther Reason of our forgetting our former state, since usually things are brought to our remembrance by some like occur∣rences. But (2) Some will argue, If this be a state of punishment for former misearriages how comes it about then, that 'tis a bet∣ter condition then that we last came from viz. the state of silence and insensibility. I answer, That if we look upon our pre∣sent terrestrial condition an an effect of our defection from the higher Life, and in reference to our former happinesse lost by our own default, 'tis then a misery, and a punishment. But if we compare our now-being with the state of inactivi∣ty we were deliver'd from, It may then be call'd an After-Game of the divine Goodnesse, and a Mercy. As a Malefactor, that is at first put into a dark and discon∣solate dungeon, and afterwards is re∣mov'd
to a more comfortable and light∣some prison, may acknowledge his re∣move to be a favour and deliverance compared with the place he was last con∣fined to; though with respect to his fault and former liberty, even this condition is both a mulct and a misery. It is just thus in the present case, and any one may make the application. But it will be said, (3) If our souls liv'd in a former state did they act in bo∣dies, or without them? The former they'l say is absurd, and the latter incongruous and unlikely; since then all the powers the soul hath to exert in a body, would have been idle and to no purpose. But (1) the most that can be argued from such like objections, is, that we know not the man∣ner of the thing; and are no Arguments against the assertion it self. And were it granted that the particular state of the soul before it came hither is inconceiva∣ble, yet this makes no more against it, then it doth against it's after-condition; which these very objectors hold to be so, as to the particular modus. But
(a) Why is it so absurd that the soul should have actuated another kind of body, before it came into this? Even here 'tis immediately united to a purer vehi∣cle, moves and acts the grosser body by it; And why then might it not in its for∣mer and purer state of Life have been join'd only to such a refined body, which should have been suitable to its own per∣fection and purity? I'me sure, many, if not the most of the Antient Fathers thought Angells themselves to be embo∣dyed, and therefore they reputed not this such a grosse absurdity. But an oc∣casion hereafter will draw our pen this way again, and therefore I pass it to a third return to this objection. (3) Therefore, though it were granted that the soul lived afore-times without a body, what greater incongruity is there in such a supposition, then that it should live and act after death without any uni∣on with matter or any body whatsoever, as the objectors themselves conceive it doth? But all such objections as these will fly away as mists before the sun,
when we shall come particularly to state the Hypothesis. And therefore I may be excused from further troubling my self and the Reader about them here. Espe∣cially since, as hath been intimated, they prove nothing at all, but that the objec∣tors cannot conceive vvhat manner of state that of Praeexistence was, which is no prejudice to the opinion it self; that our souls were extant before these earthly bodies. Thus then I hope I have clearly e∣nough made good that all souls might have been created from the beginning; for ought any thing that is made known, either in the Scriptures or our reasons to the contrary. And thereby have re∣mov'd those prejudices that would have stood in the way of our conclusion. Wherefore we may now without con∣troul, from our proof of, That it may be so, pass on to enquire, whether indeed it is so; and see, whether it may as well be asserted, as defended. And truly considering that both the o∣ther ways are impossible, and this third
not at all unreasonable, it may be thought needlesse to bring more forces into the field to gain it the victory, after its ene∣mies are quite scattered and defeated. Yet however, for the pomp and triumph of truth, though it need not their service we shall add some positive Arguments, whereby it may appear, that not only all other ways are dangerous and unpas∣sable, and this irreproveable; but also that there is direct evidence enough to prove it solid and rational. And I make my first consideration of this kind, a se∣cond Argument.
CHAP. VI. A second Argument for Praeexistence drawn from the consideration of the Divine Goodnesse, which alwaies doth what is best. (2) THen, whoever conceives rightly of God, apprehends him to be infinite and immense Goodnesse, who is alwaies shedding abroad of his own exu∣berant fulnesse: There is no straightness in the Deity, no bounds to the ocean of Love. Now the divine Goodnesse referrs not to himself, as ours extends not unto him. He acts nothing for any self-ac∣complishment, being essentially and ab∣solutely compleat and perfect. But the object and term of his goodnesse is his creatures good and happinesse, in their respective capacities. He is that infi∣nite fountain that is continually over∣flowing;
and can no more cease to shed his influences upon his indigent depen∣dents then the sun to shine at noon. Now as the infinite Goodnesse of the deity, ob∣ligeth him alwaies to do good, so by the same reason to do that which is best; since to omit any degrees of good would ar∣gue a defect in goodnesse, supposing wis∣dome to order, and power to execute. He therefore that supposeth God not al∣waies to do what is best, and best for his Creatures (for he cannot act for his own Good) apprehends him to be lesse good then can be conceived, and conse∣quently not infinitely so. For what is in∣finite, is beyond measure and apprehen∣sion. Therefore to direct this to our pur∣pose, God being infinitely good and that to his Creatures, and therefore doing al∣waies what is best for them, methinks it roundly follows that our souls lived and injoy'd themselves of old before they came into these bodies. For since they were capable of living and that in a much better and happier state long before they
descended into this region of death and misery; and since that condition of life and self-enjoyment would have been bet∣ter, then absolute not-being, may we not safely conclude from a due consideration of the divine goodnesse, that it was so? What was it that gave us our being, but the immense goodnesse of our Maker? And why were we drawn out of our nothings but because it was better for us to be, then not to be? Why were our souls put into these bodies, and not into some more squallid and ugly; but because we are ca∣pable of such, and 'tis better for us to live in these, then in those that are lesse sutable to our natures? And had it not been better for us, to have injoy'd our selves and the bounty and favours of our Maker of old, as did the other order of intellectual creatures; then to have layn in the comfortless night of nothing till 'tother day! Had we not been better on't to have lived and acted in the joyful regions of light and blessednesse with those spirits that at first had being, then just now to jump into this sad plight,
and state of sin and wretchednesse. Infinite Power could as well have made us all at once, as the Angells, and with as good congruity to our natures we might have liv'd and been happy with∣out these bodies, as we shall be in the state of separation: since therefore it was best for us, and as easy for our Creatour so to have effected it, where was the defect, if it was not   not this to  his goodnesse! and to straight-lace the divine beneficence. And doth not the contrary Hypothesis to what I am plea∣ding for, represent the God of Love as lesse good and bountiful, then a charita∣ble mortall, who would neglect no op∣portunity within his reach of doing what good he could to those that want his help and assistance? I confesse, the world generally have such narrow and unbecomming apprehen∣sions of God, and draw his picture in their imaginations so like themselves, that few I doubt will feel the force of this Argument; and mine own observation makes me enter the same suspicion of
its successe that some others have who have used it. 'Tis only a very deep sense of the divine goodnesse can give it any perswasive energy. And this noble sen∣timent there are very few that are pos∣sest of. However to lend it what strength I can, I shall endeavour to re∣move some prejudices that hinder it's force and efficacy; And when those spots and scum are wiped away that mi∣stake and inadvertency have fastned on it, 'twill be illustrious by its own bright∣nesse.
CHAP. VII. This first Evasion, that God acts freely, and his meere will is reason enough for his doing, or forbearing any thing, overthrown by four Considerations. Some in∣cident Evasions, viz. that Gods wisdome, or his glory, may be contrary to this display of the divine goodnesse, in our being made of old, clearly taken off. (1) THerefore, will some say, God worketh freely, nor can he be oblig'd to act but when he pleaseth. And this will and pleasure of his is the rea∣son of our beings, and of the determi∣nate time of our beginning. Therefore if God would not that we should have been made sooner, and in a better state
of life, his will is reason enough and we need look no further. To this evasion, I thus Reply. (1) 'Tis true indeed, God is the most Free Agent, because none can compell him to act, none can hinder him from acting. Nor can his creatures oblige him to any thing. But then (2) The divine liberty and freedome consists not in his acting by meer arbitra∣rious will as disujnct from his other At∣tributes. For he is sayd to act according to the counsell of his own will. So that his wisdome and goodness are as it were the Rules whereby his will is directed. Therefore though he cannot be obliged to act by any thing without himself, yet he may by the Laws of his own essential rectitude and perfection. Wherefore I conceive he is said, not to be able to do those things (which he might well enough by absolute power) that consist not with his ever blessed Attributes. Nor by the same reason can he omit that which the eternal Law of his most perfect nature ob∣geth him to. The summe is, God never
Acts by meer will or groundlesse humour, that is a weaknesse in his imperfect crea∣tures; but according to the immutable Rules of his ever blessed essence. And therefore, (3) Tis a derogation from his infinite Majesty to assert any thing contrary to his Goodnesse upon pretence of his will and pleasure. For whatever is most sute∣able to this most blessed Attribute, and contradicts no other, that be sure he willeth. Wherefore (4) If it be better, and more agreeable to the divine goodnesse that we should have been in an happier state, before we came into these bodies, Gods will cannot then be pretended to the contrary, es∣pecially it having been proved already, that he hath no way revealed any such will of his) but rather it is demonstra∣tively clear that his will was, it should be so. Since as God never acts in the absence of his wisdome and goodnesse, so neither doth he abstain from acting when those great Attributes require it. Now if it be excepted again (2) That
'tis true that this Hypothesis is most suta∣ble to the divine goodnesse and the con∣sideration of that alone would inferre it. But how know we but his Wisdome con∣tradicts it. I return briefly, That if it be confest to be so correspondent to, and inferrible from one Attribute, and can∣not be prov'd inconsistent with another, my businesse is determin'd. Therefore let those that pretend an inconsistence, prove it. (2) The wisdome of God is that Attribute and essential perfection, whereby the divine actions are directed to their end, which is alwaies good, and best: Therefore to do that which is best cannot thwart the divine wisdome, but alwaies includes and supposeth it. Whence it follows, that what so com∣ports with goodnesse, cannot stand oppo∣site to Wisdome. Wisdome in God be∣ing indeed nothing else but goodnesse, contriving and directing for the crea∣ture's good and happinesse. For we must remember, what was said above, that what is infinitely full and perfect, can have no ends for any self-advantage; and
therefore the ends of the divine wisdome are somthing without himself, and conse∣quently the good and perfection of his creatures. So that unlesse it can be prov'd to have been contrary to ours, or any o∣ther creatures good, that we should have been extant as soon as the Light, it can∣not be concluded to have any contradic∣tion to the divine wisdome. But it will be said again (3) Gods glo∣ry is his great end, for the promoting of which his wisdome directs all his Acti∣ons; and consequently, that which may be best for the creature, may not be so conducive to the divine Glory, and there∣fore not agreeable with his wisdome. Now though I think the world hath a very mistaken apprehension of Gods glo∣ry, yet I shall not here ingage in more controversies, then I must needs. Tis e∣nough for my present purpose to inti∣mate; That Gods glory is no by-end or self-accumulation, nor an addition of a∣ny thing to Him which he was not eter∣nally possest of; nor yet is it any thing that stands in opposition to the good of
his creation: But the display and com∣munication of his excellencies; among the which, his goodnesse is not the least considerable, if it be not that most di∣vine and fundamental Attribute which gives perfection to all the rest. So that we may assure our selves, that when ever his goodness obligeth him to action, his glory never stands in opposition. For even this is his glory to communicate to his creatures sutably to his own absolute fulness, and to act according to the di∣rection of his essential perfections, yea, though we should state his glory to con∣sist alone, in the honour and renown of his Attributes, yet even then the Hypo∣thesis of our having been made in the be∣ginning will accumulate to his praises, and represent him to his creatures as more illustrious; since it is a more mag∣nificent apprehension of his goodnesse, and cleares his other Attributes from those stains of dis-repute that all other suppositions cast upon them. And though his glory should consist, as too many fondly imagine, in being praised and
red by his creatures, even on this account also it would have obliged him to have made us all of old, rather then opposed it; since, then, his excellencies had been sung forth by a more numerous Quire, in continual Hallelujahs. Now if it should be urged, that God made all things for himself, and therefore is not obliged to consult the good of his creatures in all his Actions. I rejoin, that God's making all things for himself, can argue no more then his making all things for his own ends, viz. the ends of goodnesse. Be∣sides, the best Criticks make that place to speak no more but this, That God or∣ders all things according to himself; that is, according to the rules of his own nature and perfections. Thus then we see that for God to do that which is best for his creatures, is nei∣ther contrary to his will and pleasure, his wisdome, nor his glory, but most con∣sonant to all of them. And therefore since the Praeexistence of Souls, is so a∣greeable to the divine goodnesse, and since nothing else in the Deity opposeth,
but rather sweetly conspires with it, me∣thinks this argument were enough to conclude it. But yet there are other Ev∣sions which would elude this Demonstra∣tion, I shall name the most considera∣ble and leave it to the judicious to de∣termine, whether they can disable it. CHAP. VIII. A second general evasion, viz that our Reasons cannot tel what God should do, or what is best, overthrown by several considerations. As is also a third, viz. that by the same Argument God would have been obliged to have made us impecca∣ble, and not liable to Misery. WHerefore the second general eva∣sion is, That our Reasons cannot conclude what God , there be∣ing
vast fetches in the divine wisdome which we comprehend not, nor can our natural light determine what is best. I answer (1) Our Saviour himself, who was the best Judge in the case, teacheth us, that the Reason of a man may in some things conclude what God will do in that saying of his, If ye being evill, know how to give good things to your Children, much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give his Spirit to them that ask him. Plainly intimating, that we may securely argue from any thing that is a perfection in our selves, to the same in God. And if we, who are imper∣fectly good, will yet do as much good as we can, for those we love and tender; with greater confidence may we con∣clude, that God who is infinitely so, will conferre upon his creatures whatever good they are capable of. Thus we see our Saviour ownes the capacity of reason in a case that is very near the same that we are dealing in. And God himself appeals to the rea∣sons of men to judge of the righteous∣nesse
and equity of his ways. Ye men of Israel and inhabitants of Jerusalem, judg between me and my vineyard, which place I bring to shew that meer natural reason is able to judge in some cases what is fit for God to do, and what is sutable to his essence and perfections. And if in any, Methinks (2) its capacity in the case before us should be own'd as soon as in any. For if reason cannot determine and assure us, that a blessed and happy Be∣ing is better then None at all; and con∣sequently, that it was best for our souls to have been, before they were in this state of wretchedness; and thence con∣clude, that it was very congruous to the divine goodness to have made us in a for∣mer and better condition; I think then (1) That it cannot give us the assurance of any thing, since there is not any prin∣ciple in metaphysicks or geometry more clear then this, viz.  an happy Be∣ing, is better than absolute Not-being. And if our reasons can securely deter∣mine this, 'tis as much as we need at present. Or if this be not certain, how
vain are those Learned men that dispute whether a state of the extremest misery a creature is capable of, and that ever∣lasting, be not better then Non-entity. (2) If we cannot certainly know that it had been Better that we should have ex∣sisted in a life of happiness, proportion'd to our natures of old, then have been meer nothing, till some few years since; we can never then own or acknowledg the divine goodness to us in any thing we injoy. For if it might have been as good for us not to Bee, as to Bee, and happily; Then it might have been as good for us to have wanted any thing else that we enjoy, as to have it: and consequently, we cannot own it as an effect of God's goodness that he hath be∣stowed any blessing on us. For if Be∣ing be not better, then Not-being, then 'tis no effect of goodnesse that we are; and if so, then 'tis not from goodnesse that we have any thing else, since all other things are inferiour to the good of Being. If it be said, It had been better indeed for us, to have lived in a former
and happier state; but, it may be, it had not been so for the universe; and the ge∣neral good is to be preferr'd before that of particulars. I say then, and it may serve for a (3) answer to the general objection. If we may deny that to be done by almigh∣ty goodness, which is undoubtedly best for a whole species of his creatures, meer∣ly on this account, that, for ought we know, it may be for the advantage of some others, though there be not the least appearance of any such matter; we can never then argue any thing from the divine goodness. It can never then be prov'd from that glorious Attribute, that he hath not made some of his creatures on purpose that they might be miserable; nor can it be concluded thence, that he will not annihilate all the pure and spot∣less angells; both which I suppose, any sober inquirer will think congruously de∣ducible from the divine goodness. And if to say, for ought we know, It may be best for some other creatures, that those should be miserable, and these annihila∣ted,
be enough to disable the Argument; on the same account we shall never be able to prove ought from this, or any o∣ther Attribute. I might adde, (2) There is not the least coloura∣ble pretence for any such suspicion. For, would the world have been too little to have contain'd those souls, without just∣ling with some others? or, would they by violence have taken any of the pri∣viledges of the other intellectual crea∣tures from them? If so, how comes it about that at last they can all so wel con∣sist together? And, could other creatures have been more disadvantag'd by them, when they were pure and innocent, then they will at last, when they are so many of them debauched and depraved? (3) If this be enough to answer an Argument, to say, for ought we know, it may be thus and thus, when there is not the least sign or appearance of any such thing, then nothing can ever be pro∣ved, and we are condemned to ever∣lasting Scepticism. We should never for instance, from the order, beauty, and
wise contrivance of the things that do ap∣pear, prove there is a God, if it were sufficient to answer, That things are in∣deed so made in this earth, on which we are extant; but, it may be, they are framed very odly, ridiculously, and ineptly in some other worlds, which we know no∣thing of. If this be answering, any thing might be answered. But there is yet ano∣ther objection against mine Argument from the divine goodnesse which looks ve∣ry formidably at a distance, though when we come near it, we shall find, it will not bear the tryall. And it may thus be urged. (3) If the goodnesse of God always ob∣ligeth him to do what is best, and best for his Creatures, How is it then, that we were not made impeccable, and so not obnoxious to misery? Or how doth it consist with that overflowing goodness of the Deity, that we were let to lye in a long state of silence and insensibility, be∣fore we came into these bodies? This seems a pressing difficulty, but yet there's hopes we may dispatch it. Therefore,
(1) Had we been made impeccable, we should have been another kind of creatures then now; since we had then wanted the  or liberty of will to good and evill, which is one of our essen∣tial Attributes. Consequently, there would have been one species of beings wanting to compleat the universe; and it would have been a slurre to the divine goodnesse not to have given being to such creatures as in the id were fairly pos∣sible; and contradicted no other Attri∣bute. Yea, though he foresaw that some would sin, and make themselves misera∣ble, yet the foreseen lapse and misery of those, was not an evill great enough to over-ballance the good the species would reap by being partakers of the divine goodnesse in the land of the living; There∣fore however, 'twas goodnesse to give such creatures being. But it will be ur∣ged upon us, If Liberty to good and evil be so essential to our natures, what think we then of the blessed souls after the re∣surrection; are not they the same crea∣tures, though vvithout the liberty of sin∣ning?
To return to this; I think those that affirm, that, the blessed have not this natural liberty as long as they are united to a body, and are capable of resenting it's pleasures, should do well to prove it. Indeed they may be morally immutable and illapsable: but this is grace, not na∣ture; a reward of obedience, not a ne∣cessary annex of our Beings. But will it be said, why did not the divine good∣nesse endue us all with this morall stabi∣lity? Had it not been better for us to have been made in this condition of se∣curity, then in a state so dangerous? My return to this doubt will be a second An∣swer to the main objection. Therefore Secondly, I doubt not, but that 'tis much better for rational crea∣tures, that this supream happiness should be the Reward of vertue, rather then  upon our natures. For, the pro∣curement of that which we might have mist of, is far more sensibly gratifying, then any necessary and unacquired injoy∣ment; we find a greater pleasure in what we gain by industry, art, or vertue, then
in the things we were born to. And had we been made secure from sin, and mi∣sery from the first moment of our Being, we should not have put so high a rate and value upon that priviledge. (3) Had we been at first establisht in an impossibility of lapsing into evill; Then many choise vertu's, excellent branches of the divine Life had never been exercis'd, or indeed have been at all. Such are Patience, Faith, and Hope; the objects of which are, evill, futurity, and uncertainly. Yea, (4) Had we been so fixt in an inamis∣sible happinesse from the beginning, there had then been no vertue in the world; nor any of that matchlesse pleasure which attends the exercise thereof. For ver∣tue is a kind of victory, and supposeth a conflict. Therefore we say, that God is good and holy, but not vertuous. Take away a possibility of evill, and in the creature there is no morall goodnesse. And then no reward, no pleasure, no hap∣pinesse.
Therefore in summe (5ly), The di∣vine goodnesse is manifested in making all creatures sutably to those Idas of their natures, which he hath in his All-com∣prehensive Wisdome. And their good and happinesse consists in acting according to those natures, and in being furnisht with all things necessary for such acti∣ons. Now the divine Wisdome is no ar∣hitrary thing, that can change, or alter those setled immutable idaea's of things that are there represented. It lopps not off essential Attributes of some beings, to inoculate them upon others: But, di∣stinctly comprehending all things, assigns each Being it's proper nature, and qua∣lities. And the Divine goodnesse, accor∣ding to the wise direction of the eternal intellect, in like distinct and orderly man∣ner produceth all things: viz. according to all the variety of their respective idea∣as in the divine wisdome. Wherefore as the goodness of God obligeth him not to make every planet a  star, or e∣very star, a sun; So neither doth it ob∣lige him to make every degree of life,
a rational soul, or every soul, an impec∣cable Angell. For this were to tye him to contradictions. Since therefore, such an order of Beings, as rational and hap∣py, though free, and therefore mutable, creatures, were distinctly comprehen∣ded in the divine Wisdome; It was an effect of God's Goodness, to bring them into being, even in such a condition, and in such manner, as in their eternal idae∣as they were represented. Thus then we see, it is not contrary to the infinite plenitude of the divine goodness that we should have been made peccable and lyable to defection. And be∣ing thus in our very essential constituti∣ons lapsable; 'twas no defect in the goodnesse of our Maker that he did not interpose by his absolute omnipotence to prevent our actual praevarication and A∣postacy. Since his goodnesse obligeth him not to secure us upon any terms what∣ever, but upon such, as may most pro∣mote the general good & advantage. And questionless, 'twas much better that such, as would wilfully depart from the laws
of their blessed natures, and break through all restraints of the divine commands, should feel the smart of their disobedi∣ence; then that providence should dis∣order the constitution of nature to pre∣vent the punishment, which they drew upon themselves: Since those apostate spirits, remain instances to those that stand, of the divine justice, and se∣verity against sinners, and so may con∣tribute not a little to their Security. And for that long night of silence, in which multitudes of souls are buried before they descend into terrestrial matter, it is but the due reward of their former disobe∣dience; for which, considering the happy circumstances in which they were made, they deserv'd to be nothing for ever. And their re-instating in a condition of life & self-injoyment after so highly culpable delinguencies, is a great instance of the over-flowing fulnesse of the divine com∣passion and benignity. Thus then we see, That Gods making us lapsable and permitting us to fall, is no prejudice in the least to the infinite
faecundity of his goodness, and his ma∣king all things best. So that mine Argu∣ment for Praeexistence bottomn'd on this Foundation, stands yet firm and im∣moveable, notwithstanding the rude as∣sault of this objection. From which I pass to a fourth. CHAP. IX. A (4th) Objection against the Argument from God's goodness viz. That it will conclude as well that the World is infinite and eternal, Answered. The conclu∣sion of the second Argument for Praeexistence. THerefore fourthly, it will be ex∣cepted, If we may argue from the divine goodness, which always doth what is best, for the Praeexistence of
Souls; then we may as reasonably thence conclude, that the world is both infinite and eternal, since an infinite communi∣cation of goodnesse is better then a Fi∣nite. To this, because I doubt I have distrest the Readers patience already, I answer briefly. (1) Every one that believes the infi∣niteness of Gods goodness is as much ob∣liged to answer this objection, as I am. For it will be said, infinite goodness doth good infinitely, and consequently the effects to which it doth communicate are infinite. For if they are not so, it might have communicated to more, and thereby have done more good then now 'tis sup∣posed to do, and by consequence now is not infinite. And to affirm that good∣nesse is infinite, where what it doth and intends to do is but finite, will be said to be a contradiction, since goodness is a relative term, and in God always res∣pects somewhat ad extra. For he can∣not be said to be good to himself, he be∣ing a nature that can receive no additio∣nal perfection. Wherefore this Objec∣tion
makes no more against mine Ar∣gument, then it doth against the infi∣nity of the divine goodness, and there∣fore I am no more concern'd in it then others. Yea (2ly.) the Scripture affirms that which is the very strength of mine Argument, viz. That God made all things best; Very Good, saith our Tran∣slation: but the Original, ; and  is a particle of the Superlative. And therefore every one that owns it's sacred Authority is interested against this objection. For it urgeth, it had been far more splendid, glorious, and magnifi∣cent for God to have made the universe commensurate to his own immensity; and to have produced effects of his power and greatness, where ever he himself is, viz. in infinite space and duration, then to have confined his omnipotence to work only in one little spot of an infinite  capacity, and to begin to act but 'tother day. Thus then the late creati∣on, and finiteness, of the world, seem to conflict with the undoubted oracle of truth as well as with mine Argument,
ment, and therefore the objection drawn thence is of no validity. (3) Those that have most strenuously defended the or∣thodox doctrine against the old opinion of the eternity and infinity of the world, have asserted it to be impossible in the nature of the thing. And sure the Divine benig∣nity obligeth him not to do contradicti∣ons; or such things, as in the very noti∣on of them, are impossible. But in the case of Praeexistence, no such thing can be reasonably pretended, as above hath been declared; and therefore there is no escaping by this Evasion neither. Nor can there any thing else be urged to this purpose, but what whoever believes the infinity of the divine bounty will be con∣cern'd to answer; And therefore 'twill make no more against me, then against a truth on all hands confessed. Let me only adde this, That 'tis more becom∣ming us, to inlarge our apprehensions of things so, as that they may suit the Di∣vine Beneficence, then to draw it down to a complyance with our narrow schemes, and narrow modells.
Thus then I have done with the Ar∣gument for Praeexistence drawn from the Divine goodnesse. And I have been the longer on it, because I thought 'twas in vain to propose it, without taking to task the principal of those objections, that must needs arise in the minds of those that are not used to this way of arguing. And while there was no provision made to stop up those Evasions, that I saw this Argument obnoxious to; the using of it, I was afraid, would have been a pre∣judice, rather then a furtherance of the cause I ingaged it in. And therefore I hope the ingenious will pardon this so ne∣cessary piece of tediousnesse.
CHAP. X. A third Argument for Praeexistence, from the great variety of mens spe∣culative inclinations; and also the diversity of our Genius's, copi∣ously urged. If these Arguments make Praeexistence but probable, 'tis enough to gain it the victory. BUt now I proceed to another Argu∣ment. Therefore, Thirdly, If we do but reflect upon what was said above, against the souls daily Creation, from that enormous pravity which is so deeply rooted in some mens natures, we may thence have a considerable evidence of Praeexistence. For as this strong natu∣ral propensity to vice and impiety can∣not possibly consist with the Hypothesis of the souls comming just out of Gods hands pure and immaculate; so doth it most
aptly suit with the doctrine of its praeex∣istence: which gives a most clear and ap∣posite account of the phaenomenon. For let us but conceive the souls of men to have grown degenerate in a former condition of life, to have contracted strong and inveterate habits to vice and Iewdnesse, and that in various manners and degrees; we may then easily apprehend, when some mens natures had so incredibly a depraved tincture, and such impetuous, ungovernable, irreclaimiable inclinations to what is vitious; while others have no∣thing near such wretched propensions, but by good education and good disci∣pline are mouldable to vertue. This shews a clear way to unriddle this ama∣zing mystery, without lemishing any of the divine Attributes, or doing the least violence to our faculties. Nor is it more difficult to conceive, how a soul should awaken out of the state of inactivity we speak of, with those radi∣cal inclinations that by long practice it had contracted, then how a Swallow should return to her old trade of living
after her winter sleep and silence; for those customs it hath been addicted to in the other state, are now so deeply fastned and rooted in the soul, that they are be∣come even another nature. Now then, if Praeexistence be not the truth, 'tis very strange that it should so exactly answer the Phaenomena of our na∣tures, when as no other Hypothesis doth any whit tolerably suit them. And if we may conclude that false, which is so correspondent to all appearances, when we know nothing else that can yield any probable account of them, and which is not in the least repugnant to any in∣ducement of belief, we then strangely forget our selves when we determine a∣ny thing. We can never for instance, con∣clude the Moon to be the cause of the flux and reflux of the Sea, from the an∣swering of her approaches and recesses to its ebbs and swellings. Nor at this rate can the cause of any thing else be de∣termin'd in nature. But yet besides. (2) we might another way inforce this Argument, from the
strange difference and diversity that there is in mens wits and intellectual craseis, as well as in the dispositions of their wills and appetites. Even the natural tempers of mens minds are as vastly different, as the qualities of their bodys. And 'tis ea∣sy to observe in things purely speculative and intellectual, even where neither edu∣cation or custom have interposed to sophi∣sticate the natural  that some men are strangely propense to some opinions, which they greedily drink in, as soon as they are duly represented; yea and find themselves burthened and opprest, while their education hath kept them in a contrary belief: when as others are as fatally set against these opinions, and can never be brought favourably to resent them. Every soul brings a kind of sense with it into the world, whereby it tastes and relisheth what is suitable to its peculiar temper. And notions will never lye easi∣ly in a mind, that they are not fitted to; some can never apprehend that for other then an Absurdity, which others are so
clear in, that they almost take it for a First principle. And yet the former hath all the same evidence as the latter. This I have remarkably taken notice of, in the opinion of the extension of a spirit. Some that I know, and those inquisive, free and ingenuous, by all the proof and evidence that is, cannot be reconciled to it. Nor can they conceive any thing extended but as a Body. Whereas other deep and impartial searchers into nature, cannot apprehend it anything at all, if not extended; but think it must then be a ma∣thematical point, or a meer non-entity. I could instance in other speculations, which I have observ'd some to be passi∣onate Embracers of upon the first propo∣sal; when as no arguments could pre∣vail on others, to think them tolerable. But there needs no proof of a manifest observation. Therefore before I goe further, I would demand, whence comes this meer notional or speculative variety: were this difference about sensibles, yea or a∣bout things depending on the imaginati∣on,
the influence of the body might then be suspected for a cause. But since it is in the most abstracted Theories that have nothing to do with the grosser phan∣tasmes; since this diversity is found in minds that have the greatest care to free themselves from the deceptions of sense, and intanglements of the body, what can we conclude, but that the soul it self is the immediate subject of all this variety, and that it came praejudiced and prepos∣sest into this body with some implicit no∣tions that it had learnt in another? And if this congruity to some opinions, and a∣versenee to others be congenial to us, and not advenient from any thing in this state, 'tis me thinks clear that we were in a former. For the soul in its first and pure nature hath no idiosynerasies, that is, hath no proper natural inclinations which are not competent to others of the same kind and condition. Be sure, they are not fatally determin'd by their natures to false and erroneous apprehensions. And therefore since we find this determinati∣on to one or other falshood in many, if
not most in this state, and since 'tis very unlikely it is derived only from the body, custom, or education, what can we con∣ceive on't, but that our souls were tainted with these peculiar and wrong corruptions before we were extant upon this stage of Earth. Besides, 'tis easie to observe the strange and wonderful variety of our geniusses; one mans nature inclining him to one kind of study and imployment, anothers to what is very different. Some almost from their very cradles will be addicted to the making of figures, And in little mechanical contrivances; others love to be riming, almost as soon as they can speak plainly, and are taken up in smal essays of Poetry. Some will be scrawling pictures, and others take as great delight in some pretty offers at Musick and vocal harmony. Infinite almost are the ways in which this pure natural diversity doth discover it selfe. Now to say that all this variety proceeds primarily from the meer temper of our bodys, is me thinks a very poor and unsatisfying Account. For
those that are the most like in the temper∣ayr, complexion of their bodys, are yet of a vastly differing Genius. Yea they that havebeen made of the same clay, cast in the same mould, and have layn at once in the same natural bed, the womb; yea whose bodies have been as like as their state and fortunes, and their education & usages the same, yet even they do not unfrequently differ as much from each o∣ther in their genius and dispositions of the mind, as those that in all these par∣ticulars are of very different condition. Besides there are all kind of makes, forms, dispositions, tempers, and complexions of body, that are addicted by their na∣tures to the same exercises and imploy∣ments: so that to ascribe this to any pe∣culiarity in the Body, is me seems a very improbable solution of the Phaenomenon. And to say all these inclinations are from custom or education, is the way not to be believed, since all experience testifies the contrary. What then can we conjecture is the cause of all this diversity, but that we
had taken a great delight and pleasure in some things like and analogous unto'these, in a former condition? which now a∣gain begins to put forth it selfe, when we are awakened out of our silent recess into a state of action. And though the imployments, pleasures and exercises of our former life, were without question very different from these in the present estate; yet 'tis no doubt, but that some of them were more confamiliar and a∣nalogous to some of our transactions, than others, so that as any exercise or im∣ployment here is more suitable to the particular dispositions that were praedo∣minant in the other state, with the more peculiar kindnesse is it regarded by us, and the more greedily do our inclinati∣ons now fasten on it. Thus if a Musitian should be interdicted the use of all mu∣sical instruments, and yet might have his choice of any other Art or profession, 'tis likely he would betake himselfe to Limning or Poetry; these exercises re∣quiring the same disposition of wit and genius, as his beloved Musick did. And
we in like manner, being by the fate of our wretched descent hindred from the direct exercising our selves about the objects of our former delights and plea∣sures, do yet assoon as we are able, take to those things which do most corre∣spond to that genius that formerly in∣spired us. And now 'tis time to take leave of the Arguments from Reason that give evi∣dence for Praeexistence. If any one think that they are not so Demonstrative, but that they may be answered, or at least evaded; I pray him to consider how many demonstrations he ever met with, that a good wit, resolv'd in a contrary cause, could not shuffle from the edge of. Or, let it be granted, that the Argu∣ments I have alledged are no infallible or necessary proofs; yet if they render my cause but probable, yea but possible, I have won what I contended for. For it having been made manifest by as good evidence as I think can be brought for any thing, that the way of new cre∣ations is most inconsistent with the honor
of the blessed Attributes of God: And that the other of Traduction is most im∣possible and contradictious in the nature of things: There being now no other way left but Praeexstence, if that be pro∣bable or but barely possible, 'tis enough to give it the victory. And whether all that hath been said prove so much or no, I leave to the indifferent to determine. I think he that will say it doth not, can bring few proofs for any thing, which according to his way of judging will de∣serve to be called Demonstrations.
CHAP. XI. Great caution to be used in alledging scripture for our speculative opini∣ons. The countenance that Praeex∣istence hath from the sacred writings both of the old and new Testament; Reasons of the seeming uncouthnesse of these allegations. Praeexistence stood in no need of Scripture-proof. IT will be next expected, that I should now prove the Doctrine I have un∣dertaken for, by Scripture evidence, and make good what I said above, That the divine oracles are not so silent in this matter as is imagined. But truly I have so tender a sense of the sacred Authority of that Holy volume, that I dare not be so bold with it, as to force it to speak what I think it intends not; A praesump∣tion, that is too common among our confident opinionists, and that hath oc∣sion'd great troubles to the Church, and
disrepute to the inspired writings. For, for men to ascribe the odd notions of their over-heated imaginations to the spirit of God, and eternal truth, is me thinks a ve∣ry bold and impudent belying it. Where∣fore I dare not but be very cautious what I speak in this matter, nor would I wil∣lingly urge Scripture as a proof of any thing, but what I am sure by the whole tenor of it, is therein contained: And would I take the liberty to fetch in eve∣ry thing for a Scripture-evidence, that with a little industry a man might make serviceable to his design: I doubt not but I should be able to fill my Margent with Quotations, which should be as much to purpose as have been cited in ge∣neral CATECHISMS and CON∣FESSIONS of FAITH, and that in points that must forsooth be dignified with the sacred title of FUNDAMENTAL. But Reverend ASSEMBLIES may make more bold with Scripture then private persons; And therefore I confesse I'me so timerous that I durst not follow their example: Though in a mat∣ter
that I would never have imposed up∣on the belief of any man, though I were certain on't, and had absolute power to injoyn it. I think the onely way to pre∣serve the reverence due to the oracles of Truth, is never to urge their Authority but in things very momentous, and such as the whole current of them gives an e∣vident suffrage to. But to make them speak every trivial conceit that our sick brains can imagine or dream of, (as I intimated) is to vilisie and deflowre them. Therefore though I think that several Texts of Scripture look very fairly upon Praeexistence, and would encourage a man that considers what strong Reasons it hath to back it, to think, that very probably they mean some thing in savour of this Hypothesis; yet He not urge them as an irrefutable proof, being not willing to lay more stresse upon any thing then 'twil bear. Yea I am most willing to confesse the weaknesse of my Cause in what joint soever I shall disco∣ver it. And yet I must needs say, that who ever compares the Texts that fol∣low,
with some particulars mention'd in the answer to the objection of Scripture∣silence, will not chuse but acknowledge that there is very fair probability for Praeexistence in the written word of God, as there is in that which is engraven upon our rational natures. Therefore to bring together here what Scripture saith in this matter, 1. e lightly touch an expression or two of the old Testament, which not improperly may be applyed to the busi∣nesse we are in search of. And me thinks God himselfe in his posing the great in∣stance of patience, Job, seems to intimate somewhat to this purpose, viz. that all spirits were in being when the Founda∣tions of the earth were laid: when saith he, the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy. By the former very likely were meant the Angels, and 'tis not improbable but by the latter may be intended the blessed untainted souls. At least the particle All me thinks should comprize this order of spirits also. And within the same period
of discourse, having question'd Job a∣bout the nature and place of the Light, he Adds, I know that thou wast then born, for the number of thy days are many, as the Septuagint render it. And we know our Saviour and his Apostles have given credit to that Translation by their so con∣stant following it. Nor doth that saying of God to Jeremias in the beginnning of his charge seem to intimate lesse, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou camest out of the womb, I gave thee wisdome; as reads a very creditable version. Now though each of these pla∣ces might be drawn to another sense, yet that onely argues that they are no neces∣sary proof for Praeexistence, which I rea∣dily acknowledge; nor do I intend any such matter by alledging them. Howe∣ver I hope they will be confest to be ap∣plicable to this sense; and if there be o∣ther grounds that perswade this Hypothe∣sis to be the truth, 'tis I think very pro∣bable that these Texts intend it favour. which whether it be so or no, we have seen already.
2. For the Texts of the New Testa∣ment that seem to look pleasingly upon Praeexistence, I shall as briefly hint them as I did the former. And me thinks that passage of our Saviours prayer, Father, Glorifie me with the same glory I had with thee before the world began, sounds somewhat to this purpose. The glory which he prays to be re∣stored to, seems to concern his humane nature onely; for the divine could never lose it. And therefore it supposeth that he was in his humanity existent before: And that his soul was of old before his appearance in a Terrestial body. Which seems also to be intimated by the expres∣sions of his comming from the Father, descending from Heaven, and returning thither again, which he very frequently makes use of. And we know the Divinity that fils all things, cannot move to, or quit a place, it being a manifest imper∣fection, and contray to his Immensity. I might add those other expres∣sions of our Saviour's taking upon him the forme of a servant, of rich for our
sakes becomming poor, and many others of like import, all which are very clear if we admit the doctrine of Praeexistence, but without it somewhat perplex and in∣tricate: since these things, applyed to him as God, are very improper and disa∣greeing, but appositely suit his Humanity, to which if we refer them, we must suppose our Hypothesis of Praeexistence. But I omit further prosecution of this matter, since these places have bin more diffusely urged in a late discourse to this purpose. Moreover the Question of the Disci∣ples, Was it for this mans sin, or for his Fathers that he was born blind? and that answer of theirs to our Saviours demand, whom men said he was; in that some said he was John the Baptist, some Elias, or one of the Prophets; both which I have mention'd before; doe clearly enough argue, that both the Di∣sciples and the Jews believed Praeexist∣ence. And our Saviour saith not a word to disprove their opinion. But I spake of this above.
Now how ever uncouth these allegati∣ons may seem to those that never heard these Scriptures thus interpreted; yet I am confident, had the opinion of Praeex∣istence been a received Doctrine, and had these Texts been wont to be applyed to the proof on't, they would then have been thought to assert it, with clear and convictive evidence. But many having ne∣ver heard of this Hypothesis, and those that have, seldome meeting it men∣tioned but as a silly dream o antiquated absurdity, 'tis no wonder that they never suspect it to be lodg'd in the Sacred vo∣lumne, so that any attempt to confirm it thence, must needs seem rather an offer of wit then serious judgement. And the places that are cited to that purpose ha∣ving been freequently read and heard of, by those that never discerned them to breath the least air of any such matter as Praexistence, their new and unexpected application to a thing so litle thought of, must needs seem a wild fetch of an extravagant imagination. But however unconclusive the Texts alledged may
seem to those a strong prejudice hath shut up against the Hypothesis; The learn∣ed Jews, who where persuaded of this Doctrine, thought it clearly enough con∣tain'd in the Old Volume of holy writ, and tooke the citations, named above, for current Evidence. And though I can∣not Warrant for their Judgement in things, yet doubtlesse they were the best judges of their own Language. Nor would our School-Doctors have thought it so much a stranger to the New, had it had the luck to have been one of their opinions, or did they not too frequently apply the sacred Oracles to their own fore-conceived notions. But whether what I have brought from Scripture prove any thing or nothing, 'tis not very materiall, since the Hypothesis of Praeexistence stands secure enough up∣on those Pillars of Reason, which have their Foundation in the Attributes of God, and the Phaenomena of the world. And the Right Reason of a Man, is one of the Divine volums, in which are writ∣ten the indeleble Ideas of eternal Truth:
so that what it dictates, is as much the voice of God, as if in so many words it were clearly exprest in the written Reve∣lations. It is enough therefore for my purpose, if there be nothing in the sacred writings contrary to this Hypothesis; which I think is made clear enough al∣ready; And though it be granted that Scripture is absolutely silent as to any assertion of Praeexistence, yet we have made it appear that its having said no∣thing of it, is no prejudice, but an advan∣tage to the cause. CHAP. XII. Why the Author thinks himself obliged to descend to some more particular Ac∣count of Praeexistence. 'Tis presump∣tion positively to determine how it was with us of old. The Authors de∣signe in the Hypothesis that follows. NOw because inability to appre∣hend the manner of a Thing is a great prejudice against the belief on't;
I find my selfe obliged to go a little further then the bare proof, and defence of Praeexistence. For though what I have said, may possibly induce some to think favourably of our conclusion, That The souls of men were made before they came into these bodys; yet whil they shal think that nothing can be conceived of that for∣mer state, And that our Praeexistent con∣dition cannot be represented to Humane understanding, but as a dark black soli∣tude: it must needs weaken the per∣swasion of those that are lesse confirm∣ed, and fill the minds of the inquisitive with a dubious trouble and Anxiety. For searching and contemplative Heads can∣not be satisfyed to be told, That our souls have lived and acted in a former condition, except they can be helpt to some more particular apprehension of that stare; How we lived and acted of old, and how probably we fell from that better life, into this Region of mi∣sery and imperfection. Now though indeed my charity would prompt me to do what I can for the re∣lief
and ease of auy modest inquirer; yet shall I not attempt to satisfie punctual and eager curiosity in things hidden and unsearchable. Much lesse shall I posi∣tively determine any thing in matters so Lubricous and uncertain. And indeed considering how imperfect our now state is, how miserable shallow our under∣standings are, and how little we know of our present selves, and the things a∣bout us, it may seem a desperate under∣taking to attempt any thing in this mat∣ter. Yea, when we contemplate the vast circuits of the Divine wisdome, and think how much the thoughts and actions of Aeternity and omniscience are beyond ours, who are but of Yesterday, and know nothing, it must needs discourage Con∣fidence it selfe from determining, how the Oeconomy of the world of life was or∣der'd, in the day the Heavens and Earth were framed. There are doubtless in∣finite ways and methods according to which the unsearchable wisdome of our Maker could have disposed of us, which we can have no conceit of; And we are
little more capable of unerringly resol∣ving our selves now, how it was with us of old, then a child in the womb is to determine, what kind of life it shall live when it is set at liberty from that dark inclosure. Therefore let shame and blush∣ing cover his face that shall confidently affirm that 'twas thus or thus with us in the state of our Fore-Beings. However, to shew that it may have been that our Souls did Praeexist, though we cannot punctually and certainly con∣clude upon the Particular State, I shall presume to draw up a conceivable Scheame of the Hypothesis; And if our narrow minds can think of a way how it might have been, I hope no body will deny that the divine wisdom could have contriv'd it so, or infinitely better than we can imagine in our little modells. And now I would not have it thought that I goe about to insinuate or represent any opinions of mine own, or that I am a votary to all the notions I make use of, whether of the Antient, or more modern Philosophers. For I seriously professe a∣gainst
all determinations in this kind. But my business onely is, by some imperfect hints and guesses to help to apprehend a little how the state of Praeexistence might have been, and so to let in some beams of antient and modern light upon this immense darknesse. Therefore let the Reader if he please call it a Romantick scheam, or imaginary Hypothesis, or what name else best fits his phancy, and he'l not offend me; Nor do I hold my selfe concern'd at all to vindicate the truth of any thing here that is the fruit of mine own invention or composure; Though I confesse I could beg civilityes at least for the notions I have borrowed from great and worthy Sages. And in∣deed the Hypothesis as to the main, is de∣rived to us from the platonis: though in their writings 'tis but Gold in Oar, less pure and perfect: But a late great Artist hath excellently refined it. And I have not much work to do, but to bring to∣gether what he up and down hath scat∣tered, and by a method-order, and some connexions and notions of mine own, to
work it into an intire and uniforme mass. Now because the Frame of the parti∣cular Hypothesis is originally Philosophi∣call, I shall therefore not deprave it by mingling with it the opinions of mo∣dern Theologers, or distort any thing to make it accommodate to their dogmata, but solely and sincerely follow the light of Reason and Philosophy. For I intend not to endeavour the late alteration of the ordinary systeme of Divinity, nor designe any thing in this place but a re∣presentation of some harmlesse philoso∣phical conjectures: In which I shall con∣tinually guide my selfe by the Attri∣butes of God, the Phaenomena of the world, and the best discoveryes of the nature of the Soul.
CHAP. XIII. [7] Pillars on which the particular Hypothesis stands. NOw the Fabrick we are going to build, will stand like as the House of wisdom upon seven Pillars; which I shall first crect and establish, that the Hypothesis may be firm and sure like a House that hath Foundations. There∣fore the first Fundamental Principle I shall lay, is [1] All the Divine designes and Actions are laid and carried on by pure and Infinite Goodness. And methinks this should be owned by all for a manifest and indisputable Truth; But some odd opinions in the world are an interest against it, and there∣fore I must be fain to prove it. Briefly then, Every rational being Acts towards scme end or other; That end where the
Agent Acts regularly and wisely, is either some self-Good or accomplishment, or 'tis the good and perfection of some thing else, at least in the intention. Now God being an absolute and immense ful∣nesse, that is incapable of any the least shaddow of new perfection, cannot act for any good that may accrue to his immuta∣ble selfe; and consequently, what ever he acts, is for the good of some other being: so that all the divine actions are the communications of his perfections, and the Issues of his Goodnesse; which, be∣ing without the base alloy of self-interest, or partial fondnesse, and not comprised within any bounds or limits, as his other perfections are not, but far beyond our narrow conception, we may well call it pure and Insinite benignity. This is the original and Root of all things, so that this blessed ever blessed Attribute being the Spring and Fountain of all the Acti∣ons of the Deity, his designes can be no other but the contrivances of Love for the compassing the good and perfecti∣on of the universe. Therefore to sup∣pose
God to act or designe any thing that is not for the good or his creatures, is either to phancy him to act for no end at all, or for an end that is contra∣ry to his benigne Nature. Finally there∣fore, the very notion of Infinite fulness is to be communicating and overflowing; And the most congruous apprehension that we can entertain of the Infinite and eternal Deity, is to conceive him as an immense and all glorious Sun, that is continually communicating and sending abroad its beams and brightnesse; which conception of our Maker, if 'twere deep∣ly imprinted on us, would I am confi∣dent set our apprehensions right in many Theoryes, and chase away those black and dismal notions which too many have gi∣ven harbour to. But I come to erect the second Pillar. [2] Then, There is an exact Geometrical justice that runs through the universe, and is interwoven in the contexture of things. THis is a result of that wise and Al∣mighty Goodness that praesides
over all things. For this Justice is but the distributing to every thing accord∣ing to the requirements of its nature. And that benign wisdom that contrived and framed the natures of all beings, doubtlesse so provided that they should be suitably furnisht with all things pro∣per for their respective conditions. And that this Nemesis should be twist∣ed into the very natural coustitutions of things themselves, is methinks very rea∣sonable; since questionlesse, Almighty wisdom could so perfectly have formed his works at first, as that all things that he saw were regular, just, and for the good of the universe, should have been brought about by those stated Laws, which we call nature; without an ordi∣nary engagement of absolute power to ef∣fect them. And it seems to me to be ve∣ry becomming the wise Authour of all things so to have made them in the be∣ginning, as that by their own internal spring and wheels, they should orderly bring about what ever he intended them for, without his often immediaie inter∣posal.
For this looks like a more magni∣ficient apprehension of the Divine power and Praeexistence, since it supposeth him from everlasting ages to have foreseen all future occurrences, & so wonderfully to have seen and constituted the great ma∣china of the world that the infinite va∣riety of motions therein, should effect nothing but what in his eternal wisdom he had concluded fit and decorous: But as for that which was so, it should as cer∣tainly be compast by the Laws he ap∣pointed long ago, as if his omnipotence were at work every moment. On the con∣trary to engage gods absolute and extra∣ordinary power, in all events and occur∣rences of things, is me seems to think meanly of his wisdome; As if he had made the world so, as that it should need omnipotence every now & then to mend it, or to bring about those his destinati∣ons, which by a shorter way he could have effected, by his instrument, Nature. Can any one say that our supposition de∣rogates from the Divine concourse or Providence? For on these, depend con∣tinually
both the being and operations of all things, since without them they would cease to act, and return to their old nothing. And doubtlesse God hath not given the ordering of things out of his own hands; but holds the power to alter, innovate, or change the course of nature as he pleaseth. And to act by ex∣traordinary, by absolute omnipotence, when he thinks fit to do so. The summe of what I intend, is, that Gods works are perfect; and as his good∣ness is discover'd in them, so is his Justice wrought into their very essential consti∣tutions: so that we need not suppose him to be immediately engaged in every event and all distributions of things in the world, or upon all occasions to exercise his power in extraordinary actions, but that he leaves such managements to the Oeconomy of second causes. And now next to this, (for they are of kin) I raise The third Pillar.
[3] Things are carried to their pro∣per place and state, by the congruity of their natures; where this fails, we may suppose some arbitrary manage∣ments. THe Congruity of things is their suit∣ablenesse to such or such a state or condition; And 'tis a great Law in the Divine and first constitutions, that things should incline and move to what is suita∣ble to their natures. This in sensibles is evident in the motions of consent and sympathy. And the ascent of light, and de∣scent of heavy bodies, must I doubt when all is done, be resolv'd into a principle that is not meerly corporeal. Yea suppo∣sing all such things to be done by the Laws os Mechanicks, why may we not conceive, that the other rank of beings, spirits, which are not subject to corpo∣real motions, are also dispos'd of by a Law proper to their natures, which since we have no other name to express it by, we may call congruity. We read in the sacred History that Judas went to his
place; And 'tis very probable that spirits are convey'd to their proper   , as   the  , or a  descends. The place∣ifts would have the Soul of the world  be the great Informent of all such  , as also of the phenomina, that e beyond the powers of asser, And 'tis no unlikely : But I have  need to ingage further about this  not yet to speak more of this first part of my Principle, since i so nearly depends on what was said in be behalf of the former maxi. Yet of the  we need a would or two. When therefore we cann give Ac∣coun of things either by the  of  or concenable , (as likely some things relating to the States of Spirits, and immaterial beings can be resolv'd by neither) I say then, we may have recourse to the Arbitrary managements of those invisible Ministers of Equity and Justice, which without doubt the world is plentifully stored with. For it cannot be conceived that
those active spirits are idle or unimploy'd in the momentous concerns of the univers Yea the sacred volumne gives evidence o their interposals in our affairs. I shall need mention but that remarkable in∣stance in Daiel, of the indeavours of the Prince of Persia, and of Grecia, to hinder Michael, and the other Angel, that were ingaged for the affairs of Fles; Or if a∣ny would evade this, what think they o all the apparitions of Angels in the ol Testament, of their Pitching their Tents about us, and being Ministring Spirits for our good. To name no more such passa∣ges; Now if those noble Spirits will in∣gage themselves in our trifling concern∣ments, doubtlesse they are very sedulous in those affairs that tend to the good and perfection of the Universe. But to be brief; Iadvance.
The Fourth Pillar. (4) The Souls of men are capable of living in other bodies besides Terarestial; And never Act but in some body or other. FOr  when I consider how deeply  this state we are immersed in the body,  can ne thinks searce imagine, that pre∣sently upon the quitting one, we shall e stript of all corporetry, for this would e such a jump as is seldome or never made in nature; since by almost all i∣ances that come under our observation his manifest, that she seth to act by due nd orderly gradations, and takes no pre∣cipition leaps from one extream to ano∣ther. Tis very probable therefore, that  our immediately next state we shall ave another vehicle. And then, 2.  that our Souls are immediately  to  more  and sbile body , then this grosse outside; Tis
thinks a good presumption, that we shal not be strip and divested of our inmar stole also, when we leave this dull eart behind us. Especially 3. if we take notic how the highest and noblest faculties and operations of the Soul are help'd on by somewhat that is corporeal, and that i imployeth the bodily Spirits in it's subli mest exercises; we might then be perswa ded, that it alwayes  some body o other, and never Acts without one. An 5. since we cannot conceive a Soul to Live or Act that is insensible, and sinc we know not how there can be senc where there is no union with matter, we should me seems be induc'd to think, tha when 'tis  from all body, 'tis  and silent. For in all sesations there is corporeal motion, as all Philosophy and Experience testifies: And these motions b come sensible representations, by virtue of the union between the  and it's confeder  , So that when it is loos and - from any body whatsoever it will be unconcerned in all   , (being a  ) and
o sence or perceptions will be convey'd by them. Nor will it make any thing at all a∣gainst this Argument to urge, that there are  and purely unembodyed Spirits in the Universe, which live and act without relation to any body, and yet these are not insensible: For what they know, and  they know we are very incompetent judges of, they being a sort of Spirits specifically distinct from out order And therefore their faculties and operations are of a very diverse consideration from ours. So that for us to deny what we may reaso∣nably argue from the contemplation of our own atures, because we cannot compre∣hend the natures of a species of creatures that are far above us, is a great mistake in the way of reasoning. Now how strange soever this princi∣ple may seem to those, whom customary opinions have seasoned with an other e lief, yet considering the Reasons I have alleged, I cannot forbear concluding it very probable; and if it prove hereafter serviceable for the helping us in some
concerning Theories, I think the most wary and timerous may admit it, till upon good grounds they can disprove it. The Fifth Pillar. (5) The soul in every state hath such a body, as is fittest for those faculties and operations that it is most inclined to exercise. 'TIs a known Maxime, That every thing that is, is for its operation; and the contriver and maker of the world hath been so bountiful to all be∣ings, as to furnish them with all suitable and necessary requisites for their respe∣ctive actions; for there are no propensities and dispositions in nature, but some way or other are brought into actual exercise, otherwise they were meer nullities, and impertinent appendices. Now for the imployment of all kinds of faculties, and
the exerting all manner of operations, all kinds of instruments will not suffice, but only such, as are proportion'd and ad∣apted to the exercises they are to be used in, and the agents that imploy them. 'Tis clear therefore, that the soul of man, a noble and vigorous agent, must be fit∣ted with a suitable body, according to the Laws of that exact distributive justice that runs through the Universe; and such a one is most suitable, as is fittest for those exercises it propends to, for the body is the souls instrument, and a necessary re∣quisite of action: Whereas should it be otherwise, God would then have pro∣vided worse for his worthiest creatures, then he hath for those that are of a much inferior rank and order. For if we look about us upon all the creatures of God, that are exposed to our Observation, we may seal this Truth with an infallible Induction; That there is nothing but what is fitted with all sutaeble requisites to act ac∣cording to its nature. The Bird hath wings to waft it aloof in the thin and subtile aire; the Fish is furnisht with fins,
to move in her liquid element; and all other Animals have instruments that are proper for their peculiar inclinations: So that should it be otherwise in the case of Souls, it would be a great blot to the wise managements of Providence, and contrary to its usual methods; and thus we should be dis-furnish't of the best and most convictive argument that we have to prove that a Principle of exactcst wis∣dom hath made and ordered all things. The Sixth Pillar. (6) The Powers and Faculties of the Soul, are either (1) Spiritual, and Intellectual: (2) Sensitive: Or, (3) Plastick. NOw 1. by the intellectual powers I mean all those that relate to the soul, in its naked and abstracted conception, as as it is a spirit, and are exercised about immaterial Objects; as, virtue, know∣ledge,
and divine love: This is the platenical Ns, and that which we call the mind The two other more immediately relate to its esposed matter: For 2. The sensitive are exenised about all the ob∣jects of sense, and are concerned in all such things as either gratifie, or disgust the body. And 3. the Plastick are those faculties of the soul, whereby it moves and forms the body, and are without sense or Animalversi: The exercise of the former, I call the Higher life; and the operations of the latter, the Lower s and the life of the body. Now that there are exercised faculties belonging to our na∣tures, and that they are exercised upon such and such objects respectively, plain experience , and therefore I may be excused from going about to prove so universally acknowledged a truth: Wherefore I pass to
The Seventh Pillar. (7) By the same degrees that the higher powers are invigorated, the lower are consopited and abated, as to their proper exercises, & è con∣tra. 1. THat those Powers should each of them have a tendency to action and in their turns be exercised is but rational to conceive, since otherwise they had been superfluous. And 2. that they should be inconsistent in the supremest exercise and inactuation, is to me as probable. or the Soul is a finite and limited being, and therefore cannot operate diverse wayes with equal intention at once. That as, cannot at the same time imploy all her faculties in the highest degree of ex∣ercise that each of them is capable of. For doubtlesse did it ingage but one of those alone, the operations thereof would be more strong and vigorous, then when
they are conjunctly exercis'd, their Acts and Objects being very diverse. So that I say, that these faculties should act toge∣ther in the highest way they are capable of, seems to be contrary to the nature of the Soul. And I am sure it comports not with experience, for those that are en∣dowed with an high degree of exercise of one faculty, are seldome if ever as well provided in the rest. 'Tis a common and daily observation, that those that are of most heightned and strong Imaginations, are defective in Judgement, and the facul∣tie of close reasoning. And your very large and capacious Memories, have seldome or never any great share of either of the other persections. Nor do the deepest Judgments use to have any thing conside∣rable either of Mewry, or Phancy. And as there are fair instances even in this state of the inconsistence of the faculties in the highest exercise; so also are there o∣thers that suggest unto us. 3. That by the same degrees that some  fail in their strength and vigeur, others gain and are improved. We know
that the shutting up of the sences, is the letting loose and inlarging of the Phancy. And we seldome have such strong imagi∣nations waking, as in our dreams in the si∣lence of our other faculties. At the Sun recedes, the Moon and Stars discover themselves, and when it returns they draw in their baffled beams, and hide their heads in obsurity. But to urge what is more close and pressing; It is an uner∣ring remarque, that those that want the use of some one natural part or faculty, are wont to have very liberal amends made them by an excelelncy in some others. Thus those that nature hath depriv'd of fight, use to have wonderfully tenacious memories. And the deaf and damb have many times a strange kind of sagacity, and very remarkable mechanical ingrenities: Not to mention other instances, for I'le say no more then I must needs. Thus then experience gives us incouraging probability of the truth of the Theorem asserted. And in its self ts very reasona∣ble; for (as we have seen) the Soul be∣ing an active nature, is alwayes propend∣ing
to this exercising of one faculty or other, and that to the utmost it is able, and yet being of a limited capacity, it can imploy but one in height of exercise at once; which when it loseth and abates of it's strength and supream ; some other, whole improvement was all this while hindred by this it's ingrssing Rival must by consequence begn now to display it self, and awaken into a more vigorous : so that as the former loseth, the  proportionably gaineth. And indeed 'tis a great instance of the divine , that our faculties are made in o regular and equilibrium  or∣der. For were the same powers still p∣permost in the greatest height of , and so nakerably constituted, there would want the beauty of variety, and the other faculties would never act to that pitch of perfection that they are ca∣pable of. There would be no Liberty of Wi, and consequently no Hmare Na∣ture. O if the Higher Powers might have lessend, and fayld without a proportiona∣able inerense of the , and they likewise
have been remitted, without any advan∣tage to the other faculties, the Soul might then at length fall into an irrecoverable recesse and inactivity. But all these inconveniences are a∣voided by supposing the principle we have here insisted on; And it is the last that I shall mention. Briefly then, and if it may be more plainly, the higher faculties are those, whereby the Soul acts towards spiritual and immaterial objects: and the lower whereby it acts towards the body. Now it cannot with equal vigour exercise it self both ways together; and conse∣quently the more it is taken up in the higher operations, the more promp't and vigorous it will be in these exercises, and lesse so about those that concern the body, & è Converso. Thus when we are very deeply inga∣ged in intellectual contemplations, our out∣ward sences are in a manner  up and cramped: And when our senses are high∣ly exercised and gratified, those operati∣ons monopolize and imploy us. Nor is this
lesse observable in relation to the plastick. For frquent and severe Meditations do much mortifie and weaken the body; And we are most nourisbt in our sleep in the si∣lence of our senses. Now what is thus tre in respect of acts and particular exercises,  as much so in states and habits. Moreo∣ver, 'tis apparent that the Plastick is then most strong and vigorous when our o∣ther faculties are wholly unimployed, from the state of the womb. For  when she is at her Plastick work cealth all other operations. The same we may take noti of, in silk worms and other in∣sects, which lie as if they were dead and insensible, while their lower powers are for∣ming them into another appearance. All which things put together, give good e∣vidence to the truth of our Axiom. I'le conclude this with one Remark more, to prevent mistake; Therefore briefly; As the Soul alwayes acts by the body; so in its highest exercises it useth some of the inferir powers; which, there∣fore must operate also. So that some sen∣ces, as ghs and somwhat analogous to
hearing may be imployed in considera∣ble degree even when the highest life is most predominant; but then it is at the command and in the services of those nobler powers; wherefore the sensitive life cannot for this cause be said to be invigoured, since 'tis under servitude and subjection, and its gusts and pleasures are very weak and staccid. As this is the reason of that clause in the principlo, (as to their proper exercises.) Having thus laid the Foundation, and  the Pillars of our building, I now come to advance the Superstructure. CHAP. XIV. A Philosophical Hypothesis of the Souls aexistence. THe Eternal and Almighty goodness, the blessed spring and roo of  things, made all his , in the best, happiest, and most perfect condition, that their respective natures rendred them
capable of, By Axiom the first; and there∣fore they were then constituted in the inactuation and exercise of their noblest and most perfect powers. Consequently, the souls of men, a considerable part of the divine workmanship, were at first made in the highest invigouration of the spiritual and intellective faculties which were exercised in virte, and in blissful contemplation of the supream Deity; where∣fore now by axiom 6 and 7, the ignobler and lower powers, or the life of the bily, were languid and reiiss. So that the most teuious, pure and simple matter being the fitest instrumens for the most vigorous and spiritual facul∣ties according to Principle 2, 4, and 5. The soul in this condition was united with the most  and athereal matter that it was capable of inacting; and the inferior powers, those relating to the body, being at a very low ebb of exercise, were wholly subservient to the superiour, and imployed in nothing but what was ser∣viceable to that higher life: So that the sences did but present occasions for di∣vine
love, and objects for contemplation; and the plastick had nothing to do, but to move this passive and asie body, ac∣cordingly as the concerns of the higher faculties required. Thus then did wee at first live and act in a pure and aethereal body; and consequently in a place of light and blessedness, by Principle 3d. But particularly to describe and point at this paradisaical residence, can be done only by those that live in those serene regions of lightsom glory: Some Philosophers indeed have adventured to pronounce the place to be the Sun that vast Ob of splendor and brightness; though it may be 'tis more probable, that those immense tracts of pure and quiet aether that are a∣bove Saturn, are the joyous place of our ancient celestial abode: But there is no determination in matters of such lubri∣cous uncertainty where ever it is, 'tis doubtless a place and state of wonderful bliss and happiness, and the highest that our natures had fitted us to. In this state we may be supposed to have lived in the blissful exercise of
virtue, divine love and contemplation, through very long Tracts of Dura∣tion. But though we were thus unconceiva∣bly happy, yet were we not immutably so; for our highest perfections and noblest faculties being but finite, may after long and vigorous exercise, somewhat abat and remit in their sublimest operations, and Adam may fall a sleep; In which time of remission of the higher powers, the lower may advance and more live∣lily display themselves then they could before, by Axiom 7; for the soul being a little slackt in its pursuits of immate∣rial objects, the lower powers which be∣fore were almost wholly taken up and imployed in those high services, are somewhat more releast to follow a lit∣tle the tendencies of their proper natures. And now they begin to convert towards the body, and warmly to resent the de∣lights and pleasures thereof; Thus is Eve brought forth, while Adam sleepeth. The lower life, that of the body is now consi∣derably awakened, and the operations of the
higher, proportionably abated. How∣ever, there is yet no anomy or disobedience, for all this is but an innocent exercise of of those faculties which God hath gi∣ven us to imploy, and as far as is consist∣ent with the divine laws, to gratifie. For it was no fault of ours that we did not uncessantly keep our spiritual powers upon the most intense exercises that they were capable of exerting; we were made on for purpose defatigable, that so all degrees of life might have their exercise; and our maker designed that we should feel and taste the joyes of our congenite bo∣dies, as well as the pleasures of those seraphick aspires and injoyments. And me thinks it adds to the felicity of that state, that our happiness was not one uniform piece, or continual repetition of the same, but consisted in a most grate∣ful variety, viz. in the pleasure of all our faculties, the lower as well as the higher; for those are as much gratified by suit∣able exercises and enjoyments a hese; and contequently according to their pro∣portion capable of as great an happiness:
Nor is it any more derogation from the divine goodness, that the noblest and highest life was not always exercised to the height of its capacity, then that we were not made all Angels, all the Pla∣nets so many Suns, and all the variety of the creatures form'd into one Species: Yea, as was intimated above, 'tis an a∣stance of the divine benignity, that he pro∣duced things into being, according to the vast plenitude of Forms that were in his all knowing mind; and gave them ope∣rations suitable to their respective natures; so that it had rather seemed a defect in the divine dispensations, if we had not had the pleasure of the proper exercise of the lower faculties as well as of the higher. Yea, me thinks, 'tis but a reasonable re∣ward to the body, that it should have its delights and gratifications also, whereby it will be fitted for further serviceable∣ness. For doubtless it would be in time spent and exhausted were it continually imploy'd in those high and less propor∣tion'd operations. Wherefore God himself having so
ordered the matter, that the inferiour life should have its turn of invigouration; it can be no evill in us, that that is execu∣ted which he hath so determined, as long as we pass not the bounds that he hath set us. Adam therefore was yet innocent, though he joyed in his beloved Spouse, yea, and was permitted to feed upon all the fruits of this Paradise, the various results of corporeal pleasure, as long as he followed not his own will and appe∣tites contrarily to the divine commands and appointments. But at length unhappily the delights of the body betray us, through our over indulgence to them, and lead us captive to anomy and disobedience. The sense of what is grateful and pleasant by insensi∣ble degrees gets head over the apprehen∣sion of what is just and good; the Serpent and Eve prove successful tempters; Adam cannot withstand the inordnate appetite, but feeds on the forbidden fruit, viz. the dictates of his debachea will, and ∣sual pleasure. And thus now the body is gotten uppermost, the lower faculties
have greater exercise and command then the higher, those being very vigorous∣ly awakened, and these proportionably shrunk up, and consopited; wherefore by Axiom 3. and 5. the soul contracts a less pure body, which may be more ac∣commodate to sensitive operations; and thus we fall from the highest Paradise the blissful regions of life and glory, and become Inhabitants of the Air. Not that we are presently quite di∣vested of our Etherial state, as soon as we descend into this less perfect condi∣tion of life, for retaining still considera∣ble exercises of the higher life, though not so ruling and vigorous ones as be∣fore, the soul must retain part of its for∣mer vehicle, to serve it as its instrument, in those its operations: For the herial bo∣dy contracts crasiness and impurity, by the same degrees as the immaterial fa∣culties abate in their exercise; so that we are not immediately upon the expi∣ring of the highest congruity wholly stript of all remains of our celestial bo∣dies, but still hold some portion of them,
within the grosser vehicle, while the spi∣rit, or higher life is in any degree of ac∣tuation. Nor are we to suppose that every slip or indulgence to the body can detrude us from our athereal happiness; but such a change must be wrought in the soul, as may spoil its congruity to a celestial body, which in time by degrees is effected: Thus we may probably be supposed to have fallen from our supream feliciie. But others of our order have made bet∣ter use of their injoyments, and the in∣dulgences of their Maker; and though they have had their periga's as well as their Apoge's: I mean their Verges to∣wards the body and its joys, as well as their aspires to nobler and sublimer ob∣jects, yet they kept the station of their natures, and made their orderly returns, without so remarkable a defection: And though possibly some of them may somtimes have had their slips, and have waded further into the pleasures of the body then they ought to have done,
yet partly by their own timely care and consideration, and partly by the divine assistance, they recover them∣selves again to their condition of pri∣migenial innocence. But we must leave them to their felicity, and go on with the History of our own descent. There∣fore after we are detraded from our ∣therial condition, we next descend into the Aerial. The Aerial State. NOw our bodies are more or less pure in this condition, proportio∣nably to the degrees of our apostay: So that we are not absolutely misera∣ble in our first step of descent; but in∣deed happy in comparison of our now condition: As yet there may be very considerable remains of vertue and di∣vine love, though indeed the lower life, that of the body be grown very strong and rampant: So that as yet we may be supposed to have lapst no lower then the best and purest Regions of the
Ayre, by Axiom 2 & 3. And doubtlesse there are some, who by striving against the inordinacy of their Appetitites, may at length get the victory again over their bodyes, and so by the assistance of the Divine Spirit who is alwayes rea∣dy to promote and assist good begin∣nings, may re-enkindle the higher life, and so be translated again to their old celestial habitations without descending lower. But others irreclaimeably persisting in their Rebellion, and sinking more and more into the body, and the relish of its joyes and pleasures, these are still verging to a lower and more degenerate state; so that at the last the higher powers of the Soul being almost quite laid a sleep and consopited, and the sensitive also by long and tedious exercises being much tyred, and abated in their vigour, the plastick faculties begin now fully to awaken; so that a body of thin and subtile ayre will not suffice its now so highly exalted energy, no more than the subtile Aether can suffice us terrestial animals for respi∣ration;
wherefore the Aerial congruity of life expires also, and thus are we ready for an earthly body. But now since a Soul cannot unite with any body, but with such only as is fitly prepared for it, by principle 3. and there being in all likelyhood more expirations in the Ayre, then there are prepared bodyes upon earth, it must needs be, that for some time it must be desti∣tute of any congruous matter that might be joyned with it; And consequently by Principle 3d. 'twill lye in a state of in∣activity and silence. Not that it will for ever be lost in that forgotten recess and solitude, for it hath aptness aptness and propen∣sity to act in a terrestrial body, which will be reduc'd into actual exercise, when fit atter is prepared. The souls there∣fore, that are now laid up in the black night of stuipdity and inertnesse will in their proper seasons be awakened into life and operation in such bodyes and pla∣ces of the earth, as by their dispositions they are fitted for. So that no sooner is thee any matter of due vital temper,
afforded by generation, but immediatly a soul that is suitable to such a body, either by meer natural congruity, the dispositi, on of the soul of the world, or some more spontaneous agent is attracted, or sent into this so befitting tenement, accord∣ing to Axiom 2 and 3. Terrestrial State. NOw because in this state too we use our sensitive faculties, and have some though very small reliques of the higher life also; therefore the soul first makes it self a vehicle out of the most spiritous and yielding parts of this spu∣ous terrestrial matter, which hath some analogy both with its therial and aerial state. This is as it were its inward vest, and immediate instrument in all its ope∣rations. By the help of this it under∣stands, reasons, and remembers, Yea forms and moves the body: And that we have such a subtile aery vehicle within this terrestrial, our manifest sympathizing with that element, and the necessity we
have of it to all the functions of life, as is palpable in respiration, is me thinks good ground for conjecture. And 'tis not improbable but even within this it may have a purer fire and ather to which it is united, being some little remain of what it had of old. In this state we grow up meerly into the life of sense, having little left of the higher life, but some apish shews and i∣mitations of reason, vertue, and religion: By which alone with speech, we seem to be distinguisht from Beasts, while in reali∣ty the brutish nature is predominant, and the concernments of the body are our great end, our onely God and happiness; this is the condition of our now degenerate, lost natures. However, that ever over-flowing good∣ness that always aims at the happiness of his creatures, hath not left us without all means of recovery, but by the gra∣cious and benigne dispensations which he hath afforded us, hath provided for our restauration; which some (though but very few) make so good use of,
that being assisted in their well meant and sincere indeavours by the divine spi∣rit, they in good degree mortifie and sub∣due the bodie, conquer self-will, unruly appetites, and disorderly passions, and so in some measure by Principle 7. awaken the higher life, which still directs them upwards to vertue and divine love; which, where they are perfectly kindled carry the soul when dismist from this prison to its old celestial abode: For the spirit and noblest faculties being so recovered to life and exercise require an aetherial body to be united to, and that an aetherial place of residence, both which, the di∣vine Nemesis that is wrought into the ve∣ry nature of things bestoweth on them by Principle the second. But they are very few that are thus im∣mediatly restored to the celestial paradise, upon the quitting of their earthly bo∣dies. For others that are but in the way of recovery, and dye imperfectly vertu∣ous, meer Philosophy and natural reason (within the bounds of which we are now discoursing) can determine no more,
but that they step forth again into aer vehicles; that congruity of life immedi∣ately awakening in them after this is ex∣pired. In this state their happinesse will be more or lesse, proportionably to their virtues, in which if they persevere, we shall see anon how they will be reco∣ver'd. But for the present we must not break off the clue of our account, by go∣ing backwards before we have arriv'd to the umost verge of descent in this Philoso∣phical Romance, or History; the Reader is at his choice to call it which he pleaseth. Wherefore let us cast our eyes upon the Most, in whom their Life on earth hath but confirm'd and strengthned, their degenerate sensual, and brutish propensi∣ons; And see what is like to become of them, when they take their leave of these terrestial bodies. Only first a word of the state of dying infants, and I come immediately to the next step of descent. Those therefore that passe out of these bodyes, before the ter∣restrial congruity be spoyl'd weakened, or orderly unmound; According to the te∣nour
of this Hypothesis, must return into the state of inactivity. For the Plastick in them is too highly awakened, to inactuate only an aerial bo∣dy; And, there being no other more congruous, ready, and at hand for it to enter, it must needs step back into its former state of insensibility, and there wait its turn, till befitting matter call it forth again into life and action. This is a conjecture that Philosophy dictates, which I vouch not for a truth, but only follow the clue of this Hypothesis. Nor can there any danger be hence conceiv'd that those whose congrityes orderly expire, should fall back again into a state of si∣lence and intertnesse; since by long and hard exercises in this body, the plastick life is well tamed and debilitated, so that now its activity is proportion'd to a more teuious and passive vehicle, which it cannot fail to meet with in its next condition. For 'tis only the terrestrial body is so long a preparing. But to
The next step of Descent, or After State. TO give an Account of the After State of the more degenerate and yet de∣scending souls, some fancy a very odd Hypothesis, imagining that they passe hence into some other more course and inferior Planet, in which, they are provi∣ded with bodyes suitable to their so de∣praved natures; But I shall be thought extravagant for the mention of such a supposition; Wherefore I come to what is lesse bnoxious. When our souls go out of these bo∣dies therefore, they are not presently discharg'd of all the matter that belong'd to this condition, but carry away their inward and aerial state to be partakers with them of their after fortunes, onely leaving the unlesse earth behind them. For they have a congruity to their aery bodies, though that which they had to a terrestrial, is worn out and defaced. Nor need we to wonder how it can  have an aerial aptitude, when as that congrity expired before we defended hi∣ther;
If we consider the reason of the expiration of its former vital aptitude, which was not so much through any de∣fect of power to actuate such a body, but through the excesse of invigoration of the Plastick, which was then grown so strong, that an aerial body was not e∣nough for it to display its force upon. But now the case is alter'd, these lower powers are worn and wearied out, by the toylsome exercise of dragging about and managing such a load of flesh; where∣fore being so castigated, they are duly attemper'd to the more easie body of air again, as was intimated before; to which they being already united, they cannot miss of a proper habitation. But considering the stupor, dulness & in∣activity of our declining age, it may seem unlikely to some, that after death we should immediately be resuffitated into so lively and vigorous a condition, as is the aerial, especially, since all the faculties of sence and action, are observed gradually to fail & abate as we draw nearer to our exit from this Stage; which seems to threaten, that we shall next descend into a state of
less supor and inertnesse. But this is a groundless jealousie; for the weaknesse and lethargick inactivity of old age, ariseth from a defect of those Spirits, that are the instruments of all our operations, which by long exercise are at last spent and seat∣tred. So that the remains can scarce any longer stand under their unweildy bar∣them; much lesse, can they perform all functions of life so vigorously as they were wont to do, when they were in their due temper, strength, and plenty. However not∣withstanding this inability to manage a sluggish, stubborn, and exhausted terrestrial body, there is no doubt, but the Soul can with great care, when it is discharg'd of its former load, actuate its thin aery vehi∣cle; and that with a brisk vigour and acti∣vity. As a man that is overladen, may be ready to faint and sink, till he be re∣leived of his burthen; And then, he can run away with a cheerful vivacity. So that this decrepid condition of our de∣cayed natures cannot justly prejudice our belief, that we shall be crected again, in∣to a state of life and action in aerial bo∣dies, after this congruity is expired.
But if all alike live in bodies of air in the next condition, where is then the dif∣ference between the nst and the wicked, in state, place and body? For the just we have said already, that some of them are re-instated in their pristie happiness and felicite; and others are in a middle state, within the confines of the Air, perfecting the inchoations of a better life, which commenc'd in this: As for the state and place of those that have lived in a conti∣nual course of sensuality and forgetfulness of God; I come now to declare what we may fancie of it, by the help of natu∣ral light, and the conduct of Philosophy. And in order to this discovery I must premise some what concerning the earth, this globe we live upon; which is, that we are not to conceive it to be a full bulky mass to the center, but rather that  somwhat like a suckt Egg, in great part, an hollow sphear, so that what we tread upon is but as it were, an Arch or Bridge, to divide between the upper and the lower regions: Not that this inward llowness is a meer void capacity, for there are no such chasms in nature, but doubtless re∣plenisht
it is with some uid bodies or other, and it may be a kind of aire, fire and water: Now thi Hypothesis will help us easily to imagine how the earth may move notwithstanding the pretended in∣disposition of its Bulk, and on that ac∣count I beleeve it will be somewhat the more acceptable with the free and inge∣nious. Those that understand the Cartesian Philosophy, will readily admit the Hypo∣thesis, at least as much of it as I shall have need of: But for others, I have little hopes of perswading them to any thing, and therefore Il' spare my labour of going a∣bout to prove what they are either unca∣pable of, or at first dash judge ridiculous: And it may be most will grant as much as is requisite for my purpose, which is, That there are huge vast cavities within the body of the earth; and it were as needless, as presumptious, for me to go about to de∣termine more. Only I shall mention a probability, that this gross crust which we call earth, is not of so vast a profound as is supposed, and so come more press to my business.
'Tis an ordinary observation among them that are imployed in mines and sub∣terraneous vaults of any depth, that hea∣vy bodies lose much of their gravity in those hollow caverns: So that what the strength of several men cannot stir above ground, is easily moved by the single force of one under it: Now to improve this ex∣periment, 'tis very likely that gravity pro∣ceeds from a kind of magnetism and at∣tractive virtue in the earth, which is by so much the more strong and vigorous, by how much more of the attrahent con∣tributes to the action, and proportionably weaker, where less of the magnetick Ele∣ment exerts its operation; so that suppo∣sing the solid earth, to reach but to a cer∣tain, and that not very great distance from the surface, and 'tis obvious this way to give an account of the Phoenomenon. For according to this Hypothesis the gravity of those bodies is lesse, because the quantity of the earth that draws them is so; whereas were it of the same nature and solidity to the center, this diminuti∣on of its bulk, and consequently vir∣tue would not be at all considerable,
nor in the least sensible: Now though there are other causes pretended for this effect, yet there is none so like∣ly, and easie a solution as this, though I know it also is obnoxious to excepti∣ons, which I cannot now stand to to meddle with; all that I would have is, that 'tis a probability, and the mention of the fountains of the great deep in the sacred History, as also the flaming Vulca∣noes and smoking mountains that all relati∣ons speak of, are others. Now I intend not that after a certain distance all is fluid matter to the ceter. For the Cartefian Hypothesis distributes the subterranean space into distinct regi∣ons of divers matter, which are divided from each other by as solid walls, as is the open air from the inferiour Atmo∣sphear: Therefore I suppose only that under this thick outside, there is next a vast and large region of fluid matter, which for the most part very likely is a gross and falid kind of air, as also considerable pro∣portions of fire & water, under all which, there may be other solid floors, that may incompass and cover more vaults, and
vast hollows, the contents of which 'twere vanity to go about to determine; only 'tis very likely, that as the admirable Philosophy of Des Cartes supposeth, the lowest and central Regions may be filled with flame and aether, which suppositions, though they may seem to some to be but the groundless excursions of busie imagi∣nations; yet those that know the French Philosophy, and see there the Reasons of them, will be more candid in their cen∣sures, and not so severe to those not ill∣framed conjectures. Now then being thus provided, I return again to prosecute my main intendment; Wherefore 'tis very probable, that the wicked and degenerate part of mankind∣are after death committed to those squal∣lid subterraneous habitations; in which dark prisons, they do severe penance for their past impletyes, And have their sen∣ces, which upon earth they did so fondly indulge, and took such care to gratifie, now persecuted with darknesse, stench, and horror. Thus doth the divine justice tri∣umph in punishing those vie apostatet suitably to their delinquencyes.
Now if those vicious souls are not carried down to the infernal caverns by the meer congruity of their natures, as is not so easie to imagine; we may then rea∣sonably conceive, that they are driven into those dungeons by the invisible Mi∣nisters of justice, that manage the affairs of the world by Axiom 3. For those pure spirits doubtless have a deep sence of what is just, and for the good of the universe; and therefore will not let those inexcusa∣ble wretches to escape their deserved castigations; or permit them to resicle a∣mong the good, lest they should infect and poyson the better world, by their exam∣ples. Wherefore I say, they are disposed of into those black under-Abysses; where they are suited with company like them∣selves, and match't unto bodies as impure, as are their depraved inclinations. Not that they are all in the same place and un∣der the like torments; but are variously di∣stributed according to the merits of their natures and actions; some only into the upper prisons, others to the Dungeon: And some to the most intollerable Hell,
the Abysse of fire. Thus doth a just Neme∣sis visit all the quarters of the universe. Now those miserable prisoners cannot escape from the places of their confinement; for 'tis very likely that those watchfull spi∣rits that were instrumental in committing them, have a strict and careful eye upon them to keep them within the confines of their goal, that they roave not out into the Regions of light and liberty, yea 'tis proba∣ble that the bodies they have contracted in those squallid mansions, may by a kind of fa∣tal magnetisme be chained down to this their proper element. Or, they having now a con∣gruity only to such fatid vehicles, may be no more able to abide the clear and lightsome ayr, then the Bat or Owl are able to bear the Suns noon-day beams; or, the fish to live in these thinner Regions. This may be the reason of the unfrequency of their appea∣rance; and that they most commonly get them away at the approach of light. Besides all this, some there are who suppose that there is a kind of polity among themselves, which may, under severe penalties, prohi∣bit all unlicensed excursions into the upper world; though I confess this seems not so
probable, and we stand in no need of the supposition. For though the laws of their natures should not detain them within their proper residences; yet the care and oversight of those watchful spirits; who first com∣mitted them, will do it effectually. And ve∣ry oft when they do appear, they signifie that they are under restraint, and come ot abroad, but by permission; as by several cre∣dible stories I could make good: But for brevity I omit them. Now though I intend not this Hypothesis, either for a discovery of infallible truth, or declarement of mine own opinions, yet I cannot forbear to note the strange coinci∣dence that there is between Scripture-expres∣sions in this matter, some main stroaks of the Orthodox Doctrine, and this Philosophical conjecture of the state and place of the wick∣ed. 'Tis represented in the Divine Oracles as a deep pit, a prison, a place of darkness, fire, and bristone; and the going thither, is na∣med a descent. All which most appositely agree with the representation we have made; And the usual Periphrasis of Hell torments, fire, and brimstone, is wonderfully applica∣ble to the place we have been describing;
since it abounds with fuliginous flames, and sulphurious stench and vapours; And, as we have conjectur'd, the lowest cavity, is no∣thing else but a valut of fire. For the other expressions mention'd, every one can make the application. So that when a man consi∣ders this, he will almost be tempted to think, that the inspired writers had some such thing in their fancies. And we are not to run to tropes and figures for the interpretation of plain and literal descriptions; except some weighty reason force us to such a Refuge. Moreover Hell is believ'd among the Or∣thodox to have degrees of torments, to be a place of uncomfortable horror, and to stand at the greatest distance from the seat and ba∣bitation of the blessed. All which, and more that I could reckon up, cannot more clearly made out and explained, then they are in this Hypothesis. Thus then we see the irreclameably wick∣ed lodg'd in a place and condition very retched and calamilous. If any of them should be taught by their miseryes to re∣nounce and forsake their impietyes; or should have any dispositions to virtue and divine love reinkindled in them; meer Philosophy
would conclude, that in time they might then be deliver'd from their lad durance; But we know what Theology hath determined. And indeed those bruitish apostates are so fixt and rooted in their sensual and rebellious pro∣pensions, that those who are not yet as far di∣stant from their maker as they can be, are still verging downwards; And possibly being quite void of the divine grace, and any con∣siderable exercises of reason and conscience, they may never stop till they have run through all the internal stages, and are arriv'd to the extremest degree of misery, that as yet any are obnoxious to. Wherefore the earth and all the infernal Regions being thus monstrously depraved; 'tis time for the Divine Justice to shew some remarkable and more then ordinary severity upon those remorseless Rebels; and his goodness is as ready to deliver the vir∣tuous from this stage of wretchedness and im∣piety. When therefore those have compleat∣ed the number of their iniquities, and these are fit for the mercy of so great a delive∣rance; then shall the great decree for judge∣ment be executed; which though it cannot be expected that meer Philosophy should give
an unerring and punctual account of, yet we shall follow this light as far as it will lead us; not intrenching upon the sacred rights of di∣vinity, nor yet baulking what the Ancient Eastern Cabbala, assisted by later discoveries into nature, will dictate; But sincerely fol∣lowing the Hypothesis, we shall leave all its errours and misguidances to be corrected by the more sacred Canons. So that where we shall discern the wisdom of the World to have misdirected the most knowing and sedulous inquirers, we may duly acknowledge the great benefit of that light which we have received to guide us in matters of such vast and concerning speculation. The Constagration of the Earth. THerefore at length, when the time pre∣appointed by the divine wisdom for this execution, is come; The internal, central fire shall have got such strength and irresisti∣ble vigour that it shall easily melt & dissolve that fence that hath all this while inclosed it; And all those other smaller fires, which are lodg'd in several parts of the lower Regi∣ons joyning themselves with this mighty flame, shall prey upon what ever is combusti∣ble and so rage first within the bowels of
the earth, beginning the tragick execution up∣on those damned spirits that are there confi∣ed; these having been reserved in the chains of darkness to the judgment of this great day; and now shall their hell and misery be com∣pleated, and they receive the full reward of their impieties, which doubtless will be the most intollerable and severe torment that can be imagned, these sierce and merciless flames sticking close to, yea, piercing through and through their bodies, which can remove no where to avoid this fierie over-spreading vengenance. And now the subterranean vaults being thus all on fire, it cannot be long ere this prevailing combustion take hold of the upper regions, wherefore at last with irresistible violence it breaks forth upon these also: So that the great pyre is now kindled, smoak, fire, darkness, horror and confusion, cover the face of all things? Wherefore the miserable inhabitants of the earth and inferiour air, will be seized on by the devouring Element, and suffer in that fire that was reserved for the per∣dition of ungodly men. But shal the righteous perish with the wick∣ed? And shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? wil not the sincere & vertuous both
in the Earth and Air be secured from this sad fate? and how can their deliverance be effected? Doubtless Providence that in all things else hath been righteous and equall will not fail in this last scene; but provision will be made for their recovery from this vengeance that hath taken hold of the wick∣ed. But all natural causes failing here, since their bodies are not pure enough to wast them up the quiet regions of the un-infested ather; and the higher congruity of life, being yet but imperfectly inchoated; they would be detained prisoners here below by the chains of their unhappy natures, were there not some extraordinary interposure for their rescue and inlargement; wherefore when we con∣template the infinite fertility of the divine goodness, we cannot think, that he will let those seeds of piety and vertue, which him∣self hath sown and given some increase to, to come to nought; or the honest possessors of them, fatally to miscarry: But that he will imploy his power for the compleating what he hath begun, and the deliverance of those, who have relyed upon his mercies. But for the particular way and method how this this great iransaction will be accomplisht, Philosophy cannot determine it.
Happy therefore are we, who have the discoveryes of a more certain Light, which doth not only secure us of the thing, but acquaints us with the way and means, that the Divine wisdome hath resolv'd on, for the delivery of the righteous. So that hereby we are assu∣red that our ever blessed Redeemer shall appear in the clouds before this fiery fate shall have quite taken hold of the Earth, and its condemned inhabitants. The Glory of his appearance with his Caelestial Legions, shall raise such strong love, joy, and triumph in his now pas∣sionately enamourd expectants, as shall again enkindle that high and potent principle, the spirit, which being through∣ly awakened and excited, will melt the grossest consistence into liquid Aether, so that our bodyes being thus turned in∣to the purest flame, we shall ascend in those fiery Chariots with our Glorious Redeemer, and his illustirous and bles∣sed Attendants to the Caelestial habita∣tions. This is the Resurrection of the just, and the Recovery of our antient blessedness.
Thus have some represented this great transaction; But I dare warrant nothing in this matter beyond the declarations of the sacred scripturs, therefore to proceed in our philosophicall conjectures, How∣ever the good shall be delivered; be sure the wicked shall be made a prey to the Scorching element which now rageth e∣very where, and suffer the Judgement threatened. But yet the most degenerate part of mankind (if we consult meere Reason and the Antient Eastern Cabbals) who are detained prisoners in the now inflamed Almospheare, shall not for ever be abandon'd to misery and ruin. For they are still pretended to be under the eye and tender care of that Almighty goodness, that made and preserveth all things, that punisheth not out of malice or revenge, and therefore will not pur∣sue them to their utter undoing for ever: But hath set bounds to their de∣struction, and in infinite Wisdome hath so ordered the matter that none of his creatures shall be lost eternally, or in∣dure such an endlesse misery, then which
not Being it self were more eligible. Wherefore those curious contemplators phancy, that the unsupportable pain and anguish which hath long stuck to those miserable creatures, will at length so consume and destroy rhat insensible pleasure and congruity that unites soul and body, that the thus-miserably cru∣ciated spirit must needs quit it's unfit habitation; and there being no other body within its reach that is capable of a vitall union, according to the tenor of this Hypothesis, it must become sense∣lesse and unactive by Axiom 4. And so be buried in a state of silence and inertness. At length when these greedy flames shall have devoured what ever was combustible, and converted into a smoak and vapour all grosser concretions, that great orb of fire that the Cartesian Phi∣losophy supposeth to constitute the cen∣tre of this Globe, shall perfectly have recovered its pristine nature, and so fol∣lowing the Laws of its proper motion, shall fly away out of this vortex, and
become a wandring comet, till it settle in some other. But if the next Conflagration reach not so low as the inmost regions of the earth, so that the central fire remains unconcern'd, and unimploy'd in this combustion; this Globe will then retain its wonted place among the Planets. And that so it may happen, is not im∣probable, since there is plenty enough both of fiery principles and materials in those Regions that are nearer to the surface, to set the Earth into a Lightsom flame, and to do all that execution that we have spoken of. Some conceive therefore, that the conflagration will not be so deep and universal as this o∣pinion supposeth it; But that it may take beginning from a lesse distance, and spendit self upwards. And to this purpose they represent the sequel of their Hypothe∣sis. The Generall Restitution. Those thick and clammy vapours which erstwhile ascended in such vast measures, and had fil'd the vault of hea∣ven with smoak and darknesse, must
at length obey the Laws of their nature and gravity, and so descend again in abundant showres, and mingle with the subsiding ashes, which will consti∣tute a mudd vegetative and fertile. For those warm and benign beams, that now again begin to visit the desolate Earth, will excite those seminal prin∣ciples into action, which the Divine Wisdome and goodnesse hath mingled with all things. Wherefore they opera∣ting according to their natures, and the dispositions which they find in the resto∣red matter, will shoot forth in all sorts of flowers, herbs, and trees; Making the whole Earth a Garden of delight and pleasure; And erecting all the Phaenome∣na proper to this Element. By this time the Ayre will be grown vitall a∣gain and far more pure and pleasant, then before the fiery purgation. Where∣fore they conceive, that the disbodyed soules shall return from their unactive and silent recesse, and be joined again to bodyes of purified and duly prepared Ayre. For their radaical aptitude to matter
still remained, though theyfell asleep for want of bodies of fit temper to unite with. This is the summ of the Hypo∣thesis as it is represented by the pro∣foundly Learned Dr. H. More, with a copious and pompous eloquence. Now supposing such a recess of any souls into a state of in activity, such a Restitution of them to life and acti∣on is very reasonable; since it is much better for them to Live and ope∣rate again, then to be uselesse in the universe, and as it were nothing for ever. And we have seen above, that the Divine goodnesse doth always what is best, and his wisdom is not so shallow as to make his creatures so as that he should be fain to banish them into a state that is next to non-entity, there to remain through all duration. Thus then will those lately tormented souls, having smarted for their past iniquities, be re∣covered both from their state of rtech∣ednesse and insensibility; and by the unspeakable benignity of their Maker, placed once more in such conditions,
wherein by their own endeavours, and the divine assistance they may amend what was formerly amiss in them, and pursue any good Resolutions that they took while under thelash of the fiery tor∣tures; which thos that do, when their good inclinations are perfected, and the Di∣vine Life again enkindled, they shall in due time reascend the Thrones they so unhappily fell from, & be circled about with unexpressible felicity. Butthose that for all this, follow the sameways of sen∣suality and rebellion against their merciful deliverer, they shal besure tobe met with by the same methods of punishment; and at length be as miserable as ever. Thus we see the Ayr will be re-peopled after the conflagration: but how the Earth will so soon be restored to Inhabitants, is a matter of some difficulty to deter∣mine since it useth to be furnisht from the Aerial regions, which now will have none left that are fit to plant it. For the good were deliver'd thence before the conflagration: and those that are newly come from underthe fiery lash and latter
state of silence, are in a hopeful way of recovery; At least, their aerial congruity cannot be so soon expired, as to fit them for an early return to their terrestriall prisons. Wherfore to help our selves in this rencounter, we must remember, that there are continually multitudes of souls in a state of inactivity, for want of suit∣able bodyes to unite with, there being more that dye to the aery state, then are born into this terrestrial. In this con∣dition were myriads, when the general Feaver seiz'd this great distemper'd body; who therefore were unconcern'd in the conflagration, and are now as ready to return into life and action upon the Earth's happy restauration, as if no such thing had hapned. Wherefore they will not fail to de∣scend into fitly prepared matter, and to exercise all the functsons proper to this condition. Nor will they alone be inha∣bitants of the Earth. For all the variety of other Animals, shall live and act up∣on this stage with them; all sorts of souls infinuating themselves into those
bodys, which are fit for their respective natures. Thus then supposing habitable con∣gruous bodyes, there is no doubt, but there will be humane Souls to actuate and informe them; but all the difficulty is to conceive how the matter shall be prepared. For who shall be the common seedsman of succeding Humanity, when all mankind is swept away by the fiery deluge? And to take Sanctuary in a Miracle is unphilosophical and desperate. I thinke therefore, it is not improbable (I mean according to the duct of this Hypothesis) but that in this renewed youth, of the so lately calcined and purified Earth, there may be some pure efflorescences of balmy matter, not to be found now in its ex∣hausted and decrepit Age, that may be proper vehicles of life into which souls may deseend without further preparati∣on: And so orderly shape and form them, as we see to this day several sorts of other creatures do, without the help of generation. For doubtlesse there will be great plenty of unctuous spirituous
matter, when the most inward and re∣condite spirits of all things, shall be dis∣lodg'd from their old close residences; and scatter'd into the Ayre; where they will at length, when the fierce agitation of the fire is over, gather in considera∣ble proportions of tenuous vapours; which at length descending in a chrystal∣line liquor, and mingling with the finest parts of the newly modified Earth, will doubtless compose as genital a matter as any can be prepared in the bodys of Animals. And the calm and wholesome Ayre which now is duly purged from its noxious reeks and vapours, and abounds with their saline spirituous humidity, will questionlesse be very propitious to those tender inchoations of life; and by the help of the Sun's favourable and gentle beams, supply them with all ne∣cessary materials. Nor need we puzzle our selves to phancy, how those Terrae Filii, those young sons of the Earth will be fortified against the injuries of weather, or be able to provide for themselves in their first
and tender Infancy; since doubtlesse, if the supposition be admitted, those imme∣diate births of unassisted nature will not be so tender and helplesse as we, into whose very constitutions delicacy and effeminatenesse is now twisted. For those masculine productions which were al∣ways exposed to the open Ayr, and not cloyster'd up as we, will feel no more incommodity from it, then the young fry of fishes do from the coldnesse of the water they are spawn'd in. And even now much of our tendernesse and deli∣cacy is not natural but contracted. For poor children will indure that hardshp that would quickly dispatch those that have had a more careful and officious nurture. And without question we should do many things for self-preservati on and provision, which now we yield no signes of; had not custome prevented the endeavours of nature, and made it expect assistance; For the Indian In∣fants will swim currently, when assoon as they are born, they are thrown into the water. And nature put to her shifts,
will do many things more then we can suspect her able for the performance of: which consider'd, 'tis not hard to appre∣hend, but that those infant Aborigines, are of a very different temper and con∣dition from the weak products of now decayed nature: having questionlesse, more pure and serviceable bodies, senses and other faculties more active and vi∣gorous, and nature better exercised; so that they may by a like sence to that which carrys all creatures to their proper food, pursue and take hold of that nutriment which the free and willing Earth now offerd to their mouths; till being advantaged by Age and growth, they can move about to make their choice. But all this is but the frolick exercise of my pen chusing a Paradox; And 'tis time to give over the pursuit. To make an end then, we see that af∣ter the Conflagration the earth will be inhabited again, and all things proceed much what in like manner as before. But whether the Catastrophe of this shall bee like the former or no, I think is not
to be determined. For as one world hath perish't by water, and this present shall by fire, 'tis possible the next period may be by the Extinction of the Sun. But I am come to the end of the line, and shall not go beyond this present Stage of Providence, or wander into an Abysse of uncertainties, where there is neither Sun nor Star to guide my notions. Now of all that hath been represented of this Hypothesis, there is nothing that seems more extravagant and Romantick then those notions that come under the two last Generals; And yet so it falls out, that the main matters contained under them, one would think to have a strange consonancy with some expressi∣ons in the Sacred Oracles. For clear it is from the divine Volumne, that the wick∣ed and the Devils themselves are reser∣ved to a further and more severe judge∣ment then yet afflicteth them; It is as plainly declared to be a vengeance of fire that abides them, as a compleatment of their torments: And that the Earth shall be burnt, is as explicitly affirmed, as
any thing can be spoken. Now if we put all these together, they look like a pro∣bability, That the conflagration of the Earth shall consummate the Hell of the wicked. And those other expressions of Death, Destruction, perdition of the un∣godly, and the like, seem to show a fa∣vourable regard to the State of silence and inactivity. Nor is there less appear∣ing countenance given to the Hypothesis of Restitution, in those passages which predict New Heavens and a New Earth, and seem to intimate onely a change of the present. And yet I would have no body be so credulous as to be taken with litle ap∣pearances, nor do I mention these with an intent that they should with full con∣sent be delivered to intend the asserting any such Doctrines; But that there is shew enough both in Reason and Scrip∣ture for these Opinions to give an occa∣sion for an Hypothesis, and therefore that they are not meer arbitrary and idle imaginations.
Now whatever becomes of this per∣ticular draught of the Souls severall con∣ditions of life and action, the main O∣pinion of Praeexistence is not at all con∣cerned. This scheame is onely to shew that natural and imperfect Reason can frame an Intelligible Idea of it; And therefore questionlesse the Divine Wis∣dome could forme and order it, either so, or with infinitely more accuracy and exactness. How it was with us therefore of Old, I know not; But yet that we may have been, and acted before we descended hither, I think is very proba∣ble. And I see no Reason but why Praeexistence may be Admitted without altering any thing considerable of the ordinary Systeme of Theology. But I shut up with that modest conclusion of the Great Des Cartes. That although these matters seem hardly otherwise intelligible then as I∣have here explained them: Yet neverthelesse remembring I am not infallible, I assert nothing; But submit all I have written to the Autho∣rity
of the Church of England, and to the matured judgements of graver and wiser men; Earnest desiring that no∣thing else may be entertained with credit by any persons, but what is able to win it by the force of evident and Victorious reason. Des Cartes Princ. Prilos. lib. 4. ss. CVII. FINIS.
