H2164 12137856 54799
THE HISTORY OF THE Intrigues & Gallantries OF CHRISTINA, Queen of Sweden. AND Of her COURT, whilst she was at ROME. Faithfully Render'd into English, from the French Original. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, at the Ox∣ford-Arms in Warwick-Lane, 1697.
To his Excellency CHARLES EARL OF Dorset and Middlesex, One of the Lords Justices for the Administration of the Government, during the King's Absence. Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, &c. My LORD, THE Queen of Sweden, who travell'd so much, and spoke so many Languages, being now the Subject of this present Hi∣story, implores your Lordship's
Protection, having but newly learn'd to speak English: She comes not now as formerly, in the Pomp and Splendor of a Crown, but to render an Account of her Actions, which in her Life-time, made so mighty a noise in the World; and which, tho' they cannot be called altogether In∣nocent, are yet very diverting, and will, I question not, afford a great deal of Pleasure and Delight to the Reader; there being no Tragedy in her whole Life, except that of the Murder of the Marquis Mo∣naldeschi. She always maintain'd the Ma∣jesty of a Queen, both in her Per∣son and Character, to the highest Degree; and her Wit and Parts were so very extraordinary, that
they raised the Admiration of all. Her Inclinations were nice and cu∣rious, and her Passions strong and violent; but the Vanity and Incon∣stancy of her Temper, would not suffer them to endure long; and she had none of any Continuance, except that which she had for Chy∣mistry, which lasted even to her dying Day. The great Opinion she had conceived of her own Abilities in all things, did very much con∣tribute to the Cheat, she put upon her self in this Affair, and caus'd her to be led by those wandring Ex∣perimentators, who being deceiv'd themselves, make no scruple to de∣ceive others. The Author has handled them very severely, and some of them no less than they de∣serve,
and especially such as those, the Queen of Sweden generally met with. In short, as she was a Princess of a wonderful mixture, and strange variety, there is something to be found in every turn of her Actions, so great and surprizing, that there needs more than a common Under∣standing, to make a right Judg∣ment concerning her. She cannot therefore be recommended to a fit∣ter Hand than your Lordship's, not only in regard of the Greatness of your Descent and Original, but of your Candor, and good Humour, together with the Excellency of your Parts, and that Exactness of Judg∣ment, for which you are so justly celebrated.
The Author of this History, spends a great deal of time, in de∣scribing the Persons that compos'd her Court, and their Adventures are so interwoven with the Queens Affairs, that he could not avoid it; but both the Characters, and Adventures are so pleasant, that they make a sufficient Recompence; and indeed the History would not have been compleat without it. They are fill'd up with a great number of Delightful Intrigues, and odd Circumstances, and most of the Accidents are so entertaining, that I perswade my self that your Lord∣ship, who is so Communicative and Generous upon all Occasions, will permit me to make use of so great a Name, to recommend this
Translation to them, who cannot, with your Lordship, discern the Beauties of the Original, and will pardon the Ambition, with which I subscribe my self, My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Dutiful and Obedient Servant, Phil. Hollingworth.
TO THE READER. A French Abbot, of great Me∣rit and Understanding, re∣turning from Rome, with the French Cardinals, from the Election of Innocent XII. shewed me some cu∣rious Manuscripts, which he had obtain'd during his stay in Italy; and among others, this of the In∣trigues and Gallantries, of Christina Queen of Sweden, and her Court, while she staid at Rome. I present∣ly became of his Opinion, and judg'd them worthy of the Press, believing it would be a pleasure to the Publick, to communicate the particular Circumstances of the
Life of this incomparable Queen, which none till this present time have had any knowledge of. If this Work be received well, as I hope it will, I will afterward Print the Maxims and Sentences of this Queen, which have the force and Spirit of those of the Duke de Ro∣chefoucaults, as also the Conclaves of the last Popes, differing very much from those already Printed, and o∣ther curious Munuscripts which do well deserve to appear in Pub∣lick. Though I have not seen this Work, but in the French Language, yet the Gentleman who gave it me, assures me, that the Original was Italian, and found among other Papers of the Author, who died at Rome, a little before the Abbot who brought it, came from thence. One may easily see that it is nothing but a Translation, by many Words an improper Phrases, which are not
French; but I hope the Reader, will have the Goodness to excuse it, and content himself with the Truth, seeing he may be sure to find it here, without the least Disguise or Deceit. More time will be requi∣site, to finish the other Manuscripts which are preparing, and will be published quickly after this Work; whose Author was one of Queen Christina's Officers, and of suffici∣ent Esteem and Credit with her, to have had a share in her Secrets. It will be seen clearly enough in the reading of the History, though he endeavours to persuade us, that he was never in her Service. Flattery has no part in his Writing, as may be found by his Complaints against Cardinal Azzolini, and oftentimes against the Queen her self, who committed all to his Eminence, without leaving any thing, for her Domesticks to do. And it may be seen, that the Affection, which he
has for his Mistress, makes him often spare her, without revealing all those ill things, which he ve∣ry well knew; and could easily have given an Account of.
THE HISTORY OF THE Intrigues and Gallantries OF CHRISTINA Queen of SWEDEN, and of her Court, whilst she was at ROME. ROME which is the Centre of Religion, is also the Theatre of the finest Comedies in the World: And there did Queen Christina behave her self with so agreea∣ble a Demeanor, that I believe it will
very much contribute to the Diversion of the Publick, without shocking the Majesty she always upheld, if I give an Idea or Description of her particular Actions, and to her Heroick ones, add certain little Enjoyments, which are not to be accounted altogether ill, in a Person who had quitted a Throne for a private Life, that she might give her self a little more liberty. The Great Ones have their Frailties as well as the less; and when we consider them only, in the Splendor wherewith they are surrounded, Vice passes oftentimes for Vertue: But when we bring them to a narrower Examination, we shall easily discover those great Passions, which make them set all their Engines at work to satisfie them. History which flatters not, renders Justice to all, because she speaks nothing but what Truth suggests. 'Tis Truth which brings all things to Light, and without it we know nothing certain. She appears in all her Simpli∣city in the History of the retired Life of Christina Alexandra, Queen of Swe∣den, and of the Goths and Vandals. There is enough said there to inform the Curi∣ous, and shew the Frailties which ap∣peared in the private Life of a Princess,
who in her publick one demonstrated so much Greatness of Soul. Her History is writ by too many Authors of diffe∣rent Nations and Languages to make mention of in this place. They all agree in Matters of Fact, and we may follow them without any sruple. But seeing they have spoke nothing of the secret Intrigues of this Princess, known only to her Domesticks, we que∣stion not but that it will oblige the Publick to communicate these Memoirs; and we shall here find that Princes do easily impose upon us, and what is of∣tentimes attributed to Policy, is yet nothing else but the Effect of irregular Passion. Christina Alexandra has perhaps been the Princess, who has most of all impo∣sed on us, and made her self most talk'd of in the World. She knew so well to assert a certain Character of Greatness in her whole Personage that she charmed all Mankind. Her Wit caused Admi∣ration in all who were able to compre∣hend it; and certain Graces sparkled in her Face, which caused Love in all that view'd them: Nevertheless she had more agreeableness in the one than the other; and her extraordinary Qualities hindred
People from reflecting upon the real Defects of her Person. She was a little bent, not to say crooked: Her Stature was middle-sized, inclining to be fat; and yet she was at a reasonable stand as to that Point: Her Complexion was the finest in the World: Her Eyes were beautiful and sparkling; her Lips red; she had good Teeth, and an Aquiline Nose; her Neck and Hands white, tho' she never wash'd them in any thing but cold Water. Besides these Excellencies of her Sex, which made her a Beauty in her own Nature, she had some of the best Qualities of ours, such as Courage and Undauntedness, with an admirable knowledge of most things; a great dex∣terity in the Conduct of the weightiest Affairs, as also of the most curious. And in a word, she had almost all the choicest Qualifications of both Sexes. The greatness of her Wilt, the facility of her Genius, the exactness of her Thoughts, the delicacy of her Expressions, and last of all a prodigious Memory, which made things past appear as present: All these rare Talents should I say, or rather all these extraordinary Qualities did so astonish all that approach'd her, that they were not capable of attending any
other thing. And yet those who would not suffer themselves to be so easily led away without a nicer Inspection, could find considerable Faults in her, how great and transcendent soever her Wit were. She so much loved her Plea∣sure, that she observed no Measures in the taking of it, and would Debase her self so far as to be Familiar with many of her Officers. Her Domesticks, who would take all sorts of Liberty with both Sexes, were sometimes Doubt∣ful of their own, and her greatest Fa∣vourites have oftentimes found her Light, Inconstant, Contradictory, and always full of her self; things scarce Supportable even in Princes themselves. The Greatness of this Princess's Soul manifested it self in the generous laying down of her Crown, and quitting her Kingdoms to Carolus Gustavs, Prince Palatine of the Rhine. Every Body was Surpriz'd at it, but no one could tell the Causes and Reasons which induc'd her to it: But the Queen, excellently skill'd in the Art of Dissimulation, alledged many, which being very specious, made her th more steemd. For she having Knowledge in History as well as Langua∣ges, ad read, that some Princes who
had been Crown'd with Glory, but ired with the noise of Arms, and the trouble of Royalty, chose to retreat towards the end of their Lives, into places separate from the Commerce of Mankind, to live a more easie and quiet Life. But this Example was not the motive of her Retirement; for she was then in the flower of her Age, and had scarce tasted the Pleasure of Reigning: Nor was it want of Success, which has often been the cause of the precipi∣tate Retreat of Princes, fearing to tarnish the glory of their former Actions, by the shame of the atter. For Fortune had smiled upon our Queen even till that present time. Her People were Victorious over their Enemies. She was the Refuge of the Princes of Europe, and indeed every thing conspir'd to make her Fear'd of the one, and Esteem'd by the other. Notwithstanding all this, she took the Resolution of quitting Sweden, and advancing the Prince Pala∣tine of the Rhine, who was next Heir to the Throne. Her Subjects oppos'd themselves, and represented the mise∣rable Effects of it; and redoubled the Esteem and Respect which they always had for her Majesty.
It was noised in the World, That she being disgusted with the Lutheran Religion, had a design to make Pro∣fession of the Roman Catholick, which was not agreeable to the Laws of the Swe∣den, and that she had rather follow the motives of her Conscience, than pre∣serve her Crown. For my part, I should believe with others, that this was the true motive of her Abdication, if she had not afterwards given the Lie to those great things she at first had done for God's sake. But being throughly inform'd in all her Secret Intrigues, I believe that Love, which very often ascends the Throne with Princes, was the cause which made Queen Christina Descend. She Loved Count Magnus of Gardia so desperately, who durst not answer her Passion, that whereas Kings elsewhere make Queens by Marriage, she endeavour'd to make a King on the same manner. But not being able to bring the Estates of Swe∣den to Consent to this, she took so great a despite at it, that she resolv'd to live for the future in a Melancholy Single State However, she had neither in∣clination nor disposition to pass the rest of her days in Retirement, being per∣swaded,
as she said, that Vertue did not consist in being Severe or Rough; nor in retiring from Humane Society, to seek God in the Horrour of Solitude; And that it was the way to draw and collect a Man to himself, rather than to Unite him to God. Adding, That since there was innocent Diversion to be had in Society, and that Pleasures were permitted to the World, one might find God among Men without refusing them. So that acting upon his fine Principle, she took a resolu∣tion to quit the troublesome business of a Crown, that she might give her self up the more entirely to her own Fan∣cies. But withal thinking to improve her Wit by enlightning her Reason, she intended to Travel all over Europe, for Rules to perfect her Manners, to be built upon the different Maxims of those People among whom she came. All this (joyn'd with the Secret of ma∣king her self universally talk'd of) was the reason of calling in Prince Carolus Gustavus to Reign in her place. However, she reserved to her self the Revenue of Pomerania, and other Estates of the Crown of Sweden, in Germany. Thus she renounc'd her Royal Dignity,
at 27 Years of Age, Anno Dom. 1654. and a little after left Sweden, going into Germany, which she travers'd almost throughout, and when she came to In∣struck, abjur'd her Religion: After which, shen went into Italy, in the Year 1655. You may easily imagne, that she was every where receiv'd with the Honours due to her Quality, without being at the trouble of a particular Recitation. We would willingly have related what pass'd in her Voyages, if there had been any thiny that would have stirr'd up the Curiosity of the Reader, but she mush have made a longer stay in all Cities, to have enter'd upon Intrigues, and therefore this was reserv'd for Rome, where she would be more Easie. Pope Alexander the VIIth, who pro∣mised himself great Matters from a Queen who was become a new Con∣vert, gave order to receive and treat her Royally through all the Teritories of the Ecclesiastical State, and himself gave order for her entry into Rome; which came very near to the magnifi∣cence of the Triumphs of the Ancient Romans; but whether it were that she could not find what she sought at Rome, or whether her Inconstancy would not
suffer her to stay there for any long time, she departed for France in the Year 1657. From whence she hoped to ind an easie Passage for Engiand. But Cromwell believing it to be done out of Policy, and his Affairs being in a Staggering condition, refused to re∣ceive into his new Estates, so unquiet and turbulent a Spirit as was that of the Queen of Sweden. However she had ound in France wherewith to satisfie her self for the shameful refusal she had met with in England, if she had known how to manage it; for the King, as busie as he was, to make an end of a Civil War, which had almost ruin'd his Kingdom, omitted nothing that might render France agreeable to the Queen. And all the Princes after his Example, crowded to Visit a Princess who had obtain'd so great a Reputation among among all Nations. The Men of Let∣ters also made their Court, as well as the Persons of Quality, and both the one and the other always departed well Satisfied in the Witty and Learned Con∣versations they had with her. There was presently some Talk of her Intri∣gues with certain Princes, whom she had inspired with Love; but these
Amours were only flying Gallantries, and there was none but the Duke of Guise that had any Engagements with her for any considerable length of time. This Prince who was as knowing and dextrous in Courtly Qualifications, as skilful in Arms, was chose by the King to go and receive her upon the Frontiers of France. He shewed in his Voyage that he had lost nothing of his good Mein in the Revolution of Naples, and that the Edge of his Passi∣ons were not quite taken off by the Pri∣son of Segovia; for he knew so well how to turn all things to his own Ad∣vantage, that he quickly entred into the Queen's good Graces. She was her self too well skill'd in Gallantry, not to see the Duke's Passion through all his Cares, and the great Honours he caused to be paid her in all places where she pass'd. The particular Distinction which she made of this Prince, did confirm that it was not reported without a probable appearance, that an Intrigue was form'd in this Voyage. On the other hand, the coldness which the Queen shew'd to her grand Usher, whom she had formerly Lov'd, augmented the Suspicion, and made her Domesticks believe that the Duke
had insensibly banish'd the Love of the Marquess Monaldeschi out of the Queen's Heart. They were deceiv'd in these Con∣jectures, as it often happens to those who judge of every thing, without knowing any thing to the Bottom: For it was no new Engagement the Queen had, which made her neglect him, but the indi∣screet Conduct of Monaldeschi. This Italian Gentleman had forgot, it seems, that Policy which makes a particular Character of the People of his Coutry. Some Letters which the Queen had writ to him, fell into his Enemies hands, who sent them into France to the Queen. The Cardinal was accused of it, and the Suspicion perhaps was not ill foun∣ded. But however it were, the Queen Sacrificed this once admired Love, to the Outrage done to her Honour, with∣out any regard either to the delight she had taken in his Person, or the Laws of the Realm where she then was. This lofty Princess believ'd, that because she was a Queen, she by her own Power, might do her self Justice upon a Person who had discover'd her Weakness; and her Resentment was so great, and so much to the Quick, that she pass'd over
all Laws, in erecting a kind of Sove∣reign Tribunal, where he was Condem∣ned, as himself declared to some, with∣out being guilty of any other Crime, than answering to the first Advances that this Princess made to him. This Assassination committed in the Gallery of Harts, so called, in the Royal Pa∣lace of Fountain Bleau, sounded so ill in the World, that the Court could not but disapprove so Inhumane an Action. Our cruel Lover being come to her self, after she had dipp'd her Hands in the Blood of a Man whom she was of∣ten accustom'd to Caress, saw that she now had lost her self in the Esteem of one of the most Splendid Courts of the World, and was also constrained to leave France, which was, as the con∣fess'd, the finest and most agreeable part of Europe, adding, that Paris was the Seat of Pleasures, and the Center of fine Wits. That the Court of France was the most Magnificent in all Europe; and that there was more Politeness there, than in any other place of the World. However, the Season then, was not at all proper for Intrigues of Love; for although the Capital City was Free and at Ease, all was yet in Confusion
upon the Frontiers, and the Nobles were more employ'd to follow Mars amidst the dangers of War, than to prosecute the Pleasures of Venus in the Streets of the Ladies of Paris. Well, she went away at last, though with much difficulty, which was very happy for her, had she been able by distance, to extinguish the Reproa∣ches she had justly drawn upon her self, by the violent Death of the Marquiss Monaldeschi. And after all, she has not been able to hinder Histo∣rians from transmitting to Posterity a Fact which should teach Youth to bridle their Passions, by shewing them, that this was only Love changed into Ha∣tred; That offended Love sets every thing at work to Revenge it self, And that such Amours do often end in a fa∣tal Catastrophe. After this, Queen Christina took her way towards Rome, with a design to end her Days there, but the Plague, which afflicted it, Anno 1659, kept her along time in the City of Pesaro, and in some other places of the Ecclesiastical State, till this Lash of the Almighty being taken away, she might return in Safety to Rome.
Though her second Entry into the Capital City of the World, came not near the Pomp of the first, it was how∣ever very Magnificent. A great many of the Nobility went to meet her out of the City, and to give her a welcom Reception, and she had the general Ac∣clamations of all sorts of People. Im∣mediately after she came, she put her Court into good Order, taking Persons of the first Quality for Gentlemen and Pages; but had so little Oeco∣nomy in her House, and made so ex∣travagant an Expence, that her Reve∣nue was not able to Maintain so nume∣merous a Court. And being always in Debt, she was necessitated to Pawn her Plate, as she had done her Jewels, for Money to pay off Bills. All which, the Pope understanding, gave her Cardinal Azzolini to be her Director, and Inten∣dant of her House. This Wise and Prudent Oeconomist, by retrenching part of the foolish and unnecessary Expences of the Queen's Palace, put things into Order in a little time, and by recei∣ving her Majesty's Effects, instead of being in Debt as before, he so dispo∣sed Matters, that she had always a ready Cash.
This wise and able Politician never oppos'd himself to the Queen's Will, but on the contrary, gave free consent to what Designs soever she had. And because he knew her Fancy, made her House finer and more sumptuous than ever, advancing Money of his own when the Queen's fail'd. By this means, he en∣tred so far into the Queen's good Gra∣ces, that she could never speak of him without acknowledgment of his Kind∣ness. But the Cardinal, who had more Contrivances in his Head than one at a time, look'd upon the Queen as a Per∣son deserving to be Beloved, without daring to declare himself a Lover; there∣fore studied to gain her altogether by his Merit; And to make his Design take better Effect, he never spake to her but after he had been taking some great Care, or made some particular Application about her Majesty's Dome∣stick Affairs. The Queen, who staid some time for nothing but his own Declaration to Surrender her self, at last prevented him, by giving him Signs that he might be happy when he pleased; and he knew well enough how to make use of the occasion, and followed her
Inclination, and so they first embarked in the business of an Amour. Behold here what ill Will has made publick concerning an Intrigue, which had no other Witnesses but the Parties themselves, pretending there are such clear Reasons of this Discovery, as will not suffer us to doubt the Truth of the Matter: However thus it is, that all the World speaks about it. This Conquest, supposing it true, dissipated all the Queen's Melancholy, so that laying aside all care, she entertain'd no Thonght of any thing but her Plea∣sures, and to inspire Love into her new Favourite. The specious pretence of Business did facilitate their Inter∣views, so that they might lay their Heads together, when they had a mind to take their fill of Pleasures, without Reflection or Scandal. Ne∣vertheless the Cardinal continued to have a great care of the Queen's Af∣fairs; but took upon him to speak with such Command, and in so lofty a manner to the other Officers, that they concluded he was authoriz'd by the Queen to do it; and looking more nar∣rowly into the Reason of this, they
found him to be as well the true Favou∣rite, as the Intendant of the Queen. And it was so managed by him, that no body durst speak of this Familiarity with her. But what the Domesticks durst not say then, Monsieur Coulange afterwards express'd in this Song. But her dear Azzolini in Rome So charm'd her with Delight, From him she could not live a Day, Nor pass a tedious Night. In these few Words Monsieur Coulange has express'd very much, and withal com∣prehended the Intrigue of the Cardinal with the Queen: But he says nothing of the Cardinal's Character; which we must take in the Portraicture that fol∣lows. Cardinal Decio Azzolini, was born at Fermo an Archiepiscopal See in the Mar∣ca Anconitana, Anno 1623. He was a handsome Person, tall, and well pro∣portion'd, had black Hair, lively and sparkling Eyes; but his Nose was some∣what short, and yet he might be said to have had a pleasant and happy Counte∣nance. The Qualifications of his Mind were extraordinary; He had so great a
knowledge in all good Literature, that scarce any of his Nation could equal him; and had a Genius more adapted than any other to penetrate into the Sci∣ences. And as our Cardinal's Sphere wherein he mov'd was very large, it gave a large scope to his Mind. He had an excellent Gaiety, Briskness, and Strength of Wit, spake very well on all Subjects, writ exactly, and was admi∣red in Conversation. Which Character agreed well enough with his Years; and though he was not altogether the Per∣son he seemed to be, was yet of great Advantage to him, to insinuate himself into the Queen's Mind. He was not exempt from Faults; for he was of a jealous and deceitful Temper; flexible and patient to excess, when his Affairs requir'd it; also covetous and biass'd to his own Interest, but of great Ability in the management of the most difficult Matters, and in the discovery of the most secret Intrigues. He ow'd his Cardinal's Cap to his Abilities this way. For though he was of Quality by Birth, and that there had been a Cardinal of his Name under Sextus V. He could not propose to obtain the Purple by his Me∣rit alone; and besides, he had taken up
a ort of Life for a long time, which seem'd to be against his mind: For having gone through his Studies in the City, where he was born, the ne∣cessity of his Affairs obliged him to put himself into the Service of some Prelate of Rome. And for this purpose he em∣ployed the Credit of Cardinal Barbarini Patron of the French, and the Pope's Nephew, to whom he was recom∣mended. He got him entred into the Ser∣vice of the Archbishop Pancirola, Titular Patriarch of Constantinople, whom after∣wards the Pope sent his Nuncio into Spain; Azzolini accompanied him in this Voyage, and perform'd the Office of Secretary, during all the time of his Nunciature. In this place he made it appear to his Patron, that he was capable of being something better than a Scribe; and in∣deed from thence forward the Patriarch conceived so advantageous an Idea of him, that being promis'd to be a Cardi∣nal, he made Azzolini his Conclavist, after the Death of Ʋrban the VIII. Azzolini gave new and farther Proofs of his Abilities in this higher Station, insomuch that in this Conclave, Innocent X. being created Pope, he some∣time after declared Cardinal Pancirola
his prime Minister, in the room of Car∣dinal Pamphilio his Nephew, who had left his Hat that he might espouse the Princess of Rossano. Azzolini's Protector being thus raised to the highest Charge in the Court of Rome, did not forget a Man whom he knew to be fit for great Employs, and made him Secretary of State. This new Post furnished Azzolini with fair Occasions of making himself known, by the management of his Pa∣tron's Favour: But Fortune would not suffer him to enjoy it long, and the Death of this Minister was enough to have shaken any other besides himself. But he had the good luck to please the Pope; and the Holy Father taking him into his Protection, put him immediate∣ly into the Prelature, by declaring him Chamberlain of Honour, and permitting him in the Interim to exercise the Charge of Secretary of State. Afterwards he was made Secretary of the Breves of Prin∣ces; and he acquitted himself so well in this Office, that the Pope call'd him his Eagle. These Breves were full of fine Thoughts, and all so nobly ex∣press'd, that one might take a great pleasure in reading them several times over. However Azzolini did not limit
himself to these Breves; but fearing that his 2d. Protector might fail him in the middle of his Fortune, as the first had done, he endeavoured by all Me∣thods to advance himself; and, in the end found a favourable opportunity of doing it upon the Ruines of another. Pope Innocent X. having no Ne∣phew since the Marriage of Prince Pamphilio, adopted Cardinal Castalli his Favourite, and gave him all those Em∣ploys and Offices which the Pope's Ne∣phews usually enjoy'd; and yet this ungrateful Person ruin'd his Fortunes by his own Fault; for not being con∣tent with his Prosperity, be thought to raise his Merit with the Spaniards, who had given him the Protection of the Kingdom of Sicily. And this he endeavou∣red, by revealing Secrets of State to them, in prejudice of the Rights of the Holy See, because the World believ'd that the Pope, during Masanello's Rebellion, had a Mind to unite Naples to the Ec∣clesiastical State. And perhaps Astalli thought to come to the Sovereign Pon∣tificate by the help of the Spaniards, whose Favour he underhand sought by such shameful Methods. Now the Pope coming to the knowledge of the Mat∣ter,
very much reproved him for it, and forbad him to see the Spanish Am∣bassador any more. But it was to no purpose, which so angred his Holiness, that he promised the Hat to any one that could discover the Intrigue of Car∣dinal Astalli with the Spanish Ambassa∣dor. Azzolini who liv'd in the Palace, took his Advantage of this Conjuncture, and observed him very narrowly, till he discovered that every night about twelve of the Clock when the Pope was in Bed, Astalli came came down from his Apartment, in the Palace of Monteca∣vallo, by a little winding pair of Stairs, at the bottom of which there was a Gate, leading out to a narrow Street, through which he passed in disguise; and some paces from thence went into an Hackney Coach, which conveyed him to the Spanish Ambassadors: There he staid two or three hours, and re∣turn'd back in the same manner. Az∣zolini told the Pope of this, who cau∣sed Cardinal Astalli to be seized, as he was thus returning one night from the Spanish Ambassadors; and after he had upbraided him with Perfidiousness, dis∣charged him from being of his Family, took from him his Employments, and
expelled him his Palace. After which he fled into Sicily, and there died of Grief at his Bishoprick of Catanea. Presently after this, Azzolini appeared at Rome cloathed in Purple, being made a Cardinal for his having made himself a Spy. His Promotion was much talked of, and surpriz'd many People, and this his Vigilancy in discovering In∣trigues, hath been observed upon ma∣ny other occasions, but particularly when he acted in his own Interests; for he would then use all Arts imagina∣ble, till he brought his Designs about; and from hence it was that since that time we always saw him make so great a Figure in the Sacred Colledge. He was Secretary of State under the Pon∣tificate of Clement IX. and in the four Conclaves wherein he was present, he had a good part in the Election of the Popes, Alexander VII. Clement IX. Cle∣ment X. and Innocent XI. being one of the most esteemed Cardinals of his Fa∣ction, which was called the Flying Squa∣dron: But the best Fortune that ever happened to him, was, that he knew the way so soon to obtain the good Graces of Queen Christina; which he preserved all his Life; and she as reli∣giously
kept her Word at her Death, which she had given him at the begin∣ning, that she would make him her Heir-General. Gallantry was not the only Business of the Queen; for as she always affected to pass for a great Wit, and pretended to an Understanding of all things, (though some have reported that she had but a superficial knowledge of the Sciences) he kept an Academy of good Literature in her Palace; where the most learned Men in Rome came to sub∣mit their Works to her Judgment: And she would listen with Pleasure to the immoderate Praises which were gi∣ven her. Neither was Chymistry one of her least divertisements: For though she were descended from a Throne, she had not utterly cast aside the Love of Riches; and she believed all her Life, that she should obtain immense Treasures by means of this deceitful Art. Count Santarini entertained her with these Visions, and caused her to convert a good part of her Revenue into Smoak. But if he satisfied her in the foolish Passion which she had for Chymistry, he gave her also a great deal of Vexation, by the Violences he
was guilty of; for he committed an infinite number of Disorders in Rome, under the Protection of her Majesty. Nor was he the only irregular Person of her Court, for it seemed as if the Queen's Officers thought they were no way obliged to observe the Laws, and that they had a permission to do all manner of Ill, and Affront all the World. They became the Protectors of Assassines and Thieves; and the Honour both of Wives and Daughters submitted to their Tyranny. The Farmers of the Customs complain'd that they could not pay their Rent, because the Merchants cau∣sed all sorts of Goods to enter the City by the Queen's Coaches and Livery∣men, which hindred them from being Visited. Cardinal Farnese, the Gover∣nour of Rome, a Person of Integrity, that render'd Justice to all, without respect of Persons, Chastised some of the Queen's Domesticks, for committing Crimes in contempt of his Authority. But she who would play the Sovereign in the Dominions of others, took it heinously, yet could have no redress herein from the Pope, who was already tir'd with the complaints of their per∣petual Disorders. So that now he did
not look upon her with the same Eye as before, and resolv'd to retrench the greatest part of the Immunities, Ex∣emptions, and Priviledges he had given her, seeing her Domesticks did abuse them in so gross a manner. And tho' the Queen was obliged to Cardinal Far∣nese, who as Major Domo to the Pope, had omitted nothing for the Queen's good Reception, the first time she en∣tred Rome: she notwithstanding did what she could to give him Trouble and Vex∣ation. For this Cardinal being of the Family of the Duke of Parma, had the use of a House of Pleasure belonging to the said Prince, which was scituate near the Gate of St. Pancras, a little above the Palace de Riarli, at Langara, which the Queen had bought for her Life. The Cardinal coming often thither for be∣nefit of the Air, took a Pleasure in Beau∣tifying the Garden; and because he want∣ed Water, agreed with the Fountain-keepers of the Apostolick Chamber, to furnish him with two Cocks of Water from the Fountain of Pope Paul V. which appears so Nobly above St. Peter di Montozio. But at the same time, it seems he diminished the Queen's, which he believed her Servants would not per∣ceive,
because the Queen had abundan of Water. The Gardiners neverthel complain'd to her Majesty, how th had lessened the Current which serv to water their Herbs and other Plan Now, the Queen durst not complain the Chamber it self, and therefore thre all her Choler at the Cardinal; and bcause she would spight him, caus'd so Palisadoes she had in her Garden, a held up the Earth of the curious Terra which they call La vigna Farnese, to pull'd up; so that it was ready to tum∣ble into the Queen's Garden, that lay beneath it. His Eminence would wil∣lingly have built a Wall, but could not effect it, by reason of this Difference: however, he said pleasantly, That he had bought the Water of the Aposto∣lick Chamber, and that if the Queen had a mind to have more, and would make her Application to the Officers that Rented out those Waters, she might have enough to serve many Mills. All these Vexations joyn'd to the Queen's natural Inconstancy, made her resolve to return once more into Ger∣many. She therefore departed from Rome Anno 1666, dismissing Part of her Fa∣mily, and to defray the Charge of her
oyage, borrow'd Five thousand Crowns f Cardinal Antonio Barberini. When she Arrived at Trent, the Mar∣uiss del Monte who had been Banished ut of the Ecclesiastical State, for cer∣tain Crimes, came to throw himself at er Feet, and desire her Protection. The Queen admitted him into her Ser∣vice, not for any Merit of his Person, but being a great Boaster, she was glad to have so brave a Champion in her Train. But that which more engaged her to Protect him, was to do a de∣spight to Cardinal Chigi▪ which was butan ill return for the great Honours and Respects Pope Alexander VII. of the same Family had done her when she came first to Rome. Horatio de Bourbon, Marquiss del Monte, was of so Noble a Family, that he had the Name and Arms which the Royal Family of France▪ for many Ages, had born with so great Glory. The Bourbons of Ita-derive their Pedigree as high as Charle∣maigne: And tho' they do not descend from Robert Count of Clermont in Boau∣voisis, fourth Son of the King St. Lewis, from whom Henry the Great came in a direct Line; yet are they come from Archambaud, Sire of Bourbon, that left the
Bourbonnois to Prince Robert, who Mar∣ried his Daughter and sole Heir. And it is supposed this Bourbon Archambaud, was a Prince of the Royal House of France; that he descended from Lewis the Young; and was a Cade, who in the time of the Croisade, settl'd himself in Italy. They possessed the Mrqui∣sate Delmnte in the Appnnine Moun∣tains, under their Cousins of the Dutchy of Ʋrbino, Tuscany and Romania: Tis a Fief of the Empire, whose Investiture was given by Charles the V. and as themselves pretend, they have been Ma∣sters of it from the Reign of the Em∣peror Frederick II. However it be, this famous Person having always a round Family, and their Marquisate be∣ing very Poor, scituate upon the Fron∣tiers, and in inaccessible Places as well by Art as Nature, was always a Retreat for the Banditti, of whom these Gentle∣men became the Protectors. And I have spoke with some Ancient People, who assured me, that the Father of Marquiss Horatio, and his Uncles devoured more Men for the sake of their wealth, than any of the most famous Bandits in the Kingdom of Naples have ever done. This Mar∣quiss Horatio, was a proper Man of a
handsom Shape, had a large Face, hol∣low Eyes, a hook Nose, a large Mouth and a forked Chin; his Complexion was pale, and his Hair of an Ash Colour; he was Nervous, and of a strong Con∣stution, having his Body Hairy, his Knees turning outward, and his Feet inward; he had a precipitate Gate, and nothing great or Majestick in him; he was neither very Fat, nor very Lean, a great Opiniator, and had a Womanish Voice: He had the appear∣ance of a good Man, but was wholly steered by his own Interests; a Person very Sensible, but more inclin'd to Ill than Good, excessively addicted to Wo∣men; Passionate in Play, and knew all the Tricks and Cheats thereof, was a great Dissembler, of a Vicious Mind, Revengeful, and very Cruel. In a little time he got such an Ascen∣dant over the Queen, that she adher'd to every thing he said: And he spake with so much Assurance, and was so Positive, that all that heard him were Astonish'd. As for his Religion, his Manners shew'd that he had very little, however he confess'd and communica∣ted as others do. He knew when to Speak, and when to be Silent; was very
brisk among the Ladies, and spent much Money upon them, but 'twas often∣times at the Expence of Merchants and Trades-men. Every thing that he could lay hands on, was his own, whether Sacred or Profane; and he us'd to say, That he would revenge himself without Threatning, for feas of being preven∣ted. He eat well, but without Excess, and if any one had a Secret to excite Luxury, he would have it, though he dearly bought it with his Money. Troufles, Mushrooms, Sellery, Arti∣choak bottoms, and all things which stir up and provoke, were for his Palate: He drank none but the choicest Wines, and after a Feast, would drink a glass of Greek, or other such sort of Wine, and eat two or three Comfits to help Digestion. The Queen Travelled over Germany along with him, but made no stay till she came to Hamburgh, where she Resi∣ded a long time, taking sometimes lit∣tle Journeys to Staden, Verden, Bremen, and other Cities of the Neighbourhood under the Dominion of the Suedes. At last she took a Fancy to re-enter the Kingdom; and upon her Arrival at Ni∣coping, the Council of State, who had
the Administration of all Affairs, during the Minority of this Present King, Charles the XI, Son of Charles the X. to whom she had resign'd the Crown, sent to intreat her to come no farther, for fear of giving occasion to some People of mutinous and unsettl'd Spirits, to believe she had a mind to re-mount the Throne. But the true rea∣son of the Senate's Message was, that they apprehended some danger from her unquiet and embroyling Humour; be∣sides, they believed, that she might pos∣sibly have some Party in the Kingdom, and that she repented her Abdication, as Charles the V. had done. The change of her Religion, and the Insolence of her People, was another reason why they refus'd to permit her Entrance in∣to their Capital City; and especially after the Accident which happen'd to one of her Almoners, called the Abbot Santoni, a Priest of Tuscany, whom she had carred along with her, contrary to the Counsel of Cardinal Azzolini, who gave her two Priests of the Oratory of the new Church, to direct her Consci∣ence, and to celebrate Mass. These good Fathers were as Prudent and Regular,
as the Abbot Santoni was Irregular and unworthy of his Character. One day he was like to have Deflow∣red a Damsel of Nicoping, who came in∣to that City from a Neighbouring Ca∣stle, to pay her Duty to Queen Chri∣stina as her ancient Sovereign. But during her stay in the City, Santoni got an Acquaintance with her; and because she expressed her Respects with a cer∣tain Freedom, which is natural to those Northern People, he thought she used some Compliance, of which he might make his Advantage. in this Imagina∣tion, he one day finding an Opportuni∣ty, endeavoured to force her Modesty, and had committed an Outrage upon her, if she had not cried out for help. This brought in a great many People, who laid hands on this nfamous Person. Which Action of his, gave a great Scan∣dal to the Catholick Religion, the Peo∣ple being usually unjust enough to con∣clude Generals from Particulars, as if Faults were not Personal, and as if there were not Good and Bad in all Societies. But though the Queen did not turn him away for this shameful thing, the Pa∣rents of the Damosel conceiving great Indignation at so impudent a Villainy,
Way-laid him, with an intent to bath their Hands in his Blood, for the Injury he had done their Daughter; which the Queen understanding, was obliged to take him into her own Coach, to shelter him from their Insults; which without doubt he would have received, had it not been for this Precaution. The same Santoni had like to have been Kill'd at Hamburgh for another Fro∣lick. There was a French Protestant, a Merchant of Rochel, who had settled himself, and Married a Wife in that City, with whom Santoni having got an Acquaintance, had the freedom of his House, and Visited his Wise in his Ab∣sence, as is usual among Civil People, without any ill Consequence. Now our Italian being born in a Country where Jealousie reigns, and not without cause, and he not being accustomed to such Familiarity, hop'd that the Lady would not be Cruel, when any handsom oppor∣tunity offered, and therefore to capti∣vate her good Will, was ve Compla∣cent to her upon all occasions; but one day he had a certain Caprice which had like to have cost him very Dear. For the Wife having desired him to tell her how she might Complement her
Husand and in Italian when he came ho he taught her such Words as an ho∣nest Woman ought not to have in her Mouth, if she knew what they signi∣fied: But as she understood no Italian, she innocently repeated the words she had learn'd, for he had taught her this sweet Lesson so often, that she had got it by Heart. He did this thinking the Merchant had not understood Italian, but was mistaken, for he had Travelled in his Youth into Italy, and was so Asto∣nished to hear himself saluted with such vilainous Words, that in Passion, he gave her a sound Box on the Ear. The poor Woman very much surprized at these new Caresses, fell a Weeping: But the Merchant did not stop there, he would know who taught her these Words. He understood at last, though by Force and Threatnings, that 'twas the Abbot Santo∣ni; and she made him so throughly sensible of her Sincerity and Innocence, that the good man could no longer doubt; so that he turned all his Fury upon this unworthy Priest, and went to seek him at the Queen's Lodgings, with an intent to Kill him; but the Rage which tran∣sported him, having alarmed those which he met with, they gave advice to Santoni
to avoid the Rencounter. How Santoni durst come no more afterwards to the Merchants. Q. Christina returned by Land from Nicoping to Colmar, where she Embark'd for Lubeck, and from thence came into the Dutchy of Bremen and Principality of Verden; and as these Estates depended on the Crown of Sweden, they expressed themselves to her with very great Re∣spects; she was well receiv'd by the Ma∣gistrates, and they presented her their Keys. The Burgers with all the Mili∣tia, not only put themselves in Arms, but also drew out the Regular Troops, as well Infantry as Cavalry, to give her all the Honour they could. The Queen was equipped in a Black Velvet Justa∣core, having an Hat upon her Head, adorn'd with a Plume of White Feathers, and being Moucted like a Cavalier up∣on an Excellent Horse, we rid through their Ranks, where she met with many old Officers who had serv'd her in the Army during her Regn, and some that had even served under the Great Gusta∣vus Adolphus her Father. Among others, she knew General Ʋrangel, to whom she made a thousand Compliments, and would needs exercise the Troops in his
Presence. She would undertake to give Directions for the Marches and Coun∣ter-Marches of the Infantry, and the like for the Wheelings of the Horse; but it seem'd the Management of an In∣tregue of Love, was more suitable to her, than the ordering of an Army, for she gave very improper Words of Com∣mand, which made Ʋrangel Laugh; and he was forc'd to assist her by fit Terms, and to explain her Orders, that he might not introduce new Phrases into the Art Military, but this could hinder him afterwards from making pleasant Jests of her among his Friends, and making Reflections on the Queen, as guilty of Folly and Self-conceitedness. And yet for all this, she had so good an Opinion of her own Merit, that she be∣lieved her self perfectly Skill'd and Knowing in all things: And when once invited at Stade to a Wirschaff, which is a kind of merry Ball, she appear'd in an Antique Habit, dancing in Mas∣querade, Cloathed like a Nymph of the Woods, and behaved her self in a most Ridiculous manner. In the mean time the Marquiss del Monte knew so well how to Insinuate himself into the Queen's Mind, that he
became the Arbitrator or Master of the House. But he was as Scandalous as the Abbot Santoni; and it seem'd as if these two Men had an absolute Autho∣rity to Seduce all the Women they came near. The Queen often heard of their Insolencies, but when People com∣plain'd, did nothing but Laugh, or gave such gentle Reprimands, that they took them as a permission to commit further Disorders. The Marquiss was not content with his Debauchery only, but plotted and contriv'd to commit Violence and Ra∣pine; Covetousness having no less the Dominion over him than other Vices. The first proof of his priveledg'd Va∣lour, was to cause a poor Frenchman to be Kill'd, who not knowing how to moderate his Tongue, was the cause of his own Death: His Office was a Lungs or Bellows-blower, introduc'd to the Queen's Service in savour of that wor∣thy Science, which her Majesty had in so great Esteem, for she hop'd by it to recompence the giving up her Crown, in getting the Philosopher's Stone. And for this purpose, she built a Laboratory in her Lodgings at Hamburgh, where this French Chymist begun his Opera∣tions.
The Marquiss seeing the Queen was so easily perswaded to convert a large Sum of Money into Smoak, thought he might do very well to save one half of that Expence, and so keep as many of the Gold and Silver Pieces for him∣self, which the Chymist had to calcine, as he could conveniently; ordering him to find out an Invention to make the the Queen believe, that the loss of them happened some other way, and for so doing, assur'd him both of his Protecti∣on, and his future Kindness to him. This lasted for some Months; but the Inten∣dant of her Majesty's House, required at last, to know what was become of all the Money; for the Queen who was only made acquainted with things by Halves, contented her self with some Experiments, trusting to the deceitful Promises of the Chymist, who promis'd her Mountains of Gold. Well then, this Bellows-blower was obliged to come to an Account, and his inability to answer it, struck him with such Fear, that he was fain to run from Hamburgh, and fly into the Territories of Den∣mark, which were very near; from whence he wrote to the Queen, that the Marquiss del Monte had embezled and
misapplied the greatest part of the Money. The Marquiss being a Bold and and Confident Man, clear'd himself of this Calumny, and all the Reproach was thrown upon the poor Chymist, to whom the Marquiss caused a Letter to be written under a false Name, inviting him to go to a certain Place, where he should find an Employ: The Chymist went readily thither, thinking no harm, and was there Murder'd by the Mar∣quiss's Orders. Our Barbon now wanting this In∣come, was obliged to find out another way to get Money: He was called Bar∣bon, by a corruption of the word, in∣stead of Bourbon, which is the real Name of his Family. There was at Hamburgh a very rich Jew, a Portuguese by Nation, Named Teixero, who was a famous Merchant, and worth many Millions: This Man having a great deal of ready Money, was the Receiver Ge∣neral of the Queen's Revenue, and used to advance her Money at a large Inte∣rest. The Marquiss attheir first Ac∣quaintance pretended himself his great Friend, but with an intention some way or other to screw Money out of him. This Jew had a Nephew whose Name
was Abraham, a very handsom young Man, to whom the Marquiss presented a fine Horse, on which this young Gen∣tleman would sometimes Ride to a Country House belonging to his Uncle, to take the Air, and Divert himself; thither the Marquiss would often send him little Presents, and Musicians for him to make Merry with his Mistresses: Which Kindness was continued for some time, till at last one Night the Marquiss caus'd Abraham to be Seiz'd by six Horsemen all Arm'd, whom they took and lifted up at his whole length, and put him in a great Coffer, which they boar'd at both ends on purpose to give him Air, threatning to Kill him if he cried out or spoke one word, and so convey∣ed him into a Wood in the Country of Brunswick. In the mean time Teixero was extreamly troubled that he could not see his Nephew return; and after two or three days Absence, he sent to his Country-House to enquire News of him; and word was brought back, that the young Gentleman parted from thence the same day he came, with intent to return to the City. The Uncle caused great Search to be made far him every where, and the Marquiss del Monte was
not a little Officious to serve him in it, making shew as if he would rumage every corner of the whole World to find out his dear Friend Abraham. Now, there was one Cleuter a Servant of the Queen's, said to be a Shoomaker's Son of Leige, who undertook to make so strict and narrow a Search, that he would not fail to bring some News of him. The Queen promis'd a conside∣rable Gratuity; and the Jew on his part engaged to give a good Reward to the Person that could bring back his dear Nephew. After five days Search (altogether at the Expence of the good Man) Tidings were brought, that Abra∣ham was found in a Wood, at the Mercy of six Men Masqued, who said, They were poor Officers that wanted Money to Re-mount their Companies; and gave the Searchers to understand, that they would not release their Pri∣soner at a lower Rate than Twenty thousand Rix Dollars; That they had Thirty Comrades more at their Com∣mand, and in case they were forced, they would sooner Kill Abraham, than release him for a less Sum. The Jew when he heard this sad News, was dri∣ven almost to Despair; and the Queen
was so much incensed at it, that she would have sent the whole Suedish Army into the Country of Bremen to have destroyed those Thieves; but Ge∣neral Wrangel, who had been an old Experienc'd Officer, and had no mind to undertake the Exploit, could not sorbear Laughing, and represented to her Majesty, that these Troopers con∣tained in the Forest, were a pack of Desperate People, like so many furious Wild Beasts, and that a great many brave Men might be lost before they could be able to hunt them out of the Wood, or get any advantage of them; and that if they should kill Abraham, his Friends would be never a whit the better. To make short the Story, af∣ter a great many Treaties and Offers, they were at last forced to carry Ten thousand Rix Dollars, which were di∣vided among these honest People, ac∣cording to the Distribution of Barbon, who kept the greatest share for himself. Abraham returned presently to Ham∣burgh, fcom whence he durst not go a∣broad any more, for fear of such ano∣ther Accident.
Our Barbon was no less Gallant in Amours, than other Intrigues. For a French Captain of Foot in the Service of Sueden, coming out of the Dutchy of Bremen to Hamburgh, about some Business, brought a pretty Mistress along with him, whom he call'd his Wife, and was so Jealous of her, that contra∣ry to the Custom and temper of his Country, he kept her up close. But the Marquiss happening to see her, was so taken with her Beauty, that he fell into an extream longing to have an Amorous Correspondence with her. By the pow∣er of Money he found means to speak to her, and send a small Present, which she refus'd with Disdain, and Checked the Messenger very Severely for offer∣ing it. But Cleuter to serve the Mar∣quiss, went to the Captain like a Block∣head, and after a short Compliment, told him, Captain, you have a very hand∣some Mistress, sure you will not be so un∣reasonable to keep her all to your self. The Captain, who was a Man of very high Courage, being surpriz'd with so blunt a Salute, fiercely answer'd, that he won∣der'd a Man of his Appearance and Character, durst speak so to a Military Man, who carried that by his Side which
would do him reason against any insolent Affront that should be offer'd him. That the Consideration and Respect he had for the Queen, did hinder him from making a proper return at that Instant, but that he hoped to find both a fitter time and place to make him repent his Rahness. This was great Moderation for a Man of Courage as he was, and who had the Principal Officers in that City to back him, I mean the Body of the Army, which the King Quarter'd in Bremen, Verden, and Staden, all which had been yielded up to him by the Peace of Munster; for there was a great ma∣ny French among those Troops. Such of them as were then at Hamburgh see∣ing the Captain out of Humour, would needs know the Reason, and having un∣derstood it, would have humbled Cleuter after another manner. But the Captain intending to revenge himself like a Man of Honour, went first of all to the Quee who only Laugh'd at him, being pre∣possess'd by the Marquiss, who was the prime cause of the Difference. This Anger'd the Frenchman and made him Chalenge Cleuter to fight him with Sword and Pistol. Cleuter accepted it with difficulty, being indeed forc'd to
it for fear of passing for a Coward and loosing his Reputation; but however took Eight days to prepare himself. The Frenchman generously and readily con∣sented, and the Marquiss in vain endea∣voured to agree the Matter during that interval of time. The day of Combat came, and the Peo∣ple (as is usual there) flock'd out of Hamburgh to go and see it. For though the Magistrates had forbidden Duels in the City, yet they could not hinder Peo∣ple from going out and fighting in the Lands that were under the Power of Denmark, which was but a League from thence, at a place called Altena; near which, scarce any Week pass'd, but there was some Duel or other fought, the Custom being grown so general, that even among the very Tradesmen, every one pretended this way to revenge him∣self of the Injuries done him. Our two Champions being met, went together upon the top of a little rising Ground, near a Meadow, and there wheeling a∣bout, they both fired their Pistols at the same time; the Frenchman's fail'd, but Cleuter's went off, and Shot his Ad∣versary in the Arm, who finding himself Wounded, was the more Enraged, and
notwithstanding his Wound, drew out the other Pistol, which also fail'd as the first did. The Frenchman seeing this immediately Dismounted, and with Sword in hand Attack'd Cleuter, but he, though he saw so much Bravery, instead of offering fair Quarter, fir'd his other Pistol, Shot him into the Belly, and Kill'd him. After which, the Spectators ran in and parted them; but the Frenchman having lost much Blood, was carried Dead on a Bier into Hamburgh. Thus passed this Combat, at which the French were extreamly Mortified. And it was said, that Cleuter had a Charm which hinder'd his Enemies Pistols from going off: But for my part, I really believe it to be his Misfortune, for Arms do often fail Men on that manner, of which this is not the first Instance. At least Cleuter did not act like a Genteel Cavalier in the Queen's Judgment, who ought, (as she her self consessed) to have given good Quarter, when he saw his Adversary not in a condition of Fight∣ing. But he on the contrary, did not shew the least Compassion for his Mis∣fortune, nor gave him the least good Word, but always, like a Brute, said an hundred things of the French Nation.
But one Clairet, Valet de Chambre to the Queen, who was a Friend of the French Captain's, was extreamly affect∣ed with Grief at it, and had the Gene∣rosity to assist his Widow. The Queen also gave her something out of Charity towards her Maintenance. As for Cleuter, he acquir'd the reputation of a Valiant Person among those of his Gang, which made him more Insolent than ever. At that Juncture, a Scotch Colonel made his Court to the Queen, in hopes of obtaining some considerable Employ by her Credit. But as he was coming away from her Majesty, had some Difference, I know not how, with Cleuter, and he without many words, gave him a Wound in the right side with his Sword. The Scotchman had no time to put himself upon his Defence; for Cleuter was assisted by Seven or Eight, who kept Guard at the Gate of the Queen's Palace, and they pursued the Scotchman with Sword in Hand, so that he was fain to fly for fear of worse Mischief. The Queen augmenting her Guard, af∣ter an Accident which happen'd to her in Hamburgh, of which we shall speak by and by, made Cleuter a Captain, whom she carried with her afterwards to Rome,
and there presented him to Pope Cle∣ment, who gave him a Regiment, which he sent to Candia. Cleuter in that Ex∣pedition reaped more glorious Lawrels than he had done in Germany. And af∣ter his return, had a company of the Pope's Guards, even to his Dying day. Although the Queen had Reform'd one part of her House at Rome, as that of her Pages, Gentlemen, and other Of∣ficers, yet for the sake of her Gran∣deur, the Salaries of the Duke of Poli and other great Officers of her Chamber, were constantly paid. Cardinal Azzo∣lini, who had not been much against the Queen's Journey, believing she would have moderated her Expences, and by it have clear'd her self out of Debt; being very much surpriz'd to hear of the Queen's profuse way of Living, could not forbear Writing to her Majesty, and giving her to understand that he could no longer support her House at Rome, whither she sent nothing since her Departure from thence; That he had Borrow'd what Money he was able, and had no further Credit; And that there was a considerable Sum owing to her Domesticks for Wages; That he desir'd she would at least give him per∣mission
to put off her Stables, and sel the Horses, because this was of very great Expence to her there. The Queen who wanted not a quick Apprehension in other things, did not believe that the Life she led Abroad, had been so well known at Rome, and upon the reading this Letter, fell into a very great and fearful transport of Passion. She com∣plain'd, that she had as many Ses a∣bout her as she had Servants; and her Physician was suspected to have written an Account of his Mistress's Actions to Rome. The poor Man was sent for into her Presence, and she took him by the Collar and would have Strangled him, if he had not been Rescued out of her Hands; and after a Thousand injurious Reproaches, she turn'd him out of her Service, without giving him leave to Justifie himself. The Marquiss Del Monte doubting lest he should also be taken to Task, had an extraordinary Curiosity to see the Letters which came from Rome, and importun'd Laudini, a she Fa∣vourite of the Queen's so much, that she ventured to take some of them out of her Toilet, and others our of her Pocket when we was in Bed. By this means he found what he sought for, and
knew that Azzolini was inform'd of all. From thenceforward he therefore took all those into his Interests who made their Advantage of the Queen's Extra∣vagance; for indeed, almost every one Pillag'd her, and was for catching at what he could for himself. But her Intendant, whose Name was Pezze, whom the Cardinal had recommended as a n of Integrity and great skill in the management of Houshold Affairs, did very often beseech her to look into his Accounts, and to moderate her Ex∣pences: But she always told him she would never Quarrel with him, and that she had rather trust him than any other, and desir'd him not to trouble her with his Books. This was fine Oeconomy and excellent Order in a Queen's Court, who pretended her self a Philosopher, and Moraliz'd upon all things. But for all this, the Intendant or Steward, contrary to the usual and general Practice and Principles of those of his Profession, was Faithful to her even to his Death, which happened to him not long after in a small Village in Brun∣wick, as he was returning with the Queen for Rome. The violence of the Convulsions, in which he Expired, did
apparently demonstrate that he was Poyson'd, and the Marquiss was suppo∣sed to be the Author; though it was nois'd Abroad at that time and Printd in some Gazetts, that the Queen had caused him to be Kill'd, which I am apt to believe, was meer Calumuy, for she could have no Hatred against him, see∣ing he serv'd her very well. Yet she never made any Enquiries into the man∣ner of his Death; and after she was come back to Rome, when the Brother of this Unhappy Person, came to throw himself at her Feet, and to beg Justice of her with Tears and Sighs, she did nothing but Laugh, and gave not so much as one word of Comfort to the poor Man. As for Laudini, she had been a Semp∣stress at Paris, and her Name was Fan∣cho. The Queen being at Paris, took her into her Service for her Talkative∣ness, and because she was tolerably Handsome, and very Handy in what∣ever she did. Her Majesty made her one of the Women of her Chamber, and a little after Married her to an Italian called Landini, who was one of her Au∣spessades, and one of them who Kill'd the Marquiss Monaldeschi by her Order.
She serv'd the Queen to her dying day, and follow'd her in all her Travels. Her Husband stay'd at Rome by reason of some Indisposition; but the Marquiss did so well Comfort her in his Absence, and so fficciously supplied the want of the Auspee, that Laudini became ig with Child, which put her into a terrible Constenation. But the Queen who was good Natur'd and pitied the weakness of those of her Sex, perceived by her Couenance and Melancholy Behaviou, that  had some Trouble upon her Spirits, and by the force of Questions understanding the ruth of the whole Matter, she bid her be of good Courage, and not Despair, for she would take care to Pacifie her Hus∣band. And since the thing was done, she Pardon'd her upon the condition she would be wiser for the time to come. But alas, she Preach'd to an hardened Impenitent, for both before and af∣ter this Accident, she gave her slf in∣tirely up to the Embraces of the Mar∣quiss. For whenever she saw the Queen busie in her Chymistry, or in writing Letters, she would go out at the Gar∣den
Gate to her Gallant, with a Rin∣quelet upon her Head, and her Face cover'd like the Women of Hamburgh when they have no mind to be known. A Rinquelet is a kind of Veil, made of fine black Serge, which being put over the Head, covers both the Arms and Shoulders. Ludini went often thus Dis∣guis'd to a French Perriwig Makers, called La Fortune, whose Wie was the Manager of their Intrigue. 'Twas there the Marquiss us'd to mt her, and ob∣tain all the Favours he could wish for; but she went so often that at last she became Big, as I  been saying, and came somewhat before her time, being brought to Bed of a pretty Female Child, which was Baptized and Named Mary. This the Queen took and  up in her Palace, and there she always livd under her Mother's Wing, till her Majesties Death. The Child having a fine Voice, as she grew up, was taught to Sing and Play on vers Instruments, and became very skilful in Musick, insomuch, that one of the Princes of Brunsick, who Resided for some time at Rome, imme∣diately after the Queen's Death, carried her back into Germany, where she had the Hononr of being admitted into the
Service of the Dutchess of Hanouer, by means of these Qualifications. As for Landini, the Husband, who threatned his Wife by Letters, with nothing less than Murder and Poyson, at last did Pardon her, through the instant Prayers and intreaties of the Queen, who also gave him wherewithal to make Attonement for the Injury and Affront his Wife had done him. Whilst the Queen was at Hamburgh, Monsieur Pompone, Monsieur Chevalier de Terlon, and Monsieur the Bishop of Be∣ziers, now Cardinal Bonzi, in their re∣turn from their several Ambassages of the two Northern Crowns, and to Po∣land, passing by this Place, Saluted the Queen, who receiv'd them with great Respect, according to their Quality; and she forgot not to make mention of her Marquiss Del Monte, to boast of his Nobility and of his Honourable Name of Bourbon. But Monsieur Pompone one day told her very calmly, when the Queen would have perswaded him, the Marquiss was of the Family of the Kings of France; that he had read and examined over and over the Genealogy of the House of Bourbon, but then he had no where found, that any Branch
of it had ever pass'd into Italy, except one, unless the Constable de Bourbon, who Commanded the Imperial Army, which Sacked Rome in the Year 1527, had left any Bastards in Italy. And at another time, Mosieur de Terlin Re∣proach'd him before the Prince of Ham∣burgh, with the Belying his Descent, by his suffering so long the Insolencies of Cleuter towards the French; telling him, that he instead of Reproving him, seem'd rather to encourage him against them. But the greatest Mortification that ever the Marquiss had, was that of Madam the Grand Marshal Sobieski, since Queen, and at this present, Widow of the late King John of Poland, who passing by Hamburgh, the Marquiss was sent to Compliment her, and after in a Visit she made the Queen, he would needs have offered her some unbecoming Familia∣rity, though I do not well know or in what manner it was; but he received for it such a severe Reprimand from that Princess, and she look'd upon him with so much Contempt, that he had no fur∣ther inclination to make the like At∣tempt again. During her stay here, Pope Alexander VII. died at Rome, and the Queen ap∣prehending
that Cardinal Farnese might be chose Pope, she presently thought of a Retreat either to Venice or Holland, believing that this Pope would not suf∣fer the Disorders of her Court. But the States of the United Provinces, who some time before had oblig'd the Swedes to restore to Denmark all they had taken from that Kingdom, sent word to the Queen, That her Royal Character would be slighted in their Republick: And at last she had a mind to have Settled her self in England, which was then quiet enough, but she did not like the People. In the midst of these Thoughts and Pro∣jects, she understood by a Letter from Cardinal Antonio, that Cardinal Julio Ros∣pigliosi, was created Pope, by the Name of Clement IX. on the 20th of June 1667. There had been some Friendship for∣merly between them, and she hop'd to draw an Advantage from his Pon∣tificate. Now, therefore because this was a Subject that deserv'd it, she resolv'd to give a publick Testimony of her Joy, notwithstanding the Remonstrances of the Count de Homburg, one of the House of the Lantgraves of Hesse, who advis'd her against it, for fear the People of so great a City as Hamburgh, should com∣mit
some Insolence against Her Majesty. This was also confirm'd by one of the Magistrates, but notwithstanding all that could be said, she would follow her own Capricio, and the Counsel of the Marquis, who always push'd her on to Expences, wherein e always found his Account, seeing all things pass'd through his Hands. She gave Order therefore for the pre∣paring a fine Artifical Fire, and illumi∣nated the Front of her Palace, where she caus'd to be painted a noble Com∣partment with the Pope's Arms in it, and many curious Figures which repre∣sented his Vertues. But above it there was displayed the Picture of the Eucha∣rist in a Cloud, ador'd by Angels, and below was an Emblem of the Church in a Pontifical Habit, treading Heresie un∣der Foot. One might easily have ima∣gined the Effects which such a Represen∣tation would produce in a Protestant City, where the Exercise of the Catho∣lick Religion is not publickly permit∣ted. So a great number of Seamon, both English, Dutch and Danes, joyn'd to the Populace of Hambourgh, crowded into the Space which is before the Pa∣lace, being drawn together by the No∣velty
of the Sight. Where to increase the Misfortune she had made two Foun∣tains of Wine, whose Liqor animated them the more to throw Stones against the Decoration. Some of the Queens Domesticks to repress the Insolence of the People, shot Pistols out at the Win∣dows without Ball, but this instead of dispersing, incited them the more, and made them redouble their Insults, till they within were forc'd to shut the Pa∣lace Gates. The Windows were quickly battered all to pieces, and many of them would have set fire to the Gates with Bundles of Straw. In this Extremity the Queens Servants had recourse to four Falcons that lay in the Hall, load∣ing them with broken pieces of Brass and Iron, and discharged them against the enraged Populace, of whom they kill'd some and wounded others. This indeed made them recoil a little, but the Blood and Cries of their wounded Com∣panions animated them afresh; so they return'd to the Charge with an Intent to break open the Gates and plunder the Palace. But because they had neither Petards, nor Engines to force them, a Score of Lusty Fellows brought a huge long Body of a Tree, that lay at a Car∣penter's
Door in the Street to make a Mast for a Ship, which they moving backwards and forwards like the Bat∣tering Rams of the Antients, did many times essay to break open the Gates. It was then the Queen knew, but too late, that she had done ill to follow the Counsel which had been given her; and the fear of falling into the Hands of this Insolent Mob, did so terrifie her, that she knew not what to resolve on; for the Place was no longer tenable, and the greatest part of her Domesticks were without Doors, and even the Marquis Del Monte from whom she had it. At last two of the Servants took the Queen by the Arms, and led her out at a Back-door, which opened into another Street, and brought her on Foot, in Man's Apparel, to Monsieur le Chevalier de Terlon's Lodgings, who was then at Hambourgh; from whence he was to pass into Denmark and Sueden. He liv'd in a Quarter of the Town that was at some distance, and the Queen being half dead when she got thither, they put her to Bed, and presently after brought up Supper. When she was come to her self, she began to eat with a good Ap∣petite,
and after a while falling into her accustomed Rhodomontades, she affir∣med, That if they would but have let her appear at the Windows, she should have Thunderstruck all this Rabble, which had lost the Respect that was due to her. The Prince of Homburg being infor∣med of this Uproar, he (accompanied by some other Gentlemen of Note and Reputation) crouding themselves among the Populace▪ endeavour'd to appease them with fair Words, swearing they themselves would be reveng'd on those Dogs the Papists, that had been the Cause of this Scandal; But (said they) the Queen knows nothing of all this, and will be the first that shall Chastize the Inventers, provided you commit no further Outrage, by forcing her Palace. But know, that if we do not make a speedy Reparation for the Injuries done Her Majesty, we shall not only draw upon us the Arms of Sueden and Den∣mark, but of all the Princes of the Em∣pire, and of the Emperour himself, who will severely revenge it. These few Words pronounc'd with force, disarm'd these Mutineers; to which also the Burghers being in Arms, did not a little
contribute. So the Seige was rais'd, and the next Week after the Magistrates conducted the Queen to her Palace in Triumph. And then this Princess was so bountiful as to disburst Two thousand Crowns among the Wounded, of which two died; yet after this hot Alarm, she staid not long in this City, but in a few Days set forward for Rome. If I had been a brib'd Historian, I should have extoll'd the undaunted Cou∣rage of the Queen upon this Occasion to the very Skies, and assured the World, that the gave the utter most Proofs of an Heroick Courage, but then I should have betray'd the Truth: For it is most certain, that never any Wo∣man was more timerous than she; tho' when the Danger was pass'd, she play'd the Braggadocio, and was infinitely pleas'd when her Sycophants affirmed, That neither Alexander nor Caesar had ever testified so much Bravery in the midst of so many Dangers. So true it is, that Flattery can disguise any thing, and that Princes take a great deal of Pleasure in being impos'd upon that way.
This little Accident makes me re∣member another which happen'd a long while after at her Palace of Laugara in Rome, where she expressed every whit as little Courage as here. There was a Linnen Cloath put up before the Win∣dow in the Lower Court, to keep off the violent Heat of the Sun. A little Boy of the Neighbourhood by chance throw∣ing a Squib happened to set it on fire. This inconsiderable Flame did so di∣stract her, that she ran up and down from place to place like a Mad Woman, crying to the first she met, and beging with her Hands folded together, to re∣scue her out of the Fire, though there were People more than enough ready to extinguish it, and that it burnt nothing but the Linnen Cloath, which was not much bigger than an ordinary Table-Cloath: But the Danger being over, she play'd the Gascon again among her Bra∣vo's, as if she her self had sav'd the whole City of Rome from being burnt. Before she went away from Ham∣burgh, she gave a Magnificent Treat to many great Lords and Ladies which were in the Suedish Interest, and the Marquis Del Monte was the Superinten∣dant or Manager of this Feast. 'Twas
prepared in a very spacious Tennis-Court, around the side whereof were high Scaffolds erected as if for the re∣presenting a Comedy in a Theatre, on which a vast number of Spectators were placed to behold it. But I shall not en∣deavour to make a Description thereof, nor speak of the abundance and delicacy of the Meats, which were dress'd with excellent Skill, and adorned with the greatest Curiosity imaginable. A more Eloquent Pen than mine would write nothing but truth, if he compar'd it with the most sumptuous Banquets of the Antients; and especially when he should introduce the Instruments of Mu∣sick, with the most Charming Voices, giving an Account of the most harmoni∣ous Consorts perform'd by the skilfullest Hands; and describe the great variety of costly Illuminations, which seem'd even to out-do the Sun it self. After all there was a grand Ball, with variety of Dances, wherein the Cavaliers and La∣dies acquitted themselves with great Applause; and the Joy was in all re∣spects perfectly compleat. But the Marquis Del Monte had more reason than any other, for besides the Share he had of the Banquet, and the Entertainment
of his Eyes and Ears, he obtain'd Fa∣vours of some easie Ladies. But above all the forgot not his chief Ends, for Clairet assured me, That above an hun∣dred Pistoles of the Charge of this stuck to his Fingers. And to keep Landini still at his Devotion, he took her by the Hand, and Danc'd with her as Maid of Honour to the Queen, tho' that Ti∣tle was not at all her due, for she was a very Contemptible Woman, whose ill Conditions and Scandalous Behaviour, would have driven her out of any Fa∣miy, hat had been but a little more regular than that of Queen Christi∣na's. At last Her Majesty came to Rome the third time, never to go away any more from thence. She arrived under the Pon∣tificate of Clement IX. which may be cal∣led the Golden Age of our Times, as that of Innocent XI. the Age of Iron. For indeed under the Reign of Rospigli osi, the Court of Rome became so Mag∣nificent, that it surpassed all others in Splendour and Gallantry. New Shows were to be seen every Day;  while we were diverted with t Entry of some Ambassaor, another with a pro∣motion of Cardinals; to Day enter∣tain'd
with a Feast, and to Morrow with a Cavalcade. The Divertisements suc∣ceeded one another in such sort, that commonly the Morning was spent in Devotion and Business, and after Din∣ner, which was generally very plenti∣ful, and serv'd up with extraordinary Curiosity (for they begun then to fol∣low the French Mode) they went to a Comedy, or Opera, where the Machines were very surprizing, or else heard some great Master's Composition of excellent Musick, performed with variety both of Instruments and Voices. That Holy Father who was naturally Generous, and Beneficent, inspir'd these good Quali∣ties into his Nephews. Avarice had no Dominion over those young Lords, as in the Reigns of other Popes; but on the contrary, they spent more than their Revenues would well allow, and yet they so well knew how to make their Interests in that Court, that they are now the richest Princes in Rome. The Ladies all drest very richly, and the French Modes being then it troduc'd, they appear'd so charming in their Ha∣bits, that they could never afterwards resolve to leave them, but have retain∣ed them to this very Day; so that at
this present Luxury excessive at Rome. Nor did Love fail to make his Party, for many enrol'd themselves under his Banners, hoping to make an happy Pro∣gress under so flourishing a Reign. But this good time did not endure long; for the untimely Death of that Pope blasted many Intrigues which were but just in their Bud, because this Accident chan∣ged both the Fortune and Interest of a great many People. Clement X. being made Pope Anno 1671. after a Conclave of six Months, they reassum'd the same Course of living as before. For Cardinal Altieri, who govern'd the Ecclesiastical State under his Pontificate, after he had been adop∣ted Nephew by this, did not put him∣self to the trouble of reforming any thing, provided he could but heap up Riches for himself, of which he was always known to be covetous enough; so that there was a sufficient Liberty for People to ruine themselves by excessive Profusion. Don Gasper, who by his Nise was the Pope's Nephew, tho' he were not of so easie and so generous a Spirit, as they of the Family of Rospigliosi, ap∣pear'd yet very splendid and magnifi∣cent, and the Ladies were more glori∣ous
than ever. So that in the beginning of this Reign there was nothing to be seen but Rejoycings at Rome; Promoti∣ons of Cardinals, and the pompous En∣tries of Ambassadors. The first was that of Portugal which was very solemn, being performed in a most stately Caval∣cade, by reason it was an Ambassade of Obedience; that is to say, it was the first time the King of Portugal sent an Embassy to Rome, since his Family had reascended that Throne; and it was of no small Glory for him to be acknow∣ledged by the Pope among the number of Crown'd Heads. After this was the Entry of the French Ambassador the Duke D'Etree's, which was no less splendid than the former, though it was only made in Coaches, there being at least five hundred, drawn by six Horses each, attended with very rich Liveries; but above all that of the Ambassador was most glorious, for the Family of the D'Etree's took great plea∣sure to appear magnificent and pompous upon all Occasions which they had to express their Zeal for the Service and Honour of their grand Monarch. Then also the publick Comedies were repre∣sented at Torra di Nona by the Contri∣vance
of Count Alibert and his Compa∣ny, during the Carnaval time. A sump∣tuous Box was there fitted up for the Queen with extraordinary magnificence, whereon neither gilding nor any other Ornaments were spared, and it was hung with Damask, and other rich Stuffs adorned with fine Lace and Fringes of Gold. This Box might contain fifteen or sixteen Persons, and there were al∣ways ten or a dozen Cardinals who went to the Comedy to Honour and Accom∣pany the Queen in her Box, as they did also in her glazed Gallery, which was near to the Passage into St. Mark's place, at th orner of the Street called St. Re∣mua where she had hir'd a Palace to see  Masqueraders pass by, with wh all that place is usually fill'd du∣ring the Carnaval. The Queen tho' she was at that time above forty Years of Age, yet continu∣ed very brisk and gay, and so soon as the Theatre was open'd and the Come∣dians acted, as they did very well in the Opinions of all; Her Majesty caus'd Women Singers to be brought amongst them, which Charm'd the Ears of the Auditors by the sweetness of their Voi∣ces, as they did their Eyes by the agree∣ableness
of their Persons, and richness of their Habits. Among the Cardinals that frequented the Queens Box, Cadinal Benedetto O∣deschalchi never failed so much as one Night being there during all the five Years, the Quen maintain'd her said Box in the , but after the Eleva∣tion of this very Cardinal to the Pope∣dom▪ changing his Humour and Con∣duct both at once, endeavour'd to destroy the Play hse, werein he had former∣ly taken  mch pleasure. And to bring it the moe efctuall, to pss, he made a rigorous Edict, which  remains in force, by which he  Women to Rehearse any Pt upon  Stage, he liking rather at young Musitians should play those Parts, and be cloath∣ed in their Habits contrary to the ex∣press prohibition of the Sacred Scri∣pture, which forbids Men to wear Wo∣mens Apparel, as being an Abomination before God. The Novelty of this Spe∣ctacle drew such vast numbers of People thither, that they had much ado to get Entrance for Money. For at that time was a great Concourse of Strangers of Quality there, who had brought with them the Newest Modes from abroad,
which the Roman Cavaliers imitated, and made themselves all fine and gal∣lant. There was one among the rest who was of the first Rank, and surpass'd them all in richness of Cloaths, his Sta∣ture was middle sized, the Features of his Face rarely compos'd, his Eyes black and as lively as those of the finest Roman Ladies, he had a happy Physiognomy, and a Head of Hair which made him one of the handsomest Gentlemen in Italy. He Sung and Play'd rarely well upon divers sorts of Instruments, was a great lover of Poetry, and had also himself compos'd three fine Pieces. Hap∣py indeed, if with all these Advantages he would have Corresponded with the Ladies Desires, for there was more than one who were willing to have put him to the Proof; but he made no answer to their Attempts, as we shall presently ac∣quianit you. He was then in the Flower of his Youth, being entred into the twenty third Year of his Age, and his Blood boyl'd in his Veins, which made him appear all Spirit. The Queen seeing this young Lord in a Box just over against her, as he was making a profound Bow to her, imme∣diately
felt an extraordinary Emotion, by looking upon him, and having learnt his Quality and personal Merit, it aug∣mented the Esteem which this Princess began to have for him, and she could not forbear casting her Eyes towards his Box very often. A little while after one of Her Majesties Valets de Chambre, who had been an old experienc'd Game∣ster at Love Intrigues, hearing the Queen one Day speak many kind things of this young Prince, and at the same time say, She had a mind to have her Hair cut, took his opportunity to tell her; Madam (said he) the Prince Don Benig∣no (for that was the Name of this young Lord) has a Valet de Chambre a Perri∣wig-maker, who cuts Hair rarely well. The Queen ravisht with the Thoughts of ha∣ving an occasion to speak well of a Per∣son for whom she had so strong an In∣clination, sent for the Perrwig-maker, who performing his Office according to her Desire, after having spoken very advantagiously of his Master, gave him ten Pistols. One of the Queens Offi∣cers was afterwards with the Prince, who told him, That he was extreamly joyful that the Queen had so far ho∣nour'd him as to make use of one of his
Servants; to which the Officer answer∣ed in few words, but setting forth the Queens admirable Qualities in the choi∣cest Expressions he could invent. The Prince mightily extoll'd her, and Her Majesty was inform'd of all he said to her Advantage, and was infinitely plea∣sed with it. Another time she sent to the Prince to desire him to let her see one of his Perriwigs; she tried it on, and made a short one of the same colour, being of a fair and bright colour, which she wore many times afterwards. When the Queen was in private among her Wo∣men, there was nothing to be heard but the Praises of Don Benigno, and no other Subject could afford her so much plea∣sure as that. One of her Maids a great Favourite at that time, who was very handsome and well shap'd, call'd Signora Octavia, hearing her speak so often in the praise of this young Prince, fell in Love with him, but not daring to disco∣ver her Affection, she consum'd and pin'd away. The Queen was troubled, and seeing her thus Languish without know∣ing the Cause, oblig'd her to go and take the Country Air. Octavia chose to go to Frascati, as being one of the
most delicious Places about Rome, where the greatest part of the Cardinals, and Gentlemen of Rome had Vineyards and Houses of Pleasure, which look'd like so many Enchanted Palaces. Don Be∣nigno had one there which was none of the least, and he was actually himself there, enjoying the Pleasures of the de∣licate Season of the Spring. The Queen gave Octavia two Calases cover'd, and two acquies; and she brought her Mo∣ther, Sister, and some other Women a∣long with her, and for Valet de Chambre she would have that Intriguing Purvoy∣our who had been employ'd in the Qeens Amours. Arriving at Franscati, they alighted in a private place, because they would incommode no Body, and the Train stay'd at the Stables of the delicious Vineyard of Aldbrandina, where they were well receiv'd because of the Queens Liveries, by the Orders of Madam the Princess di Rossno. A∣chelmere (for that is the Name of the Purveyor) took care of preparing the Dinner, while the Women went to Mass at the Capuchins, and in the way met Don Benigno by chance. Octavia turn'd her self aside, that she might hide the Blushes which appear'd in her Face,
though they render'd her yet more beau∣tiful. There was only a single Salute on either side, and after the walking of a Turn or two, they return'd to a slen∣der Dinner at their Lodging; for in I∣taly People are very Sober, when they live at their own Expences. However, she eat with a good Appetite, and re∣proach'd Ahemere for being so sparing. While these things were doing a Foot∣man came from the Prince, who brought in a Man that carried a great Vermilion Bason, whose outside was gilt with Gold, full of most exquisite Viands, and desired to speak with the Conductor. Achelme presented himself, and the ootn an told him, Tha the Prince Don Lenigno had sent him ta small Trisle to make merry with the Company, and to drink his Health; nd at the same time another Person aear'd, who was load∣ed with twel Bottles of most delicate Wine. The egale was most agreeably received, and they thanked the Prince in most submissive and acknowledging Terms. Octavia cast a glance upon the Conductor, as a sign that the Re∣gale was for her sake; and after having well enjoy'd themselves, and repos'd for some Hours, they had a Mind to go to
the Vineyard of Aldobrandina, or Bel∣vedere, as well for the Walk, as to see the wonderful Cascades, or Falls of Water, which cause so much Admirati∣on to Strangers. Passing by a Vault which leads to the first Tarrass to a∣void the Sun, they met Don Benigno, who was walking there in Company Achelmere made him a profound Reve∣rence, and thanked him for his Regale in the Name of the Company, who par∣took with him in the Obligations they all had to so generous a Lord. The Prince smil'd and said, It was only a Trisle, and did not deserve to be men∣tion'd; that he would have offer'd the Ladies an Apartment in his Palace, with all necessary Conveniences, but that he had not done it, for fear of burthening them with incommodious Civilities, see∣ing they would think themselves more at Liberty, than either with him, or the Queen, whose Officers should be welcome to him without the least Com∣plement, whensoever it pleas'd Her Majesty. Octavia addressing her self to the Conductor, told him, He was very happy to be so much consider'd by his Excellency. The Prince answer'd, That he had a Value for them all in general.
Do not envy my Happiness, Madam, (says Alchelmere) 'tis only for your sake that his Excellence considers us, never Prince had so great a Regard for the Ladies a himself, but at this time I am in possession of a great part of his Bounty, having h the Honour of being his Servant along time ago. This was spoke only en passant; but the glances of the Eye have a more passionate Language: But the Prince im∣mediately left them, in order to rejoyn his Company, who were already got at a considerable distance. After they had seen the Vineyard and the Cascades, they return'd to Rome the same Night; and the Queen who would know all the particulars of the Voyage, was extream∣ly pleas'd with the Prince's Gallantry. She was the best Mistress in the World, when she was in a good Humour, and she seem'd to take it ill, that her Maids had not stay'd three or four days in the Country. Two days after the Prince came to Rome, and sent to seek Archel∣mere, to ask him who that Maid was, for whom he already felt so strong an Inclination. Achelmere told him, it was Signora Octavia, That she was one of the Queen's Confidents; adding withal, that she was charm'd with the Merit of
so Accomplish'd a Prince. The Glan∣ces she often gave him at several other Meetings, caus'd him perfectly to un∣derstand it. Words are seldom made use of in Italy; and they can manage an Intrigue well enough without 'em. But the Prince, who shew'd so much Ardor at first, relented presently, know∣ing that Octavia would consent without much Entreaty, though she had taken precautions not to suffer an immediate Shipwrack. However it was, some odd Reflection or other chang'd the Prince's mind, for he went to the Rendesvouze, and after that, Octavia conceiv'd an im∣placable Spight against him, whilst her Introducer was Confounded, and gain'd nothing but Hatred on both sides. On the other hand, the Queen, who as yet knew not the Prince's cold tem∣per, gave him him sufficient Hints, both by Signs and dark Speeches, as she found Opportunity, that himself was the cause if he were not Happy. They hd much ado to assure him, that he mght dispose of the Queen's Person, seeing he pos∣sess'd her Heart already; but he would never pass the bounds of the most inno∣cent Gallantry. The more the Obsta∣cles were brke, the more reserv'd he
became, though afar off out of Danger, he testified a great deal of Ardour to meet the Queen's Flame, who despair'd to make any thing of him, by reason of his Fearfulness and over great Respect. He was offer'd what Security he pleas'd, that the Queen her self should come in¦cognito to what Place he pleas'd, and that she should be at his Disposal; but the very conceit made him Abhor it. At last the Queen was perfectly asham'd to explain her self too clearly; and the Rage to find her self Slighted, converted her Love into implacable Hate; and if she did not take a solemn Revenge, it was to be look'd upon only as an effect of her Goodness: So dangerous a thing it is to be either Lov'd or Hated by Great Persons. If the Prince had refus'd the Queen only, it might have been said, That the fear of falling into the same Mis∣fortune with the Marquiss Monaldeschi, had hinder'd him. But he has also de∣spis'd the Fires of many other Ladies, who have accus'd him of Impotence, or a Timidity unworthy of his Rank: for the World does not esteem a Person who contains himself within a Principle of Religion. We have seen how his
Courage fail'd him in his Intrigues with Octavia; and we shall find presently, that he shewed no greater, in the case of a fair Dutchess, who had all the Qua∣lities requisite to make a Lady Belov'd. 'Twas said, that Prince Columbieri had Lov'd her a little before Don Benigno had settled his Affections there, and that he was very well satisfied. Don Benigno finding the place vacant when he enterpriz'd the Conquest of Diana's Heart, for that was the Name of the Dutchess; first made use of a Porter to a numerous Community, who had Vi∣ctory for their Arms, but not finding him fit for Management, employ'd a French Merchant that liv'd near to St. Augustin's, because he Serv'd the Dutchess, and was very capable to ma∣nage an Amorous Intrigue. After a thou∣sand Caresses, he open'd his Design to him, and promis'd him Mountains and Wonders as Lovers us'd to do, and put the conduct of his Affairs into his Hand. As soon as this Confident came to the Dutchess, under pretence of bringing her a new French Stuff, he fell on the reading of a Billet while her Back was turn'd, but suffer'd himself to be Sur∣priz'd.
The Dutchess ask'd what it was? The Merchnat, who was Familiar with her, told her it was the Pleasantest Paper in the World, and that it was a Billet of Love in behalf of the Person he Esteem'd most. I'm resolv'd I will see it, said Diana. Hold, Madam, answers this rare Merchant, or otherwise you will be my Confident. She snatch'd it from him, and read these Words. Madam, the Prince Don Benigno Adores you, and has chargd me to let you under∣stand it; I could wish that for the repose of his Love, you would hear it from himself; I am  you would take Pity of him, if you know the Torment  es for you, and if you will give me the liberty I will ac∣quin you ith the rest by word of Mouth. I must own that this confident Trades∣man was as fit an Instrument as could be thought o for this Affair, provided he an not Risque; for a Woman is al∣ways pleas'd when she is perswaded she is Amiable. This Princess, whose Cu∣riosity carry'd her to read this Billet, believing it to be another thing, was Surpriz'd at this new way of hearing her self to be Belov'd, and became as a Rose, remaining perfectly Silent for some time in a Cofusion, which
shew'd a strong agitation of her Mind. The Duke her Husband entred the Chamber at the same time, to see the Stuff the Merchant had brought before they cut it, and seeing the Dutchess in a great Trouble, ask'd her if she were not satisfied with so fie a Stuff, which appear'd to him to be very Rich. She testified her Content, but said she would willingly have it all, because the Prin∣cess of Sonino had a Mantua and Petti∣coat very like that which she had be∣fore. The Secret, saith the Merchant, is to take whole Piece, for I assure you there is no more such in Rome. Claude has Reason, says the Duke, and I would counsel you to buy the whole Piece, if it be not too Dear; as to the rest, I believe he will be Faithful. Yes Monsigneur, says the Merchant, Ma∣dam may reckon that I will be Secret in that, and every other thing, and at the foot of the Account 30 Pistols, more or less ought not to hinder her Excel∣lence from taking a Stuff which is the most in Mode, and especially when there will be none like it for a long time. See what an Admirable Fellow this is, says the good Husband, buy it Madam, but take care to see the Stuff well Mea∣sured.
There was nothing else worthy of Remark which pass'd in this first In∣terview; and the Merchant went imme∣diately to give Don Benigno an account of his Negotiation. The Prince find∣ing his Declaration very Ingenious, Em∣braced the Merchant, and told him, that he had begun very well, and pray'd him to continue it till such time as he was Happy. Two days after, he came again to bring her the Lining of her Garment, and she had been impatient to see him; but by a Slyness peculiar to Ladies, when they have a regard to De∣cency, she expected when he would be∣gin. Being then alone with her, he de∣sir'd to know of her, what effect his Bil∣let had produc'd; She sat down upon her Couch, and said, with a seeming Carelesness, that she made no account of it; and that she was unwilling to embark her self in an Amour with a young Man who was over Bold, that presum'd too much of himself, and be∣cause he was a fine Youth, believ'd him∣self a Narcissus. The Merchant assur'd her, that the Prince had an inviolable and inseperable Affection for her; and that as his Passion could not be greater, so his Respect and Fidelity would not
be the less. Upon these assurances, she told the Merchant, Monsieur Claude, said she, I beg of you not to Flatter me with any hope, till I have made Trial, for under pretence of guarding all the mea∣sures that are necessary, I shall find whe∣ther he will persevere or no She then confessed to the Merchant, that she had some inclination for him, and that he should not be unhappy upon her Ac∣count. I believe she had reason to say this, for she perfectly knew the Person of whom she spake; for without doubt, if his Vigour had answer'd his Presump∣tion, he had wherewithal to please the Ladies. However, he was yet such a Novice, that he thought 'twas sufficient to tell a Lady he was Amorous of her, to oblige her to have the same Passion for him. But he found in the Person of Diana, a Woman that knew how to teach People Manners, and instruct him how to Live. One day Don Benigno being at Fresca∣ti, was Attack'd by three Ladies, who believing themselves Handsome, set with their Tongues very briskly upon him. One of them was the Marchioness Nari, who told him in Railery, That as Beau∣tiful
and fine Shap'd as he was, he had found the Ladies Cruel; that they had hear'd news of his Affairs, and were ob∣blig'd to that beautiful Person to whom he paid his Vows, for preserving in him a respect for the Sex. He was stung with these Words, but kept still to his Indifference for the Ladies; neverthe∣less his vanity being excited, he was re∣solv'd to make use of all things to make himself Beloved of Diana. And he did very well at first, for after he had gi∣ven some Signs of Perseverance, he made a Present to the Dutchess, of a Slk Stuff with a blew Ground, strip'd with Silver Columns, interwoven with most beautiful Leaves Flowers both of Gold and Silver, to a great Value. To conceal this from the Duke, the Dutchess made him believe that the Merchant was content with the third part in Money, and for the rest he would take Wheat and Wine, at so much per Month, till 'twas all paid. The Duke was very glad of it; for in Rome the Great Lords have oftentimes but little Money, because they Farm a great part of their Estates themselves, and have but few Tenants that pay them in ready Money.
The Dutchess after this, became a little more Familiar with Don Benigno; and the Carneval being come, the Prince often went out in Masquerade, wearing a short Cloak surr'd with Ermines, with a small Cuffedg'd with Bone-lace, and a red Ribban on his Head, which was the Signal to make himself known by. Diana was in the Balcony as the Train went along, and look'd upon him with a sweet and Languishing Eye; and they saw one another at Comedies, and danc'd together at Balls; but this afforded on∣ly an opportunity of speaking some few Words by Stealth, the Italian Jealousie not permitting a regular Conversati∣on at such times. He would willingly have obtain'd some Favour from Diana, but she had a mind to make him value the thing, however, she promis'd that she would find an opportunity in the Lent time to satisfie his Desires. The first Week being come, the Ren∣desvouze was agreed upon, which was to be in a Garden ear St. Sabina, upon Mount Aventine, into which there is an entrance at two different Gates. Don Benigno came there in a close Coach, which was left about Fifty  from the Privy Gate. The Dutchess who came
by the great Gate, receiv'd him very a∣greeably, while his Confident enter∣tain'd her Associate, till such time they had insensibly got a good distance from them. Diana who for this time had a mind only to Amuse the Prince, order'd her Follower not to lose sight of her; and she oblig'd her, though she kept her self out of Call. The Conversation lasted about half an Hour with equal Satisfaction. Don Benigno was very well content with this first Interview; but as in Italy they have but little liber∣ty of seeing one another, he desir'd the favour to write to her, and the pleasure of Receiving her Answers. Diana made a great difficulty of this, and said, there was less danger in satisfying a Lover, by yielding the last Favours, than to write to him and receive his Letters; because if a Lover should boast of Privacies with his Mistress, (as it often happen'd) she had power to deny it all; but as for Letters, the Characters being once known, they were certain and undeni∣able Testimonies. At last, by the means of Prayers and Intreaties, he obtain'd so far as to have Billets, upon condition he sent them back in his Answers. All these Difficulties being Surmounted, the
conclusion of some twenty Letters were made by a Rendesvouz with Diana at a certain Hour, at which Don Benigno did not fail. He came very late at Night with his Confident, and they enter'd by the Back-Gate of the Lady's Palace. They wrap'd their Faces in their Cloaks, and moun∣ted a pair of Stairs without seeing any Body, till they came to the uttermost Lanthorn, where they found a Gentle∣man, Don Arimatheia, Brother to Dia∣na, who looking upon them a little, went away, and said Laughing, God send you good Luck, my Friends. Being come into a little Gallery, which led into Clarice's Chamber, Diana's Follow∣er: They were not yet at the end of their Troubles; for having shut up their dark Lanthorns, they knew not where they went. The Merchant, who knew the Passages, went first, groaping the way, but thought he should have been Strangled by the Prince, because he pull'd him so hard by the Cloak. At last, after a Labyrinth of turnings, they entred into a little Chamber, where the first thing they saw, was the Head of a Bed, and a Crucifix upon it Ten Foot high. Above It was a small Picture of
St. Francis, encompass'd with a Chaplet about an Ell long, and the Bed w not above two Foot high from the Ground. Don Benigno had put on a black Per∣riwig instead of the light Hair'd one, which he always wore, and Combing it, expected when the Nymph would arrive, assuring himself, that he was prepar'd for the Combat, and carried good Arms to attack and batter the Fort in a most regular manner. A little after, the Dutchess appear'd at the fur∣ther end of the Gallery, and came brigh∣ter and more sparkling than the Moon; she had a Wax Candle in her hand, her Habit loose and white, and her Head dress'd very advantagiously. She had a fine Knot of red Ribbands on her Breast, which being but half discover'd, gave a great lustre to one of the finest Necks in the World. Don Benigno was some∣what in a Maze at her Approach, till after the first Compliments were over: Then the Merchant retir'd, leaving the Lovers at full liberty to do what they pleas'd. But all pass'd in Ceremonies, Don Benigno knew not how to say any other thing to Diana, than that he died for Love of her, and that though she left him at liberty to enterprize any
thing, yet he durst not attempt what he most desir'd. So going away with∣out doing what was expected. He was afterwards asham'd of his Bashfulness, and had a great mind to repair his fault: But a second Audience which was agree'd to, did nothing but divulge the Secret; so that Prince Columbiere having got the Wind of it, procured six Fellows to wait for Don Benigno under the Portal of the Palace D'Estre; where present∣ing a dark Lanthorn to his Face, that they might know him, they retir'd pre∣sently, as if they had been the Round, though one of them follow'd him at a distance, as far as Diana's Palace. There Don Benigno got admittance, but was on purpose Baffled as before: From which the Prince Columbiere did not fail upon the first occasion to congratulate him upon the number of his Mistresses, which he told him, hindred his being able to satisfie them all. This join'd to the Advice he had that the Prince Columbieri saw Diana again, renew'd his Passion, Jealousie working a more powerful Effect upon him than Love. He complain'd of Diana that she preferr'd an old Man before a Youth full of Vigour, and ready to satisfie
the Ladies at all times, whereas the Prince Colombieri must have eight Days to prepare himself. These Complaints were carried to the Dutchess by the Merchant, word for word; to whom she answer'd, that Don Benigno was worse than the Prince Columbieri; for, said she, if he must have eight Days to prepare himself, I have given that Poul∣tron more than three Months, and he has always fail'd me in the occasion. Madam, reply'd the Merchant, that may happen through too much Ardour, as it did in France to the Count de Guiche. Fie, fie, answer'd Diana, that's a meer Trifle; for though it may once happen so, yet a Man of Vigour is never more distinguished then upon such occasions. The Merchant knew not what to answer in defence of so ill a cause. Believe me honest Claud (pursued she) your Friend is not like the Scorpions which sting with their Tail; for he stings only with his Tongue; and we ought to di∣strust those great Boasters, which make a fair Appearance, and are good for no∣thing. The Merchant then to divert her, said, Madam, a Man of an in∣different Stature, large Shoulders, brawny Limbs, and full of Muscles,
that has black Hair, a brown Visage, and full of Vigour, is 35 Years old, with Eyes sparkling and fill'd with Fire: And as to the rest, though the Man be not handsome, is he good for nothing? Very good, said she, that is as we love; 'tis for Women to be fair, and for Men to be brisk, and methinks you do very much resemble that Man. She lay then upon her fine downy Couch, with her Breasts naked, in a very tempting posture, when at that instant one came and scratch'd at the door to give notice that Cardinal Co∣lonna was below and come to make her a Visit. She arose in haste, took her Coif, and went to the Cardinal, while the Merchant slipp'd into a Closet, and from thence into the Wardrobe, and after∣wards went his way by a private pair of Stairs. He went then to Don Be∣nigno to tell him that if he did not use Diana better, it would oblige her to renew her Friendship with Prince Colom∣bieri; but he took the thing wrong, and made use of this pretence to break off with Diana. He said he would not have the Leavings of Prince Colombieri, who was the Town-Bull of Rome, and had certain Distempers which he should
be sorry to contract; yet the Prince Co∣lombieri was very well and in perfect Health; so was the Dutchess also fresh, and sound as a Roach. To be short, Don Benigno went to the Dutchess no more, and, to spite her, kept one of her Letters, which he was resolved never to restore. All the Revenge she could take, was to laugh at him with the Queen, with whom she was very great: When they spoke of him together, it was with the utter∣most Contempt; they treated him as the most wretched Man living, and ever loaded him with all the Jeers and Af∣fronts they could invent. And the Queen who took a great liberty of Speech, had certain Expressions for him in French, which she was asham'd to speak there in the Italian Language, be∣cause those Terms do not make such an Impression in a strange Language as in our own, told Diana one day she had found a Nick-name which agreed with him best of any, which was Limberham or Fumbler. The Dutchess applauded it, and both in concert cried, Let the Devil take the Fumbler. Don Benigno durst come no more to the Queen's, though he us'd to go thi∣ther
very often, and particularly when she kept her Academy, whither also the finest Wits in Rome resorted; and he took the pretence of being unwilling to have any Conversation with the Marquis del Monte, whom the Queen had made great Master of her Horse; and, to spite her Majesty, he oblig'd his Sister the Princess Altamira, to turn away the Page she had, who was Bro∣ther to Seignora Octavia, and which she had taken out of respect to the Queen. But Love was not the only amuse∣ment of this Royal Lady; Chymistry was her more serious business, though she had lost considerable Sums of Money by it at Hamburgh; and particularly with one Borry a Chymist of Milan, who is now condemned to perpetual Impri∣sonment for Heresie in the Castle of St. Angelo, and who return'd her only Cinders and Smoak for 2 or 3 thousand Crowns. The unfortunate Experiments she had often made, excited her to go forward in the search of the Philoso∣pher's Stone. As soon as she arriv'd at Rome, she built a great Laboratory in her Palace, and consumed the best part of her ready Cash, not so much in
Coals and Ingredients, as the Roguery of the People she employ'd in this mi∣serable Trade; for 'tis ordinary with great People to be robb'd by those they put the most Confidence in. Cardinal Azzolini, who would not openly op∣pose himself to this her predominant Passion, presented a Chymist to her, who was named Bandiere the Son of an A∣pothecary, in a little City of Romagina near to Bologne, thinking that by this means he had sufficiently engag'd her to keep within some reasonable bounds, himself pretending to follow the Queen's Inclination for Chymistry. But though this Man render'd an exact Account of all things to appearance, the Cardinal easily found out a great deal of Rogue∣ry, seeing there was scarce a Month pass'd, wherein the Expence upon Chy∣mistry, which they call'd Distillation, did not amount to three, and sometimes four thousand Livres. And notwith∣standing his Pretences, he had only some Secrets in Chymistry of little use, and sustain'd himself upon nothing but in∣coherent Tattle, and fabulous Receipts of fine Experiments, which he had never made. In a little time he had the Artifice to insinuate himself very
much into the Queen's Favour, by his unreasonable Complaisance, so easie was she to be govern'd by People of no Account. But this way of Proceeding did not always succeed; for sometimes she beat him, and handled him very ill more ways than one. 'Tis impossible to reckon up all the Rogueries he had done in his Life; but above all, while he was supported by the Queen: And yet notwithstanding the ill Treatment he sometimes met with, he made bold with all Mankind, except the Queen whom he was forc'd to flatter, and such as durst shew their Teeth; for to these he was very humble, being the greatest Coward in the World, though he al∣ways went arm'd with Pistols and Bay∣onnets. He was a Lyar to the utter-Point, and a Traitor to that did him good, as well as those that hurt him; very much addicted to Women, and al∣most always drunk when he had no busi∣ness with the Queen. After the Heat of this Princess was a little abated; (that is to say, after three or four Years,) she was willing to content the Cardinal, and bargain with Bandiere to undertake this Distillation at two hundred Pistols per Month,
which he was oblig'd to accept of; for besides this he got Cloaths, with fifteen Crowns wages per Month, and many other little Profits; but he committed so many Rogueries, that he must have a good memory that is able to reckon them. Those who understand any thing of Chymistry, know what abun∣dance of Utensils and Instruments are requisite to such Undertakings, not only in Coals and Furnaces, but in di∣vers pieces of Earth and Glass, Vials, Alembicks, Mortars, and other Vessels of Earth and Metal. But the greatest Expence is in Drugs, Quick-silver, Li∣tharge, Lead, and a thousand other Ingredients which they pretend to con∣vert into Gold. The Queen would al∣ways go her self, to calcine, filter, di∣still, and to find out that which was never found. The miserable Bandiere was the Jest of the Queen and Cardi∣nal, who being willing to put the Queen into a disgust of this Trade, was very glad to see all things go cross: So that Bondiere passed his Days with trouble enough, but the Nights brought an heap of Miseries upon him; for then the Queen being at leisure, would keep him lock'd for six or seven hours toge∣ther
at his Furnaces; and because she could never meet with what she sought for, she would throw at his head any thing that came next to her Hand, and sometimes would give him good rough blows with a Faggot-stick. At last the Queen perceiv'd that the Cardinal only laugh'd at these her Fan∣cies; yet because she would not break with Bandiere, but keep some measures with him, she ordered him to make Bills of what he wanted for Manual Operation, imagining she should save something, when he had no more the management of the Money: So Ban∣diere went for his Powders and other Drugs to the Druggist: But at the Year's end the Cardinal discovered that it came all to the same Expence. Well the Queen left off Chymistry for a time, because her Rents from Sweden came not so current as formerly, by reason of the War. Nevertheless she pleased her self with making little Experiments, and to draw Salts from many things. I have seen Bandiere bring her little Bits of Glass found in the digging of Caves, and in the Chanels of Rome, and other like Trinkets, and the Queen would sometimes commend him, and some∣times
again reward him with a Box on the Ear. This miserable Wretch was sometimes so vex'd, that he would call her a thousand Fools, and yet no body durst tell the Queen of it, because she thought they bore Malice against him; and that the Reports which were told of him were nothing but ill Will, on pur∣pose to destroy him. But after all this unhappy Man's Sufferings, he made all others suffer in their turns, because he would be always whispering Stories to the Queen, having the Priviledge at all times to enter into any place where she was. Thus he became the Protector of all the Villainies that were commit∣ted in her Majesty's Quarter; and be∣ing in League with the Marquis Dl Monte, wou'd discover to him all that pass'd between this Princess and the Cardinal; which was easie for him to do, knowing all corners of the Palace where he might hide himself to hearken. The Cardinal being enraged against him, and grown almost desperate, shewed him a Trick of Kindness on pur∣pose to destroy him. He begun to ca∣ress him afresh, and insinuated into the Queen to put into his Hands the Alms of an hundred Crowns a Months, which
she caus'd to be distributed to the poor Families of Rome. He was transpor∣ted with this pious Office; but he com∣posed himself after such a manner in the doing of it, that the Cardinal had quickly an Opportunity to revenge himself of the Vexations he had given him. For this Rogue in distributing the Alms, instead of giving it to ho∣nest Families according to the Queen's Intention, gave it to People of an ill Life to satiate his infamous Passions. And because he was oblig'd to shew Certificates of Poverty sign'd by the Parish-Priests, he counterfeited them, or else applied himself to Women and Maids of Reputation to procure true Certificates from them; and he so or∣der'd it that he subborn'd the greater part of them at the 2d. or 3d. Visit of Charity, to give them an Alms in se∣cret. Those who would not abandon themselves to his Lusts, were depriv'd of the Alms; and he gave in his Re∣port that they were People of a scan∣dalous Reputation, and did not deserve the Queen's Charity. They murmur'd and complain'd to the Cardinal, but he would take no Cognizance of the Matter, craftily sending both the poor
People and the Parish-Priests to make their Complaint to the Queen. A zealous Curate, one of those whom they call the Pope's Barboni, went boldly one Day to find her Majesty; but whether it was that the Priest did not play his part well, or that the Queen would not take notice of his weakness, and her ill choice of Bandie∣re for her private Almoner, the Barboni was child, and Bandiee denying his ill Actions was believ'd upon his Word. But as he was a Wretch whom no Po∣liticks could make wise, he went on at such a rate, that Pope Innocent XI. had Complaints against him from all sides. Cardinal Azzolini going to an Au∣dience of the Holy Father, found that he was angry, and he told him of it in such a manner, that the Cardinal could not forbear writing a Letter to the Queen about those Complaints which were made against Bandiere. The Letter was brought unhappily at a time when the Queen was embroil'd with the Cardinal about other Affairs, inso∣much that it was not well receiv'd; nay, on the contrary, she gave it to Bandiere out of spite to the Cardinal,
saying, Bandiere these wicked Priests would ruine thee with me; but laugh at both of them, for I will always take care of thee. Bandiere kneeling down before the Queen, with Crocodiles Tears implor'd her protection, and afterwards shew'd the Cardinal's Letter to all the World, and gave him all the ill Language ima∣ginable. The poor Cardinal seeing the Queen had thus sacrific'd him, made as if he never minded it; and because of his Heirship to the Queen, suffer'd both this and a great deal more from others, as well as Bandiere. But the Cardinal's Heirs were well reveng'd upon this Wretch, and reduced him to that pass that he perished for want, af∣ter having been the reproach and scorn of all that knew him. For as he had a wicked Tongue, and had offended eve∣ry body, he found no Friend in time of need, neither ought it to be at all won∣der'd at, if seeing he had dishonour'd so many honest Families, God permit∣ted the same to fall upon his. He had a Daughter tolerably hand∣some, but very ambitious, who was not contented with the Cloaths her Father would bring her, because being
covetous, she often wanted what was necessary: She therefore contrived to have them another way than from him. For a certain Abbot happened to fall in Love with her, who was an Italian Gentleman descended from an honou∣rable Family, and was called the Ab∣bot Vannini; which Man became noto∣rious for his Extravagancies, as you will find in the progress of this History. For this our Prelate always loving a sweet Bit, and never valuing the Ex∣pence of it, his Propositions were quick∣ly list'ned to; and the Conclusion was made betwixt them without any great Preliminaries: For in Italy they come presently to the Point in these kind of Affairs, because Opportunities are more scarce there than elsewhere; and when such are presented, Lovers never fail to take their Advantage. One Night, though very late, as Bandiere according to his Custom came from the Queen, he found a Guard at the Door of his Lodging, who would not suffer him to enter; and because Bandiere used to say he could lye when he would at the Queen's, where he had a Bed, our Lovers did not expect he would have come to interrupt their
Pleasures, and trouble the Merriment. Bandiere being thus kept out of his House, laid his hand upon his Pistol; but whether it were that it did not take Fire, or that he knew not how to make use of it, two Men took hold of his Cloaths and drubb'd him soundly, but did not kill him. These trouble∣some Companions went along with him as far as his good Friend the Marquis Del Monte's House, where he got in, and shelter'd himself, passing the rest of the Night very ill. And, after all this, his Daughter's Lover marched off at his own leisure; but the next Day this Story was spread through the whole City. Bandiere complain'd of it to the Queen, who as she some∣times paid him home, told him, that he ought not to think it strange, if the same measure were meted to him that he himself measured to others. Car∣dinal Azzolini laughed with all his Heart; and the Marquis Del Monte ha∣ving had his part of the Concern, would fain have perswaded the Queen to put this young Woman into a Monastery for some time. But she was only a Young Thing, who had married her self without her Parent's Consent to one
who was better Acquainted with the Daughter, than the Father: But the poor Wretch died in Childbed of her first Child. Now the Queen did not only search after the Art of making Gold, but pre∣tended to find out the Universal Medi∣cine, and the Secret of living an hun∣dred Years. As she was very easie of belief, having read a Secret of this kind in the Mercury Gallant, so she would try it upon her own Person, without any Precaution; but she quickly began to swell so much that she was ready to burst, and had been in a very ill conditi∣on, if she had not received a speedy Re∣medy. This Experiment not succeed∣ing, she suffer'd her self to be deluded afterwards by an English Chymist, who having entertain'd her one Day with a great many things which were very cu∣rious, assur'd that he had had a Secret to prolong Life, and that by it Persons being of about fifty or sixty Years of Age, might maintain themselves in the same Vigour to Sixscore Years, and much further. He said he had made the Application upon himself, and being 70 Years old as he pretended, he had yet a good Appetite, slept well, and had all the
Functions of Life as a Man of fifty Years old. And for a proof of his Knowledge, he shewed her Certificates from a great number of Persons, whom he had not only cur'd of strange Distem∣pers, but had made Young again, and given them Vigour. He said he had tryed the Experiment upon the Marquis Del Monte, who shewd thereupon anextream Vigour in the Combat of Love, and assured the Queen, that the Marquis (tho' he were 60 Years old) had never more Vigour than at that time. He needed say no more to set the Queen on fire. This English Mountebank, knew so well how to perswade her, that she would have this Secret at any rate. He pro∣fess'd that he would never teach it to a∣ny Person, but that he would furnish her with a Dose which should be suffici∣ent to keep by her without revealing his Secret, because Her Majesty being the most Generous Queen in the World, would make no difficulty of teaching it to a great many People, and for his part this Arcanum was all the Treasure he had. At last the Queen being eager, promis'd him ten thousand Crowns for his Secret, upon Condition he should go immediately out of Italy, and come thi∣ther
no more. But he every Day rai∣sed his Price higher and higher, and the Marquis Del Monte who intended to have his Share herein, perswaded the Queen by any means not to let this Secret e∣scape, and the thing was carry'd so far, that he was offer'd thirty thousand Crowns. But Cardinal Azzolini having understood it, was all over in a cold Sweat at so great a Sum; for the Queen was ready to have given him a Bill up∣on the Bank of Santo Spirito, which was engaged for Payment, or would have put her Jewels into his Hands for Secu∣rity. One Day being among her Maids, as they were combing her Head, she said, I will put my self into the Mode now more than ever; my Secret will be vhemently desired by some People, and rejoyce others. I hope in God to live yet longer than I have liv'd, to a large extent of Years, and to see a dozen Popes more. Then I shall tell them a great many things which I can assure them I have seen, tho' Cardinal Ricci said of me, The Queen of Sweden eats a great deal, and digests but little, because she does not chew it well; and this will hasten her Death. And now the old Fool is dead himself, but as for
me I shall live a long time; and other such like things. But all these fine Hopes presently vanish'd; for Cardinal Azzo∣lini, with an hundred Pistols, sent this English Man out of Rome, tho' himself afterward shewed a Weakness of the like kind, in his last Sickness, where he would have given two thousand Crowns for a Pill composed by the Marquis San∣tanell. The Marquis Del Monte lost a Gud∣geon, by the English flight, but he had many other Supplies, being accustom'd to live upon Rapine. The Charge of Captain of the Queens Quarter or Bar∣rier, furnish'd him continually with new Means of getting Money; But Play swallow'd up all. When he was in Debt he would appear before the Queen with a Melancholy Air, and she demand∣ing the reason of his Sadness, he would tell her with admirable Address, That he had lost at Play. She saw him thus oftner than he really had Play'd, and would give him Bills from thirty to for∣ty Pistols, more or less, according as it happened. For the Queen reserv'd a certain Sum per Month, for small Uses, and sometimes she had certain Funds out of Sweden, which she kept in private to
be liberal with, upon occasion. But she did not so often distribute them ac∣cording to Peoples Merits, and in pro∣portion to the Services done her, but al∣most always by Fancy, and without di∣stinction. The Marquis had caus'd his Wife and Children to come to Rome, with the Marquis Mario his Brother, and he would have found a great diffi∣culty to maintain so numerous a Family, without his Industry, because he had but very small Funds from his own Patri∣mony, and no more than thirty Crowns a Month from the Queen. 'Tis true that the other Advantages which he had from this Princess came to as much more, for she paid the Hire of his Lodgings, kept him a Coach, gave him also many Priviledges and Exemptions of Customs of Goods, and many other things. This Marquis who had a mind to fur∣nish his House at the Expence of such as retir'd into the Queens Quarter, had a thousand Intrigues with the Jews; and it would be tedious to reckon up all the Stories of the Cheats he put upon them. I will only mention one, whereby he got a great many good Pictures, without disbursting one Farthing. He had a Tay∣lor,
whom they call'd the Liegeois, as being of the Country of Liege, who had not much Wit, though he was a Man of Substance. He had an Acquaintance with some Flemish Painters, who were able Men at their Art., from whom he had very valuable Pictures, because they were Originals, for Cloaths, the Hire of his House, and a little ready Money. He had bought a little House at Lan∣gara, within the Queen's Jurisdiction, or Franchises, and it had a little Gar∣den well Cultivated, full of Flowers and Fruits; and among other things, with fine Oranges and Limons in Vessels of Earth, which were the Delight of this poor Man. The Marquiss went to him, and demanded this House in the Queen's Name, to lodge a Swedish Gentleman in, who was one of the Queen's Recei∣vers, and was then at Rome. The Liege∣ois at first refused this Demand; but be∣ing threatned with ill Treatment, he presented a Petition to the Queen, who had no regard at all to it, but on the contrary, forc'd him to give the Swede the best Room in his House. The Mar∣quiss went to see him often, and the Flowers and Fruits in his Garden.
This pierced the poor Proprietor to the Quick; and to redeem himself out of this Vexation, he threw himself at the Marquiss's Feet, who promised him to Dislodge the Swede, provided he would lend him four of his best Pictures to take Copies of. You shall not only Copy them, said the Taylor, but I will give you the Originals with all my heart, provided you will grant me your Pro∣tection The Marquiss Embracing him, promised him he would, and Dislodged the Suede, who was however just upon his departure out of the Country. By this Trick, the Marquiss got four Ori∣ginal Pictures, which might be worth about 12 or 14 Pistols a piece; and sometime after, he desir'd four more, only to Copy, which he promis'd to restore, without performance, deferring it so long till the Liegeois Died; and his Heirs could never regain them: For not long after, the Marquiss Del Monte made a Voyage into Sueden, where he staid a long time, and at his retnrn al∣ledg'd Prescription, and would never hear them talk'd of any more. At the same time he was preparing his Chambers for the Taylor's Pictures, he contriv'd to fill his Cellar with good
Wine for nothing. There was a cheat∣ing Rogue named Gaspar, a Joyner by Trade, who wanted the Marquiss's Pro∣tection, which he bought to the Price of 80 Barrels of excellent Wine, and it cost nothing either to the one or the other. He had a Friend, one of the Queen's Suisses, call'd Melchior, who was a Serjeant, and kept a Cabaret or place to sell Wine at Langara, where he had a good Trade by the Refugees and other wicked People, who retir'd into the Queen's Franchises, because they would not pay their Debts, or to avoid Punish∣ment for their Crimes. Melchior, who was as great a Cheat as Gaspar, went with his Comerade, into the Villages about Rome, where the best Wines in the Country grow, as at Frescati, Alba∣no, Gensano, Tivoli, and others, where they bought 300 Barrels of Wine, at half a Pistol a Piece to be paid in Rome, paying only a little Money in Earnest, to cover the Cheat. The Marquiss, as we have said before, had 80 Barrels of the best Wine Albano afforded; Gaspar had twenty Barrels, and Melchior the rest to sell by Retail. And the Merchants doubted nothing for three or four Months, but afterward came to Rome
to demand Payment. At first they gave them good words, to draw the thing at length, and hop'd to tire them by sending them so often back without doing any thing. They Addressed themselves to Cardinal Azzolini, who shrugg'd up his Shoulders, and advis'd them to present a Petition to the Queen, which they did, but they lost a great deal of time, because the Queen was very often not to be seen. The Cardi∣nal, who was willing to have Justice done, favour'd them all he could with the Queen. She sent the Petition to the Marquiss Del Monte, and order'd him, as Captain of the Queen's Quarter, to see Sa∣tisfaction given to these poor Merchants. This was to make him Judge of his own Cause; and he ordered it accordingly, for he gave them nothing but good Words, and appointed several days of Payment, one after another: At last for Form sake, he called the Debtors before him, in the presence of the Creditors; sometimes they denied the Debt, and sometimes quarrel'd with the Price and the Quality of the Wine, pretending they had been Cheated. At last, one of the boldest of the Merchants present∣ed a Petition to the Pope; and the Mar∣quiss
understanding it, perswaded the Queen not to hear them, because they had Affronted him, in recurring to ano∣ther Justice besides his own. Upon a second Petition to the Pope, his Holiness ordered the Governor of Rome to see good Justice done; and thereupon the Joyner was taken out of the Queen's Quarter, and put into Prison, but be∣ing insolvent, he came out at three Months end, by listing himself for a Soldier. The Goods of the Swisse were Seiz'd in Execution, and sold by the Queeen's Permission; and he was oblig'd to serve a Year without Wages. So that with this and some Money the Queen gave in Charity, the Merchants were paid some well, some ill, and some scarce any at all. The Marquiss being got out of this untoward Business, thought of nothing else but Diverting himself; and the Franchises of the Queen's Quarter fur∣nish'd him every day with an opportu∣nity of satisfying his irregular Passion for Women. For those whom Debau∣chery had caused to retire thither, were oblig'd to abandon themselves to him, that they might have permis∣sion to prostitute themselves to o∣thers.
When they were afraid of Dan∣ger, or too great in Number, he was contented with a Present, to let them stay in the Queen's Quarter. And you might frequently see Maids, who run away thither from their Father's Hou∣ses; and Wives that forsook their Hus∣bands Beds, to live publickly in a Crime, without fear of being Punish'd, so that our Barbon got Money by them, and might produce them to his Friends. He ordinarily kept Company with Prince Columberi, who was the Town-Bull of Rome, and let him know the fine things, and pleasant Recreations of the Queen's Quarter. This great Prince, who was very Accomplish'd, had no other fault, but that he was addicted to Women: But having too great a Soul to approve the Cheats of the Marquiss, he was yet very glad to see by his means, fresh Women as often as he pleas'd, to amuse himself withal. For indeed, the Great Lords do not know for the most part how to spend their time, when they are neither exercised in War or Hunting. Though he was far from being Liberal, he never Cheated any body▪ no not so much as one single Person; and if he did not pay them in Money, furnish'd
them with Wine, Wheat and Coals. For having a great deal of Land in and about Rome, he did not always receive his Rents in ready Cash, and therefore it was more commodious for him to pay rather in Provisions than Money; reser∣ving the latter, only for new Acquain∣tance. To these he would give only a Testoon of about the value of Eighteen pence, never more nor less; for he was not of their Humour, who ruine them∣selves by Women, as the Spaniards of∣ten do. And indeed, the great number of those he dealt withal, made him put a low Price upon them, and he found his Account much better among the Lesser, than with the Great Ladies, who are not to be enjoy'd without great Expences; for he was not so blind to sacrifice his Interests to his Pleasures. As the Prin∣cess his Wife had forsaken him, he was not of a Complexion to forsake the Sex, but therefore gave himself up to Plea∣sure, and would taste of all, without setting any Bounds to himself. No Wo∣man 'scap'd him that had any Dealings of that kind, and he was welcome every wher by reason of his Birth and the Charms of his Person; For he was well made, and very well provided with
the Talents of Nature, and principally those appropriated to the Pleasures of Venus. Although his Prince would see many Women, yet he had but one which he constantly kept; to this he paid his Respects, and no body durst touch her for fear of being Murther'd upon the least Signal, by some of his Bravo's, of which he had always twenty at com∣mand. She I am going to speak of, was Daughter to a certain Widow named Manchol. Prince Columbieri did as many of the long Robe do at Rome, who not being able to Contain, are obliged to make a fair Appearance, and chuse out a poor Maid, such as they like best, both for Beauty and other Respects, and keep her at a distance from them, paying her Lodging with a Salary of nine or ten Crowns a Month, where they recreate and themselves as often as they please, without permitting her to see any other Company. And this ma∣nagement having lasted some Years, or till such such time as the Vestal begins to grow Old, they put her off to some Ʋltra montain, Arificer, or ades∣man newly come thither, who Marries her for a Virgin. After this, some of
them live Vertuously. But they that cannot forsake their vicious Courses, live with their Husbands till such time as their Debaucheries are discover'd, and then they withdraw into the Fran∣chises of the Queen, or some Ambassa∣dor, and there live freely, according to their former manner of life, till such time as Sickness or old Age, disorders or quite break it off. There happen'd one time a villanous case of this Nature, which cries out for Vengeance. One of these sorts of Maids having Married an Artizan who was a Stranger, and ex∣cellent in his Art; She left him at three Weeks end, because he would force her to live in Order; and therefore she contrived with her Mother, to destroy her Husband; and the Measures being taken accordingly, one day as the Mo∣ther did entertain her Son-in-law in a Chamber with a long Discourse, her Daughter brought in a Man at another door, where on a sudden they were Sur∣priz'd by the Sbirries, who were hir'd and let in on purpose, to carry them all to Prison. And there was immediately a Criminal Process form'd against the Husband, at the request of the Fiscal, who was also gain'd, and the poor Man
was condemn'd to the Gallies for five Years, for a contented Cuckold, or such a one as will suffer his Wife to be Kiss'd in his Presence for Money, and died in Misery at Civita Veccia, while his Wife in the mean time prostituted her self to all the People in Rome. But to return to Manchol, Prince Columbieri had Lodg'd her in a Private House, but pleasant, with a fine Garden, towards St. Mary Majeure, where he furnish'd her with all things necessary. She had two Daughters, one of which was called Menica, and the other Anto∣nia. The first was that which the Prince Loved: She was one of the finest Wo∣men in Rome, of a curious Stature, the turn of her Visage well made, fine Eyes, and the finest Teeth in the World, an admirable Neck, and Sung well: In short, there was no Defect in her Person, ex∣cept that her left Arm was a little short∣er than the right, with a little Hand, which was something dry. Her Sister was a great fat Woman, and of a Swar∣thy Complexion. The Prince Charm'd with his Menica, had a fancy to shew her to the Marquiss Del Monte, to challenge him to shew any Woman in the Queen's Quarter that was comparable to her.
All these three made a bargain to bring these Girls to walk to the Ban∣queting House of Farnese, at the Gate of St. Pancrass. The Marquiss also pro∣mised to bring his Damosel, who was then a small Remblant, or the Leavings of the Queen's Taylor; yet she was very Handsome and full of Play, and was call'd Rosina. They came pretty early to the Banqueting-House, in Coaches with the Windows shut, and in com∣pany of their Mothers. Our three Pala∣dnes came later, every one in his Coach. The Marquiss Del Monte, brought a course Dinner, which he had made ready at the Cabarets of the Gate Settignana. But our Nymphs gave notice to their old Sweethearts, that if they had sufficient Dexterity, to come into the Banquet∣ing-House without being seen, they would steal from them a Moment to en∣tertain them in Private. The World is always full of Waggery, for though these Gentlemen Treated their Damosels well, they were mad that they had been Faithful so long, and almost died with longing to Betray them, so true it is, that there is little stress to be laid upon these kind of Animals. The three Fa∣vourites, were the Queens Taylor, a
Valet de Chambre of her Majesty, and ano∣ther Taylor of the Place, d'Espagne, call'd Picard, a very Debauch'd Fellow, no Novices in the Court of Venus, and who fail'd not to be there according to the Assignation. In the enclosure of the Vineyard of Furnese, there is a great and a little Banqueting-House; in the great one is a large Hall, marvelously built, from whence you may see the Fields as far as the Sea. 'Twas there the Feast was made, and the two Mo∣thers of these two Girls Dined with the House-keeper, and our People di∣verted themselves together, each one embracing his Cloris. The cunning Jades counterfeited with admirable Dis∣simulation, and one would have sworn it was the first time they had been with Men. For the Romans do know so well how to make themselves Grave, that the most Debauch'd would pass for Lu∣cretia's by their mein and outward ap∣pearance, unless they chance to mistake when they are heated with Wine and good Chear. When the Chevalier had Dined, he took a Guitar and Play'd, to which they Danc'd and Caper'd; and when they had heated themselves suf∣ficiently, our Seniors went to Sleep, as
it is the Custom of Italy after Dinner, and gave liberty to the Girls to walk in the Porch. But they impatient to see their ancient Gallants again, Detatch'd themselves out one after another, and went to find them in the little Banquet∣ing-House, carrying some remainders of the Dinner, and some Bottles of Wine half empty along with them. These new Comers had some Advantage of the Regale, while their good Mothers stood Centry. This was not the first time they had been at the same Rendezvouse; for they were so well acquainted, that they knew every Creek and Corner, and nick'd their Opportunity, because the Moments are there Precious. But in the midst of all the Joy, our Seniors awak'd and demanded their Nymphs. Their Mothers called them, but that did not avail, for they were so impatient, that they could not for∣bear to Search after them. But in the interim, the Valet de Chambre and the two Taylors slip'd away cunningly, and leap'd over the Wall into the Queen's Garden below, going as softly as they could through the Thickets and Brushes. The Girls were found Blood-red and all in an Heat; and our Seniors, who were
old experienc'd Gamesters, got Ladders and look'd over the Wall, to see if they could perceive the Tracts of any Body. The Marquiss Del Monte, who knew the place best, discover'd the Matter by some prints of their Feet, but had the Discretion to say nothing, and to tell them on the contrary, that it was a false Alarm. They Diverted themselves to the fulltill the Evening, or rather the Night came; and they had no sooner retir'd, but the Marquiss told all to the Queen, who was ready to die with Laughing, and said there was no trust∣ing to Beasts without Tails: Those were her very words. Love and Debauchery though they were a great part, were not the only business of the Marquiss Del Monte, for at the same time he had a regard to his Interests; for his Affairs being but in an untoward posture, he took all occasions to better them, and therefore demanded his Tribute from those who shelter'd themselves in the Queen's Quarter. He help'd the Merchants as much as he could to Cheat the Custom-House of all sorts of Merchandize. A Cashier of the Mount of Piety, run away into the Queen's Quarter with a Strumpet call'd
Isabella, and three Thousand Crowns he had Robb'd the Bank of, was sent away some days after in the Queen's Coach, as far as the Confines of the Realm of Naples, by the means of a Present of two Hundred Pistols he made the Mar∣quiss. Some time after, one of the Cashiers of the Bank de Spirito Santa, named Paterno, fled into the Queen's Quarter with ten Thousand Crowns in Gold and Silver, which he had Cheated the Bank of; the Marquiss conducted him in the Queen's Coach, as far as Mantua, for the Sum of 2000 Crowns. This Wretch went to Hamburgh to Teixere, upon the Marquiss's Recom∣mendation, where he died in the Flower of his Age, having shortned his Life by Debaucheries and vicious Courses. When the Debauch'd Monks had a mind to divert themselves with Publick Women, they commonly came to the Caberets of Port Settignana, where they were cover'd from Justice and the Cen∣sure of their Superiors. The Marquiss always found a Seat at their Table, and perhaps something else at the end of the Feast. And indeed he let no oppor∣tunity slip, to make his Advantages up∣on the Chapter of Interest and Love.
But however, he was sometimes mista∣ken, as may be seen in the following In∣stance. A Piemontois Lady, the Wife of a Mar∣quiss in that Country, I know not for what reason, went away from her Hus∣band, and came to the Queen, disguis'd under a false Name. Her Husband being angry that his Wife had left him, or rather her Parents complain'd to the Duke of the ill Usage of her Husband, and moved his Royal High∣ness to send after her to Stop her. This was done, but it prov'd too late; for having always the wind of the Pursuers, she came to Rome without any Obstacle, and went directly into the Queen's Quarter. The Marquiss Del Monte ha∣ving Notice of it, did not fail to Intro∣duce himself, and went readily to wait upon her. She was one of the finest of a brown Complexion, the Court of Savoy had. This Lady seeing her self under the necessity of having a Prote∣ctor, recommended her self to the Mar∣quiss Del Monte, who brought her to the Queen. Her Majesty seeing a Wo∣man so fine, well Shap'd, and of consi∣derable Quality, had all the considera∣tion and regard for her possible. But
in the interim, the Duke of Savoy had wrote to the Pope, and Cardinal Francis Barberini, Dean of the Sacred College. The Pope at that time would take no cognizance of it himself, but spoke to Cardinal Barberini to Address himself to the Queen about it; which was difficult, because this Princess was angry that the Duke of Savoy had not sent to her. The Savoyard Lady seeing so many Power∣ful People at work to force her back to her Husband, cast her self at the Queen's Feet, humbly begging her to take Compassion of her, because her Husband was the Cruellest of Men; and if she should be constrained to return to him again, he would certainly make an end of her Life. Cardinal Barberini came to the Queen under pretence of a Visit, and falling into Talk about the Piemontois Lady, he exhorted the Queen to restore her to her Parents. The Queen who knew that Cardinal Barberini had receiv'd a Letter from the Duke of Sa∣voy, desir'd to know, her self seeming ignorant of the Matter, why he con∣cern'd himself about this Lady, seeing nobody had as yet addressed themselves to her upon that account. The Cardi∣nal answer'd, that the Duke of Savoy
doing him the Honour to Write about certain Affairs, had desir'd him in the same Letter, that if he knew the Lady was at Rome, as he was assur'd she was, he would oblige her to retrrn to her Hus∣band, and had given his word upon the Faith of a Prince, that her Husband should treat her with all sort of good Usage, and would take the trouble up∣on himself to compose the Difference betwixt them. The Queen Answer'd him, that when she had the same Assu∣rances, she would restore her, and that in the mean time, she has promis'd her Protection, and that she would deliver her to no Body, but such Hands where∣in the Lady might trust her▪ self with all manner of Security. Hereupon the Cardinal replied, that he thought her Majesty would have been satisfied upon his single word; that delay in a thing of this Nature, would but exasperate her Husband; that he would intreat the Queen to consider that the Lady's being in a particular House, look'd a little strange; and if her Majesty would acquiesce ei∣ther in his Opinion, or most humble Re∣quest, he would take care to put her into a Convent. Hereupon the Queen began to be hot, and demanded whether
he would put her into the Sculetta, or St. Jaques, in the company of Whores; for 'tis there Married Women are shut up who are Surpriz'd in those kinds of Gallantries. Barberini was hot also in his Turn, for being every whit as Pas∣sionate as the Queen, he could not for∣bear telling her, that he knew he had given her Majesty good Counsel, and that perhaps they would make but a bad bargain of the Matter. Upon this, the Queen was downright angry, and after many words and a great deal of course Language between them, call'd Barberini Vecchio Matto, Old Fool, and conducted him quite out of hearing with those words. Barberini made no other An∣swer, but Vecchiosi, ma matto no. I am Old, 'tis true, but I am no Fool for all that. But afterwards Azzolini inter∣pos'd himself, the Pope made a Noise, the Lady was Restor'd, and at last of all, the Marquiss Del Monte got nothing for his Pains. The Marquiss was not the only Offi∣cer that diverted himself, but others manag'd their Intrigues with greater secrely, and did not give so great a Scan∣dal: But above all, there was none that manag'd their Affairs with so much pri∣vacy
as Count Boccabella the Queen's Groom. He was a Man of a fine Sta∣ture, but gross, deform'd, stufft up, of a very amorous Complexion, and one that slipp'd no occasion of satisfying his Sensuality. Instead of dividing his Love, as formerly, among many Persons of different Humors and Tempers, he re∣solv'd, in the Instance I am now speak∣ing of, to re-unite his wandring Affe∣ctions, and fix them all upon a single Object; but instead of a Maid, who had been at perfect Liberty to dispose of her self, he took away a Marry'd Wife, and carry'd her off in this manner: The Climate of Italy, and particular∣ly Rome, is so hot, that 'tis no wonder if all the People there are inclin'd to Love: The Women, above all, when they follow their own Inclination, and suffer themselves to be guided by the Dictates of corrupt Nature, are most addicted to it. Their Diet contributes not a little thereunto: For, because they pretend that Water is crude and un∣wholesom, the Women and Maids drink as much, nay, more Wine than the Men, without making any Ceremony upon the matter, and especially the
Vulgar. Besides this, they eat very of∣ten Leeks, Onions, and Garlick, which they swallow down like Sweet-meats: Cellery, Feunel, Artichoaks, Mushroms, Trousles, Spiceries, and, in a word, all sorts of Aliments which are hot and provocative, are their Delight; and there are but very few to be found there, that have any extraordinary Appetite for things tending to Mortification. 'Tis true, they are kept up very close; but because things forbidden make us long after them the more, this constraint is not at all proper to inspire Conti∣nence; nay, on the contrary, they be∣lieve for the most part, that they are not accountable for the Honour which Men dare uot trust in their hands. But to speak the truth, there is never so much reason to keep them up, as when Ambassadors enjoy the Franchises of Quarters; for when they fly thither, a Person cannot re-call his Child, nor an Husband his Wife; nay, further, when a Maid is Marriagable, that is to say, above Twenty Years old, and runs a∣way from her Father's House, and goes to the Governour or Register, and de∣clares that seeing her Father and Mother have not Marry'd her, she will turn
Courtesan; he gives her his Protection, and her Parents cannot afterwards keep her up; on the contrary, they often exercise this infamous Trade before their Eyes, and they are not able to hin∣der them. It hapned ill to a Coach-man of Bur∣gundy, Servant to Cardinal Altieri, who knew not this Custom, though he had liv'd Twenty four Years in Rome. His Daughter being unfortunately run a∣way from him, to set up this hopeful Occupation, he found out the Place where she was, and brought her back to his House, where he lash'd her stoutly; but this was look'd upon as a Breach of the Publick Liberty, and Justice took her away again; and if he had not had good Friends, he had been publickly chastiz'd. This is hard to believe of so Holy a City as Rome; but it happens sometimes, and they oblig'd to tole∣rate such Abuses, for fear of Spight, and some other Reasons, which the Rea∣der will find in the sequel of this History. This is certain, that when a Woman addicts her self to Ill, she always finds some way or other to satisfie her Pas∣sion: To instance n what hapned here some Years ago in a Merchant of Terre-Sanguina,
who had a Wife, believ'd to be the Mirror of Chastity; and he watch'd her narrowly; for as the Italian Nation is very distrustful, he lock'd her up when he went abroad, and never lost sight of her when she went out, going along with her both to the Church and to walk; and yet notwithstanding all the care he could take, she fell in Love with a Young Man that pass'd often that way, and made Love to her by Signs, which is a Language well understood by the Italians. She found a way to let him know, That if he came upon a cer∣tain Saturday at night, he should find the Gate open at an Hour she told him of; and to deceive her Husband, staid while he was in bed. She was no sooner come to bed also, but she cry'd out, O God! Husband, I have no Cravat nor Sleeves for you to wear to morrow, and I never thought on't; I must rise again to wash and iron them quickly. The Hus∣band, who believ'd she spoke truth, let her do it, and slept soundly, having been at work all day by himself; for the Wo∣men there never put their foot into the Shop. In the mean time, the Merchant's Wife comes down, and opens the Door to her Lover, to whom she prostituted
her self, and then return'd to her Hus∣band, as if she had but just iron'd the small Linen. Next Morning the Mer∣chant went to trim himself at the Bar∣ber's, where was usually good store of Company; his Wife's Lover was there also, who not knowing the Merchant, old all the story of his Adventure with the Merchant's Wife, whom he had the Indiscretion to name: But it cost him his Life; for he was Poniarded the same Night ar he went home. Neither did his Wife stay long for the Punishment of her Crime; for as Men dare, and at∣tempt all things in Italy, her Husband brought her Fruit to eat, which he had poison'd beforehand; and she perceiv'd nothing 'till the Poison began to work its Effect; and then he reproach'd her with Unfaithfulness, Injustice, and Base∣ness, and exhorted her to prepare for Death, acknowledging that he had poi∣son'd her. He sent for the Curate, and in the mean time fled away, taking with him all the Money and Jewels, and what he could conveniently carry besides, and was never more heard of. But to return to Count Boccabella: He having an Intrigue with a Trades∣man's Wife, was resolv'd to carry her
off; and they agreed together, that it should be upon a Wednesday in March, when her Husband went to St. Peter's Church, where there was great Devo∣tion, and a grand concourse of People, because of the Indulgences given at that time. As she was going under the Co∣lumns of the broad Passage, call'd St. Peter's Place, she set up a cry, O my God! I have lost my Chaplet of Beads; but it must be fallen near this place; for I had it as I pass'd by the Penitentiary. In Italy the Women always wear a Chaplet in their Hands when they walk in the Streets, and are incessantly mumbling over their Pater-Noster's. Hers was of Coral, or Granat, with great Silver Medals. Stay here, says the poor No∣vice of a Husband, I will return by and by, and perhaps I may find it. This sweet Beast of a Wife desir'd him to make haste; but as soon as ever his back was turn'd, she advanc'd three or four steps forward, and on the other side of the Columns, she found one of the Queen's Coaches, into which she stept, and was carry'd to Longara to Count Boccabella, where she stay'd as long as he liv'd, the Count's Domesticks knowing not one word of it. They only wonder'd that
their Master eat all alone; that he serv'd himself, and carefully lock'd the Door after him; that he consum'd as much Meat as wou'd serve two; and, that there was no body entred into his Apart∣ment, which was call'd The Noble, be∣cause he kept his Fair One enclos'd there. But when the thing was once become customary, they took it for Fan∣cy, which caus'd the Admiration in some measure to cease. It is surprizing that this Woman should live so many Years in Adultery, without speaking to any body, and without the least sence of Religion. Count Boccabella died suddenly of an Apoplexy, at a time when he thought least of it, and some say in the very Act, and that he was drawn off by force: A fit End for such a Life! But one would never have imagin'd such a thing of a Man that pretended to be a De∣votee, and was a Member of one of the Principal Fraternities of Rome, I mean that which wears a particular Mark upon their Garments, and pra∣ctise all manner of Spiritual Exercises. But howsoever the thing were, never was Woman in so great a Perplexity; for as soon as it was known he was
dead in that manner, there was a great Alarm in the House, and the Woman was in such a confusion and consterna∣tion she knew not what to do: But when she had recover'd herself a little, she sent to find out the Marquiss Del Monte, and falling upon her knees, with Tears tric∣kling down, besought him to procure the Queen's Protection for her. This Princess being inform'd of the Accident, hindred Justice from taking cognisance of the matter, and the rather, because he was one of her Domesticks, and dead in her Quarter. The Corps of the Count was carry'd to the Parish-Church of St. Dorothy, and there in∣terr'd without any Ceremonies. And as for this miserable Woman, the Queen put her among the Penitents, where she entred voluntarily, chusing to be shut up there, rather than return to her Hus∣band, from whom she had no reason to expect a kind Reception, after such an injury to his Bed. The Marquiss, who would do nothing but upon Interest, pretended to obtain some Favours for his Pains; but she was so afflicted, she could not so much as hear him, and so he pass'd it by, having otherwise where∣withal to recompence himself: But he
did so many Exploits and injurious things, and the Complaints against him came so fast to the Queen, that she was oblig'd to turn him out, at least in ap∣pearance, from being Captain of her Quarter, and to give it to Count Vase∣nau, who was Captain of her Suiss Guards. Count Vasenau was Natural Son to Ladislaus King of Poland, and a Polish Damosel: He had a delicate and for∣cible Wit, a Soul fill'd with Greatness and Integrity; and you might see some∣thing Noble in all his Manners, which corresponded to the Nobility of his Birth; but he had nothing handsome in his Face; which however is no mighty Fault in a Man's Phisiognomy. He cloath'd so fine (for he follow'd none but the Modes of France, of which he had generally the first notice) that the most Genteel Persons did always imitate him; but commonly adding something of their own, spoil'd what was good in the In∣ventions of the others. He had a German Gate, and was a little heavy on Horse∣back, which made some People difficult to believe that he was so perfect at the Exercises of the Body as he was repor∣ted to be. I should easily agree to his
Bravery; and there are none but those who are either malicious or misinform'd, and have been at Madrid or Holland, that can dispute it; and there is none of them perhaps will say they had measur'd Swords with him, as the Gascon Captain, who was in the Spanish Service, did. His great Patience in suffering Affronts, which pass'd for Insensibility and Cowardise, has given occasion to some to form injurious Sentiments con∣cerning him: But however, it is not al∣ways insensibility in a Man to suffer; it is Prudence to dissemble that, which the necessity of Affairs will not sometimes permit him to revenge. If Fortune had not been addicted to persecute the Count, without doubt he had took fire as soon as another upon the least Injury done him. If he was at any time com∣plaisant towards a Person, it was rather out of Policy than Baseness of Mind: Nor was it that he lov'd the making of his Fortune more than his Fame; for we do not see that he made any great Business of the Queen's Service, which he might have done perhaps, if he had not had so nice a Conscience. 'Tis well known what Temptations were offer'd him by a Jew of Hamburgh, who was
gain'd by the Marquiss Del Monte, to corrrupt him when he went into Sweden to receive the Queen's Revenues, as we shall find in the ensuing History. Having lost the King his Father, when as yet he had done nothing for him, he took a Fancy to travel to the Northern Parts by his own Natural Inclination; but they perswaded him, and that with Reason, that he might find that elsewhere which was not to be found amongst them. He passed first into England, where he had the Honour to insinuate himself into the Favour of King Charles the II. and re∣ceiv'd several Obligations from him; but he was not long there; for he happen'd into some Quarrels, which oblig'd him to repass suddenly into Holland, where Fortune did not declare her self in his Favour: So he went into Spain, and had good Success at the first; for his Air and Manners being very agreeable, gave him an Entrance into all Places; and his way of Address pleas'd many, and particularly Don John of Austria declared himself in his Favour. But a certain Gallantry he had with a Spanish Lady, brought him into fresh Trouble, so that he was con∣strain'd
for his own Safety to depart out of the Estates of the Crown of Spain. From thence he came into France, where he found a good Esta∣blishment, and a Fortune worthy of himself. Casimir King of Poland after his Ab∣dication, chose France preferrably to all others to pass the rest of his days in. This Religious Prince took Count Vase∣nau near his Person, and bestow'd so many Kindnesses upon him that he was quickly envied. And some, even a∣mong the Rank of Princes, would have supplanted him at the same time the King of Poland thought to advance him. And for this purpose, because the King would go upon sure grounds, he pro∣pos'd to acknowledge him for his Ne∣phew in the Parliament of Paris; but however it was not difficult to turn this inconstant Prince from his Design, or at least to cause him to deferr the Execution of it. And it was deferr'd so long, that in the Interim the King died in the Abbey of St. Germain de pre, so that these good Projects quickly vanished; and instead of an Establishment, he was forc'd to be content with a small Matter the Prince
of Conde gave him, of what the King left at his Death. Afterwards he came to Rome to Queen Christina, who own'd him for one of her Family, and put him into the number of her Domesticks. Cardinal Azzolini and the Marquiss, who were afraid of these Marks of Distinction, would willingly have seen him far enough of, suspecting that this Kinsman and New-comer would be∣come the chief Favourite, and obtain the highest Reward. However they made fair Weather to him at first, though in the mean time they thought of nothing more than how to get rid of him. The Queen made him Captain of her Swiss Guards, and a little while after Captain of her Quarter. But he had this last Charge only in appearance; for the Marquis perform'd all the Functions of the Of∣fice, so that we ought not to impute those disorders to the Count, which afterwards happen'd in the Queen's Quarter. He spent his first two or three Years in great Tranquillity, and without any thing remarkable except some small petty Amours: Madam de Chalais was the first of his Inclinations; but
seeing she was enclos'd in a Convent of Nuns of St. Mary, or of the Visitation at Langara, this was only an Amour of an Iron-Gate. I have seen him often in a Moon-shine Night playing upon a Violin, which he had in his Pocket, round about the Walls of the Cloistr; and at the sound of certain Airs, Ma∣dam de Chalais would shew a small Light in her Apartment on the Garden-side, where the Count having found a way to enter, made Love to her afterward by Signs. They had seen one another in Spain, when the Prince of Chalais retir'd thither by reason of the Troubles he had in France; and the Count had a Company of the Regiment of Chalais in the Spanish Service. The Duke de Poli entred into a stricter Tye of Friend∣ship with him than any other, and they made a little League between them∣selves to uphold one another with the Queen; nevertheless the Count dili∣gently made his Court to Cardinal Az∣olini, who treated him with a great deal of Civility, Ceremonies of which the Italians, and above all the Courtiers are no way sparing. This Union of the Count with the Duke lasted continually, and so much
the more agreeably on the Count's part, for that the Duke of Poli had a Daugh∣ter married to another Duke, who pass'd for one of the finest and most charming Ladies of the Age. She was rarely well shap'd, and of a stature good enough: Her Complection was fine, the Linea∣ments of her Face were agreeable, and she had the whitest Teeth in the World. Her Mouth was a little large, her Eyes black, lively, and well defended; Her Complection was very beautiful and uniform; Her Hair curl'd and brown, a fine Neck, and indeed her whole Per∣son had an Air of Quality. She sung di∣vinely well, and understood Musick perfectly, and touch'd all sorts of In∣struments most excellently. She was then in the Flower of her Youth, about 20 or 22 Years of Age, and as she was often in the Conversation of the Duke her Father, the Count had seen her a long time before he fell in Love with her. She charm'd all the Company that heard her play upon the Base Viol, as much as any Master of Musick could do; which did facilitate the Conquest of his Heart to so rare and beautiful a Person as the Dutchess was, so that in a little time he became desperately in
Love. His Air, his Manners, and his Eyes did all denote him in a strong Pas∣sion, but a certain Respect, and Time∣rousness, hinder'd him from declaring himself. He therefore endeavoured to do that by another, which he durst not do by himself. And to this purpose he cast his Eyes upon a Taylor which made the Dutchesses Cloaths, and he was a Man proper for a Confident. He was Di∣screet and Bold, Prudent and Ingenious, Qualities necessary to the Conduct of an Amorous Intrigue. He did it with Success, and as these sort of Trades∣men find an Entrance every where, he made no great difficulty to acquit him∣self of his Commission, and in the con∣sequence render'd himself necessary, both to the one and the other, without being suspected. He then saw the Dutchess the same Day, and gave her an Account of some Love-Matters, without telling her from whence they came, and she heard him so favourably, that he did not conceal the Name of the Count de Vasenau: The Lady had already observed his Mysteri∣ous and Study'd Arts, and did easily be∣lieve that he was in Love; so she volun∣tarily heard the Declaration made to
her by a Person well known, and whom she knew to be in the Count's Interests. She return'd as agreeable an Answer as the Count could wish; but added, That she had Measures to guard, for that she had a Severe Father, and a Jealous Hus∣band, who look'd strictly after her. And thus the Introducer concluded the Matter without much difficulty. All the Secret then was deposed into these Hands, and he made so faithful a Report to the Count, that he became more Amorous than before. He sought for an opportunity to speak to her with∣out his Introducer, but it was very dif∣ficult to find one, at least to come Head to Head, or enjoy one of those happy Moments where he might find her alone. All that could be done was within the Circles of the Ladies of Italy, that is to say, in casting some Glances by Stealth, which did not satisfie our Passionate Lo∣ver, who believ'd, that the Dutchess as well as himself, did not intend only the Language of the Eyes. But fearing that she did not see one half of his Pas∣sion, he desired to explain himself by Billets Deux: However, the Dutchess being of Opinion that these Letters did often discover Intrigues, which other∣wise
had been conceal'd, would never receive any, for fear they should fall in∣to a strange Hand. And indeed she had Supervisors in the Country, and Spies set over her by others, as well as the Duke of Aqua Sparta her Husband. And Ambassador who had all the Qualities to please Ladies, even to Old Age, and had lost almost nothing of the Beauties and agreeableness of Youth, set all Hands at work to enter into an Intrigue with the Dutchess, and he handled the Mat∣ter so neatly, that, he was with her at the Baptizing of a Child of a French Bookseller, who liv'd in the Place Na∣vona. The Honest and Engaging Com∣pliments of this Ceremony, were re∣new'd every time they saw one another, with abundance of Sweetness and Reci∣procal Pleasure. The Duke D'Etree, for 'tis easie to see that 'tis he I speak of, made a most innocent Amusement to please the Dutchess, but withal spar'd no cost to obtain her favour, and he was so liberal upon all Occasions, that even Daphne her self would have turn'd back again, if she had been flying away: It cannot be thought strange therefore, if the Dutchess did not hate him; but tho' she was very reserv'd, ill Tongues
did so envenome all things, that this Princess was banisht Rome, and sometime after confin'd by her Husband to one of his Estates; and he was assisted in it by Cardinal Baromeo, and the Princess Cor∣boniano who were Related to the Duke. In the mean time the Count's Affair ad∣vanc'd nothing at all, although his Con∣fident was not asleep; for he let slip no Opportunity to make the Dutchess sensi∣ble of the Count's Torments. This ex∣pert Introducer would speak his things so agreeably, that she would hear him with Pleasure, and as he always mingled some pleasant things in his Discourse, he would make her Laugh; so that the Confident had more Pleasure than the Lover himself. For there was never a Day in the Week wherein he did not go to see the Dutchess under some Pretext or other. The Count would often go and ride about her Palace mounted upon an excellent Horse, Calashes being then not so common, for Cardinal Chigi first us'd them in imitation of the French Mode. One Night the Count's Confi∣dent ventur'd to introduce him into the Dutchess's Palace, wrapp'd in a Cloak, under pretence of an Address to a Dam∣sel who was the Lady's Confident, but
they were greatly astonish'd to find the Duke in his Entertaining Chamber. They strove to hide themselves in a cor∣ner to avoid meeting him, but to no purpose, for he discover'd them as they were retiring, and was very much sur∣priz'd to see two Men in his Palace at such an Hour, and in such a place. But the Taylor who had both Courage and Dexterity, came up to him, and told the Duke, That the Dutchess hd or∣der'd him to come to speak with Mada∣mosel Palma, for so was the Maids Name, to take the Body of a Gown to make fit, and that the other Man was his Sr∣vant. The good Duke search'd no fur∣ther into this Affair, but permitted them to enter where Palma was. She was Astonish'd to see the Count, but did promise and assure to serve him to the uttermost; nevertheless, for want of being Liberal, his Affairs advanc'd but slowly. Some time after he was in the Conversation of the Duke of Po, and there was Singing, with a Sympho∣ny, and Consort of Musical Instruments, and a Comedy with Marrionnets. That Night the Count thought he should have died of Love, for the Dutchess was as Lovely and Fine as an Angel. But while
these things were transacting, the Queen's Affairs being Embroil'd in Sueden, her Majesty sent Count Vesenan to receive her Rents, and put things into better Order. 'Twas then he must forsake her for a long time, and his Sighs and Tears gave the Dutchess an Account of his Despair; and they promis'd each other to Love eternally: But the Count's Back was no sooner turn'd, but she for∣got him. Being arriv'd in Sueden, his Confident wrote to him every Post, and sent him News of the Dutchess; but he was not Faithful, because he was employ'd in another Intrigue between the Dutchess and a Roman Prince of great Merit. However he was useful, in giving him notice of all the Traps and Machinations against him, which came to his Knowledge: For the poor Gentleman had a great deal of Persecu∣tion from the Marquiss Del Monte, who was enrag'd that he was not sent in his Place. Cardinal Azzolini did what he could to calm the Queen's Mind, but the Mar∣quiss's Cabal aggravated it, and Landi∣ni always entertain'd the Queen with this Discourse, when she was in an ill Humour. The Queen of Sueden, the
young King's Mother, did him all the Service she could with Queen Chri∣stina; but the famous Jew at Hamburgh, call'd Teixere, who was in the Interests of the Marquiss Del Monte, because he had confirm'd his Commission to receive the Queen's Rents in Pomerania, and in the Dutchy of Bremen, which he always remitted to the Queen by the way of Venice, at great Interest. This Perfidi∣ous Man, gain'd by the Marquiss, made all things go Cross, on purpose to ruin and destroy the Count. 'Tis true that he had some complaisance for this Jew, but if they had Robb'd the Queen toge∣ther, his Affairs had gone better; but he had too Generous a Soul, and a Heart too well fix'd; and in all his Voyge and stay at Stockholme, he comported him∣self as a Man of Probity, which in part was the cause of his Ruine; for the Receivers forsook him, because he made too strict an Examination of their Ac∣counts. But that which compleated his Ruine, was a Letter he writ to the Queen, wherein he gave her an Account, that he had found a way to save a great deal of Money in Exchanges, by return∣ing her Subsidies by the way of France, and exchanging with the Pensions the
King of France gave the Suedes; so that whereas she paid Nine per Cent by way of Venice, he reckon'd not above Two or three to make it come by France. This vex'd the Queen afresh, because it should seem by this Letter that she had a Commerce with the Minister of France in Sueden. But he knew not she would take it ill. After all, the Count return∣ed to Rome, and went to the Queen with Boots and Spurs on, but she gave him a very brisk reception, for she would scarce suffer him to speak, and when he did, he was not heard. He ran to Cardinal Azzolini, to beg of him to interceed with the Queen on his be∣half, alledging, that he was oblig'd to Protect him, because of the good intelligence that had always been be∣twixt them. But his Persecutor the Marquiss, represented that the Count was more careful to give the Car∣dinal an account of Affairs, than he was to her Majesty her self. She who had a Domineering mind, and would play the Sovereign in all things, took Um∣brage at the Count's Proceedings, and treated him ill upon all occasions. Nay, she proceeded to that Excess, that ha∣ving one day sent for him into her Pre∣sence,
and charging him with Injuries▪ She in great rage gave him three or four Blows over the Head with a Cane she had in her Hand. This poor and much afflicted Lord went to bed with a Fea∣ver, and perfectly despair'd to see him∣self treated in this sort; but he must have Patience, for what could be done with a Fool that had neither Rhime nor Reason? Neither is he the only Person who has been thus treated, for the World is full of the Extravagancies of this Princess. But that which gave him most Affliction of all, was the Cheating and Mockery of the Marquiss Del Monte, who came to Comfort him, and that was the cause of all the Mischief that befell him. The poor Dutchess of Aqua Sparta Wept for Grief, and the Count's Confident was witness to her Sorrow: For notwithstanding the Count had not seen the Dutchess, she had yet some con∣sideration for him. His ingenious Con∣fident oblig'd her to write a word or two, to testifie that she took a share in his Disgraces; And this she did, upon condition that he would restore the Let∣ter, as he punctually did, after he had kiss'd it very often wi Transport. It was matter of great
consolation to him, that so lovely a Person was touch'd with his Disgrace. The Duke of Poli sent to Visit him of∣ten, and they saw one another incognito; and at last Cardinal Azzolini reconciled him to the Queen, who made him Satis∣faction. After the Count had respited a while, he would willingly have re∣newed with the Dutchess; but besides that, he was engag'd, in some measure, with the Prince I have spoken of alrea∣dy, and would give him no occasion of Jealousie: An unforeseen Accident broke all the measures of their ancient Corre∣spondence. The Queen at the Count's first coming to her, had hung two of his Chambers with Damas, and at his departure for Sueden, had deputed the Duke of Poli to serve in his Place, till his Return. The Duke appropriated these Hangings to himself, as coming to him from the Queen. And the Master of the Hotel had put him into some hopes of them, which embroil'd the Matter further. At last the Count perempto∣rily demanded the Damas from the Duke, who refns'd to restore it, al∣ledging Prescription and Possession. Neither of them durst complain to the Queen, and the Master of the Hotel
would disoblige neither of them. So they took Cardinal Azzolini for Arbitrator be∣twixt them, and he counselled the Duke to restore them; but he was Obstinate, and would keep them. The Queen came to understand it by means of the Mar∣quiss her Spy, who lov'd to fish in trou∣bled Waters. She Laugh'd and diver∣ted her self with their Dispute, with∣out obliging either of them to desist from their Pretentions. At last comes a Jew and ended the Strife, desiring the Duke to restore him the Damas, which he prov'd to be his own, or to pay him for the Hire of it. The Duke restor'd him the Damas before the Count, and neither of them had it. So the Count lost both his Damas and the favour of his Lady. So that we see Interest is sometimes stronger than Love. The Dutchess expected, that at his return from Sueden and the Low-Countries, the Count would have brought her some piece of Holland, or some fine Flanders-Lace: But he gave her nothing but Gugaws, small works of Ivory, and some other things made at Nremburgh, which though artificially done, were neverthe∣less but of small Value.
no such great matter of mingling Blood, as they do in France and Germany. At last the Business was made up by Donua Maria Candida, a Religious of St. Cecily, and the Abbot de Cabannes, Gentleman to Cardinal Altieri. It is Suprizing, that at a time when the Queen her self liv'd upon Alms, or a Pension which the Pope allow'd her, her Rents not com∣ing from Sueden because of the War, that Cardinal Azzolini should find Ten Thousand Crowns in ready Money, to Marry Octavia to the Marquiss Caponi. This she had, without reckoning what she got from the Queen both before and after this Marriage, which amounted to more than double the Sum. Fortune was very favourable to this Girl; seeing that they, who would otherwise have ruin'd it, contributed so much the more to her Preferment. So poor Count Vasenau, on which Side soever he turn'd him, was always Cross'd. Nor are we yet at the end of his Mis∣fortunes. For Prince Radzevil, Ambassa∣dor of Poland, arriv'd at Rome in the Year 1680, and visited the Queen in form: And Madam the Ambassadress went also to see the Queen, who gave her a favou∣rable Reception, not only in quality of
Ambassadress, but as one of the Family of the King of Poland. Count Vasenau serv'd as Ambassador, and she vigorously recommended him to the Queen. The Ambassador, who was willing to serve the Count also, open'd a way to appro∣priate to him certain Pensions in the Realm of Naples, which belong'd to the Jagellons, who Reigned so long in Poland, of whose Family Count Vasenau was the last. The Queen listned to this Over∣ture, and writ into Spain to the Duke de Medina Celi, first Minister to the Ca∣tholick King, who was Sovereign of the Realm of Naples. She wrote also to the Marquiss Don Velos, Vice Roy of Naples; and every thing prepared to favour the Count, if her Vanity and In∣constancy, had not spoil'd all. Some∣times she would accept this Obligation from the Spaniards; and sometimes she would not have it said she should have begg'd their Favour, being perswaded they would find some sly trick or other not to keep their Words; as indeed they did, when they had penetrated the Queen's Intentions: And so Count Vase∣nau was frustrated of his fine hopes. Sometime after, it happen'd, that the Queen would raise the Marquiss Del Monte to the Charge of Great Master
of her Horse, and gave him the Title of Excellence, pretending this way to Recompence him for the Services he had done her in Sueden, whither he had accompanied her in her last Voyage, and whither he went afterwards upon the Queen's Business; but the Ambassadors and Cardinals, except Azzolini, refus'd to give it him. The Queen hop'd, that at least the Duke of Poli would obey her Will; but though he was but a poor Lord, and drew great Subsidies out of the Queen's House, he chose ra∣ther to quit her Service than stoop to so mean a thing. But the Marquiss Del Monte did not loose it, for besides the Charge of great Master, he was made Major Domo of the Queen's House, and had the profit of both Charges. As for Count Vasenau, he not only gave him the Title of Excellence without Scruple, but would likewise have given him that of Highness, if they would have let him alone. Upon this, the Marquiss look'd upon him with a better Eye, and pro∣tested he would serve him upon all Oc∣casions. The Queen also made him more than ordinary Caresses, because of his Obedience, and ordered him a Coach for himself all alone, augmenting the
number of his Liveries, which were not much different from the Queen's; an Honour the Queen did to no body but himself, as being one of her own Family. The Count now finding himself a little at Repose, and more Honour'd than before, fell into an amorous Intri∣gue, being content to sweeten his Mis∣fortunes with Madam Beauregard, whom he saw every day. But then he left her in the Lurch, and bestow'd all his Courtship upon a new Mistress which he had, without going out of Langara. It was the Dutchess of Salviati with whom he was Smitten, and she was of the first Quality, and Allied to the great∣est Houses in Rome. She was a very Handsome Person; and when you look upon her altogether, she was not more agreeable in Beauty, than in a sprightly and charming Wit; for she had great Accomplishments in Conversation, and you would never be weary with hear∣ing her Discourse, for she reasoned with a great deal of Exactness and Judgment. 'Tis true, she was subject to some little Discontents, which took her now and then, but that did not hinder her in her Lucid Intervals, from being brisk and sparkling, and to Charm all those which
had the happiness to approach her. This I say, because she communicated her self only to Persons of her own Genius, who knew how to bear her Conversation, but besides they must have the gift of managing her, for she had a Briskness that was able to dash even those of the best Assurance. She was Sister to Don Frederick Scorza, now Duke of Caesarini, by his Wife's Title. Count Vasenau found a way to insinuate himself by honest means. For she had a young Son who was a Comely Youth, and of great Hope, but because he had not Travell'd; the Count to make him an Accomplish'd Prince, instructed him in many things, shewing him how to Tread well, and take upon him an Air of Greatness, conformable to his Birth, and to appear Gallant in the Streets. During the whole Carnaval, he never left the young Lord; and at the same time, the Dutchess went Masqued in the Concourse, in a Magnificent Chair, with those of her Family and Domesticks. The young Prince and the Count were always at the sides of them with Masks on, mounted upon excellent Barbs, which they made to wheel and Prance with a Grace. As for the Duke her Husband,
he is a Solitary Prince, and does not love to appear in Publick. The Night after, having accompanied the Dutchess home, the Count and the young Prince were at a Ball together all Night, and pass'd the time very pleasantly. Thus the Count comported himself in this new Intrigue, which nevertheless, he must quickly break off: For the old Dutchess Dowager, the Duke's Mother, a very Severe Princess, of great Vertue, and admirable Conduct, who was afraid any Body should speak to speak to her, oblig'd the Count to retire by degrees, though they shewed him great Respect. This old Lady was Sister to Cardinal Cibo, and so great an Enemy to all sorts of Intrigues, that when she was young, she broke the Skull of a pretty Girl with a Plate, whom her Husband en∣tertained, and us'd to serve at the Table. After which she retir'd into a Convent at Florence, and there remain'd till her Husband's Death. Afterwards she re∣turn'd to Rome to her Sons, where she took care to see every body live in or∣der, and according to their several Du∣ties. The Count had other Amorous Intrigues, besides those already menti∣on'd, with which I am not willing to
tire the Reader; but however we may say something perhaps in another place, if an occasion present it self. I shall make an end of this Article with the telling you, That after the Death of Pope Alexander VIII. he was made one of the Knights of Honour, to Pope Innocent XI. where he subsists by the Pope's Bounty, and a Pension of 500 Crowns which the Queen left him for his Life, payable by the Heirs of Car∣dinal Azzolini. But the Count is not now the same he was heretofore, for having renounc'd the Vanities of the World, he practiseth great Devotion, and lives a very Exemplary Life, and worthy of a true Christian. Since we have begun to note the Cha∣racters of the Queen's Principal Offi∣cers, who have so great a part in her History, it will not be amiss to see here the Portraicture of the Duke of Poli, who made the finest Figure with this Princess next to Cardinal Azzolini; and afterwards we shall speak a word or two concerning Count d' Alibert, whom she honour'd with her Confidence, tho' she did not much esteem him at first.
The Duke of Poli was of the Family of Conti, which is one of the Noblest and most Ancient in Rome, out of which there has been Eleven Popes. He was a big Man, very gross, whose Age made him grow stooping. He was certainly a Lord of Merit, full of Honour, and in∣corruptible Probity, reserv'd in Dis∣course, and Phlegmatick to the utter∣most point: He would always say, that every thing was brought to pass with Patience▪ He was as severe as Cato; and as to his Oeconomy, it would have been call'd sparing in another, who had not been charg'd with so great a number of Children. Pope Alexander VII. pro∣pos'd him to the Queen to be her Major-Domo, or First Gentleman of her Cham∣ber; and she accepted it so much the more readily, because she was ambitious of having one of the First Gentlemen of Rome in her Service. He behav'd him∣self there with a great deal of Prudence, but he could not forbear to testifie his Displeasure when he saw things done disorderly. He was ador'd by all the Queen's Officers, and respected as much as her self, because of his Probity. Crown'd Heads did much look upon him, and their Ambassadors came to vi∣sit
him, not so much for his Birth, as the Esteem they had for his Person. He had the good Fortune to marry his El∣dest Son, who had been one of the Queens Pages, with the Sister of the Constable Colonna, Widow to the Duke de Bazianello. This Alliance did much displease the Constable, who cross'd it as much as he could, but could not pre∣vent it. The Widow was indow'd in Fifteen Thousand Crowns in Rent, and the Duke suppos'd that both the Goods and Estate, would come in∣to his Family with the augmentation of her Dowry, because she had no Chil∣dren by her first Husband. But she was happier in this second Marriage, for she had a fair Lineage from the Duke the Guadagnoli. The Profits the Queen gave to the Duke of Poli were great. She paid the Hire of his Palace which was near the Queens, and she kept three Coaches and Liveries for him. This joyn'd to the number of Priviledges, Exemptions, Rights of Entries, and 180 Crowns per Month, made him up 4000 Crowns per Annum, comprising therein 600 Crowns for the Dutchess of Poli, who was first Lady of Honour to the Queen, tho' she
very seldom perform'd her Function. For besides that, Her Majesty had other Ladies and Damsels, she had so little in∣clination for her Sex, at least in the be∣ginning, that Women were seldom seen with her; and when she went abroad, she had never any follow'd her. So that the Dutchess of Poli went only to the Queen at good Feasts, to receive Am∣bassadors, Princesses, and Nieces of Popes that came to visit Her Majesty. As for other Roman Princesses and Dutchesses, as the Queen could give them nothing but a Cushion, without transgressing the Law of Ceremonies. So they never came to see her, because they pretended to greater Honours. The other Visits which the Queen receiv'd were from Ambassadors and Cardinals, who when they came to Rome were obliged first to visit the Pope, next St. Peter's Church; afterwards the Dean and Cardinals, and immediately after the Queen, and if they made any other Vi∣sit before, she would not give them Au∣dience. She came to the Top of the Stairs to receive Ambassadors, Cardi∣nals, Princesses, Ambassadresses, and concucted them back again to the same place, and sent her Gentlemen to ac∣company
them to their Coaches; but she came to the Bottom of the Stairs to receive the Pope, and conducted him back again also. For all the four Popes which Reign'd in her time, came very often to visit her, and she kept a Cham∣ber for them alone; and seated them un∣der a Cloath of State, embroidered with Gold. She visited also the Pope, and never fail'd twice a Year, to wit, at the Nativity of our Saviour, and St. Peter's Day. The Duke of Poli had a Brother a Cardinal, who is yet living, and cal∣led Cardinal Conti; he was Bishop of Ancona, and made his ordinary Resi∣dence there; and as he was in a Possibi∣lity of being Pope, the Queen was ve∣ry glad to be in the Interests of that Fa∣mily, that she might obtain some Credit under his Pontificate, in case he hap∣pen'd to be chose. This Incomparable Queen, who pretended to surpass all the World, one Day as the Cardinal took leave of her to enter into the Con∣clave, after the Death of Innocent IX. Embraced him and said, Monsieur Car∣dinal, Remember Queen Christina, if you become Pope, as I believe you will. The Cardinal smil'd at this Discourse, and
said, He was her very humble Ser∣vant, without any such hopes; but in what Estate soever God should put him, he would always remember the Obligations that both himself and all his Family had to her. This Discourse being reported to the Dutchess of A∣qua Sparta the Duke of Poli's Daughter, the said, That if the Queen had no better a Method to obtain Authority, then in her Uncle's being chose Pope, she was much deceiv'd; for mine Un∣cle (said she) will have enough to do, to provide for so numerous a Family, and such a multitude of Kindred. As to the rest, tho' the Incomes of the Duke of Poli were well paid, and that he was in great Necessity, yet he quit∣ted the Queens Service some time before her Death upon a point of Honour. The Queen took a fancy to declare the Marquis Del Monte her Grand Master, and in this Quality would oblige all the Family to treat him with the Title of Excellence. Cardinal Azzolini who had reasons not to displease her, obey'd without Contradiction. But tho' the Marquiss was of most Nobl Blood, as his Sirname of Bourbon made it appear, he never had this Title in Rome, and the
Duke of Poli, having consulted the Duke de Bracciano, the Constable Colon∣na, and other Princes of Rome, to know whether they thought it convenient he should give this Title to the Marquis Del Monte, they were all against it, and concluded they would keep no further Society with him, if he gave the Title of Excellence to the Marquis. This made the Duke resolve to desire his Conge of the Queen, under pretext, That his great Age of 75 Years oblig'd him to retire, and prepare himself for Death. And he had another reason as specious as the former; for the Queen would have him give place to the Mar∣quis Del Monte out of the Palace, when they went with her abroad; tho' she consented, that the Duke should have the Preference within. This Propositi∣on being injurious to the Duke, he chose rather to forsake her Service and retire, as we have said. Count Alibert Son to one of the In∣tendants of the House of Monsieur Ga∣ston Duke of Orleance, Uncle to the French King, was Originally from Or∣leans, born at Paris. After his Fa∣ther's Death he was sought after, for some Miscarriages committed in his
Charge; but be was so nimble, that he sav'd himself at Rome with above 50000 Livres in ready Money. At first he had a magnificent Equipage, for he prepar'd himself a Coach, four Lacquies, and a Valet de Chambre; went with a fine Air, and had the Ambition to play with great Lords, and among others with the Princes of Brunswick at the Constable Colonna's, and other Ladies and Gentlemen, who tho' they often pluck'd away some of his Feathers, yet he had enough to sustain himself still. In the Carneval-time he had one of the proudest Chariots of all, representing Mount Parnassus, with A∣pollo and the Nine Muses, which sung in Musick; and this joyn'd with a Consort of Instruments, made a fine Symphony. He pass'd with this Magnificent Train before the Queens Palace, and she came to know him by this means. She per∣mitted him afterwards in her Anti∣chamber, and had some consideration for him, till at last she took him into her Service in Quality of Secretary of Embassies. He was of a middle Stature, and neither well nor ill made, except that he was a little flat Nos'd; a great Talker, and spoke nothing to the pur∣pose; Sparkling enough, but of no So∣lidity;
Intriguing and Curious, but a little fearful; full of Activity, and made abundance of Motions, which tended to no purpose. When he would compose a Letter, he sometimes did it well, but it was after he had pillaged Balzac and Voiture. He affected in his speaking, to declaim and gesticulate like a Come∣dian; and with all these fine Qualities he entertain'd the Queen every Day after Dinner for two or three hours. She often corrected him, but he suffer'd it very patiently; and above all, when he brought her the News of the Pope's Pa∣lace, or the City, which were often in∣vented, because he knew not what to say. I remember one Day the Queen asking his Opinion of some black Laces which she had in her Hand, demanded, Whether they were not Violet color? Yes, Madam, (says he) they are Violet. You are a Sot (saith the Queen) they are a Dark Gray. 'Tis true, Madam, (says the Count:) You're a Beast (says the Queen) they are an obscure Blue. That is the Term (says he) that I could not find out. In fine, he said what she would; but after her Back was turn'd, address'd himself to the Valet de Chambre, and said, What Folly is this? But I must say as she
does. Another time, having a mind to flatter the Queen upon the Whiteness of her Hands, as she was washing with her Arms naked as high as her Elbow; I must own, Madam, that your Skin is par∣fectly fine, and very white; 'tis admirable, for 'tis all pure Nature, and Art has no share in it. Thou'rt a pleasant Jack F— (said she) to speak to me after this manner? Do'st thou think I am thy Wife that paints as low as her Breech? He bore all these Re∣flections without Regret; and she would often say to him, Qui vive? And would take Pleasure in making him deny his Country, and to say, Let France be Damn'd, and even worse than that, tho' he was always a good Frenchman in his Heart. One Day he demeaned himself, laying by his Cloak, and took Nails and an Hammer to tack and untack a Picture against the Wall; where being mount∣ed upon a Chair which fell backward, he had like to have broke his Neck. All these Debasements of himself, made the other Gentlemen of the Queens Cham∣ber, to have but a very low esteem of him; till such time as being one Day in Her Majsties Anti-Chamber, speaking about the News of the War with Count Caprara, whose Brother was in the Em∣perour's
Service, and had been engag'd in a Fight against the Viscount Turenne; Caprara would needs prefer his Brother before this great Captain, which Alibert could not suffer with Reason. But one word drew in another, till they came to gross Injuries; and Count Caprara with∣out respect of the Queens Palace, or her Domesticks, threatned to Battoon him; and did it to the purpose. The noise coming to the Queens Ears, in∣ftead of taking the Part of poor Ali∣bert, to enrage him the more, applau∣ded Count Caprara, and told him that he ought to be serv'd so. One Day as Count Alibert reasoned before the Queen in the Presence of the Messieurs de Vendome, he said so many silly things, that these Princes as they were going out, said to their Governour; Is it pos∣fible that the Queen of Sueden, who hath so much Wit, should hear with Patience all the Fopperies which Alibert utters every Day, in so troublesome a Manner? The Queen knew very well they were no∣thing else, but did it only for her Di∣vertisement. And it is impossible for a Man that talks two hours a Day, with∣out a Subject, but he must be very im∣pertinent.
After he had staid some Years in the Queens Service, he had a mind to Marry, and made choice of the Niece of Col. Or∣nano, who had commanded the Militia in Corsica, before he was suppress'd for an Insult made upon the Family of the D. of Crequi. The Baron Ornano Father of the Lady, was very hot upon this Match, believing that his Son in Law, that was to be, was very rich, because he had been brought up with Monsieur the Duke of Orleans; where one Ornano had made his Fortune, and came to be Mareschal of France. But when the Business was done, Count Alibert could not have the Considerable Portion pro∣mis'd him. And as he had impos'd up∣on his Wives Parents, by his Pride and Boasting, was himself sham'd in his i∣maginary Possessions, which he thought lay in the Isle of Corsica, which made the Queen say, That both the Parties were equally deceiv'd. And to add to the Misfortune of Count Alibert, he lost a great deal at Play. But to make up his Losses he had recourse to Inventions; for under the Pontificate of Clement X. he set up a Lottery in the Hall of the Colledge de Sapienza, where being assi∣sted by some Friends, he put in some
odd Baubles, Looking Glasses, and other little things. He oblig'd many Trades∣men to whom he ow'd Money, to take Billets of his Lottery in Payment; but almost all these Unhappy People lost their Debts, being paid only with a lit∣tle Paper; for when they came to Draw, they met with nothing but Blanks. After this he essay'd with some of the Altieri's to make a Theatre for Co∣medies at the Tour de None, which was formerly the Prison of Rome; and in this he had the Address to get a consi∣derable Sum from the Queen to assist him towards the Expence. The Altieri's con∣tributed too; and the Chevalier Acciajoli, who is admirable at fine Decorations, and to rectifie the Order of the Thea∣tre, had the Conduct of the Enterprise. It would have succeeded very well, if Count Alibert could have abstain'd from Gaming: Not that he took any great Pleasure in Play, but engag'd in it out of hopes of Winning; wherein he was always deceived, for he had nei∣ther good Fortune to befriend him, nor sufficient Understanding and Skill to manage such an Affair; so that it is no wonder, if the Chevalier Acciajoli of∣ten
call'd upon him to discharge the Ex∣pences of the Habits, as also the Salaries of the Actors, and Musicians. Acciajoli complain'd to the Queen, and she was angry with him, but that could not re∣store what was already lost, and there∣fore he must have Patience, and stay till the Carneval was past, before he could have the Money which he expect∣ed from the Hire of Lodgings and Gar∣dens. At last the Design was carried on, and the Business compleated, but he was never the Richer sos it. He al∣so found out an Invention to play with Marionnets at his own House, and made a Traffick of it. And for some time he kept Playing in his House, under the Queens Protection, otherwise he durst not do it, because it was forbidden in Rome; where to entertain the Gamesters so much the better, he had from time to time Consorts of Musick, whose Sym∣phony Charm'd the Ear, while their Pockets were emptying. He set up a Tennis Court, near the place d Espaign, towards the Gar∣den Di Napoli; and  time made a Trade of hiring Chambers ready Fur∣nish'd. When he put his Men into i∣veries, he had a thousand Inventions
for that with the Jews, and always without ready Money, for sometimes he would Truck one thing, and some∣times another. And after all, no Knight of Industry, knew more Tricks than he; And he that would undertake to write the Particulars of his Life, might make a large Volume of it. During the War in Pomerania, the Queen not receiving her former Rents, was forc'd to reform her House, and to throw off the greatest part of Domesticks. The Count, with many others, having lost his Service, was resolv'd to try his Fortune in ano∣ther Court, and went to Turin to offer his Services to Madam Royal, who then govern'd the Estate during the Minority of the D. of Savoy, who now Reings. He was well look'd upon in the beginning, but when he was once throughly known, they set but little by him: And so he, who thought to have business only with the Allobroges, found in that little Court People so Spiritual and of so great Sense, that it does not give place to the Court of France it self, except in Number. At last, Count Alibert being weary of the Court of Savoy, or the Court of Savoy of him, return'd to Rome, where he found his Countess, who did not ex∣pect
him with any great Impatience: For this Lady had found an opportuni∣ty of enjoying her self with a Young Man, who liv'd over her in the same House. As for the Young Man, he was a Roman Gentleman, a Beau and Gallant, who seeing the Conveniency the Neigh∣bourhood afforded, had no mind to run further abroad, if you will believe the Scandalous Chronicle. And as for the Countess, she was none of those Beau∣ties that would engage a Man in spight of his Teeth; but the facility of seeing her every day, or at least at the Win∣dow, engag'd them in a Commerce of Gallantry, as much as the Italian Seve∣rity would permit. She was of a gross Stature, a fault very common among the Romans. The turn of her Visage Irregu∣lar, black Eyes, but well defended: And as for her Complexion, she was never satisfied, borrowing from Art what Na∣ture had refus'd. She always daub'd over her Face, as the Queen reproach∣fully told her Husband, which made it shine like a Looking-glass, or a Bottle of Oil, and caus'd her to loose all her Teeth at Forty years old. Her Mind was as ill compos'd as her Body; . notwithstanding all this, 'tis pretend s'd
but without Ground, that she did not want Adorers. After the Peace of Nimmeghen, the Queen enjoy'd her Revenues again, put her Court into its former Splendor, and re-establish'd Count Alibert in his Charge. This did easily comfort him, for his past Disgraces, and to sweeten his Discontents, he would make Love to Madam Beauregard, Daughter of a Con∣federate of France, that made his For∣tune with Mazarine. But fled into Italy after Monsieur Fouquets Disgrace, for he was Tax'd by the Chamber of Justice; but had the good luck to carry off the best part of his Effects. He was Ori∣ginally from Lucca, and was called Dio∣dati; so being a Refugee at Rome, he put himself under the Protection of the Constable Colonna, but did not live long. His Widow was introduc'd by little and little to the Queen; and she had an on∣ly Daughter, which was called Mada∣mosel Diodati. This young Creature was very Tall, and had the Air and Visage of a Musketeer: The lineaments of her Face were irregular, and she had the finest Nose in the World to carry a of Spectacles. But in all the rest, she he well and hondsome enough. As on
her Wit, she thought she had enough, because she had got all Clelia by Heart; Cyrus and Cleopatra were her Delight, and by the help of Romances, she was become a precious Jewel of the first Order. A sturdy young Fellow, who was the only Son of a Councellor of the Parliament of Grenoble, called Mon∣sieur de Beauregard, was come to Rome unknown to his Father, and became Amorous of so Charming a Person. He liv'd with Madam the Constable, and though he was well Shap'd, his Name did not at all fuit him, for he was a Slouch, Pur-blind, and of mean Regard. This fine couple of Lovers serv'd to divert all that came to the House of Colonna. Nevertheless, Love did so well play his own Game, that they must needs be Married, without the consent of the young Man's Father. The Ce∣remony of this Marriage was perform'd in the Queen's Chappel, and in her Ma∣jesty's Presence, by a little Prelate of Lucca, call'd Monsieur Bottino, a Kins∣man to the Married Couple. He made a very Spiritual Railery, and much to the purpose, upon the Consent of the Parties, requir'd in the word Oui. Yes. Saying, Though it was but a word compos'd
only of three Letters, it made many People Repent. This was but too true in regard of the Espoused: For the young Man not being able to get any succour or help from his Father, was forc'd to re∣turn into France to Plead against him. He made two or three Journeys to no purpose, and died in Misery at Marseilles, leaving his Wife and three Children behind him. Count Alibert endeavour'd to Console her; but Compassion quick∣ly gave place to Love, and to break it to her, he studied the finest Common∣place Books of the Romans, to make a Speech according to his Fancy. But none of them pleasing him, he wrote one of the most Elegant Letters that was to be found in the Secretary a-la-mode, which he got by Heart. Upon this, the Count assum'd a fine Air, comb'd his Periwig, and tied his Stockings about his Legs better than ordinary, and his Cloak did not hang on the left side, as in time past; And for a Livery, he made a red Serge Breeches, with white Sattin Points, set out with a fine Galloon. Madam de Beauregard who never had so Magnificent a Lover before, answer'd the Count's Desires with all the Ardor he could wish. All that discontented the Count
was, that she came too fast upon him, for he would have conducted his Amours like a Roman, that is to say, with one Adventure upon another. But Madam de Beauregard had a good Appetitite, and did not care for Procrastination. Count Alibert was apparently at a Stand, seeing he must for Decency sake furnish his Countess with things necessary, who then liv'd Soberly, that she might give no ill Impressions concerning her Person, such power had the Queen's Satyr's in rendering her Vertuous. Madam de Beauregard, who had her Ends, which she would not speak of, was stark mad that he was so cold. But he found a way to content her; For he knew so well how to take the Queen in a good Humour; that he procur'd her a Pen∣sion of Ten Crowns a Month, which the Queen gave her for Life: And af∣ter the Queen's Death, she retir'd to Lucca to her own Relations. As for Count Alibert, the Queen left him no∣thing, though he deserv'd it better than most of them that had. Monsieur the Duke of Chaunes, gave him the Office of Secretary of the Chamber of Ambas∣sies to France, but he perform'd no Fun∣ction of it, after Cardinal Janson came
to have the charge of the Affairs of France in Rome, his Eminence using his own Priests and Domesticks. Nor did he long enjoy the Pay, because the War hinder'd it; For many more necessary to the State than himself, found a great deal of trouble in getting their Salaries. However, he went up and down to pro∣cure News, as he us'd to do, without bringing any thing to the purpose. His great business was at the Theatre of Torre de Nona, where he bestow'd his Cares, and subsisted most of all by the Profit which he drew from thence. If the Queen made Count Alibert her Sport, who had Birth, and some Merit, she made a Minister, of her Favourite, Valet de Chambre, called Claret, who had neither Birth nor Education. We will relate some Circumstances of his Life, to see if he deserv'd so great a distin∣ction from so clear sighted a Queen. Clairet Poissonnet, Son to a Man that kept a Cabbaret at Triere, a Village be∣tween Pontoise and Poissi, was first Lac∣quay to Monsieur the Marquiss de Valan∣cay, who brought him to Rome, when he was Ambassador from France. The young Boy could neither Write nor Read, but addicted himself to Comfi∣ture,
and perhaps did not ill under∣stand a Kitchen. Having lost his Ma∣ster, a Polish Lord brought him into Po∣land, where he got into the Service of King Casimir, before he was Crown'd. But he did not stay there long, for ha∣ving a mind to see the Countries, he engag'd himself in Service to the Sue∣dish Ambassador, who was then at War∣saw. He came then with his Master in∣to Sueden, and being very Active and Handy, had the Honour to enter in∣to the Service of Christiana Queen of Sue∣den, by means of one Bourdelot, a French Physician, whom the Queen had drawn, by several Gifts and Advantages to Stock∣holm, to be near her Person. The first Employ he had in the Queen's House, was to be Comfiter and keep the Linnen. But in a little time he had the good Fortune to make himsel known upon this occasion. Her Majesty had sent for one Champagne a French Head-dresser, out of France, who knew the Art in Per∣fection, and therefore was much sought after by the fair Sex; and he came to be known to her upon this occasion. One day as they were making a Wirchaff, which is a sort of Masquerade in Sueden, where every one, without being entirely
Mask'd, takes what Figure he pleaseth. Champagne who saw Clairet had very fine Hair, had a mind to put him into Wo∣men's Cloaths, and dress up his Head a-la mode. The Caprice had good Suc∣cess; For Clairet being then very Young, and had a very fresh and lively Colour, pass'd for a Woman. The Queen, who knew it, took great pleasure in seeing him in this Habit; and he Serv'd her afterwards in many Affairs under this Figure. There was a Court-Lord her Majesty was dissatisfied with, and he re∣tir'd into one of the most distant Pro∣vinces of the Realm, to hide and con∣ceal himself, and by that means to avoid the effects of her Wrath. She had much ado to discover him, because there was a great many Nobles in his Inte∣rests, and favour'd his retreat. Clairet knew him at Stockholm, and promis'd the Queen to bring News of him. And for this purpose, Habited himself in Wo∣mens Apparrel, kept his Hair always close Shav'd, and went into the Province whither the Gentleman was retir'd, un∣der pretence of being a Chambermaid to Lady of that Country, who kept Intel∣ligence with, and was the Queen's Friend to assist Clairet to discover him. The
poor Gentleman had a Valet de Chambre, who was a Piemontois and spoke French: Clairet under this habit, got Acquaintance with him, and seeing Love mix'd it self in the Conversation, it was easie enough for Clairet, by means of her Lover, to discover where the Gentleman hid him∣self: Who although he kept upon his Guard, and apprehended Ambuscades and Traps to be laid for him, could not hinder a Discovery through such a Dis∣guise. Clairet being sure of his Blow, took Post and went to Stockholm to ad∣vertise the Queen, while the pretended Damosel pass'd for a Sick Woman upon the Piemontois, who Pray'd heartily, and made Vows for her Recovery, with a great deal of Zeal. In the mean time, his Master was Seiz'd, and drank ex∣ceeding deep of the Cup of the Queen's Resentments. Clairet having succeeded so well, was made Valet de Chambre to her Majesty: But it is surprizing, that this Man, who knew neither how to Write nor Read, and who never spoke any Language tolerably, (for he con∣founded them all together) should have the Fortune to succeed so well in those things the Queen employ'd him. This Princess seeing the Nobles Discontent∣ed
at her Government, was desirous to establish her self with France. And to keep her Affairs secret, could find no better an Expedient, than to make use of Clairet. After he had receiv'd his Instructions, and a Letter of Credence put between the Soals of his Boots, he took his Leave of the Queen, up∣on pretence that the Climate was too cold for him; and the favour was grant∣ed him with difficulty to all appearance. Upon his Arrival at Paris, he gave his Letter to the Secretary of State for Fo∣reign Affairs, and having given in his Instructions by word of Mouth, and re∣ceiv'd his Answer, he return'd into Suedon, pretending he had repented him∣self, and was sorry he had left the Queen's Service. She took him again with great difficulty, upon the pressing and earnest Sollicitations of the Mar∣quiss of Gardia and the Physician Bour∣delot, so well was the Play acted. One Night as he went to drink with a Friend of his, he was set upon by four Armed Men, he drew a Pistol, and had the good luck to Wound one, but having made head for some time, he was forc'd to give way to Number, seeing he was already Wounded himself; and they had cer∣tainly
done his Business, if one of the Counts of Coningsmark, had not pass'd by accidentally, with four stout Foot∣men, carrying of Flambeaux, and given him a timely, and seasonable Assistance. This Rencounter coming to the Queen's Ears. She gave Orders to the Officers of her Regiment of Guards, to send two of the best and stoutest Soldiers a∣long with Clairet, when he had a mind to go abroad in the Night. It was never known from whence this Blow came, but it was suppos'd to be from the Re∣lations of the Gentleman that was Arre∣sted by Clairet's means. One of the chief Senators of Sueden having found that Clairet lov'd Drink, would have forc'd him by Wine and Caresses, to di∣scover the Queen's Secrets but to no purpose, for he could never Surprise him. And it is Astonishing, that he should be more reserv'd when he was Drunk, than otherwise, for when he was in that con∣dition, he would do nothing but Sing, Laugh, and play Monkey tricks. At first he was Secret for his own Interest, but became more reserv'd afterwards, and at last got such an habit of it, that all the World admir'd it. Neverthe∣less, he was extreamly Curious, and
press'd very much to know the Secrets of others. The Queen, who made use of him for a Spy, was very glad to find in him these good Qualities, and never suffer'd him to be without good store of Money. With these helps he would discover any thing he had a mind to, insomuch that the Count de Chanut, Ambassador of France in Sueden, forbad his Domesticks to keep Company or have any Converse with him, because when he had made them Drunk, he would lead them by the Nose, and get from them the most Secret Words and Acti∣ons of their Master. He had a prodi∣gious Memory, and never lost one word that he heard. After the Queen had Abdicated the Kingdom, he accompanied her in all her Voyages, and was Mareschal of her Lodgings; and when the Queen Tra∣vell'd into France, he went before, and had Order with the Abbot Bourdelot, to make an hundred Embroider'd Cassacks, and as many Boots, Holsters, and Arms, for an hundred Horse Guards, that were to accompany her at her entry into Paris. When the King was with his Army in Flanders, and the Court at La Fere in Tartenois, There came an Order for an
hundred thousand Franks, to help her to support the charge of her Voyage. Clairet had a Commission to receive this Money, and he carried it to Monsieur Basiniere, who told him, he had also three thousand Franks for himself, but de∣sired him to write a Receit for both the Sums at the bottom of the Ordonnance. He answer'd, that being a Gentleman, he would give no Receipt, but would commit it to one of his Lacquays. But he was told that those that receive Money at the Royal Trea∣sury, even as high as a General him∣self, wrote a Receipt with their own Hands, below their Ordonnance, and that it would not all derogate from his Nobility. He found himself then in a great Distress; For as on the one side he was not willing to renounce so ad∣vantageous a Commission, and on the other, asham'd to look like an Ass. He said, to excuse himself, that he had been in a small Skirmish, and was Wounded in the right Hand, so that he could not use it at present. So they made up a Receipt for him, that he might subscribe his Name at the bottom; but they were very much surpriz'd when they saw him make nothing but a Cross, and that he
knew not how to hold his Pen. This made them Laugh, and it was sent to be Sign'd by the Queen's Intendant. Clairet went afterwards to Triere his place of Birth, to see his Parents, and he treated them Magnificently, to∣gether with the chief Inhabitants of the Village, for he ordered Tables to be prepar'd for above an hundred Persons. The Meat was the most delicate that could be got; and as Triere is a place that abounds in delicious Wine, they drank to Excess. It was pretty to see and hear the good People drink the King and Queen Christina's Health; the Feast was so Splendid, that it made a kind of Wake in the Village, and the Ga∣zett made mention of it. What a loss it is, that the Mercury Gallant was not then Invented, that Posterity might learn the Circumstances of it! This Feast encreas'd his Reputation; and Car∣dinal Mazarine one day demanding News from the Queen, she gave Clairet a very advantageous Character, exaggerating his Fidelity and Zeal for her Service. His Eminency was astonish'd to hear that a Man without Birth, Education, or Study, should be fit for every thing the Queen would have him. The Queen
knew well enough, that she was not de∣ceiv'd in putting Confidence in him, and therefore when she design'd to Murther the Marquiss Monaldeschi at Fountain∣bleau; 'twas Clairet that was the first Conductor of the whole Intrigue, and none truly knew but himself who they were that Assassinated the poor Gentle∣man. If Clairet was useful to the Queen in her Voyage to France, he was not less in that which she made first to Rome, and particularly in riding Post with a Let∣ter to Cardinal Antonio Barberini, to know beforehand how she should be re∣ceiv'd and treated both at her first En∣try, and during her abode there. He never left the Queen in her Voyages, whether into Italy or Germany. And while this Princess was at Hamburgh, upon the Election of Clement IX. she sent Clairet Post to Rome to Congratulate his Exal∣tation, and to beg permission of him to return to Rome. The Pope receiv'd him very well, and by him as the Queen's Envoy, invited her to return, and pro∣mis'd to give her Eminent Marks of his Paternal Friendship. And because he kuew Clairet when he was but a Prelate, he Caress'd him greatly, and gave him
a Medal of Gold, of the value of Ten Pistols. Clairet begg'd of him the grant of some Indulgences to the Chappel of his Village; and he gave him an entire Saint's Body over and above; and the Prelate which distributed the Pope's Graces, presented him with a Prayer that would keep him from all Evils, provided he recited it every Morning. He demanded, whether it would not have the same effect, if it was said by another, and he was answer'd, that it was better to recite it himself: Give me then a Schoolmaster, said he, which shall teach me to Read. This quick Answer, made the Pope Laugh, and he discharg'd him from the reading on't, which would have the same effect, car∣ried in his Pocket. But Clairet was no great sayer of his Prayers, a Bottle of good Wine went a great deal nearer his Heart. His business every Morning was to go into the place d'Espain, or into the best Inns of the City, and when any Stranger of Note arriv'd, he made himself acquainted with his Followers or Domesticks, and from them learn'd the Adventures of their Master, the Sub∣ject of their Voyage, and gave an ac∣count of all to the Queen. He ransack'd
every where among the Ambassadors and Ministers of Princes, and made his Ad∣vantage of all that he heard. And he went also to the Post, and took from thence the Letters which belong'd to Gentlemen of Quality of other Coun∣tries, and after the Queen had read them, Seal'd them up again, and carried them back to the Post. But as these things made him serviceable to the Queen's pleasure, it drew upon him a great number of Enemies, and some∣times he was in danger of being knock'd in the Head with Stones, or else severe∣ly Battoon'd. Though he knew neither how to Write nor Read, yet he receiv'd Letters every Post, and made an Answer regularly thereunto, without ever re∣vealing his own Secrets. In fine, after he had liv'd till the 77th year of his Age, he died almost suddenly at Rome, upon the same day that Monsieur the Duke d'Estrees Deceas'd, and had the Impudence to make the Queen his Heir, though he did not leave one Farthing; nay so far from it, that her Majesty was forc'd to Bury him; and afterwards had the goodness to pay 500 Crowns that he was Indebted to several People.
Some time after, the Queen lost her brave Marquiss Del Monte, at a time when she had most need of him to main∣tain the Franchises of her Quarter, which the Pope now began to Dispute. He died as he had lived, that is to say, in Disorder, having no time to Repent in. The Circumstances are terrible to relate, but is however necessary, were it only for Example sake. How happy are they who know how to profit by the Faults of others! But for the Co∣herence of the Story, we must take it a little higher. After the Peace of Nimeguen, the Queen who had been some Years without her Rents, by reason of the War, sent the Marquiss Del Monte into Sueden, where he staid above a Year, to put her Affairs into order, and give an account of her Majesty's Receivers, who pretended they were not able to pay her. The King of Sueden was so favourable o the Queen, that he caus'd her Receiv Ge∣neral to use such diligence in ptting things into good Order, that the Queen's Affairs went according to the Marquiss's Mind. The Court of Sueden began to respire after so many Losses, and the Marquiss
pass'd under the Figure of the Queen's Envoy. Where when he had a little settled Matters, he began to call those to an Account who had fingered the Queen's Revenues, and he found many who had been fishing in troubled Waters. The Marquiss wrote to the Queen, and insinuated his Thoughts, and desir'd her Majesty te have some Compassion upon the People, representing that the Wars had put them out of a condition to per∣form the Obligations of their Leases. The Queen either out of Generosity or Compassion, that she might not beregret∣ted by her ancient Subjects, discharged them of many things; but the Marquiss never discover'd this Nobleness of the Queen, till he had accomodated Matters according to his own Interests; for he always minded himself first, and the Queen afterwards. He got new Tenants to some parts of her Estates, and it a∣vailed him in such sort, that the anci∣ent Tenants made him Presents, which he greedily took with both hands, and preferr'd them that gave most. After he had continued a long while at Stock∣holm, he went into Pomerania, which was the Province from whence most of the Queen's Rents came, where coming
into a City of that Country, he Lodged at one of the Queen's Receiver's, who had great Effects in his Hands, and he treated him with all the Kindness ima∣ginable, to lay an obligation upon him to confirm him in his Place. He pro∣mis'd to serve him effectually, but it was after he had drawn a good Present from him; and he staid a great while in that House, expecting as he said, the Queen's Answer. But the true reason was, the Receiver had Marry'd a very pretty Wife a little before that, and the Marquiss devour'd her Eyes, and delay'd the time, in hopes to make himself Be∣lov'd. The Receiver's Business oblig'd him to be frequently absent from his House, which gave Barbon an occasion to let her know how much he was in Love. He was Bold, and she Time∣rous, so that he would easily have brought his purposes about, if the Re∣ceiver's Brother, who did not like the Marquiss's Proceedings, had not got an inkling of the Matter. The Marquiss seeing this Rub in his way, feign'd that he had receiv'd Letters from the Queen, and that she had sent him a Blank, desi∣ring him therefore to get on Horseback quickly, and go two days Journey from
thence, to find out his Brother, who must come to him, that they might com∣pose their Affairs. This Man being doubtful of the Marquiss's Design, dis∣sembled an Obedience. He got on Horse∣back, but return'd the same Night, and having left his Horse with a Friend, put himself into an Ambuscade in a Place where he knew the Marquiss would pass to his Fair Sister. Not long after, the Marquiss came, and without any other Weapon but a Sword. He was all in the dark, and walk'd very softly, for fear of Discovery. In the mean while, the young Man, who could not discern Objects, let fly a Pistol in the dark, charg'd with three Bullets, but miss'd the Marquiss on purpose, who fell, and roll'd down the length of a pair of Stairs, which bruis'd his whole Body, and made a dangerous Contusion in his Head. The House was presentld in an Uproar, and the Domesticks run together from every side, and found the Marquiss all in his Blood. None of them knew what to think of such an Accident, but after he had recover'd his Spirit, and the Sur∣geon laid the first dressing to his Wound, though yet full of Confusion and Fear, he said, That he was coming in at the
noise of the Pistol, but taking a false step, had fall'n all along. In the mean time the young Man got away without being perceiv'd, and went to find his Brother as fast as he could, telling him that the Marquiss was too dangerous a Ghest in his House, but told him nothing at all of what had happen'd. At their return, which was next day at Night, the Re∣ceiver was amaz'd to understand what had happen'd, but the Marquiss dissem∣bled it Wisely, and after they had fi∣nish'd their Affairs, he return'd, for Stockholm, to take leave of the King of Sueden in order to return for Rome. Being arriv'd at Hamburgh, he found there Teixere the famous Jew, who ex∣pected him to regulate the first payment of the Queen's Revenues, which was Ten thousand Rix Dollars, and Five thousand more which the Farmer-Gene∣ral had sent upon the Queen's Account. At last the Marquiss arriv'd at Rome full of Glory and Riches; for he made his Journey worth thirty or forty thousand Crowns, where he was receiv'd both by the Queen and Cardinal with great Ap∣plause, and the Queen's House was put into a good posture, not forgetting that of the Marquiss. And the Queen pro∣claiming
every where that the Marquiss had done her good Service, some time after rais'd him to the Charge of Grand Master of her Horse, which had been vacant since the Murder of the Marquiss Monaldeschi, ordering all her Dome∣sticks to give him the Title of Excel∣lence; which though the Duke of Poli refus'd, the rest Obey'd. The Marquiss after his return to Rome, follow'd the same course of Life; but not to trouble the Reader with his De∣bauches, I shall say only one word of his disrespect both for the Palace and the Queen's Domesticks; for he spar'd nei∣ther of them when they came in his way. 'Tis true, he found a free Passage in the Instance I speak of; but he ought to have stopp'd the Scandal, rather than encrease it by his own Example. But to come to the particulars. The Queen's Court being then becom finer than ever, every one fell into som Amour or other. Seignora Giovannia Giustiniani, younger Sister to Signora Octavia, was a very lovely Maid, a lit∣tle brown, but having all the Ligeaments of her Visage excellently formed: A fine Stature, together with so ine a Neck, that the like was no where to be sound. At
first when the Queen brought her from her own Village, she was simple enough, but the Court Air quickly refin'd her, and she was not very long in taking the humour of being Talkative and Proud; Manners, to which the most elevated of that Sex find so strong an Inclination. Her Majesty had a great kindness for her, but she abus'd her good will, and became so presumptuous, that she would not acknowledge her Birth. A Page of the Duke d'Estre's Ambassador of France was the first that offer'd Incense at her Altar. He was a young Italian Gentle∣man, well Shap'd, Fair and Gallant, and and had every thing requisite to create Affection. The Palace Farnese where the Ambassador lived, was over against the Queen's at Langara. The Tyber was be∣twixt them, with a double range of Houses, but the two Palaces were so oty, that our two Lovers could easily see one another upon the Terrasses, and make Signs of Intelligence. At last they found a way to send Billets, and the Queen being no way prepossess'd, took pleasure in this Foolery. One day the Queen Surprized Signora Giovannina, as she was writing a Billet-deux; and she was so attentive to answer her Lover,
that she did not perceive the Queen when she seiz'd upon her Letter. The poor Girl believ'd she was utterly Ru∣in'd, for sometimes the Queen, at least to appearance, would make a shew as if she were Severe. Giovannina then cast her self at her Feet, apprehending that she should have been ill treated, but she was quickly rid of her fear, for the Queen Smiled, and was so complasant, that having forbidden her to speak of it, she made a Billet for her after her own fashion, which was the most spiri∣tual in the World. Tre Page ravish'd with joy to receive the marks of so o∣bliging a Tenderness, from his Mistress, was so little Master of himself, that ei∣ther through Vanity, or Indiscretion, he shew'd the Billet to a Gentleman of of the House, who made it known to the Ambassador; but he only Laugh'd, and would see what course and Method these Lovers would take. In the begin∣ning of the Spring, another of the Queen's Maids, named Portia, under the pretence of being Indispos'd, got leave of the Queen to take the Air of the Fields every morning with her Kinswo∣man Giovannina, in their Mother's Com∣pany. They went out of the Gate of
St. Pancras, and going along the Ram∣parts, re-enter'd by the Gate of the Light-Horse, on St. Peter's side. By this means, our Lovers saw one another of∣ten, but they must do it with Secrecy for fear of Argus's, I mean the Old Women, who would no more leave them than their Shadows, according to the Custom of Italy. But Love found them out a way to see one another more easily. For the Page being bold and hardy, got into the Queen's Garden, which was of large Extent, where there was great Walks, shaded with fine Greens, and there these Virgins came to take the fresh Air every Morning; and they were both agree'd to serve one another upon such Occasions. There the Page and his Mistress were hid to∣gether, and without as Witness, declar'd their Loves, and spoke the tenderest things in the World. The Pleasure continued for some time, to the great satisfaction of both; but their Interview being discover'd, she was oblig'd to be more retir'd. The Page, whom these Obstacles made the more ardent, in∣vented new ways to see his Mistress; but some small difference happening between the Queen and the Ambassador, he was
to keep at a distance for some time. The Marquiss de Mala Spina was the next, who was Gentleman of the Cham∣ber to her Majesty. He was Young, and well Made, extraordinary Handsome, and had a Bon Grace in all that he did: But he was an universal Lover, and manag'd an Amour like a Roman Hero. It was only Languishing and Sighs, that express'd his Flame at the first, and he was diligent both Night and day, to make her see and understand it. She gave him some Hopes which made it stronger, which were fully to be explain'd by the Marriage Bed. But however the Queen had no inclination to give the poor Gentleman any thing, though he had serv'd her as a Page from his Youth; and her Majesty had bestow'd Favours upon others who had not merited so much as himself. Her Caprice cross'd this Amour, but his Patience and Assi∣duity gain'd his Mistresses Heart, inso∣much, that she gave him to understand, that if he was not Happy, it would be his own fault. But however, these fair hopes were of no long continuance, for the Count of Warwick came in to Tra∣verse 'em, by declaring himself a Lover, and was receiv'd with little Ceremony.
He was an English Lord of high Birth, Son to the Earl of Northumberland, but being a younger Broer of that Illustri∣ous House, which were Persecuted for their Loyalty to their King, during the Troubles of England, rais'd by Cromwel and the Parliament, he was oblig'd to seek his Fortune in Foreign Courts; and was at last recommended to the Queen, who made him Major Domo, after the Death of the Marquis Del Monte. The Earl of Northumberland died at Florence, where both himself and Family, were Maintain'd by the Bounty of the Grand Duke. Count Warwick was of a slender Stature, and had an Air of Grandeur, which shewed who he was. His Com∣plexion was very delicate, but his Health seem'd to be ruin'd, by the paleness of his Face, whether it came from his Temperament, or Debaucheries. As to the rest, his Carriage was the most a∣greeable in the World; and if his Health had been perfectly entire, he had been one of the finest Gentlemen in Italy. The Marquiss de Mala-Spina being al∣larmed at so redoubtable a Rival, did not know what to do, daring neither to conceal nor publish it, because of the
Antipathy of the Queen against him: But his good Genius inspir'd him to go to a Lady of Quality who was Marri∣ed to a Roman Lord, (Captain of a Troop of Light-Horse in the Pope's Guards) called the Marquiss Cavallieri, his Lady being Sister to Count Warwick. He entreated her to do him the Favour, to represent to her Brother, that his In∣tention in addressing himself to Jovan∣nina, being not to Marry her, he would not cross a Passion, which tended to that Holy Sacrament. The Marchioness rea∣dily undertook it, for fear her Brother should fall into any Trouble in the Queens Service, and caus'd him to de∣sist; so that the Marquiss was quickly at Repose on that side. Jovannina having lost Count War∣wick, treated the Marquiss much bet∣ter, for fear he should escape again; and these two Lovers manag'd their In∣terests so well, that the Maid (by the Ascendant she had over the Queen) brought her to consent that the Mar∣quiss should make Love to her in the way of Marriage. But Cardinal Az∣zolini, who was afraid the Queen would execute this Project, and spend as much Money upon her, as she had done upon
Octavia her Elder Sister, turn'd the Queen against it, and broke all the Mea∣sures of these poor Lovers, and at last to comfort her said, The Marquis was impotent, and no way fit for Marriage. The poor Girl afflicted with so many Crosses, fell sick, and must take the Air again to dissipate her Sorrows. And she had scarce begun to take Breath, when a certain Italian Abbot of some Birth, but little Merit, and full of Va∣nity, thought it a seasonable time to perswade her to hear of a Passion which he begun to have for her. To this purpose he employ'd a Woman, who was one of the Queens Guardrobe, who had not been Cruel in her Youth, and was very proper to tie an Amo∣rous Noose. And as she had an En∣trance into the Appartment of the Maids, and some part of their Confi∣dence, it was easie for her to perswade Jovannina to have some Complaisance for the Abbot Vannini, the same Per∣son that had already dishonoured Ban∣diere's Daughter This Maid being dejected at the ill success of her Amours, and the Dis∣grace of being cast off by so many Lo∣vers, embrac'd the Motion, upon Con∣dition
that her Mother approv'd it. The good Mother who liv'd upon no∣thing but the Wages of the Daughter, and had other Children besides, and an Husband to maintain, yielded to the Temptation of a Thousand Crowns which he gave her, and deliver'd up her Daughter to this Villainous Baboon, whom Vanity, and the Difficulty of it, stir'd up to so hard an Enterprise. To come to him, she counterfeited her self sick once more, and the Queen out of Complaisance sent her to Albani, where not to lengthen out the Story, the Ab∣bot was satisfied. After fifteen or twenty Days absence, she return'd to Rome, and the Abbot (who found her a delicate Morsel) in∣vented a way to introduce himself into the Queens Palace, by means of his Mi∣stresses Confidents. His Liberalities gave him Entrance every where, and surmounted all Obstacles, but he could not do his Business so retly, but that it was found out by the Marquiss Del Monte, for he surpriz'd the Lovers in the very flagrant Delight, and threat∣ned to destroy them, if he did not come in for a share. And as he was Almigh∣ty with the Queen, so he had a Talent
to make himself fear'd: Thus he ob∣tain'd his Wishes, and the Abbot al∣ways paid the Expence of the Feast. But after all these Pleasures, poor Jovannina found her self with Child, which affrighted her, and made her per∣fectly desolate, ànd her Mother became the most sorrowful of all Women; but the Queens Goodness supply'd all Defects, and she had Remedies given her to take it away, but they had so ill success that she died, and was interr'd in the Habit of a Carmelite Crown'd, and set round with Flowers, for a mark of her Virginity. The Queen wept as much as if she had been a Rela∣tion; so good was this Princess, and so full of Tenderness for her Dome∣sticks, that she would have left them all Rich at her Death if they would have permitted her to do it. 'Tis Time that wipes away Tears, and Her Majesty comforted her self for the loss of Jo∣vannima, by  Acquisition of another, call'd Georgina, who surpass'd her in all things, but was the innocent cause of her Death, as shall be related after∣wards.
At this time the Duke of Mantua be∣ing come to Rome, the Queen did him so great Honours, as none ever recei∣ved from her before, and the Duke on his side would not be behind her in Ci∣vility; but at last the Ceremonies aba∣ted both of one and the other side. The Queen was over joy'd that a Sovereign Prince came to visit her, for no Body would visit her, since she had caus'd the Marquiss Del Monte to be Treated with the Title of Excellence; and she was well enough pleas'd, that the Duke of Mantua spoke to him by a third Person, as is usual at Rome to avoid Disputes, without giving him any Title. After∣ward the Marquiss never quitted the Duke all the time he stay'd at Rome, who though he came in cognitio, had the finest number of Followers that any Prince ever had. For almost all the No∣bles of his Estates accompanied him, and the Roman Cavaliers throng'd in to add to the Number of his Train, but he had the Moderation to hinder his Guards du Corps to accompany him on Horseback, giving order that some of them only should follow him on Foot. He Lodged at the Palace Des Ʋrsins in Monte Giordiano, and the Queen sent
him every Morning not only her best Coach, but two more of the House-Choaches, and one part of her Pages, with Men that bore Staves. The Duke d'Estrees Ambassadour of France did the same, to augment his Train, and there came with him Mon∣sieur Gambaul the Envoy of France to his Highness. I shall say nothing of the Publick Honours done him at Rome, the Gazettes have spoken enough of it, and therefore I shall rather chuse to make mention of the Private Divertisements, in which the Marquiss Del Monte was his Procurer, because they are known to very few. He brought him acquainted with Georgina, the Famous Singer, and he was exceedingly Charm'd to hear her Sing one Evening at the Vineyard of Corsini, without the Gate of St. Pan∣cras, whether he brought her without the Queens Knowledge. He saw her often afterwards with the Queen her self, and agreed with her to carry her off, and bring her into his own Estates, but she did not keep her Word. Ano∣ther time he Regal'd the Duke with one Fani in the same place. She was so fine a Widow that she made her self
the common Topick of Discourse; in∣somuch that her Parents shut her up in a Convent, but she found a way to e∣scape, and retire into the Queens Quarter. This anger'd the Pope very much, so that having now understood she was gone out of the Queens Franchise, to meet the Duke of Mantua at the Vine∣yard Corsini, gave order for a Bariseel to seize and carry her off, as she re∣turn'd from thence. But having time∣ly notice, she was put into one of the Queens Coaches, with her Sister La Mosca, and by this means re-entred the Franchises in spite of the Pope's Ar∣rest. These two Sisters were Daughters to a rich Banker, who had given them Twenty Thousand Crowns a-piece to their Portions, and had Married them to the most Eminent Nobles of Italy. Fani was of a middle Stature; the turn of her Visage was very agreeable, Blue Eyes, a fair Skin, and in good Health, fine Teeth, a little Mouth, and very pretty, had not Laughing spoil'd it: But her Mind was Foolish, and she had lit∣tle Judgment, and less Conduct. Her Sister, who was call'd La Mosca, was
not quite so sparkling, but all things considered, was more esteem'd then Fani. Nevertheless she was a well shap'd Per∣son, of a solid Wit, and had the Con∣duct to appear Fair in the Eye of the World, so that her Freaks were known but to few. Fani's first Amours were with the Marquiss Mari) who went with her to Comedies all the Carneval, and every Night to a Ball. She had af∣terwards a great many Lovers, of which many Stories might be made, but this would drive us too far from our Sub∣ject. The Young Marquiss Mathew Del Monte, Son to Barbon, became Amorous of her, though he was Married; but to speak the Truth, she was rather A∣morous of him; for the Young Mar∣quiss had all Exteriour Qualities that were fit to render him amiable. He was of a Stature something above the ordi∣nary height, a well made Person, and had the Air of a Man of Quality; but Presumptuous, despising his Equals, and so conceited of his Birth, that his Vanity made him insupportable, which yet notwithstanding proceeded only from his Youth.
After his Return from France, his Father would Marry him to the Niece of the Marquiss Monaldeschi, the same whom the Queen had Sacrific'd to her Resentment in the Gallery of Fontain∣bleau: Her Majesty being desired to give her Consent, did it accordingly, and it was a great Advantage to the Marquiss, for she was an only Daughter, very Rich, and yet more accomplish'd by her Ver∣tues, but the poorest Lady in Italy for Beauty, though she had a fine Stature and an Air good enough, when she was Masqued. The Young Marquiss having understood this last Quality, would not Marry her, though he esteem'd her o∣ther Perfections, being passionately in Love with Gabrieli Niece to a Cardinal of the same Name, who was very handsome. But the Marquiss his Father being more tied to his own Interest than his Son's Satisfaction, would be obey'd. The Son resisted, but the Father outra∣gious with Choler, and mad that his Son contemned so great Advantages, and the Opportunity of making his For∣tune, set a Poniard to his Throat to compel him to resolve upon't. The Queen, when she came to her Presence,
knew so well how to flatter her, that she gave her self up to her Reasons, and so the Marriage was concluded by Her Majesty's means: By which we may know that Hatred is not Immortal; for she was willing upon this occasion, to give satisfaction to the Memory of her Uncle, by the Honours she would do to his Neice. The Nuptial Benediction was performed in the Queens Chappel, and in her Presence, where she often told the Husband leaning upon his Shoul∣der, Ah how well shap'd and Charming is your Bride! But he turning aside his Head, because he would not give a dis∣respect to Her Majesty, always an∣swer'd, That he knew the contrary but too well. The Young Marquiss con∣tain'd himself for some time within the Duties of Marriage, but at last flew off, and embarked himself with Fani, who became Foolish, and pass'd eight times a Week in a Coach by Langara, to ee and be seen of the Young Marquiss. E∣very Body laugh'd in the Palace-Win∣dows, but as on the one hand Love cannot be altogether restrain'd, so on the other, she ought to have manag'd things better, both to avoid Scandal, and for her own Interests. For the
Prince of Belleville who Maintain'd her at that time, could not endure this Com∣merce, and threatned to forsake her, if she did not break off this new Intrigue. She would not loose him, not so much for his Merit, as Liberalities to her, and therefore constrain'd her self for some time. The Marquiss who was of an hot Temper, and Transported of a sud∣dain, threatned to destroy all things, if she did not regard him better, as if the Lady could Live upon his good Mein and Vigour, for that was all he paid her. One Day as she pass'd by his House tel in a Coach, being Transported with Choler, he came immediately down Stairs, cut the Harness of her Coach, and gave her many Blows on the Face, speaking all the Vile and most Infamous Things, that could be said to Common Whores. Poor La Mosea, who was in the Coach with her, thought she should have died for fear. Fani suffer'd her self to be thus abused, and did no∣thing but cry; but the Spectators were like Stocks, immoveable at the Sight of the Tragedy, for there was never any Example before of so criminal an Inso∣lence. So the Pope, who was a great
Enemy to these Scandals, caus'd them both to be Arrested, and would have sent the Marquiss to the Castle of St. An∣gelo, if he could have got him out of the Queens Quarter: But at last Cardi∣nal Colonna did remonstrate to the Pope, that the two Sisters being Widows, were not oblig'd to live with the same Circumspection as if their Husbands were living. The good Prince Belleville, employ'd all his Interest to obtain her Liberty, be∣lieving that after so publick an Affront, she would have broke entirely with him. But he was very much mistaken, for she was no sooner out of Hold, but she im∣mediately fled into the Queens Quarter, who receiv'd her very well, and was mightily overjoy'd she had got this Ce∣lebrated Fani, who was every where talk'd of as one of the most perfect and exact Beauties. She kept her continu∣ally afterwards, till in the Young Mar∣quiss's Absence, who was sent into Swe∣den, the Father got her sent away, and would not permit her to return any more. After the Departure of the Duke of Mantua, and the Death of the Prince Colbier, the old Marquiss who ought
to have retir'd by reason of his great Age, begun to make Love more than ever. The Marquiss Cincinnatus, who drew his Nobility from the antient Ro∣mans of this famous Name, as 'tis thought, but whose Riches did not an∣swer his Quality, had Married one of the finest Women of Italy, who was of mean Birth, but Rich, and though she had brought him many Children, had not yet lost that lustre which sparkled in all her Person. Her Stature was of a middle size, but slender, her Complexion fine and united; her Eyes, Mouth and Teeth in a rare Perfection; and besides had a Wit that was lively, pleasant and agreeable. The Marquiss who had a numerous Family upon his Hands, had a mind to enter into the Queens Ser∣vice, in Quality of a Gentleman of her Chamber, which was easie for him to obtain by the Credit of the Marquiss Del Monte, who procur'd it more for his Wifes sake than his own. The Tye that was between the two Marquisses, being now both in the Queens Service, gave Barbon a free access to the Fair Ri∣ga, Wife to Cocles, for so was Cincin∣natus called, because he had but a short sight. The Queen that knew all that
pass'd, (for Barbon, to divert her, told her all his good Fortune) said, speak∣ing of Cocles, That he had an happy ig∣norance of what was done at his House; for his short sight hinder'd him from see∣ing many things which otherwise would terribly vex him. He seem'd to do what he could not understand when himself was spoken of; and yet he was perpe∣tually at the Queens, where he pass'd his time in telling of News with the other Courtiers. The Marquiss Del Monte was so charmed with his Mistress the Fair Riga, that he resolv'd from hence∣forward to fix all his Love upon her; so that he did all that he could to make himself agreeable; he spent more than ordinary, Regal'd his Mistress often, took care to inform himself in the New Modes, that he might bring her News of it, and was very liberal towards the Ladies Domesticks, and others who as∣sisted him in his Amour. And whereas when he was threescore Years of Age, he endeavour'd to support his Vigour by Art. But one Day being more than or∣dinarily heated, he slept upon his Mi∣stresses Bed till Dinner time; and as it happen'd, the Abbot Cincinnatus the Mar∣quisses his Brother came in unawares,
without being perceiv'd, and saluting his Fair Sister, was extreamly surpriz'd to see Barbon sleeping upon the Bed: He demanded of the Fair Riga from whence this Sottishness proceeded? She presently answer'd, That the Marquiss being come to see Cincinnatus, was ta∣ken with a Faintness, which oblig'd him to lie upon the Bed. That's all Trifle, (reply'd the Abbot) 'tis you have put him out of Breath. Riga fell into Tears, and answer'd, Alas Monsieur, I hope you will not kill him? No, Madam, (answer'd the Prelate) you will much oblige me to kill him your self. The Marquiss awak'd with the Noise, and being much surpri∣sed to find himself in such a place with so good Company, said in his own ex∣cuse, That he came thither to seek for Cincinnatus from the Queen, and being taken with a Faintness and Stupidity of Brain, he was constrain'd to lay himself down upon the first Bed he found. This Prelate who was very wise, and did not think it convenient to make a noise of it, left the Guilty to their Remorse, and pretended to change the Discourse, but could not hinder himself from saying, Marquiss have a care of your self, and manage it so with her, that you remember
you are no more Young; Reflect upon what I have said, and turn it as you please: And so being a little more pleasant he retir'd; but Riga all in confusion shut her self up in her Closet, and the Mar∣quiss went away in all haste. In the mean time the Pope was per∣fectly oppressed with the Complaints daily made of the Disorders committed in the Franchises, and particularly in the Queens Quarter. He lamented that he was the only Sovereign that could not be Master of his Capital City, and could not hinder the greatest Disor∣ders. This at last confirm'd him in the Resolution, to execute the Design he had long before conceived of abolishing these Franchises of Quarters, and he did it a while after with a Courage that was not to be shaken. He was always of this Mind, that it would put Tranquili∣ty and Calmness among Families, ho∣nest and fair Dealing into Trade and Commerce, and would make the City secure. And it is so true that the fear of Punishment is necessary to Mankind, and Nature without Grace so corrupt, that the hope of Impunity carries Men on insensibly to commit the greatest Crimes. 'Tis certain, that if this Af∣fair
had been well brought about, it would have Immortaliz'd the Pope who began the Enterprise. In truth he had all the Zeal that was necessary upon such an occasion; but being encompas∣sed by People who were declar'd Ene∣mies to a Crown he ought to have the greatest respect for, he was carried on to those Excesses that everlastingly sul∣lied the high Reputation which he had acquir'd by his Innocence and Holy Life. But before we enter into a Discussion of his great Affair, where the Queen had a considerable share, we must make an end of the History of the Marquiss Del Monte. In the time the Queen united her Interests with those of the Marquiss Lavardin Ambassador of France, to ob∣tain satisfaction of the Pope, for the Violence of his Ministers concerning the Quarters. Barbon perswaded the Queen to make a Serenade to spight the Pope, and so much the rather seeing the Season was proper for it: And accordingly Couplets and Songs were made, and recited with Consorts of Instruments; the most famous Musicians in Rome be∣ing of the Party, with two of the finest Singers the Queen had, Georgina or An∣gelica,
and Mariouche or Maronte Daugh∣ter of Barbon and Landini. They made also an Amphitheatre in a little Garden of Jessamy, which was towards the Street, at the Appartment of Marquiss Del Monte, over against the Queens Pa∣lace, where there was great preparati∣on; for there was a number of Galleries built for the Ladies, and he fail'd not to put the Fair Riga in full view, by building a Place on purpose for her and her Friends. There was also many Re∣petitions in the Queens great Hall, the last of which was extraordinary, by Il∣luminations and an hundred sort of In∣struments and fine Voices which an∣swer'd the Harmony, which was most Charming. That which was most ex∣traordinary, was to see Marquis Del Monte bestir himself to put all things in order, and command every one to his Duty. The Fair Riga, with other La∣dies, whose Husbands had any Charge under the Queen, sate in little Boxes on the upper part of the Hall, and there was nothing to be heard, but the yauling of the Feminine Voice of the Marquiss. He was all on fire through the Vehemence of the Action, and af∣ter all was done, thrust himself forward
to re-conduct the Ladies, and do the Honours of the House; the last Cares∣ses which he made, were to Mariouche his dear Daughter, applauding her that she had Sung so well this Night. The Queen was pleas'd to the highest point, that her Opera succeeded so well, com∣mended the Marquiss before his Face, and withdrew very late; and the Scan∣dalous Chronicle saith, That she went to abandon her self with the Fair Riga. Being retir'd at last to his own House, he drank a great deal of Soup, and Sup'd well, and among other things eat a Sal∣lad of Cellery well prepar'd. Afterwards he went to Bed, and rose next Morning about eleven of the Clock, to shave himself, and at the same time was taken with an heaviness in his Head, and palpitation of his Heart: Quickly after he fell into a kind of Convulsion Fit, which made him lean his Head on the Back of his Chair; he fell a foaming at the Mouth, his Face was swell'd and discolour'd, and his Eyes star'd. All the House was in an Allarm, and the Crys and Tears came to the Queens Ears, who ran thither presently; but seeing him stiff and in this Condition, was struck with such an Horrour that
she return'd all in Confusion, and had not the Courage to speak one word of Comfort to any. To make short, he never came out of his Fit, but died sud∣dainly without Sense, and his Enemies spread it abroad, that the Devil strangl'd him; and others said, that having set at naught, both the Pope's Remonstrances and Threatnings, God had visibly pu∣nisht him. But 'tis most probable, that his continual Debauches having exhaust∣ed him, together with his great Age, were the occasion of his Immature Death. By the Consequence of this History, shewing the irregular Conduct of the greatest part of the Queens Officers, it is easie to judge of the great Disorders which reign'd in her Quarter. This was one of the specious Pretences of Pope Innocent XI. to abrogate the Franchises of the Queens, and Ambassadors Quar∣ters; as if there had been no way to stop the Disorders of particular Persons, but by taking away the Rights of Sove∣reigns. But the Pope found more dif∣ficulty in the Execution, than he had foreseen in the Project. He renewed the Bulls of the Popes his Predecessors about the Revocation of Franchises,
but no Body desisted; he remonstrated to Ambassadors, That the Dissorders committed in Rome, came from the Im∣munities of Quarters; and that they had authoriz'd the Fault by protecting the Criminals. But seeing they gave no heed to him, he spoke to the Princes of Europe by his Nuncio's, in which they succeeded no better than the Pope had done. For the Ambassadours wrote to their Masters, and they took the Re∣monstrances to come as from Persons su∣spected to act in favour of their own Interests. In the mean time, if the Princes themselves had faithfully understood the Disorders committed in these Quar∣ters, it is not to be imagin'd they would have much insisted upon those Immuni∣ties, for no Body can perswade himself that any Prince has pretended by main∣taining the Franchises of their Ambassa∣dors, to make them a Retreat to Thieves, Assassins, and Debauch'd Wo∣men. They would without doubt give orders to remit them into the Hands of Justice, though refug'd in their Quar∣ters, or their Palaces themselves. But seeing the Affair advanc'd not, the Pope was forc'd with displeasure to expect
that from Time which he could not ob∣tain by Force. He reserv'd himself therefore for a better Opportunity, re∣solving that when Princes should recall their Ambassadors, he would receive no others, till such time as they had re∣nounc'd these Franchises. This way was easier, though longer about, and it suc∣ceeded better than the violent Courses he had took. Spain by and by recall'd the Marquiss Del Carpio her Ambassa∣dor, to send thither the Viceroy of Naples, in the beginning of the Year 1683. The Pope immediately after his Departure, sent all his Sbirries to take possession of his Quarter, in the Place d'Espaign, and scowr'd it of all the Ma∣lefactors that were retired thither. The Quarters of the Ambassadors of Venice and Portugal were recover'd in the same manner; that is to say, by the Depar∣ture of those that possess'd them. Prince Radzeville the Ambassador of Poland, who made his Entry in the Year 1680. and the Lord Castlemain Ambassador of England, in the Year 1686, were nei∣ther of them acknowledg'd in this Qua∣lity, till they had declar'd that they would not pretend to Franchises, or Quarters. The Pope would never re∣ceive
the Marquiss Cogliudo Son of the Duke of Medina Caeli, new Ambassador from Spain, but upon the Assurances of the Marquiss de les Balbazes, that this Ambassador should pretend neither to Franchise nor Quarter, in case other Ambassadors did likewise renounce them. There was none now at Rome which enjoyed either Franchises or Quarters, but the French Ambassador, which gave occasion for a Song which was then in fashion, whose Ends sounded like one another in two Syllables. SONG. DAns Rome qui n'est plus la terrur de —l'Afrique Depuis que ses Soldats chantent none au —Bivach Que ses Elections se forment par—Micmac Et que ses Senateurs sont Maitres de—Musique. Ceux là cedans, la France a tort dans son —Refus Les Cadets a l'ainé doivent fair le—Planche Selon le resultat de Conseil de—Bibus:
Là nul Ambassadeur par belle—Politique Ne sera non pluus franc qu'un Merchand de —Tabac Et sans aucun respect nec ab hoc nec—Ab hac Les Sbirres passeront par son palais de —Brique. Les Jurisdictions n'iront pas plus—Ʋltra Portugal, Angleterre, Venise, &—Caetera Méme l'Ambassadeur du pais Don—Sanche. No sooner was the Duke d'Estrees Dead, towards the end of Jan. 1687. but the Sbirries came presently and ap∣pear'd at the Palace of Farnese, and took Possession of the Quarter. Mon∣sieur the Cardinal d'Estrees who receiv'd this Loss of his Illustrious Brother, like a true Christian, with the Sentiments of an enlightned Soul, did not think of maintaining the Right of the Franchises, believing that there was no prescription in the case, and that the King being bet∣ter established in the Enjoyment of
Quarters than any other Prince, would have time enough to repress those who pretended to take them away; and so his Eminence immediately left the Pa∣lace Farnese, and went to Lodge at the Vineyard of Pamphilio. In the mean time the Queen of Sweden was the only Person remaining, who had any Possession of Quarters; and they presently became the most frequent∣ed in Rome, and Langara which was the most desert, became now the most po∣pulous part of the City. So that all Lewd People being retir'd thither, there was every Day new Stories, and no∣thing in Rome was more talk'd of, than the Adventures of Langara. The Pope who was very sensible of it, sometimes spoke to Cardinal Azzolini and some∣times to the Queen, expressing his Re∣sentments, but it was all to no pur∣pose. After all, he saw plain enough that notwithstanding all his Endeavours, he had done nothing, as long as there was any Asylum, or place of Refuge, left for Criminals to fly to. But at last the Queen by the Measures of ill concerted Politicks, remitted her Right of Fran∣chises into the Pope's Hand, of which
she was not long before she repented. She knew well enough that her Title to these Immunities was not over well founded; nor durst she pretend to them, in either of the Voyages which she made to Rome, in the Year 1655. and 1659. and yet she shewed afterwards as great a difficulty to part with them, than if they had been the Rights of her Crown. Neither had she over-done it at all, if the unfetled State of her Affairs had not engag'd her to endeavour to manage the Pope in favour of her own Interests. See here the Contents of a Letter which she writ to him after the Death of the Duke D'Estrees Ambassador of France. Most Holy Father, TO second the Just Intentions of your Holiness, in abolishing the Franchi∣ses of Qnarters, I come to offer you to re∣sign for ever mine, which the Justice and Courtesie of your Holiness, and your Pre∣decessors have permitted me to enjoy without disturbance till this present, reserving ne∣vertheless the Respects due both to my Habi∣tation and Domesticks. I acknowledge that I offer nothing to your Holiness, but what is your own; and can we offer any thing to
God Almighty but what is his already? But yet the Offer is not only acceptable, but re∣compencd by the immense Bonnty, with un∣speakable and eternal good things. As for my self, I neither pretend to, nor desire a∣ny thing of your Holiness, I only pray you to accept this my Example, which per∣haps may not be unuseful in the present Conjuncture of Affairs. I protest that I am with a profound Veneration, Your Holinesses Most Devote, and most Obedient Daughter, Christina Alexandra. This good Princess did believe she should bring the Princes of Europe to agree; and that her Example would cause even France to give up her Fran∣chises; but she was mistaken, for the Most Christian King while these things were in doing sent the Marquiss de La∣vardin his Ambassadour to the Pope. This Minister entred Rome the 16th of Novembor 1687. and went to live at the Palace Farnese, where he re-established
the Franchises of his Quarter, during all the time of his Abode, upon the same foot his Predecessors had enjoy'd them time out of mind. To speak the truth, the Pope's Pre∣decessors had never contraven'd the Rights of France; for they knew too well from whom they had the Patrimony of St. Peter. They acknowledg'd the Kings of France as the only Proectors of the Holy See; Pepin and Charlemagne ha∣ving highly declar'd themselves against the Enemies of the Popes, and made it their proper business to enter into War in their behalf: They themselves be∣stow'd on them the Exarchal of Raven∣na, and the other Provinces of the Pa∣trimony of the Holy Foundation of the Church of Rome, after the Defeat of all their Enemies: So that all this, and an infinite number of other Services which the Kings of France had render'd the Church, made Popes to distinguish them from all the Princes of Europe. 'Tis true, that notwithstanding all this, the Ingratitude of Priests is so great, that there is no Statue of Pepin or Char∣lemagne to be found in Rome, nor the least Inscription in their Honour. If Pope Innocent XI. had no mind to hear
the recital of all these Donations, nor search into Antiquity unknown to him, he might at least have call'd to Memory the Treaty of Pisa, concluded in these Days, wherein the Possession of the Franchises were confirmed to the French. But the Spirit of Partiality, which ought never to reign in the Common Fa∣ther of Christians, hindred Innocent XI. from entring into these Reasons, and made him push on things to a Scanda∣lous Extremity. If he had as soon gi∣ven Audience to the Marquiss de Lavar∣din, or Monsieur Chanelay Envoy of France; as to the Envoy of the Prince of Orange, he had known the true Sen∣timents of France. All the World knows that this Minister had order to remit the Franchises, if the Pope would have given him a present Audience, but not being able to obtain that, which was yet accorded to a Protestant, he would not yield up his incontestable Rights. But this drives us off oo far from our Subject; we will therefore return to see the Consequences of the Queens dismis∣sion of her Franchises, which cost her so much Displeasure and Uneasiness. We shall understand it best from the following Relation which was sent me
from Leghorn, by a French Officer of the Queen's, who went thither to seek for an Employ. As he was Her Ma∣jesty's Confident after Clairet's Death, no Body knew the Queen's Secrets bet∣ter than himself; and therefore having desir'd him to instruct me, as to what pass'd upon that occasion, I shall relate it according to the Words of his own Writing. The Queen of Sweden having pro∣mis'd, and afterwards written an elo∣quent Letter to Pope Innocent the XI. (wherein she makes the Resignation with a great deal of Zeal to please his Holi∣ness) quickly saw her Error, and the Injury she had thereby done to her self. For whether it were that she had not used all the Precautions that were ne∣cessary to make this Action valuable, or pretended that the Pope ought to have given her thanks, or rather because her People were accustom'd to an insuppor∣table Liberty, and could not be con∣tain'd within Bounds; but so it was, that the Cession of the Franchise did not last above two Months, before the Queen receiv'd Discontent and Vexa∣tion from it every way. The first thing that was seen was a
Battallion of Sbirries, with their Bari∣seil at the Head of them, to take pos∣session of the Quarter with insupporta∣ble Pride. The Pope made these Scoun∣drels insolent by the Power given them, and it was the reason that we look'd up∣on them with Contempt; and it did so much the more mortifie all the Dome∣sticks, in that they were not us'd to be vex'd with such Rogues with whom they had never any thing to do before. At last happen'd an Accident which was the Cause of all the Mischief that might be foreseen. A Valet of one of the Queen's Anspessades, had cheated a Banker of some Barrels of Brandy; and the Sbirri's, whether of their own Motion, or excited by some of the Queen's Enemies, took him Prisoner upon Easter-Day, near the Queen's Pa∣lace, and dragg'd him as far as the Steps of the Church de Regina Coeli, which is at Longara. Many Footmen, and others of the Queen's Domesticks, who went to St. Peter's for their Devo∣tion, cry'd out to the Sbirri's as they went along, that it was a shame to take him upon Easter-Day, without regard to the Sanctity of the Festival. This did not terrifie them at all; for
they brought their Prisoner to a Caba∣ret, keeping him by main force, though they remonstrated to them that he be∣long'd to her Majesty. The Queen having understood it, sent to disengage him, being angry that they had not ask'd her permission to take him. He was taken away by force, out of the hands of these Rascals, and brought back in Triumph to Langara, the Peo∣ple crying out Vivat to the Queen, and Hooting at the Sbirri's. But this caus'd a great Noise; for the Pope taking Offence, that they had committed Vio∣lence to the Ministers of his Justice, and enterpriz'd upon his Authority, made a Criminal Process against all those that had a share in this business, and condemned them all as seditious. The Queen being stark mad to see the Placards, stuck upon the Walls of her Palace, wherein the pretended Crimi∣nals were condemn'd to Death for Con∣tumacy, and their Heads set at a Price, kept no farther measures with the Pope; and to brave him, took the occasion of a Feast which the Jesuits made, whi∣she went with a magnificent Train, ac∣companied by all her Domesticks, arm'd like so many St. Georges under their
Habits: The Condemn'd had order to follow her Majesty at the sides of her Coach, with the three accus'd Auspes∣sades, and nine others, which made up the number of a dozen all well-arm'd, and resolute to the uttermost. I remember poor Captain Landini who had before pass'd for a Man of Courage, considering the danger, fell a trembling when he went out of the Port Settignana; and whereas he should have follow'd the Queen at the Head of the Auspessades, was forc'd to be put into one of the Queen's Coaches, being as pale as a dead Man. However they seem'd to take no notice of it at the Apostolick Palace, but on the contra∣ry, the Pope regal'd her Majesty with some Basons of Fruit, the first of which, I remember, was green Raisins, a Ra∣rity for the Month of May, as then it was. A Chamberlain of Honour pre∣sented them to the Queen, who gave him no more than ordinary Thanks; but after he was gone, look'd upon me, and said, What does Mingon mean with his Raisins? She spoke of the Pope; who, being of an austere Temper, re∣fus'd almost every Favour asked of him, with this Word Minga; which
is as much as to say, No, or not at all, in the Milanese Language, or in the Coun∣trey of Spain, from whence the Queen gave him the Nick-name of Mingon. Does he think, said she, we are asleep, No, I will vex him in my turn. She then gave Orders, that as many Sbirries as pass'd by her Quarter. should be ta∣ken up. One Merula, a Neopolitan Ban∣dit, whom the Queen had taken from Justice, which would have punish'd him for some Crimes committed in the Realm of Naples, was her Bravo. And indeed this Man, though but of few Words, was a wicked Devil; for he would Kill a Man upon the least occa∣sion, or for Money, if you pleas'd. There was then a Corporal of the Sbir∣ries, who had Insolence enough to speak some ill things of the Queen, and to boast an Exploit which he had done in her Quarter; but he did not live long after this Temerity, for he was Kill'd by Merula, at Noon day, as he was going out of his House, near the Gover∣nor's of Rome. The Pope enrag'd at the Death of this Man, redoubl'd his Edicts against the Queen's People; and and came to such a point of Choler, that he propos'd in a Consistory to Ex∣communicate
the Queen. But Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees so strongly re∣presented to his Holiness, that he must have more circumspection in regard of Crown'd Heads; and that it could not be prov'd that the Queen was the cause of it, that it hinder'd his Holiness from coming to this Extremity. And 'tis re∣markable, that the Queen, who had of∣ten vexed his Eminence upon many oc∣casions, found no body but him to maintain her Interests, for I think Car∣dinal Azzolini was then Sick. In the mean time, things grew worse and worse, insomuch, that the Queen having understood that the Pope would send all the Sbirries to carry away the Con∣demn'd by force out of her Palace, or∣der'd the Marquiss Del Monte to give Notice to all her Houshold to be in her Palace on Sunday after Mass. All the Domesticks were there, and above all, the Gentlemen were the first that heard the Queen's Speech. She said, Gentlemen, and all you others my Domesticks, I have brought you hi∣ther to tell you, That the Pope is coming to the Sword's Point with me, by forcing my Domesticks, your
Comerades, into the hands of Justice; I am resolv'd not to forsake them, and therefore those that are in my Ser∣vice, must prepare themselves to run the same Fortune with me, and to repulse couragiosly those Violences that will be offer'd; I will be at your Head, and expos'd to the same Perils with all of you. You know me, and understand by some Actions of my Life, that I am not Fearful; let those that have not Courage to serve me, declare it, for I will force no body. I know the Pope is your Sovereign, and if any Interest oblige you to retire, those that have a mind, may do it freely; I had rather have ten Coura∣gious Men, who are willing, and will be Faithful, than a thousand timerous Persons and Cowards, who for fear of prejudicing their Affairs, are not wil∣ling to run the same Fortune with me. They all appludd the Speech, but you might see by their Faces, that one half of them could have wish'd them∣selves far enough off. I was a File∣closer, or the last Man that brings up the Ranks, and cast my self at the Queen's Feet, assuring her, that any
Interest of the Family, should make my spend the last drop of my Blood in her Service. Go my poor N. said she to me, I know thou speakest from thy Heart, and one time or other, I will take an opportunity to let thee know, that I am fully perswaded of it. Not I alone, Madam, (said I) but all the French that are in Rome, will take it for a Glory, to die in your Majesty's Service. I know said she, the French Nation loves me, and as I always Esteem them, I shall free∣ly receive their Service. The good Prin∣cess in a Transport, fell into a Panegy∣rick upon the French Nation, exalting to the Skies, their Fidelity and Love to their King, and for all the Princes they took an inclination to Serve. The Pope, when he understood the Queen's Resolutions, fell a Laughing, as he had reason. Nevertheless, some of the Court-Prelates took the liberty to represent to the Pope, that if he push'd things to extremity, he would cause a Mutiny among the People, and especially by the French, who were not well satisfied about the Proceedings of the Court of Rome, and having but the least Pretence, such as that of the Queen's was, would blindly follow her Will. 'Tis
certain that these Reflections did a lit∣tle slacken the Court-Resolutions. But while these things were doing, the Queen call'd to me after Dinner. At first when I came, I fell on my Knees before her, as she was sitting on a Couch. I send for you now, said she, because I would be seen by no body else, for now every one is at Rest, because of the Heat. And indeed there was no body about her. I remember (pursu'd her Majesty) what you said to me some days ago: The Pope continues his Anger, and though he be Pope, I will make him remember I am Queen. You know all the French which are in this City; manage them, for I shall have occasion, and I esteem an hundred French, more than a thousand Italians. I have already provided (said I, Madam) the greter past of the French, which I esteem the most Brave, and who have no settlement in Rome, but seek for some Business, or an occasion to shew their Bravery. Your Majesty knows, that as the French Na∣tion is Persecuted at Rome under this Pontificate, because of the Differences between the two Courts, upon the Sub∣ject of the Regalia, and the four Pro∣positions of the Clergy of France; So,
Madam, the profound Veneration which the French have for your Majesty, and Hatred to the Pope, will make them enterprize all things. If your Majesty will be so kind to permit me to do it, I will bring you Fifty, all good Men, who shall pass under your View, with∣out their knowing of it. The Queen approved my Design; and the way I took was ths. Whereas, her Majesty's Palace was adorn'd with precious Moveables, fine Pictures, and excellent Statues, which were inviting to Strangers. It was not difficult for me to bring whole shoals t see these Rarities at certain Hours. A Valet de Chambre, who was a Confident, had or∣der to leave all Open; So I brought in every time Nine or Ten Persons; and when I had introduc'd them into the Chamber of the Mirroir of Time, where all the fine Paintings were; She could see them without being seen her self, by means of certain Windows which were above, near the Ceiling. One day above the rest, I brought in a certain French Grenadier, who had Deserted; he look'd upon the Queen's Picture very earnest∣ly, and cry'd, Oh, how great a Queen is this! Gods Zd, Why is she not at the head
of her Armies, as heretofore, I would Serve her willingly. I said to him, Monsieur, If there should be an occasion, you would hardly be of the same mind. Yes by G. answers my Brave, I have hlf a Dozen Comerades besides, which shall be at her Service. Well, said I, Gentlemen, you have seen all, let us go and drink her Majesty's Health. Judge you whether I did not do my business to effect, for she sent for me again, and as soon as she saw me, said, Oh, how well things go! these are the People I must have: Get in besides, some Trades-People if you can, for they are, for the most part, as good as Sol∣diers. So I went to her Shoemaker and her Taylor, who had got ten Boys a piece, all Merry Lads. I declar'd my self to their Masters, and as I could trust them with the Secret, I told the Lads, that the Queen had given me a Pistol to make them Drink. Her Ma∣jesty, who would see all, made me bring them into a great Cabbaret, at the Port Settignana, over against one of her Apartments, where she could both see and hear us. We were there in the Afternoon under a Tree, which cast a great Shade: There was an Arbor in the Branches, and Banks round about,
into the Apartment of which Places you must enter by a Wooden Bridge, where there was Conveniencies for 20 Men, without incommoding one another. These Merry Blades began to Sing and drink the Queen's Health: She heard all, and took a great deal of Pleasure in the Applauses given her: so that she sent a Footman, who gave order to the Landlord, to distribute a dozen Bottles of Wine, to redouble her Healths. This Surpriz'd me, because I would have con∣ducted this Affair with all the Secrecy imaginable, till such time as I had brought the Train to Perfection. I saw her Majesty next day, and she told me all went well. Madam, said I to her, I manage my People, and do not declare my self, but to those that I am sure will make no noise, till the time comes, according to your Majsty's Orders; But if I durst, I would ask, on whose behalf it was, that we were Yesterday Regal'd with a dozen Bot∣tles of Wine, becaue I am apprehen∣sive lest it should discover my intrigue. The Queen, whose intention it was to make a noise, fell a Lghing, and told me, she was very well pleas'd with my Conduct. And to make short, in three
or four days time I was assur'd of four or five Hundred Men. The Pope, who had Notice given him, that the Queen Fortified her self, and knew very well that the French were ill satisfied with their hard Usage, began to fear some Rising; but his Humour being severe and inflexible, he did not come to any terms of Accomodation. Yet at last, by the means of Monsieur Albani, Se∣cretary of the Briefs, who Succeeded Cardinal Siusius, and wore the Purple by his proper Merit, who was of great Credit with the Queen, and to whom the Pope always listned, and the Endea∣vours of Cardinal Azzolini, things be∣gan to sweeten and come into a better temper. Albani went to vlsit the Queen as from himself, and at first talk'd about things indifferent, but insensibly fell in∣to the Quarrel between the Pope and the Queen. She complain'd, that the Pope treated her with Rigour; and the Prelate assur'd her Mjesty, that his in∣tentions were good, but complain'd that her Majesty suffer'd her self to be pos∣sess'd by certain People of her Court, who proceeded contrary to his Interests. Then we are both equal in the matter, saith the Queen briskly, for he is more possess'd
than I, seeing his Ministers create Trou∣ble to all People. Monsieur Albani sweet∣ned the matter as well as he could, re∣presenting to her Majesty, that what anger'd the Pope most, was, that it seem'd to him as if the Queen had a mind to make a Sedition in Rome, by raising the People. I had no such thought (said she) for I know too well my Duty towards His Holiness to do any thing of that nature; But I would take such mea∣sures that may put him in mind who I am. I own, that among Strangers and the People of Rome, I find some whose Minds are more inclinable to me, than the present Government; nor does it belong to me to reform it; But however, I will at least take care, that my Domesticks be not ta∣ken away from me, and my Palace Rifled before my Face, as I have been threatned, and know not how soon it may be executed. Monsieur Albani concluded, that the Pope could not re∣tract what he had done; but if her Ma∣jesty would permit the formalities of Justice to be done, it were not difficult to find such a Temper, that no body might receive any harm, and that the culpable being condemn'd by Justice,
might be Pardon'd again, because the Pope's Authority would suffer damage, if he acted otherwise. And my Ho∣nour (said the Queen) would be woun∣ded if I should act in any other man∣ner; and if I were to begin again, the Pope should not have so free Ac∣knowledgments and Condescentions, seeing I have made my self Enemies to please him; But now Crown'd Heads are well agreed, it is in his power to give me a Disturbance. But (said she to conclude) things are not yet past remedy, for my own part, if an Ex∣pedient can be found to save my Re∣putation, I will give him both my hands to what he pleases. Nevertheless, things continued in this posture till the coming of the Marquiss Lavardin, Ambassador of France, with whom she found it convenient to unite her Interests, because he was the Mi∣nister of a Potent Prince, who was ill satisfied in the Court of Rome. She said a thousand good things by way of Ad∣vance, and spoke of him always in the most Obliging terms. As for Instance, That the King of France could not have made a better choice, than to have em∣ploy'd a Person of so much Understand∣ing
as himself. That being most intel∣ligent in the business of Ambassages, he would cause the respect due to his Cha∣racter to be easily paid him, and other things of the like nature. Her main end was to join her self to him, to obtain Satisfaction of the Pope, supposing she could not make her own Accomodation apart; For notwithstanding these ap∣parent Unions, they would easily se∣parate and forsake one another, to bet∣ter their own Affairs. But the Pope, who did not like this Ambassage, and would never acknowledge him, made Lavardin (seeing himself forsaken by all) very glad to unite with the Queen, who was also in the same Circumstances. The day that this Ambassador made his Entry into Rome, the Queen under most rigorous Penalties, forbad all her Officers and Domesticks to see it. But I who knew by her Eyes, that she made this Prohibition contrary to her Inclina∣tions, asked leave by the Marquiss Ca∣poni, as being a Frenchman, to go and see this Entry: She granted it in the Presence of the Marquiss Del Monte, with this condition, that I should observe very well all that pass'd, and give her an Account as soon as it was done. Af∣ter
I had seen all, I came to give a re∣lation of the Particulars as well as I could; and remaining alone with her Majesty, she said to me, Look you, this is a matter of Consequence, act with all the address you can, ad do not fail to get Acquaintance with some Favourite Valet de Chambre, to discover as much as 'tis possible, what passes at the Marquiss de Lavar∣din's. At the beginning every one manag'd the matter so as to serve themselves with most advantage in the Court of Rome. The Ambassador and the Cardi∣nal D' Estrees, did not fail to manage all their Intrigues either to bend or terrifie the Pope. At last the Ministers of his Holiness having renvers'd all the Projects of the French, and the Pope having refus'd to receive a Letter writ∣ten with the King's own hand, brought Express by Monsieur Chanelay, Gentle∣man in ordinary of his Chamber. Things broke without return, and made the Am∣bassador resolve at last, to unite with the Qeen. They who desire a thing, do easily believe it, or seem so to do. Two or three days were scarce past, but there run a Report, that the Courts
of France and Rom were just upon agree∣ing; and at the same time arriv'd a Courier from France, as 'twas said, about the Vacancy of Benefices, but no Body knew what the Letters imported. The Queen being in suspence, and not know∣ing what to believe, desir'd me to bring her the Courier, whom I was Acquain∣ted with. I pretended to shew him all the Rarities of the Queen's Apartment. He came, and I conducted him through all Places, till we came to the Chamber of Mirroir, where the Queen Surpriz'd us, at it were by chance; She question'd the Courier very much, but being one of the Cabinet, and a Man of Wit, she could only draw from him some general things. In the mean time, she never left to speak a thousand good things of the Ambassador, and the Ambassador of the Queen, and I found out an Invention to bring them a little nearer one to ano∣ther. I told her Majesty, that Madam the Ambassadress had brought the finest Habits in the World along with her: And she let me know that she was very desirous to have a sight of them I made the Ambassadress acquainted with it, and she fail'd not to send them to the Queen,
and she said, she was much pleas'd with them, but should have been better to see them upon the Person for whom they were made. Madam de Laverdin understood this, and was mightily pleas'd with the Esteem the Queen had for her. For the poor Lady, in the Mis-intelli∣gence between the Court of Rome and her Husband, saw no body which gave her the Title of Excellence, out of her own Palace, nor treated her as Ambas∣sadress, and therefore died with long∣ing to see her self Honour'd with these Titles by so great a Queen. I Din'd at the Ambassadors some time after, and by way of Entertainment, it was ask'd me how her Majesty would treat Mon∣sieur the Ambassador if he should do her the Honour of a Visit. I answer'd that I knew not the Queen's Secrets, but yet I durst promise, that her Majesty would treat him according to his Character. The same Night I saw the Queen, and said, Madam, dare I enquire of your Majesty, how you will treat Monsieur de Laverdin, if he gives you the Honour of rendring his Devoirs. I would treat him (said she) as all other Am∣bassadors of France; or in short, how he pleases. She let him know it also
by other means; and the same Night I went to tell the Ambassador's Confident what the Queen had said: And after some few days, a Valet de Chambre of Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees, call'd Constant, met me going over the Bridge of Ponte Sista, and told me, that the next day Monsieur the Ambassador of France would come to Visit her Majesty. I flew presently to tell her, and as soon as she saw me, ask'd me: Well, what News? Madam, (said I, speak∣ing very low to her) Monsieur the Ambassador will come to Morrow to Visit you. She was much surpriz'd at these words, and said, Ah N—the Affection you have for me, makes you desire these things. No, Madam, (answer'd I) there's nothing so true, I have seen the Preparati∣ons, and was told it by a Friend. My Child, (said she) I have no News of all this, and I believe the Orders of the Court are chang∣ed; but say nothing, to Morrow we shall know all. I could not Sleep all that Night, and the next Day went to the Queens Levee, and she cast so many Glances at me, that I was quite put out of Countenance; but she was scarce cloath'd before Monsieur de la Brussiere Master of Monsieur de Lavardin's Cham∣ber,
came to tell Her Majesty, that Monsieur the Ambassador desir'd the Honour of paying his Respects to her, and doing his Devoirs. One may easily believe that the Queen gave a good Answer to this a∣greeable Message, saying that Monsieur the Ambassadour was perfectly Master to come when he pleas'd, and that he should be receiv'd, according both to his Character and his Merit. The Visit was great and magnificent, and they spoke an hundred obliging things, and full of esteem one for another, and in the praise of that great Monarch Mon∣sieur Lavardin represented. This Visit entertain'd all the City with Discourse for some time, and all the Queens Cour∣tiers became good French Men. Madam the Ambassadress came also to see the Queen, and was well receiv'd; and af∣ter this, there was nothing so frequent as the Coaches of the Ambassador and his Lady in the Queens Court. I had forgot one Circumstance, which is, that while this Enterview was treat∣ing, Her Majesty went one Day to the Colledge of St. Clement, to hear some Academical Discourses, in Prose and Verse, with a recitation in Musick, and
it was at the time of the Carneval, Anno 1688. when all Rejoycings were for∣bidden by the Pope's Authority. I told the Confident of Monsieur the Ambas∣sador, that the Queen in returning home, would pass by the Palace ar∣nese; which Monsieur de Lavardin un∣derstanding, assembled all his Guards Marine, together with his whole House∣hold, and made a double Hedge, in the middle of which the Queen pass'd with all her Train, with Flambeaus lighted. Monsieur the Ambassador, Madam the Ambassadress, Madamosel their Daugh∣ter, and a little Child a Daughter of theirs, were upon the Balcony, where they made a profound Reverence to the Queen; she re-saluted them with her Hand, and all the Nobles with their Hats off accompanied Her Majesty as far as Ponte-Sisto. In short, the whole Carriage of the Thing was Agreeable and Magnificent on both sides; for the Queen had one of the finest Coaches in Rome, and a Chair of the same, all her Footmen and twelve Anspessades at the back of them, and all illuminated by twenty six Flambeaus in White Wax.
It was again inquir'd, how Madamo∣sel Lavardin should be treated if she came to kiss Her Majesties Hands. The Queen ask'd me from whom I brought that Question, and whether Monsieur the Ambassador made this Demand? No, Madam, (I answer'd) it is a Dam∣sel that waits upon Madamosel Lavardin. They are not very knowing in the Ceremonial Law, (said the Queen;) If Madamosel Lavardin comes to see me, I must stand upon Niceties; but because we will not come to that, I will go abroad for her sake, and we will meet one another in a Church or Religious Monastery, and I will carry her to see the finest Convents in Rome, that I will treat her with all Civility, and make her sit in my Presence next my self. This was done, and the Young Lady was entirely satisfied in Her Majesties Goodness. One Day the Queen would have me to watch when the Ambassadour pass'd by Longara, to go to the fine Garden of Cardinal Barberini, which is near the Gate de Spirito Santo. After I knew, I gave notice to Cardinal Azzolini on Her Majesties part, who was to come to meet him as it were by Chance, and they met one another over-against the
Monastery call'd Regina Celi, where there pass'd a great many Civilities between them, and the Cardinal treated the Mar∣quiss de Lavardin with the Title of Ex∣cellence and Ambassadour, in the Pre∣sence of a great number of People who waited on purpose to see how they would Salute one another. I caus'd the Ambassador's Trumpets to come af∣terwards into the Queens Garden, where they Play'd most excellently, and were gratified with ten Pistols from the Queen, and Monsieur the Ambassador extoll'd this Liberality to the Skies. The Queen being desirous to com∣pose the Difference that was between the Cardinals Azzolini and D'Estrees, could not bring it about, and was so an∣gry at it, that to be reveng'd she strait∣way remonstrated to the Ambassador, That the hot Councils of Cardinal D'Estrees had exasperated Matters, and would cause him to make false steps; that such a Man as he had no need ei∣ther of Counseller or Pedant, and that the Pope was irritated against him for Cardinal D'Estree's sake; that Azzolini was certainly a good Servant of the King's; and though decried in the Court of France, had always maintain'd a great
Respect for the King; and that if his Excellee would confide in him, he would manage things to his Satisfacti∣on. Monsieur de Lavardin gave Ear to it, and look'd coldly upon Cardinal D'E∣strees; but this incomparable Cardinal, who had faithful Spies over the Queen, was immediately inform'd of all, and so with his winning Manners prevented the Ambassador, and said to him; Monsieur, the Queen of Sweden is so Inconstant, and Cardinal Azzolini so great a Deceiver, that if the Pope do but make the least shew of giving them some slight satisfaction, you will find the Queen turn her Back of you. I know, Monsieur, she has told you, that you may lay aside my Counsels, and that you have no need of a Pedant: But since the King has done me the Honour to communicate his Affairs to me as, well as your self, I will always speak my Thoughts, where the Interests of his Estates are transacted. But Monsieur Lavardin, who was of Opinion, that the Court of Rome, was not very fond of the Queen of Sweden, was well satisfi∣ed with this Remonstrance; but the
Queen gave D'Estrees to the Devil, knowing he had been inform'd of all, and was never able to discover him that betray'd her. What happen'd after the Discovery of all these Intrigues? The Pope was always obstinate, and would hear no body. The Queen died the 13th of April, 1689. The Mar∣quiss de Lavardin parted from Rome into France from whence he came, without seeing the Pope, who died the 12th of August in the same Year: And as to Cardinal Azzolin, he died on the 9th of June, going before that of the Pope. This Relation, though a little long, us in many curious Circum∣stances, and shews the inconstant Gnius of the Queen. For after all, who would have believed a little beore, that she would have made so strict an Union with the French Ambassador, after she had spoken so much ill of this Crown, and concerning which, she pretended to be dissatisfied. Witness what escap'd from her as she was talking to the En∣voy of England, who was at Rome a lit∣tle after James II. came to the Crown of those Realms.
She receiv'd his Picture from the same Lord, and made him as magnifi∣cent a Reception, as if he had been de∣clar'd Ambassador, though he never had that Character; for it was Conferr'd upon the Lord Castlemain. She Re∣gal'd him one Night with fine Musick and Verse in the Praise of King James, a quantity of Liquors, and other Re∣freshments, and holding his Picture in her Hand: This is a great King, and (said she) I hope I shall not die, till I see the English again in France, as they have been heretofore, to hum∣ble that Light and Ambitious Nation. If the Pope would believe me, I could shew him a way to penetrate into the Bowels of France: The true way to abate the Pride of the French, (who would not acknowledge the Holy See, except for Interest) is to make a firm League with the King of England. To know the Original of that Aver∣sion which the Queen and Cardinal had for Cardinal D'Estrees, we must go a step higher; for it is certain that this Misintelligence begun before the Am∣bassadors of the four Crowns were dis∣contented with Cardinal Altieri, who
govern'd the Ecclesiastical State, as of Cardinal Patron, under the Pontificate of Pope Clement X. I say he govern'd the Estate, for the good Pope Altieri be∣ing come to decrepit Age, and fal'n in∣to meer Childhood again, had no part in it: Which made Pasquin say, when Marforius demanded under whose Pon∣tificate they liv'd? Sumus sub Pontifica∣tu Alterius. We are under the Pontifi∣cate of another, (answer'd he) alluding to the Pope's Name, and the small share he had in the Government. Another time Pasquin said no less in∣geniously upon this Subject, that Cle∣ment X did only Benedicere & Sanctifi∣care, whereas Cardinal Atieri did for his part Regere & gubernare. The Pope was Elected 22th of April, 1679. in spite of the Queen and Cardi∣nal Azzolini's Mind, who had an hun∣dred Juggles and Contrivances, to make Cardinal Vidoni Pope; this Princess ho∣ping that under his Pontificate she should have the same Respects and Convenien∣ces that she had under Clement IX. But Fortune was not so favourable to Vido∣ni, as Pasquin also had foretold: For during the Conclave, there was found a Writing fix'd upon the Gate of the
Pontifical Palace at Monte Cavallo, where was written, Qui non intrano, ne Facchini, ne Guidoni. Alluding to the Names of the Cardi∣nals Facchenetti, and Guidoni, or Vidoni; the last of which signifies a Beggar, or a Rogue, and the other a Porter. Azzolini who hoped to be Secretary of State under Vidoni, as he was under Clement IX. was satisfied no more than the Queen, so that when Her Mjesty receiv'd the News of his Elevation, she would not believe it, and treated all them that brought it as Beasts, saying, they did not understand themselves. In the mean time Count Alibert en∣tred, and told her with his affected Air, Madam, the Cardinal Altieri is Pope: Oh bene bestia (said he) non occorro altro, s'attacchi la Carrzzo. She went out with all her House by the Garden Gate, which opens towards the Gate of St. Pan∣cras, to avoid the Crowd, and entred in∣to the Bourg of St. Peter, by the Gate of the Light-horse, from whence she went directly to the Vatican; but she had no heart to receive him at the bot∣tom of the Stairs, she was only in the
Hall, where some Prelates were come before her. After her Compliment made to the new Pope, which was very brief, she went back as she came, but so melancholy, that we easily knew she was not content, Azzolini having miss'd his Blow, quickly found means to adjust his Affairs to the new Regent. At this time the House of the D'Estrees pretending to an Hat for the Bishop and Duke of Laon at the Solicitation of Portugal, entred into Cabals with one another; but the Queen being of a rest∣less Spirit, and always an Enemy to France, because they would not yield to her Sentiments, would with Azzo∣lini cross as much as they could the pro∣motion of the D'Estrees; and this illu∣strious Prelate waited a long time, be∣cause he would be a Cardinal by his own Merit, and not put on his Hat at a price, as was hop'd for by the devour∣ing Avarice of the Regent. From hence began at first the Antipathy for the D'Estrees, which augmented afterwards by divers Accidents. After the Death of Clement X. the Queen out of Policy writ a Letter to the Most Christian King, by which she of∣fer'd to joyn Azzolini to the Faction of
France, for the Election of a Pope; but they made so little account of it, that they never return'd her an Answer, till two Days after the Election of Innocent XI. the Queen took it with all the spight that could be thought of, and had the Injustice to believe that Cardinal D'E∣strees was the Cause of this Contempt. She was angry besides that they did not give her timely notice of the Queen of France' Death, and for that reason would not wear Mourning; but after∣wards changing her Opinion, in favour of so Pious and Holy a Queen, she ha∣bited her self in a stuff of Goats Hair of a Violet Colour, which is made no where but at Naples, aud is very dear, and the Thing of the World, which is the deep∣est Mourning. But that which most augmented the Queens Rage and her Marquisan, for so she her self used to call Azzolini, be∣cause he was of the Marca de Anchona, was the Affair of Molinos. He was a Secular Spanish Priest, and undertook the direction of Consciences for twenty Years in Rome, and under this Pretext brought in a new Heresie without ma∣king a noise, which was so much the more pernicious in that, under a shew of
Elevating the Mind, to a more sublime Contemplation, he would not have us stop at the Humanity of the Word In∣carnate saying, that we ought always to consider it in the Bosom of the Eter∣nal Father. This made some to believe him to be a conceal'd Jew, of which there was a great deal of likelihood. In effect all his Discourses tended to de∣stroy as much as possibly he could the Ineffable Mysteries of the Holy Trini∣ty, and the Incarnation of the Son of God. He was against all Images, and renew'd all the Dreams of the Ancient Iconoclasticks, condemn'd by so many Orthodox Councils. His Manners were as corrupt as his Faith, and he would abuse the finest Women and Maids to whom he had access, by perswading them that Whoredom was no Sin, when it was not Scandalous. According to him, Confession was no way necessary, and that Prayer of Quietude abolish'd all sorts of Sin; so the Tribunal of Penitence, was no more frequented, and the most Devout to outward appear∣ance, whom he had seduced, approach'd the Holy Table, as soon as ever they came to Church, without putting them∣selves to the trouble of an Absolution;
this abominable Rogue, all the while re∣joycing at the horrible Sacriledges he committed. But there is no need I should enlarge my self any further in things which are known to all the World, nor upon the Important Service Cardinal D'Estrees ender'd the Church, in advertising the Holy Office of this Infamous Heretick, who had infatuated all the principal Personages in Rome, as far as the Queen of Sweden, nay even as far as Pope In∣nocent XI. who believed him a Saint, and would have made him a Cardinal in a few Days. The Method Cardinal D'Estrees took to Arrest Molinos, was a piece of consummate Prudence, and any other Person but himself, who should have declar'd it, would have suffer'd him to escape. It was upon a Thursday that the Congregation of the Holy Office was held before the Pope, where after they had expedited the Affairs which lay up∣on the Table, Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees demanded and obtain'd Audi∣ence of the Pope, and the Sacred Col∣ledge, about a thing of the greatest im∣portance; and every one being silent, said, That one of the most pernicious of Heresies was form'd in Rome, and if
a prompt Remedy were not applyed, there was an end of all Religion. But that he who was the Author, had so great Credit even in the Sacred Colledge, (meaning Azzolini without naming him) that he would escape as soon as the Con∣gregation was ended, if sufficient pre∣cautions were not taken thereupon. And therefore he requir'd the Pope's Order to seize the Person he would name, and bring him to the Prisons of the Holy Office, before the Assembly should separate. This being agreed to, Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees, named Molinos, as the most detestable of Hereticks, sum∣moning the Pope to keep his Word, and cause him to be Arrested, and immedi∣ately to conduct him to the Prisons of the Holy Office. The Pope had a mind to take his part, and to justisie his In∣nocence before hand: But the Cardinal protested, that if he intended to act for the Glory of God, he ought not to loose one Moment; and when they were assur'd of his Person, he might give him time enough to justifie him∣self.
Upon these Remonstrances the Pope sent for a Baiseel, and commanded him to go with all his Sbirries, and Arrest Doctor Molinos, who liv'd near St. Lau∣rence in Panisperna, and to bring him im∣mediately into the Prisons of the Holy Office, telling him, That he lost his own Head if he miss'd his Blow. In the mean time the Cardinal D'E∣strees kept Azzolini always in his Eye, for fear he should go away, and give notice to Molinos, and retain'd the Car∣dinals lock'd up with the Pope, till two of the Clock, after Dinner, notwith∣standing the great Heat of Summer, till the Bariseel had brought a Scrowl of his Imprisonment, who after three Months Juridical Proceedings, made a Publick Recantation of Errors, at the Minerva. He Detested, Abjur'd, Ana∣thematiz'd them, and after he had re∣ceiv'd Absolution, he had the Pennance inflicted on him, of being confin'd all his Life, in the Prisons of the Holy Of∣fice. This wicked Person had the address to insinuate himself into the most consi∣derable Persons in Rome, among whom he spread his Venom more or less, ac∣cording as he found the Subjects dispo∣sed.
He had seduc'd and infected al∣most all the City of Rome, where they look'd upon him as a Saint, even as far as the Queen her self, who gave him Audience for three Hours every Monday. 'Tis certain that the Queens House re∣ceiv'd a great deal of ease by his means, in that he moderated her violent Tran∣sports, which would become sometimes so excessive, that no Body durst come near her. She treated her House in so rude a manner, and committed such in∣supportable Extravagancies, that if they did not forsake her, pure Necessi∣ty was the reason. For the greatest number of Servants, serve their Masters out of Interest, and not Duty or Con∣science; and if they honour them by one Motive, contemn them by another. Count Alibert who studied to know her so well, had his Hands full, for sometimes when he would come to her after his Flattering and Complaisant way, think∣ing to find her in an happy Hour, it was then oftentimes she was most unto∣ward. I remember one Day he came to the Queen with a pleasant Air, and told her, Madam, your Majesty may be plea∣sed to understand that this Morning Cardi∣nal
D'Estrees has been ill satisfied with the Pope▪ and that the Affairs of Fran are more embroil'd than ever: And after∣wards made a very troublesome Nar∣ration of all that he had heard or invent∣ed, as 'twas ordinary with him. But he had not always the good luck to suc∣ceed, and particularly at that time; for the Queen who had no more reason than others to be satisfied, treated him with Sot and Beast, that would make believe any thing; that he studied nothing but Lies to amuse her, and that she would cause him to be thrown out of the Windows: And so the poor Eternal Flatterer finding himself thus terribly repuls'd, came out with Tears in his Eyes. But to return to Molinos: Never Wo∣man appear'd more transported than the Queen at the taking of this Impo∣stor; she spoke all that Choler could in∣spire with Infernal Fury, and among other things, that she wonder'd that so Learned and Judicious a Congregation as that of the Holy Office, in which the Pope presided, should suffer themselves to be led by the Sophistical Discourse of Cardinal D'Estrees, whom she call'd Rattle-Head twenty times. I shall say
notg of the Applications made Pope to save Molinos, to which he but too much inclination; but that which is of most concern is, that this Impostor should give her a Confessor to cheat her, (a Calabrian by Nation) and made her dismiss a Reverend Capuchin Father, a Man of an Holy Life, and a better Director than himself, under pretence that he was not learned enough, because he would innovate nothing in Religion. As long as the Process of Molinos la∣sted, she sent to him Fruits and Comfi∣tures, and obstinately continued so to do for two or three Months after his Condemnation, against the Advice of Azzolini himself. Cardinal D'Estrees only laugh'd at these Transports, and upon all occasi∣ons serv'd this Princess afterward with the best Grace in the World: But there was always a Coldness between the Car∣dinal and Azzolini, and yet they saw one another in Chappels, Consistories, Congregations, and other Functions of the Court of Rome, where they could not avoid speaking without Scandal, but they were very reserv'd, and had no Confidence one in another. The Queen
would have had them have gone to it briskly, but they were too wise to make a Noise, which made the Queen say aloud one day, when she saw Azzolini discoursing with D'Estrees, in the Pre∣sence of many other Cardinals, at the Theatre of the Tour de None. Politica delli miei coglioni mar chiginacccio. It is time to finish this History by the Death of Queen Christina, but it is so interwoven with the Adventures of Ge∣orgina, or Signora Angelica, that we can∣not describe the one without making mention of the other. For though this Charming Virgin was the innocent cause of her Death, it had been better she had never entred into the Queen's Ser∣vice, for this Princess perhaps might have been yet Alive, had she not died of spite that she could not revenge her self of an Outrage done in her Family, to Signora Angelica. It must be acknow∣ledg'd that Beauty is a dangerous thing in a young Virgin, but above all when she has other Talents, which inflame no less, seeing the Palace of a great Queen was not able to protect her from the Ambushes laid for this fair Singer, by which she became a Prey to a Wretch,
after she had triumph'd over the Pur∣suit of the greatest Lords in Rome. Angelica was a Virgin, incomparable both for Beauty and Wit; her Stature was something above the ordinary size, well taken and slender; her Visage a perfect Oval, her Eyes Sparkling, her Hair of a bright Flaxen colour, but in∣clining to White, an Aquiline Nose, white Teeth, vermilion Lips, and her Neck excellently Shap'd; Her Wit was full and exact, her Conception easie, of a complaisant Humour, and such an a∣greement in her whole Person as made her Beloved by great and small, for it may be said, that from the Scepter to the Spade, all Estates and Conditions of Men have done Homage to her Merit. In fine to make a just Portraiture of her, one must take a Muse for a Model, for to all her Perfections, she would sing so rarely, that it would Ravish all that heard her, and touch'd Instruments to a Miracle. Her putative Father was Comptroller of the Mount of Piety and because he was call'd Georgino, she acquir'd the Name of Georgina. Her Mother who was very Intriguing, some time before her Marriage, had a Knight of the Order of Melchisadec. And ill
Tongues, who are never idle, would let themselves loose against this excellent Virgin, as if she had a fault in her Birth, and that the Religious would have her, because Ecclesiasticks have there some∣times a Commerce of Gallantry, as if they were not like other Men. Love is the most Violent of all the Passions, and there are none but are sensible of its Effects. A peaceable and sedentary Life, is more susceptible of it than any other, and to sum up the Account, a Man with a long Gown, both in Italy and Spain, though he be oblig'd to live in Gaelibate, does not loose his Reputation among Men, because he has had an Amorous Intrigue. I know, that before God it is a Sin without Excuse: But however it be, when the Fact is done, the Laws oblige Priests who have Children, to breed them up well, and to furnish Ne∣cessaries for their Subsistence and Edu∣cation. Monsieur Zchary perform'd this to excess, in favour of Georgina; For never any Father took greater care in the Breeding and Instruction of a Child, than he of her, without sparing of Expences; so well did he love her, and with rea∣son, for as much a Child as she was,
she had so many Agreements, that she Charmed the most Insensible. As she had Naturally a most admirable Voice, and an inclination to Musick, he gave her the best Masters in Rome, to teach her to Sing, and touch all sorts of In∣struments, which she learn'd so easily, that she surpassed all her Masters with∣out taking pains; and to this day she has not any equal at the Lute, The∣orboe, Harpsicord, or Virginals. She had besides the finest Voice in Italy. For though there be excellent Musicians at Rome, who are most of them Castrated to preserve their Voices, there was found in hers a certain Harmony with such force and sweetness, as there was no∣thing like it. These rare Qualities made her sought after by the greatest Princes in Europe, and it was Force only that withheld her from going to the Empe∣ror's Court, or that of France, where she was much desired. But those who gave Life to her, could never resolve to loose her out of Sight, through the Affection they bore her, judging besides that she would not fail to make her For∣tune in her own Country by her Merit, without exposing her to the danger of Travel. Signora Caterina, her Mother,
who had other Children to provide for, was very fond of Angelica's Merit, who had a great mind to Travel, and above all, into France, Because the Modes and Gallantries of that Court, run strongly in her Mind; but not being Mistress of her own Will, she had no other part to take, but that of Obedience. Her Beau∣ty and her Talents encreas'd with her Age, and at the same time, the num∣ber of her Admirers augmented every day. The first who enterpriz'd the Conquest of her Heart, were young Men of a suitable Condition to her own. For she always pass'd for the Daughter of a little Commissioner of the Mount of Pie∣ty, of a very indifferent Fortune, but yet one who was a civil Person, and maintain'd his Family Honestly npon the Revenue of his Employ, and some As∣sistances which Monseignieur Zachary furnish'd them with Privately upon the account of Angelica. Georgino had not Married the Mother of Angelica, but in view of a better Dowry than she would have had without her Gallan∣tries with the Prelate, and in hope of being assisted for their Care in the Edu∣cation of his Daughter. And that as he was none of those Commodious Hus∣bands
which suffer their Wives to live in Disorder, provided it bring Water to the Mill; so on the other hand, he was not so scrupulous about the Gallantries his Wife had done before Marriage. He liv'd very Privately, according to the Custom and Genius of the Italians, keep∣ing almost no Company, and therefore liv'd in a Quarter that was distant from Noise, and Great People, in which also good Husbandry might have a share, as well as the love of Ease. For in the Quarter of Trastevera, Houses are very Cheap, though Spacious enough, and he had there the convenience of a Foun∣tain and a Garden, being near the Mo∣nastery of St. Cecilia, over against the Working-Shop of the French Accademy. Every body knows, that the French King maintains an Academy in Rome, for Twelve French Youths, who there learn fine Arts, with intention to be∣come capable of the better Service of their Country, when they come home. This Academy is compos'd of six Pain∣ters, four Gravers, and two Architects, whose Business it is to Copy and imitate the finest Paintings and Sculptures in Rome, and to Measure the finest Palaces and other Edifices, both Ancient and
Modern. Monsieur Errard, Director of the Accademy, liv'd with his Pupils, in the old Palace, near St. Andre de la Val∣le; but because he had not room enough for Marble and other Materials for Sculpture; he had a Working-Shop, as I said before in Trastevera, near St. Cecilia, where the Gravers of the Acca∣demy Wrought, and Din'd every day for their greater Convenience. A young French Graver called Theodon, who was already very skilful in his Art, and be∣sides a well Shap'd Person, having upon occasion seen Angelica at a Window, and and as she went to Church, became Charm'd with her Merit, and endea∣vour'd to make her understand it by Signs. His Perseverance touch'd her at last, and she permitted him to see her sometimes, which pleas'd him extream∣ly; but he was so often cross'd by other Pretenders, that it gave him mortal Alarms, fearing one or other of them would ravish away his Mistress's Heart. The Fame of Angelica encreas'd daily, as well as her Voice and Beauty. Her Mother often brought her among the Religious and Ladies of the first Quality, where she Charm'd them all by her Singing, and her address in tou∣ing
of Instruments. This encreas'd the multitude of her Lovers, among which were many Persons of high Birth; this oblig'd her Mother to keep her shut up closer than usual, and to watch her Conduct more narrowly. This pro∣ceeding did nothing but augment the crowd of her Adorers, and their Quar∣ter was more frequented than ever, to have the pleasure of seeing her at her Window, which she kept open more than ordinary, to cross the Jealousie of her Mother, and above all, in Carnival time, where the finest Masquerades would forsake their Course to come and walk up and down about her House. Her Mother being Cunning and Intriguing, made a great advantage of the Presents made her, in giving some hopes to all People, without engaging her self too much, and obtain'd what Favours she pleas'd from the Great ones, who Sigh'd and Languish'd for her Daughter. Prince Columbiere propos'd to Marry her to one of his Gentlemen, to get her into his House. But her Mother discovering the Intrigue, would hear of it by no means, and besides, expected a more considera∣ble Match for her Daughter Angelica, whose proper Merit, was her Misfor∣tune,
desir'd to match with one of an equal Condition with her self, out of fear that if she Married above her self, her Husband should come to Despise her, if a fit of Sickness, or any other Acci∣dent, should cause her to loose her Beau∣ty, or her Voice. Among all that sought after her, none pleas'd her so well as Theodon the Graver. He was a well shap'd Person, and they had a Sympany in their Humours. He excell'd in his Art, and did the Office of Director of the Accademy, instead of Monsieur Errard, whose decrepid Age, had made him unfit for Business. Catherine, who was more ambitious than her Daughter, would hear nothing of it; and in the mean time making advantage of the Gifts, which the greatest Lords in Rome Pre∣sented her, to obtain the promise of hearing Angelica Sing, though they did not end their Pretensions there. But she not seeming to penetrate their Thoughts, and agreeing to their De∣mands, was contented to keep her Daughter in her Sight, fearing other∣wise there might happen some Accident which might loose her Reputation and ruine her Fortune. Angelica, who did not like this Management, and could not
find poor Theodon in all the Crowd, be∣came so Melancholy that she fell Sick, and was in danger of Death. Her Parents were much Alarmed, and the Prelate told her Mother, that if she did not drive away this Multitude that Besieg'd his Daughter, he would take her out of her Hands, and put her into a Convent. As he was a severe Man and had Autho∣rity, they must obey him, and so they sent her into the Country, where the Air quickly re-establish'd her Health. Being return'd to Rome, some time af∣terwards, she was invisible to all the World, except Theodon, who saw her at a Window, and spoke to her by Signs: Signora Caterina sent Angelica to the first Mass upon Sundays and Holy∣days, and made her keep within all the rest of the Day. But this constraint being very uneasie to Theodon, he spoke to a Friend of his who was the Father of Inventions, and he promis'd him to find out some way or other, to have a sight of his Beloved. He search'd round about the House, and sound a small House just by it, which had a Court yard well stor'd with Fowls; he got acquainted with the good Wo∣man that kept them, and under the pre∣tence
of buying of Eggs, and a Present, obtain'd Permission to come into the Court-yard every Night with his Friend Theodon, because a back Window of Angelica's Chamber look'd into it. They advertis'd the Fair one of this Discovery, and she promis'd at a cer∣tain Signal to appear at that Window; but she was so high they could not hear her, unless she spoke aloud, which she durst not do, for fear of a Discovery: Then they tied Billets deux to the end of a Packthread, and she drew them up, and some time after sent back an Answer the same way. Her Billets were so Spiritual and Tender, that one might see, that her Heart and Love dictated them; but besides these, she had some∣thing in store for the happy Theodon, that was more Charming. Whereas in Rome other Lovers Se∣renade their Mistresses at their Win∣dows in the Night, and endeavour to express their Torments in tender and passionate Airs; here on the contrary, this Charming Virgin would Sing to her Harpsical, pieces of an Opera, which a∣greed so well to the Subject of Love, that one would think they were made on purpose. You may believe that Theo∣don
and his Friend did not fail to be at the Rendezvouse, where they always found new Pleasures, and they carried also little Collations, and served her al∣ways with the best things, which they put into a little Basket, and the Lovely Prisoner drew it to her self, and so par∣ticipated of the Feast, telling them that she eat these Fruits and other Trifles with more appetite than a Hawker, or those Solider Viands her Mother was so often Regal'd with; for she could not hinder her self from receiving part of that which the most illustrious of her Pursuers, would privately bring into their House. There was two among the rest who were very considerable, both in their Quality being Princes, and by their Li∣berality. Catherine manag'd them both, and assigned them different Hours, for fear they should meet one another; but but this Precaution was all to no pur∣pose, for their Grisons discover'd them, and they were much amaz'd to meet one another in the same Chace, for they were both Comrades, and Allies. Things being so, they were forc'd to accommodate themselves to the Season, and each endeavour'd to prefer himself
to his Mistresses Favour, living as yet in a good Understanding with one ano∣ther; but the Coldness and Indiffe∣rence of Angelica towards them, made each of them believe his Comrade hap∣py to his prejudice. They fell out up∣on this Imagination, and would have made a noise, if they had not been hin∣dred. For one who was call'd the Abbot of St. Marc, was Violent, Imperious, and of an high Hand; but the other, who is at present Lord de la Mouche Eri∣three, was more Tractable. Angelica hated them equally, and being a Person no way suitable to either of them, sigh'd only for her dear Theodon. The frequent Importunities of these two great Lords, forc'd Angelica to have recourse to her Father, (for so they call'd Monseigneur Zachary) ex∣aggerating the Tyrannies of her Mo∣ther. This Prelate to encourage his Daughter, to enter into a Convent, gave her a Dowry of eight thousand Crowns, which were put into the Bank of the Mount of Piety in a borrowed Name. Angelica not being able to do any bet∣ter, dispos'd her self to enter into a Nunnery, comforting her self with this, That she should however be near her
Lover, and that she might see him in his Working-Shop, by the Ballistrades of the Clock, which at the same time de∣notes her Innocence. While these things were a doing, the Prelate dies, leaving this fine and deso∣late Daughter to the Discretion of her Mother, who dissuaded her from going into a Convent for the Interests of her Family, and the poor Daughter was forc'd to accommodate her self to her Humour; she must then take up again the Trade of Singing as before. A Cardinal of the first Rank in the Sacred Colledge, and perhaps one of the handsomest, who had sometime be∣fore made an Ambassadress of France, in Love with him, hearing so many fine Things spoken of Angelica, would see whether they were true: His Authority and Liberality found every where a free Access; and he was Charm'd with the Voice and Manners of Angelica, but he went so often, that the noise came as far as the Ears of Pope Innocent XI. As he was a very severe and angry Pope, and would let no Body be at quiet, he took a resolution to cause Angelica to be taken up and put into a Convent, as Scandalous, and of ill Reputation. So
true is it, that in his Time, the Innocent suffer'd as well as the Guilty; for her Mother was more to blame than she, seeing she receiv'd no visit but out of Obedience. At that time, the Duke of Mantua was at Rome, and they boasted to him of Angelica, as one of the Singularities, or finest thing that was to be seen in Rome. The Marquiss Del Monte brought her to his Highness, as we have said before; and he found her so well to answer her Character, that he made her very considerable Offers to come to his Court. The great Liberalities he be∣stow'd upon her Mother, engag'd her to promise a consent to his Will; but An∣gelica, who saw no Security for her self, when she was in the hands of so puissant a Prince, was not able to resolve what to do. She had notice given her quick∣ly after, to have a care of her self, be∣cause the Pope was going to take her up and put her in a Convent, and this put her into a terrible Fright; for tho' she had no repugnance to enter into Re∣ligion, she could not suffer her self to be confin'd in a Monastery, ordain'd on∣ly for Women of ill Reputation. There
was then no remedy, but in all the haste imaginable, to implore the Protection of Queen Christina. She did it, and this Generous Princess, who had a great va∣lue for her, because she had heard her Sing often, not only permitted her a Refuge in her Quarter, but took her into her Service, with a Sister of hers named Barbara, who was also a most Beautiful Virgin, but had not so great a faculty of Singing. Theodon was over joy'd that his Mi∣stress had escap'd so many and powerful Rivals, and it gave him courage to con∣tinue his Pursuit. To this end, he ad∣dress'd himself to one of the Queen's Valet de Chambres, who was his Friend, to get a sight of her, and easily obtain'd his Request. But as Lovers are never con∣tented, Theodon importun'd him so much, that he promis'd him, that he should come to the Speech of her. One day the Queen kept an Academy of Musick in her Garden, and there was a great many Ladies, Knights and Gen∣tlemen, under the shady Grove, where was a fine breeze of Air: Angelica, when she had sung her Roll, slipt down an Alley with her Sister, and entred into a
little Banquetting-House, where Theo∣don had made a magnificent Collation to present her with in his Friend's Compa∣ny, of the best Wines that were to be had. It was about the time that the Song of Flon, Flon, was in request; and the Trumpets of the Marquiss de Lavardin, being posted upon a little Hill in the same Garden, sounded the same Tune. The Eccho's repeated the last Words; All the World Sung it, and the Qeeen her self sung Flon, Flon. The Joy was universal, and the Wine made our Lo∣vers become Poets; For after they had drank plentifully, they propos'd to make every one a Couplet to this new Air, and Angelica taking her Guitarre, be∣gan, and did it very well for an Ex∣tempory Effort, and was follow'd by Theodon's Friend. A thousand sits of Laughter accompanied the Musick, in∣somuch, that others of the Queen's Maids walking in the Garden, were drawn thither by the Noise. They presented them Fruits, and they sat down on Angelica's side, and drank their Healths over and over, and the Sport sted till almost Night, when a Footman
came to give her notice, that she must wait upon the Queen, the Company be∣ing now gone. She broke off therefore this sweet Conversation, but with Vio∣lence to her self, and promis'd to see him again as often as she could. But this happy Season did not last long; for a little after the Queen fell Sick, and so all sorts of Divertisements ended. This Sickness was fatal to An∣gelica, for her own Mother deliver'd her up to be Dishonour'd by an infa∣mous wretch in the Queen's Palace. It was to the Abbot Vannini, (whom I have mention'd before) the same that abus'd Signora Giovannini, and was the cause of her Death. This Prelate, who was ambitious to make himself Talk'd of, had gain'd Signora Caterina, with a Pre∣sent of Silver, of above the value of a thousand Crowns; Angelica having all sorts of Liberty of going out with her Mother; was carried to walk a∣mong Women, where she always met the Abbot Vannini, who perpetually courted her, but to no purpose; For she was extreamly angry, that her own Mo∣ther should so often expose her to the Outrages of this rash Man, insomuch,
that she protested, she would no more go out of her Majesty's Palace, whose Sickness encreas'd daily, and at the same time, the Fears of the House. The Abbot, notwithstanding all the Disdain of Angelica, was neither asham'd, nor dejected, but thought to obtain that by Presents and Importunity which he could not by Personal Merit; but he advanc'd nothing at all that way; for all his Presents were rejected, and his Sighs despis'd. At last being provok'd by such a Re∣sistance as he expected not to find, he undertook one of the rashest and most dangerous Actions that could fall into the Imagination, of so contemptible a Person as himself, which was to do Vio∣lence to the Honour of Angelica, even in the Palace of the Queen her self. To this end and purpose he gain'd a Neapo∣litan, who was one of the Queens Valet de Chambres, with his Brother an Anspas∣sade, and they brought him privately into Angelica's Chamber, with the con∣sent of her Mother. Angelica was then with the Queen, scarcely ever forsaking her, because her Sickness was very dan∣gerous; But coming into her Chamber
by chance to do something, she was ex∣treamly surpriz'd to find a great Colla∣tion, and the Abbot Vannini, who invi∣ted her to eat, with her Mother, and those honest People, that were of the Plot. But she, seeing her self Betray'd by her Mother, was perfectly Astonish'd, and set up a great Cry. The Abbot threw himself upon his Knees, and en∣deavour'd to assure her, by good Words, but in the mean time they all slipt out of the Chamber, and left them alone, and one may easily imagin that the Abbot be∣ing Master, did not loose time. The Chamber was so high that Angelica's Cries could not be hear'd; but there was other Signs of the resistance of this Gene∣rous young Woman, for the Table and Chairs were all overturn'd, and at last so great a noise was made, her (Cham∣ber being just over the Queen's) that her Majesty complain'd they had lost their Respect. One of the Gentlemen run up and saw this fine Farce, and cry'd out for help to some Auspessades and Foot men, who were upon the Guard. Her Friend The∣odon ran up at the Noise, and she Em∣bracing him, begg'd that he would have
Compassion of her; He presently took him by the Throat, and would have Strangl'd him, if he had not been forced out of his hands. They then sent to seek out Monsieur Pompey Azzolini, the Cardi∣nal's Nephew, to know what they must do with this impudent Person. His first thought was, that he should be hewed in Pieces; and in so doing, he had followed the Queen's Genius, and highly reveng'd the Injury done to her Majesty. But considering that the Queen was Sick and the Abbot well Al∣lied, he thought it convenient, (for fear of making himself Enemies) to suf∣fer him to Escape. He sav'd himself at the Cardinal D'Estes, and the two Nea∣politans Fled, and were never heard of since. They told the Queen, that the noise came from Cats, who had overturn'd the Utensils of the Chamber, and caus'd this Alarm. Poor Angelica, after so bloody an Af∣front, abandon'd her self to Despair, and was a long time in a Swoon, and amaz'd, not knowing what to do. Her Sister coming up at the Noise, put her to bed, for the Traytress her Mother.
was as invisible as the rest, and Angelica was seiz'd with a Fever, and sick of Grief for a long time? In the mean time, the Queen began to be better, and all People rejoyc'd for her Recovery. For she was well Belov'd in Rome, because she gave much in Cha∣rity towards the Subsistance of the Poor, and Maintain'd a great many Peo∣ple. The Nation of the Marca d' Ancona, made a fine Feast at the Church of St. Saviour du Lauier, in honour of the Queen, and fine Illuminations in the Street of Coronari, which is near it, with Bonfires and other Rejoicings of Drums and Trumpets. Count Alibert also made a very Mag∣nificent Feast at Jesus, where a Votive Mass of the Blessed Virgin, was Sung in a Thanksgiving for the Queen's Health, and he had the most excellent Musicians in Rome, and the Church was hang'd with the richest Tapistry her Majesty had, and all People crowded into testifies their joy. But at last she perceiv'd that Angelica fail'd in her Duty, and asked for her very often, but they always told her she was Sick.
Cardinal Azzolini had forbidden any body to speak of this Scandal which had happened in the Queen's Palace. But a certain Woman who help'd Bandiere in his Operations of Chymistry, whom they call'd Sybil, for the reasons we shall afterwards mention, told the Queen ei∣ther by Accident, or out of Malice, that Angelica was Well. The Queen sent presently to call her in all haste, and the poor Girl being frighted, because she was forc'd to appear before her, whom she believ'd to be inform'd of all the Affair, cast her self at her Feet, pouring out abundance of Tears, and could not speak for Grief. The Queen press'd her to tell the reason of her Tears, and she answer'd, that her Misfortune was but too publick. Her Majesty order'd her to Explain her self; but Sobs interrup∣ted her every Moment; and therefore the Queen desir'd Cardinal Azzolini who was then come to her, to inform her of all the Affair Azzolini being troubled at the unseasonableness of the time, pal∣liated the Matter, and told her only what he thought convenient to discover, for fear she should fall into an excessive Passion, which might make her relapse.
But this did not satisfie her, for she saw well enough, that he hid the greatest part of the Circumstances from her, and therefore could not be quiet till she had learn'd the whole Story from her Do∣mesticks, by Questions and Threatning. What he had foreseen, fell out, for the Queen presently fell into an horrible Passion against this infamous Abbot, and against all those that suffer'd him to Escape. After she had comforted Ange∣lica, about the Disgrace she was no way guilty of, sent for Captain Merula her Bravo, and commanded him to bring her the Head of the Abbot Vannini, and to observe him so narrowly, that he did not Escape; and because she would be sure of her Blow, she order'd what Men and Money he had need of, pro∣mising him a good Reward and prote∣ction against all his Enemies. It is not known whether this Assassin by Profession, did himself discover her Orders, or that it came to be known some other way; But Vannini fled from Rome, to Subjacco an Abbey of Cardinal Charles Barberini in one of his Eminence's Coaches, but absconded often by the way, and at last when he came there,
look'd more like Dead, than Alive, so true it is, that Vice is its own Execu∣tioner. He pass'd from thence into A∣bruzzo, a Province of the Realm of Na∣ples, where he remain'd till the Queen's Death. In the mean time, Merula sought him every where, or pretended so to do; for 'tis believ'd, that the two Cardi∣nals who were the Abbot's Protectors, presented him with a thousand Crowns, to hold his Hand. Besides that, he might fear their resentment if the Queen should Die quickly, of which there was great likelyhood. The Queen being impati∣ent, often demanded from Merula the effects of his Promises. But one day he own'd, without thinking on't, that the Criminal had scap'd out of his Hands, and had refug'd himself within the Realm of Naples. At these words, the Queen was in such a Rage, that she Scratch'd him in the Face, and gave him twenty blows with her Fist, reproach∣ing him with Perfidiousness, and had certainly Strangled him, if she had not wanted Strength. But she kill'd her self in the Effort which she made; for this Agitation brought her Feaver on her again, and sent her into her Grave
in a little time, to the great damage of the Domesticks, for whom she had no time to provide. No body got more by her Death than Angelica; For if the Queen had liv'd a a little longer, she had been confin'd in a Convent all her Life, as Scandalous, though she had more misfortune, than fault in her Conduct. For the Queen had promis'd the Pope (who was irri∣tated by the frequent Stories brought him concerning her) that she would put her among the Religious of St. Ruffinus in Trastevera. The best way Angelica could take in this unhappy Conjuncture, was to put her self under the Protection of the Duke of Medina Celi, Ambassador of Spain; And he came to take her at the Queen's Palace Gate, just as she was Ex∣piring, before they had forc'd her into a Convent. He plac'd her under the Dutchess his Lady, where she lives yet at this present time, in Quality of her first Lady of Honour, being equally dear both to the Husband and the Wife, who know very well, by long Expe∣rience, that she has given no occasion for those false Reports, which have al∣most
tarnish'd her Reputation; and that her Merit only has been the cause of all her Persecutions. There run a Report, that Monsieur the Ambassador, had Mar∣ried her to a Spanish Gentleman in his Service; but it is not true, for she is not yet engag'd in that Sacrament, no more than her Sister Barbara, who is also Maid of Honour to Madam the Ambassadress of Spain. The Sieur Theodon being convinc'd, that Angelica was not ordain'd for him, has Married another, who has neither the Gifts nor Reputation of Angelica, yet notwithstanding is not inferior to her in Wisdom. She brought him a con∣siderable Portion, and he lives with her like an honest Man, and has obtain'd by Merit, to be Director of the Works of Architecture, and Painting of the Basi∣lique of St. Peter at the Vatican, which is very Gainful. We must not forget, before we finish this History, that the Duke of Mantua made another Voyage to Rome incognito, towards the end of the Queen's last Sickness, (and as the common Vogue goes) to carry away Angelica, with her Mother's Consent; but being prevented
by the Spanish Ambassador, he was so an∣gry, that he had been twice cheated by that Interested Woman, that he slit both her Husband's, and afterwards her Son's Nose, who is a Glasier, and keeps a Shop in the Bouchi. They are so dis∣figured, that they will carry the Marks, as long as they live; which will testifie to all the World, that Georgina having Perfections enough to Charm many Princes, and great Lords, had not yet the happiness to please them all. The Queen had some Pre-sentiments of her Death, which made her appre∣hensive, she should not live long. Six Months before her Sickness, or there∣about, she made her a Habit of Sattin, white Ground, stitch'd with Flowers, and other works of Gold, garnish'd with Lace, and Buttons set in Gold, and Fringe of the same below. This Ha∣bit was Invented by her self, and serv'd for a Manteau and Body together. It was close before, without a Tail, and round at the bottom, and the Queen tried it on upon Christmas Eve, and took many turns in her Closet, without speaking a Word: She look'd upon her self often, both before and behind, in a couple of
Looking-glasses, which were set oppo∣site one to another, and then walked again, in profound Silence. Her Tay∣lor, who thought he had done better than ordinary, rejoic'd within himself; And there was none but him, the Mar∣quiss Caponi, and two Maids there, when Sybil entred. This Sybil was a Woman well skill'd in Chymical Operations, and had served the Queen for some time. Cardinal Azzolini brought her in to counter-check Bandiere. Her Name was Julia, and she was Daughter to an Apo∣thecary, a good Simpler, who taught her his Trade, which she improv'd, by the Invention of a certain number of fine Secrets. She had something Marvelous in her Person, and her Birth was Ex∣traordinary. For when her Mother Lay in of her, which was upon the 3d. of No∣vember, 1665, she was seven Hours in Travel, with great Pains, and was not Deliver'd, but by an horrible Clap of Thunder: The Lightning that accom∣panied it, made her Chamber seem all on Fire; and the Fright made such an Impression upon her, that it threw out the Child.
Her Sex was doubtful at first, and though time made it appear she was a Girl, yet she always had the inclinati∣ons of Men, flying Girls Company, and seeking after Boys; She would throw Stones as they did, and fight with her Fists, and shewed a Masculine Spirit in all things. She learn'd Latin, and made a a great Progress not only in Pharmacy, but Chymistry; besides this, she touch'd Instruments well. But she had yet a Quality beyond these, which pleas'd the Queen better than all, which was that of the foretelling of things to come, and for this reason, the Queen gave her the name of Sybil. I have been inform'd, she had once an Husband a Distiller, but he died after he had been Married a∣bout six Months. The Queen, who was foolish in the belief of all vain and curious Sciences, as Chymistry, Astrology, the Divining-Rod, and loved those who pretended to possess them believ'd all that Astrologers said, and particularly the Abbot Massoni, who us'd to flatter her with the promise of living Fourscore Years, and by these deceitful hopes, he drew a good deal of Money from this credulous Princess, and afterwards Laugh'd at her.
I could tell you a great many Stories of this nature, if this Book were not too big already. Sybil coming to congratulate the Queen upon her fine Garment, exagge∣rated the fineness of the Stuff, its Beau∣ty and Fashion, which very well suited her Majesty's Person. Well, Sybil, (says the Queen) does this Habit please you? Yes, Madam, (repled she) it is per∣fectly well made. Upon this, the Marquiss Caponi took up the Discourse, and said, you are come very luckily, for we are here act∣ing the Comedy of the Mutes. It is true, says the Queen, that no body has said any thing, nor I my self, but this Habit which you see, makes me think of some things of great Con∣sequence, and I believe it will serve me in a little time, in one of the greatest Functions that can be; but Sybil, thou art not able to Divine what Function this should be. Pardon me, Madam, (answer'd she) looking attentively on the Queen, your Majesty thinks this Habit will serve; Shall I speak it, Madam?
Yes, saith the Queen. The thought afflicts me, saith Sybil, Your Majesty thinks, you shall be Bu∣ried in this Habit in a little time. And I, saith the Marquiss, interrup∣ting hastily, believe the Queen thinks it will serve her to wish the Pope an happy New Year in. Sybil has spoke the Truth, replied the Queen, that was it I thought on, but we must put all into the Hand of God, for we are all Mortal, and I as well as another. The Taylor, to divert this sorrow∣ful Discourse, addressing himself to the Queen, said, Will your Majesty have a Cover made for this Habit? Why a Cover, great Beast, says the Queen? To keep it twenty Years, and above, saith the Taylor; For if it be design'd for the use your Majesty speaks, you must take care the Worms do not eat it. She fell a Laughing, and was well pleas'd with the Repartee. After some Discourse of this nature, they separa∣ted, and the Marquiss grumbled at Sy∣bil, for her ill Augury.
You mistake, quoth Sybil, I have not foretold the Queen's Death, I only found out her Thought. This odd Apprehension did so possess the Queen's Mind, that the Taylor Con∣gratulating her upon the recovery of her Health, as others did, said, Madam, the Habit is the Cover, and may, if it please God, be so a long time. God grant it, says the Queen, but I am of Opinion it will serve me ere long for the use I believe 'tis design'd. This thought made too strong an Im∣pression upon her Spirits, to believe the Sybil Divin'd it meerly by chance. It is strange, says the Marquiss Capo∣ni, your Majesty should think so much upon the words of a Fool; And will your Majesty be always abus'd? Cardinal Azzolini coming in, he de∣sir'd him to assist, to take off the ill Im∣pressions the Queen had receiv'd; which he endeavouring to do, the Queen seem'd to believe, only for this reason, that he might no farther trouble her Head a∣bout it. The Cardinal meeting the Sybil after∣wards, gave her a smart Reprimand, for entertaining the Queen with Melancho∣ly
Visions. But she excus'd her self, That she had done nothing with an ill intent; That she wish'd not the Queen's Death, for her own sake; for, said she, there will no body loose more than my self, for I foresee the Crosses and Per∣secutions that will happen to me. God preserve us, for your Eminence will not be long after the Queen, when God shall call her. Azzolini, who heard the first words of the Sybil, without Emotion, was troubled at the last, and turn'd his Back all in Confusion. She repented that she had said so much, for her Predictions were but too true, whether it were that she was ef∣fectually Inspir'd from Heaven, or Chance and Conjecture, that made her to advance things, I know not, but the Event confirm'd them. She had also told the Queen, that the Pope would die the same Year, in the Canicular days, and he Deceas'd the 13th of August next following. He was inform'd of these Predictions of the Sybil, and was so displeas'd, that as soon as ever the Queen's Eyes were clos'd, he caus'd her to be taken up,
and Imprisoned in the Castle of St. An∣gelo, where she remain'd till her dying-day. She said something also of Alexander VIII. but he changed her Prison into a Conservatory, where she consum'd and pin'd away for Grief. At a time when the Queen did not think of Death, she had a mind to Bespeak a magnificent Tomb. She sent for for her Graver, called Francis Marie Anco∣nitano, and order'd divers Models, with∣out telling him of any Place where it should be set up. The Graver being busie, and not having his Measures rea∣dy to extend his Figures and Bas Reliefs there, the Queen was forc'd to tell him she would have it made round, like the Pantheon of Agrippa in old time. At the same time she forbad him to speak a Syllable to any Person about it, but a∣bove all, enjoyn'd him, that Cardinal Azzolini should know nothing of it. However, the thing was so long in Agi∣tation, that Cardinal Azzolini came to know of it, and was affrighted at the vast Expence of bringing it to Perfe∣ction, but however durst say nothing of it to the Queen.
This had pleasant Consequences, for when the Intrigue came to be known, the Graver was turn'd off, though he re∣presented to her Majesty, that he could not make his Models with so much cau∣tion, but that Cardinal Azzolini might get an inkling of it. The Queen having ask'd him, what the Expence of the whole might amount to, he told her ingenuously, that an hun∣dred thousand Crowns would not finish it. You're a Rogue, said she to him, an hundred thousand Crowns, I would spend a Milion upon't. The Cardinal hearing this, fell a Laughing, knowing that all her Estate, did not amount to half a Million. And after all, she was poorly Interr'd in a Cave of the Sacrasty of St. Peter. This shews the Genius of the Queen, who would do every thing extraordi∣nary; and with the Magnificence due to her Character. But finally, it must be said in Praise of this Generous Princess, that she died with an Intrepidity worthy of the Daughter of the Great Gustavus Adol∣phus.
Her Relapse having taken from her all hope of Cure, she very early took care of her Soul; She Confess'd with great Sentiments of Contrition; and receiv'd the Holy Sacrament with pro∣found respect, and unspeakable Com∣fort. Finding her Strength to dimi∣nish, she sent to desire the Pope's Bene∣diction; praying him to forgive all the Differences, that had been between them, which yet had not hinder'd her from being inviolably fixt to the Interests of the Holy See; and that she had always a great respect and esteem for the Person of Innocent 11th. Afterwards, she Sign'd her last Will and Testament, and presented it to Car∣dinal Azzolini, which he told her, was advantagious to her Majesty's Houshold, though he made it only according to his own Interest. Father Sclavata, a famous Discalceat Bohemian Carmelite, exhorted her to prepare for Death; sometimes speak∣ing Latin, and sometimes German, or French. At last the Queen Died, April 19th. 1689, at Six of the Clock in the Morn∣ing; and her Body was carried next
day, towards Night, to the New Church of the Fathers of the Oratory of St. Phi∣lip Neri, being Embalm'd and Cloath'd in the same Habit, which was design'd for her Funeral Solemnity. It was carried in a Coach, accompanied by the Cardinals Chaplains, and the Curate of St. Doro∣thy's Parish. The day following, the Queens Body was expos'd upon a Bed of Parade, with a Royal Crown upon her Head, and a Scepter in her Hand, in the Body of the Church, and round about her 300 Flambeaux of white Wax. The Church was hung with Mourning, with Escut∣cheons of her Majesties Arms, and with Counterfeit Bas-reliefs of Black Marble, which alluded to the Vanity of Life, and certainty of Death. Her Obsequies were very Magnificent, and the whole Colledge of Cardinals assisted, and Azzolini appear'd in deep∣est Mourning, with the greatest Lowli∣ness and Dejection. Towards Night, the Queen's Body was transported upon the same Bed of Parade, with her Face dis∣cover'd, to the Church of St. Peter, at the Vatican, the Con-fraternities of the Regular and Secular Clergy, the Canons
of St. Peter, and her Domesticks in Mourning, going before; The Counts of Warwick, Vasenau, and two other Lords of Note, holding the four Cor∣ners of the Pall. The Pope accompa∣nied the Body, by the Officers of the Papal House, as is done when the Dean of the Cardinals, and the Ambassadors of Crowned Heads die at Rome. She was Inhumed in the Sacristi of St. Peter's, an Honour done to no body but Cardinals, and Arch-priests of St. Peter; for in the Church it self, none are Inter∣red, but Popes only. And 'tis said, that the Pope would have erected a magni∣ficent Tomb for her, if he had liv'd any time longer. Thus did Queen Christina Alexandra of Sueden, testifie all along more Firm∣ness and Grandeur of Soul at her Death, than she had shewed Constancy in her Life: Her Inequalities, Ambition, and vain Occupations, had much diminish'd the Esteem whith the Publick had of her Magnanimity. She always loved Change except in Religion, which when once she had found to be true, she embrac'd it so firmly, that nothing could Sepa∣rate her. In all other things, she shew'd
her self a true Woman, that is to say changeable. She affected to pass for a Maid, and the word Woman of∣fended her horribly. So that for fear of Offending her, you must say for Example, Your Majesty has most excellent Maiden-hair, and not Woman's; and so of the rest. She had Eloquence, Spoke well, and Wrote better, even in many Langua∣ges; but above all in French and Italian. The Learned do yet admire her Letters to the King of Poland, upon the raising the Siege of Vienna, and the Battle of Barcan, to the Chevalier Terlon, upon the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and to Cardinal Azzolini, upon the re∣trenchment of the Pope's Pension, and others. One day hearing of the Death of Ca∣simir King of Poland, in the Abby of St. Germain de Pre, at Paris. She said, I am very glad to hear that he is Dead a∣mong Men, for if he had staid in his own Country, he had died among Beasts. She lov'd neither Bigots in Religion, nor Atheists. She had a true regard to Piety, though in her Youth, the Abbot Bourdelot and other Libertines, shook
her Religion. She participated of the Holy Sacraments, and after she under∣stood the Impostures of Molinos, who would have Seduc'd her, she was the more confirmed in the true Faith. She trok care that her Domesticks should practice all the Duties Religion re∣quires, and go to the Communion in general three times a Year, as the Car∣dinal did. She heard Mass every day, unless some Indisposition hinder'd her; and sometimes she had so tender a sense in Religion, that one could not wish more even in a Capucin. One day look¦ing upon the Picture of the Great Gusta∣vus her Father, she said, Ah poor Gusta∣vus! What great things hast thou done in thy Life! But what hast thou done for thy Soul? I thank God for his favour in ma∣king me to understand the Truth, and cau∣sing me to enter into the good way of Sal∣vation. She said, that of all the Sacraments, she held that of Confession to be the most useful. That in truth the Luthe∣rans did practice it, though not in Form, and that a good Confession was the Bri∣dle of Vice.
One day as she went to an Audience of the Pope, she said to the Women which Dress'd her, Cover my Breasts well, for fear Mingon should be angry. For he stood upon the most minute things, which are so much the more indecent, in that they are not Evils he rebukes. To what purpose should the Wo∣men of the World, wear the Habit of Beguines? Put them under what Habit you will, they will always find some agreement to please the Men. Another time when she went to the Pope, to shew her Obedience, she dress'd her self and all the Ladies of her Court, in a sort of a Robe which they call Innocentian, being long Vests which trail upon the Ground, close before, and strait Sleeves which come as far as the Wrists, and so close at the Neck, you could scarce see her Col∣lar of Pearl. To this fine Habit, she likewise added some few knots of Ribbands. None of her Woman could hardly forbear Laughing. But other Roman Ladies Laugh'd at them outright, and said, The Queen might make as many Apes as she pleas'd, but she should
not make them Monkies, by imitating her Fashion. This Princess hated, or pretended to hate Marriage; insomuch, that at her first coming to Rome, she could not endure any Married People in her Service. When Landini was big with Child, she would not see her, and if she had occasion for her, she would say, Bring the Cow hither, and send her a∣way again as soon as she has done. When she had made the Marriage of Beauregard, she said to the Husband, God send thee the Signs of the Zodiack; and to you Beauregard, (says she to the woman) If you come to shew like a Cow, do not come to see me in that condi∣tion. But she was quite otherwise in re∣gard of the Marquiss Caponi, for she would cause his first Child to be brought to her, Caress it, and some∣times hold it in her Arms; and when the little Child began to go, and came to the Table to Embrace her Feet, she would fill his little Apron with Fruits and Comfitures. Though she was a huge Eater, as the Northern People are, she drank al∣most
no Wine. She lov'd rather Colli∣flowers, or boil'd Chestnuts with her Maids, for which she would slip into their Chambers on purpose, rather than eat the delicate Morsels which were prepar'd for her with royal Mag∣nificence. The Sieur Romulus Spoziola, her Physician, Remonstrating to her, that it was not good for her Health, she call'd him Drunkard and Beast, and said he knew no more than her Cap. Her Taylor trying on a Coat one day when she had been let Blood, prayed her not to force her Arm; but she gave him a Box on the Ear, with the same Hand, which fill'd the poor Advice-monger with Confusion. She was often at Difference with the Ambassador D'Estrees; But as she had no Gall, she was very glad to make Peace with him. One day as he was at the Vineyard of Pamphilio, she coming thither by chance, and perceiving him there, ran to him and made him an hundred Civilities, insomuch that she mounted a little Horse of Monsieur the Ambas∣sador, and made him turn and Prance in his Presence, above half an Hour, with a very good Grace.
Another time as she was driving a Calash in the Alley's of her Garden, she asked one of the Ambassador's Dome∣sticks, that she found there by chance, whether ste did not Drive well? He told her, that there was no body but her self and the King of France that knew how to drive a Coach well. She was stung with this Answer, and run like a Fool up and down the Field: But the Calash Overturn'd, and her Majesty came to the Ground with her Coats upwards, and cried out for Help. And because no Man durst come near her in this condition, she Laugh'd at their foolish Shame, saying, I am not sorry I am seen by this Accident, to the end it may be known that I am nei∣ther Male nor Hermophrodite, as some People in the World have pass'd me for. As the Queen had an infinite deal of Wit, she believ'd therefore that she ought to have a proportionable Pru∣dence and Policy; but she took little care to shew it, and would not take the trouble upon her to be so much upon her Guard, as to make a decent ap∣pearance.
She freely follow'd her own Genius in all things, and car'd not what any body said. She maintain'd all her Life an Emulation and secret Envy against the King and French Nation, though otherwise she infinitely esteem'd that Monarch, and took him for the Model of her Conduct, saying, She would make a little Queen of France in Rome; yet she let slip no opportunity to speak evil of the French Nation, either to lessen their Advantages, or magnifie their Faults. 'Twas in in this mind, that being one Night at a Comedy at the Theatre Tour de None, in Company with the Cardinals Rospigliosi, and Altieri. She said to the first, Is it true then that the Army of Marshal Turenne is entirely Defeated in Germany. I know not Madam, (anwer'd Rospig∣liosi coldly, but we have this Night a new Musician in the Opera will advance the lustre of the Theatre; Tis Fede, who knows so well how to Charm the Ear, that your Majesty will not be uneasie to hear the Singing, as you were Yester-night. This enrag'd the Queen, who turn'd her Back upon him, to
speak to Cardinal Altieri, concerning the Consequences of this pretended Defeat, asking him if General Mont∣cuculi would find resistance, if he Sack'd all, even as far as Paris? He answer'd, That he had never been in War, and that he did not know how the mat∣ter would go. She then spoke to him against Cardinal D'Estrees, with whom he had some Misunderstanding. But as Altieri was a refin'd Polititian, who knew how to hide his Sentiments, for fear of prejudicing his Interests, turn'd off the Discourse with such a presence of Mind, that the Queen could draw no Advantage against D'Estrees, with whom she would fall out, and was Reconciled as often, and had occasion to make use of him at that present. After the Queen's Death, Cardinal Azzolini was very willing to be re∣conciled, and enter into the favour of Cardinal D'Estrees; but he liv'd so lit∣tle a time after, that he had not lei∣sure. However it is certain, it was not long of him, and to prove this, I will insert here a Letter, written to me from Leghorn, from the same Per∣son, who sent me a Relation touching
the Affair of the Quarters. See here the Contents. I should fear the Relation would want something, If I should not inform you of the last Sentiments of Monsieur Cardinal Azzolini, for Monsieur Cardi∣nal E'Estrees. Some time be fore the Death of Queen Christina, Monsieur Cardinal Azzolini sent for me, and said. MY little Compere (for he had done me the Honour to be Godfather to my Child) I would communicate to to you an Affair of greatest Importance. 'Tis believ'd, that I have been an Enemy to the Crown of France. It was never true, for I esteem my King as much as any of his Subjects. I say, my King, for I have always had a strong Af∣fection for this great Monarch. And many of my Letters shew, that this Disgrace has happen'd to me from being too much engag'd in the Queens Interests. And notwithstanding the Differences I have had with Mon∣sieur Cardinal D'Estrees, I am his Servant and Friend. In short, my
Compere, the Queen is Dead, and had made me her Heir, as you know very well. She has left me very pre∣cious things of all sorts, and there is none but my King to whom these things deserve to be Presented. And know that no Interest moves me to do this; I contend only for the Honour, that he would accept these Testimonies of my good Will. But Monsigneur, said to him, If you will permit me to speak my Thoughts to your Eminence; I do not believe the King will accept these things as a pure Gift. All the World knows, (Answer'd he, that the King of France, is the most Generous of all Princes, but we do not act with Kings as we do with Merchants; All that I wish is, that he will do me the Honour to accept them. You are a good Frenchman, and have a love for your Country; I have known you a long time, and I confide in you, because I am perswaded I shall find you Faith∣ful. You know I have opened my Design to Monsieur Alibert, and he would be overjoy'd to have it done
by his Means. But some Reasons oblige me to Prefer you. You have some Acquaintance with Monsieur Cardinal D'Estrees. Endeavour to insinuate to his Eminence, as from your self, that he ought not to let this occasion slip; and that if he will undertake it, he shall be Master of all. I know your Conduct in Af∣fairs, and it will make your For∣tunes, if you bring this about. After so fair an Instruction, I took leave of his Eminence, and the same day, I made it my business to see the Cardinal, under pretence of thanking him for the Protection he had gene∣rously given me, upon the occasion of a Quarrel I had with a Suede, who had spoken ill things of the Queen. The Discourse fell afterwards insensibly up∣on the fine Moveables the Queen had left to Cardinal Azzolini: And I Re∣monstrated to his Eminence, that the Medals and Manuscripts of her Maje∣sty, and above all, the Pictures of Paul Varonese and Cortege, were Originals of an inestimable Value, and fit to be presented to the King.
Monsieur the Cardinal was of the same mind; and I told him in few words the Intentions of Cardinal Az∣zolini, giving him an Account of the Conversation I had with him. His Eminence took it well that I had free∣ly discovered the Truth to him, and order'd me to see the Cardinal often, and to tell him directly, that he him∣self was in the fault, if the Rarities of the Queen's Palace did not come in∣to the King's Hands; and that assured∣ly he would loose nothing by it. Two days after I went to Cardinal Azzolini, and gave him an account of my Negotiation, assuring him, that Cardinal D'Estrees had writ to Court about it. He was then Indispos'd and in Bed, but shew'd a great deal of Joy that I had begun so well, and giving me his Hand, which I respectfully Kissing, he promis'd me he would not be Ungrateful, if the Affair succeeded. I was perfectly overjoy'd and fill'd with the finest Hopes in the World, but they quickly vanish'd, for the Sick∣ness of this poor Lord did so encrease, that there was no speaking with him. However, I did not stir from his Pa∣lace,
and gave an exact account of his Sickness to Cardinal D'Estrees. The same day that Cardinal Azzo∣lini was given over by his Physicians; his Eminence went himself to know the State of his Health, just at Twelve a Clock, and came thither from the Congregation of the holy Office. It was in June, and in the hottest time of the day, which made me think 'twas out of Policy, because he would not be oblig'd to go up. Cardinal Azzolini being advertiz'd, that Monsieur Cardinal D'Estrees scop'd his Coach at the Gate, to Enquire how he did, either Rejoyc'd so much, or so well dissembled it, that his Expres∣sions melted those that heard him. Is it possible, says he, that his Eminence should come to Visit such a poor Sick Person as my self? I shall reckon this day the happiest in all my Life, and I wish its prolongation for no other rea∣son but to embrace so good a Lord. Desire him nevertheless not to incom∣mode himself by coming up, for fear the great Heat should do an injury to his Health, for the preservation of which, I would Sacrifice my own.
Cardinal D'Estrees answer'd this Dis∣course with such Expressions as were yet more Obliging, and said to his Ma∣ster of the Chamber, all that the most tender Friendship conld think of, to perswade a sincere Reconciliation be∣tween two Friends, who had lived some time in a Misintelligence one with another. The Master of the Cham∣ber went many times up and down be∣tween them, each of their Eminencies being desirous to have the last word. If I had not been present at all these Discourses, I should never have be∣liev'd it. And because Dissimulation cannot be carried so far in such a Con∣juncture, I am verily perswaded, that it was Sincere, and that Policy had no hand in it; my self being very much Edified by such a Proceeding. I am, &c.
Who would ever have believ'd that a little Gentleman of Marca d' Ancona should become Heir to the Daughter of the Great Gustavus Adolphus the Terror of Germany: And yet it has happen'd to Pompey Azzolini, Nephew to the Cardinal of that Name, by which he is become Master of that Rich Pos∣session, by the greatest Fortune in the World. If his Uncle had died before the Queen, as he died immediately af∣ter, she would have dispos'd of the Succession after another manner, be∣cause she did not love this Nephew at all. The Cardinal put him into the number of her Majesties Gentlemen, but it was to be a Spy upon her Con∣duct. And one day she gave him ve∣ry ill Language, because he discover'd to his Uncle, that the Queen went out in the Night with the Marquiss Ca∣poni in a Close Coach, to go to a Ball, stopping afterwards at Monsieur Mon∣fronio's, where she spent the Night very Pleasantly. Pompey Azzolini did not quietly enjoy his Inheritance; and the ready Money went for the most part to pay the Charges and Legacies of the Will. The
rest consisted in fine Moveables, which were bought upon Credit, by divers great Lords, who as to all appearance, will not Pay in a long time, because they are above the pursuit of Justice. Pope Alexander VIII. bought the Queen's fine Library, which was so rich in Ma∣nuscripst, for a piece of Bread. Don Livio Odescalchi, Nephew of Innocent XI. had the Cabinet of Medals, of which there was so fine Setts in all sorts of Metals. The Pictures are en∣gag'd here and there; and so the rest: So that there is no great matter remains now to Pompey Azzolini: and seeing he took no Pains to get it, it is not reaso∣nable he should enjoy alone the Spoils of so great a Princess, while her Dome∣sticks, who have Served her so long, remain in Misery. FINIS.
