h2423 19569535 109112
A worthy Speech SPOKEN At the Guild-Hall by the Earle of Holland. With the Resolution of the Earle of Pembroke, Earle of Northumberland, Earle of Bedford, Earle of Holland, Viscount Say and Seyle. Sir Edward Hungerford. And Sir Thomas Barrington. Declared in their severall Speeches at the Guild-Hall, on Munday the 20. day of June, 1642. Also some passages concerning his Maiesties Letter to the Lord Major, touching the carrying in of Plate into Guild-Hall. Together with a Command from the High Court of PARLIAMENT, to the Officers of Jreland. As also the Cruelty used by the Lord Macquere to the Protestants in Jre∣land, one of the Rebels now Prisoner in the Tower. With severall Votes of the Lord Keeper, concerning the lawfulnesse of the Exercise of the MILITIA. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these particu∣lars shall be forthwith Printed. Jo. Browne Cler. Parl. LONDON, Printed by T. Fawcet. Iune, 21. 1642.
ON Munday being the 20. day of Iune, the Earle of Pembrooke, the Earle of Northumberland, the Earle of Holland, the Earle of Bedford, the Lord Sey, Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Edward Hunger∣ford, and divers other members of the House of Commons came to the Guild-hall, where were assembled the Lord Maior and Aldermen, with the Common Councell of the Citie, where being seated in a discreet Order, the Lord of Holland made a worthy Speech, the effect was as followeth. 1. He endeavoured to cleere all doubts that were raised by the Letter sent from his Maiesty to the Lord Maior, withall declaring that their Actions and intentions were imployed to advance his Maiesties Honour. Likewise manifesting the great Love they had received of the Citie, giving them great thanks for the same, animating them on to a continuance and perseverance in the same, decla∣ring how the Malignant Party by their Practises and endeavours strive to destroy and confound the very being of Parliaments, and the Liberty and propriety of the Subiect, telling them that it was their cause which the Parliament maintained, their owne, their Wives, their Childrens Lives lying at Stake, for however faire pretences seeme to cover and colour the designe, these Forraigne preparations and Domesticke Actions can portend nothing lesse then such a fatall Attempt. Severall Speeches were made by the other Members of Par∣liament, tending to the same purpose, which were received with generall applause, and every one departed to his habitation ex∣ceeding well satisfied, and absolutely resolved to hazard both Lives and Fortunes, for the defence of his Maiesty, and the pri∣viledge of Parliament.
Remarkable Passages concerning the Kings Majesties LETTER to the Lord Major of the City of London, touching the carrying in of Plate into Guild-Hall. ON the 18. day of this present June, the Lord Major of this City received a Let∣ter from his Maje∣stie, wherein he was commanded to stop the bringing of Plate into Guild-Hall, which being received by the said Lord Major, hee with all speed, was intended to publish such his Maie∣sties Commands, neverthelesse he thought it convenient to send for the Aldermen of
the City requiring their advice, who coun∣celled him first to acquaint the House and to show the said Letter, which councell was approved of and the Letter presented to the Parliament, who gave Order that a generall Councell should bee held that night at Guild-Hall, and that a Committee of Lords and Commons should be there to consult and determine what were most secure, and fit to be done, neverthelesse the manifold distractions and urgent occasi∣ons of greater importance tooke up so much time, that they were inforc't to put it off till a further time for a considerati∣on thereof. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious consideration the deplorable estate of Ire∣land, have by an Order from both houses of Parliament, appointed that on the two and twentieth day of this instant: June, all the Commanders should meet at St. Lawrence Church at nine of the clocke in the morning, where after a Sermon, they
are to repayre to Guild-hall, there to take the Protestation, and to enter into Pay. Likewise an information was given concerning the Lord Paget's Iourney to∣wards the King, with the Coppie of a Letter sent from him, wherein was decla∣red the reasons of his departure, which Letter being read, it was Ordered that enquiry should be made for the Printer, and that the said printed papers should be burnt. This day also a true intelligence was given, of certaine Jrish Rebels, namely the Lord Maguieres, which in the begin∣ing of this Rebellion kept Seven-score Protestants two dayes in a Church, and afterward whipt them into a River, and drowned Men, Women and Children, in a most inhumane manner, with many more cruelties of the same nature, being sent for by the Parliament, was brought to London, and now lyes in the Tower with his Comrades, waiting till Gre∣gory shall play the Midwife, and deliver them up to the gallowes.
Likewise Letters were read in the house from Ireland, declaring that the Lord Conway, with the assistance of the Scots Forces, had obtained a great victory against the Rebels, which good successe did much affect the house, many other matters of great importance tooke up the time, so that the members of the high Court of of Parliament could hardly spare so much time, as to meet at the Guild-hall, to dis∣cusse of the Letter sent from his Maiesty to the Lord Maior of this Citie. Neverthelesse the said Letter doth no way deterre the said Citizens from bring∣ing in their Plate, and Moneys, for dayly and hourely People of all degrees, carry in what they are able to spare, with great willingnesse, to the great comfort of the Parliament, and all wellwishers to the peace of Church, and Kingdome.
1. Martii, 1642. Lord Keeper present. Both Houses Petition the King, wherein is this Clause. viz. WHerefore they are inforced, in all humility, to protest, that if your Majesty shall persist in that deniall, the dangers and distempers of the Kingdome are such, as will endure no delay; But unlesse you shall be graciously pleased to assure them by these Messengers, that you will speedi∣ly apply your Royall Assent to the satis∣faction of their former desires, they shall be inforced for the safety of your Maiesty and Your Kingdomes, to dispose of the Militia, by the Authority of both Houses, in such manner as hath beene propoun∣ded to your Majesty, and they resolve to to doe it accordingly. 15. Martii, 1642. The Lord Keeper present▪ and Voted, and Argued for this gollowing Vote, viz. That in case of extreame danger, and of his Maiesties refusall, the Ordinance
agreed on by both Houses, doth obliege the People, and ought to be obeyed by the Fundamentall Lawes of this Kingdom. Thirdly, he named his Deputy Liev∣tenants, and sent Lievtenants names to the House of Commons, and often asked the Clerke of the Peers House for his Depu∣tations, and commanded him to deliver them to one of his Servants; which he accordingly did in his presence. 25. Martii, 1642. Lord Keeper present. Fourthly, he agreed to the severall forms of Deputations for the Militia. Mereurii, 15. 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these particulars shall be forthwith Printed and published. Jo. Browne, Cleric. Parl.
