H3495A 10784538 45843
The humble Petition of the COMMONS of KENT, Agreed upon at their Generall Assizes. Presented to His MAJESTIE August the first, 1642. With certain Instructions from the County of Kent, to Mr Augustine Skinner, whereby the Desires of the said County may be presented by him, to the Honourable House of COMMONS. With His MAJESTIES Answer to the aforesaid Petition. At the Court at YORK, August 4. 1642. Printed by his Majesties speciall command, At CAMBRIDGE, By ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the famous Universitie. 1642.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
¶ To the Kings most Excellent MAjESTIE: The Humble Petition of the Commons of KENT, agreed upon at their Generall Assizes. Most gracious Sovereigne; WE do, with all thankfulnesse, acknow∣ledge Your great Grace and favour to∣wards us, and the whole Kingdome; In passing many good Laws for the benefit of Your Subjects; In promising to ease us of all our grievances; And graciously inviting Us by Your Letter directed to the Judge of Our Assize, full of Love and Care for Your Peoples good, to petition for redresse of them, promising a gracious Answer: And we should with all humility have presented them to Your Majestie at this time, did not the present great distractions and apprehension of a Civill War (which we earnestly pray to God to divert) put us beyond all thought of other grievances. For prevention whereof, we have with all Loyalty of Heart to Your Sacred Majestie, with all Love and Faithfulnesse to our Countrey, presented our humble advice in certain Instructions, to one of our Knights of the Shire now here present with a Committee from the House of Commons, to be presented by him to that Honourable House: The Copy whereof we make bold to annex unto this Petition.
Most humbly desiring Your Excellent Majestie, That if it shall please the Houses of Parliament to satisfie Your Majesties just desires in these particulars, That then Your Majestie would be graciously pleased, to lay down Your extraordinary Guards, and cheerfully meet Your Par∣liament, in such a place where Your Sacred Majestie and each Member of both Houses, may be free from tumultu∣ary Assemblies; And as in all Duty bound, we shall daily Pray for Your Majesties long Life, and prosperous Reigne over us.
Instructions from the County of Kent, to Master Augustine Skinner, whereby the desires of the said County may be presented by him to the Honourable House of COMMONS. WHereas a Committee from the House of Commons is now sent down to the Assizes, upon a credible Information (as they say) that something should be done to the Disturbance of the Peace of this County. We, the Commons of Kent, require you Master Augustine Skinner (as our Servant) to certifie to that Honourable House, That you found the County in full Peace, and that there is no ground for any such Information, and that you desire, in our Names, to know the particulars of that Information, (of which it seems you are ignorant, and the Informer) that this County may have full reparations in Honour against so scandalous an aspersion cast upon them; and that the Informer, of what quality soever, may receive condigne punishment. And that the House of Commons may understand our desires, not onely to preserve the Peace of this County, which (with Gods blessing, and the help of the good known Laws of this Kingdome) we are confident we shall maintain, but also of the whole Kingdome, being now in so great a distraction, that every Man stands at a gaze, to see what the event is likely to be, and well weighing what a great fire a
small spark may kindle; abhorring and detesting the thought of a Civill Warre: We farther require you to offer our humble advice, as Faithfull and Loyall Subjects to His Majesty, and good Patri∣ots and Lovers of our Countrey, for settling the Distractions of these times. One principall means to effect it, we conceive will be to give His Majesty full satisfaction in His Just Desires, in these foure Particulars. 1. In presently leaving the Town of Hull in the same State it was before Sir John Hothams entrance into it; And delivering His Majesty His own Magazine. 2. In laying aside the Militia, untill a good Law may be framed, wherein care may be taken as well for the Liberty of the Subjects, as the Defence of the Kingdome. 3. That the Parliament be adjourned to an indifferent place, where His Sacred Majesty, all the Lords and Mem∣bers of Your House of Commons may meet and treat with Honour, Freedome, and Safety. 4. That His Majesties Navie may be immediately re∣stored to him. Our Reasons are these. 1 For withdrawing your Garrison out of the Town of Hull, we are perswaded your fears and Jealousies of forrein forces, of French, or Danes, or of the Papists at home (an inconsiderable Party, especially being disarmed) are long since vanished, the Magazine or a great part of it being removed to London, we con∣ceive Master Major of Hull may safely keep the Town as before. 2. For laying aside the Militia, we are free from Jealousies of Forrein Forces, so that you may have time enough to frame a lasting Law, which notwithstanding, for fear of Inconveni∣ence to the Subjects Liberty, you may, if you so think fit, make the Law a Probationer. Besides, His Majesty, if occasion should be,
is vested with sufficient power to raise forces for the Defence of the Kingdome, for which onely we are confident His Majesty will employ them. And we should hold our selves worse then In∣fidels, if, after so many Protestations to maintain the True Reli∣gion by Law established, the Subjects in the Liberty of their Per∣sons and Propriety of their Goods, and the Priviledges of Parli∣ament, and that He will Govern us by the known Laws of the Land, we should not with full assurance, believe in Him and con∣fide in Him. 3. For adjourning the Parliament to another place, His Majesty hath expressed the Reasons, That He was driven away by tumultuary Assemblies, and that he cannot return thither with Honour and Safety: And divers of the Lords are absent, who promise to return back to the House, when they may sit with the Liberty, and that condition that the Peerage of England former∣ly have done, secured from all menaces, or demanding any Ac∣count of their particular Votes; which we conceive to be against the Freedome of Parliament, which by our Protestation we must maintain, and from tumultuarie Assemblies: These having been the Occasions, as we believe, that of near five hundred in the House of Commons, there are but about one hundred and forty left to sit there, and the greater part of the Lords gone away. 4. For the Restitution of the Navie, our Reason is, That the Neighbour Nations do take notice, that His Majesties Navie is detained from him, which if not suddenly restored, may turn to His Majesties dishonour, whose honour, by our Protestation, we are bound to maintain. Another means, we conceive, to settle the States and Minds of the Subjects, is a free, generall, and large pardon: which since His Majesty hath so graciously offered we desire and expect to re∣ceive, and if any Man do dislike it, he may be excepted, and the generality of the Subjects not hindred of their good, and His Ma∣jesties Grace and Goodnesse.
¶ His MAjESTIES Answer to the humble Petition of the Commons of Kent, agreed upon at their generall Assizes, and presented to His Majestie, August 1. At the Court at York, August 4. 1642. HIs Majestie hath with great satisfaction in the Loyaltie and Affection of the Petiti∣oners considered this Petition, with the Instructions annexed to their Knight of the Shire, & hath expressely command∣ed me to return this His Answer in these words: That the Petitioners are not more eased and satisfied with the good Laws His Majestie hath passed, then His Majestie Himself is pleased with that way of obliging His Subjects, neither hath He ever made the least Promise or profession of repairing or redressing the grievances of His People, which He hath not been, and alwayes will be ready to per∣form. His Majestie cannot blame the Petitioners to be appre∣hensive of a civill Warre, since the present distractions (grounded upon no visible cause, to which His Majestie
could, or can yet apply a remedy) threaten no lesse confusi∣on. But his Majestie doubts not, that the Petitioners and all His good Subjects, do well understand, That His Maje∣stie hath left no way unattempted, which in Honour or Wis∣dome could be consented to, to prevent that confusion. That after so many Injuries and Indignities offered to Him, so many combinations and conspiracies against Him, He departed so much from His own Majestie, and the Ju∣stice due to it, That he required no other reparation, then to have His Town, Goods, and Navie (taken and kept by violence from and against Him) to be restored to Him: The power of making Laws without Him, by the way of Ordinances (and that in particular, concerning the Militia) to be disavowed. And that a safe Place might be agreed on, where He might be present with His great Councell, for the composing of all misunderstandings, and making the Kingdome happy. That before any Answer returned to His Majestie (whil'st with all patience and hope His Majestie forbore any action or attempt of force, according to His promise) Sir John Hotham issued out of Hull in the Night, burned the Houses, and murthered the Persons of his fellow-subjects (though he knew His Majestie quietly expected an Answer to His reasonable and necessary demands) and hath since exercised most barbarous cruelty upon a Drummer then taken prisoner by him. That those Propositions made by His Majestie, and men∣tioned by the Petitioners in their Instructions, are dissented from, and His Majestie not suffered to enjoy what is as un∣questionably His own, as any thing His Subjects can call most theirs, upon pretence there is some trust on foot to dispossesse His Majestie of them: Whether any such trust be derived from the Petitioners, themselves best know. That a Generall is made to command His Subjects a∣gainst
Him, and Forces already marching with Cannon to∣wards Him, under the conduct of the Lord Brook, whilst all Labour and Endeavour is used, to cut off all Succour and Supply from His Majestie, as from a Forein Enemy. When the Petitioners and all other His Majesties Sub∣jects have weighed this, and considered that these strange unheard of proceedings must be the effects of desperate Resolutions, and that all this calamity is brought upon this Nation, to wrest from his Majestie His just Rights, when no sober man can see the want of any thing which is in His Majesties power to grant, and necessary for the peace and full happinesse of the Kingdome. That when all encouragement is given, scandals raised, and provocations used to incense the People against His Majestie, and to publish Petitions and Declarations against the known Laws and established Government: The Peti∣tioners, and all other His Majesties good Subjects (who out of a true sense of the distraction and ruine the Com∣monwealth must speedily fall into through these distempers have prepared sober and moderate Petitions and Animad∣versions for the peace of the Kingdome) have been discoun∣tenanced, censured, and imprisoned in a Lawlesse Arbitrary way, when no offence hath been committed by them, of which the Law hath taken notice: That all their Rights, Interests, and Priviledges, which they were born to, by the good known Laws, are taken from them, or subjected to an unintelligible Arbitrary power and resolution, which de∣stroyes their confidence and assurance even in Innocency it self; They will think it time to provide for their own se∣curity, by Assisting His Majestie for the Defence of His Person, preservation of the true Protestant Religion, and maintenance of the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject; of the which, as the Petitioners care is very eminent, and deserves all protection, thanks, and estimati∣on
from His Majestie; So His Majestie will venture His Life and His Crown with them in that Quarrell. Lastly, lest any of the Petitioners may unjusty suffer for making or presenting this humble, dutifull, and modest Petition to His Majestie; His Majestie declares, That He will with His utmost power and assistance protect and de∣fend them against any power whatsoever, which shall que∣stion them for so doing; And to that purpose advertiseth them, That they are not obliged to yield Obedience to any Pursuivants, Sergeants, or Messengers, who shall endeavour to molest them for doing their Duty, and discharging their Consciences therein. And that the whole County of Kent may know His Majesties gracious acceptance of this ex∣pression of their Duty and affection unto Him: 'Tis His Majesties pleasure, that this Answer, together with the Pe∣tition and Instructions, be read in all the Churches and Chappels of that County. Falkland. FINIS.
