J941AD 99828762 33193
BY GEORGE JONES OF Hatton-Garden Holborn, A Corner-house, three doors from the Sign of the New Hole in the Wall, over against Baldwins-Gardens, near the George; (Student in the Art of Physick and Chirurgery for the space of about thirty years) His Book of Mighty Cures; Cures of all sorts, the Peoples Names, Men, Women, and Children, of all Ages, the Places where they live: the like not known to be done in this Age. I Desire you will take notice that although it hath pleased God to give me the gift of Healing for a time, he does not give the like to every one that practiseth Physick: therefore I would have you be∣ware who you deal with, and take no Physick of any but such as are known to do great Cures. I can tell presently what good can be done for you, and give you speedy help, if there be any to be had: but young Beginners may practise on your bodies many years before they can learn to do good. I give my true Judgment to all for nothing: Read over the Cures in this Book which I have done in City and Country; they are your Neighbours round about you, inquire of them from their own mouths, and so come to me: you will find many good people among them which dare not tell a lie; but if you will not believe this, you'l certainly slight all that God would do for you, and become faithless in evrey good work, and so live and die in pain and misery, it may be before half the number of your dayes are spent.
I confess Paul may plant, and Apollo water, but God giveth increase: and I be∣lieve that above fourty thousand in City and Country are my Witnesses how God hath followed me with his Blessing on my doing Cures. I would not have spoken so much, but that I see so many pretenders to Physick that never practised before, who use all the means they can to cry down those who do good, and cry up themselves, indeavouring to turn Light into Darkness, that their dark works may not come to the Light: But I shall leave them, and give you notice that I practise, Mondays, Tuesdays, & Wednesdays at my House in Hatton-Garden; and the other three dayes of the week at my House in Moorfields, in the upper Fields as you go into Crown-Alley on the left hand, two Posts before my Door with two Golden Balls on the tops of them; and do intend (God willing) to practise there all the year, and from year to year. First, I will set down some of the Vertues of my Electuary: and after that may eight several sorts of Balsams, with their Vertues. 1. My Balsam of Balsams, very well known in City and Country for its won∣derful Vertues. 2. A Balsam for the Leprosie. 3. A Balsam for the Rickets. 4. A Balsam for Deafness. 5. A Balsam, for old Ulcered Gonorrhea. 6. A Balsam for the Ptisick and Cough. 7. A Balsam of twenty shillings the ounce. 8. A Balsam for a weak Back. 9. The next is the signs of the Scurvy, and the Vertues of my Friendly Pill. 10. And after that all sorts of Great Cures, both of young and old, which I have cured; inquire of them. 11. Then a Diet for Children when they breed Teeth. 12. A word to Men how to preserve Health. 13. Next how to make the everlasting Cordial Drink, Water, or Spirits, which the Cheats have cryed up to Cure all Diseases. Their Vertues I shall set down in order, and Directions how to apply most of them. FIrst, the ELECTUARY, of two shillings the ounce, which I have made better then ever I made before, and it will work much better. A Man or a Woman must take as much as a small Nut at night going to bed, and so much in the morning fasting, and you may eat and drink what you please, and go where you please, keeping your self temperate. It hath a pleasant taste, and you may eat it as you eat Bread, or roul it into Pills, or dissolve it in a little Ale, or any thing what you please any way, so it goeth into the Body, it will do
its work: and you may give the same quantity to any above sixteen years: and for those which are between eight and sixteen, you may give them half the quantity: and for Children under eight, give according to their age and strength, more or less, according as you find it. It gives three or four Stools a day; and, as you have occasion, continue taking it tell you are well. You can hardly err in giving it, it is so safe, and may be taken any time of the year. It doth (to the best of my knowledg) Infallibly cure all manner of Convulsion-fits, Falling-sickness, Fits of the Mother, and all sorts of Fits of that kind, be what they will; it doth comfort and chear the Spirits within an hours time after you have taken it. It will cure all manner of Sore and Rhumy Eyes though never so bad; it will help all sorts of Melancholy; all Swellings in the Face, Lips and Nose; Expelleth Wind upward and downward, strengthens both Head and Stomach, and cleanseth them, as also the Kidneys, Reins, and Bladder, of tough slimy Humours, which Nature is not able to carry away; and all sharp Humours, which breed Cancers in the Mouth, and at the root of the Tongue and Throat; which you may perceive when they are breeding, if you draw forth the Tongue a little sideways, you may see it will be a little raw on one side or both, near the Throat; in such the whole mass of Blood is corrupted, and many dy thereof. And because this Distemper most commonly breedeth without pain, People do not mind it till it begins to be painful, and then most of them are past help. It is caused by a sharp humor that distilleth down from the Brain, and this my Electuary carrieth off all such sharp and mixed humours which breed this Distemper; and there is not any thing in the World like it: For it is continually drawing off all tough slimy Humours from all parts of the whole Body by its gentle and mild operation; for if you eat as much of it as a small hazel Nut in the morning fasting, before you go forth about your business, you will seldom hear any more of it till six or seven hours after, and then it may give you two or three stools, and not gripe nor distemper you all this while; and if you take the like quantity when you go to bed, it will do the like in the morning. And note, that whatsoever Humour offendeth, it brings it off; as in some, it bringeth away green Choler, in another black Choler, and in ano∣ther yellow Choler, and in some thin watry Humors mixed with yellow and black, or green, according as they are gendred in the Body: And it is such a friend to Nature, that they joyn hand in hand to drive all these sharp and mixt Humours out of the Body. Nature rejoyceth when it is received into the Body, as you may see by the Party that taketh it, who will be more chearful and lightsom by far than at any other time. It doth correct the sharpness of all tough slimy Humours, and draweth them back out of the Veins and Arteries to the Stomach, and sends them down through the Bowels, and so by that means leaveth not a soul corner in the body unswept. It takes away the Scurvy out of the body both root and branch, if it be not got into the Bones or Joynts; Dropsy and all other Distem∣pers that joyn with it. And Reason may tell you that if it draweth away all this vicious matter out of the Veins and Arteries, it must free the Liver and Spleen of all stoppages, and by that means helps the Fits of the Mother, and cleanseth the whole mass of Blood to the purpose, and by that means helpeth the Gonorrhea,
running of the Reins, and all wasting Consumption of the Reins and Kidnies, which you may know by soulness and thickness of your Water after it hath stood a while; it dryeth all most and sharp venerial Distempers, and restoreth to the for∣mer strength; it doth so much cleanse the Blood of all Melancholly, that in young people it charges the colour of the black and swarthy skin, and taketh away all Morphew off the Face, or any other parts of the Body, when no other means will do any good. It is good for them that are well to take an ounce or two of it Spring and Fall; for it will not suffer any foul or noysom Humour to breed in the Bo∣dy: and if there be any already gendred in the Body, it will take it away. It doth draw away all thick slimy Humors out of the Veins and Arteries, both Reins, Bladder, and Ureters; cleanseth the Spermatick Vessels of all corrupt Seed and Matter, and makes the Body lively and fit for Generation, and by that means helpeth Barrenness, and prevents Miscarrying. I never heard of any Woman that was fit to bear a Child that had taken of it long, but she soon Conceived: It doth prevent the growing Stone in the Kidnies, Reins, and Bladder; It will help the swell'd Bellies in Children: It also helps Nurses that have bad Milk, and will prove beneficial for her self and Child; it doth help the Wind Cholick, as also maziness or dissiness in the Head, and taketh away all stinking Vapors which over∣whelm the Brain: It is good for such as are subject to be costive, or bound, to have some of it alwayes by them; for it will be a merry companion when they take it, and give them their desire. It comfortably cleanses the Body after the small Pox and Measels, and carrieth off all the dregs and Poyson out of the Blood, which the Distemper hath left behind; it doth bravely cleanse the bodies of Women after Child-bearing; It prevents miscarriage in Women with Child, being taken three or four times a week, and also maketh barren Women fruitful: It helps the Con∣sumption of the Kidnies and Reins; Which is a Distemper more People die of, then of any other. Most that have this Distemper have a foul disorderly Water, with pain in the Back in most, and some will have a greasy Cloud on the top of their Water, after it hath stood a while. And I give you notice that violent Purges cannot do any such Cures, because they go speedily through the Body and leave the Distemper behind, and make the Body weak to little or no purpose: but this my Electuary never maketh you weak, nor hinders business, though you take of it a month or two together. It is gently drawing away night and day, and wea∣kens not the Body. I sell it for two shillings the ounce, and that serves a Man or Woman ten or twelve times taking. It hath helpt thousands of the Gonorrhea. The Cheats have counterfeited it very much: some by the name of Cordial Wa∣ters, or Spirits; some in one way, and some in another, and have with their delud∣ing Tongus cheated many. It helpt Mr. Withers of Hamersmith of Melancholly, who was so bad therewith that he could not go out of his Chamber about any business; and a few ounces of it did the work; you have your directions how to take it at the beginning. It will Cure the Jaundice, I have experienced it several times. I have often made use of it to fetch Mercury out of the Body; And because I would be sure to prove the Truth of it, I have made them go to stool in any Vessel of Silver, and if there be Mercury in the Body, their Ordour will turn the Silver of a black blew colour, and so netims mixed with yellow: and if there be no Mer∣cury
in the Body, there will not be any alteration of colour in the Silver. This I have proved to my satisfaction. THe next thing I will set down is, some of the Vertues of my BALSAM of BALSAMS, being the best that ever was found out in the World, for all outward and inward Diseases. I sell it for one shilling the ounce; and they that take a pound together, have it for twelve shillings, or half a pound after the same rate. And now I will give you your Directions in short. Pray note that whatsoe∣ver distemper you take it inwardly for, the quantity of a small hazel Nut is enough for a Man or a Woman; roul it in some powder of Liquoris and so swallow it down with a draught of Ale or Beer, or what you please last at night going to bed, and in the morning fasting as hot as you can drink it. 1. And for all manner of Pains, Aches, and Swellings; It must be chaft well in with the heat of the Fire, every night going to bed, and a peice of thin Bladder laid thereon to keep it soaking in; only you must not rub it in to the small of the back, for fear of hurting the Reins. 2. For all manner of Sores, new and old, you must apply it as a plaister morning and evening; let it be laid on a linen rag, or a piece of thin Lether: it will make and old Sore run faster then it did before for a little time, till the Humours have emptied themselves, and then it will begin to heal. I told you in my last Book of one Piry and one Brlin which did counterfeit it and my Electuary, ull & I am now informed of many more such wicked People: but if you have it at the places set down in this Book, you cannot be cheated. 3. It doth help Tetter, Ring Worm, Shingles, or any sort of Worms in the Face, Nose, Mouth, Teeth or Gums, by anointing the part grieved when you go to bed, and as often as you please. 4. It helpeth the Toothach, and fastens loose Teeth, and must be used as a plaister on the Tooth and Gum that aketh; and so fast as the Rhume washeth it away, put on another, till the pain is gone; which is most commonly in less then a quarter of an hour. To fasten the loose Tooth, apply it as a plaister to the Tooth and Gum, and were the Plaister all night: do so till you are well. 5. It will take a way the Scurvy out of the Mouth, if you anoint the Gums with it two or three times a day. 6. For Soreness in the Mouth, Throat and Brest, take as much as a small Nut every night when you go to bed, and in the morning fasting. 7. For the Headach, anoint all over where the pain is, and rub some up into your Nostrils; do so every night going to bed, and as often as you please, till the pain is gone. 8. For Staying the Bleeiding at Nose, presently put some of it into that Nostril with the end of your Finger, and hold it on close to the Grisel of the Nose in that side that bleedeth, where the Vein is broken, and it helpeth presently. 9. For Foul Teeth▪ wash them morning and evening with a little white Wine, and so soon as you have washt them, anoint the Teeth and Gums with the Bal∣sam, and it will take away the Distemper.
10. For Consumption and Cough, Running of the Reins, Gonorrhea, weakness and wasting in the Back, the heat and wasting Kidnies and Reins. This kind of Consumption or wast of the Reins and Kidnies is very dangerous, and you may know it by a thin Cloud on the top of the Urin after it hath stood a while, or a bricky substance in the botom or sides of the Pot, or a continual pain in the Back, or a foul Water at some times, and clear at other times; when you perceive these symptoms, take as much as a small Nut of this Balsam morning & evening, and roul it up in a little pouder of Liquoris, or any other thing or things you can best take it in, and cleanse your Body a little now and then with my Electuary, and you may be helpt of all these Distempers, if you are not too far spent before you begin. 11. For the Cramp, rub it well in to the parts grieved when the fit is on you, and it helpeth presently. 12. It much helps those which have not their breath freely through their No∣strils, by rubbing up a little into both Nostrils with the end of our finger every night going to bed, or at any other time. 13. And if you will help the shrinking Sinews, you must wear it with a piece of thin Bladder on the part grieved; and as it drieth in, renew it, and chase it well in with the heat of the fire. It cured the Wife of Robert Austin of Hitchin in Hartfordshire of a lame Leg with shrunk Sinews, who could not set her foot to the ground, nor get help in twenty years, and it made her as well as ever she was in her life. 14. For a stinking-breath from the Stomach, take as much as a small Nut every night going to bed, till you find your self well; and when y ou would not have any to smell your Breath, rub a little of it up your Nostrils with your fingers end. 15. The Itch, and all manner of Scabs; anoint the part grieved, and in a few times doing, it will take the distemper away. 16. For the Worms, you must chafe it well in to the Stomach and Belly with the heat of the fire, for three or four nights together, and lay a double Linen-Cloth thereon warm, and so wear it to asswage the hard Bellies of Children. You must do as aforesaid: it doth sometimes gently purge, if the body be foul. 17. For Pains in the Stomach, Sides, Belly, and Back, use it as aforesaid. 18. Piles and Hemorrhoids; anoint the part grieved every night going to bed, and at any other time. 19. Pains in the bottoms of the Feet, Toes, Ankles, and those which have weak Ankles, wear it with a piece of thin Bladder. 20. It will cure a new wound with a few dressings, though the Member be cut three parts off; It will help a man run through a Leg or Arm without any Tent; apply it plentifully about the Member grieved, and dress it twice aday. 21. For All sorts of old Sores, apply it as a Plaister morning and evening; it will make the Sore run more at the first then it did before, till the Humours have emptied themselves, and it will bring out the skale of rotten Bones; after that it will run but little, and heal apace. 22. It will dissolve and cure hard knobs that breed in the Necks of Boyes and Girls. 23. For the Red Pimples in the Face, anoint every night going to Bed.
24. It will help any sharp briny Humour that breaketh out on any part of the Body, by anointing the part grieved morning and evening. 25. For the Palsie; it did help Mr. Bailif a Scrivener in Chippingham in Wilt-Shire of the shaking-Palsie, by applying it to the wrists for three or four dayes; Insomuch that some Gentlemen of the Country thereabouts would not believe till they had seen, but sent for him, and me also; and when they saw that he could lift a Glass of Beer to his Mouth without spilling, they believed, because they knew he had not any such use of his hands of a long time before: However it hath done greater Cures since; for instance one Mr. Gregory Coe, living on the Bank-side near the Bear-Garden in Southwark, of the Palsie; who had not the use of his hands to cut his meat for above three years, being near fourscore years of age, and by the means of this my Balsam of Balsams he soon had good use of his hands: it is four years since I cured him, and he continueth very well to this day. It will not fail doing good for the Palsie. 26. It will take away all pains from the Shoulders, Sides, Arms, Hands and Feet. 27. It helpeth the Cancer, or any other Sore or Swelling in the Brests of Wo∣men. It did save and help the Wife of Mr. Richard Yokney of Walminster in Wiltshire, when she could not be delivered of her Child by any other means, and so soon as the Midwife had applyed this my Balsam, she was delivered of a live Child; and many more I might mention, and they all did well. 28. For the Fleshy Rupture, apply it to the part grieved as you will, so you keep it on, it will Cure. 29. It helpeth those whose Limbs are wasting, and their flesh withering away, by taking of it inwardly, as you are directed at the beginning. 30. For the Fistula in the Hip, or any other part of the Body, it helpeth when no other means will do: you must anoint the part grieved twice a day. 31. It giveth such present ease for all Burnings and Scaldings, that so soon as laid to the part grieved, the pain is gone, and in a few dressings maketh a Cure. 32. For Surfeits, want of Appetite, want of quiet sleep, or any sudden Distemper, take as much as a small Nut going to bed, and roul it up in any thing you can best take it in. 33. It will cure all manner of Squats, Bruises, Sprains in the Back, or any part of the Body; and those that get Strains with over-lifting. 34. How many would give hundreds of pounds they were free from the Pits and Scars of the small Pox, and there is no Cure; therefore I would advise all which have not yet had the small Pox, and Men for their Children to have of this my Balsam of Balsams from my own hand, and keep in a readiness; and when the Scabs of the Small Pox begin to be dry, anoint them with the Balsam, and they will all sheal off; you may do so once a day for three or four dayes, and there will not be any sign where they were; but they must not pick them. All that I have said of my Balsam of Balsams I have truly proved. 35. For such old Men and Women whose Blood is grown cold and chilly, and such as are through Consumption of any other means weakned, and have lost their
Appetite; let them take as much as a small Nut of it going to bed now and then, and they will find more warmth and comfort therein, then can be thought. You have the price at the beginning, one shilling the ounce. THe SECOND BALSAM is for the Leprosie and Scurvy mixed together, and setled in the skin in great white and red Scurvy Bloches on the Elbows and Knees, and sometimes over all the Body: it is five shillings the ounce, and most com∣monly one ounce or two doth the Cure, with a little inward means: you must a∣noint the parts grieved with a little of it every night going to bed for two or three nights, and then forbear three dayes, and see where it doth appear again, and then do as aforesaid till you are well. THe THIRD BALSAM is for the Rickets; it infallibly cures, if they can have any strength to stand, and it hath cured many that had not any strength at all. For instance one, the Child of Mr. John Sarret at the upper end of Sea-Alley in Kingsstreet in Westminster, being pin'd away with a Consumption and Rickets to the bare Skin and Bones, being above two years of age, and could not have any strength to stand; however, through Gods Blessing with the means, he is grown as brave a Boy as any about London. I sell the Balsam for one shilling four pence the ounce; and most commonly four or five ounces doth the Cure: you have your directions with it. THe FOURTH BALSAM is for Deafness: I sell it two shillings six pence the ounce, with directions. It cured Mr. Chearsly in Brick-Lane in Oldstreet, being near fourscore years of age, who had been quite Deaf about forty years, and I think about four or six ounces cured him, and he heareth as well as any. THe FIFTH BALSAM is for Old Ulcerated Gonorrhea. After the Body is well cleansed it doth strengthen the whole Body, the Kidnies, Reins, Bladder and Ureters, strengthens the Spermatick Vessels, and thickens the Seeds, and makes it good; it cheareth the Spirits, and causes a fresh lively colour in the Face; it is a little restringent. I sell it for five shillings the ounce. You must take as much as a small hazel Nut every night going to bed, and in the morning fasting, and drink a draught of Sack, or what you like best, after it; do so till you have taken an ounce or two. THe SIXTH BALSAM is for the Ptisick, Cough, stoppage of the Breast and Pipes; take as much as a small Nut every night going to bed, and every morning fasting, and drink a draught of that you like best presently after as hot as you can drink it.
THe SEVENTH BALSAM is twenty shillings the ounce; with direction for the taking it. It doth cure and help as followeth. 1. First; Sowr Belches. 2. The Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen. 3. Causeth a good Appetite. 4. Agues and Feavers of all sorts. 5. Present help for Vomiting. 6. Present ease for the griping Plague in the Guts; and in a few times taking, maketh a Cure. 7. The Wind Cholick, Stitches, and pains in the Sides. 8. The Strangury, and pains in the Bladder, and taketh away the sharpness of Urine. 9. Bleeding by Urine or Stool. 10. Yellow and black Jaundice. 11. Mother, and Spleen. 12. All running pains in the Joynts. 13. It bringeth away all Sand and Gravel out of Kidneys and Reins without pain, and Stones as big as Pease. 14. All manner of Pains in the Head. 15. It doth prevent Miscarriage in such Women which are subject to it, and doth save the lives of many Women and Children; and prevents many and long tedious fits of Sickness, and many times Death it self, which doth attend most Women after Miscarrying. It helpt Mr. Richard Bower at the sign of the Wheat∣sheaf in Jarmanstreet, Westminster; there came a Stone from him first, and presently after that he made much water, and so the great Stone dissolved to Sand and Gravel, and came from him with much ease for the space of eight or nine dayes, to the quantity of about half a pint of Sand and Gravel. 16. It giveth present ease and comfort to a disquiet mind, and wandering dis∣pairing thoughts. 17. It strengthens the Memory exceedingly, and sometimes recovereth the Senses lost. 18. It drives out the Small-Pox, and Measels at once taking, and in two or three times taking maketh a Cure. 19. It drieth up all manner of Rhume, though never so sharp; strengtheneth the Stomach, and purgeth Wind downwards. 20. It doth help and dry up all sharp moist Humours of the Womb, which hin∣der Conception. 21. It helpeth Vapors, that ascend from the Mother and Spleen to the Head, which make some Women as if they had lost part of their Senses. 22. It taketh away all Swiming in the Head, and Swooning-fits. 23. It helpeth the Dropsy, Cough and Consumpsion, if they are not too far spent. I would not have you think it dear, being twenty shillings the ounce; for any one may have a shillings worth, and as they like, may have more, if that doth not the Cure.
THe EIGHTH BALSAM is for healing and strengthening the Back, and Spermatick Vessels, and thickening the Seed, after your Blood is well cleans∣ed with my Cordial Pill: you must take as much as a small Nut of it morning and evening, and hinder no business: and you that have weak Backs will soon find much strength. The price is two shillings the ounce, you may take of it till you are well, for it will not much hurt your Purse. MY friendly Pill cureth the Scurvy, when it is grown to that height that it makes many People fear they have got a worse Distemper, and I think that can hardly be: for it will cause great pains in the Head, and sometimes prick∣ing pains in the Nose, and much dulness, and heavienss of body, some will have pains in the Shoulders: in others, pains in the Shin-bones, and some pains in the Joynts; and in others, pains all over, with foulness of Stomach, Tongue, and Teeth, and loss of Appetite: pains in the Back, and Bladder, sharpness and heat in making Water, and stoppage like the reliques of an old Gonorrhea, which was not well cured, or like those which have taken Mercury ill prepared, that cannot work it self out of the Body; some will have breakings out, or hard knobs in the Head, others swellings in the Groin, or breakings out there-about; some will have pains and swellings of the Joints of their Hands, others in Legs and Thighs, others little swellings in the Belly and Stomach; some will have Hoarsness with sore Throat and Mouth, and swelled Gums; others will have hard red knobs in the Face, some Scurvy Briny Humors behind their Ears, some little Pimples about the Body, others bad Sleep, with confused Dreams; some will be tyery, faint and weak, like the Green-sickness; some will have pains now and then between the Shoul∣ders and Elbows; and some will be only dizzy in the Head: their Water will alter according to what they eat and drink; but most commonly in young Men it will be high coloured, and thick at the bottom when it hath stood a while; in some it will be yellowish, and make the Glass it standeth in of an unwholsome greasie colour; and after a Man or Woman hath had it ten or twelve years, they seldom make a good Water, and as seldom enjoy any perfect Health; sometimes they think they have one Disease, and sometimes another; they are often seeking for help, yet get but little. The Urine of Women that have this Disease, in some it will be of a sad colour, but in most it will be pale or greenish, with a whitish set∣ling at the bottom, when it hath stood a while: some grow heavy-headed, and when they have had it some years, they grow Melancholy, and enjoy nothing: some it bringeth into a Dropsy and Consumption, and when these three Distem∣pers meet together in the Body of Man or Woman, they seldom part till Death. This Pill helpeth all these Symptoms aforesaid, though it is gotten into the Mar∣row of the Bones: For the Scurvy will get into the Bones the soonest of any Distem∣per. It will cure the Gonorrhea, and sharpness and stoppage of Urine, and all manner of Venereal Diseases, from the greatest to the smallest, although they have had it
twenty years; I say, all manner of Venereal Distempers; and the pain and killing Consumption of the Kidneys, which is a very dangerous waste: Ulcers in the Kidneys and Bladder, and Cancers and Ulcers in the Womb; all sorts of Worms that breed in the Stomach and Maw, and the other small Worms: it most commonly causeth a good Appetite to ones Meat at the first taking; and causeth as good sleep as a Man can desire, and cheareth the Spirits very much: it doth presently help and carry off all Crudities, and swellings form the Stomach and Belly, Leggs, and Thighs: and is the presentest help that I know in the World for the Dropsy: it doth help Ulcers in the Throat, to admiration: those which are sick with eating, or drinking, it doth help at once taking: it taketh away all pains out of the Bones, when no other means will do it; and for any of the aforesaid Distempers, the Pill being taken at the first beginning, once taking will cure, but if the Scurvy be old and stubborn, it will require more: and if you find the first taking have not finished the cure, take one Dose every third night going to Bed, till you have taken four or five times. Now I would have you take notice of the rarity of these Pills, they are in bigness of a Pins Head, and any Man or Woman may take twenty and put them into a Spoon with a little Ale, or Beer, and swallow them all at once, at night going to Bed, or any way you can best take them, for they are very easie to take; then you shall see the rarity of this little merry Bed fellow. In the first place you will have a comfortable nights rest, with a little breathing sweat all night, but not so much as to make your Linnen wet, and in the morning the sleep and sweat goeth off to∣gether, and presently it beginns to Purge by Stool and Urine, and will bring away corruption out of the Body, according to the quantity that doth offend; if the Body be very foul, it doth bring away almost a Chamber-pot full the first Stool, and two or three small Stools of Corruption afterwards, and so you may go about your business: the People say it doth make them very hungry, and you may know by that, the Pill is very wholsome, and well prepared: and having the warm Bed all night, they draw all the bad Humours to the Stomach, and there correct their sharpness, and send them down through the Bowels; But still the more rarity of these Pills, they do not gripe at all, nor make you sick; but strengthen the whole Body, and chear the Spirits: and you may go where you please, and do what you please, only Women must not put their Hands in cold Water the next day: they may be taken any time of the year, with good success; and will continue good longer than any Man can live. These Pills operate five several wayes: First, after you have taken them at night going to Bed, they operate by sleep; 2dly, By Wind downward; 3dly, By little breathing Sweat; and in the morning that goeth off; and 4thly, They work by Stool; and 5thly, By Urine And if Children have any the same Distemper's aforesaid, they may take from one year old so many Pills as they are years old, till they come to twenty Pills: and so they which are three or four score years of age, may take twenty. These Pills raise the Lame out of their Beds, though Aged. This which I have said is Truth. The Dose which I now sell for a shilling, I formerly sold for a Crown, but now the Poor may have the benefit, as well as the Rich.
You shall have them in Boxes, twenty in a Box, price one shilling; and if you find the first taking doth not the Cure, take twenty every third night, till you have taken four or five times, or till all your pain is gone; for they fail not to cure all sorts of Pains, only the Sciatica, the Bone being out: put all the twenty into a Spoon, with a little Ale, or Beer, and swallow them all at once at night going to Bed, and have a large Chamber-Pot ready in the morning, you need not take any Posset-drink, nor eat or drink till Dinner time, for the Pills have enough in themselves to uphold Nature, only those which are very weak may drink some Posset Ale. The Scurvy is the Mother and Nursery of all Diseases: and upon taking cold, or any disorder of Body, it branches out one Distemper or other, and yet the grand cause which is the Scurvy, remains all one in the Body. Most of these Cures, with thousands more, I have done with the help of this my Friendly Pills, though I did not administer them in the same manner as now I do. Now you shall hear of some of the Cures which I have done, the Peoples names, and places where they live: and I desire you will enquire the truth of them, and I think you will hardly find any the like done before me. 1. Mr. Alelxander Toys of Cattern wheel-yard, over against the Sheep-Pens in West Smithfield, of the Feaver and Gripes of the Guts, when it had brought him so low, that none thought he would have lived. 2. Mr. John Farmer of Limekil-yard in Limus, near the Sign of the Carpenters Arms, of the Ptisik, and Cough of the Lungs, and Consumption, when he was like to dye, and I told him if he did find good in my things, and live a week, he might with God's help recover: he returned thanks for his Cure. 3. Mr. Edward Quinborow, over against the Bear and Ragged-Staff, near the Bank-side, Sothwark, of the Ague and Feaver. 4. Mr. Wafs at the Sign of the Robbin-Hood and Little-John, in Maiden-Lane in Westminster, who had a Coach run over his Leg, and I cured him in about three weeks. 5. Mr. John Shersly living at the Swan and Key in Brick-Lane in Old street, who had been quite deaf, troubled with a great noise in his Head above forty years, being above threescore and seventeen years of age when I cured him: both he and his Wife returned thanks both to God and me, and he heareth very well. 6. Mr. William Shearman in Black-Fryers, over against the Dark-Entry, of the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder, and of the Sciatica. 7. Mr. Ralph Steel of Clarkenwel, the next door to the Sign of the Flying-Horse, of a Consumption and great weakness. 8. Mr. Harris of Christophers Alley, in the upper More-Fields, of a Palsie, who could not get help in fourteen years, and near threescore years of age, and with Gods help I made him well. 9. Mr. John Davis of Pickled-Herring-Stairs, at the Sign of the five Tobacco Pipes, of the Ague.
10. Mr. William Medbery, of St. Martins in the Fields a Coachmaker, next door to the Sign of the Sugar-Loaf at a Glassmakers, of the Sciatica in his Hip, and at times in all his Joints, who lay very weak, and could not get help by any other. 11. Mr. Edward Baily, at the Kings Brew-House, over against the Turks-Head in St. Giles's in the Fields, of the Griping Plague in the Guts. 12. Mr. Richard Bower, at the Sign of the Ship in Jerman Street Westminster,☜ of the Stone and Gravel: there came a small Stone from him at the first; and after he had used that I ministred to dissolve the Stone, there came from him above half a pint, by his own relation, of Gravel and Sand, and within eight or nine dayes time; he made water very well all the time, and after that was very well. 13. Mr. Seal an Oyl-man in Holborn, over against the White-Lyon at the lower end of Hatton Garden end, of a Feaver, and Griping in the Guts. 14. Mr. Fawey at the Black-Raven in Long-Acre, of the Sciatica in his Hip. 15. Mr. Adam Prince at the Sign of the Boot in Kings-street Westminster, of the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder. 16. Mr. Barns of Hornsy, four miles form London, of the Ague. 17. William Day near the Grey-Hound in Broad-Mead in Bristol, of deafness, being near therescore years of age when I cured him, and now he heareth as well as any. 18. John Pawel of Donkerton, three miles from Bath, of a Wen on his Eye∣brow,☜ being of great bigness: and he brought it into the World with him, being near thirty years of age when I cured him, and I did it without cutting. 19. Mr. Edward Corbis of the Neat-Houses a Gardiner, of great pain and stop∣page of his Stomach. 20. Francis Hollis in Wapping, at the Sign of the Water-house, of great pain in his Ankles, who could not get help by any in three or four years. 21. William Ash of Bednal-Green, over against the Old Chappel, of the third-day Ague, and Feaver. 22. Mr. John Weston of the Neat-houses, near Westminster, of the Third-day Ague, and Feaver. 23. Mr. Phillip Luke of the Neat-houses, near Westminster, of the Stone. 24. Mr. John Baker, a Ship Carpenter at Deptford, near the Checquer, of a Fea∣ver, with great pain in his side. 25. Mr. Samuel Chadwel, the next door to the Sign of the Worlds-end, in Tooly-street in Southwark, of the Feaver, and Gripes in the Guts. 26. Mr. John Heel of Angel-Alley in Bishops gate-street, I saved his Leg from rotting off. 27. Mr. Thomas Anyan in Bedfordberry, over against the Tobacco Roul, of Loos∣ness and Vomiting, with a Cough and Feaver, and great pain. 28. Mr. Shephard, next door to the Golden-Ball in Hatton-Garden,☜ of the new Feaver, and Gripes in the Guts, his Tongue was as black as Ink with the violence of the Distemper, yet with Gods help, I made him as well as ever he was in his life. 29. Mr. James George on the Bank side near the Bear-Garden in Southwark,
of great pain in his Shoulders, Arms, and Hips. 30. Mr. John Butcher of Hay-grove, a little way out of Warminster in Wilt-Shire, of a Cancer in his Shoulder, Neck and Throat; he was so bad that none would meddle with him but my self;☞ when I had undertaken him, the Doctors thereabout laught: and one said he would give me fifty pound, if I cured him, and others likewise; but when I had cured him, there was not any would give me a Peny, but himself, yet with Gods help, I made him as well as ever he was in his life. 31. Mr. Henry Clare, of a Consumption, when he was so much wasted, that his Flesh was all withered away,☞ that he had not any thing left to cover his Bones, but the Skin; I did never see any Man so bare of Flesh neither dead nor alive, and using my things, he grew strong and lusty, and Flesh grew up and covered his Bones, insomuch, that he hath as much Flesh as any ordinary Man; and thus we may see God blesseth the means sometimes contrary to mens expectations: the People at the Golden Pattin, over against the Kings-Bench in Southwark, will give you an account of this great Cure. 32. Mr. Cook of Spalldock, three miles off St. Eeds, of the Sciatica-Gout. 33. Mr. Whale of Wells, of Lameness, who was not able to rise out of his Bed, and could not get help by any, and I gave him ease of his pain, in about three hours, and in a short time cured him. 34. Mr. Thomas Day living in Shore-Ditch, at a Corner Brick-house, next to Hollow-way Bridge, of a Sciatica. 35. Mr. Abel Barton at the Brewhouse, at the upper end of St. John-street, of the Gout,☞ being near threescore years of Age, and so lame with it, that he was not able to turn in his Bed, and with Gods help, I made him as well as ever he was in his life. 36. Mr. Michael a School-master, in Angel Alley in Grays-Inn-Lane, of a sore and Rheumy Eye, who had made tryal of able Men, for the space of seven or eight years, and could not get any remedy, and with Gods help I made him well in nine or ten weeks. 37. Mr. Richard Young of Park-street near St. Albans, of a Wen upon the top of his Head: who could not get help by any other in twenty years, and I took it out at twice dressing, not spilling one drop of blood. 38. Mr. Edward Squire in Goswel Street, at Mr. Matthew Brown's House a Sho-maker, over against the Pump, between the Sign of the Maiden-Head and the Bell,☞ of a Cancered Wen in the side of his Neck, near as big as a penny Loaf, which grew fast to the Mandible, or the Jaw Bone; and the Veins and Sinews grew through it, and I Cured him without hurting the Veins and Sinews, inso∣much that none can hardly see where it grew: And if he be not there now, Mr. Brown, the Man of the fore-said House can give you an account of this great Cure. 39. Mr. Robert Doyly, of Kingston upon Thames, ten miles from London, of the Vomiting Blood. 40. Mr. Robert Miles, of Kent-street, next door to the Rose, in Southwark, of the Ague and Feaver.
41. Mr. John Arnel, at the top of Saffron-Hill, of the Ague and Feaver. 42. Mr. Michael Smith, near the Sign of the Griffin in Russel-street in Covent-Garden, of great pain in his Limbs, and the Cramp. 43. Mr. Bull, near the Sign of the George, in Grove-street, in Hackney, of the Third day Ague. 44. Mr. Richard Pope, of Bricksham, two Miles off Dartmouth, of great pains in his Stomach, Sides, and Back. 45. John Beard, of Tottnes in Devonshire, of Lameness in all his Limbs, and I soon made him lay by his Crutches. 46. William Randal, three Miles off Exeter, of the Megrim and Cough, and great pain of his Stomach and Back. 47. William Friggey of Glaston, four Miles from Wells, of great pain in his Side, being Aged, and could not get help by any other. 48. Robert Brownsy, of Honington in Devonshire, of the Cough, and great weakness in all his Body; and I made him go about his Work in three or four dayes. 49. Walter Collins, of Charlton Adam, eight Miles off Taunton, with Noise and Deafness in his Head. 50. Benjamin Hollet, in Swan Lane Court on the Key in Bristol, of the Third day Ague. 51. Thomas Roads, of Broad Mead in Bristol, of the Ptysick and Cough, with a Consumption, and extraordinary pain and stoppage at his Stomack. 52. Thomas Elot, near the Sign of the Leg in Temple street in Bristol, of the Cough. 53. John Douting, of Lewins Mead in Bristol, of great weakness and pain. 54. John Cox of Bath, of Lameness, who could not get help by any other. 55. James Bramble, of Downing, in Mangersfields Parish, three Miles from Bristol, of the Dropsie, with great pain all over his Body: I took away all his pain and swelling, and made him as well as ever he was in his Life, with God's Blessing and help. 56. John Stevens, of Swanswick, two Miles off Bath, of the Sciatica,☜ pain in his Hip and Side; he being above threescore years of Age when he was Cured. 57. Benjamin Cott, of Bath, two sad Ulcers in his Feet. 58. John Selmon, of Marshfield in Glostershire, of a sad pain and lameness in his Shoulder. 59. Robert Brothers, of the Devises Green, of an Ague and vomitting Blood. 60. John Sidhinham of Chicklet six Miles of Warminster, of the Ague. 61. Henry Bealing of Gillingame parish, seven miles off Warminster,☜ of the Sci∣atica pain in his Hip and Side, being above threescore years of Age when he was cured. 62. William Hayght of Allsy Parish a mile off Coventry, of the Sciatica pain in his Hip. 63. William Rabbet of Kettorin in Northamptonshire, of the Third day Ague. 64. George Morris, of Ansly four miles from Coventry, of a Cancer on his Face, who could not get help in fourteen years, being near threescore years of age when he was cured.
65. Mr. Henry Chapman of Moulton, three Miles from Northampton, whose Hand was to be cut off, and I cured him without the loss of a Joynt. 66. Thomas Gun of Rodington three miles off Northampton, of the Third dayes Ague. 67. John Smith of Kingswaldon, three miles off Hitchen, of a Wen on his fore∣head, without a skar. 68. Thomas Robinson of Soothil Parish near Hitchen, of the Third-dayes Ague. 69. Richard Dear of Shillington three miles off Hitchen, of Deasness. 70. Peter Shadbole of Gravenist four miles off Hitchen in Hartfordshire, of the Ague. 71. Matthew Negus of St. Needs, of the Third-day Ague, who could not get help in three years. 72. John Roch of Swasy three miles off St. Jues, of the Ague. 73. Robert Thurborn of Hadengham in the Isle of Ely, who had kept his bed a long time of Lameness, with great pain, who could not get help by any, and I cured him in one weeks time with Gods help. 74. Robert Pillings of Notingham, of the Ague. 75. Thomas Raynor of the same Town, of six Ulcers in his Legs, who could not get help in many years. 76. Thomas Foster of Darby, of the Scurvy all over his Body, and I cured him, with Gods help. 77. Mr. John Acton of Howbick-Hall neer Worsup in Notinghamshire, who had been quite deaf above twenty years,☞ being above fourscore years of age, and I made him hear as well as any in six weeks time, with God's help. 78. John Astcot of Tornes in Devonshire, of the Stone, being about threescore years of age when I cured him:☞ he could not make one drop of Water, his pain was very terrible, and I made the Stone to break to pieces in about six hours, and cannot hear that he hath been troubled any more therewith, being neer six years since: Witness John Sampson, Peter Bragg, Ptolomeus Sampson, Zach. Pan∣chard, Anthony Longworth, John Amott, being his Neighbours in Totnes. 79. William Blackaller of Totnes aforesaid, of the Apoplexy and Palsy on his right side, and a Consumption withal, so that he coul dnot rise out of his Bed, and none thought he would ever recover; and I first made him go on Crutches, and soon after without, and within a reasonable time, with Gods help, I made him well. 80. William Day near the Greyhound in Broad-Mead in Bristol, of Deafness; being near threescore years of Age when I cured him, and he heareth as well as any. 81. Mr. Thomas Love near Shorditch Church, of the Jaundies, he being near fourscore years of Age, and cannot hear the he hath been amiss ever since. 82. Mr. Adam Fowler Gardener, of Brick Lane in Old street near the Sign of the Horshooe, of the new Plague in the Guts, with voiding Blood and Slime by Stool. 83. I helpt John Neal at Mris. Lumin's House at the three Tobacco Rolls in
Woodstreet near the Mill-Bank at Westminster, of a broken Vein, who bled at the Nose, Mouth, and by Urine, and of black spots in the skin all over his Body. 84. John Day of Chiriton Bushel nine miles from Exeter, of great pain in his Head, and also the black Cataracks, which were breeding in his Eyes; and he was so blind with them that he was fain to grope to find the Door: and to the best of my remembrance he had but five or six shillings worth of things of me and within three weeks, or thereabouts, he brought me a dish of small Trouts, and told me he caught them himself with an Angle, and gave me thanks for the good I had done for him. 85. William Grigg of Atherford six miles from Taunton in Devonshire, of great pain and weakness which was caused by a great Surfeit, and all that had him in hand had given him over for a dead Man, and I gave him present ease and cured him. 86. Mr. Gregory Coe on the Bank-side near the Bear-Garden in Southwark, of the Palsie, who had not the use of his hands to cut his Meat, or to help himself any manner of way, for the space of three years and two months, being near fourscore years of age, and I soon made him well, with Gods help, and he hath the use of his hands as well as any of his Age. 87. William Panchin near the Sign of the Leg in Templestreet in Bristol, of the Sciatica-Gout in his Hips, who was so lame therewith, that he was fain to creep about the House upon his Hands and Knees, being about threescore years of Age,☜ and could not get help of any other, and I made him as well as ever he was in his life, with God's help. 88. John Jackman of Guilford in Surry, of the Head-ach, who saith his pain was so great for the space of twelve Weeks before he made use of my things, that he could not take any rest night nor day. 89. Mr. Robins of Cranebrook in Kent, a worthy Person of good note and qua∣lity, who had laboured under the pain of the Gout, not able to stir out of his Chamber for the space of three months; who having heard of me,☜ sent no worse Person than his own Wife being a Knights Daughter, to whom I said I did not fear with God's help to raise him up in two dayes time: & a while after this noble Person was pleased to send for me, and gave thanks both to God and me for his speedy help; and desired me to put it into my Book for the publick good, that others might know where to come and have help also, August 8. 1674. 90. I cured Mr. James Gwilliams of Archingfield eight miles from Hereford, in Wales, of the Leprosy all over his Body, who had been afflicted with that loathsome Disease above twenty years; and seeing after all means used here he could not get any help in England, he travelled beyond the Seas, hoping the change of Air might help him, but all to no purpose, for his Distemper still attended him:☜ and after his return home he yet made further trial for help, but without any effect: then he made some Voyages to Sea, hoping the Air on the Salt-water might profie something, but all to no purpose: So at his return home, hearing what Cures I did, he came to me, and told me as aforesaid, and also that the constant wrk∣ing of the Distemper was in so strange a manner, that every night in his Bed at least a quart of thin white Scales would drop from his Skin; besides he judged
there might as many fall from him constantly in the day-time, with a briny thin humour Issuing forth through all the Pores of the Skin, insomuch that he loathed himself; all which notwithstanding, I made him as well and as clear from his Di∣stemper as any man in England. This Archingfield aforesaid lives in the Parish of Waynyards near Broadoak. He returned thanks both to God and me the 24 of July 1674. Now you shall hear of some of the great Cures I have done on Women, and the places where they live, here being already ninety Witnesses of Men. 1. Mrs. Terry, both her Husband and her self desired this great Cure should be set down in my Book, so that others might know where to come to me and find good in like manner. Her Disease was a stoppage fallen into her Kidnies, which caused an extraordina∣ry racking and torturing pain in her back, and great pain and weakness in her Hips and Limbs downward; this Distemper seized her immediately after my going into the Country, whereupon she consulted the best means she could for the Cure, but found none to be effectual;☞ and at my return to London, being near three months, she sent her Water to me, by which and other Circumstances, I scund her to be in a very desperate condition, and that in all likelihood she could not live above a day or two; whereupon I administred something to her, and in once taking she found a great benefit by it, which gave me incouragement to proceed in the Cure, which it pleased God in a short time to make an effectual and perfect Cure. She liveth at the Bunch of Grapes near the Kings-Bench in Southwark, where she and her Family are able to attest the truth hereof. 2. The Wife of William Thomas of Cock-lane going out of Cornstreet into Nicolas∣street in Bristol, of a Cancer in her left Breast and Side, when they that had her in hand gave her off for a dead-Woman;☞ the Distemper being so bad, with hardness of red, yellow, and black Colours, which was very sad to behold; and they every day put in a Tent between her Ribs quite into her Body, about the length of a mans finger; so I judge the end of the Tent must needs reach within an Inch of her Heart: She had also a continual Feaver attending on her; so that there could not be any thing expected but Death; I presently caused the Tent to be laid by, and I never applied Tent nor Instrument, but gave her present ease, and cured her in nine or ten weeks time with God's help. 3. Elizabeth Tonson, of Newington Butts, in Blackmans-street in Lamb-Alley, in Southwark,☞ of a Cancer in her Breast, almost as big as a man's Head, and I con∣sumed it away without cutting, and without putting her to pain, or hindring busi∣ness; and she continueth well to this day, it being three or four years since I cured her. 4. The Wife of Robert Harison, of Coundon a Mile off Coventry, of the Consump∣tion, Feaver, Yellow and Black Jaundice, having these four Distempers all on her at once; and all that had her in hand gave her off for a dead Woman; and yet
God was pleased to give a Blessing to the means I used, and restored her to her for∣mer Strength and Health again. 5. The Wife of Mr. Middleton, at the Golden Pattin over against the Kings-Bench in Southwark, of the Dropsie, with great weakness, who had lost the greatest part of her Blood, so that she had little left in her Veins but watry Humours which turned to a sad Dropsie, with great weakness; and this came with a miscar∣riage of two Children at one Birth; and I made her as well as ever she was in her Life. 6. The Wife of Mr. Edward Thomas, near the Sign of the Gun, in Woolledge, of great pain and weakness after Child-bearing, who had made use of other Doctors for about three months, and could not get any help. 7. Mrs. Margaret Guiny, of Church-Yard Alley in Chick-Lane of great pain in her Stomach and Back, and Vomiting. 8. The Wife of Mr. Edward Pearsisil, in the Glass-House yard in Ratcliff, neer the Red-Lion, of Weakness and Wasting of the Kidneys, with great pain in her Head and left Side, who could not get help in many years. 9. The Wife of Mr. John Fisher next door to the White Horse, over against Claringden-House in Portugal-street, at the upper end of Pickadilly, of the Palsie all on one side; and other weakness, which came with miscarrying of her Child. 10. The Wife of Mr. John Hodgkins, in Shoomakers Row in Black Fryars, at the Sign of the Last, of a Feaver, with great pain on her Stomach, and was so bad that none thought she would have lived. 11. The Wife of Mr. Bullock of Feather-Alley, or Yard, in Grays-Inn Lane, of the Feaver, and Gripes in the Guts. 12. The Wife of Mr. Isaiah Palmer, the next door to the Old Shears in Great Woodstreet, of a Cancered Wen on her Hand, which was breeding above twelve Years, and could not get help, and I made here as well as ever she was in her Life. 13. The Wife of Mr. Steel, the next door to the Flying-Horse, near Hockly, in Clarkenwel Parish, of great pain in her Side, who could not get help. 14. The Wife of John Wright, of Brick-Lane in Old-street, in Key and Swan-Yard, of Deafness. 15. Elizabeth Brownsear, of Swan-Alley, in the Minories, of the Convulsion-Fits, and shortness of Breath. 16. Mrs Ann Fisher, of Churchyard-Alley in Chick-Lane, of Deafness and Singing in her Head. 17. Judith Brownsy, in Honington, in Devonshire, of the Collick and Spleen.
18. Mary Wilson, of Booknel Parish two Miles off Honington, of loofness of her Teeth, when they were ready to fall out. 19. Rebeccah Phillips, of the same Town, of a sad pain in her Breast and Head, being near fourscore years of Age when I cured her: She could not get help by any other. 20. Susannah Woran, of Stockland five Mles off Honington, of the Ague and Feaver. 21. The Wife of Mr. John Brooks, in the Back-Lane without the Castle-Gate in Bristol, of the Ague and Feaver. 22. I did much good to Deborah Phillips, in Rackly-street, in Bristol, over against the Three-Kings, for the Rising of the Mother, with great pain in her Stomach, and great weakness of Body. 23. The Wife of Mr. Charles Parsons, at the Black-Raven in Pearpool-Lane, of the Feaver, with great pain at her Stomach. 24. Mrs. Clipson, at Safforn-Hill, next door to the Tobacco-Roll, of a Cough, who could not get help by any other. 25. Elizabeth Fish, of Hogsdon, the next door to the Three-Kings, of a great pain and lameness in her Limbs, and the Grips in the Guts. 26. Mrs. Elizabeth Cleverly, next door to the Three Neats-Tongues, in Sil∣ver-street in Bloomsbury, of the Ptisick and Cough, who was so bad therewith, that she was likely to lose her speech. 27. Alice Baker, over against the Black-Swan, in Turnmil-street, at Mr. Cor∣ner's House, a Brick-layer, of Loosness of her Teeth, when they were all ready to fall out. She is near fourscore years of Age. 28. Mris Holloway, at the Nags-Head in Grays-Inn-Lane, of a Feaver with great Weakness, when none thought she would have lived. 29. Mrs. Collins. near the Castle-Gate, in Bristol, of an Imposthume in her Ear. 30. Elizabeth Gareish, of Warminster, in Wiltshire, of a Consumption, with great pain at her Stomach, Head, and Side, who could not get help in three years. 31. Ann Penny, of Froom, five Miles from Warminster, of the Evil in her Neck. 32. The Wife of Thomas Wenton, of Forshil, two Miles off Coventry, of the Mo∣ther and Spleen. 33. The Wife of Mr. Burnham, of Westhadingham, seven Miles off North∣gmpton, of Lameness in her Back and Hips, which came with Child-bearing, and I soon made her throw by her Crutches, and cured her. 34. The Wife of William Biggs a Smith in Darby, of the Mother and Spleen.
35. The Wife of Rober Ostine of Hitchen in Harfordshire, of a lame Leg, and shrunk Sinews, who could not set her Foot to the ground, nor get help in twenty years, and I made her as well as ever she was in her life. 36. Mary Tholins of Ilkuston on the Hill near Darby, of the Evil on her Hand. 37. Margaret Valence of Long-Maston near Worsworth in Darbyshire, of the Evil in her Neck. 38. Joan Lodsdon of Southward near St. Needs, of blindness with the E∣vil. 39. Elizabeth Barton at the Wool-pack in Sea Alley in Kings-street in Westmin∣ster of the Dropsie, and Timpany, who was likely to dye thereof. 40. The Wife of Mr. Richard Kirwood an Apothecary in Corn-street in Bristol, who got harm in her Lying in, and had the advice of many able Doctors, but none could cure her, insomuch that there was little expected but Death; however, with God's Blessing, I made her as well as ever she was in her life. 41. The Servant of Mr. Richard Corbit at the Globe in Long lane, who was quite blind of one Eye, of the Evil, and I cured her. 42. I cured Mary Wilmot of Hogs-Norton in Oxfordshire, of the Evil and Scur∣vy, when it had almost eat her Limbs to pieces. 43. I cured the Wife of John Stooks of Guilford in Surry, of tormenting pain and lameness of the Scurvy in all her Limbs. 44. I helpt Mrs. Lime a Lodger at the Crooked Billet in St. Martins Lane in the Fields, of five Stones that came from her at once,☜ the first or second time after she had taken my things: They are about the bigness of little Nuts, shaped like a Muscle, four of them, and the other is of another shape; any that please may see them. 45. I cured Mrs. Sarah Merryman, over against the Sign of the Bll in Rotchester seven miles from Gravesend, of an Ague and Feaver, You may see, and prove the truth hereof, and you will find that there is not any but my self have done any such Cures, since God gave me the gift of Healing. Therefore, I would not have you believe all Men and Women that say they can do the same, for we live in a false Age and many People are given to lying: therefore prove the truth of their works, and mine, and you that cannot trust your own judgments, take the advice of some godly honest Man, and so proceed. One thing more take notice of, which is this; Because I do good to all that come, being curable, many of the People think that others can do the like, and so go to those which have no skill, and so are cheated of their Money, Lives and all.
Here followeth and account of what Children I have cured. 1. The Child of Mr. Edward Costerine at Wapping-wall a Sailmaker, of the Rickets, and Hectick Feaver. 2. The Son of Mr. Thomas Partridge at the lower end of East-Smithfield, near the Hermitage Bridge a Plummer, of the Feaver. 3. The Child of Mr. Harkalus Bridson near the Sign of the King David, a Dier, on the Bank-side in Southwark, of lameness all one side. 4. The Child of Mr. Henry Peacock, near Catherins Dock, of the new Malignant Feaver and Cough. 5. William Davis's Daughter of Warminster in Wiltshire, of the Evil in her Neck. 6. Elizabeth Butcher, of the same Town, of a Scald and Leprous Head, who was twelve or thirteen years of Age, and brought it into the World with her. 7. I cured her Sister of the same Distemper. 8. Mr. Brooks his Daughter of Fillingsly, three Miles off Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness. 9. Elizabeth Weltons Son of Hill-woton, six Miles off Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness. 10. Mr. Francis Plowmans Daughter of Wotton, two miles off Northampton, of the Palsie, and withered Hand and Arm. 11. Mr. Vickers Daughter of Little Oakly, ten miles off Northampton, of the Evil and Blindness. 12. John Smiths Daughter of Northampton, of Convulsion-Fits. 13. The Daughter of Mr. Standbridge in Catherine-wheel-yard, over against the Sheep-pens in Smithfield, of the Feaver, and Grips in the Guts. 14. Mr. Hayht's Son of Catherine-wheel-yard in Smithfield, of the Consuming Feaver, which is the worst of Consumptions. 15. The Child of Mr. Thomas Parsons, over against St. Giles Church at the Wool-Pack, of the Evil in his Hand, being eat through the Bones and Sinews; and to any honest Man's Judgment,☞ was quite past Cure, his Hand being eaten almost to pieces; and now he is a brave Boy and five years old and upward, and his Hand well, and hath the use of it. 16. The Child of Mr. Grimes, between Vine-street and Mutton-lane, near Clarken-Well, a Clock-maker, of the Rickets and Consumption, when he was almost at Deaths door. 17. The Son of Mrs. Mary Clark, near the Lamb in Islington, of the Lethargy, with great pain in his Head, and Deafness. 18. Richard Kinds Child of Bachwell near Littleworth in Northamptonshire, of the Rickets and Feaver, being four years of Age, and never could have any strength to stand, and I made the Child to go about the Streets in a Fortnights time, with God's help.
19. I helpt Mrs. Mary Coopland in Beamont-yard, a little without Algate, of great lameness in her Hips. 20. The Child of Mr. John Sereitt, at the upper end of Sea-Alley in Kings-street Westminster, being pin'd away with a Consumption and Rickets to Skin and Bones, being above two years of Age, and could not bear any strength to stand, and peo∣ple thought it was impossible for that Child to be recovered; however, with God's blessing, he is as brave a Boy as any about London. And whereas there are sick and diseased Children in the Womb, that die be∣fore they are born, or soon after, besides it doth indanger the Womans Life also; This is to let you know that I Cure Children before they are born and preserve the Womans Life and Health also. And if Children have the same symptoms, as aforesaid, they may take from one year old one Pill, and so many years old, so many Pills as they are years old, till they come to twenty Pills: And so they which are three or fourscore years of Age may take twenty. You are not to give Children any thing but Milk before they put forth their Foreteeth; but after the Foreteeth are come forth, let the Child by little and little be accustomed to chewing, and use flesh minced very small with Bread, which with a little chewing may be swallow'd easily; and abstain sucking the Brest for at least an hour after eating, lest the Milk being mixed in the Stomach with the other Meats, and too long kept there, be corrupted; for I have observed that Children are scarce ever troubled with Worms while they use Milk alone. I can with God's help save the lives of thousands of Children that may dye breeding Teeth, and do it for small charge, if the Parents are but willing. I cure all sorts of Blindness curable, without putting any thing into the Eyes. I cure the Scald or Leprous Head without pain, or loss of a hair of the Head. All sorts of Deafness curable All sorts of Sores, though the Bones be rotten. THe Scarvies breed a Gonorrhea, and so will hard drinking, smoaking Tobac∣co, and late sitting up at nights, and a Gonorrhea will breed a Consumption of the Reins and Kidneys, and this Consumption will breed a Catarrh, which is known by a sharp tickling in the Throat, which is a briny Rheum distilling down from the Brain, but comes from the whole mass of Blood, being corrupted, and made thin and sharp; and when it hath much Ulcerated the Lungs, the best things in the World will not cure; and that is known by much Coughing and Spit∣ting Ropy Flegm in the night time, the loss of natural rest, the appetite bad, and strength decaying, being heavy and melancholy, and little comfort in any
thing, and the flesh wasting away; the mass of Blood is all naught, the Bodies of most all raw on the inside, from the Throat to the neck of the Blader; and fur∣ther in some: so all the Art is to take away all the corruption out of the mass of Blood, and to make it pure and good and to heal all the inward parts, and then the work is done: I do it in the hardest times of Winter, or Summer, the Catarrh goeth speedily off, and all pains soon after that; then comes a good appetite, with all man∣ner of comfort as formerly, but you must not give off taking things, till you find some other symptoms gone as well as the former, which is foulness and greasiness of the Urine, and when it coms to be of a clear wholsome colour, you are well. But beware lest you come too late; therefore to prevent this Mortal Distemper, so soon as you find a tickling in your Throat, make haste and come to me, and I, under God, will help you for small charge; but if you stay till the foresaid symp∣toms appear, you cannot without much difficulty be cured. I help all sorts of Ruptures, and Burstenness in Men, Women and Children, and keep a Truss-maker on purpose to make Trusses fit for them, otherwise they can∣not be cured: I do not hinder them of doing any business, but give present ease, and they go more comfortably about their business: But do not believe them that say they can cure without a Truss, for they will but cheat you of your Money; I have not seen any Trusses so good as those which I have made; I do not get one peny by them. I cure the Ague for five shillings, and every one that I miss doing the Cure, I will give them ten shillings. I do more Cure for a Crown or an Angel, than you can have done at many places for forty shillings. How Men may preserve Health. ANd first of Tobacco, it is hot and dry, and therefore it may be good for gross Phlegmatick Bodies, which are cold and moist, so they take it moderatly. But for a thin Cholerick Man which is by nature hot and dry, Tobacco is the Plague of the whole Body, and the best fruit it bringeth forth is a kind of mad∣ness. Also keep good hours going to bed; forbear hard drinking, which kills as sure as a Gun, though not so quick: and when you are at Dinner or Supper rather rise with an appetite than loathing of Meat: Walk moderately and what-ever you do vex not your mind with care and troubles of the World, for it will breed many Diseases, and eat out the Body like a Canker-Worm: And knowing, that though we are alive and well to day, we may be dead to morrow; therefore I think he doth well that considers his latter end. The true Receit (as it was given to me) of the Everlasting Cordial Drink, Wa∣ter, or Spirits, which the Cheats have cryed up to cure all Diseases: Take Spirit of Wine one Gallon, Senna two pound, bruise it a little, and put it into the Spirit of Wine for the space of forty eight hours; then strain out the Sen∣na,
