L2235 R28782 10759089 45692
Mr. Lilly's NEW PROPHECY, Touching the Notable Actions of this Instant September, and the ensuing Three Months of the Year, (viz.) October, November, and December. With an Astrological Account of the Future Plenty, or Scarcity, Dearth or Cheapness of most sorts of Fruits of the Earth, Merchandize, or Commodities. AS ALSO, Of the remarkable Alterations of Weather, during all the remaining part of this Year, 1679. London, Printed in the Year, 1679.
Mr. Lilly's New PROPHECY. THE Great and truly Merited Reputation our Famous Author hath acquired throughout the World, for his profound skill in this most difficult speculative Science, may (we hope) serve to com∣mend this little Abstract to every Mans serious Perusal and Consider∣ation. For if we consider but the truth of things past in the former part of the year, by him most plainly predicted, we have no reason to imagine, but that his Predictions touching the latter part thereof, are grounded upon the same truth of Judgment, and will as certainly come to pass as the former have done— Astrolgy i certainly the most Noble of the Sciences, and where truly Arrived at (as in our Author) to be regarded with the greatest respect. But though some Ignorant Pre∣tenders do abuse and impose upon the World with their trash, yet that in no wise serves to cast a disesteem upon the Art, any more than any Tub Preachers nonsence and error does upon Divinity. But rather to commend to higher Veneration, its Faithful and Judicious Dis∣pensers. I need not detain you with an Apology where Lilly's Name is prefixed. Nor will I; Therefore read these his Observations amongst others, Touching the Months of September, October, and No∣vember. God direct Mens minds to require Justice, and their Supe∣riors to encline thereunto. And a little further, the Moon is in conjunction with Jupiter, and posited in Taurus her exalta∣tion and a fixed sign which denotes the safety and prosperity of the people in general, both in their bodies and Estates, which we pray God continue, yet he presently subjoyns. But as the Moon lately separated from the opposition of Mars; we may therefore rationally conjecture that the minds of the Vulgar have been somewhat disturbed or corrupted, with Seditious thoughts and discontents. Also great fear of War daily ex∣pected
or much repining at the Soldiery, who are generally thought by the Country too burthensome and uneasy to them. And as the next application of the Moon is to an opposition of Venus, it shews therefore small probability of any sudden amendment, but rather a continual grumbling and dissatisfa∣ction — Also a repining against the Edicts of Superiors and Governors But Good News to Merchants. The Merchant will notwithstanding all dangers be blessed with hopeful returns, although he may be a little fearful of Damage at Sea by Piracy, high Winds and Tempestuous Storms. And after adds, and all things being seriously con∣sidered we conceive his dangers may be many, but his fears more than his loss. Controversies and frequent differences a∣mongst Eminent Persons in the World shall cease, at least for some time, but we fear they may again break out afresh, not∣withstanding the endeavors, &c. The position of Jupiter in the Ninth in opposition to Mars, shews some differences, may be debated in Religious Affairs or some Eminent Clergy-men or Lawyers, strangely opposed. And those their endeavors may be to elevate themselves or settle Religious Matters and Ceremonies, and this by force rather than gentle means, or the command of those in Power and Authority. The same positin also portends disturbances shall arise amongst or ra∣ther against the Religious party (of what Sect soever) some opposition they must expect to meet with, perhaps more than ordinry this Quarter, and prosecuted vigorously by Authori∣ty: And yet they should remain resolute and wilful in their greatest troubles and afflictions. Afterwards many sudden and sharp Councels generally on
Foot, and the generality of Mankind, too frequently repining (and sometimes plotting and contriving mischiefs) against their Superiors: We fear this Quarter, may prove more sick∣ly than most expected. &c. Then as to Cattle, Corn, and Fruit, hear his own Language. The greater sort of Cattle, as Horses, Oxen, Cows &c. Should stand moderately well this Year in the general. But the smaller sort will be subject to diseases, especially towards this Quarter. We fear a rot amongst Sheep, and some dange∣rous Disease amongst Hogs — Corn for the most part shou d bear a good price, especially Wheat and Barley, and cone∣quently Malt will prove a good Commodity — Coals will not advance much but continue at a reasonable price, and the lat∣ter half of the year rather fall than rise, if our long experience and observations fail us not. All these are faithfuly collected out of his Astrological Judgments for this Quarter; he mo∣destly concludes that he might, in these his Astrlogical con∣jectures have given many other material hints. But excuses himself with a (Senesco) he is grown old and unwilling to give the least occasion of offence in these ticklish times. Nor (sayes he) is it convenient to be too loquacious or publick spiritd; least we produce disturbance in our old Age, as we have often met withal in our younger years, and we know — — Habent sua fata & regna & homines, &c. But — Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. I had almost forgotten one material passage, whch pleae to take in his own words— (sayes he) but the actions of this present Year 1679. do not wholly depend (Astrologically) ei∣ther upon the Quarterly ingresses of the Sun, or the several Lu∣nations and Eclipses, but the effects of the late Comet, as al∣so the grand Transits and Conjunctions of the superior Planets
ought with them to be considered, of which we have not been unmindful in this our General Judgment, as also in our moneth∣ly observations. So far in his years Astrological Judgments. Now let us take a Brief view of his Monethly observations for Septem. Octo. Novem. and Decem. For we dare not entertain you with our own rude conjectures, nor presume to assign to each Pla∣net, its Regiment of peculiar Creatures, and to make our own observations upon the plenty or scarcity of such things, according to the power or weakness of the Planet they are un∣der. Neither dare we insert our own weak notions with the strong well digested Judgments of our Author. For that would be not only to render our self presumptious and ridiculous, but also to prophane the more precious writings of our Author, and (according to our sweet Poet in his description of the Chaos) to intermix Sacra profanis— I begin therefore with his observa∣tions on Septem. which he begins thus (viz) this will certain∣ly prove a Moneth of much business, wherein many serious and long winded debates, will take up the most generous spi∣rits of Europe. &c. Again (sayes he) 'tis observable that the Planet Mars is now in that fixed Treacherous sign Scorpio, the most vitious of all the Twelve, and there in opposition to Jupi∣ter, which manifests superlative actions upon the Stage; and old matters seem to be called in question, Informations, Im∣peachments, Accusations, and quid non? Those that shall be found Guilty must expect considerable Punishment (viz) Im∣prisonment or loss of Estate, Detrimentum patietur omne quod est ejus, if not of all they have — The Sun towards the end here∣of is Eclipsed, though invisible to us, yet may produce notable ef∣fects (viz) Multitudo Pluviarum abundance of Rain or many Showres, with Storms and Tempests &c. so of September.
A brief account of Octobers Observations. Here falls an invisible Eclipse of the Moon in Aries, which notwithstanding may operate aswel upon the temper of Man∣kind, as upon general matters in the World — Male-con∣tented spirits about this time, too busie to foment—ambi∣guous and false reports of very ill consequence, &c. —Mis∣sives, Agents, or Embassadors from several parts of Europe con∣gratulate England's Monarch &c. — also honor conferred upon some deserving Person, who is excellently well qualified for the same — to the general content of most men — some slight aspersions cast upon an Eminent Clergy-man, &c. — And to∣wards the Moneths end, we may expect to hear of some emi∣nent Marriage of some great and worthy Persons in England, or in some Country near adjoyning to it &c. so of October. Novembers Observations in Brief. Notable things had in consultation in Spain, the Emperor of Germany active and vigilant in preventing many inconvenien∣ces, &c. Again very serious negotiations now on Foot. And about this time the grievances and complaints of the distressed in many Countries, are taken into consideration, also divers e∣normities regulated — The Monarch of Great Britain is near this time made happy by several welcome Intelligences, of the Gallantry and Noble deportment of his Subjects both at Sea and Land, to the honor of the English Nation. The weather proves seasonable and calm for the most part, and the Moneth concludes with hopeful successes of the English Merchant ships, every day expected from several parts of the World. Decembers Observations in Brief. This Month is usher'd in, or begins with an unhappy opposi∣tion
of Saturn and Mars, from Tropical signs, whence abun∣dance of mischief is threatned both at Sea and Land, occasioned partly by unseasonable Weather, or by Treacherys Mutinys, Combustions and other immoderate Actions, Deus avertat judi∣cu. Many lying Intelligences and fale Reports are rumored abroad this Month, still Differences lye under debate, and one Cros follows upon the Neck of another. —The Diseases of this Seson which afflit Mankind, may be Imposthumations in the Stomack, Phthisick, Rotten Coughs, Dropsical Humors, Di∣senterys, Wind, Collick, French Pox, &c. And so with some Reflectins touching the Affairs of Holland and Flanders, and a Prayer for the well Issuing of His Majesties Affairs, He ends this Months Observations. Thus you have a Faithful Account of all Mr. Lilly's material Observations and Preditions to the end of the year, from this time, wherein I am perswaded are divers passges worth the remarking. We are cast upon difficult times and more Mischiefs seem to threaten us than we are yet aware of, our duty and business therefore is, well to weigh and consi∣der all Gods Providences towards us, and to declare his Praises in our Gates, for his wonderful Discovery of the Damnable Hellish Plot, lately (and we doubt still on Foot) against us. And to beg of God that he would make fuller and clearer Discoveries thereof unto us, that the Hellish Designs of those Miscreants may not previl gainst u: And we may gather much of future occur∣rences, by well heeding the judicious Observations of this our Learned Author, which may tend much to the prevention of (otherwise unforeseen) future Mischiefs. The good God of Heaven Preserve His Majesty from any Popish Snares, and Grant him long to Raign, make him happy in this ensuing Parliament, dispel all His Subjects Doubts and Mis-conceivings, and bring us at length out of Romish Entanglements, to enjoy our selves in Peace and Plenty as Formerly, Farewel. FINIS.
