L572 8776962 41777
CHRIST CRƲCIFIED: OR, The DOCTRINE of the GOSPEL ASSERTED Against PELAGIAN & SOCINIAN ERROURS, Revived under the Notion of New Lights. Wherein also the Original, Occasion, and Progress of Errours are set down: And Admonitions directed both to them that stand fast in the Faith, and to those that are fallen from it. Unto which are added three Sermons, Preached upon publick Oc∣casions, being of the same Nature and tendency with the Tract. By Paul Lathom M. A. Vicar of Warmister in VViltshire. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. But we preach Christ Crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks, foolishness. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1 John 2.22. Who is a lyar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist that denieth the Father and the Son. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn. 1666.
To the Right Reverend Father in God, ALEXANDER, Lord Bishop of SARƲM, My very much Honoured Lord and Patron. MY LORD, THe Church of God is ve∣ry fitly represented as a Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. which though it self be both harmless and plea∣sant, yet must expect unpleasant and harsh usage, from the Ill-neighbourhood of them who are as Briers and Thorns. Mic. 7.4. Psal. 80.12. Cant. 2.15. Prophane per∣sons, like the wild Boar, will be at∣tempting to dig up the Roots; and Hereticks, like little Foxes, will be
spoyling the tender Grapes, of this Vine, Psal. 80.15 which the Lords own right hand hath planted. And both these sorts of them that are born after the flesh, Gal. 4.29. through their enmity to them that are born after the Spirit, as they greatly disturb the progress and peace of the Shepherds of Christs flock (who must expect to be men of strife, Jer. 15.10. and to op∣pose themselves against a current of prophaness and errors (of whose trou∣bles, 2 Cor. 11.26, 28. together with the care of the Church of God, the perils from false brethren are not the least part) so to those that are of the Flock, it must needs be an occasion of many sad thoughts and searchings of heart, many sad temptations and trials of their stability. Now the Word of God, As it sup∣plies us with such comforts which in the multitude of the thoughts of our hearts, Psal. 94.19. may at all times delight and bear up our souls: So in this sort of distresses, Psal. 119.50. we may truly say, This is our comfort in our distress, Thy word hath quickned us. And that, Ʋnless this word had been our delight and
comfort, we must needs have sunk and perished under these troubles and tri∣als. Whose heart would not fail him to see so many false Prophets, and false Christs arise in the Church, Mat. 14.24. if Christ had not told us before, That false Christs and false Prophets should arise; and St. Paul, 2 Tim. 3.1. That in the last dayes perilous times should come: And St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1. that There should arise false Teachers among us, which should pri∣vily bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them? What sad thoughts and searchings of heart would the divisions of Reuben cause, Judg. 5.15, 16. while the sons of Belial are confederate in wickedness, if Christ himself had not told us, that his Co∣ming and Doctrin would not send peace in the earth, but a sword, Mat. 10.34. not designedly, but by accident? How would it startle us to hear the confi∣dence of many in citing the word of Truth, for the defence of dangerous errors; if the Apostle had not told us, 2 Cor. 11.14. that Satan doth oft transform himself into an Angel of light; and the Evangelists, that he had the im∣pudence
to quote Scripture to our Saviour to entice him to evil; Mat. 4.6. and therefore that it is no wonder if his ministers do transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ? How would it stagger us to see the outward strict∣ness of life, and specious pretences of Sectaries, if Christ had not told us, that many should come in sheeps clothing, Mat. 7.15. who inwardly are ravening wolves? How would it sad our hearts to see men of good affections, and excellent gifts, drawn away to errors; if Christ had not told us that the Se∣ducers will be so prevalent, Mat. 24.24. as to de∣ceive (if it were possible) even the very Elect? What sadness must it needs work in our hearts, to see men sleight and loath the spiritual Manna of Gods publick Ordinances, and to long for flesh of their own fancying; if the Apostle had not told us, that the time would come, 2 Tim. 4.3. when men would not endure sound Doctrin, but after their own lusts, would gather them an heap of Teachers, that should claw their itching ears? Whose heart would not break to see the general
coldness and want of zeal for God; yea, that Irreligiousness and Atheism of many; if Christ himself had not told us, that when Iniquity should so much abound in the later dayes, Mat. 24.12. the love of many would wax cold? Now God in his Word, hath told us of these things before hand, to the end that when we see them come to pass, we should not be offended: Joh. 16.1. And withal, that being thus fore∣warned, we might endeavour to arm our selves against these trials. It is the duty of all men, like the good Beraeans, to search the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. and find out the deceits of seducers. And those especially whom God hath made watchmen over his people, Ezek. 3.17. ought to give all diligence in disco∣vering these enemies, that would gladly find an opportunity, to sow these Tares, while we are sleeping: Mat. 13.25. To settle, as much as may be, them that stand fast; to reclaim (if possi∣ble) them that are gone astray; and to clear our selves from the blood of all men. Acts 20.26. This small Tract is designed for
the promoting of these Ends, which I hope may stir up others of better abilities and leasure, to go further in so necessary a work. If any ob∣ject, that this Doctrin of the Gospel being generally owned, did not need to be asserted: I answer, I could wish that all our Neighbours were both almost, and altogether, such Christians as they ought to be: But it is too sadly evident, that all are not Christians, that go under that general Name. Beside, if Saint Augustine's learned books de Civitate Dei, and that later Work of the noble Du Plessis De veritate Christ. Relig. be accounted both excellent and useful: then why may not ano∣ther of the same nature, that fol∣loweth them, though not passibus aequis, be esteemed acceptable, and useful in these giddy times, Psal. 82.5. wherein all the foundations of the Earth are out of course? And as for the stile, it is such as is both sutable to my own Genius, and I hope to the subject here handled: And being designed chiefly for the benefit of ignorant
and misguided people: I thought it better to use such a language as might profit them, then such as might amuse them. However, Gen. 27.22. if the hands be rough like Esau's, I hope the voyce will appear to be Jacob's. Whatsoever it is, it tenders it self to your Lordships acceptance, as a Testimony of my canonical Obedi∣ence, and dutiful Respects to your Lordship, as my Reverend Dioce∣san, and much Honoured Patron: Whose candid construction of this mean Present, will much encourage the Authour; and your good Prayers pro∣mote the success of this small piece in the ends for which it is designed. That I may no longer detain your Lordship from more weighty mat∣ters in reading these lines, I shall humbly take leave to break off: beseeching the great Shepherd and Bi∣shop of our souls, to double unto your Lordship, the abundance of those Graces and Gifts of his Holy Spirit, which may render you a common Good in your place here, and happy in
giving up the accounts of your Stewardship, with much joy. Which is the hearty prayer of Your Lordships most humble and ready SERVANT Paul Lathom. Warmister, March 1. 1665.
The Contents. CHAP. 1. The Soul of man in its first Creation, was per∣fectly free from Ignorance and Errour: Errours the Fruit of the Fall of our First-Parents. The pernicious na∣ture of Errours, in matters of Reli∣gion. Page 1. CHAP. 2. A right understanding of the Holy Scriptures is our best secu∣rity against Errours. We need not sail to Rome to fetch it thence. Two Extreams in the interpreting of Scripture, both which do dangerously tend to induce us to Errour. Page 10. CHAP. 3. As in vitious Courses, so also in erronious Opinions, men go from bad to worse. The experience of our age hath sadly confirmed this. The sad pass that many are come to at this day, in matters of Religion. Page 25.
CHAP. 4. An Introduction to the Doctrine of Christ our Mediatour, shewing how far the Light of Na∣ture will lead us toward Heaven, and wherein it comes short. The va∣rious acceptions of the words Christ, and Mediator, opened. page 34. CHAP. 5. The Holy Scripture being owned by all that call themselves Christians, we may therefore expect that Arguments drawn from thence, should put an end to all strife. The Design and Method of the four next Chapters, propounded. page. 45. CHAP. 6. The first Proposition con∣firmed, viz. That God did to the Fathers of the Old Testament, pro∣mise to send his own Son to be In∣carnate, and to be a Mediator be∣tween God and Man. page. 49. CHAP. 7. The second Proposition con∣firmed, viz. That the time for the accomplishment of these promises is long since past, and consequently the Messiah long since come. page. 64. CHAP. 8. The third Proposition con∣firmed, viz. That the same Jesus in whom we believe, is the true Messiah
that was promised to the Fathers. page 91. CHAP. 9. The fourth Proposition con∣firmed, viz. That the New Testa∣ment doth hold forth to us such a Christ as is truely God and Man, and who did truly satisfie Gods justice for our sins. page. 108. CHAP. 10. Two Cautions drawn by way of Inference from the afore∣said discourses. page. 121. CHAP. 11. Seasonable Admonitions to those who as yet stand fast in the Faith. page. 134. CHAP. 12. Seasonable Admonitions to them that are either wavering, or fallen from the Faith. page. 145. Serm. 1. The Nature and Danger of a Misguided Conscience, on Act. 26.9. page. 161. Serm. 2. The Subtile and Pestilent Nature of Seducers, on Eph. 4.14. page. 201. Serm. 3. The Properties of Heavenly Wisdom: An Assize-Sermon, on James 3.17. page. 237.
ERRATA. PAge 31. line 23. for or read and. p. 126. l. 1. f. scutiny r. scrutiny. p. 162. l. 23. f. ages r. eyes. p. 206. l. 24. f. n Istruction r. Instruction. p. 239. l. 3. f. . r. . p. 253. l. 18. f.  r. . p. 254. l. 2. f. frowing r. frowning.
Christ Crucified: OR, The Doctrine of the Gospel ASSERTED, Against Pelagian and Socinian Errors, Revived under the Notion OF NEW LIGHTS. CHAP. 1. The Soul of Man in its first Creation, was perfectly free from Ignorance and Error. Errors the Fruit of the Fall of our first Parents. The per∣nicious Nature of Errors in matters of Religion. THe infinite Wisdom and Power of the Creator of the World, did compose all things in the Universe, in Number, Weight, and Mea∣sure. Gen. 1.26. And in making Man (about which the whole Sa∣cred Trinity seems in an especial manner to consult) he was pleased to shew a most
Exquisite piece of his Workmanship, cre∣ating him after his own Image, so far as a Creature (whose Nature speaks him finite) was capable of representing his Creator; who as he is Infinite in his Being, so likewise in all Excellencies, and Perfections. The soul of man considered in it self, as a Spiri∣tual and Immortal substance, endued with such admirable Faculties of Understanding, Conscience, Memory, Will, and Affecti∣ons, as it gives us great reason to say with the Psalmist, Psal. 139.14. that we are fearfully and won∣derfully made; so it affords very ample oc∣casion for breaking forth into the high praises of the God of the spirits of all flesh, Num. 27.16. and saying, Psal. 104.24. O Lord how manifold are thy Works! In Wisdom hast thou made them all. Our souls are beautiful even in those ruins into which they are fallen by trans∣gressing the command of our Creator: But how glorious were these spiritual Beings, when they came first out of their Creator's hands, Psal. 8.5. beautiful as the Morning, and little lower than the Angels? Then was this little world Man, like a well-ordered Kingdom, where the Prince commands with singular Prudence and Justice, and the people obey with a willing and submissive obsequious∣ness. Then the Understanding did fit at the Stern, with singular foresight and exact∣ness to stear our course, and the Will and Affections did with as much readiness apply themselves to follow the Dictates of Reason,
as one Member of our Body doth bestir it self in ministring to the necessities of another. Those that fancy that there was a differ∣ent inclination in the Superiour and Inferi∣our Faculties of the souls of our first Parents from their Creation, and that it is insepa∣rable from the Nature of man as consisting of soul and body: (From whence they sup∣pose such a Conflict to have been in the soul of man between these different Motions, as did dispose him to forsake his own happi∣ness): These I say, might be better advised, if they did duly consider what is meant by Gods making man after his own Image. Gen. 1.26. For as the supream Being and first Cause of all things is in his measure, that is infinitely and unconceivably, perfect in all his Attri∣butes and Works, and amongst other Attri∣butes, so perfect in Knowledg and Wis∣dom, Psal. 104.2. that he is said to cover himself with Light as with a Garment, and to be such a Light, that in him is no Darkness at all. 1 John 1.5. Even so by mans being made after the Image of his Maker, we are to understand that in his measure, and according to his capacity, he was perfect in all those Excellencies that did appertain to his Nature. And as the Un∣derstanding is one of the noblest, and the leader of the other Faculties of mans soul, we must therefore conceive that to be made perfect in Knowledg, so far as to be capable of rightly understanding whatsoever was necessary or suitable to the Nature of man
to know: That this Light was pure and free from being mixed with any darkness of Ig∣norance or Error. And that the Will and Affections were perfectly subjected to the dominion of the Understanding, so that they did then as readily obey and execute its Dictates, as the Members of our Body do now move themselves at the appoint∣ment of the Will. Nor are we to imagine that in this estate of perfect holiness and happiness in which man was placed, there was any such drawing downward of the sensitive Appetite, as might either disturb the peace of the soul by the contrariety of its motion to the di∣ctates of Reason, or else dispose and incline man to swerve from the right way. But e∣ven as we believe the Saints in Heaven, when their bodies shall be re-united to their souls, to be made perfect in holiness, Heb. 12.23. and nothing to remain in them, that may tend either to disturb the perfection of their happiness, or to draw them away from serving and en∣joying him that is the chiefest good. So we may most reasonably believe that in mans first Creation, there was no manner of de∣fect or error in his Understanding, nor any discording motions arising from the union of the soul and body; nor yet any clouds arising from the sensitive Appetite, to dark∣en the light of Reason. And whereas there are some that conceive the Fall of man to have been occasioned by
his Inadvertency, that, being of a Finite, though perfect understanding, he did not therefore apprehend or consider all things at once: And therefore fixing his mind wholly upon the pleasantness of the Fruit, so as not at the same time duly to consider the strictness of Gods command, and the threatning that was annexed to it, he did hereby come to violate Gods precept by em∣bracing that pleasant fruit. Neither doth this evince any shortness of sight, or natu∣ral ignorance or error to have been in man from his Creation: For if he did not consi∣der all those things together which he ought to have considered, yet had he power and capacity sufficient to have apprehended all things necessary to be considered at once; for else we should lay a fault upon the Good∣ness or Wisdom of God in the Creation of man, if we believe him to have permitted such a defect in his Nature as must needs occasion his sinning: The default therefore is to be imputed to mans want of putting in execution that power which God had given him. Man fell, not because he wanted knowledg enough to hold him upright, but because he did not put forth that power which his Creator had given him to apprehend the strictness of his Law, and the certainty of the inflicting the penalty that was annex∣ed, in case of mans disobedience. By what hath been spoken we may be put in mind to reflect with sadness of heart,
upon that happiness which once our Nature did enjoy. Eccles. 7.29. Thus God made man upright, but he sought out many inventions. And how art thou fallen from Heaven, O thou that wast made but little lower than the Angels? How unlike is man now to that Exquisite piece which our Creator sent forth of his hands perfect in beauty? Now the course of Nature is inverted, and as all things in mans soul were once governed with singular order and harmony, so now there is as great discord and disorder in all our facul∣tie and the exercises thereof. Now the Will and Affections do sometimes with their insinuation enveagle and bribe the Reason of man, either to shut its eyes, or else to pronounce false sentence upon things that differ, Isa. 5.20. to call good evil, and evil good. Or if they cannot prevail to do this, they then rise up like unruly Subjects against the commands of their Sovereign, and shake off that yoke of obedience which God in Na∣ture hath laid upon them, as in those incon∣tinent persons, who do with Medea in the Poet, Videre meliora & probare, but dete∣riora sequi. Nor hath the Understanding it self (though freer from corruption than the other faculties) wholly escaped without de∣pravation, but partly through a dimness and short-sightedness in it self, is subject to Ignorance and Error; and partly through the ill neighbourhood of a depraved Will and disordered Affections, it is wofully
swerved from its original Rectitude and In∣tegrity. The wonderful Wisdom and Power of God is manifest in making such variety of Features in mens Faces, that amongst the many myriads of men that live upon the face of the Earch, there are not any two so ex∣actly alike but they are to be distinguished by him that looks heedfully upon them. And the sad and, wonderful mischief of sin is as manifest in that it hath begotten as much variety in mens minds, as is in their Physiog∣nomies; so that you can hardly meet with two men so exactly of one mind, that you will need to lay a thread upon them to know them apart. From the beginning doubtless it was not so. For, as the God of Truth is but one, and there is but one way of Truth; we may believe, that God who made the mind of man on purpose to apprehend the Truth, did not put such various tempers into mens minds at first, as might make them to have such different thoughts of the same thing, of which some must needs be false: For, Cujus contrarium verum est, &c. contrary con∣ceptions of the same object, cannot both be true. Now if Truth be so valuable, or rather unvaluable a Jewel, that the wise Man ad∣viseth us to buy it at any rate, Prov. 23.23. but to sell it at no rate; then certainly Error which is con∣trary to it, must needs be as evil and unde∣sirable as being not onely a debasing and
perverting of the first and leading Faculty of the Soul, and a drawing it beside the Truth, which it was made on purpose to contemplate, but also in that it produceth so many pernicious consequents in the world. When God confounded the Lan∣guage of the builders of Babel, it is said, That they were scattered abroad upon the face of the Earth, Gen, 11.3. and left off to build the City. And that confusion of Mind and Language which hath befallen us as the just desert and proper fruit of our fins, hath hindred the building up of the Church of God, and the edi∣fying of mens souls, to Eternal Life: And hath scattered and severed men one from another in their Affections and Associations. Hence have issued Schisms and making of parties; one for Paul, another for Apollos, a third for Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12. a fourth for Christ in op∣position to Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, all Teachers, and all Ordinances. And indeed, though difference in judgment about smal∣ler matters ought not to produce di∣stance in Affections, and standing aloof from Unity and Association; yet we find by day∣ly experience that it doth bring forth these Apples of Sodom. Amos 3.9. Can two walk together ex∣cept they be agreed? Yea, it hath occasioned many to become indifferent, & others Scep∣ticks in matters of Religion: And all these things have conspired to produce another effect of dangerous consequence, even the putting of a stumbling block in the way, to
turn them aside from Religion, which else might have come to the embracing of it. The best and most proper Expedient to help us against these growing mischiefs, is to get our souls well ballasted with substantial Knowledge of the Fundamentals of our Faith, that an over-large sail of Affections, may not betray us to those prejudices that are prepared against us, by the various Winds of strange Doctrine that are abroad. That we may be, like the Mountains, fixed and unmoveable, and not like Chaff and other leight and loose matter, easily carried away and driven to and fro with these blasts. 1 Cor. 3.11. Now it is certain, that Other foundati∣on can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And therefore as they are to be esteemed, Houses built without a Foundation, that are not bottomed upon him: so it will greatly concern all of us, to endeavour to be rooted and built up in him; Col. 2.7. which will be our best safegard in these perilous times, wherein there are so many Seducers that watch for our souls; divers of whom do bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. even denying the Lord that bought them.
CHAP. II. A right understanding of the Holy Scriptures is our best security a∣gainst Errors. We need not sail to Rome to fetch it thence. Two ex∣treams in the Interpreting of Scri∣pture, both which do dangerously tend to induce us to Error. THe Papists do both injuriously and ab∣surdly alledge, to the undervaluing of the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and setting the Authority of their Church above it, that all sorts of Hereticks have pretended the Scriptures to favour and father even their most deformed and monstrous Con∣ceits. In this Allegation, they do not one∣ly wrong the Word of God in attempting to detract from its Authority, but also pre∣judice their own cause, by giving us just oc∣casion to suspect either the Judgment or De∣signe of those that would impose upon us by such a Non-concluding Argument. For this very thing doth argue what great re∣spect men are naturally enclined to shew to the Word of God; seeing, though many men hold that which is really contrary to it,
yet they would make it seem, as near as they can, to be agreeable to it. And it hence appears that they account an Argu∣ment drawn from the Scriptures to be very firm and powerful, seeing they take such pains to wrest the Scriptures to make them speak that which they never intended, on their side. It is then very evident (and may be spo∣ken for the honour of this sure word of Pro∣phesie) that men of all Professions and Per∣swasions, 2 Pet. 1.19. do appeal to it as the last Judge in all Controversies appertaining to our Christian Faith. But the great thing con∣troverted, is, What is the best way for In∣terpreting the Scriptures? The Papists, if either Self-interest, or the just Judgment of God upon them, did not quite put out their eyes, could not possibly give up themselves to going round in these mills which grind for their advantage. In treating of the Authority of the Scri∣ptures, they first will have the Scriptures to obtain Authority from the Testimony of the Church, and then the Authority of the Church shall be established from the Testi∣mony of the Scriptures. So that the Church, before its Authority be proved, must give Authority to the Scriptures, and then the Scriptures which they suppose to have received their Authority from the Church, must give Authority to the Church. And in like manner they deal about the
Interpretation of the Scriptures. For if we ask, Who must have Authority so to In∣terpret the Scriptures, that we must rest in that Interpretation? They will tell you, The Church. And who is that Church? but he whom they suppose the Head of the Church, The Pope. So that, first that In∣terpretation which the Pope gives of the Scriptures, must establish his Authority to interpret them; and then by vertue of Au∣thority with which he conceives himself to be invested by the Scriptures, he takes Au∣thority over the Scriptures. But we may well reckon it a considerable part of our happiness in matters of our Faith, that as we do, upon good grounds, believe the Authority of the Scriptures, to be such as needs not to be supported by the Pope; but to which indeed he ought to sub∣mit himself, and by which he must be judg∣ed: So we believe, upon sufficient grounds, that for the Interpretation of Scripture in matters necessary to our salvation, we need not send to Rome to be informed. We should esteem it an unpardonable injury, both to the Wisdom and Goodness of our Heavenly Father, if we should suppose that he had left his Will in order to our salvati∣on, involved in such intricacies, as should not be obvious to be apprehended by those that with an honest heart, set themselves to search the Scriptures. And whereas in matters of less moment, there are some
dark places of Scripture, which the Lord hath thought meet to leave for the exercise of our Industry, and trial of our Humility; As to these we say, that as a man may be saved without a distinct understanding them, so the Pope not onely may erre, but hath fouly erred in attempting the Inter∣pretation of them. And I may reasonably add before I leave this, that the Papists in pleading for a necessity of appealing to the Pope as the last Judge of the Interpretation of Scripture, do quite shake the foundation of his power by overloading it with a too∣high structure. For if we must needs be∣lieve our selves to be at a loss as to the meaning of the Scriptures, unless we have the gracious Nod of his pretended Holiness to confirm it, then why may we not as well sus∣pect our selves not rightly to understand those Scriptures that are alleadged for the Popes Authority to interpret Scripture, un∣less his Authority do confirm us in this meaning of them? And if so, then the Popes Authority to interpret the Scriptures is wholly founded (as I intimated before) upon his own Magisterial deciding the mean∣ing of Scriptures. And if even our Saviour saith, If I bear witness of my self, John 5.31. my wit∣ness is not true; then why may we not sus∣pect the Popes Authority, which is wholly built upon his own Testimony? And if the Popes authority in this case be not reasona∣bly confirmed, then are we as far to seek for
the meaning of the Scriptures, as before he delivered his judgment. And consequently the appealing to him in this matter, is so far from putting an end to all strife, that it is the way to continue an endless strife, till he hath better Asserted his own authority, then ever yet he hath done. And therefore we may very reasonably invert this Argument, and say, that if the appealing to the Pope, be not the way to satisfie our saith, but rather to make it giddy by running round in these mazes; therefore it is not the best way to refer our selves to him as an Arbitrator, or Ʋmpire in those differences that are amongst us, about the meaning of some Texts of Scriptures. If yet they persist in pleading necessity to draw us to this inconvenience, and that without putting it to this refer∣ence, the suit will never be at an end. We answer, That as the case is very sad in our Church, in regard of these divisions of Reu∣ben; so we may well suppose that the evil eye with which they look upon us, represents it as much worse then it is, when they would draw us to lean upon a broken Reed for fear of falling, to rest upon that for the streng∣thening of our Faith, which is not able to uphold it self (I mean the Pope's authority) and therefore will afford but a sorry sup∣port to us. Besides, when we find that in the Apostles times, there was great cause to complain of Multitudes of false Teachers, which then were risen up in the Church
(all which, no doubt, did pretend to the Patronage of the Scriptures, as our Modern Opiniators now do) and yet we never hear St. Paul, who complains so much of them, to appeal to St. Peter (who was then alive, and able to give a better construction of the Scriptures than those that call themselves his Successors) for deciding those contro∣versies, and pronouncing who was in the right; But he proceeds to cut his way by the Sword of the Spirit, Eph. 6, 17. which is the Word of God, and reckons these Weapons to be mighty through God, for pulling down strong Holds, 2 Cor. 14.4, 5. casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it self against the Knowledg of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought into the Obedience of Christ. There∣fore, I say, Why may not we believe that the same strength is able to do the same works still, and that if we be diligent in endeavouring by sound Doctrine, Tit. 1.9. Chap. 2, v. 1.8. both to ex∣hort and to convince the gain-sayers, and preach the things that becomes sound Doctrine, and use sound Speech which cannot reasona∣bly be contradicted; that this, I say, shall be effectual for the discovery of the Truth: And that we shall find in the issue, that, Great is the Truth, and stronger than all things, that it endureth, and is alwayes strong, 1 Esdras 4.35, 38. and conquereth evermore: Whereas Error (though it appear boysterous and turbulent for the present) yet it shall in the end appear to be weak, and yield the Victory unto Truth,
And though for the present it afford us no small trouble in the Church, that men of perverse mindes will not see the plain and true meaning of some Scriptures, because they are blinded with prejudice and self-conceit: yet do we not think that the onely expedi∣ent to remedy this, is to turn Papists, both be∣cause their Pope hath nothing to shew as a Commission for his Ʋmpirage, and therefore we should be never the better for appealing to him: and also because we doubt not but the Lord who is pleased to permit these er∣rours for the trial and exercise of our Faith, when we have suffered under them as much as he thinks meet for us, will (with∣out applying our selves to this indirect course) stablish, 1 Pet. 5.10. strengthen, and settle us, and ry true member of his Church in the right Faith, Rom. 16.20. and that the God of peace will himself tread Satan under our feet shortly. I might add, to make this up weight, the contrary judgements of Popes and Anti∣popes, which have for some time made a great stir in the Church, and must needs be a great distraction to the mindes of them that were bound by their Religion to rest upon the judgement of an infallible person, when it was so hard to determine which of the two contraries was truly infallible. And be∣side that in the successions in that See, there have been divers that have contradicted the judgement of their Predecessors; yea, we are not certain, but that the same Pope may the
next year esteem himself infallible in hold∣ing that which is quite contrary, to what he now doth infallibly determine: and these cases must needs puzzle the Faith of those that apply themselves to such a judge as may be subject to such alterations and con∣trariety. But these things have been so fully and excellently managed by far abler hands, that I shall content my self with gi∣ving a brief hint of them. And this I think is sufficient to convince any person of an un∣byassed minde, That there is neither necessity nor convenience to invite us to refer our selves to the Pope for deciding of contro∣versies, about the interpretation of difficult Scriptures. But to proceed: As there are many places of Scripture, which are not easie to be un∣derstood; so it behooves us, both to be indu∣strious in using the means which God affords us for attaining the knowledge of them; and withal, to be very modest in passing our judgements concerning the meaning of them. And indeed it is mostly to be ob∣served, that, they are most confident of their understanding the darkest places of Scri∣pture, that have very little to support this confidence, but onely that good Opinion they have thought meet to entertain of their own abilities. And as the Moralist saith of mo∣ral and natural knowledge, Seneca. Multi ad scien∣tiam pervenissent, nisi putâssent se jam perve∣nisse: Mens confidence that they are in the
right, hinders them from finding out their errour, and seeking after the truth: So we may say of spiritual Knowledge, that one great thing which keeps many from the knowledge and belief of the truth, and locks them up fast in the fetters of errours, is that presumption they have taken up, that they are in the right, and that it is not possible they should be deceived; and therefore Though you bray them in a morter, yet will not this wisdom depart from them. In the interpreting of Scripture it hath alwaies been observed, as a general Rule, that That interpretation which is nearest to the letter, is the safest and most ge∣nuine; and that The further men go from the letter, the more hazzardous path they tread. Indeed, if the litteral meaning do either contradict our Senses or Reason, or be ex∣presly contrary to any other more plain Text, or to the analogy of Faith; then we must leave the letter, and look for another meaning, that will not run us upon such in∣conveniences. So when the Prophet speaks of the calves of our lips, Hos. 14.3. we must needs qua∣lifie it, by rendring it the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, which proceeding from thankful lips and hearts, is more acceptable to God, then the offering of Calves or Lambs was under the old Law. So when the Scripture applies to God, hands, and feet, and mouth, and eyes, &c. we must not
with the Anthropomorphitae entertain such gross and absurd conceits of God, as to think him to be a body, and endued with such parts of a body as be in us: but we must understand those expressions to set forth unto us, such works of God in the World, as some-what resemble these acti∣ons of ours, in which we use those members of our bodies as Instruments? So when the Apostle saith, Christ sent him not to baptize, 1 Cor. 1.17. but to preach the Gospel; for as much as in the former verses, the Apostle expresly tells us, that he had Baptised some, which he could not have done without a commission; we must therefore understand it, that Christ sent him not so much to Baptize as to Preach; even as the same negative particle in other places, Mat. 9.13. doth not deny absolutely but compara∣tively: as in that Text, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. So when the Papists pertina∣ciously urge the letter of those words, Mat. 26.16. (This is my Body) to prove the Body of Christ to be present, in their sense, in the Eucharist: we say, That forasmuch as this is both contrary to what our senses witness, and is a contra∣diction to reason, and also destroys the very nature and end of a Sacrament; that there∣fore it is a great injury to the Text, to ad∣here so pertinaciously to the letter of it, and not to qualifie it with a milder and more in∣telligible construction. This then is one extream in which many run on to the wronging of the Scripture, and
of their own judgements, when they are over∣severe in adhering to the letter. And indeed such a pertinaciousness, as it sometimes ar∣gues men to be guilty of a fond ignorance, so for the most part it smells of a design: for I have still observed, that they who would be over-strict in sticking to the letter of a Text, when they have conceived it meet to serve their own turn, would be forward e∣nough to run off from the letter, when ano∣ther interpretation would suit better with their purpose: And therefore it argues that they are not onely deceived them∣selves, but have a design to deceive others also. But there are others, who run in ano∣ther extream, which is equally dangerous, viz. those that, without necessity do, fly to a spiritual or mystical sense, so as quite to reject the literal: and this, as it doth commonly proceed from affectation, and a desire to seem to take notice of somthing more than vulgar eyes are aware of; so it is, for the most part, used to serve a design, to evade the force of some plain & convincing Scripture, by mudding the water that so themselves and their tenets may escape unseen. Did it not smell of a design in those female teachers, who when that Text was alledged against their usurping of this office, 1 Tim. 2.11. I suffer not a wo∣man to teach; would seek to evade it by giving a mystical interpretation thereof, as if by woman should be understood the flesh, by
which the Apostle will not have us to be taught. But so it is, that too many do not search the Scriptures, to the end that they may conform their own opinions and practices to this Rule, but that they may warp the Rule as far as possible, to a compliance with the irregularity of their own thoughts and actions. Indeed, it hath always been the practice of the godly Divines and Fathers of the Church, to endeavour to raise up their own and their Readers Meditations to high and spiritual things, upon occasion of some historical passage in the Scriptures: and there is no doubt but we may very profitably tread the same steps: but yet we had need to take heed that we be not tempted to follow these Meditations or divine Fancies, so far that they draw us to an utter leaving and forgetting of the literal sense of a Text. Origen of old was accused as faulty in this point: And no doubt but his too much ad∣miring that Platonism, in the Study where∣of he spent his younger years; and toge∣ther with that, his over much affecting to soar high in a mystical interpretation of Scripture, did, if not draw him to over∣reach in many things, yet induce them that have read his Works, either to draw erro∣nious conclusions from them, which hath been the unhappiness of some; or else to condemn his writings as erronious, as did the se∣cond
Council held at Constantinople, Prid. Synop. Concil. An. Dom. 532. And it is great pitty that some amongst the Learned and Eloquent persons of our age, who are great admirers of that Platonick, Philosophy, in which Origen was trained up in his youth, and Favourers of those no∣tions of his, which the Church hath con∣demned as errours, have bestowed those choise parts which might have done God and his Church great service, if they had been otherwise imployed, to invent Caba∣listical interpretations of some pieces of Scri∣pture, which the Chuch hath in all ages re∣ceived in the literal sense. Me-thinks this danger might easily be discerned to attend upon such attempts, that if we once admit a Cabala to interpret the beginning of the History of the World (I mean the three first Chapters of Genesis) we cannot imagine what should hinder the same spirit from passing the like construction upon the History of the Gospel: and so in a while such projectors may either begin themselves, or at least induce their injudicious Readers to doubt not onely whether there was any such thing in reality as the Fall of a Protoplast, and of us all in him; but whether there were any such things done in reality as those transacti∣ons, which the Gospel relates, in order to the reconciling of God and Man. I could wish those that make this great stir for reducing our Religion and holy Scri∣ptures
to a compliance with Platonism, would receive a check by that Grave caution of a late Pious and Learned Bishop, Bp. Prid. Fa. con∣trov. Caveant ne dum Platonem faciunt Christianum, seipsos ostendant esse minime Christianos. While men attempt to mix Christianity and Platonism together, instead of mending what they conceive to be a miss, they may be in great danger, both to pervert their own judge∣ments, and to mud the streams of Doctrine, to the great prejudice of those that shall drink of them. They seem already to soar aloft above the simplicity of the Gospel; I wish they may be sensible of it before they meet with the success of Icarus. And that they may in time employ themselves in the de∣fence of the ancient Christian Faith, and beat∣ing down of Atheism, rather then to bestow their time and pains in preparing Weapons to put into the hands of men of Atheistical mindes, to sight against Christianity, and to defend themselves in a sceptical or scornful neglect of the things that concern their souls everlasting health. But it is not onely the Learned, but many amongst the unlearned also, that have made so bold with the Scriptures: 2 Pet. 3.16. And the Apo∣stle tells us, that such are most apt to wrest the Scriptures to the destruction of themselves and others. Whose heart would not bleed to see this Coat of Christ torn to pieces, every man snatching at some rag or other of it to cover the nakedness of his own conceptions?
We need not envy, but rather pitty the high conceits that many have entertained of themselves, who will needs undertake the Apocalypse to understand it, as well as he that wrote it, before they be well catechised in the first Principles of the Oracles of God. Some we finde despising the plainness of the Gospel, as if it were ut  dead letter, and as if they had some thing within that were a bet∣ter light to walk by, than this Light of the Word of God: Others that presume to advance the plainness of the Gospel, and make it speak higher matters then our meaner understandings can apprehend therein. And indeed, these fancies have not onely flattered such people into errours, but made others also to be at a stand, as not knowing what to do with the Scriptures, or when they may conclude themselves to have gained a right understanding of them, and fearing lest the letter may rather do them hurt then good, except they have these higher notions of it.
CHAP. III. As in vitious Courses, so also in erro∣nious Opinions men go from bad to worse. The experience of our age hath sadly confirmed this. The sad pass that many are come to at this day, in matters of Religion. THe ways of Truth and Virtue are to our corrupt nature like the steep ascent of an high Hill, which we do not recover without much industry and difficulty: But the wayes of vice and errour are like the descent, which is not onely easie but precipitant. If a man begin to run down a steep Hill, he cannot stop when he will, but may much endanger himself before he can recover the command of his own motion: Even so men that with great heat of a mis∣guided zeal have set themselves to run down this precipice of errours, cannot set them∣selves bounds; but are very apt to outrun those limits which they proposed to them∣selves at their first setting out, and there∣fore they must needs be supposed to run in a very dangerous course. What Solomon saith of strife, Prov. 17.14. The beginning of strife is as when
one letteth out water; therefore leave off con∣tention, before it be medled with, may very fitly be applyed to errour. Its beginnings are commonly small and modest, but when we have given a little way to it, it will enlarge its passage even beyond the expectation of him that began it: which should therefore make every man afraid to medle with that, which himself shall not be able to command in a while. The Waters of the Sanctuary were at first so shallow, Ezek. 47.4, 5. as to be but up to the ankles, then they rose up to the knees, afterwards to the loyns, and at last became a River that a man could not pass through. The Cloud which the Prophets servant saw, was at first in bigness but like a mans hand; 1 Kin. 18.47, 44. but in a while it overspread the whole Heaven, and poured forth abundance of Rain upon the Earth: even so those Notions and novel Opinions, which in their beginning have seemed so in∣considerable, as not to deserve any great op∣position, have proceeded by degrees to overspread the Firmament, and to darken the Sun of the Gospel: those waters which at first seemed so shallow, that a Childe might play in them without danger, have by degrees swelled like Jordan, so as to over∣flow all their Banks, and to threaten a deluge to the Church of God. As in vicious practices it hath been ob∣served, that Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. Men first hearken to the counsel of the ungodly,
and then proceed to walk in the way of sin∣ners, Psal. 1.1. till at last they come to sit down in the seat of scorners at God and goodness. Yea so insensibly do men slide into this gulph of sin, that they do not foresee the dange∣rous course they are venturing upon; but by giving way to vice, do become by de∣grees so bad, as they could not once have imagined it possible for them to be. When the Prophet foretold Hazael, what a bloody man he would be, when he should come to the Kingdom of Syria; he replyes, 2 King. 8.13. Is thy servant a dog, that I should do such things? and it is very likely that he did not imagine while he was a private person, that he could have so much wickedness in him, as by de∣grees he did manifest when he came to have power in his hands. And the same we may say of errours in judgement, that men have not onely taken their degrees in them from bad to worse, and so as to outstrip in the succeeding year, the errours which they held the year before, but even to outstrip their own thoughts, and to out∣go those bounds and limits that they had set to themselves, in their first entring upon these dangerous courses. I believe that if any man had been so much a Prophet, as for twenty or thirty years ago, to have foretold to many persons of our age, what they would have come to by this time, they would have replyed as Hazael did to Elisha: yea, if they had but seen the
picture of such a Monster represented unto them as now themselves are, they would have been the first to have cast stones at it. Those that begun first to scruple at the Cere∣monial part of the worship of our Church, did little expect to have grown to that pass as to disown that Church in which them∣selves were born and baptized, as Antichri∣stian. Those that were so zealous for the purity of Gods Ordinances, and for the powerful and frequent preaching of the Word, as to forsake their own Parishes and go many miles to hear a Sermon, did little think that they should have lived to see themselves become despisers, and disowners of those Ordinances which they then did so highly value, and scorners of that preaching which then they followed with so much di∣ligence and pains-taking. Those that began from a sense of the benefit and necessity of that great Christian Duty of counselling and stirring up one another to that which is good, to proceed to appoint some set-times for private meetings for such purposes, did little think to have improved themselves so far in spritual pride and self-conceit, as to venture with Ʋzze, to touch that Ark which it was onely lawful for the Levites to touch, 1 Chron. 13. yea with Ʋzziah, presumptuously to rush unto Gods Altar and incroach upon the Priests Office. 2 Chro. 26.17, 18 Much less that they should have gone so far in the way of Corah and his company, as to tell the Priests of the
Lord, that they take too much upon them, Num. 16.3. and that all the Lords people are holy in the same sense as they, and as fit to dispence Gods Ordinances, as those that were solemnly and orderly set apart to this Office. Those that first began, through the specious pretences of some false Teachers, to scruple the baptizing of Infants, did little think they should have made such progress in giddiness and unfoundness, as to deny any such thing as an outward Baptism (which was so ex∣presly commanded by our Saviour, and sanctified by his own example, and practised without any interruption in the Church of God in all ages) yea, to account the holy Communion of Christs Body and Blood, as a common and prophane thing: to account the preaching of the Word no better then foolishness (whereas the Apostle represents it as the onely outward and ordinary means for working of Faith, Rom. 10.14, 17. 1 Cor. 1.21. and that which God is wont to make use of for this end): yea, to esteem the prayers of our Church, as no bet∣ter then Popish superstition and Idolatry (which were composed by them that laid down their lives for the witness of the Truth against Popish idolatry and errour). And in a word, (according to their own prophane expression) to esteem themselves above those Ordinances, which are infinitely above the best of men. Those that first be∣gun to raise doubts concerning some points of our Faith, were so short-fighted as not
to see the pernicious consequents of distur∣bances and unsettlement in the Church, and did little think to see raked out of the grave most of the old errours, which had for so long time lain buried in forgetfulness, that so many of the notions of the old Gnosticks, of the Arians, Macedonians, Pela∣gians, Socinians, Antitrinitarians, Antiscriptu∣rists, should have been revived under the notion of new lights; while in the mean time, the good old Orthodox Faith is ana∣thematized, as Antichristian. But such is the deceitfulness of mans heart, and such the subtlety and unwearied industry of that enemy of the Church, that it is an hard matter for men to set bounds to them∣selves, when once they have transgressed bounds. To have foretold these things in the be∣ginning of our Civil and Ecclesiastical con∣fusions, would have seemed to many wel∣meaning, but injudicious people, not onely to have foretold strange and unlikely matters, but also to have prophesied evil and not good, meerly out of prejudice against those specious pretences. But as the Maxims of Policy do shew, and the sad experience of our Age doth confirm, that in the Civil State, it is far easier to find faults in a Government, then to exchange it for a better, and that Ʋnsettle∣ment must needs resolve it self into Anarchy at last. So in Church matters, it hath al∣wayes been observed to be a dangerous
course to remove a stone out of the Foun∣dations of our Faith, though with never so fair pretences of better polishing it, and protestations of placing it there again. A man of clear Reason and unbyassed Judg∣ment, might partly have foreseen the ten∣dency of these things, in the beginning: And I hope all succeeding Ages will learn this, from the calamities which we have felt, that it is better for every Christian to exer∣cise his Patience in bearing with, and his Devotion in praying for, the Reformation of some mistakes and comings-short in Church-Government, then to pull down the whole Edifice, under pretence of a through-Re∣formation; lest the Remedy prove far more dangerous than the Disease. How sad a pass are we come to in matters of Faith! when some talk so presumptu∣ously of a Light within, that should be suf∣ficient to lead a man to Heaven, if he walk answerably to it; which must either be per∣fect Pelagianism or Socinianism, denying any such depravation of our Natures, as doth disable us from doing that which is good by our own strength; or that there is any such distance between God and man, as should make us stand in need of a Mediator to work out a Reconciliation: Or else we must take it to be a meer Meteor, exhaled by the heat of a misguided Zeal, from the Dunghil of Popery, and elevated unto the middle Region of their Brain, the seat of Fancy; a Va∣pour
not well understood by them that are im∣pregnated with it; a Tympany, that swells them up to a conceit that they are big belly∣ed of some great matters, which yet in the bringing of it forth into the World, appears to be like the birth of the Mountains: A Glow-Worm that is set in the dark to amuse the minds of those that are Children in un∣derstanding: A New nothing blown up like a Bladder, by the unsavory breath of men of putrid Lungs, and laid in the way to cause men to stumble and fall short of Christ, who is the Way, Jo. 14.6. the Truth, and the Life. How sad is it to see others turn Scepticks, and such as shame not to profess themselves to be to seek, whether there be any true Church of Christ upon Earth, or any Or∣dinances to be attended on. While in the mean time, both these and the former neg∣lect that means of Knowledge whereby they might be convinced of their Errors, and in∣structed in the way of Truth; forsake the holy Ordinances of God, which He hath ap∣pointed us to attend upon, for our own good alway; their Families are of the number of those that call not upon Gods Name, Jer. 10.25. either at their lying down and rising up, or at their partaking of the good Creatures of God; which the Apostle tells us are to be received with thanksgiving, 1 Tim. 4.5. and are sanctified to our use, by the Word of God and Prayer. It behoves therefore every good Christian to take heed, That he be not drawn away with
the Error of the wicked to depart from his own stedfastness, but to grow in Grace, Acts 3.17, 18. and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And those whom God hath set to watch for the souls of others, as they that must give an account, ought to be diligent and faithful in preaching Christ crucified; 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. who though he be to the Jews a stumbling blook, and to the Greeks foolishness, yet to them that are effectu∣ally called both of the Jews and Greeks, he is Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. Not but that we know that the Church of Christ is so built upon a Rock, that all the malice and subtilty, Mat. 16.18. of the gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against it: But yet it is our duty to give testimony to the Truth, whereby, through Gods blessing, those that stand fast may be the more setled, and those that are fallen may be raised up, and we our selves may be clear from the blood of them that wilfully and obstinately resolve to perish. Acts 20.26.
CHAP. IV. An Introduction to the Doctrine of Christ our Mediator, shewing how far the Light of Nature will lead us toward Eternal Happiness, and wherein it comes short. The vari∣ous acceptions of the Words, Christ, and Mediator, in the Scriptures o∣pened, for preventing Erronious constructions of those places of Scriptures. THe Apostle tells us, Rom. 1.20. that, The invisible things of God, even his Eternal Power and Jodhead are clearly seen and to be un∣derstood by the things that are made. The Philosophers, and as many amongst the Hea∣thens as did improve the Light of Nature, and study the Book of the Creatures as they ought, could not but apprehend that this stately Fabrick of Heaven and Earth, could not be reared up without an Architect; yea, that, Praesentem refert quaelibet herba Deum, The smallest Creatures that are in the World may convince us that there was some first cause to Create, or produce them upon
the Earth. And as every Workman is more noble then his Work, so he that made all Things, must be a more Noble and Excellent Being, then any or all of those Creatures: And this was sufficient to convince them that there is a Being Infinite in all Excellen∣cies and Perfections, in Wisdom, Power, Goodness, &c. who had a Being before any of the Creatures, even from all Eter∣nity, and gave beginning and being to all things beside Himself; and this is that Su∣pream Being and first Cause which we call, GOD. And he that duly considers himself and all Things else to be Creatures, might easi∣ly from hence conclude, that this Supream Being which gave beginning and being to all things, ought by them all to be Loved, and Served, and Adored, as he, Acts 17.28. In whom they live, and move, and have their beeing. And as Reason binds us to believe the Maker of Heaven and Earth, infinitly to excel the most excellent of all the Crea∣tures; so it must be thought very unreason∣able to entertain any dishonourable thoughts of God, to subject our Maker to our own making, or to carve out him from the stock of a Tree, who formed Us and all other Creatures out of nothing: To impute to him those Quarrels, Rapes, Adulteries, Incests, and other Enormities, which the Heathens fathered upon their gods. For if we esteem these the fruits of the most debauched Na∣tures
amongst men, and every man accounts them faults wheresoever they are; then, sure, to impute these Acts to that Supream Being, that infinitly excels whatsoever is excellent in us, and is free from whatsoever is evil or imperfect in us, must needs be a great wrong to our Maker, and to be esteemed no better then a project of the sensitive Appetite in man, to excuse its own highest enormities, by fancying the same to have been acted by him that made us, and whom we ought, as near as we can, to resemble in our Affections and Practises. Beside, the like exercise of Reason would readily shew us, that the first Cause and Mover of all things is but one, and that to conceit more than one infinite Being or first Cause, is equally absurd, as to believe none at all. And consequently they might easily have seen that their  was a most absurd Chimera, fancied by idle and extra∣vagant brains. Yea further, Reason might be ready to prompt us, that as we owe our beginning, and being, and whatsoever we do enjoy, to this first Cause, the Lord our Maker; so we owe to him the best and fairest of those fruits that we can possibly bring forth, as a testi∣mony of our thank fulness to him, for his favours vouchsafed unto us. And as the in∣finit perfections that are in him, may rea∣sonably be supposed to oblige him to love what is like them, and to abhor what is
contrary; so whosoever doth desire to please his Maker, must endeavour to be like him in his Imitable Attributes, of Holiness, Ju∣stice, Goodness, and Mercy, &c. and that whosoever doth not endeavour to frame his Heart and Life to a conformity to the Nature and Will of God, cannot please him, nor be said to answer the ends of his Creation: Nor yet can reasonably expect to partake of those rewards which Nature prompts us to hope for from the goodness of God in plea∣sing him, nor to be free from those punish∣ments, which Nature tells us we are to ex∣pect to suffer from the Justice of God, in displeasing and provoking him. Thus far, I say, the Light of Nature, and right Reason, will easily carry any man who doth not violently disturb it in its proceed∣ings. And from hence the Apostle, Ro 1.20, &c. in the forecited place, doth conclude, that even the Gentiles, though they had not enjoyed the written Law of God, yet would be with∣out excuse before Gods Tribunal; for that they had not walked up to these Dictates of Rea∣son, but had entertained dishonourable appre∣hensions concerning him whom Reason did prompt them to believe to be their Maker: Some of them denying the being of God, o∣thers by multiplying it, confounding their own conceptions touching a first cause: Most of them, by the impious practices which they imputed to their gods, dishonouring that God in whose Throne they set these Idols:
And all of them, by their own impious and wicked lives, coming short of that obedi∣ence which the Law of Nature did oblige them to pay to him that made them. As to this light that shines unto us from the Heavens, and all the host thereof, the earth and the Sea, and all that therein is, the Psalmist tells us, Ps. 19.3, 4. That it is gone forth into the ends of the world, and that there is no Speech nor Language where the voice of it is not heard. But that this is not sufficient to lead a man to heaven without a further guide, is evi∣dent, both in that the Lord hath thought meet to set up a clearer Light, before his own people in all ages, the light of the Law, and the Prophets to the Jews, and the light of the Gospel to us Christians; which though they differ in the way of administration; the services of the Law pointing them to Christ that was to come, the services of the Gospel pointing us to Christ as already come; and also in the clearness of them, the Law repre∣senting Christ in Types and shadows, the Gospel taking off the vail from Moses face, and letting us with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18. as in a glass be∣hold the glory of the Lord: Yet I say, That as the light of the Gospel is sufficient to us Christians, so was the light of the Law and Prophets sufficient to the Jews to point them to Christ, who was represented in all their typical oblations and expiations, and who is the onely way to eternal Righteousness and
Salvation. Now forasmuch as the great God of heaven and earth, who maketh no∣thing in vain, hath given these further Lights to his people, which would have been superfluous, if the former had been suf∣ficients we may hence conclude, that he did not esteem the Light of Nature suffici∣ent to guide us in the way to Hea∣ven. Beside, This that might be known of God by the creatures, though it might indeed shew us what service and obedience it was reasonable for us to perform unto God, yet could it not enable us to perform it aright. Some of the Philosophers have observed so much of a depravation in mans nature, as hath made them break forth into direful and tragical exclamations, concerning the mise∣rable estate of man. But the light of Nature could never shew them, without the light of the Word of God, the original of this De∣pravation, the creation of the Protoplast, and the Covenant which God made with him, both in behalf of himself and all man∣kinde; the fall of our first Parents and of us all in them, from our original Rectitude and Holiness of Nature; nor the way and means how to have our Nature reformed, and our Persons reconciled unto God, and the de∣fects of our obedience supplyed. Flesh and blood hath never revealed, nor is it in its power to reveal this unto us, but the holy Ghost that dictated the Gospel, is that alone
which reveals unto us Christ and his Merits, as our onely propitiation and way to Salva∣tion: 2 Pet. 4.12. That there is not Salvation in any o∣ther, neither is there any other name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby we may be saved, but onely this name of Jesus Christ. This one word, Christ-crucified, is the Epitome of the Gospel, and the end and design of the Law and the Prophets also: the substance of all that we ought to preach, and the Object both of your and our Faith. And that we may the better understand this Foundation of our Belief, concerning Jesus Christ as our Mediator; I shall begin this discourse with opening these two terms, Christ and Mediator: which I am therfore in∣duced to do, because these terms are used in different significations in the holy Scri∣ptures, from whence men of corrupt mindes, and who have endeavoured to cor∣rupt others, have taken occasion to deduce many Paradoxes. The word Christ, I presume is so well un∣derstood by the most that are Professors of the Christian Religion, that it would be needless to spend time in the opening of it. In the Old Testament he is called Messiah, who in the New Testament is called Christ. This name Messiah we meet with in several places of the Old Testament, 1 Sam. 2.10. Psal. 2.2. and 84.9. and 89.51. Dan. 9.25, 26. Hab. 3.13. The name of Christ is so
frequent in the New Testament, that I shall not stand to instance in particular places. Now this name is sometimes used (and that most properly) to denote the Word made flesh, or God manifest in the flesh; Jo. 1.14. 1 Tim. 3.16. Mat. 1.16. his name is rendred Jesus, who is called Christ, and he that denyeth Jesus to be Christ, is said to be a lyar and an Antichrist, 1 Joh. 2.22. Sometimes this word Christ, is used by a Metonyny, to signifie the Church of Christ, as 1 Cor. 12.12. and according to some Di∣vines, in Gal. 3.16. Is enim est Christi in Ec∣clesiam amor, &c. saith Beza upon the place: Such is the love of Christ unto his Church, that though he filleth all in all, yet is he pleased to esteem himself, as it were, imper∣fect without his Body the Church: and there∣fore the Church is called, The fulness of him who filleth all in all, Eph. 1.23. To which purpose we may refer these Texts, Act. 9.4. and Mat. 25.40, 45. together with Col. 1.24. where Christ is put for the Church, which is his mystical Body. Again, that we be not deceived about this Word, we must take notice of some ex∣pressions in the New Testament, which have reference to Christ. As first, To be Christ's, signifieth to be a Christian, Mark 9.41. 2 Cor. 10.7. To be subject to Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12. and chap. 3.23. To be truely regenerate, Rom. 8.9. 1 Cor. 15.23. and Gal. 3.29. and chap. 5.24.
Secondly, To be with Christ, signifies to enjoy blessedness with him, as Phil. 1.23. comp. 2 Cor. 5.8. Luke 23.43. Col. 3.3. comp. John 17.24. So, 1 Thes. 4.17. Thirdly, To be in Christ, signifies to be converted to the Faith of Christ, as Rom. 16.5, 7, 11. Gal. 1.22. Phil. 4.21. Col. 1.2. 1 Thes. 2.14. Sometime indeed it is taken for an outward cleaving to Christ, as John 15.2. But more usually it is put for a real conver∣sion of the heart unto Christ, as Rom. 8.1. 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 Pet. 5.14. 1 John 2.5. and chap. 5.20. So to be found in Christ, signifieth in the Faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9. Fourthly, To be By Christ, signifieth to be redeemed by Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. Fifthly, Christ is said to be in them, whom he hath sanctified by his holy Spirit, and u∣nited to himself as Members of his mystical Body, John 17.23, 26. Rom. 8.10. 2 Cor. 13.5. And Christ is said to be with them, whom, though most unworthy, he hath not yet wholly divorced from himself, Mat. 17.17. Mark 9.19. and Luke 9.41. Or else with those, whom he doth most dearly love, and for this cause, assist and defend, as in Mat. 28.20. Sixthly, To be without Christ, is to be without the knowledge of Christ, as the Gen∣tiles which had not had the Gospel preached unto them, are said to be without Christ, Eph. 2.12. Sometimes also to be without
Christ, signifieth to be without dependance upon Christ and assistance from him, as John 15.4, 5. To this we may add, that to be weak in Christ, sometimes signifieth to be conforma∣ble to those infirmities, that were in the humane Nature of Christ, 2 Cor. 13.4. To be dead in Christ, signifieth to be dead in the Faith of Christ, as 1 Cor. 15.18. 1 Thes. 4.14, 16. To speak the truth in Christ, is to speak it with∣out ambition, and meerly for the glory of Christ, as Rom. 9.1. and 2 Cor. 12.2, 19. These things I thought necessary to point you unto, because many have been apt to wrest these places of Scripture beside the true meaning of them, both to the prejudice of themselves, by inducing a belief of er∣rours, and to the dishonour of Christ, by entertaining dishonourable conceits of him, through misunderstanding the Scri∣ptures. For the word Mediatour, it signifieth in general one that interposeth between two or more persons: for, a Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3.20. Now in Scripture we sometime read of a Mediator to carry messages between two par∣ties. So Moses is called a Mediator, because he delivered the Commands of God to the people, and the answer of the people unto God, Gal. 3.19. comp. Exo. 19.3. &c. and chap. 20.19. Deut. 5.5. Besides, Divines speak of a Conservatory
Mediation, which tends to perserve unity and friendship between friends: In this sense some do believe Christ to be a Media∣tor, in respect of the Elect Angels, to pro∣cure the confirmation of them in their estate of holiness and happiness. But in this I determine nothing, because the holy Scri∣ptures are so sparing in speaking of it The usual acception of this word Media∣tor, is to signifie him that reconciles parties that be at difference: and in this sense Je∣sus Christ, the word made flesh, is truely and properly called a Mediator to reconcile God and man, because he interposeth himself be∣tween God and us, in this difference that sin hath made; to reconcile Gods justice to us, by making satisfaction for our sin; and to reconcile us to God by sanctifying our na∣tures, and making us conformable to his will; in this life inchoatly, and at death per∣fectly.
CHAP. V. The holy Scriptures being owned (at least in outward profession) by men of all professions that lay claim to the common name of Christianity; we may therefore take it for grant∣ed, that Arguments drawn from them, should put an end to all strife amongst us. The design and method of the four following Chapters pro∣posed. THe Reverence we owe to the authority of the holy Scriptures, doth oblige e∣very good Christian, not onely to account it a necessary piece of humility to subscribe to the doctrine thereof, as the will and plea∣sure of him that made us, and to whom we owe all obedience: but also to esteem it the safest and most prudential course, to enter∣tain and embrace the truths thereof, as the Word of him who is Wisdom it self, and therefore cannot err or be deceived, and Goodness it self, and therefore we may be sure he will not endeavour to seduce or de∣lude us. So that though there be divers
things contained in this Sacred Volume, which our shallow capacities cannot reach to comprehend, yet we finde reason e∣nough to impute it to the defects of our Na∣ture, and not to any over-sight in those Sacred Writings, that we cannot always see a rea∣son of every thing therein delivered. And the Soveraign Authority, and infinite Wis∣dom of him that inspired those holy men that wrote these Books, is a sufficient argu∣ment to move us, to a reverent submission to those matters of Faith which surpass the reach of our reason: and therefore as every sober Professor of Christianity makes the Word of God the foundation of his Faith; so the best Arguments that can be produced for the confirming of our Belief in that Faith, which hath been delivered unto us, will be such as are fetched from this Sacred Prom∣ptuary of holy Writ. And as I was mentioning it before, Chap. 2. for the honour of the Word of God, that men of all Sects and perswasions, who center in the common Profession of the Christian Re∣ligion, do (at least) pretend great reverence to these Writings, and (whether in good earnest, or in design, to put off their opini∣ons the more plausibly in the world) do endeavour to represent even their most he∣terodox and incredible Notions, as the Doctrine of the Spirit of God in the Scri∣pture: we may therefore very reasonably expect that Arguments drawn from the
Scriptures, should be convineing to them, and an end of all strife. And further, that the fair and plain meaning of the words of Scripture, which is most obvious to every man of understanding, and which hath been received by the Church of God in all ages should be embraced by them as well as by us, as the ground upon which all Arguments are to be built: It being as absurd in mat∣ters of Reason and Faith, for one or a few men to expect that his or their single Vote, for some singular meaning of a plain Text of Scripture, should be heard in oppositi∣on to the judgement of the Church of God in all ages; as in matters of sense it would be for one man confidently and contentiously to pronounce that colour to be white or red, which all his Neighbours, and people of all Ages before him, have received under the notion of black. We may therefore take it for granted, that Arguments drawn from the plain and obvious sense of the Scripture, such as hath been received by the Church in all Ages, should be accounted sufficient, both to con∣firm the faith of those that are serious in Christianity, and also to convince (or at least put to silence) those that are dissenting from us. In order therefore to the confirming of us in the belief of this Truth, which is the substance of the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, that, The Word made flesh, or, God
the Son manifest in the flesh, hath truely and really undertaken and performed the Office of a Mediator, to reconcile God and man; I shall propound these four general Heads to be considered and confirmed. First, That the Lord did promise to Adam after his fall, and to all the Fathers and Prophets of the Old Testament, his own Son to become man, and in the Union of these two Natures, to perform all those Offices which were necessary in order to our Re∣demption and Salvation. Secondly, That the Time which was ap∣pointed for the accomplishing of these pro∣mises and Prophesies, and for the sending of the Son of God into the World, is long since expired; and consequently that we ought stedfastly to believe that our Saviour is already come in the flesh. Thirdly, That we have full and suffici∣ent grounds to believe, that the same Jesus whom the New Testament holds forth unto us, and in whom we and all the Churches of God in all Ages have believed, is that very Person who was promised to the Fa∣thers, to come as the Messiah or Saviour of the World. Fourthly, That the Apostles and Evan∣gelists in the New Testament, do hold forth unto us such a Christ, as was really and tru∣ly God and Man, Hypostatically united in one Person; and who did in a real and pro∣per sense satisfie Gods Justice for our sins,
and purchase eternal Salvation for us by his Merits. On this Rock is the Church of God built: Matt. 16.18. On this, have every one of us built our particular Faith, and in this we had need to be fully and persectly setled. And he that is confirmed in the truth of these four Positions, is confirmed in the whole Doctrine of the Gospel. Let us then pro∣ceed by the assistance of the good Spirit of God, to the opening and confirming of them in order. CHAP. VI. The first Proposition confirmed in its two Branches, viz. First, That God did promise to the Fathers of the Old Testament, to send his Son in∣to the World, to take our Nature upon him. Secondly, That he pro∣mised that in the Ʋnion of these two Natures, he should perform all those Offices which were necessary in order to our Redemption and Salvation. ALL the Promises of God are Yea, 2 Cor. 1.20. and A∣men, Faithfulness and Truth, as be∣ing the Words of the God of Truth, Tit. 1.2. who
cannot lye. Hath he spoken it, and shall it not stand? Hath he promised, and shall he not make it good? Mat. 5.18. Behold Heaven and Earth shall pass away sooner, then one iota or tittle of his Word fail till all be fulfilled. And therefore if we make it appear that such a thing was promi∣sed by God to the Fathers, that the Son of God should be Incarnate, to the end that he might be a Mediator between God and man, and the Authour of Eternal Salvation to us; I suppose, no man that reads this, will doubt but that in the fulness of Time, these promises would take effect. Now that God did all along to the Fa∣thers of the Old Testament, make such a promise, will be evident by considering: First, The Names and Titles that are appli∣ed to him that was promised to come as the Messiah, which will shew that he was foretold to be such an one as should be truly God, and truly Man. Secondly, The Offices that are applyed to him, which will shew that he was foretold to come as the Saviour of the World. First, I say, the Names and Titles which up and down the Old Testament, are given to the Messiah that was promised; do shew that, for his Person, he should be God and Man; and some of them also do point at his Office. 1. Gen. 3.15. We find him stiled, The Seed of the Wo∣man, that should break the Serpents head: His Humanity is denoted in his being the Seed
of the Woman; his Divinity in that Office that is ascribed to him, To break the Ser∣pents head, which may very fitly be inter∣preted by that expression of the Apostle, He was manifest to destroy the works of the Devil: 1 Joh. 3.8. Now no person can enter into the strong mans house, except he be stronger then he. To the same purpose is that other expression, where he is called, Gen. 22.18. The Seed of Abraham, in whom all the families of the Earth shall be blessed; which as it foretels his humane Nature which should be born of the Seed of Abraham, so it shews that he was to come as a general good to the world, not onely to be the glory of his people Israel, Lu. 2.31. but also to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, that both Jews and Gentiles might, through him, be delivered from that curse which they were liable unto through Sin, and might be partakers of the blessedness that he hath purchased, by his Sufferings and Obedience. And this likewise foreshews that he should be the Son of God, in that his sufferings and obedience, are represented of such infinit value, as to purchase so great and general benefits to Mankind. 2. He is sometimes called by the name of Shiloh, Gen. 49.10. by which word is understood the Messiah, as is evident by the Caldee-Para∣phrase, and most of the Ancient Rabbies, who in this place for Shiloh, do read Messiah. As to the signification of this word, some derive it from  which signifies the Se∣cundine,
that contains the Embryo in the womb: and in this sense it may denote, that the Messiah should be born an Infant; and also (say some) that he should be born of a Woman, without a Natural Father. Others derive it from  to send, and so it may denote his Office, that he should be sent by God the Father into the world, for the Salvation thereof. Others derive it from  which signifies Peace; and so likewise it may denote his Office, that he should be the Author of Peace, and Reconciliation be∣tween God and man, and should purchase eternal Happiness for us, and therefore he is called our Peace. Eph. 2.14. However we interpret this word, yet still it speaks the Messiah to be such a Person, and designed to such an Office, as I said before. 3. He is elsewhere stiled, A Prophet whom the Lord should raise up to Israel, like unto Moses; Deut. 18.15. The Lord thy God shall raise up unto thee a Prophet: this both shews that he should be a real and not a fantastical Person, and it sets before us one of those Offices which he should undertake in order to our Re∣demption: He shall be raised up in the midst of thee, of thy brethren: and this shews that he was to be the Son of Man. That this Pro∣phesie belongs to Christ, is evident from Acts 3.22. and Chap. 7.37. 4. Psal. 80.15. David calls him, The Man of Gods right hand; and the Son of man, whom he had made strong for himself. And this shews both
the truth of his Divine Nature, where in he was the man of Gods right hand, the Son of God, Phil. 2.7. equal to the Father in Power and Glory, in Blessedness and Eternity; and also it foretels that God the Father should prepare him a body in which he might suffer for our sins, and which by the Hypostatical union with the Divine Nature, was made strong to undergo that wrath of God, and to break through the bonds of Death, which no meer man would have been able to do; & likewise by the Union of the Divinity with the Humanity of Christ, his suffering should become of infinit value, and, Heb. 9.14. This blood of Christ being offered up by the Eternal Spirit, should be able to purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God. Further, Da∣vid calls him his Lord, who was foretold to be his Son after the flesh; Ps. 110.1. The Lord said un∣to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool: now the same person being in different respects Davids Son, and Davids Lord; this shews him to be both the Son of God, and the Son of Man. 5. He is called Immanuel, Isa. 7.14. which shews the admirable and unconceivable Union of the Divine Person of the Word: with that flesh that he took upon him, God was plea∣sed to dwel with men on earth, 1 King. 8.12. and to pitch his Tabernacle amongst us, in a more near and especial manner, when the Word was plea∣sed to be made flesh. Joh. 1.14. And this stupendious Transaction was not for nothing, but for
this end that being a middle Person between God and us, Medium participationis, one that did partake of both Natures; he might fitly stand as a middle Person, Job. 9.33. and lay his hand upon us both. 6. We have other Titles given to him in that eminent Scripture, Isa. 9.6, 7, which serve to denote both his Natures and Offices. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given: This shews the humane Nature of Christ which should be taken into that near Union with the Person of the Son of God. And the Government shall be upon his shoulders; This denotes that Kingly Office which Christ as our Mediator, did undertake: And his Name shall be called Wonderful, in regard of the Ineffable Union of the two Natures in the Person of one Mediator; to which a∣grees that of the Apostle, 1 Tim. 3.16. Without controver∣sie, great is the mystery of godliness, God mani∣fest in the flesh. Further he is called, Coun∣cellour, not onely in respect of his divine Na∣ture, 1 Cor. 1.24. which is called The Wisdom of the Fa∣ther, but chiefly in respect of his Office in the Church as our Mediator: he is our Prophet, who is sent to reveal unto us the Will of God and the way to Heaven. He is called, The mighty God, which denotes him that was before said to be born of a Woman, to be also God equal with the Father: The everlasting Father, or Father of Eternity; not as if the first Person in the Trinity had taken our Nature, or suffered to satisfie his own
Justice; but onely to denote the Eternity of his Divine Nature, who was our Mediator: Though as man he was conceived in time in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin, yet as God he was begotten of his Father before all Words, even from everlasting. Further, Eph. 1.14. he is called The Prince of Peace, to note the end of his coming, to make Peace between God and us. And finally it is said, Col. 1.20 that of the encrease of his government there shall be no end, &c. to note both the great encrease of his Kingdom, Dan. 2.35. that Stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, shall fill the earth. And with∣al, that his Kingdom shall not be subject to those vicissitudes and decayes, to which o∣ther Kingdoms are subject. 1 Cor. 15.25. He shall reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet. 7. Further, that evangelical Prophet Isaiah, chap. 42.1. calls him Gods servant whom he did uphold, his Elect in whom his soul delighted. As to his Divine Nature, he was God equal with the Father: Phil. 2.7. but in respect of this Office of Mediator, as he was Gods Elect, whom the Father did choose to appoint and accept as our surety and a propitiatory Sa∣crisice in our behalf, so he was in some respect the servant of the Father, and tells us that he came into the world to do the Will of his Father. Nor may we therefore, Joh. 4.34. with the Arians, think that Christ's being sent by the Father, and being called his Servant, doth argue any inequality between the Fa∣ther and the Son; nor yet, with the Macedo∣nians,
that the holy Ghost being sent from the Father and the Son, Jo. 15.26. this doth argue him to be unequal or inferiour to them both. For that Rule in divinity is very rational as well as Orthodox, that Missio & Obedientia non tollunt aequalitatem Personarum in Sacrâ Trini∣tate: The Fathers sending the Son, and the Father and Son sending the holy Ghost, doth not argue the Father to be above the Son, nor them both to be above the holy Ghost; but onely denotes that order in which each person in the Sacred Trinity is pleased to transact its several operations. 8. Jer. 23.6. He is termed by Jeremiah, The Lord our Righteousness: the name Jehovah, which is no where in Scripture applied to any Creature, doth argue him to be truely God; and the other word shews the end of his coming into the World, even to make recon∣ciliation for iniquity, Dan. 9.24. and to bring in everlasting Righteousness. 9. The Messiah is frequently stiled by the name of David, Jerem. 30.9. Ezek. 34.23, 24. and chap. 37.24, 25. Hosea 3.5. To which may be added other places, which are not so express as the former Psal. 132.10. Isaiah 37.35. and chap. 55.3. Amos 9.11. Acts 13.34. and chap. 15.16. Now the rea∣son why he is called by this Name, may be either 1. Because he was to be born of the Posterity and Family of David, in which re∣spect he is called a Branch of David, Jerem. 23.5. and a Rod of the stem of Jesse, Isa. 11.1. And in the New Testament, he is said to be
raised up in the house of David, Luke 1.69. and to be made of the seed of David, John 7.42. Rom. 1.3. 2 Tim. 2.8. He is also called, The root of David, Revel. 5.5. and the off-spring of David, Revel. 22.16. 2. Or else he may be called David, because the promise was renew∣ed in a special and solemn manner to Da∣vid, that of his seed should come the Mes∣siah, 2 Sam. 7. and 1 Chron. 17. Or 3. be∣cause David was in some sort a Type of Christ, as namely, in that David was both a King and a Prophet, as Christ was King, Priest, and Prophet; but chiefly in respect of his wise and happy administration of his Kingdom and Government. And these Prophesies do betoken both the humane Na∣ture of Christ, who should come of the Seed of David, and his Divine Nature, in that he was to be King of the Church which is called The Israel of God. Gal 6.16. 10. Zech. 9.9. The Prophet Zechariah calls him the King of Israel, which shews both his Power and Authority to rule his Church; and also his Humanity, in that he is said to sit upon an Ass and a Colt, the foal of an Ass. And though Christ did not in his life-time, take upon him the temporal jurisdiction over Is∣rael, but tells his Disciples they were mi∣staken in looking for this; and tells Pilate that his Kingdom was not of this world; that is, Joh. 18.36. according to the fashion of earthly King∣doms, yet doth he in all ages in a spiritual sense govern his Church, feeding his flock like
a Shepherd, and ruling his enemies with a rod of Iron. And further, the same Prophet calls him Gods Shepherd; Zech. 13.7. that is, a Shepherd of God the Fathers appointment, and the man that was his fellow; which denotes his Di∣vine Nature, wherein he was equal to the Father. And this Shepherd is said to be smitten, Mat. 26.31. and the sheep of the flock to be scat∣tered from him, which is a Prophefie of what Christ in his humane Nature did suffer, as our Saviour himself interprets it. 11. In Malachi the last of the Prophets, he is called, the Lord whom they sought after, and the Angel, Mal. 3.1. or Messenger of the Covenant in whom they delighted. And as the name Je∣hovah, being here applyed to Christ, doth shew him to be truely God; so the name Angel doth both denote his real existence, and his Office likewise, as being appointed by the Father to ratifie and fulfil that Cove∣nant which he had made with the Fathers, even the Covenant of Life and Salvation, which was expressed in these words, Jer. 31.31. I will be thy God, and thou shalt be my people. And further, Mal. 4.2. He is called the Sun of Righteous∣ness, which should arise upon the earth with healing in his wings: Which denotes both the excellency of his Nature being like the Sun, the most glorious and excellent of all bo∣dies; and likewise the greatness and com∣monness of his benefits; the Sun is a com∣mon good to the world, giving Light and Life to all Creatures that are capable of it:
and so this Sun of Righteousness shall come with healing in his wings, to all that will re∣ceive him, to heal the wounds which sin hath made upon the soul, Isa. 61.2. and to pour in the oyl of Joy and consolation, unto them that mourn in Son. 12. Prov. 30.1. I may add that some conceive him to be understood by Ithiel and Ʋcal. Ithiel signifieth God with me, and so is to the same purpose with Immanuel, and may signi∣fie the Union of the Divinity and Humani∣ty in Christ our Mediator. Ʋcal signi∣fieth power and strength, and so may note the strength of his humane Nature, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union of the Di∣vine Person; both to undergo all those suf∣ferings, that were to be laid upon it, and al∣so to give infinite value to these sufferings, that they might make a perfect satisfaction to Gods Justice, as I said before, and be a sufficient price to purchase Eternal Salvation for us. To these I might add divers other names that are given to the Messiah in the Old Te∣stament, but these are sufficient: and in∣deed, the very name Messiah, as it speaks him to be anoynted of God to that threefold Office of Prophet, Priest, and King, to which Offices men used to be set a-part by the ce∣remony of Ʋnction; so they suppose him to be such a person as should be qualified and made meet for these Offices, and to this end it was necessary that he should be God and
Man, that he might be a middle person be∣tween both. Having considered his Names & Titles, let us proceed, in the second place, to take a view of what the Old Testament speaks of the Of∣fices, to which the Messiah was designed by God the Father. And there will be the less need to dwell long upon this, because I have spo∣ken something of it upon the former Head. We commonly believe, that Jesus Christ, in order to the accomplishing of this great bu∣siness of our Salvation, As he was pleased to stoop so low as to take our Nature into that neer Union with his Divine Person, so that he was both truly God of the substance of his Father, and truely Man consisting of a reasonable soul and humane flesh; So in the hypostatical Union of these two Natures, he did perform the office of a Prophet, of a Priest, and of a King to his Church. And that we may see that we neither wrong Christ in imputing that to him, which may either be dishonourable or disagreeing to him; nor yet our selves or others in en∣tertaining fond and groundless conceits as Articles of our Religion; I shall therefore endeavour to shew you that Christ was pro∣mised to the Fathers of the Old Testament, as one that should undertake, and go through with each of these Offices. First, it was foretold that he should be a Prophet, one that should both by his own preaching and the preaching of his Apostles,
while he was upon the earth, and after his Ascension by giving the holy Ghost to his Ministers, shew unto us the will of his Fa∣ther, and all things that should be neces∣sary for us, to know, believe, and do in or∣der to our pleasing God in this world, and everlasting enjoying of him in the world to come. This is evident from that promise which God made by Moses, Deut. 18.15. The Lord thy God shall raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, and him shall ye hear in all things: to which agrees that voice which came from Heaven, Mat. 17.5. in our Saviour's Transfiguration. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. Again, the Prophet Isaiah speaking in the person of Christ, saith, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek: he hath sent me to bind up the broken∣hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord: And this our Saviour, when he was upon earth, applyed to himself, and told the people that they had then seen that Scripture fulfilled before their eyes. Luke 4.18. Secondly, that he should be our High∣priest, one that should do that in reality and substance, which was done onely typically by all the Oblations enjoyned in the ceremo∣nial Law, that he should offer up an expia∣tory and propitiatory sacrifice to Gods justice, even his own body, and thereby make an
Atonement for us. Surely (saith that Evan∣gelical Prophet) he hath born our griefs, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. and carried our sorrows. He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquities of us all. And again, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justifie many; vers. 11. for he shall bear their iniquities. And further, vers. 12. He was numbred with the transgres∣sours, and he bare the sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressours. Of whom the Prophet speaks all this, you may hear from St. Philip's exposition of this place to the Eunuch, Acts 8.34, 35. 1 Pet. 2.22. and from St. Peter's applica∣tion of it to our Saviour: Therefore he is called The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. and he is said to swallow up death in victory, Isa. 25.8. and his people are called The ran∣somed of the Lord, Isa. 35.10. Thirdly, It was foretold that he should be a King: not that his Kingdom should be of this World, that is, after the manner of worldly Kingdoms, Joh. 18.36. as the carnal Jews did conceit, of which errour himself doth con∣vince them. But that he should have such a Kingdom, wherein he should Rule his own people as a Shepherd doth his Sheep, and his enemies with a rod of Iron, so as to re∣strain their fury against his people, to disap∣point their devices, and to dash in pieces
at last those that are his implacable ene∣mies. This was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 40.10, 11. Behold the Lord shall come with a strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: he shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather the lambs in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. And by Da∣vid, Ask of me, and I will give thee the hea∣then for thine inheritance, Ps. 2.8, 9. and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. So again the Prophet Jerem. Jer. 23.5. Behold a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgement and righte∣ousness! And who is this? but he whom he calls in the next verse, The Lord our Righte∣ousness. To this end he is so often called David, Ezek. 37.24, 25. and said to sit upon the throne of his father David. Not in a literal sense, as some conceit, as if he should come in per∣son to Reign upon earth, and set up his Throne in the same place where David Reigned, but that he should exercise a spi∣ritual jurisdiction over The Israel of God, as I have spoken before. To this purpose also is that which Daniel speaks of The God of heavens setting up a Kingdom that should never be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. which is spoken of the Kingdom of Christ: And that Zechariah speaks of thus, Behold thy King cometh unto thee, Zechar. 9.9. which is applyed to our Saviour, Mat. 21.7. By all this it is sufficiently evident, to e∣very sober and impartial eye, that the Lord
did promise to the Fathers of the Old Te∣stament, his own Son to become man, and to be a Mediator between God and man: and that accordingly the Spirit of God in the Law and the Prophets, hath attributed to the Messiah, who was promised, such Names and Titles, as speak him to be such a Person: and withal, that they foretel him to be de∣signed by the Father, to such Offices as were necessary to be performed in order to our Redemption and Salvation. CHAP. VII. The second Proposition confirmed by nine Arguments, viz. That the time which was appointed by God for the accomplishing of these Promises and Prophesies, and for the sending of the Son of God into the world in our Nature, is long since expired; so that we are certainly to believe that our Saviour is already come in the flesh. THat God the Father was pleased in his wonderful goodness and tenderness toward Mankind, to make very gracious promises concerning the sending of his own
Son into the World to be our Redeemer and Saviour, I think hath been made so evident, that he who would go about to cavil at it, must either bid open defiance to the belief of the Law and the Prophets, or if he pro∣fess with his mouth that he believeth them, yet he will shew indeed by his wresting of them, that he bears very little reve∣rence to them. Now, as we have seen how the inestimable love of God was manifest, in that man had no sooner fallen from obedi∣ence to his Creatour, and given him occasi∣on to pronounce that sentence of the Law, which his Justice did shew to be the due desert of sin; but he did presently, even in the midst of judgement remember mercy, and promised unto man a Saviour, that should deliver him from that curse of the Law which was but now denounced: So now let us see the admirable faithfulness of God, who hath fulfilled with his hand what he promised with his mouth, and, When the fulness of time was come, Gal. 4.4. did send forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law. The Apostle tells us that the Doctrine which they preached of Christ, being then already come and crucified for our sins, was to the Jews a stumbling-block, 1 Cor. 1.23, 44. and to the Greeks foolishness: and we may add, that what he told us before, we have still reason to tell you weeping, 2 Cor. 3.24. that to this day the vail is up∣on the hearts of the Jews, even a double vail,
of ignorance and obstinacy: so that though the wrath of God hath come upon this Nation to the utmost, 1 Thes. 2 16. and doth continue to this day, by reason of their crucifying the Lord of Life; yet will they not be sensible of it, but still are ready to cry, as their fathers former∣ly, Mat. 27.25. His blood be on us and on our children. And which is more sad, many even amongst the Professours of Christianity, are waxed so wanton in matters of Religion, that they would be glad to finde out some new sawces to gratifie the vanity of their own appe∣tites, would fain finde some new matters in this great Mystery of godiness, God mani∣fest in the flesh, as if the old Doctrine of the Church of God in all ages were so old that it were time to lay it aside. To obviate therefore the growing vanity of those that are so loose in the Profession of Christianity, and to help to establish us all in the belief of that Faith, into which we have been Baptized; I shall endeavour by several Ar∣guments to confirm this Truth, that we are verily to believe the time to be come, and long since past, when the Son of God was to come in the flesh, and to make him∣self an offering to Divine Justice for our sins. First, Argu∣ment. I argue from the calling of the Gen∣tiles, to the Knowledge and Service of the true God. When God was pleased to make choice of Jacob and his Posterity for his pe∣culiar people, he gave them several Ordi∣nances
and Rites, Eph. 2.14. which the Apostle calls a middle-wall of partition between them and the Gentiles: God having appointed the observation of these to be the cognizance of his own people: so that the Gentiles not observing these, this made, as it were, a partition-wall to separate the Jews from the Gentiles. And if we look into all the Writings of the Prophets, whensoever we finde any thing spoken of the Conversion of the Gentiles, we finde it tyed to the coming of the Messiah in the flesh. So when the Prophet speaks of Christ, Isa. 49.6. and the forming of him from the womb, he saith, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Judah: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, Isa. 60.3. that thou mayst be my Salvation to the ends of the earth. And after∣wards speaking of the coming of Christ, he saith, The glory of the Lord shall arise upon the earth: and the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and the King to the brightness of thy rising. I might instance in many other Prophesies, concerning the Conversion of the Gentiles, all which do foretel its coming to pass about the time of the coming of the Messiah in the flesh: Eph. 2.14, 15. who was to break down the middle∣wall of partition that was between us, and so of twain to make one people. Now that the Gentiles have been many of them long since turned to the knowledge and obedience of the true God, is evident: Joh. 4. Christ himself preached the Gospel to the
man of Samaria, and afterward to the whole City, and many of them believed in him: And afterwards we finde that divers of the Apostles went and preached the Gospel to the Gentiles: yea, St. Paul is expresly stiled The Apostle of the Gentiles: Eph. 3.2, 3. And he saith, Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not of the Gentiles also? Rom. 3.29, 30. Yes, of the Gentiles also: See∣ing it is one God that will justifie the circumci∣sion by Faith, and the uncircumcision through Faith. We read in the New Testament, of the Churches of God, at Rome, at Corinth, at Galatia, at Ephesus, and many other places, which before were Heathenish places. Yea, to go no further then this our Island, which was sometime of the number of the Gen∣tile Nations; yea, of the remote parts of the Gentiles: and yet, as we know that at present we do worship the true God; so the Histories of our Nation do report that we have been turned from Idols near 1600 years ago, which argues the Messiah to be long since come. Secondly, Argu∣ment. we argue from the destruction of the second Temple built at Jerusalem: The Messiah was promised to come into that Temple, and therefore that Temple being long since destroyed, it argues him to be long since come. We read, that when the Foundation of this later house was laid, Ma∣ny of the ancient men, Ezr. 3.12. who had seen the for∣mer house, went to see how far this came short of the first; and this did discourage the
people from going on with the Work. Up∣on this, God sends the Prophet Haggai, to encourage them to go on, and he speaks thus: Hag. 2.3. Who is left among you that saw this house in its first glory? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing? Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, &c. And how doth he incou∣rage them? I will shake all Nations, vers. 7. and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this house with Glory, saith the Lord of Hosts: And the glory of the latter house shall be greater then the former. vers. 9. You see then that the latter Temple was promised to excel the former: And how should that be? Not for famous structure, for as to this it came so far short of it, that it seemed in their eyes in comparison of it as nothing: nor was it so glorious as to the Vessels of the Temple, for there were five things wanting in this latter Temple, which were in the former: The Ark, the Mercy-seat, God∣wins An∣tiq. the Tables of Stone, wherein God with his own hand wrote the Ten Commandments, the Ʋrim and Thummim, and the holy anointing Oyl: Now sure it must be some great thing that could make up all these wants, and render the Glory of the latter Temple, greater than that of the former. Now as to this, the Prophet tells us, that the desire of all Nations, that is, Christ who was desirable to all Nations, as he in whom all the Fami∣lies of the earth should be blessed, He should come into this Temple to teach and work Mi∣racles
there, and this should make it more glorious. The former Temple had Solomon to pray and offer Sacrifice in it, but a grea∣ter than Solomon was in this latter Temple. So also Malachi tells them, Mal. 3.1. Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare my way before me: and the Lord whom ye seek, shall sudden∣ly come into his Temple: even the messenger of the Covenant in whom ye delight. This An∣gel or Messenger of the Covenant is the Lord Jesus Christ, and he is promised to come into this Temple; and therefore we must conclude, that his coming must be be∣fore the utter destruction of this Temple. Now it is sufficiently evident, that this Temple together with the City of Jerusalem, hath been utterly destroyed near 1600 years ago: Buchol. Chronol. for it was in the 71 year of Christ that Titus took the City, and set fire upon the Temple, and ever since it hath lain desolate; yea, when Julian the Apostate, in despight to the Christian Religion, gave the Jews liberty and encouragement to rebuild the Temple; there was an earthquake which so shook the foundation that they had laid, that it left not one stone upon another: Sozo∣men. and when for all this they obstinately persisted in attempting to build the Temple, God sent a fire from Heaven which consumed divers of the Builders. And therefore seeing that Temple is long since destroyed, the Messiah is undoubtedly long since come. Thirdly, I argue from the Scepter's being
departed from Judah; the government, Argu∣ment. even all face of a government being departed from that Nation. Jacob in blessing his Sons, Gen. 49.10. tells Judah that The Scepter should not depart from him, nor the law giver from between his feet, till Shiloh should come. This place is frequently urged for the conviction of the present Jews, and to which indeed they can oppose nothing, but a resolute and stiff-necked obstinacy▪ That by Shiloh is understood the Messiah, I have shewed al∣ready, and the Jews themselves confess it. And for the precise time when the Scepter departed, we need not to be very nice in enquiring. Judah was governed by Kings, Joseph. Antig. by the space of 514 years in all. At the end whereof they were carried away Cap∣tives into Babylon by the space of 70 years. After this they had Governours for divers years: then the Maccabees held both the Government and High-Priest-hood for four successions. Then Aristobulus the first made himself King, and so the Posterity of the Maccabees held both the Kingdom and Priest-hood, till the days of Herod the Son of Antipater: He slew Hircanus and Ari∣stobulus, the last of the Asmonean Family, and also many of the Jewish Sanhedrim, and en∣joyed the sole Government and Kingdom of Judea. And now many thought that the Scepter was departed from Judah: for Herod was a stranger born, who had the Government, and therefore many did now
begin to look for the Messiah. Some were such flatterers of Herod that they perswaded him that he was the Messiah, and thence (say some) came that Sect of Herodians mentioned in the Evangelists. There was also one Theudas, not long before Christ, who boasted himself to be the Messiah, and drew a company of people after him, Acts 5.36. but was destroyed with those that followed him. And after him arose Judas of Galilee in the days of taxing; vers. 37. Josephus saith, this man arose in the time of the gathering of that Tax, which was levyed by Augustus when Christ was born, and some conceive those Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sa∣crifices, Luke 13.2, 3. to have been followers of him. And divers others have arisen since, who have boasted themselves to be the Messiah. So that though the generality of the Jews re∣jected Christ, yet many of them did follow false christs; Joh. 5.43. as himself told them, I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another man come in his own name, him ye will receive. Thus you see how many of the worse sort of the Jews, believing the Scepter to be already departed, did follow false christs: but if we look further, we shall find that many of the devout sort amongst them did begin now to expect the coming of the Messiah: Luke 1.25. So we read of Simeon that he wait∣ed for the consolation of Israel; and Anna spake of Christ to all them that looked for Re∣demption in Jerusalem: vers. 38. and Joseph of Arima∣thea
is said to have waited for the Kingdom of God; that is, the coming of the Messiah. Luk. 2.51. So that it is evident, that many of the Jews did now think the Scepter to be departed in the days of Herod the King. Others say that there was some kinde of government (though much shattered and broken) till the time when the City was destroyed: but, granting this, it is evi∣dent, as I shewed before, that the City was utterly destroyed, and the people reduced into a Roman Colony, and the very face of a Common-wealth utterly abolished a∣mongst them well nigh 1600 years ago: And therefore we may firmly conclude, that the Messiah is long since come. Fourthly, Argu∣ment. I argue from the breaking and decay of the fourth Monarchy spoken of by Daniel the Prophet. Nebuchadnezzar in his dream saw an Image, whose Head was of gold, the breast and arms of silver, Dan. 2. the belly and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, the feet part of iron, and part of clay. In this Image were represented to the King the Govern∣ments that should be in the World. The Head of gold did signifie the Babylonian or Assyrian Monarchy, vers. 38. which was a very glorious Kingdom; after which succeeded the King∣dom of the Medes & Persians, when Cyrus the Persian overcame and slew Belshazzar, the last of the Assyrian Kings: this was also a great Kingdom, but came as far short of the glory of the Assyrian Kingdom, as silver comes
short of the worth of Gold; and it is com∣pared to two Arms, Ver. 39. because there were two Nations joyned, the Medes and Persians. After this arose a third Monarchy, viz. of the Grecians, when Alexander the great con∣quered Darius, Ver. 39. the last King of the Persi∣ans, this was the thigh of Brass. After this it is said, that a fourth Kingdom should a∣rise, Ver. 40. which should be a very strong King∣dom, and therefore is compared to legs of Iron. Now whereas the King saw that a Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, Ver. 44. should break to pieces all this Image, and afterward grow to a great Mountain, he saith, that in the dayes of these Kings, that is, the Kings which should be of the fourth Monarchy, The God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom which never shall be destroyed, and it shall break in pieces all those Kingdoms, and consume them, and it self shall stand up for ever. This is un∣derstood of the Kingdom of the Messiah, who is compared to a Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands. Isa. 28.16. Christ is called by the Prophet, a Stone, and he is said to be cut out without hands; that is, say some, he was conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin, without the help of a man: But o∣thers (and perhaps more probably) think this to belong to the Kingdom of the Messi∣ah, which should be set up or propagated, not by the power and policy of man, as o∣ther Kingdoms were, but by the Almighty power of God alone.
This Kingdom of the Stone, we see, was to begin in the time of the fourth Monarchy; Now what this fourth Monarchy was, is va∣riously interpreted: but which interpretati∣on soever we imbrace, this Argument will be sufficiently cogent. When Alexander the Great was dead, Josephus Antiq. Sir Walt. Rawley. his Dominions and Kingdoms, fell into divers mens hands: Antigonus was Lord of Asia, Seleucus of Babylon, and the bordering Na∣tions: Lysimachus, had Hellespont: Cassan∣der, Macedon; and Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, held Egypt. After a while, these five King∣doms were reduced into two, viz. The Sy∣rian Kingdom, which was called the King∣dom of the Seleucidae; and the Fgyptian Kingdom, called the Kingdom of the Ptole∣mies; and these some take to be the legs of Iron, and the feet, part of Iron, part of Clay. But according to this computation, the fourth Monarchy was gone somewhat before the birth of Christ; for Cleopatra, who was the last Queen of Egypt, was over∣come by Octavius Caesar, divers years before Christ was born. Others say, that this fourth Kingdom was the Roman Monarchy, which had ten Toes, that is, so many Forms of Government. Now in the time of this Monarchy Christ was born, viz. in the days of Augustus Caesar: It is an Observation of a Learned man, that, M. Legh. ver. 35. there is a two-fold Kingdom of the Messiah described; first, the Kingdom of the
Stone, and then the Kingdom of the Moun∣tain. The Stone shall first break in pieces the Gold, the Silver, the Brass, the Iron and Clay; and then grow up into a Moun∣tain: That is, Jesus Christ, when he shall come, shall break in pieces all those 4 Monar∣chies, and afterward his Kingdom shall fill all the Earth. And so we know that while the Roman Kingdom stood in its strength, the Kingdom of Christ was but small, it was then the Kingdom of the Stone, but af∣terward it became a Mountain; the Doctrine of the Gospel then spread into all the world; while the Roman Emperors flourish∣ed, the most of them persecuted the ser∣vants of Christ, and endeavoured to hin∣der the Promulgation of the Gospel; but afterward when their power was cut short, the Kingdom of Christ flourished: The sum of the Argument is this. There were four Monarchies to be erected by the God of Heaven in the world; In the dayes of the fourth Monarchy, Christ was to be born, and his Kingdom set up. Now whether we take this fourth Monarchy for the Successors of Alexander the Great, or for the Romans, both these are long since decayed: and therefore surely the Messiah is come in the flesh. Fifthly, Argu. I argue from the exspiring of the seventy weeks, Dan. 9.24. to the end. spoken of, in Dan. 9.24. to the end of the Chapter: which you may read at your leasure. It is generally agreed up∣on, that this is a Prophecy concerning the
time of the birth of the Messiah, and con∣cerning his death, and the end for which he was to die; and the Text speaks plainly, that these weeks were determined, to finish transgression, and to make an end of Sin, and to maze reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness; now this can be done by no other but by him that was the Saviour of the world: Yea, the name Messiah is twice mentioned, so that undoubtedly this is a Prophesie concerning the coming of the Messiah. Now as to what is meant by the Seventy weeks; it is thus agreed upon, that every day es for a year, so that seventy weeks are eventy times seven years, that is, 400 and 90 years; and it is said, Vers. 25. that the be∣ginning of these seventy weeks, should be from the going forth of the Commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. Now here lyes the great difficulty when this time was, for the Jews had four several times Command∣ment to build the City and the Temple: Ezra 1.1, 2. The first was from Cyrus, in the first year of his reign: The second from Darius, the son of Hystaspis after it had been some time hin∣dred by Cambyses: Ezra 6. The third was given to Ezra, by Artaxerxes Longimanus: Ezra 7.12. Neh. 2. The fourth & last was given to Nehemiah, who was But∣ler to the King. This commandment was gi∣ven out in the dayes of Artaxerxes; whether the same that gave the commandment to Ezra, or another of the same name, I can∣not find determined.
Now being it is not specified in Daniel, from which of these times the seventy weeks should begin, therefore there is some differ∣ence amongst Interpreters, and Chronolo∣gers, concerning it: Some make it to begin from that commandment given to Ezra from Artaxerxes, after which the work went on without Lett, for we do not read that ever this Decree was revoked. And in my opi∣nion this seems most probable: Chrono. For both Bucholtzer, and whosoever wrote the Chro∣nology in the Margin of Josephus Antiqui∣ties, say, that from the time of this com∣mandment to Ezra, to the death of Christ are near about four hundred & ninty years: And so this computation answers to that ex∣pression in Daniel, Dan. 9.25. that, after seventy weeks the Messiah should be cut off. Now, say we, Christ was born in the second year of the sixty sixt week, and the thirty four year inchoat, which he lived upon Earth, make up just the num∣ber of seventy weeks, and so the Prophesie was exactly fulfilled, beginning from the third commandment which was issued out for the building of the City. Others there are that begin these weeks thirty seven years later, viz. in the second year of Darius Nothus, and so make them to end just at the time when Jerusalem was taken and destroyed by Titus, led, I suppose, by these words; Ver. 36. And the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a
flood, and to the end of the war desolations are determined. But if we grant this, yet the seventy weeks are at an end many hundred of years ago, the City being destroyed (as I said before) about the seventy one year of Christ. The sum of the Argument is this: These seventy weeks denote the number of 490 years, within which time the Messiah must be born and cut off: But these seven∣ty weeks or 490 years, are ended many hundred of years ago: and therefore the Messiah is long since come. Sixthly, Argu∣ment. I argue from the ceasing of the Sacrifices, which were appointed by the ce∣remonial Law, and extinguishing of that Priest-hood. That those Sacrifices were to continue, and consequently the Priest-hood that was to offer them, until the coming of the Messiah, and then to cease, may be evi∣dent from that Text, Psal. 40.6, 7. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire mine ear hast thou boared: in burnt-offerings and sin offerings thou hast no de∣light: Then said I, Loe I come. When Christ should come in the flesh, then God declares that he would no more take delight in burnt-offerings and other oblations and expiations which were used under the Law. And that this Prophesie is to be applyed to our Savi∣ours coming in the flesh, is evident, by the Apostles exposition of it. Wherefore when he, Heb. 10.5, 6. that is, Christ, cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering, thou wouldest not, &c. And a little further, vers. 9. He take away the first
that he may establish the second. Christ by the once Offering up of himself as an expia∣tory Sacrifice for our sins was to put an end to all those legal oblations, which were Types of this great Oblation. Beside, the Prophet Daniel saith, that when the Messiah should come, Dan. 9.27. He should cause the Sacrifice and the Ob∣lation to cease. Indeed the very end and sig∣nification of all those Sacrifices did shew that they were to be abolished at the coming of the Messiah, who was the true Sacrifice for sin: God did not set them up that men might rest in them, or expect pardon of sin by them. Heb. 10.1. The Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offe∣red year by year, make the comers thereto per∣fect, vers. 4. for then should they not have ceased to be offered. And further, It was not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin. All these Sacrifices did serve to shew them, that Without shedding of blood, Heb. 9.22. there was no re∣mission of sin; and did thereby teach them to look unto that Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. for justification and Salvation: and therefore, when Christ the true Sacrifice was offered, and not be∣fore, these Sacrifices were to cease. Now it is evident that these Sacrifices are long since quite ceased, the City of Jerusa∣lem, and the Temple being long since de∣stroyed: and this was the place where alone he had appointed them to offer Sacrifice: Deut. 12.5.
and therefore seeing he hath suffered this Place to be utterly destroyed, it argues, that it was his pleasure, that these Sacrifices should cease to be offered: Heb. 10.14. For this man (that is, Jesus Christ) by one offering hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The continual offering of Sacrifices under the Law did shew the imperfection of them, that they could not perfectly justifie those for whom they were offered: Now what these Sacrifices, through their weakness were not able to do, God sending forth his own Son, made under the Law, and made a Sa∣crifice for sin, hath perfected. So that from the ceasing of these Sacrifices which were appointed as Types of Christ, we may con∣clude, that the Messiah the substance of all these shadows is already offered up for us. Seventhly, Argu∣ment. I argue from the abolishing of the power of the Heathen Idols, and its si∣lencing of their Oracles. It was foretold that when the Messiah should come, he should destroy the Idols of the Gentiles which be∣fore had been of so great power and cre∣dit. Isa. 2.18, 19. The idols he shall utterly abolish (saith Isaiah) and they shall go into the holes of the Rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Ma∣jesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. In that day shall a man cast away his idols of silver and his idols of gold which they have made, to the Moles and to the Bats. And
the Prophet Zechariah, speaking of the time of Christ's coming, Zech. 13.1, 2. when the Fountain should be set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, for sin & for uncleanness: he adds, It shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembred: And also I will cause the Prophets, and the un∣clean spirit to issue out of the land. You see then that it was prophesied, that at the time of Christs coming in the flesh, the power of the idols should decay, and the Oracles of the Heathen-gods be struck dumb. Now this is long since come to pass: That which made the Idols of the Heathen to be in so much request, was, that the Devil did many times enter into them, and speak out of them, and shew strange feats before them: But this power of the Devil was taken a∣way long since. The great Temple of A∣pollo, and the Oracle at Delphos that was so famous all over the world, is long since abo∣lished. It is related, that neer about the time when Christ was born, Augustus Caesar sent to enquire of the Oracle, and it told him that he could receive no Answer from him, for there was a Childe born in Judaea, who commanded him from those shores: and this was the last voice that was heard from that Temple. And it is written by an Author of this Nation, S. Geo. Sands Travels. that a Merchant∣ship sailing neer those coasts, those that were in it heard an hideous howling noise, and
one call to the Master of the Ship by name, and bid him tell, when he came to the shore, that the great god Pan was dead. Now the silencing of these Oracles doth shew the Messiah to be come. Eighthly, I argue that the Messiah is come, Argu∣ment. because the Genealogies of the Jews are so con∣founded, that it is impossible to find out the Ancient Posterity of David. Isa. 11.1. Christ we know was promised to come of the Seed of David, in divers places of the Prophets: And hence we may argue, That if God had so punctu∣ally foretold the Family of which the Me∣ssiah should be born, then sure he would take special care to keep the Pedegrees so orderly that it might be known of what Fa∣mily Christ's Mother was, that we might be the better confirmed in our Faith, that He which did come was the true Messiah. And it is evident that Gods providence did take great care to keep the Families distinct, that each man might know his own Pedegree: To this end he commanded, Num. 36.6, 7, 8. That a man of one Tribe, should not marry a wife of another Tribe, but that every man should marry in his own Tribe. And to this purpose it is thought, that Commandment was given forth, Deut. 25.5. Josephus Antiq. that the younger Brother should marry the Relict of his elder Brother, who died without issue. And the Jews are said to be so careful of this, that every family had its own Pedegree up∣on Record, which Records were kept in the Archives at Jerusalem.
Now Herod the King seeing how much the Jews valued their descent from David, and other such like Worthies; and knowing that himself was not a Jew, but a stranger born; caused all those Books to be burned, in which the Pedegrees were recorded, ho∣ping thereby that the Families would be confounded, and his own base descent should after some time be forgotten. Now since this time, these Records being lost, the Ge∣nealogies are confounded; so that, though some few did know their Pedegrees for a while, yet now they are so forgotten, that no man can directly tell of what Family he is. And therefore if God by his Providence did preserve these Records so long, that it might be known that Christ came of the House of David, and did then suffer these Records to be utterly destroyed, and the Fami∣lies to be confounded; then may we from hence conclude, that the true Messiah is long since come in the flesh. Lastly, Argu∣ment. There is another Argument urged by some, which though it be not of very great force to a Christian, yet is it suffici∣ent to stop the mouth of a cavilling Jew, as being ad hominem, an Argument drawn from their own principles. The Argument is this: The Jews have a Tradition amongst them, that as God made the world in six dayes, and then rested the seventh; so the world should stand six thousand years, and then keep an everlasting Sabbath. Now of
these six thousand years, they say, that two thousand should be before the Law was gi∣ven; two thousand under the Law; and two thousand under the Messiah. Now the four thousandth year of the world is long since past. There are divers Opinions of Chro∣nologers concerning the precise time of Christs birth, which I shall not think need∣ful to be here set down: But according to the computation of most of them, the birth of Christ fell out not very far distant from the four thousandth year of the world; and this might perhaps be one reason why so many of the Jews, did about this time expect the coming of the Messiah, and followed divers false Christs, though they forsook the true One. But without doubt these four thousand years are long since expired, and therefore according to their own Tradition, the Messiah is long since come in the flesh. We have seen the point proved positively: Let us next consider one of their chief Ob∣jections against the believing of the Messiah to be come. They say that their sins have hindred the Messiah from coming at the time which was appointed. The calling of the Gen∣tiles, the ceasing of the Sacrifices, the de∣struction of the second Temple, the depart∣ing of the Scepter, but especially the Pro∣phesie concerning the Seventy weeks, do so urge them, that they can hardly deny, that the time fore-appointed is long since past:
But they say, that the sins of their Nation have hindred the accomplishing of the pro∣mises at the appointed time. But this is a very weak refuge to flie un∣to: For, First, the sins of their Fathers did not hin∣der the making of these promises, and why should they think that the sins of the Chil∣dren should hinder the fulfilling of them in due time? The bestowing of Christ is the freest of all gifts: God doth not give him for the deserts of any people. It was not for the merits of those to whom he was promised, that God made these promises, and therefore the demerits of the Children could not hinder the accomplishment of them. Gen. 3.15. The first time when God made this promise to Adam, was, when there was no∣thing in man to deserve it; yea, the great∣ness of mans sin which he had but newly committed, might have made God far from shewing any Mercy: So, when God renewed it by Moses to the Israelites, Deut. 18.15. it was at that time when they shewed themselves a most unthankful & rebellious people, who grieved the Lord forty years in the wilderness. And when the Prophets foretold the coming of the Messiah, it was in a time of great Wickedness among the people: That promise Isa. 7.14. was made in the days of Ahaz the worst of all the Kings of Judah; and vers. 13. he tells them, Jer. 23. 5, 6. that they had even wearied the Lord with their sins. So, that other was made in
the days of Jeconiah, when the land was so filled with wickedness, that the earth groaned under its inhabitants, till God eased it by sending them into Captivity. Now if the abounding of sin in the Fathers did not hinder the making of these pro∣mises; it is very unreasonable to imagine that the sins of the Children should hinder the fulfilling of them at the time appointed. Secondly, the promises concerning the Messiah were absolutely expressed, without any respect to the worthiness or unworthiness of the people. Jacob doth not say, Gen. 49.10. If the people be obedient, Shiloh shall come when the Scepter departs, but speaks it absolutely. The seventy weeks are said to be determined; Dan. 9. not conditionally, if the people did please God, but absolutely. And if the sins of the people did not hinder the fulfilling of other Prophesies of this Nature, why should they be thought to have hindred this? Doubt∣less, this is but a Cavil invented by the Jews of latter ages: for their fathers that lived about the time of Christs Birth, did look upon them as absolute, and did expect the Messiah about that time, as I shewed be∣fore; and this cavil is only invented to de∣fend the obstinacy of this Nation at this day. Nay, let us hear what a promise the Psalmist mentioneth, If the children of Da∣vid do break my laws and keep not my com∣mandments, Psal. 89.30, 31, 32. &c. then will I visit their trans∣gressions with a rod, and their sins with stripes;
nevertheless my loving kindness will I not take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gon out of my lips. And this must needs be understood of the Covenant concerning the sending of the Messiah: so that their sins could not hinder the fulfil∣ling of it in due time. Thirdly, the Messiah was promised to be a blessing to all Nations, Gen. 21.16. and therefore the sins of one Nation could not hinder the sending of him in due time. God promised Abra∣ham, that in his seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: and Isaiah, speaking from the Lord unto Christ, Isa. 49.6. saith, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Judah; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayst be my Salvation to the ends of the earth: The Gentiles were to receive benefit by his coming into the world, as well as the Jews, as I have before shewed: and therefore it would be unreasonable to imagine that the sins of that one Nation should hinder the coming of Him, who was to be a blessing to all Nations. Ezek. 18.20. God saith, The soul that sinneth shall dye; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the ini∣quity of the son: the righteousness of the righ∣teous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Now if God will not punish the sins of the father on the son, who is not accessary to his father's
faults; much less will he punish the sins of the Jews, upon all the whole world, who were not accessary to their sins. Fourthly, Dan. 9.24. The Messiah was promised to come for this end, that he might take away sin, to finish Transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to bring in everlasting Righteous∣ness; Isa. 53.5. and to be wounded for our Transgressi∣ons, &c. as I have said before: And there∣fore why should we think that the abound∣ing of sin should hinder his coming? Doth the sickness of the Patient hinder the Phy∣sitian from coming, whose office is to cure Diseases, and there would be no need of him if men were not sick? Yea some of the Learned do tell us, that the Jewish Rabbies that lived before Christ, did foretel that when the Messiah should come, there would be a great abounding of Iniquity in the world; and therefore we may conclude this to be onely a Cavil of the later Jews, to ex∣cuse their obstinate slighting of the true Christ whom their Fathers crucified. As for that fond conceit of some of the Jews, who say that the Messiah is indeed come, but is hidden at the gates of Rome, and that it shall be some time before he be dis∣covered: This is so far lighter than vanity, that I shall take no further notice of it, then to put you in mind thereby of that heavy curse of God that lies upon them; That though the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 3.1. for about two thousand years ago, did tell them, that
the Lord should suddenly come into his Temple, yet they will believe that he is still to come. Yea, though they have felt the heavy wrath of God lying upon them to the utmost, for so many Ages; yea, though their condition be so sad, that they have no Prophets to tell them how long it shall last, yet still they per∣fist in denying and opposing the true Christ. Let us pray for their Conversion, and en∣deavour to be setled our selves in this Arti∣cle of the Christian Faith, that the Messiah who was promised to the Fathers, is long since come in the flesh.
CHAP. VIII. The third Proposition, viz. That we have full and sufficient Grounds to believe, that the same Jesus which is held forth unto us in the New Testa∣ment, and in whom we and all the Churches of God in all Ages have believed, is that very Person who was promised to the Fathers to come as the Messiah, or Saviour of the World; Confirmed by the Mira∣cles which he wrought to confirm this Truth, and by the fulfilling of all Prophesies in him. THat a Saviour was promised to the Fa∣thers of Old, and that these promi∣ses are long since out of date, you have seen confirmed; so that consequently we must look backward with the Eye of our Faith, to a Christ already exhibited, and not for∣ward to one yet to come. The next thing in which it will be necessary to have our Faith setled, is, that we are not deceived, as to that particular Person, upon whom we and all the Churches of God, for this six∣teen
hundred years and upward, have pitched, as our Messiah or Saviour. And though the consent of the Church in all Ages, be a very good Argument to satisfie us in this point, yet it may be necessary in these fickle times, to look for a firmer Ground to build our Faith upon, in this which is a matter of so great moment. First then, Argu∣ment. I argue from the many Mi∣racles which Jesus wrought, when he was up∣on the Earth; for the confirmation of this Truth, that he was indeed the Messiah that was promised. A Miracle, is a work that exceeds the power of any created cause, to produce by his own strength, and therefore whosoever can do miracles, is either God, or hath received power from God in a spe∣cial and supernatural manner. And as Gods giving power to any person to work Mira∣cles, for the confirming of any point that he teacheth, is to be accounted as Gods setting his Seal to the truth thereof: So it would be unreasonable, as well as impious, to imagin that the God of Truth should set his Seal to a ly; and consequently whate∣ver Doctrine hath been confirmed, by the the working of apparent and undeniable Miracles, we are to receive it as that which God himself hath commended to us as a Truth, and himself born witness of it. Indeed to determin what is the utmost that is in the Power of Natural Causes, or Agents, to produce without Supernatural
Assistance, and what is the least of those that are to be esteemed Supernatural Effects, and which ought to be ascribed to a cause of Transcendent Power, this is a matter of great difficulty. But yet when such things are done as were never heard of from the Foundation of the World, to be done by them that have made the greatest expe∣riments of the strength and operation of Natural Causes; yea, which have directly crossed the course of Nature, without using any Natural Causes to oppose one another: I suppose that every rational man, will ac∣count him absurd that will deny these to be Miracles, and done by the immediate hand of God, except he can shew any Natural cause that should be imagined to work these effects. This we find our Saviour to stand much upon, when he was on Earth, for the con∣firmation of his being the true Messiah. Joh. 5.36. I have a greater Witness, then that of John (though the Jews did most of them rever∣ence him greatly for his strict life) the works which my Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. And afterward, Joh. 10.25. when the Jews asked Jesus, to tell them plainly, whether he were the Messiah, he sends them to his Works; The works that I do in my Fathers Name, Ver. 37, 38. they bear witness of me: And further saith, If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if
I do, though ye believe not me, yet believe the works: that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him. And else∣where, Joh. 14.11. Believe me that the Father is in me, and I in him, or else believe me for the very works sake. Joh. 15.24. And again, If I had not done amongst them the works, which no other man can do, they had not had sin, (that is, their sin had not been so great and inexcusable) but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father. Yea, he tells those that were understanding persons among them, that inasmuch as they had refisted and opposed that Doctrine which he had thus confirmed, and had imputed these works to the evil Spi∣rit, Matt. 12.28. therefore they had sinned that sin against the holy Ghost, which should never be forgiven. Thus you see that Jesus himself laid great stress upon this Argument, Mark. 3.29. to prove himself to be the true Messiah, because he had done such works to confirm this Truth, as no o∣ther man could do, yea such as none but God himself could do. And that Jesus did work these Miracles to confirm the truth of his being the Messiah, may be sufficiently evident, both by what hath been spoken already, and also by what he spake to the Disciples of John Bap∣tist. Matt. 11.4. When their Master sent them to him to be satisfied whether or no he were the true Messiah; he answers them, Go tell John the things that ye have seen and heard: The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, the dead are raised up: And therefore do you judge who it is that hath power to do such works as these. It would be a large task to reckon up all the Miracles of Christ which are upon re∣cord: I shall onely set before you some of those which do most apparently shew them∣selves to be works peculiar to the Divine Power to effect. Joh. 2. He turned water into wine, at Cana of Galilee. Mat. 14. He fed 5000 men with five loaves, Mat. 15. and 4000 with se∣ven loaves. Joh. 9.1. He restored divers blind men to sight, amongst which one that was born blind. Mar. 7.32. He restored to speech and hearing, one that was deaf and dumb. He calmed the Seas twice. He raised three dead folks, whereof Joh. 11. Lazarus had been dead four days, so that there could be no doubt, but that he was really dead and past being recovered by na∣tural Causes. These works and many o∣thers which Jesus wrought, being such as no man can reasonably deny to be the works of Gods immediate power, and being wrought to confirm the truth of his be∣ing the true Messiah, may be sufficient to establish our Faith in the belief of it. If the unbelieving Jews and Atheistical persons amongst us, do doubt of the truth of these matters of fact, and consequently of the truth that they are brought to con∣firm, alledging that we bring onely the Writings of the New Testament for the
proof thereof; which is of suspected credit with them: I answer that we have as much cause (Reason it self being judg) to believe the History of the New Testament, as any other Histories which are written in the world. If we believe the Roman History written by Livie, and Suetonius, & Tacitus; and the Eng∣lish Chronicles written by divers of our own Nation: and should account him very un∣reasonable that should deny the truth of the things therein reported, without alledging any sufficient ground for his suspecting the integrity of these Writers: then why should we not believe the matters of fact recorded by the Writers of the New Testa∣ment, seeing we cannot alledge any suffici∣ent ground of doubting either the sufficiency of these Writers or yet their integrity? But have rather ground to conclude, that no bad creature would write those things, which tend so directly to the beating down of Sa∣tans Kingdom, and terrifying of lewd and wicked men: nor would any good creature so far take the name of God in vain, or wrong the souls of well-meaning people, as to report such matters in the name of God which they knew to be untruths: and that therefore it is most reasonable to conclude these things to be written by good men, and who did know themselves to write the truth. Besides, the Miracles that Christ is re∣ported
to have wrought were not done in a corner, nor a great while before they were written. He fed 5000 people at one time, and 4000 at another miraculously: yea, most of Christ Miracles were wrought openly, so that many of the Jews were present at the doing of them: and they were written in the same age wherein they were done: so that the unbelieving Jews, who were such ene∣mies to Jesus, would certainly have contra∣dicted them, if they had written an un∣truth. Yea, other Writers besides the Evange∣lists do mention these Miracles. See what testimony Josephus himself, though a Jew, Joseph Antiq. l. 18. c. 4. gives of Christ. At that time was Jesus a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a man: for he was the performer of divers admira∣ble works, and the instructor of those who willingly entertain the truth: and he drew un∣to him divers Jews and Greeks to be his fol∣lowers. This was Christ, who being accused by the Princes of the Nation before Pilate, and afterward condemned to the Cross by him, yet did not they who followed him from the begin∣ning forbear to love him, for the ignoming of his death: for he appeared to them alive the third day after, according as the divine Prophets had before testified the same. And divers other wonderful things of him: and from that time forward, the Race of Christians, who derived their name from him, hath never ceased. Thus we see Josephus confesseth the great
works which he did, and withall the truth of his Doctrine, and certainty of his Resur∣rection: And, which we may greatly wonder at, he who in flattery had before called Vespasian the Messiah, when he comes to write this History (whether it overslipped him, or whether it was forced from him by the o∣ver-ruling hand of God) he confesseth that this Jesus was the Christ. Yea, the Turks cannot but confess that Jesus did very many great and wonderful works: and therefore they preferr him be∣fore Moses, and set him next to their Ma∣homet, and say, He was a good man and a great Prophet. And some of the Jews say that Jesus was a very holy man, and highly in favour with God, who enabled him to do all these works: and yet they will not believe him to be the Messiah. Pilate himself who condemned him most unjustly to death, yet is said afterward to have written to Tiberius, a relation of his many Miracles. Whereupon Tiberius was willing to admit him into the number of their gods, and wrote to the Senate to that end. But the Senate refused, alledging one of their Laws, that none should be ad∣mitted into the number of their gods, but whom the Senate did first propose them∣selves. Which as it shews the vanity of minde, to which even the wiser sort of the Heathens were delivered up, that they could conceit that they could either keep
out him who was truly God, by a Vote in the Senate, or by a more favourable Vote, when they were in a kinder mood, make him a God, who was none before: So it hws the Providence of God, in not per∣mitting his own blessed Son, who as to his divine Nature, was equal to the Father, to be ranked amongst them that were no gods, as equal with them. The Evasion, whereby some of the mo∣dern Jews, are said to endeavour to keep off this Argument from the Miracles which Jesus wrought, from convincing them that he was the true Messiah, is so absurd, that the very mentioning of it, will proclaim it ridiculous. They say, that as to those works which he did, he came to do them by this means: He got once into the Holy of holies, and stole out thence the name Jehovah, which was there written upon a Plate of Gold; and for fear lest it should be taken from him, he cut a hole in his Thigh, and put the Plate therein; and by vertue of that Name, they say he did all those miracles: Every man will easily see the absurdity of this, without my spending of words to confute it. However, hereby it is evident, that men of all Nations and Professions, are convinced of the many miracles which Jesus wrought, when he was upon Earth: And forasmuch as he wrought these on purpose to con∣firm the truth of his being the Messiah that
was promised; we may therefore conclude that this Truth is hereby setled as such a Rock, that the gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against it. The second Argument, Argu∣ment. shall be drawn from Jesus his fulfilling all the Prophesies, that went before, concerning the Messiah. All things did concur in his Person, which were foretold concerning the Person of the Messiah, and all things were done and suf∣fered by him, that were foretold to be done and suffered by the Messiah, and therefore he was the true Messiah. This was another great Argument which Jesus himself used; Search the Scriptures, for they are those that testifie of me. John 5.39. And tells them, that if they did not shut their eyes, they might plainly see all things so exactly fulfilled in him, that, if they did not believe in him, Vers. 45, 46, 47. Moses himself would bear witness a∣gainst them: For if they had believed Moses writings, and rightly understood them, they would have believed Jesus to be the Messiah. So when Jesus, after his Resurrection, was going with the two Disciples to Emmaus, Luk. 24.25, 26, 27. he began at Moses, and so, through all the Prophets, expounded unto them those things which were written concerning himself; and blames them for that they had searched and under∣stood the writing of the Prophets no bet∣ter. Acts 17.2, 3. And the Apostle Paul at Thessalonica, entered into the Synagogue three Sabbath dayes, And reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures, opening and alledging that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus whom I preach unto you, is Christ. And again, it is said elsewhere, Acts 18.28. that St. Paul mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the Scriptures, that Jesus is Christ. It is very observable, that the Evangelists in relating many of the passages of our Sa∣viours life, do refer to the Prophesies that foretold these things. This, and This was done that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by this and the other Prophet, and then was fulfilled the saying of the Prophets, &c. Luk. 24.44. So Je∣sus saith, These are the words that I spake un∣to you while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which are written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me. Yea, he was so ex∣act in accomplishing all the Prophesies, that when he was upon the Cross, in extremi∣ty of pain, and knew that all things were fulfilled, save only that one Prophesie, which foretold that they should give, him Vinegar to drink, he therefore gives occasion for the fulfilling of it, before he would die; John 19.28. Vers. 30. and when that was done, he said, It is finished, and then gave up the Ghost. Now that we may be the more sensible how Jesus did fulfil all the Prophesies that went before, concerning the Messiah, let us consider it in these several Branches. 1. It was foretold, that the Messiah should
spring from the Loyns of Abraham, and in the Line of the House of David, Gen. 22.18. and Chap. 49.8. Isa. 11.1. Now this was exactly fulfilled, as we see, Mat. 1. & Luk. 3. where the Pedegree is traced up to David, and thence to Judah, and so to Abraham: And for this very purpose, we may conceive these Genealogies to be set down, even to satisfie us, that Jesus came of these Fami∣lies, as it had been foretold concerning him. 2. It was foretold, that he should be born of a Virgin; Isa 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, &c. The Jews of late have endeavoured to evade the force of this Text, by corrupting it; telling us that the word  which we render, a Virgin, doth onely signifie a Woman; but this, as it doth offer great violence to the word here used, so also to the scope of the Text, and Context. For the words are spoken as a signe to Ahaz; Now what signe or wonder would it have been, to tell them that a Wo∣man should conceive or bear a Son? But for a Virgin to conceive, and yet continue a Virgin still, that is a wonder, and fit to be given as a Signe. Now this also was fulfilled in that Jesus, in whom we believe as the Scripture shew. Mat. 1.18. The Angel of God came to a Virgin, whose name was Mary, and told her, Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy Womb, &c. and when She asked, Luk. 1.34, 35. How can this be? see∣ing I know not a man. It was answered, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon Thee, and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow Thee, &c. 3. The Messih was to be born in Bethle∣hem. Thou Bethlehem Ephrata, Mic. 5.2. though thou be mean amongst the Tribes of Israel, yet out of thee shall he come forth, who shall be Ruler of my people. The Jews were sensible of this, and therefore the Scribes and Elders, directed the Wise-men thither, Mat. 2. Luk. 2. and cite this place of the Prophet for it. Now Jesus was born there; and it is the more observa∣ble, because of that Providence which brought Joseph, and the blessed Virgin hi∣ther, without any thoughts of him that cal∣led them thither. 4. It was foretold, that the Messiah should have John Baptist, to go before him. Be∣hold, I will send my Messenger before thy face, Mal. 3.1. which shall prepare thy way before thee; and then, The Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come into his Temple. And elsewhere, Isa. 40.3. he is called the Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Now Jesus in whom we believe, had John Baptist to be born six months be∣fore him; Luk. 1. Mal. 3. and he is said to begin a little be∣fore Jesus began to Preach, and he Taught in the Wilderness of Judea, the Baptism of Repentance, for the Remission of sin. Mark 1.1, 2. And it is observable how St. Mark begins his Gospel, as it were taking at these Prophesies of Isaiah and Malachy, The beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in the Prophets, Behold I send my messenger before thy face, &c. 5. The Prophet fortold that when the Messiah should come, he should confirm his Doctrine by many and great Miracles. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, Isa. 35.5, 6. and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped: then shall the lame man leap as an Hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing. Now Jesus did con∣firm his Doctrine with these and many o∣ther Miracles, as I have shewed. But to ap∣ply his Miracles particularly to this Pro∣phesie; He opened the eyes of the blind, Matt. 9.27. he unstopped the ears of the deaf, Mar. 7.32. he made the lame to walk, Matt. 15.30. and the dumb to speak, Matt. 9.32. 6. It was foretold that the Messiah should enter into Jerusalem in a kinde of a tri∣umphant manner. That they should cry to him Hosanna, Zech. 9.9. Psal. 118.25, 26. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. For the word Hosanna signifies Save we beseech thee, and in the O∣riginal of that place of the Psalm, the word Hosanna is used. And this also was fulfil∣led in Jesus Christ, as you may see at large, Mat. 21. 7. It was foretold that he should be be∣trayed by one of his own Servants. As Da∣vid in his own person speaketh, Psal. 41.9. Yea, mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, who did eat of my bread, hath lift up his heel a∣gainst
me. Zech. 11.13. And that he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver, with which thirty pieces the potters field should be purchased. Now this was exactly fulfilled in Jesus: for Ju∣das one of the twelve went to the Chief∣priests, and said, What will ye give me, Mat. 26.14, 15. and I will deliver him unto you? and they cove∣nanted with him for thirty pieces of silver: with which, after Judas in remorse of con∣science had restored it, Mat. 27.7, 8, 9. they consulted to∣gether, and bought the Potters field to bury strangers in. And whereas there may be some scruple here, in that the Greek cites Jeremy the Prophet, when the words are not to be found in him, but in Zechariah: for the resolving of this, see Junius in Parallelis, Doctor Hammon in loc. and other Com∣mentators. 8. It was foretold that the Messiah should suffer death, Isa. 53.12 vers. 5. that he should pour out his soul unto death, that he should be numbred with transgressors: that he should be scourged, to the end, Psal. 22.17. that by his stripes we might be healed. That he should be crucified, I may tell all my bones, they look and stare upon me: this crucifying was such a torment as did, as it were, put all his bones out of joynt. That he should be mocked by his enemies, as he hanged upon the Cross. vers. 7.8. Psa. 69.21. Psal. 22.19. That he should have vinegar mingled with gall given him to drink. That they should divide his Gar∣ments among them, and cast lots upon his Vesture. Now these things were all fulfilled
in Jesus Christ: as we may see if we con∣sult the story of his death in the Evange∣lists, and in particular, Mat. 27.15, 26, 34, 35, 38, 39. 9. It was foretold that the Messiah should rise again from the dead the third day. That when he had made his soul an offering for sin, Isa, 53.11. he should see his seed and prolong his days. And some take those words in Hosea to foretel his rising the third day, Hos. 6.4. After two days he will revive us, and the third day we shall live in his sight. That he should ascend into Heaven, Psal. 68.19. Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive; and received gifts for men. And some take that other place to be a prophesie of the same, Psal. 24.4, 5. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye ever lasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Now this also was fulfilled in Jesus Christ, Matt. 28.1. who rose again from the dead the third day: and ascended into heaven before divers witnesses. Mar. 16.19. Lastly, it was foretold that the Mesliah should be God as well as Man, as I have shew∣ed fully before, Isa. 9.6. by those Names that are gi∣ven to him. Now Jesus in whom we be∣lieve, as he was evident to all that knew him, to be truely man; so is he affirmed to be over all God blessed for ever: Rom. 5.9 to be Davids Son, Mat. 22.42. and Davids Lord also. There were also some other things fore∣told concerning the Messiah. As that he should call the Gentiles, enter into the se∣cond
Temple, ruine the Idols of the Hea∣then, silence their Oracles, &c. But of these I have spoken in the last Chapter. Also there are some lesser matters as that he should be called a Nazarite, that he should be brought up and preach in Galilee, and the like. But these things which I have mentioned, are some of the chief things that are contained in the Prophesies con∣cerning the Messiah. To sum up therefore the Argument: If all things that were foretold concerning the person of the Messiah, or concerning what he should do and suffer upon earth, did concur in that Jesus in whom we believe, then may we conclude him to be the true Messiah: But all things did concur in his person as to his Conception, Birth, &c. and all things were done and suffered by him, which the Prophers foretold concerning the Messiah: Therefore we may undoubtedly believe, that the same Jesils in whom we be∣lieve is the true Messiah, who was promised to come into the world.
CHAP. IX. The fourth Proposition confirmed, viz. That the Apostles and Evangelists of the New Testament do hold forth unto us such a Christ as was really, and in a proper sense God and Man hypostatically united in one Person: And who did in a real and proper sense satisfie Gods justice for our sins, and purchase eternal Sal∣vation for us by his Merits. WE have proceeded so far, as to shew evident proof of these truths: that the Son of God was promised to the fathers of the Old Testament, to take our Nature upon him, and to become our Saviour: and that the time for the fulfilling of these Pro∣mises, yea, the set time is long since come: and withal that the same Jesus in whom we believe, is that very Messiah who was pro∣mised to the fathers. And me-thinks to men of moderately clear Reason, and com∣petent Modesty, this might be sufficient both to satisfie all doubts, and also to stop their mouths from cavilling at,
or contradicting our Christian Faith. But because, first, there are a generation of people, so wise in their own eyes, that they conceit themselves to see something more in the name of Christ, then the Churches of God in all ages have seen. And second∣ly, do talk of a perfection of righteousness by walking up to the dictates of I know not what light within. And thirdly, do seek for the confirmation of all points of Faith out of the New Testament, as if the Old Testa∣ment were too old to be good. I shall there∣fore, for the convincing of these men (if possible) or (at least) for the stopping of their mouths: and withal for the strength∣ning of our Faith against the cavils of se∣ducers without, and the suggestions of Satan within, endeavour from the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists to prove; First, that Christ was really such as we believe him to be, and such as the Prophets foretold him to be, The Son of God made Man, or The Word made Flesh. Secondly, that he did fully, and in a true and proper sense make satisfacti∣on to Gods justice for our sins, and that there is no way to be saved, but by his Me∣rits. First, That Christ was such as we believe him to be, and such as the Prophets did foretel that he should be, viz. God and Man, or the Word made flesh. Deut. 17.6. By the mouth of two or three witnesses, (saith God in the Law) shall every word be established. And it is our com∣fort,
that God hath given us, not onely two or three witnesses, Heb. 2.1. but even a whole cloud of witnesses, to establish this Word of Faith. Christ chose twelve Apostles to be witnesses of what he did and spake upon earth; and be∣sides them there are many other witnesses of this Truth. First, the Angels whose Ministry God was pleased to use in the revealing of this great Mystery to the World. Before he was con∣ceived in the Womb, the Angel, speaking to Zacharias, calls him The Lord as to his Divine Nature, Luke 1.17. and speaks of his coming af∣ter John Baptist, as to his humane Nature. And speaking to the B. Virgin, v. 30.31. he tells her that she should conceive in her Womb and bear a Son: This notes his humane Nature. And he shall be called The Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall ive him the Throne of his father David: This notes the truth of his Divinity. And hen he was conceived in the Womb, Mat. 1.20 21. an Anel tells Joseph, that That which was conceived in the Blessed Virgin, was of the holy Ghost, and that she should call his Name Jesus, because he should save his people from their sins. Behold both his Humanity in his Conception, and his Divinity in his Office, to save his people. And again, when he was born, the Angel saith to the Shepherds, Luk. 2.10, 11. To you is born a Saviour which is Christ the Lord: he is born, this notes his Humanity: he is Christ the Lord, that notes his Divinity. Again, after his Resurrection,
an Angel saith unto the Women, that Christ who was crucified was risen up again; Mat. 28.5, 6. That shews that he was truely man. Come see the place where the Lord lay: Act. 1.11 That shews him to be truely God. Yea, after he was ascended into Heaven, they say of him: This same Jesus, who is taken up from you into heaven, shall come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven: his Ascention which was a change of Place, notes his Hu∣manity: his coming to Judge the world, his Divine Power and Authority. So that all a∣long the Angels witness him to be truely God and truely Man. 2. We have the testimony of many Pious Persons in the New Testament: which, though to a Jew or Heathen it be of little value, yet to all that profess obedience to the holy Scriptures, it is of great mo∣ment. Let us see the confession of Zachary: Luk. 1.68. He calls him the Lord God of Israel who had visited his people so as to Redeem them: a clear testimony of both his Natures. vers. 43. And Elizabeth calleth the Blessed Virgin, vers. 47. The mother of her Lord. And the Blessed Virgin her self calls him that was conceived in her Womb, The Lord her Sauiour: a clear proof of his two Natures. 3. John Baptist gives testimony to this: whose testimony may well be reckoned di∣stinctly from other Saints, because he was sent especially about this Message, to bear witness of Christ. Joh. 1.29. He calls him The Lamb
of God, that taketh away the sins of the world: Here he gives Testimony both to his Divinity, in that he was able to make satis∣faction to Gods justice, and to take away sin; and to his Humanity, in that he was a Lamb that had a body to sacrifice; and to the end of his coming into the world, viz. to take away the sins thereof. 4. The greatest and most Authentick Testi∣mony that can be defired or imagined, is that of the Father from Heaven concerning him: This is my well beloved Son, Mat. 3.17. Chap. 17.5. in whom I am well pleased, That he was truly man, was evident to those that were about him; that he was God, was evident by the Testimony of God himself, who is the God of Truth. 5. The passages of his life upon Earth, doth shew him to be both truly God and truly Man. His hungring and thirsting, his weariness and faintness, his sighing and weep∣ing, and such other fruits of humane infir∣mity, were sufficient Arguments to prove him to be truly man. And all the miraculous works of his Power, which he wrought up∣on earth (of which I have spoken before) as they shew him to be the Messiah, Isa. 35.5, 6. that was foretold by the Prophets; of whom it was foretold that he should work such miracles; so also that he was truly God, Joh. 5.36 as himself argues. 6. The Testimony of the Evangelists and Apostles, doth confirm this: Of St. Peter, Mat. 16.16. Acts 2.36. Chap. 3.17, 18.
and Chap. 4.11, 12. and Chap. 10.43. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. Of St. Paul, Acts 9.22. and Chap. 13.23, 34. Rom. 15.8. 2 Cor. 1.10. 2 Tim. 2.8. Of St John, 1 John 2.22. and Chap. 5.2, 15. Of St. Stephen, the Proto-martyr, Acts 7.52. Of St. Philip, Acts 8.32. And many more Instances of this sort might be alledged, but these are some of the chief. 7. The general consent of the Catholick Church of Christ in all Ages, ever since the time of Jesus and his Apostles, who have held this Truth, and made it a main Article of all their Creeds: The concurrence of all Pious and Orthodox Fathers and Councils, beside the chearful and undaunted suffer∣ings of many thousands of Martyrs, for the Profession of this Faith: This, I say, toge∣ther with the former Testimonies, do argue this foundation of our Faith, to be laid as so sure a Rock, that The gates of Hell, Mat. 16.18. shall never be able to prevail against it: and that we may comfortably venture our selves upon this Truth, that the same Jesus in whom we believe, is both Lord and Christ, God and Man, Hypostatically united. Secondly, Let us proceed to the other Head, viz. to prove that, Christ did fully, and in a true and proper sense, make satis∣faction to Gods justice for our sins: And that; Salvation is to be expected from, him and no other way. 1. It is very evident that the Apostles, in
the New Testament, do affirm us to be re∣conciled to God, and justified in his fight, by the merits and sufferings of Christ: Rom. 5.10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Which as it shews plain∣ly, that there was an enmity between God and man through the Fall, and this enmity mutual: God offended by mens transgres∣sion, and man alienated from God, by the depravation of his Nature: So it shews whereby the Reconciliation was wrought be∣tween God and man, even by the death of Christ the Son of God; who did both by the merits of his death, satisfie Gods ju∣stice; and also by the efficacy of his Death, and Resurrection, take from us the stony heart, and give us an heart of flesh. And it is very observable, Vers. 19. how afterward the Apostle makes a direct Antithesis, between the first and the second Adam: the misery that befel us by the transgression of the first, and the benefits we receive by the obedience and sufferings of the latter: As by one mans disebedience, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. Which words as they do suppose, the Com∣munication of the guilt of Adams sin to all his posterity, whereby they are said to be made sinners, and liable to Gods justice: So they do plainly express the benefits of Christ's death, to be communicated to the justification of as many as do believe in him; And what can be a plainer proof of the point in hand?
Secondly, The New Testament speaks of the blood of Christ, being shed to make an attonement for us. Phil. 2.8. Being found in fashion of a man, having taken our Nature upon him and set himself in our stead, in this nature and in our stead, He humbled himself, and be∣came obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. And, that we may know that he died for us, & shed his blood to make attonement to Divine Justice for our sins; 1 Joh. 1.7. St. John tells us, That the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, 1 Pet. 2.24. cleanseth us from all our sins; And St. Peter tells us, That by his stripes, we are healed: Not healed only in a moral sense, as good ex∣amples tend to heal and take away corrupt manners: as if Christ had come into the world, onely to give us an example of Ho∣liness in his life, and of Humility and Pati∣ence at his death, and that were all the be∣nefit which we were to expect by him: But we are so healed by his stripes, that our sins are thereby pardoned, being punished on his back: He suffered, the just for the unjust, to the end that he might justifie the ungodly that believe in him: So himself tells us, Luk. 22.20. that his blood was shed for many, for the remis∣sion of sins. He died that he might purchase at Gods hands, the pardon of our sins, by undergoing that punishment which we had deserved. To this agrees that Character which the Baptist gives of Christ: Joh. 1.29 Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world. This sheweth plainly that he
was slain, and offered up as a Propitiatory sacrifice, to expiate the guilt of our sins. 3. The New Testament sets him forth as the Substance of all the Legal purifications, and ceremonial Oblations, and Expiations which were used by the Law of Moses: And this argues, that he made an Attonement for us. Certainly the great God of Heaven and Earth, did not take their Cattel from the Jews, because he had need of them, or because he delighted in shedding the blood of innocent Beasts, that were no wayes ac∣cessary to the sins of their Masters: But we have reason to believe, there were further matters intended by these Ceremonies of the Law. God did appoint these Ceremo∣nial washings, and expiations, after legal defilements, that the people might be put in mind of the defiling nature of sin, and might be warned to take heed of it, as that which defiles the soul, and accordingly might endeavour, after they had fallen into it, to wash their souls with tears of Repent∣ance and Contrition. He charged their Estates, and caused them to sacrifice their Cattel, that they might learn, that Sin is ve∣ry displeasing to God, and did expose them to that, and a worse death then the innocent beast did sustain: And yet further, to put them in mind, that without shedding of blood, the blood of Christ the Lamb of God, there could be no remission of sin obtained: And that their laying their hand upon the sacrifice
that was offered up for them, might stir them up to put forth an hand of Faith, to lay hold upon Jesus Christ: And by wash∣ing their bodies in water, they might be put in mind, Zech. 13.1. to apply themselves to that Foun∣tain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, for sin and for uncleanness. That this was the signification of their ceremonial Cleansings, and Expiations, and that Christ by the sheding of his blood, did accomplish that for us really and effectually, which was shaddowed in these Ceremonies, is very evident in that of the Apostle: Heb. 1.12. Not by the blood of Calves or Goats, (as the high Priest amongst the Jews, was wont to enter into the most holy Place) but by his own blood he entred once into the holy Place, having ob∣tained eternal Redemption for us. Hence he sheweth the excellency of Christ's sacrifice, beyond those Typical sacrifices: Those Priests offered often, He offered but once; they entred into the holy Place made with hands, He into the holy Place made without hands, even into Heaven; whither he went as our Head, to prepare a place for us, and to shew that he had purchased eternal Re∣demption for us, and an interest in that In∣heritance, which he went to take possession of for us. And he goes on to argue, à fortiori, Vers. 13. If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, did sancti∣fie to the purifying of the flesh, in a legal sense; Vers. 14. then how much more shall the blood of Christ,
&c? Seeing the Sacrifice which Christ offer∣ed was of infinit value, as being offered up by the Eternal Spirit, or Divine Nature, which was Hypostatically united to the hu∣mane Nature; it is therefore sufficient to make a full and perfect Attonement for us. And further, Vers. 15. For this cause he is the Media∣tor of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, &c. Which shews very evidently, that Christ was the thing intended by those ceremonial Obla∣tions; that his blood did that in a real and effectual manner, which those sacrifices did Legally and Typically; and withal that his death was intended purposely for the Re∣demption of Transgressions. 4. It is said, Gal. 3.13. that, Christ hath delivered us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. He was subject to that accursed death, and to the wrath of God for the present; for this end, that he might deliver us from this wrath and curse of God, and from that eternal death, which our sins had made us liable unto. There was no reason for Christs suffering as to any thing in him∣self: 1 Pet. 1.22. Vers. 24. For, He had done no evil, neither was any guile found in his mouth; but he bare our sins in his body upon that Tree, whereon he suf∣fered that shameful, painful, and accursed death. 5. The Apostles do plainly pronounce that we are redeemed by the death of Christ.
The Apostle Paul saith, Rom. 3.24, 25. We are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption of Je∣sus Christ, whom God hath set forth to be , a propitiation through Faith in his blood: Here the Apostle doth expresly say, that Christ is a Redeemer, and a Propitiation for us, and shews us that the onely way to have our sins pardoned, is by Faith in his blood. So the Apostle Peter saith, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. We are redeemed, not with corruptible things, as Sil∣ver and Gold, but with the most precious blood of Christ, that Lamb without spot and blemish. To which agrees that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made of God to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption: And again, 1 Cor. 6.20. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Tim. 2.5, 6. We are bought with a price. And St. Peter calls Christ, The Lord that bought us. So elsewhere it is said, There is one God, and one Mediatour between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself , a ransom for us: To this agrees that, Col. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins: And further, chap. 2.14. The Hand∣writing that was against us, is said to be nailed to his Cross. 6. St. Paul tells us, That Jesus Christ hath purchased that Righteousness for us, which we could not obtain by the works of the Law, that is, by our own personal Obe∣dience to the Law of God. If man had from his first Creation continued in perfect obedience to the Law of his Creator, there would have been no need of Christs dying:
But man had sinned and come short of this Obedience, and therefore Christ died, to expiate this guilt which we had contracted by our disobedience: Gal. 2.21. If righteousness come by the Law, saith the Apostle, then Christ di∣ed in vain: There would have been no need of Christs death, if man could have been righteous by his own good works; but Christ therefore died, because we were con∣demned before God, and he took our guilt upon him: Acts 13.39. And, By him all that believe are justified from all those things, from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses; God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. made under the Law, subject to the obedience and to the curse of the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law. 7. The Apostles tell us, That whatsoe∣ver Christ did or suffered, it was for our sakes, and to purchase Reconciliation and Salvation for us. Rom. 4.25. He was delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification; and our sins are said to be forgiven us, 1 Joh. 2.12. for his Names sake. In which respect Christ calls his flesh our meat, Joh. 6.57. and his blood our drink, be∣cause, as our bodies are kept alive by Bread, so are our souls by his Merits: As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by him, so he that eateth me, that is, applies me to his soul by Faith, he shall live by me. By these and many other Testimonies of the Evangelists, and Apostles of Jesus Christ, it is sufficiently evident to every man whose
eyes are not blinded by the God of this world, that Christ did offer up himself an Expia∣tory sacrifice for our sins; and that through his Merits, and Sufferings alone it is, that we obtain the forgiveness of our sins, and eternal Salvation. CHAP. X. From the foregoing Discourses, two Cautions are deduced. First, That we take heed of laying any other Foundation, then that which is laid, viz. Jesus Christ: Three sorts of Persons that build beside this Foun∣dation. Secondly, That we take heed what we build upon this Foun∣dation. WE have seen the Doctrine of Christ crucified, as the onely way to Justi∣fication and Salvation, laid open and assert∣ed in the four preceding Propositions. And from what hath been spoken, we may, First conclude with the Apostle, that, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other Foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, and his merits. This is a foundation of Gods own
laying, 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and pretious, he that believeth in him shall not be confounded: And whosoever attempts to lay any other foundation, or to draw men off from this Foundation, must needs expect to be confounded in the issue. Three sorts of builders we meet with, even amongst those that pretend to Christianity, who at∣tempt to lay other foundations, or at least are in danger to draw men off from this sure Foundation. 1. The Papists, who though they have devised many Ceremonies and comple∣mental expressions of honour unto Christ in their way of Worship, yet are found to betray him in their Doctrine, while they salute him with so many Ave's. There are two Points of Popery, which are detestable to every true Christian, as having an appa∣rent tendency to draw men off from that honour which they owe to Christs Merits, and that trust which they ought to repose in Him alone. First, The adoration and invocation of Saints departed. To omit their Canonizing of those for Saints, that either had never any other place but in the Popish Calendars; their Utopian Saints, as Christopher, and George, and such like: as also those who though they have lived upon earth, yet it may justly be suspected they never lived in Heaven; their Prophane and traiterous Saints, their Becket, and Faux, &c. And
yet this tends much to render their Religion ridiculous, that they should undertake to make them Saints that were either no men or no honest men; and expect help from those that stand in need of help themselves, though it shall never be afforded them. To omit this, I say that the Divine Worship, which they bestow upon the best and most undoubted Saints, the Apostles or Evange∣lists; yea, or the Blessed Virgin her self, is no better than gross Idolatry. We reverence the Mother of our Saviour, inasmuch as He that is Mighty hath magnified her, and there∣fore we and all generations do deservedly call her Blessed. Luke 1.48, 49. We honour the memory of the Apostles and Martyrs in Heaven, and those dayes which our Church appoints annually for keeping up the remembrance of them, do put us in minde to bless God for his Graces bestowed on them, and the benefits which we may hope to receive both by their Doctrine and Examples. But to give Divine Honour to any of these, so as to worship them or invocate their help, either as abso∣lute donors, or yet as intercessours; we believe to be as palpable idolatry, as to worship any of the Heathen gods. And certainly if the Blessed Virgin, and the other Saints in Hea∣ven were capable of understanding the su∣perstitious vanity of those that worship them, and of communicating their mindes to us on earth, they would declare their ut∣most abhorrency and detestation of that un∣due
honour which is given them. Beside, is it not gross Sottishness for men to believe that their whispers should be heard by the Saints in Heaven, and the whispers of so ma∣ny thousands as may be conceived to be praying to one Saint at the same time; ex∣cept they can either shew some reason that perswades them to this belief, or else a pro∣mise that such prayers should be heard? And what can be more evident then the wrong that is done to Jesus Christ, by sub∣stituting many mediatours of Intercession, as if himself were either not able or not at leasure to receive all the petitions that are put up to him at the same time, or else had not so much goodness and compassion in him towards his people, as the Saints have, which should make us to expect a speedier redress, by calling upon them then by calling upon himself? The Apostle tells us, 1 Tim 2.5. that There is but one God, and one Media∣tour between God and man, the man Christ Je∣sus. And as the owning or worshipping of more gods then one, is as absurd and impi∣ous as to worship none at all; so the owning or invocating more then one Mediatour, is an high wrong to Jesus Christ our onely Me∣diator and Advocate. 2. Their Doctrine of Merits doth lay a∣nother foundation beside Jesus Christ. When they teach a Merit either of condig∣nity, or yet of congruity in our good Works; yea, are so super-arrogant as to teach their
Doctrine of supererogation: A monstrous term, invented to express a monstrous Noti∣on in Divinity: and that which doth appa∣rently tend to draw men off from building their Faith wholly upon the foundation of Christs Merits, and to part the glory of their Salvation between him and the Saints departed. Doubtless, this is such a gross and apparent contradiction to the Doctrine of the Gospel, Roa. 11.6. Eph. 2.9. 2 Tim. 1.9. Tit. 3.5. that themselves could not but be sensible of it, did not that gain which accrues to them by dispensing these merits from the Popes treasury, blind their eyes that they cannot see a truth which would be so unprofitable to them to own. Secondly, some new Projectors amongst us, who if they did terminate their speculati∣ons within the compass of Philosophical points, we would easily allow them to make themselves proud with conceiting that they have found out a device to see further into a Milstone then their poor blind Fore-fa∣thers. But when they will attempt to alter the old Bodies of Divinity, under pretence of solving I know not what Phaenomend in the Divine providence; they must give us leave to look a little into their proceedings in matters wherein our Free-hold is so neer∣ly concerned. How happy did the Protoplasts conceit themselves, when they thought of being like God to know both good and evil? and how great happiness do many conceit in
attempting such a scutiny into every thing, that not only Nature, but Religion also must discover all its secrets to their refined reason? When these persons have first performed such wonders in Nature, as to grasp all the Air that incircles the Earth in their fist, or to embrace Heaven in their arms, or to lade the Ocean dry with a Nut-shell; then we shall believe that the vastness of their Rea∣son may not onely comprehend those mat∣ters of Faith, which we poor Mortals have admired for so many ages; but also perfect their devices for climbing up to the Lunar Orbe, and examine the Religion that is pro∣fessed there. But they might do well, first to discover the contradictions that are to be met with, in the old. Systems of Divinity, and that by men that have so much serious∣ness and humility, as to understand them in a competent and candid manner: and next to reconcile the contradictions which are so palpable in some of their Hypotheses, (by name that which supposeth the Eternity of the World) and then to begin to apply their Engines to work strange feats, when they have found them sit to bear the censure of the world. These attempts, if they have not disposed the Authors of them, yet I fear they will prepare many of the Readers and admirers of them, to be first Scep∣ticks then Hereticks, and in conclusion A∣theists. Thirdly, another sort are they who (to
give them a Name nearest relating to their principal Tenet, or rather pretence) may be termed Illuminati. Those that pretend to such a light within, as should be sufficient to lead them to Heaven, if they walk answera∣bly to it. I would willingly know of these pretenders, what they understand this light to be? Is it Christ, or is it something else? If they say, It is Christ, whom we have shewed to be God and Man hypostatically united; then how near do they symbolize with the Papists in their Doctrine of the Ʋbiquity of Christ, and their Capernaitical conceit of a gross eating of Christs Body by the most wicked man, that partakes of the Elements in the Eucharist? Seeing this Tenet would both suppose Christs Person to be every where, and also to have his abode in the vilest of men, as well as in the best. But if they say, It is something else then Christ, I ask then, What it is? Is it that Spi∣rit which Christ before he left the world, promised to send? Or is it onely the Na∣tural light of Reason and Conscience, which are the remainders of that Law of God, which was written upon Mans heart in his Creation, but sadly defaced by the Fall? If they say that it is that Spirit which Christ promised to send after his Ascension: We must desire them to take notice, that in this Promise there was something? peculiar to the Apostles and others that were to be sent abroad to preach the Gospel in the begin∣ning
of the planting of Christianity: some things that have respect to all Believers in all succeeding ages of the Church: and others, that were common to all the World. It was peculiarly promised and fulfilled to the Apostles, and some others that were to be employed in planting the Gospel at first, to have the Holy Ghost given them to ena∣ble them to work Miracles, Act. 1.8. and to speak with divers tongues for the confirmation of the Doctrine which they taught: and this, I suppose, they cannot themselves believe to be in every man that comes into the World, nor yet in every man that talks of God and pretends to this light: If they do, let them shew it by working of Miracles, and speak∣ing with strange Tongues. It was pro∣mised to all Believers that this Holy Spirit should be a Comforter to them, Joh. 14.26. and withal a Remembrancer, to teach them, & bring to their memories the things which Christ had spo∣ken: but in this sense also, they cannot but confess that the Spirit of God is onely given to the children of God. Gal. 4.6. It was more gene∣rally promised that this Spirit of God in the Ministry of the Apostles and their Suc∣cessours, who should be fitted for and assisted in their Ministry by this Spirit, should con∣vince the world of sin, Joh. 16.8 of righteousness, and of judgement: but what is this to such an in∣ward teaching as they conceive to be in eve∣ry man from this light within? But then if they say, It is the Light of reason and natural
conscience, as we confess this to be in every man, and that even the worst of men, the Heathens themselves, have that within them which doth testifie against their grosly lewd and vicious courses, and ac∣cuse and condemn them when they have done such things; Rom. 2.14, 15. and withall doth excuse and encourage them when they have done that which is good: so we must needs add, that this light is far from being sufficient to lead men to Heaven. I have shewed be∣fore, Chap. 4. how far the light of nature will guide us, and how far it will leave us short of Heaven, if it be not helped by a better light. And I may here say further, that this light of Nature is so far vitiated by the Fall, that the Scripture doth frequently re∣present the state of a man in his natural con∣dition, to be an estate of darkness, Eph. 5.8. Act. 26.18. and the regeneration of a soul to be a turning it from darkness to light. If then the light that is in man be darkness, how should it be suffici∣ent to lead him to Heaven without a better guide? But how do they mean that this light within is sufficient to lead a man to Hea∣ven? Is it so sufficient, that there is no need of Laws or Government to punish evil doers, and to encourage them that do well? Is it so sufficient, that we have no need of the preaching of the Word of God, or to hear∣ken to the dictates of that light without? Is it so sufficient, that a man by walking up to
it may attain Heaven by a righteousness of his own, so as not to stand in need of the help of a crucified Jesus, either for the pardon of actual sin, and much less of original, which persons of these Principles do seem to disown? This we have sad reason to suspect to be the tendency of this dark Tenet con∣cerning a light within, and that which the Authors and divulgers of this Opinion do aim at: for otherwise they bring to light nothing extraordinary in it, and therefore spend a great deal of pains and ill-composed Zeal in opposing those who taught them this very thing, Joh. 1.9. that Christ is the true Light that enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world: Mal. 4.1. that he is that Sun of Righteous∣ness that is arisen upon the earth with healing in his wings: that there is sufficient light in him to enlighten the darkness of our souls: that what light soever is in any man, whe∣ther that of Nature or the other of Grace, it comes from him: and moreover that there is in every man that cometh into the world the light of nature, and the remainders of that Law which was written upon mans heart at first, not quite obliterated, by the Fall. These things; I say, we taught them, and wherefore do they set up this as the principle wherein they differ from us and oppose us, if they mean no more than this in the plain and true sense of it? But it is too sadly evident that those that are the de∣ceivers of them have a further meaning, e∣ven
a denying of a crucified Christ, and setting up a righteousness of their own, though the poor deceived ones that follow the glorious blaze of this new light, or ra∣ther Ignis fatuus, do not understand these depths of Satan, and I wish they never may understand them so as to own them. Woe to him that stumbles at this stone. 1 Joh. 2.22. Who is a lyar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ: he is Antichrist that denieth the Fa∣ther and the Son. Secondly, as we should all take heed that we keep close to this one Foundation, so also we should have a care what we build upon this foundation. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13. that there are some who build upon it Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, sound and Or∣thodox principles of Faith; and these shall receive a reward when their works come to be tried and approved. But others build Wood, Hay, Stubble, gross and unsound con∣clusions; and these, though they shall be saved in the day of Christ, so long as they hold fast the Foundation, yet when their works come to be tried in the fire, they shall suffer loss, but themselves shall be saved, yet so as by fire. It is good when men hold fast the Foundation: though they err in less matters, the Lord will take occasion in his good time to convince them, and bring them to Heaven at last: but it is better not onely to lay a good Foundation, but also to build a good superstructure upon it.
There are two sorts of had superstructures which many build even upon the Founda∣tion of Christ crucified. 1. There are some who encourage them∣selves in loosness and licentiousness in their practice, from the consideration of the Grace of God in Christ. It is very certain that the Mercy of God and the Merits of Christ, are not onely very great, but infinitely beyond all that we can speak or think of them. But yet the mercy and the truth of God are joyned together: Psal. 25.10. And as he hath said that Whoso confesseth and forsaketh his sin shall finde mercy; Prov. 28.13. and he will be sure to make this good: Mat. 11.28. there was never any that came to him weary and heavy laden, but he did give him rest: So on the other hand, he hath threat∣ned to wound the head of his enemies, Psal. 68.21. and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses: and therefore those that make this bad use of the free and gracious pro∣mises of the Gospel, and those instances that the Scriptures shew us of the wonder∣ful mercy of God to sinners, do both wrong and deceive their own souls, and also they injure the great Mercy of God in Christ while they seem to advance it. His name was called Jesus, because he should save his people from their sins, Mar. 1.21. not in them. And him∣self bore our sins in his own Body upon the Cross, to the end that we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.. and then we may comfortably hope that by his stripes we are
healed. This then is one sort of them that build. Hay and stubble upon this pretious Foundation: and though God may in Mer∣cy save such persons, yet it will be as by fire; such must expect to be brought unto great humiliation and brokenness of heart, be∣fore they finde assurance of Gods Mercy. 2. There are others, who though they hold fast the Foundation of the Christian Faith, yet build upon it many erronious conclusions, in matters further off from the Foundation. Indeed it is the Duty of e∣very Christian to bear with many infirmi∣ties and mistakes in his brother, whom he findes to be sound in the main, as consi∣dering himself also to be a man. But no man ought to indulge himself in an errour: both because errour persisted in with eager∣ness and obstinacy, is to be accounted rather a sin of presumption than infirmity, and with∣all because of the dangerous tendency of errours, of which I spake before. Chap. 3. Such a person who is sound in fundamentals, doubtless God will not charge upon him to his condemnation mistakes in smaller mat∣ters; but yet his works shall suffer loss, and himself shall be saved as by fire; he must ex∣pect to pass through convictions and contri∣tion of heart before he come to Heaven And therefore as every good Christian should make it his first care to hold fast the Founda∣tion of our Faith, so he should not neglect due care of his superstructures, that he
build nothing upon this pretious Founda∣tion, that may be unsuitable or disho∣nourable to the foundation upon which it is built. CHAP. XI. A Seasonable and necessary Admo∣nition to those that stand fast in the Faith, delivered in five Branches. BEfore I withdraw my hand from this Undertaking, I think it very necessa∣ry to leave a word of Admonition with them that yet stand fast in the Faith, amidst all those blustring winds of strange doctrines which have tried mans stability. Indeed as David said in his haste, Psal. 116.11. That all men were lyars; so if a man did with haste and passi∣on take a view of the times wherein we live, he would be apt to take up the complaint of the Prophet, Mic. 7.2. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright among men: that there are scarce any left, who are not less or more shaken at the root. But yet as God answered Elijah in his com∣plaint, 1 King. 19.18. I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and
every mouth which hath not kissed him: So we have some grounds to hope that the Lord hath left many thousands in England, who are both upright in heart, and in a good mea∣sure found in Judgment, notwithstanding all the Temptations which they have met with. To such therefore, I will direct my speech. And 1. Let me beseech and exhort all such as profess the true Ancient and Orthodox Faith, by that love they bear to the Truth, and to the God of Truth, by that reverence they owe to the Church, in which they were born, and to that Faith into which they have been Baptized, that they endea∣vour to adorn the Docirine of God our Saviour in all things, Tit. 2.10. and to cut off all just occasion from the mouths of slanderous persons, who are ready to object against those that pro∣fess the wayes of Truth, the evil and unan∣swerable lives of many that are retainers to this Profession. I know that this is an insufficient ground for Separation, and will be far from justify∣ing them before Gods Tribunal, for those rents which they have made in the seamless Coat of Christ. He that will separate from every Society, where there is any thing of sin amongst any of them that retain to it, had need to make haste out of this world, for he will find no society here to answer his ex∣pectation. And would not he have well de∣served to be drowned, that would have
leaped out of Noahs Ark (which was a Type of the Visible Church) because of the evil society of a wicked Cham? Would not he have run upon a dangerous Rock, that would have forsaken the society of Christ, and his Apostles, because there was a Judas among them? He that can either shew me a Command to separate from every Church, where there is any corruption; or produce me any Church of God since Christs time, which hath not had some spots in it; or else convince me that the society with which him∣self is joyned, is free from sin: I will readily excuse him in his Separation. But in the mean time, forasmuch as I know that none of these can possibly be made out, I must needs, 1 Cor. 3.1.3. with the Apostle, pronounce Schisms to be of the works of the flesh, and this plea to be insufficient for the justifying of these practises. But yet, Mat. 18.5. as our Saviour saith, as It is im∣possible but that offences should come, so Woe to him by whom they do come. If men take oc∣casion of scandal where it is not given, it is their fault; but he that gives just occasion of turning men away from the profession of the true Faith, and adherence to the true Church, by his lewd and wicked life; woe be to him, and, Better had it been for him, that he had never been born. It must needs be confessed, that the mouths of erronious persons, are opened through the evil lives of many Church-lovers, and Church-men too,
so that we may say, Pudet haec opprobria nobis Et dici potuisse & non potuisse refelli. These things being told in Gath, and published in Aselon, have caused the Daughters of the Ʋnoircumcised to rejoyce. Let us therefore every one of us, set our selves both to cut off this occasion, and also to cause our Light so to shine before men, as may induce them all to embrace the Truth and Unity. Certainly, Rom 2.27. what the Apostle speaks of Cir∣cumcision to the Jews, may be said of Bap∣tism to the Christians. It profiteth us great∣ly if we keep the Law, if we lead lives an∣swerable to our Baptismal vow and Cove∣nant: but if not, it will be all one as if we had not been baptized; Yea, it will rise up against us at the last day, and aggravate our Con∣demnation. Secondly, Let me further admonish those that are sound in the Faith, that they stagger not in their Profession, nor be induced to a love of Errors, through the strictness of the lives of those that are Erronious. Indeed, there is so little shew of Reason, or plain Scripture, for most things in which our Se∣ctaries differ from us, that the Opinions themselves yield little of powerful Tempta∣tion, to the embracing of them. But the greatest thing that is apt to make people of good affections to stagger, is the strict lives of many that take these courses: But yet if we seriously consider this, it doth not af∣ford so strong a temptation, as at first view
it seems to do. That Whore of Babylon, of whom these people talk so much, is said to have a golden Cup in her hand, Apoc. 17.4. full of abomi∣nations, and the filthiness of her Fornication. The Papists are many of them of as strict lives, as our Sectaries: And their Monks, and Jesuits deliver as strict rules for the or∣dering of our Conversation, as any men can; and have as sublime and spiritual noti∣ons, many times, in the Interpretation of Scripture: But if I meet with, and approve these things in one leaf, and in the next, find blasphemous expressions of honour to the blessed Virgin, and other Saints, and prayers put up unto them; shall I therefore close with their Errors and Idolatry, be∣cause I find something amongst them which I love? Yea, the Jews and Turks, who are at this day the professed enemies of Christ, are for the most part as faithful in their word, as just in their dealings, and of as strict and temperate lives, as our Opiniators: But this shall never make me to love Judaism, or Mahometanism the better. He was not a wise child that threw the whole Apple a∣way, because some of it was rotten; nor yet he that greedily eat up the rotten together with the sound; but he that pared out the rotten, and fed upon that which was sound: So they do not well who cry out against a Profession of Religion, and strictness of life, because these things are to be found among them that are erronious: Nor are they so
wise as they should be, who because they see many things commendable in the lives of those that differ from us, do therefore turn to an embracing of their Errors and Schisms. But this is the truly wise and christian course, To love that which is good in every man, to love and imitate the strictness and circumspection of their lives, yea, to let them know that they do not outdo us therein; but yet to avoid and abhor their Errors. Indeed a man were not fit to be an Here∣tick, if he were of a lewd life. Nullis aco∣nita bibuntur Fictilibus; tunc illa time, &c. Satan hath the better advantage in tempting men to drink this poyson of errors, by dazling their eyes with the lustre of the golden Cup in which he presents it. Let us labour to be so wise as to examine the prin∣ciples, as well as the practises of those with whom we close, and not rashly to joyn with persons of strange principles, though of ne∣ver so strict lives. 3. It will greatly concern us all to take heed of spiritual pride, and self-conceited∣ness, as that which will greatly hazzard our standing fast in the Faith. We have seen in our time many stately Cedars blown up by the roots, those that have been very high and lofty, not only for natural Gifts and Know∣ledg, but, at least for a shew of a very high measure of zeal for God; yet how have they been overturned by those turbulent winds of strange Doctrine. It behoves us there∣fore
to take the Apostles exhortation: Rom. 11.20. Be not high minded, but fear. We should not be puffed up so as to scorn or despise those that are fallen, but pitty them, as knowing that we also are men subject to the same infirmities, if God should leave us to our selves. We should not entertain high thoughts of our own strength, because we have stood fast thus far, as if we had been supported by our own abilities; or as if it were not possible for such as we are, to be deceived: For as there is nothing more displeasing to God then pride, and of all pride spiritual pride is the worst; so nothing is more likely to provoke God to leave us to our selves, then these high thoughts of our own strength. Beside, Reason and Experience shew, that confidence doth usually invite men to care∣lesness, and that prepares men for a fall: Had men been well ballasted with Humility, they would not have been so far tossed with this sail of self-conceit, as to despise the teachings of those that are called to that Office, and to think themselves wiser then their teachers, so as to prefer their own bare groundless conceits, before all the Rea∣sons and Scriptures that can be produced to the contrary, and their own fancical wresting of Scripture, before the plain and obvious meaning of it, and the concurrent judgment of the Church of God in all ages concerning it. Were men so lowly in e∣steeming of themselves, that they could be
perswaded that it is possible for them to be in a mistake, they would not add such obsti∣nacy to their errors, but would be in a fair way to be convinced: And therefore, as that which will expose us to great and ap∣parent danger, let us take heed of confidence and self-conceitedness. 4. It will behove us to take heed of a loose and unsetled spirit, in matters of Reli∣gion: 1 Cor. 10.12. The Apostle exhorts him that think∣eth he standeth, to take heed lest he fall: And the first thing requisite, to taking heed lest we fall, is, to see that we stand upon firm ground. Ships that are floating on the Sea, are tossed to and fro with every wind and storm, whereas the beating of the Waves against a Rock, doth not move it, but onely dasheth themselves to pieces against it. How dangerous a course do they take, who, though they do not profess any palpable er∣rors, yet shew a great indifferency of spirit about points of great concernment, and are not affraid to hear Errors, as well as the Truth, taught; nor do they fear any infecti∣on thereby, but rather live between Truth and Error, as if each of them were equally their proper Element. I think every man that is well in his wits, would both account it hazzardous to his bo∣dily health, and also a tempting of Divine Providence, to adventure into infectious Houses, or Companies, under the confi∣dence of an healthy constitution, or of
trusting Gods Providence to preserve him in one place, as well as another. And if the soul be the more precious part, they must needs be esteemed to run a greater haz∣zard, who will adventure to dally with all sorts of Principles, till at last they have brought themselves to a careless indifferency, and a Laodicean luke-warmness in mat∣ters of Religion. Which frame of spirit, as it is very dis∣pleasing to God, arguing want of a due mea∣sure of love to him, and thereby provokes him to give men over to their own hearts lusts, Psal. 81.12. to walk in their own counsels: So it doth di∣spose the mind (Reason and Experience be∣ing Judges) to neglect that industry which it ought to exercise in contending for the Truth; yea, to a readiness to entertain Er∣ror, as soon as Truth; and is indeed the foundation of that Scepticism in matters of Religion, which makes them utterly to seek in the points of our Faith: And this (if Gods mercy interpose not) is the high way to lead men to Atheism. 5. It will greatly concern all such as de∣fire to stand fast in the Faith, to avoid se∣ducing Teachers, and to keep close to the publick Ordinances: Prov. 19.27. Solomon exhorts us to cease from hearing the instruction that causeth us to err from the words of Knowledg; and to watch dayly at Wisdoms gates. Prov. 8.34. Certainly, many people by going from Gods blessing in his publick Ordinances, into that warm
sun which they have fancyed in turning aside to the flocks of the companions; Cant. 1.7. have found the same success which Dinah did, by wan∣dring from her Fathers house, Gen. 34.1, 2. out of a vain desire to see fashions: They have had the virgin-purity, and chastity of their souls, ra∣vished from the truths of God, by the lust∣ful embraces of them that have lien in wait to deceive: Ephes. 4.14. God in his just judgment seeing it meet to deliver them up to their own ways, who would not keep themselves in his ways, in which onely God hath promised, that his Providence shall keep them. Psal. 91.11. And therefore it will greatly concern every man that de∣sireth to keep in the Wayes and Truth of God, To seek Christ in going forth by the foot∣steps of the flock, Can. 1.8. to feed their Kids beside the Shepherds tents. Not to forsake the assem∣bling of themselves together in Gods House, as the manner of too many is. For, Heb. 10.25. The Priests lips should preserve Knowledg, and the people ought to seek the Law at this mouth, Mal. 2.7. for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Those that meditate on these things, 1 Tim. 4.15. Vers. 13. and give them∣selves wholly to them, that give attendance to Reading, as well as to Exhortation and Do∣ctrine, may reasonably be expected to be far more likely to understand the Truth them∣selves, and to guide others unto it, then they that onely cast aside their worldly busi∣ness, and adventure suddenly and boldly to open their mouths, not having so much as considered what they are about to speak in
the Name of that God who will not be mock∣ed, nor hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. From the publick Ordinances, we may comfortably expect benefit to our souls: By these, Jude v. 20. we have, by gracious experience, found our souls to be built up in our most holy Faith, and refreshed as with marrow and fat∣ness. Psal. 63.5. Whereas those that have forsaken them, have forsaken their own mercy, and shewed before the world a sensible decay in that which is good. Psal. 73.28. And therefore, let us conclude with David, It is good for us to draw near unto God: Psal. 87.2. And as the Lord doth, so let us love the Gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob.
CHAP. XII. Five seasonable and profitable Ad∣monitions, commended to the Con∣sciences of them that are either wavering, or already seduced to the embracing of Errors. HAving spoken these things to them who through Divine assistance, do yet stand fast in the Faith; let me now add a few words of Christian Counsel and Admonition, to them who are either fallen into dange∣rous Errors, or wavering and enclining to∣wards them. Rom. 10.1, 2. What the Apostle saith of the unbelieving and obstinate Jews, I may se∣riously and truly say of such persons: My hearts desire and prayer to God for them, is, that they may be saved: For I bear them re∣cord, that many of them have a very ardent zeal for God, but not according to knowledge: Yea, Rom. 9.2. as the same Apostle speaks of the same people, I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart, in behalf of many who are drawn like incautious Birds, into the snares of them that have so cunningly laid wait for them. I know that many judicious persons will
be ready to pluck me by the slieve, and say Quis leget haec? We can hardly expect that such men to whom these words are directed, will vouchsafe these things the reading, and much less that they will bestow an imparti∣al and serious consideration upon them. We may cry out with the Prophet: Jer. 6.10. To whom shall I speak and give warning that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the Word of the Lord is to them a reproach; they have no de∣light in it. Acts 28.27. For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted and healed. However, the Sower that soweth the Word of God, must cast his Seed abroad, though he see but little that is good ground and likely to bring forth fruit answerable to his desires. Who can tell but the Lord may direct his Word as an Arrow to hit them between the joynts of the Harness, though they have armed them∣selves against it, with so much prejudice and resolvedness in their own ways: But whe∣ther they will hear, or whether they will for∣bear (for they are most rebellious); Ezek. 2.5. yet shall they know that there hath been a Prophet a∣mong them. 1. Let me entreat and exhort all such, in the fear of God, and as they love their own souls, Apoc. 2.6. to remember from whence they ae
fallen: to remember the years that are past, and consider what the temper of their souls was then. See what the Apostle saith to the Galatians, and apply it to your own consci∣ences, Gal. 3.13, &c. You know how that through much infir∣mity of the flesh, we, and other Ministers, preached the Gospel to you at the first: those Ministers whom you sometimes heard, and in whom ye delighted were men subject to the like infirmities with us: And yet our temptation which was in our flesh ye despised not, nor rejected us and the Gospel for those infirmities; but received us even as Angels of God, and as those that brought glad tydings of Jesus Christ unto you: and did esteem the very feet of them that brought these glad tidings, to be so beautiful, that if it had been possible, to do us good you would even have pluck∣ed out your own eyes, and given them to us. But where is now the blessedness that ye then spake of? Is not the Word of God as good as it was then? And are we become your enemies because we do tell you the truth, and the very same truths that were preached to you then? Let me ask of you: Do not we preach the same Doctrine, and profess the same Faith, as they did whom you followed formerly with so much diligence? I believe, you can∣not deny it: Or, if you think us to be changed, this is but like the thoughts of one in a Ship, who when he puts off from the Land, conceits the Shore to move back from him, whereas it is the Ship onely that moves,
while the Shore remains where it was. Your Seducers may possibly suggest such thoughts unto you: of whom I may say with the Apo∣stle, They zealously affect you, but not well; they would exclude us, that you might affect them. Zeal indeed is very useful and commendable while it is rightly imployed, vers. 18. It is good to be zealously affected alwayes in a good matter: But it is a very dangerous thing to be zea∣lously carried forward in a mistake. I pray, Ask your own consciences (I speak this to them that are serious, though misguided, in their profession) Whether your consciences were not in a better frame when you frequented the publick Ordi∣nances, then now they are? Did not the Word of God rellish better with you, so that you esteemed it more then your necessary food, Job. 23.12. more precious then gold, yea, then fine gold: sweeter also then honey, Psal. 19.10. and the honey comb? Were you not more constant in those family and Closet-duties, of which every good Christian makes conscience? Had you not a more kindly sense of your sins upon your souls, and more child-like sorrow for them? Had you not more love to God and his people? Apoc. 2.5. Well, Remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your first works. And say with them, Hos. 2.7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then it was better with me than now. 2. Let me ask you (and I pray be serious in answering); Where did you first receive
the foundation of that light, which you so much talk of? How came you first to know any thing of God, and of the things that appertain to your Salvation? Was it not by attending upon that Ministry, which you now despise as Antichristian? You did not bring this knowledge into the world with you: And you could not learn it in private Meetings, seeing many of the elder sort of you profess your selves to have had something of the knowledge of God, be∣fore you frequented these Meetings; yea, be∣fore there were any such Societies for you to joyn with: And therefore, if you will deal fairly, you must acknowledge those sparks to have been kindled in you, by the preaching of the Word of God as the means. And how can you possibly so far rub all modesty out of your Fore-heads, as with such confi∣dence to pronounce that Ministry Antichri∣stian, which was the means first to discover the true Christ to you? Or do you think your selves to deal ingenuously in setting so soul a foot upon that step which first raised you from the ground; and casting away that ladder which helped you up, that it may not stand to upbraid you with the help it hath given you? Is not this, wantonness of spirit and a spiritual fulness, which keeps you from hungring and thirsting after the Word of God? that makes you loath the Manna of Gods publick Ordinances, and to long for flesh of your own fancying?
Were it not better to acquiesce in our Savi∣ours Judgement in this case: Luk. 5.39. No man having drunk old wine, straight-way desireth new: for he saith, The old is better. 3. Let me intreat and admonish you, not to condemn the Church of England without exa∣mination. Joh. 7.51. Doth our Law (saith Nicodemus) judge any man before it hear him, and knows what he doth? Certainly, no good Lawes, nor any sober Christian will judg and condemn any person or thing, without hearing and considering the matter. Let it please you therefore, first to be so much your own friends, as to take the pains to cast out the leaven of malice and prejudice out of your hearts (for these, blind the eyes even of the wise, that they cannot see that which is most palpable): And then lay before you the Doctrine of the Church of England con∣tained in the Creeds which we own, in the Catechisms of the Church, and in the Ar∣ticles of our Religion: As also the Liturgy of our Church, which contains our daily prayers, and the manner of administring the Sacraments, and performing the other Offices in the Church. And compare these with the Confessions and Services of other Churches: and see where you finde any Church that is more Orthodox and pure in every respect: yea, if you finde any thing in it which to a sober and impartial minde doth so much as appear to be contrary to the Scriptures.
If you would take this pains, I should verily expect to see a great number of those that separate from us; to flock like Doves to the Windows, yea, like good Christians, to the bosome of Gods Church. If you will not; judge your own selves whether your errour be not inexcusable, in your departing from, and disowning and opposing those things which you do not so much as understand. Si accusâsse sat est, quis innocens fuerit? If meerly to cavil, and rail, and calumniate be sufficient to confute the Doctrine and pra∣ctice of a Church; without doubt the Church of England hath been as profoundly confuted as possibly can be imagined. It is one of the easiest parts of wit, that consists in finding faults with others, and repre∣senting what is practised by them, as odious and ridiculous. There was never any thing so well devised by the wisest of men, but he that had a malicious minde and a pe∣stilent tongue, might represent as a very strange Monster, when he had first dressed it in clothes of his own devising: Nor any thing so evil and pernicious, but those that loved it, would find something to say for it. No marvel then that we have met with so many Pamphlets stuffed with Queries, and Cavils, and Calumnies, to which the best Answer that can be given, is, The Lord re∣buke thee thou evil spirit, which art the cause of these divisions of Reuben, that are the occasions of so many sad thoughts
of heart to all sober and Religious per∣son. But setting aside these Cavils which come not from the heart, at least not from a heart seriously desirous to be satisfied; Will you do your selves the right to come to us, who are Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, as you come to your Lawyer or Physitian; move such scruples touching the way of our Church, as do re∣ally trouble you; shew forth such a spirit as doth not come to cavil, but to be inform∣ed: and see if (I will not say we, but) your own mindes will not suggest an answer to what you can reasonably object against our Church. 4. Be serious and ingenuous in answering me one Question more: Do those whom you follow into corners teach you the same Doctrine which we teach in publick? or do they teach that which is contrary to it? If they teach that which is contrary, we are a∣ble fully to confute them by sufficient Scri∣pture-Arguments: yea, there is not any one of those many errours which are taught by them that creep into houses, but it hath been fully and solidly confuted by the publick Ministry; to which nothing can be replyed, but obstinacy and resolvedness to be deceived. If you say, they teach the same things that we do, Why do you not come to hear them from us? who are likely to teach them
more profitably, as being both better quali∣fied, by giving our selves wholly to these things, and applying our selves daily to searching of the Holy Scriptures, Eccl. 1.10. and to the setting in or∣der profitable and acceptable words; and withal being orderly called to this Office by them who had authority to lay hands upon us? May not we say to you as King Abijah to the Israelites? 2 Chron. 13.9, 10, 11. Have not ye cast out the Priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and have made you Priests of the lowest of the people? But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him: and the Priests which minister to the Lord are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their bu∣siness: And they burn unto the Lord every morning and every evening burnt-Sacrifices and sweet Incense, &c. And though you have gon on in the gain-saying of Corah, Jude v. 11. and say with him and his company, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, Num. 16.3. and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Yet may we answer you as Moses did them: Ye take too much upon you, vers. 7. vers. 11. ye sons of Levi, that affect the Priest-hood it self: and ye are gathered together against the Lord: and what is Aaron, who are we the Ministers of the Lord, that ye murmur against us? 5. Consider and lay to heart the sad spi∣ritual judgements, which God hath in∣flicted upon many of those that separate
selves from the publick Ordinances. Is it not observable, that the most of them are given up to a spirit of giddiness and insta∣bility, so that they cannot tell where to six when once they have forsaken their first Foundation? Is it not easily to be observed how many of them have taken their degrees from one errour to another, till they have even outdone themselves, and their first thoughts in forsaking the Church? Hath it not been sadly evident in many that have not received the love of the Truth, 2 Thes. 2.10, 11. that they might be saved; that God for this cause hath given them up to strong delusions, that they should believe a lye? Yea, have not many of them brought in or received in damnable here∣sies, 2 Pet. 2.1. even denying the Lord that bought them? Besides the presumption and self-willedness that is written in their fore-heads, despising of government, vers. 10. and speaking evil of dignities. And (that nothing might be wanting a∣mong them of those characters, whereby the Apostles do decipher the Hereticks of the latter ages) they speak evil of those things which they know not; but what they natural∣ly know, as brute Beasts, in these they corrupt themselves: they are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and their mouths speak great swelling words, having mens per∣sons in admiration because of advantage: Jude 8.16, 19. these are they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. Yea, are not many of them grown to looseness and licentiousness
of life, and to an utter neglecting of those Religious duties in their Families and Closets, which belong to every good Chri∣stian to perform? to spend all their Zeal ra∣ther in opposing what is held and practised by others, than in holding or doing any thing that is good themselves. Now these things have befallen them, to the end that they might be Examples to us, that he that thinketh he standeth might take heed lest he fall: 1 Cor. 10.11, 12. And that we seeing the sad con∣dition of so many unstable souls, may be the more diligent in prayer, and watching over our selves, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. lest we also being drawn away with the errour of the wicked, do fall from our own stedfastness. But that we may endeavour to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: To him be Glory both now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
THE NATURE and DANGER OF A Misguided Conscience. A SERMON Preached at the VISITATION OF Mr. ARCH-DEACON of SARƲM. Held At Warmister, April 27. 1664. By Paul Lathom, M. A. John 16.2. Yea, the time cometh, that who∣soever killeth you, will think that he doth God service. Printed by T. M. 1666.
To the Reverend, The DEAN and CHAPTER Of the CATHEDRAL At SARUM. Reverend Fathers, and Brethren, THe two later of the ensu∣ing Sermons are yours of right, as being preach∣ed in your Cathedral, and owing very much to your Candid and Chri∣stian attention. The other, that goes before them by order of Birth-right, may fitly be joyned with them, as tend∣ing to promote the same common end with them and the foregoing Tract. I take the boldness to tender them
all Three, as a Testimony of the re∣verential, and cordial Respects I owe you; and of that Thankfulness which is due for the favourable Respect wherewith you have been pleased to look upon me, and to encourage me in exercising your Patience with my Dis∣courses from time to time. I shall beg the help of your good Prayers, for the rendring these small Pieces as succesful as they are necessa∣ry, in these unsetled Times. Long may you live to be burning and shining Lights, in that Golden Can∣dlestick; that the light of your pious Lives and powerful Doctrine, may re∣prove the works of Darkness; and that they who have said, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession, may in due time be ashamed of their furious and preposterous zeal. This is the hearty desire of Your Servant in the work of the Gospel, Paul Lathom. Warmister, March 1. 1665.
THE NATURE and DANGER OF A Misguided Conscience. Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. HOw reverend and sacred the Authority of Consci∣ence is, may be evident, partly by the ready Obse∣quiousness that all good men shew to its Commands; and partly by the proness of Impostors, to affix the hand and seal of Conscience, to their counterfeit Forgeries; together with the readiness of men of good meanings, but ordinary understandings, to
yield obedience to those delusions that come authorized with this Name. And as in all Courts (especially of great Jurisdiction) 'tis a great joy and happiness to the people, to see Order and Justice in their proceed∣ings, and a great Burden and Misery, when it is otherwise: So it was a great happiness to man, when this great Court of Consci∣ence was setled in due order, and is now as great a misery since it is become so many wayes corrupted. Look how beautiful and lovely is the face of a well-ordered State, where the Prince commands with singular Wisdom and Justice, and the Subjects yield Obedience with due Loyalty and Humility; so amiable a piece was the Soul of man, when the Understand∣ing and Conscience did govern the other faculties with rectitude and discretion, and the will and affections did most readily obey, and put in execution these rightful Dictates. And if we consider how ungrateful an Ob∣ject a disordered State affords to the ages of them that view it, when either Tyranny, or Folly do usurp the place of Soveraignty; or else Faction, and Rebellion take place of that Loyalty, and Dutifulness that should be in those that are subject: We may from thence conclude how deformed the state of mans soul is now become, since Ignorance and Error have clouded the Understanding and Conscience, where the seat of Sove∣raignty of right ought to be placed, and
Frowardness and Contumacy have raised the will and sensitive Affections, to a rebel∣lion against the commands of Reason and Conscience. Whether of these two, the weakness of the Commanding, or the disorder of the Obey∣ing Faculties of mans soul, be of greater mischief both to our own selves in particu∣lar, and also to the Community; I shall not now strictly enquire or determine. But certainly, as in the Body Politick, when delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi, the errors of the Leaders will turn to the prejudice of the Followers; and as in the Natural Body, an error in the first Concoction, is hardly rectified in the second: So in the Soul, an error in these leading Faculties hath a very pernicious Influence upon the Will and Af∣fections, to the depraving and debauching of them. When mens Consciences are mis∣guided, they will easily be induced both to an eager loving and desiring, and to an im∣petuous prosecuting of that which is evil, be∣cause their own mistakes and delusions do represent it as good; and thereby offer great violence to a good Conscience, while they pretend to obey the Dictates of Consci∣ence. It may therefore be of very good use, to obviate this Distemper of mens minds, which is both Dangerous and Epidemical, by shew∣ing them the causes of this disease, and som∣thing also of the Diagnosticks, which will
be a good step toward the learning of its cure. And a Discourse of this Nature and Tendency, as it is to these times, a word in due season; so it will be very properly ground∣ed upon the words I have read unto you, which shew us the confession of the Apostle Paul, concerning his former condition, that he had been so far misguided in his Conscience, that he verily thought with him∣self, that he ought (or was bound in consci∣ence) to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which words are part of the Apostle Paul his Apologetical speech, before Agrippa and Festus▪ This Appearance is reckoned by those that are skilful in Chronology, to have been in the 57th year of our Saviour, and in the second year of Nero's reign, before the time that his rage against the Christians carried him forward so far as to wash his hands in their blood. Claudius, indeed had set out a Decree to banish all Jews from Rome, of which we read, Act 18.2 and there∣upon Aquila, & Priscilla Christian Jews, among the rest were forced to come out of Italy. But this Edict did not concern them, be∣cause of their profession of Christianity, but because of their being of the Jewish Nati∣on. And the late Reverend and Learned, D. Hammond, tells us, that in the reign of Claudius, St. John was banished into the Isle of Pathmos, and quotes Epiphanius for the proof of it. But Nero was the first of
all the Roman Emperours, that began to persecute the Christians, as such; as the aforenamed Authour proves from the words of Tertullian, Primum Neronem in hane Se∣cam gladio ferociisse: Nero was the first that put men to death, for the profession of Christianity. This persecution by Nero, was not begun when the Apostle made this Speech; and therefore in defending him∣self, as he doth not shrink from the profes∣sion of Christ, for fear of shame or punish∣ment, so he pleads Not guilty, as to the breach of any Law of the Romans, by any thing he had spoken or done; and therefore claims the priviledge of a Roman-Citizen, notwithstanding his being a Christian, and hopes to be delivered by appealing to Caesar, chap. 25.11. This I thought necessary to put you in mind of, that you might the more easily apprehend the purport of the Apostle's speech, vers. 31. and how Agrippa could truly say in the end of this Chapter, that Paul had done nothing worthy of death, or of bonds, by the Roman Laws; though his being a Christian, was very evident by his own Confession. Now for the substance and scope of this Speech, I shall set it before you in a few Words. After the Preface, vers. 2.3. where∣in he in sinuates into the affections of Agrip∣pa, before whom he was to plead his Cause: he sets forth the manner of his former life, vers. 5. That he had been a Pharisee, of the strictest
Sect amongst the Jews: and that now he did not differ from his former Principles, any further than that he did believe those Promises to be already accomplished, vers. 6, 7. which all the twelve Tribes did hope for, onely they were not yet convinced, that they had took effect in that Jesus whom they had put to death. Then he endeavours to perswade his hearers, vers. 8. both of the possibility of God having raised up Christ from the dead; and also of the present unbelieving Jews being mistaken in that Zeal, or rather Fury, which they shewed in opposing Christ, and persecuting those that did profess his Name. And, that they might not be too confident of their be∣ing in the right, he tells them that for his own part he had been formerly of the same minde with them, and had spent much pains in opposing and persecuting those that be∣lieved in Jesus Christ, until such time as it pleased God to work in him a saving con∣viction of the errour of the way he had been in; which he goes on in relating, in the fol∣lowing Verses. So that the words of the Text, considered with reference to what goes before, are an Argument intended for the perswading of the King and the rest of the Auditory, that it was possible for the Jews to be mistaken in their zeal against Christ, seeing himself had been made sensible of his mistake in fol∣lowing their principles, and being zealous for them. Considered in themselves, they
are the Apostles acknowledgement of his for∣mer mistakes, and of the misguiding of his Conscience therein: he tells us that he had not, in his unregenerate estate, persecuted Christ and his followers, out of malice, but through mistake: he did not believe him to be the Messiah, but an Impostor, and that he was bound in Conscience to do many things, even the utmost that he could, contrary to the Name and Profssion of Jesus of Naza∣reth. Instead of a more exact or artificial divisi∣on of the Text, I shall resolve it into two Po∣sitions, which the Apostle points at herein, and of which he endeavours to convince his hearers. 1. Pofition, That a mans Conscience may be so far deluded, as that he may verily think himself bound in Conscience to do that which is amiss. 2. Position, That this mistake or mis∣guiding of Conscience, doth not excuse those irregularities which men run into through it. The consequence of these, from the scope and design of the Apostle's confession con∣cerning himself, is so clear to every man, that seriously observes his meaning, that I shall not trouble you with spending time in making it out, but presently ap∣ply my self to the opening of the Positions in order. 1. Position, Position. That a mans Conscience may be so far deluded, &c.
As for the Latin word, Conscientia, and our English word, Conscience, some give this Etymology of it: Conscientia, quasi Cordis scientia; but that seems too remote: Or, Conscientia, quasi concludens scientia, because it concludeth or passeth sentence for, or a∣gainst a mans self: Or, Conscientia from Con and Scire, because it doth, as it were, joyn with God in seeing and taking cognizance of our ways. The Greek word is , which, as some observe, is used about thirty times in the New Testament. In the Old Te∣stament, we once meet with the word (Madagna) from (Jadang) to Know, Eccles. 10. ult. which is there translated, Thoughts or Conscience. But most commonly, that which in the New Testament is called , in the Old Testament is called (Leb) the Heart. 1 Sam. 24.5. So Davids heart is said to smite him, that is, his Conscience, and the people are exhorted to lay it to heart; Mal. 2.2. that is, to their Conscience. And sometimes the New Testament useth the same word, as, If our hearts condemn us, 1 Joh. 3.0. God is greater than our hearts, &c. We have seen the Quid nominis. Now for the Quid rei: Conscience may be de∣scribed thus: It is a power or faculty, of the practical part of mans Ʋnderstanding, where∣by we are enabled to judge, of our selves and our actions, according to the Rule of the Law of God.
In this Description there are five terms worthy our consideration. 1. The Genus of Conscience, is, a Power or Faculty. That Conscience cannot so pro∣perly be stiled, either an Act or an Habit, I think is plain enough; and therefore it is most properly termed a Power or Faculty, wherewith God hath endowed the Soul of Man. But in the Scriptures, as Faith and Love are sometimes used to signifie the Ha∣bits of those Graces, and sometimes the ex∣ercise of them: So Conscience is sometimes  for the actings or dictates of Consci∣ence, as when the Apostle tells the people, That he had lived in all good Conscience, Acts 23.1. that is, according to the dictates of Conscience: sometimes for the Power or Faculty from whence these actings proceed, as when he saith, He had exercised himself herein, Acts 24.16. to have alwayes a Conscience void of Of∣fence. 2. The Seat of Conscience, is said to be in the practical part of our Understanding. It is peculiar to understanding Creatures, to have a Conscience; and the more clear any mans Understanding is, caeteris paribus, the more refined are the motions of Consci∣ence in him. And, that Conscience is seated ra∣ther in the Understanding then in the Will, is evident, in that Conscience will many times do its office, though the Will do hang back never so much. And further, we say 'tis seated in the practical Understanding,
because as the office of the speculative Un∣derstanding, is, to judge of Truth and Er∣rour, so the practical judgeth of Good and E∣vil. 3. The Office of Conscience, is, to judge. The judgement that Conscience passeth, may be conceived to be in such a way as this. What the Scripture approves, is good and to be followed: But the Scri∣pture doth approve this: Therefore it is good and to be followed. What the Scri∣pture condemns, is evil and to be a∣voided: But the Scripture condemns su and such courses: Therefore they are evil and to be avoided. Some Divines say, that in the major proposition, Conscience is Lex: Though I think that expression not to be very proper, because Conscience doth not lay down this Law by its own Authority, but takes it from the Word of God, yet so as to assent to the Authority of it: and in this respect Conscience is sometimes called , because it keepeth the Law of God in our mindes. In the Minor Pro∣position, Conscience is called Testis. In the Conclusion, Judex. 4. The Object of this Judgement, is, both our selves and our actions. Concerning our selves, or our own Condition towards God, Conscience passeth judgement in this sort: The Scripture saith, He that truely repenteth of his sins, and resteth by Faith upon the Merits of Jesus Christ is in the
way to Eternal life; but he that goeth on still in his trespasses obstinately and securely, is in the broad way that leads to the Cham∣bers of death. Now accordingly as Consci∣ence findes our Condition to be, either peni∣tent or impenitent, so it pronounceth us to be either in a good or bad way. Concerning our actions Conscience passeth Sentence, partly before we enter upon them; and as it findes them either agreeing with, or con∣trary to the will of God, so it either en∣courageth us to them, or disswades us from them: partly afterward, and then by the same rule of the agreeing of our actions to the Will of God, or opposing of it, so Con∣science doth either accuse or excuse and commend us for what we have done. 5. The Rule by which Conscience ought to proceed in judging of our Persons and Actions, is, the Law of God. This Law is either that which was written upon mans heart, which though sadly defaced by the Fall, yet some remainders of it are to be found in all men, and according to this the Heathen that know no other Law, Rom. 2.14, 15. are to judge of their actions: or else that which is written in the Holy Scriptures, and accord∣ing to this all of us should judge our selves and our actions. It will not be sufficient that our Consciences speak peace to us, and tell us that our actions are good, and our selves in a good estate, except this judge∣ment of Conscience be grounded upon the
Word of God. For if we hold Consci∣ence to be the supream Judge, and that we are to attend wholly to it, without looking to any other Rule, hence will follow a two∣fold absurdity. 1. Hence it will follow, that Conscience is infallible: and so those that bestow so much Zeal in crying out against one Antichrist, will set up many Infallibles in his stead, even as many as be of this Opinion. But, that Conscience is not infallible, may be evident by this, that one mans Consci∣ence doth (at least in pretence) dictate that which is quite contrary to the dictates of a∣nother mans Conscience; and therefore one of them must needs be supposed to be in a mistake, and consequently not infallible. 2. It will also follow, that a man would alwaies do right, when he acts according to the dictates of Conscience. But, that this is not true, is sufficiently evident by the example of St. Paul here before us, who before his Conver∣sion did verily think himself bound in Con∣science to do what he did against Jesus Christ; but this did not bear him out in it, as you will see more fully anon. You see then the Nature and Office of Conscience, which will open our way for setting before you the dangerous mistakes of Conscience. The office of Conscience, you have heard, is, to take cognizance of, and pass a judgement upon our actions, according to the Rule of Gods Law, so as to encou∣rage or discourage us before we enter upon
them; and to accuse or excuse us, after we have done them. And herein chiefly lies the mischievous mistake of Conscience, that either it self doth erre by mistaking its Rule, and thereby comes to pass a wrong judge∣ment upon our actions: or else (which may as probably be imagined) something else intrudes into the Office of Conscience on purpose to deceive us, by encouraging us to that which is evil, and disswading us from that which is good; accusing us when we have done that which is good and com∣mendable, and excusing us when we have done that which is evil and unwarrantable. And by this means men are not onely drawn to evil courses, but encouraged and hardned in them, whilst they conceit them∣selves to follow the motions of Consci∣ence, though all the while they are doing that which is quite contrary to a good Con∣science. Now there are especially three things that are ready to step into the seat of Consci∣ence, and to delude us into a belief that we are led by Conscience, when we are stirred up by a worse principle, and do those things which are contrary to the right dictates of Conscience. 1. Sometimes the strength of Fancy or I∣magination usurps the office of Conscience, and makes men believe they are prompted by Conscience to do such and such things, when it is nothing but Fancy that hurries
them forward. It is strange to observe how powerful Imagination is, not onely to carry men violently forward in their motions; but also to disguise it self so subtilly, that men will strongly conceit themselves not to be conceited in what they do. If we look to the Sanguin-Fancies that proceed from such a Constitution of the Body, how ma∣ny remarkable stories have we both of the Anabaptists in Germany, and of many Ran∣ters and Libertines in England, who under the lowd cry of Conscience, and Liberty of Conscience, have onely hunted for game to satisfie the foul lust of Uncleanness? Yea, and made the filly people of the world (if not themselves among the rest) to believe that e∣ven uncleanness it self should not be filthy, nor unlawful, while it did gratifie persons so high∣ly in the favour of God, as they were confi∣dent to pronounce themselves to be. It is not indeed so strange, as it is sad, that such persons have prevailed so far, as to impose upon many of the injudicious Vulgar with these pretences: but that they could so far delude themselves as to conceit that they were acted by Conscience and by the Spirit of God, in these courses, seems a ve∣ry great Wonder. The chiefest Reason I can give of the prevalency of this delusion, is, that these Fancies move them with so much violence and impetuousness, being help∣ed forward by Satan who watcheth all op∣portunities to ensnare the soul, that the poor
deluded soul is ready to conceit it self to be moved by some extraordinary impulse of the Spirit of God, and so gives it self up confidently to the lustful embracing of a Cloud, in the shape of Juno. And for that other humour of Melancho∣ly, 'tis strange to observe the effects of it up∣on the Fancy; this useth to beget sowre and sad fancies. And the stories which Physi∣tians and Historians relate concerning the effects hereof, are so strange, that they would seem incredible to vulgar ears. And doubtless in many 'tis a sowre and me∣lancholick temper of body (and pride toge∣ther) that is the cause of their severe incli∣nation, to dislike and find fault with what so∣ever is practised by others; and to effect a strange and uncouth way of living, under the notion of Mortification, and Denying of themselves. And in good people also, the prevalency of this Temper, is many times conspicuous: To this, many of their groundless Doubts and fears, as to their spi∣ritual Estate, do owe their beginning: which though they represent themselves as the fruits of tenderness of Conscience, and are seldom or never to be found, but in persons of truly tender Consciences (as many bad weeds do not grow, but in the best soyl;) yet they are evil in themselves, as being a false judgement passed upon our selves, and a denying the great things which God hath done for our souls; and as to their tendency,
which is ordinarily the hindering of the soul from its vigorous actings in good du∣ties, and from taking due comfort in the performances which Gods Spirit hath car∣ried it through: These I say, are to be im∣puted to the constitution of the body, help∣ed on by Satans Temptations. If any enquire, upon hearing this, How we may distinguish these workings of Fancy from the true and genuin Motions of Con∣science? and truly know what impulses we are to follow, and what to reject? I an∣swer. 1. Look to the Constitution of thy Body; or if thou hast not much skill in such mat∣ters, be content to receive the advice of those that are able and competent Judges of it. Art thou of a sanguin Constitution, and find∣est the motions that solicite thee to a prose∣cution of them, to be of that nature? Or art thou naturally inclined to Melancholy, and findest such motions in thee as are suit∣able to that humour? It will be a great right done to Conscience, to forbear to impute those motions to it, which our own Reason may shew us to come from another cause. 2. Observe when the temper of thy Bo∣dy doth alter, and see whether these moti∣ons and inclinations do alter with it. It is sufficiently evident, that the temper of mens bodies doth admit of alteration. The Sanguin temper will alter by age or sick∣ness,
or worldly cares: The Melancholick will vary by change of Air, or Dyet, or by the use of Physick, beside those lucid inter∣vals wherein most Melancholick persons do meet with an abatement of that humour. Now ask thy own experience, whether these motions do not ebb and flow, according to the abating and encreasing of these Di∣stempers in thy body? If so, there is great reason to impute these motions and inclina∣tions, not to Conscience, but to the tem∣per of thy body; and it would be a great wrong to the sacred name of Conscience, to father them upon it. Secondly, Even the motions of Lust will sometimes deceive us, under the pretence of being the dictates of Conscience. This may seem very strange to them that have never been willing to put themselves to the trouble of examining the motions, which they have followed, whence they have come: But it is very palpable to every man, that with a discerning eye, and un∣byassed mind, looks upon them. Sometimes the lust of the Eye, Covetousness, and Am∣bition, lapps it self in the Mantle of Consci∣ence. Come see my zeal, 2 King. 10.16. for the Lord of Hosts, saith Jehu; when every man knows that it was somewhat else, and not true zeal, that made him drive so furiously. Yea, some may go so far as not only to deceive others, but themselves also, in this point; as, in their denying Tythes, and other Payments,
'tis too too palpable, that Covetousness hath taken the place and office of Consci∣ence; and yet sets so bold a face upon it, as if it were pure Conscience that guided these men to such practises. Sometimes that lust of malice and revenge, may put us forward to serve it under the notion of Conscience: So the Scribes and Pharisees persecuted Christ out of malice, and yet with a great shew of Zeal and Conscience: And those others, of whom our Saviour fore-tels, that they would persecute his Apo∣stles, Joh. 16.2. and verily think they did God good ser∣vice, in doing it. Now if any enquire of the manner how these lusts come to prevail so far as to deceive us under the name of Conscience, I need say no more then I did upon the former Head, viz That the Impe∣tuousness of these motions in the mind, may be apt to make us mistake them for some extraordinary Inspirations, which we ought not to resist. But to undeceive us in this point, it may be very useful to consi∣der, 1. That what motions soever do encline us to any thing that is forbidden by the Law of God, are evil and to be rejected: Now the motions of lust, do alwayes stir us up to do that which is contrary to Gods Law, and therefore are to be opposed, though never so suitable and grateful to our sensitive appe∣tite. Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony we ought to look, and whatsoever persons or
motions are contrary to that, this very thing is sufficient to convince us, that they are not of God. 2. If we find our selves to be zealously carried forward, onely in some things that tend to our own profit, or pleasure, and careless and remiss in other things, we have great reason to conclude these zealous mo∣tions, not to proceed from Conscience, but a worse Principle. 2 Kings 10.28, 29. Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel, and was very zealous in it, as that which was a fair pretence for cutting off the house of Ahab, that none might be left to lay claim to the Crown; and also to dazle the eyes of the people, that they might not rise up in opposition to him, who shew∣ed himself so zealous in executing the Lords pleasure: But from the sins of Jerobo∣am the son of Nebat, the serving of the gold∣en Calves at Dan and Bethel, from these he departed not, because he thought the conti∣nuance of this, to be a good piece of poli∣cy, to keep the people from returning to Jerusalem to worship, lest they should also carry back the Kingdom to the House of David. Hereby Jehu did discover, that it was not zeal for God, but Covetousness and Ambition, that made him so strict in obeying Gods commands in other respects: And if any man find the same temper and tendency in his zeal, he will have just rea∣son to suspect the same things concerning it.
3. Satans temptations and suggestions may sometimes impose upon men, under the no∣tion of Conscience, and inspirations from the Spirit of God. The Apostle tells us, that Satan hath an art to transform himself into an Angel of light; 2 Cor. 11.14. to represent his tem∣ptations, as the advice of some good An∣gel, or as the motions of the holy Spirit of God. He had the impudence to cite the Scripture in his tempting of our Saviour; Mat. 4.6. and therefore it is no marvel, if he seduce so many ignorant people to pervert the Scriptures, for the encouraging of them∣selves to do that which is quite contrary to the meaning of the Scriptures. Yea, we have very strong reasons to perswade us, that those raptures and Enthusiasms, which have possessed some of them, have been no∣thing else, but an higher degree of the work∣ing of Satan in them. And that they may not think we use them hardly in spending such a censure upon them, let them but consider how many of them, under the pretence of these Instincts, have encouraged themselves in Murthers, Adulteries, and o∣ther the greatest sorts of Impieties, which are no way imputable to the motions of the Holy Ghost, who as he is a most pure and ho∣ly Spirit, so is he far from inclining any man to that which is impure or unjust, but doth abhor such practises himself, and stirs up all those that are acted by him, to the ut∣most loathing and abhorring of them.
Now for distinguishing the temptations of the evil spirit from those motions that come from the good Spirit of God, I shall, to what was spoken upon the former head, add onely one Rule, viz. That it will greatly concern us to observe the tendency of these Motions: The Spirit of God, as it doth not move us to any thing that is evil in it self, so neither to any thing that tends directly to the pro∣ducing of evil. And therefore, If any mo∣tions that seem never so specious, that look like Angels of Light at their first appear∣ance, do yet tend to draw us to evil in the issue; if they tend either to draw us to any gross impiety or dishonesty, if they designe to draw us to the venting and maintaining any dangerous or strange Doctrine, or to the ma∣king of rents and divisions in the Church; we have reason to reject these, as suggestions of Satan, however they may make a shew of advancing us to higher attainments then ordinary. And thus we have seen, how the Conscience may be imposed upon so far, that men may think verily, that they ought, or are bound in Duty and Conscience, to do that which is really amiss. I proceed to the other Position, Position. That this mistake or misguiding of Conscience, doth not excuse or warrant those irregularities, which men erroniously run into. It is not suf∣ficient for men to plead Conscience for what they do, that their Conscience binds them to do this, and to abhor the other;
except they can shew sufficient grounds for these motions and inclinations that are imputed to Conscience, this will not war∣rant them in what they do. This, I think, is so clear, that it cannot but be received by every serious and sober person, so that I shall not need to spend many words for the confirmation of it: onely let me entreat you to consider, 1. What the Apostle Paul speaks of him∣self, who is a notable instance to this pur∣pose. While a person is distempered in minde, he is not capable of judging how sad a condition he is in; but when he is reco∣vered out of it, then is he very sensible of the sad condition he was formerly in, and of the great cure that hath been wrought in his recovery. So men that are under these delusions of Conscience, are not com∣petent judges of their own actions; but St. Paul who recovered out of this conditi∣on, may more properly be heard to speak in this case. He tells us in the Text, that he did not persecute Christ out of malice to∣wards his person; but because, through the misguiding of his Conscience, he did not believe him to be the true Messiah: But doth he think this sufficient to warrant, or yet excuse his persecution? No, for not∣withstanding this, he calls his sins by their proper names, and acknowledgeth himself to have been a blasphemer, 1 Tim. 1.13, 15, 16 and a persecutor, and injurious; yea, the chief of sinners, and
such an one that it was a great wonder that ever the Lord had shewed him mercy. Phil. 3.6. He tells us that he had persecuted the Church with Zeal as hot as fire. But doth he think that the heat of his Zeal would awarrant the ir∣regularity of his actions? No, but tells us that he was the least of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.9. and not worthy the name of an Apostle, because he had persecuted the Church of God. And what we have said of the Apostle Paul, in his unre∣generate estate, we may say of the genera∣lity of the Jews of that age, that they had a Zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Rom. 10.2. And what they did unto our Saviour (the common people denied the Holy One and the Just, Act. 3.14, 15, 16. and their Rulers killed the Prince of Life) St. Peter bears them witness that they did it through ignorance, both the People and Rulers. But shall we think that this did ex∣cuse so horrid a fault? No, the Apostle tells them that for that very sin, 1 Thes. 1.15, 1.6. The wrath of God was come upon them to the utmost, and so hath continued for so many hundreds of years. Yea, the Turks and all other Hea∣thens and Idolaters, are doubtless given up to such blindness of minde, that they verily conceit themselves to do well in wor∣shipping their false gods, and defying the onely true God, and his Son Jesus Christ; but I hope, no man is so senseless as to think that these mistakes of their Conscien do excuse, much less awarrant, the pra∣ctises.
2. Reason bears witness to this Truth; for we have shewed before that the proper Office of Conscience, is to judge according to the Law of God. And, as the opinion of a Judge, who is bound to adhere to the Laws of the Land, doth not make that to be Law which is contrary to the written Laws; it being very unreasonable to think that his transgressing the bounds of his Office, should excuse another, that adventures to do that which is forbidden: So Conscience, which is bound to proceed in judging ac∣cording to the Law of God, if it neglect this Rule, cannot awarrant a man in doing that which is contrary to this Rule. And it would be very unreasonable for any man to imagine that these mistaken dictates of Conscience should excuse him that follows them, except Conscience were the Supream Law; the contrary whereof I have shewed before. I have done with the opening of the Posi∣tions, and shall next proceed to the im∣proving of them, by drawing several practi∣cal Inferences from what hath been spo∣ken. 1. Inse∣rence. This may shew us what great need we have to be very circumspect and cautious in trying those motions that present themselves under the Notion of Impulses of Consci∣ence.  will concern us, not rashly to be∣lieve  obey those motions in our selves; that pretend to come from Conscience, till
we have first tryed them, whether they be not the Impulses of our Imaginations, or the clamours of our lusts, or the voice of Satans suggestions. Nor yet too credulously to be∣lieve all the pretences that other men make to Conscience. And there be several dan∣gerous Symptoms, whereby it will appear very evidently, that men are either not at all acted by Conscience, in what they do, or (at least) by a mistaken and deluded Conscience. First, When men are very strict and scru∣pulous in some things, and very careless in o∣thers. Pals. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed (saith Da∣vid) when I have respect to all thy Command∣ments. This is a good sign of a truely con∣scientious person, when he hath an even and equal respect to every part of Gods Law: So to do one as not to leave another un∣done. But, on the contrary, as in the Body, we reckon it a sign of a distempered stomack, when the appetite is carried out to an inor∣dinate longing after some sorts of food, which is attended with a fastidious nauseating of o∣thers: so in the soul 'tis a sign of a Consci∣ence that is out of order, when men are more then necessarily strict and scrupulous in some matters, and careless of keeping o∣ther commands: when men are not care∣ful both to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.2. and to God the things that are God's. 2. Especially, if men spend a great deal
of Zeal, and make a great stir in the World, about smaller and less confiderable matters, and in the mean time are cool and remiss in matters of greater moment. Indeed, all Gods Commands are great, and the least of them is not to be slighted: but, as our Sa∣viour speaks of a first and great Command∣ment, Mat. 22.38. and elsewhere of one of the least of his commandments: Mat. 5.19. So he makes it a sign of an hypocritical Conscience, when men strain at a gnat and swallow a camel; Mat. 23.23, 24. when they took special care to tythe mint, and annis, and cummin, but neglected the weightier matters of the Law, Justice, and Mercy, and the Love of God: So if we see men that had rather kill a good Minister, then hear a good Sermon; rather pull down the houses of God, then come to worship God in them; rather starve their Pastour, then pay him their Tythes; rather cut off a mans head, then move their own hat; we may very reasona∣bly doubt that 'tis no well-informed Con∣science, that puts them upon spending so much zeal and industry about such trifles and nicityes. 3. If men do what they do, rather to gra∣tifie their own humours, than to please God and benefit his Church. Those are truely good works, and acceptable to God, as proceeding from a right Christian spirit, which are the Fruits of pure obedience to Gods Law, and done with a true design to please God, and to further the good of his
Church. And therefore if men embrace opinions and crochets in Religion, or Hetero∣dox singularities in their practices, not so much because they believe them to be ac∣ceptable to God, but because they suit with their own humours: If men are so in love with what they have conceited to be conve∣nient, that (though themselves cannot but believe and confess it to be an indifferent thing) yet they will not depart an hairs breadth from their own humours; though their complyance in such things, would tend never so much to the peace of the Church, and the good of the Community; if there be not humour and pride at the bot∣tom of this, yet certainly there is but lit∣tle shew of a well-informed Conscience. 4. If men are stiff and zealous in their courses, for this end, that they may ad∣vance their fortunes in the world thereby. He that is truely conscientious, doth not onely talk much of the glory of God, but doth indeed and truth make it his utmost end. And therefore if we see men stickle for novel opinions and conceits in Religion, and betake themselves to parties and separa∣tions, and embrace odd kinde of singulari∣ties in their lives, onely that they may be taken notice of beyond other people by be∣ing of another Colour: If men plead hard for such things, in the advancing of which, and opposing the contrary, they have greatly promoted their worldly estates; though these
later may seem to shew somewhat of a grate∣ful spirit towards those things that have been good benefactors to them, yet neither sort shew any better Zeal then Demetrius and his crafts-men did in crying out against St. Paul and his Doctrine, Act. 19.25. not that they cared so much for the honour of Diana, but because by that craft they had their wealth. 5. If men spend much Zeal in finding faults with others, but little or none in re∣forming what is amiss in themselves. Tibe∣rius in Tacitus observed it to be the temper of men of mutinous spirits, Tacitus, Annal. l. 3. Accusare tantum vitia, & deinde cum gloriam ejus rei adepti sint, simultates facere: They sought for ap∣plause, and the Title of pious men, onely by loud exclamations against the faults of other men; and when they had raised their credits amongst the vulgar by these arts, then upon this stock they set up a Trade of Faction and Sedition. And when we see men spend all their time and zeal in censuring, and reviling, and scorning at the practices of others, while in the mean time they are careless of themselves, and neglect to reform what is amiss in their own lives, we may conclude that, if there be not Sediti∣on, to be sure there is little of Conscience at the bottom: for the office of Conscience (as you have heard) is, to judge, not other mens persons or actions, but chiefly, and in the first place, our own.
6. When men avoid and despise the means of Conviction, it is a signe that their Con∣sciences are not in right order. Every truly conscientious person makes it his ear∣nest desire, in the first place, not to do a∣miss; and, next to this, that he may be made sensible of his errors, and brought back into the right way when he hath wan∣dred from it. And those therefore that make it the first principle, which they teach their Disciples, to forsake and despise the publick Ordinances, for fear lest they should be convinced of the errors which they are running into, 1 Sam. 11.2. do make such a Covenant with them, as Nahash desired to do with the Children of Israel, To thrust out their right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon Israel: And they shew that they have rather ta∣ken a strong fancy to their own Conceits, then that they have a well-informed Con∣science, and a sincere desire to do as they ought. By these and such like Rules, we may both try those motions that we find in our own minds, whether they proceed from a well-informed Conscience or no: And also may give a ghess at those who are about us, whether they be in good earnest, and well-advised in their large talking of Conscience in their proceedings. And that I may pre∣vail with you to lay these things to heart, let me add, that 'Tis a business of great im∣portance, to have our judgments well in∣formed
in this point: and that I shall briefly demonstrate, by shewing in two words, the great hazzard that men run in entertaining their own fancies, or the motions of lust, or the suggestions of Satan, for motions of Conscience. First, While men embrace these delusi∣ons, they sin at a more dangerous rate then other men; in that they go on the more earnestly and confidently in evil, while they think they do God good service in doing it: And further, they are harder to be reclaim∣ed then a prophane person, Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit, Porv. 26.12. there is more hope of a fool, then of him. Besides that they aggravate their sins, by taking the sacred name of Conscience in vain, while they pre∣tend it to Patronize them in that which is evil. Secondly, When such men come in cool blood to consider what they have done, and to find out the mistakes they have commit∣ted under the thoughts of being acted by Conscience, it may be in danger to make them cast off all Conscience, and turn Seek∣ers in matters of Religion, which are next door to Atheists. Add to this, that the ex∣orbitant courses which many have taken un∣der pretence of being led by their Consci∣ence, hath sadly opened the mouths of pro∣phane persons, to scorn at Conscience it self, and take no care to keep a good Con∣science, or to do that which is agreeable to it.
2. It may be very wholsome and seasona∣ble Advice, Infer∣ence. to endeavour rightly to inform our selves in the nature of the true Christi∣an Liberty: which will be one special help to the due information of our Consciences, in many controverted points. It is most certain, that, beside the Liberty which Christ hath purchased for us from his Fa∣thers wrath, and from the thraldome, and slavery of sin and Satan; there is likewise this further Liberty which every Christian may comfortably expect under this New Co∣venant, that was not to be enjoyed under the old, viz. That if the sincere purpose and desire of our soul be to please God, and this desire do shew it self to be real, by a con∣stant and diligent endeavouring to walk in those wayes which are acceptable to God; our gracious and merciful Father will not be extream to mark those defects that proceed from the infirmity of our Nature, but will cover our imperfections, and accept of our Obedience, through the perfection of Christs obedience. And further, that in things, which in their own Nature are truly indifferent, there is much Liberty allowed us by God, provided still that our desires be towards his Glory in what we do. Now as the due apprehension of this would be of great advantage to us, to make us go on the more cheerfully and comforta∣bly in his service; so for want of being du∣ly informed about it, the soul doth sustain
much prejudice. Some, by overstretching the Nature of Christian Liberty, have proceed∣ed to turn the Grace of God into wantonness; and others, by not understanding how far this Liberty doth extend, have incurred great prejudice. For, 1. Hence have proceeded endless and un∣profitable scruples in the Conscience. The word scruple (as some say) comes from that dust or gravel in our shooes, which, though small in it self, yet gives us great trouble being in such a place. And so, Scruples in the Conscience, though small and inconsidera∣ble in themselves, yet do greatly disturb the mind. Indeed, when men pretend to scru∣ples in small and indifferent matters, while they can take too much Liberty in matters that go nearer to the life of Religion; 'tis a signe that their Consciences are sick of a Pharisaical disease. But yet 'tis sufficiently evident, that the soberest and truly conscien∣tious people are much disturbed in their minds with such scruples, as even themselves are sensible that there is little weight in them. And though this trouble doth argue a sincere desire in the soul to please God, yet 'tis of bad consequence, as tending to disturb and distract the soul in good duties, and to take off that cheerfulness which ought to be in us, in serving so good a Master. 2. Hence a man may come to a doubting Conscience. Divines distinguish thus be∣tween a scrupulous, and a doubting Con∣scence.
A scrupulous Conscience, is, when a man is satisfied in the main, of the law∣fulness of an action, but yet there are some odde inconsiderable thoughts in his mind which trouble it: A doubting Conscience, is, when a man doubts in the main of the lawfulness of the action. And accordingly they resolve that against a scrupulous Con∣science a man may, yea sometimes must of necessity proceed, but not against a doubting Conscience: Now through ignorance of the due extent of this Christian Liberty, a man may come to these doubtings of Con∣science, which will quite put him to a stand in many things. 3. From this a man may come to that which Divines call, a perplexed Conscience, which involves a man in a kind of necessity of sinning. That there is such a perplexed estate of Conscience, may be evident by such an Instance as this. Put the case that a lawful Authority enjoyn us something about a matter which in its self is truly indifferent: If a man doth not yield obedience to it, he sins against the fifth Commandment, and if he doth yield obedience, and yet doubts that the thing he doth is unlawful, though he doth not formally break any of Gods Commandments, yet virtually he doth, in yielding to that which he believes to be sin∣ful, and so falls under that censure of the Apostle, Rom. 14.23. It is indeed a sad case when the soul is involved in such a per∣plexity.
But God is not the Authour of this occasion of sin, for he made the Con∣science upright, and 'tis the fall of man that hath brought upon it this and all other dis∣orders. And forasmuch as you have heard that the mistake of Conscience, doth not excuse the irregularity of an action, it will therefore concern us the more diligently to study the true Christian Liberty, that we may not at any time come to this pass. 3. Infer. ence. Let me add a word of Caution. Let no man from what hath been spoken, take occasion to make light of Conscience. Be∣cause you have heard that Conscience may be, and is many times deceived, let no man hence conclude that all pretences to Con∣science, are either counterfeit or erroneous: That all men who pretend to Conscience, are either Deceivers, or deceived. Conscience is a Sacred thing, and of So∣vereign authority with all good men. And those wicked men that will not hearken to the voice of Conscience in this world, but cast away its cords from them, shall in the world to come, find it turned to a Worm that shall gnaw, and torment their souls to all eternity. Lastly, Infer∣ence. To you Fathers and Brethren of the Clergy, my speech directs it self. Foras∣much as it is evident, that the misguiding of mens Consciences is so common and dan∣gerous a disease, and there are so many Se∣ducers abroad, that lie in wait to deceive
them into this inconvenience: Let me therefore take the liberty to put you in mind, whose Office obligeth you to be Guides to mens Lives and Consciences; that you use all possible diligence in the rectifying those mistakes which impose upon mens Consciences; and cut off all just occasion from them that are ready to seek occasion for de∣livering up their minds to be seduced to an embracing of that which is evil. Let us put no advantage into the hands of false Teach∣ers, that make it their business to deceive ignorant and well-meaning people: Nor let us justly provoke such people to deliver up themselves as a prey to those Foxes and Wolves. And to this end, give me leave to commend to you this two-fold word of Exhortation. 1. To be diligent and constant in preaching such sound Doctrine as may both exhort the people to that which is good, and also con∣vince Gain-sayers. Let not the people have any just occasion given them to follow these grievous Wolves, because those that should teach them, are dumb Dogs, Isa. 56.11. that either can∣not, or will not bark, and look, after nothing, but every man his gain from his quarter. Let them find that the Priests lips do preserve Knowledge, and that it is the best course for the people to seek the Law at their mouths, Mal. 2.7. who by their Office, are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts. 2 Tim. .2. Let's take the Apostle Exhor∣tation: Preach the Word, be instant in season,
and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. 2 Tim. 2.15. Let us shew our selves Workmen that need not be ashamed of our work, and such as are not a shame to our Work and Profession; but rightly divi∣ding the word of Truth, so as to carve to eve∣ry man his portion. Tit. 1.11. And withal, There are some whose mouths must be stopped, who creep into Houses, 2 Tim. 3.6. and lead captive silly people. And these we must confute (if they will not be convinced) with sound Doctrine, that the people may see the reasonableness of the truths which we preach, & the unreasonable∣ness of the errors that are taught in corners. And for those that are impetuously obstinate in their errors, I doubt not but our Church, which hath waited for their return with much long-suffering, 2 Cor. 10.8. will seasonably exer∣cise towards them, that power which God hath given, Acts 20.28. for their edification, and not for their destruction. 2. We must also take heed to our selves as well as to our Doctrine, that we give no ad∣vantage to false Teachers, to insinuate into men of good Affections, a fancy to leave the Church, because of the scandalous lives of them that are publick Preachers. 1 Tim. 4.12. Let us be to the Believers a pattern, not onely in word, but also in Conversation, in Charity, in Spi∣rit, 1 Sam. 3.13. in Faith, in Purity. Remember how God did punish Eli's house, when his sons, by their wicked lives, made men to abhor the offerings of the Lord. Remember what
God threatens to the Priests, Mal. 2.2, 3. Mat. 5.17. and 8, 9. Remember also our Saviours words, Ye are the salt of the Earth; if the salt have lost its savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is thenceforth meet for nothing, but to be troden under feet of men. 1 Tim. 4 16. Let us therefore take heed to our Selves, and to our Doctrine, and then we may hope that we shall be In∣struments to promote the salvation of our selses, and of those that hear us. However, Isa. 49.4, 5. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious in the eyes of the Lord: And our judg∣ment shall be with the Lord, and our work with our God: 2 Tim. 3.13. Though evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being de∣ceived, Ezek. 3.19. yet we having discharged the parts of faithful watchmen, shall have delivered our own souls. Now the Lord of his mercy, inform the Consciences of those that are erroneous, Acts 24.16. and soften the Consciences of prophane sinners, and give us all grace to keep Consciences void of offence, toward God and man, in this world; that so when we have fought our good fight, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. and finished our course, and kept the Faith unto death, we may at death receive the Crown of Righteousness, through the alsufficient merits of Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Fa∣ther, and the Holy Ghost, let us give, as is most due, all Honour and Glory, world without end, Amen. FINIS.
THE SUBTILE and PESTILENT NATURE OF Seducers. A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL AT SARUM Upon St. Marks Day, 1665. By Paul Lathom, M. A. 1 John 1.4. Beloved, believe not every spirit but try the spirits, whether they be of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Printed by T. M. 1666.
THE Subtile and Pestilent Nature OF SEDUCERS. Ephes. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more Chil∣dren, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lye in wait to deceive. THE Gospel written by St. Mark (whose memory we celebrate this day) hath in all Ages been received as Canonical Scripture. But there hath been some dif∣ference amongst the Learn∣ed concerning the Person that wrote it
some affirming it to be written by that Mark whom St. Peter calls his Son, 1 Pet. 5.13. Others supposing the Author of it to be that Mark who was also called John, the Son of Mary, of whom we read, Acts 12.12. That he whom St. Peter calls his Son, was the Evangelist, I suppose to be be∣yond controversie: the onely doubt that re∣mains, is whether he was the same with John-Mark?  Son of Mary; or another person of the e name. This I cannot finde ab∣solutely determined by the Learned and Judicious: and therefore shall leave it in the middle. It is agreed that this St. Mark the Evange∣list was the first Bishop of Alexandria, as Doro∣theus, tells us: and that he preached the Gospel to all those parts, from Egypt even to Pentepolis. The time of whose Preaching the Gospel in Egypt, Buchol. Chronol. Bucholtzer determines to be about the 44th. year of Christ. Con∣cerning the time when he wrote this Gospel, no certainty can be gathered out of Histo∣rians, Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 15. saith Bullinger. But Eusebius reports it to be presently after the confusion of Si∣mon Magus, which was in the Reign of Nero, and about the 68th. year of Christ. And yet Bucholtzer in his Chronology reports from Eusebius (I suppose his Chronicle) that St. Mark did suffer death four or five years be∣fore this time. So that the most Learned and diligent searchers of Antiquity,
are not free from over-sights especially in Chronology. But this by the way. For the occasion of the writing of this Gospel, Eusebius relates it thus, Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 15. out of Cle∣mens Alexandrinus. That, after that won∣derful confusion of Simon Magus, the Chri∣stian Religion began so much to flourish and encrease amongst them that had heard St. Peter preach, that they were not content to hear these things once, nor to receive them by unwritten Tradition; but earnest∣ly defired St. Mark, that he would write down for them the substance of that History of Christ, which they had received by word of Mouth. And ceased not, till they had prevailed with him. And thereby they gave occasion to the writing of that Holy Gospel, which we to this day enjoy the be∣nesit of, and which bears the name of him that wrote it. And again Eusebius writes further out of Papias, Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. ult. that St. Mark being St. Peters at∣tendant and Interpreter, did accurately write down what he had heard from St. Pe∣ter: not indeed in the same order, as they were spoken or done by our Saviour, for he was not one of them that heard and fol∣lowed Christ, but onely heard St. Peter, and wrote what he retained in his memory from his preaching. And therefore he is not to be condemned, for that he doth not follow the Method of the other Evangelists, seeing he did not design a full Commentary of all
things that Christ had done and spo∣ken, but onely to relate with faithful∣ness, what he did retain in his memo∣ry. And further, Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 24. the said Eusebius, relating a Catalogue of the Books of Canonical Scri∣pture, out of Origen, he speaks of this Go∣spel written by St. Mark, that he wrote it according to the direction of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.13. who in his aforementioned Epistle calls him his Son. The death of this Holy Evangelist is re∣ferred to the Reign of Nero, and the 63d. year of Christ, by Bucholtzer, in his Chro∣nology. But Dorotheus refers it to the Reign of Trajan, and describes the manner of it, thus: That at Alexandria, in the place called Bucolus, he had a Cable-rope put about his neck, and therewith drawn from Buclous, to a place called the Place of the Angels, and there by the Idolaters burnt to death in the Moneth of April, and his bones buried in the Bucolus. This account I thought meet to trouble you with, concerning this Holy E∣vangelist St. Mark. The Text you know, is part of that por∣tion of Scripture appointed by our Church to be read as the Epistle for this day. In the beginning of which Portion, the Apostle sheweth us that the variety of those gifts which God hath bestowed upon divers members of his Church, v. 10, 11. are the fruits and benefits of Christs Ascension: And that the
end of all the Officers, both extraordinary and ordinary, which he hath appointed in the Church, is for the benefit of the whole, Vers. 12. , for the perfecting or kniting together of the Saints: And for the work of the Ministry, to fit men to serve him in the daily administration in the Church: and for the edifying of the Body of Christ, for the building up of the Church, and further instructing of those that are come into it. Vers. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, till Jews and Gentiles come to be one sheepfold under one Shepherd, and till we be grown up to that perfection of Know∣ledge, as will speak us to be men of Sta∣ture. And then he proceeds, in my Text, to shew one of the great Benefits which we hope to reap from those Officers whom Christ hath appointed in his Church, and from our being built up in Knowledge and Holiness, by their Ministry, that we shall be setled in the unity of the Orthodox Faith, against all the assaults of those that are enemies to the Truth. That we hence∣forth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. In which words, we may observe six parts 1. The causal particle of conjunction, , that.
2. The subjects spoken of, included in the verb () we be. 3. The condition they had formerly been in, which had disposed them to receive pre∣judice; and that is expressed in the word, , Children. 4. The prejudice, which they had been apt to receive in that condition, which is set forth in two very Emphatical words, , and , tossed to and fro, and carried about. 5. The instruments of doing them this mischief, set forth in those words, , the winds of strange Doctrine. 6. The Authours and Promoters of this mischief, which are set forth in those words, . By the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. While I go over the illustration of each of these parts, and improve them to our ulstruction and Edification, I shall be bold to beg your serious and candid atten∣tion. I begin with the leading part of the Text, Part. the Conjunction which connects these words with what went before. Pulchre in Metaphorâ a viro perfecto sumptâ perseverat, &c. saith Mesander upon this Text. The Apostle had been mentioning it but now, as one of the special benefits which we re∣ceive
by those Officers which Christ hath ap∣pointed in his Church, that we might be built up from the condition of Children, to that of grown men, or men of stature in the Faith. And here he proceeds further in setting forth this benefit, that being come to the stature of men in the knowledge of Christ, we should now put away childish things; wavering and irresolution of minde in matters of Faith; and set our selves as men to stand fast in the Profession of that Faith, into which we have been Baptized. Our Learned Doctor Hammond doth express the sense of this illative particle to the life thus: Which may secure us that we henceforth, &c. So that this Conjunction doth readily offer us this Note. That the continuance of a powerful and painful Ministry in the Church, is one special expedient to establish people in the Faith, and to settle them against the seducements of false Teachers. The truth of this is so evident to every mans Observation, that I shall need to say very little for the clearing of it. To the Office of a Minister it belongs, to shew the people the ways of Truth which they ought to follow, and by so doing, they must needs at once shew them the by-ways of errour which they ought to avoid. For, Rectum est index sui & obliqui. To the Office of a Minister it appertains to exhort and admonish the people that they be not drawn away by the errour of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.16. to depart from their
own stedfastness, but rather to grow in Grace. Now the words of the wise, saith Solomon, are as nails to fasten men, and as goads to stir them forward in that which is good, when they are fastned by the wise Masters of Assem∣blies. Eccl. 12.11. And therefore the labours of such may probably be expected to be effectual, through Gods blessing, to stablish, strengthen, and settle mens mindes against the tempestu∣ous Winds of erronious Doctrines. From hence then, 1. We may see that it is no wonder, that they whose design it is to seduce the people to errours, do bear such a bitter and impla∣cable hatred to the Ministry: that they have spent their mouths so liberally, in bestow∣ing upon them and their Function, all the Calumnies and scurrilities, which the malice of Hell could invent: that the subtilest spi∣rits amongst them by attempting to take a∣way their ancient and settled maintenance, have designed to stop their mouths by starving them, except they would learn, cum psittaco suum . The Wolves in the Fable, when they had made War against the Sheep, would admit of no accommodation, except upon these terms, that they should deliver up the Dogs of the Flock; intending thereby, that the removal of these, should make way for their quiet and secure preying upon the Flock. Every man may easily see how Mutato nomine, de his fabula narratur. These grievous Wolves whose design is to
prey upon the Flock, knowing full well that the Ministry is the greatest defence of the Flock, and offence to them; cry out by all means to have these taken away that they might securely prey upon the Flock, when none was left to oppose them. 2. Hence we see likewise what reason we have to be very thankful to God, for ap∣pointing and continuing this Office in the Church. That our Lord Jesus Christ, when he ascended up on high, gave gifts to men to fit them for this work: Rev. 3.1. that he hath held these Stars in his own right hand, mauger the Fanatick rage of erronious and illiterate miscreants. It is easie to imagine, what an Egyptian darkness would have over-spread the face of our Church, if these Stars had been re∣moved. Let us therefore be thankful to him that hath upheld these, and that they still shine amongst us, both to shew us the right way to heaven, and to discover and shame the dark and absurd Doctrines of men of un∣sound and corrupt mindes. 3. We learn hence, whereunto we that are employed in this honourable and weighty Office of the Ministry, ought to apply our selves, even to be instant in season and out of season, both exhorting the people to the practifing of good Duties, and also convincing gain sayers with such speech as can∣not reasonably be gain-said, Tit. 1.9 & 2.8. that so those that are
contrarily minded may be ashamed, and those that are in the right may be encouraged to stand fast in the Faith. And though men of unsound heads may esteem this way of preaching to be galling and unpleasant, yet it being our duty, we must not neglect it: And we should the more be engaged to faithfulness, by considering those that are committed to our charge; which leads me to the II. Part. Thing in the Text, the Subjects here spoken of, included in the Verb, , (we be not). You shall seldom see Hereticks to at∣tempt the seducing of lewd and prophane persons: for they know that such are a disgrace to any Profession or Cause, to which they adhere or wish well: But their great design is to pervert them that have in some measure escaped the pollution of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20. through the knowledge of Christ: because they are sensible that the same of the innocency and strictness of the lives of those that are retainers to their ways, will make men of good affections and weak judgements, to have the greater kindness for, and inclina∣tions towards their opinions. And indeed such is the subtilty of these false Prophets, that, as our Saviour faith, They would deceive, if it were possible, Mat. 24.24. the very Elect. Now, these words of Christ, may give us a fit opportu∣nity to enquire concerning these subjects (we) how far Gods Elect and Sanctified ones
may be led away with the errour of the wicked, so as to depart from their own stedfastness? In answer whereunto, I say, 1. That it is certain that such shall never fall away to such errours as will be incon∣sistent with Christianity, and the holding of which would shew a man to have left that one Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. besides which no other can be laid. The Apostle speaks of some Here∣ticks that should bring in damnable doctrines, 2 Pet. 2.1. even denying the Lord that bought them. Now we say, that none that ever had true Grace in his heart, shall be totally given over to such errours, so as to live and dye in them. Peter indeed denyed his Master three times, but he was in a little while convinced of his sin, and went forth and wept bitterly. But to persist in errours of this Nature, is incon∣sistent with a state of Grace. Though there are diversities of Physiognomies amongst men, yet all have the faces of men: And though true Christians may have different thoughts about some points, yet they all hold fast the Foundation of Christianity. And this we may make use of First, To comfort us as to any of our Friends or those whom we wish well unto, that are either ensnared, or in danger to be ensuared in errours. If they be such as truly fear God, we may comfortably conclude, that though they fall, yet they shall rise again, be∣cause
the Lord upholdeth them with his hand. Psal. 37.24. Luk. 21.31. And Christ hath prayed for them, as he did for Peter, that their faith do not utterly fail. 2. It may show us how to judge of them that are quite departed from the foundation of that Faith into which they were bapti∣zed: even as the Apostle doth in the like case. 1 Joh. 2.19. They went out from us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us: but they went out from us, that it might be manifest that they were not of us. Secondly, But yet we say that in matters futher off from the Foundation, those that are of truly gracious and honest hearts, may erre and be deceived. Amongst the sons of men, there is such variety of Features in their faces, that no two are in all points alike; and yet are all concluded under the general name of men. And amongst the minds of men, there may be great variety in smaller matters, and yet while they hold fast the foundation, we are not to exclude them from our charity, as if they were no Christians. And this may serve 1. 1 Cor. 4.7. For caution; they that think they stand fast, have need to take heed lest they fall: And, as the same Apostle elsewhere, Rom. 11.20. Thou standest by Faith; be not high minded but fear. We have heard, that even truly good men may fall into some errors; and we see by daily experience, that men of very high Profes∣sions
and Attainments have fallen, and do daily fall. Now Pride and Carelesness, will put any of us into the way of falling, and therefore let us not be secure, nor lean to our own understandings, Prov. 3.5. but trust to the strength of the Lord, who alone is able to hold us up. 2 This should teach us charity toward ma∣ny seduced persons. There are Seducers, and Seduced, amongst the Sectaries. The Seducers are abominable, and to be prayed against: The Seduced are to be pittied and prayed for. Our Church teacheth us very piously and charitably to pray, that God would please to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have erred and are deceived: And also, that he would strengthen such as do stand, and finally beat down Satan under our feet. And this is a prayer which we had need dai∣ly and devoutly to put up, seeing even those that are truly gracious, may fall into some Errors. And they are in this danger espe∣cially at some times, which leads me to the III. Part of the Text, viz. Part. The condition which these Christians had formerly been in, which had laid them open to the dan∣ger of being seduced, and that is set down in the word, , children. When I was a child, saith the Apostle, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: 1 Cor. 13.10. But when I became a man, I put away childish
things. Pueri mobiles sunt, & sine judicio, &c. saith Mesander in locum. Children are fickle, and without judgment, and therefore do easily assent to any Doctrine. And Calvin, Pueri sunt, qui nondum gressum firmârunt in viâ Domini, &c. They are cal∣led Children, who have not setled their feet in the way of the Lord: who are not fully resolved which way to take; but fluctu∣ate, inclining now this way, now that way. But those that are setled in Christianity, though they be not arrived to full perfecti∣on, yet they have so much constancy as to be setled in the Faith. A Child, you know, will easily be induced to believe any thing, upon slight grounds; will presently be en∣flamed with an eager love to any novel vani∣ty; will easily be perswaded to follow a stranger, or to part with any thing it hath, because it knows not the value of it. So those that are , children in Christianity are easily induced to believe the fair and spe∣cious pretences of seducing spirits; to de∣light in novel Opinions, and modes in Re∣ligion; 2 Pet. 1.1. to follow false Teachers, and to de∣part from that precious Faith, into which they were Baptized. And as there are three things in Children which makes them prone to mistakes, so also in them that are Chil∣dren in knowledge. 1. Want of Consideration. They do not take the pains to weigh what they hear, but
presently entertain and are fond of it, whereas Elder persons are more staid and deliberate, and have, through use, obtain∣ed a faculty to see further into a thing then those that are younger. And while men are Children in Christianity, they are apt rashly and inconsiderately to fall out with the Truth, and to embrace novelties; whereas due consideration would prevent this. 2. Want of Experience. Experience is the Mother of Prudence; for want of this, Children are so easily overseen. And those people that are not versed in the History of the Church, to observe the rising and fal∣ling of these Errors in former Ages, that have not experience of the subtilty and wickedness of seducing spirits, may easily be ensnared by their fair pretences. 3. Self-confidence. Young persons are prone to conceit themselves to know more then their Elders; and this confidence doth commonly overthrow them, while it with∣holds them from hearkning to the advice which elder years might administer. And the Apostle tells us, 1 Tim. 3.6. that Novices in the Faith, are very apt to be pufft up with pride, and thereby to fall into the snare of the Devil. It will greatly concern us therefore, 1 Cor. 14.13. to take the Apostles Exhortation. Brethren, be not children in understanding: In malice be ye children, but in understanding be ye men. For to be children in Knowledge, will expose us
to that great mischief, which I am now coming to speak of in the IV. Part. Part of the Text, viz. The prejudice that the Apostle tells them they had been apt to receive, while they were children in the Faith: And this he sets forth by Two very remakable Expressions. The first is , tossed to and fro, like waves of the Sea. Another Apostle calls the Seducers, Jude 13. , raging Waves of the Sea, both in regard of the boistrousness of their motion, and that trouble and prejudice that they give to those that pass through them. And here this A∣postle sets forth the condition of those that are seduced, by this term , tossed to and fro, as a Ship amidst the Waves of the Sea. Eleganter miseram eorum trepi∣dationem exprimit, &c. saith Calvin in locum, He very elegantly sets forth the uncertain and wavering condition of seduced people, by this Metaphor of a Ship at Sea, in a tem∣pestuous time: For as such a Ship is tossed by the merciless Wind and Waves, so that neither the counsel nor strength of the Pilot or Marriners can guide it; Even such is the condition of them that are tossed by the winds of strange Doctrin: All the counsel and advice of Friends and Teachers, yea all the strength of good Laws and Govern∣ment, cannot prevail to steer them in a right course, but the unruly winds of false
Doctrin, and false Teachers, like raging waves of the Sea, do hurry them up and down at their pleasures, and to their ex∣treme hazzard, all this while. As a Ship in a tempestuous Sea is in great danger of shipwrack, and it is very doubtful whether ever it will safely arrive at its desired haven: So these seduced persons are in a very great and apparent danger of their souls; though the almighty power of God be able to re∣scue them as a Lamb out of the mouth of a Lion, yet I say for the present they are in a condition of very great hazzard. The second word is , carried about. Comparat eos vel stipulis, vel aliis rebus infirmis, &c. saith Calv. in loc. As twigs are bended every way with the wind, and chaff and straw, and such like matter that is light and lies loose, are easily driven to and fro with it; Even so persons that are but as weak twigs, will bow and bend to a com∣pliance with every strange Opinion; when strong Trees, that are well rooted in the Faith, will sooner break then bend. Those that lie loose and unsetled, and withal are of a light and less solid temper, are blown up and down like chaff, while those that are weighty and good Corn, lie still in the floor. How greatly therefore will it concern us all, to endeavour to be solid and setled in the Faith, that we may be secured in these.
troublesome times, when there are so many blustering winds of strange Doctrin abroad, to try our stability. And this calls me to the V. Part. Part of the Text, viz. The instrument of this great mistake, which he sets forth in these words, , the winds of strange Doctrine. New fancied and false Doctrines may fitly be compared to the Wind. 1. As to the original of them both. The Wind is conceived to be an Exhalation a∣rising out of the Caverns of the Earth. Arist. 2. Meteor. c. 4. And false Doctrines are Exhalations arising out of the bottomless pit, sent forth by that infernal Aeolus, at the command of an an∣gry Juno: Raised, I say, by the Prince of darkness (though in the shape of New Lights); permitted by the wise and just pro∣vidence of God, whom we have thereunto provoked by our sins. 2. As to the substance of them: the Wind is so leight and fluid a body, that it escapes our sight, nor are we well able to tell what it is. Such are false doctrines, though they make a great noise and bustle, so as to fill the world, as the Wind doth, yet are they in∣deed (if well looked into) but vain and empty nothings, contending to appear as something extraordinary to men of com∣mon apprehensions. 3. As to the effects of them: Pulchra
Metaphora, dum omnes hominum doctrinas, &c. saith Calvin in locum, It is an elegant Meta∣phor, whereby the Apostle compares all the novel Doctrines of men to the Wind: for, as the Wind doth remove things from their places, and tosseth them to and fro; so false doctrines do tend to unsettle us, and remove us from the Faith, whereas the in∣tent of the Word of Truth, is to root men and settle them in the Faith. And here∣unto I may add, that as the Wind, though a leight and fluid body, yet hath a very great strength and force in it: so false doctrines, though in themselves lighter then vanity, yet are very powerful to amuse and un∣settle mens mindes from their former pro∣fession. 4. As to the uncertainty of them: Adhaec, incertam, dubiam, falsam doctrinam, confert Paulus cum vento, &c. saith Sarcerius in lo∣cum, The Apostle compares false doctrines to the Wind for their uncertainty and doubtfulness. Nothing more variable then the Wind, and nothing more uncertain then they that have once left the Founda∣tion of their first Faith to embrace Novel∣ties. And further, saith he, this expression denotes the imperpetuity, and short conti∣nuance of errours. The Truth shall en∣dure for ever, like the Heavens; but Errour shall vanish like the Wind, when it hath spent its boysterous blasts, as long as the
most wise God sees fit. False doctrines then, as you have heard, are like the Wind: But these Winds have an Aeolus that sends them abroad, and manageth them to the mischief of mankind. And this leads us to the Sixth, Part. and last thing in the Text, viz. the Authours or foundation of this great mis∣cheif, set forth in these words, , we render it, not improperly, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lye in wait to deceive. Beza renders it, In hominum alea, per veteratori∣am ad insidiose fallendum versutiam: which I would thus translate, By the cogging of men, and their pestilent craftiness whereby they en∣deavour to betray men into the snares of errour. Tremellius, out of the Syriack, reads it thus: Ad omnem ventum doctrinarum versu∣tarum filiorum hominis, qui per astutiam suam sese componunt ut fallant. By the wind of subtil doctrines of the sons of men, who by their subtilty do compose themselves to deceive others. Our Doctor Hammond, in his Marginal Note, reads it, By the sub∣tilty of men, through their craftiness for the contriving of deceit: which seems to me to come nearest to the sense of the words in the Greek. All these versions concurr in the substance; and shew us that there is a great deal of subtilty and cogging, which Seducers
do make use of in order to the beguiling of ignorant and unstable Souls.  from , a Dye, may signifie cogging. Some would make this construction of it: Ʋt hic per aleam intelligantur incerti illi casus, Marlorat. quibus jactantur homines, &c. As nothing is more moveable than a Dye, so nothing more un∣certain and wavering than the mindes of erronious persons. But I rather incline to them that say, Per aleam intelligitur alea∣toria quaedam vafrities, Such craft as is used by Gamesters in cogging the Dice. So Cal∣vin and Bullinger in locum. Alludens ad luso∣rum quorundam artes, &c. He alludes to the cogging of Gamesters, whereby they cheat those that play with them. False teachers have an art of cogging with the Holy Scri∣ptures, to make them seem to fall to their own minde, and to maintain their own Opinions, and thereby they easily impose upon those they have to deal withal. For there is such a reverence in the mindes of well-disposed persons, towards the Autho∣rity of the Scriptures, as being the Word of the God of Truth, that they are presently induced to receive with a great deal of respect and zeal, whatsoever appears to them to be grounded upon the Word of God. And therefore it is that Seducers do take this course, as that which they have al∣wayes by experience found to be very ef∣fectual.
Yea further, saith Calvin, Huc decedit, quod ad struendas insidias excubant. They are said to lye in wait to deceive. Which notes the vigilance and unwearied diligence that false teachers use, to catch poor Souls into snares. They humble themselves, and stoop, and creep, and comply, to intise men into their snares, even as Vitellius in the Historian, who is said, projicere oscula, &c. & quicquam fa∣cere pro Imperio, that he would prostitute his Salutations, and Embraces to gain mens hearts to own him as Emperour: Or as Absalom, who hugged the people and kissed them, and gave them good words when they came to him; complaining of the King his Father, and promising them great matters when he should come to the Kingdom, and by these arts he stole away the hearts of the men of Israel. 2 Sam. 15. Even so these Seducers do humble themselves, and give fair words to those that follow them: they complain of great disorders in the Church of England, and promise them strange things, if they will but come over to their Sect or Party: and by such arts they lay in wait to steal away the hearts of simple people. Yea, they spare no pains, but, as our Saviour saith of the Pharisees, Mat. 23.15. They compass Sea and Land, to gain one Proselyte to their opinions. Now as this shews the inveterate malice, and subtilty of that old Serpent, who hath
been so long versed in the accursed art of subverting mens Souls: So it should teach us cautiousness, that we endeavour to equal the vigilancy of our enemies that lye in wait to deceive, by being as vigilant to prevent their deceits. Quae omnia excitare & acuere studium nostrum debent, &c. saith Calvin upon this occasion. All this should stir up and whet our industry and watchful∣ness, lest by neglecting to study the Word of God, and to stand fast in the Truths there∣of, we be circumvented by our enemies, and suffer the sad punishment of our sloth and security. And whereas one great help against stra∣tagems is a suspicious minde, and diligent in∣quiring where and how they are laid, (for such designes, when discovered, are in a fair way to be disappointed:) It may therefore be a great help to us against the subtilty of these men that lie in wait to deceive us, not to be over-credulous, or prone to believe eve∣ry man that comes unto us with fair preten∣ces. Beloved, believe not every spirit, 1 Joh. 4.1. nor every one that pretends to the spirit, but try the spi∣rits whether they be of God, because 'tis too evident that there are many false Prophets gone out into the world. And that we may the better be acquainted with their subtil∣ties and deceits: I shall lay before you some characters that will shew men not to be sent from God, whatsoever they pretend, but
that they lie in wait meerly to deceive us: That so on whomsoever we see these Marks, we may know them so as to avoid them, and their delusions. 1. Those that apply themselves rather to perswade the Affections, then to convince the Judgement. The Understanding was by God appointed to be the leader of the o∣ther faculties of the soul: whereas we or∣dinarily say, that Love is blind, and the same we may say of Hatred, and all the rest of the Affections; and consequently the Un∣derstanding ought first to be informed of the goodness or evil of any thing, before the Affections be set on, either to love or abhor it. And therefore we may well con∣clude, that they who attempt to win mens affections by perswasions, before they have convinced the judgment by weighty and cogent reasons, doe take a very indirect course, to come in at the window and not at the door of the soul: And that either they are blind leaders of these blind affections; or else that, having more knowledge then honesty themselves, their designe is to impose upon the simple honesty of well-meaning people. A way of popular oratory, mixed with plau∣sible and earnest exclamations, and patheti∣cal obtestations, is indeed very apt to prevail with men of lively affections, and dull under∣standings: But they that take such courses, may be suspected as those that intend
to draw men into their net by low-bel∣ling. 2. If men wholly decry the judgment of Reason in matters of Religion, they afford us very strong grounds to suspect them. It is true, that many points of our Faith are so high, that they transcend the reach of Reason; onely we can see it reasonable to receive those points, upon the authority of the God of Truth, though our understand∣ings come short of fathoming the depth of them: But we may speak it for the honour of our Christian Religion, that it presents nothing to our Faith to be received, which is contrary to the principles of well-impro∣ved Reason. And therefore those that have the face to tell us, that we must receive things from them, and from I know not what light within; and, if reason contradict it, we must lay it aside as an humane and carnal business; yea, if a plain and ra∣tional interpretation of Scripture op∣pose them, we must reject that also as the Letter, and not the Spirit: What is this, but in plain terms to tell us, that they come on purpose to blindfold us, that they may lead us whither they list, and that it is but fit we should subject our eyes to that cover they offer to put upon them. 3. If men pretend to be infallible, and make it their common course in cool blood
(if ever they be so) to brazen it out, and make the world to believe, that whosoever opposeth them, must needs be in an error, they give us just occasion to suspect their designe. We have a great deal of talk in the world concerning Antichrist, and what a dangerous Body he is: and as to the person or people that deserve this name, we may say as Christ did of the true Christ, they shall say, Mat. 24.23. loe here is Christ, and loe there; many say, lo this is Antichrist, and others cry, loe that is Antichrist, till the vainest sort of them have come to that pass as to believe what∣soever is contrary to their own Way and Sect, to be Antichristian. Now, if we con∣demn this as one of the most unreasonable and dangerous Tenets that are professed by the Roman Antichrist; then why should we not reckon them to be of Antichristian spi∣rits, that will not believe that it is possible they should be deceived? 4. If men will usurp the office of publick Teachers, and will not submit themselves to an orderly tryal by them that have judgment and authority to take an account of them, they give us just ground to sus∣pect them as deceivers, instead of instructers of the ignorant. The Apostle tells us, that the spirits of the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32. are subject to the Prophets. And that the publick Teachers should first be proved before they be admitted to take upon them to teach. 1 Tim. 3.10. And there∣fore
as this surly Tenet of refusing to be subject to the trial and approbation of o∣thers, doth at the first view, discover it self to be the product of pride and height of stomach; so it is a signe, that these per∣sons have a designe to put off very bad wares to the people, seeing they will not suffer them to be brought to the light to be examined. 5. Those that spend more time and dili∣gence in pressing men to embrace their Te∣nets and opinions, then in exhorting them to the duties of holiness towards God, and righteousness towards men, are very suspi∣cious in their proceedings. As Christ bids all of us, to Seek first his Kingdom, Mat. 6.33. and the righteousness thereof; so every profitable Teacher should make it his first and chiefest design to perswade men to become Subjects of this Kingdom, and to lead lives answera∣ble to their profession. And therefore those that spend their pains chiefly in teaching men to renounce their Teachers, and to separate themselves from the society of the Church, to follow their new-fangle ways, give us just ground to suspect that they defire to baptize men into their own name; 1 Cor. 1.15. that they are self∣seekers, such as are setting up for themselves to establish a Sect of their own: and that they have rather a design to draw men to them∣selves then to God, preferring their own cre∣dit, or something else that is worse, before the glory of God.
6. Those that spend more Zeal in crying out against indifferent things, then in re∣proving apparent ungodliness, may justly be suspected by us: Rom. 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols (saith the Apostle) dost thou commit Sacriledge? It is true, that in respect of the Authority of him that commands, there is no small com∣mandment, and the breach of any of Gods Laws is a great sin: But yet in respect of the nature of the Command, Christ sometimes speaks of a first and great Com∣mandment, Mat. 22.38. Mat. 5.19. and sometimes of one of the least Commandments: and he that is scrupulous in smaller matters, and careless in greater, doth betray himself to have a diseased Con∣science, Sermon on Acts 26.9. as I have elsewhere shewed. And therefore those that Cry out with such a loud and bitter cry, against things which, in the judgement of the soberest of them∣selves, are in their own Nature indifferent, as if they were palpable Idolatry; and yet have made no bones of sacriledge, injustice, and shedding of innocent blood, it is a shrewd sign that they are Seducers, and have a de∣sign to impose upon us. 7. Those that contradict the sense of the Church of God in all ages, are to be suspected as Innovators, and that their o∣pinions are rather new then good. It is true that the antiquity of an errour doth not excuse it, for there have been errours in the Church, ever since the time of the
Apostles: But yet the constant judge∣ment of the Church of God in all Ages, concerning any point in controversie, or concerning the meaning of any contro∣verted Scripture, gives us good en∣couragement to believe it, and to dis∣believe them that oppose it: because it is not probable that our gracious God would leave his Church in the dark, through so many ages, and never discover the Truth till now of late. 8. Lastly, we may know them from the direction that God himself gives us, Deut. 18. ult. VVhen a Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass; that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the Pro∣phet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be affraid of him. Those that pretend to a gift of prophecy, as many have done in our age (though they should by often shooting at random, hit the Mark sometimes, yet) if they miss in anything that they foretel (as we have seen it in our frequent experience) this is a sure sign, that the Lord hath not sent them, but they speak of their own heads: and we have reason to fear, that they have not onely belyed the Lord, in saying, Thus saith the Lord, Jer. 23.31. when the Lord hath not spoken, but also that they have had a further design, even to entice us to the
embracing of their errours by these pre∣tences. Upon whomsoever we see any of these Marks, we have reason to suspect them to be of those that lye in wait to deceive: and therefore should avoid them, and take Solo∣mons counsel, Prov. 19.27. to Cease, or forbear, to hear the instruction that tends to cause us to err from the ways of Wisdom. To conclude, I shall give you a recapitu∣lation of what hath been spoken, a little va∣rying from my former Method. You have heard (1.) That there are many Winds of false doctrine stirring, to try who are sta∣ble. (2.) That Seducers use a great deal of subtilty and diligence, lying in wait to deceive. (3.) That a great number are by them tossed to and fro, and carried about. (4.) That even those that are of honest af∣fections and good lives, are in danger of being ensnared by them; and therefore he that thinketh he standeth, should take heed lest he fall. (5.) That especially those that are children, and weak in knowledge, are in great danger, and consequently that we should labour to be men and not children in understanding. (6.) Lastly, that God hath ap∣pointed the Office of the Ministry, in the Church, as a special preservation from er∣rours. Now the Lord, Joh. 5.29. of his Mercy, grant to all of us Grace and Wisdom to search the
Scriptures, 1 Joh. 4.1. and to try the spirits whether they be of God: and to hold fast the Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Tim. 1.19. now when so many have made shipwrack of both: that so we may not be drawn away with the errour of the wicked to depart from our own stedfastness; 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. but may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Je∣sus Christ. Grant this, O Lord, (we be∣seech thee) through the Merits of thy dear Son, and the working of thy Holy Spirit. To which glorious Trinity, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honour and Glory, world without end. Amen. FINIS.
OR, HEAVENLY WISDOM described by its seven Properties. An ASSIZE SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL at SARƲM, July 9th. 1665. at the Wiltshire-Assizes. Before the Right Honourable his Majesties Judges of Assize, and Nisi Prius, for the WESTERN Circuit. In the Sheriffalty, and at the request, of THOMAS MOMPESSON Esquire. By Paul Lathom, M. A. Pro. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing: there∣fore get Wisdom, and with all thy getting, get Ʋnderstanding. Printed by T. M. 1666.
OR, Heavenly WISDOM described By its Seven PROPERTIES. James 3.17. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without partiali∣ty, and without hypocrisie. WIsdom is the soul of Nature, the eye of the Soul, the light of the Eye, the sun of that Light: the copy of Heaven, the standard of the Earth; the helm of Reason, the guardi∣an of Life, the glory of Men, the mirror
of Angels, the shaddow or reflection of God himself, who is, as the Psalmist speaks,  covered with Light as with a Garment. Psal. 104.2. It is Wisdom that makes a man Denizon of the upper, Regent of the lower World, correspondent of both: Without which, we should be but clods of moving Earth, steept to dirt in Phlegm, and knead∣ed into humane shape. This general term, Wisdom, divides it self (ut analogum in sua analogata) into world∣ly Policy, moral Prudence, and Christian Wis∣dom. Worldly Policy trades in the World as its City, from whence it seems to take its name. Now all that is in the world, is ei∣ther , 1 Joh. 2.18. or else  Plea∣sures, Profits, or Honours. That which de∣signes riches as its end, our Apostle calls  earthly; that which designes plea∣sures, Jam. 3.15. he calls , sensual; that which designes honour, he stiles , De∣vilish, because it imitates that great sin of the Devil, Pride. And of all worldly wis∣dom in general, St. Paul pronounceth, that it is  foolishness before God. 1 Cor. 3.19. Moral Prudence, whether we take it for a practical Virtue, or for an intellectual Ha∣bit, is so excellent and useful a thing, that we may truly say of it, that Without prudence neither the mind nor actions can be good. Prov. 19.2.
Christian Wisdom, which our Apostle in the Text calls, , the Wisdom which is from above, hath many that are pre∣tenders to it; but few, that are candidats of it: And as concerning the excellency and value of this Wisdom, we may say with Job, Job 28.15.  It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be weighed for the price of it: So by reason of the boldness of those that pretend to Wis∣dom, we may take up that which he saith before (Vehachachmah meaijn timatze, vers. 13. veeh zeh mequom binah,) Where shall Wisdom be found, and where is the place of understand∣ing? Many men lay such confident claims to Wisdom, that it is very difficult to judge on whose side the Verdict will pass. Such were the Gnosticks of old (a Sect very rise and pernicious in the beginning of the Christian Church) against whom to fortifie those to whom he writes, seems to be the chief designe of the Apostle in this Epistle. And more particularly at vers. 13. of this Chapter, he calls them to a tryal of their title to Wisdom, ; who is the wise man amongst you? Or, Who are they that are the great pretenders to Wisdom? Let them come and shew their wisdom, by the fruits of it: Let them shew out of a good Conversation their fruits with meekness and wisdom. But, saith he, I fear there are to be found, especially
among you Gnosticks, those fruits that never grew upon the Tree of saving Knowledg: For, vers. 14. , If ye have bitter envying and strife among you, it is but vain glory, and lying against the Truth, to term your selves such men of knowledge: For envy and strife, are not the fruits of Heavenly Knowledge, but of that worldly Wisdom, vers. 15. which is earthly, sensual, devilish; and is the cause of confusion (tumult or un∣quietness) , vers. 16. and in a word, of every evil work. Whereas, , the Wisdom that is from above is of another nature, and brings forth other manner of fruits, in the words I have before read unto you. But the Wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be en∣treated; full of mercy and good fruits, with∣out partiality, and without hypocrisie. In which words (Chachmoth baanetha bethah, chatzebah hammudehaa shibhah) Wisdom hath builded her house, Prov. 9.1. she hath hewen out her seven Pillars. The Palace of Wis∣dom, is, like that of the Sun, — sublimibus alta columnis, very lofty and magnificent; it is , from above. If any ask, Where shall true Wisdom be found? And, where is the place of Ʋnder∣standing? Behold here is her House. And these are the seven Pillars upon which it is built. , It is first pure, or
holy. , it is secondly peace∣able. Thirdly, , gentle. Fourth∣ly, , easie to be perswaded, or of an obedient temper. Fifthly, , full of mercy and good fruits. Sixthly, , without partiality, or without wrangling, or disputing, as the Margent hath it; or, as some render it, without wavering. Seventhly, , without hypocrisie. While I survey this Palace of Wisdom, and take a view of the Pillars upon which it is built, I am bold to beg your serious and candid attention. The name of Wisdom sounds so laudably, that there is hardly any man so far from Wisdom, but he is a pretender to it: Most men contend either to know more, or at least to be thought to know more, then their Neighbours. In a word, all men are Gno∣sticks, they have perswaded themselves, and are very earnest in perswading the world that they are a knowing people; that, no doubt, themselves are the people, Job. 12.2. and that Wis∣dom shall die with them. The Suit hath been so long depending, that it is high time it were brought to an Issue; and that the Evi∣dences were impartially examined, which each man hath to shew for himself. And, as in most controversies, if men could be perswaded to lay aside passion and prejudice, they might easily be judges of their own
cause: so in this great Contest, who are the wisest men, and take the best course, if men would lay aside passion and prejudice, they might themselves easily judge from this Text, who they are that have met with true Wisdom. He that desires to find any person, Wisdoms House. must ordinarily go to his house to seek for him. Now the house of Wisdom is , from above: it is like the heavenly Jerusalem, which St. John saw , Apoc. 21.2. coming down from God out of Hea∣ven. prov. 2.6. For, The Lord giveth Wisdom, and out of his mouth proceedeth Knowledg and Ʋnder∣standing. And the Wisdom that he gives, prompts a man to look upward for his joy and portion; and to look up unto God, and acknowledge Him the Authour and Giver of that Wisdom which he hath. Here then is the Palace where Wisdom dwells. But, Psal. 48.12. Let us walk about this Sion, and go round about her, and tell the Pillars thereof, that we may see whether we have the coun∣ter-part of this Fabrick erected in our souls, and consequently, whether true Wisdom hath entred into our hearts or no. The first Pillar of the House of Wisdom is Purity. 1 Pillar. , it is first pure or chaste, free from those impure lusts, with which the Gnosticks were defiled, though
pretending to an higher measure of know∣ledge than other men were Masters of. To man God said, Behold (jirath adonai hi chachmah) the fear of the Lord, Job 28. ult. that is Wis∣dom; (vesur merang binah) and to depart from evil, that is Ʋnderstanding. And (reshith chachmah jirath Jehovah) the fear of the Lord is the beginning, the very foundation, Psal. 111. ult. of Wisdom: and who are they that are to be accounted men of a good understanding? but (col hahoshem) all they, and onely they, that keep his Commandments, and lead their lives according to the directions of his Word; they onely are men of Wisdom. St. Gregory Nazianzene saith very divinely▪ Greg. Naz. O∣rat. 10. The first and chiefest Wisdom is a good and laudable life, purified, and in some measure answerable to the purity that is in the most Holy God; who accepts of purity alone in stead of, and before all other sacrifices: Which (saith he) the Scripture calleth a contrite heart, a sacrifice of praise, the new creature in Christ, the new man, and such like names. And elsewhere the same Fa∣ther speaking to Hero the Philosopher, saith, Orat. 23. to Hero the Philo∣sopher. This is the true Wisdom and the true No∣bility, that makes us truly honourable and praise-worthy; which hath the seal of pu∣rity and good manners upon it; which en∣deavoureth to carry us up to God the chiefest good, and thereby sheweth a true nobility of Spirit.
Purity must needs be the fruit, or proper∣ty of Heavenly Wisdom. First, because the ways of Holiness are the safest and best course which a man can take even in respect of this life. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence: Prov. 8.12. Now Prudence looks round about in what it doth: And he that looks well about him, cannot but by Faith see him that is invisible to the bodily eyes: that the eyes of the Lord are in every place, Prov. 15.3. beholding the Evil and the Good. Now that which the light of Nature sheweth us of the omnipresence and omniscience of him that is an infinite and immenss Being, and who daily upholdeth and ordereth all things in the VVorld, Heb. 1.2. by the Word of his Pow∣er; Seneca Ep. 83. did prompt even Seneca the Moralist to give this good counsel: Sic certe vivendum est, tanquam in conspectu vivamus; sic cogitan∣dum, tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum in∣spicere possit: & potest quidem. Quid enim prodest, hominibus aliquid esse secretum? nihil Deo clusum est. It is the best course always to live so as remembring that we have eyes upon us; yea, so to order our very Thoughts, as if they were seen: and so they are. For, though men cannot, yet, God doth see them, from whom nothing is hid. And if natural Reason did prompt men to take heed to their ways, how much more should Religion teach us this lesson? This re∣strained Joseph from embracing impure and
unlawful pleasures, when he had the most in∣viting opportunity to tempt him to them. How can I do this great wickedness, Gen. 39.9. and sin a∣gainst God? And from cruelty and injustice, when he had both might and Authority to bear him out in it. This do and live, Gen. 42.18. for I fear God. And we may add hereunto, that as there is no greater torment than that which pro∣ceeds from consciousness of an evil life, and dishonest heart: so there is no greater comfort on this side Heaven, than the testi∣mony of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our conversa∣tion in this world: So that, even as to this life, a pure and holy conversation is most prudent and agreeable to the dictates of VVisdom. Secondly, it is much the safest with re∣spect to the life to come. Eccl. 2.14. The wise mans eyes are in his head, he sees things at a distance as well as those that are near at hand: And the VVisdom that is from above will tell us, that we must all appear before the Judgement-seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.1 to give an account of those things which we have done in the body, and to receive a reward according to them, whether they be good or evil. And that he that hath sowen to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6.8. whereas he that hath sowen to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. And there∣fore true VVisdom cannot but account it a
mans best and most prudential course to bear fruits of holiness here, Rom. 6.22. that at last it may have the end, even life everlasting. If we reflect upon this first property of Wisdom, we shall easily be prompted to inferr, 1. That if the Wisdom that is from above be , if it be the first property of Wisdom, to be pure, then they stand convict of palpable and extream folly, that are of impure and wicked hearts and lives. The Integrity of Cato, the Justice of Aristides, and other eminent Virtues in many of the Heathens, were very remarkable to the shame of too many that are called Christians, as St. August. Ep. 142. Augustine saith, Quàm multos Philoso∣phorum & audivimus & legimus, &c. How many of the Philosophers have we heard of, and read of, and seen, to be chaste and pa∣tient, modest and liberal, abstinent and bountiful, despisers of the honours and de∣lights of the world, and lovers of Justice as well as Knowledge? And if these men with∣out the knowledge of the Scriptures did these things, how shall those Christians be condemned, who are better taught, but do not practise so well? Chrysos. Hom. 18. in cap. 5. Mat. And St. Chrysostom, Quae non tormenta patiemur, &c? What tor∣ments shall not those Christians undergo, who being commanded to excel the Scribes and Pharisees in righteousness, do yet come short of the Heathens? How, I pray you,
shall such men see the Kingdom of God? Yea, the very Satyrist may shame the in∣justice and lewdness of many Christians, who tells us, that this is the best and most acceptable Sacrifice to the Gods, Compositum jus fasque animo, Persius Sat. 2. sanctique re∣cessus Mentis, & incoctum generoso pectus honesto. A just and honest heart, and a life that is an∣swerable, is so acceptable to the gods, that, as he there addeth, Haec cedo ut admoveam superis, & farre litabo. The meanest oblation, even a poor Barley-cake offered by such an one, shall sooner be accepted then thousands of Rams, Prov. 15.8. and ten thousands of Rivers of Oyl from the wicked whose Sacrifice is an abomination before the Lord. 2. This argues that they are but superfi∣cially wise, that onely talk of purity, but do not practise it. Who talk as if they had partook of the cloven tongues, but walk as if they were supported with cloven feet. Qui Curios simulant & Bacchanalia vivunt. Juven. Sat. 2. VVho speak like Saints, but live like sinners.
— Et de virtute locuti Clunem agitant. — That read hard Lectures of Piety and strictness to others, and bind heavy burdens to lay upon other mens shoulders, Mat. 23.4 but them∣selves will not touch them with one of their fingers. 3. This convinceth them of the highest folly, that make knowledge and pretence of Piety, an encouragement to impurity and dishonesty: as if that were lawful for them which is unlawful for others: or as if they had gotten so far into favour with God Al∣mighty, that he had given them an Indul∣gence to do what they list. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 5. c. 20. St. Augustine tells us, that the Stoicks who place felicity in virtue, to shame such as approved vir∣tue, but applyed all to bodily delight, did use to delineate a Picture wherein Pleasure sitteth on a Throne as a delicate Queen, and all the Virtues stand about her to serve her: Prudence must contrive a way where∣by Pleasure may reign in safety: Fortitude must defend the body from fear or feeling of sufferings, and each of the other Virtues must employ it self for the service of Lady Pleasure. And as the Father saith, Nihil vi∣lius, &c. Than such a Picture nothing can be more vile and deformed. And such are they, who place pleasure and profit in the
throne of their hearts, and set Religion as the Hand-maid to wait on it, and either to cloak all its projects, or else excuse them. Than this, nothing can be more odious, and nothing more contrary to true Wisdom. For these, while they pretend to the build∣ing of the House of Wisdom, do take away the first and main Pillar, Purity. From the viewing of which, let us now move forward to the Second Pillar in this Building▪ viz. Pillar. Peace∣ableness. , it is next pea∣ceable. St. Paul placeth Peace before holi∣ness: Follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.14. and holiness without which no man shall see God. This A∣postle inverteth the Order, and placeth first Purity, and next Peaceableness as Pillars in the House of Wisdom: whence we may note, how the Spirit of God doth inter∣twist Holiness and Peace, and Peace and Ho∣liness, making them inseparable in a Chri∣stian; to the great shame of them, who set up the one to the overthrowing of the o∣ther. St. Gregory Nazianzene, Greg. Naz. Orat. 15. to set forth the excellency of Peace, sheweth how all things in Nature conspire to agree, which tends to their mutual preservation; where∣as discord tends to ruine. And elsewhere, Orat. 22. in exhorting to modesty in disputations, he saith that, Nothing is more beautiful and profitable than Peace, and nothing more o∣dious and troublesome than discord. And
in his Tract de Fide, Greg. Naz. De Fide. Phil. 4.9. Isa. 9.6. he saith, that Nothing is more precious then Peace. That God who made us, is called the God of Peace. Christ that redeemed us, is called the Prince of Peace. The Holy Ghost that sanctifieth us, Mat. 3.10. descended in the shape of a Dove, as an emblem of Peace. Our Saviour when he ascended on high, left Peace as his last Le∣gacy to his people: Joh. 14.27. Eph. 4.3. 2 Thes. 4.11. Rom. 12.18. His Apostles do fre∣quently exhort us to peace; to keep the uni∣ty of the Spirit, in the bond of peace; to study to be quiet; and if it be possible, as far as ly∣eth in us, to live peaceably with all men. All which is sufficient to convince us, that they that would deserve the reputation of Wisdom, must by all means approve them∣selves of the number of those that are quiet and peaceable in the land. 2 Sam. 22.19. What then shall we say to those boysterous Nimrods, those sons of Thunder and Whirl-wind, that can never endure to see Janus's Temple shut? Certainly, though they be endued with a large portion of that policy, which is Earthly and Devilish, they have but little of this Wisdom that is from above. Indeed peace is so valuable, or ra∣ther unvaluable a Jewel, that it is a wonder that any man should be so brutishly unrea∣sonable as to cast it away; except he was either born in perniciem humani generis, be∣gotten and born in spight to the world; or else doth hope to fish to his best advantage
when the waters are troubled. Tacitus, Annal. l. 12. The Histo∣rian saith of Agrippina, Dare filio Imperium potuit, tolerare Imperantem non potuit: She was defirous to set her son in the Throne, but could not endure his Government, when he was made Emperor: And such is the per∣verseness of many peoples spirits, that they could rather be willing to believe them∣selves to have set up or restored a Prince, then to obey him when he is set up. Nor will men of troublesome spirits and plausible tongues, want for specious pre∣tences to colour their detestable practises. Sometimes they pretend great faults in those that are instruments in Government: Annal. l. 3 just like those of whom Tiberius in Tacitus speaks, Nonnulli accusare tantum vitia vo∣lunt: deinde cum gloriam ejus rei adepti sunt, simultates faciunt: Many men seek for ap∣plause in the world, not by amending their own lives, but by crying out against the faults of others: and when they have got∣ten this applause, they make use of it to raise Sedition. And certainly, this way of accusing others, is very apt to take much with the common people; as the same ju∣dicious Historian observes. Tacitus, Hist. l. 1. Ambitionem scrip∣toris facile adverseris, &c. Men are natu∣rally prone to nauseat him that is too prodi∣gal in commending another, but a detra∣ctor is eagerly heard; because, the paneg∣gyrick smells of self-ends, but he that speaks
evil of another, seems to incautious people to have a better design. Sometimes, again we shall hear them pre∣tend I know not what liberty, as if the want of that were the occasion of their discon∣tent: Hist l. 5. And as Tacitus saith, Libertas & spe∣ciosa nomina praetexuntur, &c. Liberty and such like words, are but specious pretences; nor did ever any man attempt to enslave o∣thers, but that he pretended liberty. And it hath been too truly observed of such per∣sons, Tacitus Annal. l. 16. what Tigellinus in the Historian speaks falsly of others, Ʋt imperium evertant li∣bertatem praeferunt: postquam everterint, ip∣sam invisuri. Those that have pretended the liberty of Parliament and People, to the reproaching and overthrowing a well setled Monarchy; as soon as they had done that, have been the greatest invaders of those li∣berties which they pleaded for. Sometimes they plead for a Reformation in matters of Religion, which if it were carried on as far as the shoulders of these great talkers would be able to bear it, yet would it not give satisfaction even to them∣selves: Tacitus Annal. l. 3. But as Tiberius speaks about the Sumptuary Laws, In conviviis & circulis incusari ista, & modum posci, &c. It is easie for men in their meetings and tipling abouts, to find fault with this and that, and the o∣ther thing, and to wish for a Reformation of them, and to condemn their Govern∣ours
because it is not done; whereas if these things were done, at least some of these persons would be the first to find themselves agrieved therewith. Which argues, that these large talks do not proceed from a true zeal after a reformation of what is amiss, but from an itching humour after novelties and disturbances. For, as the Historian ob∣serveth of the estate of Rome at some times, Periculosa severitas, flagitiosa largitio, Tacitus Annal. l. 1. seu omnia militi seu nihil concesseris, in ancipiti republicâ, Whether a Prince grant none of mens desires, or grant all, they are still of the same temper: and oft times the gra∣tifying of them in some needless things, doth but encrease their thirst, and make them bolder to ask, and more hard to be satisfied. Thus, I say, unquiet spirits will never want pretences to colour their turbulency: But these are meer pretences. What then shall we say of these men? Shall we say with David, Scatter O Lord, Psal. 68.30. the people that delight in war? Or wish them with Cyrus, to be once glutted with blood, Justin. who delight in blood? No, far be it from us, to have a zeal as hot as fire; to call for fire from Heaven, even upon those that would gladly set us all in a flame. We rather wish they may shew themselves such men of wisdom as they pretend to be: and may learn to shew forth that wisdom which is from above,
which is not onely pure, but peaceable also. From hence let us proceed, Thirdly, Pillar. to view the next Pillar in this Palace, and that is Peaceableness. This Wis∣dom is  gentle:  (saith a Learned and judicious Annotator) is the or∣dinary word of the Philosophers, Dr. Ham. in lo∣cum. and taken from them by the Lawyers, to signifie the mitigation of exact and strict Justice, when the execution of it is not so agreeable to the Rules of Charity. And so it notes in gene∣ral the fit and proper temper that is to be observed in all things. Hesychius saith,  is , that which is fit, decent, or due. This ge∣neral word is several wayes applied in divers places of Scripture. In this Text, the word peaceable that goes before it, and o∣ther words of the same Nature attending it, advise us to construe it, a readiness to recede from our own strict right in order to Peace. In this sense the Apostle exhorts Ministers especi∣ally to be gentle. 2 Tim. 2.24. Tit. 3.2. And all men also to labour after this frame of Spirit. In which places he opposeth gentleness to a contenti∣ous strictness, in standing upon our own Right to the prejudice of Peace. And in∣deed, Peace being so excellent a Jewel, as I have before shewed; Wisdom, but especially that which is from above, will perswade a man to part with much, to purchase this pearl of price. Beside, that God who is in∣finite
in Wisdom, is said to be gentle: Psal. 18, 39. (hanva∣thekah tarbeni) Thy gentleness hath made me great. Christ who is the Wisdom of the Father, is gentle: 2 Cor. 10.1. I exhort you , by the gentleness of Christ. The Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of Wisdom, is gentle: Gal. 5.22. for gentleness is reckoned among the fruits of this Spirit. How far then are they from this Wisdom which is from above, who (with the Spanish begger) will not alter one step of their gra∣vity for all the lashes of the Law, for all the entreaties of friends, nor for the preserva∣tion of publick peace? Yea, who had ra∣ther see Heaven and Earth blended toge∣ther, then to abate any thing of their own humours. Certainly, if this Wisdom be not , yet it looks very like it: and represents men as much resembling that sort of persons, whom the Apostle de∣scribes to be  and , presum∣ptuous and self-willed. This is none of the Fruits of the Wisdom that is from above. And indeed, there are so few endued with this Virtue of gentleness, that we may leave this, with a lamentation, and proceed to the Fourth Pillar in the House of Wisdom, Pil∣lar. viz. Easiness to be entreated: it is . Which word may either signifie an easiness to believe any good of another, or that may mitigate his fault; and so our Doctor Ham∣mond
paraphraseth it: and thus it casts a frowing eye upon those that are very prone to evil surmises, malignant interpretations of other mens actions and intentions, to ca∣lumniating and backbiting their Brethren: and who , 2 Pet. 2.10. are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, at least in their secret discourses. A sin which, as it is very common, so is it very contrary to the nature of that Charity, which, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 13.6, 7. doth not rejoyce in iniquity, in evil and false reports of others, but believeth all things and hopeth the best; and consequently it is contrary to the nature of Heavenly Wisdom. But Beza renders this word, Obtemperans; and Tremellius out of the Syriack version, Ob∣sequens. It is the property of the Wisdom that is from above, to be obedient to Go∣vernment. How great care God hath taken to preserve the Authority of the Ma∣gistrates, is evident by his investing them with the title of Father and Mother, in the fifth Commandment. Yea, he calls them (Elohim) gods: Psal. 82.6 and joyns the fear of the Lord and the King together: (jirah eth Je∣hovah ve hammelech) fear thou the Lord and the King. Prov. 24.21. Nor hath he in the New Testa∣ment been more remiss in exhorting to obe∣dience, even when they were subject to the worst of men for their Governours: but exhorts us to be obedient, not onely , for fear of wrath and punishment,
but chiefly, , for Conscience sake, Rom. 13.5. and in obedience to Gods Command∣ment. So strange is it, that any man can pretend Conscience as an encouragement to disobedience. 1 Pet. 2.13. And St. Peter exhorts us to be obedient to every ordinance of man, , for the Lords sake: Strange then it is that any can pretend obedience to God, as opposite to their Allegiance to Caesar. Piety, is defined by Cicero, Cicero de Na. Deor. to be Justitia erga Deos: And St. Augustine explains it, It is Verus cultus veri Dei, the right way of worshipping the true God. Ludovicus Vives, Aug. Civ. D. l. 4. c. 23. Comment. in Aug. tell us, that Piety is also taken for reverence to our Elders and Superiours: Which makes it the more strange, that any should oppose Piety to that reverence and obedi∣ence, which they owe to their Parents and Superiours. What shall we then say of them, who, Tacitus, Hist. l. 2. as the Historian saith of Otho's Souldiers, Jus∣sa Dueum interpretari quam exequi malunt, are nimbler at disputing, then at obeying the commands of their Governours? How far are they from that Wisdom which is from above: There is no doubt but such persons are furnished with many pleas to colour and countenance their disobedience. Some will find fault with those that rule them: And no doubt but
—Facilis cuivis rigidi censura chachinni. Juvenal. Sat. 18. he that is indued with a malicious mind to∣wards any person, and carries a pestilent tongue in his head, may easily open his mouth against that mans person or actions: and , It is much easi∣er to see faults in those that govern, then to rule well if our selves were in Authori∣ty. He takes but little notice of the state of the present world, who is not sensible that one great cause of breeding and nourishing this malignant and disobedient temper in mens spirits, is, the multitude of Sedu∣cers, who creep into houses, and lead by the ears, not onely silly women, but even men also, who think themselves wiser then the rest of the world, both from the obedience of the Faith, & from their allegiance to the King. Tacitus, Hist. l. 1. Of whom we may say as Tacitus of the Mathematicians in Rome: They are, Genus hominum potentibus infidum, speranti∣bus fallax, quod in republicâ nostrâ & vetabitur semper & retinebitur: A sort of men disloy∣al to their Prince, Seducers to the people, whom the laws do condemn, but do not as yet prevail to restrain. These are they who zealously affect men but not well: Gal. 3.17. and who in∣deed do fill them with that which our Apo∣stle calls , Jam. 3.14. bitter Envy
and Strife. These are so far from deserving the Title of the Wisdom that is from above, that they are rather to be reckoned among them, 2 Pet. 2.10. whom the Apostle calls , despisers of Government: And another Apostle, , Jud. v. 13. raging waves of the Sea, Eph. 4.14. by whom ignorant and unstable souls are , tossed to and fro. Whatsoever such men may pre∣tend, the word of God tells us, that the Wis∣dom that is from above, is, , of an obedient temper. But leaving this, let us advance towards the Fifth Pillar in this Edifice, Pillar. and that is  full of mercy and good fruits. St. Gregory Nazianzene, Greg. Naz. Orat. 19. exhorting to care for the poor, perswadeth us to works of Charity, in this manner. If we believe St. Paul, yea Christ himself, Charity is to be esteemed the first and chief amongst those things that God commands, and the substance of the Law and the Pro∣phets. And the branches of Charity, are, Taking care for the poor, and mercy and compassion towards our kindred: For God delights in no service so much as Mercy, because nothing is so suitable to his Nature, of whom it is said, Mercy and Truth, Psal 89▪ 14. Jam. 2.13. go be∣fore his Face, and Mercy rejoyceth over Judg∣ment. And indeed as every Tree is known by his fruits, so hereby onely can a man be known to have a good root and principle
within, if he bring forth these good fruits in his life. But as Ludovicus Vives tells us, Lud. Viv. in Aug. Civ. Dei. that Epicu∣rus held indeed that there were Gods, but that they did not regard humane affairs, which is all one as to hold no Gods at all: so, many men hold and profess a faith, but such as is regardless of good works, which, as this Apostle tells us, is but a dead faith. St. Augustine sets forth many of the eminent acts of some of the Romans: Jam. 2. ult. Aug. Civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 18. and, as he saith, If such low motives, as love to their Country, and desire of fame in the World, as the Poet expresseth it, Vicit amor patriae, Virgil. Aineid. laudumque immensa cu∣pido. if these Motives did extimulate Brutus, Tor∣quatus, Camillus, Scaevola, Curtius, and those other famous Hero's, to undertake such noble attempts, then what shame is it for Christians, Tit. 2.14. if the Love of Christ and hopes of heaven, do not make them Zea∣lous of good works? Civ. D. l. 21. c. 27. But yet, as the said Fa∣ther doth admonish us, we must not think our good works to be meritorious, or that some acts of Charity will make satisfaction for the leading of an evil life: But we must endeavour to be constant, and eeven in lead∣ing a good life, Luk. 17.10. and when we have done all we can, acknowledge our selves to be but unpro∣fitable
servants. This is the property of the Wisdom that is from above. But let us now pass on to the Sixth Pillar in this Structure, Pillar. it is , which we render, without partiality: and in this sense it may shew us what Wis∣dom doth in a special manner belong to Magistrates in the execution of Justice, e∣ven not to respect persons in judgement, Deut. 7.17. but to judge righteous judgement: Not to reverence the person of the rich, Exod. 23.2, 3. nor yet to favour the per∣son of the poor: But to be like Aristides or Fa∣bricius, that it may be as impossible to move them from the wayes of Justice, as to disturb the Sun in its course. But (my Lords) I am confident you are so sensible of the obligations that lye upon you as to this, both from Conscience and Honour also, that I shall not need to speak any more of it: nor should I have said so much, if the Text had not drawn me to it. But there are some that render this, Dr. Ham. in locum without wavering or inconstancy in the Faith; and so it will return to the same purpose with that of St. Paul. Those that are come to be perfect men, that are arrived at the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, Eph. 4.14. that are filled with this Wisdom which is from above, are secured that they be no more like Children and Novices , tossed like Ships at Sea, and , carried a∣bout
like chaff with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lye in wait to deceive. And to this agrees that of our Saviour: Those that are built upon a solid Foundation, Mat. 7. ul will stand fast against the assaults of wind and waves: and those that fall, do shew that they were never built upon any good Foundation of Divine and Heavenly Wis∣dom. The Wisdom that is from above is fixed. But Beza renders it, sine dissidio; and Tremellius out of the Syriack, sine discepta∣tione, without wrangling or disputing. The Apostle tells us, 1 Tim. 6.4, 5. that he is a man of a cor∣rupt minde, and destitute of the Truth, who , doth not come and resign up his judgement to a form of wholesome words: but is , doth dote, or is sick about que∣stions and strifes of words: the ordinary and natural Fruits whereof, are envy, strife, rail∣ings, evil surmisings, and , per∣verse disputings or gallings of one another, not so much with a design to finde out the Truth, as to cross and vex the adver∣sary. vers. 11. But, saith he, Thou, O man of God, flee these things, and follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meek∣ness. We read of Anaxagoras, Ludov. Vives. that because a stone fell out of the Air into the River Ae∣gos
in Thrace, he did therefore perempto∣rily hold an opinion, that the Heavens were made of stones; and that the Sun was a fiery stone. Whereupon Euripides his Scho∣lar, calleth it a Golden-Turfe. And we are still brain-sick in studying the secrets of Na∣ture. One will take upon him to command the Sun to stand still, and the dull Earth to move round it, to save the Sun the labour of moving. Others are like Alexander, of whom the Satyrist Ʋnus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit Orbis, Juvenal. Sat. 10. Aestuat infaelix angusto limite mundi, Ʋt Gyarae clausus scopulis, parvâque Se∣ripho. This small Earthly-Globe is not wide e∣nough for their over-grown Fancies to bustle in, and therefore they have added to it a New World in the Moon: To which yet they have not thus far attained, to set up a Post-office, that we might have some correspondence with the people of that Re∣gion. Others will needs fancy a Commu∣nis anima mundi, to save the divine Provi∣dence, the labour of looking to particular things in the World. Others dream of a long time of the Prae-existence of the Soul of man, before it came into the body, much like the Egyptians, that conceit themselves to have a Chronicle of ma∣ny
thousands of years before the world began. These and many other fancies in Philo∣sophy, we may reasonably believe to have proceeded rather from an humour to op∣pose the vulgar Opinions, and desire to finde out something New under the Sun, then that men did verily believe such things to be so as they have attempted to make o∣thers believe. Nor is the wantonness of mans wit con∣tent to vary in Philosophy, except they may have liberty to frame a new body of Divi∣nity too. And sure 'tis strange, how some mens humours suit with disputing and op∣posing each other: Who doubtless would not embrace so many Paradoxes, were it not, that to be heterodox will gall other men, and make themselves appear to be some bo∣dy in the world, by wearing a colour distinct from other men. But we may say by too sad experience, that Nimium altercando amittitur veritas, men have mudded these clear Crystalline streams of Religion, by too much stirring in them, so that Truth can very hardly be discerned in the bottom. And indeed, Pruritus disputandi scabies Ecclesiae, This itch of disputing is one of the curses of the Law sent upon our Nation, for not keeping the Commandments of God: it hath taken off mens fingers from a zealous practising of
good duties, to claw this itch of oppositi∣on, while the life and power of Godliness hath been almost forgotten amongst such people. Yea, it hath opened the mouths of Papists, and men of Atheistical spirits, to reproach the Protestant Religion, if not all Religion, doubting whether there be any such thing in reality, because the pro∣fessors of it cannot agree about it. It might have been a necessary act of cha∣rity to have digressed here a little, to have fortified us against those advantages that Pa∣pists and Atheists, are apt to take against our Church, by reason of these divisions: By telling the Atheist, that there were as great differences between the Platonists, and Peri∣pateticks, the Stoicks, and Epicureans, and Academicks, as there are now amongst Chri∣stians: By telling the Papist, that the differ∣ences between the Thomists and Scotists, be∣tween the Jesuites and Seculars, between the Jansenists and Sorbonists, are not inse∣riour to those which they see amongst the Protestants. Besides, that the Church of England (properly so called) is like Jerusa∣lem, a City compact together; and as for those that are turned aside to dangerous Sects and Errors, we may say, They went out from us, 1 Joh. 2.19. because they were not of us. And I might re∣fer both Papists and Atheists, to that pious and learned Father, St. Augustine, de Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 51. where he sheweth, how the
Lord is pleased to suffer Errors, and Schisms in his Church, for the trial of our Faith, and for the benefit of the Church in the issue. But these things the time commands me to passe over: Greg. Naz. Orat. 10. I shall therefore conclude this head, with that of St. Gregory Nazianzene: It is the first and chief wisdom to despise that wisdom, which consists in talking and subtilty of words, and in captiousness and oppositi∣on one of another. Leaving this then, let us proceed to view the Seventh and last Pillar in this bullding. Pillar. The Wisdom that is from above, is, . Vultum non accipit, saith Beza, it doth not regard the faces or outward shew of men: Sine simulatione, saith Tremellius, without counterfeiting or dissembling. Diog. Laert. Dio∣genes Laertius, reports of Diogenes the Cynick, his trampling on Plato's pride, sed majori fastu. And this Cynick would some∣times in the coldest time of VVinter, go to bathing himself in cold water, to make the people admire and pity him. But Plato easily saw that it was not virtue, but vain∣glory that made him do this, and perswa∣ded the people to leave off taking notice of him, and he would presently be weary of these tricks. So the strange austerities and affected singularities of many of our de∣luded people, it is to be feared, arise from no better ground. And yet, as the Poet saith of covetousness,
Fallit at hoc vitium specie virtutis & umbrâ, Cum sit triste habitu, Invenal Sat. 14. vultuque & veste severum. These austerities and singularities, are apt to impose upon injudicious people, as pieces of Self-denyal, and singular parts of mor∣tification, and forsaking of the world. But there hath been a far worse sort of Hypocrisie practised in our dayes, like that of Nero, of whom the Historian speaks, Quoties fugas aut caedes jussit, &c. When he had appointed to banish or murther any man, Tacitus, Anual. l. 14. then he must have publick thanksgi∣ven to the gods: and that which before was a sign of the common weal, did then become a token of the common woe. How many of these Jezabel-fasts and thanksgi∣vings have we seen? to the prophanation of the sacred Name of God, and to the scandal of our Religion: This was the fruit of that wisdom which the Apostle calls, , Devilish. But this subject of Hypocrisie, is too large to be entred upon at this time. I shall onely say, that he that onely seems to be a good Christian, hath onely the shew of Wisdom; but he alone that professeth him∣self, to be such as he ought to be, and is as good as he professeth himself, he hath that wisdom which is from above. For this is the bond and perfection of all the excellencies of this VVisdom, that it is , with∣out Hypocrisie.
You have seen now the House of VVisdom surveyed, with its seven Pillars. : Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the Sum. First, it is easie hence to judge, ; who is a wise man among you, and endued with knowledge; even he that can shew out of a good conversation, these fruits with meekness of VVisdom; these Fruits, I say, which always grow upon the Tree of saving-knowledge. It is not enough to shew a man to be wise from above, to talk much of Religion and Purity, and of giving God his due; if in the mean time he de∣tract from Caesar's Rights; if he be not of a peaceable spirit, and to this end ready to depart from his own right; if he be not o∣bedient to his Superiours, free from wrang∣ling and unnecessary oppositions. Nor on the contrary is it sufficient to swagger for Caesar, if men be of prophane and lewd lives, or Atheists as to matters of Religion. But, as our Saviour saith in another case, These things ought ye to have done, Luke 11.42. and not to leave the other undone: So, I say, he that to the Wisdom of the Serpent doth joyn the inno∣cency of the Dove, Mat. 10.16. he that is both a good Christian and a good Subject, he hath the VVisdom that is from above. But, alas! how little a Flock do such men make!
Rari quippe boni.— said the Satyrist, good men are choise, and never choiser then now adays: Aug. in Psal. 47. Non possumus negare plures esse malos, &c. saith St. Augustine. It cannot be denyed, but the most men are bad, and that the bad are so many, that a∣mongst them there can hardly be discerned a good grain of Corn in the Floor; but whosoever looks upon the Floor, may think there is nothing but chaff there. Secondly, this discovers the substance of every mans duty, which he should endea∣vour to put in practice, Heb. 12.14. even to follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man shall see God. To be no brawlers, but gentle. Tit. 3.2. To be obedient to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. 1 Pet. 2.13. To be full of mercy and good fruits: To avoid perverse disputings, such as are most suitable to men of corrupt mindes: And finally, to fear the Lord, 1 Tim. 6.5. and serve him in sincerity. Josh. 24.14. To profess our selves to be such as God requires us to be: and to endeavour to walk up to our profession: As many as walk according to this Rule, Gal. 6.16. Peace be on them and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Finally, my Lords, I know you are sen∣sible whom it is that you are to patronize, even them that are endued with this Wis∣dom that is from above: and against whom
you are to exercise the sword of Justice, even them that are opposite to it. You are sent by his Majesty, as his Vice-Gerents,  to the terror of evil doers, and to the praise and encouragement of them that do well. Them therefore that are prophane, and opposite to Purity, or turbulent and opposite to Peace, or factious and disobedient, your Lordships will please to observe them as the fit objects of the censures of the Law. But those that are good Christians, and good Subjects; whose practice is that , Jam. 1.27. that pure Religion and un∣defiled: who are first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be perswaded to obedience, full of mercy and good fruits, free from partiality, wrangling, and hypocrisie, your Lordships will please to own them with your Favour and Patronage. Now the Lord of Heaven, who alone gi∣veth this Wisdom, and out of whose mouth proceedeth Knowledge and Ʋnderstanding; Prov. 2.6. and who hath bidden us, Jam. 1.5. If we want wisdom, to ask it of him, deliver us from this wisdom which is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish; and teach us this Wisdom that is from above, which may make us holy as he is holy; 1 Pet. 1.16. 1 Thes. 4.11. and also to study to be quiet, and to do our own busi∣ness: That so being Lovers and Promoters of Peace, we may receive the reward of Righteousness, even the peace and favour
of God in this life, Jam. 3.18. and the everlasting en∣joyment of his blessed presence and love in the life to come. And that alone through thine alsufficient Merits, blessed Jesus: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; three Persons, and one most glorious and infinite Deity, let us give, as is most due, all Honour and Glo∣ry, world without end, Amen. FINIS.
