L61 13483690 99716
A LETTER From a Gentleman of the Lord Ambassador HOWARD's Retinue, To his Friend in London: Dated at FEZ, Nov. 1. 1669. Wherein he gives a full Relation of the most Remarkable Passages in their Voyage thither, and of the present State of the Countries under the Power of TAFFALETTA, Emperour of MOROCCO; With a brief account of the Merchan∣dizing Commodities of AFRICA; As also, The Manners and Customs of the People there. Published for Publick satisfaction. LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Moses Pitt, at the Sign of the White Hart in Little Britain, Anno Dom. 1670.
To his very Loving Friend T. G. in LONDON. Sir, ACcording to your earnest Request, you have here a full Account of the Estate of this Country, as much as I have received from very good hands. I wish that it may give you that satisfaction that you request. It is certain that all that have written any thing of Africa, have spoken of it as blind Men of Colours, by guess, and by hearsay. The Truth is so mixed with Fables and Tales, that it is not easie to distinguish them. This Part of Africa is much changed within these two hundred years, and the Names of Places and People altered; so that we shall lose our labour to con∣sult the ancient Writers, concerning the present condition of this Country. It might give great satisfaction to the Learned in the Northern Climates, to be informed of all the Transactions of this unknown World, but that we can never expect whilst Trading is so much neglected here and Strangers, especially Christians, do run so many hazards when they enter into the Land; it being one of the Articles of the Moors Faith, that he that sheds Christian Blood in
their Ramedam, merits Heaven, and purchases the Eternal Favour of God with this Sacrifice: So great an invitation to Cruelty, may justly stop us, that are not weary of our Lives, from running too far amongst them, unless it be upon a good account of Trading or Peace, and then none dares expose himself alone to the Peoples mercy without sufficient guard to defend him; yet I have seen some French Merchants riding abroad without fear, and return safely: I conceive they were known to the People, who are sensible that the acquaintance with forreign Nations, is very necessa∣ry for their more convenient subsistance. The Jews are to be seen every where in this Country, they are very serviceable to the Inhabitants, for they furnish them for the most part with forreign Commodities, and make those things that are necessary for them. They never grow rich, but the Mahumetans do accuse them of some Crime, to have a pretence to seize upon their Treasure, as it happened lately to a Jew, who was grown a petty Prince; he Commanded a Place strong by Situation and Art, called Darbinmeshaal, there was but one ascent, and that so diffi∣cult, that without his leave all the Moors of Barbary might have spent their daies in the Siege of it; for besides that it is impregnable, it contains so much ground within the Moun∣tain as might very well nourish a thousand head of Cattle, and supply them with Corn and Fodder. This Jew had won the esteem and favour of the Grandees round about by his courteous behaviour and good hospitality; for it was his custom to invite all the Persons of Note into his City, and there entertain them very kindly: This dealing made every one, especially the Arabs, to love him, and got him a great Name. When Muley Archeid, otherwise called Taffaletta, flung himself into the protection of the Arabs, and that they had all owned him for their Prince, he was also entertained by this courteous Jew, and at a small provoca∣tion he was inassacred: Taffaletta found one Point in the Law of Mahomet to justifie the Murder, which was ap∣proved
of, and applauded by the ignorant Multitude. A∣nother Jew named Joseph Ben-simon, a very great Trader, and one that had Correspondents in many Places, did run the same Fortune. He supplyed the Moors with many Commodities, especially with Powder and Shot, Guns and other Weapons, which he conveyed out of Spain by stealth. At last his Wealth made him guilty of Death, for he was accused of Adultery, and although common report pro∣nounced him innocent, he lost his Life, and had his Estate seized for the Kings Use. Thus all the Princes of these Countries do treat this miserable Nation. When they have occasion for Money, they force it from the Jews, either by right or wrong. Gayland, as I am informed, did enter∣tain Jews in Arzilla, for no other end but to have some on whom he might prey: He raised a considerable Sum of Money from them on this occasion: About thirty or forty Families of the Jews had managed all the Trade of that part of the Country, and were grown rich; Gayland con∣sults his Cadir, and asks from this deceitful Oracle, whether it was lawful to suffer Jews, Infidels, to dwell amongst the Musulmans? He answered, That it was not lawful, but that if they would not turn Mahometans, he was comman∣ded by the Law of Mahomet to punish that contempt with present Death. This sad News frighted the Jews, especially when they heard that the day was appointed for their Exe∣cution; in the mean whiles they Petition the Sultan, and make their Peace by offering a large sum of Money, all they had gathered in many years. This satisfied Gayland's weak Conscience, concerning the bloody clause of Maho∣mets Law, and made him free them from the great danger that threatened them. You see by that what favour Stran∣gers may expect from this treacherous People. But before I begin to inform you of my Journey from Tangier, and of the Estate of this County, I will relate unto you something of our Passage thither▪ and of that fa∣mous Garrison: You may know many Particulars from
them that have dwelt there some years; but from very few you may learn what I have observ'd in that Place: Some things I have taken notice of, which if they were well known in England, and minded, might make it a happy City. At our departure from England, we sailed near the Sylly Islands, where we met with a North-west Wind that blew very fresh a day and a night; we made such Advantage of it, that in that time we were carried near 80 Leagues from the Lands End, into the Bay of Biscay; a most dreadful Sea, at the least breath of Wind the Waves swell into Mountains: It is a grievous thing to be tost in this Sea by a Tempest: The danger is able to try the stoutest Courage. I know it by our Passage over this Place, the wind began to turn about, and then we heard that doleful Cry of the Seamen, No Near That begat in us a longing to see the pleasant Shore; but we were not long before the wind favoured us again, which did sometimes toss us till we were come near the Coast of Portu∣gal, where we met with these Particulars that I cannot o∣mit: In a lovely calm Morning, as the Sun began to look up∣on us, and visit us with his Beams, the Air being clear, and the Weather most pleasant, we spied a Face of a Rising of the Water; the Seamen called it a Spout: I know no other Name for it, unless I call it the greatest Miracle in Nature; The Figure was like a Pyramide, sharp at the top, and large at the bottom, about the compass of two or three Acres of Ground; the Top reach'd so high, that I could not well dis∣cover it: I wondred at the sight, so did many of the Sea∣men, who professed to have never seen the like in the Nor∣thern Parts. I admired from whence such a Violence in Na∣ture could proceed; That the Water should leave its own Element, and ascend up into the Air, and in such great quan∣tity, it is not possible without some most powerful Agent: I began to reason with some who esteem themselves of the more refined Souls, and to ask their Judgment about it; but▪
I found their Answers so dull and impertinent, that I quickly discovered their ignorance. We sailed within two Leagues of the Place, and had time to behold it at our leisure; as we approached nearer, we found a Current turning that way, which, if we had ventured farther, might have endan∣gered our Lives; but the wind being pretty fresh, and all our Sails open, the Current at such a distance, could not prevail upon us. One thing we took notice of, which seem'd very wonderful; out of the Pyramid of Waters about a hun∣dred Yards high, leapt something that was Bulky; for it made a Plunge in the Water, that appear'd to us, we imagin∣ed it to be a Fish of a considerable Bigness, which the vio∣lent Ascent of the water had sent up in the Air, but then meeting with a lesser and a weaker motion, at a distance from the Sea, it had the power to free it self from that Cap∣tivity from which it was hurried, by casting it self again into the Ocean. This happened several times, whether it was the same Fish, we could not well distinguish: This Relati∣on may seem very incredible, but you may have it confirmed by many that venture to the Indies, who do often meet upon the Coast of Guiny with such Wonders of Nature. Immediatly after this strange sight, we felt the Wind more violent, and saw the Air darken, and fill'd with many threatning Clouds; therefore we prepared for a storm, which did quickly overtake us to our great advantage; for it drave us with such violence, that we made six Leagues in an hour with our Main Sail spread: All that day it conti∣nued, and was accompanied with such grievous Rain that I never savv the like in England: It vvas fearful to us that had never exposed our Lives to the Mercy of the Liquid E∣lement, especially vvhen vve felt our ship crack under us, and the main Mast bend as a Bovv. But the Evening deli∣vered us from all fear; for then a handsom Gale of Wind succeeded the Tempest, and dispersed all the fearful Clouds that did surround us, and the setting Sun took his leave of us with a pleasant countenance.
The next day we saw afar off a Whale spouting Water in∣to the Air very high for its Pastime: And about forty Leagues off on this side of the Southern Cape, we beheld two Vessels chasing one another; the Wind being North-west, and they making towards the Land, we could only discover their Colours; the one was a Turks Man of War, the other a Hamburger; the Turk overtook his Enemy, and then began a furious Fight, which lasted about two hours; the Guns did thunder on both sides, to our satisfaction that were not engaged in the Peril: We could not discover how they ended their Quarrel, because the Christian Ship main∣tained a running Fight, and made with all Sail towards the shore. The next morning we had a sight of the Cape St. Vincent, otherwise the Southern Cape, a noted place to all strangers; we were not long ignorant of the Maritine Customs of that Place, which were signified unto us by the Ship-Company, that demanded their usual Fees from all that had never been there before. Ile assure you, Sir, the Joy that we did feel at such a sight, to be so happily escaped out of the danger of the Sea, made us be liberal of our Purses, and of our strong Drink; for we were not far from Tangier, our Landing-Place, which the next day we discovered, and were most joyfully received by the Governour and Inhabitants, that caused the Eleven Guns of the Town to proclaim our Arri∣val. Before I go from hence, I will give you a short Account of this Renowned City. It is situate upon the Decline of a Hill; the Houses are so built, that from most you have a pleasant Prospect into the Straights Mouth: It is almost triangular, and stretches it self along the Sea shore: A high Hill overlooks the Town on the North-side, where a strong Castle is built capacious enough to hold a thousand or two thousand men in Garrison. Don Sebastian King of Portugal fortified it with high Bastions of square Stone: Over a∣gainst there is a large Bay, where, some say, Coral is to be
found. Round about on the Land-side several little Hills do stand that are now fortified with Lines and Forts for fear of the Enemy. A considerable Compass of Ground is enclo∣sed within the outtermost Lines. I had the curiosity to take a view of every part of the Town, and its Dependencies. An Officer of my Acquaintance, Mr. T. by name, offered himself to satisfie me: We entred first into the Castle, and there I took notice of many Stones that did bear the Names of those that governed that Province in the time of the Romans; these were fixed in the Wall of the Governors House. Out of the Castle I found an old ruined Building, almost all buried in its own Rubbish: A little farther, some ancient Graves cut out of the hard Rock, about four foot broad, and nine in length; by which I discovered the great diminution in the stature of men, that are nothing near so large and so high as in primitive times, Nature still falls into Decay. The Spaniards of Andaluzia are the least men I have ever seen; our Boys of twelve years old are higher. I took notice also thereby of the great care the Ancients had to preserve their Dead Bodies and Ashes from being dismem∣bred and dispersed, which doubtless did proceed from their Belief of a Resurrection. We continued our Walk farther into the Fields, and there I had an excellent Prospect over all the Works and Forts built by that great Captain for whom Tangier may ever mourn; I mean the Renowned Earl of Tiveot. My Friend related unto me his unhappy Death, and shewed me besides, the Wood in which he was kill'd in the company of 600 stout men, with most of the Officers of the Garrison. He was a man of great experience in Martial Affairs, having done so good service in the French Wars, that Mazarine appointed unto him during his Life a yearly Pension. The occasion of his Misfortune was this; He had sent into Portugal for Lime and Materials for the Fortifications: The Ships being not yet arrived, and that Par∣ty of Men that came from the Guard, wanting imployment, he resolved to make some execution with them upon a Wood
that did serve as a Retreat unto some stragling Moors, who from thence did kill our Scouts undiscovered. In order to their going out, he dispatches several Run-aways of the Moors, that lived in the Town, to discover if any Party was thereabouts to keep Guard. They returned with this in∣formation, that no Moors were to be seen round about the Country, The unfortunate General believes them, yet he had a presentiment of his misfortune, and specially be∣cause it was the same day of the year, that the English had lost six hundred men, massacred under their Walls by Gayland in person. Therefore he was often heard that morning to say, Remember, Gentlemen, that this is the Third of May; he did discover some kind of apprehension, which one Major Knightly laboured to overcome, by offering himself to lead out the Party; but he would not be thought to be less daring than any man, therefore he adventures out, most of his men being fitter to encounter with boughs and shrubs than with an Enemy, for they were more armed with Hatchets than with Muskets. He was no sooner advanced into the Wood, but immediately there appear as many Al∣hags as Trees. Gayland's Army of Foot and Horse it seems had marched all night from Alcazor, and (as some say) he had an intention to conclude a Peace. This appearance strook such a fear into our men, that they minded more how to save themselves by flight than to fight; but being about three miles from Tangier, and many thousand Horse in the Valley, they were all cut off to three men, who recovered the Sea, and hid themselves in Rocks, until hunger forced them to adventure to Tangier again. According to the Moors information, some of our men did fell their lives at a deer rate; about forty rallied in a place where the Horse could never come, and began such a desperate fight with the Foot, that filled the Wood, that as many of their men ended their daies as of ours. Had Gayland made use of his Victory, and assaulted the Town, it had yielded without resistance, the remainder of the Garrison was so astonished
at this Defeat. Our Horse, it seems, were then Command∣ed by an old Souldier that was grown rich, and knew how to save his own Pate. Therefore they were not concerned in this fight, but as standers by and lookers on. Had the three Troops advanc'd out of the Lines, they might have sa∣ved some of our Men. My Friend having ended his Relation, we went from the sight of this unhappy place, unto Charles Fort, and to the Decline of a Hill, where he told me that some of our men, to the number of three or four encountred with a Troop of Moors, and took from them their Colours, a Dishonour that had never happened to them before in the space of twen∣ty years. We continued our walk round the outtermost Lines, and there I took notice of the Wisdom and great Skill of my Lord Tiveot in the Art of Fortification: Nothing could be better begun, and were it continued, the City might stand in defiance of any Enemy. We had here very plea∣sant sights into the neigbouring Valleys that are all covered with the natural Tapestry of Flowers and green Grass; for this is the first Spring of the Year, the time that the dry Land of Africa yields most excellent Herbs fit for all uses. Now when the first Rains do fall, I took notice of nothing else worthy your knowledge, but of a wild Boar of a strange bigness, a little after the Rain had wet the ground, he was turning it up, to seek for some dry Roots fit for food; he was at some distance from us, yet I could judge him to be a∣bout five or six foot high; a desperate enemy if angered: since I have encountered some of a lesser size, and found them to be full of Courage and Strength. We saw also some ruined Walls, the ancient Reliques of Tangier's large extent. It reach'd according to all probability, about five or six miles in length. My Friend did entertain me with many excellent Relati∣ons of the several Affairs and Transactions of this Place, which I will reserve for our next Meeting I must not forget one Story that he affirmed to be true,
and which I had afterwards from other persons; That in the fatal year of 66, the Portugueses, the Dean and Canons of the Cathedral Church of Tangier began to rejoyce and to feast their Friends in the Moneths of March and April, and being questioned about this unusual Mirth, they said it was because the time was now come when Don Sebastian King of Portugal, who was reported to have been slain near Alcazar; should return from his wandring up and down Africa: And that he should enter again by the same Gate that let him out; it is now stopt up, at the East end of the City joining to the Sea. This old Tale they did believe so assured, that several of them began to prepare an Entertain∣ment for his solemn Reception in their Covent, and did shew their Book of Prophesies to confirm this Belief; but either these ignorant Fools are mistaken about the time, or the good Prince hath forgot his way home again; for he hath not yet paid them any Visit that I could hear of. I had the Curiosity to see the Mould in the next place: It is thirty yards broad at the top, and it is built about 300, or 350 yards in the Sea: At the end some great Guns are planted that command the Harbour, and that carry over the Bay. A Story was told to me by the Serjeant of the guard, that will please you. About the Moneth of April last in a dark night, about Eleven of the Clock, the Souldiers upon the Guard heard such fearful Outcries and Shouts, that they were all astonished; for it being at such a distance from the Town, and such strict Guards being kept at all the Avenues that none could pass to them, they could not imagin what was the matter, until there appear'd unto them a great Gi∣ant, attended by lesser shapes, some like Men, others like Cats, others like Dogs. The Centry asks Who's there? and is answered with silence; he threatens Death with his Gun; but the Appearances remained unmoveable until the Serjeant with his Guard was allarm'd with the Centry's angry Speeches; and then they began to dance about, and to offer them many Affronts, and to fill the Air with fearful shrieks
and Cries a long while. The next morning all the Guard protested before the Governour that it was no Illusion, and that they had been grievously disturbed that night; but none would credit their Relation, until the next night, that there happened so violent a storm that 100 yards of the Mould were carried and washed away; a thing almost incredible: The Waves could never have had that power to destroy so much Work, had they not been assisted by some Infernal Spi∣rits; for the Stones of the Mould are very large; besides, the upper are linked together with Iron Bars; but the Iron and all the Art of man was not able to resist the fury of the Sea and Wind. That vast heap of Stones so well disposed and setled, was tost away, and carried at a considerable di∣stance. I leave it to you, Sir, to judge of the true cause of the wonder: You'll give me leave to offer unto you my thoughts, and to tell you how the thing stands: This Ac∣cident did a little discourage the Oversers of the Mould, but yet they continue with great resoution to repair the breaches that the violence of the Sea hath caused; and maugre all the Infernal Spirits, to build in the middle of the Sea a safe Harbour for our Ships I wish the success may at last an∣swer their expectation and endeavours. Now you may expect my Judgment of that Place, which I send to you freely: It is a most pleasant Seat as is in the world; the Air is pure and refined, the Territory good and fruitful, the Climate very moderate, neither too hot nor too cold, by reason of the continual Brizes or the Etesiae Winds that refresh the Air in the heat of Summer. It were to be desired that such industrious and publick spirited per∣sons did inhabit there as might make an improvement of the goodness of the Soil, and of the Conveniencies of the Place. If wine were prohibited, so many of our English Nation had not found here their Graves. Scarce any die here but by Excess and Intemperance; some having brought themselves to that capacity of Drinking as that they will make no difficulty to swallow above a Quart of strong
Nantz Brandy at one time. We see therefore in the most of them Death appearing in their faces long before they die. Their inward parts are burnt up with the hot Spirits of their strong Liquors. They seem to take pleasure to destroy them∣selves. If this reigning Vice and some others were restrain∣ed, I doubt not but that City might flourish in English hands, as much as it hath done in former Ages; for it is one of the ancientest of the world: it was first built by the Canaanites that fled from the fury of the Children of Israel, and since it hath always been the Chief Place of that Province; the Seat of a Pro-Consul when Africa did submit to the Roman Power. It hath been several times destroyed▪ in the time of the Goths and Vandals an Earthquake overthrew the old Walls, and tumbled them far into the Sea, where they re∣main to this day: since by the Saracens or Arabs this City was destroyed by the Sword, and all the Inhabitants massa∣cred, because it did resist the Power of the Infidels, and by a Sally that was made, had kill'd the Generals Eldest Son. It continued next under the Empire of Morocco till the year 1523. when the King of Portugal attempted to win several Places upon the African Coast.
THus have I given yo an account of the City of Tangier, which might be made as beneficial to Our King, as any City of his Dominions, if Men did but mind the Publick good, as much as they do their fordid Interest. We continued here some few days, and found a kind En∣tertainment, especially from the Officers, that are most ob∣liging Gentlemen. But as my Lord's business was not to pitch his Tents in this place, He dispatcht C. W. towards the Emperour, with my self, and another, as well to give notice of His Excellencies arrival, as to procure from him a Pasport, in order to His Journey to Fez. We set forward with a Flag of Truce in Our Hands, and were met by 20 Horse about a Mile from the Lines. The Commander came up to Us first, and askt from us our business; We told him by our Interpreter, that His Imperial Majesty of Great Britain had sent an Embassador to the great Emperour of Barbary his Master, a Person of a very eminent Quality, and of a most Illustrious Family, to Treat with him about the Concerns of both Nations. The Captain seemed to suspect the truth of what we had said, and asked if we had any Letters; We shewed him some, but would not part with them: at that He was offended, and lead us about a Mile further behind a Hill where we saw 6 Tents erected for Us, and two old Women miserably deformed, with half a dozen Lancers to Guard them: There was a great Contest among them at our first appearance; and I thought they had intended to use their Weapons. As soon as the Commander in Chief, (that was a little behind) was come, all was calm again, We laboured to know the reason of their contest; and found by our Interpreter, that they were disputing about a Clause of the Law of Ma∣homet: both maintaining their different Opinions and Inter∣pretations with much eagerness. The one was not satisfyed to enjoy his own Fancy, but he was resolv'd to impose it up∣on
his Comrade, and make him submit unto it by violence. So general is that madness amongst Men, not to allow what Nature cannot refuse a freedom f Judgment; and to be so fond of our Opinions, as to disturb the Publick Peace, rather than to suffer them to be contradicted: An unsufferable Pride possesses their minds. Every petty Coxcomb would erect a Soveraignty in the invisible world of our Fancies, and would see all Men bowing and rendring homage to his Judgement. I'l warrant you if those two nasty Moors had but had a little more breeding, and a little more Authority, they would have been content to have made a Schism about Trifles, and to have endangered Mens lives, in the maintainance of their mistakes. This particular I could not forget, because it re∣lates to our own condition at home. As soon as the Commander, whose Name was Zidi Ab∣dala, was entred into the Tents, and that the Dispute was over, We saw them draw aside, to consult what should be done with Us. The Resolution, as we understood, was, that we should remain in custody, until one was sent to the new Town, to have the Order of Taffaletta's Lientenant that was then there. In the mean while they entertained us with all civility, and presented to us their greatest dainties, moist Cheese, Butter as thick of Goats Hairs, as our English clay Morter with Straw; some musty Bread, and for our desert we had some wild Honey; a sad Food to our English Palats. It is like our English French Beans, but black. It grows upon stalks every where in the Country wild. I never was in such a trouble to eat; for our Interpreter advised us not to contemn the Moors kindness by a refusal. We were long at a stand, but He began by his Example to shew us what We should do: I deceived them all, for with a Crust of our English Bread, that I pull'd out of my Pocket, I kept my Teeth a going. Our Lodging was answerable to our Diet. Our Bed was the cold Ground, our covering a pitiful Tent, Our Bedfellows stinking Moors; and that which was worse than all this; it rained all Night upon us, so that the
Musketo's, a venomous Fly did creep under our Cloaths, to seek a dry shelter, and did sting us to some purpose; I wish∣ing my self again in your good company at the Kings-Head at Charing-Cross. We were afraid that our continuance should be longer in this place; for the Moors dispatches are but slow. They observe the Spanish gravity in their pro∣ceedings with Christians. An expression of Grandeur, that well becomes this miserable People. About 2 a clock in the afternoon the next Day, We had a few Horse-men came to us to be our guides to Salley, for that was the place unto which we had Order to go. They intended to remain there all Night, because We could not reach Arzilla that evening, while it was Day; But our earnest entreaties prevailed upon them, for we pretended our business to require hast, to oblige them to set forwards; which accordingly they did 6 in num∣ber, about 3 a Clock in the afternoon: as it began to be dusky, we came in sight of Arzilla, a place scituate upon the Sea shore in a plain Ground; before it there are yet the Ruines of an old Haven, upon which the main Ocean dis∣charges the fury of its Waves. It yields a pleasant sight afar off; for the Turrets of the Wall are Painted with many cu∣rious colours, and many Storks do make their Nests upon the Battlements. So that it appears to the ignorant Beholder a most pleasant Pallace: but We were never so deceived, as when we entred the Gates, and viewed the next day the curiosities of the Town, the greatest was Gayland's Pallace, and the Castle of Arzilla, that hath the name of being strong. The Pallace is towards the Sea, and like our old English Houses; there is a little Court at the entrance embellished with Paint∣ed Tyles of divers colours: at the left hand, a low Gallery with Rails; before it about 20 Foot long, and to broad, where Gayland lay in State to receive the Embassadors of Forreign Princes. The good Prince was content it seems with a mean Lodging, the apartments of his Officers were not better. That of his Secretaries did look rather like a Swine-keepers Lodge, than a Dwelling for an Officer of
State. We were here received with more kindness than Pomp. The Governour came to visit us, and sent us from his own Table, such Victuals as he himself did eat: here I met with several Renegadoes, one English that had been in the Country, He informed us of several things. One I must not omit: Lately when Gayland's Army was routed, and the Chack of Angiers Son kill'd. The City of Tetuan would not submit to Taffaletta's Summons, but seemed wil∣ling to endure a Siege, but by his Agents in the Town, He did work so effectually upon the Inhabitants, that they open∣ed their Gates, and yielded themselves. This good success was followed by the reducement of all the Country, which hath a great dependency upon the Mart Town. Taffaletta places there a Governour for himself, and appoints one of the City to Rule as our Mayors and Bailiffs. This Gover∣nour forgetful of his Benefactor, entertain'd some correspon∣dency with them of Argiers, which gave his Master cause to suspect that he intended a Revolt. Taffaletta having learnt that by his Spies dispersed in all the Cities of Barbary, and how he was affected, conceal'd his intentions, and came with a flying Party of Horse towards Tetuan. The Governour hearing of his coming, prepares for his reception, and with a small company goes out about a League from the Town, to meet his Soveraign Prince. He met him at the head of his Army, attended by all his Great Officers: according to his duty, he alighted, and kist the Hem of his Garment, a Ce∣remony that signifies as much as the kissing our Princes Hands. Muley Arsheid commands him to mount upon his Horse; which being done, He comes close to him, and with his Stab, a desperate Weapon amongst the Moors, He cuts off his Head, takes it by the hindermost lock, and there commands all his Army to pass by, shewing and shaking the Head now and then at such as he suspected of unconstancy and unfaithfulnes. This is a sign of his great resolution and courage. The sight of this Head did not a little terrify the rest of his Grandees, who are become wonderfully faithful to his Interest.
Immediately after this Execution He goes to Tetuan, ac∣quaints the People with the Traitors Guilt, and he wanted not the applauses of the fawning Moors, that are for him who hath the greatest Power. Taffaletta places over the City another Governour, a Person most intimate with Him, be∣cause it was a place of great Importance: He likewise incurs his displeasure by some misfortune, and ended his days soon after his Predecessour, in this manner. A Gentleman ac∣companied only by two lusty Blacks, comes to Tetuan, and asks for the Governour; the People shew him a little Hill, where he was gone to take the Air: thither He comes with all speed, and falutes the Governour, delivering to him some Letters from the Sultan; which were received with all ex∣pressions of Joy. The poor Governour not thinking that his death was so nigh at hand; He invites the Gentleman to his House, and did not so much as dream of the Mischief prepared for him. All this while the other keeps his design secret, and being entred with the Governour into the House, and sat down upon Carpets, as the manner of that Country is; He discoursed with him about several Affairs; and at the con∣clusion, when he saw his opportunity, He pulls out of his Pocket a Sentence of Death Signed by Taffaletta, which he bid the Governour read. These unwelcome Lines did strike such an amazement into his Mind, that he became unmove∣able. The other commanded his Blacks, that had been care∣ful to follow him to the Chamber door, to come in, and do their Office. They presently take the Cord that they had prepared on purpose; and without delay, fall upon him. The miserable Governour seeing no remedie, begs on his knees the savour to be Strangled with the Shash about his Middle. That satisfaction was granted unto him Thus he that was intimate with his Prince, and that did slatter himself in his Prosperity, ended his days when he least suspected it The Gentleman goes next into the Streets of the City with his naked Cimeter, and causes it to be Proclaimed by his At∣tendants:
That the Prince, for just cause, had commanded the Governour to be put to death; and that he was appointed in his stead to Rule in that City, and that if any would op∣pose his Reception, that he should appear. The Citizens ap∣proved the Fact, cursed the dead Governour, and received the new with all Honour. An infallible sign of the Peoples great Respect and Submission to their Princes Judgement and Actions, That none did dare to search into his Proceedings, or to examine the Justice of his commands. This expresses also his great confidence and trust that he reposes upon his Peoples Obedience. To dispose in such an absolute manner of their Lives and Fortunes; and in such a powerful City, to think to bring to pass such an unexpected change by such weak Agents in a moment. He could never have ventured to give such a Commission, had he not been assured of the Moors con∣descention to his Pleasure. I have since heard at Fez, that there is a Cloud that hangs over this Governour of Tetuan also, which may have the same effect upon him, as upon the former It is certain, Taffaletta removes, destroys, strangles, and banishes all that he suspects in the least. We remained one Night in Arzilla, and the next Day we Journeyed through the Country called Elfas, that is to say, the Plow Land; It reaches as far as one can discover from Tan∣giers a great number of little Hills do appear, upon which, and in the Valleys the best Corn of Africa doth grow. It was the custom of the Moors in Gayland's time, to repair thither from all parts to Plow and Sow, and every one had a cer∣tain Portion of Land appointed for him, which he Manured, and at the Harvest he payed only the tenth part to the King, unto whom all the Land belongs. It is a very fruitful Soil in that part, and yields a great increase, especially of Wheat In our Journey this day, which was the most pleasant that we ever had we met with some few Tents, and out of one came forth a little dirty Rogue about 12 years old, cursing us because we were Christians; He spoke so much Spanish, as
to name us Peras Christianos, you Christian Dogs. This People is bred up with a prejudice against Us, and taught from their Cradle to abhor our Religion. It is the Divels policy to keep them thus in their Ignorance, by giving them in their tender years an inveterate hatred of the Truth, and its Professours, unto which their Reason might otherwise in∣cline them, when they attain to an age of discretion, and un∣derstanding. We arrived that night at Alcazar, Gayland's unhappy City, where he was overcome, and where four of his Wives were taken for the Conqueror's use: It is an ancient City, such as the most of that Country are; pitiful for the Build∣ings: It hath a few Streets that are straight as a Line at both ends. There are Gates joining to the Houses, I conceive, to defend them from wild Beasts; for it is not possible to shel∣ter them from Men; the Gates that are at the end of eve∣ry Street are like our good great Barn Doors, so old that they can scarce hang upon the Hinges. This is that Famous City where three Kings were kill'd in a day, and the Arch Rebel of Ireland, Stukely, created by the Pope, Earl of Wexford, and Marquiss of Leinster, died also, with those Troops that were intended for the disturbance of Qu. Elizabeth's Dominions: But here Divine Justice overtook them, and prevented their bloody Designs. We had the Governours House for our Lodging; for it is the Custom in all those Countries to repair to the House of the Chief Per∣son in the Place, who is prepared for your Entertainment; having, as all the Eastern People, a Guest-Chamber or Room to keep Strangers dry. Every one brings his own Provision with him. There are no publick Houses of En∣tertainment, or Inns; but he that is a man of any esteem, is bound to receive strangers. Now the Custom is amongst the Arabs that live in Tents, That when a Stranger comes, and desires to be received, he stands at a distance over against the Principal Tent praying to Mahomet: The Master when he sees him, either sends for him, or goes himself to fetch
him in for Mahmet's sake, whether he be poor or rich; according to the custom of the Ancient Fathers, who were thus hospitable to Passengers. We found here very much Civility, when our Business was known and divulged, many persons of quality flock'd to∣gether to bid us welcome; for this Country desires nothing more earnestly than to entertain a good correspondency with the English, for whom, above all Nations, they have a par∣ticular kindness and a great esteem, because their Slaves are so well treated amongst us, and because we bow not to Images, which they abhor. Amongst those that did visit us while we were at Supper, a famous Negromancer came in to see us, and bid us be of good chear, and that he desired to shew his respect to us by a Dance and Musick. He had under his Arm a long Instrument with a Wire instead of a String, up∣on which he plaid most dexterously. He had no sooner be∣gun, but in steps an ill shap'd Rogue as black as the Devil, followed by a furious Goat and a Dog; these three began the Dance, the Goat and Dog striking the Ground accord∣ing to the sound of the Instrument. The Sport had been pleasant, had we not been informed by a Stander by that these shapes were not real, but that they were Devils or E∣vil Spirits that did thus appear at his Command. This Fan∣cy did make us desire that the Pastime would end a little sooner than otherwise we would have done. The Negro∣mancer perceived it; therefore he concluded; and all these Appearances vanish'd to our Eyes, the Door being then shut, leaving such a horrible Stench as made us all rise to seek the open Air to breath; Which the Negromancer laboured to excuse, telling us we had affronted his Devils, by expres∣sing a Dislike of their Kindness, and therefore we might thank our selves if they had left such an ill Sent to punish our Contempt: We told him by our Interpreter, that we did not desire such Entertainment, and that the Devils Company was never grateful to us. This Accident made us fall to our
Prayers, and be more devout than otherwise we should have been: We afterwards inquired what this Fellow was; some told us, that his Name was Zidi Lamed, a man highly e∣steemed amongst the Moors because of his Art in Negro∣mancy, and his Acquaintance with Familiar Spirits, by which he knows the News of all the world, and foretels ma∣ny things to the People which they are desirous enough to know; so that he is consulted as an Oracle in all urgent oc∣casions. There are many that study the Black Art, but this man was the most eminent. As he went from us, he let fall some threatning words, which we did not understand till the next day, that we all fell from our Horses and bruised our selves. That night we forgot not to say our Prayers, and to recommend our selves to Gods Protection. And assoon as it was day we departed towards Saley, and that night we came to the Mountain called Istibel, where one Beleif com∣mands, as being his Inheritance; I should be too tedious to write every Accident that happened to us in the way. Our next Stage was Sarsar upon the River Sbom, where one of our Guides, a Spanish Renegado shewed me the Place where a great Battel had been fought between Gayland and Ham del Hag, otherwise called Bembouqua; in which he told me he did fight for Gayland, and was present during the En∣counter. The two Princes were at variance for their Limits, which caused them to expose the Lives of their Subjects, and to give many Battels: this that was fought upon the Banks of the River Sbow, was a bloudy one, and fatal to Bembou∣qua's Interest through his own eagerness; for he being with his Horse and Foot beyond the River, ventured over to charge the Enemy; Gayland keeping his men close, expecting his Coming, at last he gave such a furious Onset, that the San∣to's men gave back with much loss; notwithstanding the Ge∣nerals Courage rallies them and brings them on again; here Victory was long uncertain; sometimes one Party flies, sometimes the other; and had it not been for a fresh Supply of Men led on by Gayland's second Brother, which came at
that moment, he had lost the Day; but his Number increas∣ing with this unexpected Recruit, and by consequence, his mens hearts being thereby filled with new Courage, he had not much difficulty to overcome his Enemies, who had at their Retreat two sorts of Enemies to fight withal, Gay∣land's men, who pursued with all Fury behind, and a deep River before; for the Bridge over which Bmbouqua saved himself was broken down. Many were killed that day, but more were drowned, in all of the Saint's men about 5000 stout Souldiers. This Success of Gayland caused many of the Saints Subjects to revolt to him, and to set up his Banner in their several Jurisdictions: So that he became by this Battel a most powerful Prince, very dreadful to his Neigh∣bours. This happened in the Year 1663. By the way as we passed, we had a sight of several Spanish Garrisons upon the Sea-side: Larache, where Gayland's Power received a very great check by a handful of Spaniards, who made such a brisk Saly upon them, that they kill'd a good number of his Men, took Gayland's Brother, and hang'd him up upon their Walls: A bold Action! that ren∣dred them odious to the Country and to Gayland; so that he never would have any peace with them. The next is Mammora, a noted place in Spain; for there they banish the malefactors. As we were over against this Garison, our Company being advanced a little before, there happened an Accident that scar'd me more than it hurt me, a Horseman having spoken with our Guides, who told him our business, and who we were, came up to me, having but one Moor with me, and brandish'd his Lance as he rid tilt at me; I understood not his meaning, and thought he had intended Mischief, yet I was afraid to discover my Fear, and therefore I would not put myself upon a posture of De∣fence till I felt his Weapon; but I was surpriz'd, when in stead of a Blow with his Lance, which I expected, seeing
him gallopping at me, he most dexterously turn'd the Point, and laid the other end upon the Pommel of my Saddle; a great expression of Civility and Kindness amongst them, as I understood by our Interpreter; resigning by that Action, the Weapon▪ into the hands of him whom they treat in that manner: When I saw his Intentions were not evil, I salu∣ted him according to our fashion: after a little Discourse with the Moor, he went his way, and I made up to my Com∣pany. We came through the Country of Elhalat, a Plain Ground, so named from that Tribe that dwells there, and within three days we arrived at Saley: The City stands very pleasantly; it is divided into two parts, a River passing in the middle of the City. It is two Miles about, having a very strong Castle at one end, with a scurvy Harbour for Ships before it. We were led directly to the Governours House, where we met with a kind entertainment, especially C. W. who was well known to the Town. Here we found many English Slaves, taken in English Bottoms by the Py∣rates of this place; some were newly brought in. We gave them all the assistance our Purses or Favour could afford, and put them in some hopes to obtain their Freedom, if my Lord was so happy as to obtain a firm Peace, a joyful news to those poor wretches, that had left all hopes of returning home to their beloved Soil. Here we remained some days, viewing the ancient Mo∣numents of the Town, that is possessed by the Arabs. And here we took notice of the miserable condition of the Barba∣rians. There are a great number of them in the Country round about, dispersed up and down. The Arabians are their Lords, having Power of Life and Death over them. Each Arab hath his particular Servants that he sends to Till his Ground, and from him requires so much Tribute either in Corn or Money every year. Sometimes he rides about
to view his Territories, and then his Tenants are bound to provide him with all necessaries: Besides, he takes from them what he pleases, and Sells them and their Family, and disposes the poor Brabbers as he lists. For as the Arabians are entred into the Country by way of Conquest, they ac∣cordingly behave themselves there as Conquerors, treating the Inhabitants as Slaves and Captives. But at the death of the last King, they freed themselves from the Arabian Ty∣ranny, and under the Conduct of several Princes did subdue the Arabians themselves. Gayland, Bembouqua, and several others, had many successful Battles with the Arabs, their Masters, for near Twenty years; and because of some Divi∣sions amongst them, and that their Lawful Prince was slain, they could not recover their former Estate, until Taffaletta's late Victories over the Barbarians, Gayland, and the rest. When the Governour of this place was acquainted with Our business, He freely gave us a Pass through his Government, for he commands much of the Country round about almost as far as Fez; unto which City, We set forward next through a Tribe of the Arabs, called Mouktar; and by the way we desired to know the meaning of several Pillars and Monuments; Our Guards told us, that they were set up by the Army of the Arabians that came from the East, when they over ran this Country, in memory of some signal Battles given in those places against the Inhabitants; for as amongst the Israelites they give Names to several places, according to the accidents that happen there. We thus past without any molestation, being sometimes obliged to shew our Pasport to the Chief Men. As we were come about 10 Leagues on this side of Fez; We past through a delicate Champaign Ground, over fruitful for such lazy Inhabitants as the Moors. In a pleasant Valley about 2 Leagues further, We passed by above a thousand Tents, distinguisht by their several Fami∣lies, which were separated at some convenient distance, round about many thousand head of Cattle were a feeding. Now these that live in Tents are the Arabs, the People that came
from Arabia by the sollicitation of the ancient Sultan of Morocco, who made use of their assistance to recover his Dominions from an Usurper, that in his absence had revolted from him; since they have over-spread all this Country: and as their manner is, they live in Tents, and as the Nomades remove from place to place with all their Substance. They are distinguished into several great Tribes, as the Children of Israel, whose Brethren they are: for they are the Sara∣cens, Aagarens, or Ishmaelites, or the Posterity of Ishmael, the Son of Abraham. Their manner of living may be a very good Commentary to several Passages of the Old Testament. The chief Tribes are named Heldauquella, Ʋledesees, Spenet, Elholot, Mouktar, Shregga, Hiaina, Soubba, Dama, Themsna, Heleela, Elanyad, &c. These are divided into Families, Governed by the first born, who hath a jurisdiction over the several Members. They have all a dependency upon him, and received from him their livelihood. He is their Captain in War, their Fa∣ther in Peace, their Judge when any difference arises in his Precinct. Therefore, all their Tents do keep close to him; His Tent is planted Westerly, being bigger and handsomer than the rest: then the others are erected on both Hands, as a half Moon, open towards the East, aswel that they might salute the Rising Sun, for whom they have a great Reverence, as that they might look towards Mecha, the place of Maho∣met's Birth, for which also they have a particular Devotion. In the middle of the Tents, there is one which is appointed for their Meeting to Prayer. This Barbarous People have that good Instinct to set apart a place for the Worship of God. Where there are many hundred Tents together, a Priest also, had in great esteem amongst them, is set a part for that Service; unto some they appoint 100 Dollers, to some more, to others less, according to their Number. His Office is to Read Prayers 5 times a day, unto which he calls the People, standing at the Door of the Tent with his Alla illa Mahomet resul all,
and many other expressions of Humility and Devotion: His Office also is to teach the Children to Read and Write Ara∣bick, and to instruct them in the Law of Mahomet. An excellent Custom, but ill applyed. By that means, these Talouts, for that is their names, do render themselves ser∣viceable, and do train up their Children in awe and respect of their Order, and of Religion, Imprinting in their tender minds those Impressions, as may make them for ever faithful to Mahomet, and his Interest. That is the cause that every one is so Devout, and that Prophaness finds such little enter∣tainment amongst them. It were to be wisht that our English Clergy would practice the same Custom, and take into their tuition the Children of their several Parishes; We might then hope that the next Generation of Men would be less Atheistical and Vitious, and more Devoted to the Service of God, and their Prince. Their constant Preaching should not hinder the Catechizing of Youth▪ I am sure that would be the means to expel Ignorance which reigns in Cities, and Country. It would also be the means to settle their Interest in the Kingdom, and to raise their Holy Order in the esteem and favour of the People, from whence (it is unhappily fallen by their own miscarriages. Besides, these ordinary sort of Priests, there are others called Elftees, Itinerary Preachers, who are esteemed Learned in the Mahometan Law; these do upon the Solemn Days, and when they are required, ascend up into a Pulpit, and there they Expound a Text of the Alcoran. It is wonderful to see the Veneration, and the respect that is paid to these Men. There is nothing too precious for them, no company too Honourable. They are lookt upon as so many Gods amongst the People, and re∣ceived with the greatest expressions of love and kindness. I did often wish that our English Clergy were as happy as these Men. But that may be desired, but never expected in our days.
Several other sorts there are; some called Hages, or Saints; they are those that have visited Mahomet's Tomb. Of their other Orders several have written. Now the chief of every Family appoints a Thaloub, to instruct his People, and Pray for them. If any difference arises between them, or any injury be done, they come before Him: His Sentence is a Law to them; so great is the priviledge of the first born. They have no Judges, but in Cities: Those that live in Tents, do submit to the pleasure of their Chieftain. I saw a Fellow, that in his anger had stab'd his Comerade in the Belly; the Wound was not so Mortal, but he came immediately before the chief of the Family; who presently ordred him to be sent for, to pay for his Cure, and 10 Dollers besides; and then taking a sound Stick, commanded him to lie upon his Belly; which was immediately done, then he gave him 10 blowes upon his Breech. The Fellow having receiv'd his Punishment, made a profound Reverence, and seemed to be as contented as ever, only for his 10 Dollers; He desired his Party to compound with him. Another had stollen a Hen from a Thaloub, with some other trifles: the crime being known, He was sent for, and all the stollen Goods, that weighed about 20 Pounds, were hung at his Ears, through which wide holes were made, and he condemned to stand thus at the entry of their Mosque; or Tent consecrated to Prayer. I have seen many other Punishments of the like nature inflicted. Their ordinary is the Bastinado for small offences; Empalling for grievous; and for some they Burn, they Hang, Strangle, and Poyson. There is another manner of Execution very strange; they put a Fellow naked, only somthing about his middle to hide the Privity, which they can never abide to behold. They shackle his Feet, so that he may only go and then they let loose upon him the Boys and Chil∣dren, who with their sharp Canes, do make him bleed to death, pricking him, till he gives up the Ghost: this is the most cruel death practised amongst them.
One thing I cannot forget of their Customs. If any kills another, the next Brother or the next Kinsman is bound to seek the Murderer out, and to kill him where ever he meets him; Besides, they swear to maintain their Captains, and to die in their Quarrels. So that one Company of Tents many times do fall out with another. For they are disposed of in the Country of so many little Villages, making the appear∣ance of a Town. These Arabs, by what I have said, you may perceive that they hate the Government of Barbary, and love a free Life. Since the last Emperour of Morocco that was Massacred by his Servants, never any had any rule over them, but they maintained a kind of an Aristocracy amongst themselves, until Muley Arsheid cast himself into their Protection, when he fled from his elder Brother Muley Mehammed. He be∣haved himself so bravely, and did ingratiate himself so cun∣ningly with them, that they made him first their General, or Great Moukadem. In which Imployment he had won∣derful Success against the East Arabs: a People that cannot endure the West. After he led them against his elder Bro∣ther, and enriched many of them with Plunder and Spoil. That made them proceed to this Election, in which he was so happy, that all consented to make him their King or Em∣perour. This was his first rise after the death of his elder Brother, that he took Prisoner, and then kill'd. The chief of the Kingdom of Taffaletta made him also their Soveraign Prince. He hath a younger Brother named Muley Zidan, and that he might oblige the People to a greater obedience, and more fidelity, he hath given out, that he is of the Race of their Prophet Mahomet, and that acording to that Law none ought to Command in Chief, but one lineally descend∣ed from Mahomet. This Perswasion prevails much upon the superstitious Moors, and disables them from resisting or op∣posing his proceedings, for fear of their Prophet, makes
them revolt from their former Governours, and submit to his Dominion. He hath Conquered all Gayland's Country, and the Territories of Bembouqua, called Si Mehamed, Boubquer del ago, the King of Morocco, who had been an Usurper. The Kingdom of Sous, the Countries where these Tribes do dwell, Themsna, Heldedla, Moukter, Hiania, Widlobar, Elangad, Heldouquella, Uleidezin, Dama, and many more; all making up 43 Tribes, with the Country of Hel Ishbel: All these Kingdoms and Places do acknowledge him for their Prince. Only some Petty Lords of the Craggy Mountains do resist his Power. Against these he is now marched with his Army, and as we hear, hath reduced some to Obedience, having executed great Numbers of them in a cruel manner▪ to terrifie the rest. These are Barbari, the ancient Inhabitants of that Country, who have been forced to submit to the yoke of the Arabians; yet in these latter days they were become Masters over them, and did use them very hardly when their last Emperour was kill'd; for then they fell into Divisions. Alcaide Issa, a great man amongst them, commanded the chief of their Tribes: Next was Zidi Douckag, with Zidi Boumhedi. All three had under them Sheirs, Governors of Tribes, that they had ingaged in their Parties; but when they fell out a∣mongst themselves, Bembouqua that commanded the great Country called Helishbel and Fez, where the Barbarians do live, took the advantage, and made War upon the Arabians, and reduced them to Obedience, using them in the same manner as they did before his People, as so many Slaves; which made them put themselves more willingly under one Head, that by his means they might free themselves from the Barbarian Bondage. The Case here is much like that of the Children of Israel; by Joshua's means they conquered Canaan, and did domineer over the Inhabitants; but those of the Sea Coast could not be driven out: when therefore they saw an opportunity, they did revenge themselves upon the Posterity of Israel, until Israel made Saul their King,
and after him David; then they returned to their former Com∣mand over the Inhabitants & the Country round. Thus is it with their Brethren the Arabs; they conquered all this Country, and made the Inhabitants bear the Yoke; but sometimes those that live in strong Places and high Mountains, do revolt from them, and give them no little disturbance, as they have done in these late years under several great Command∣ers. A memorable Battel was given about Saley between them, where ten or twelve thousand Arabians were killed, and their Families and Cattel taken by Bembouqua at the Ri∣ver Widlobar. Now these Arabians do never mingle themselves with the Brabbers, thinking themselves an abler Generation of men; neither doth one Tribe mix with another: they observe in that the Law of Moses. At the Division of the Land, they had for every Tribe a parcel of Ground appointed, in which they live up and down in their Tents, never going with their Cattel out of their own Limits, unless some urgent occasion calls them; as when they fight: Then all the Tribes join, and form an Army: over which they elect a General. Now every Tribe keeps a Record of all the Members of Persons that do belong unto it, and therefore every one is able to give an account of his Ancestor; All the Royal Blood pretends to be come from Haly, Mahomet's Son in Law. The Ara∣bians acknowledge none other for Prince, but he that is be∣lieved to be thus descended. Taffaletta or Muley Arsheid is so; his Ancestors have long commanded in the Kingdom of Taffalet, being entred there with the Conquest of that Coun∣try. In our Journey to Fez, we met with many thousand A∣rabs removing with their Substance from place to place, and they were the Tribes of Ʋlaidezin Dama Saubba, amongst whom we lodged one night; and were invited by one of the Sheirs to Supper: We had a Table spread with all the Va∣riety
of that Country, and very good Water to drink, mix∣ed with a sweet Stuff much like our Mead. Our Seats were Carpets, our Table the Ground. When we came at the Gate of Fez, we were commanded to light off of our Horses, because no Christian is to ride on a Horse in that Ci∣ty. You may expect an account of this City; but that I reserve for some other time, when I can write to you. I think this Letter is long enough to weary your Patience. At our Arrival, we found Taffaletta gone with his Army against some Barbarians in the Kingdom of Sous, beyond Morocco: And it is reported here that he hath obtained a great Victory over a considerable Number of them, and that the rest are retreated into the Mountains. We hear that he will be here within a few Moneths, and then we hope to have our Dis∣patches: Some are sent to acquaint him with the Honour our King hath done him, to send him a Person so eminent in our Nation, and of that great Wisdom. In the mean while, we have here a Civil entertainment, and have liberty to di∣vert our selves in hunting the Wild Boar with some Persons of Quality in this Place, who love the Sport, but make no use of the Flesh. I have seen abundance of rare things in this City; for it is a very sumptuous one, because of the Quar∣ries of Marble that are here. You see, Sir, that I have leisure to write a long Letter; it is to satisfie your Curiosity. I send it to you by one that goes from hence to Tangier, and there my Friend hath pro∣mised to take care of any thing that I shall send. God keep you, and send us a happy Meeting. Yours to Command, S. L. Fez, Novemb. 1. 1669.
A Brief Account of the Native Commodities of AFRICA. AFrica yields most excellent things fit for the use of man: The Ground may dispute in Fruitfulness with any part of Europe: it only wants Rain to moderate the heat of the Climate; when the showers come, eve∣ry where green Herbs appear amongst the driest Sand. Here are excellent Simples sit for Physick. It hath often been observed that many Creatures when offend∣ed by their Enemy, and wounded, have sought after some of these Herbs that are proper to cure and heal them; Gods Providence hath therefore planted that part of the world with such good and healing Roots as might oppose the Malice, and prevent the Mischiefs of Venomous Creatures, whereof here are a great number, especially in the Land; and in the Woods there are great Numbers of Scorpions as black as a Coal, Serpents that cast themselves from Trees and surprize and wound the unwary Passenger. Here are venomous Aspes, whose least touch brings present death, let it be never so small; for it conveys its Poison secretly into the Veins, through the least wound, and that infects the next bloud; thus the In∣fection spreads by degrees until it reaches the heart. Here are many Basilisks; a dreadful Creature, that kills by the
infection of the Air. There is also another kind that caus∣eth a present driness in the Palate assoon as it hath wounded the man, and therefore called by the Ancients Dipsas. The Inhabitants speak of a new sort of Creature that they see al∣most every Year; for when all the Creatures do come to the fresh Springs and Fountains, the heat carries them to unna∣tural Copulation, and from these extraordinary Conjuncti∣ons do proceed Monsters that are of several Species, which have not the power to propagate or to increase. Beyond the City of Fez there is a great Wilderness full of wild Beasts and Fowls. The Arabs do live in all the fruitful places; but in the Land nothing is to be seen but Mountains of Sand, that are very dreadful in a storm of Wind, because it carries and transports them from place to place, and buries the Pas∣senger under the weight of it alive. The Commodities of this Countrey are very many; it were a happy thing to have a Prince there that did command all the Land, and that were a Lover of Trade; then Carovans might go safe from place to place without fear of robbing: But the nature of the A∣rabs inclines them to thieving and violence; so that although one should have a Pasport from the Prince, it is a great ha∣zard, if you be not provided with a good Guard, that you will be set upon by these Rogues, who are notwithstanding, in their esteem, the best Gentlemen, and the noblest in the World. The chief Commodities are Hides, they kill as many wild Bulls and Cows in the Land, as they of the East▪Indies do in their Plantations. Besides Goat-skins, Marok, or Spanish Leather, that are excellent, here is great store of Honey; the Bees do increase in the Woods and Mountains, and as there are excel∣lent Flowers that grow in all the Valleys, so naturally the Country is full of Bees and Wax. There is also a kind of Silk Stuffe that is made by the Inhabitants of the Sea-shore, of the Bark of Trees. Here is also Raw Silk; the Countrey breeds silk-Worms in great abundance about Fez and Mo∣rocco. Here are many other things useful to the life of man,
if Peace were established in the Country, and with our Na∣tion, then we might fetch from Guiny, and the Negro's Country, the rich commoditie of Gold dust. Now every Month some of the Blacks do adventure to Fez, with Camels loaden with that superfluous Earth, of which they have too much, and carry back other trifles that are esteemed amongst them. Some say that the Sun hath burnt the Sand of the Wilderness in some places, and that it is become perfect Gold. It is certain, that in the Sandy De∣sarts the Blacks do gather up Gold; This Gold is the best in the World, it is as pliable almost as Paper, and doth not so easily consume and waste. If some would adventure in the Land, to search out the Country, and bring a just and a true Report, he might discover many things which our Traders might improve to their advantage. In the Wilderness there are great store of wild Asses, Horses, Lions, Jaccals, &c. It is wonderful of this last, that smells a dead Carkase many Miles; and towards the Night, they run howling out of their Dens and Caves in great numbers right to the place where lies their Prey. The Lions and Leopards, and other furious Creatures are presently awakened with the noise, and there∣fore they follow them always. A Jaccal is a kind of a Fox, bigger and longer, just of the same shape, but for the most part of a blackish Gray, as high as a good Mastiff Dog. In the Night they surround the Tents of the Arabs, and if they meet any dis-armed, he serves to satisfie their hunger; for then such a company do over power him, that he is over∣come, and torn in pieces in a moment. Here are also many Apes and Baboons. The Apes do dwell in Forrests and Woods on the tops of Trees: Sometimes they venture down in the Valleys in Troops, 6 or 7 hundred at a time, and do a considerable execution upon the poor Corn. Many are undone by this scurvy Vermin. They never suspect the come∣ing of any Creature, but presently save themselves by slight at the least discovery or appearance of Man or Beast▪ It is remarkable, what hath been observed of them, that he that
comes first to a Tree, he skips, and seizes upon a bow, which he labours to bend to the Ground, then all his com∣panions do follow, and run upon the Tree over his Back that comes first to the place. Here are many strange Insects, and Birds of divers colours. There is one remarkable, that our English call a Bee eater; It is Red, Blew, White, Yellow, Green, and very handsomely painted with divers colours: It appears in the Months of April, May, June, July, the hottest Months of the Year. They pursue the swarms of Bees, and devour them, and have a cry much like a Frogg. They dwell in the Land during the Rains, and come to the Sea-coast in Summer & Spring. Here are also excellent Roots, that are brought from the East and West Indies to us, such as do fill the Shops of our Druggists. Were that Country in the hands of an ingenious and laborious People; it is not to be doubted, but that it would furnish the rest of the World with excellent Productions: But since the Conquest of the Country by the Arabs, War and Oppressions have hindred the Inhabi∣tants from the improvement of their Soil. Errata. Pag. 1. Line 5. for request, read expect. p. 4. l. 22. for race, r. far. p. 5. l 16. for from r. into p. 7. l. 18. for twelve, r. sixteen. FINIS.
