L654 13208088 98500
Parents Groans OVER THEIR Wicked Children. SEVERAL SERMONS On PROV. XVII. 25. Published for the Benefit of all, but especially of good Parents and their Children. By EDWARD LAWRENCE, M. A. sometimes Minister of the Gospel at Bas∣church, in the County of Salop. 1 Sam. 2.25. —Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel: and Joseph Collier at the Bible, under the Gate, on London-Bridge. 1681.
To my beloved Children, Debo∣rah, Samuel, Edward, John, Thomas, Elizabeth, Mary, Ben∣jamin, Nathanael; and to all the Children of Christian Pa∣rents. My dear Children! I Am sensible of my unworthiness, and un∣fitness to be seen in Print; it is now above Twenty years since, by the power and goodness of God, I was unexpectedly rescued from the jaws of death, which was the reason I then published that little book, called, Christs Power over bodily Diseases: and I had never been the Author of a book of this Title, had not two of you, but espe∣cially one made me the Father of fools. I shall here say no more particularly to you two, but that sound repentance, and the fruits thereof, in a setled reformation of life, will yet be your glory, and my joy; but if ye hate to be reform'd, (which God forbid) I shall mourn till I dye for the loss of Children, but ye will be tormented for ever for the loss of God. Children! I have not of the things of this world to leave you. I do acknowledge the wis∣dom
of God in not judging me sit to be intrusted with these things; but it's enough for us if we can call God our own, though we cannot call the riches of the world our own; some of you do with comfort remember how we have often wor∣shipped God together in singing with delight those words, Psal. 37.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. A little that a righteous man hath, is better than the riches of many wicked, &c. I here leave you this Letter of the counsel and advice of your aged, and loving, and faithful Father, who sees death looking him and you in the face, and beholds the Judg before the door: this will speak to you, when death hath silenc'd me; and it speaks the same things which God, and Christ, and your own Consciences speak to you; and it speaks to you (as it were) in the hearing of the world. 1. Put a true value on your own Beings, for ye cannot love God and Christ, if ye do not love your selves; ye are of that kind of creatures who are made much higher than all other visible creatures, and but a little lower than the An∣gels; ye are capable to know, and chuse, and love, and delight in God, and to speak of him, and to entertain your selves continually with him; ye are of those creatures in whose happiness God glorifies all his perfections; he made this world for man; he commanded his only-begotten Son to sacrifice himself for man, and sent him
to be born, and to live, and dye, and to rise again, and to intercede in heaven for man; he hath reveal'd all the Truths of the Christian Religion for the good of man; and therefore ye should think it greater madness to sell your precious souls and bodies to the Devil, and your lusts, for the short and dirty pleasures of sin, than to sell a purse of gold, or a cabinet full of jewels for a bag of chaff or cherry-stones; and should ac∣count it below you to give your selves to any but to God. 2. Know that as your Beings are great, so your happiness or misery will be very great; Riches or poverty, sickness or health, this pre∣sent life, or the death that deprives you of it, are things too little to make you blessed or miserable; all the curses of God, or the blessings of the Go∣spel will be upon you presently; and ye can nei∣ther live like men, nor like Christians, till ye know what it is to be sav'd or damn'd, and what it is to lose or enjoy God. 3. That ye may escape the wrath, and obtain the glory set before you, let it be your chief end and interest to know, and honour, and enjoy God; use the creatures as his witnesses, to testi∣fie and declare the being and glory of God to you; for God hath not only made and appointed them to fill your hearts with food and gladness, but also that in the use of them ye may feel, and find, and fill your souls with God; but
especially behold the glory of God, as he is pre∣sented to you in the glass of the Scriptures, that he may have that name in your hearts, which he hath in his word. Present him to your souls as God over all blessed for ever, that ye may conclude that he who is so infinitely good, as to be his own hap∣piness, is sufficient to make you happy: And that this God may be your eternal life and happiness, ye must know and behold his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person; and therefore behold his glory as the Father of such a Son, and as the Lord of such a servant, for Jesus Christ is the Lords Christ, Luk. 2.26. Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.23. and executes his office of a Mediator in obedience to the will, and to the glory of God the Father, whose glory ye may behold in his calling him to such a high office, in his accomplishing him for the execution thereof, in prospering him, and making him suc∣cessful in his whole work, in giving him such a blessed seed, in making him victorious over all his enemies, and in rewarding him for his great service and obedience; so that according to the intent of the Scriptures forenamed, ye must la∣bour to get such a sight of the glory of God shi∣ning upon you in the face of Jesus Christ, as will make an impression of his image in your souls.
And therefore loathe and abhor sin, which is against the glory of God, and which is the only evil that can make you lose such a glorious God. And for this reason be convinc'd of the va∣nity of this world, which is but a poor thing when the glory of God shines on your souls; for ye will be most blessed in him when this world shall be dissolv'd and pass'd away. And let this make Jesus Christ glorious and acceptable to you, whose office and work it is to redeem you from all sin and misery, and to make you blessed for ever in the likeness and enjoyment of this glorious God. And let this also cause you to endeavour to fill all persons with the great Name of God and Christ, that ye may gain them all the hearts, and love, and service ye can; and therefore in all company let God and Christ have your good word. 4. Know that to love and delight in God is the best imployment for the days of your youth; God is much concern'd for young persons; the Proverbs of Solomon are written, to give to the young man knowledge and discretion, Prov. 1.4. and one great use of the word of God is to teach young men to cleanse their way, Psal. 119.9. Young men, and maidens, and children, are call'd upon to praise the Name of the Lord, Psal. 148.12, 13. We find many mourning with holy Augustine, that
they loved God so late, but none complaining that they loved him too soon; as young as you are, in heaven and hell, it's better be a young child of God, than a young child of the Devil: young Saints are the glory of God, the fulness and accomplishment of Christ, the joy of Angels, the security and support of Religion, the crown of their Parents, and the blessing of their Gene∣ration. 5. Fill your time with the fruits of the Spi∣rit; see that your hearts be fill'd with grace, and then your days will be fill'd with fruit; be always receiving Christ, and resigning your selves to him; feel your hearts continually lay∣ing hold on eternal life, and live as if ye were always running to heaven; spend every day, so that ye may lye down in peace at night, that the Lords-day may be pleasant, death gainful, and eternity glorious. 6. Improve Gods Ordinances of worship; feel your vow of Baptism always fresh and strong upon you; feel the difference betwixt the Lords-day and other days; see that the word Preached be mixt with faith, ingrafted in your hearts; that it kill your sins, and reform your lives; pray continually, and in that duty see that ye be with the spirits of children with your Father in Heaven; let all your affairs pass through praying-hearts; and reckon all your own which ye sincerely pray for; Sing
Psalms, as those that make God your song and joy; and as if ye were sensible that ye are in the gates of heaven, ready to enter therein, to joyn with that world of blessed Angels and Saints in admiring and praising God. When ye come to the Lords-Supper, see all that is pre∣sented to you, receive all that is offered, and do all that is commanded you. 7. Be saithful to the Truth, and then ye need not be afraid of your selves, or of any other: this is your greatest safety, and ye may then feel the ground firm under you, and may say with David, Psal. 26.12. My foot stand∣eth in an even place; and if ye are called to suffer, chuse it rather than sin; and seeing men cannot kill your souls, let not the fear of them make you destroy them your selves. 8. Decline evil company; do not go with them to Hell, who will not go with you to Hea∣ven; but if ye are called into such company, feel your selves with God, whilst ye are with them, and carry it as those that are sensible that there is a God in the place; exercise those graces which are contrary to, and do cendemn their sins; be humble with the proud, meek with the angry, loving with the malicious, that they may be reproved by your graces, and that ye may not be defiled by their sins. 9. Labour to be a blessing to all persons; let men see that in you, for which they may have
cause to love and praise God; bear all wrongs, but do none; do what in you lyes to make all persons holy and joyful, but make none sinful, angry, or sad; forgive all, but let none have need to forgive you; exercise their love, but do not by your sins exercise their patience; give all cause to bless God for you, but give not cause to any to wish they had never known you. 10. Dread debts; do not unnecessarily bring your selves under the bondage of debtors; look upon it as more just and honourable to beg, than to borrow, if ye are not likely to pay, except in that case ye plainly acquaint the lender with your condition, that he may know what adven∣ture he makes; and when ye are able, pay seasonably, fully, and thankfully: I would have none to lend to any children of mine, without first advising with me, except they be in a hope∣ful way of trade: and my advice to such of you is, that you be afraid of being too much trusted; for it's often seen, that they who go to the length of their credit, are injurious to others, and prove bankrupts them∣selves. 11. Abhor Lying: This is a sin which is an abomination to the Lord, whom ye should always please; it's contrary to the Divine Na∣ture, which is in every one that is born of God, Ephes. 4.24. It's an abuse of your tongues
which should be your glory; for the use of your tongues is to express your minds; but in a lye your minds and thoughts do contradict your words; it's a wrong to others whom ye would have believe you, when ye do not believe your selves; it makes you unfit for humane society; for who will converse with those whom they cannot believe; ye hereby rot your names, for a lyar is one of the worst characters of the devil of hell; ye destroy your bodies and souls for ever, for all lyars shall have their part in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death. 12. Do not dare to steal; take nothing from any person, but what ye can say ye received it from the hand of God, and can praise him for it; and can comfortably beg his blessing upon it; kill those lusts which ye would feed with the fruit of other mens labours; consider, that when ye are tempted to this sin of theft, ye are tempted to bring a curse on your estates and persons, to thrust a dagger into your Fa∣thers heart, and to hasten your selves to an untimely and shameful death, and a tormenting eternity. 13. Deride and jeer no persons; let your jests be harmless, and make not your selves the fools of your company; but whilst ye are cheer∣ful as men and women, lose not the savour of Christians.
14. Haunt not Taverns or Ale-houses, &c. Go not into such places, but when God calls you; stay no longer than he will stay with you; and do nothing there, but what ye shall have cause to bless God for when ye come a∣way. 15. Be thankful to them who have shew'd mercy and kindness to me and you; pray for them; inquire how it is with their posterity; and as ye are capable, do them good: remem∣ber Prov. 27.10. Thy own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake not. 16. Forgive all that have done me wrong, and pray to God not to visit it on them, or their posterity; ye know I have had hard measure from some, and I know that I have stood be∣fore God to speak good for them, and to turn away his wrath from them. 17. As for you that are or may be hereaf∣ter set up for your selves in a way of trade: my counsel to you is this: See that your persons be upright with God, that ye may have a Scrip∣ture-right to the promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, which is to be prefer'd before the best estate in the world. Pray to God for his blessing, and see every customer as sent from him, and love them as your selves; let all that deal with you have cause to say, that they deal with the members of Jesus Christ.
18. And for you that are or may be Ap∣prentices, my counsel and command to you is this: Let those Scriptures dwell in your hearts which teach you your duty, and encourage you therein, as Ephes. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 3.22, 23, 24, 25. Tit. 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21. Commit them to memory, and bless God that he condescends to be a teacher of ser∣vants; be content with your present condition, which may be the easiest time of your whole age; be not apt to find fault, for that will make you uneasie to your selves, and to the family; let all your words, and looks, and actions, be such as do witness that ye do in your hearts honour your Masters and Mistresses, and Christ in them; bear correction patiently, though ye be wrong'd; the sufferings of Christ are set before you as your patern herein. Pray daily for your Masters, and their families, for ye ought to improve all your interest in God for their good; pray to God to fit you for your calling, that he who teacheth the hus∣bandman to plow and sow, Isa. 28.26. may teach you herein. To conclude, Love one another according to all the Obligations that are upon you, but never put it in the power of any one to undo the other. Kill all lustings after the honours, or riches, or pleasures of the world: Remember I have
told you, that as love fulfils all the Law of God, so lust fulfils the law of the Devil. I will say no more, chuse him for your Father that cannot dye: And as Mr. Bolton said to his children, so say I to you, Do not dare to meet me at the day of judgment in an unre∣generate state. June 6. 1681. Your loving and faithful Father, EDWARD LAWRENCE
To all Christian Parents. IT is not only for the sake of my self and children, but also for the sake of you and yours that I have pub∣lished this little book; but especially out of respect to the glory of God, that we may leave a seed to bless him in this world, when we are glorifying him in the better world; it will cost you but a little money to buy it, and but a little time for you and your children to read it; if those of you who are able, do give to every one of your children one of these books, and do likewise bestow some of them upon the children of the poor, this will be no ad∣vantage to me; and when ye come to give your account, will be no loss to you: I am a lover of children, and have often lifted up my heart in prayer to God for them, where I have seen them. I wish this may be a blessing to you and them; pray that we may leave that Religion which came
originally from the Father of Jesus Christ, and is reveal'd to us in the Scrip∣tures, to our posterity, and that they may have hearts to live according to the rules and principles of it, more than we have done. Farewell. June 6. 1681. Your Servant for Jesus sake, EDW. LAWRENCE. ERRATA. Page 35. line 19. instead of cinque, read sink. Page 82. line 21. read afflictions.
Parents Groans over their wicked Children. Prov. XVII. 25. A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him. IT is one great argu∣ment of the vanity of this world, that we may be spoil'd of all that is dear to us un∣der the Sun by the sins of other men. A common and sad instance of this is, That the Comforts of godly Parents here are very much at the will and plea∣sure of their own Children: For had a
good man all other delights that the creatures can yield, and did wash his steps in butter, and dip his foot in oyl: Nay suppose he had all the pleasures of Godliness that are ordinarily attained in this life, yet he will be a man of sorrow, if a wicked Child make him the Father of a fool. This doleful case is presented to us in this Text, which I have chosen for the subject of this discourse, that I may du∣ly affect my own and others hearts with this great calamity. In the Text two things are clearly set before us. 1. A case taken for granted; and that is, That godly Parents have often foolish Children. 2. The misery of that case is ex∣pressed; that is, That such Children are a grief to their Fathers, and bitterness to the Mothers that bare them. The Explication of the Text. A foolish son, that is, a wicked and ungodly son, or daughter; for it's usu∣al in this book of the Proverbs, that both sexes are intended, when but one
is expressed: Wicked Children think themselves wise, wiser than their Parents, or Masters, or Ministers; for vain man would be wise, though he be like a wild Asses colt, Job 11.12. But all the De∣vils children are fools; for he that will obey and imitate the Devil, who is a murderer of all his own children, and will not obey and imitate Christ who is the Redeemer and Saviour of all his Children, I may say of him in the words of a wise Woman, A fool is his name, and folly is with him. Is a grief to his Father. By Father and Mother in the Text, I understand a godly Father and Mother, who are most affected with this case. Is a grief: some render the word anger, or indig∣nation, and both grief and anger are intended; for a foolish son maketh his good Father both angry and sad. And bitterness to her that bare him; that is, to his good Mother, called her that bare him, to aggravate the Mothers misery, and the Childs sin: It cannot but torment the good Mother to think that she did with so much sickness, and
pain, and sorrow bear and bring forth one that proves a child of the Devil, and is like to be a firebrand of Hell; and it's a great aggravation of the childs sins, to imbitter the life of her that was a means of life to him; and to hasten that womb to the worms, which with such pangs and throws brought him in∣to the world. The Text will be further opened in the following discourse, which I shall reduce to these three Heads. First, That it is ordinary for godly Parents to have wicked and ungodly Children. Secondly, That this is a very great calamity to these godly Parents. Thirdly, Use. 1. It is ordinary for godly Parents to have wicked and ungodly Children: this is implied in the Text: And I may say of this what Solomon speaks of ano∣ther case, Eccles. 6.1. It is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is com∣mon among men. In the handling of this, I shall 1. Give some Characters of godly Parents.
2. Some Characters of ungodly Chil∣dren. 3. I shall give you several instances for the confirmation of it. 1. I shall only give you two main Characters of godly Parents. First, They are conscienciously care∣ful for their preservation. Secondly, For the Eternal happiness and salvation of their Children. 1. They are conscienciously careful for the preservation of the natural lives of their Children, as trees sup∣port and feed the branches that grow out of themselves: And as it's natural to the brutes to defend and keep their own young, so nature it self teacheth and inclineth Parents to defend, and preserve, and provide for the fruit of their own bodies: and for this end to supply them with food, raiment, and physick, and to fit them for callings, and seasonably to provide for them meet yokefellows, and every way to take care, that they neither perish or be made miserable: but godly Parents, in whom natural affections are sanctified
and improved by Grace, do all these out of a principle of Godliness, as per∣sons who have to do with God herein: they do it in a sense of their depen∣dance on God, and pray for daily bread to feed their Children, and are thankful when they feel it come warm from their Father in Heaven; they do it in obedience and faithfulness to God; and with a design, that their Children may live to be born of God, and to be a blessing to this world, and be blessed in the other world: As for those un∣natural monsters, who feed their lusts with that which should maintain their Children; they are so far from being Godly Parents, that they are worse than Infidels, in not providing for their Families; and are like the Devil, who (as I said, is a Murderer of his own Children. 2. They are conscienciously careful for the Eternal happiness and salvation of their Children; for their natural affections being now sanctified, do work in them for the spiritual good and hap∣piness of their Children. Prov. 4.3, 4, 5.
I was my fathers son, tender and only be∣loved in the sight of my mother. Solomon was his fathers and mothers darling, their love did run out exceedingly up∣on this son; and he tells us which way their love and kindness was express'd: he taught me also, and said unto me, Get wisdom, get understanding: He tells us also how the affections of his good mo∣ther did work, Prov. 31.2, 3. What my son? and what the son of my womb? and what the son of my vows? The son of her womb, was the son of her vows, whom she had devoted to God; those Parents who have known both states, the state of Wrath, and the state of Grace, and have experimentally felt what it is to pass from death to life, and from the kingdom of Satan, into the kingdom of God, cannot but de∣sire that the same change be wrought upon their children. And as they who love themselves with a holy love, do take God for their eternal life and hap∣piness, and Christ for their Redeemer, to redeem them from all evil, and to bring them to this happiness; and the
Spirit for their Sanctifier, to fit them for this happiness: So they that love their children with this holy Love, will desire and endeavour that they be par∣takers with them of the same happi∣ness. 2. I proceed to give you three Cha∣racters of ungodly Children. 1. They are such Children as will not be subject to the authority of their Parents: The reverence of Children to their Parents is so incorporated into the whole body of Religion, that all Religion is in vain without it: this fully appears, Levit. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my sabbaths, I am the Lord your God. Observe, this duty is here joyn'd with keeping the Lords Sabbaths, wherein Religion did always very much consist: but it's often seen, that disobe∣dient children are great prophaners of the Lords-day; they are always bad, but usually worst on that day; and some of them may remember, that their first breaking out into scandalous sins, was on the Lords-day. We are here
further taught, That this duty of Reve∣rence to Parents, is joyn'd with all Re∣ligion to God; for, saith God in effect, it's in vain for any to pretend to call me their Lord and their God, if they do not fear their Parents; and there∣sore wicked children are numbred a∣mong the most flagitious and worst sin∣ners. Ezek. 22.7. In thee have they set light by father and mother; they villified and despised them, and made nothing of them: such break all the bonds of Religion; and many hasten through a shameful and untimely death, into a dreadful and tormenting eternity, whose wickedness first began in scorning and despising their Parents. 2. They are such children as will not obey the Commands of their Pa∣rents: The godly Commands of Parents, are the means which God hath appoint∣ed, and doth often bless to make the children godly, Gen. 18.19. I know, Abraham, that he will command his chil∣dren, and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment: and God com∣mands
all children to obey all the holy and lawful commands of their parents, Ephes. 6.1. Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right: It's the parents right that their children should obey them; and it's Gods right that they should obey them in the Lord: and this, saith the Apostle, Col. 3.21. is well-pleasing to the Lord: so that those children do neither fear provo∣king God, nor care to please him, who will not obey their parents; and so are children of their parents sorrow, and of Gods wrath. 3. They are such children as are un∣thankful to their parents; the Apostle tells us, 1 Tim. 5.4. That it is good and acceptable before God for children to requite their parents: and they have great things for which they should la∣bour to requite their godly parents, viz. for all their care, and cost, and pains to keep them alive, and for all their diligence and faithfulness in en∣deavouring to make them blessed; and all the requital which the poor parents desire, is, that their children would but
love and obey God, and not damn them∣selves; but these ungodly children are so far from requiting them, that like so many Dogs and Lyons, they tear in pieces the hearts and bowels of their tender parents. 3. I now come to confirm this, That it's ordinary for godly parents to have ungodly children: and for this end. I shall first give you some instances re∣corded in Scripture. 2dly, I shall in∣stance in several cases wherein this is verified. 1. I shall only give you four in∣stances recorded in Scripture for the confirmation hereof. 1. Instance is in Adam and Eve; these were both godly parents; and there∣fore in that first Evangelical promise, Gen. 3.15. we have notice of the two great parties in the world; the one was the Woman, and her seed; and the o∣ther the Serpent, and his seed, and of the enmity betwixt them; and though there is only mention made of the wo∣man, yet the man is also included; so that by the woman and her seed, we are
to understand Adam and Eve, and Christ and his Church; and by the Serpent, and his seed, are meant the Devils, and all the devils children; and forasmuch as we find Adam and Eve of the same party with Christ and his Church, and in enmity with the Devil and his seed, we conclude them to be godly persons, and godly parents: Moreover we find Genes. 4. that they brought up their children in that Religion, and to wor∣ship God in the use of those Ordinan∣ces which he had then instituted as a means of their salvation: these two were the first-fruits of Christ; the first persons that ever entered into the Co∣venant of Grace; and Christ might say to them, as Jacob said to Reuben, Gen. 49.3. Ye are my first-born, my might, and the beginning of my strength. At first the whole Church of God was on∣ly in these two persons, and yet these are the parents of that cursed and bloody Cain. And I shall observe three things in this history that render this case very doleful.
1. That Eve was so exceeding glad for the birth of Cain: some are of opi∣nion, that she thought she had brought forth the promised Messiah; and that made her break out with joy, saying, Gen. 4.1. I have gotten a man from the Lord: and yet this is he of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 John 3.12. He was of that wicked one, meaning the devil: This is a common case, that parents are exceedingly glad for the birth of a child, and call their friends and neighbours to rejoyce with them; and yet that sweet and pleasant babe proves the greatest torment to their parents, which ever they met with in their whole age. 2. Consider his crime, he barba∣rously murdered his own brother, Gen. 4.8. Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him: He considered not how this would grieve the heart of his good Father and Mother, nor that he was the elder brother, and there∣fore ought to have nourished the life of the younger, and to have been a pattern of holiness and love to him; neither did he consider that he hated
and murder'd not only a brother, but also a holy child of God, and for that which he ought to have honoured and loved him; because his brothers works were righteous: and he considered not how his brothers blood would cry to God for vengeance against him; no bonds, or arguments, or reasons will prevail with ungodly children. 3. Consider the dreadful judgment of God, both upon himself and his po∣sterity: Gods judgment on his soul was so dreadful, that he desperately cries out, Gen. 4.13. Mine ini quity is grea∣ter than that it may be forgiven: he was cast out of the favour of God, excom∣municated from the Church, and all his posterity were excluded from com∣munion therewith: they are call'd the sons and daughters of men, in opposi∣tion to the Sons of God, and at last all perished in the deluge of waters; and yet, I say, this bloody and cursed monster was the son, the eldest son of the two first godly parents that ever were in the world.
2d Instance is in Noah; the first in∣stance was in the first godly man in the old world, as the ages before the flood are called, 2 Pet. 2.5. This instance is in the best man in the new World after the flood: this Noah hath a great cha∣racter in the Scriptures, Gen. 6.8, 9. Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations. When all the earth was debauch'd and corrupt, Gen. 6.11, 12. yet then was Noah just and upright, and walked with God, it's he that is called in 2 Pet. 2.5. A preacher of righ∣teousness: It is he that was so much in the favour of God, that he and his fa∣mily were singled out to be preserved in the Ark, when all the world besides were drown'd and perish'd in the wa∣ters: yet this holy Noah was the Father of that wicked Ham, whom all the wa∣ters of Noah (as the Scripture calls that deluge) were not effectual to eure of his wickedness; but he went a wicked man into the Ark, and came wicked out; insomuch that his own holy Fa∣ther was inspired by a prophetical spi∣rit,
to curse both his son and posterity, and the crime mentioned, Gen. 9.22, 25. was his irreverence and disrespect to his father. 3d Instance is in Isaac, that holy Pa∣triarch, who so greatly feared God, that his son Jacob gives God that ho∣nourable name, Gen. 31.42. The fear of Isaac, meaning the God whom Isaac feared; yet he and that good mother Rebekkah were the parents of a wicked Esau, whom God is said to hate, Rom. 9.13. I know we read Gen. 25.28. that Isaac loved Esau: but we see that children may be greatly beloved of their parents, and yet abhorred and cursed of God. 4th Instance is in David, call'd a man after Gods own heart, whom God rais'd up to be king of Israel: he was a Pen∣man, of a considerable part of the holy Scriptures; such an eminent type of Christ, that Christ himself is often call'd David in Scripture; yet he was the tender father of that wicked Absolom, who bloodily murdered his brother Amnon, and miserably and shamefully
dyed in Treason and Rebellion against his Royal Father, whose bitter lamen∣tation is yet in our ears, 2 Sam. 18.33. O my son Absolom, my son, my son Absolom! would God I had died for thee; O Absolom my son, my son! 2dly, I shall further instance in four Cases, wherein this is often verified. 1. Those Children who are most be∣loved of their parents, do often prove the most wicked Children. Absolom was David's darling; insomuch, that although he set his whole kingdom in a flame, and constrained his father to fly for his life; yet when David sent out his Army to suppress that rebellion, he gives this charge to his Commanders, in the audience of the Soldiers, 2 Sam. 18.5. Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absolom. And it often happens, that the Chil∣dren who have most of their Parents love and delight, and whose looks and talk they are most taken with, and whom they are most apt to boast of, and are most unwilling to part with,
and in whom they promise themselves most content and pleasure, do often prove the greatest scourge and torment to their parents; for it is not the love of the godly parents, but the love of God that makes children holy and happy. 2. This is often the sad case of some holy Ministers of the Word: I know it's a Popish and peevish humour in some to say, that Ministers children ne∣ver do well; indeed every thing of Ministers is most exposed to the obser∣vation of people, and therefore the wickedness of their children is most observ'd and talk'd of; but the holy, learned, and every-way prosperous and blessed seed of divers godly Ministers, is sufficient to confute and shame the ignorance of people herein; and yet it is true that many godly Ministers in all ages have groan'd under this sad ca∣lamity: Eli was a holy Priest of God, but his two sons were Devils incarnate, monsters of men, scandalous, sacrilegi∣ous and adulterous sons of Belial, as
appears 1 Sam. 2. And this is no rare thing, that the Prayers, Studies, Ser∣mons, Examples of many good Ministers are often made successful to bring o∣thers to Heaven, when they can by no means restrain their own children from running to Hell, and their own chil∣dren make them do the work of their Ministry with grief, when often the children of drunkards, worldlings, and whoremongers will be their crown and glory in the day of the Lord Jesus. 3. This is often true, when both pa∣rents are godly; indeed when either father or mother is wicked, no marvel if the children be hardned in their sins by their examples: but it's usually seen, that when children have both the in∣struction of the father, and also the law of the mother; and when they cry to all the Ministers and Christians about them, to help them by their prayers and coun∣sels to save their children; yet all pre∣vail not, but the holy father and mo∣ther can scarce keep one anothers hearts from being broken by their
stubborn and disobedient children. 4. The children of godly parents often prove wicked, when God doth sanctifie, and bless, and save the chil∣dren of ungodly parents; we see some∣times trees of righteousness, growing in the families of the wicked, when briars and thorns grow up in the fami∣lies of the righteous: We read Matth. 1. that Ahaz, a very wicked king, begat holy Hezekiah, and good Hezekiah be∣gat Manasseh, who was an Idolater of the highest rate; a Witch, and such a bloody murderer, that the Chronicle of his reign tells us, 2 Kings 21.16. He shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to the other (though afterwards he is set forth to be the greatest pattern of the grace of God in the Old Testament, as Paul is in the New Testament): It is no new sight to see children of the best Saints in the way to Hell, and children of Atheists and Persecutors in the way to Heaven; Nay, though some parents do persecute their own children for loving
and fearing God, yet they cannot de∣bauch them; when all endeavours of godly parents will not prevail to make their children hate sin, and love God: and this is one of the saddest instances of that great mystery of Providence, mentioned Eccles. 8.14. There he just men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked: again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth ac∣cording to the work of the righteous. 2. Head. It is a very great calamity to godly parents to have wicked and ungodly children; A foolish son (saith the text) is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him: To the same purpose is that, Prov. 17.21. He that begetteth a fool, doth it to his sorrow, and the father of a fool hath no joy; a foolish son damps all his joy: and Prov. 19.13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father. I shall set forth the greatness of this trouble by these Eight particulars:
1. By the matter of these parents grief. 2. By the passions that this calamity doth move and affect. 3. By comparing this with other afflictions, and shewing how this ex∣ceeds them. 4. By shewing that this makes these parents do all their work with grief and sorrow. 5. By shewing that this embitters all their other comforts. 6. By the sad concommitants of it. 7. By the several aggravations of it. 8. By instancing in some cases wherein this calamity is more grievous. First, The matter of these parents grief is very sad, as appears in these seven things: 1. That their children are so defiled and debauched with sin, which is so loathsome to these holy parents; it vexed the righteous soul of Lot to see
and hear the filthy conversation of the beastly Sodomites; how grievous then must it be to these godly parents, to see and hear the filthiness of their own dear children; it is a grievous thing to a man that loves God, and Godliness, and Souls, to see a drunkard staggering in the streets, or to hear any man blaspheming and reproaching his Maker and Redeemer; but none can tell but those that feel it, what a sad spectacle it is to sober and godly parents to see their own children drunk; or how it torments them to hear their own children lying, and blaspheming God and his Saints. 2. That their children are the chil∣dren of the Devil, and under the power of Satan, and ridden by him, and car∣ried captive by him at his will; it was a lamentable case of that good Mother, who came to Christ, saying, Matth. 15.22. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil: yet this was not her daughters sin, but only her great affliction: but how doleful is it to these
parents, who have renounced the devil themselves, and live in continual war∣fare with him, to see the hearts, and mouths, and lives of the children, whom they have devoted to God, fill'd and possess'd with the devil, whose children they are, and whose lusts they will do; if the devil tempt the parents, their own graces will resist and overcome his temptations; but they cannot se∣cure their children from being over∣come, and from falling into the con∣demnation of the devil; but with sad hearts do see the Lyon of Hell running away with the lambs of their flock, and cannot recover them. 3. That their children are under the wrath and curse of God; it did sadly affect the father of that lunatick son, mentioned Matth. 17.15. to see his son fall oft into the fire, and oft into the water: How would he screech at such a sight, and cry, Ah my dear child will be burnt, my child will be drown'd! but much more terrible is it to these parents, who know the terrors of the
Lord, to know that their children have cut off the entail of the Covenant of Grace, and are every moment ready to fall into the hands of the living God! when such parents are, with faith, reading the curses of Gods Law, how doth it cut them to the heart to think, that they are then reading their chil∣drens doom. 4. That their children are under those black characters, which are given in Scripture to ungodly men; for the faith of these parents makes all persons have that name in their hearts, which they have in the Word: And as God is no respecter of persons, so Faith, so far as it prevails, respecteth not the per∣sons of any, no not of a mans own chil∣dren; but because they are more un∣der their notice and observation than others, and because they are more con∣cern'd for them, therefore the deeper impressions do these characters make on their hearts; so that this is the mi∣sery of these parents, that whilest they look on persons through the glass of
the Scriptures, and see many to be the jewels, and treasure, and children, and heirs of God, and the glorious bride and spouse of Christ; they must and do judge their own wicked children to be a generation of vipers, and ser∣pents, and dogs, and swine, and lyons, and bears, and wolves, as God calls them in his Word. 5. That the anger and displeasure of God appears so much against these good parents herein; indeed the sense of their own folly must make them justi∣fie God in this sharp correction, and cause them to say with Solomon, Prov. 26.3. As it is meet that there be a whip for the horse, and a bridle for the asse; so is it, that there be a rod for the fools back: But this is very grievous, that God should correct them with a scourge made of their own bowels, and should chasten a blessed father with a cursed child; his holy anger must be acknow∣ledged herein; for when the child de∣spiseth his father, God himself doth justly spit in the fathers face.
6. The shame and disgrace which comes to them hereby, Prov. 19.26. He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causeth shame: Every one will be ready to re∣flect upon their parents, and to say, Surely these children were never taught to serve God, who do so sacrifice them∣selves to the service of the devil. 7. Both parents are deeply affected for the trouble and misery that comes hereby to one another; their love to, and sympathy with one another, makes the burden of both more uneasie: The good father is not only troubled with a wicked child, but also for the bitter∣ness and sorrow of his wife; and the good mother is not only troubled with the wicked child, but also for the grief of her husband; the mothers heart bleeds to see the tears, and to hear the groans of the afflicted father, and cries out, Oh, what a child have I brought forth, that so much deprives me of the comfort of a loving hus∣band, and is like to break his heart,
and to make me a desolate and discon∣solate widow: The father mourns to see the tears, and the sad countenance, and to hear the groans of the distressed mother; and is ready to cry out, Wo is me, that the child of my bowels is destroying the wife of my bosom; and yet these hard-hearted children are not affected herewith; but let the parents sigh, they will sing; let the parents weep and mourn, they will rant and roar; and care no more to break their parents hearts, than to break a Tobacco∣pipe; and will not abate a lie, or oath, or cup, to save the lives of their ten∣der parents. Secondly, The greatness of this cala∣mity appears by the passions in the pa∣rents, which are moved and affected hereby. I shall only instance in three passions, Fear, Anger, and Sorrow. 1. Fear: This is a troublesome pas∣sion, and godly parents are never out of fear of their wicked children; they
are afraid that every one that knocks at the door, and that every post, and every friend that comes to visit them, brings them some sad tidings of their disobedient children. I shall amplifie this, by instancing in three great Evils, which such parents are greatly perplex∣ed with the fear of. 1. They are afraid lest their children are in the practice of some great sins: this was Jobs fear, when his children were feasting together, Job 1.5. Job said, It may be my sons have sinn'd and curs'd God in their hearts: their chil∣dren are seldom out of their sight, but the good parents are in fear of this; they know their children are always expos'd to the devils temptations, and to the snares of the world, and to the allurements of evil company; and that their corrupt hearts are set to comply with all; and that they have provoked God to give them up to their own lusts; and therefore they are in continual fear, lest these poor children are lying, or swearing, or cursing, or whoring, or
drunk, and defiling, and debauching, and destroying themselves and others. 2. They are in fear lest some heavy judgment of God will befall them in this life: And thus David, when his son Absolom was in the head of a high rebellion against his father, and the battel was to be fought with the Re∣bels, was fearful lest his son should then perish in his sins: these parents know that their poor children are out of Gods way, and as birds wandring from the nest, Prov. 27.8. are expos'd to all manner of danger; they know what the word threatens against them, and what fearful instances there are of the vengeance of God upon disobedient children; and therefore they are in fear, lest their sins should bring them to some untimely, and shameful death. 3. They are in fear of their eter∣nal damnation; they are sensible that their children are children of wrath, and do live in those sins for which the wrath of God comes on the children of disobe∣dience;
and these parents believe what Hell is; for as faith in the promises is the substance of things hoped for; so faith, as it believes the threatnings, is the substance of things feared; and therefore they cannot but tremble to think, that their dear lambs, whom they so tenderly nourish'd and cherish'd, are in danger every moment to be cast into the fire that is prepared for de∣vils. 2. Anger is another passion that is moved in godly parents, with the wick∣edness of their children: and this is troublesome; for a man is never out of trouble whilst he is in anger; and the more the wills of these parents are bent to have their children godly, the more are they displeas'd, and provok'd to anger by their sins: they are angry to see them provoke that God whom they themselves are so careful to please; and to see them destroying their precious souls, which they are labouring to save; and to see them waste those estates on their filthy lusts, which they have got
by their care, and labour, and prayers: they cannot but think of them with anger, and speak of them with anger, and look at them with anger: and thus their children which should be their delight and pleasure, are a conti∣nual cross and vexation to them. 3. Sorrow: They are deeply affected with grief and sorrow for the wicked∣ness of their children; the parents graces cause them to mourn for their childrens sins; their saving-knowledge makes their hearts bleed to see their children scorn and despise that glory which they see in God and Christ; and whilst they by faith are feeding on Christ, it grieves them to see their chil∣dren feeding themselves with the dirty pleasures of sin; their love to God makes them groan, that their children love sin the worst evil, and hate God the chiefest good. Thirdly, I proceed to shew the greatness of this calamity, by compa∣ring it with other troubles, and shew∣ing
how this exceeds them. I shall in∣stance in four other Troubles. 1. This is a greater calamity than to be without Children; so that if God had said of those Parents, as he said of him, Jer. 22.30. Write ye this man, and this woman childless, the punish∣ment had not been so great, as to be afflicted with wicked children: such parents may say with our Saviour in another case, Luke 23.29. Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. As it's better to have no herbs in your gardens, than to have only stinking-weeds that cumber the ground; and better to have no beasts in your ground, than a company of foxes and wolves; so it's better to have no children, than to have only such who are the conti∣nual shame, and plague, and torment of their parents. 2. It's a greater misery than to have diseased, or deformed children: This indeed is a sore affliction, to be the pa∣rents
of sick, or blind, or lame, or mon∣strous children, because such children are naturally disabled to do that service to God, and their generation, and their parents, which otherwise they might do: but this is not so grievous as to have wicked children; for they that are most diseased and uncomely, are often called to be the blessed and glo∣rious children and heirs of God, and the amiable and beautiful bride and spouse of Christ, when all wicked chil∣dren are the filthy and loathsome chil∣dren of the devil. 3. This is more grievous than the death of children. I know it's matter of deep sorrow when parents may say with the tender Patriarch, Gen. 42.36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not: My son is dead, and is not; and my dear daughter is dead, and is not; but this sorrow is not lasting, the impression of it usually doth, and should wear off; but wicked children are constant trou∣bles to their parents, and cause them to say with the Psalmist, Psal. 31.10.
My days are spent with grief, and my years with sighing. 4. This calamity is greater than per∣secution from wicked men, though that be also very grievous; insomuch that Paul, a man of a great spirit, was so affected herewith, that he solemnly be∣seecheth the Roman Christians, Rom. 15.30. For the Lord Jesus sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that they would strive together with him in prayer to God for him, to deliver him from persecuting∣men; it is a sad case to be smitten and wounded in our names by lying and slanderous tongues: David, and Christ in him, tells us, Psal. 69.20. That re∣proach hath broken his heart: It is sad for the jewels of God to be accounted and used as the sink and jakes of the world, and to have our estates wasted and spoyl'd, and to be expos'd to beg∣gery and want, and to be drag'd from our healthful and pleasant habitations and families, and to be cast among rogues and thieves into nasty and loath∣some prisons, and to have our innocent
and precious blood shed by barbarous men: but all this is not so grievous as to be tormented by wicked children; for in that case we are distressed by the sins of our enemies; and if so, as Da∣vid speaks, Psal. 55.12. We could have born it: But in this case we are afflicted by the sins of our own children, and may say with David, when he was re∣viled by Shimei, 2 Sam. 16.11. Behold my son which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more may this Benjamite? It is a far greater torment to have the children of our own bow∣els tear and break our hearts, than to be destroy'd by merciless enemies. Fourthly, The greatness of this ca∣lamity is seen, in that it causeth these good parents to do all their work with sorrow. I shall instance in three sorts of Works which they do in the bitter∣ness of their Souls: 1. Natural. 2. Ci∣vil. 3. Religious Works. He that hath a wicked child on his heart, doth all these with a sad heart.
1. Natural Works: these they do with sorrow: They are fed with the bread of tears, and drink their tears in great measure, as the Psalmist speaks in another case, Psal. 80.5. And as it's said, in the prayer of the afflicted, Psal. 102.9. They eat ashes like bread, and mingle their drink with weeping. 2. They do their Civil Works with grief: this makes them labour with sor∣row in their particular callings; it was Solomons trouble to think that a fool should have the rule of his labour where∣in he laboured, and shewed himself wise under the Sun, Eccles. 2.18, 19, 20. And this sad case is often observ'd, that the same estates which were the fruit of the wise and good parents prayers, and diligence, are consum'd upon the chil∣drens lusts; and that the good crea∣tures which were a blessing to the pa∣rents, and wherewith they did honour God, and feed Christ in his members, do prove a curse to their children, and weapons in their hands wherewith they sight against God and his people.
3. This also causeth them to do their Religious Works in grief and sorrow. I shall only instance in two particu∣lars. 1. This makes them instruct these poor ungodly children with sorrow: It is a doleful case when men can have their dogs to come at their whistle, and their horses to yield to the bridle, and their oxen to submit to the yoke; but their unruly children will not be sub∣ject to the holy government of their parents; they can readily learn filthy words, and wicked actions from their ungodly School-fellows, or Fellow-ap∣prentices, or debauch'd companions; but they will not hear the instruction of their father, nor obey the law of their mother. 2. This causeth them to pray for such children with sorrow; for accord∣ing as is the spiritual state of the chil∣dren, so are their holy parents affected in prayer to God for them; when they can in prayer call upon God as the Father of their children, and can
present their children to God as such, who are born of God, and adopted of him, and can beg mercy for them who are the vessels of mercy, then they do, as the Apostle for the Philippians, Chap. 1.4. In every prayer make request for them with joy: but when children are manifestly wicked, and their good pa∣rents must in prayer to God call them what they are, and must say, Lord, my poor children are children of the devil, children of disobedience, chil∣dren of thy wrath, lying, swearing, covetous, drunken, unclean, stubborn children; Oh pity, pardon, save, con∣vert them; they pray for them, but they pray in the sorrow and anguish of their souls. Fifthly, I come to shew how wicked children embitter all the comforts of their good parents; so that as Solomon tells us, Prov. 17.21. A father of a fool hath no joy. I shall exemplifie this in four particulars.
1. The good parents cannot be so comfortable and delightful to one ano∣ther as they would be, when both are in bitterness for their wicked children; the husband cannot be such a comfort to his wife, when he is almost in con∣tinual anger and sorrow for his wicked child; nor the wife such a delight to her husband, when her heart is bleed∣ing for her ungodly child; for if they have no joy in themselves, as was said before, they cannot be so much the joy and delight of one another: but when they lye down, this makes them water their bed with tears, and they awake with sorrow, with a wicked child on their hearts. 2. They cannot take so much com∣fort as they would in the other chil∣dren that are godly; not that they love them less, but rather more; but their joy in them is much interrupted here∣by. Suppose among many children there be but one ungodly child, that one is a disturbance and annoyance to the whole family; that one sinner (as
Solomon speaks in a more general case) destroys much good; it grieves them to think, that whereas that one child was in the same Covenant, and had the same dedication to God by Baptism, and the same affection and education from the parents with all the other children; yet the rest are vessels of mercy, but this seems to be a vessel of wrath. 3. They cannot take so much com∣fort in the victory over their own sins, when they see the same corrup∣tions which are abhorred, and morti∣fied, and forsaken by the parents, breaking out, and reigning in the chil∣dren. 4. This interrupts their joy in God and Jesus Christ; when such parents must with the same faith believe Gods wrath to their children, as they believe his love to themselves; and when they look upon God as their Father, they must look upon him as an enemy to their Children; and when they say, We hope Heaven is our portion and
place, it must grieve them that their children will not go with them thither. Sixthly, The greatness of this affli∣ction appears further by the concommi∣tants of it. I shall only instance in three things that usually accompany it, which make it more grievous. 1. Such children do often impove∣rish their parents; Solomon tells us, that a wicked child wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother; such children care not if they starve their poor pa∣rents, so that they can feed their own lusts; and it's often seen, that a plenti∣ful estate is consum'd by riotous chil∣dren. 2. Such children do often debauch and corrupt the other children, and make their brethren in nature, to be their brethren in iniquity: and often their brothers and sisters are easier in∣ticed to sin by a wicked brother, than drawn to God by a godly father: and if any of the other children be godly,
these wicked ones do hate, and revile, and persecute them like wicked Cain, who slew his brother because his works were righteous. 3. They bring reproach upon that good Religion which their good pa∣rents profess and practise: and thus Eli's sons made men abhor the offerings of the Lord; and with some the holy lives of the parents cannot wipe off the reproach which is cast on Religion by the wickedness of their children. Seventhly, The greatness of this af∣fliction appears by these eight Aggra∣vations of it. 1. It aggravates their grief to re∣member what pleasure and delight these children were to them in their child∣hood; it torments them now to see their sweet and pleasant smiles, turn'd into scornful and disdainful looks at their parents, and their pretty broken words turn'd into oaths and lies, and other rotten speeches; and to think
that these who once were so forward to clasp about their necks, and to kiss them, and to run at their commands, do now lift up the heel against them. 2. It aggravates their sorrow to see themselves so miserably disappointed in their former hopes of these children; Hope deferred (saith Solomon) makes the heart sick: but to be cross'd and disap∣pointed in hopes of so great mercy, doth even break the heart. When these parents remember how pleasant it was to them to hear these children lisp out their Catechisms, and to hear their good words of God and Christ; it cannot but be very grievous to them, that the same children which they did with Hannah lend to the Lord, should sell themselves to the devil. 3. It aggravates their sorrow, that their children are so void of love to their parents, and to see that the com∣pany of lyars, and drunkards, and whoremongers, and thieves, is more delightful to them than the company of their parents.
4. It aggravates their sorrow to look upon the holy children of others; when they may say, Yonder are chil∣dren that make a glad father and mo∣ther, when the children of our bodies, and counsels, and prayers, and vows, and tears, live as if their father was an Amorite, and their mother an Hittite. 5. Aggravation is, in case the parents have but one child, and that proves foolish and disobedient: and of this there be many instances; the Scripture, to set forth the saddest kind of mourn∣ing, compares it to the mourning for an only son, Jer. 6.26. Make thee mourning as for an only son, most bitter lamentation. Zech. 12.10. They shall mourn as one that mourneth for an only son. I know these Scriptures speak of parents mourning for the death of an only son; but it's not so sad to follow an only son to the grave, as to see an only child live to the dishonour of God, to be a curse to his generation, and to be continually destroying his precious soul; it's a very bitter case, when as
much love, and kindness, and care, and cost, and pains, and prayers, and fastings, are bestowed upon one child, as other parents bestow upon many children; and notwithstanding all this, one child should prove such a monster of wicked∣ness, as if the sins of many ungodly chil∣dren met in him. 6. Aggravation. When Gods holy Ministers are the Fathers of fools, which (I have told you) often happens: and this is a most dreadful case for such who have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and yet must bind over their own children to the wrath of God: such know the terrors of the Lord, and the torments of Hell more than others; and therefore must be more affected to believe, that this at present is the por∣tion of their own children. 7. Aggravation. When such chil∣dren whom their parents design'd to serve God in the Ministry of the Gospel, do prove ungodly: this is matter of great lamentation, for the parents to intend them for the highest office in
the Church, and give them education for that end, that these children should make themselves as salt without savour, which is good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under foot of men. 8. Aggravation. When children are a grief to their parents in their old age, and do as it were throw dirt up∣on their hoary heads, which is their crown of glory; it's the command of God, Prov. 23.22. Despise not thy mother when she is old: Solomon tells us, Eccles. 12. That the days of old age are evil days; their very age is a trou∣blesome and incurable disease; now the grashopper, every light thing is a burden to them, and therefore it must be more troublesome to them to be then tormented with wicked children, when the strong men (as Divines think) Solomon calls the legs, do bow them∣selves, and their children who should be a staff and support to them, do break their hearts, and cause their grey-hairs to go with sorrow to the grave.
I now come to make application of this discourse. Ʋse 1. Let such parents praise and ho∣nour God, whom God hath bless'd with wise, and holy, and obedient children; whether by those words in Psal. 144.12. David means children accomplish'd with natural or spiritual endowments, or both, I shall not determine; but to apply them to the case in hand, I say it's the great mercy of God to you, that when so many children are as noisome weeds, your sons should be as hopeful plants grown up in their youth; and when so many make themselves ugly, and deform'd with sin, your daughters should be as corner-stones (in which is seen the beauty of the building, and the art and skill of the workman) po∣lished after the similitude of a palace. Do not hence conclude, that you are better parents than others, or have had more care in the education of your children than others, but ascribe all to the free grace of God, who will
have mercy upon whom he will have mercy. 2. Let none presume to censure godly parents for their wicked chil∣dren; To him that is afflicted, saith Job, pity should be shew'd him from his friend. Have they not trouble enough already, but will you add to their affliction? They have not hereby forfeited the good thoughts and esteem which you should have of them; and if you judge them for this, ye must judge as wise and holy Saints of God as ever were in the world; though God herein doth sharply correct them, yet he will not allow you to sit in judgment, and to pass sentence upon them: I say to you, as Job to his friends, Hold your peace, let them alone; and leave them to stand or fall to their own Master. 3. This should fill the hearts of these holy parents with revenge up∣on Sin and Satan, which have so
debauch'd, and defiled, and destroy'd their dear children: If a man should murder your child, a spirit of re∣venge would rise in you, and you would say to such a one, I will have thy life and blood for the life and blood of my child; but Sin and Sa∣tan have destroy'd both the preci∣ous soul and body of the child; therefore labour, as for other rea∣sons, so for this also, to be reveng'd of them: Labour to do as David did by the Lyon and the Bear, which took a Lamb out of his flock, he slew both the Lyon and the Bear, and delivered the Lamb; so do all ye can to reseue your poor lambs out of the jaws of Satan; however labour to hate Sin and Satan more, to promote Gods honour and king∣dom, and the salvation of souls more: and this is the way to be re∣veng'd on Sin and Satan for the ruine of your children.
4. I do hence exhort all holy and obedient children to acknowledge the grace of God to them, that they are or have been the joy and crown of their parents: It is his distin∣guishing grace that made you to differ from all wicked children, and perhaps from some that came out of the same womb, and sucked the same mothers breasts as you did. Consider four things which are great matter of praise. 1. That ye are the children of holy parents; that ye may comfor∣tably come to God in prayer, and say, we are the children of thy ser∣vant our father; we are thy ser∣vants, and the children of thy hand∣maid our mother: bless God for your parents good counsels and ex∣amples, and for a great part of an age of prayers, which ye are daily receiving the benefit of; if your parents are dead, and in heaven, it
may put you into a holy and spiri∣tual frame to think of the graces of God that did shine in them. 2. That the same graces which dwelt in your good parents, are in you: Paul speaks of it as matter of praise to God, that the same faith was in Timothy, which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mo∣ther Eunice; and the Apostle John rejoyced greatly, that he found the children of the elect Lady walking in truth. 3. That thou art freed from those stings of conscience, which grace∣less children shall one day feel for their disobedience to their parents; thou mayest joyfully reflect, that thou wast the joy of thy holy pa∣rents, and that their lives have been made sweeter, and their crosses ea∣sier by thee; that thou art the ho∣nour and seal of their holy education, when wicked children are the shame and reproach of their parents.
4. That thou hast a right to that rich and precious promise annext to the fifth Commandment, and men∣tion'd Ephes. 6.2, 3. So that thou may'st be assur'd that it shall go well with thee both in this world, and in the world to come; I do seriously profess, I had rather have a right to that one promise made to obedient children, than to the best estate and inheritance under the Sun. I shall finish this discourse, 1. In prescribing some means to be us'd by those that may be, or are parents, to prevent this cala∣mity. 2. I shall direct those parents that groan under this calamity, how to bear it. 3. I shall give a serious exhor∣tation to such children who are the grief and bitterness of their pa∣rents.
First, I shall prescribe means to be us'd to prevent this calamity. 1. Use all holy prudence and care in your choice of a yoke-fellow; for if ye make your selves the hus∣bands or wives of fools, ye are like in time to become the fathers or mothers of fools; when before the flood, the members of Gods Church married with a wicked generation, Genes. 6.2. they brought forth a wicked posterity; but to have a holy yoke-fellow, is the way to have a holy seed; and therefore what ye would most desire to have for your selves, that labour to find in the person who is to be one flesh with you: thou wouldst have thy self born of God; thou wouldst have the Image of God, and the life of Christ in thy self. Labour that these things be in the person whom thou chusest for thy yoke-fellow; but never make choice of one for
thy husband or wife, whom thou shouldst not chuse for thy compa∣nion. 2. Be faithful and upright with God, Prov. 20.7. The just man walketh in his integrity, and his chil∣dren are blessed after him: If you would have grace and mercy for your children, love and please the God of all grace and mercy; what∣ever secret sins are in thee, kill those sins for thy poor childrens sake, lest the sins you too much harbour in your own hearts, do break out in your childrens lives: Parents may often see their own sins against their heavenly father in their childrens disobedience to them; when your children despise you, remember your want of honour, and fear, and re∣verence of God; when they vex and trouble you, remember how ye have griev'd and provoked him; when they decline your company, remember how your hearts have
wandered from God in his Ordi∣nances. 3. Bewail and beg pardon of God for your failings heretofore to your parents; for many do often reap from their own children, what they formerly sow'd by their sins against their parents; and their miscarriages to their parents do fall upon them in the wickedness of their children: the best may sadly reflect upon their want of due honour, and obedience, and thankfulness to their parents; ye may remember your peevish looks, undecent behaviour to them; your grieving them in quarrelling with your brethren and sisters; your un∣just censuring them for partiality in their love to their children, and judging them to want love to you, when you were wanting in your duty to them; and many, who are now godly parents themselves, may remember, that by greater sins in their youth they were the grief and
bitterness of their fathers and mo∣thers; and therefore pray mightily to God to pardon you, and not to visit these sins upon you in the diso∣bedience of your children. 4. Pray to God not to visit your sins upon your children: When Manasseh was in Heaven, Amon his son followed the steps of his uncon∣verted estate; and Jehoiakim was car∣ried captive into Babylon for the sins of Manasseh: Pray that your chil∣dren may not be like you in any thing, wherein ye are unlike God; and that their teeth may not be set on edg for the sowre grapes that ye have eaten. 5. Be deeply affected with the corruption of nature in your chil∣dren: For as no man will value a Saviour for himself, who is not con∣vinc'd of the sin and misery which he must be saved from; so ye must be sensible of your childrens sins, or else ye cannot labour for their salva∣tion.
When your sweet babes are born, ye rejoyce to find that in Gods book all their members were writ∣ten; but ye should also be sensible of that body of sin they are born with, and that by nature they are young Atheists, and Infidels, and haters of God, and basphemers, and whoremongers, and lyars, and thieves, and murderers; for they are natu∣rally inclin'd to these and all other fins, and are by nature children of the wrath of the infinite God; and being convinc'd of this, ye will find that your chief care of them should be to save them from this dreadful state of sin and misery. 6. Be convinc'd what a great deal of work lies upon you to endea∣vour the salvation of your chil∣dren: young children always make a great deal of work; they make work for parents, and work for ser∣vants, and work for all that are a∣bout them; but to save them from
sin and hell, is the greatest work that belongs to their parents: for this purpose they have a great deal a work to do in their own hearts; they must know, and believe, and love, and obey the doctrine of sal∣vation themselves, that they may be able, and sit to instruct their chil∣dren therein; for a man cannot train up his child in the way he should go, if he do not know the way himself: We read Deut. 6.6, 7. These words shall be in thy heart, and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy chil∣dren; it's fitly render'd in the mar∣gin, thou shalt whet or sharpen them; the word of God is more keen and sharp when it hath first done its work on the parents hearts, and so comes from their hearts to their chil∣dren: Parents must keep their own graces in exercise, to put authority and savour in all that they say and do for the salvation of their chil∣dren: Grace must work in their
prayers; grace must rule their tongues; grace must guide the rod, and grace must shine in their lives: and then it's a great work which is to be wrought in the children; it is a great work for them who are born of the flesh, to be born of the spirit; a great work to make Reli∣gion and Godliness natural to them; to make the children of the devil to become the children of God Almigh∣ty: and parents must constantly la∣bour in the use of means to accom∣plish this work. 7. Be mighty in prayer for your children; for all the good ye desire for them must come from God, and therefore must be beg'd by prayer; it is in vain for them to be taught of us, except they be taught of God; Whose words, Lord, (saith holy Augustine) were they but thine, which by my faithful mother thou hast sung in my heart. Pray, and pray in faith and hope; thy ears (saith Augustine
again) were at my mothers heart, when she pray'd for me; ye must pray with tender and melting hearts: the same Father tells us, that his mothers tears watered the earth when she pray'd for him: and ye must pray for their salvation: this also Augustine calls the hinge of his holy mothers prayers for him. 8. Solemnly dedicate them to God by baptism; and then ye must heartily consent that God alone be the eternal life and happiness of you and your children, and that Jesus Christ be their and your Redeemer, to redeem you and them from all sin and misery, and to bring both to God; and that the Holy Ghost be their and your Sanctifier, that by him you and they may have a Scripture-right unto, and be made meet and fit for this happiness. 9. When they are capable of it, instruct them in the Covenant, which by baptism they were solemnly en∣tered
into. For this end ye must diligently teach them these six things: 1. To know the evil and dan∣ger of sin; for till they come to know what sin is, and what it is to be saved, or damn'd, and what it is to lose, or enjoy God; they will not value or accept of Christ, but will despise the Redeemer of the World as good for nothing: ye must there∣fore labour to make sin odious, and Christ precious to your children, and then they will value Christ, and obey you: It was prophesied of John the Baptist, that he was to prepare the way of the Lord, and to turn the chil∣dren to the parents: so let it be your care to make way for Christ in your childrens hearts; and if ye prevail in that, they will be obedient to you. 2. Inform your selves and them in the doctrine of God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: for this is the doctrine whereinto they are bap∣tized; and by baptism they are so∣lemnly entered into Covenant with these sacred persons, against the flesh, Satan, and the world: shew them the glory and love of God the Fa∣ther in chusing, ordaining, fitting, and sending Jesus Christ, and in commanding him to be a sacrifice for us; inform them that God the Father is the fountain of life; for Christ lives by the Father: the foun∣tain of Authority; for Christ re∣ceived all power in heaven and earth from him: the fountain of all the Christian Religion; for Christ first heard these truths from the Father, and then made them known to us; and the fountain of glory, for the Father hath exalted Christ, and all glorified Saints are the blessed of the Father. Labour by these and all other means, that God the Father have the greatest place in your chil∣drens
hearts. Teach them to know and prize Jesus Christ; without this they cannot be true Christians: shew them all the fulness and glory of the Godhead in Jesus Christ: Labour to make them see his glory as the only begotten Son of God; and all that he as Mediator and Redeemer hath done in the state of his humiliation, and is doing, and will do in the state of his exaltation, for the salvati∣on of lost sinners. Labour to im∣print these great Truths upon their hearts. 1. That it was the Will and Law of God the Father, that God the Son in our nature should be a sacri∣fice for our sins: this fully appears Heb. 10.5, &c. A body hast thou prepared, or fitted me, meaning to be a sacrifice: and, saith he, Lo I come to do thy will, O God: and Psal. 40. Thy law is in my heart; meaning that will and law of the Father, which
bound him to offer and sacrifice him∣self for our sins. 2. That Jesus Christ by his obe∣dience to the death of the cross, did perfectly obey and fulfil this law and will of God the Father. 3. That all salvation and happi∣ness is by the Covenant of Grace setled upon all, and only those who believe and obey the Gospel, only for the sake of this sacrifice and obedience of Jesus Christ: and therefore, saith the Apostle, Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Christ once for all: that is, by Christs fulfilling the will of his Father, in once sacrificing himself for sinners, we and all true belie∣vers are sanctified, that is, perfectly saved. Ye must also acquaint them with the office and work of the Holy Ghost, which our Saviour tells us, John 16.13. is to guide or lead
them into all truth; that is, to in∣able them to believe, and love, and obey the saving-truths of God re∣veal'd in the Gospel: for to the end, that they may know and keep their baptismal-covenant, they must know how all the Three sacred persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are interested in the great work of Salvation. 3dly, Labour to convince your children of the Excellency of the Life of Religion, and obedience to God: commend this to them as the most honourable life; for our Savi∣our tells us, John 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my father honour. What shall be done to the man (saith Ahasuerus) whom the king will ho∣nour? But who is able to tell what shall be done to the man whom the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ will honour? Let them also know, that this is the wisest life; it's Jobs in∣quiry, Where shall wisdom be found?
and, saith he, Job 28.28. Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil, is under∣standing: And further, that it is the safest life, for God is a shield, and rock, and wall to all that obey him; and although such things which they have in common with other men are expos'd to danger and loss, yet their persons, and their whole por∣tion is always safe; and also, that this is the most gainful life, for here∣by Saints gain God, and Christ, and Heaven, and lose nothing; for we cannot lose by a Saviour, who saves us from all evil, and brings us into the possession of all good; and though death it self strips us naked of all things under the Sun, yet death is unspeakable gain to all who live this life: and ye must further assure them, that this is the most pleasant life, for it is a life of faith, and love, and praise, and joy, and a life of victory over sin; and they
who live this life, have all things to please them; they have God to please them; Christ and his Merits to please them; and a prospect of a holy and a blessed Eternity to please them: ye would never be the fa∣thers and mothers of fools, if ye could perswade your children to be so wise, as to prize and love a life of obedience to God. 4. Commend to your children the glory and amiableness of the House and Church of God: this is the body whereinto they are bap∣tized; take your child with you, and go walk about Sion, and go round about her, and tell the towers thereof, and mark well her bulwarks, and con∣sider her palaces, as ye are taught, Psal. 45.9. Present to their view King Jesus, and at his right hand standing the Queen (his Church) in gold of Ophir, Psal. 45.9. say to them, as the Angel said to John, Rev. 21.9. Come hither, and I will
shew you the bride, the Lambs wife: shew them that glorious sight, Rev. 12.1. The woman cloathed with the Sun, and upon her head (that bright and glorious constellation) a crown of twelve Stars, that so the company of those who live in communion with God and Jesus Christ, may be desirable, and delightful to them; and that they may forsake evil company, which is often the bane of youth. 5. Teach them to esteem aright of Gods Ordinances: for by baptism they are solemnly admitted into that house and family which is blessed with these, as the means of salva∣tion: Labour to beget in them good thoughts of Gods Ministers; for ye shall ever find, that those children will despise you who make light of them: teach them to pray; ye can never have comfort in your chil∣dren till they cry to God, Abba Fa∣ther: teach them to know, and prize,
and long for the Lords-Supper, and therein to take Christ and all Sal∣vation in a little bread and wine: teach them to honour and delight in the Lords-day, as the Diamond in the ring of time; those children are always the honour and joy of their godly parents, who make conscience to keep holy the Lords∣day. 6. Make them sensible that time is short and precious, that an eter∣nity of glory and misery is at hand; and that death, and judgment, and heaven or hell are at the door of young children. I shall further add five Directi∣ons to godly parents, to prevent this sad calamity. 1. Labour to save your children from those sins which provoke God, and will destroy them, as well as from those sins which will also bring
loss and reproach upon you: some are sadly affected to see their chil∣dren given to drunkenness, or whore∣dom, or the like sins; but are not so much concern'd for their unbe∣lief, and impenitency, and want of love to God, and for their cove∣tousness; which shews such parents to have too much of the love of the world, and too little love to God and their childrens souls; but we must take our measures of the evil and danger of sin from the word of God, which tells us, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. that the covetous, as well as drunk∣ards and whoremongers, shall not in∣herit the kingdom of God: and this will teach parents not only to mourn over a debauch'd child, but also over a covetous, though he be a wealthy child. 2. Observe what sins your chil∣dren are most prone unto, and la∣bour to fill them with revenge and hatred against those sins: If your
child have a foot, or hand gan∣gren'd, ye will cut off the incurable member, rather than bury your child; so ye should do what ye can to pull out the right eye, and to cut off the right hand; and the right foot of sin in your children, rather than suffer their bodies and souls to be cast into Hell: As ye should especially kill those sins in your selves, which your natures are most inclin'd unto; so ye should do by your children, who are so great a part of your selves: we are taught, Prov. 20.11. That even a child is known by his doing, whether his work be pure, or whether it be right: Pa∣rents may much discern by the man∣ners and ways of their children in their childhood, what they are like to prove in their riper years; and therefore they must observe them, that they may encourage them in the good, and discourage them in the evil, which they then appear to be most bent unto.
3. Chuse to place your children in families of holiness and prayer; ye will not plant your trees among briars and thorns; much less should ye chuse to place your children to serve those who will not serve God. 4. Give them due correction: this hath God commanded to kill their sins, and to save their souls, Prov. 23.13, 14. Withhold not cor∣rection from the child; for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not dye: thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell: It is better thy child be whipt, than damn'd; and let not thy childs weeping and crying under the rod move thee to withhold due corre∣ction, Prov. 19.18. Chasten thy son, and let not thy soul spare for his cry∣ing: If your childs bone be out of joint, ye will have it set, though he cry and bawl under the hand of the Surgeon; and will say, It's better
he cry now, than be lame so long as he lives; so it is better your chil∣dren cry now under the rod of their father, than that they should weep and wail for ever under the wrath of the infinite God: and therefore that ye may perform this duty, take these five Directions. 1. Do not allow your servants to correct your children; for cor∣rection is an act of authority, and therefore cannot belong to those who are meerly your servants; I would not have parents to permit their children to despise and abuse their servants; but for parents to suffer their servants to correct their children, is the way to make their children stubborn, their servants proud, and themselves contemptible in the eyes of both. 2. Convince them that it is your duty to correct them for their sins; and therefore it is adviseable, that
you make them get those Scriptures without book, which bind you to correct them; also some of those Scriptures which condemn the sins which you correct them for, that their consciences may justifie you in doing your duty; and that they may be more afraid of sin, than the rod; and of provoking God, than offend∣ing you. 3. Correct them betimes, Prov. 13.24. and Prov. 19.18. Chasten thy son while there is hope: Use the rod wisely to them, before they become scourges and scorpions to you. 4. Labour to be in a good frame when you correct them, that love, and prudence, and meekness, and not rage and fury may govern the rod; and do not exercise too much severity towards them, that ye may not provoke them to wrath, lest the wrath of the children prove the grief of the parents.
5. Pray to God for a blessing up∣on your correcting them, that it may be effectual to drive out that foolishness which is bound up in their hearts. Lastly, Be good examples to your children; let them not see you in any sin, for that may infect them, and make them despise you; but let them always see you shining in the Image of God, and that is the way to make them honour, and obey you in the Lord: live so, that ye may say to them, as Paul to the Phi∣lippians, Chap. 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and re∣ceived, and heard, and seen in us, do, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. 2dly, I proceed to direct those parents who are under this calamity, how to bear it.
8 Directions. 1. Abhor it as a great sin to faint under this affliction; that is, either to be disabled for thy duty, or to sink in thy comforts; for it's a sign that thou didst place too much of thy happiness in thy children, if their wickedness make thee faint under this calamity. I shall only plead with thee, as Joab did with David, when he made that bitter lamentation for his son Absolom, 2 Sam. 19.6. Thou hast declared this day, that thou re∣gardest neither princes, nor servants: So I say to thee, thou hereby de∣clarest that thou regardest not God and Christ, if thy soul faint under the burden of a disobedient child. 2. Consider what I have proved, that this is an affliction which ordi∣narily befalls Gods dearest children: ye must not think of this, as if ye were the first godly parents of un∣godly
children; or as if herein some strange thing happened unto you. I confess where a calamity seems sin∣gular or extraordinary, it is more apt to overwhelm the afflicted, be∣cause they will be then apt to think that there is some extraordinary displeasure in God against them; and to say with the Church, Lam. 4.12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, where∣with the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger: But this af∣fliction is ordinary, and is consistent with the saving and distinguishing grace of God to them; and is a rod that hath usually lain on the lot of the righteous. 3. Consider that there might have befal'n thee greater miseries than this. I shall instance in three greater Evils which would have made thee more miserable.
1. Thou mightest have been a wicked, an ungodly wretch thy self; and for the great Jehovah to have curs'd and damn'd thee for ever, would have made thee unspeakably more miserable, than to be torment∣ed a▪while with a wicked child. 2. Thou mightest have had an ungodly yoke-fellow to be as rotten∣ness in thy bones: Solomon seems to speak of a troublesome yoke-fellow, as more grievous than a wicked child, Prov. 19.13. A foolish son is the ca∣lamity of his father, and the conten∣tions of a wife are a continual drop∣ping: This is like the constant drop∣ping of rain into a house, which rots the building, spoyls the goods, and ruins both house and inhabi∣tants: and forasmuch as thy yoke∣fellow is nearer, and ought to be dearer to thee than thy child; to be afflicted therein, is a greater ca∣lamity.
3. God might have left all your children to perish in their sins: but if ye have but one godly child, your joy in that should much abate your sorrow for your other wicked children. 4. Consider, thou hast greater things to affect thee with grief and sorrow than thy wicked children: there are whole Empires and King∣doms of men, and women, and chil∣dren who have as precious souls as thine, or thy childrens: these disho∣nour the same God, and perish un∣der his wrath; and multitudes that have the Scriptures and Ordinances, despise the same Christ, and the same Gospel as thy children do: and why shouldst thou be more concern'd for one, or more of thy wicked children, than for the whole world that lies in wickedness? 5. Let your sorrow be guided by Scripture and Reason, that ye may not provoke God, and defile your
souls, and wound your consciences by sinful groans and tears. For this end observe two Rules. First, Mourn more for their sins whereby they provoke and disho∣nour God, and defile and destroy themselves, and others, than for any shame or loss in worldly things that befall you hereby; that it may ap∣pear that the love of God, and your childrens souls, and not the love of the World, hath the greatest influ∣ence on your sorrow; for I fear that there is usually in good parents too much of carnal sorrow, and too little of godly sorrow in their mourning under this great cala∣mity. Secondly, Let not thy sorrow dis∣ease thy body, and impair thy health: God doth not require us to mourn more for our childrens sins, than our own; and he never makes it our duty by sorrow for either, to destroy
our bodies, which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost: and the truth is, that godly sorrow is the health of the soul, and never hurts the body; for Grace is always a friend, and never an enemy to nature; and therefore do not deprive thy self of all opportunities to honour God, and serve his Church; do not make thy yoke-fellow desolate, nor thy children Orphans by such sorrow, that will neither please God, nor ease thy self, nor do any good to thy wicked and miserable children. 6. Labour to get your Graces strengthened under this great affli∣ction; for ye have need of more knowledge, and wisdom, and faith, and hope, and love, and meekness, and patience, to inable and fit you to bear this, than most other affe∣ctions; and ye must see and enjoy more of God and Christ, to keep up your hearts under this, than un∣der most other troubles; yet by the
strength of Christ ye may be inabled not only to bear, but to glory in this tribulation; and the greater the trouble is, the more good ye may gain by it. 7. Comfort thy self, in that the greatest and best things which thou hast most pray'd for, and trusted un∣to, and expected, and chiefly loved and desired, are all safe and sure. 1. Thy God is, and will be blessed and glorious for ever, whatever be∣comes of thy child; all his infinite perfections are working for his glo∣ry: Christ himself is Gods, and doth the whole work of a Mediator as his servant, and for his glory; all the blessed Angels and Saints will for ever honour, and admire, and love, and praise him. 2. God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are for ever thy own, and will to all eternity be glorified in making thee blessed and glorious:
thou hast a bad child, but a good God; all thy work will be done, thy sins pardoned and kill'd, thy graces perfected, and body and soul glorified: and shall an ungodly child make all thy consolations herein small to thee? Lastly, Consider, this trouble will last but a little while. I confess I do not know, or can upon search find any thing that can lift up the heart above this trouble, but the knowledge and sense of the infinite love of God in Christ to a mans self, and of that holy and glorious eter∣nity which this love will shortly bring him unto; to tell you, that this is and hath been the case of o∣ther godly parents, may allay some∣thing of your grief: But what is this, but to tell you, that others are, and have been as miserable as you? or to tell you, that as wicked chil∣dren as yours have been sanctified and saved, yields some hopes; but
it can amount to no more than to think they may be sav'd, or thy may be damn'd; and there is as much reason to fear the one, as to hope for the other: But for a man to see a gainful death, ready to loose him into that world, where there is none of this sorrow; and to know that at the day of judgment his wicked children will be no more to him than bloody Bonners, or Gardi∣ners, or damn'd Devils, and that he himself shall sit with Christ to judge them; and that he shall love and delight in the holiness and justice of the Judg of all the World, in passing that sentence upon them, Depart ye cursed into everlasting sire, prepared for the devil and his angels: This is sufficient to overcome all immode∣rate grief for his ungodly children. Lastly, I shall finish this discourse in a serious exhortation to these ungodly children, who are the grief
and bitterness of their good parents: And herein I shall, 1. Endeavour to convince them of their sins. 2. Of their misery. 3. Perswade them to forsake their sins, that so they may be freed from that misery. First, I shall set before you the greatness of your sins in these four particulars: 1. Ye have broken your Covenant with God. 2. Ye have broken the Bonds wherein ye were bound to the Church of God. 3. Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your parents. 4. Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your other rela∣tions.
First, Ye have broken your Co∣venant with God, whereinto ye were solemnly enter'd by baptism; for it's clear by that Scripture before men∣tion'd, Levit. 19.3. That by casting off the authority of your parents, ye have disowned the Lord to be your God. Your breach of Covenant with God appears more fully in these four particulars. 1. Ye do in your hearts and pra∣ctices deny the Being of God; the first Article of the Covenant is, that ye should acknowledge and believe that the Lord he is God; for he that cometh to God, must believe that he is, Hebr. 11.6. But this is the language of your hearts and lives, That there is no God: Ye deny God to be the first and best Being, in preferring the creatures before him; and saying in effect, That the creatures are all, and the great Jehovah is but as a cypher to you.
Ye deny his Omnipresence; he fills all places where ye are, but ye take no notice of him; the presence of a Father or Master hath some influence upon you; but it works not at all upon you, that there is a God in the room. Ye deny his infinite Wisdom, that Wisdom of God in contriving the work of Salvation by Jesus Christ: I say that Wisdom which is so glo∣rious and wonderful to the princi∣palities and powers of heaven, is to such proud and ignorant boys and girls as you, but a foolish and ridi∣culous thing. Ye deny his Power, in daring to war against him; and like those hectoring Atheists, Job 15.25, 26. Ye stretch out your hands against God, and strengthen your selves against the Almighty: ye run upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his buckler, as if ye were able to fight God, and overcome the Almighty.
Ye deny his Holiness, and think that God is altogether such a one as your selves, Psal. 50.21. And that ye may not be terrified by your en∣mity and unlikeness to him, ye will please your selves in fancying that God is like you; as if ye must ra∣ther be a pattern to him, than he be a pattern to you; and so ye will perswade your selves that he is the God of Atheists, and Whoremon∣gers, and Drunkards, and Lyars, and Thieves, and not the holy God of a holy people. Ye deny the Truth of God; one of the greatest and best truths that ever God spake to man is that, 1 Joh. 5.11. God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: and yet herein ye would make him a liar, in not believing this solemn record which he gave of Christ; a liar is one of the worst characters of the devil: and this ye give to the true and holy God. These things I write,
as it were, upon the brazen faces of all ungodly and disobedient chil∣dren. 2. Ye break the Covenant, in re∣fusing to take God for your God and happiness; the greatest promise that ever God made to man, is that Hebr. 8.10. I will be to you a God: but this signifies nothing to you, ye will not accept of him for your chief honour, and treasure, and joy; it is no honour to you to have the great Jehovah for your Fther; ye see no good in him, and account not your selves the better for him; and if ye lose him, ye think ye lose nothing; ye neither love, nor desire him, nor take any delight or pleasure in him. 3. Ye have broken the Covenant, in renouncing God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose Name ye were baptized: your lives declare that ye had rather have the love of a debauch'd companion, than the love of the Father of Jesus Christ;
ye despise the Lord Jesus, and ac∣count the great price of redemption to be worth nothing; and would rather keep your sins, than be saved from them: ye defie the wrath of God, and scorn that the Mediator should make your peace with him: ye resist the Holy Spirit, and would rather be made filthy, and wicked, and be taught to lye, and swear, and steal, than that the Spirit should teach you to love, and serve, and de∣light in God. 4. Ye have broken the Covenant, in taking part with the devil, and the world, and sin, against the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and this ye have done two ways: 1. In believing the promises of the devil, the world, and sin, and in not believing the promises of God; the devil, the world, and sin, are the three great cheats of mankind, and they deceive men by making seem∣ingly
great and high promises: and by these they have prevail'd with man to break both the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace: the devil tempted our first parents not to believe that word of God which he gave them to deter and keep them from sin, which word is written, Gen. 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely dye: the devil tempted them to look on that word as a lye, and makes them that great promise, Genes. 3.4, 5. wherein he promiseth them, that if they eat the forbidden fruit, they shall not only be safe from all evil, saying, Ye shall not surely dye; but that they shall also be preferr'd to greater happiness than God had then placed them in; for, saith he, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil: and by believing this promise of the devil, they brake the Covenant of Life, and brought that deluge of sin and
misery which came upon all man∣kind; and since he prevail'd with men not to believe the word of God, which he spake to keep them from sin and destruction; now his work is to tempt them to make God a lyar in the word which he hath spoken to save them from sin and ruine by Jesus Christ: and this is the word of the Covenant of Grace, which pro∣miseth eternal life and salvation to all that believe in Christ, and repent of their sins, and live the lives of new creatures, according to the rules of the Gospel: but the devil tempts men to break this Covenant by pro∣mising them life and all happiness in a course of sin; and these wicked children believe the devil herein, and bless themselves in their sins, saying with those bold ranters, Deut. 29.19. We shall have peace, though we walk in the imagination of our own hearts, to add drunkenness to thirst: and thus ye break your Covenant with God,
and make a Covenant with Death and Hell. 2. In obeying the devil, the world, and sin, and in disobeying God; ye call God your Father in heaven, but ye do the lusts of the Devil your fa∣ther in hell; ye walk according to the course of this world, Ephes. 2.2. and are the servants of sin, Rom. 6.20. and ye hate, and fight against God your Maker and Redeemer; and were it possible for you, ye would every day kill him who only hath immortality: And thus like a com∣pany of renegado's ye live as if ye were baptized in the name of the de∣vil, the world, and the flesh, to re∣nounce the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Secondly, Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to the Church of God; ye were born members of the Church, and subjects of the King∣dom of Jesus Christ; and by bap∣tism were solemnly admitted into that
great, and holy, and victorious, and blessed society, Hebr. 12.22, 23. Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the general as∣sembly and Church of the first-born written in heaven; but ye have for∣saken this Church, and turn'd your selves out of the family and house of the living God, and are become of the same party with the devil and his seed, and have laboured to fill the world with sin, and the kingdom of Satan; and ye would have Jesus Christ to have no Name, or King∣dom, or Ministers, or Ordinances, or People in the world. Thirdly, Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your parents: This appears in that those black characters already given of wicked children are found on you; whereunto I shall add this one, which includes all the particulars of your disobedience which can be mention'd, namely,
Ye do not love your parents; for love worketh no evil unto, but al∣ways willeth and seeketh the good of the beloved: Love ever inclines persons to please them whom they love, and to love and delight in their company; and causeth such looks, and words, and behaviour, as are ex∣pressions of love; how pleasant hath it been sometimes to me to see, as it were, the heart and soul of a child running out in his pleasant and loving looks to his parents! but ye disobe∣dient children do not love your pa∣rents, but do them more hurt, and cause them more sorrow than all the malicious enemies and persecutors they ever met with in the world; ye are always vexing, and crossing, and provoking them, and are as con∣tinual pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides; and had rather be with lyars, and swearers, and drunkards, and with your wanton and idle com∣panions, than with your wise, and
grave, and holy parents; how merry and jovial are ye in the company of such who will joyn with you to serve the devil, and dishonour God, and destroy your souls? but how uneasie, and lumpish, and sowre, and discon∣tent are ye in the presence of your parents? your spiteful looks, and sullen words, and scornful carriage doth betray your hatred, and anger, and envy against your good parents: Ah wicked wretches! that ye cannot find in your hearts to love your pa∣rents, from whom ye had your Be∣ings under God, and who have us'd all holy means to make you holy and blessed. Lastly, Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your other relations, and to all men; ye cannot be good brothers, or sisters, whil'st ye are such bloody children to your parents; ye cannot be good servants or ap∣prentices, or good husbands or wives, or good subjects to Magistrates, whilst
ye are bad children; for the same sins that debauch you in that relation, will debauch you in all, and will make you an incumbrance to your place, the troublers of the world, and a very plague and curse to your ge∣neration. 2. I shall now endeavour to con∣vince you of your misery; and oh that I had a heart and tongue to think and speak of this as the matter doth require! Consider, ye are cursed children, Deut. 27.16. Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother, and all the people shall say, Amen: Observe, God himself doth here proclaim you cursed; he only can curse or bless you, having all curses and blessings at command; and can set his love, or pour out his wrath where he pleaseth; he is able and faithful to fulfil his own threat∣nings; and he knows you to be cursed, for he knows all the children of his Grace, and all the children of
his Wrath. Observe further, that all Gods Ministers are to pronounce you cursed, vers. 14. The Levites shall speak and say to all the men of Israel with a loud voice, Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mo∣ther: The Ministers of God must with a loud voice, as if they would ring in the years of all, declare you to be cursed; and I, a Minister of the Gospel, do hereby proclaim all wicked and disobedient children, (though some of them may be the fruit of my own body) to be cursed. Nay further, all people, yea your own selves are to judge you cursed; and all the people shall say, Amen: They and you are to believe it, and to approve of it as most just and righ∣teous, that ye be cursed. But that I may convince you of your misery, I shall further set before you these four things: 1. Ye are out of the way of all good: God hath his way of mercy,
and his way of wrath; and ye are out of the way of his mercy, for ye do not stand in the grace and love of God, which causeth all good; and are children of his wrath, which cau∣seth all misery; and (as I have told you) ye have broken that Covenant which conveys all Grace and Mercy: so that no good can come to you, except ye turn to God and your pa∣rents. 2. Ye are in the very way and road to all wickedness: Many of the most horrid sins in the world first be∣gan in disobedience to parents; and most of those who have proved Lyars, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Thieves, Murderers, were first ungodly and disobedient children. 3. Ye are in continual danger of some remarkable judgment of God in this life, Exod. 21.17. He that curseth (or revileth) his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death. Prov. 20.20. Who so curseth his fa∣ther,
or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness. Your lamp of life and pleasure may seem to burn and shine at present, but there is a black and dismal night ha∣stening on all disobedient children, Prov. 30.17. The eye that mocketh his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it: None are more like to pass into the eternal world, through a shameful and untimely death, than disobedient children; when God leaves children to disobey their pa∣rents, it's a dreadful sign of their ap∣proaching ruine: it's recorded of Eli his sons, 1 Sam. 2.25. That they hearkned not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them. 4. If ye go on in your course of disobedience, ye will for ever be damn'd in Hell; for (I say) ye have broken that Covenant which promi∣seth
eternal life to all that believe and obey the Gospel, and doth as certainly bind over to the wrath and vengeance of God all that live in disobedience to God and their pa∣rents. Miserable children! I have sent this poor little book to over∣take you, before the wrath and ven∣geance of God do overtake you: I am not altogether a stranger to the terrors of the Lord, but do know what is before you, and what a meeting there will quickly be be∣tween God and you, better than ye do; and have laboured to affect my heart, in seeing what lies at your door; I know that whilst ye are fol∣lowing the chase of your filthy plea∣sures, evil from God is hunting you, and will find you out to destroy you; and I dare not damn my own soul by not warning you of those sins, which will be the damnation of yours: Foolish boys and girls can now laugh at the hearing of death, and hell, and
judgment to come; and when Mini∣sters sound the trumpet in their ears, to give them warning of these things, they can, like the War-horse in Job, say among the trumpets, Aha; for the devil tempts his children to make sport of those things at which he trembles himself: but when I remem∣ber how I have seen in some of you your down-looks, your pale-faces, your shivering-limbs; and as Job speaks of the Adulterer, when he comes to be known, Job 24.17. that ye have been as in the terrors of the shadow of death, when your mortal parents have found you out in your sins: I cannot but think how your countenances will fall, and your stout spirits sink, and your mettal fail, when ye come to fall into the hands of the living God. Lastly, I come now to exhort and perswade you to abhor and forsake your sins, that ye may escape this
misery. I would have you to repent and believe with the Saints of God, that ye may be saved, before ye come to repent with the damned in hell; and with the devils, to believe and tremble. For this end I shall, 1. En∣deavour to convince you of your Folly. 2. Direct you how to attain true Wisdom. First, I shall endeavour to con∣vince you of your Folly: ye see the Text calls a wicked son, a foolish son; God who knows you best, and hath a true judgment of you, calls you fools, and would have all the world to be of the same judgment with himself, and therefore to ac∣count you fools; and ye will at last call your selves fools, when ye come to have the portion of fools; and except ye judge your selves fools, ye cannot be wise. And that ye may, as in a glass, see your own folly, I shall propound to you these five Questi∣ons; and as God said to Job, so do I
in his name say to you, Job 38.3. Gird up your loins like men: I will demand of you, and answer ye me. 1. Are ye not very fools in that ye do in your hearts and lives deny the being of God? There are no worse fools than they that say in their hearts, There is no God, Psal. 14.1. For such a one saith in effect, that there is no Religion, no Sin, no Hea∣ven nor Hell; yea, he saith, that he himself is nothing, and that there are neither Heavens, nor Earth, nor Seas, nor Men, nor Beasts, nor any other creatures; for if there be no God, there can be nothing else; so that ye have the name of fools written on your foreheads; and as it's said, Eccles. 10.3. Ye say to every man that ye are a company of fools. 2. Are ye not fools to make such a foolish choice? It is the infinite goodness of God, that ye have life and death, blessing and cursing set before you; and that ye have a God
and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and the heavenly glory to chuse; and ye have Beings capable to chuse them, and may take them for your own, and use them as your own every day, and that ye are called and com∣manded to chuse them, and have time and opportunity to chuse them, and shall certainly have them, if ye chuse them: and yet these, as Solo∣mon speaks, Prov. 17.16. are but as a price in the hands of a fool that hath no heart to it. Consider, there are two sorts of Affections in all humane creatures, and all are wise or fools, according as they set and place these; there are affections of union, as love, desire, and delight, which do unite the heart to their objects; and there are affections of opposition, as ha∣tred and anger, which do separate the heart from their objects: And are ye not monstrous fools, in that ye hate and abhor God and your Redeemer, in whom there are all reasons for
your love, and desires, and joy; and in that ye love, and desire, and de∣light in sin, and the devil, and death and hell, in whom there are all rea∣sons for the hatred and revenge of your souls? To love those things which are altogether loathsome, and and to hate what is altogether lovely, is a plain argument of your madness and folly. 3. Are ye not fools in suffering every thing to deceive you? The Scripture tells you, that the devil is a deceiver; it tells you of the de∣ceitfulness of your hearts; of the deceitfulness of sin; of the deceit∣fulness of riches; of the deceitful∣ness of wine and strong drink; of the deceitfulness of harlots, who promise pleasure, but prove a deep ditch, and a narrow pit; of the de∣ceitfulness of a lying tongue, which promiseth that lyes shall serve the ly∣ars turn, and do his work, but pro∣veth to be but for a moment; of the
deceitfulness of theft and unjust gain, which seems sweet at present, but soon after proves as gravel in the mouth: and yet notwithstanding all the shame, and rags, and stings, and torments of conscience, which have come upon you by trusting in these; yet ye will still believe them, and suf∣fer your selves by these deceivers to be cheated of God and Christ, and of your souls, and of your time, and of heaven. 4. Are ye not fools in being so set and bent to ruine and destroy your selves? Prov. 18.7. A fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul. Eccles. 10.12. The lips of a fool shall swallow up him∣self: ye are so bent on your own ruine, that your hearts rise in anger and hatred against your good Pa∣rents and Ministers, and all that la∣bour to save you; and ye account them your worst enemies, who would not have you damn'd. Miserable
children! allow your selves but one hours serious consideration of your eternal estate, and ye will see reason to condemn your selves for a com∣pany of proud and ignorant fools, in attempting to run down God, and his Kingdom, and Religion, and in valuing your cups, and lusts, and lies at such a rate, as for them to ex∣change the eternal life and happiness of your souls. 5. Are ye not fools in not prepa∣ring for death and judgment, which are ready to overtake you? To con∣vince you of this, be inform'd, That men are prepared for death and judg∣ment, who by faith, and repentance, and holiness, are become heirs of the promises of the Gospel, and so have a right unto, and fitness for all that glory, which in performance of these promises, God will give them the possession at those great days; but men are unprepared when they are under the wrath and curse of God,
and are condemned to those eternal torments which are threatned in the Scriptures, and will at death and judgment be executed upon them. Now prove your selves by these things, and ye may then see what fools ye are, in not preparing for these days; for if ye were prepared, ye should then enter into a world where all will love you; God, and and Christ, and all Angels, and all Saints will love you, and ye will for ever be holy and blessed in their love to you, and in your love to them; but being unprepared, ye must then be cast into a world where all will hate you, and where you will hate all the holy and blessed; God will there hate you, and be a consuming fire against you; the devils, and all the damned in hell will hate you, and you will hate them; and we find that our Saviour brands him for a fool, Luke 12.20. who promiseth to himself an easie and merry life for
many years, when that very night he was to lose his soul: and he gives the character of foolish virgins, Matth. 25.2. to those who were unprepared for that great, and ter∣rible, and sudden cry, The bridegroom is come, go ye out to meet him. Poor children! let these common things be imprinted on your hearts; Death is certain, the day of death is as cer∣tainly appointed, as was the day of your birth; and as your birth kept its time, so will your death keep its time; ye cannot sin away death, though ye sin away the sense of death. Consider also, that death is near; whatever ye think of your lives, they will be but as a vapour, or sha∣dow, or smoke, as God speaks them to be; and though ye put death far from you, yet it will be within a hands-breadth of you; one day or hour may put an end to your space of repentance, and conclude your day of grace and salvation, and di∣spatch
you into that world where no new creatures are made: ye now de∣fie death, as if ye were a fit match for the king of terrors; ye scorn the grave, and scoff at the day of judg∣ment, and deride everlasting burn∣ings; but when God shall pour upon you your own wickedness, Jer. 14.16. then ye will too late condemn your selves for fools, when ye come to reap the fruit of your own folly. Secondly, I come to give you di∣rections to direct you to true Wis∣dom, that ye may be such wise chil∣dren, as to make glad fathers, and not to be the heaviness of your mo∣thers. 1. Do not dare to put off your repentance any longer; it is not too late to repent, so long as God calls you to repentance, and gives you time for it: Yet is the accepted time, yet is the day of salvation: God, and Christ, and Angels, and the Church,
and your bleeding parents are yet ready to receive you in love and joy: but it will shortly be too late to repent, though it can never be too soon. Dear children! ye must either perswade your selves that the word of God is a lie, and so think ye are secure from hell, because ye deny the Bible that threatneth it; or ye must presume that ye are not ungodly children, as indeed ye are; or else ye must conclude that your present state is not safe and good, and that therefore ye must either re∣pent or be damn'd; and perhaps the devil himself doth not tempt you to resolve, that you will never repent, but to think that it is yet time e∣nough, and that therefore ye will repent hereafter. I have sometimes dreaded to hear debauch'd children confidently say, That they do not question but they shall be converted, and become good, when at present they hate to be reformed; yea, I am
perswaded that some secure them selves in their sins, by presuming that the prayers of their good parents for their conversion and salvation will at last be heard: but how many such have been, as Solomon speaks of o∣thers, Prov. 14.32.—driven away in their wickedness; in whom that dreadful Scripture hath been fulfill'd, Prov. 29.1. He that being often re∣proved, hardneth his neck, shall sud∣denly be destroyed, and that without remedy. I shall here seriously reason this case a little with you; Why should ye continue one moment longer in those sins which ye must repent of, or perish; and defer re∣pentance, for which ye shall have cause for ever to rejoyce and bless God when it is done? Are ye not wicked enough already, that ye must stay to be worse? Have ye not de∣fil'd your selves, and provok'd God, and refus'd Christ, and afflicted your parents long enough already? Poor
souls! if there be one hour yet left wherein ye are sure that ye shall not die, and fall into hell; or one hour wherein sin is better than grace; and wherein it is better be a child of the devil, than a child of God; or if ye can come into the kingdom of God, and begin an eternal life an hour too soon, take that hour, and spend it on your lusts; but if not, stop pre∣sently, and let this be the hour wherein ye begin to believe, and re∣pent, and reform, and wherein ye begin to set your faces towards hea∣ven, with an unmovable resolution, to walk in the way of faith and obe∣dience till ye come there. Direct. 2. Judge whether ye have more reason to obey the devil, or to obey God, as the Apostles said to their Persecutors, Acts 4.19. Whe∣ther it be right in the sight of God, to hearken to you more than unto God, judge ye: So say I to you, whether
it be right to obey the devil rather than God, judge ye. Consider, God hath authority to command you, for he is your Maker, your Preserver, and Redeemer, and ye owe your selves to him; but the devil neither made, nor kept, nor bought you, and therefore can have no right to com∣mand you. Consider further, that all the Commands of God, are the Commands of his Love; for he doth not only command you as your Lord, but also as your Father and Savi∣our; and therefore he commands you to take himself to be your God and happiness, to take his Son Jesus Christ to save you from all evil, and to make you for ever holy and bles∣sed: but the devil commands you out of hatred and malice, and all his commands are the commands of a Murderer, and therefore he com∣mands you to defile, and to destroy, and to damn your selves; he com∣mands you to be blind and ignorant.
to hate and scorn God and Christ, and to love sin, and death, and hell. Consider also, that God is able to re∣ward your obedience, and to punish your disobedience; he is that only law-giver, who is able to save, and to destroy, James 4.12. He can crown you with eternal glory, if ye obey him; and can cast you into ever∣lasting flames, if ye disobey him; but the devil, who is cursed and tor∣mented himself, cannot make you happy, if ye obey him; nor misera∣ble, if ye do forsake and renounce him. 3. See the great difference be∣twixt those wise and holy children, who live in obedience to God and their parents, and you who live in disobedience to both; it is not wealth, or poverty, or beauty, or deformity, or sickness, or health, but sin and grace that make the greatest differ∣ence betwixt persons; and ye must know God and Christ, or else ye
cannot understand the worth of a Saint, nor the vileness of a Sinner: Some of you may look into your own families, and there see some of your brethren and sisters like plea∣sant and fruitful plants about your fathers table, when ye are as briars, and thorns, and weeds in the family; they are the crown and joy, and you the calamity of your parents; all that see them, may look upon them as a seed whom the Lord hath blessed; but all that see you have reason to judge you to be a cursed generation. Poor children! is it better to be like Cain, than like Abel? or like cursed Canaan, than like Shem? or like Ish∣mael, than like Isaac? or like Esau, than like Jacob? Are not your souls and bodies as precious as the souls and bodies of your good brethren and sisters? or can the devil, and sin, and the world be better to you, than to them? or is not death and judg∣ment as near you, as it is to them?
or have not ye as much reason to love and obey God and your parents, as they? or can ye endure the loss of Heaven, or torments of Hell, bet∣ter than they? if not, why should not ye be as good as they are? 4. Do nothing but what ye are willing should be known; if ye would not have your Parents, and Masters, and the Magistrates, and your Friends and Foes know your lies, and lusts, and theft, and propha∣ning the Lords-day, and your haunt∣ing evil company, do not practise these things; ye need not fear who knows how holy, and just, and sober, and chast ye are: Religion can bold∣ly shew its shining face to God and man; but sin makes you sneak, and cowardly, and base, and fearful; and imprints marks of dishonour and shame upon your looks and counte∣nances, and fills you with horrour and consternation, when ye are dis∣covered. Consider seriously, that all
from whom your greatest shame and misery will come, do know you; the devils know you, and will accuse, and disgrace, and torment you for the same sins they tempted you un∣to; and they will not help you to hide your sins when time of grace, and repentance, and pardon is past; your own hearts and consciences know you, and will awake out of their present sleep to condemn and sting you; and God who is greater than all, knows you, and all your secret sins are in the light of his coun∣tenance, and he will bring them all to judgment: and it will then fully appear to Angels, and Devils, and to Saints and Sinners, what ye are. 5. Therefore be not such now, as ye dare not at the hour of death profess your selves to be: Religion and Godliness is at all times to be profess'd before God, and Angels, and Men, Rom. 10.10. For with the heart man believeth, and with the
mouth confession is made to salvation. But what monsters would ye appear to your selves, if ye did profess your selves to be what ye are? Suppose ye were reading this but one hour before ye dye, and must say, We are now falling into the hands of the li∣ving God; and by that time that the glass is run out, and the clock strikes next, we are to give account of our selves to the Judg of all the World: Dare ye then say, We pro∣fess our selves to be haters of God, and children of the devil, and de∣spisers of our holy parents, and that we chuse the way to hell? 6. Consider what account ye can give in being such burdens of the earth, and in being so grievous and chargeable to all who are concerned with you: Is it nothing to you to be as biles or scabs in the body, or as smoke, or a stinking smell, or an infectious disease in the house and family where ye are, or as weeds in
garden, to cumber and annoy your place? Ye will pay dear one day for all the sighs, and groans, and tears which ye have caused to your affli∣cted parents and friends; it will sting you to think that so many have been losers by you, and that your parents, and brethren, and sisters, have been so much wasted and impo∣verished by your costly lusts; and that ye have given cause to all your wicked companions, to curse the day that ever they knew you; and that ye have fill'd so many other parents besides your own with grief and bit∣terness, by infecting, and defiling, and debauching their children: and methinks I hear all these saying to you, as Joshua said to Achan, Josh. 7.25. Ye have troubled us, but the Lord shall trouble you. Lastly, I shall ask you this one question, What would ye have your parents to do with you? their love
makes them to be continually con∣cern'd for you; but they know not what to do with you, for all the means which they have yet used for your good, hath but aggravated your guilt, and their grief; whilst they kept you at home, ye did break all the good orders and rules of govern∣ment in the family; at set-times for meat and family-worship, either your places were empty, or fill'd with sin; ye disquieted your parents, wasted the estate, defiled, or disturbed your brethren and sisters, and troubled the house night and day: When they sent you to School, ye plaid the truants, grieved and dishonoured your Masters, debauch'd your School-fellows, and were a reproach and scandal to the School: If they set you to be Apprentices, ye hated and wrong'd your Masters, and were a plague to the family: If any of you were sent to the University, ye were the rake-hells of the Colledge, and
the Society was sick of you, till it had expell'd and cast you out; if af∣ter all other means were us'd, your parents sent you to Sea, the Atheism and Wickedness of some of the Sea∣men, did you more hurt, than all the Wonders of God in the deep waters did you good; so that ye return'd, as if the Sea had made you like it self, more raging and boisterous than before; insomuch, that your misera∣ble parents can do nothing but spend their days in mourning for your sins, and in praying for your salvation, and in labouring to bear patiently your ruine, and to be content to live and die the fathers and mothers of fools. And now, Children, I will take my leave of you, and shall leave you to the God with whom ye have to do, and with whom ye must have to do for ever; he is the God who will plead the cause of his own Name,
and Honour, and of Religion, with you, and who will plead the cause of your distressed parents with you; a God whose wrath ye can neither escape, nor bear; there is a war be∣twixt this God and you; and if ye can make it appear that ye are grea∣ter, and wiser, and stronger, and bet∣ter than he, ye may go on: But my design in all this discourse, is to per∣swade you to believe, and repent, and obey the Gospel and so to make peace with God through Jesus Christ; and for your encouragement, I do assure you, that the grace of God, and the Merits of Christ are as suf∣ficient to save you from all your horrid abominations, as if ye were as innocent, as when ye were new∣born: God, and Christ, and Angels, and your Parents, and Friends, and all Saints are ready to rejoyce in your conversion and salvation, and your iniquities shall never be men∣tioned against you; but upon your
unfeigned turning to him, God will (as he is represented in the Parable of the Prodigal son) meet you in mercy, and fall on your necks and kiss you, and entertain you with all the blessings of the Gospel, say∣ing, These my children were dead, and are alive; they were lost, and are found. FINIS.
