l601 12764878 93564
THE TRVE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT FROM THE MOST REVEREND WILLIAM Lord Arch-Bishop of CANTER∣BURY to the Ʋniversity of OXFORD, when he resign'd his Office of CHANCELLOUR. Published BY OCCASION OF A BASE LIBELL AND Forgery that runs under this TITLE. And also the Answer of the VNIVERSITY to the said LETTER. יהוה ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS Veritas in Profundo Christus Lucrum. printer's or publisher's device OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Ʋniversity, Anno Dom. 1641.
TO MY VERY LOVING FRIENDS, THE VICE-CHANCELLOVR, THE DOCTORS, THE PROCTORS, AND The rest of the Convocation of the Vniversity of OXFORD. AFter my hearty Commen∣dations &c. These are to remember my love to that whole Body. That love, than which never any Chancellour bare greater, or with more ferventnesse and zeale to the publique good and happines of that Place.
And I doe heartily pray all, and every of you to believe me, for most true it is, that the unfortunatenesse of my great affliction doth not trouble mee for any one thing more, then that I can be no farther usefull or beneficiall to that Place, which I so much love and honour. I was once resolved not to resigne my Place of Chancellour, till I saw the issue of my troubles one way or other. And this resolution I took, partly because I had no reason to desert my Selfe, and occasion the World to think me guilty: And partly be∣cause I have found so much love from the University that I could not make my selfe willing to leave it, till some greater Cause should take me off from that which I so resolved on. That Cause (if I be not much mistaken,) doth now present it selfe. For I see the U∣niversity hath great need of Friends, great and dayly need. I see my triall not hasten∣ed; so that I am neither able to assist your great occasions my self nor procure Friends
for them: I see that if you had another Chancellour you could not want the helpe wch now you doe. And I cannot but know that were your love never so great to me, it must needs cool, when you see me able to give no Assistance, and yet fill the Place which should afford it to you. And I should hardly satisfy my selfe, that I love you so well as I doe, if I did not further your Good and happinesse by all the meanes I can, and even by this my Resignation. The serious consideration of these things, and the foresight which I have, that I shall never be able to serve you as I have done, have prevailed with me at this time, to send the Resignation of the Chancellour∣ship, to your Body met in Convocation. And doe hereby pray you that it may bee publikely read and accepted, the time being now most fit, that so your Honourable suc∣ceeding Chancellour may presently appoint an able Deputy for the Government accor∣ding to his owne judgement. And now I doe earnestly desire of you
all, either to remember, or to know, that I never sought, or thought of the Honour of this Place to my selfe: And yet that since it was by the great favour and love of that University laid upon me, I have discharged it (by Gods grace and goodnesse to mee) with great paines and care, and Gods bles∣sing (I humbly thank him,) hath not been wanting. And I professe singly and from my heart, if there be any Good which I ought to have done to that Place, and have not done it, it proceeded from want of under∣standing or ability, not Will or affection. And though I doe for the Causes aforesaid resigne this Place, yet I shall serve it still with my Prayers, so long as God continues my life. And as J doubt not but God will blesse you with an Honourable Chancellour, and one able to doe more for that Place than J have been; so J pray God to give you a peaceable and quiet Election, and to direct it to the Good of this his Church, and the honour and happinesse of that fa∣mous
University. That you may have no misse in the least of me, who (after your Prayers heartily desired) now writes himselfe the last time From the TOWER. Iune 25. 1641. Your very loving poore Friend and CHANCELLOUR, W. CANT.
AMPLISSIMO ET REVERENDISSIMO DOMINO GVILIELMO ARCHI-PRAESULI Cantuariensi. Reverendissime ARCHI-PRAESUL—Hoc enim solum Tibi (sic voluisti) Nomen relictum est — NOvissimae literae tuae, amoris, sed & doloris, plenae, fecerunt ut dehinc nos planè are dirutos diruptos{que} profiteri debeamus. Cum effusissi∣mo amori tuo, verbis (quod unicum nobis suppe∣tit peculium) ut paria faceremus, nunquam spe∣randum fuit; nedum dolori nostro verba nos re∣perturos
paria; Ne si passis quidem eloquentiae velis vehi, & totâ doloris praerogativâ frui li∣ceret. Hodie verò, ut sunt tempora, ad justissi∣mum dolorem nostrum non levis hic accessit cu∣mulus, quòd eum in sinu premere & quasi stran∣gulare necesse habeamus; Quibus ne illud qui∣dem tutò queri licet, in ea nos tempora incidis∣se, in quibus singulari tuae prudentiae & erga nos amori consultissimum visum sit, nostra{que} quâm maximè interesse, ut Res ac Fortunas nostras à Tuis segreges habeamus & sejunctas. Quan∣quam verò supremo Numini sic visum est, ut illud nobis beneficij loco imputandum haberes, quòd maximum beneficiorū tuorum, Teipsum, à nobis segregares, & Cancellarij munus abdicares; Affectus tamen tuus erga Academiam nostram propensissimus, tum literis tuis novissimis, tum aliis frequentibus argumentis abundè testatus, dubitare nos non sinit, quin deposito invidioso Cancellarij titulo, amantissimi Patroni affe∣ctum adhuc in sinu tuo retineas. Quamdiu Ma∣nuscriptaMSS Cod. plus quàn MCCC. De quibus plus quam CCCXXX Linguis Ori∣ental. scripti. & paulò mi∣nus C. Ling. Gr. illa  Tua, Orientis spolia, & verè  Bibliothecam nostram illustrabunt; quamdiu Lectura Arabica, á
TeSalarium Professoris Ling. Arab. XL. lb. An∣nuae. dotata, frequentabitur; quamdiu Antiqui∣tatis vindices simul & testes antiquaHebr. Graec. Ro∣man. Famil. & Imper. Britannic. Numis∣mata visentur; quamdiu castigatior disciplina, mores emendati, morumque Canon Statuta vige∣bunt; quamdiu pro studio partium bonarum Ar∣tium studia colentur; quamdiu literis honos, ho∣nori Literae erunt, Cancellarium adhuc esse Te, sentiet praesens Aetas; fuisse, poster a agnoscet. De∣hinc, immortalitatis securus, gloriae{que} Tuae super∣stes, diu hîc posteritati tuae intersis; Ac demum, ubi mortalitatis numeros omnes impleveris, ple∣nus annis abeas, plenus honoribus, illis etiam quos abdicasti. Ita vovet Dat: è Domo Convocat: 6o. Iulij. 1641. Amplitudini Tuae omni cultûs ac ob∣servantiae nexu devinctissima, ACADEMIA OXON.
