R1837A 13280484 98737
LEYCESTERS GHOST. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
LEYCESTERS GHOST. I That sometimes shind like the Orient Sunne, Though Fortunes subject, yet a puisant Lord, Am now an object to be gaz'd upon; An abject rather fit to bee deplor'd, Dejected now, that whilom was ador'd; Affected once, suspected since of many, Rejected now, respected scarse of any. My Spirit hovering in the foggy ayre, Since that did passe the frozen stigian flood, Vnto great Britaines Empire did repaire, Where of Elizas death I understand, And that the Heavens, carefull of Englands good▪ Rais'd up a King, who crowned with loves peace Brought in new joyes, and made old griefes to cease. Thus from the concave vault of starles night, Where neither Sunne nor Moone vouchsast to shine▪ My wretched Ghost at length is come to light By Charters granted from the powers divine, Snake-eating envy, ô doe not repine At Honours shadow, doe not bite the dead, My pride is past, my pompe from th'earth is fled. My Princely birth, my high enobled state, My sometime dreadfull frownes, now none regard, My great good turnes, to many done of late, With gratfull hearts now none or few reward, My Fame is plotted out, my Honour sear'd, My Monuments defast, my Reliques torne, Yea vassailes doe my excellency skorne,
Ah silly peasants, as each Grecian boy, Would brave stout Hector being dead and cold, That whilome was the piller of old Troy, Whose presence living they durst scarce behold, Now since you see mee dead you grow so bold, As to controle my acts, whose lookes did daunt The proudest Peeres that liv'd in Troynovante. A time there was, when stately Beares could clime, And in that time, was I a stately Beare; Who clim'd so fast and in a little time, That my high mounting other beasts did feare My fortunes, by their downefals I did reare: I now rejoyce, whilst others I made mourne, And serv'd the time to make time serve my turne. I was the of-spring of a Princely Syre Hee too well knew by his clime-falling pride Like Dedalus hee taught mee to aspire; Wee both did flie, he fell, I did but slide; Like in attempts, yet unlike chance wee tried: Hee by a Queene did die, and as that chanc'd, I by a Queene did live, and was advanc'd. For Lady Iane by him a Queene proclaimed Was soone supprest, Queene Mary got the Crowne▪ Which as her proper right shee boldly claim'd, My Father striv'd in vaine to keepe her downe, And for that lost his life, I my renowne, Till sacred Cynthia to the Kingdome came, That gave new life to my late dying fame. That Peerles Queene of happy memory That late like Debora the Kingdome swaid, Now triumphes in the Iasper coulered skie With starre embrodered vesture rich arrayed; Shee, shee restor'd my honours then decay▪st When treason did attaint my Fathers bloud, And drown'd our Princely race in Lethes floud.
Then Iupiter was in my Horoscope, And Cynthia blest mee with her faire aspect, What might not then my youth and courage hope, When mee my soveraignes favour did protect? O what may not a Princesse grace effect, When Majesty on hopelesse men doe smile, Whose joyes did seeme to perish in exile. Even when Queene Maries tragick raigne did end, My comick fortunes in their prime begun That time when Cynthias brightnesse did extend To lighten this darke Land, whose splendant Sunne Was in Eclips, and sorrowes streame did runne; I like the glorious day-starre did appeare, With faire uprise to grace this Hemispeare. Since Brute first sway'd all this united land, No subject firmer held his soveraignes grace, My will Imperiall for a Law did stand, Such was my Princes pleasure, such my place, As Momus durst not offer mee disgrace, What man did smile, when Leysters brow did frown, Whose wit could guide, though never get the Crown. Whil'st in this glorious Ocean I did swimme To high preferment divers men I brought, Which since have sought my honours lampe to dimme, Yea such as I before advanc'd of nought Against my person treacheries have wrought, Thus honours doe oft-times good manners change And men grown rich to ancient friends grow strange. I grieve to thinke, I did such men advance, And raise their base lines to a stately pitch Vnder the shadow of my countenance, The substance of the earth did make them rich, What fury did their senses thus bewitch, Or was it some ill Spirit that possest them? To seeke my ruine, whose large bounty blest them.
Thus they in vaine my downefall did conspire; Like dogges that at the Moone doe fondly barke, And did but burne themselves like Aetnas fire, Or like grimme Owles did wander in the darke, Contemn'd of mee, that mounted like the larke: Or that rare bird that builds his nest on high, In Cedar trees, whose tops affronts the skie. When I commanded, who durst countermand, Were not meane Subjects subject to my beck? What man of worth my pleasure did withstand? What single swaines could doe, I did not wreck? I gave the Mate to those that gave mee check. By the Queenes helpe, and by my threatning lookes, I ruld the Pawnes, the Bishops, Knights, and Rookes. Thus did I play at Chesse and wonne the game, Having the Queene my pusiance to support, The Bishops for ambition did mee blame, The Pawnes affirme I wonne by much extort, The Rookes and Knights found draughts to marre my sport; Had not some stopt mee with their timely checks. I might have given them Checks without their necks. My braine had wit, my tongue had eloquence Fit to discourse and tell a courtely tale; My presence portely, brave, magnificent, My words imperious, stout, substantiall, My jestures loving, kind, Heroycall, My thoughts ambitions, proud and full ofire, My deeds were good or bad as time requir'd. Some of my foes that bare mee deadly hate, That had to them chiefe offices assign'd, And were my sellowes, Consuls in the State, Emulous still of my aspiring mind, Gave mee this praise, though otherwise unkind: That I was wonderous politique and wise, A States-man that knew how to temporise,
Some others tooke mee for a zealous man, Because good Preachers I did patronize▪ And many thought mee a Precisian, But God doth know, I never was precise, I seem'd devout in godly exercise, And by religious shew confirm'd my might, But who durst say, I was an Hypocrite. As Numa, when hee first did seeke to drawe The Roman people underneath his yoke, Touching Religion hee ordain'd a law And fain'd, hee with nimph Aegerin spoke, That him to his good motions did provoke; Whereby, as if it were with Heavens consent, He brought these men to civill governement. So when I came in high affaires to deale, Of sound Religion I did make a shewe, And by pretence of that and fervent zeale, In wealth and faction, I more strong did growe, For this by practize I did plainely knowe, That men are apt to yeeld to any motion Made by a man that is of pure devotion. Yet could I straine my conscience for a meed, For though I seem'd an earnest Protestant, For gaine I favour'd Papist; so indeed, Some held mee for a Newte, and I grant, To serve my torne, I would turne Puriant; Thus by Religion honour some did winne, And this faire cloake oft covers filthy sinne. Like as the ayre-sucking Camelion Can him transforme to any hue save white, So man can turne to any fashion, Save to that forme which is sincere and right, For though hee may delude the peoples sight; It is in vaine before God to dissemble, Whose power the Divels know, & knowing tremble.
Was I the onely man that hath offended In making holinesse a cloake for sinne? The French-men for religions sake pretended Their civill warres of late time did beginne, But yet ambition chiefely drew them in, Yea mad ambition and desire of gaine Makes endles broiles betwixt the State and Spaine. Of promises I was so prodigail, So kind, well spoken; and so liberall, That to some great divine as that might fall, Perhaps I promised a Bishoprick, But in performance I was nothing quick; Thus with faire words mens honours oft I fed, Whilst hope this while a good opinion bred. To learned Schollers, I was something franck Not for the love that I to learning bore, But either to get praise or pick a thank Of such as could the Muses aide implore, For hee is blest, that so be-friended dies, Whose praise the Muses will immortalize. You mortals that would have your fame survie, When you within your grave entomb'd shall lie, Cherish those sacred sisters while you live, For they bee daughters of Dame memry, And of the thundring Monarch of the skie, They have the guift to register with penne Th'eternall fame or infamy of men. The Students of the Vniversity, Oxford whereof I was the Chancellour, That Nurce of Science and Philosophie Knowing the greatnesse of my wit and power, Did honour mee as the faire springing flower That in the Princesse favour highly grew, Whom shee with showres of gold did oft bedew.
At my command both Dee and Allen tended, By magick art my pleasure to fulfill; These to my service their best studies bended, And why they durst not dis-obey my will, Yea whatsoever was of secret skill In Oxford or in Cambridge to bee sold, I bought for love, for feare, or els for gold. Doubtles the most renown'd Philosophers, As Plato and Pythagoras have sought To learne the Hiraglised characters, And secrets which by magique skill is wrought, Such as the Aegyptians, Iewes, and Caldaeans taught; The Arts not ill, if men doe not abuse it, No fault so bad, but some man will excuse it. Lopus and Iulio were my chiese Physitians, Men that were cunning in the art to kill; Good Schollers, but of passing ill conditions; Such as could rid mens lives yet no bloud spill, Yea, and with such extreamity and skill Could give a dram of poyson that would slay, At th'end of the yeare, the moneth, the week, the day. I never did these wicked men imploy To wrong my Prince, or my true loving friend, But false deceiptfull wretches to destroy, And bring them to an unexpected end, Let them looke to it that did most offend, Whose names are register'd in Plutos scrowles, For I will never answere for their soules. Knights and Esquires the best in every shire Did wait on mee in England up and downe, And some among them, did my livery weare, My smiles did seeme to promise them renowne, But dismall hopes ensu'd when I did frowne: As when the starro Aretarus did appeare Of raging tempest, Sea-men stand in feare.
As for the souldiers and the men of warre At home in service, some I did retaine, Others I sent abroad not very farre, At my commandment to returne againe; These I with costs did secretly maintaine, That if ought chanced otherwise then well, I might have sent my foes to Heaven or Hell. Likewise I brought the Lawyers in someaw, The worthy Students of the Innes of Court, That there appli'd them to the Common-law Did yeeld to mee in matters of import, Although sometimes I did the law extort; And whether right or wrong my cause on'st hard To plead against mee, made great Lords afeard. So the Lord Barckley lost his good lands by mee, Whereof at first perhaps, hee did not dreame, "Might many times doth overcome the right, "It is in vaine to strive against the streame; Where he, that is chiefe subject of the Realme, Vpon his Soveraignes favour rests him bould, Hee cannot, or hee will not bee contrould. Thus by the Queene my puisance was upheld, And for my foes I ever was too strong, The grace I had from her, all feare expell'd I might wrong others, but not suffer wrong; So many men did unto mee belong, Which on my favour chiefely did depend, And for my sake both lands and goods would spend, The best esteemed noble of the land, On whose support the publique State reli'd Were linkt with mee in friendships faithfull band▪ Or els in kindred neerely were alli'd, Their perfect loves and constant hearts I tride; Th'inferiour sort, at our devotion stood▪ Ready to execute what wee thought good.
The Earle of Warwick my owne loving Brother; My Sisters husband th'Earle of Huntington, The bounteous Earle of Bedford was another: Of my best friends belov'd of every one, Sir Henry Sidneis power in Wales well knowne, And there th'Earle of Pembrooke chiefe of all, Of kinne my friend what ever chance might fall. In Berwick, my wifes Vncle had chiefe power, The Lord of Hlunsden my assured friend, In Ireland the Lord Gray was Governour▪ Gernsey and Iersey likewise did depend Vpon such men as did my will attend; Hampton my man, Lieutenant of the Tower, Prompt to doe my service at an houre. Sir Edward Horsey in the Isle of wight, And Noble Sir George Ceraw, next bore sway, Men of great courage and no little might To take my part in any doubtfull fray, In London the Recorder Fleetwood lay, That often usde good words that might incense The Citizens to stand in my defence. The Prentises did often take my part, As I in private quarrels oft have tride, So that I had the very head and heart, The Court and City leaning on my side, With flattery some, others which guifts I plide; And some with threats, stern looks and angry words, I winne to my defence with clubbes and swords. Thus I by wisedome and fine policy Maintain'd the reputation of my life Drawing to mee, the flowers of chivalry To surrour mee at need in time of strife, Men that lov'd change in every place were rife; And all the Realm was with my power possest, Thinke what this might have wrought, but judge the best.
Like Claudius Marcellus drawne through Rome In his faire Chariot with youths Trophies deckt, Crown'd with garlands by the Sonats doome, Whom they five times their Consull did elect, That from their foes hee might their lives protect; When hee with conquest did his Countrey greet, Loads of rich spoiles lay prostrate at his feet: So did I triumph ride through all those townes, As if I had beene Viceroy of this land; My face well grast with smiles, my purse with Crownes, Houlding the raines of honour in my hand, I manag'd all the State, I did command: My lookes with humble Majesty repleat; Made some men wish mee a Kings royall seat. Thus waxt I popular to purchase fame, To mee the Common-peoples knees did bow, I could my humour still so fittely frame To entertaine all men to outward show, For few with inward love my heart did know, And that I might not seeme puft up with pride, Bare-headed oft through Cities I did ride. While some cried out, God save you gratious Lord, Lord how they did my fame h'iperobolize, My words and gesture did so well accord As with their hearts I seem'd to simpathize, I charm'd their cares, and did enchant their eyes, Thus was I reckon'd their chiefe Potentate, No poller but a piller of the State. Then I was call'd the life, and ô the Court! And some, I wot, wisht I had beene the head; I had so great a traine and such a port, As did the pompe of Mortimer exceed; Whom (as in th' English Cronicles wee read, When second Edward lost his Kingly rights) Was waited on at onst with nine score Knights.
The Earle of March, Sir Robert Mortimer, Ruld the young King, Queene mother, and the Peeres, I Robert Dudley Earle of Leycester, Did sway in Court, and all the English Shires; His rule was short, mine florisht many yeares. Hee did his life with Ignominy loose; I liv'd and triumpht ore my proudest foes. As the Image of great Alexander dead, Made King Cassander tremble at his sight Spying the figure of his Royall head, Whose presence sometime did the World affright; Or like as Caesar monarchizing spright, Persude false Brutus at Phillippos field, Till hee that slew his leige himselfe was kild. So view yee petty Lords my Princely Ghost, I speake to you whose heart is full of gall, I whilst I liv'd was honour'd of the most, And either fear'd for love, of great and smale, Or lov'd for feare of such as wisht my fall; Behold my shadow representing State, Whose person sometime did your pride abate. Waigh what I was, Knights, Gentlemen, and Peeres, When my death threatning frownes did make you quake, As yet there was not pass't not many yeares, Since I you plumes pluckt, lofty crests did shake, Then tell mee Sirs for old acquaintance sake, Waxe yee not pale to heare of Leysters name, Or to bakebite mee, blush yee not for shame. You say, in dealings that I was unjust As if true Justice ballance yee could guide, Had I dealt justly, I had turn'd to dust, Long before this, your corps swolne up with pride, Which now surviving doe my acts deride: My fame yet lives, though death abridg'd my dayes, Some of you died that over liv'd your praise.
Are there not some among you Parasites, Time-servers and observers of no measure, Damn'd Machevillians given to lust and pleasure, Church robbers▪ beggers of the Princes treasure, Prince-smothers, people pleasure, Hippocrites, Truce-breakers, Pirats, Atheists, Sycophants, Can equity dwell here, where conscience wants. And yet, you thinke none justly deales but you, Divine Astrea up to Heaven is fled; And turne to Libra there looke up to view, Her ballance in the zodiack figur'd, Iust Aristldes onst was banished, Where lives his match whom envy did persue, Because men thought hee was too just and true. Yee say ambition harbour'd in my braine, I say ambition is no hainous sinne, To men of state doe stately thoughts pertaine By basebred thoughts never can any winne, Who ever did a great exploite beginne, Before ambition mov'd him to the deed, And hope of honour urg'd him to proceed. Themistocles had never put to flight, Xerxes hughe host; nor tam'd the Persian pride, Nor had King Pyrrus got by marshall sight; The Romans spoiles with conquest on his fight, If first ambition had not beene the guide; Had not this humour, their stout hearts allur'd To high attempts, their fame had beene obscur'd. The Eagle doth disdaine to catch smale flies, The Lion with the Ape doth scorne to play, The Dolphin doth the Whirle-pooles love despice; Thus if Beasts, Birds, and Fishes beare such sway, Much more should man (whom reason doth adorne) Bee noble minded and base fortune scorne.
Admit I could dissemble wittily, This is no grievious sinne in men of State, Dissembling is a point of policy, Plaine dealing now growes stale, and out of date, Wherefore I oft conceald my privy hate, Till I might find fit time, though long I stay'd, To wreake the wrath, that in my heart I lai'd. The ould proverbe saith, plaine dealing is a Juell, But hee that useth it a begger dies; The World is now a dayes become so cruell That Courtiers doe plaine Country-men despice: Quick wits and cunning heads doe quickly rise, And to bee plaine, yee shall plainely deale, That office seekes in Court or Common-wealth. Now Aristippus is in more request That knew the way to please a Monarch's mind Then that Cinique swad that us'd to jest, At every idle Knave that hee could find, To unkind friends you must not bee too kind, This is a maxime which to you I give, Men must dissemble or they cannot live. Yee say I was a cowerd in the field, I say that fits not such a Noble wight, To whom his Countrey doth the title yeeld of Lord Lieutenant, with full power and might To venture his owne person in the fight; Let others die which as our vassailes serve, Whilst heaven for better haps our hopes preserve. How soone did Englands joy in France diminish, When th' Earle of Salisbury at Orlne By gunshot strooke, his honours life did finish: When Talbot that did often time advance, The English Enfines in despite of France Was at the dat Invironed and slaine, Whose name the French-mens terrour doth remaine.
And what a fatall wound did Rome recieve By Crassus death whom faithlesse Parthians slue, How did the Senate for Flaminius grieve; And for Aemilius death and his stout crue, Whom Hannibal at Cannes did subdue; Cut off an arme, yet life the heart may cherish, Cut off the head, and every part will perish. Iphicrates th' Athenian usde to say, Vaunt Currours are like hands to battaile prest, The men of armes are feet whereon to stay, The Foote-men as the stomack and the brest, The Captaines as the head above the rest; The head onst crased troubleth all the parts, The Generall slaine doth kill ten thousand hearts. Therefore a Lord Lieutenant should take care, That hee in safety doe himselfe repose, And should not hazard life at every dare, But watch and ward; so Fabius tir'd his foes. When rash Minutius did the conquest loose, If such in open danger will intrude, It is fond rashnes and not fortitude. You say I was lascivious in my love, And that I tempted many a gallant Dame, Not so content, but I did also prove To winne, their handmaids if I like the game▪ Why Sirs, you know love kindles such a flame, As if wee may beleeve what Poets penne, It doth inchant the hearts of Gods and men. Iove lov'd the Daughter of a jealous Sire, Dnae a maid immur'd within a Towre, Yet to accomplish the end of his desire, Hee metamorphos'd to a goulden showre Fell in the lap of his faire pramour, And being term'd a God did not disdaine, To turned to man, to beast, to showre of raine.
Deere Lord, when Cupid throwes his firie darts, Doth none of them your tender bodies hit, Doth Cytherea never charme your hearts, Nor beauty trie your quintessentiall wit, Perhaps you will say, no, fie it is unfit: Now by my Garter and my George to boote, The blind boy surely hits, if hee doth shoote. Whereas you doe object by magick charmes, I sought to winne faire Dames to my desire▪ T'is better so then strive by force of armes "For forced love will quickely back retire; If faire meanes cannot winne what wee require▪ Some secret tricks and slights must be devised That love may even from hell bee exercised. To you dull wits it seemes impossible, By drinkes or charmes this worke to passe to bring, Know then that Giges went invisible By turning of the sigill of his Ring Toward his palme, and thereby slew the King, Laie with his wife of any man unseene, Lastely did raigne by marrying with the Queene. King Solomon for magick naturall Was held a cunning man by some divines, Hee wrote a booke of Science naturall, To bind ill Spirits in their darke confines, Hee had great store of wifes and concubines; Yet was hee a sacred King, this I inferre, "The wisest man that now doth live may eric. Also yee said that when I waxed old, When age and mispent time had made mee drie, For ancient held in carnall lust is cold, Natures defect with art I did supplie, That so to helpe this imbecility▪ I used strange drinkes and ointments of great price, Whole tast or touch might make dead flesh arise.
To this I answer, that this fine extraction Drammes and electuaries rarely made, Serv'd not so much to helpe▪ veneriall action, As for to comfort nature that's decay'd, Which being with indifferent judgement way'd; In Noble men may bee allow'd I trust, As lending to their healths, and not their justs. What if I drunke nothing but liquid gold, Lactrina, Christall, Pearle dissolv'd in wine, Such as the Aegyptians full cuppes of did hold, When Cleopatra with her Lord did dine, A trifle, care not, for the cost was mine; What if I gave Hypomius in drinke To some faire Dames, at smal faults yee must winke. Yee say I was a Traytor to the Queene, And that when Monsieur was in greatest grace, I being out of favour, mov'd with spleene, To see a French-man frolique in the place: Forth toward Berwick then did post a pace, Minding to raise a rebellious rout, To take my part in what I went about. That I was then a Traytor I deny, But I confesse that I was Monsieurs soe, And sought to breake the league of amity, Which then betwixt my Prince and him did growe: Doubting Religion might be changed so; Or that our lawes and customes were in danger, To bee corrupt and alter'd by a stranger. Therefore I did a faction strong maintaine Against the Earle of Suffex, a stout Lord On Monsieurs side, and then Lord Chamberlaine, Who sought to make that nuptiall accord, Which none may breake, witnesse the sacred word; But thus it chanced that hee striv'd in vaine To knit the Knolt which Heavens did not ordaine.
Thus did yee mis-enterpret my conceits, That for disloyalty my deeds did blame, Yet many men have layed their secret baites, To entrape mee in such snares to worke my shame, Whom I in time sufficiently did tame; And by my Soveraignes favour bore them downe, Proving my selfe true Liegeman to the Crowne. Thinke yee I could forget my Soveraigne Lady That was to mee so gratious and so kind, How many triumphes for her glory made I, O I could never blot out of my mind; What Characters of grace in her still shin'd, But some of you which were by her prefer'd, Have with her bones almost her name interr'd. When shee was gone which of you all did weepe, What mournefull song did Phylomela sing▪ Alas when shee in cold deaths bed did sleepe, Which of you all her dolefull knell did ring, How long will yee now love your crowned King▪ If yee forget so soone you ould Queene dead, Which foure and fourtie yeares hath governed, Yee say I fought by Muither to aspire, And by strong poison many men to lay, Which as yee thought might erosse my high desire, And cloude my long expected golden day, Perhaps I laid some blocks out of my way, Which hindred mee from coming to the bowre, Where Cynthia shin'd like lampes in Pharohs Towre. Alas I come not of a Tygers kind, My hands with bloud, I hated to defile; But when by good experience I did find How some with fained love did mee beguile, Perchance all pitty then I did exile, And as it were against my will was prest, To ke their deaths that did my life detest.
Lo then, attend to heare a dolefull tale, Of those whose deaths you doe suppose I wrought, Yet wish I that the World beleeve not all, That hath of mee by envious men beene wrot; But when I for a Kingly fortune sought, O pardon mee, my selfe I might forget, And cast downe some my state aloft to set. My first wife fell downe from a paire of staires, And brake her neck and so at Cromner died, Whilst her true servants led with small affaires, Vnto a faire at Abbington did ride, This dismall hap unto my wife betide: Whether yee call it chance or destinie, Too true it is shee did untimely die. O had I now a showre of teares to shed, Lockt in the empty Circles of mine eyes, Or could I shed in mourning for the dead, That lost a spouse so young, so faire, so wife, So faire a corps, so foule a corse now lies; My hope to have married with a famous Queene, Drave pitty back, and kept my teares unseene. What man so fond that would not loose a Pearle To find a Diamand, leave brasse for gold? Or who would not for sake a gallant girle, To winne a Queene, great men in awe to hold? To rule the State of none to bee controld; "O but the steps that lead unto a throne, "Are dangerous for men to tread upon. The Cardinall Chatillian was my foe, Whose death peradventure I did compact, Because hee let Queene Elizabeth to know▪ My false report given of a former act, How I with her had made a precontract, And the great Princes hope I hard thereby, That sought to marry with her Majesty.
The Prelate had beene better hold his tongue And kist his Fathers holy feete in Rome, A Masse the sooner, for his soule was song, But hee might thanke mee had hee stayed at home, Or late or never hee to Heaven had come; Therefore I sent him nimbly from the coasts, Perhaps to supper with the Lord of hoasts. When death by hap my first wifes neck had crackt, And that my suite unto the Queene ill sped, It chanced that I made a post-contract, And did in sort the Lady Sheifield wed, Of whom I had two goodly Children bred, For the Lord Sheifeild died, as I was sure Of a Catarchy, which Physitians could not cure. Some thinke, the Rhume was artificiall▪ Which this good Lord before his end did take, Tush, what I gave to him was naturall▪ My plighted troth▪ yet some amends did make, Though her at length, unkind, I did forsake; Shee must not blame mee for a higher reach, Made my sure promise find a sudden breach. The valiant Earle whom absent I did wrong, In breaking Hymeneons i holy band, In Ireland did protract the time too long, Whil'st some in England ugled under hand, And at his comming homewards to this land, Hee died with poison as they say infected, Not without cause, for vengance I suspected. Because this fact notorious scandall bred, And for I did his gallant wife abuse, To salve this sore when this brave Lord was dead, I for my selfe did this faire Lady choose, And flesh is fraile, deere Lady mee excuse, It was pure love which made mee undertake▪ This haplesse recontract with thee to make.
Now In Ioves Pallas that good Lord doth sup, And drinke full bowles of Nectar in the skie, Hmnos his page▪ that tasted of that cup, Did onely loose his haire and did not die; True noble Earle, thy fame to Heaven did flie, Hee doth repent his fault, and pardon crave, That mar'd thy bed, and too soone made thy grave. Thou did'st behind thee leave a matchlesse sonne; A peerelesse patern for all Princely Peeres, Whose sparkes of glory in my time begunne, Kindled with hope, flam'd highly in few yeares, But death him struck and maim'd this land with feares, His sonne doth live, true Image of him dead, To glad this soile where showres of reares were shed. They were too blame that said the Queene should marry With mee, her Horse-keeper, for so they told mee, But thou Throgmorton, which this tale did carry From France to England hast more sharply gld mee, Sith my good Queene in office high extol'd mee; For I was Master of her highnesse Horse, I scorn'd thy words, which did my hate inforce. But tell mee then, how did'st thou like thy fare When I to supper last did thee invite, If I did rid thee of a World of care By giving thee a sallet, gentle Knight, With gastely lookes doe not my soule affright; Leycester I am whom England on'st did dread, But now I am like thee Throgmorton dead. My Lord of Sussex was too collerick, That cald mee Traytor, and a Traytours sonne, But I serv'd him a fine Italian trick, Had I not done so I had beene undone, Now marke the end what conquest hee hath wonne; A little scruple that to him I sent, Did purge his choller till his life was spent.
Hee was a gallant Noble man indeed▪ O but his life did still my life decrease, Therefore I sent him with convenient speed, To rest amongst his Ancestours in peace▪ My rage was passifide at his decease; And now I come to imbrace his love too late, Whom dead I lov'd, and living I did hate. I came to visite as I chan'st to walke My Lady Lenox whom I found not well, I tooke her by the hand had private talke, And so departed a short tale to tell, When I was gone unto a flux shee fell, That never coast her company to keepe, Till it had brought her to a sencelesse sleepe. I dreamt shee had not many dayes to live, And this my dreame did shortly fall out true, So as her Ghostly father, I did give Some comfort to her soule, for well I knew, That shee would shortly bid the World adue; Some say I gave such physick as did spill her, But I suppose that meere conceit did kill her. Some will object perhaps I did pretend To meet the Earle of Ormond on a day, In single fight our quarrell for to end, But did command my servant Kyllagray, To lie in ambush that stout Lord to slay, But Heaven did not consent to worke his spoile, Which was the glory of the Irish soile. Perhaps I doubted that I was too weake, And loth I was, hee should the conquest winne, If in this cause I did my promise breake, I hope men will not count it for , Is it not good to sleepe in a whole ▪ When Hanibal could not prevaile with blowes▪ Hee used  to .
If I the death of Mounsieur Simrs sought, When he from France Embassadour was sent, I had good cause to seeke it, as I thought, For towards meehee bore no good intent Had hee fled by times, perhaps I meant To have sent him in Embasse for my pleasure To the black Fiend that keepes Avernus treasure. For when no men about the Coasts durst speake, That I the Lady Lettice married, This pratling French man first the Ice did breake, And to the Queene the fact discovered, Which (not without just cause) the anger bred; Thus th'ape did play his part, contrould of none, When hee espied the Beare from home was gone. One Salvadore an Italian borne, Having on'st watcht with mee till midst of night, Was found slaine in his bed the next day morne, Alas poore man, I rue his wofull plight, That did in nothing but in sinne delight: Had hee to honest actions bent his wit, Hee might have longer liv'd and scapt his fit. But what reward should such a man expect, Whom gold to any Lewdnes could entire, Ons turne, on'st serv'd, why should wee not reject So vile an instrument of damned vice, What if hee were dispatched in a trice, Was it not better this mans bloud to spill, Then let him live the World with sinne to fill. I doubted least, that Doughtie would be wray My Councell, and with other party take, Wherefore the sooner him to rid away, I sent him forth to Sea with Captaine Drake, Who knew how t entertains him for my sake, Before he went his let by mee was cast, His death was plotted and perform'd in hast.
Hee hoped well, but I did so dispose, That hee at Port-Saint-Gillian lost his head, Having no time permitted to disclose The inward griefes that in his heart were bred; Wee need not feare the biting of the dead, Now let him goe transported to the Seas, And tell my secrets to the Antipodes. My servant Gates did speed as ill or worse, To whom I did my close intents impart, And at his need with money stuft his purse, And will'd him still take courage at his heart, Yet in the end, hee felt the deadly smart; Hee was inveiglde by some subtill witted, To robbe, so hee was taken and committed. Of pardons, I did put him still in hope, When hee of felony was guilty found, And so condemn'd, till his last friend, the rope Did him uphold from falling to the ground, "What hope of grace, where vice doth so abound: Hee was beguil'd like birds that use to gape, At Zeuxes table for a painted grape. Yet did I to the man no injury, I gave him time and leasure to repent, And well hee knew hee had deserv'd too die, Therefore all future mischiefe to prevent, I let him slip away with my consent; For his reprivall, (like a crasty Fox,) I sent no pardon, but an empty Box. Else as unfaithfull Banister betrayed The Duke of Buckingham, his Master deere, When hee of Richards tyranny affraid, Fled to his servants house for succour there, So might my man for gaine, or forst for feare, Have brought my corps, with shame unto my grave, By too much trusting to a pratling knave.
It seemes at mee great Norfolke Duke doth frowne, Because hee thinkes I did his death contrive, Perswading some hee aymed at the Crowne; And that by Royall match hee meant to strive, A Kingdome to his Lordship to revive. Alas good Duke hee was too weake and mild, And I too faithlesse, that his trust beguild. For that I found his favour first was bent, To take the Scots captived Queene to wife, I egg'd him on to follow his intent, That by this meanes I might abridge his life, And she a crowned Queene to stint all strife; First finding Scotland lost, to England fled, Where shee in hope of succour lost her head. O blessed Spirits live yee evermore, In Heavenly Syon where your Maker raignes, And give mee leave my fortunes to deplore, That am fast fetterd with sinnes iron chaines; "Mans most sweet joyes are mixt with some soure paines, And none doth live in high or low degree, That can in life or death, from Woe bee free. And now my tongue growes weary to recite, Such Massacres as have beene here exprest, Whose sad remembrance doth affright my sprit, Mee thinkes I see Legions of soules to rest In Abrahams bosome▪ and my selfe oppest: The burthen of my sinnes doe waigh mee downe, At mee the Feinds doe laugh, and Angels frowne. My crimes I grant were great and manifold, Yet not so hainous as men make report, But flattering Parasites are growne so bold, That they of Princes matters make a sport, To please the humour of the vulgar sort, And that poore peevish giddy-headed crew, Are prone to credite any tale untrue.
Let those that live, endeavour to live well, Least after death, like mine, their guilt remaine, Let no man thinke there is no Heaven nor Hell; Or like the impious Saduces maintaine, That after death no flesh shall rise againe: Let no man trust to fortunes fickle wheele, The guerdon due for sinne I partly feele. Know that the Prince of Heavenly Seraphines, When hee against his Creatour did rebell, Was tumbled downe for his presumptuous sinne; Sathan, that onst was blest, like lightening fell, From the highest Heaven to the deepest Hell; And all those Angels that his part did take, Have now their portions in the burning lake. Of mighty heapes of treasure I could vaunt, For I reapt profit out of every thing, I could the Prince and peoples hearts inchant With my faire words and smoth fac'd flattering; Yea out of drosse pure gould I oft did wring, For though the meanes to winne bee oft unmeet, The smell of lucre ever smelleth sweet. So I sometime had very much good hap, Great suites of my dread Soveraigne to obtaine, Prodigall fortune powr'd downe from her lap: Angels in gold as thick as drops in raine, Such was my luck to find the golden vaine; Likewise with mee it seemed nothing strange, Both rent and lands oft with my Prince t'exchange. I had another way to enrich my selfe▪ By getting Licenses for mee alone, For wine, oyle, velvet, cloath, and such like pelfe, Also by Licenses of Alienation, By raising rents and by oppression, By claiming forrests, pastures, commons, woods, And forfeiture of lands, of life, and goods.
By this strange course I also greatly thriv'd In falling out with my deere Soveraigne, For I the plot so cunningly contriv'd, That reconsilement soone was made againe, And by this meanes great gifts I did obtaine, For that I might my purse the better fill, I begg'd great suites as pledge of new good will▪ Besides, sometimes I did enerease my store, By benefits that I from Oxford tooke, Electing heads of houses heretofore; I lov'd their money, and they lov'd there booke, Some poorer, though more learned, I forsooke; For in those dayes; charity waxed cold, Little was done for love, but much for gold▪ Doubtles my Father was a worthy Peere In Edward the sixt dayes, when hee was sent Agrainst Rebels that did rise in Norfolke shire, And after that, when hee to Scotland went Vnder the Lord Protectours regiment, By notable exploit against the Scot, Eternall glory to himselfe hee got. Truly ambition was his greatest fault, Which commonly in noble hearts is bred, Hee thought, hee never could his State exalt, Till the good Duke of Somerset was dead, Who by my Fathers meanes did loose his head▪ So ill the race of Dudleis could endure, The Seymoures lives which did their fame obscure. When onst King Edward at the butte had shot, My Father said, your grace shootes neere the marke, The King repli'd but not so neere I wot, As when you shot my Vncles head off quite; The Duke my Father knew the King said right, And that hee meant this matter to debate If ere hee liv'd to come to mans estate.
It seemes my Father in times past, had beene A skilfull Archer, though no learned clearke, So strange a chance as this is seldome seene, I doe suppose, hee shot not in the darke, That could so quickly hite so faire a marke, Nor have I mist my aime, nor worse have sped, When I shot off the Duke off Norfolkes head. Now when the Duke of Somerset was dead, My Father to the French did Bulloigne sell, As pleased him the King hee governed, And from the privy Counsell did depell, Th' Earles of Southampton and of Arundell, Thus while he rulde and controuled all, The wise young King extreamely sick did fall. Who having languisht long, of life depriv'd, Not without poison as it was suspected, The Counsaile through my Fathers meanes contriv'd That Suffolkes Daughter should be Queene elected, The sisters of King Edward were rejected; My brother Gilford to Iane Gray was wedded, Too high preferr'd, that was so soone beheaded. This Lady Iane that onst was term'd a Queene, Greater in fame then fortune was put downe, Had not King Henries Daughters living beene, Might for her vertues have deserv'd a Crowne, Fortune on her at onst did smile and srowne; Her wedding garment for a Princes meet, Was quickly changed for a winding sheet. For I was jumpe of Iulius Caesars mind, That could no one superiour Lord endure, Nay, I to rule my Soveraigne was enclin'd, And bring the Common-people to my lure, Accompting that my fortunes was obscure, And that I lived in a wofull plight, If any one Ecclipst my graces light.
The love to raigne makes many men respect, Neither their friend, their kindred, nor their vow, The love to raigne makes many men neglect, The duty which to God and man they owe, From out this fountaine many mischiefes growe, Hereof examples many may bee read, In Chronicles of the English Princes dead. This humour made King Harrold breake his oath, Made unto William Duke of Normandy, This made King Ruffus and young Beauclarke bt Their elder brother Robert to defie, And Stephen to forget his loyalty, To Maude the empresse, and to hould in scorne, The faithfull oath which hee to her had sworne. This made young Henry crowned by his Sire Against his Father warrefarre to maintaine, This made King Iohn the Kingdome to aspire, Which to his nephue Arthur did pertaine, And him in prison hardely to retaine; And this made Bullingbrooke usurpe the Crowne Putting his lawfull Soveraigne Richard downe. This made Edward the fourth at his returne, To breake the oath which hee had lately sworne When hee from Burgondy to Yorke was come, And rule the Realme in good King Henries roome; This made the Tyrant Richard eake to doome, His nephues death and ridde away his wife, And so in bloud to end his wretched life. A pretty plot in practize I did put, Either to take a Queene without delay, Or when the cards were shuffled and well cut, To choose the King and cast the Knaves away, Hee should bee cunning, that great game would play; Ill luck hath hee, that no good game can make, Where Princes play and crownes lie at the stake.
First I assay'd Queene El'zabeth to wed, Whom divers Princes courted but in vaine, When in this course unluckly I sped, I sought the Scots Queene marriage to obtaine, But when I reapt no profit for my paine, I sought to match Denbigh my tender chil'd To Dame Arbella, but I was beguil'd. Even as Octavus with Marke Anthony, And Lepidus the Romaine Empire shard, That of the World then held the Soveraignty, So I a new Triumverate prepar'd, If cruell death young Denbighs life had spar'd, The Grandame, Vncle, and the Father in law, Might thus have brought all England under aw. In the Low-Countries did my fame sore high, When I was sent Lieutenant generall, The Queenes proud foes I stoutly did defie, And made them too some composition fall, There I maintain'd a port Majesticall; In pompe and triumph many dayes I spent, From noble then, my name grew excellent. Then was my heart in height of her desire, My mind puft up with sarquery and pride, The vulgar sort my glory did admire, Even as the Romans, Ave Caesar cried When the Emperour to the Senate house did ride; So did the Flemings with due reverence, Like thunder say God save your excellence. Few subjects before mee obtain'd this stile, Vnlesse they were as viceroyes of this land, The name of Lordship seem'd to base and vile To mee that govern'd such a Royall band, And had a Princes absolute command, Who did not of my pussiance stand in aw? That might put him to death by Martiall law▪
Lo what a Title hath my honour got, An Excellency added to my name, Can this injurious World so quickly blot A name so great out of records of fame, Covering my glory with a vaile of shame; Or will it now contemne mee being dead, Whom living, even with feare it honoured. The Towne of Denborough I did besiege, Which did on composition shortly yeeld, I did good service to my gracious leige, Till by ill Councellours I was beguil'd; For such as were my Captaines in the field, To whom I did at length chiese charge commit, Seduc'd mee to doe many things unfit. When Sir Iohn Norris counsaile I refus'd, Whose perfect skill in Armes I well knew, By Rowland Yorkes devise I was abus'd, Whereof some losse soone after did ensue, Deventer Towne and Zutphen Sconse I rue; By Yorke and Stanley without many bloes, Where rendered up to mercy of the foes. And that which to my heart might more griefe strike, Hapned the death of that renowned Knight, My nephew Sidney neere Coleston Dike, Receiv'd his deadly wound through fortunes spight, I sent no fresh supply to him out right, I was not farre off with a mighty hoast, So with his losse of life some fame I lost. The Court of him lost a brave Courteour, The Countrey lost a Guide their faults to mend, The campe did loose an expert Souldiour, The City lost an honourable friend, The Schooles a Patron their rights to defend, The Court, the Countrey, and the Schooles and City, For Sydne is death doe sing a mournefull ditty.
Now while my Princely glory did abound, Like rich Lucullus I great feasts did make, And was for hospitality renown'd, The use of Armes I quickly did forsake; An easier taske I meant to undertake, I tooke no joyes in wounds and broken pates, But to carrouse and banquet with the States. Not Heliogabilus whose dainty fare Did all the Roman Emperoars feasts exceed, In cost and rarenes might with mine compare, Though hee on braines of O stretches did feed, And Phinicepteries, and that insteed Of Oyle, hous'd his lampes with Balme to fill, Such was the pleasure of the Tyrants will. To mee Count Egmonts Daughter did resort, And such brave Dames as Flanders still did yeeld, That it did rather seeme, I came to court A gallant Lady, then to pitch a field, For I did lay aside the sword and shield, At cards and dice I spent the vacant dayes, And made great feasts insteed of Martiall frayes. But whilst in games and love my time I spent, Seeming secure as though I car'd for nought, My Messengers abroad I dayly sent, As instruments of my still working thought, Whereby my purpose oft to passe I brought, And compast what before I did devise At such a time as no man will surmise. Thus great attempts I ost did enterprise, Like a Magitian that with some fine wile, Dazels the sight of the Spectatours eyes, And with illusions doth their sence beguile, Such polices my cunning did compile, That I before mens eyes did cast a mist, While I perform'd such matters as I list.
Yee that like apes doe imitate my deeds, Hoping thereby like favour to obtaine, Know that so high a Spirit never breds, In a blunt Pesant, or unnurtur'd swaine; But in my heart imperious thoughts did raigne: No flegmatique dull milke-sop can aspire, But one compact of th' Element of fire. Hee dayly must devise some stratageme, Hee must bee rich, stout, liberall, and wise, The humours of base men hee must contemne, Hee must bee gratious in the peoples eyes, Hee should bee furnisht with rare qualities; With learning, judgement, policy and wit, And such like parts as for the times are fit. For every froward fellow is not borne, To bee a Scipio or a Maximus, Vnlesse that wisedome doth his state adorne, Or valour make his life more glorious, Though hee bee base of birth as Marius, Yet hee by vertues aid aloft may come, Like him that was seven times Consull in Rome. Ventillius name at first was meane and base, Till he the Parthians host had overthrowne, And Cicero came not of Noble race, Borne at Arpinum a poore Countrey Towne, Yet hee made Armes give place unto the gowne: And Rome by his great wisedome freed from spoile, Call'd him the Father of their native soile. Perchance young Courtiers learne sometime to sing, To skip or dance before their Mistres face, To touch like Orpheus some inchanting string, To runne at Tylt, to jet with stately pace, Or by some fine discourse to purchase grace, But cannot mannage the affaires of state, Which best belongs to rich great Potentate.
Listen to mee yee lusty Souldiers, That in such favour of high attempts doe grow▪ Experience bred in mee these many yeares Hath taught mee cunning which you doe not know, Some precepts here I doe intend to show; And if my Syrens song please not great Peeres, Then may they with Vlisses stop their eares. Trust not a friend that is new reconsil'd, In loves faire shew hee may hide foule deceipt, By him yee unawares may bee beguil'd, Reveale to none your matters of great weight, If any chance to know your leud conceipt, Suspected to bewray your bad intent, Hee ought to suffer death or banishment. Caligula the scourge of famous Rome, Wisht all the Romans had one onely head, That when hee list to give their fatall doome, Hee might with one great blow strick all them dead▪ So should hee never need their hate to dread; Even such a mischiefe I wisht to my foes, That many men might perish with few blowes▪ But unto those that doe your favour seeke, And by your helpe, hope their lowe state to raise, You must bee courteous, bountefull and meeke; Caesar by clemency wonne greatest praise, And was esteem'd the mirrour of his dayes: For it belongs to men of great estate, To spare the poore, and rich mens pride abate. It is ill to bee a Rubbe upon that ground, Whereas the Prince the Alley meanes to sweepe, There owne estate  fondly doe confound, That into high attempts doe bouldly creepe, And with their shallow pates doe wade so deepe, To hinder what their Soveraigne doth intend, Or to controule what they cannot amend.
Calisthines much torment did sustaine, Because great Alexanders pride hee checkt, Grave Scaenecae choosing his death was slaine, By Neros doome, whose faults hee did correct, Vse not too sharp rebuke, but have respect Vnto the Persons: when great men doe evill, The vengance leave to God, or to the Devill. Bee not too haughty, pride procureth hate, And meane mens hate may turne to your disgrace, Nor too familiar in thy high estate, For that will breed contempt among the base; Observe a meane which winneth man great fame, Speake faire to all, truth none, use well your foes, For this may purchase love where hatred growes. And if that you doe feare your friend should chance, To mount too highly in the Princes grace, His praise to Heaven then stick not to advance, Say that the charge hee beareth is too base, And that his worth deserves farre better place; So may yee by this praise rid him away, And so supply the place another day. Say hee will prove a terrour in the fiel'd, This private life doth muchobscure his fame, More fit to beare great Aiax seaven fold sheild, Then like Sardanapalus Court a Dame, Hee idly lives at home, it is a shame; His very presence may his foes apale, Let him bee sent Lieutenant Generall. Now if hee chance to perish in some fight, It was not your worke, but the chance of warres, Or thus you may excuse your sel slight Blaming the influence of the angry starres, That thus by death his future fortune barres: And sighing, wee are sorry, yee may say, That this brave man would cast himselfe away.
But if in feates of Armes hee have no skill, If hee bee learned grave and eloquent, By praising him thus may you have your will, Procure him in Ambassadge to bee sent, Farre off least hee returne incontinent, As to the mighty Cham, or Prester Iohn, And triumph in his roome when hee is gone. Let no man thinke I exercis'd the Ghost Of this great Peere that sleepeth in the dust, Or conjur'd up his Spirit to his cost To presse with dispraise or praise unjust, I am not partiall but give him his due, And to his soule I wish eternall health, Ne doe I thinke all written tales are true, That are inserted in his Common-wealth; What others wrot before I doe survive, But am not like to them incenst with hate, And as I plainely write, so doe I strive To write the truth, not wronging his estate. Of whom it may bee said and censur'd well, Hee both in vice and vertue did excell. FINIS.
