P2067 09025197 42260
THE MYSTERIES OF LOVE & ELOQUENCE, Or, the ARTS of Wooing and Complementing; As they are manag'd in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New Exchange, and other eminent places. A Work, in which is drawn to the Life, the Deport∣ments of the most accomplisht Persons, the mode of their Courtly Entertainments, Treatments of their Ladies at Balls, their accustom'd Sports, Drolls and Fancies, the Witchcrafts of their perswasive Language in their Approaches, or other more Secret Dispatches. And to compleat the young Practitioners of Love and Courtship, these following conducing Helps are chiefly insisted on. Addresses, and set Forms of Expressions for imitation, Poems, pleasant Songs, Letters, Proverbs, Riddles, Jests, Posics, De∣vices, A-la-mode Pastimes; A Dictionary for the making of Rimes, Four hundred and fifty delightful Questions, with their several Answers. As also Epithets, and flourishing Simili∣tudes, Alphabetically Collected, and so properly applied to their several Subjects, that they may be rendred admirably useful on the sudden occasions of Discourse or Writing. Toge∣ther, with a new invented Art of Logick, so plain and easie by way of Questions and Answers, that the meanest capacity may in a short time attain to a perfection in the ways of Arguing and Disputing. The Third Edition, with Additions. London, Printed by James Rawlins, for Obadiah Blagrave at the Black-Bear and Star in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1685.
THE Misteries of LOVE and ELOQVENCE The Arts of Wooing and Complementing LOVE ELOQVENCE Theater of Courtship. LOVES LIBRARY
The Preface To the Youthful Gentry. IT hath been such an hereditary practice for the Author, to declare to the Reader the depth of his design, that should I decline this custom, I should not free my Endeavors from the nice exceptions of the too curious Criticks of these times. When Playes were at their height, Prologues were so in fashion at the Court, and so desired on the Stage, that without them the Audience could not be pleased; so that the best Poets were forced to satisfie the greedy expecta∣tions of the multitude, that gaped and yawned for such set and starcht speeches to be gravely de∣livered to their Worships by the man in the long cloak with the coloured beard. It is repor∣ted of Mr. Fletcher, that though he writ with such a free and sparkling Genious, that future Ages shall scarce ever parallel, yet his importunate Commedians would often croud upon him such impertinences, which to him seem needless and lame excuses, his Works being so good, his in∣dignation rendred them as the only bad Lines his modest Thalia was ever humbled with. The truth is, when an Author hath set down well, and so descended to his Readers capacity, that
his Muse is obvious and easie to be understood, what needs there a Clavis or a Thred where there is no Labyrinth; notwithstanding, we cannot but be sensible that some Prefaces have so abused the credulous Readers trust, that they cannot now be too slightly set by, as most of them may; and that not improperly, be fitly compared to rich capparrison'd Jades, to painted Inn-posts, to Wenches admirably trickt forth, but pull off their dressings, and they look like flead Cats. What the Country-man said of the Nightingale, Vox & praeterea nihil, A great cry and no wool, may be rightly applied to them. I acknowledge, Courteous Reader, that as I have already in my Epistle to the Coy Ladies, discourst Jovially and Ironically of Love, as also in my other Adver∣tisement, treated by way of Introduction, of the right management of Eloquence and Comple∣ments, if I had not still inforced my Intellectu∣als to further serious and useful Instructions, for my Readers greater benefit, this Preface had been like those I have found fault with, superflu∣ous; or at least to little purpose. And now it will be expected, nor can I do otherwise, then make an ingenious confession, why I set those subjects of Love and Complements apart by themselves; I shall give my Reader sufficient rea∣son, that I might not justle too much matter into this Preface, which I only intend for a Landskip to the Work, my whole design being included in these two particulars. First, why I have pub∣lished this Volume. Secondly, what Profit and Delight an understanding Reader may expect
to drive to himself from his diligent perusal of it. For the first, to deal plainly with my Coun∣trey-men, the several simple Pamphlets that have treated so surreptitiously of this subject, ex∣acted this employment from me, as I could not but be highly incensed, to see them so cheated and baffled by such specious pretenders, but most wretched performers of what they undertook. I will not vex my Reader with the Names or Ti∣tles they are distinguisht or dignified with, I hope by this time all Ingenious Persons have learnt sufficiently to detest them. For my own part, in these my Studies I have not so much as ta∣ken any other notice of them, then to shun the in∣fection of their papers; and though some may ob∣ject that the Green is the same that we bowl on, such persons, if they make but the least inquisi∣tion, shall quickly find that my Byas is turned another way, my flight is higher, my engage∣ments are different; for without any vain glory I may confidently attest to the world, that the con∣tributions of several persons of Honour, as well by their particular prescriptions, as also by the as∣sistance of their choisest Manuscripts, built up this Volume. It took its birth from them, to whom with a most sincere gratitude it doth again hum∣bly dedicate it self. For my second Consideration, what benefit the Peruser of this Book is likely to acquire to him∣self, I shall express to him in few words; he hath, as I may rightly call it, a Magazin richly furnisht, for his dispatch of any of those high Concern∣ments,
Cupid or Mercury shall at any time instate him in; all manner of Adresses, Entertainments, and Ceremonies, whether of Salutation, Love or Court-ship, which are comprehended under those Heads of Wooing and Complements; from whence as from two Springs, the other lesser streams do distill, whether of Prose or Verse, seri∣ous or Drolling Subjects in Letters, or otherwise; these contain in them, a grand part of the body of this Work; for the other Additions of Pro∣verbs, Posies, Characters, Jeasts, Clinches, Si∣militudes, &c. as also the Miscelania, of Natural, Amorous, Moral, Experimental, Paradoxical, E∣nigmatical, and ovial Questions with their An∣swers, I am confident they will no less inrich the Readers Mind, then admirably delight his Fancy. As for the several A-la-mode Games and Sports, I have inserted them with such plain demonstra∣tions, that any person of a reasonable capacity, may quickly be expert in them; to which pur∣pose I have invented a Riming Dictionary, con∣sisting of Monasyllables, for the ending of Verses, applicable for those that are yong Practioners in the pleasant Sport named Crambo: together with another particular Alphabet, intituled, The triall of Wits, which consists of Epithets, properly fit∣ted for immediate use, on the sudden occasions of Writing or Discourse, which I have also appro∣priated to the other Recreation, so much in fashi∣on, called Substantives and Adjectives. And that the Ingenious Reader may be assured of my care and industry, to render this Book worthy of his acceptance, I have also presented him with a
compleat Tract of the Art of Logick by way of Question and Answer, so clearly delineated, that the Judicious Student may in a short time attain to a competent knowledge of those most neces∣sary ways of Arguing and Disputing, so much practised in the Universities. How advantagious this work will be to all in∣telligent Persons, will more easily be instanced, if we rightly consider the incongruity of mens parts, and look narrowly into their gifts; one speaks well, but writes improperly, another im∣ploys his pen in excellent sence, but wants good language; another hath a good invention but no method; so that whatsoever some of our Moderns pretend to their ex tempore inspirations, it cannot but be confessed by all men in their right minds, that Artificial set Forms may be aiding to them all, not as they are litterally to be applied but as they are additional helps to quicken and enligh∣ten the Genius. This my assertion will be clear∣ly made good, if we do but consider the smooth effeminate silken tribe, how some of them de∣mean themselves, who if they are put to it on sudden alarums or unexpected summons of their fancies by letters, or otherwise, how are they forced in such exigents, to have recourse to their Romances, Plays, Manuscripts, and such like Common place books, they turn down the page, transcribe, and for the present subsist on such slen∣der notions. How without blushing can I express it, that I have known a wench of fourteen, with a few Dramatical Drayton and Sidney Quillets, put to the non plus a Gallant of thirty; I may safe∣ly
dispose on it, that I have heard such a Lass defeat a Gentleman of some years standing at the Inns of Court. To those that scruple at Complemental Cere∣monies and Tenders of Service, I positively af∣firm, that such nimble applications, if rightly di∣rected, are most absolutely useful; and that those which have been adorned with such qualifications have had such tall advantages over others, as sel∣dom or never to fall short of their ends; more e∣specially when their good behaviours have been set off with Eloquence, which though it often carries with it self a false fire, yet if it be smooth∣ly and discreetly manag'd, it works wonders, not only for the present, but future times to ad∣mire at. Not to detain the worthy Reader with any longer suspence of so unquestioned a truth, I shall only desire thee to take notice, that these my endeavours had a gentle rise, so they still car∣ry with them a more than ordinary splendor; as they have shuned the common rode of all former Writers, so that if with Phaeton my muse is some∣times placed in the Chariot of the Sun, that she soars at the highest and most generous Designs; she may apologize for her self, that it was not her ambition, but the commands of several noble Per∣sons, whose importunity from her most serious Studies diverted her so far, as to make her parti∣cipate of their recreations, whether they took the air in the Spring Garden, raced in Hide Park, or expaciated, as Portugals called it, in New Ex∣change, or otherwise revelled at their Balls; in
all which Celebrations of pleasures with them, though my Muse was obleiged to observe some particulars, yet they are such as are civil and modest, such as need no veil, nor reflect upon any person whatsoever; and I hope so well of her, that as her Sphere is higher, she hath not been deficient in this her Deportment, so as to stoop to any more inferiour Theam, then what might be worthy of her. Courteous Reader, of late there hath been a scarcity of Wit, it will there∣fore seem to be more discretion in us, for to husband it as well as we can; what thou hast here, as I have sufficiently intimated, hath been derived from the best hands, such sprightly quick wit, as I can assure thee no language in so small a page ever afforded bet∣ter: In a word, thou mayest rest satisfied, that the ingenuity that is contained in this Book, is to much for one single brain to teem with, and therefore wonder not, if in such a Caskanet thou findest so much of in∣valuable treasure to inrich thy Fancy with; such, but that it seems too proud an ex∣pression from my self, others have been bold to affirm, that to compleat this Volume, they could not imagine what more could be ad∣ded or invented. For my own part, worthy Reader, I submit these my best endeavours to thy impartial and judicious censure, I e∣steem of thy well poised Genius, as the only Jacob's staff, with which the height of these conceptions can be rightly taken; and what∣soever
the inconsiderate opinion of some ri∣diculous Criticks may be, I am confident that as long as Wit, Love, or Courtship are in fashion, this Book shall live and flourish. Yours, ever to be commanded, E. P.
To those Cruel Fair ones, that triumph over the dis∣tresses of their loyal Lovers, the Auther wisheth more Clemency; and to their afflicted Servants, more magnanimity and Roman Fortitude. Bright Stars of Beauty, INcouraged by your former inexpressible favors, I am at this time emboldned to prostrate these my Devoirs at your feet: after your Ladiships e∣gress from the Spring Garden, I was invited by the pleasure of the season, into the solitary reti∣redness of an Arbour, where in my Tale-book I intended to insert some slender Observations of those harmless Transactions and civil Frolicks, that had past betwixt you and your Servants, whose entertainments you had graced that eve∣ning with the serene influences of your propiti∣ous smiles. I had scarce for the recreation of my Genius, employed my pen to the draught of the first Character, when of a sudden from a shady Grove, I heard a mournful hollow sound, which at the first, I imagined to have been occasioned by some fresh gale of wind, that had only rustled among the trees, till ascertained otherwise by the iteration of a Heart-tearing groan: I was so far disturbed as to cast my eye of one side, where I soon discovered a woful weight; who by his me∣lancholly posture, and leaning of himself so dis∣contentedly against a tree, as if he supported it; I could not but with probability of reason at the the first sight determine, to be some wretched In∣amarato,
some Love-sick person; such an one whom the blinde God hath more fiercely woun∣ded, then the twelve signs of the Anatomy. A dismal object he was; and so represented to my view, as if his misfortune had ruined him so at once, as that he could not be rendred more unfor∣tunate; he lookt as if one of your Ladiships had whispered into his ear that doleful tune of Adieu, or at least that desperate sentence, Miscreant, thou shalt lie alone with thy bed unwarmed a score of frosty Winters. It cannot be amiss, by your Ladiships fair permissions, to draw the cur∣tain from before this Love Martyrs picture, to describe him to you, vultu, gestu, & oculis, just as I then found him suffering his ten Persecutions; his Hat in one place, with papers of Verses in a∣nother, were so fantastically dispersed on the ver∣dent Grass, that if he pleased, with his Feet he might spurn the wantonness of his own Muse: for I perceived by the baldness of his crown with scratching, that he had lately been delivered of Acrosticks and Encomiums; in praise of some of your Beauties. After the writing of which, for fear of a non acceptance, he was most pestilently dogged, and as I then found him, in such a sullen station, yet were not his eyes so set in the hollow∣nesses of his head, but that I discerned from them such diliberate and heavy motions, as caused me, had I not been convinced by the former symp∣tomes of his disease, to have suspected, whether otherwise, according to his education, he were not some Clown, who having mistaken the Al∣manack, wept for fair weather. Certain I am
that I saw a most pitiful object, one that I could not but conceive that his Mistress had frowned on, and he in requital thought for a foil, to shew her a worser face then her own. I protest to your Ladiships, after I had entertained my most serious thoughts of him, I could not but take him for such an unthrift, as had spent the best stock of wits in adoration of his Ladies Looking-glass; I approacht nearer to him; not Imagining but that he would at length have disimprisoned to his thoughts in some discourse; for indeed after a stricter surveigh of his presence, he seemed to me as if he indeavoured to hew and fashion out his conceptions to some purpose, though I am confident they proved as unprofitable to him, as an unfinisht piece of Artifice; what weight he poised in his Perricranium, I cannot well guess, but thus much I observed, that sometimes his head hung down to his breast, like the mon∣ster boys brother; till of a sudden he assumed more confirmed imaginations of his Mistresses kindness, which in an instant placed it again, and fixt it right, as it was before, on its own Pedestal; his face was scorcht with his Ladies eyes, as if he bin a three years voiage at the Indies, I am per∣swaded his very Soul was tanned, for beauty hath the same influence with the sun, it blacks within, as his brighter beams do burn without. Bless me from Cupid, O Mistress! thought I, give me a friend and good wine. But to proceed in my description, I vow to your Ladiships, he hath so strictly manacled himself, that his arms seemed pinnioned, like rabits feet to a spit, cros∣sed
like the strings of a book; in such a posture he showed, as if he had been all contemplation, no action; like a woful Jesuit, that had forsaken the world, so as never to rise from before his Cruci∣fix; one might have taken him for a statue, had not his sighs breathed from his heaved-up heart, a kind of a living death, which together with sudden startings caused a paleness sometimes to overcome the otherwise more dusky colour of his face, even so as that same time, to discover that in diebus illis, his cheeks had entertained some tell-tale blushes, and dimpled smiles. His afflictions were so merciful to him, that to my better apprehension his very tears were of a so∣vereign use, which as they then gusht forth, ser∣ved to quench those flames his Mistresses eyes had kindled, which otherwise would have scorcht him to ashes, and to this purpose I do be∣leive they did distil all the seasons of the year. I could not but laugh at the cloaths he wore, which were so far from A-la-mode, that I rather conceive he had mistaken one piece for another; as if he had put on his breeches for his doublet, the buttons wherof, were most of them off, for at every sigh that came from him, like Poppy∣heads, half a dozen of them dropt at a time. At this strange disguise of his habit, together with the further waggery of the blinde God, I could not but cry out, Fie, when I saw how his garters were tied in the wrong place, about his neck, as if he had received his Mittimus, and should want no accommodation for his journey to the Elizian fields, whither certainly his stragling thoughts had
already transported him; for he appeared to me, as if he dreamt waking of some business that con∣cerned another world. Alas cruel Fair Ones, de∣prived of your pitty, without my more oppor∣tune address, he had been for too much loving, your most unhappy Victim. When I first begun to break the silence of that place, where all things were as still as night, he heard me with his eyes, his ears followed his minde, which I perceived was not then at leasure, as he was at that time all things but himself; but having now at length recollected so much strength as to breath a few horse sighs, for as then he wanted other lan∣guage to speak his misfortunes, so desperately had this idolatrous Lover faln sick of his Goddess. At length after he had bestowed on me an angry nod, for the strangeness of my intrusion on the privacy of his thoughts, he started forth into an unusual kinde of furious madness, unclasping his arms, which before I suppose could never have been untwined, he fell to beating and thumping of his breast. I could not chuse at that time, but be merrily conceited, that this incensed rage of his, might arise from some displeasure he took, that his Invention could not presently teem with some Anagram, as fruitful as his Mistresses name. To be breif, I was amaz'd to think into how many strange shapes this Passion of Love transforms us, what Owls and Monkies it makes of us; in truth, the variety of antick tricks he played, to∣gether with the vain apparitions, that questionless at that time peopled his brain, rendred him to my thinking, the most unfit person that ever I
saw for any humane converse: I assure you, La∣dies, so monstrous and fatal to the most eminent Heroes of the world in all Ages, have the cruel∣ties of your implacable Sex proved. Not to de∣tain your Ladiships any longer with the descrip∣tion, of this distracted Lovers Herculian passions, by degrrees after he had a while held his hands, with a little chasing of his temples, stopping of his ears, tweaking of his nose, he came again to himself, and then crossing his breast, after a few lamentable Ay mee's he removed from the tree, into which, till then, I thought he had been in∣grafted. It was now night, whereof he was so sensible, as also of his late indisposition, that he requested my company with him out of the Gar∣den. As we walkt, I discoursed the strangeness of his distemper, for I durst not acknowledge his Love to be a disease, least I should have oc∣casioned his prejudice, so far, as for him to have esteemed it to have been incurable. We agreed to go to the Tavern, where, after we had lustily quaft the Blood of the Grape, I presented him with this Book of the Mysteries of Love, which, toge∣ther with clapping of warm trenchers to his Bel∣ly, so perfecty and speedily recovered him, that within a few dayes after I met him in Bloomes∣bury, with fresh Roses in his Cheeks, he lookt as if his Soul were returned to its right home a∣gain, probatum est. Thus have I given your fair Ladiships a large, but no Empirical, relation of the cure of this mad Lover, without either casting of his Urine, or any other Charms on his Mistress, except they are such as are contained
in this Book, the Witchcrafts of Eloquence, and the right Arts of Wooing; which as I hear, have since taken her Fort in, and that they are now happily married, I wish them all joy; only I thought fit in this my Epistle, to give your coy Ladiships notice, what vertue this Volume hath, to triumph over your most Beautiful Disdains; to turn your Frowns into Smiles; your Angers into Kisses; to repreive those whom you have de∣stined for most bloody Sacrafices; to metamor∣phose your Champion Cupid from a Boy to a Man, to give him his eyes again, peruse this Book, bright Ladies, and commend it to any of your modest Sex, that are troubled with the Green∣sickness of Love, they cannot fail of a Remedy, 'tis Diana's own Receipt Book. To conclude; I do not desire that either of the Sexes should take a∣ny tyrannous advantages over one anothers Af∣fections, neither would I bar them of their Fro∣licks; but that after the Youths have plaid a while at Bo-peep, lookt Babies in one anothers eyes, Hymen in his saffron robe, hath his torch light, may conduct them to their Marriage Beds: which is the hearty wish, and hath been the aim of these endeavours of your Ladiships Eternally obliged E. P.
A short Advertisement to the Reader, by way of introduction, for his better under∣standing of the Mysteries of Eloquence and Complementing. HAving already in my Epistle to the Coy Ma∣dams treated or rather traversed, the passion of Love with a serious and light fancie, like Gallen and Donquixot, mixt together, to please as well the Stoical Student, as the most airy and fantastical Gal∣lant: I have since thought it no less my duty to dis∣course of these two other mysteries, of Eloquence and Complementing. This task I might have evaded, since none of the former scriblers of Books, in this kind, ever particularly undertook these Subjects, which I must either impute to their simplicity or la∣ziness. Courteous Reader, Eloquence is so absolutely necessary, and pertinent to humane converse, that it cannot but be confessed by all intelligent persons that in the management and conveyance even of reason it self, it would be most expedient, that there should be so many Artifices and Masteries together, with most subtil Conducts; for without them a man cannot so well attain his ends. Hence it is that the Learned compare Eloquence to the Chymists Elixar; it con∣tains all qualities in it, yet it should not have one perceiveable: it is not to be denied, but that this age is that which expects that men should learn the Rhe∣torick from their own Genius; or as some Natura∣lists writes of the Spider, that she weaves her web out of her own bowels, or like our Enthusiasts, that
pretend to inspirations. It were to be wisht Eloquence could be so attained, rather then that the Schools should so manacle and fetter it with their old Maxims; but if these so pregnant persons in their own imaginations did but rightly consider what Eloquence is in its de∣finition; How that it is a way of speech prevai∣ling over those we have designed to prevail o∣ver: and that it is so Etherial, or rather I cannot tell, how Divine, that it depends not alone on the single Embroidry of words, but there must be somewhat more in it; an excellent knowledge of men, deep and studied acquaintances with their passions: a man must not onely know very perfectly the agitations of his own mind, but be seen and conversant in those of others; otherwise it wants that which animates and breaths a fire, which makes it both warm and shine. We say of Logick that it files and keels the reason of a man, which otherwise had been blunt in the wedge and tongue, which is the only distinction of a man from a bruit beast. The same may be said of a person without behaviour and good language, that he is but a meer motion, a most sad spectacle. Indeed this is our misery, that though Eloquence be so absolutely necessary, yet it is such a thing of it self, that though we make use of our quickest conceits, we can rather wish for it then describe it in its perfect Idea; the Crises of it having been so altered from time to time in all Spee∣ches and publique Harrangues, in so much, that it cannot be amiss to consider how the ancient Orators that lead the people whither they pleased, were put to it, being sorced to wrestle with the disadvantages of single nature, so as at the last to divide and throw it into several Subjects, by which they reigned over
the mindes of men, and did many strange things, the end of Oratory being to perswade. Thus having discoursed of Eloquence, I am now to descend to entertain some thoughts of her fair subser∣vient Hand-maid, Complement. Civility is the most refined Complement; for as Complements them∣selves do but serve to compleat the Gentry, so where they are thus tendred, they are always in Fashion; ever new, ever acceptable; and as they entertain a grace in the wearer, so they deserve an admiration from the beholder. And thus they have in all ages been received for no less formal, then real accom∣plishments; and are held as most absolute ornaments of Gentility. Complements were first intended to di∣stinguish betwixt the Civil and the Savage; Persons of Honour and Peasants, yea, to appropriate a title of Prehemincy to such, who exceed others in grounds of Precept of Morality; such as used not paintick Rheto∣rick, but express'd themselves compleat without singula∣rity, that could love without flattery, discourse without affection, that freed Courtly Ceremonies from dissimu∣lation, and made Vertue their Mistress; that knew what it was to protest in jeast, and entertain Suitors onely for their Pastime. All wise people are suffici∣ently convinced, that Complements consist not of Con∣ges, Cringes, Salutes, Superficial Discourses, foolish Repetitions or frivilous Extravagances; these are but the shadows, which they that use forget the sub∣stance: wheras the attraction and desert of a Comple∣ment consists very much in the gracefulness of the pre∣sence, beautified and set forth with a modest and na∣tive comeliness; nor do I question but these three Na∣tions have many such noble and compleat Ladies that
prefer the inside before the outside, the kernel before the shell; that make honour the Load-stone, by which they daily draw near to perfection, their own proper Centre. Certain it is, that tho' our tongues, hands, and legs be the same, our Elocution, Action, Gesture, and Posture are not the same; though managed in the like manner by others, yet are they not alwayes directed to the same ends, as there are vast differences to be made betwixt Vertue and Vice. I cannot want in∣stances, the fantastical Amorist is one of those pup∣pies that hath them in a continual practise; he for∣sooth will complement your very glove, worship and sweeten every seam of it with the perfume of his discourse; he will take it for an extraordinary fa∣vor but to be the porter of a Ladies Fan, whilst she pins on her Mask: these kind of complementings a∣mong great persons are like chantings among Beg∣gars; only in use with the Mimicks and Buffons of our times, whose behaviours deserve more derision then applause. I will not here squirt any more ink at them, Courteous Reader, in my Preface to the youthful Gentry you shall find something to this purpose inser∣ted, which I accounted too improper for this place. To draw to a Conclusion, the Court, and such emi∣minent places as Hide Park, the Spring Garden, and the New Exchange, and set Meetings at Balls, are esteemed the fittest Schools of Ceremony and Com∣plement; where the most select, as also the newest Fashions are alwayes in request; where if discretion be not wanting in the Courtier, he will not fail to confirm himself to the mode and condition of the place that he is to exercise his Genius in. For Com∣plements do not suit with all places, nor with all sorts
of men; it ill beseems a Mechanick to play the Ora∣tor; that urbanity which becomes a Citizen, would relish of too much curiosity in a Countrey-man; and that Complement which gives proper grace to a Cour∣tier, would cause derision if presented by a Mer∣chant or a Factor. The Statesman requires a graceful and grave posture, whereas in ordinary affairs of Traffique, it were indiscretion to represent any such state. Thus I might instance from the Madam to the Chamber-maid, but that I am resolved to trouble the Reader with no further Preadmonitions, the Se∣ries of the ensuing Work will fully inform him in whatsoever other concernments have been wanting in this Advertisement. Farewell.
THE MYSTERIES OF Love and Eloquence; OR, The Arts of WOOING and COMPLEMENTING, &c. The Mode of Hide Park. MAdam, That free Interest which you have granted me in your Favour, ho∣nours me with a boldness to give you an invitation this fair afternoon, to take the Air in Hide Park. Your most humble servant, Sir, I'le assure you, had you not come as you did, you might perchance have found me there before you, for my Cousin here and I were taking up a resolution to be jogging that way. I'le assure you, Madam, your journey will not want its plea∣sure, beside that of the season, if the Town news hold true.
I see you came, Sir, with a resolution not to be deny'd, having brought an argument so perswasive to Women, as that of Novelty; but pray what is it? Madam, they say, Sir Charles—hath put off his mourn∣ing-weeds, and appears this day in the Park with a new Coach and Livery: they report he looks with an amorous Counte∣nance upon the young Lady—to whom he intends, as they say, to give a Treatment at the Spring Garden; so that if Businesses be well manag'd on her side, it may chance to be a match. But, pray give me leave, I heard lately that the old Countess—is dead. Very true, Madam, I was this morning at a Drapers shop in Pauls Church-yard, and there came in her Steward to provide Four hundred pounds worth of Mourning. Do's it not bring a very great addition to my Lords Estate? Doubtless Madam, a very considerable one; for she was al∣ways a near and parcimonious Woman, and indeed was con∣siderable for nothing else, but the affection she bare him. I could tell you more, Madam, but I defer the rest for discourse in the Coach. In the Ring. Coachman, keep the out-side of the Ring, I think, Madam, that way will not be so dusty. This is the voice of a Gen∣tleman that would shew a more then ordinary care of his Mistress. Much discourse cannot be expected from that restless mo∣tion of Wheels and Horses, it being only a preparative for treatment talk; neither indeed in that place of Observation, is more required, then only as occasion serves, to tell your Lady, That is my Lord such a ones Coach; That's my Lady such a one; That's Squire such a one. And then when opportunity offers it self, to say, Your humble Servant; my Lord; Your most humble Servant, Madam. For though it be not so great a sin, yet it is as great a Solecism, as to talk at Church; and they shall be counted as shallow persons, that can give no account of what they have seen here, as those that can remem∣ber nothing that they have heard spoken to a Text. This is not without reason, for it being an impossibility for Ladies to travel, it was thought fit that there should be a publick Meet∣ing
of all sorts of Societies and Habits, both Forreign and Domestique, that so those young and tender Gallants might be spar'd the labour of going beyond Sea. In the spaces among the Coaches there walk up and down Objects of Charity, and Enticements to Liberality. Beggars, and Fruiterers, who are bold Wenches, and by their own, well knowing the disposition of other Women, with their Eyes fix'd upon the Ladies, and their Ware held up to the Gentlemen, they cry so as they may easily be heard, My Lord, Will your Honour have any Civil Oranges! Madam, Will your Honour buy a Basket of Cherries! The Gentleman finds himself surpriz'd, but knows not which to give, Oranges or Cherries; yet at length remembring Oranges. how great whetters of the stomach they are, and deeply considering the price of Cheesecakes, he resolves up∣on Cherries. Then quoth he, How do you sell your Cherries, good Woman? A Crown a Baket, my Lord, quoth she; with which word being extreamly pleased, he parts chearfully with his mo∣ney (for who would not purchase Honour at any Rate) and then presents his new bought treasure to his Lady in these words: Madam, I do here present you with these First-fruits of the Year, which would have been due from Pomona her self, had she not forgot the duty that she owes your per∣fections. The Lady makes a short reply, well knowing the end of his kindness, which was to stop her mouth. Whether Cherries are diuretick or no, I will not here di∣spute; however, the Coachman presently after hath a com∣mand given him to wheel off, and the Lady finds in her self a disposition to walk on foot toward the Brakes: yet she is not so much tormented, but that she can talk; which is com∣monly much to this effect: Really, Sir, I have not seen so great an appearance of com∣pany in the Park all this Spring before. Madam, it was the lustre of your person drew'em hither, and doubtless having now seen you, they will have no cause to repent their coming. Sir, you have a strong faith to speak so highly of one whom you have known no otherwise then in the formalities of a Vi∣sit?
I wish I that know my self better, knew my self so well as to confirm your Encomiums. Madam, that lies not on your part to do, for wherefore hath Nature granted Man to excell in the invention of Lan∣guage, but that she would not so far deprave the dignity of the Female, which is her own Sex, as to make them the vain∣glorious praisers of themselves; and it is retaliation sufficient in you, to favour us with the acceptance of our Labours. I confess I am fallen upon a subject that I could dwell upon; I could make a particular harange in the praise of every part that builds up the noble Frame of your Body, but I am put to silence by that little Bird which warbles tydings of more con∣cernment to your ears. Do you not hear the Nightingale Madam? I do, Sir. And indeed it is the first time I have heard her this Spring. They say it is lucky to unmarried people to hear her before the Cuckow. Doubtless then, Madam, the end that brought her hither, was to bring you that good fortune. Sir, It cannot be but that you must have a greater share in her happy Auguries, who better deserve them. I should then, Madam, deserve your self, which is the hap∣piest Augury I can expect. Pardon me, Madam; if you have open'd my mouth to utter so great crime; for indeed I could say, I love you, but that I fear lest you should frown me into despair for such a high presumption. Believe it, Sir, my ambition never aspir'd to such thoughts, as you would fain put into me; but if you have idly scatter'd a little respect upon a person no way meriting, doubtless a few dayes and another Object will soon randezvouze your Passions another way. Madam, could any protestation avail to fix my Constancy in your belief, you should soon command me to seal my pro∣strate Vows upon the Ground on which you tread; yet since that cannot be, I onely beg this on my knees, That you will still count me your Servant, whom it shall suffice to be ho∣noured with that Liberty which you have hitherto given, till time shall discover my immutable Affection, and the pro∣firable Testimonies of my Obedience. The Gentleman resolves now to strike while the Iron is hot, and to win her with kindness; for which end he carries her to
the Lodge, and throws away forty or fifty shillings to please her appetite; and to shew her that he was not so much cove∣tous of his Money, as of her Good Will: He breaks up Cheesecakes, cuts up Tarts, and calls in for Wine and Sugar, as if his Mistress had a Legion in her belly; though his ob∣servance is such that he eats nothing himself, for fear she should have a desire to any particular plum in his morsel, In drinking, he sweetens her Affection with a great deal of Sugar with an humble obeysance, wishing it were Nectar for her sake. She cannot be so unmannerly as not to drink to him, there being no body else in the room, which he takes for a very great kindness, and wishes for the capacious throat of the great Gyant, that he might swill up a whole pipe for joy. The Wine inspires him, and produces many extravagant Vows, and sundry Comments on her Hands, Lips, Eyes, and Forehead; which beget an host of Comparisons, putting such a scorn and contempt upon the Sun and Moon, as if they were but meer Candles of Ten in the pound, subject to be capt by every common Extinguisher. At length, emboldned by a surreptitious vapor, upon the merits of his Oblation, he craves a kiss, which being granted, with a high satisfaction he calls to pay. This is the meek spirited Lover. But that bold Mamaluck Yelep'd, a Hector, courts his Lady more daringly. Madam, cryes he, By Heaven I love you, and then he falls down with a submissive reverence, and kisses the hem of her Petticoat; then arising up again, he proceeds, Madam there is no person living bears you a greater respect then I, or car∣ries more affection for you in his bosom then my self; make trial of it, Madam, and though you bid me die, I'le do it willingly. He comes into the Park, like the son of Death, arm'd with the accouterments of Mortality, Sword and Pistol? he stands not much upon the nicety of Habit, so his Belt be not out of fashion. He is generally known in the Ring, and every one salutes him by the name of Tom or Jack such a one, whose kindness he requites with an Oath, and an Humble Servant: and so having done his Evening Exercise, he retires to the Lodge, where he spends his money with such a liberality, as if he bore malice to his fortunes.
The next variety is that of the Horse-Races, the general Terms of which Art, are exprest in these following Dia∣logues. 1. Gent. In good faith, Sir, that Horse must have wings that beats me. 2. Sir, your confidence may deceive you, you will ride with a Jocky that hath Horsemanship. 1. Pish, that's but your opinion; I'le tell ye what I say to ye, were it in my power, I'de lay the World upon my Mare, that she should run with the Devil for a hundred pleces. The Gentlemen to the Jocky. 1. How now, what dost think Jocky? 2. The crack of the whole Field is against you. Jocky. Let'm crack and be hang'd till their lungs ake. Gentlemen. 1. What weight? 2. I think he has the Heels. 3. All that you are to do, Jocky, is to get the start. Jocky. I'le warrant you, if I get within his quarters once, let me alone. After Starting. 1. Twenty pounds to fifteen. 2. 'Tis done with you. 3. Forty pounds to thirty. Lord. Done, done, I'le take the odds. 1. My Lord, I hold as much. L. Not so, Sir. 1. Forty pounds to twenty. L. Done, done. 2. You have lost all, my Lord, and 'twere a million. L. In your imagination, well, who can help it. . Crop had the start, and keeps it. The Loser. Gentlemen, you have a sine time to triumph, 'tis not your Odds that makes you win.
Upon the fatal disaster that befell the Gallants upon May-day last in Hide-Park. THe last sad May-day know ye not? It was a fatal day, God wot, Which gay new Clothes did all bespot With mire and dirt. Much might be said of other days first, For which that Year ought to be curst, That such inhumane Traitors nurst To do men hurt. Sad to the Romans was that day When they from Hannibal ran away, Losing their gold Rings in the fray, He did so rout 'em. Was not dark Monday sad d'ye think, When Phoebus look'd as black as ink, 'Twas all one whether men did wink Or stare about 'em. That day had made your hearts to ake, If Faux's plot had hap'd to take, Of which the Crums of Comfort make A large recital. And that sad day my heart doth nettle When Fire on London-bridge did settle, And Thames boyl'd under like a kettle: Men read at Whitehall. By the vast Flame: Though at this hour, I blame not fire, but a great shower, Which Heaven did on clean linen powr, And Blades a horse-back. For all that are but worth a groat, On May-day will in fine clothes show't, Some borrow a Belt, and some a loose coat, That money in purse lack. First the clear Sun-shine did invite The Lord, the Lady, and the Knight, Who all in Satins richly dight, Did sit i'th boot.
The Race-nags follow'd more then ten, Upon their backs sate Gentlemen, They never were so wash'd as then From head to foot. In sutes. from France, made a la mode, Upon their Barbaries they rode; Oh had their money been bestow'd In pious uses: T'would ha' built an Hospital in the Strand, For Gentlemen that sell their Land, Or a Poet a week in Sack maintain'd, With all his Muses. To copy out these Fashions then, For Male and Female Citizen, The Taylor came, as fine as when He went to woe, Next came those pillars of the Nation, Those polishers of Education, Hight men oth' Kit, all in the fashion From top to toe. Phoebus withdrew his beams to see Such a deal of bravery, And scorning thus outvied to be By low mortality: He put on's cap, cryes bonas noches, Then pist, and flung it all ith' Coaches; Quoth he, I'le meet with these Cocaloches For all their great quality: The Barber, Taylor, and Gentleman eke, They rid each one a tree to seek; They were so sad they could not speak, But sigh'd at each other. They lookt on the ground with great regret, They lookt on the sky, and cry'd not yet! Then for being born, their stockins to wet, Each curses his mother. But when their hats began to drip, Then desperation made them weep, And so they put on with spur and whip To London: But, Oh the saddle of velvet blue,
And stockins of most glorious hew, They now were not fit for the stall of a Jew: Some men were undone, Then came another in a sad case, With a handful of dirt dasht in his face, Which he wip'd with his band of Flanders lace, Who could him blame, His Feather, that so gay of late Adorn'd his head, lay now so flat, You'ld think it were crept into his hat For very shame. But as they pass'd quite through the street, The Alley-women glad to see't, From stalls and cellars did them greet With many a flour. Most patiently they pass'd along, They took no notice who did'm wrong: But I must make an end of my Song. The candle's out. The Mode of Balls. The Dancing Master. COme stir your selves, Maidens, 'twill bring a fresh colour into your cheeks, rub hard, and let the Ladies see their faces in the boards, you may lose nothing by't, if you be ready to light 'm out of doors your selves. And by the Mass that will I do, and make'um such fine dops and curtsies in my best Wastecoat, that they shall not chuse but take notice of me; and Sarah shall dance a North coun∣trey Jigg before'um too; I warrant it will please the Ladies better then all your French whisks and frisks; I had rather see one freak of jolly Milkmaids, then all the story that will be here to night. That's your ignorance, Bess. Ignorance, I know not what you call ignorance, but I am sure there's one Dance I have been longing to dance this ten
years, and I can get no body to dance it with me in the way of honesty. 'Tis a thousand pities Bess, yet I'le search among my ac∣quaintance, It may be my chance to do thee a kindness; what Trade dost thou love best? Any trade, any trade, Sir, I'le not confine you; beggars you know must never be their own choosers. Well, Bess, I'le do my endeavour, in the mean time fetch the perfumes and fume every corner, that there may be no∣thing wanting but our Noble company, to make the room a perfect paradise. At the entry of the Ladies, the Master of the Ball thus accosts them one by one. Madam, You have afforded me an honour not to be requi∣ted, in granting me the happiness of your company this day. To another. Madam, Y'are welcome to this poor habitation, though your presence hath so far transported me, that I find my self unfur∣nish'd with words to express my gratitude for this high favour To another. Madam, I kiss your fair hands, and beg pardon for the rude∣ness of the Invitation which I sent you this morning; But this I can say, you will not find your self the only sufferer through my unmannerliness. To another. Madam, Your most humble servant, 'tis but just that I should give you a kind and hearty welcom, since your pre∣sence adds so much to my good fortune. To another. Madam, This civility hath eternally obliged me; I confess there is no recompence lies in my power, and therefore I shall
recommend to you these noble Ladies, to receive from them the amends, which my unworthiness is uncapable to render you. To another. My best wishes come along with you, Madam; really, you have now done me a kindness answerable to your own goodness in honouring me with your presence before this fair society. To another. Madam, I bless my Stars that have bestow'd on me the happiness of your fair company; I assure you, had the Queen of Love her self descended to visit this my poor habitation, she could not have been more welcom. To the Musick. Come, why is our Musick silent all this while, hath it no voice to bid these fair Ladies welcom. To a Lady taking her forth to Dance. Madam, the ambition which I have to wait on you in a Country Dance, emboldens me to invite you from your seat. Sir, You have oblig'd me to obey you, for I am engag'd to please this noble company, though I fear my performance will give them but small satisfaction. To a Gentleman, desiring him to take out his Lady. Sir, This Dance requires four, and therefore be pleased to engage a Lady to your assistance. The Applause at the end of the Dance. Lady, You needed not have made any Apology, for doubt∣less the Cyprian Bowers ne're knew so much delight when the Graces themselves danced there. Sir, I dare not contest with your more fluent Language, and therefore must submit, though unwillingly, to your commen∣dations.
At their going to dance Countrey Dances. Ladies, will you be pleased to dance a Countrey Dance or two, for 'tis that which makes you truly sociable, and us truly happy; being like the Corns of a Song, where all the parts sing together. To his Lady, desiring her to name her Dance. Lady, will you please to call for your own Dance, or will you lay your commands on me to name it. An offer to give over. Ladies, when you please to give your selves rest, command us to leave off; for you must pardon us, if the desire we have to continue our own happiness make us unmanerly. At giving over. Ladies we must confess that we have too much presumed upon your goodness, and therefore we shall rather choose to quit our own Felicity, then to make your Recreation tiresom Answer. Believe not, Sir, that we can be tir'd where the Content we find in the company gives new refreshment to our Spirits, so that we should be willing still to be a part of your delight, did not the late hour of the Night, or rather the early hour of the Morning put a period to our mirth. Return of Thanks. Ladies, You see I have brought you into a rude Chamber; I must beg your pardon, that I can give no entertainment an∣swerable to the pains that you have taken to honour me, and grace this mean habitation of mine. Answer. Sir, There needs no such Apologics, for in earnest, you
have so far engag'd us, that I believe, that there is no Lady here but will think her self oblig'd to take from hence a hap∣py occasion, to be the publibk relater of your Nobleness and Civility. There was now a general cessation of the Feet from labor, onely that small member the Tongue was not a little put to it, to express such Complements as the Brain continually hammer'd out for its delivery: Many high Strains are spoken, many pathetical Sentences are uttered, with all varieties of Congies, Bows, and Kissing of the Hand that may be. But now in come the Sweet-meats and Burnt Wine, as the reward of their great pains, which they tipple with great alacrity, as being all very thirsty. After all this, to give a little more rest to the Ladies weary limbs, they all take ther seats, and a motion is made to go to Questions and Commands, which is by all unanimously consented to. Questions and Commands. The Question was put, Whether Colatinus were not a cuckold for all that Lucretia stabb'd her self? To which the Lady answered in the Affirmative. It was demanded, Whether of the two wrought the most excusable Love-cure upon themselves, Hero that drown'd her self, or Phillis that hang'd her self? It was answered, Phillis that hang'd her self; because it may be the nature of some women to love hanging so well, that they had ra∣ther hang by the neck then not hang at all. It was ask'd, Whether it were more dangerous for Ladies to dance upon the Ropes, or to dance upon the Ground? The Reply was, To dance upon the Ground, because that sport hath been the occasion that several Ladies have caught many a shrewd fall. It was demanded, Why women are many times more quick witted then men? The Answer was, Because they eat so much salt. It was required, Why the Poets do so much extol Cupid for his shaft, being but a Boy;
Answer was made, That Venus bid them do it upon her reputation, who knew better what belonged to a Page then they did. It was ask'd, Why Maiden-heads was so much priz'd? It was reply'd, Because a man might then be sure there was no danger. It was ask'd, Who was the fittest man to marry a flat nos'd woman? The Reply was made, One that had a Roman nose. The Question was put, Why women used to spit when they heard men speak bawdy? It was answered, Because their teeth water. It was demanded, What was the humor of those people that dyed for Love? The Answer was, That they lov'd to dye. It was demanded of a Lady, Whether she had rather marry a Fool or a Wiseman? Answer was made, A Wise man, unless it were such a Fool as would let her do what she listed. The Question was, Why women are said to be in subjection to men, The Answer was, Because they lie undermost. The Question was put, Whether a wise, beautiful, or wealthy woman were to be chosen? The Reply was drawn from the comparison of a Wallnut; For they said, Beauty was like the rind, presently peel'd off; that a womans Wit was quickly crack'd; and that therefore Wealth, which was like the kernel, and brought substance along with it, was to be preferred as best of all. Their Commands consisted more of Unluckiness then Wit. A Lady was commanded to put her busk in a Gentlemans codpiss.
Another Lady was commanded to pull it out, which occa∣sioned some sport, for she laying hold upon somthing else, after two or three pulls gave over, excusing her disobedience, by pretending that the busk was tackt to the Gentlemans belly. Another Lady was commanded to lead a Gentleman three times about the Room by the nose with her teeth, which be∣ing done, He was commanded to wipe off the wet with the lappet of her Smock. Another Lady is commanded to tell, how often she open'd her back-gates to let forth the captivated wind of her belly since she came into the Room. Another Lady is commanded to tell, if she have not a wart, like that in her face, upon such or such secret part of her body. Another Lady was commanded to tell, whether she had her maidenhead or no. Another was commanded to tell, who she loved best in that Room. Another was commanded to tell, how many times her Husband had enjoy'd her. The Gentlemen were commanded, One to untie a Ladies garter. Another, to kiss her bare knee. Another, to tell how many of Aretines postures he had try'd. Another, to tell who he lay with last. Another, to tell how many Mistresses he had, and which he loved best. Another was commanded to tell how many children he had that he durst not own. Another was commanded to tell how many times he could lie with a Woman in one night. By this time 'tis very late, and they resolve all to depart, which makes the Master of the Ball put on all his gravity, with which he thus accosts his departing guests. Ladies, Since the time of parting is now unhappily arrived, I am now to give you thanks for that great kindness which you have shewed me; but seeing I want expressions to per∣form so great a work, I shall endeavour to supply my defect
of words in deeds, beseeching you to command from me what testimonies you please of my duty and service upon all occasions. Reply. Sir, we cannot in modesty require any such debt from a person who hath so much engaged us by his favours; and so all happiness attend you till our next meeting. Pardon me Ladies, I shall wait on you to your Coaches, and then commit you to the protection of your own goodness, and of these Gentlmen who have the happy fortune to attend you home. An address to a Company of Ladies. A. Ladies, I beseech you that my coming may be no inter∣ruption to your discourse; though it would be no small hap∣piness to me, to partake of your pleasant entertainments. B. Sir, our discourses are not of much importance; we meet often among our selves, and therefore we do willingly quit them, to enjoy your better company. A. Truly, Ladies, he that is in this company cannot want an Object to entertain himself; onely it is my imperfection, that I have not language enough at command to express the zeal which I have to honour and serve your perfections, B. Sir, we dare not acknowledge any such thing in us, and therefore, if you please, take some other subject on which to imploy your Eloquence; you will otherwise make us believe that you go about to play upon us. A. Give me leave to tell ye, Ladies, that if your modesty will not let you aver so real a truth, yet the respect which I bear to Ladies, commands me not onely to acknowledge, but to be a witness thereof. B. Sir, we beseech you not to take so difficult a task upon you, before question be made of what you affirm. A. It is good to be modest, when we speak in our own commendations, or of the vices and imperfections of another; but when we speak in the praise of a friend, we ought not to conceal any thing of the truth.
B. Sir, you place among your commendations, things that we are not guilty of, rather fancying and imagining such ver∣tues and perfections which may become your eloquence to exalt, then believing any such in us. A. Ladies, you would force me to an injurious respect; but it is as impossible for me, to forget your deserts, as to for∣get my devotions towards you. B. Sir, it is your aim to overcome us with the excess of your courtesie: yet believe it, Sir, that there is not any one of us, that does not think her self highly honour'd, if she may bear the title of your most humble servant. A. Ladies you would make me to dispair, in seeking to beat down that honour which is your due. However, I shall not cease to admire your perfections; being sorry that I have not merit enough to render my obedience worthy your acceptance. To enter into Discourse with a Lady being in Company. A. Lady, here is a very fine appearance of fair and hono∣rable persons, and indeed I cannot but esteem my self ex∣tremely happy in meeting with them, to participate of the content that now dwells here; but more particularly in ha∣ving the happiness to see and know you, as being a person in whom all perfections imaginable are so illustrious. B. Sir, the character which you have given of this Com∣pany is very fine; you could not wish for persons more ac∣complished, nor find more honest content in any other con∣verse. But your favour, Sir, is too excessive, to attribute such great praises to her that doth so little merit them, and which in comparison to others, hath no one vertue to render her considerable. A. Madam, your modesty makes your speak to your own dis∣advantage, and it may be permitted to you; but if I should consent to what you say, it would be a great fault in me; or if I should dissemble a truth which is so apparent to the eyes of the whole world, I should render my self altogether unworthy to behold so fair an object, should I not know how to admire the wonders and graces of your beauty; the lustre whereof, your modest expressions are not able to reclipse. For my part, I cannot conceal how great a sway you bear over my affections,
so that there is nothing in my power, that I do not freely dedicate to your service. B. Sir, the more high you are in your expressions, the more am I subject to abate of the praises which you so liberal∣ly bestow upon me; in regard Heaven hath not been so boun∣tiful of its graces towards me. And therefore not judging my self worthy the favours which you heap upon me, I hum∣bly intreat you, Sir, to change your discourse. A. Lady, though at present, you refuse me the honour of serving you, yet I shall not cease to seek all occasions to make the truth and sincerity of my words apparent. An Address, to make known an Affection for his Mistriss. A. Madam, among all the dayes of my life I must accompt this the happiest above all the rest, wherein I had the ho∣nour first to know you. B. Sir, if I did know any thing in my self, worthy your merits, I should esteem my self obliged to employ it to your honor: But there being in me nothing but weakness, and im∣perfection, I do not imagine how the knowledge of me can any way contribute to your content, much less to your well being. A. Madam, I see so many perfections; that I find my self oblig'd to honour them to the utmost of my power, and to offer you my most humble service. B. Sir, this is your courtesie and favour, that seek to quali∣fie my defects, onely to shew the excellent endowments that nature hath bestow'd on you. A. Pardon me, Madam, it is the inchanting force of your worth and vertues, which oblige me, not onely to honour and serve you, but also to seek an interest in your graces. B. Sir, all that a Daughter of Honour owes to a Person of Merit, you have already at your devotion; I respect your qua∣lities, admire your vertues, and wish you a happiness answe∣rable to the nobleness of your designs. A. Believe it, Madam, that my desires are good, and that my affection, if your wishes flow from a sincere intention to oblige me, is the most happy that ever was in the world. B. Pardon me, Sir, I have not so piercing an apprehension to understand the meaning of your intentions; that which I say
is upon no other accompt, only to give you the honor which is due to you. It is true, Madam, I do you wrong, to go about, to make you believe, that which I have never made apparent by any certain proof; However, that shall not hinder me from tell∣ing you, that your perfections have so far incaptivated my senses and affection, that I have resolved neither to love nor serve an other, but your self. I therefore only intreat you, to esteem my affection real, and to perfect your own wishes. B. Certainly, Sir, I cannot believe that you would set your affection upon a person so inconsiderable. It suices me to have the honor to know you, and I desire that your good fortune may guide you to some person more worthy your esteem. A. Madam, I have not so far forgot my self, as to forget your merits and perfections. My resolution is unseigned, to serve you to the utmost of my power, and your refusal dimi∣nisheth nothing of my affection; only take it for granted, that I desire to be your servant. Sir, I am not Mistriss of my self, and for that reason can∣not accept of your offer; but if you shall find, that the affecti∣on, which you say you bear me, is well liked of by my Pa∣rents, I shall esteem my self, very much honoured in your love, and shall, as far as honour will permit me, do any thing to assure you of my good will. Lady, you do infinitely oblige me, for which I return you many thanks; I shall seek all occasions to obtain the leave of your Parents, in the mean while honor me with your com∣mand, and suffer me to kiss your hand. Sir I am your very humble Servant. Addresses of Salutation. Save you fair Lady, all health and your own wishes be upon you. All the toys the Gods delight in, wait on you, fairest. Ans. Sir, I should be ungrateful not to wish you a share in them. By your leave Lady, may my boldness prove pardonable. Good morrow to you Sir, to meet you was a happiness that I did not dream of. But tell me how it is with you?
Well, Sir, at present, and I hope always shall be so, to do you service. Save you Sir, you are most fortunately met. Lady, The pleasure of this sweet morning attend you. On her Face. You are the beauty without parallel; in your Face all the Graces, and in your Mind all the Vertues are met: he that looks upon your mild Aspect, were it the most savage crea∣ture, would derive a new Nature from your Beauty. On her Eyes and Lips. That Eye was Juno's, those Lips were once the Queen of Loves, that Virgin Blush was Diana's: Thus, Madam, You have a Donative from every Deity. On her Beauty. Apollo hath given you his orient Brightness; Venus her curious Shape; Jupiter his high and stately Forehead; the God of Eloquence his flowing Speech: and all the Female Deities have show'd their Bounties and Beauties on your Face. On her Hair. Her Hair is like the Beams that adorn Apollo's head. Her Locks Soft as new spun Silk, curling with such a natural wanton∣ness, as if they strove to delight the Fancy of her that wears them. Her Forehead Made a stately prospect, and show'd like a fair Castle com∣manding some goodly Countrey.
Her Face So full of majesty, that Aurora blushes to see a countenance brighter then her own. Her Face is full of Sun-shine. Her Looks Have more entertainment then all the vain pomp which the Persians ever taught the world. Her Eyes Dart Lightning through the Air. The Stars borrow new light from your more radiant Eyes. They are able to grace the Heavens, and beautisie the Skie in the clearest night. They are Natures richest Diamonds set in foils of polisht Ivory. Her Smiles Are so graceful and full of comfort, that with them she is able to revive a dying Lover. Her Cheeks Shew like Lawn spread upon Roses. Nature painted the colour thereof in the most glorious Tulips. They are slips of Paradise, not to be gather'd but wondred at. Her Breath So sweet, that the Arabian Odours seem to borrow their excellency from thence. It expires more sweet Odours then issu'd from the palm-trees in Paradise. Her Lips Are like the full ripe Cherry, which when they open, dis∣cover a treasury greater then that of the Indian Ivory. Her Chin Shews llke a piece of pure and polisht Chrystal, which the God of Love delights to uphold with his soft hand.
Her Tongue Is tipt with such a fire and powerful art, as might tame the most rebellious spirit. Her Brow Is Cupids Bow, most sweetly bent, to shoot his Darts against every heart. Her Neck Of such a whiteness as exceeds the unsull'd Snow. Her Words Invade the weakned senses, and overcome the heart. Her Voice So charming, that it hath power to do more then ever Spi∣rits or Orpheus did; should the holy Church-men use it, it would tie up the nightly, without the addition of more ex∣orcism. Her Arms Are sit to embrace a King. Her Hands Soft and smooth, the violet Veins whereof run along like Mines of Turkoeses. Her Breasts Are two mountains of pure Snow, from the two Fountains whereof, Cupid himself sucks Nectar. Briefly, in the Abstract of her Self. She comprehends whatsoever can be imagin'd, or wish'd for in the Idea of a Woman; She is so heavenly a piece, that when Nature had wrought her, she lost her needle, like one that never hop'd to work again any so fair and lively a crea∣ture. An Address of Courtship to his Mistress. Lady, My vital breath runs coldly through my veins, I am sick for your Love, dearest Lady; neither is there any thing, but your own heart, can heal me: believe me also, fairest of
Women, there is nothing beneath the Moon, but your frown, can grieve me. Sir, Methinks this is a strange fit. Lady, Count not my love light, because 'tis sudden; for By Cupids Bow, I swear, I never knew true Love till now. Sir, I intreat you not to wrong your self, and me; your love is violent, and soon will have a period; for that is the most perfect love, which loves for ever. Such love is mine, believe me, divinest Beauty, for although men use to lie, yet do I speak truth; and therefore, Madam, give me sentence either of life, or of a speedy death; can you affect so mean a person? Truly Sir, I should deny my thoughts, to give you an abso∣lute denial, yet must I not turn disloyal to former Promises, and therefore let this suffice, I cannot wrong my friend. Then here my love must end, and in your presence thus for love I die. Nay, hold Sir, these are soul killing passions, I had rather wrong my friend, then that you should wrong your self Love me dear soul, or else my death is but delay'd; my Vow is fixt in Heaven, and no fear shall move me: for my life is a death, that tortures me, unless you love me. Give me then but a little respite, and I will resolve you. Alass, Madam, my heart denies it; my blood is violent, now or else never love me. Love me, and both Art and Na∣ture at large shall strive to be profuse in ravishing thy sense. I will entice Dalliance from thee with my smiles, and I will steal away thy heart with my chaste kisses, Well, Sir, I am yours then from all the world; your wit and your person have entranc'd my soul. I kiss thee, Dearest, for that breath; and know that thou hast now joyn'd thy self to one whose life rests onely in thy sight. To discourse concerning the noise of a Match. Sir, I am very glad to meet with you, were it for no other reason, but to give you joy. Sir, Your company is always a thing most acceptable to me, and your wishes cannot be other then very fortunate;
yet, if you please, pray let me understand why you wish me so much felicity, there being nothing new that I know of in my condition. Sir, You dissemble that which is well known to many, and which hath been told me some few days since. Pray Sir, do the favour to tell me what it is, for I can nei∣ther think nor imagine. Sir, They say that you intend to marry in this Town. Truly, Sir, 'tis the first news that I have heard of any such thing. I can assure you, Sir, those that told me, believe that they know very well; and they take upon them to report many particulars. Pray Sir, be pleas'd to tell me, to whom, and what are the good Conditions of this Marriage; perchance the person and the advantages may be such, that I may speedily advise with my self; and as speedily resolve. Why should you do so, Sir? Would you marry out of your Countrey, far from your friends, and distant from all conve∣niences; obliging your self to quit the sweet presence of your kindred, or else to bring a strange Woman among them, which of what House or Quality soever she be, either will her self be despis'd, or bring envy upon you. Sir, You have not answer'd my question, but instead there∣of have made a kind of sophistical digression. I shall therefore come now more close to the matter; the young Lady is the daughter of M. N. to whom her Mother left a very fair Estate, besides a very fair Portion which her father intends to bestow upon her. Sir, You have told me so much that you make my mouth water; I know her Father well, he is a Gentleman of worth and honour; the young Lady is Fair, Wise, and Rich, which are three good qualities: And truly I do not so much mis∣like her, but that if I thought I had so much interest in her Affections, as that I should be master of them for asking, I would run the hazard of sending one packet. Surely, Sir, you must know something, I am told that you do not speak the truth, dissemble the matter as well as you ca. Believe it, Sir, nothing to any such purpose has been so much as mention'd by me. Those that report this, are
persons that take all occasions to babble, and urge the least appearances of a thing for certainties: and certainly this rumour comes from my frequenting often the places thereabouts, or because that now and then I go to see her Father. Sir, That may be very likely; but 'tis very incredible but that there must be something in it: you know there is no smoak but there is some fire. Truly, Sir, I do not wonder at all at it; for we must give the world leave to talk. But do you believe you should do well to engage your self in a business of such importance, on which, not only your fortune, but the content of your Parents depends. Be confident, Sir, that I was never counted a rash person, yet I have such an assurance in the paternal care and wisdom of my friends, that if any advantage did present it self in my behalf, they would not stick to quit some part of their content for my good. Sir, You have fully satisfi'd me, and if there be any thing begun already, I wish you all happiness and content. Several Addresses of perfect Courtship. Lady, Who are inspir'd with all the praises that the world can bestow upon your sex, I am come to offer you my ser∣vice, which you may at present only call obedient, hoping that your better knowledge thereof will stile it faithful. Truly, Sir, I think that fame is more favourable to me then truth, seeing that all that which is publish'd concerning me proves so false; and therefore you have reason to present me your feigned service, in obedience to my feigned merits. Madam, You wrong your Beauty, which being so great, can work no other designs in men, but those of truly honoring you. Sir, This confirms my former opinion, for seeing my self without Beauty, of which you cannot be ignorant, I must necessarily be unprovided of all those Services that depend thereon. Madam, I fear I should sin against the truth, should I put my self to the trouble to make you see them; it is a thing so visible of it self, that by endeavouring to demonstrate it by words, I should presume to assist your judgment.
Sir, I find that you are easily able to overcome my Rheto∣rick, but not my Belief. Madam, I am confident to gain this advantage by showing the proofs of my Obedience, that men will condemn your misbelief, to authorize my true sayings. Sir, Such kind of words as these, are usual in this age, which promise alwayes a great deal of Sérvice, but performs little but outward Complement. Madam, 'tis very ordinary to swear the same words, but a thing very extraordinary to make them afterwards appear to be truth: But that which may assure you that I do not walk the common path, is, That I know your Beauty to be such, as is onely to be serv'd by knowledge, not by imtation; which makes my Design glorious, and my Enterprize noble, that waits on such an Object. Sir, I know not how you can call this an Enterprize, since your Design is more easie then courageous; and a noble En∣terprize hath always difficulties that opose it. Madam, My resolution to serve you is so magnanimous, that there can no ill fortune attend upon it; for if you do make the end happy, it will be always an honour to my cou∣rage, to have, and to pretend to your accomplish'd Graces. Sir, Since you do establish your content upon unhappiness, your hopes, cannot deceive you much; for if it do deceive you, it will be in making you happy. Madam, I can easily count it an honour to serve you, as being oblig'd by your merit, and my obedience. Sir, I shall never counsel a generous soul to stop at such Designs, since his resolution is so low, that infallibly both the Design must fail, and Repentance ensue. Madam, That which animates me more to do you service, is this, That I shall receive this honour from the Enteprize, that there is no small difficulty in performing it, with that perfection, as it requires. Sir, If you do give such proofs, as you offer, of service, you shall be acknowledg'd through the whole Empire of Love. Madam, Since I have the courage to pretend to the merit of your fair Graces, I shall have a care to keep my self con∣stant; and certainly it behooves me, there being so strict a watch over me.
The Departure. Adieu dear Beauty; it behooves me to be banish'd from you, that I may dispose my Soul to esteem you the more; one way, by the loss of your presence, another way, by recollecting the thoughts of past happiness. Truly Sir, you have very great reason to make use of your Fancy, when you would praise me; for Fancy and Thoughts will forge imagenary Merits, where your Eyes and Judgement will finde the contrary. Madam, You do very well make use of a new custom, I believe you would perswade your self to speak false, that you might have an advantage over one, that breath nothing but the truth; is it possible that such a vanity should make you offend that which I honour, and that which you possess. Truly Madam, you will gain nothing by it, but the pleasure of fine words. Sir, Call them rather true, and then you will speak truth your self. You continue, Madam, acquiring new glories to your per∣swasions, by maintaining Paradoxes against your Beauty, which will be alwayes perfect in it self, though not in your opinion. Sir, If I am perfect, I do know my self; perfection being the knowledge of ones self: since therefore I do know my self, I may be permitted to stile my self very poor in Merits. But you would perswade the contrary, to exercise your parts, knowing that it is a greater honour to vanquish the Truth, then to sustain it. Madam, The design which I have to serve you, may give you testimony sufficient of that power which you have to dispose of me; In one moment I saw you enjoying a thou∣sand wonders, and in a moment I was sensible of a thousand torments of Love; and being capable of nothing but Admira∣tion, methought that this Beauty was in the world for no other end, but deserve, and for me to be obedient to. I see no reason, Fairest, that the belief which I have taken with the clearest judgement that I have of your Beauty, should be swal∣low'd up by your misbelieving opinions. Sir, They say, that contrariety doth animate persons the
more; and therefore I shall be silent, that I may hinder these unjust Praises; perhaps you will have pitty on my seeble re∣sistance, and will be weary of conquering so easily. Madam, 'Tis rather my self that ought to keep silent, be∣ing so lately in an astonishment; but as for you; Madam, it would be a sin against your fair lips, whose words are Oracles. Then pray, Sir, why do you not believe that which I say, for all Oracles are truth? But why will you, Madam, by perswasion hinder the belief which I have taken with sight and judgment. For I will believe your Beauty against all your unbelief and undervalu∣ings: and also continue the Service which I have sworn you, against any thing that shall hinder it. My Attempt also hath promis'd my Design, that future Ages shall admire your Merit and my Servitude; and record us as the most faithful Lovers in Cupid's Dominions. I fear, Sir, that time will alter this opinion. Madam, Time can do nothing against that which Love hath ordain'd; he is the master of Fortune, and an enemy to change. But wherefore this superfluity of speech? It is bet∣ter to believe by the force of Words, then by the force of Perswasion; and therefore at this time, it is more necessary for me, to demand of you Remedies for this remove, the apprehension whereof makes me endure this present pain. Sir, It behooves you to forget your Design, and you will avoid the Pain that will follow, and also the Repen∣tance. No, Madam, I will keep the memory of my Design eter∣nally, and shall always see painted before me the glory of my Enterprize. Adieu great Beauty, you shall never cast your eyes downward, but you shall perceive, lying at your feet, him that admires you; nor ever elevate your Thoughts to your deserts, but you shall remember your conquest. Adieu Fairest, for now I leave the Sun, and go to seek out Night and Sor∣rows cell. The Return. I come, Madam, to receive as much content from your
chearful Countenance, as the loss of it hath yielded me sor∣row. I know the Good will now be as great as the Evil, since they proceed both from the same cause. Sir, I do believe that you do receive the one, as well as you have suffer'd the other: but I beseech you, Sir, to tell me from whence that pain proceeds, which you say you do en∣dure; for as to my self, I do believe, that the pleasure of Thinking, is greater then that of Seeing. Madam, It is permitted me to think, but experiment for∣bids me believe that opinion; for I receive from my Ima∣ginations only a good imagination; on the contrary the sight cannot err. But it is said, Sir, that the presence only contents the Eyes, which are Mortal; but that absence exercises the Soul, which is Divine; and therefore if that did any way afflict you, you might easily avoid it. It was some good Genius, Madam, that took me yesterday from your eyes, that I might the better value the happiness of their lustre, and avoid the extremity of that pain which the loss of them made me endure; causing in me such an im∣patience to return to you, that every hour I staid from you seem'd an age. Sir, That which is foreseen is easily avoided. Now you perceive whence the evil that you speak of proceeds, yet the little occasion that you had to fear it, makes you find it out willingly; therefore blame your own desires, which have pro∣cur'd you this evil, and do not complain on Destiny, which is always just. Madam, My Will is not the cause; for then I should fly my self, and come back to you: but Love, to abuse me the more, gave me the Desire, and hinder'd the Effect. Though I believe it to be one of his Destinies, for it behooves a true passion to overcome the violence of all opposition by a dili∣gent constancy. Demand of Assurance. Fairest, It is now time that I should require from you some Assurances of your friendship, because I cannot grant you that authority which you have over my Affections, but by the service which I am willing to render to your power:
The proof whereof depends upon opportunity, and the oppor∣tunity occasion upon your commands: swear to me therefore, by your fair Eyes, that you love that which they have subdu'd, that I may boast my ruine to be a mark as well of my glory, as of your puissance. Do you think, Sir, that that which is ruin'd by the Eyes, can e belov'd by the Heart? Dear Lady, why should you not affect that love which you your self have created? Would you cause it to be born and dye at the same instant? that would be the action of an incon∣stant soul. It is you, Sir, that run the hazard of being call'd by that name; for if love proceed from merit, you will soon finde some one more worthy your Affection then my self. Madam, I shall never seck the means to find any more signal worth then that which you possess; it is permitted to those who are less worthy to have such jealousies, but not to you whose Beauty hath such a supereminence above all others in the world. No Madam, take counsel of your own worth, and it will shew the fair Election which I have made, how im∣possible it is to be changed; the design coming from the judge∣ment of our Soul, which being Divine, cannot erre. But, Sir, they say that love is very subject to knowledge, of which you being so well provided, 'tis to be fear'd, that you may make use of those agreeable diversities, that Love doth every day present to unfaithful Lovers. Madam, May he banish me from his Empire, if I have any other Will, then what is agreeable to his. He sees that I am yours, so his Power and my Will are agreed; my Designs concur with his Commands. Sir, I believe that Love himself could not know how to force you to love. He fear'd, Madam, lest he should be made himself a slave; He hath no force able to resist your puissance, unless it be your own: therefore since you have this Glory entire to your self, to have vanquish'd all the world, there remains nothing now, but that you should vanquish your self. Sir, I cannot do any thing else but vanquish, having neither Will nor Thought, which doth not render obedience to that duty, which I have taken to be the perfect guide of my life. Madam, You oppose your Designs to my Prayers, to the
end, this refusal may redouble my passion, and cause me to persist more eagerly in the pursuit of your tempting Graces: yet it suffices that the pain and difficulties of the acquest, will remain the glory of my conquest. If it be your Difficulties, Sir, that can create your Glory, why do you complain? Madam, I do not repine at the pain, but at your unkind∣ness that will not acknowledge it; but if that be not so, I do conjure your fair Lips to produce some assurance of your friendship. Will Sir, then I do promise your servitude, to acknowledge it for the price of your constancy; and believe this, that as my true passion doth onely oblige me, so there is no adjura∣tion shall have power over me. Madam, I wish that I could transform my whole will into words, to render you sufficient thanks for this favourable promise; but since I am not born capable of such a happiness, I will only say this, That he to whom your Favours are so liberally extended, shall pass the rest of his days in your Service. The Trial. Madam, If the opportunities of serving you were as ordi∣nary, as those of speaking to you, I had rendred you as many Services, as I have spoken Words. I dare not confirm them always with the same testimonies; and since I am so little capable of persuasion, I fear I shall discover my Ignorance and not my Servitude. Sir, I am of opinion that the custom of Persuasion is only used there, where Truth is wanting: and therefore seeing you have always protested the Truth, you ought not to make use of it, else you will make your Oaths and my Credit as in∣different, as your Words and Assurance would be. The cunning of a Discourse shall never do me such an ill office, as to make me believe an untruth; for I am ignorant of the custom and invention thereof, which shall cause me not to seek out such an Enterprize, to the end, that being warranted from the disturbance which I find between the resolution and the event, I should not give you for an assurance, that the whole world, seeing so noble a Design as mine, will judge that I owe an eternal perseverance to it.
Be advis'd, Sir, to conform your minde to your words, for time will give us always opportunities to distinguish between those that are feigned, and those that are true. Truly I must make this promise in answer to your promises, that if I do not finde them true, you will repent to have so vainly lost them; for I shall always reserve to my self this power, either to reject or accept of what you tender me, Why should your belief take any ill impression of your ser∣vant? I do call love and your beauty to witness, that I should always preserve my self the same. Well Sir, I shall content my self at present with your drift, notwithstanding I shall expect better assurances. Madam, Be confident that you shall draw as much fidelity from your conquest, as I expect glory and happiness from my subjection. But I desire to know if your Promises shall be as faithfully performed, as your Oaths. Much more, Madam, for I can give you but weak words, which my ignorance furnishes me withall: whereby you work effects worthy a glorious death. Will you then die for me, Sir? No, Madam, for that which would be a death to others, would be a life to me, provided it came from your hand. Live then, Sir, and take heed that your repentance do not kill you. 'Tis well, Madam, I shall live your Servant, and live long through the worth of my preserver. Full Satisfaction. Madam, The day wherein I had the happiness to present my Soul and my Affections to you, and then you made au entire con∣quest of all that was within me, I had also a thousand jealou∣sies of misfortune: for the fairest conquests are always cross'd, and my small merit did not permit me the honour of your friendship. But since that you and my good fortune have de∣ceiv'd my apprehension, therefore by how much the more extraordinary the Affection is which you have testifi'd to me, so much the more carefully shall I keep the Obligation which I have to serve you.
Not me, Sir, I never could in the least pretend to your Fa∣vour, that is a happiness which, I swear to you, my Desire doth rather enjoy then my Hope; and there is reason for it, seeing you the possessor of so many rich Qualities. I see, Madam, that I shall possess nothing hereafter, since I must take all from my self to bestow it upon her, for whom I could willingly suffer my self to be robb'd of all. Sir, When I shall enjoy that happiness, the gift will be much greater then all I can yet call my own. Teach me, Madam, how I may swear, and you shall see what use I will make of it, to assure you, that I am wholly yours; and that that which Love gives you now, can never be taken from you but by death. Sir, Be confident that I shall diligently seek all opportuni∣ties to deserve you; and receive these words for the most infallible, that ever Faith it self swore. Madam, I shall live always at your devotion. And I, Sir, living to you, shall live to my self. Then, Lady, let us tye our souls together with this kiss. And now this enterprize having given me so much joy as to think of it, I will go sacrifice my silence to your judge∣ment. An Amorous Complement. Lady, Wounded by your beauty, I will acknowledge it a mercy if you kill me not; yet rather murther me then vul∣nerate still your creature, unless you mean to heal what you have hurt; giving me a remedy from the same instrument wherewith you pierc'd me; your Eye having shot lightning into my breast, hath power with a smile to fetch out the consuming fire, and yet leave my heart enflamed. Sir, Although, where I am not guilty of offence, I might justly deny to descend to a satisfaction; yet rather then I would be counted a murtherer, I would study to preserve so sweet a Model as your self; and since you desire that my Eye which hath enflamed you, should by the vertue of a gracious Smile make you happy in your fire: It shall shine as you would have it, disclaim that Beam that displayes it self upon another Object.
The Discourse of a Gentleman bringing his Friend into Company. Gentlemen, Knowing that you were here, I am come to have the honour to see you, and to kiss your hands; and moreover on the confidence of your favour, I have taken the boldness to bring this Gentleman along with me, being a per∣son that deserves much respect. The Company. Sir, It is a singular contentment to us to see you; you and your friend shall be always welcome; our devotion is dedi∣cated wholly to your service: But as for these Ladies we can∣not so dispose of them, it lies on your part and his to insi∣nuate your selves into their favour. The Stranger Replies. Gentlemen, I durst not have so far presum'd thus to thrust my self into your company, being altogether unknown to you, if this Gentleman, who is my friend, had not put me under the shelter of his favour; the honour which you shew me for his sake obliges me infinitely: and as for these Ladies, their excellent beauty and aability seem to promise me this happiness, that at least my presence shall not displease them; and that if they will permit me the avour to see them, per∣haps hereafter by my services, I shall gain some other inte∣rest in their Affection. The Ladies. Sir, We should shew our selves as much unprovided of Judgment, as we esteem our selves to be of Beauty, if we should not regard your worth, of which your friend and ours gives so good a testimony, and which your behaviour and lan∣guage discovers sufficiently of it self. You need not doubt, Sir, but that you are lookt upon with a good Eye by every one of us, and that we altogether desire to give you that ho∣nour which is due to you.
To them the Stranger. Ladies, You oblige me with so much civility and respect, that I shall bear you an eternal gratitude; this is my unhap∣piness, that I have not an opportunity to render you that service which may equal your deserts: yet shall I not cease to offer it to you, beseeching you to receive it with as good a will, as I offer it unfeignedly to you. The Ladies. Sir, You exceed in your courtesie, we are satisfi'd enough with the honour of your presence, and with the contentment which we receive from your acceptable company. The Stranger. Perhaps, Ladies, you do not esteem my service worthy your deserts; yet for all that, I shall not omit any opportu∣nity to testifie how much I honour and esteem you. Another Gentleman. Sir, We are going to play, will you please to make one, or do you like it better to entertain the Ladies? The Stranger. Sir, I am very well here, and though I have to do with the stronger party, yet I shall try my fortune among the Ladies. The Ladies. Sir, You will have a hard task to be a gainer here. The Stranger. Ladies, I care not for any loss, so I may gain a part in your good affections.
A Lady. Sir, I believe you will have small content in our slender entertainment. The Stranger. Ladies, Had I no other happiness but that of seeing you, there is enough to ravish all my senses, so much do I see there of Beauties and Graces; neither do I believe that Paris ever saw more perfection in the three Goddesses. To him one of the company answers. Sir, If you had an apple of Gold to bribe them withall, you would perswade them sooner to your opinion. The Stranger. But besides this, Ladies, I doubt not but that the excel∣lency of your minds is correspondent to the beauty of your Faces; and that there are not more Charms in your Words, then there are Wonders in your Thoughts, which makes me prefer the happiness of being in your company, before any other. The Ladies. Sir, If we did not know our selves very well, you would make us presume very high of our selves; but we only be∣lieve that you put your Eloquence into a full career to pass away the time. The Stranger. Ladies, Your modesty shall not make me to forget my duty, which is to admire and publish your perfections, and to honor them with all my p; yet if my unhappiness shall be such, that you shall no e a person worthy such a task, it will be my comfort  have met with such pleasing enemies.
To offer Service and to begin a Friendship G. Sir, The reputation of your vertue and courtesie hath made me desire the honour of your knowledge and fami∣liarity, so that not finding any other opportunity to insinuate my self, I have taken the boldness to come and find you, to offer you my humble service, and assure you of the sincerity of my affection. Sir, I thank you most kindly for the paines that you have taken to come and see me, though I know nothing in me that can merit the honour which you have done me. Yet if there be any thing which may make me worthy your friendship and affection, assure your self that I do offer it you with a very good will. Beseeching you that for a tryall thereof, you would honour me with your commands, and my obedience shall testifie my affection. Sir, You ought not to debase those good qualities which are in you, the worth thereof is too well known, and I do not esteem the obligation less for the honour which you do me, in receiving me so courteously in the number of your friends, only I fear that I shall not have means enough to acknow∣ledge them according to their true esteem. Sir, I shall receive full satisfaction from your good will, with the which I finde my self highly honoured; and there∣fore I shall study to preserve it by my humble service, and shall honour my self in coming to see you. Sir, There shall be no man more welcom to me, I shall earnestly attend your coming, in the confidence whereof I kiss your hands. Sir, I remain your most humble servant. To make an Acquaintance Sir, I count it a singular happiness to have met with this acceptable company, since it hath been a means to bring me into your acquaintance. Sir, If the good fortune that brought us together into this place did put also into my hands the means to make my ac∣quaintance profitable, since your favour esteems it acceptable,
I should think my self happy in a double manner; but I be∣seech you, Sir, let not my good will suffer for want of op∣portunity. Sir, Your worth obliges me to make a great esteem of your acquaintance, and to desire your friendship; and indeed it was my intention to offer you my most humble service; but, Sir, you have doubly obliged me, preventing me by the offer of your good affection, for which I give you my most cordial thanks, and beseech you to accept reciprocally of mine. Sir, I accept the offer which you are pleased to make me, but on condition that I may merit them by all means possible. Sir, You would oblige me further then my power is able to acknowledge; it shall be sufficient for me to have the honour of your good will, and the liberty of coming sometimes to re∣ceive your commands. Sir, I say nothing how far my duty doth oblige me, I beseech you to believe that the affection which I have to put in practise, is sincere, and shall appear upon the first occa∣sion. Notwithstanding, there is nothing which I shall more desire, then the honour of waiting on you at your own House. Sir, You shall ever be most welcome. A Visit. Sir, Ever since I have had the honour to be acquainted with you, you have obliged me with so many favours, that I know not how to enter into any worthy acknowledgement. I have taken the boldness to give you a Visit, that I might give you more ample thanks, and assure you of the continuance of my devotion to your service. Sir, I do not believe it in my power to give you respect euough for so much worth; but assure your self that it shall be no fault of my good will. You infinitely oblige me, in giving me the honour of this visit. Sir, you are more then welcome. Sir, You oblige me with courtesie, and every day bestow new favours on me; I fear that in the end you will oblige me to become ungrateful, not being able to requite the honour
which you do me. But now tell me, Sir, how have you done since I had last the honour to see you. Very well, Sir, at your service; pray how have you done? I have not been very well, but this shall not hinder me from serving those that do me the honour to have any kind∣ness for me. To request a Courtesie. Sir, The good affection which you have always testifi'd towards me, hath made me take the boldness to request a Courtesie of you, That you would be pleas'd to give me your advice, and lend me your assistance in an affair of moment; it would add to your former obligations, and I shall be always oblig'd particularly to acknowledge it. Sir, The affection which I bear you is sincere, and as for that little proof which you have seen thereof, it is but a small pattern of that which I desire to perform on your behalf. Assure your self that in this which you demand, and upon all other occasions, you shall finde me always dispos'd to serve you. Sir, You double the obligations which you have laid upon me by your readiness and freeness; it will never be in the power either of my words or actions to make a full acknow∣ledgement: Yet if you please, honour me with some of your commands, that I may be enterprizing some action of duty and gratitude. To give thanks for a Courtesie received. Sir, That good affection which you have made appear to∣ward me, commands me to give you thanks for the honour and favour which you were pleas'd to do me, you have ob∣lig'd me more then any man in the world. Sir, I do cordially love my friends, and do not willingly refuse them any thing which is in my power; take what I do in good part, and believe that I would do more for you. Sir, I have not merited this favour; it behooves me to seek all opportunities to make you a full acknowledgement. Sir, Your thanks have surpass'd the service which I have done you; I would not put you to purchase so dearly the favor
of your friends: I can assure you, Sir, there is nothing in my power which is not at your commands. Sir, I cannot doubt of your affection, and be confident that I shall ever acknowledge it. I am, Sir, your as much obliged as affectionate Servant. To invite a Friend to Dinner. Sir, Since you are so well met, I beseech you Sir, to go home and dine with me. Sir, I give you many thanks; it suffices me to have had the honour to see you, and to understand your good health. Sir, I intreat you that I may have the honour to entertain you a little longer, which may be conveniently done for a di∣ning while, if you please to have the patience to stay. Sir, If in so doing I could do you any service, or that my Presence were capable of giving you any content, I should not be difficultly intreated; but I am afraid of giving you so much trouble. Pardon me, Sir, your company is very acceptable, and ob∣liges me very much. Sir, I have some business which I must dispatch, and there fore I beseech you to excuse me. Sir, I would not be a hinderance to you, but I am sorry not to have the happiness to enjoy you a longer time. Sir, I am as much troubled that I cannot accept of the ho∣nour which you would bestow upon me, yet I must confess my self to have a very great obligation. Sir, I hope another time will be more convenient. Sir, I shall be always ready to obey you Another form of Invitation. Sir, Since I have the good fortune to meet you, oblige me so far as to take a small Dinner with me. Sir, Were it in my power to do you service, I would wil∣lingly accompany you, but my presence will be both inconve∣nient and troublesome. I bseech you, Sir, use not these excuses, your company cannot but be very acceptable; but perhaps you suspect your being ill treated.
Pardon me, Sir, I know there is all good entertainment in your house, and that you may not think that I have any such apprehension, I shall do whatsoever you please to com∣mand me. Sir, You shall be very welcome, and you oblige me ex∣ceedingly. Before Dinner. Sir, Be pleas'd to seat your self there, that is the place which is appointed for you. Sir, I shall be obedient, 'tis better to be uncivil, then trou∣blesom. After Dinner. Sir, You will excuse your bad entertainment, otherwise we must oblige our selves to make you a better. Sir, Your entertainment hath been very good, there hath been no fault, there is no need of excuses. At least you may assure your self to have been lookt upon with a respect, and to have been cordially receiv'd. I wish I could testifie my affection to you in a thing that were more worthy of you. Sir, I have had so many testimonies of your favour that I am ashamed that I have not bin able to give you better ac∣knowledgements, which I shall be ready to do, when you are pleas'd to honour me with your commands. At present I humbly thank you for my entertainment and kiss your hands. Sir, I recommend my self to your good thoughts. To take leave of his Friends Wife. Madam, The favour which I have received from your hus∣band, obliges me to you both; I cannot at present give you sufficient thanks, but I beseech you to believe that my appre∣hension of them is such, that I shall give my self no repose, till I have found an occasion to revenge my self. Your most humble servant, Madam.
To take leave of a Lady with whom you are familiar. Madam, among the favours that I have received in this town I esteem the honour of your acquaintance the chiefest; But as much as I estem'd my self happy in the content which I receiv'd in your sweet company and conversation, so much do I now find my self unfortunate by reason of the necessity of my departure. If I thought my self worthy of your memory, I would beseech you to bear me always in your thoughts. For I do assure you, that nothing shall take from my mind th'Idea of your perfections, to which I have vow'd so much service and respect, and which I shall always cherish in my memory. Neither will there be any greater glory which I can boast of, then to stile my self your most obedient Servant; under which notion I give you this farewel, recommending my self to your fair vertues and affections. A Private Intercourse between the Trunk-breech'd Page and the waiting Gentlewoman in her Ladies Chamber. Come Mrs. Katharine, now my Master and my Lady are gone forth, you and I in their absence had best stay and exercise one another. How mean you Page? Why I'le teach you, if you will vouchsafe to learn. How prithee now? Let me beg your Lip. I cannot spare it by any means. I warrant you scorn me now, because I want hair upon my upper-lip; yet I can tell you, I have kist Ladies ere now, and have been sent for to their Chambers. That's a good one, you sent for! Yes, and have been trusted with their secrets too; such pretty little things as we are, can play at hoop all hid under a Fardin∣gale; prithee how long hast thou been a Waiting-woman? Not above a month yet. I thought so, you are so ignorant: I warrant you have your maiden-head still. I do hope so. Oh fie upon't, away with it for shame, chaffer it with the Coach-man for the credit of your profession; 'tis finable among Lasses of your rank.
Good Mr. Page, how long have you been skill'd in these affairs. E're since I was in Breeches; I vow you'l find your hone∣sty very troublesome. How can that be? Why, when you have truckt away your maiden-head, you have a lawful excuse to put off Gamesters, by telling them you have not what they look for: besides the benefit of being impudent as occasion serves; 'tis a thing very necessary for a Waiting-creature, and we Pages can instruct you in it, if you will be tractable. Sure thou art wild. So wild, that if you will lead me the chase I'le follow you. Mock-Complements, or Drolling-Complements. A Complement between a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman before a Riband-Shop in the Exchange. MAdam, y'are welcom to this Paradise of Toys: be pleas'd to chuse what you like, and I shall sacrifice to your beauty upon the Altar of this Stall, what gold you shall think fit to command from my pockets. Sir, You enrich me with your gifts; I'le assure you Sir; I do as freely accept of your kindness, as you do liberally be∣stow them: for we Ladies of this Town, seldom have any mercy upon a Country-gentlemans pocket, when we meet with an opportunity to empty it. Madam, Your nimble eye wherewith you do espie the faults of garb and habit, emboldens me to crave your judg∣ment concerning the cut of my Breeches, the choise of my Fancies, and the fling of my Legs. Sir, For your clothes, were not your Breeches a little too long, they were Jeer-proof against all the Ladies either in Hide-Park or Spring-Garden. You walk with such a Barbary prance and stately step, that your feet are like load-stones, drawing the eyes of all persons on you. Madam, I wish the Gods would transform me into this Fan, that I am now about to give you, that I might be always puf∣fing
into your mouth the breath of my affections; or this piece of Ribband, that I might always hang about you in two assels, the one at your breast, the other at your breech. Sir, I never fancied flesh-colour knots, nor am I about to build Cities, that you should proffe me your hide to measure the compass of the walls; If I were your favours, Sir, merit, that I should like Dido, use something else for that work; rather chusing you for my Aeneas, to help me to people it. A Horse Courser courting a Parsons Widow. Lady, The great affections that I bear you, and the great de∣sire I have to be luckie in Horse-flesh, spur me on to accost you with an humble request, that I may be your Servant. Sir, Your proper person and eloquent language would ac∣cuse me of ingratitude, should my obstinacy to your reason∣able demands be any hindrance to your fortunate Markets. An Apprentice and a young Lady at a Boarding-School. Lady, Seeing the painted cloth of your Vertues hang out at the window, and Fame standing at the door with a trum∣pet in her hand, I could not chuse, out of a natural inclina∣tion which I have to Sights and Puppet-playes, but step in to behold the monstrousness of our Beauties; and now, Ma∣dam, having seen you, I admire you more then the Hairy-Gentlewoman. Sir, Your kindness proceeds more from your goodness then my desert; but you must give me leave to think you com∣plement, since you have compar'd me to a person whose in∣comparable qualities are as much above mine, as Pauls is above St. Gregories. Lady, If you'l be pleas'd to take a Cheesecake, and a bottle of Beer, as the earnest of my affection, I shall think my self honour'd with waiting on you to the next Ale∣house. Sir, I shall not refuse the proffer of your kindness, for the short Commons our Mistriss allows us, makes us very willing to embrace such invitations.
At the Cake-house. Madam, Let me beg a kiss from you, that I may drink to you in that liquor which I most love, the Nectar of your lips. Your servant, Sir, now give me leave to pledge you in that liquor which I most love, which is a cup of bottle Ale, for I am very dry. Madam, These Cheesecakes were made to eat, I would you could feed on them with that eagerness, that I could feed on the perfections of your face; there is in them sweetness, ten∣derness, and pleasantness, the emblems of your qualifications. Sir, I know not how to recompence these favours, so that I am troubled that I must be now more in your debt, before I have gratifi'd your first kindnesses; for I must desire you to give me leave to go orth to make water. At Parting. Empress of my soul, God give you good night, many thanks to you for your sweet company. I must return the same acknowledgments to you again, Sir, who have this night both fill'd my heart with your Love, and my belly with good Cheesecakes. A Passado Complement between a Gentleman and a Lady, meeting in two several Coaches in the High-way going to Hide-Park. Your most humble servant, Madam, I bless the opportu∣nity that now gives me leave to tell you how much I honour you, since you are the only Lady that ride triumphant in the Coach-box of my heart. Sir, I do not know how I have merited so great a favour, I wish it were a sufficient recompence to let you understand, that you are the only person that hold the Reins of my affection. Madam, Be pleased to honor me with your commands, and I shall diet my self like a Race-horse, that I may be swift to obey them. Sir, My commands are only, that you would accept of my love, which I bestow upon you with the same freeness
that you ever gave your Mistress bottle Wine and Tarts. Oh Dear, Madam your most humble servant, drive on Coach-man. Between a Gentlemam and a Sempstress. Lady, The neat cut of your Bands which I do now and then send for by my Foot-boy, hath brought me to visit the maker of those comely ornaments of my neck. Sir, Were it not for speaing against my Trade and Profit, I would say that your good face needs no band. Then the Gentleman olling over the Counter thus proceds. Truly Mistress, I do not wonder that your pretty fingers do stitch up so many neat ornaments, seeing that you are that very picture of ornament it self, and doubtless your Trade must be very innocent for you deal all in white. Sir, Your good opinion doth much oblige me; yet I en∣treat the favour of you to believe, that there is as much deceit in our Trade, as in any occupation about London. Lady, You may perceive by my behaviour and my garb, that I am a person wholly made up of complements, so that the greatest complement that I can give you, is my self. And as a testimony of this I should be glad to give you a treatment at the Sebastian over against Southampton-house, not daring to doubt, but that you are, as fame speaketh most of your calling, of a courteous and yielding nature. Sir, Your great estate would argue me of folly, should I de∣ny you any thing that may obtain your custome. Between a Journeyman-Haberdasher of small Wares, and a Ladies Chamber-maid. Fair Creature, For whose sake Cupid became a Weaver; that he might twist into thee all his mothers graces, grant me the favor to accost thy coral lip, that I may shew thee how my Master kisses my Mistress. Sir, Though our Butler hath bin teaching me something of
this nature already, yet I shall be glad to take better example from your more exquisite accomplishments. Lady, I have here brought you four pair of blew Shoe∣strings to signifie the knots wherewith you have tied my heart; as also a Love-hood, to remember you of the love I bear you; and a pair of trimm'd Gloves, that when your fingers are im∣prisoned in them, you may think upon the captivity into which you have brought my soul. 'Tis true, I rather chose to steal then buy them, partly having the advantage of my Ma∣sters Shop, and partly knowing how much young people do delight in stoln contents. Sir, Though I that am a Chamber-maid, an exact Trim∣mer of Gloves, have deserved these, and greater avors then these; yet if you will bring me when you come hither next Sunday a set of Lemon colour and silver Knots, I shall then think it my part to study the satisfaction of your desires; but it must be upon good conditions. Lady of my constant affections, impose what conditions you please, the strictest of them will not be too heavy for him that desires to bear the burthen of your love. Briefly thus Sir, You must let me have young Pease by lat∣ter end of March, ripe Cherries by May-day; in clothes none of my quality must go finer then I. 'Twill be your gain, for I shall sit in the Shop and invite custom. Mistriss Prudentia, You may think I lye now, but let me ne∣ver stir more if I do; in reality I love you; and as for these conditions, if I do not follow them, then cut my throat, and throw me into the House of office; what can a man say more? Well Sir, go to, I'le tell you more next Sunday; but be sure you remember my Knots. Between a Gentleman Usher, and a Waiting Gentlewoman. Bright pearl in Natures eye, I have made a journey from my looking-glass hither, that I may present you my exiguous devoires. Sir, Your exquisite knowledge in the service of Ladies emboldens me to desire a avour of your hands, that you would be pleas'd, the maids being all busie in washing, to help me to comb my head.
Lady, The softness of your Hair betrays the softness of your disposition, and indeed how should it be otherwise, it having been so long sleek'd with the smoothing-iron of a mild and gentle education. Sir, As one shoulder of mutton drives down another, so the readiness wherewith you have done me one courtesie makes me to request another from you, that when my Lady is engag'd abroad in company, you would be pleas'd to carry a Complement from me to a Sweet-heart of mine, a Barber in Fleet-street; I can assure you, that for my sake, he will give you a cast of his Office for nothing at any time. Lady, You have ript up an old sore in my heart, which hath been wounded long ago by your Beauty; for it was now my intention to have ingrafted my self into your affection. Oh, Sir, I dare not presume upon a man that goes before my Lady; beside, that your Periwig and the smallness of the Calf of your Leg, would cause the Hickup in my Fancy should you urge your request any further, and therefore I implore you to desist. Between a Lawyers Clerk and his Masters Daughter. Most celestial beam of Beauty, I have receiv'd you into my heart, which like a burning-glass contracting the heat of your rayes, is now all on fire, not to be quench'd but by the moi∣stening julip of your affection. Kind Robin, I have long thought thee to be what now I find thee, a Phenix among men, which thou provest, by going about to die in thy flames: but heaven forbid, I will first make water in a bason, and give it thee wherein to bathe thy burning breast, before I will be depriv'd of thy service. How willingly Mrs. Mary, should I receive such a stream into my bosom. But, Oh your Father; he's the shoe that wrings us both by the foot; methinks I hear him saying al∣ready, Out ye poor condition'd slut; what, marry your Fa∣thers Clerk? Come Robin, Clerk me no Clerks, I love thee; and if my father do compel me to marry another, yet Robin, thou know∣est there are private corners in London. Mrs. Mary, I bow with all reverence to your manifold fa∣vours. But what do you think of a little horse-play in the time.
Robin, I acknowledge thy civility, and shall not refuse any occasion to gratifie thy reasonable request; for I love tumbling dearly. Between the Countrey Bumkin and his Mistriss going to a Fair. Well overtaken my dear Katie, I no sooner heard that thou wert gone to the Fair, but I came a swinging pace after thee; for in troth Katie I love thee above all things, as a man may say, in the versal world. Alas, Katie, thy love hath gor'd me to the very heart, so that I shall be always as sick as a Horse till thou hast cur'd me with the plaister of thy love. Nay Richard, As bad as I love thee, I do not love thee so Ill, but that I'le kiss my lips into a consumption to save thy life. Ita, say'st thou me so Kate, God a mercy for that girle, by the mass, and that word shall cost me the best fairing in the Ped∣lers pack. Come hold by my skirts, and let's make all the haste we can Kate. O Dear, Richard, how you sweat! here take my handkercher to wipe your face. But Richard, must not I wear a gold Ring like my Dame, when I am married I Kate, and a posie in it too, which shall be this, Richard and Kate shall live without hate. 'Twas my own invention, and judge you now Kate, if I be not a brave blade to lead a Hen to water. Truly Richard did I not take you for a very pretty fellow, you should not be so much in my books as you are; I know more then one or two that would kiss my back side to have half those favours from me that you have received. Heaven bless us, how the Fair's crouded already. In the Fair. Come Kate, follow close, unhook my dublet, take fast hold on my Wasteband, shoulders make room for your Mistriss. Thom, dost do, Thom Kate where are ye, what do ye like at that Stall. Oh Richard, Ile tell thee what thou shalt give me; A silver Bodkin to scratch my head at Church withal, and a silver Thimble to make thy Wedding Shirt. What thou wilt Kate, my fobb buttons and unbuttons at thy
command. Uds boars Kate, why dost think I won't please my Sweet-heart, Yes faith, and l'e give thee a Bottle of white Wine and Sugar too at the George, before we go home. At the Inn. Come Kate, give me thy Suger-candy first. Here's to thee with heart and good will. And now caperDick for joy; Katie's thine, Katie's thine, boy. I have purchased her with a silver Bodkin, and a Thimble, and she's now my Tenant in Tail: come Girle, give me thy hand once more, and strike me good luck. Here Richard, here's to thee. I'le warrant thee a merry grigg how ere the world go. Come say away Girle; Hey down a down a derry down, Hey down a down a derry do? My Love she is as brown as a Nut, My Love's a very pretty little Slut; She hath a dimple in her chin, And I am he that did her win. Nay 'tis true Kate, and I'le lay our pie-bald Mare against any Horse in the Town, that thou hast as pretty a smelling brow as any Lass in the Countrey. Ay, but Richard will you think so hereafter? Will you not when you have me throw stools at my head; and cry, Would my eyes had been beat out of my head with a cricket-ball, the day before I saw thee. Kate, My Infections are greater toward thee yn so. But if I should chance to call louder then ordinary, why, 'tis but saying hold your tongue Dick, here's piece of bag-budding for you: I and my mouth is stopt presently. Richard, thou dost well to tell me some of thy humors; But art thou not terrible mad when th'art drunk, and quarrelsome withall? No Kate, as quiet as any Lambkin: All that I shall do is one∣ly this, that when I come home, I may snore an hour or two perhaps with my head in thy lap; then I start up and cry, Hoh Kate, what's a clock? and so go to bed. Well Richard, my left eye itches, which puts me in mind of
going home, for I'm afraid my Dame will thrash my bones for staying so long. Between the Coach-man and the Kitehin-maid. Fair Goddess of the pottage pot, how done you do tzip morning? In truth George, I find my self very hot. Oh, I am glad that you begin to feel the heat which you make me suffer. Why, what hurt have I done you? have I scratch'd you, or prickt you with any of my loose pins, or have I trod upon your corns? Truly Bess, you are in the right on't, for the nails of your allurements have scratch'd my mind, the pins of your features have prick'd me; and the foot of your disdain hath trod upon the toes of my perseverance; and besides all this, you have struck me to the heart. With what good George. With the miracles of your beauty. Alas that cannot be, for I am blacker then the Crock in the Chimney. Truly Bess, if thou art a Chimney Crock, thou oughtest not to be us'd in any place, but in the Chimneys of the Gods, where there is no fire made but that of Love. Oh that I were some Celestial Kettle that I might hang always over thee, that I might be never separated from thee! George, You will never leave your jeers, but 'tis no matter, I have a back broad enough to bear'em. Truly Bess, I speak nothing but the truth; measure me according to the greatness of my affections, not by the smallness of my deserts; and though I am but a poor Coach-man, scorn me not, for I can tell you of Goddesses themselves, that have affected mortal men, perhaps meaner then my self. The Picture of the Poets Mistress. Gentleman, step in and see the begining; here is a Lady worth your seeing, She was born like Minerva, for she hath been breeding like mites in old cheese, in the heads of several Poets for this thousand years. Who have at length produc'd her to out-miracle the Hairy Gentlewoman; being quite contrary to
her, for hair she hath none, her head being cover'd with an Aurora colour'd silk, which hangs dis-shevel'd about her shoulders; instead of curls it is ty'd in nooses, such as they catch Jacks withall, with which she recreates her self in fish∣ing for Gudgeons. Her fore-head is a Tower planted all about with Cupids artillery; The whole structure of her head re∣sembles a stately Palace; Her nose is the Throne where Ju∣piter himself sits under the Arches of her brows, which are not brows but two rainbows, to signifie the warry temper of their eyes; Instead of her eyes she hath two burning Torches in each hole, and here by the way, the Poets tell a story, how that Cupid about a hundred years ago sing'd his wings in the flames thereof, and falling into one of the corners, was al∣most drown'd in the Rhume; Her lips are two Altars of red Coral, continually reeking with the incense that comes from her mouth; Her teeth are not made of bone like those of other Women, but of the tears of true lovers congealed into pearl; Her Neck is nothing but a cloud, out of which you may see a Sun break orth to enlighten the two Orbs of her breast; though indeed they are not so properly to be termed Orbs, as Mountains, resembling the two hillocks that are upon Mount Parnassus; these overlook her belly, which is not a belly, but rather a plain, large and smooth, like that near Sa∣lisbury. Further I might go, but the Painter being not willing to draw more, makes me as abruptly to break off with my Pen, as he did with his Pencil. Many Books have been written of sundry, and several Arts and Sciences, so that even the scabby invention of Short-hand hath not wanted Printed Instructions for the attaining there∣of. Yet strange it is to tell, that there never was yet any Book published concerning the Art of Ushering Ladies; doubt∣less it would have sold well, and might aptly have been call∣ed, The Gentleman Usher in Print. Therefore that this gene∣ration of Men may no longer live like Jews, depending whol∣ly upon Tradition; it was thought requisite to set them down some few Precepts, not doubting but that some or other of them, in their lazie hours, may build greater works upon this small Foundation.
The Choice of a Gentleman Usher. He ought to be indifferently tall, that is, being measured with a Carpenters Rule, seven foot, three inches, and a quarter. He ought to have haunted Dancing Scools with more zeal then the old Women have that go to St. Alis; He ought diligently to have studied over Melchi Swashbucklerus, de hol∣dendo haum in hando, and Cussius Candus of the Ornaments of Nations; he ought to be a diligent Observer of Fashions, and an espyer of faults in the garb and house keeping of other La∣dies, that he may be able to furnish his own Lady now and then with discourse. Lastly, he must have a good head of hair, and handsom feet without corns. How he must be fitted for Service. Having been bespoken, and received earnest, he must de∣sire a weeks time to fit himself for her Ladiships service. The first two days he must walk in iron Boots, and an iron Breast and Back-piece, such as children wear that have the rickets, to bring his body into an upright and perfect po∣sture. After that he must drink Scurvygrass-Ale to reform his complexion. He must then furnish himself with all the Books of Complementing, and be sure to get enough to ena∣ble him to shew his wit the first night before the Waiting Gentlewoman at the Stewards Table. His motion must be with such a Clock-work formality, as if he were only made to strike the Quarter-Bell upon Bow-Steeple. This must be practised every morning in his Looking-glass, and he must not suffer himself to eat until he find he hath profited something. His Behaviour in the House. He must be affable to his fellow-servants, especially the Wait∣ing-Gentlewoman and the Cook; to the one for his break∣fast, to the other for a kiss or two now and then, and that she may speak well of him to her Lady; when he goes before his Lady he must walk as circumspectly as a Milk-maid with a pail upon her head, crying ever and anon, by your leave Gentlemen.
He ought in company to value himself according to the de∣gree of his Lady, wherein he must have a care not to lose the least atome of her dignity. His pockets must not be greasie, because he may have occasion to carry his Ladies Hoods and Scarfs in them. He ought not to cast any affection upon his Masters daughter, for the Butler having more wit then himself, made sure of her before he could make his approaches. His Dressings. He must not be long in dressing himself, because of walking the Rounds of his morning Visits. The heels of his Shoes ought to be long and very slender, that he may tread with the more grace, and make the less noise. His clothes ought to be put on with so much accurateness, as if he were to dress himself every day for his life, or if the world would perish, were there a wrinkle in his Band; white Gloves he must not want, for they like white staves in other employments, are the badges of his preferment. In his Hair he must be as nice as the ancient Greeks, and good reason that he should make much of it while he hath it, it being uncertain how long a man in his place may keep it. The Diseases incident to Gentlemen Ushers, and their Cures. The first is, when his hair doth utterly abandon his head, leaving his ears open to all reproaches, finding the wages of their nourishment as small as the recompence of his service. The Cure of this, is by way of humble Petition to the Gen∣tlewoman, to afford him her Combings, and some few spare Locks, to hide the nakedness which she laid bare. The other is the dwindling away of the calves of his legs; This happens from his being overtoyl'd; for being to divide himself between the Lady and her Woman, they never leave sucking him, till they have made him so transparent that you may see his very thoughts. For the cure of this disease, he must go to the Hosier instead of the Apothecary. If the Gen∣tlewoman will take the pains to nurse him, his body may per∣haps return again to his soul, otherwise he dies like a Silk∣worm, having spun out himself to pleasure others.
To his Mistriss. O Thou the dear inflamer of my eyes, Life of my soul, and hearts eternal prize! How delectable is thy love, how pure, How apt to vanish, able to allure A frozen soul; and with thy sacred fires, To affect dull spirits with extream desires. How do thy joys, though in their greatest dearth, Transcend the proudest pleasures of the earth? Thou art a perfect Symetry, a rare Connexion Of many perfects, to make one perfection Of Heavenly Musick; where all parts do meet, In one sweet strain to make one perfect sweet: Glorious Extraction, where each several feature Divine compriz'd, to so Divine a Creature; Give me thy heart, and for that gift of thine, Lest thou shouldst rent a heart, I'le give thee mine. Song. MIstake me not, I am as cold as hot; For though mine eyes betrays thy heart o're night, Ere morn, ere morn, ere morning all is right. Sometimes I burn, And then do I return; There's nothing so unconstant as my mind: I change, I change, I change even as the wind. Perhaps in jest I said, I lov'd thee best; But 'twas no more, then what was long before I vow'd, I vow'd, I vow'd to twenty more. Then prithee see, I give no heart to thee,
For when I ne're could keep my own one day, What hope, what hope, what hope hadst thou to stay. Plurality in Love. HE whose active thoughts disdain to be captive to one foe, And would break his single chain, or else more would undergo; Let him learn the art of me By new bondage to be free. What tyrannick Mistriss dare, to one Beauty, Love confine? Who unbounded as the air, all may court, but none decline; Why should we the Heart deny As many Objects as the Eye? Wheresoe're I turn or move, a new Passion doth detain me; Those kind Beauties that do love, or those proud ones that disdain me: This frown melts, and that frown burns me, This to tears, that to ashes turns me. Soft fresh Virgins not full blown, with their youthful sweetness take me; Sober Matrons that have known long since what these prove, awake me: Here staid Coldness I admire, There the lively active Fire. She that doth by skill dispence every favour she bestows, Or the harmless innocence, which nor Court nor City knows; Both alike my Soul enflame, That wild Beauty and this tame.
She that wisely can adorn nature, with the wealth of arts; Or whose rural sweets do scorn borrow'd helps to take a heart: The vain care of that's my pleasure, Poverty of this my treasure. Both the Wanton and the Coy, me with equal pleasures move; She whom I by force enjoy, Or who forceth me to love: This because she'l not confess, That not hide her happiness. She whose loosely flowing hair, scatter'd like the beams oth' morn; Playing with the sportive air, hides the sweets it doth adorn: Captive in that net restrains me, In those golden-fetters chains me. Nor doth she with powers less bright, my divided heart invade; Whose soft tresses spread like night, o're her shoulders a black shade: For the star-light of her eyes, Brighter shines through those dark skies. Black, or fair, or tall, or low, I alike with all can sport; The bold sprightly Thais woe, or the frozen Vestal Court: Every Beauty takes my mind, Ty'd to all, to none confin'd. A description of his Mistriss. SO looks the Virgin Rose, which cherish'd by the genial truth; Her crimson Beauties doth disclose, as doth the ruby portals of her mouth.
Which when she doth unfold, Two bright transparent rows Of pearl ye may behold; From between which a breath of Amber flows. A more then Tyrean purple doth o'respread Her lips, which softer are Then the Swans down, and smoother far: The costly juice that dwells In Oriental shells, To them looks pale, they are so purely red. Fair Cheeks that look like blushing roses plac't In purest Ivory, Or Coral, within snow enchas'd; The Glories of the Spring Grow pale, and languishing For envy, so out-shin'd by them to be. Sweetly triumphing Eyes, That in two Crystal prisons do contain, Death in affrown's disguise, How gladly would I die to be by those eyes slain. Delightful cruelty Of those all charming Eyes, That have on one design'd to try With what a pleasing empire they can tyrannize. The Melancholy Lover. HIther I come delightful groves To spend my sighs, and make my moan, To whose still shades it best behoves To make my plaints and sorrows known, And these gentle trees invite, To pity my disconsolate plight. 'Tis rigorous love that doth torment This disturbed heart of mine;
But of a Creature so Divine, That I ought not to repent To have loved, though unlov'd again, The sole author of my pain. Is bright Sylvia gentle bowrs, To your gloomy walks unknown? Who loves to spend the harmless hours Among silent groves alone; Hnd can with her presence bright To the darkest shades give light. Sylvia hath about her charms Nations able to subdue; And can conquer with those arms More then mightiest Kings can do: But I that am her chiefest aim, Am destin'd to the greatest flame. I die Sylvia, when I behold Those eyes that set on fire my heart; Yet I (for love is uncontroll'd) Greedy, and fond of my own smart: And captive to my misery, Love to behold those Stars, and die. To his Mistriss falsly accusing him. WRong me no more In thy complaint, Blam'd for inconstancy: I vow'd to adore The fairest Saint, Not chang'd while thou wer't she; But if another thee out-shine Th' inconstancy is only thine. To be by such Blind Fools admir'd, Gives thee but small esteem;
By whom as much Thou'dst be desir'd; Did'st thou less beautious seem; Sure why they love they know not well, Who why they should not, cannot tell. Women are by themselves betray'd, And to their short joys cruel? Who foolishly themselves perswade, Flames can outlast their fuel. None (though Platonick their pretence) With reason love unless by sense. And he by whose command to thee, I did my heart resign; now bids me chuse a Deity Diviner far then thine, No power from love can beauty sever, I'me still loves subject, thine was never. The fairest she whom none surpass, To love hath only right: and such to me thy beauty was till one I found more bright: But were as impious to adore thee now, as not t'have don't before. Nor is it just by Rules of Love, Thou shouldst denv to quit a heart that must anothers prove even in thy right to it; Must not thy subjects captives be To her who triumphs over thee?
Cease then in vain to blot my name With forg'd Apostacy; thine is that stain, who dar'st to claim what others ask of thee: Of Lovers they are only true Who pay their hearts where they are due. To his false Mistriss. CElio remains disconsolate, forsaken of his cruel Lover; Who not asham'd to violate Her faith, doth for her false heart discover. Oft do I her hard heart bemoan, Inveigh on her unconstant mind, Oft blame my self for doting on a thing more fickle then the wind. Sometimes unhappy men he deem'd, her absence might have quench'd his flame: But now more and fair then e're she seem'd, his flames increase through her disdain; Now nought is left me but dispair, My adverse ate brought me to see Things distant most admired are, enjoyment breeds satiety. I go to see the fair unkind, whom her new Lovers arms immure; Me she vouchsas'd not once to mind in her inconstancy secure. Was't not enough, Phillis said I, that thy deceitful charming wiles Should cheat my ond credulity, that thou seekst others to beguile.
If amidst these thy new delights Thou hapst no time to think on me, Think how awakn'd conscience frights; Think Phillis on thy perjury. Longer to grieve I see 'tis vain, Longer my troubled thoughts to vex; Phillis triumph in her disdain, Phillis the falsest of her sex. Resolution to Love. I Wonder what the Grave and Wise Think of all us that love; Whether our pretty fooleries Their mirth or anger move: They understand not breath that words do want, Our sighs to them are unsignificant. One of them saw me t'other day Touch thy dear hand, which I admire; My soul was melting straight away, And dropt before the fire: This silly Wiseman, who pretends to know, Ask'd why I look'd so pale and trembled to. Another from my Mistriss dore Saw me with watry eyes to come; Nor could the hidden cause explore, But thought some smoak was in the room: Such ignorance from unwounded learning came, He knew tears made by smoak, but not by flame. If learn'd in other things you be, And have in Love no skill; For God sake keep your arts from me For I'le be ignorant still: Study or actions others may embrace, My Love's my business, and my Book's her face.
These are but trifles I confess, Which me weak mortal move; Nor is your busie seriousness Less trifling then my love: The wisest King, who from his sacred brest Pronounc'd all vanity, chose it for the best. Tyranny in Love. BLind Cupid lay thy Bow aside, Thou dost know its use; For Love thy Tyranny doth shew, Thy kindness is abuse. Thou who wer't call'd a Pretty Boy, Art thought a Skeleton: For thou like death dost still destroy, When thou dost strike at one. Each vulgar hand can do as much; Then Heavenly skill we see When we behold two Arrows touch Two marks that distant be. Love always looks for joy agen, If e're thou woundst mans heart, Pierce by the way his Rib; and then He'l kiss, not curse thy dart. Against Love. NOw fie on love it ill befits, Or Man or Woman know it; Love was not meant for people in their wits, And they that fondly shew it Betray their too much feather'd brains, And shall have Bedlam only for their pains.
To Love is to distract my sleep. And waking, to wear fetters; To Love is but to go to School to weep: I'le leave it for my betters: If single love be such a curse, To marrie is to make it ten times worse. The Maiden-head. THou worst estate even of the sex that's worst, Therefore by nature made at first T'attend the weakness of our birth; Slight outward Curtain to the nuptial Bed, Thou cause to buildings not yet finished: Who like the Center of the Earth Dost heaviest things attract to thee, Though thou a point imaginary be. A thing God thought for mankind so unfit, That his first blessing mind it; Cold frozen nurse of fiercest fires, Who like the parched plains of Africk sand, (A sterel and a wild unlovely Land) Art always scorht with hot desires, Yet barren quite didst thou not bring Monsters and Serpents sorth thy self to sting. Thou that bewitchest men, while thou dost dwell Like a close Conjuer in his Cell; And fear'st the days discovering eye No wonder 'tis at all that thou shouldst be Such tedious and unpleasant company, Who liv'st so melancholily; Thou thing of subtil slippery kind, Which Women lose and yet no man can find. Although I think thou never found wilt be, Yet I'me resolv'd to search for thee, To search it self rewards the pains; So though the Chymick his great secret miss;
(For neither it in art nor nature is) yet things well worth his toil he gans, and doth his charge and labour pay, With good unsought experiments by the way. Say what thou wilt, chastity is no more to thee, then a Porter to the dore; in vain to honour they pretend, Who guard themselves with Ramparts and with Walls; Them only ame the truly valiant calls, who can an open breach defend: of thy quick loss can be no doubt, Within so hated, and so lov'd without. A Fond Design. IN vain fair Cis you design To be cruel, to be kind; For we know with all yours arts, You never hold but willing hearts: Men are too wise grown to expire, With broken staves and painted fire. 2. And if among a thousand Swains. Some one of Love or Fate complains; And all the Stars in Heav'n defie, With Clora's lips, or Celia's eye: 'Tis not their Love, the youth would chuse But the glory to refuse. 3. Then wisely make your price of those, Want wit or courage to oppose; But tempt not me that can discover What will redeem the fondest Lover: And fly the least, lest it appear, Your power is measur'd by our fear. 4. So the rude wave securely shocks The yielding Bark, but the stiff Rocks If it attempt, how soon in vain,
Broke and dissolv'd it fills the main; It foams and roars, but we deride, Alike its weakness and its pride. On his Mistress Singing. I Have been in Heav'n I think, For I heard an Angel sing Notes, my thirsty ears did drink; Never any earthly thing Sung so true, so sweet, so clear, I was then in Heav'n not here. 2. But the blessed feel no change, So I may mislike the place, But mine eyes would think it strange Should it be no Angels face; Powers above it seems design Me still mortal, her Divine. 3. Till I tread the Milky way, And I lose my senses quite; All I wish is that I may Hear that voice, and see that sight: Then in types and outward show, I shall have a Heav'n below. Parting. But that I knew before we met, the hour would come that we must part; and so had fortify'd my heart, I hardly could escape the net, My passions for my reason set. But why should reason hope to win a victory, that's so unkind, and so unwelcome to my mind? To yield is neither shame nor sin, Besieg'd without, betray'd within.
And though that night be ne're so long, in it they either sleep or wake; and either way enjoyments take In dreams or visions, which belong, Those to the old, these to the young. But friends ne're part to speak aright. for whose but going is not gone; Friends like the Sun must still move on, And when they seem most out of sight, Their absence makes at most but night. I'me old when going, gone 'tis night, my parting then shall be a dream, and last tell the auspicious beam Of our next meeting gives new light; And the best vision that's your sight. Not to be Alter'd. CAn so much beauty over a mind; o'resway'd by Tyranny, As new afflicting ways to find a doubtless faith to try; And all examples to out-do, To scorn, and make me jealous too. Alas, she knows my fires are too too great! and though she be stone-ice to me, Her thaw to others cannot quench my heat. 2. That Law that with such force o're ran the armies of my heart; When not one thought I could out-man, that durst once take my part: For by assault she did invade, No composition to be made; Then since that all must yield as well as I, to stand in aw of Victors Law, There's no prescribing in captivity.
3. That love, which loves for common ends, is but self loving love; But nobler conversation tends soul mysteries to prove: And since love is a passive thing, It multiplies by suffering, Then though she throw life to the waining Moon On him her shine The dark part mine, Yet I must love her still when all is done. Loves Martyr. HOw long shall I a Martyr be, To love and Womans cruelty? Or why doth sullen ate consine My heart to thee, that is not mine? Had I ev'r lov'd as others do, But only for an hour or two; Then there had store of reason been, Why I should suffer for my sin. But Love thou know'st with what a flame, I have ador'd my Mistress name; How I ne're offer'd other fires, But such as rose from chaste desires, Nor have I e're profan'd thy shine With an inconstant fickle mind; Yet you combining with my ate Hast forc'd my Love, and her to hate. O Love, if her supremacy, Have not a greater power then thee; For pitties sake then once be kind, And throw a Dart to change her mind: Thy Deity we shall suspect, If our reward must be neglect: Then make her love, or let me be Inspir'd with scorn, and well as she.
Protestation of Love. DEar soul, who hath encaptiv'd so my heart; Vouchsafe to bear these lines which I impart; I dare not bless my self to call thee mine, Yet I, if I am any thing, am thine. The Poles shall move to teach me e're I start, And when I change my Love, Ile change my heart; Nay, if I wax but cold in my desire, Think Heaven hath motion left, and heat the fire, Much more I could, but many words have made, That oft suspected, which men would perswade; Take therefore all in this, I love so true, That I will never love none else but you. The Golden Age. WHen from each Thought a seed did spring, And every Look a plant did bring, And every Breath a flower; The Earth unplough'd did yield her crop, And honey from the Oak did drop, The Fountains did run milk: The Thistle did the Lilly bear, And every Bramble Roses wear, And every Worm made Silk. The very Shrub did Balsom sweat, And Nectar melt the Rock with heat, And Earth did drink her fill: Then she no hurtful weed did know, Nor barren Fern, nor Mandrake low, Nor Mineral to kill. The Male and Female us'd to join, And into all delight did coin, That pure simplicity: Then Feature did to Form advance, And Youth call'd Beauty forth to dance, And every Grace was by. It was a time of no distrust,
So much of Love had nought of Lust, None fear'd a jealous eye. The Language melted in the ear, Yet all without a blush might hear; They liv'd with open vow. Each touch and kiss was so well plac't, They were as sweet as they were chaste. FRom the fair Lavanion shore, I your Markets come to store; Muse not at me that so far dwell, And hither bring my Wares to sell. Such is the sacred hunger of gold, Then come to my pack where I cry, What do you lack, what do you buy? For here it is to be sold. You, whose birth and breeding base, Are rank'd into a noble race; And whose Parents heretofore, Neither Arms nor Scutchons bore: Such is the sacred hunger of gold, Then come to my pack, where I cry, What do you lack, what do you buy? For here is Honors to be sold. Madam, for your wrinkled face, Here's complection it to grace; Which, if your earnest be but small, It takes away the vertue all: But if your palms be well anointed with gold, Then shall you seem like a Queen of fifteen, Though you be threescore years old. On the perfections of his Mistress. HER loks are streams of liquid amber, Curtains fit for beauties chamber; Of which slender golden sleave, Love his wanton nets did weave.
Her forehead, that is beauties sphere. A thousand graces moving there. Venus triumpheth on her brow, That comely arch of silver snow. The Savages that worship the Sun-rise, Would hate their god, if they beheld her eyes; All heavenly beauties joyn themselves in one, To shew their glory in her eye alone: Which when it turneth it's celestial ball, A thousand sweet Stars rise, a thousand fall. Her nose is beauties splendid port, Where Zephyrus delights to sport. Her breath is such, whose native smell All Indian odours doth excell; If all the pleasures were distill'd Of every Flower in every Field, And all that Hybla's hives do yield, Were into one broad mazer fill'd If thereto added all the Gums And Spice that from Panchaia comes; The Odours that Hydaspes lends, And Phoenix proves before she ends; If all the Air that Flora drew, Or Spirit that Zephyrus ever blew Were put therein, and all the Dew That ever rosie morning knew; Yet all diffus'd could not compare With her breath, delicious air. The melting rubies on her lip, Are of such power to hold, as on one day Cupid flew thirsty by, and stoopt to sip, And fasten there, could never get away. Have you seen Carnation grow, Fresh blushing through new flakes of snow? Have you seen with more delight, A red Rose growing through a white? Have you seen the pretty gleam That the Strawberry leaves in cream? Or morning blushes when day breaks? Such is the tincture of her cheeks. Her silver neck is whiter far
Then Towers of polisht Ivory are, And now behold her double brest, Of Venus Babe the wanton nest, Like Pommels round of marble clear, Where azure veins well mix'd appear; With dearest top of porphiry, Betwixt which two a way doth lie; A way more worthy beauties fame Then that which bears the Milky name; That leads unto the joyous field, Which doth unspotted Lillies yield; But Lillies such, whose native smell, All Indian Odours doth excell. Her hands would make a Tyger meek, So soft, so delicate, and sleek; That we from hence might justly prove, Nature wore Lillies for a Glove. Where whiteness doth for ever sit, Nature her self enameld it, Wherewith a strange compact doth lie, Warm snow, moist pearl, sost ivory. There fall those Saphir colour'd brooks, Which conduit-like with curious crooks, Sweet Ilands make in that sweet Land; As for the fingers of that hand, (The bloody shafts of Cupids war) With Amethyst they headed are. Her Chastity. HEr cool thoughts feel no hot desires, Serving not Venus flames, but Vesta's fires: In wanton dalliance such, as untill death, Never sinelt any but her Husbands breath. Jupiter would court her, did he know a shape Would tempt her chastity, unto a Rape; Who when her lawful sports she doth begin, Still blushing, thinketh her own kisses sin.
On her Beauty. WHen that my Mistress looks my sight doth grace, She seems to sway an Empire in her face; Nature her self, did her own self admire, As oft as she were pleased to attire Her in her native lustre, and confess, Her dressing was her chiefest comliness: Where every limb takes like a face, Built with that comely and majestick grace; One accent, from whose lips the blood more warms Then all Medea's exorcisms and charms. He that since Nature her great work began, She made to be the mirror of a man: That when she meant to form some matchless limb, Still for a pattern took some part from him; And jealous of her coming, brake the mould. In his proportion, done the best she could, If she discourse, her lip such accents breaks, As love turn'd air, breaths from him as he speaks. She maketh Jove invent a new disguise, Inspite of Juno's watchful jealousie: Whose every part doth also reinvite The coldest most decayed appetite: And shall be Nurse, as mighty Juno swears, To the next bright hair'd Cupid that she bears. On a fair and richly attir'd Lady at a Mask. IN one Heav'n many Stars, but never yet In one Star many Heav'ns, till now, were met; Her Orient cheeks and lips exceeded his, That leapt into the water for a kiss Of his own shadow; and despising many, Dy'd ere he could enjoy the love of any. Had wild Hippolitus this beauty seen, Pierc'd with his Darts, he had enamour'd been. The wealth she wore about her, seem'd to hide Not to adorn her native beauties pride.
Though there bright pearls from Erythrean Shore, With silver Ganges, and Hydaspes store; And chearful Emralds, gather'd from the green Arabian Rocks, were in full splendor seen; Pale Onyx, Jaspers of a various dye, And Diamonds darkned by her brighter eye; The Saphirs blew, by her more azure-veins, Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains; The blushing Rubies seem'd to lose their dye, When her more ruby lips were moving by; It seem'd so well became her all she wore, She had not robb'd at all the creatures store: But had been Natures self there to have show'd What she on creatures could or had bestow'd. And Jupiter would revel in her bower, Were he to spend another golden shower. Song. CElia, thy sweet Angels face May be call'd a heavenly place; The whiteness of the starry way, Nature did on thy forehead lay? But thine eyes have brightness won, Not from the Stars but from the Sun. The blushing of the morn, In thy Rosie cheeks is worn; The Musick of the Heav'nly Spheres, In thy soul winning voice appears: Happy were I, had I like Atlas, grace So fair a Heav'n with mine arms to embrace. The Queen of Fairies. COme follow, follow me, You Fairy Elves that be; Which Circle on the Green, Come follow me your Queen:
Hand in hand, let's dance a round, For this place is Fairy ground. When Mortals are at rest, And snorting in their nest; Unheard and unespy'd Through Key-holes we do glide: Over Tables, Stools and Shelves, We trip it with our Fairy Elves. And if the House be foul, Or Platter, Dish, or Bowl; Up stairs we nimbly creep, And find the sluts asleep: There we pinch their arms and thighs None escapes nor none espies. But if the house be swept, And from uncleanness kept; We praise the Houshold-maid: And surely she is paid: For we do use before we go, To drop a Tester in her Shoe. Upon a Mushrom's head, Our table we do spread; A Corn of Rie, or Wheat, Is Manchet which we eat: Pearly drops of dew we drink, In Acorn Cups fill'd to the brink. The brains of Nightingales, The unctious dew of Snailes, Between two Nut-shels stew'd, Is meat that's easily chew'd; And the beards of little Mice Do make a feast of wondrous price. On tops of dewie grass, So nimbly do we pass, The young and tender stalk,
Ne're bends when we do walk: Yet in the morning may be seen, Where we the night before have been. The Grashopper and Flie, Serve for our minstrelsie; Grace said, we dance a while, And so the time beguile: And when the Moon doth hide her head, The Gloe-worm lights us home to bed. Cupid Contemn'd. CUpid thou art a sluggish Boy, and dost neglect thy calling; Thy Bow and Arrows are a toy thy monarchy is falling. Unless thou dost recall thy self, and take thy tools about thee; Thou wilt be scorn'd by every Elf, and all the world will flout thee. Rouze up thy spirit like a God, and play the Archer finely; Let none escape thy Shaft or Rod, 'gainst thee have spoke unkindly. So may'st thou chance to plague that heart, That cruelly hath made me smart. Bootless Complaint. THough bootless I must needs complain, my faults are so extream: I loved and was belov'd again, yet all was but a dream, For as that love was quickly got, so was it quickly gone; I'le love no more a flame so hot, I'le rather let't alone.
The Departure. WE must not love as others do, With sighs and tears as we were two; Though with this outward form we part, We find each other in our heart. What search hath found a being, where I am not, if that thou be there? True love hath wings, and will assoon, Survey the World, as Sun or Moon; And every where our triumph keep: Our absence which makes others weep, Shews it thereby a power is given To love on Earth, as they in Heaven. To a Lady in Prison. LOok out bright eyes, and clear the air, even in shadows you are fair; Caged beauty is like fire, that breakes out clearer still, and higher: Though the body be confin'd, and soft Love a prisoner bound; Yet the beauty of your mind, neither check nor chain hath found. Look out nobly then, and dare Even the fetters that you wear. To Sorrow. Sorrow why dost thou seek to tempt my quiet soul, to misery and wo; My constant thoughts from thine assaults exempt Inur'd to fortunes crosses long ago: Go seek out some who doth affect thy pain, If none thou find'st, return to me again. When elder years witness my race as run, and hoary locks my hollow temples fill;
When I shall sit and say, the world is done; sorrow return, and satisfie thy will: Till then, go seek out some who affects thy pain, If none thou find'st, return to me again. Constancy resolved. COme constant hearts that so prevail, That every passion puts in bail; My innocence shall dare as far, To bid the Tyrant open war: If warm'd with pride he kindle fires, We'l drown them in our chaste desires, If he assail with Dart and Bow, We'l hide them in the hills of snow: So shall his heart plagu'd, mourn, and die, While we smile at his memory; And keep our hearts, our eyes, and ears, Free from vain sighs, sad groans, and tears. Lose no time. LOse no time, nor youth, but be Kind to men, as they to thee; The fair Lillies that now grow In thy cheeks, and purely show: The Cherry and the Rose that blow, If too long they hand and waste, Winter comes that all will blast: Thou art ripe, full ripe for Men, In thy sweets be gather'd then. Song. NOt Roses couch'd within a lilly bed, are those commixtures that depaint thy face; Nor yet the white that silver Hyems head, mix'd with the dewy mornings purple grace:
but thou, whose face my senses captive led, Whom I erst fondly deem'd of heavnly race; Hast from my guiltless blood which thou hast shed, And envious paleness, got thy white and red. Song. REad in the Roses the sad story, Of my hard fate, and your own glory; In the white you may discover The paleness of a fainting Lover: In the red, the flames still feeding On my heart, with fresh wounds bleeding. The white will tell you how I languish, And the red express my anguish; The frown that on your brows recided, Have the Roses thus divided: O let your smiles but clear the weather, And then they both shall grow together. Dying to Live. YOung Thirsis laid in Phillis lap, and gazing on her eye; Tyought life too mean for such good hap, and fain the Lad would die. When Phillis who the force did prove of Love, as well as he, Cry'd to him, Stay a while my Love, and I will die with thee. So did these happy Lovers die, but with so little pain, That both to life immediately return'd, to die again.
Who his Mistress is. WIll you know my Mistress face? 'tis a Garden full of Roses When the Spring in every place: white and blushing red discloses; 'Tis a Paradise, where all That attempt the fruit, must fall. Will you know her forehead fair, 'tis heavenly living Sphere; Under which the veins like air, all Celestial blew appear: But those burning Suns, her Eyes, He that dares live under, dies. Will you know her body now, 'tis a tall ship under sail; From the rudder to the prow, nothing but Imperial: But that foolish man that stears, Fills his Compass by his fears. Shall I now her mind declare, 'tis a body arm'd for war; Marching in proportion fair: till the Lover hopes too far: Then her eyes give fire, and all Within level, helpless fall, In praise of Fools. FOols they are the only nation, Worth mens envy, or admiration Free from love and sorrow taking, Themselves and others merry making. O, who would not be! He, He, He.
All they speak or do, is sterling, your Fool he is your great mans darling; And your Ladies sport and pleasure, tongue and babble are his treasure. Even his face begetth laughter, and he speaks truth free from slaughter; He's the grace of every feast, And sometimes is the chiefest guest; Hath his Trencher and his Stool; When Wit waits upon the Fool. O! who would not be? Hee, Hee, Hee. The Impolitick Beauty. CLoris I wish, that envy were As just, as pity doth appear Unto thy state; whereby I might Rob others, to give thee more delight: But your too free, though lovely charms, In others glory breeds your harms. But since you so admit, So many rivals to your wit; Unthriftily you throw away The pleasures of your beauties sway. Which loosely scatter'd so on many, Securely fastens not on any. And then your beauty doth discover, Many that gaze, but ne're a Lover; And your so greedy hands destroy, What you would your self enjoy. So Princes by Ambition thirsty grown, In chase of many Kingdoms, lose their own.
YOU must suppose it to be Easter Holy-days: for now Sisly and Dol, Kate and Peggie, Moll and Nan are march∣ing to Westminster, with a Lease of Apprentices before them; who go rowing themselves along with their t Arms to make more haste, and now and then with a gre uckender wipe away the dripping that bastes their . At the door they meet a croud of Wappin Sea- Southwark Broom-men, the Inhabitants of the Bank-side, and utcher or two prickt in among them; there a while they nd gaping for the Master of the Shew, staring upon the Subs of their delight, just as they view the painted Cloth before they go in to the Puppet-play: by and by they hear the Keys, which rejoyces their hearts like the sound of the Pancake-bell; for now the Man of comfort peeps over the spikes, and beholding such a learned auditory, opens the Gates of Paradise, and by that time they are half got into the first Chappel (for time is then very precious) he lifts up his voice among the Tombs, and begins his lurry in manner and form following: HEre lies Will. de Valence, a right good Earl of Pembroke; And this is his monument which you see, I'le swear upon a Book: He was High Marshal of England, when Harry the Third did raign: But this you may take upon my word, that he'l ne're be so again. Here the Lord Edward Talbot lies, the Town of Shrewsbury's Earle, Together with his Countess fair, that was a delicate Girle. The next to him there lieth one Sir Richard Peckshall, hight; Of whom we always first do say, he was a Hampshire Knight. And now to tell the more of him, there lies under this stone His two Wives, and his Daughters four, of whom I knew not one.
Sir Bernard Brockhurst there doth le, Lord Chamberlain to Queen An: Queen Ann was Richard the Second's Queen, and he was King of Englan. Sir Francis Hollis, the Lady Frances, the same was Suffolks Dutchess, Two children of Edward the Third lie here in Deaths cold clutches. This is King Edward the Third's brother, of whom our Records tell Nothing of note, nor say they whether, he be in Heaven or Hell. This same was John of Eldeston; he was no Costermonger, But Cornwals Earl. And here's one dy'd 'cause she could live no longer. The Lady Mohum Dutches of York, and Duke of York's Wife also; But Death resolving to cuckold the Duke, made her lie with him here below. The Lady Ann Ross, but note thee well that she in child-bed dy'd. The Lady Marquess of Winchester lies buried by her side. Now think your penny well spent good folks, and that ye are not beguil'd; Within this Cup doth lie the heart of a French Embassadours Child: Nor can I tell how came to pass, on purpose or by chance; The bowels they lie underneath, the body is in France. There's Oxford's Countess, and there also the Lady Burley, her Mother;
And there her Daughter, a Countess too, lie close one by another. These once were bonny Dames, and though there were no Coaches then, Yet could they jog their tails themselves, or had them jogg'd by men. But wo is me, these High-born sinners, that strutted once so stoutly; Are now laid low, and cause they can't; Their statues pray devoutly. This is the Dutchess of Somerset, by name the Lady Ann; Edward the Sixth her Lord protected, and he carried himself like a man. In this fair Monument which you see, adorn'd with so many Pillars, Doth lie the Countess of Buckingham, and her Husband, Sir George Villars. This old Sir George was Grandfather, the Countess she was Granny To the great Duke of Buckingham, who often fox'd King Jamny. Sir Robert Eatam a Scotch Knight, this man was Secretary, And scribled Complements for two Queens; Queen Ann, and eke Queen Mary. This was the Countess of Lenox, I clep'd the Lady Marget King Jame's Grandmother, but yet 'gainst death she had no Target. This was Queen Mary, Queen of Scots, whom Buchanan doth bespatter, She lost her head at Fothringham, whatever was the matter.
The Mother of our Seventh Henry, this is, that lieth hard by; She was the Countess wot ye well, of Richmond and of Darby. Harry the Seventh himself lies here, with his fair Queen beside him; He was the Founder of this Chappel, Oh! may no ill betide him? Therefore his Monument's in brass, you'l say that very much is. The Duke of Richmond and Lenox there lieth with his Dutchess; And here they stand upright in a Press, with bodies made of wax; With a Globe and a Wand in either hand, and their Robes upon their backs. Here lies the Duke of Buckingham, and the Dutchess his Wife: Whom Felton stab'd at Portsmouth Town, and so he lost his life. Two Children of King James these are, which Death keeps very chary; Sophia in the Cradle lies, and this is the Lady Mary. And this is Queen Elizabeth, How the Spaniards did infest her? Here she lies buried with Queen Mary, and now she agrees with her Sister. To another Chappel now come we, the people follow and chat; This is the Lady Cottington, and the people cry, Who's that? This is the Lady Frances Sidney, The Countess of Sussex is she. And this the Lord Dudley Carleton is, and then they look up and see.
Sir Thomas Bromley lieth here, Death would not him reprieve; With his four Sons, and Daughters four, yet I heard no body grieve. The next is Sir John Tullerton, and this is his Lady I trow, And this is Sir John Duckering with his fine Bed-fellow. That's Earl of Bridgewater in the middle, who makes no use of his bladder; Although his Countess lies so near him, and so we go up a ladder. King Edward the First, that gallant blade, lies underneath this stone; And this is the Chair which he did bring, a good while ago from Scone. In this same Chair till now of late, our Kings and Queens were crown'd; Under this Chair, another stone doth lie upon the ground. On that same stone did Jacob sleep, instead of a doun Pillow; And after that, 'twas hither brought by some good honest Fellow. Richard the Second he lies here, and his first Queen, Queen Ann. Edward the Third lies here hard by, I, there was a gallant man: For this was his two-handed Sword, a Blade both true and trusty; The French mens blood was ne're wip'd off, which makes it look so rusty. He lies here again with his Queen Philip, A Dutch Woman by Record;
But that's all one, for now alas! his Blade's not so long as his Sword. King Edward the Confessor lies within this Monument fine; I'me sure, quoth one, a worser Tomb must serve both me and mine. Harry the Fifth lies there. And there doth lie Queen Elenore; To our first Edward she was Wife, Which is more then ye knew before. Henry the Third lies there entomb'd, he was Herb John in Pottage; Little he did, but still reign'd on, although his Sons were at age. Fifty six years he reigned King, ere he the Crown would lay by; Only we praise him, 'cause he was last Builder of this Abby. Here Thomas Cecil lies: Who's that? why, 'tis the Earl of Exeter. And this his Countess is to die Lifes sweet. how it perplexed her. Here Henry Cary, Lord Hunsdon rests, what a noise a makes with his name? He was Lord Chamberlain unto Queen Elizabeth of great fame. And here one William Colchester lies of a certainty, An Abbot he was of Westminster, Plain deal∣ing's a Jewel. and he that says no, doth lie. This is the Bishop of Durham, by Death here laid in Fetters; Henry the Seventh lov'd him well, and made him write his Letters.
Sir Thomas Ruthat, what of him? poor Gentleman not a word; Only they buried him here. But now behold that man with a Sword. Humphrey de Boliun, who though he were not born with me in the same Town; Yet I can tell, he was Earl of Essex, of Hereford, and Northampton; He was High Constable of England, as History well expresses. But now pretty Maids be of good chear, we are going up to the Presses. And now the Presses open stand, and ye see them all arow: But more is never said of these, than what is said below. Henry the Seventh and his fair Queen, Edward the First and his Queen; Henry the Fifth here stands upright, and his fair Queen, was this Queen. The noble Prince, Prince Henry, He does not run atilt. King James's eldest Son; King James, Queen Ann, Queen Elizabeth, and so this Chappel's done. Now down the stairs come we again, the man goes first with a staff; Perchance one tumbles down two steps, and then the people laugh, This is the great Sir Francis Vere, That so the Spaniards curri'd; Four Collonels support his Arms, and here his Body's buried.
That statue against the wall with one eye, He had two eyes, if he could have kept them. is Major General Norrice; He beat the Spaniards cruelly, as is affirm'd in Stories. His six Sons there hard by him stand, each one was a Commander; To shew he could his Lady serve as well as the Hollander. And there doth Sir John Hollis rest, who was the Major General To Sir John Norrice, that brave blade, and so they go to Dinner all. For now the Shew is at an end, all things are done and said; The Citizen pays for his Wife, The Prentice for the Maid. The Hector's Farewell. GOod people all, I pray give ear, my words concern ye much, I will relate a Hector's life, pray God ye be not such. There was a Gallant in the Town, a brave and jolly Sporter, There was no Lady in the Land, but he knew how to court her. His person comely was, and tall, more comely have been few men; Which made him well beloved of men; but more belov'd of women.
Besides all this I can you tell, that he was well endow'd With many graces of the mind, Which Heav'n on him bestow'd. He was as liberal as the Sun, his Gold he freely spent; Whether it were his own Estate, or that it were him lent. For valor, he a Lion was, I say a Lion bold; For he did fear no living man that Sword in hand did hold. And when that he with glittring blade did e're assail his foes; Full well I trow they did not miss their belly full of blows. A Frenchman once assaulted him, and told him that he ly'd.; For which with Quart-pot he him slew, And so the French man dy'd. Three Danes, six Germans, and five Swedes met him in Lane of Drury; Who cause they took of him the Wall, did kill them in his fury. Upon his body I have heard, full many a ear he bore, His skin did look like Sattin pinckt, with gashes many a score, Oh had he lost that noble blood For Countries liberty! Where could all England then have found so brave a man as he?
But wo is me these vertues great, were all eclips'd with vice; Just so the Sun that now shines bright, Is darkned in a trice. For he did swagger, drink, and game, indeed, what would he not? His Psalter, and his Catechize he utterly forgot. But he is gone, and we will let no more of him be said; They say 'tis nought to reveal The vices of the dead. Beside we have some cause to think, that he may scape tormenting; For the old Nurse that wach'd with him, did say he dy'd repenting. The Second Part. FArewell three Kings, where I have spent full many an idle hour; Where ost I won, but ne're did lose if it were within my power. Where the raw Gallants I did chuse, like any Ragamuffin: But now I'me sick and cannot play, who'l trust me for a Coffin. Farewel my dearest Piccadilly, Notorious for great Dinners; Oh, what a Tennis Court was there! alas! too good for sinners. Farewel Spring-garden, where I us'd to piss before the Ladies; Poor Souls! who'l be their Hector now to get 'em pretty Babies?
Farewel the glory of Hide-Park, which was to me so dear; Now since I can't enjoy it more, would I were buried there. Farewel tormenting Creditors, whose scores did so perplex me; Well! Death I see for something's good, for now you'l cease to vex me. Farewel true brethren of the Sword, all Martial men and stout; Farewel dear Drawer at the Fleece, I cannot leave thee out. My time draws on, I now must go from this beloved light; Remember me to pretty Sue, and so dear friends good night. With that, on Pillow low he laid his pale and drooping head: And straight e're Cat could lick her ear, poor Hector he was dead. Now God bless all that will be blest, God bless the Inns of Courts; And God bless Davenants Opera, which is the sport of sports. On the Death of Jo. W. WHen rich men die, whose purses swell with silver and with gold; They straight shall have a Monument, their memories to uphold. Yet all that men can say of them, they lived so unknown;
Is but to write upon their Tombs, here lieth such a one. When Joseph, who died poor, (though Simon was his Porter) Shall die as if he ne're had been, and want his worths reporter. Full many a Can he often drank, In Fleet-street in the Cellar; Yet he must unremembred dye, like some base Fortune-teller. He made the Ballad of the Turk, and sung it in the street; And shall he dye, and no man heed it? no friends, it is not meet. He lived in a Garret high, as high as any Steeple; And shall he dye? alas poor Jo! unknown unto the People. He had no Curtains to his Bed, yet still paid for his quart, While Coin did last; and shall he dye? And no man lay't to heart. He lov'd his Dog, Icleped Trou, his Dog he loved Pye; Shall Tobit live for his Dogs sake? and Jo neglected, dye. He hated all the Female sex, who knows his private grudge; And must he therefore dye forgot? I leave the World to judge. Each Term he ask'd his Father Blessing, most gravely and demurely, Who then did give him Shillings Ten; and must he dye obscurely?
No Jo, I'le bid peace to thy bones, Though they were sick and crazie, And must be quite made new again, Before that Heav'n can raise thee. And since th'art gone, and there is none, who knoweth where to find thee; I'le fix this truth upon thy name, Thou didst leave Wit behind thee. Wit that shall make thy name to last, when Tarletons Jests are rotten; And George a Green, and Mother Bunch, shall all be quite forgotten. Now if you ask where Jo is gone, you think I cannot tell; Oh he is blest! for he was poor, and could not go to Hell. But for his Father rich in Bags, the Devil ought to have him; That took no care of such a Son, till 'twas too late to save him. The Song of the Caps. THe Wit hath long beholding bin Unto the Cap, to keep it in; Let now the Wit fly out amain With Praise, to quit the Cap again; The Cap that owes the highest part, Obtain'd that place by due desert. For any Cap what e're it be, Is still the sign of some Degree. The Cap doth stand, each man doth show, Above a Crown; but Kings below. The Cap is nearer Heaven than we, A greater sign of Majesty;
When off the Cap we chance to take, Both Head and Feet obeysance make. For any Cap, &c. The Monmouth Cap, the Saylors Thrum, And that wherein the Saylors come. The Physick, Law, the Cap Divine, The same that crowns the Muses nine. The Cap that Fools do countenance, The goodly Cap of Maintenance. And any Cap, &c. The sickly Cap, both plain and wrought, The Fudling Cap, however brought. The Quilted, Furr'd, the Velvet, Sattin, For which so many Pates learn Latin. The Crewel Cap, the Fustean Pate, The Periwig, a Cap of late. Thus any Cap, &c. The Souldiers that the Monmouth wear, On Castle tops their Ensigns rear. The Saylors with their Thrum do stand On higher place than all the Land. The Tradesman Cap aloft is born, By vantage of (some say) his horn. Thus any Cap, &c. The Physicks Cap to dust may bring, Without controll the greatest King. The Lawyers Cap hath heavenly might, To make a crooked Cause stand right: Which being round and endless, knows To make as endless any Cause. Thus any Cap, &c. Both East and West, and North, and South, Where e're the Gospel finds a mouth, The Cap divine doth thither look; The Square-like Scholars and their Book: The rest are round, but this is square;
To shew that they more stable are. Thus any Cap, &c. The Motley man a Cap doth wear, That makes him fellow for a Peer; And its no slender part of wit, To act the fool where great men sit: But Oh the Cap of London town! I wis 'tis like the Giants crown. Thus any Cap, &c. The sick mans Cap not wrought with silk, Is like repentance white as milk. When Hats in Church drop off in haste, This Cap ne're leaves the head uncaste. The sick mans Cap if wrought, can tell, Though he be ill, his state is well. Thus any Cap, &c. The Fudling Cap, God Bacchus might, Turns night to day and day to night; Yet spendors it prefers to more, By seeing double all their store. The Fur'd and Quilted Cap of age, Can make a mouldy Proverb sage. Thus any Cap, &c. Though Fustean Caps be slender wear, The head is of no better gear. The Crowel Cap is knit like Hose, For them whose zeal takes cold in the nose Whose purity doth judge it meet, To cloth alike both head and feet. This Cap would fain, but cannot be, The only Cap of no degree. The Satin and the Velvet hive, Unto a Bishoprick doth drive: Nay when a file of Caps y'are seen in, The Square Cap this, and then a Linen. This treble may raise some hope, If fortune smile to be a Pope. Thus any Cap, &c.
The Periwing, Oh that declares! The rise of flesh the loss of hairs, And none but Graduates can proceed In sin so far, till this they need. Before the Prince none cover'd are, But those that to themselves go bare. This Cap of all the Caps that be, Is now the sign of high degree. The Jolly Ale-Drinker. I Cannot eat but little meat, my stomach is not good; But sure I think, that I can drink with him that wears a hood: Though I go bare, take ye no care, I nothing am a cold, I stuff my skin, so full within, with jolly good Ale and old. Back and sides go bare, go bare, both foot and hand go cold; But Belly, God send thee good Ale enough, whether it be new or old. I love no Rost, but a nut-brown Tost, and a Crab laid in the fire; A little bread, shall serve my stead, for much I not desire. No frost or snow, no wind I trow, can hurt me if I would; I am so wrapt, and throughly lapt with jolly good Ale and old. Back and sides, &c. And Tib my Wife, that as her life loveth good Ale to seek; Full oft drinks she, till you may see the tears run down her cheek. Then doth she trowl to me the Bowl, even as a Mault-worm should;
And saith, Sweet-heart, I took my part of this jolly good Ale, and old. Back and sides &c. Now let them drink, till they nod and wink, even as good Fellows should do; They shall not miss, to have the bliss, good Ale doth bring men to. And all poor Souls, that have scowr'd Bowls, or have them lustily trowl'd; God save the lives of them and their Wives, whether they be young or old. Back and sides go bare, &c. The Shepherd's Song in praise of his God Pan, who prefers him before the Sun. THou that art call'd the bright Hiperion, Wert thou more strong then Spanish Gerion, That had three heads upon one man; Compare not with our great God Pan. They call thee Son of bright Latona, But girt thee in thy orrd Zona; Sweat, baste, and broil, as best thou can, Thou art not like our Dripping Pan, What cares he for the great God Neptune; With all the broth that he is kept in; Vulcan or Jove he scorns to bow to, To Hermes, or th'Infernal Pluto. Then thou that art the Heavens bright Eye, Or burn, or scorch, or boil, or fry: Be thou a God, or be thou Man, Thou art not like our Frying Pan. They call thee Phoebus, God of Day, Years, Moneths, Weeks, Hours, of March and May: Bring up thy Army in the Van, We'l meet thee with our Pudding Pan.
Thy self in thy bright Chariot settle, With Skillet arm'd, brass Pot, or Kettle; With Jug, black Pot, with Glass or Can, No talking to our Warming Pan. Thou hast thy beams thy brows to deck, Thou hast thy Daphne at thy beck: Pan hath his horns, Syrinx and Phillis; And I his Swain, my Amarillis. Song on Women. TRust not a Woman when she cries, For she'l pump water from her eyes With a wet finger; and in faster showers, Then April when he rains down Flowers. As out of Wormwood Bees suck honey; As from poor Clients Lawyers firk money; As Parseley from a rosted Coney: So though the day be ne're to sunny. If Wives will have it rain down, then it drives; The calmest Husbands make the most stormy Wives. On an Excellent Race-Horse. COme Muses all that dwell nigh the Fountain, made by the winged Horses heel; Which firk'd with his Rider over each Mountain, let me your gallopping raptures feel. I do not sing of Fleas, nor Frogs, Nor of the well-mouth'd Hunting-dogs; Let me be just, all praises must Be giv'n to well-breath'd Jilian Thrust. 2. Young Constable and Kil-deer's famous, the Cap, the Mouse, the Noddy gray, With nimble Pegabrigg, you cannot shame us,
With Spaniard nor with Spinola; Hill climing white Rose praised doth not lack, Handsom Dunbar, and yellow Jack: But if I be just, all praises must Be given to well-breath Jilian Thrust. 3. Sure spurr'd Sloven, true runing Robin of young Shaver, I do not say less; Strawbery, Soam, and let Spider pop in, fine Brackley, and brave running Bess, Victorious too was Herring Shotten, And Spin in's arse is not forgotten. But if I be just, all honour must Be given unto Jilian Thrust. 4. Now Gentleman all I pray you hark yet, to winning Makarel, fine mouth'd Freak; Bay Tarral that won the Cup at New-market; thundring Tempest, Black-dragon eke; Precious Sweet-lips, I do not lose, Nor Toby with his golden Shoes: But if I be just, all honour must Be given to well-breath Jilian Thrust. The Clown's Description of his Mistress. HAppy am I in Mops love, that ever I bespoke her; Whose hair's as fine as any hemp, and colour'd like red okr. Whose hammer-head and beetle-brows. will never me deceive; If I have any Nail to drive, or any Block to cleave. Those eye-holes, if thy eyes were out, would serve as well for Sawcers; But thy plump cheeks puft up do hang like to a pair of Dossers. And from this Limbeck the rare Juice,
continually that flows: Lest thou should lose one drop of it, thou hast a Bottle-nose. Thy chaps do water, I protest, as they were greas'd with tallow; Thy scattering teeth enamel'd are, with blew, and black, and yellow: When thou dost talk, I do admire, thy stumbling and thy trips; Thou art no great blab of thy tongue, but a little of thy lips. The rubies, and the carbuncles, on thy face shine most Star-like; But oh! thy spicy fragrant breath, smells like a bed of Garlike. Thy comely breasts to me appear like Mole-hills newly raised; Which for their mountainous extent, are highly to be praised. Her sides be long, her belly lank; of her legs what should I say? But that she feels well in the flank, her feet themselves display. The Watch-mens Song. SIng and rejoyce, the day is gone, and the wholesome night appears, In which the Constable on throne of trusty Bench, doth with his peers The comely Watch-men, sound of health, sleep for the good ot'h Commonwealth. 'Tis his office to do so, being bound to keep the peace, And in quiet sleep you know, mortal jars and lewd brauls cease.
A Constable may then for's health, Sleep for the good ot'h Commonwealth. Unless with nobler thoughts inspir'd, to the Tavern he resort; Wherewith sack his senses fir'd, he raigns as Fairy King in Court: Drinking many a lusty health, Then sleep for the good ot'h Commonwealth. With a comely Girle, whom late he had taken in his watch; Oft he steals out of the Gate, her at the old sport to match: Though it may impair his health, He sleeps for the good ot'h Commonwealth. Who then can Constables deny, to be persons brave and witty; Snce they only are the eye, the glory, the delight o'th City: That with Staff and Lanthorn light: A like-black Pluto Princes of the night. The Jovial Companion. COme let's drink, the time invites, Winter and cold weather; For to pass away long nights, and to keep our wits together: Better far thna Cards or Dice, Or Jack's balls that quaint delights, Made up with fan and feather. Of great actions on the Seas, we will ne're be jealous; Give us liquor that will please, and 'twill make us braver fellows, Then the stout Venetian Fleet,
When the Turk and they do meet, Within their Dardanello's. Mahomet was not Divine, but a simple Wigeon; To forbid the use of Wine, unto those of his Religion; Falling sickness was his shame, And his Tomb shall have the same, For all is whispring Pigeon. Therefore water we'l desclaim; mankinds adversary; Once it caus'd the worlds whole same in the deluge to miscarry. Nay this enemy of joy, Seeks with envy to destroy, And murther good Canary. Valentien that famous Town, stood the French mens wonder; Water it employ'd to drown, so to force their Troops asunder: Turain cast a helpless look, Whilst the crafty Spaniard took La Ferto, and his plunder, See thee Squibs, and hear the Bells the fifth day of November; The Preacher a sad Story tells, and with horror doth remember, How some Dry-brain'd Traitor wrought Arts, that might have ruine brought. To King, and every member. He that drinks hath no such thoughts, black and void of reason; We take care to fill our vaults with Wine for every season: And with many a chearful cup We blow one another up, And that's our only treason.
A New Ballad of St. George for England, and the Dragon. WHY should we boast of Arthur and his Knights, Knowing how many men have performed fights Or why should we speak of Sir Lancelor du Lake, Or Sir Tristram du Leon, that fought for Ladies sake: Read old Stories, and there you shall see, How St. George, St. George did make the Dragon flee; St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France, Sing Hony soit qui maly pense. To speak of the Monarchs, it were too long to tell; And likewise of the Romans, how far they did excel; Hannibal and Scipio they many a field did fight; Orlando Furioso he was a valiant Knight; Romulus and Rhemus were those that Rome did build, But St. George, St. George the Dragon he hath kill'd. St. George, &c. Jephtha and Gideon they led their men to fight, The Gibeonites and Ammonites they put them all to flight; Hercules's labour was in the Vale of Bass, And Sampson slew a thousand with the Jaw bone of an Ass; And when that he was blind, pull'd the temple to the ground; But St. George, St. George the Dragon did confound. St. George, &c. Valentine and Orson they came of Pippin's blood; Alphred and Aldrecus they were brave Knights and good; The four Sons of Ammon that fought with Charlemain, Sir Hugh de Burdeaux, and Godfrey de Bolaigne; These were all French Knights, the Pagans did convert; But St. George, St. George pull'd forth the Dragons heart. St. George, &c. Henry the Fifth he conquered all France; He quarttered their Arms his honour to advance; He razed their walls, and pull'd their Cities down;
And garnished his head with a double treble Crown; He thumped the French, and after home he came; But St. George, St. George he made the Dragon tame. St George, &c. St. David you know, loves Leeks and tosted Cheese; And Jason was the man brought home the Golden Fleece; St. Patrick you know he was St. Georges Boy, Seven years he kept his Horse, and then stole him away; For which knavish act, a Slave he doth remain; But St. George, St. George the Dragon he hath slain. St. George, &c. Tamberlain the Emperour in Iron Cage did crown, With his bloody Flags displayed before the Town; Scanderbag magnanimous Mahomets Bashaw did dread; Whose Victorious bones were worn when he was dead; His Bedlerbegs, his Corn-like drags, George Castriote was he call'd But St. George, St. George the Dragon he hath mauld. St. George, &c. Ottoman the Tarter, Cham of Persia's race, The great Mogul, with chests so ful of all his Cloves and Mace; The Grecian youth, Bucephalus he manly did bestride; But those with all their Worthies nine, S. George did them de∣ride; Gustavus Adolphus was Sweedlands warlike King; But St. George, St. George pull'd forth the Dragons sting. St. George, &c. Poldraggon and Cadwallader of Brittish blood do boast; Though John of Gaunt, his foes did daunt, St. George shall rule the rost, Agamemnon, and Cleomedon, and Macedon did feats, But compared to our Champion, they were but meerly cheats; Brave Malta Knights, in Turkish fights their brandish Swords out drew, But St. George met the Dragon, & ran him through & through. St. George, &c. Bidia the Amazon Potius overthrew; As fierce as either Vandal, Goth, Saracen, or Jew; The potent Holophernes, as he lay in his bed, In came wise Judith, and subtly stole his head; Brave Cyclops stout, with Jove he fought, although he showr'd down thunder,
But St. George kill'd the Dragon, was not that a wonder; St. George, &c. Mark Anthony, Ile warrant you, plaid feats with Egypts Queen; Sir Eglamone that valiant Knight, the like was never seen; Grim Gorgons might, was known in sight; Old Bevis most men frighted; The Myrmidons and Prester John, why were not those men knighted? Brave Spinola took in Breda, Nassau did it recover: But St. George St. George he turn'd the Dragon over & over. St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France, Sing Hony soit qui mal y pense. New Song. In Defiance of Drinking-sack WHat a Devil ail our Poets all, For drink, for drink thus always to call? And nothing goes down but drink, Friends, whether are your stomachs flown? That you the noble food disown, That better deserves your ink. Food! I there is a substantial word, And it beget a substantial turd, That breeds grass for Cows and Sheep: The Countrey-bumpkin he comes for it, And at night it rideth in a Charret, When all men are asleep. Alass! for drink, 'tis not worth your meeter, Drink maketh Piss, and piss makes Salt-peeter, That kills and blows up the people. You may drink Clarret, and have the gout, Ile eat, and drink little, and go without, And laugh at the drunken Cripple. Let Lady's the Exchanges range, The Shambles shall be my Exchange, Which I count a noble place:
What do I care for pins or points, Let me behold the solid joynts, That keep up humane race. The noble Sirloins there doth lie, A Joynt well known to satisfie, Though you feed ne're so fiercely: And there you may see the glorious Buttocks Of many a Cow, and many a fat Ox; Oh how they taste with Parseley; The Brisket must not be forgot, 'Tts meat for a Prince, while it is hot, If Cabbage do attend it; Though if the Turneps be of Hackney, I will not covet any Sack nigh, To inspire me to commend it. Nor must we pass the Leg of Mutton, Tis a noble Dish for any Glutton, Although he rul'd an Empire: Whether a Sea of Anchovies sawce, Like Delas Isle, do it imbrace, or serv'd with Capers and Sampire. Your Venson Pasty, if well soakt, If not, I wish the Cook were choakt, What say you to such meat? Capons refus'd, to let it go down, It wisdom gives to the man o'th Gown, Who will feed on't till he sweat. Who will not commend the high-soaring Larks, Or a Pidgeon-pye, worth three or four Marks, With Rabbets all butter'd about? The Woodcock, Partridge, and the Teal, The Pheasant and Turky, which the Commonweal could never be without. There be your Hashes, and Fricasses Which are contemn'd by none but Asses,
And mushroms no meat for Carters; With a thousand more so long to recount, 'Twould make my Song for to surmount The three great Books of Martyrs Nor would I now advise any man, For to extol the glass or can, Least he receive the foil; Should we compare them with pot or kettle, Or ladle, or skimmer of as good mettle, Or grid-iron fit to broil; Or with the spit much us'd at court, Which Vulcan found out, heaven bless him for't, As sing the learned Atticks: And for the Jack, there is no watch, Was ever able for to match The Turn-spit Mathematicks. Nor let the men that drink Paris Wine, Or Sack, which I take to be more Divine, Plead wit, or inspirations; Meat has a more large prerogative, For by it all Professions live, And it multiplies the Nations. The man that drinketh all his life, What can he do unto his wife? Poor soul she lives in quiet? But such a restless quiet 'tis, That never ends, till she doth kiss The man that eats good dyet. The crafty Polititian, Who with his acts doth all he can, The Cellar dores to shut; Must have his boil'd, his bak'd, his rost, Nor will he spare for any cost, To cram his lawless gut. The serious Lawyer, who doth firk Out of his pate full many a quirk,
Refuses all strong liquor; Yet cause his commons are but short, A Clients feast does him no hurt, It will make them talk the quicker. Peace therefore, Broom, for liquor so fierce, The Cooks are angry at thy verse, And ha'sworn the Fidlers to cripple; If against next Term they ha' ne're a new song, Which may to the praise of Meat belong, As well as to that of Tipple. The OLD GILL. IF you will be still, Then tell you I will, Of a lovely old Gill, Dwelt under a hill: Her Locks are like sage, That's well worn with Age, And her visage would swage A stout mans Courage. Teeth yellow as Box, Clean out with the Pox; Her Breath smells like Lox, Or unwiped Nocks: She hath a devilish grin, Long hairs on her chin, To the soul footed Fien, She is nearly a Kin. She hath a beetle brow, Deep Furrows enow, She's ey'd like a Sow, Flat nos'd like a Cow: Lips swarthy and dun, A mouth like a Gun, And her tattle doth run, As swift as the Sun.
On her back stands a Hill, You may place a Wind-mill, And the Farts of her gill, Will make the sails trill: Her neck is much like, The foul swines in the Dike, Against Crab-lice and Tike, A blew pin in her pike. Within this Anno, There dwells an Hurricano, And the rise of her Plano, Vomits smoak like Vulcano: But a pox of her twist, It is always bepist, And the Devil's in his list, That to her Mill brings grist. 'Ware the dint of her dirt, She will give you a flirt, She has always the squirt, She is loose and ungirt: Want of wind makes her pant, Till she fizzle and rant, And the hole in her gant, Is as deep as Levant. Yea deep as any well, A Furnace or Kell, A bottomless cell, Some think it is Hell: But I have spoken my fill, Of my Lovely old Gill, And 'tis taken so ill, I'le throw by my Quill.
The PUDDING. FRom twelve years old, I oft have been told A Pudding it was a delicate bit, I can remember my Mother has said what a delight she had to be fed With a Pudding. Thirteen being past, I long'd for to tast What Nature or Art could make so sweet, For many gay Lasses about my age Perpetually speak on't, that puts me in a rage For a Pudding. Now at Fifteen I often have seen Most Maids to admire it so, That their humour and pride is to say O what a delight they have for to play With a Pudding. When I am among some Wives that are young, Who think they shall never give it due praise, It is sweet, It is good, It is pleasant still They cry, they think they shall ne'r have their fill Of a Pudding. The greater sort of the Town and the Court, When met, their tongues being tip't with Wine, How merry and Jocund their Tattles do run To tell how they ended and how they begun With a Pudding. Some ancient Wives, who most of their lives Have daily tasted of the like food, Now for want of supplies do swear and grumble, That still they'r able enough, to mumble A Pudding.
Now, now I find, cat will to kind Since all my heart and blood is on fire, I am resolv'd whatever comes on't My Fancy no longer shall suffer the want Of a Pudding. For I'le to John who says he has one That's cram'd as close as Cracker or Squib, Who ever is telling me when we do meet Of the wishing desires and sweetness they get In a Pudding. I thought at first, It never would burst, It was as hard as grissel or bone, But by the rouling and trowling about How kindly and sweetly the Marrow flew out Of his Pudding. Well, since I ne'r, was fed with such geer, Untill my John did prove so kind, I made a request to prepare again That I might continue in Love with the strain Of his Pudding. Then straight he brought, what I little thought Could ever have been in its former plight, He rumbl'd and jumbled me ore and ore Till I found he had almost wasted the store Of his Pudding. Then the other mess, I begg'd hin to dress, Which by my Assistance was brought to pass. But by his dulness and moving so slow I quickly perceiv'd the stuffing grew low In his Pudding. Though he grew cold, my Stomach did hold With vigor to relish the other bit, But for all he could do, could not furnish agen, For he swore he had left little more than the skin Of his Pudding.
A Parly, between two WEST-COUNTRIMEN on sight of a WEDDING. I Tell thee Dick where I have been, Where I the rarest things have seen; O things beyond compare! Such sights again cannot be found In any place on English ground, Be it at Wake or Fair. At Charing Cross, hard by the way Where we (thou know'st) do sell our hay, There is a House with stairs; And there did I see coming down, Such Volk as are not in our town, Vortie at least in pairs, Amongst the rest one pest'lent fine, (His beard no bigger though than thine) Walkt on before the rest: Our Landlord looks like nothing to him The King (God bless him) 'twould undo him Should he go still so drest. At Course-a-Park without all doubt, He should have first been taken out By all the maids i'th Town; Though lusty Roger there had been, Or little George upon the green, Or Vincent of the Crown. But wot you what; the youth was going To make an end of his woing, The Parson for him staid, Yet by his leave (for all his hast) He did not so much wish all past (Perchance) as did the Maid. The Maid (and thereby hangs a tale) For such a Maid no Whitson-Ale
Could ever yet produce: No grpe that's kindly ripe, could be So round, so plump, so soft as she, Nor half so full of juice Her finger was so small, the Ring Would not stay on which he did bring, It was too wide a peck: And to say truth (for out it must) It lookt like the great Collar (just) About our young Colts neck. Her feet beneath her petticoat, Like little mice stole in and out, As if they fear'd the light: But Dick she dances such a way, No Sun upon an Easter day Is half so fine a sight. He would have kist her once or twice, But she would not she was so nice, She would not do't in sight; And then she lookt as who would say, I will do what I list to day; And you shall do't at night. Her cheeks so rare a white was on, No Dazy makes comparison (Who sees them is undone:) For streaks of red were mingled there; Such as are on a Katherine Pear, The side that's next the Sun. Her lips were red, and one was thin Compar'd to that was next her Chin (Some Bee had stung it newly:) But (Dick) her Eyes so guard her Face I durst no more upon them gaze, Than on the Sun in July. Her mouth so small when she does speak, Thou'dst swear her teeth her words did break, That they might passage get; But she so handled still the matter,
They came as good as ours, or better, And are not spent a whit. If wishing should be any sin The Parson himself had guilty bin. (She lookt that day so purely) And did the youth so oft the feat At night, as some did in conceit, It would have spoil'd him surely. Passion, Oh me! how I run on! Ther's that that would be thought upon (I trow) besides the Bride, The business of the Kitchin's great, For it is fit that men should eat; Nor was it there deny'd. Just in the nick the Cook knockt thrice, And all the Waiters in a trice His summons did obey, Each Serving man with dish in hand Marcht boldly up like our Train-band, Presented and away. When all the meat was on the Table, What man of knife or teeth was able To stay to be intreated? And this the very reason was Bofore the Parson could say grace, The company was seated. Now hats fly off, and youths carouse; Healths first go round and then the House; The Brides came thick and thick; And when 'twas nam'd anothers health, Perhaps he made it hers by stealth; (And who could help it, Dick?) O'th suddain up they rise and dance; Then sit again, and sigh, and glance: Then dance again and kiss: Thus sev'ral ways the time did pass,
Whil'st every woman wisht her place, And every man wisht his. By this time all were stoln aside, To councell and undress the Bride; But that he must not know: But 'twas thought he guest her mind, And did not mean to stay behind Above an hour or so. When in he came (Dick) there she lay Like new-fallen snow melting away, ('Twas time I trow to part) Kisses were now the onely stay, Which soon she gave, as who should say God B'w'y'! with all my heart. But just as Heavens would have to cross it In came the Bride-maids with the Posset, The Bride-groom eat in spight; For had he left the woman to't; It would have cost two hours to do't, Which were too much that night. At length the Candle's out and now, All that they had not done they do; What that is, you can tell; But I believe it was no more, Than thou and I have done before With Bridget and with Nell. The OLD and NEW COURTIER. WIth an Old Song made by an Old Antient pate, Of an old worshipful Gentleman who had a great Estate: Who kept an Old house at a bountiful rate, And an Old Porter to relieve the Poor at his Gate, Like an old Courtier of the Queens.
With an Old Lady whose anger good words asswages, Who every quarter pays her old Servants their wages, Who never knew what belongs to Coachmen, Footmen & Pages; But kept twenty or thirty old Fellows with blew-coats and badges: Like an Old Courtier, &c. With an old Study fill'd full of Learned books, With an Old Reverend Parson, you may judge him by his looks, With an old Buttery hatch worn quite off the old hooks, And an old Kitchin which maintains half a dozen old cooks; Like an Old, &c. With an old Hall-hung round about with Guns, Pikes and Bows, With old swords and bucklers, which hath born many shrewd blows. And an old Frysadoe coat to cover his worships trunk hose, And a Cup of old Sherry to comfort his [Copper Nose;] Like an Old, &c. With an old Fashion when Christmas is come To call in his Neighbours with Bag-pipe and Drum, And good chear enough to furnish every old Room, And old Liquor able to make a cat speak, & a wise man dumb; Like an Old, &c. With an old Hunts-man, a Falkonner and a Kennel of Hounds Which never Hunted, nor Hawked, but in his own Grounds: Who like an old Wise-man kept himself within his own bounds And when he died gave every Child a thousand old pounds; Like an Old, &c. But to his eldest Son, his house and land he assign'd, Charging him in his Will to keep the same bountiful mind, To be good to his Servants, and to his Neighbours kind, But in the ensuing Ditty, you shall hear how he was enclin'd; Like a young Courtier of the Kings. Like a young Gallant newly come to his Land, That keeps a Brace of Creatures at's own command,
And takes up a thousand pounds upon's own Bond, And lieth drunk in a new Tavern, till he can neither go nor stand; Like a young Courtier, &c. With a neat Lady that is fresh and fair, Who never knew what belong'd to good house keeping or care, But buys several Fans to play with the wanton air, And seventeen or eighteen dressings of other womens hair; Like a young, &c. With a new Hall built where the old one stood, Wherein is burned neither coal, nor wood, And a new Shuffle-bord-table where never meat stood, Hung round with pictures which doth the poor little good. Like a young, &c. With a new Study stuff't full of Pamphlets and Plays, With a new Chaplin, that swears faster than he prays, With a new Buttery Hatch that opens once in four or five days, With a new French-Cook to make Kickshaws and Toys; Like a young, &c. With a new fashion when Christmas is come, With a journey up to London we must be gone, And leave no body at home but our new Porter John, Who relieves the poor with a thnmp on the back with a stone. Like a young, &c. With a Gentleman-Usher whose carriage is compleat, With a Footman, a Coachman, a Page to carry meat, With a waiting Gentlewoman, whose dressing is very neat, Who when the Master has din'd gives the servants little meat; Like a young, &c. With a new honour bought with his Fathers old Gold, That many of his Fathers Old Mannors hath sold, And this is the occasion that most men do hold, That good House-keeping is now a days grown so cold; Like a young Courtier of the Kings.
The FRYER and the MAID. ASI lay musing all alone A merry Tale I thought upon; Now listen a while and I will you tell Of a Fryer that lov'd a Bonny Lass well. He came to her when she was going to bed Desiring to have her Maiden-head; But she denyed his desire, And said that she did fear Hell-fire. Tush, tush, quoth the Fryer, thou need's not doubt. If thou wer't in Hell, I could sing thee out: Why then, quoth the Maid, thou shalt have thy request; The Fryer was as glad as a Fox in his nest. But one thing more I must request More than to sing me out of Hell-fire, That is for doing of the thing An Angel of Mony you must me bring. Tush, tush, quoth the Fryer, we two shall agree, No Mony shall part thee and me; Before thy company I will lack Ile pawn the Gray-gown off my back. The maid bethought her on a Wile How she might this Fryer beguile; When he was gone, the truth to tell, She hung a Cloth before a Well: The Fryar came, as his bargain was, With Mony unto his bonny Lass; Good morrow, Fair Maid, good morrow, quoth she; Here is the Mony I promis'd thee. She thank'd him, and she took the Mony; Now let's go to't, my own sweet Honey:
Nay, stay a while, some respite make, If my Master should come, he would us take. Alass; quoth the Maid, my Master doth come; Alass! quoth the Fryer, where shall I run; Behind you Cloth run thou quoth she, For there my Master cannot see. Behind the Cloth the Fryer went, And was in the Well incontinent: Alass: quoth he I'm in the Well; No matter quoth she if thou wer't in hell. Thou said'st thou could'st sing me out of Hell, I prithee sing thy self out of the Well; Sing out, quoth she, with all thy might, Or else thou'rt like to sing there all night. The Fryer sang out with a pitifull sound, Oh! help me out or I shall be Drown'd: She heard him make such a pitiful moan, She hope him out, and bid him go home. Quoth the Fryer I never was serv'd so before; Away, quoth the Wench, come here no more: The Fryer he walked a long the street As if he had been a new washed Sheep, Sing hey down a derry; and let's be merry, And from such sin ever to keep. TOM a BEDLAM. FOrth from my sad and darksome Cell, From the deep abyss of Hell, Mad Tom is come to view the world again, To see if he can ease his distemper'd brain. Fear and Despair possess my Soul; Hark how the angry Furies howl!
Pluto laughs, and Proserpine is glad To see poor naked Tom of bedlam mad. Through the World I wander Night and Day To find my troubled Senses, At last I found old Tine With his Pentateuch of Tenses. When he me spies, away he flyes, For Time will stay for no man; In vain with cryes I rend the Skies, For pitty is not common. Cold and comfortless I lye, Oh help, O help or else I dye! Hark I hear Apollo's Team, The Carman'gins to whistle; Chast Diana bends her bow, And the Bore begins to bristle. Come Vulcan with tools and with tackles. And knock off my troublesome Shackles; Bid Charles make ready his Wain To fetch my five Senses again. Last night I heard the Dog-Stark bark, Mars met Venus in the dark; Lymping Vulcan heat and Iron bar, And furiously run at the god of War. Mars with his weapon laid about, Lymping Vulcan had the gout, For his broad Horns hung so in his light That he could not see to aim aright. Mercury the nimble Post of heaven Stay'd to see the Quarrel, Gorrel belly Bacchus giantly bestrid A Strong-beer barrel:
To me he drank, I did him thank, But I could drink no Sider; He drank whole Buts till he burst his guts, But mine were ne're the wider. Poor Tom is very dry, A little drink for Charitie: Hark! I hear Acteon's hounds, The Hunts-man hoopes and Hallows; Ringwood, Rockwood, Jowler, Bowman, All the Chace doth follow. The man in the Moon drinks Clarret, Eats powder'd Beef, Turnep and Carret; But a Cup of old Maligo Sack Will fire the Bush at his Back. Alas poor Scholar, Whither wilt thou go? OR Strange Alterations which at this time be, There's many did think they never should see. IN a Melancholy Study, None but my self, Methought my Muse grew muddy; After seven years Reading, And costly breeding, I felt, but could find no pelf; Into Learned Rags I've rent my Plush and Satten, And now am fit to beg In Hebrew, Greek and Latin; Instead of Aristotle, Would I had got a Patten. Alas poor Scholar, whither wilt thou go?
Cambridge now I must leave thee, And follow Fate, Colledge hopes do deceive me! I oft expected To have been elected, But Desert is reprobate. Masters of Colledges Have no Common Graces, And they that have Fellowships Have but common Places, And those that Scholars are They must have handsom faces: Alas poor Scholar, whither wilt thou go? I have bow'd, I have bended, And all in hope One day to be befriended. I have preach'd I have printed What e'r I hinted, To please our English Pope: I worship'd towards the East, But the Sun doth not forsake me: I find that I am falling, The Northern winds do shake me: Would I had been upright, For Bowing now will break me: At great preferment I aimed, I looked lately To live most stately, And have a Dairy of Bell-ropes milk; But now alas, My self I must not flatter, Bigamy of Steeples Is a laughing matter; Each man must have but one; And Curates will grow fatter. Alas poor Scholar, whither wilt thou go? Into some Country Village Now I must go, Where neither Tythe nor Tillage
The greedy Patron And parched Matron Swear to the Church they owe: Yet if I can preach, And Pray too on a sudden, And confute the Pope At adventure, without studying, Then ten pounds a year, Besides a Sunday Pudding. All the Arts I have skill in, Divine and Humane, Yet all's not worth a Shilling; When the Women hear me, They do but jeer me, And say, I am profane: Once, I remmember, I preached with a Weaver, I quoted Austin. He quoted Dod and Clever; I nothing got, He got a Cloak and Bever: Alas poor Scholar, whither wilt thou go? Ships, Ships, Ships, I discover, Crossing the Main; Shall I in, and go over, Turn Jew or Atheist, Turk, or Papist, To Geneva, or Amsterdam? Bishopricks are void In Scotland; shall I thither? Or follow Windebank And Finch, to see if either Do want a Priest to shrive them? O no, 'tis blust'ring weather. Alas poor Scholar, whither wilt thou go? Ho, ho, ho, I have hit it, Peace good-man Fool? Thou hast a Trade will fit it;
Draw thy Indenture, Be bound at adventure An Apprentice to a Free-School, There thou mayst command By William Lylies Charter; There thou mayst whip, strip, And hang, and draw, and quarter, And commit to the Red Rod Both Will and Tom, and Arthur, I, I, 'tis thither, thither will I go. Superscriptions for Letters. To a Duke. A Duke first was made by the French Kings, when they had chased the Romans out of Gallia; bestowing the name of Dux, a little altered to the French Idiom, upon those to whom they gave the Principal Government over those Pro∣vinces which they had recovered: in process of time theyusurp∣ed the Inheritance of their Governments; and made their Fei∣feswhich before were revocable at the Princes pleasure, to be hereditary. So that at length their Titles came to be so much esteemed as to be thought the next in order to that of a King. The Title which is most usually applied to a Duke, is that of Grace; and we address ourselves ohim by word of mouth, thus. May it please your Grace. If he be the Kings Son, or of the Royal blood, we write to him thus. To the most Illustrious Prince Henry, &c. To the most excellent Prince. Or else, To the most High and Noble. EArls at the same time, and upon the same account, were created by the French King, only here seem'd the diffe∣rence to be between them; for the Dukes seemed to have the Military Power, and the Earls were only made to exercise the Civil Jurisdiction in the Towns where they were plac'd.
They are now the next in order to Marquess; by word of mouth we make our Addresses thus, May it please your Honour. And write to him thus, To the Right Honourable. A Marquess formerly was the Governor of a Fronteer Town, and inferiour to the Earl of a Province; but supe∣riour to the Earl of an Inland Town. In speaking we thus ad∣dress our selves to them, May it please your Honour. We write to them thus, To the Right Honourable. A Viscount was formerly the Lievtenant to an Earl, so that their Dignity hath continued next to that of an Earl ever since; and indeed between a Viscount and a Baron or Lord, there is no difference used in making addresses to them. We speak to them thus, May it please your Honour my Lord. We write thus, To the Honourable. A Knight is the next Degree of honour being more peo∣perly a Military Dignity; but of late very much confu∣sed. They bear the Title of Right Worshipful. We make our dress thus, May it please your Worship. We write thus, To the Right Worshipful. ESquire was formerly but he that bore the Shield and Lance of a Knight before him. It is now the next Degree of Honour to the Knight; and now so much used by Gentlemen, that he who stiles not himself Esquire, is hardly a Gentleman. He bears the Title of Worshipful. And we write to him thus, To the Worshipful J. D. Esquire.
Note here, that the same Titles are appliable to the Wives as to the Husbands; and though the Daughter of an Earl marry an inferior person, yet she doth not lose her Title, which is, Right Honorable. In the writing of familiar Epistles, there are sundry varieties, which ingenuity will easily apply to his occasion. For example, at the beginning of a Letter these Expressions do very often offer themselves. Honour'd Sir. Dear Sir. Dear Friend. Learned Sir. Madam. Dear Lady. Dearest. Joy of my Life. My Heart. Fairest. Delight of my Heart. These Subscriptions also are usual. To great Persons, Your Graces most faithfull and most obedi∣ent Servant. Your Honors most faithfull and most obedi∣ent Servant. Your Excellencies most humbly devoted Servant Your Worships most faithful Servant. In familiar Letters thus The admirer of your Vertues. Madam, The Honorer Of your Perfection. Madam, The Honorer Of your Vertues. Madam, Adorer Of your Perfection. Madam, Adorer Of your Vertues. Madam, Worshipper Of your Perfection. Madam, Worshipper Of your Vertues. Your most affectionate Friend and Servant. Your assured Friend. Your most obedient Servant. Your most obliged Friend and Servant.] Your eternally engaged Servant. Your Creature. Your faithful Servant.
Yours for ever. Yours to command eternally. Yours while I have life. Yours while I have a being. Your faithful, though contemned Servant. For Superscription; these Forms may be used. To my much respected Friend. To my much Honored Friend. For my much Valued Friend. For my much esteemed Friend. Friend. For my approved To the truly Noble To the truly Vertuous To the most incomparable Lady. To the fair Hands of To the most accomplisht To the mirror of Perfection To the most lovely ornament of Nature. There is something more to be observed concerning the Dignity of places. For a Knight being made General of an Army, obtains the title of Your Excellency, though but a Lord, Knight, or meaner man by birth. A Lieutenant-General, is Right Honorable, A Major-General, Right Honorable. A Collonel is Honorable, and we give him the title of Your Honor. A Captain is Right worshipful. From a Son to Father, Your most dutiful, and obedient Son. From a Daughter, Your loving and obedient Daughter. From a Husband, Your most affectionate Husband till death. From a Wife, Your faithful and loving Wife till death.
From a Servant, Your most obedient and faithful Servant. Forms for the concluding of Letters. BUt whatsoever happen, I shall be no other then, &c. I shall endeavour with the best of my care and indu∣stry, whenever you desire the proofs of the obedience of, &c. If it could be perswaded that my absence gave you any dis∣quiet, or that my presence could afford you any service, you should soon perceive by my speedy return how much I am, &c. If I am able to do you service, there wants nothing but that you should command me the imployment; there being no∣thing which I more desire than to witness my self conti∣nually, &c. There being no man who hath a firmer resolution to ren∣der you all the testimonies of a willing service, in the qua∣lity of, &c. Let this for the present satisfie you, till I shall meet with some better opportunity, to shew how much I am, &c. The only happiness that I expect is, that I may be able to change my words into effects, that I might shew you how much I am really, &c. I shall now free your patience from reading any more, give me leave only to make this conclusion, that I am and shall be, &c. For every time I reflect upon your great obligations, I am impatient of an opportunity to shew my self; I cannot pass away the unquiet of my mind by any other way, than by seeking occasions to testifie how much I am, &c. Be pleased to take this for a real truth from him who hath made an Oath to live and die, &c. This is the advice and friendly Counsel of, &c. And I hope there is nothing shall debar me from conti∣nuing for the time to come, what hitherto I have been, &c. Neither is there any thing that I would omit whereby I might give you an assurance of fidelity to your Commands, as protesting to live and die, &c. But I desire to testifie to you rather by words than by dis∣course, how much I am, &c. Sir, I beg you to accept this testimony of my gratitude, and my earnest desires to be, &c.
I never reckon up the Catalogue of my friends, but I pre∣sently call to mind how much I am obliged to give you this Subscription, &c. My gratitude is as necessary as my being, and I can sooner not be, then not be most truly, &c. For I never think of your favours but it renews the re∣membrance of my engagements to be, &c. Though I have a very great press and urgency of business at present upon me, yet shall my occasions never be so vio∣lent, but that I will have leisure both to be and to tell you, that I am, &c. I shall be contented to be counted ungrateful when I am less, &c. Sir, if you doubt the truth of my service, I beseech you to make use of that absolute power which you have acquired over me, to oblige my endeavours to all manner of proofs, that I am, &c. He pleased as yet to take my bare word till I can give you further testimonies how much I am, &c. Though I am debarr'd your sight, yet I hope I am not en∣vied the happiness of giving you notice, how passionately I am, &c. I will lose my life, rather than my resolution to die, &c. If you knew with what impatience I expect a reply, charity would oblige you to set at rest the disquiet mind of, &c. My resolution is to possess my self always, &c. There is none more interested in your concernments, nor more participates in any satisfaction of yours, than he that is by reason as well as inclination, &c. Could my endeavours take effect, or my vows accomplish∣ment, you should not long reckon me in the number of your unprofitable servants, for I am most assuredly, &c. Sir, I know your high merits, and the nobleness of your condition hath much encreased the number of your servants; yet I will say this, that though you joyn them altogether, yet they are not so much as I am, &c. You may easily know, without being a Prophet, the dear esteem I have for you, and may believe without any further assurance, that I am, &c. It remains in you to allay the discontent of my mind, by giving me some imployment in your service, which may wit∣ness
the passion that I have to maintain the quality of, &c. Which obliges me in the midst of mine ill fortune to have recourse to prayers, that you would honour me with your commands, that by my obedience to them you may be forced to believe, &c. Desiring to make you see rather by effects than words, how much I am without complement, &c. I shall give you new proofs thereof by the continuance of my respects, and the title which I desire to bear of, &c. For though you may have a more powerful, yet you never can have a more constant and faithful servant, &c. I shall expect the favour that I may not bear the unprofita∣ble title of, &c. Neither shall I be contented till I have given you full te∣stimonies thereof, as being, &c. Desiring nothing more then to live and die, &c. Though I shall not regard that while it is for your interest, as being one that makes it his publick profession to appear in all places, &c. Only be confident of this, that I am more than any man in the World, &c. For I shall never be capable of apprehending any thing else, but how to testifie my devotion to be, &c. For she participates very much of that passion which I have to serve you, &c. In which list I am bold to write my self, &c. Among all my felicities I count it not the meanest, the li∣berty which you are pleased to give me of stiling my self, what I most truly am, &c. And find occasions more and more to testifie what I am, and shall ever be, &c. Sir, if you will permit me to imploy my soul thus, you may still enjoy him, who is, &c. I am preparing to forsake all the affairs of the world to entertain you, and testifie how much I am, &c. You know very well that I am but a rude Courtier, but my words carry truth with them, while I affirm, that I am from my soul, &c.
To his Mistriss recover'd from an Ague. Madam, YOu may very well admire to receive a Letter from one whom long before this time you might have imagin'd to have been dead: a Patient which the Doctors gave over, and who himself acknowledges no Physick could have cured, but that of your fair presence; which carried such a soveraignty with it, that my Ague presently left me, and nature in spight of my disease, took strength to her self and rais'd me up in my bed, to make this clear acknowledgment of cure to your Beauty. Madam, I now find my self rid of that distemper, and am per∣swaded I shall sooner for the future, suffer under the violence of a Feaver, than of a shivering Cold. I could not but express my scars to you, with my thanks, hoping that you will take care to preserve what you have again created. Be pleas'd to interest your affection for my safety, and to defend a thing, whom your goodness hath made so dear to you, as to be ever, Madam, &c. To his retired Mistriss. Lady, YOu carry your eyes like one of those that wear a Veil: not a look of yours but preaches chastity; and you are so con∣firm'd in a general contempt of manking, that if Fortune her self should come to present you with a Husband, you would scarce go out of your Closet to meet him in your Chamber. You speak of nothing but Religion and Cloisters, and all your entertainment, is discourse of mortification. Lady, not to dis∣semble my thoughts to you, I much fear, that a beginning like yours, so full of restraint, will afterwards be followed with a progress of too much liberty; and instead of the precise de∣mureness that you pretend, some Servant or other will read a new Heresie in your face. I shall not at this time send you stu∣died Oaths or Protestations. I know some Moons must go about before you will acknowledge the error wherein you live. For the present I shall only desire you to take care of your health, if not for your own, yet for the common good of those that love you; of which number he desires to be the first, who pre∣sumes to honour himself with the Title of, Madam, &c.
To his Mistriss, being disoblig'd by her. LAdy, I did always expect this favour from your ordinary goodness, that I might promise my self that you would have a little kindness for me; 'tis true that I was pre-inform'd of your humor, but I could hardly believe it; or that you would disoblige those that shall do you service and friendship. I would not now complain of you, but that I should give you advantage by my silence that I had not discovered the subtle∣ties of your deceit; which is so malicious, that I have at once stript me both of love and hatred: and I am now impatient, till I have acquainted those that yet profess their service to you, how that of all the Ladies I ever knew, you are the most un∣worthy of affection. In the mean space I beseech you to believe, that those endeavours which you have employ'd to disoblige me, have absolutely taken away my will and desire to be, Lady &c. To his Mistress, acknowledging the kindness of her Letters. LAdy, I am no less oblig'd to you for your Letters then for your entertainments, & though I have not judgment enough to censure their goodness, I am not so unfortunate, as not to tast of their sweetness; I must entreat you to belive me, and not to forbear to make me happy with them: You know not but that I may be-come a Ciceronian, being instructed by your elo∣quent Copies; which if I cannot reach to my self, I will at least shew them to those, that shall render them excellent by their imitation. For certainly, without flattery, all nature had need put her self into action, to find out your equal. Lady I I do with all seriousness acknowledge, that it is too great an ambition for me, either to stile my self your Scholar, or your Servant. To excuse to his Mistress his too easie believing of false Reports, LAdy, I am impatient till I see you, that I may between your hands abjure all false opinions. Onely be pleas'd so to dis∣pose your self, that you may accept of my recantation. By my
last letters, you might perceive that I had let in some false re∣ports had almost poison'd the fair soul of my belief: but as soon as I receiv'd the characters of your hand, and perus'd the simplicity of that naked truth, wherewith you may put my suspicion to flight, I soon came to my self. I was ever confi∣dent, whatever false rumour divulg'd, that a person of your noble deportment, knew how to preserve your self in the greatest contagion: and that ye could run no other peril in those adventures, but that of being importun'd. You express in your Letter some weak conjectures concerning me: I per∣ceive we were both tainted with the same imperfection. Lady, such jealousies, though they are dangerous if dispers'd, yet are the greatest confirmations of future love. It was no great mat∣ter which of us chang'd our opinion; It was no great matter which of us chang'd our opinions first. The thick breath is now gone off from the clear Crystal of our then blemish'd af∣fections. I assure you now, that I have suffer'd my self to be perswaded by your Reasons; as for your Objections, they were not worth the confuing. Lady, you see, how easily I am cured of this sickness, being wholly dispos'd to believe and obey you; and be to the uttermost of my power, Lady, &c. To his Mistriss thanking her for the acceptance of his Service. LAdy, I am now at last in part perswaded, that I have now two the best fortunes that the earth can afford me; the pos∣session of our virtue, and of your favour. You may say, this language is very fair, and that my friendship speaks like love. I have no other answer to return you, but that as you gain hearts, you have found a way to enter into them, and see what affections they produce. Let me therefore intreat you to behold the violence of devotion; and since I do entitle you my Goddess, be pleas'd to express your self by the effect of so fair a name, in accepting the heart more than the hand, and prizing the character of my sincerity above the value of my oblation. Certainly I should be the most unfortunate a∣mong the living, should you be a severe censurer of my works or words; in both which there is neither power nor elo∣quence:
but had I the one or the other in a perfect degree, I should never be able to shew you, as I would, the desire that inflames me to serve you, and to be Lady your, &c. To his Mistriss, desiring her Picture. Madam, I Hope that you will not take amiss the Request that I do now make to you; that you will please to give me your Picture, knowing that I esteem the original more than any thing in the world. That fair Body enliven'd with so much sweetness and perfection, I hold in so great a veneration, that I pant after the shadow thereof. Be pleased therefore to case my impatience by the grant of this favour, assuring your self that I shall place it among the greatest happinesses that could ever befall, Madam, Your most humble Servant. The Reply. Sir, THe request that you make to me, to give me your Picture, is so obliging, that I am constrain'd to give my consent; not at all wondring that you have before your eyes the Image of a person that admires you so much; Be pleased to believe this for a truth, in recompence of that favour, which I be∣stow on you, as also that I shall ever continue to be, Sir, Your most humble Servant. To his Mistriss, desiring a Lock of Hair from her. Madam, YOu need not wonder at that servitude, to which you have reduc'd me; 'tis so pleasing to me, that I do now request from you new chains, by the gift of a Bracelet of your Hair, to tell you how much I shall esteem this favour, your merit or my love are only capable. And as you have the knowledge of my request, so I shall leave you to think of an∣swering my desires, and also of the passion which I have to serve you, being more than ever, Madam, Your most humble and obedient Servant,
The Reply. Sir, YOur deserts have wrought so strong a perswasion in me to consent to the favor which you request of me, that I send it you in this Letter; I shall not impose on you the silence which you ought to keep in this matter, knowing that your discretion hath prevented my commands. It suffices me to put you in mind, that as these are no common favours, they require secresie from those that receive them. I suppose that you will not forget your self in this particular, while you remember that I am, Sir,  Your most humble Servant. To his Mistress, an Acknowledgment for being belov'd by her. SHall I pass over in silence, Fairest, so excessive a happiness? or shall I publish it, to render it more great? I know my silence will honour it most, but by making it known, I shall render it more glorious; for in telling it abroad, I shall eternize the memory thereof. Therefore shall my mouth be always open in the extolling of your favour, my mind wholly taken up with thoughts of you, and my soul always admiring its most perfect object, blessing the day of my birth, for being happy in yours. Your Death shall be my Tomb, desiring no other honor or glory while I live, but the title of, Madam, Your most faithful Servant A Lady to her Servant accusing him of Inconstancy. Sir, THey do always tax our sex for being inconstant, but I must now apply that fault to you, I say to you, whose Oaths did give so great a testimony of your fidelity, that I durst not doubt them for fear of injuring my self; though the wind was always the bearer of your love, and not your love, for that you
never had; so that if I blame my self for having believ'd you, I shall praise my self hereafter for imitating you though with some trouble, that I was not your example; for it was most reasonable, that I should have preceded you, as being your Mistress, though now Your Servant. To request a Favour from his Mistress. Madam, YOu bestow your favours with so much bounty, that though I am averse to beg them, yet the freeness of your curtesie leaves me no other shame, then that which proceeds from my inability of return. I do not use to value the services which I perform to my friends, but you are pleas'd to put such a rate upon them, that I have no other way left, but to vow thus with all respect, to solicite you as long as I live. Believe me, Madam, you have entertained my service so nobly, that I stand in fear of a propension to make motions to you, and to remain still an importunate Beggar, till I have tir'd you into a necessity of yielding to my Request, Though I confess, could I but gain the advantage of being esteem'd, and beloved by you, it is the highest light that my ambition covets. To his long absented Mistress. Madam, I Cannot but deplore my misfortune, that Cameleon like, I live onely on the Idea; all the support of my frail life having been for this twelve moneths onely from imagination. I pro∣test Lady, those four Letters which I receiv'd quarter after quarter have with much ado kept me alive; the last you direct∣ed to me, being so short, as if you had confin'd me to the ex∣tremity of so thin a dyet, that your most despised Lovers might in my pittiful Picture, read to themselves Lectures of consolation. Lady, I know at the best, that absent persons cannot entertain themselves but by Letters, yet by as woful experience I find, that there is but small pleasure to hear thus so far off from one another, as we do. For my part, I cannot but complain, and I think I
have more cause than any man living; you know the reality of this my expression: believe me, you have expos'd me to such extremities, that I am now resolv'd to approach you, and to write no more, but act what I have been accustom'd to protest, how perfectly I can be, Madam, &c. To his Mistriss upon the death of her Brother. LAdy, The continuance of your melancholy having toucht me so far, as to make me partake of your grief, wonder not if you receive these undeserved lines from me, which I hope will wipe away your tears, if you consider him that in∣treats you to be pitiful to himself; if not, to his youth. Be∣lieve me, Dearest, my sorrows for your self carry more reason with them, then yours for your deceased Brother, which can have no other pretence than custom, and your good nature. Pardon me if I tell you freely, that if you do not decline your grief, I shall abate of the belief I had of your spirit. I know well that the loss of Friends must needs touch us, nor would I remove the sense of mourning, but the error; not the tri∣bute of tears, but the superfluity of them. For though we must give something to nature, let us not take away all from reason; neither doth Nature so much as Opinion prevail over in these extreams of sorrow. Believe me, Fair one, sorrow hath plac'd you too near the grave, that should you look in your glass, you would already conceive your self there: for never did tears deal more cruelly with any than your self; seeing they have mind at once two of the fairest things in the world, the clearness of your disposition and beauty. Judge therefore, whether I have not as much cause to lament with you, as to write to you. At least I hope you will of your sub∣tle thoughts, to consider a little of him, who with tears en∣treats you to consider of your self, as being Madam, &c. To her Servant accepting his Service, SIR, Since you can so well express your affection to one that needs it, I could not but let you understand how you have prosper'd; with Justice enough you name your self a
Friend, yet in my opinion you might invent some more signi∣ficant word, though it were to stile your self a Lover; for you have already given me such real testimonies of your affection, that I dare entertain you in such a quality. I only wait for a favourable occasion, which may for my excuse, witness the dear and glorious marks which you gave me of your love and account of me, and how much I am already, Sir, &c. The Answer. LAdy, I am no longer able to keep my words from letting my heart fall upon this paper: your Letter having won me to you in such a sort, that I have no power over my self but what you leave me; the joy I have entertain'd from your lines, having not yet restor'd me to my reason; this may seem strange to you, but I assure you, I find no other reason to be contented to live, but as you are still in the world; and I am therefore only bound to preserve my self, because you are un∣willing to lose me. Your lines sweetly invite me to give you a visit. Fairest, if you will have me to endure your presence, take some more humane form, and appear not in that fulness of splendor, lest I forget what you are, and never cease to do you continual acts of reverence; and when I should speak to you, should overflow with prayers and thanks; conceiving that I may have fortune from others, but glory from none but you. Let me intreat you therefore, when I approach your fa∣vours, that you would give them out by tale, and distribute them by measure, that he may not be too far transported beyond himself, who is, Lady, &c. From a Lady consenting to her Servants Requests. SIR, I must not wish you good without endeavouring to do it, as far as my weak endeavours will permit me. I have so many affections that I remain unmoveable, so that you may be assur'd, if you can love your self, that you need not to doubt of my endearments to you. Sir, though I cannot be regu∣lar
in observing complements, I shall never be negligent in necessary duties; and so often think of you, that you need not to sollicite my thoughts. True friendship is always attended with remembrance, and they that can forget were never truly in love. When we fix upon a worthy object, we should resemble the Covetous, who have no less care to conserve, then to heap up treasure. All that for the present I shall request you is, that you would be more bold to employ me, and think if I want a memory to accomplish your desires, that I am then on my death-bed. This is the assurance you may expect from her, who is Your, &c. To her Servant, resolving not to Marry. SIR, I am not yet in the mind to change the blessedness of my Liberty for the Purgatory of Marriage: you tell me a Wife is the wealth of the mind; you must except all, all jealousies and dislikes that may happen: Then that she is the welfare of the heart; 'tis so when her youth with beauty, her wit with vertue, have that happy agreement between themselves, so as to command the affections. But Sir, you are not to learn, they have left most of our sex: It were a sin to pry further into their imperfections; the terms you write on being so extreamly opposite. But if I am not deceived in my reading, the learned express, that they weaken the strength, confound the business of our life, empty the purse, with a thou∣sand other feat qualities, which when I meet you next, you shall be sure to hear of. Till when, wishing you the continuance of that quiet, wherein you boast your self to live, I decline this theame of your wiving Letter till our next visit. I bid you farewell, and rest Your, &c. To his Mistress, Sick. Madam, THough the most fair envy your beauties, and the most perfect your merits, yet are they silenced by your charms; nay, sick∣ness it self is render'd captive by the puissence of your allure∣ments;
though if it wound you now, it is but with the wounds that you have made; and doubtless it hath seiz'd on you, hoping that by possession of your fair body, it may both change its name and nature; so that it is pardonable, both for its love, and for its subtlety. Neither do I believe that it is you, but your rigour that it aims to destroy, be you less cruel, and the disease will asswage; otherwise you will be in danger of your life. Though doubtless the consideration of destroying so many mar∣vels, will stop his designs. Death oft-times make use of love against us; so that he will have a care of your life, as of his keenest weapon wherewith he brings us men under his command, making us willing to yield to his stroak, as the refuge of that misery into which your cruelty oft-times throws us. This I know by experience, as being your Slave. To his Mistriss, despairing of her Favour, though unjustly offended against her. Madam, WHat avails it you to make me feel your Thorns when I have gather'd your Flower. Why do you blame in words, him whom you have honour'd in effects and blame him without cause, who cannot praise you but unjustly; Moderate your severity, seeing that it offends you more then it hurts me. I have protested a thousand times that I never was faulty, as you thought me; though it was to no purpose, you believing otherwise. It suffices for my satisfaction, that I know the truth, and that I have essay'd, all the ways in the world to make you understand it, though in vain. Adieu most fair but yet too cruel, if you leave me triumphing over the most wor∣thy subject in the world, I leave you vanquish'd by a more faithful Lover. A Letter of Consolation to a Mistress, upon the death of her Servant. Madam, I Believe that if you have been the last who have understood the death of your Servant, that you will be one of the first, and indeed the onely person, who will in your soul celebrate
the sad remembrance of him, a much longer time than any of his Friends: not that his merit doth oblige you, for I well know that all merit loses its esteem in your presence, being so perfect as you are; nor your Piety, though it be a thing natural to you with your other vertues; but only his love, and constancy, as be∣ing both equally incomparable. Neither do I believe, that ei∣ther of these do oblige you at all, for though his love were very great, that could not be otherwise, seeing you were his object, no more than his constancy whatever it were; so that to say the truth, I know not what can urge you to bewail his loss, unless it be the goodness of your inclinations, being as mild and sweet as you are, fair, and consequently full of Piety. I should weep my self, for having the least thought to condemn your tears, yet give me leave to believe, that when you remember that the fires pro∣ceeding from your eyes did help to consume his life, it would make them weep for sorrow. Now what punishment will you im∣pose upon your Beauty, if there be nothing in you that hath par∣taken of the millions of pains which he hath endured for your sake: Certainly you ought to suffer Shipwrack in the Sea of your tears, unless the God of Love have need of you for one of his Altars. Since you are the only Idol, to whom all mortals will present the sacrifices of their Servitude. And as for my self, who have undertaken to succeed to the merits and constancy of your deceased Servant, I will not give assurances in words, for deeds themselves shall always be my sureties. Dry up your tears, stop your sighs. I summon you to this duty, in the behalf of Reason it self, knowing that his Commands are to be obey'd. Madam, when I first put Pen to Paper, I had a design to comfort you, but knowing the greatness of your resolution against all sorts of accidents, I chang'd my intention, to assure you of the love and servitude that I have vow'd to you, under the title of, Madam, Your most humble Servant. Letters. SIR, I Know 'tis to  purpose to dispute of Civilities with you,  li in the light of the world, and are so well stor'd with the best words to express them. I know too well that the
excellency that dwells in you, begets at the same time desires to preserve, as well as to acquire your favour. I have but one grief, that I have not Soul enough to judge of those perfections that dwell in you, which though I can never attain rightly to conceive, yet I am confident, no man can honour them more, so that should you call me your Idolater, you could not strain a word that could so rightly, as that, express my respects toward you. Sir, Complements are very rare with me, and therefore I request you to believe me, when I say, that they must be very strong cords and dangerous commandments that shall remove me from your service; I know I can never deserve such violent proofs of my obedience: it shall suffice me that I doubt not of your love, as being, Sir, Your most devoted Servant. To his Absent Friend. SIR, IF I thought Fortune could be so much our Friend, I should request her to make us inseparable, that I might be no more oblig'd thus to write; since the entertainments that distant friends do give and take by Letters, is but a picture of those between persons presents: for to say the truth, a Letter is but a Copy of that, which makes us more curious of the original; a Glass that shadows to us stronger desires to enjoy the person that is absent. The very lines I receive from you, carrying with them the effects of joy to hear from you, and of a passion to be more near you that I might not still be forc'd to write that to you, which I would willingly protest; and find occasions more and more to testifie what I am, and ever shall be. To his Friend complaining of Neglect. SIR, THE Friendship which you have promised me, and the service which you have protested to me, force me now to demand the reason of your silence. I question not but that you will want no excuse to plead for your self: But I entreat you
to believe, that unless they be very lawful, I shall not cease to complain of you. You do well to lay the fault sometimes upon your urgent occasions, sometimes upon the indisposition of your body: but all this is no satisfaction to me. Confess but your fault, crave pardon, and you shall have it presently granted. This is the way to preserve eternally the friendship of Your most humble Servant. The Answer. SIR, YOu do me so great a favour in complaining of me, that I am constrained to give you thanks, instead of taking the least offence at you. This is not because I want excuses to authorize my silence, but the interest that you have in me, which makes me to condemn my self, resolving hence forward, that you shall rather complain of my importunity then of my sloathfulness. Which is the protestatiom of Sir, Your most humble Servant. Return of Thanks. SIR, I Protest that you have obliged me with a Favour, and that so perfectly, that I must be your Debtor all the dayes of my life. I wish that an opportunity would offer it self for you, to employ me in your service, that I might testifie to you, that since your favours are so extreamly high, there is no extremity which I would not undergo to requite them. This is no com∣plemental discourse, my heart dictates to my Pen all that which I write to you, assuring you once more, that I will long bear in vain the title of Your most humble Servant.
The Answer. SIR, I must complain of the excess of your civilities and curtesies, since our interest consists in a reciprocal friendship. You thank me for curtesies receiv'd from me, as if I were not oblig'd to do them, accustom not your self to such kind of Phrase, and believe that the Language of Complements is unknown to friends. I am in the number of them, and moreover, Your most humble Servant. To desire a Curtesie. SIR, The same of your generosity, hath given me the bold∣ness to require a avour from you, to disintangle me from a business, the success whereof depends much upon your autho∣rity. 'Tis true, that I never had the honor to be acquainted with you. But though this be my particular unhappiness, I hope that you will not make any excuse to refuse me the Curtesie which I desire from you, not doubting but that in some other matter I may have the honour to make my self known to you, rather by my services then by my name, since your descent obliges me to remain, Sir, Your most humble Servant. The Answer. SIR, I have done all what you required of me, with a great deal of satisfaction, and little trouble. Prepare your self to impose commands upon me, that you may not let the passion which I have to serve you lie idle, and you shall discern by my obedience, that I take delight in nothing more, then in making my self appear in all places. Sir, Your most humble Servant.
On the same Subject. SIR, ALthough I am the most unprofitable of all your Friends, yet am I none of the least willing to serve you, and from thence I take the liberty to desire you; to give me a meeting. All that I can say for the first acknowledgement of this favour, is, that I shall eternally remember this savour; and that if I cannot meet with any opportunity to requite so great a kind∣ness, I shall bear my sorrow for it to my grave, together with the title of, Your most loyal Servant. The Answer. SIR, WHen you desire any service from me, I entreat you to consider whether it be in my power to perform it: that I may be more bold to encounter the blame which my unhappiness obliges you to lay upon me. You shall command, when you please other proofs of my willingness to serve you, desiring nothing more then the title of, Sir, Your most humble Servant. To congratulate the good Fortune of his Friend. SIR, IF you know how acceptable the news of your good fortune is to me, you would not doubt, but that the joy which sur∣prises me for the same, is equal to yours. Truly I cannot add any thing to it: since it proceeds from the friendship which I have vow'd to you, which is not common since your merit is the object. I would tell you more, if the excess of my joy would give me liberty. It suffices me to assure you, that my content cannot equal the passion which I have to serve you, as being, Sir, Your most humble Servant.
The Answer. SIR, I Did always believe that you were of so generous a spirit, that you participate in my concernments; But I perswade my self at the same instant of time, that you doubt not of my willingness to serve you, that I may in some measure merit the effects of your noble disposition. This I am urg'd to, not being able further to requite the continual proofs, which you give me of your good will towards me. I entreat you to esteem this for an undenyable truth, as being from my heart and soul. Sir, Your most faithful Servant. To his Accomplish'd Friend. SIR, If I have hope to be known to after ages, it must be by the honour of your acquaintance; Your reputation at this time, being so just and so general, that 'tis become a verity wherein the Wise agree with the Vulgar. Pardon me Sir, if I presume thus to prevent your command, by this early show∣ing you my ready inclination to obey them: But I am con∣tent that you should give it what name you please, provided you judge well of the effects of my duty, and do me the ho∣nor to believe that I am, Your, &c. To his Learned Friend. SIR, All the riches both of Nature and Art dwell in you, and are of such force, that I acknowledge my inclinations to serve you, carry with them immortal reason; your discourse being so grave, and soild that they cannot be sufficiently listen'd to, for the edification of men that have seen four ages. And for your Letters, in what stile soever you write them
They are always pleasing, if not, most admirably profitable; as if your Spirit had been employ'd from your youth, in perswading of Princes, or instructing of Embassadours. When your Lines are serious, they strain not; when familiar, they are without neglect: like beauties that appear in all fashions, yet allure, whether neatly drest, or carelesly plain. Pardon me Sir, if I lay open my naked soul before you in this simplicity of my ac∣knowledegments, you having so absolutely purchast both my thoughts and affections, that I must need ingenuously confess, that I have nothing left, but to assure you Sir how much I am, Your &c. To his Friend at Court. SIR, YOU seem to have so persum'd your self with the sweet∣ness of the Court, that you cannot admit of the profaneness of a Village. Such a rudeness is the errand this Letter car∣ries with it; but be pleas'd to accept of it, as you know the keight of my ambition is bounded in such rural presents; neither should I dare to presume thus, were I not perswaded that you allow me this liberty, which otherwise I should never take. But I am confident you delight to gratifie me, and to do me thè same good that I wish to you. If you desire to know the cause of such extraordinary boldness in me, I beseech you to believe there is no other, then the great affection I have to serve you, and to be, Sir, &c. To his Friend, upon the renewing of their Correspondence. SIR, To be separated from a man so dear to me as your self I do believe I could not live in the fortunate Islands, and having till I embrace you no other way of traffick but by Let∣ters, I am extreamly angry with my self, that you have preven∣ted me in returning our old correspondence. Though I must ac∣knowledge there is some justice in it, for since you were the first that broke it, 'twas fit you should be the first to reestablish it: I write thus of the honour of your favour; assuring you notwithstanding that I could no way deserve it. Therefore Sir, give me leave to beg your pardon for my neglect, if I
were guilty, which I shall never be in any thing that concerns you: and to make it more clear to you, I never ceas'd to honour you; but onely not to express it, was like a secret fire not quench'd but cover'd, which became the more violent when it had less liberty to appear; Wherefore Sir, be confident, that I shall make you see upon all occasions, for what is just that I will never be less then I am Your, &c. A Familar Return of Thanks. SIR, THis negligence of my stile be pleas'd to esteem one of the marks of friendship between us. Gratitude is one of a poor mans vertues. This is the best Rhetorick you could ex∣pect in so few Lines; and so I would renounce the world, and all its promises, if a mortal could do so, to express my self but truly thankful to you for your exquisite favours. The expedition of this messenger would permit me no further at this time, but onely to set my hand to this protestation, that I love you ex∣ceedingly, that I honour you, and am as much as any man can be in the world, Your, &c. To his Friend, inviting him into the Country. SIR, I will not send you studied complements, I know you are born in a Country of good words; I am here among Thorns and Thistles, among people that are naturally affected with dulness, and dream in the best company, such as can give no other reason for their silence, but that they are entreated not to speak; in so much, that you may walk our Village, and hear nothing but whistling; and which is a miracle, our Coridons are here arrived to such a height of wilful ignorance, as if they held their Lands by no other Tenure, but that of never speaking to the purpose. I should be quite out of heart, if I had not your promise to relie on, that you will suddenly give me a visit, to witness what I am like to suffer this long vacation, except I enjoy your company; I wait for you as for a blessing, and if you come not hither next week, I proclaim to you, that I am no longer, Your, &c.
To his sick Friend. SIR, The news of your sickness hath so alter'd my health, that I may count my self a sharer in your misfortunes. Really it hath so much griev'd me, that the sorrow which I sustain, is more then the fever which you endure. Do you therefore take courage, if you will that I should be in good health. You know how much I am interested in your con∣cernments. In a word, I assure you, that if you do not quit your bed, I shall be forc'd to betake my self to mine. These are the absolute protests of, Sir, Your, &c. A Letter of Resolution. WHY thus in Cynthia's sports do you delight, And take from Loves all their due and right; Yield brightest, and his sweetest pleasures try, Whose fires in funeral flames can onely die. May I not live, if all things plead not sin; I wonder what strange sear doth keep thee in. Though with Diana thou dost seem to vie, Trust me, thy face doth give thy words the lie; More sit for Venus thou then her wilt prove, There's no Religion, sweet, but that of Love. Were the Gods kinde, and to my love agreed, With eyes unwilling thou these Lines should read. When shall I thee embrace intranc't, and lie Languishing wrapt in Loves sweet extasie. If Arts will not avail, then Arms Ile move, And so my longing besome force thy love, Yet us Loves warfare better will become. Soft breathings best please love, not the sierce Drum; If that thou wilt I can more gentle be, Lay shame aside, and yield thy self to me: Either thy self into my arms resign, Or I must fall, for I have vow'd thee mine.
To his Mistress, desiring Enjoyment. TEll me cruel fair one, why, When I ask you still deny; You thereby unkind do prove, Both to Nature and to Love; Nature when she gave that eye, That hand, that lip, that majesty: Surely then she did not mean, Here riches should be onely seen, And not enjoy'd; were not each sense A Sharer of your excellence? Shee'd wrong her self, and so destroy Mankind by making you so coy. Oh then yield, and let me find That y'are thankful if not kind; Cupid in your bosomes snow, Losing his Shaft, unbent his Bow; And woo'd his Mother, since he shot So long and wounded not. Your eyes henceforth might be his Darts, With which he slew so many hearts, She did; but with all gave you skill To heal again, as well as kill; She gave your eyes power to enflame A breath with all to cool the same; You are just to use that breath, To be a Sentencer of death; Nay, you are impious, if you are Less merciful then you are fair: And by denying needs must grant, That you are proud or ignorant. Where Women truly know their price, 'Tis pride not vertue makes them nice. Let us Lucinda henceforth twine With close embraces. Let us joyn Lip unto lip, and reap the pleasure Of true Lovers without measure; Till our Loves are by wonder grown
From two bodies into one. Yield Lucinda thy consent, That from our true and just content; Others may a perfect rule obtain How they should love, how be belov'd again. Thus she striveth to indite, That can love but cannot write. In every Line, here may'st thou understand, That Love hath sign'd and sealed with his hand. These cannot blush although thou dost refuse them; Nor will reply, however you shall use them. O modesty! dist thou not me restrain? How would I chide thee in this angry vain? Pardon me dear if I offend in this, With such delays my love impatient is. I needs must write till time my saith approve, And then Ile cease but never cease to love. Tears, thou know'st well my heart cannot abide; How I am angry when I least do chide: Too well thou know'st what my creation made me; And nature too well taught thee to invade me. Thou know'st too well, how, what and when, and where, To write, to speak, to sue, and to forbear; By signes, by sighs, by motions, and by tears, When vowes should serve, when oaths, when smiles, when prayers. If any natural blemish blot my face, Thou dost protest it gives my beauty grace; And that attire I'me used most to wear, That's the most excellent of all you swear. Or if I wake, or sleep, or stand, or lie, I must resemble some one Deity. But Sweet Diana what strange fears have I, That am confirm'd how men can swear and lie? As with an ague I do shiver still, Since to this paper first I set my quill. What blots so e're thou seest, my tears did make; And yet these tears do weight of words partake. If I do erre, you know our sex is weak, Fear proves a fault when Maids are forc'd to speak.
Could I my soul into thy brest convey, It might like purity to thine display. I should not then come short of any trick, Which makes thee prettily appear love sick; But all my thoughts are innocent and meek, As the chaste blushes on my Virgin cheek: For till this blush, I never did espy The nakedness of an immodesty. Disguise not love, but give thy self to me, I cannot write, but I could die for thee, A Letter from a Lady with Child. WHen thou dost see my Letter, dost thou know Whether 'tis my right hands Character or no? Why should I write, I feel a present fear, That I must write more then a Maid should dare. Oh! should I make it to my mother known, Needs must it make m'asham'd what thou hast done. No outward symptome shews my grief, yet I, Wretched, past help of any medecine lie. Think but how weak I am, when I scarce these Can write, or turn me in my bed with ease; How I do fear lest that my Nurse should spie One Letter interchangeing coloque. Then hastily I leave my words half fram'd, My Letter straight is in my bosome cramm'd; The name of Marriage with shame abash't, My pale wan cheeks with glowing blushes quash't. Fond man what glory hast thou won, Or praise, a Virgin thus to have undone? As once an Apple did Atlanta seize, Th'art now become a new Hippomanes. O be not angry quiver-bearing Maid, That I'me loves patiently by youth betray'd; 'Tis now too late, let thy rage be exil'd, And spare the Mother of, but for the Child. He had a face and years too fit for play, A treacherous face that stole my heart away. Who whil'st I sung for Love is all things mind,
Upon my amorous lips did kisses bind Both them, and each part else did please him well; But chiefly when to loves choice sports, he fell; But whither hath my Pen transported me, Thus to discourse to th'Queen of chastity. Sweet Sir. You sware by these same brests of mine To me, and by thrice three Maids Divine, You'd celebrate the Himeneal rites, And in my arms spend all your youthful nights. This was a Language you were us'd to say When we were acting our delicious play; And when of me your last leave you had took, You sware an oath upon my lips, your book, That you would back return with winged speed To save my name from scandal of the deed; With patience Sir your coming I attend, Until you come receive these Lines I send. A Perswasive Letter to his Mistress. SWeetest, but read what silent Love hath writ With thy fair eyes, tast but of Loves fine wit, Be not self will'd; for thou art much too fair, For death to triumph o're without a heir; Thy unus'd beauty, must be tomb'd with thee, Which us'd, lives thy Executour to be; The Flowers distill'd, though they with Winter meet Lose but their show, their substance still is sweet. Nature made thee her seal, she meant thereby: Thou shouldst Print more, not let the Copie die; What, hast thou vow'd an aged Maid to die? Be not a fool; Lovers may swear and lie. Forswear thy self, thou wilt be far more wise To break an oath then lose a Paradise. For in the midst of all Loves pure protesting, All Faith, all Oaths, all Vows should be but jesting: What is so fair that hath no little spot; Come, come thou mayest be false yet know'st it not. I wish to you, what hath been wish'd by others, For some fair Maids by me would have been Mothers; Pardon me not, for I confess no error;
Cast not upon these Lines a look of terror, Nor vainly Lady think your beauty sought For these instructions are by Loves self wrought; Venus her self my Pen to this theam led, And gives thee freely to my longing bed. I saw thee in my thoughts fair beauteous Dame When I beheld the eyes of fame I lov'd thee, ere I saw thee long ago, Before my eyes did view that glorious Shew. Imagin not your face doth now delight me, Since seen, that unseen did invite me. Believe me, for I speak but what's most true, Too sparingly the world hath spoke of you; Fame that hath undertook your worth to blaze, Plai'd but the envious Huswise in your praise; 'Tis I will raise thy name, and set thee forth, Enjoy thy riches, glorifie thy worth; Nor with vain scribling longer vex my head To fancy love, but leap into thy bed. Best Wishes from a Lady. Most worthy SIR, Unto your Noble blood 'TIS no adition to think you good, For your demeanor bears that equal part Y' have won the love, not envie of the Court; Having observ'd the forms and laws of state; Gaining mens emulation not their hate. With such a noble temper you divide The difference 'twixt formality and pride; Thus your indifferent actions are as far From being too common, as too singular. Whilst in your nature those two Suns arise, The attributes of beautiful and wise. Give me now leave, to wish that you may be As clear from others envy, as y'are free From the desert. But here I must not cease, May no rude chance invade your blessed peace To your chast thoughts, I wish as chast a mate
Blest in her dower, in beauty fortunate. May all the happiness Heaven can confer, Be acted on your lives fair Theater. And may I live to see you thus possest Of these good wishes, that flow from the best Of your most entire Servant. A Letter of Acceptance from his Mistress. I am not angry, wo can angry be With him that loves a Mistress? Love is free; But you have further aim, and seek to do, What Jove defend, I should consent unto. I know that too much trust hath damag'd such As have believed me in their love too much. Leda when she ne're dreamt of God nor Man, Jove did surprize her, shaped like a Swan. But you'r a Wag, I'me certain by the signes You make at Table in the meats and wines; How you can wanton, when your eye advances It's brightness against mine, darting sweet glances; How you can sigh, yet by and by can grace With an angelick smile, your cunning face? You are too manifest a Lover. Tush, At such known sleights I could not chuse but blush. Yet am I not incenst, couldst thou but be As loyal, as th'art amorous to me In the loves just ways; for if thou seekst to climb, My wisht for bed, at the appointed time; When Saffron Hymen hath concluded quite Such covenants as belong to th'nuptial rite; I shall inter pret kindly every sign, And moralize them in my being thine, Taffy to his Mistress. MOdest Shentle, when her but see The great laugh her made on me, And fine wink that her send
To her, came to see her friend; Her could not shuse py Cot apove, But he was intangle in her love; A hundred ofttimes her was about, To speak to her, and have her out: But her peeing a Welsh man porn, And therefore was thank her would her scorn; Was fear, put think nothing better, Then put her love into a Letter; Hoping her will not ceptions take Upon her love, for Country sake. For say her be Wilsh man, what ten By Cot they all be Shentlemen; Was descend from Shoves none Line, Par humane, and par divine; And from Venus that fair Coddes, And twenty other shentle Poddies. Hector stout, and comely Paris, Arthur, Prute, and King of Fairies, Was her none Cosin, all a kin, We have the Powels issue in. And for ought that her can see, As cood men as other men pee; But what of that, Love is a knave, Was make her do what her would have; Was compel her to write the rhime, That ne're was write before this time; And if she will not pitty her pain, As Cot shudge her soul shall ne're write again. For Love is like an ague fit, Was bring poor Welsh-men out of her wit, Till by her answer her do know, Whether her do love or no. Her has not pin in England long, And con no speak the English tongue, Put her is her friend and so her will prove; Pray send her word if her can love.
Superscription for the Drol∣ling-Letters. TO the most gracious Queen of my Soul. To the most illustrious Princess of my Heart. To the Countess Dowager of my Affections. To the Lady of my Conceptions. To the Baroness of My Words and Actions. To the Spring-Garden of all pleasure and delight. To the Peerles Paragon of Exquisite Formosity. To the chief of my Heart and Affections. To the Empress of my thoughts. To the Lady, and Mistress of my thoughts and service. To the Lilly-white-hands of my Angelical Mistress, These present. To the Compleat Mirrour of Beauty and Perfection. To the ninth Wonder of the World. To the most Accomplish'd Work of Nature, and the A∣stonishment of all Eyes. To the Fair Murdress of my Soul To the Rose of pure Delight. To the Choise Nutmeg of Sweetest Consolation. To the most Flourishing Bud of Honour. To His Most Sacred Angel, Mistress &c. To Her who is Day without Night, a Sun full of Shade, a Shade full of Light, Mistress, &c. To the Atlas of her best Thoughts and Affections, Her Dearly beloved M. L. Broom-man in SOUTHWARK, These.
Subscriptions. MAdam, Your Gally, Gally, Gally-Slave, Madam, Your Always burning Salamander. Madam, Your Continual Martyr. Madam, Your poor Worm, that must of necessity die, if trod upon by the foot of your disdain. Madam. Your Captive, willingly fetter'd in the Chains of your beauty. Madam, The Vassal of your Severest Frowns. Madam, The Most Loyal Subject to Your Imperial Power.
MOCK LETTERS And Drolling Letters. A Souldier to his Mistress. Madam, I Have now left the bloody Banners of Mars to follow Cupids Ensigns. Though I must now confess, the latter to be the severer service: for under the one we onely get broken Pates, under the other wonded Hearts. There we have pay and plunder, here we have neither. But from whence arises all my trouble? 'tis from you Madam, who like Jone of Ar∣quez are risen up to terrifie me in the midst of all my conquests. For alas! the assaults of your eyes have so alarum'd my brest, that it is in vain for me to think of reposing by day, or sleeping by night: Oh! that you would make an end of the War, and come and take me in my own Quarters. Otherwise I must be compell'd to bring my scaling ladders to force that Lathem∣house of Beauty, which is your fair body, to free my self from the hourly incursions, that your perfections make upon my soul. But why do I rage? Deliver it by fair means. By the Nails of Jupiter of you will not delay to do it, I swear there is no man shall venture his life further to defend you from the Batteries of lying fame or injurious slander. And more then that, you shall find me the most faithful Knight that ever smote terri∣ble Gyant for fair Ladies sake,
A Pedagogue to his Mistress. Most Dear Star, KNow you not that you are already mounted above the Ho∣rizon of Accomplish'd. Nihil verius est. There is nothing more true. And being thus the Miracle of your Perfections, and the perfection of your Miracles, with a soft violence ye have wounded my bleeding soul. Foemineo teneri tribuuntur. The Feminine gender is very troublesome; But O Damsel! as fair as you are cruel, and as cruel as you are fair, do not resem∣ble that treacherous Emperour Nero, who took pleasure to see the City of Rome on fire. O! do not from the turret of your merits, with delight, behold not onely the Suburbs, but even the City of my Heart to burn, with all the Churches in it, that I have dedicated to your honour. For I can assure you more fair then Venus, then Venus of Cyprus, as the Grammar hath it, Creta, Brittannia, Cyprus, Great Britain and Cyprus; that whatever Oration or Sillogism, poor, miserable, and passive, I can make by way of special demonstration is onely to shew and acknowledge how much I am your superlative servant, per omnes casus, in all cases. A Cockney to his Mistress My Dear Peggie, I Have here sent thee these Lines writ with my tears, and a little blacking that our Maid rubs my Fathers Shoes with, that I may unload a whole Cart-load of grief into the Ware∣house of thy bosome. Truly Peggie, I think I shall die, for I can neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor wake. Nothing that my Mother can buy, either in Cheap-side or Newgate-Market will go down with me; yet, you know my mother's as pretty a Hswife as any in the Town. She seeing me look as pale as the Linen in Moor-fields, and moping in the Chimney corner, bid the Maid fetch me a Cap, and ask'd me if I would have any Sugar sops. But I cry'd no, I'de have Peggie, with that she jeer'd me, saying, What are you love-sick Tom? And then I
I cry'd, and made a noise like a C upon the Tiles. But let all the world say what they will, I will pout and be sick, and my Father and Mother shall lose their eldest Son, but Ile have Peggie, that I will. I beseech thee not to omit any occasion of writting to me, that since I cannot kiss thy hand, I may kiss the Letters that thy hand did write. The Bearer hereof is our Cook-maid, one that pitties my condition, and is very trusty: I have therefore engag'd her to call and see thee every time she goes to Market. My Mothers Rings are all close lockt up, else I would steal one to send it thee: however, I intreat thee to ac∣cept of the good will for the deed, and to take in good part the endeavours of thy most faithful Servant. Postscript As I was going to seal, my Father came in, taken suddenly and desperately ill. The Physicians were sent for, and by their whispering, assure me that he cannot live; assoon as he is dead I shall not fail to visit thee, and make sure work between us. A Sea-man to his delight in Wapping. Kind if not unkind Susan. HAving read in a Ballad, how that a Woman is compared to a Ship, it made me to conceive no small reason, for a Sea-mu∣tual love between us. Since it is most certain that a Sea-man cannot be without a Ship, nor, a Ship without a Sea-man, do not therefore shipwrack my good intentions in their first Voyage to thee. Alas! for thou hast no reason to despise me, because my Cloathes are besmear'd with Pitch and Tar, knowing that I shall stick the faster to thee. I must confess I have cast An∣chor in the Harbour of thy Love, do not cut the Cable of my Affections, lest I am adrist into a Sea of misery; and where the Waves of desair encreas'd by the North-wind of thy disdain, shall dash out my brains against the Rocks of Misfortune. lnce, I am in already, neither is it in my tower to help my self. O Susan, Susan, Susan! receive my floating soul into the Cock-boat of thy heart, that thy poor Richard may not die, but live to recompence thee the Preserver of his life.
A Hector to his Mistress. Most Illustrious Queen of Beauty, BY the heard of Achilles my affections groan for you; Your perfections have trapand me: For when I had the honour to smell your odoriferous breath, me thought it pleas'd me better then the sent of the best Spanish Tobacco. And when I kiss'd your vermillion lips, I suck'd Canary from them. Now Lady, your Sack and Tobacco are the two strings to the bowe of a mans life; Oh, thou that art the third string to the bowe of my life! bind thy self about my waste, that I may be thy Oak, and thou my Ivy; or else that I may bear thee up and down the Town like the Fellow that carries his Brother in his belly. Destroy not him that both can and will destroy millions for thy sake. But be my Aqua Coelestis, my Castle of strong water, to defend from the Batteries of misfortune, the drooping spirits of thy dejected Slave. A Lawyer to his Young Mistress. Madam, THis Indenture made the thirteenth day of April, in the year, One thousand six hundred fifty six, Witnesseth, that I John a Stiles of Long Acre in the County of Bedford, Gent. am a person of credit and reputation. Hoping therefore that you are in good health, as I am at the writing hereof. These are to certifie you that I am sick at the very heart for love of you. The Judge thinks me mad, for when I should plead, I fall  courting of him, telling him he is the Star of my affections, and that unless he will marry me, I shall be undone. My Clients also leave me, for while I peruse their papers, they hearing me sigh so cruelly, begin to despair of their Cause, and go away in dis∣content, without giving their fees. But all this, my pretty Dar∣ling, may be help'd by thee. Deigne therefore to bargain, sell, and to farm let, that fair Tenement of Beauty, which is thy self, unto him, that cares not what he gives for the purchase; together with the hands, legs, arms, fingers, toes, hair, eyes head, thighs, belly, water courses, easents, commodities, and appurtenances whatsoever, to the foresaid Tenement belonging.
That I may have, hold, occupy, and enjoy them for the term of years wherein thou shalt live; at the expiring thereof fully to be compleat and ended. And I on the other part do pro∣mise and grant, to, and with thee my foresaid pretty Darling, to be thy old Fool, thy doting Fool, and to give thee all that I have for a Joynture. And further, that thou shalt live in the Countrey, and cuckold me, all' the Term-time, and come up every year after Easter to buy thee Pins, Gloves and Ribbands, and a new Gown. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the Day and Year first above-written. A Passionate Love Letter. LOve having taken your Beauties for Arms, had long since laid siege to my Liberty, which was retreated within the Fort of my Reason, when without putting himself to the trou∣ble of a Scalado, he is fled into my Eyes, and is by that way entred into my Heart, as a Robber breaks into a house through the windows. The sufferings I am in through his means are very violent, but being at length appeased, he hath sworn to me that the remedy lay in your power; and that all I had to do, was to write to you of it: But seeing me a Secre∣tary very ill furnish'd with the necessaries of my profession, he took a Quill out of his own wing, and made me a pen with the point of his dart; he hath given me paper made of his old Headbands by a celestial paper-maker; he took the coals of my heart which was half burnt, and having beaten them to powder, he mingled them with my tears, and thereof hath fur∣nished me with ink, with which I have written to you; and for to dry the writing, he cast the ashes of those coals upon it. He gave me waxout of his torch to seal it, and cut off a little peice of the string of his bowe for me to binde withall. And now fair Lady consider, if having assisted me thus far so favour∣ably, he may not with as little difficulty, furnish me with all his arrows for to wound you, and make you sick of the same disease, as he is, who terms himself, Your Slave.
The Mountebank's Letter to the Chyrurgeons. Gentlemen, HAving had continual and daily experience in several parts for many years together, in the cure of the French Dis∣ease, with as good success as mine own heart could wish; and now at length desiring to shew my self a profitable member of this Commonwealth and City wherein I abide, I could not chuse but write to you, by way of advice, seeing so many errors among you, tending all to the destruction of the Patient. In the first place, I counsel thee O man or woman, who ere thou ar, that dost profess the cure of Venereal Distempers, to avoid that common fault among all the Professors thereof, which is Coveteousness. For if a young man or a young woman hath by chance got a Clap, and is willing to give all he hath, ra∣ther then to endure the disease long, wilt thou be so base and sordid, to make his or her earnest desire to be the cause of thy exaction. Assure thy self that money got by such exaction, will be a worm to consume that part of thy Estate which thou hast honestly got. In the next place, be not too inquisitive of any Patient who he is, and where he dwells; for if he have not a mind to tell thee, what hast thou to do to enquire any thing concerning him? Thirdly, judge not rashly of him, as who should say, you have been lying with a Wench; for you cannot but know that there are many ways of getting Claps beside that one; as by drinking with the party, lying in a hot bed with him, sitting upon a close-stool after him; as also by lifting, riding, or any other manner of straining. Then let every Patient receive his cure with all privacy. And lastly, do not flatter me daily with any patient whatsoever. This is the part which ye have to act upon the Theatre of this world, which, if thou dost not justly perform, consider, I say, consi∣der, that you must make your exits into Stoves and Sweating∣tubs, much hotter then those with which you ever afflicted your patients withall, being on earth. Heaven direct your course, that you may be neither Cheaters, Imposters, nor Cozeners, as most are who profess the cure of Venereal Di∣stempers; but that ye may be in this, as well as in all your other actions, faithful and honest; which is the daily wish of Your Friend and Servant.
A Broom-man in Kent-street, to a young Lay of quality, whom he fell in Love withall, behold∣ing her in a Belcony. Madam, AND by that word you may know I am no zuch Clown as you may take me for, in good sooth law now, your fair face hath wounded me to the very hart, so that I would give all the old Shoes in my Sack to enjoy the happiness of your sweet company. I know that Ladies love variety, so that I am bold to think it would be no small recreation to you, when you have been glutted with the company of your silk and satten Gallants, to converse two or three hours with a taterd Broom-man. I have heard in some Ballads, how the Gods did condescend to come upon the earth, and dine with poor people; much less therefore should you being but a mortal Lady, disdain to eat a peice of bread and cheese, now and then, with a sorry Broom-man. There is a Proverb that tells the Gentlemen, that Jone is as good as my Lady in the dark: and why should there not be another Proverb to tell the Gentlewomen, That Tom is as good as my Lord in the dark. I do not want examples to tell you, how that the Queen of Fairies married a Tinker, and of several Ladies that have married their Gentlemen Ushers, others their Fathers Grooms, and others their Butlers. Now I believe my self not inferiour to any of those. As for what you, as a Woman, can expect from a man, I know my self sufficiently able, of which I have sent you a Certificate, signed with the Marks of most of the pretty Lasses in this street; neither do I doubt of the continuance thereof, unless your hard heart do con∣sume my marrow with grief and anguish of mind; do not therefore kill me, who though I am but a Broom-man, dare swear my self as faithful a Servant to you, as any man in Eng∣land, Scotland, France or Ireland. Pray send me word by this Bearer, for I stay within in great perplexity, and can∣not stir abroad with my Ware till I hear your Answer.
The Ladies Answer Gentle Broom-man, I Understand the great affection which thou hast signified to me in thy Letter. For which I give thee ten millions of thanks. Truly thy eloquent expression, and pat examples have begot so great an affection toward thee, that the smoak of all the Shoes thou hast in thy Ware-house, were they on fire, is not able to smother the flames which thou hast kindled in my heart. I shall not come to thee in my Coach, lest it should draw out all the Wenches in the street to stare upon our private affections. But if thou wilt make haste home from crying thy Ware about the streets, I shall not fail to meet thee at the Wool-sack in Kent-street, by six a clock to mor∣row night, where I doubt not but that I shall be able to give thee sufficient testimonies of my humility, and affable nature. In the mean time, I have sent thee a Flanders-lace Band, and a Diamond Ring, to wear for my sake. Wash thy feet, and put some sweet powder in thy hair, and be confident in so do∣ing, thou wilt render thy self most acceptable to thy Endeared Friend and Servant. A Country Parson to a rich Farmers Daughter in the same Village. Kind Mistress Dorothy, THE Parson of this Parish doth send thee greeting in these Lines. For verily last Sunday as I was preaching, thou didst dart from thy eyes the love of thy amiable features into my brest. So that even as a Woman with Child longeth for the corner of an Apple-tart, or a piece of raw Mutton, so do I thirst after thee; and even as a Virgin that eateth Chalk and drinketh Vinegar, looks pale, & loseth her stomach, so do I look pale with languishing for thee, and my belly is shrunk up for want of food; for I have not eaten above half a surloin of Beef, forty tythe Egs, thirty black Puddings, and five great brown Apple-pies, since Sunday last, that your Father took me home
to dinner, which is now almost a week. I shall put it to thy choice, whether thou wilt be courted in publick or in private; for I have made five delicate Sermons upon the most amo∣rous place in all the Canticles, wherewithall to allure thee into my embraces. If thou dost consent, then will I go to thy mother, and as the childe desireth the maid to spread him some bread and butter for his afternoons Luncheon, so will I desire her to give thee unto me that I may spread my my self upon thee. If she replyeth, Yea, Then will I speak to her in the words of Saint Bernard, saying, I thank you hear∣tily good Mother. But if she say unto me, Nay, then as Saint Cyprian hath it very well: I shall be ready to hang my self. Be thou therefore my preserver, and my intercessour, that nei∣ther thou mayest want a Husband, nor the Parish a Minister, nor thy Mother a Man to devour her bag puddings. A Letter of Smiles from a young conceited Scrivener to his beloved Mistress, Mistress D. C. Spinster. Madam, I No sooner saw you, but the tinder of my affection began to take fire. For your beauty was to me like the hearb Larix, cool in the water, but hot in my stomack. So that as Pharaoh did long to know his dream, so did I long to know what would become of me, as to your good liking of me. Be not therefore a beauty without compassion, which is like a Mandrake apple, comely in shew; but poisonful in taste. But woe is me, for I find that my words have wrought no more impression on your heart then an arrow on a rock of Adamant. So that I may say of you, that as in the greenest Grass is the greatest Serpent, in the clearest Water the ugliest Toad; so is your fair Body lin'd with a cruel Soul. Alas, you have no mercy on my captivity, so that I am like the Spaniel that gnaws his chain, but sooner spoils his teeth then procures liberty. But as a Bladder is to a learning Swimmer, so is Hope to me; which makes me apt to believe, that as there is no Iron but will be softned with the fire, so there is no Heart how hard so ever, that will not be soft∣by continual prayers. I confess my expression is but like a
picture drawn with a coal, wanting these lively colours, which a more skilful Pen might give it. However consider, that the Sun disdains not to shine upon the smallest Worm. Reconcile your self to the humblest of your Vassals, and do not through your Marble-hearted-cruelty utterly overwhelm him with Sence-distracting grief, like a Current that breaks the Dams, and with a vigorous impetuousness drowns the Fields. A Countrey Bumpkin to his Mistress. Sweet honey Jone, I Have here sent thee a thing, such a one as the Gentlefolks call a Love Letter: 'twas indited by my self after I had drank two or three good draughts of Ale, but 'twas writ in a Roman joyning-hand by the School-master and Clerk of our Parish, to whom I gave six pence for his pains. Truly Jone, my parents never brought me up to speak finely as my Land∣lords Son doth, but this I can say in downright terms, I love thee. Marry Jone, many time and oft have I fetcht home thy Cows, when no body knew who did it. Marry Jone, thou know'st I always plaid a thy side at stool ball, and when thou didst win the Garland in the Whitson-holidayes, marry Jone, I was sure to be drunk that night for joy. Marry Jone, cry I still, but when wilt thou marrie, Jone? I know thou dost love Will. the Taylor, who, 'tis true, is a very quiver man, and foots it most fetuously; but I can tell thee Jone, I think I shall be a better man then he shortly, for I am learning of a Fidler to play o'the Kit; so that if thou wilt not yield the sooner, I will ravish thee ere long with my musick. 'Tis true I never yet gave thee a Token, but I have here sent thee a peice of silver Ribband; I bought it in the Exchange, where all the folks houted at me, but thought I, hout and be hang'd and you will, for I will buy a Knot for my love. I assure thee Jone, 'twill make a better shew then a Gilt Bay-leaf, and for this year be the finest sight in all our Church. But what wilt thou give me for this Jone? alas, I ask nothing but thy self; come Jone thou shalt give me thy self, come prethe Jone give me thy self. What a happy day would that be, that to see us with our best Cloathes
on at Church, and the Parson saying,  Tom, take thee Jone, and by the mass I would take thee, and hug thee, and lug thee too, and hey then away to the Alehouse, and hey for the Musitioners, and the Canaries, and the Sillabubs, and the Shoulder a Mutton and gravie, with a hey down derry and a diddle diddle dee. Thus having no more to say, I rest in as∣surance of thy good will, thine honestly, truly and blewly, FINIS. Posies for RINGS. THou wert not handsom, wise, but rich, 'Twas that which did my eyes bewitch. What God hath joyn'd, let no man put asunder. Divinely knit by God are we, Late one, now two, the pledge you see, We strangely met, and so do many; But now as true as ever any. As we began, so let's continue. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. True blew will never stain. No money shall buy my—. No horns good Wife. Against thou goest, I will provide another.
Let him never take a Wife, That will not love her as his life. In loving thee, I love my self. A heart content Cannot repent. I do not repent, That I gave my consent. No gift can show, The love I ow. What the eye saw, the heart hath chosen. More faithful then fortunate. I'le ring thy thumb, Then clap thy bum. Hab nab; yet happy be lucky. Love me little, but love me long. 'Tis a good Mare, that ne're trips Love him that gave thee this Ring of gold; 'Tis he must kiss thee when th' art old. Now I know more Then I knew before. I long'd to lose, and now have lost; I am contented, farewel frost. This Circle, though but small about, The Devil, jealousie, shall keep out. If I think my Wife is fair, What need other people care.
Now do I find, Why men are kind. 'Tis in vain for to resist, Women will do what they list. This Ring as a token I give to thee, That thou no tokens do change for me. One begs enough, ne're fear, To a small closet door my Dear. Sarah, I do love thee so, Cause thou didst not say me No. My dearest Betty, Is good and pretty. I did then commit no folly, When I married my sweet Molly. Dorothy this Ring is thine, And now thy bouncing body's mine. 'Tis fit men should not be alone, Which made Tom to marry Jone. Peg, if thou art a Peg for me, Then I will have a Peg for thee. Su is bonny, blithe, and brown, This Ring hath made her now my own. Katie, I chose with hair so red, For the fine tricks she plays abed. Nan with her curl'd locks I spy'd, And would never be deny'd. Prances is a name that's common But H. W. made me a woman.
Tabitha's a name that sounds not ill, She was bid rise, but I bid mine lie still. Ursula her name sounds rough, I warrant she'l give thee enough. Dorcas she made coats for Children. But we'l make Children to wear coats. Like Phyllis there is none, She truly loves her Choridon. Leonora's fair, well bred; Yet I had her Maiden-head. Ellen, all men commend thy eyes; Onely I commend thy thighes. I have a John as true as steel, I do believe, because I feel. Robert, thou art a man of mettle, Thy string is sweet, yet doth it nettle. My Henry is a rousing blade, I lay not long by him a maid. My William with his wisp, He loves me well, although I lisp. I love James for Scotlands sake, Where so many bellies ake. I love the name that conquer'd France, Which made me yield to Edwards Lance. Thomas is fit a Cuckold to be, For he will not believe unless he see. I love Abraham above any, Because he was the father of many.
PROVERBS. The Text. HE that hath a Woman by the waste, hath a wet Eel by the tail. Comment. For Women hate delaies as much as they abominate debility. Womens actions are like their wombs, not to be fathomed. And therefore he that deals with them ought to be a man of a deep reach. Love though he be blind can smell. This is the reason, that a man that runs passionately after a woman, is said to have his nose in her tail, and is call'd a smell∣smock. Nothing venture, nothing have. Yet he that ventures too far loses all. Now the question will be in these two Proverbs, Whether it be better for a man to lose nothing, though he get nothing, and so to keep his pate whole, or to lose that which he hath gotten, and to have nothing left him but a skin full of holes. The gentle Ewe is suckt by many Lambs. And so is a kind woman butted at by many Rams. Love and Knowledge live not together. That is to say, they live asunder. They love too much who die for love. For as Aristotle says, Every excess destroys; and therefore he is a fool what will do so, seeing a man hath so little thanks for his labour. A fat Wife never lov'd a aint Husband. And there's good reason for it, the Devil ought to have his due. Love me and love my dog.
To this Proverb are the Ladies beholding for all the verses made upon their Beages. He that loves another better then himself, starves in a Cooks shop. And ought to be buried under the Gallows. Every one is not merry that dances. Neither does every one dance that is merry. 'Tis a trouble to ride, and death to go on foot. What a devilish lazy fellow was he that invented this Pro∣verb. He incurs no danger, that comes not where it is. That's very certain. He that goes far, gains much. That's a lie, witness Thom. Coriat. When a man is dead, his Friends forsake him. That's because he forsakes his Friends. Blows makes love decay. And therefore he that beats his Wife, is sure to be a Cuckold. Rome was not built in a day. That every body knows, but can any man tell us how many days 'twas a building. Love makes men marry, money makes them angry. That's when they cannot get their wives portions. He that cannot pay let him pray. With all my heart, if he can meet with those that will say, Amen to his requests. Nothing but money is money worth. Very true, for here's knavery in all Trades. Claw an Ass by the breech and hl bewray your fingers. One good turn requires another. He that believes a woman, and leads an Ass, will never be in quiet. Then he that believes this Proverb, is an Ass. that will do either. He hath enough that's pleas'd. But can any body tell when he hath enough to please him. A man may well call till his heart ake, if no body will hear him. Right Roger, your Sow's good Mutton. One Barber trims another.
'Tis very kindly done of them He that means to pay gives good security. Because he intends his security shall pay. A man may lead his Horse to water, but he cannot make him drink unless he list. Otherwise he would infringe the liberty of the Subject. He must needs go whom the Divel drives. For the Divel's a notable whipster. Fast bind, fast find. This Proverb caused the invention of the Italian Padlocks. There's many a one sings that is full sorry. This Proverb i verified by those that sing upon the Gallows. He's sure of a Cat that hath her skin. Would I were as sure of an hundred pound. A man may easily finde a stick to beat a Dog. Gentlemen, I hope you know the meaning of this Proverb without expounding it, if you do not, you shall ne're un∣derstand it for me. A Dog will endure no companion in the Kitchin. For Dogs are like Usurers, they love to eat by themselves. A fat Kitchin makes a lean Testament. Very likely, for a man cannot eat his Cake, and have his Cake. The Lady kisses her man for his masters sake. Neither do I see how his master can be angry, 'tis one part of his duty to man his Mistress. He that spends beyond his ability, May hang himself with great agility. For he is lighter then he was by many a pound. Every truth is not to be told. And therefore Scogan's wife, when her husband as'kd her whether he where a Cuckold or no, deny'd to tell him. He that begins a matter untowardly, ends it ill-favouredly. This Proverb concerns Courters of Mistresses and getters of Maidenheads. The Divel is known by his Claws. How can that be, when some Authors affirm he hath no Claws. An ill wife that grows not worse, is not the worst of wives.
A bad excuse is better then none at all. Women weep and sicken when they lit. But let the Cock crow, and you shall presently perceive change of weather. On my word 'tis time to stand to your tacklings friends when the ship leaks. The Wife that bites her lips and treads askue, Is to her Husband, or her self, untrue. Gentlemen, forewarn'd forearm'd. These are signs easie enough to be seen, take notice of them A Woman and a melon are both alike. For till they are broke up, no body knows what is in them. 'Tis no great matter though a woman drown her self. For there are flesh-pots enough in Egypt. A gadding hen and a gadding wife will be soon lost. But here's the mischief on't, that the gadding wife knows the way home, and the hen does not. He that loses his wife and six pence loses by the money. Let him that can finde the six pence take the wife for his pains. A man of straw is worth a woman of gold. Nay, here Ile be sworn, the Proverb-monger was out. For a whole Seraglio of such Concubines would do a man no harm. Fall back, fall edge. Some thing I would say to this Proverb, but I cannot tell what, and therefore I care not what becomes on't. Farewell frost. So said the Maid, and then she sighed. Every day is not Sunday. No, for then people would be weary of going to Church. Every woman hath her wanton fit. I, and will have it in spite of the Devil. A gazing, gadding maid seldom proves a good liuswise. 'Tis much they should not prosper when they look so well about them. He is a fool that loses flesh for bones. That is to say, he is a fool that refuses a fine plump Girle for a lean one. Let him that fears the wagging of feathers fear to go among wilde fowl. But now a dayes a man may walk among the wild fowl, and ever fear their feathers,
Such as the tree, such is the fruit. That's not alwayes so, for there's many proper women have hogoblins to their Children. Many a little makes a mickle, Light gains makes heavy purses. Ha! well said, old true Penny. Fine feathers make fine birds, As you may see in Hide Park. He repents too late that repents at the gallows. Therefore he had as good let it alone. He's an ill cook that licks not his own fingers. Doubtless the light of Nature hath taught every man this Proverb. A sack full of holes can hold no corn. Even so there be some women that cannot hold their water. A little rain allays a very great winde. So said a mad fellow when he bepist his wives farting hole. The longest dayes have evenings. Who can help it, Ladies! A low man can fell a tall oak. If a tall oak, much more a tall woman; therefore maidens despise not little men. Too much scratching hurts the skin. But say the women there's a difference between scratching and rubbing. Of idleness comes no goodness. For that's the reason so many maids have the green sickness. Good at meat, good at work. Therefore 'tis the best way alwayes to eat stoutly in the com∣pany of women. Grass grows not in hot ovens. He that made this Proverb, was bound sure to speak truth for a wager. Ill weeds grow apace. That's always the answer of an old woman, when you tell her she has a proper maid to her daughter. Good clothes hide much deformity. What rare men Taylors are. Men may meet, but not mountains. Therefore you see when Mahomet bid the Hill come to him it would not stir, 'twas so lazie. He that wants shame shall never win credit.
How is that great vertue impudence here abused? He that is ashamed to eat, is ashamed to live. If a man could live as long as he could eat, I make no que∣stion but that he might easily be perswaded to lose his shame, and put in sureties for the eternity of his stomach. As shamefac't as a sow that slaps up a sillabub, Those are your Whitson-Holiday sows, that swill up whole milk-pails in the field, till you may follow them home by the leakage of their tap-holes. He never goes out of his way that goes to a good house. This was a maxim observed by Taylor the Water-Poet in his long vacation voyages. He that cannot fight let him run. 'Tis a notable piece of Matchavilian policy. A fools bolt is soon shot. That made the Gentlewoman shit in the Exchange. A gentle shepherd makes the wolf shite wool. 'Tis a very fine way to be eased of the trouble of sheep-shearing Good words cost nothing. Unless it be Dedications and Love Verses, for some men do pay for them. Better may a mans foot slip then his tongue trip. Commonly the tripping of the tongue and the slipping of the foot happen both together. Now if a man be late abroad, 'tis better that his tongue should trip then his foot slip, for he may chance to fall in the street, and have a coach go over him. Some men may better steal a horse then others look on. For 'tis fit that he that took least pains should have least profit. When thieves fall out true men come by their own. For as Philip the great King of Macedon well said, Con∣cord upholdeth all societies: Therefore 'tis high time for thieves to be hang'd, when they cannot agree among them∣selves. A liquorish huswife seldom makes thick pottage. For she puts all her Oatmeal in Caudles. Hungry dogs love dirty puddings. There's many a man hath lost his Nose by verifying this Proverb. He'l make you believe a Hare lays eggs. See Brown's vulgar Errors.
'Tis an ill winde blows no body good. After meat comes mustard. For their teeth watered so much after the meat, that it was impossible their eyes should water after the mustard. He that holds a frying-pan by the tail may turn it which way he lists. See more of this in Alexius his secrets, or in Aristotles book of the dyet of the Phisolophers, cap. 6. of the manner of ma∣king pancakes. Better no pies, then pies made with scabby hands. Wink and all's well, for what the eye sees not, the heart never rues. He that is born to be hang'd shall never be drown'd. VVell fare him that is born to be hang'd say I, for he goes to heaven in a string, when he that is drown'd goes to hell in a ferry-boat. A wary father has a prodigal son. He is to be commended for not letting his fathers estate lie fal∣low; for if he will not sow again after his great harvest, his son must. A man cannot make a cheverel purse of a sow's ear. Ye cannot tell what a man may do, there are very notable pro∣jectors living now adays. Like will to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier. Gentlemen, ye need not wonder how the Collier and the De∣vil came to be familiar, for he is fain to keep in with that trade, that he may buy his provision at the best hand, against he goes to to set up his Pye corner calling.
MISCELANIA. Fancy awakened: Natural, Amorous, Moral, Experimental, Paradoxical, Enigmatical Jest∣ing, and Jovial Questions, with their several Answers and Solutions. Davus es huc venias mox eris Oedipus alter. Q. Why did Apelles paint Cupid with these words, Spring-time and Winter? A. By those two seasons, he represented the prosperities and adversities that wait on Lovers. Q, Why do lovers blush on the bridal night? A. Out of natural shamefastness of what they are about to do. Q. What is the difference betwixt an honest and dishonest woman? A. A word. Q. VVhy do whores paint? A. That they may have some colour for there Venery. Q. VVhat differences a woman from a man? A. Meum & tuum. Q. VVhy do they use to paint Cupid bare-headed? A. To signifie, that betwixt true lovers, there should be no∣thing covered or concealed Q. VVhat is the greatest wonder in a little circuit? A. The face of a man. Q. VVhat said the Squire when he found his man Harry in bed with his own Curtizan? A. Well done Harry, after me is manners. Q. VVhat if there had not ben been an Act against building? A. That they would have built from the So Ho to Branford. Q. VVhat did the old Book-sellers Dedication Horse cost him that he use to ride on up and down the countrey? A. Go look.
Q. What are the attendants on love? A. Pleasure, travel, sweet; bitter, war, peace, life, and death. Q. What are the joyes of love? A. Plays, sweet sleeps, soft beds, ravishing musick, rich per∣fumes, delicious wines, costly banquets, wanton refreshing, and such other soft and ravishing contentments. Q. Why do the Poets bestow arrows on Cupid? A. To Signifie how desperately love wounds. Q. Why are the lips moveable? A. For the forming of the voice and words Q. How many veins are there in the body of a man! A. As many as there are days in a year. Q. Why do some stammer and some lisp? A. By reason of the shrinking of the sinnews which are cor∣rupted by flegm. Q. Why are we colder after dinner then before? A. Because that the natural heart retireth to the stomack to further digesture. Q. What Lady was that, which daunced best at the Ball in Lincolns-inn-fields? A. She, whose foot slipping fell on her back. Q. What reply was made to him that said, He did not use to give the wall to every Cockscomb? A. But I do Sir, and so gave him the wall. Q. What is an ordinary Fencer? A. For flesh and blood he is like other men, but sure na∣ture meant him for a Stock fish. Q. Where is reputation measured by the acre? A. In the countrey. Q. What are the outward signs of the body, to judge of the inward disposition of the mind? A. A head sharp, and high crown'd imports an ill affected mind, tallness of stature, dullness of wit, little eyes, a large con∣science-great ears, kin to Midas an ass, spacious breasted, long lined, smooth brows without sorrow, liberality; a beautiful face denotes the best complexion, soft flesh to be the most apt and wise to conceive, and so &c. Q. Who was famous for his memory? A. Seneca, who writes of himself, that he was able to recite two thousand names after they had been once read to him. Q. What will never be out of fashion?
A. The getting of Bastards. Q. When is a Cuckolds Almanack out of date? A, Its perpetual. Q. Why do some men love wenches better then their wives? A. Because stoln pleasures seem sweetest: Q. Why are women smoother then men? A- Because they have the help of nature to expel those superfluities that remain in men. Q. What's that which is too hard for one to keep, enough for two, and too much for three to keep? Sol. A Secret. Q. What people are those that have but one day and one night all the year. Sol. Those that live under the Pole Artick, for to them the sun never riseth in the Horizon 24 degrees, nor comes under; so they have six signs above, and six signs beneath it. Q. What is that which goeth the swiftest of all moving things, and is the most apprehensive of all living things, yet we cannot perceive his instant moving. Sol. The Sun, which according to the astrological conje∣cture, runs two hundred seven and twenty thousand miles in one hour. Q. How is kissing used? A. Onely as a Prologue to the play. Q. How doth a man look after the recreations of a bridal night? A. Like the picture of ill luck. Q. Who invented the first lie of the great Giant? A. Charles Brandon Stone-cutter in Phenix Alley, near Long-acre, into whom his next neighbor John Tayler the Wa∣ter-Poet breathed his fictitious spirit. Q. Why is Cupid pictured flying? A. Because when he is sufficiently routed, he can stand no longer to it. Q. Why are Tobacco-shops and Bawdy-houses coincidents? A. Because smoak is not without fire. Q. What is a Pyrate? A. He is called a Traytor, because he fortifies a castle a∣gainst the King. Q. What answer did the Lawyer return to him that askt him, whether his long discourse was not troublesome to him?
A. No indeed Sir, said he, my mind was on another matter. Q. How might Naylers female be rightly named Mary Magdalene? A. As she was a grievous sinner. Q. To whom may a man best commit a secret? A. To a common lyer, for he shall not be believed though he tells truth. Q. What is that which of running, becomes staid; of soft, becomes hard; of weak; becomes strong; of that which is in∣finite, becomes but one. Sol. Ice. Qu. Wherefore is it that Bastard children are often more in∣genious then the Legitimate. A. Because, as they are got secretly, and by stealth, so the act is performed with a more forced affection. Q. Why are those that have their hair of one colour, and their beards of another, for the most part, accounted dangerous per∣sons? A. because it denotes in them an inequality of their hu∣mors and complexions, which makes them naturally variable. Q. Why is every creature sad after copulation? A. In consideration of the unhandsomness of the act. Q. Whether do the Gallants go to Hide Park to hear the Cuckow or the Nightingal? A. Both. Q. Why did Adam take the apple from Eve? A. Because she bit it first, and said it was good. Q. Why do Exchange-men so seldom speak truth? A. Because it is not A la mode. Q. What said the Horse-courser to the Justice, when he said; If he were not hang'd, he would be hang'd for him? A. He desired his Worship when the time came, that he would not be out of the way. Q. What said the fellow to the Chandler that had a whole groze of Candles stoln from him. Q. Take not your loss so to heart friend; there is no que∣stion but that they will be brought to light Q. Why are they called Quakers? A. Because they tremble at their own opinions. Q. What is a precise Sister? A. She is one that will not let her childe read the Horn∣book, if a Christ-cross row be in it.
Q. What are Chamber-maids like unto? A. Lotteries, you may draw twenty, before you shall have one good one. Q. What is the mystery of greatness? A. To keep inferiors ignorant. Q. What was that which little Jeffry's the Queens dwarfs mothers health was drunk out of? A. Queen Mabs thimble, an akorn. Q. What city is that which is founded in the water, com∣passed with water, and hath no other walls but the seas? A. Venice, which hath continued uninterrupted since the first building 1152. years. Q. What little fish is that in the sea, which is the greatest wonder for its strength? Sol. A Remora, which is a fish that is not above a foot long, yet by fastning on a ship, will stay it under sail against winde and tide. Q. Why do some mens hair curle? A. It is caused by the hot and dry temperatures of the persons. Q. Why do gelded animals grow more fat then others? A. Because they do not lose their better humors in follow∣ing the females. Q. Why are little men more prompt, subtil, and Chollerick then great? A. Because their vertue, and natural vigor, together with the forces of the spirits are more united in them, then in the great. Q. What are those swellings and pimples that are usually in the face? A. They are no other then an enunciation of crude, indi∣gested humors, which proceed from the moisture of the head. Q. What reply made the young wife to him, that because she had married an old man, said, that sometimes an old horse would travel as long a journey as a young one? A. I, said she, and withal fetching a great sigh, and stro∣king down her Belly; but not in this rode, Sir. Q. Why should a man chuse a little wife? A. Because too much of one thing is good for nothing. Q. Why is sweet mistress so usual a complement? A. Because shitten comes shites is the beginning of love. Q. What answer did the wench return to him (being bare∣foot) that askt her, whether or no she wore her every dayes stockings?
A. Yes Sir, said she, and I have a pair of breeches to them of the same, which hath a hole in't, into which you may if you please thrust your nose. Q. What shift did he make for to pay for his pint of Sack that he call'd for at the Kings-head in Fleet-street? A. He thrust his stuff cloak into his codpiss, and running by the Bar cryed, stop thief, one had stoln his cloak out of the room. Q. VVhat said the Lady to the Gentleman that often used that protestation, That he would pawn his soul on it? A. She desired him to bring another pawn, for she greatly feared that was forfeit already. Q. VVhat is a whore-master? A. He is one whose ordinary sport is cock-fighting, which he uses himself so long too, that at last he grows better acquain∣ted with Cornelius then Tacitus. Q. VVhat did one compare tall men unto? A. To garrets, which have nothing but lumber in them. Q. VVhat creatures of all others live the longest? A. Man, a hart, the phenix; when as other creatures lives, compared with theirs, are but short: the hare lives but ten years, the cat as many, the goat eight, the ass thirty, the sheep ten, the dog twenty, the bull fifteen, the ox because he is geld∣ed, twenty, the sow and peacock twenty, the horse thirty, the dove eight, the partridge five and twenty. Q. First my mother brought me forth, then I the daughter bring forth my mother again? Sol. 'Tis water, which is first ice, and then melts again and brings forth water. Q. VVho are those that see many things afar off, but little near at hand. Sol. Old folks, who are blind in the present tense, but quick sighted in the preterpersect tense. Q. VVhy is Cupid painted a Child? A. To signifie the youthfulness that should attend a lover, as also, that for the toy and knack of his light affections, he will lose the accomplishment of his weightist fortunes. Q. VVhy do lovers look so pale and lean? A. As the passions of their minds inwardly consume them. Q. VVhy do lovers delight in amorous histories? A. In respect of the conformity of their passion to the subject
Q. Why doth one gape when another gapes? A. There is no other reason to be given but a sympathy of imagination when another man gapes. Q. How is it that women go so unwillingly to bed, and rise the next day so lusty? A. From the perfection they receive from the man, in that they then know they are women indeed. Q. what made the Water-Poet believe he was a cuckold? A. As 'tis reported he lookt through the window. Q. when may a lover fall out with his Mistress? A. When he hath learnt the trick to fall in with her agen. Q. when will Playes be in request? A. When Tom Randals Muses Look-glass may be acted. Q. what may be said of a common whore? A. Non redolet sed olet. Q. what's an excellent receipt to keep a woman honest? A. For her to be alwayes cross leg'd. Q. What is the latter part of the word jealousie? A. Lowsie. Q. What said a Gentleman to the Ladies, amongst whom, one of them let a fart? A. Ladies, I know it is for your ease, I beseech you let it go round, and when it shall come to my turn, I will use my best endeavor to try what I can do. Q. How did the late King serve one that was importunate to be knighted? A. After he had kneel'd, he bid him rise, and tell himself what he would be, and so he dismissed him. Q. what said she to her husband, that named all the cuc∣kolds in the town? A. Truly husband you are such another man. Q. What may be said of a young fellow that is in love with a whore? A. That he is faln asleep in the chimney corner, and is very likely to nod into the fire. Q. What are the three first members formed in the womb? A. The heart, the brain, and the liver, which are the three first members of life. Q. Why have women thicker bloods then men? A. By reason of the coldness of their nature which doth thicken and congeal their blood.
Q. VVhat creature is that which bites with his tongue? A. The Flatterer: Q. What do the ancients hold for one of the greatest won∣ders of the world? A. The Pyramids of Egypt. Q. VVhen I lived I fed the living, now I am dead I hear the living, and with swift speed walk over the living? Sol. A Ship made of an Oak, which growing, feeds Hogs, now bears men, and swims over fishes. Q. VVhy do we see our breaths in the winter, but not in the summer? A. Because in the summer the exterior air is more subtil and hot, and our breaths spread with such an attenuation, that they cannot be perceived; whereas in the winter, the air being more thick, and gross, and cold; it keeps it self more close, and unites it self in its issuing, to resist the coldness of the air, which is its contrary. Q. VVhy is a whores trade opposite to all others? A. Because she sets up without credit, and too much custom breaks her. Q. VVhat is a meer scholler? A. An intelligible ass. Q. What is the reason that Luke turned Preacher. A. Because he was not suffered to write news any longer. Q. VVhy is the language of a scold most moving? A. Because no man in his wits will tarry to hear her. Q. VVhat subject is the least worthy of a mans thoughts? A. The constancy of a woman. Qu. VVhat is the suddenest and most successful way of address to a widow? A. To tell her that you come to plough her up, that she must lie fallow no longer. Q. VVhen doth the voice change in men? A. At fourteen, when they begin to feel their concupi∣sence. Q. VVhy is the heart placed in the midst of the body? A. To impart life to the other parts. A. How are Hermophrodites begotten? A. By reason of the diversity of cells in the womb. A. VVhy are curled haired men sooner gray then others? A. Because their heat consumes the moist humours, which in
Eunuchs and others, is the cause of gray hairs. Q. Whose cock, whose dog, whose servant may be kept at the Cheapest rate? A. The Millers cock, the Butchers dog, and the Inn-keepers servant. Q. what is that, which having taken we have lost, and ha∣ving not taken we have kept still? Sol. A louse Q. When a man dies, which is the last part of him that dies, and which of a woman? A. To answer merrily, the heart is the last part of a man, and the tongue of a woman. Q. what is a flatterer? A. He is the shadow of a fool. Q. What said the Barbers wife to her husband, when he would have went out of the bed to have fetcht an instrument, which he told her he would use for to put her to less pain in the Iosing of her Maidenhead? A. Sweet Husband said she, Lie down again, there is no such need, my fathers man hath taken such an order with me three moneths since, that you may spare that labour. Q. What said the Usurer to the impudent fellow, that com∣ing into his room where he was in Pye-Corner, without any ceremony, drunk up his single pot of beer? Sir, said he, you are, as like the fellow that was taken the other day in Smithfield, and committed to Newgate for stealing of a horse, as ever I saw man. A. The fellow replied, Say you so Master Usurer, I knew him very well, he made no more of stealing a horse then I do of eating this black pudding; and so he snatcht the Usurers din∣ner and left him. Q. What Almanack maker writes truest this year? A. He that tells fewest lies. Q. What game do men love best? A. My Ladies-hole. Q. What sport doth women like best? A. Push pin. Q. If a man calls his wife Whore, what follows by consequence? A. That he is a Cuckold. Q. Why are women most jealous?
A. Because they love with less discretion then men. Q. Why do some ladies breasts leap, and as it were daunce when they talk with their lovers? A. From the neighborhood of the heart, from whence all the vital spirits proceed, which on such joyful occasions re∣tire to the breasts. Q. Why do lovers so kiss the eyes of their mistresses? A. Because they would if they could, through those win∣dows discern what is in the heart, or else in gratitude, as the eyes were the first beginners of their love. Q. What said the Tyler to his man when he fell through the rafters of the house? A. He liked a fellow that went through with his work. Q. What said the captain when his leg was shot off, and they cryed for a Chyrurgion? A. No Chyrurgion says he, a Carpenter, a Carpenter. Q. What said one that perceived a fellow in Bedlam more distracted then the rest, Sir were you ever married? A. Married quoth he, looking stedfasty upon him, I was never yet so mad. Q. Why is a prisoner the best fencer? A. Because he alwayes lies at a close ward. Q. Why doth marriage free a man from all cares? A. Because the woman takes all upon her. Q. VVhy did Nailor stand in the Pillory? A. For being Antichrist. Q. How is an Hypocrite defined; A. He is one that for the most part is full of oral subtilty and mental impiety. Q. VVhat is that which produceth tears without sorrow, takes his journey to heaven, but dies by the way, is begot by another, yet that other is not begot without it? Sol. Smoak. Q. VVhat two dissillables are those that divide the world? A. Meum et tuum. Q. VVhat is the wisest of all other things? A. Time, which findeth out, and altereth all other things Q. Why is Ben. Johnsons Chair at Robert Wilsons Tipling∣house in the Strand? A. To signifie that Poets in these hard times, though they should invoke the nine Muses, may still want nine pence to purchase a pint of Canary.
Q. what is the profitablest sign, that one that hath a hand∣some wife, can hang at his door? A. A pair of Horns, for then he shall be sure never to want custom. Q. Why are there so few of the sect of the Adamites? A. Because people are ashamed to show all. Q. What replied the Vintner to the Gentleman after he had drawn him good wine, and he said it had a whiff with it? A. So had his— Q. what is an Hoast? A. He is one that is none of his own, for he neither eats, drinks nor thinks, but at other mens charges. Q. What is a Tinker? A. He is a moveable, for he hath no certain abiding. Q. Whither doth S. A. go when he dies? A. Alas, he doth not know himself. Q. What said the fellow that had lost one of his ears for his former fact, and was for another crime condemned to lose the other? A. What a pox, said he, am I bound to find ears for every Sessions. Q. What answer did the Taylors boy give to him, that when he presented him with his masters Bill, said, that he was not running away? A. That though he were not running away, his master was. Q. What part is last formed in the womb? A. The eye, the interpretation of the minde, which as it is last formed, so it is the first which loseth its motion in death. Q. Why do men become bald? A. Because with their declining with age, their natural hu∣midity consumes in them, although they may otherwise a∣bound with corrupt excrements. Q. Why have gelded men shrill voices? A. The abundance of their humidity fills up the artery and makes it strait, so that the breath proceeding from a narrow passage, causeth the voice to be sharp. Q. Why do the Anabapists hate churches? A. Because they are used to preach in tubs. Q. What said Pope Urban the eighth to an English Gentle∣man that kist his toe? A. Sir, I hope you have not travelled thus far, to report when
you return to your own countrey, that you have seen Anti∣christ; alas Sir, I must deal plainly with you, I am no other then what you see me, a frail old man, ready to drop into my grave. Q. What if the bed should speak what it knows? A. It would put some persons strangely to the blush. Qu. why may an Hypocritical Puritan be said to be a bastard? A. Because he will not allow of Our Father. Q. what is the nick-name of Mistress M. T? A. Mistress Moll Cutpurse. Q. VVhat become of the Turk that daunced on the ropes, and stood on his head with his heels upright on an exceeding high pole? A. He was so near to Paradise that Mahomet onely put out his hand, took hold of his great toe, and pulled him in, Q. VVhat kind of thing is a New England brother? A. He is one that fled thither for conscience sake, and left his wife and children behind him for the Parish to keep. Q. VVhen policy trips up a mans heels, what is it called? A. Dexterity. Q. VVhy is it probable that Eve studied Astronomy? A. Because her sex have ever since been used to lie on their backs. Q. what may an importunate Dun be compared unto? A. A mans shadow. Q. What answer was given to him, that disswaded one from marrying of a wife, because she was no wiser? A. I desire said he, my wife should have no more wit; then to be able to distinguish my bed from another mans. Q. VVhat trick did a scholler that was a lewd rogue, use af∣ter he had often sent to his father, and could get no money from him? A. He sent a letter to his father, to certifie him that he was dead, and desired him to send him up money, to defray the charges of his funeral. Q. VVhy do not whores conceive? A. They have been ploughed so much, that they can of necessity yield no crop, Q. VVhy do we sleep better on the right side then on the left?
A. Because the lungs do then lie more remote, and cover the heart, which is on that side under the pap. qu. Which is the seat of the memory? A. The hindermost part of the brain. qu. Why are women said to be the weaker vessels? A. Because there are so many of them crakt. qu. Why do Lawyers wear such short gowns? A. Because the vacations are so long. qu. what was that in the Exchange that the Millener sent the Lady word that she had left behind her, and she sent him word back, that he might take it for his trouble of sending af∣ter her? A. A— qu. Wherefore is it that the Eccho reports more clearly to our hearing, the last syllable than the first? A. Because the first are broken by the last, or that we are too near, or that we speak the last in measure longer then the Eccho giveth us the first, and so we cannot so well under∣stand them. qu. What is that which knoweth not it self to speak, under∣standeth not a word, yet conceals not, but repeats the voice of him that speaks? A. The Eccho. qu. How long did the learned guess that the world would last? A. Six thousand years: two thousand years before the Law, two thousand years under the Law, and two thousand years under the Gospel. qu. From whence proceed tears? A. Out of the brains most thin and liquid excrements. qu. Of all fishes in the sea, which is the swistest? A. A Dolphin. qu. what thing is that which is neither fire, nor moon, nor star, yet it shines only in the night? Sol. A Gloeworm. qu. Why are so many whores gone beyond sea? A. To find out those Hectors that they missed in England. qu. What's the news from the Paris-garden? A. That there is no inferior Officer left to carry guts to the Bears. qu. What may be said of the surred Giant in the last Lord Mayors show?
A. That when he stood on his tip-toes, he was higher then the Pageants by the head and shoulders. Q. What said the gentleman to the thief, when he was wak't by chance, and heard him breaking in? A. My friend it is your best course to tarry till an hour or two hence for I am now awake. Q. What said the Farrier to the Emperick, when he would have given him money for a drench for his horse? A. Sir, we of one profession should not take money of one another. Q. what answer did the poor scholler give to the begger, that said that he had a licence to beg? A. That lice he might have, but sence he had none, to beg of a poor scholler. Q. what said the gentleman to his wife, when she desired him to give her a flap of the coney? A. How wife, before all this company. B. what is a creditor? A. A fellow that torments a man for his good conditions, he is one of Deucalions sons, begotten of a stone. Q. what is a Bawd like? A. A Medlar, for she is never ripe till she is rotten. Q. what is the reason that the out-landish woman is so hairy? A. Because she is so seldom trimmed. Q. why should not a married wan be called ass in his wives presence? A. Because ox is more proper. Q. At what season doth the patient husband love the scold his wife best? A. When she is speechless. Q. why are there so many whores and so few bawds? A. Because they want stock, though they have impudence enough to set up for themselves. Q. why are short and dim sighted people, more given to love then others? A. Because they discern not the unhandsom features and imperfectness of women so well as those that can see. Q. what is the meaning of the word Marriage? A. Marry at age. Q. what saying pleases a foolish Sollicitor best? A. Currat lex, ignoramus.
Q. why did the ancients paint on the borders of Cupids robe, Life and Death? A. Because true love lasts not onely for life, but after death also. Q. why have some stinking breaths? A. From the evil sumes that arise from the stomack. Q. why is the heart first ingendred and dead last. A. Because it is the original of life, and without it other parts cannot live. Q wherefore is it that we are most ticklish under the soles of the feet, and under the armpits? A. Because the skins of those parts are more strecht and more delicate. A. what is the swiftest thing in the world? A. One would imagin the sun, because in a day he compas∣eth the whole circuit of the earth, but a thought is swifter then the sun, for that it travelleth the whole world in a moment. Q. where is the center or middlemost part of the earth? A. Some Geographers write at Delphos. Qu. VVhy do husbands for the most part seek wives, and not wives husbands? A. Because the man is still seeking of his rib, which he lost, when it was taken out of his side to form woman. Q. VVhat is an hyporcritical Puritan? A. A diseased piece of Apocrypha, which bound to the Bible, corrupts the whole text. Q VVhat is a mans reason compared unto? A. In matters of faith, to fire; in the first degree of his as∣sent, flame; next smoak, and then nothing. Q. VVhy is it dangerous to marry a widow? A. Because she hath cast her rider. Q. Now Marriot is dead, who is the greatest eater? A. One that is living. Q, VVhat said the boy to the Cuckold, when he askt him why he stared him so in the face? A. Truly Gaffer quoth the boy, for no hurt, but because every body said that you had horns on your forehead, I look∣ed, and indeed Gaffer I could see none. Q. VVhat said the wench to the genleman, that hit her a clap on the breech, and cryed, I marry, here is a plump one in∣deed?
A. Truly, said she, if you should blow as much wind in there, as I have blown out, you would say it were plump to some purpose. Q. What was said to the dwarf? A. That he should still carry some sweet thing in his hand to smell to, whose nose is level'd to every mans tale that he followeth. Q. What is said to be the beautifullest thing in the world? A. The Sun, but to a blind man that cannot discern his glory, we may conclude vertue. Q. What creature of all others sheds tears at his death? A. The Hart. Q. How many miles is the earth in circuit? A. It is uncertain to define it, yet the learned and Astro∣logians are of opinion, that it is four times 5400. miles, how∣soever in respect of the heavens, they conclude it to be but a point, and that every star in the eighth Sphere is esteemed bigger then the whole circumference thereof; where if the body of the earth should be placed in the like splendor, it would hardly appear. Q. Why doth the stomach digest? A. Because of the heat of the parts adjoyning to the liver and the heart. Q. Why doth nature produce moystures? A. Through the evil disposition of the matter, and the influence of some ill constellation, not being able to bring forth what she intended, she bringeth forth that which she can. Q. When doth the voice change in women? A. At twelve years of age, when their breasts begin to grow. Q. What is the dolefullest Latine that a lover can speak? A. Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabile herbis. Q. What was old Chaucers Saw? A. Lord be merciful unto us, Fools or Knaves will else undo us. Q. What place is the worst to learn French in? A. The Low Countreys. Q. what's the best Rhetorick a man can use? A. To speak to the purpose. Q. what Rhetorick is most graceful in a woman? A. A beautiful face. Q. what companion should a man be most private withal?
A. A handsom Wench. Q. Why did Phil. Porter dye? A. Because he could live no longer. Q. How do the English love the Spaniards? A. Not so well as they do their silver mines. Q. When should the longest grace be said? A. When their is cold meat on the table Q. When will Saint James's Fair up again? A. When the Sutlers wives are not so subject to lie down. Q. Why do ladies always eat the kernels but leave the stones. A. Because to their best apprehensions they are to be kept for anothers use. Q. Why is love compared to a maze? A. Because when a man is once got in, he can never get out. Q. Why are women more silent in love then men? A. Because they are ashamed to talk of an unhansom busi∣ness that is already past. Q. What is the benefit of sneezing? A. To purge the expulsive power and vertue of the sight. Q. Why are all the senses in the head? A. Because the brain is there, on which all the senses do depend. Q. How should a man behave himself to a coy Lady? A. As if he were in the field, to charge her home. Q. Why is wit compared to brush-wood, and judgment to tinder? A. Because one gives the greatest flame, and the other yields the durablest heat; but both meeting together make the best fire Q. Why is a soldier so good an antiquary? A. Because he hath kept the old fashion, when the first bed was the ground. Q. Why may Aretin be accounted an expert artillery man? A. Because he gave directions for the postures. Q. When does the world end with an old man? A. When he begins to dote on a young wench. Q. what replied the fellow when one bid him hold his horse? A. He said, it was but one mans work, he might do it himself. Q. What is reported of the Executioner? A. That if he do not mend his Manners, he is likely to trust his life to the mercy of one of his own trade.
Q. What said one to a Lady that had so many patches on? A. That she could not well laugh for fear of shewing of two faces. Q. VVhat is a bawd? A. She is a charcoal that hath been burnt her self, and therefore is able to kindle a whole copper. Q. How did Master Not of the Inns of Court love a citi∣zens wife? A. Like any thing. Q. what is the most lascivious part of a woman? A. Her rowling eye. Q. what said the Vintner of Southwark, when the Parson killed his wife in the Percullis? A. By and by, anan, anan Sir, I come, I come Sir, by and by, Q. Why is love painted with flowers in one hand, and a fish in another? A. To show that without any contestation he governs both by sea and land; Q. why is marriage compared to a sea voyage? Qu. Because if people have not the greater, and the better fortune, They are very likely to be cast away. Q. which is most jealous, the man or the woman? A. The woman, though men have most cause, you know why. Q. Why are some left handed? A. Because in some persons the heart sendeth not heat to that side? Q. Why can women endure thin clothing in the winter bet∣ter then men? A. Because being naturally cold they feel cold the less Q. what creature is that which bringeth forth at once, nourisheth her young, and goes with young again? Sol. A hare. Q. what is that which being first water assumes the form of a stone, and still retains it? A. Crystal congealed by frost. Q. which is the quickest of the sences? A. The eye. Q. why is it better to marry a widow then a maid? A. Causa patet
Q. What may be said of a covetous rich man? A. That he freezes before the fire. Q. What reply did one of the Tylers make to the other, when he said, You do your work too slightly. A. Brother, said he, we must work at one time as we in∣tend to have work at another. Q. what was the reply to one that gave him this comple∣ment, Sir, I wish that every hair of my head were a groom to do you service? A. He replied, Sir, I wish that every blast from my back side were a cannon bullet ready charged to batter down your enemies. Q. A cowardly Captain askt a Soldier whether he knew him or no? A. The Soldier replyed, I should have known you if you had shown me your back, for that I have seen often; but I never saw your face before. Q. When will the Vintner at Aldersgate pull off the Mourn∣ing from his sign? A. When Wine is at the old price. Q. A fearful bashful Countrey-fellow was askt, whether he would go to bed to his bride? A. No quoth he, I'le go to Bed to my mother, that I will. Q. Whence is it that those people that wash in the winter in warm water feel more cold then those that wash in cold water? A. Because that the warm water opens the pores, and gives an entrance to the cold; whereas cold water on the contrary, shuts the pores, for cold is restringent. Q. wherefore is it that the Hycup, especially if it be not very violent, ceaseth in holding the breath; or else if we are sud∣denly frighted, or afflicted with some opinionate unhappiness, or else with the taking of vinegar? A. Because the Hycup proceeds of a sudden difficulty in breathing, and that in holding our breath, it must be of ne∣cessity, that we shall a little after respire by course; also we being made attentive to that we are fearful of, makes us hold our breath, and sometimes with a profound sigh fetcht from the stomach, it hinders the cause of the Hycup. Q. Can you in few words give an illustration or description of the body?
A. Yes, the body is the dwelling of the soul, the eyes are the windows of the soul, the brows the portals of the mind, the ears the interpreters of sounds, the lips the leaves of the mouth, the hands the workmen of the body, the heart thereceptacle of life, the lungs the bellows of the air, the stomac the orderer of meat, the bones the strengthners, and the legs the colums of the body Q. What seed is that which joyneth all the countries of the world together? A. Hempsed, of which is made sails for ships that trans∣mit them far and near. Q. What art is that which makes use of the wildest things in the world? A. Physick. Q. What was the Welsh-mans meaning, when he said, He had the law in hu own hand? A. He was burnt in the hand. Q. One said painters were cunning fellows, the other askt why? A. Because said he, they are sure to find a colour for what∣soever they do. Q. One said to a sturdy begger, friend, it is a custom amongst those of your trade, if a man doth not give you, to rail at him? A. The begger answered, thinking to get something of him, Ah master, I am none of those. Say you so, says the gentleman, I will try you for once; and so away he went, but never unbuttoned his fob. Q. One boasted himself to be a wit, saying, That the world ke him to be all wit? A. One that stood by, and knew him very well, Is it pos∣sible that you are taken to be a wit, or to be all wit, I on∣ly took you to be a wittal Qu. What is a meer common Lawyer? A. He is a soil to make a discreet one look the fairer. Q. what is a Bragadia welsh-man? A. He is one that hath the abilities of his mind in potentia, but not in atu. Q. why d se of our Lay Preachers hold forth so long? A. Because their ware being course, they can afford the larger measure. Q. what is cast beauty like? A. A pair of bellows, whose breath is cold, yet makes others burn.
Q. Who hath more pleasure on the bridal night, the man or the woman? A. The woman, who though she rises like blushing Aurora, yet such a tel-tail lightsomness, chearfulness and mirth appears in her face, as discovers the chaste and pleasant content she received from her bridegroom. Q. What is the highest respect, an honest wife can tender her husband? A. To expose her self to his embraces, to make him lord of her body, and commander of her thoughts. Q. Why doth a drunkard think that all things turn round about him? A. Because the spirits that serve the ight are mingled with the vapors of the drink; which with too much heat, cause the eye to be continually moving. Q. Why do gentlemen so powder their Periwigs? A. Because all their own hair comes off. Q. How did the gentleman requite his blind bears courtesie? A. She burnt him, and the fire shovel burnt her. Q. Why do Apprentises wear no cuffs? A. Because they cannot abide to were those that are of their masters giving. Q. Why cannot the Spaniards so properly now as formerly, for their keeping of forts, be compared to crab-lice? A. Because the English have of late so put them to the shrug, that they are always upon remove. Q. Why doth Cupid, of a blind archer, shoot so well? A. Because for the most part he hits the mark. Q. Why is wealth better then wit? A. Because few Poets have had the fortune to be chosen Aldermen. Q. What said the fellow to the sleeping watchman, when he stole away his lanthorn? A. Good night. Q. What is the worst argument a Vintner can use against the late act for the prizes of wine? A. To draw bad wine. Qu. What said the Welsh-man, that by his reading saved his life, when after they had burnt him in the hand, they bid him cry, God save the King? A. Nay, quoth he, rather God bless my father and mother, for
if they had not brought me up to reading, I might have been hanged for all the King. Q. To one that excepted that another had saluted his Mistress? A. This answer was given, that as he had kist her before, he might if he pleased kiss her behind. Q. what is the greatest traveller next to a man? A. A louse, because he always bears him company. Q. what is a fellow of a house? A. He is one that speaks swords, and fights ergo's. Q. what is that which makes no difference betwixt a wise man and a fool? A. Sleep. Q. wherefore are the morning studies best? A. Because the spirits are more free after their repose, and the brain and organs of the body are discharged of the fumes and vapor that arise from the nourishment, the di∣gestion being finisht. Q. wherefore in winter do we smell perfumes less then in summer? A. Because that the cold thickens the air. Q. what stone is that which neither yields to the fire, nor the hammer? A. The Adamant, which is only dissolved by Goats blood. Q. How is the taste best discerned? A. By the veins which spread though the tongue and pallat, to distinguish of every relish. Q. A gentleman hawked in a farmers ground, for which the farmer being much incensed, gave him base words, which provok∣ed the gentleman so highly that he spit in his face; at which the farmer being amazed, askt him, what was his reason for the affront. A. The gentleman answered, what would you be at, I could do no more then give you warning, I hawked before I spet. Q. To one that said that lead was the basest mettal of all mettal? A. One replied, Sir it is so, but yet it is the stoutest, for the Glasier will tell you that it keeps more quarrels asun∣der, then any other mettal in the world, Q. what answer was made to him by the Judge who fearing the cause would go against him, desir'd a longer day of hear∣ing?
A. The Judge answered, that he should have one, it should be on Saint Barnabies day next. Q. what reply was made to her that had never a Child, yet she thankt God that she had a husband of very good parts? A. It is true, replied one of the neighbours, I acknow∣ledge him to be a man of good parts, but yet he canot multiply. Q. VVhy do women take those for asses that are too impor∣tunate? A. As they are sensible of their own imperfections, they admire men should descend so below their understandings to be so simply sensual. Q. VVhat things are Chiefly in opposition to true love? A. Shame and fear. Q. VVhy is love painted naked? A. To shew that all the acts and deeds of love ought to be open, such as are free from treachery or dissimulation. Q. wherefore is it that by the rubbing of our eyes, we cease to sneeze? A. Because that this rubbing excites heat in the eyes, near which we make the sneezing, and that being a stranger heat, nevertheless a more strong, extincts the other heat which caused the sneezing. Q. Wherefore is it that in summer we drink more, and in winter we eat more? A. Because as the summer dries our bodies, so we are forced to moisten them, and in the winter, the cold predominating on the exterior and natural heat, inforces it self, and gathered all into the interior, whereby we eat & digest our meat the better. Q. what creatures of all others, as Naturalists write, are the worst that the earth nourisheth? A. Of beasts, tygers: of men, adulterers and flatterers. Q. From whence proceeds jealousie? A. From envy and love. Envy to see him whom a Mistress loves, to love another; out of love, as she is fearful to lose him who is her best beloved. Q. why is a Drunkard a good Philosopher? A. Because that he thinks the world goes round. Q. what said Sir Benjamin Ruddiard of Master P? A. That he was too high for this world, and too low for the world to come. Q. what is the least part of the body, yet darkens the whole body?
A. The eye-lid, the hair whereof, neither waxeth more nor groweth longer. qu. why are the Italians said to be so jealous? A. Because they keep all under lock and key. qu. what is the name of that fish, which of all others, pleases women best? A. Plase. qu. why are Taylers of such esteem? A. Because they are men of great reckoning. qu. How did a gentleman of late requite him that gave him the horns? A. He bit off a convenient piece of his nose, as they were together in a coach, over against the Half-moon Tayern in the Strand. qu. what death would a Dutch man soonest chuse? A. To be drown'd in a barrel of English beer. qu. what said the gentleman to him that wrangled with him at cards and called him knave? A. Sir, said he, you are a court card, that is neither king nor queen. qu. What reply made the Lock-Smiths wife to her husband, when he would ntver let her be quiet, but according to his jea∣lous custom, preacht to her a sermon out of his trade, of what bars bolts, and locks belonged to the chastity of an honest wife? A. What a coil is here, quoth she, with your bars, your bolts and your locks; you are a little too conceited of your trade, when there is never a Tapster nor Ostler that I know, but hath as good a key to open it as any Lock-Smith of you all. qu. what is good manners in a Chamber-maid? A. To exercise her patience behind the hangings, whilst her Mistress is busie with a gentleman in the same room. qu. what said the French madam to her husband, when she went to bed to her Lodger in the next room? A. Husband, I went only to the Chamber-pot. qu. what if dreams and wishes had been all true? A. There had not been since Popery, one Nun to make a maid of. qu. How do you define a Serjeant A. He is for the most part the spawn of a decayed Shop∣keeper, a hangman and he are twins, only a hangman is his eldest brother.
qu. what is an Almanack maker? A. He is a tenant by custom to the Planets, of whom he holds the twelve signs by lease parol, to which he pays yearly rent. qu. which at all times is the best bed-fellow? A. Sleep. qu. why are women at all seasons more prone to love then other creatures? A. Because they are naturally more soft and ticklish, qu. whether is the man or woman more constant in love? A. The man, as he is of a more firm body and spirit. qu. Why did Paris see the Goddess naked, when he was ap∣pointed to give his judgment about the ball? A. Because many have handsome faces, that if they were stript of their cloaths, have such nasty deformity on their bo∣dies, that a Beadle of the wand would sooner lose his place then approach them with a clean whip. qu. why did the admired Painter Xerxes figure Cupid in a green robe? A. Not only to express the youthfulness of love, but also to moralize what the colour green signifies, which is Hope. qu. How may carnal copulation be civilly defined? A. It is a mutual action of male and female with conveni∣ent instruments, ordained and deputed for generation, to maintain and multiply the species and kind of every creature. qu. why is that saying, That the falling out of lovers is the beginning of love? A. Because love is like a flame that increaseth with every blast. qu, what kind of people are those, that being as beasts them∣selves, set upon beasts, carry beasts in their hands, have beasts running about them, and all to pursue and kill beasts? Sol. Unlearned Hunts-men. qu. wherefore is the world round? A. To signifie that it, nor all in it can fill the heart of man, which is triangular. qu. what are the benefits of good sents and perfumes? A. To purifie the brain, refine the wit, and awaken the fancy. qu. Is lying of any ancient standing? A. Yes, but not as the atheistical writer antedates, and be∣fore Adam.
Q. why is immoderate venery hurtful? A. Because it destroyes the sight, spends the spirits, dries up the radical moisture, which is instanced by the naturalists in the Sparrows, which by reason of their often coupling, live but three years. Q. Whence comes it that those that are born deaf are also dumb? A. There is a certain tie or conjunction of the nerves which stretch to the ears, and from the tongue, the which being indisposed from the birth, it must of necessity be, that those two faculties should be equally affected; onely it is confessed, that certain sicknesses may make one deaf, without being dumb; and on the contrary, one may be made dumb without being deaf, because it may so fall out, that one branch of the nerve may be offended without hurting the other. Q. Why do lovers sit up with one another whole nights? A. Because they cannot go to bed together. Q. May a lover die with too much loving? A. Yes, as 'tis in the Song, for the space of half an hour, but no longer. Q. Why is Cupid pictured blinde? A. Because he uses in the dark to play at blind-man-buff. Q. why do the Dutch eat so much butter? A, Because they have there fish so cheap. Q. what said the Gardiner to his wife when she came to see him hang'd? A. Get you to work you whore, weed, weed for bread for your children, is this a time for you to see showes. Q. What think you of the wife, that said the Taylor her husband, was not fit for her? A. She had a minde to measure with a yard of her own chusing. Q. What said one of a marriage that was made betwixt a widow of a vast fortune, and a Gentleman of a great house that had no estate A. That the marriage was like a black pudding, one brought blood, and the other brought suet and oatmeal. Q. What may a porter of the city gates becompared unto? A. Cerberus, that would not let the wandring ghosts pass without a sop. Q. Why should a fair womans neck be awry?
A. Then it stands as if she lookt for a kiss. Q. what is a Mountebank? A. He is one that if he can but come by the names of dis∣eases, to stuff his Bill with, he hath a sufficient stock to set up withall. Q. what Officer keeps his Oath most strictly to the City? A. A Serjeant, for he swears to be a true Varlet to the city, and he continues so to his dying day. Q. what trick will the Vintners use after walnuts are out of season, to keep up their price of sack? A. Cunning knaves need no Brokers. Q. whether is the water or the earth bigger? A. The water is bigger then the earth, the air is bigger then the water, and the fire bigger then the air. Q. How many bones are there in the body of a man? A. In the Head 49. in the Breast 67. in the Hands 61. in the Feet 60. the vulgar opinion is, that there is in all 284. Q. How may one distinguish of the height of things? A. The Sea is higher then the Earth, the Air is higher then the Sea, the Fire then the Air, and the Poles above them. Q. why doth a chaste woman love him exceedingly that had her virginity? A. Because of her shamefac'tness, as also out of an esteem of him to whom she intrusted her credit. Q. what herb of all others most present the form of a man; A. A mandrake. Q. what birds of all others are the most perfect heralds of the Spring? A. The Swallow and the Cuckow. Q. At what time do womens breasts begin first to increase? A. At fourteen. Q. what is conjectured of him that made the song of the Bulls feather! A. That there is one about the the town, that can pre∣tend more reason to sing it, better then himself. Q. why did a Pulpit cuffer about London, cry out so for bows and arrows, bows and arrows? A. Because, according to the Proverb, a fools bolt is soon shot. Q. why do some women blush so? A. Because that little modesty they have, is contracted in their faces.
Q. Why do young whores turn old bawds? A. It is with them as it is with other trades, after they have served out their times, they set up for themselves. Q. What is a whore? A. She is one that pricks betimes, for her stock is a white thorn, which cut and grafted on, she becomes a medlar. Q. One askt Ben. Johnson what reparation he would tender to his honor for spitting in his face? A. He answered, if he pleased, he would tread it out again. Q. What said the wench that was brought before the Judge a∣bout a rape, when he askt her, whether the fellow offered any violence, or the like? A. Yes, said she, and please your worship, he bound my hands, and would have tyed my legs together, but I thank my own industry, I kept them asunder. Q. A countrey Painter painting of a small Parish Church, and writing false Orthography, one askt him, that overlookt his work, why he spelt so false? A. Alas Sir, says the Painter, you must understand that this is a poor Village, and they will be loath to go to the charges of true English. Q. What were those two stars that the sea-man cryed out for in the storm, as onely desirous to see, before he was cast away? A. The star in Cheap-side, and the star in Coleman-street. Q. What said he that saw a fellow in a very cold morning on the gallows in his shirt? A. That he was afraid he would catch his death. Q. What may a covetous Lawyer be compared unto? A. He's one whose fingers have itcht for a bribe, ever since his first practising of Court-hand. Q. What is a meer Pettifogger? A. He is one of Sampsons Foxes, he sets men more shame∣fully together by the ears then pillories. Q. Why do lovers shed their hair so fast? A. Because with them it is for the most part the fall of the leaf. Q. Is it lawful for a lover to make use of any other Lady then his own? A. The law of Nations permits no such custom, nor will it serve his turn, though she be never so like, to say, that he mistook her for his own Mistress.
Q. What is love? A. 'Tis a passion without reason, order, or stability, 'tis the whirle-pool of mans liberty, a disease that will make one as sleepy as a cat. Q. What is the female sex without the male? A. Imperfect. Q. when will A. B. make another song in praise of Sack? A. Ask the Fidlers. Q. What said the Soldier when his Captain demanded of him, why he bought his Colours at his shop, and why he fancied them still above any other. A. Oh Sir, said he, I have all the reason of the world to fancy them; for these your Colours saved my life, I follow∣ed them when you run away from Basing-house. Q. What said the Carrier to the Thieves when he saw they would rob him. A. Friends, make a conscience, let me share, I desire to drive the same trade with you, to have something of my own. Q. Why did Mrs. H. make her Husband a Wastecoat of her Willow colour'd Stuff-petticoat? A. As she might otherwise have parted with her smock; and you know what the Proverb sings, Near is my Petticoat, but nigher is my smock. Q. One askt another what Shakespears Works were worth bound up together; the other replyed, not worth a farthing; not worth a farthing, said he that was to buy them, why so? A. The other answered, that his Playes were worth money, but he never heard that his Works were worth any thing. Q. Why is a Puritan a Non-resident. A. Because he never keeps near his Text. Q. What is the best way of dealing with a seemingly zealous Lay brother? A. Not to trust him, for then he can never deceive you. Q. Why cannot the Devill take tobacco through the nose? A. Because Saint Dunstan seared it with a pair of tongs. Q. What may the Law be most fitly compared unto? A. To a thicket of Brambles, into which by tempest the poor sheep being driven from the Plains for refuge, are there fleeced. Q. Why may not Machivel be reputed as honest as some modern Politicians?
A. Because he made no use of the hypocritical veil of a re∣ligious profession, to rough-cast his knavery withall. qu. What kinde of people are those, that sleep not with their own faces? A. Women that paint. qu. What is that, which being contained in it self, yet from it thousands do dayly grow and issue? Sol. An egg, from whence are produced sowls, fishes, birds, and serpents. qu. What breaks the shell at the coming forth of the chicken? A. The defect of nourishment, which at the end of the time is wasted in the shell, which the chicken wanting, exposeth it self, and so breaketh it. qu. What is that which is milk in his dam, or fire, of a ming∣led seed, brought forth by others, and produceth not his like? Sol. A mule begotten betwixt a horse and an ass. qu. Why have those that lie on their backs so many dreams and visions? A. Because the humors are disturbed, and upwards where the fantasie is. qu. Why is it unwholsome to lie on ones back? A. Because it disposeth a man to the Incubus, or night mare, which is a passage of the heart, when a man thinketh himself to be strangled in his bed, and somewhat lies heavy on his stomach which he would throw off, it also causeth with the over heating and oppression of the reins, an efusion in the night, which weakens the back. qu. what payes Venus more custom then all the world be∣sides? A. The bed. qu. what is a Sexton? A. He is one, that of all Proverbs cannot abide to hear that of, VVe live by the quick. and not by the dead. qu. why are boats compared to females. A. because every one enters into them. qu. what said she to him that sound her at it behind the door in a Tavern? A. At this time, Sir, I cannot pleasure you, keep this secret from my husband, and I will disclose as great a one to you, when it lies in my power. qu. what said the Cuckold to him that he sound a bed with his wife?
A. Sirrah, for this once I forgive you, but look to it, the next time, I catch you in the corn, I will put you into the pound, to the tune of, Come no more there boyes. Q. With what words did one challenge another that had abused him, but was not his equal? A. J. N. do confess my self to be as base a villain as thou art, and therefore let me see thee to morrow by such an hour in Hide Park? Q. what said the Saylor when the ship was set on fire in the coast of Peru? A. He cast himself into the sea, and cryed, some rosted and some sod. Q. what answer did one return him that desired to borrow his cloak? A. Sir, seeing it rains not, what need you borrow a cloak; and if it should rain, how can I my self be without it. Q. what said the Lady to her son that was a great game∣ster, when she was likely to be drowned? A. Son said she, for your part you can swim, but if I am drowned to day, pray thee play not away my clothes till I am buried. Q. who are those that are near the Suns rising, and see the first day, yet themselves are of the colour of the night? A. The Ethiopians. Q. why are children osner like their fathers then their mo∣thers? A. To give a modest reason, it proceeds from the imagina∣tion of the mothers, that at such a time, thinks of the dis∣position of the father. Q. what do the eyes chiefly betray? A. Those things which a man would keep most secret, Love and Drunkenness. Q. From whence is derived the power of feeling? A. It spreads it self through every part by Sinnews, which descend from the hand to the foot, and like a net spreads over the whole body. Q. what thing is that which being blind it self, leads the blind, and bears him that bears it? A. A staff. Q. why is the flesh of the lungs white? A. Because they are in continual motion.
Q. what is an idle magistrate like? A. The picture of Saint George on a sign-post, with his sword drawn to no purpose. Q. what may be said of him that speaks great Gun-powder words? A. That he hath a timpany in his mouth. Q. what are lovers oaths like? A. Marriners prayers, that last no longer then the storm. Q. what may a Musician be compared unto? A. To a Camelion that lives by the air. Q. why doth a Knight take place of a Gentleman? A. Because some are Knights before they are Gentlemen. Q. what is a domineering fellow to be compared unto? A. A gingling spur, that keeps a noise but never pricks. Q. what is the reason that captain Bulmur could not make his boat leap out of the water, and fly over London Bridge? A. Because the people could not believe. Q. what did the fellow near Doctors Commons do that sent his wife for salt? A. He eat up the quarter of lamb before she came, for which he is called lamb without salt. Q. what was Jeffry's the Queens little dwarf's usual hiding place? A, In Parsons the Kings great porters fob. Q. why are Tailers like woodcocks? A. Because they live by their long bills. Q. why is it dangerous to abuse a Physician? A. Because if he once have to do with a man, he will make him stink. Q. why are Players like to poor Philosophers? A. Because they are as well contented with their rags, as when they are in their richest robes. Q. why are great eaters the most valiant men? A. Because they never fight but with a good stomach. Q. what are Horse-keepers and Oastlers, though the times are never so mutual? A. Stable-men. Q. why are Fidlers so unfortunate? A. For that they never do any thing, but it is against the hair. Q. why are Scriveners hard hearted fellows?
A. Because they rejoyce when they get other men into bonds. Q. why is a miller the fittest husband for a scold? A. Because when the mill goes, her tongue cannot be heard. Q. what may be said of one that speaketh hard words? A. That he hath swallowed a Doctor of Physick's bill. Q. why are Glasiers good Arbitrators? A. Because they spend their whole time in composing of quarrels. Q. Why is it unlikely that Sailors should be rich men? A. Because they are never so well pleased, as when they go down the wind. Qu. Of all knaves, why is there greatest hope of a Cobler? A. Though he be never so idle a fellow, he is still mending. Q. Why is a Hang-man a person of a contemplative pro∣fession? A. Because he never goes to work, but he is put in mind of his own end. Q. Why is a Tooth-drawer a kind of an unconscionable trade? A. Because he takes away those things, by which every man gets his living. Q. Why is it not proper to call a Tapster a Drawer? A. Because beer only makes men piss, but it is wine that makes them draw. Q. Why is a Barber said to be such an active fellow? A. Because when he uses his comb, he doth so box one about the ears. Q. Why are there so many Pick-pockets in every corner, though there be, for the most part, a watch in every Street? A. It is all one for that, for a Pick-pocket had as live meet with a watch, as any thing else. Q. Why are Tobacco-Shops of all other places most dan∣gerous? A. Because there is none ever frequented them, but he smoakt for it. Q. Why is a Midwives trade of all others most commendable? A. Because they lived not by the hurt of others, as Chy∣rurgions do, nor by the falling out of Friends as Lawyers do, but by the agreement betwixt party and party. Q. Why do Lawyers Clerks write such wide hands?
A. To keep the peace, for if the Plantiff should be in one leaf, and the Defendant in another, the lines being too near, they might perhaps fall together by the ears. Q. why must an Apothecaries shop needs be healthful? A. Because the windows, boxes, benches, and all things in the shop take Physick. Q. what may an Antiquary be compared unto? A. To a Dutch man, that loves cheese for being worm∣eaten and mouldy. Q. One drinking of a cup of burnt Claret, said that he was not able to let it down, another askt him why? A. He answered, because it was red hot. Q. One seeing a man and his wife fighting, askt another why he did not part them? A. He answered, he was better bred then to part man and wife. Q. why is it necessary for women to learn a Roman hand? A. Because they are seldom very good Secretaries. Q. One saying that it was a fine quality for one to speak ex∣tempore. A. Another answered, it was no such fine quality, for e∣very inconsiderate Sectarist did it. Q. Why is one squint-eyed most circumspect of all others? A. Because he can look nine ways at once. Q. why is corn a quarrelsome creature? A. Because it rises by the blade, and falls by the ears with those that cut it. Q. what may a Middlesex-man be called? A. An Hermophrodite, because he is of both sexes. Q. why have Hoasts red noses? A. To show the world an experiment of the vertue of what they sold. Q. A Gentlewoman that was always jealous of Latine, hear∣ing one say bona mulier? A. That for bona, she knew that was good, but I will pawn my self on it, the other word says she, means that which is stark nought. Q. The people wondering at the Eclipse of the Sun? A. One that stood by told them that it only burnt dim, and that Phebus was snuffing of it. Q. What did the fellow to his wise, that said she was neither sick nor well?
A. He turned her out of doors, for said he, Hussie I am only bound to keep you in sickness or in health. Q. One told a gentleman that went by water, that his cloak burnt? A. I knew that, said the gentleman, and therefore I put it into the water. Q. A Wit meeting of a Usurer, desired him to lend him some money, Sir, said the Usurer, I do not know you? A. Therefore I ask you, says he, for they that know me will not lend me a sarthing. Q. One saying that he was sorrowful, that such a Venison Pasty was eaten? A. His friend replied, if he pleased, he would write an Epitaph on it. Q. One askt in which part of the house a gentlewoman did use to lie? A. Answer was made that she lay backwards, and did let out her fore rooms, Q. One askt a pretty wench that came out of the countrey in her linsie woolsie petticoats, very mean in habit, when he saw her not long after in the Strand mighty brave, how she purcha∣sed such cloaths? A. Faith, said she, onely for the taking up. Q. One asking another what Superscription he had best write to his Mistress on his letter, was told, Venus Lass of his affe∣ctions? A. No by troth, not I said he, she shall be stiled as I think she, is, Venice glass of my affections. Qu. One askt what was the first commodity a young shop keeper would put off. A. Another answered his honesty. Q. One askt why men should think there was a world in the moon? A. Answer was made, because they are Lunatick. Q. what reply did he make to the Physitian, that said that his liver was nought? A. Qualis vita, fuit ita, Q. why are women like a piece of Grogram? A. Because they are always fretting. Q. One being askt what countrey man a Plough man was? A. Was answered an Hungarian.
Q. One asking a Poet where his wits were? A. Another that stood by, answered, they were a wooll∣gathering, for said he, no people have more need of it. Q. One said he was so tender hearted, that he could not abide to kill a louse? A. Another replied, because he was too cowardly to see his own blood. Q. One perswaded another, because she was rich, to marry a whore, saying, it was not too late for her to turn? A. A Pox on her, says the other, she hath been so much worn, it is to no purpose, she is past turning. Q. What said the Gentleman to the Citizen that with his hat in his hand began a health to all the cuckolds in the world? A. Sir, says he, be cover'd, what do you mean, pray be pleased to remember your self. Q. How did Phil. Porter rid himself and his company of the Fidlers? A. He caused one of his Comrades to snip off a piece of his ear, and drinking off a beer-glass to the musick, swore every one of them should follow his example.
Wit and Language. Set Forms of Expression inserted for imitation. A Kiss is but a minutes joy. Your words are Delphian oracles. Your wit hath too much edge. I am a cast-away in love. You are a flame of beauty. Sweet and delicious as the feast of love. Sweet as the breath of lutes, or loves deliciousness. I, like a childe, will go by your directions. You are the rising sun which I adore. It is a confidence that well becomes you. I see your wit is as nimble as your tongue. Your favors I did tast in great abundance. Let me but touch the white pillows of your naked breasts. Your words like musick please me. I prize your love above all the gold in wealthy Indies arms. I'le play at kisses with you. Give me a naked Lady in a net of gold. Your fingers are made to quaver on a lute, your arms to hang about a ladies neck. Your tongue is oyled with courtly flatteries. You guild my praises far above my deserts. My boldness wants excuse. Reward stayes for you.
I'le pay the tribute of my love to you. Welcome, as light to day, as health to sick men. Let me share your thoughts. Let men that hope to be beloved be bold. You have a face where all good seems to dwell. My duty bindes me to obey you ever. I sacrifice to you the incense of my thanks. You wear a showie livery. I will repay your love with usury. Vertue go with you. You are the star I reach at. I am engaged to business craves some speed. You speak the courtiers dialect. Inherit your desires. You are my counsels consistory. Your title far exceeds my worth. I'le bathe my lips in rosie dews of kisses. I wear you in my heart. You are the miracle of friendship. You are the usurer of fame. My genius and yours are friends. I will unrip my very bosom to you. My tongue speaks the freedom of my heart. Give me leave to waken your memory. Of late you are turn'd a parasite. With your Ambrosiack kisses bathe my lips. Sure winter dwells upon your lip, the snow is not more cold. Mine eyes have feasted on your beauteous face. Your favors have faln like the dew upon me. Oh! I shall rob you of too much sweetness. You have the power to sway me as you please. Your goodness wants a president. Your acceptance shall be my recompence. The Sun never met the Summer with more joy. You wrap me up in wonder. You temporize with sorrow. mine's sincere. You have made me sick with passion. Oh! suit your pitty with your infinite beauty. There is no treasure on earth like her. Your breath casts sweet perfumes. Goodness and vertue are your near acquaintance.
You understand not the language of my intent. My entertainment hath confirmed my welcome. Your words have charmed my soul. Make me companion of your cares. I want no part of welcom but your wished presence. It is no pilgrimage to travel to your lips. I am proud to please you. By you, like your shade, I'le ever dwell. The unblown rose, the crystal, nor the diamond, are not more pure then she, I'le chronicle your vertues. As white as innocence it self. As constant as the needle to the adamant. You are the only anchor of my hopes. I am as mute as night. Women are angels clad in flesh. My arms shall be your sanctuary. You, like a comet, do attract all eyes. As kinde as the Sun to the new born Spring, As glorious as the noon-tide Sun. Your eyes are orbs of stars. You make my faith to stagger. You are too much an adamant. As you have vertue speak it. You are a noble giver. Let me seal my vowed faith on your lips. It is a paradise enjoying you. You are a white enchantress, Lady, you can enchain me with a smile. I have no faculty which is not yours. You are full of fair desert. Your purse is my Exchequer. Your example steers me. Her name, like some celestial fire quickens my spirit. You cannot tempt me Syren. Let me perish in your presence. Your love out-strips my merit. Your complements call your faith in question. My wish requites you. Midnight would blush at this. There's musick in her smiles.
The ocean's not more boundless then your favors. I'le lodge you in my bosom, and wear you in my heart. It is the blessing of my fate. Fire quickens my spirits. Your presence is restorative. Your language is more dubious then an Oracle. Your heart's like pibble, smooth but stony. Passion, like midnight, sits upon your thoughts. Her swan-like breasts more white then new faln snow. Confirm me in your favor with a smile. Welcom as Manna to my hungry soul. She is the glory of her sex, she bears the palm of beauty from them all. Others to her seem like the glimmering stars compared to the full moon. I'le pay the last tribute of my lips to your fair hands. The musick of the spheres is not so ravishing as her voice. Report could never have got a sweeter air to fly in, then your breast. You have the power to steer me as you please 'Tis my duty to obey your fair commands. You are the only person I have ambition to honor. Pray point me out some service to express my gratitude. I know you are all courtship. You are liberal in language. Her breath persumes the air. You imbrace the occasion to depart. You are the partner of my hopes. You are all worth, all bounty. She is a mine of beauty. I'le like your shade pursue you. You have discourst me into admiration. You have a soul is full of gratitude. This kiss seals my repentance. Your sight gives me a lease of longer life. Let me now circle in my arms all happiness. Let me be bold to claim your noble promise, my blood heaves in my veins to be in action. 'Tis happiness enough that you have mentioned it. She hath an easie melting lip, and a speaking eye. I must enroll you in the catalogue of my dearest friends.
Trust not the unruly appetite of youth that pines in more then wishes. You walk in artificial clouds, and bathe your silken limbs in wanton dalliance. Farewell fair regent of my soul, you still obliege my gratitude. The sight of loves on both sides, they send amorous glances from one anothers eyes. The blessings of your Mistress fall upon you. Would I were secretary to your thoughts. My best abilities of power are at your service. A maiden head is a creature got in the eye, conceiv'd in a kiss, I have no shift of faces, no cleft tongue. I am not Oedipus enough to understand you, I am wrapt with wonder. I have a strong assurance of your vertue. Trouble me not with thanks, lest I endeavour not to merit any. I'le rather doubt an Oracle, then question what you deliver. You may teach Hermes eloquence. My want of power to satisfie so great a debt, makes me accuse my fortunes. Your bounty, like a new Spring, hath renewed the Autumn of my years. I will not war with Eloquence. You are Fortunes minion, you sleep in her bosom. Such endearments will too much impoverish my gratitude. Take me into your bosom, and hide me there. Not the mountain ice congealed to crystal is more chaste then she. I'le celebrate my Mistress health to you. I ever held you my best example. I'le like the perfumed winde sport with your hair. You may challenge all my powers on your behalf. All valor is confined in within your breast, I emulate your da∣ring spirit. You overcharge me with so great a favor, as your descending thus to visit me. I should do wrong to merit not to honor you. As loved as the air I breathe. You are the friend of Fortune. All the dayes good attend you.
You cast your eyes too much upon the flame moves your destruction. I'le be as just to you as heaven to truth, You'l set the aspiring Cataline to school. You are as amorous as youthful May. I yield my self to your direction, mannage me at your pleasure. I listned for that string, and your discourse hath toucht it. You have suckt the milk of the court. I will out-wait a Serjeant to attend you. You set too high a price on my poor deservings. The vertues of your mind would force a Stoick to be your Servant. You have fired me with the heat of your deservings. You are the star by whom my fate is led. Her eyes are diamonds set in purest gold. The very air is ravisht with her touch. I cannot speak your praise. You are the soul of goodness. You may as you please determine of me. You are the star that rules my faculties Her breath is like the smoke of spices. She whispers like the amorous lute. My desires equal your wishes. You have out-stript me in the race of Honor. No service more then reciprocal. I cannot pass you without an Ave. Your noble deeds transcends all presidents. It is an honor and so I do receive it.
Select Sentences. WHosoever writes a modern History, and follows truth too near the heels, may chance have his teeth struck out. The dignity of truth is lost in much protesting. No Hell so low, which lust and women cannot lead unto. The world is a theatre of theft, great rivers, small brooks, and they the ocean. True love is a servant, brutish lust a tyrant. Duty must not assume the name of merit. Unequal marriage is not love but lust. Revenge is lost, if men profess they hate. Mischief doth ever end where it begins. Where distaste begins, there friendship ends. When a woman hath lost her chastity, she hath no more to lose. Too much indulgence is not love but hate. Reason is the mistress of experience. Nothing is hard to them that dare to die. He is next in right that hath the strongest power. Blinde is the censure of uncertainties. Time wears out what art and nature cannot bring about. Great sorrow is always dumb. Women are like to Venice-glasses, one crack spoils them. Discretion is the better part of valor. The man that would have sold the lions skin whilst the beast lived, was killed with hunting of him. When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks. Hope is a bate, it covers any hook. Libels are stifled with taking no notice of them. Good wits are greatest in extremity. Mischiess seed like beasts till they be fat, and then they bleed. The worst deeds are made good with good success.
Invocation is more dangerous then error. A Politician must, like lightning, melt the marrow but not pierce the skin. An old husband is good to make a screen of, to stand next the fire, whilst his yong wise sits behind him, and keeps a Friends lips warm. Virgins resolves are weak. Envy stands on tip-toe to pull down innocence. When lust is up, all women are alike. Love is the soveraign vertue of the soul. The dawn of midnight is the drunkards noon. Suspicion always hath a ready tongue. The sun that sets, doth rise again. All faults are still bore that from greatness grows. The feast of marriage is not lust but love. Love is a slave to hope.
A DICTIONARY FOR The more expeditious finding out of any Rime, being useful for that pleasing Pass∣time called CRAMBO. Ab. STab Scab drab slab crab mab blab dab Ace. Ase uncase case dace lace place mace face trace base brace grace bebase chace race embrace beface surface enchase pace apace space Aze. Aies. Ays. allays. baies bewrays blaze daies delayes decays fraies glaze gaze graze jayes keyes maze amaze obeys playes payes praies praise raies raze laies to laze raise stays stays assays essays sprays splays swaies brays strays trays betrays ways
Ack. almanack black back track jack knack brack clack crack lack hack pack quack rack attack sack smack stack stack thwack tack track wrack Act. act fact compact bact tract pact quact act crackt rackt sackt thwackt Ad. add mad glad dad bad clad dad gad pad had lad sad swad Ade. Ayde. aide afraid blade brayde dismayd fade jade layd allayd delayd made maide playd payd prayd arrayd stayd staid shade bewrayd unstaid spade splaide straid perswade diswade trade weighd wade obeyd decayd Af chaff draff laugh quaffe staff epetaph Afe safe Ralph chafe halfe calfe Aft aft chaft craft daft haft graft laught quaft shaft waft Agg brag bagg cagg cragg clagg dragg flagg shagg fagg hagg jagg lagg magg nagg ragg quagg stagg wagg to wagg Ague plague prague Age age engage gage cage stage parentage pilgrimage pupilage page rage asswage sage wage Adge
badge fadge madge Ai. Ay. aye bay obey defray delay decay bewray clay array dismay allay tray gay gray hay ay lay may nay play pray dray rate say say stay splay spray stray sway tray way whey Ake. ake bake brake cake drake slake jake make mistake quake rake sake shake slake spake stake awake betake undertake Ale. Aile avail aile ale bale bewail dale engrail exhale sail entail fail frail gale goale naile all hail male mail nail pale prevail pail quail rail stale sale scale shail retail trail rale tayl vale vayl wail whale All. Aule. all appall awle ball brawle call caule crawl fall gall hall mawl Paul pall small shall stall sprawl spawl tall thrall wail yawl Ald balld embrawld calld crawld enthralld galld mauld scauld sprawld besprawld scalld walld yawld Ayld. bayld bewaild faild engraild retaild haild hald exhald naild empaild prevaild ralld saild scald retayld trayld vaild Alk.
balk chalk calk stalk talk walk Alm. alm balm calm palm psalm qualm shalm Als. alice malice Alt. inalt exalt halt malt palt salt shalt fault revolt Am. am clam cram cham dam dram flam flimflam lamb ram ram mam slam whimwham Ame. ame blame came claim dame frame flame fame game lame mame name same shame tame An. Ann began ban bran can clan canne dan randan fan man unman nan pan paun raun span scan swan tan vanue wan wanne Ance. advance chance countenance dance deliance deliverance trance glance enhance ignorance lance prance maintenance perchance ballance governance And. and hand brand over-cand tand grand command hand land mand stand with-stand understand scand strand stand spand tand wand Ain abstain again bain brain blain Cain cane crain contain drain ordain constrain disdain dane complain counterpan entertain fain fane distrain profane grain gain Jane
lane main maintain plain pain obtain regain raign slain sustain retain rain slain Spain sprain stain swain restrain train vain vaine vein wain Amp. cramp camp champ damp lamp stamp ramp vamp Anch. planch branch cranch hanch lanch stanch Ang. bang sang gang hang pang sang rang sprang stang tang twang brang Ange. change exchange grange mange strange range estrange Ank. Mountebank bank blank crank drank dank flank franck frank lank rank stank prank plank shrank shank slank thank Ant. ant aunt daunt flaunt gaunt grant haunt want pant scant tant vaunt want recant enchant Aint. acquaint saint complaint paint Saint Ap. cap clap chap flap gap hap lap map xap pap vap stap snap swap scrap strap thunder-clap trap tap entrap wrapt Ape. ape gape grape jape cape nape rape shape scrape scape escape tape Aps caps claps, &c. relaps Apt apt
chapt clapt flapt gapt lapt rapt wrapt escapt scrapt shapt swapt intrapt snapt slapt strapt Ar. are bar car sar tar mar scar spar star sar war Are. aire bare care chair dare fair glair hair mair impir depair repair prepare scare paire praier rare share stare spare square swear ensnare aware ware Arb. barb garb herb orb Arch. arch march starch parch torch scarch Ard. award bard debard card discard dard outdard hard guard heard mard nard pard ensnard despaird scard shard spard squard stard starrd reward yard Arf. dwarf scarf wharf Arge barge charge discharge enlarge large searge verge Ark ark bark embark cark dark cleark heark jeark lark mark park qucrk spark sark chark stark Arle. carle charle marle snarle Arm arm disarm barm charm farm to farm harm alarm sparm swarm term warm Arn. barn sern learn stearn warn
forwarn yarn Arp. carp chirp harp querp sharp warp Arrs. barrs carrs dares sares Ars. ars farce scarce Mars Arsh. harsh marsh As. ass brass bass class glass grass lass mass pass was repass alass Art. art cart dart fart heart hart mart part impart depart puart start smart tart thwart wart Arth. swarth earth girth hearth dearth Ash. ash cash clash crash dash flash gash gnash mash plash quash rash slash swash stash trash thrash wash Ask ask bask cask flask mask masque pask task To these be∣long masquer masker mask her tasker ask her Asp asp clasp gasp grasp hasp rasp wasp unhasp Ast. blast bast cast chast enchast fast too fast agast hast has't last mast past pac't tast was't wast At. at bat cat chat fat hat gnat begat flat mat pat sat rat squat that what Ate.
abate bate debate delicate elevate date to date fate gate grate to grate ingrate hate Kate late relate elate mate inmate plate pate conservate consecrate contaminate slate state to state strait wait Atch. batch catch cratch hatch dispatch latch match to match patch scratch smatch snatch thatch watch Ath bath faith hath lath path rath swath saith wrath Ave. brave cave crave drave gave grave have knave lave nave pave save rave slave slave slave thrave wave Aw. aw claw daw draw withdraw flaw jaw law gnaw maw paw raw saw soresaw spaw straw thaw Awd. bawd clawd dawd sraud desraud laud applaud thawd gnawd abroad broad Awn. bran dawn drawn withdrawn sawn spawn gnawn lawn spawn prawn pawn yawn Ax. ax flax lax tax wax Ea. flea key plea sea yea Ease. sease decease decrease encrease flease grease lease peace pease please seas seize disseize
tease these Each. each beach bleach breach leach impeach preach reach teach Ead. bead bread flead glead knead lead mead plead read shead Eaf. deaf leaf sheaf Eak. beak bleak break creak sreak leak peak sneak squeak streak weak reak Eal. peal heal congeal meal peal steal squeal sweal reveal teal weal Commonweal wheal zeal Eam. beam bream cream dream fleam ream gleam seam scream stream theam team extrcam Ean. bean clean dean glean lean mean quean skean wean yean Eap. cheap heap leap reap Ear. appear ar bear blear besmear chear fear flear lear rear sphear spear swear were wear where East. beast breast deceast east feast least neast Eat. beat bleat deceit conceit cheat feat defeat great heat jeat meat neat pleat seat sweat theat teat retreat intreat, repeat wheat Eath. breath death heath sgeath wreath Ee. ave
cleave deceive receive heave leave bereave sleave weave Eb. neb web eb Eck. beck check deck neck peck speck to deck Ect. checkt reflect reject respect deckt correct erect eject sect neglect pect circumspect protect detect recollect deject insect architect dialect infect Ed. bed bled bread bred dead dread fed fled flead led ned red overspread shed sped stead shred thred tred wed enamored enamelled polished Edge. alledge edge hedge pledge ledge wedge priviledge Ee be decree dee ce see glee agree degree free flee gee hee knee lee me pee ree see shee thee three tree wee yee immortalitie deitie divinitie everlastinglie lovinglie enmitie vanitie, &c. Eece. geese Greece sleece peece Eeze. cheese degrees decrees frees bees freeze knees lees sees squeeze trees wheeze Eech. breach breech leech speech beseech Eed. bleed breed decreed deed freed fee'd feed agreed heed meed need seed speed weed
read reed Eef. beef breef cheef greef releef theef Ek cheek creek eke gleek greek leek meek seek shreek sleek squeek week El. eel feel heel keel kneel peel reel wee'l Eem. deem seem esteem redeem beseem teem Een. seen green keen queen seen screen spleen ween over ween Eep creep deep keep peep sheep sleep steep sweep weep Ee't beet bee't flee crete feet greet meet Leet sheet see't street sweet Eeth seeth teeth Eev beeve atchieve cleave grieve deceive conceive relieve believe reprieve shrieve Eft cleft deft left bereft Eg beg dreg leg meg peg El bell rebel cell dwell fell ell Hell knell nel repel expel refel compel quell sell tell shell smell spell swell well yell citadell Nathaniel spaniel Daniel Eld feld geld held queld rebelld expelld spelld swelld commpelld repelld seld Eild. feild
sheild yeild weild guild build Elch. belch squelch welch filch Elf. delf pelf elf self shelf Elm elm whelm overwhelm film helm realm Elt, belt dealt dwelt felt smelt gelt melt pelt spelt welt Ealth. health stealth wealth Elve delve shelve Em. condem gem hem kemb stem En. Ben den fen ken hen wen men pen ten then wren when Ence. intense incence insense innocence conscience hence defence influence diligence negligence indigence offence sence excellence commence immense recompence expence eloquence circumference quintescence tense pretence whence thence Ench. bench wench clench french quench drench trench stench wrench End. amend bend blend comprehend condescend defend intend offend befriend apprehend reprehend lend commend extend expend rend spend dispend pend attend contend Ength. strength length Ent. bent innocent ascent descent negligent indent repent indigent diligent Kent spent lent commandment argument meant shent
sprent constraint restraint tent intent represent sent absent present consent dissent resent merriment content extent attent Trent vent event invent circumvent underwent Ep. crep step leap Ept. crept kept slept stept swept Er. her defer refer confer deter prefer inter foreiner loiterer poulterer pewterer, &c. Erb. herb verb Erse. fierce herse amerce pierce serce terse converse reverse verse scarce. Erch. birch pearch surch search Eard. beard bird cheard endeard feard fleerd herd heard unheard overheard jeerd appeard sheard stird besmeard Erge. verge irge Erk. cleark serk jerk heark kirk per querk smerk yerk Earle. earle girle pearle twirle whirle Erm. sperm term firm confirm affirm Ern. concern discern earn dern fern stern girn yearn earn Erp. chirp querp Ears. Ers. bears chears endears fears fleers jeers hers peers pears shears sears, sphears spear besmears fears besmears tears swears
converse reverse adverse wears years refers defers differs confers prefers errs Et. heart malepert pert skirt squirt shirt dert convert pervert assert desert insert invert divert Erth. birth dearth mirth earth perth Erve. carve preserve conserve deserve reserve swerve serve nerve Ess bess bless excess consess chess address redress express guess jess less mess oppress repress digress ingress profess distress impress suppress yes. Esh. flesh fresh Est. best blest brest incest addrest redrest opprest profest confest exprest devest hest jest inest well guest ill lest nest deprest supprest at least rest interest quest prest distrest drest best contest invest detest protest west assest wrest Et. bet counterset debt sret tet get let pet regret cabinet coverlet set wet whet yet spet Etch. fetch stretch retch wretch bitch vetch Ew. adieu blew chew crew dew slew hew ew knew trew few shew slew view yew Ex. sex
vex rex perplex Ey key weigh whey I I by buy bribery bitterly bodily crie curiosity calamity die deitie dubiously drie divinitie fie furiously fatally fatalitie fie fly frie guie hie high lie lye With all words ending in ly, as mutually heavenly, &c. my nigh pie comply reply imply prie rie skie stie And many words ending sie and cy, as extasie omnipotencie stie tie thigh thy try vie whey awrey Ib bibb cribb gibb glib nib lib rib fibb snibb squibb tibb Ibe bribe gibe prescribe proscribe describe scrib inscribe subscribe prescribe transcribe ascribe kibe tribe Ice, Ise deities vanities monstrosities circumcise precise obscurities fallacities paradise advise edifice sacrifice demise eyes tryes styes lyes dyes tries wise flyes eternize immortallize fraternities disguise prize price comprise disguise tries tyrannize hies lice mice pies precipice plies thighes rice rise sieze sice devise villanies spice intice thrice twice dice vice advice wise simplicities ties, &c. Ich itch rich which bitch dich Ick brick obick dick
quick prick flick rick sick pick stick tick strick trick bayliwick politick Id bid chid did hid kid amid stidd ridd stridd bestrid Ide abide bride chide cryd dyd dryd crucifyd fryd glid decide hide replyd relyd denyd applyd replyd complyd implyd pride pyed ride deride descride slide spied stride tide ty'd tryd vy'd wide guide dignifyd aside ally'd espi'd provide Idge abridge ridge flidge Ife fife knife life rife strife wife Iff cliff if stiff whiff Ift drift fift gift lift whift sift shift rift swift thrift Ig bigg digg pigg rigg gigg figg ligg trigg twigg wigg perywigg Ike dike pike like spike strike dislike Ile bile reconcile crocadile defile i'le beguile mile nile compile revile smile stile file vile wile while Ill bill chill dill drill fill gill till spill mill nill pill kill quill rill shrill skill fulfill still swill till
thill will Ild. build filld fulfilld killd milld pild guild skilld distilld stilld swilld tilld untilld trilld will'd selfwilld Ilde childe defilde milde smild reconcild compil'd beguild stil'd til'd wilde Ilk milk silk whilk Ilt built mi't guilt gilt quilt spilt tilt wilt Im brim dim gim him limb trimb rim skim swim Ime chime crime grime lime prime time slime rime time Imp imp limp pimp shrimp In bin been chin din fin inn in begin gin grin kin lin min pin shin spin thin tin twin win sin Ine columbine combine concubine brine incline decline chine dine fine kine line mine designe repine resigne shine shrine swine vine wine valentine thine tine twine divine trine whine Ince. prince mince since quince rince convince wince Inch finch inch binch winch Ind friend grind pind find skind spind
Inde blinde binde inclinde declinde dinde finde, minde grinde behind linde kinde pin'd rinde designde resigned twinde winde whinde unkinde combinde enshrinde Ing. bring cling ding fling hing king ling ring spring sting string swing thing wing flourishing nourishing easterling Inge. cringe fringe hinge finge swinge revenge Ink. blink brink cinque chink ink wink sink shrink slink link stink bethink twink Int. dint flint hint lint mint splint squint stint imprint Ip. chip clip dip hip lip nip pip quip rip ship skip flip strip tip trip whip Ipe. gripe wipe pipe ripe snipe type tripe wipe Ipt. chipt clipt dipt hipt quipt ript sipt shipt skipt slipt snipt stript tript whipt Ir. fir myrh sir stir bestir Ire. brier buyer cryer dire dryer fire flire frier implyer ire higher admire lyer nigher quire desire expire aspire conspire Esquire retire attire fryer wyer
Irt. dirt girt shirt skirt squirt Is. is bliss cis dis his kiss miss abiss piss swiss this wis Ish. dish fish pish wish rush Isk. brik frisk fisk whisk Isp. crisp lisp whisp Ist. desist exorcist fist grist kist list mist twist insist assist resist consist persist It. bit chit hit it knit kit acquit sit spit shit slit split commit remit immit submit emit remit fit twit writ Ite. bite bright dight light night sight knight fight delight mite might benight affright pight plight requite requisite upright opposite oversight shite smite spite excite sprite wight write white excite incite recite Itch. bitch ditch breech fitch flitch pitch stitch rich switch twitch witch which Ith. blith lith belith fith tith writh Ive. dive drive five give hive live alive contrive connive deprive reprive rive shrive slive strive thrive wive
Oe doe dough toe forgoe fro goe loe moe no poe roe row so shoe show throw to though woe wooe who Obe globe Job robe Oach bloach broach coach encroach reproach loach poach approach roche Oad abode aboad abroad goad load rode mode tode trod yode Oak oak broke choke cloke croak poke soke smoke spoke stroke invoke provoke revoke awoke yoke Oale bole cole dole tole goal hole mole pole sole soul shoal stole whole Oam foam home comb roam tomb womb Oan one bone cone drone flown gone groan hone Jone lone stone alone moan none rone shown tone throne own Ope ope cope coap grope hope Pope rope scope sope slope trope Oar oar ore boar bore core door floor before adore glore goar store more hoar lore moor deplore implore pore poor rore sore soar score shore snore restore swore
tore wore whore yore These rime all in their plural num∣bers. Orse course horse hoarce source remorse gurse morse Oard bor'd board accord afford record abhord goar'd gor'd hoar'd hourd implord deplord por'd roar'd soar'd snord sword whord word lord Ob bob cob fob rob sob throb stob Ock block brock cock clock dock flock frock knock lock smock mock pock rock stock shock sock hillock Ockt. blockt cokt dockt flockt lockt knockt mockt rockt stockt Od cod clod pod nod god rod odd sod tod trod Odge dodge lodge Off cough doff goff rough scoff trough enough Oft cough'd croft doft oft soft loft aloft scoft Og brog clog dog frog cog pettifog gog hog log vog Oll coll Doll Moll goll loll pole roll scrowle controll toll Old bold cold old fold controlld hold mold rolld sold scolld enrolld mold
told controlld shold Olk. folk yolk stalk Olt. bolt colt dolt revolt Olve. involve wolve revolve Om. come comb from some plum Tom womb whom Omp. pomp romp On. con don John upon none won Once. sconce once Ond. bond cond dond pond strand enthrond bemond groand Ong. among long song string strong throng thong wrong young Ont. wont font hellespont Op. crop pop dop fop chop lop hop knop sop prop shop slop top stop Opt. chopt lopt cropt hopt dopt propt stopt topt Or. dor for nor or Ors. discourse concourse purse force horse source gorse remorse nourse Erch, perch starch scorch torch Orge, disgorge forge George scourge Ork. cork fork pork stork work York Orld. world hurld curld Orm. form storm worm Orn. born
orborn corn horn ligorn forlorn morn mourn scorn shorn thorn sworn torn worn adorn Ornd. scornd adornd mournd hornd Ort. cort report fort sport resort dort alamort exhort dehort transport pourport sort short retort extort wort Orth. worth sorth Os. imboss loss cross dos gross gloss goss ingross moss soss toss Ose. chose closs enclose disclose propose gloze hose lose nose pose rose grows compose repose depose expose impose transpose those whose shoes shows glows Oast. boast ingrost imboast cost crost frost host lost most impost tost Ot. blot clot got grot Castriot hot jot philamot knot lot not pot plot mariot rot sot scot shot not snot spot trot wot Oat. boat moat bloat coat float goat groat note denote oat quoat stoat rote smoat throat wrote vote Otch. botch scrotch notch Oth. both broth cloth doth oath froth loth moth quoth
doth troth wroth Ow. bough bow allow blow brow cow crow dow flow glow grow know how low mow now plow prow row sow bestow strow tow thou throw trow vow you Own. blown known brown clown crown down drown flown frown gown known grown renown mown shown town thrown unknown Ox. box fox pox ox Oy. boy coy enjoy cloy destroy annoy joy employ toy Oyd. avoid employd enjoyd destroyd annoyd cloyd void Oyle. boyl broil recoil oyl foil moil quoil soil spoil toil Oin. foin groin enjoyn conjoin rejoin purloin coin Oint. oint appoint anoint disappoint unjoint Oice. choice rejoyce voice hoise poise Oist. rejoyc't voic't hoist foist coist Ood. cood food brood mood withstood stood good wood woed hood blood rood could should Oof. hoof aloof reproof roof scroof woof proof Ook. brook book overtook
mistook undertook cook hook look shook rook took Ool. cool fool pool tool school stool Oom. bloom broom coom doom groom loom Rome room tomb womb Oon. boon moon noon spoon Oop. droop hoop loop poop troop stoop whoop coop Oose, loose noose goose Oot. boot foot root shoot soot Ooth. sooth tooth truth youth Ouch. couch pouch disavouch crouch slouch touch Owd. bowd cloud croud flowd glowd proud lowd mowd shroud vowd endowd embowd Owl. bowl cowl fowl towl howl jowl poul rowl soul scrowl controul Ould. could should controld would Ound. abound redound confound rebound crownd drownd found frownd hound pound round sound stound wound renownd Ounce. bounce flounce renounce plounce trounce Ount. account recount surmount mount fount count Our. bower flower four hour parumour lowr powr conquerour power sower cowre tower
tour devour impowre your Ouse blouse house louse mouse rouse souse Out. about out without throughout bought brought doubt lout clout drought flout fought gout naught pout rout snout sprought stout trout thought devout wrought taught thought Outh. grouth mouth south youth Ove above clove love dove drove grove move approve reprove rove shove shrove stove strove Ub. cub chub dub grub rub scrub stub shrub sillabub snub tub Use abuse accuse excuse refuse chuse recluse secluse cruse dues diffuse confuse transfuse juice Jews luce muse news scrues sluce spruce stews sues truce use Uck buck chuck duck luck muck pluck suck stuck Ud bud blood cud flood hood good mud sud spud stood understood wood Ude brewd conclude imbrewd eschewd seclude exclude include crude feud glewd dew'd lewd mu'd renewd rude scrude shewd spud stu'd strewd intrude detrude obtrud'd view'd Udge budge Judge grudge
drudge adjudge snudge trudge Uff buff cuff ruff stuff puff huff muff tough enough chuff Ue blue brew imbrue eschew drew dew due accrue few slew glew hew hue Hugh jew knew fore-knew lieu mue renew scrue shew ensue sue slew shew spew strew threw true view you Ug bugg drugg dugg rugg hugg jugg lugg tugg shrugg trugg pugg Ul bull cull dull sorrowfull pitiful mercifull full gull hull lull mull annul disanul pull trull wooll Ule mule pule rule thule Uld bulld gulld dulld annulld disannulld lulld mulld pulld Ulfe engulf wolf gulf Ulk bulk hulk sculk Ulse pulse repulse Um bumb come dum overcome drum some dumb gum hum mum num plumb some scum sum swum thumb thrum stum womb whom Ump bump jump crump trump lump pump stump rump thump trump Ume sume presume perfume plum theum
assume Un dun done gun run bun sun some shun stun pun tun wun Une prune tune Unce. dunce ounce nunce Unch. bunch clunch munch punch hunch Und. stund sund shund tund Ung bung clung dung hung among flung rung sprung sung stung swung tongue young Unge plunge spunge Unk. drunk munk punk shrunk sunk shrounk slunk stunk trunk Unt. amount surmount blunt hunt fount runt wont Up up cup tup sup Ur bur blur cur demur fur slur spur sir Ure. demure inure cure endure sure allure ensure obscure assure pure skuer Urb disturb curb Urse. disburse curse purse worse nurse burse Urch. burch church lurch Urd. bird blurd furd stird absurd curd slurd spurd sword turd word Urf. scurf turf Urge, vide Orge. purge surge scourge
Urk. lurk turk work Urle. curle hurle churle purle whirle Urld. curld whirld world hurld purld Urn. urn burn churn turn torn spurn mourn Urt. blurt spurt curt durt hurt wurt flurt Uss. buss us truss thus puss Ush. bush blush brush crush flush hush push gush plush rush tush thrush Usk. busk husk musk tusk Ust. bust crust entrust dust gust just lust must rust trust thrust Ut. but cut gut glut nut put foot rut scut slut strut shut hut Ute. flute recrute dispute impute repute compute depute lute suite mute Utch. clutch hutch much grutch crutch such smutch touch crowch Uth. truth Ruth youth pursu'th Urst. disburst curst accurst durst burst purst worst first nurst Ucks. bucks ducks plucks tucks dux sucks
THE ART of REASON IN THE ART of LOGICK. Rendred so plain and easie by Questions and Answers, that the meanest capacity may in a short time attain to the perfect ways of Arguing or Disputing. The first Book of the Art of Logick. CAP. 1. What Logick is. Q. WHat is Logick? A. Logick is the Art of disputing well, and in that sense is called Logick. CAP. 2. The parts of Logick, and kinds of Arguments. Q. How many parts hath Logick? A. Logick hath two parts, Invention and Judgment. Q. What is Invention? A. Invention is a part of Logick of inventing Arguments. Q. What is an Argument? A. An Argument is that which is affected to argue any thing: such as are all Reasons considered apart, and by themselves.
Q. What be the Kindes? A. Artificial and Inartificial. Q. What is an Artificial Argument? A. That which argueth of it self. Q. What be the Kindes. A. First, or derived from the First. Q. What is First? A. First is that which is of its own original. Q. What be the Kindes? A. Simple or Comparative. Q. What is Simple? A. Simple is that which is considered simply and absolutely. Q. What be the Kindes? A. Agreeing or disagreeing. Q. What is Agreeing? A. That which agreeth with the thing which it argueth. Q. What be the Kindes? A. Agreeing absolutely or after a certain manner. Q. What is agreeing absolutely? A. The Cause and Effect. CAP. 3. The Efficient, Procreant, and Conservant Cause. Q. what is the Cause? A. The Cause is that by whose force the thing is. Q. What is the profit of it? A. This first place of Invention is the fountain of all Know∣ledge: and he is believed to know, of whom the cause is held. As the Poet saith worthily: The man sure happy is, who cause of things doth know. Q. How is the Cause divided? A. Into two Kindes, Efficient and Matter, or Form and End. Q. what is the Efficient Cause? A. The Efficient Cause is that which the thing is. Q. How many Kindes hath it. A. There appeareth to us no true Kindes, yet the great plenty of it is distinguished by certain means. Q. What is that which effecteth by the first mens? A. That which procreateth or defendeth. Q. Give me an example out of some Poet!
A. Ovid first, remedio amoris. Therefore when thou shalt look in this our medsonal Art, My admonition do, set idleness apart. This causeth thee to love, this doth defend it still, This is the cause of Joy, as meat sometimes breeds ill. Take lastly sloath away, God Cupids bow is lost, His torches lose their light, contemn'd, away they'r tost. Q. Give me a more familiar example? A. The Father and Mother procreate, the Nurse defendeth. Q. Give an example of this out of some Poet? A. 4. Aeneid. Th'rt no Gods child, ne Dardanus his son; Thou rather from the steep hard rocks didst come Of Caucasus, it seemeth of that breed, Hyrcanian Tigars thee with breasts did feed. Aeglog. 8. Now what this whorson love is I well wot. It is a little busie boy begot, Not of mans seed, ne sib to one of us, But farthest Garamants, and Ismarus. Or rockie Rhodope as it should seem, In their rough ragged hills ingendred him. Q. Do not builders and governours of Cities come under this Head. A. Yes, Romulus the builder of the City of Rome, also all other Kings, Consulls, and Emperours are defenders and keepers. CAP. 4. The Efficient alone and with others Q. What is that which effecteth by the second means? A. That which effecteth alone or with others. Q. What are those others? A. Some oftentimes are Principal, others are helping and Ministers. Q. Give an example of the Cause that effecteth by it self? A. Aeneid. 6. Nisus called back both the blame and the punishment of the slaughter from Euryalus upon himself: be∣cause he was the onely author. Lo here I am who only did this deed, Nations, against me turn your swords with speed.
T was my deceit: He could it never do, Ne would his courage serve him thereunto. Q. Give an example of the solitary Cause with Principals and Fellows, out of some Orator? A. The Solitary Cause, with many, both Principals and Fellows, is diversly ser forth pro Marcello. For the warlike praises (saith the Orator) they are wont to extenuate truly by words, and to detract them from their Leaders, to communi∣cate them with many, lest they should be proper to their Commanders: and certainly in War, the strength of the Soldiers, opportunity of places, help of fellows, ranks, provi∣sion do much avail. But Fortune (as it were) by her own right, challengeth the chiefest part to her self; and whatsoever is prosperously carried, that altogether she leadeth. But yet of this glory (O Caesar) which a little before thou didst obtain, thou hast no companion: all that, how much soever it is, (which truly is the chiefest) all (I say) is thine. The Pen∣turion, President, Ranks and Companies, have taken from thee none of this praise: Yea, even the Lady of Humane Af∣fairs, Fortune offereth not her self into the society of this glory; to thee she giveth place, and confesseth it all and wholly to be thine. Quest. Are not Instruments numbered among helping Causes? A. Yes. Q. Give an example of it? A. By this Argument the impious Epicure disputeth that the World was never made. Primo de Nat. For by what Eyes of the Mind (saith he) could your Plato behold the frame of so great a Work, whereby he maketh it con∣structed and builded of God? what labour? what iron∣hinges? what lever? what devices? what ministers were there of so great a work? CAP. 5. The Efficient by it self or an Accident. Q. What is that that which effecteth by the  ans? A. That which effecteth by it self or an Accident.
Q. How effecteth it by it self? A. When it effecteth by its own faculty. Q. How effecteth it by its own faculty? A. When it effecteth by nature or counsel. Q. Give an example of that which effecteth by Nature? A. The efficient of the winds is natural. Aeneid. 1. The East and South winds on the Sea do blow, They rush through deep, till on the top they show The Affrick oft with these his blasts conjoyns, And so the floods are cast up by the winds. Q. Give some example of that which effecteth by counsel? A. That confession of Cicero touching himself, is an exam∣ple of Counsel. The War taken in hand (O Caesar) waged also for the most part, not constrained by any of my judge∣ment and will; I came forth to those Wars which were un∣dertaken against thee. Q. How doth the Efficient Cause effect by an Accident? A. When it effecteth by an external faculty. Q. How doth it effect by an external faculty? A. When it is done by Necessity or Fortune. Q. How by Necessity? A. When as the Efficient is constrained to the Effect. Q. Give an example of this? A. There is one in the excuse of the Pompenians. But to me truly (saith the Orator) if there may be sought out a pro∣per and true name of our evil, it doth seem that we are faln into a certain fatal calamity, that hath occupied the unpro∣vident mindes of men; that none should wonder how hu∣mane Counsel is overcome by Divine Necessity. Q. How by Fortune? A. When somewhat happeneth beyond the scope of the Efficient. Q. Give an example? A. So the case chanced (saith Tullius tertio de Nat. deo.) That Pherius the enemy was profitable to Jason, who open∣ed his impostume with his sword; which the Physicians could by no means heal. Q. May not Impudence be numbered amongst these kind of Causes? A. Yes.
Q. Give an example? A. Ovid. de Trist. 2. Why hurtful light, or ought else did I see? The fault was mine and not unknown to me, Wise Acteon Diana naked saw, And food became to's dogs devouring maw. Blind Fortune 'mongst the Gods is surely blamed, Ne pardon gets, the Gods she hath so harmed. Q. Do not Deprecations then proceed from hence? A. Yes. Q. Give an example? A. Pro P L. Pardon O Father: he hath erred: he is slip∣ped: he thought not: if ever hereafter. And a little after I have erred: I have done rashly: it repenteth me: I fly to thy clemency: I ask pardon for mine offence: I intreat thee that thou wilt pardon me. Q. What first caused the name of Fortune? A. The ignorance of the Causes have feigned this name: for when as something happened beyond counsel and hope, it was called by the common people Fortune. Q. What is Juvenals Opinion of it? A. Wise if we were, no God should want but Fortune: We place thee high, and often thee importune. CAP. 6. The Matter. Q. What is the Matter? A. The Matter is the cause of which the thing is. Q. Give an example out of some Poet? A. By this feigned Argument the house of the Sun is com∣pounded of Gold, Carbuncles, Ivory and Silver. Ovid. 2. Me∣tamorf. The Suns high place was built with Pillars tall, The Gold did shine Carbuneles flames let fall: The top thereof was laid with Ivory neat, And silver doors in portal shined feet. Aeglog. 3. A merry Musor fram'd of Beech in tree, Carv'd work, by hand of divine Alcimeden, 'Tis round impaled with a scattering trail Of tender Vine, and over all between,
A pale green Ivy, wherewith as a vale, The thick diffused cluster shaded been. Q. Give an example out of some Orator? Q. Caesar. 1. Bel. Civil. Caesar commanded his Soldiers to make ships of that kind, which in former years the use of the Britains had taught him: first they made the keil and pins of light matter, the rest of the body of the ship being knit together with Osiers, was covered over with Leather. CAP. 7. The Form. Q. The first kinde of the Cause, in the Efficient and Matter being expounded; the second followeth, in the Form and the End; what therefore is the Form? A. The Form is the Cause by which the thing is that which it is. Q. What is the benefit of it? A. From hence the thing is distinguished from all other things, and the Form is ingenerated together with the thing it self. Q. Give some example of it? A. A reasonable soul is the form of a man, because by it a man is a man, and is distinguished from all other creatures thereby. The form of Geometrical Figures is in Triangles and Quadrangles. Heaven, Earth, Trees, Fishes, are the form of Physical things. From whence the chief explication of things, as it is by nature, so (if it may be found out.) it shall be, as in artificial things it is more easily met withall. Q. Give an example out of some Orator? A. Caesar. lib. 7. But all the French walls are almost of this form, the beams long and plain, with equal distance between them about two foot, are placed upon the foundation. These are bound within, and fastened very strongly: for those spaces (of which we spake) are filled up to the top with great stones. These placed and knit together, another row is also added, that the same might keep the spaces: neither do the beams touch one another, but being distant by equal spaces, all of them are strongly fastened, great stones being placed between them. And even so is the whole work knit together un∣til the just height of the wall be fulfilled. This work therefore is not deformed, as well for the comeliness and variety, beams
and stones being by courses, which keep their rowes in right loins, as, because it hath the chief strength for profit and de∣fence of cities; because it doth defend both from the mischief of stones, and the material Ram, which with its forty feet, being oft bound to the long beams inward, can neither be bro∣ken or drawn back again. Q. Give an example out of some Poet? A. Aeneid. 1. Virgil describeth the form of his port. Between two Seas two Islands there doth lie, Side-wayes they'r made, the water runs fast by. Huge double rocks that do reach up to heaven, Under the which the seas lie still and calm: And by that place green woods there are growing, Forth from the same comes great black darkness flowing. Under which rock a den's made very fleet, Wherein's rich living stones, and waters sweet: Houses for Nimphs, and chains for ships there laid, Which would not by the anchor or the chains be staid. CAP. 8. The End. Q. What is the end? A. The end is the cause for whose sake the thing is. Q. Give example? A. To Physical things the proposed End is man to man, God. There is some chief good and last end of all Arts: as to speak well, of Grammer: to plead well, of Rethorick: to dispute well, of Logick. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. Aeneid. 1. Juno assumeth the end of Marriage, when as she promiseth Deippeia to Eolus, to wit, for solace and childrens sake. Nimphs full fourteen I have of bodies rare But who so is most beautiful and fair, Even Deiopeia I to thee do give Her year in marriage state with thee to live? Thee to reward for thy love unto me, And cause thine off-spring beautiful to be. Q. Give an example out of some Orator? A. Cicero pro Lg. urgeth Tubero his accuser, when as he presseth the end of the Wars takenup against Cesar. And truly
(saith he) he is come forth armed against Caesar himself. But what did this Tubero his sword do in the Pharsalian Army? hose sides did the sharp point aim at? who was to feel the force of thy weapon: where was thy minde, eyes, hands, cou∣rage? what didst thou desire? what didst thou wish? CAP. 9. The Effects. Q. What is the Effect? A. The Effect is that which ariseth from the causes, whe∣ther begotten or corrupted, or whether any thing be moved by any means. Here the motion, and the thing done by motion, is called the Effect. Of this place are praises and dispraises, of which sacred and prophane books are full. Q. Give example of this out of some Poet? A. Aeneid. 6. The facts of diverse people are compared to the praises of the Romans. Some finely carve upon the boiling brass, They'l on the marble grave a living face, They wish the causes better, they'l descry Heavens shining parts, and tell the stars ith' sky: Remember thou Romes people brave to rule, These things shall be thine art, peace to impose, To spare thy subjects, and subdue proud foes. Q. What else cometh under this Head? A. Hitherto are speeches and writings referr'd. Q. Give an example? A. Pericles and Hortentius did celebrate the praise of plead∣ing well: and by the same argument also, Demosthenes and Cicero of writing well. Q. What further? A. To this place are referred Councels and Deliberations, although not brought to their end. Q. Give an example? A. Parmenio and Phylotus were beaten to death, because they were suspected to be of the conspiracy against Alexan∣der, as Curtius and Arianus have remembred touching Len∣tulus, Cethegus, and others the complices of Cateline; they suffered punishment by judgement of the Senate. Q. Have not Vertues and Vices their effects also? A. Yes.
Q. Give an example? A. Horace after this manner describeth the Effects of Drunkenness. Secrets it shews, and Hope it doth command; Unto the Wars it drives, although unarm'd: It takes the burthen from the careful man, It teacheth art to all that will or can. Whoev'r was drunk that wanted Eloquence? Was any poor that used this defence. CAP. 10. The Subject. Q. The argument agreeing after a certain manner succeedeth, what is that then; A. The subject and Adjunct. Q. What is the Subject? A. The subject is that to which any thing is adjoyned. Q. Make this plainer by examples? A. The minde is the Subject of science, ignorance, vertue, vice, because these happen beside the being. The body, of health, sickness, strength, weakness, beauty, deformity. Man is the Subject of riches, poverty, honour, infamy, apparell, company. The place is the Subject of the thing placed. Q. How prove you this last by testimony and example? A. The Philosophers attribute a place to Divine beings although wanting part and greatness. So the place of Geome∣try, and the difference of places is in Geometrical things. So of Physick, it is more diligently considered in Physical things. In the world, in simple Elements, in Compound things. Q. Give an example out of some Poet? A. So Virgil in his Georgicks admonisheth, that the place be diligently sought out for things proposed: as corn, trees, plants, pastures. Before we pass into a Sea unknown, Know we the wind and various manner of heaven; Our native soil, and every habitation, What will refuse or grow in any nation: Some beareth corn, th'other with grapes doth pass, Some with tall trees, the rest with unsown grass. Q. Proceed further in explicating the Subject? A. The subject of senses are called sensibles; of vertues
or vices, things proposed to vertues or vices. Q. Give an example of the former? A. Colour is the subject of the sight, sound of the hearing; because these senses are occupied and exercis'd in the sensibles Q. Give an example of the latter? A. Vertues and Vices are set forth in moral Phylosophy by this Argument, Temperance and Intemperance, by Plea∣sure: Magnanimity and Sloth, by Danger: Liberality and Covetousnss, by Riches. Q. Ezplicate the Subject further? A. So things numerable of Arithmetick: measurable (as I may say) are the subjects of Geometry. Q. Give example of the Subject out of some Orator? A. By the same Subject Cicero (second Agra) disputeth, that there was no contention amongst the people of Campania, because there was no honour. They are not carried (saith he) with the desire of glory, because where there is no publique honour, there the desire of glory cannot be. There is no dis∣cord, neither by contention nor ambition; for there is no∣thing for which they should strive, nothing for which they should war, nothing for which they should contend. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. Propertius useth this Argument. Of winds  Saylors talk, the Husbandmen of bulls, The Soldiers of their wounds, and Shepherds of their wools. CAP. 11 The Adjunct. Q. What is the Adjunct. A. The Adjunct is that to which any thing is subjected: which Argument though it be lighter then the Subject, yet more copious and frequent: therefore of its signs Ovid speak∣th, Second Rom. Anno. Some man (for such there be) may count this small, Yet that helps some which doth not profit all. Q. Make this plainer? A. Those things which are called good and evil of the mind, Body, and the whole man, are the Adjuncts of the minde, body, man: also whatsoever happeneth without the Subject is the adjunct. Q. May not time also be reduced unto this Head? A Yes, as place was in the Subject, so is time in the
Adjunct, viz. the enduring of things past, present, to come. Q. What further is comprised under this head? A. All those qualities beside the causes, adjoyned to the subject, whether they be proper or common. Q. What is Proper? A. That which agreeth only and wholly with the subject, as laughing with a man; neying with a horse, barking with a dog. Q. what is Common? A. That which is not proper after this manner. Q. Give example of the Adjunct out of some Orator? A. By this kinde of argument, Cicero in the defence of Roscius the Comedian, cavelleth with Fanius Chercus. Doth not his head and eye-brows altogether bald, seem to favour of malice, and cry out of deceit? doth he not seem to be compounded from the foot to the head, (if a man may conje∣cture by his shape) of frauds, fallacies, lies? Who therefore is altogether bald on the head and eye-brows, lest he should be said to have one hair of a good man. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. So Martial lib. 2. mocketh Zoylus. Red hair, black mouth, short feet, and ilk squint eyes, 'Tis marvel Zoylus if goodness in thee lies. Q. What further may be reduced under this head? A. Garments and company are Adjuncts. Q. Give example? A. By this kinde of circumstance, Dido going a hunting is magnificently set forth, Aeneid. 4. The morn appear'd, Dido forsook the sea, The day stir up, to th' heaven youth guides the way: Both nets and gins, with pike-staves, all were ready, Messalian horse, with hunting dogs so greedy. Princes did wait, the slow queen did expect, With fair clad horse, her way for to direct. Forth cometh she at length with mighty train, In her long robe, with many a long seam? Her horse down trap, with gold her hair was trest, Her robes with golden hooks, together did she wrest. Q. What is the benefit of Adjuncts? A. There is great use of Adjuncts to the subject by which they are occupied.
Q. Give example. A. By this argument Plato foretold those cities to be mi∣serable, where the multitude of Physicans and Judges were wanting: because, of necessity, there was conversant in those cities, both Intemperance and Injustice. And thus much for the place of agreeings, from whence every agreeing argument may be said to be one or the same: and all manner of Unity and (as I may say) Identity are re∣ferred hither, as the first and simple fountains. CAP. 12. Diverses. Q. You have expounded the first agreeing argument: the disagreeing followeth, what then is disagreeing? A. That which disagreeth from the thing. Q. How are disagreeings manifested? A. Disagreeings are equally manifested amongst themselves and equally argued one of another, although they do more clearly shine in their disagreeings. Q. What are the kindes of disagreeings? A. Two: Diverse and Opposite. Q. What are Diverses? A. Diverses are disagreeings, which disagree only in reason. Q. What are the most frequent notes of speech for this Argu∣ment? A. These. Not this, but that; although, yet. Q. Give some example from some Orator? A. Pro Pompeio. He carried not the victory, but the en∣signs of the victory. Q. Give some other examples. A. Ovid secund. Art. Amand. Ulisses was not fair but Eloquent. Aeneid. 2. This Priamus though held in dust of death, Yet ceased not. Also this of the like matter, Pro Lig. callest thou that wic∣ked, (O Tubero) why, he hath not hitherto deserved this name. For some called error, some fear, that which more hardly, hope, desire, hatred, pertinacy, the most grave temerity, none wicked besides thy self.
CAP. 13. Disparates. Q. What are Opposites? A. Opposites are disagreeings, which disagree in reason and thing; therefore cannot be attributed to the same ac∣cording to the same, and at the same time. Q. Make this plain by example? A. So Socrates cannot be black and white of one and the same part; father and son of the same man; whole and sick at the same time: but he may be white on the one part, black on another; father of this, son of that man; sound to day, sick to morrow. Q. It should seem by this, that the one being affirmed, the other is denied? A. So it is. Q. What are the kindes of Opposites? A. Disparates, or Contraries. Q. What are Disparates? A. Disparates are opposites whereof one is opposed equal∣ly to many. A. Give example? A. Green, Ash-colour, Red, are means between White and Black, which are Disparates, both with the extreams and a∣mong themselves. So liberality and covetousness are Dis∣parates among themselves. So, a man, a tree, a stone, and in∣finite of this kinde are Disparates; neither can one thing be, a man, a tree, a stone. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. Virgil. Aeneid. 1. disputeth by this argument. O virgin, how shall I remember thee! Whose countenance not mortal seems to be: Toy voice is sure above the humane reach, Both which thee Goddeses proves, and so do teach. CAP. 14. Relates. What are Contraries? A. Contraries are opposites, whereof one is opposed to one only. Q. What are the kindes of it?
A. They are either affirming or denying. Q. What is affirming? A. Affirming is that of which both of them affirm. Q. How many Kindes hath it? A. Two, Relate and Adverses. Q. What are Relates? A. Relates are Contraries affirming, of which one consisteth of the mutual affection of the other: and from hence they are named Relates. Q. Make this plain by example? A. The Father who hath a Son, and the Son who hath a Father are Relates. Q. They may seem by this to be together by nature? A. So they are, so that he which perfectly knoweth the one, knoweth all the rest. Q. Give some examples of Relates? A. Pro Mare. By which thou truly understandest how much praise there is for the benefit given, when as for the receiving is so much glory. Marc. against Sosib. Sosibian, thou yield'st, thou wast born thrall, When flattering thou thy Father Lord dost call. So Quint. Lib. 5. Cap. 10. If it be honest to place himself at Rhoades, and to lodge at Hirmaereon. After which manner Tullius, in the perfect oration. It is therefore dangerous (saith he) lest any should think it dishonesty, to teach that in the great and glorious Art to others, which it was honesty for him to learn. Q. Doth not earnest affection sometimes flow from these Relates? A. Yes. Q. Give example out of some Orator? A. Cicero in his Oration hath brought forth a certain ear∣nest affection from these Relates. Now these are grave (saith he) Wife of the Son in law, Step-mother of the Son, anp Bawd of the Daughter. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. All this Ovid hath effected maniefestly in his descripti∣on of the Iron Age, Met. 1. e doth the guest safe in his Inn remain, His Host him troubles who doth him retain: Sisters ev'n from their Brethren are not free,
The Husband longs the death of's Wife to see; She hateth him, and 'gainst him doth conspire; The cursed Stepdame's always in an Ire, The Son before his time doth's Fathers years enquire. Q. But the Argument of such Relations hath nothing con∣trary: yea, it rather argueth mutual causes: as, thou art my Father, I therefore am thy Son, how then appeareth the Con∣traries? A. When I say I am Father, I am not therefore thy Son, then are the Contraries true. CAP. 15. Adverses. Q. What are adverses. A. Adverses are Contraries affirming, which are perpe∣tually adverse among themselves. Give example out of some Poet? A. Aeneid 11. No health in war, we all desire Peace. Q. Give further example? A. White and black, hot and cold, vertue and vice are opposed. Q. Give example out of some Orator? A. Parad. 1. Cont. Epe. Yet they do hold strongly and defend accurately, that pleasure is the chief good: which to me truly doth seem to be the voice of Beasts, not of Men; when as whether God, or Nature (as I may say) the mother of all things hath given thee a soul, then which nothing is more excellent, nothing more divine; dost thou so cast and throw down thy self, as that thou thinkest there is no dif∣ference betwixt thee and the four-footed Beasts. Q. Wherein consists the force of this example? A. Cicero hath opposed beasts and men, Adverses: plea∣sure is the good of beasts, and therefore of men. Q. Give another example out of some Poet? A. So Liberty and Servitude in Tib. Lib. 2. So Servitude I see prepared for me, Yet Parents Freedom would far better be. Q. Give example out of an Orator? A. Pro Marcel. For Temerity is never joyned with Wis∣dom, neither is Chance admitted to Counsel.
CAP. 16. Contradicents. Q. Having spoken of contraries affirming, we are come to con∣traries denying, what are they then? A. Contraries denying are such, of which one saith, the other denieth the same. Q. What are the kindes? A. They are Contradicents or Privants. Q. What are Contradicents? A. Contradicents are Contraries denying, of which one denieth every where. Q. Give example? A. Just, not just; a creature, not a creature; it is, it is not: These are Contradicents. Q. Give example out of some Orator? A. Pro Murena. The sentence of Cato and Cicero are con∣traries; this of the Stoicks, that man of the Academicks. The Dialogue is in these words. Thou hast known nothing, yea something, but not all things. Thou hast done nothing meerly for thanks, yet refuse not thanks when as thine office and trust requireth it. Be not moved with mercy in con∣demning. But yet there is some praise of humanity. Stand in thine own opinion, except a better should overcome. Q. Give example from some Poet? A. Mart. lib. 2. Th'art fair Fabulla, rich, and all's a maid, Can you deny, 'tis truth that I have said? But if thou boastest of thy self too much, Th'art neither fair, a virgin, nor yet rich. Q. Give another example out of some Orator? A. Cicero primo Tusc. Forceth Atticus the Epicure by this argument to confess, that the Dead were not miserable, if they were not at all, as the Epicures believe; I had rather (saith he) thou shouldest fear Cerberus, then speak so inconsiderately. Atticus, why? Marcus, that which thou deniest, that thou sayest. Where is thy wit? For when as thou sayest he is mi∣serable, thou then sayest, he is, which is not. Then after long disputation Atticus said, go to now I grant that those which are dead are not miserable; because thou hast forced me to confess, that they be not at all, lest they should be miserable.
Q. Give another example? A. Terrence in Ev. Phedria frameth his speech to Dorus, when as he had affirmed that which he denied afterwards. Af∣ter a manner (saith he) he saith, after a manner he denieth. CAP. 17. Privants. Q. What are Privants? A. Privants are contraries denying, of which one denieth in the same Subject only, in which the Affirmative (of its own nature) is. Q. What is the Affirmative called? A. The Habit. Q. And what the Negative? A. Privation. Q. Make this plainer? A. Motion and Rest, Drunkenness and Sobriety, are com∣prised under this Head. Q. Give example? A. Mart. Lib. 3. Th'art drunken sure, sober thou would'st not do't. Q. What may further be under this Head? A. To be blinde, and to see. Give example? A. Pro Celio. There is therefore one of this family, and he truly is greatly blinde: for he shall take no grief who shall not see her. Q. What may further be under this Head? A. Poverty and Riches are thus opposed. Q. Give example? A. Mart. Lib. 5. Poor shalt thou be Emilian, if poor; Wealth's never given but to the rich before. Q. What further? A. Death and Life. A. Give example? A. Cont. Mil. Sit ye still, O revengers of this mans death, whose life if you thought you could restore, would you? Q. What further? A. Silence and Speech. Give example?
A. Primo Cat. What expectest thou the authority of the Speakers, whose silence thou beholdest to be their pleasures? Q. What more? A. Mortality and Immortality. Q. Give example? A. Pro Marc. I grieve when as the Common Wealth ought to be immortal, that it consisteth of one mortal life. And this sufficeth to be spoken of disagreeing, from whence every thing may differ from another by certain means. CAP. 18. Equalls. Q. Simple Arguments were agreeings and disagreeings; we are now come unto Comparatives; what are Comparatives there∣fore. A. Comparatives are those which are compared amongst themselves. Q. How are they manifested? A. Although they be equally known by the nature of Com∣parison, yet one to another is more known and illustrated then another: and oftentimes are judged by shorter notes, sometimes distinguished by fuller parts. Q. What may these parts be called? A. They are named the Proposition and Redition. Q. May not Comparatives also argue Fictions? A. Yes, Comparatives to argue feigned things, and do cause trust. Q. What be the kindes of Comparisons? A. Comparison, is in Quantity or Quality. Q. What is Quantity? A. Quanity is that whereby is shewed how much the thing compared is. Q. What be the kindes of Quantity? A. Equalls or Unequalls. Q. What are Equalls? A. Equalls are those of which there is one Quantity. Q. What is an equal Argument then? A. An equal Argument is, when an equal is explicated by an equal. Q. What are the Notes of it? A. Even, equal, like, the same, that, so much the more, how
much the more, by so much, by how much, so much, how much, not more, not less. Q. Give example? A. Aeneid 2. Equal with light winds. Aeneid 3. And now't should grow in equal age with thee. Aeneid 6. Behold this thing, Great Rome with earth is even, The spirit of man shall also equal heaven. Q. What further is necessary to these equals? A. A Proposition or Reddition doth distinguish them. Q. Give example out of some Orator? A. Quart. Cat. Whose things done, and the vertue to the same, by which things only the course is contained in its regions and bounds. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. Aeneid 4. As well a bruiter of things false that be, As messenger of truth and verity. Cat. By how much I am worst of Poets all, By so much the men best of patrons call. Ovid de Trist. 4. As many shells on shore, as roses sweet; As many sleep, as men, by poppy seeds do get; As many beasts in woods, fish in the sea do lie; As many birds as in the ayrie heavens do fly: So many griefs me pass, their number should I tell, Icarian waters I must surely number well. Q. Proceed to further examples? A. Phil. 9. Neither had he more skill of the law then of justice: therefore those things which the laws had brought forth, chiefly the civil, he always referred to ease and equity: neither had he rather approve actions of strife, then take a∣way controversies. Ovid de Art. Amand. Tis no less vertue for to keep then get. Pro Mur. I acknowledge this to be equal for Lucius Mure∣na: and so equal, that neither he shall be overcome by dig∣nity, neither by dignity shall overcome thee. Phil. 2. Whose burthen being common, why not a com∣mon pray of them.
Ter. in Adelph. When as I care not for thine, care not thou for mine. Q. What may further be comprised under this head? A. Of this place are those that follow derived truly from contraries, but treated of in the place of Equals; as this of Mart. Sosibian thou yield'st, thou wast born thrall, When flattering thou thy father lord dost call. Ovid. 1. Fast. There's price in price, the Censors honours give; He giveth friendship, poor alone doth live. Q. But are they not more frequent from adverses? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Cicero Syl. Neither do I understand my self to have been angry. But if I defend him whom thou accusest, why should I not be angry with thee, who accusest him whom I defend? he saith, I accuse mine own enemy; and I said, I defend my friend. So primo Tusc But when as they confess that there is force enough in vices to cause a miserable life, why should it not be granted that there is force enough in vertues to effect a blessed life. Q. It should seem by this, that contraries are sequences of contraries? A. So they are. Q. What may further be comprised under this head? A. Sometimes there is put forth like for like. Q. Give example? A. Such is the contention of the shepherds in Virgil. Aegl g. 3. Dtas first of all putting forth this riddle. ell in what place, and I will herry thee, For great Apollo's self, the welken large ust three ells broad, and no more, seems to be. And Menalcas answering in this other riddle. ell in what place the flowers have their marge, With Kings names in their leaves inscribed plain; And to thy self take Phillis for thy pain. Q. Give example of feigned equals? A. Feigned equals are such as is in Aeschinus Sacraticus, erein Socrates sheweth Aspatia, speaking to Zenophons wife and Zenophon himself. Tell me, I pray thee, thou wife of Ze∣nophon,
if thy neighbor should have better gold then thou, whether hadst thou rather have hers or thine? hers, said she. And if she have a gown, and other womens garments of a greater price then thou, whether hadst thou rather have hers or thine? hers, said she. Go to then, if she have a better husband then thou, hadst thou rather have hers? here the woman blushed. But Aspatia spake to Zenophon himself, I pray thee (said she) if thy neighbor have a better horse then thou, hadst thou rather have his or thine? his, said he. But if he have better ground then thou, whether hadst thou ra∣ther have? his, said he, viz. the best. But if he have a better wife then thou hast, whether hadst thou rather have his or thine? And here Zenophon also himself held his peace. CAP. 18. Greaters. Q. What are unequals? A. Unequals are those of which the quantity is not one. Q. What be the kindes of unequals? A. Unequal is greater or lesser. Q. What is greater? A. Greater is that which quantity exceedeth. Q. What be the proper notes of it? A. Not only, but also; I had rather this, then that; more also by Grammatical comparison. Q. Give example. A. Bicero pro Mur. There is taken from amongst us not only that verbal counterfeit of Prudence, but also that Lady of things, Wisdom it self. The thing is carried by force, not only the hateful Orator in pleading, or the pratler, but also the truly good is despised. A horrid soldier is loved. Q. Is not a certain Logical gradation, sometimes joyned with a Rethorical climax taken from hence? A. Yes. Q. Shew example? A. Pro mil. Neither did he so handle himself to the peo∣ple only, but also to the Senate; neither to the Senate only but to the Publique, President, and Soldiers: neither to these alone, but also to the power of those, to whom the care of Senate, Soldiers, and the whole Commonwealth of Italy was committed. Qu. Give a Poetical example?
A. Ju. Sat. 8. Against a proud Noble man. Rather had I Thirses thy fire should be, Whilst that Aeacides is like to thee: And that thou shouldst with Vulcan armor make, Then for Achilles son men should thee take; Or that thy feature should like Thirses be. Q. Proceed to further example? A. Pro. Marc. Having more admiration then glory. Aeneid. 1. O fellows we these evils knew before! God will them end, we greater far have bore. Cic. pro Mur. Be not so unjust, that when as thy fountains are opened by thine enemies, our rivers should be stopped up even by our friends. Q. Give an example of a gradation, without a rethorical climax? A. Ter. Thr. But doth Thais give me many thanks for it? Gn. Many. Thr. sayest thou so? is she glad? Gn. Not so much for the gift it self, as that it was given by thee; for that she triumpheth in good earnest. Q. Are not also greaters feigned? A. Yes, and of great force. Q. Give example? A. Ter. Hort. A Noble man if he be made a lover can ne∣ver undergo the charges, much less thou then. Aeneid. 5. O great Aeneas, although Jove should not Promise to help or aid me now one jot! I hope that Italy shall reach to heaven, The winds once charged their forces cross have driven: Arising from black night i'th city cast, Our power is weak, our greatest strength but waste. CAP. 20. Lessers Q. What is Lesser? A. Lesser is that whose quantity is exceeded. Q. How is a Lesser judged? A. Oftentimes by proper notes. Q. What be these notes? A. Not only, but not at all: rather this then that, when as, as also.
Q. How else? A. By Grammatical comparison, Q. How lastly? A. By the denying of parts. Q. Give example of the notes out of some Orator? A. Cic. secund. Cat. No man not only of Rome, but in no cor∣ner of all Italy, was ever oppressed with so great a tax, as that he once knew of so incredible a Caesar. Cat. 1. Thou canst rather as an Exul tempt, then as a Consul vex the Com∣monwealth. Ag. 2. Which when to all it is very hard, and an evil reason, then truly to me above the rest. Q. Give Poetical examples. A. Ovid. Trist. 1. More fierce then Busiros, more fierce then he, Who in slow fire his Ox burnt furiously. Ovid. pri. de. Rem. Amor. Thy body to redeem bear sword and fire, Ne drink to cool thy thirsty hot desire: To save thy soul wilt thou not all forbear, This part exceeds the other price by far. Q. Give example of those which are done by denying of parts? A. Phil. 9. All in all ages who have had the understanding of the Law in this City, if they might be brought together in∣to one place, are not to be equalled with Servius Sulpitius. Cat. 2. Although those which say that Catilina is gone to Messilia, do not so much complain of it, as fear it. Q. Is it not sometimes without notes? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Pro Mur. Thou art so much wanting from the per∣fection of great works, as the foundation, which thou think∣est thou hast not yet laid. Pro Arch. The stones and deserts oftentimes answer to the voice; wilde beasts are tamed and subdued by singing; shall not then the instructions of the Poets in the best thing move us? Q. Is there not also a gradation from lessers? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Ver 7. Is it a great act to over throw the city Rome, to beat a Knave, to kill a Parricide, what shall I say? to hang him upon the gallows.
Q. Are not lessers also sometimes feigned? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Virg. Aeglog. 1. The light-heeld hyndes in th'air shall feed therefore, And in the Ocean all the fishes die, For want of water, on the naked shore. The wandring Parthyan first shall drinken dry Huge Araxis; and gusling Germany, Suck down their thirsty throats swift Tigris tide, Ere his dear lovely face shall from my bosom slide. Q. Give another exmple? A. Phil. 2. O filthy thing, not only in the sight, but also to hear of! if it had happened to thee amongst thine in∣humane Pots, who would not accounted it filthy? But in the assembly of the Romans about publique affairs, the master of the horse, to whom it is not comely to belch, he vomi∣ting a crust of bread and wine, filled his lap and all the Tri∣bunal with stink. CAP. 21. Likes Q. You have expounded Comparison in Quantity, Comparison in Quality followeth; what therefore is Quality? A. Quality is that whereby the things compared are said to be such. Q. What are the kindes of quality? A. Like or Dislike. Q. What are Likes? A. Likes are those of which there is the same quality. Q. What are likes called? A. Likes, is called proportion, as the likes are proportionable. Q. What are the notes of likeness, whereby it is concluded in one word? A. Likes, Effigies, in that manner, as also denials of dis∣likeness. Q. What be they? A. Such as this, not otherwise. Q. Give example of the first sort? A. Aeneid. 1. His mouth and shoulders being like to God Phil. 9. Although Servius Suspicius could leave no clearer
monument then his son, the egies of his manners, vertues, constancy, piety, wit. Q. Give example out of some Poet? A. Ovid Trist. 1. For he or none, even he that made the wound, Only Achilles 'tis can make me sound Q. Proceed to farther examples? A. In Phis. There was one day which was to me the like∣ness of immortality, wherein I returned to my countrey. Ver 1. But presently from the same likeness of a man, as it were by some Circean pot, he is made a Bear. Pro Pomp. Therefore all in this place do behold Cons. Pompeius not as one sent from the city, but fallen from heaven. Aeneid. 3. They do not that which I have commanded. Ter. I am not, neither have been otherwise then he. Q. What is the partition of likeness A. Disjoyned or continued. Q. What is a disjoyned similitude? A. A disjoyned similitude is when as four terms are distin∣guished to the thing. Q. Give example? A. Aeglog. 5. So me thy song, as sleep on grass doth quench The traveller, his weary limbs to drench. Q. What is the force of this example? A. The songs to the hearers, as sleep to the weary, are four distinct terms. Q. Give another example? A. Ad fratrem. As the best Governous cannot overcome the force of the tempest, so the wisest men oftentimes cannot overcome the violence of fortune. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. Here are four terms, as the governor to the ship, so wise men to fortune. Q. Proceed to farther example? A. Trist. 1. Even as the yellow gold in flaming fire is seen, So men may trust, behold, in time that's sharp and keen. Cic. Phil. 2. But even as those who in a great sickness do not taste the sweetness of meat, so the lustful, covetous, wic∣ked, have not the taste of true praise. Virg. made these verses.
All , next day the signs are seen, E  parted Caesar and Jove between. arrogated them to himself and obtained a great ; therefore Virgil in these Verses mocketh Ba∣. I made these Rimes, another had the Land, So Birds,  nests not for your selves have made; So you, O Bees, make honey not for you; So you, O Sheep, bear wool but not for you; So you, O On plow, but not for you. Q. Are not the notes sometimes omitted? A. Yes, sometimes there is no note at all Q. Give an example? A. Virg. Aeglog. 2. Ah my fair Boy! trust not thy hew too much, Hurtles though black, by every handsom hand Are pluck'd while Dazies none vouchsafe to touch, All be they white, yet shed they as they stand. Q. What is continual likeness? A. A continual likeness is when as the first term is to the second, so the second to the third. Give an example? A. De. Leg. 3. See you not that this is the Migistrates power, that he should rule and prescribe right, profitable, and agreeing things with the Lawes: for as the Lawes do govern the Magistrates, so the Magistrates do rule the people. Q. What is the force of this example? A. Here are three terms, Lawes, Magistrates, People. Q. Have not feigned likenesses equal force with these above? Yes. Q. Give example? A. It appeareth chiefly in this explicated similitude of Aesop his Apology taken out of Horace. Epist. 1. But if Romes people ask me happily, Why not 'mongst Judges on the Bench sit I; And do that which they love, fly that they hate? I answer as the crafty Fox of late. When tooth-sick Lion he this message sent, Fain would I come, to that thing was I bent;
But that I saw the steps of many feet, That way to go, none back again to get. CAP. 22. Dislikes. Q. What are dislikes? A. Dislikes are comparatives, whose quality is diverse. Q. What are the proper notes of dislikes? A. Dislike, different, another, Q. Give example? A. Pro Plan. Although the paying of money and thanks be unlike. Aeneid. 1. O ancient house! O how unlike for that Lord to govern. Caes. Pri. Bel. Gal. All these differed in their tongues, instructions, lawes. Agra 2. One is known by his countenance, another by his voice, another by his gate. De Nat. Deo 2. Because I have begun to do otherwise then I had said in the beginning. Q. Are not dislikes also known by denying the likes? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. De Orat. 2. Philosophy is not like the other arts. Aeneid. 2. But he was not of that seed wherein thou rememberest Achilles, such was Priamus his enemy. Lor. Epist. 1. There is not the same age, the same minde, Ad frat. 1. So thy ring is not as a certain vessel, but as thy self. Phil. 3. This certain day he is wont to expect not so much of sacrafice as counsel. Qu. Give some Poetical examples. A. By this argument the shepherd confesseth his error. Aeglog. 1. Ah fond friend Melibe, I whilom dempt. That famous city which I now and then, In common chat amongst our countrey-men; Have heard, yea cliped by the name of Rome, Certes for all the world cib to our homely home: and by and by, —so did I dare. Kids liken to their Goats, whelps to their dams, And mole-hills wont to mountains to compare. Qu. Shew the force of this example? A. As neither the whelps to the dogs, nor kids to their dams, so neither is Mantua like to Rome.
Q. Be not notes of dislikes sometimes wanting? A. Yes, oftentimes, and the dislikeness is more clearly explicated. Q. Give an example out of some Orator? A. Quint. L. 1. C. 11. Brutus slew the Children of the Tray∣tors: Muntius did punish by death the vertue of his Son. Q. Give another example? A. Cut. The Sun sets and riseth again: but when our lit∣tle light setteth, there is a perpetual night. CAP. 23. Conjugates. Q. Hitherto you have expounded the first arguments, those derived from the first follow, what are they then? A. Those derived from the first are these, which are even to that which they argue, as the first from whence they are derived. Q. VVhat be the kinds of these arguments? A. A Conjugate, a Notation, a Distribution, and a De∣finition. Q. VVhat are Conjugates? A. Conjugates are names drawn diversly from the same principal. Q. Give example? A. Justice, Just, Justly. Q. Is there not a Symbol in Conjugates of agreeing argu∣ments? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Propert. Lib. 2. Because in love there is no liberty, VVhoever loves that man, can ne'r be free. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. Here liberty is the cause why we should be free. Q. Give another example? A. Cic. Nat. Deo. 2. Where he speaketh of Dionysius the ty∣rant. He commanded that the tables of silver, in which were the Images of the Gods, should be taken away; in which after the manner of the Grecians should be ingraven, The goods of the Gods, saying, that he was willing to use of their goodness.
Q. Shew the force of this example? A. The Gods are good, therefore their goodness is to be used: here from the effects it is directed to the causes. Q. Give another example? A. Ter. I am a man, no humane thing is strange to me. A. Is it not sometimes from the Subject to the Adjunct? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Phil. 2. I will not handle thee as a Consul, lest thou handle me as one standing for the Consulship. In Pis. When as all the cause was of the Consuls and Senate, both the Con∣suls and Senate had need of my help. CAP. 24. Notations. Q. What is notation? A. Notation is the interpretation of a name. Q. what are names? A. Names truly are notes of things. Q. May there not be rendred a reason of the names? A. Yes, either from the derivation or composition, if they be made by true notation, from some first argument. Q. Give example? A. Homo ab humo. Ovid. Fast. 6. Stat vi terrasua, vi stando vest a vocatur. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. This is a notation from the cause. Q. Give another example? A. At focus a flammis & quod fovit omnia dictus. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. This is a notation from the effects. Q. Give another example? A. Vir. 4. O Verrea praeclara! quid enim accessisti, quo non attuleris tecum istum diem? & enim quam tu domum, quam ur∣bem adiisti, quod fanum denique, quod non eversum atque exter∣sum reliqueris? quare appellentur sane ista Verrea quae non ex nomine, sed ex moribus, naturaque tua constituta esse vide∣antur. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. This is also a notation from the effects. Q. Give another example?
A. Ovid. Fast. 1. Prima dies tibi carna datur, dea cardinis haec est, Nomine clausa aperit, claudit aperta sua. Q. Wherein is the force of this example? A. This is a notation from the subjects in the inward, about which the Deity of this Goddess is exercised. Q. Give another example? A. From the adjuncts, there is a notation from Bambalion. Phil. 2. Quia balbus & stupidus: hinc igitur cavilatio in An∣tonium generum. Tuae conjugis, bonae faeminae, locupletatis qui∣dem certe, Bambalio quidem pater, homo nullo numero, nihil illo contemptius, qui propter haesitantiam linguae stuporemque cordis cognomen ex contumelia traxer it. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. This is a notation from adjuncts. Q. Are there not notations also from disagreeings? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Quint. Lib. 1. Cap. 6 Lucus, quia umbra apacus, parum lceat. & ludus, quia sit longissime a lusu, & dies quia mini∣me dives. Q. May not notation be also from comparatives? A. Yes. Q. Give example: A. Pyropus, quod ignis slammam imitetur. Q. But is there not, as to the notation to his name, so an af∣fection of the name to the notation. A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Animi plenus ergo animosus. Q. Shew the contrary? A. Animosus, ergo animi plenus. CAP. 25. Distribution. Q. What are the other derived arguments? A. Distribution and Definition. Q. Is there not a reciprocal affection in both these? A. Yes. Q. What is the affection in the distribution? A. Of all parts with the whole.
Q. What is the affection in the definition? A. Of the definition with the things designed. Q. What is a distribution? A. A distribution is, when the whole is distributed into parts. Q. What is the whole A. The whole is that which containeth parts. Q. What are parts? A. Parts are those which are contained of the whole. Q. It should seem then that the distinction of the whole into parts is distribution? A. So I said. Q. What is then the collection of the parts to the making up of the whole? A. It is called induction. Q. Whence is distribution taken? A. Distribution is taken from arguments altogether agree∣ing, but disagreeing amongst themselves: therefore it shall be by so much more accurate, by how much the agreeings of the parts shall be with the whole, and the disagreeings among themselves. CAP. 26. The distribution from the Cause. Q. Whence is the first distribution? A. The first distribution is from absolute agreeings. Q. What are these absolute agreeings? A. The causes and effects. Q. What is distribution from the causes? A. Distribution from the causes, is when the parts are causes of the whole. Here the distribution of perfect into its members is greatly praised. Q. What is perfect? A. Perfect is the whole, to which the parts are essential. Q. What is a member? A. A member is a part of the whole. Q. Give example? A. Grammer is divided into Etymology and Syntaxis; Rhetorick, into Elocution and Action; Logick, into In∣vention and Judgement: for those Arts constituted of those parts.
Q. What is the principal distribution? A. When the explication of a longer thing is received. Q. Give examples? A. Georg. 1. What makes glad corn, and how to till the ground, How to plant elms that be so strong and sound; How to guide oxen, cattel how to tend, And how the little pretty be desend, I will declare.— Q. Give another example? A. Cic. pro Mur. I understand, O you Judges, that the whole accusation hath three parts, one of which is in re∣prehension of life, another in contention of dignity, the third touching the fault. Q. How is the second kinde of handling this kinde of argument? A. Either from the parts to the whole; or from the whole to the parts. Q. Give example? A. Cat. Quintia is fair to many, so to me, I will not therefore this same thing deny; But wholly fair I will not say she's not, True beauty in her there is not a jot. Lesbius fair, in every part most fine; Venus adorn'd her, clear did make her shine. CAP. 27. The distribution from the effects, also the genus and species. Q. What is the distribution from the effects? A. The distribution from the effects, is when the parts are effects. Q. Give example? A. In a ship the sea-men, some scale the masts, some run in at the doors, some draw water, the governor holdeth the rudder in the ship Q. May not distribution of genus into species be comprised under this head? A. Yes, distribution of genus into species doth here excel. Q. What is genus?
A. Genus is the whole essential in parts. Q. What is species? A. Species is the parts of genus. Q. Give example? A We say a living creature is the genus of a man, and a beast; for a living creature is the whole of that effect: viz. a corporal living substance, which commonly pertaineth to the beasts and men. We say the species of a man and a beast is living, because they are parts of a living subject, which living essence they have common. We say a man, the genus of every man; and a lion, the genus of every lion; but con∣trary, every man, the species of a man; every lion, of a lion. Q. What is the kinds of the genus? A. The genus is most general or subalternate. Q. What are the kinds of the species? A. The species is subalternate or most special. Q. What is the most general genus? A. The most general genus is that of which there is no kinds. Q. Give example? A. In Logical invention, an argument is the most general genus of artificials and inartificials. Q. What is the subalternate genus, and the subalternate species? A. The subalternate genus, as also the subalternate species, is that which is the species of this, but the genus of that. Q. Give example? A. The cause is the species of an absolute arguing argu∣ment, but the genus of the matter and form. Q. But what is the most special species? A. The most special species is that which is individable into other species. Q. Give example? A. The matter and form singly. Q. What are the genus and species notes of? A. Of the causes and effects. Q. Give example? A. In a living thing there is a corporeal essence, which in the matter is belonging commonly to the species; as also the faculty of life and sence, which in the form pertaineth commonly to the species.
Q. It should seem that the genus containeth the causes, which do attain to the species of it; and therefore contrarily, the species contains the effects of their genus? A. So it is. Q. From whence then is that universal famousness and ex∣cellency? A. From hence, because it declareth the causes, Q. Shew some example now of the distributions of the genus into species? A. Distribution of genus into species is very excellent truly, but hard and seldom found, yet we will bring what illustrations and examples we can. Ovid. Met. 1. Divideth living creatures into five species? stars, birds, beasts fish, men: he giveth life to the stars, as the Philosophers do. No region is without some living thing, Stars in the skie, the forms of Gods being: Birds in the air in abundance be, Beasts on the earth, and fishes in the sea. But yet 'mongst these a creature more divine, Who may them rule and govern all in fine; There wanted much until that man was born. So Cic. Offic. 1. Divideth vertue into four species, prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance; but all that is honest springeth out of one of these four parts, for either it is conver∣sant in the knowledge and skill of the truth, or in the defend∣ing the society of men, and giving every one his own; also in trust of things bargained, or in a high mind and admirable greatness or courage, or lastly in all things which are made and called order and means, in which is modesty and temperance. Q. What is distribution of the genus into the forms of the species? A. Distribution of the genus into the forms of the Species is the same; because the form with the genus, constitute their species. Q. Give example? A. Of living creatures, one is speaking, another dumb. Q. May not genus and species be handled a part and seve∣rally. A. Yes, genus and species are not only handled after this simple form of division, but also apart one from another. Q. Give example?
A. Pro Arc. But lest any should wonder that we say so that there is a certain faculty of wit, and this reason or dis∣cipline of speaking, neither that we have truly given our selves altogether to this study; for all arts which pertain to humanity, have a certain common band, and are contained (as it were) in a certain knowledge amongst themselves. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. Art is the genus; poesie, and eloquence the species. Q. Is not the genus handled by the species? A. Yes. Q. Give example? A. Ovid de Trist. 4. Fill thy sad matter with thy vertues grave, Hot glory doth decay, it none can save: Who had known Hector if Troy well had been? Through publique vices, way to vertue's seen. Thine art (O Typhis) lies, if in the sea There be no floods; if men be well truly, Then Phoebus art decayeth instantly. That which they hid, and is not known for good, Appears at last, and shews where evil stood. Q. But are there no special examples fitted to this kind? A. Yes, such as this. Attic. 7. Wilt thou leave the city? What if the French men come? The Commonwealth, he saith, is not in walls, but altars and Religion. Theomisticles did the same, and a whole host of Barbarians were not able to take one city. But Pericles did not so, who in the year almost be∣fore fifty, when he kept nothing but a wall; our city before being taken, they kept the tower notwithstanding. CAP. 28. Distribution from the Subject. Q. what is the other distribution? A. The other distribution is of agreeings after a certain manner. Q. what are agreeings after a certain manner? A. The subjects and adjuncts. Q. what is the distribution from subjects? A. The distribution from subjects is, when the parts are subjects. Q. Give example?
A. Cat. Thy maiden-head's not wholly thine I ween, One part thy Father gave, the part between, Thou of thy mother hadst; so that to thee, None but the third remaineth for to be. Therefore resist not two, cast not away, The thing thy parents gave to thee I say. Q. Give example out of some Orator? A. Cic. Tusc. 1. There are therefore three kindes of good, as I understand from the Stoicks, to whose use oftener then I am wont we give place. There are therefore those kindes of good, whilst that the external things of the body are cast up∣on the ground, and because they are to be undertaken, they are called good. There are other divine things which do more nearly concern us, and are heavenly; so that those who have attained them, why may I not call them after a manner blessed, yea most happy. CAP. 29. Distribution from Adjuncts Q. What is Distribution from Adjuncts? A. Distribution from Adjunct is, when the parts are Ad∣juncts. Q. Give example? A. Of men, some are sound, some sick, some rich, some poor. Q. Give a poetical example? A. Virg. Georg. 1. Divideth the World into five parts, the middle scorching hot, the other two extream cold, the two last temperate. Five Zones the heavens do hold, the middle hot: The Sun there burns, cold in it there is not; But on the right and left hand there is seen, Rain, frost, and cold, that's bitter, sharp and keen. The two last temperate, yet in them is, Mortality, and many sicknesses. Q. Give an Orators example? A. Caes. Bel. Gal. 1. All France is divided into three parts; of which, one the Belgians inhabit, the other the Aequitans, the third, those who in their tongue are called Ces, in our Language the Gaules.
CAP. 30. Definition. Q. What is definition? A. Definition is when it is explicated what the thing is, and that interchangeably may be argued with the thing defined. Q. What are the kindes of definition? A. A definition is perfect or imperfect. Q. What is the perfect definition called? A. This is properly called a definition. Q. VVhat is the imperfect called? A. A description. Q. What is a perfect definition? A. A perfect definition is a definition consisting of the one∣ly causes which constitute the essence: such as the causes comprehended by the genus and form. Q. Give example? A. After this manner is a man defined, viz. by the genus, (a living creature) we understand (as it is said) a corporeal essence full of life and sense, which is the matter, and a part of the form of a man; to which (if thou addest reasonable) thou comprehendest the whole form of a man, by the whole faculty of this life, sense, reason. Q. It should seem then that the perfect definition is nothing else then an universal symbol of the causes, constituting the es∣sence and nature of things? A. So it is. Q. Give an example? A. The Arts have such definitions, Grammer, of well speaking; Rhetorick, of pleading well; Logick, of disputing well; Arithmetick, of numbering well; Geometry of mea∣suring well. CAP. 31. Description. Q. VVhat is description? A. Description is a definition defining the thing from other arguments also. Q. Give example? A. This is the description of a man, a man is a living crea∣ture, mortal, capable of discipline,
Q. Are not proper circumstances also mingled with common causes sometimes? A. Yes. Q. Then it seemeth that succint brevity is not always in this kinde? A. No, oftentimes it desireth a clearer and greater expli∣cation. Q. Give an example out of some Orator? A. In Mil. Glory is described. But yet of all rewards of vertue, (if there be a reason of rewards) the greatest is glory; this one comforteth us, touching the shortness of our life, cau∣seth that we are present with the absent, dead, maketh us live; to conclude, by these steps we do seem to ascend unto Heaven. Q. Give a poetical example? A. Aeneid. 4. Fame is described. From Libeans temple cometh forth great fame, Nought swifter then ill news which bears this name; Moving she goes; by going, strength she gets: She fears at first, at last with winds she fleets; Walks on the earth, her head she lifts to'th skie: Earth brought her forth, the Gods were angry. In Caeus and Encelladus his land, She was at last as I do understand; Her feet were swift, here wings most hurtful were, A horrid monster, wicked, full of fear: As many feathers as upon her are; So many eyes attend her every where. So many tongues: so many mouths do sound, So many years do lessen her around. In night she flies through heaven, and in the shade, About the earth she goes, no noise is made: She sitteth by the light on houses high, And causeth towns to quiver fearfully. As well a bruiter of things false that be, As messengers of truth and verity. Q. Proceed to further example? A. Such are the discriptions of plants and living creatures in physick: also of rivers, mountains, cities, in Geography and History.
CAP. 32. Divine Testimony, Q. You have expounded the artificial arguments, the inartificial followeth; tell me then what an inartificial argument is? A. An inartificial argument is that which argueth not by its own nature, but taken force from some artificial argument. Q. It seemeth by this, when a hidden truth of things is more subtily searched for, that this argument hath small force of proof? A. So it is, but in civil and humane things, oftentimes this argument effecteth the greatest trust from the moving argu∣ments, if wisdom, vertue, and good will be present. Q. What is it called? A. In one name is called testimony. Q. What are the kinds of testimony? A. Divine or humane. Q. What may be comprised under the Head of divine testimo∣ny? A. Not only the miracles of the Gods, but also the answers of Prophets and Fortune-tellers are counted amongst divine testimonies. Q. Give example? A. All these are brought forth Cat. 3. For that I may omit (saith the Orator) the fires seen in the night from the West, and the burning of heaven, as also lightning, as earth-quakes, with other many things done to us Consuls, as those which are now done do seem to proclaime the Gods immortality. And a little after, at which time when the Araspatians were come to∣gether out of all Herturia, they said that slaughter, burn∣ing, perishing of the laws, civil and domestical war, and the fall of the whole city and empire approached; unless the immortal Gods pleased by all reason, by their power should change those destinies. At length when he said that they mocked at the answer of the Arispatians, and that they did more regard the sign of Jove, turning to the East, he then said, But is not he so present, that it should seem to be done at the beck of the mighty Jove; that when this morning before my door, by my command and con∣juration, the Judges being then in the house of Concordia, at the same time there appeared a sign, which being turn'd toward
you and the Senate, both you and the Senate saw manifestly laid open, who they were that were against the health of all men. Q. Give another example? A. That of Tibullus is more short. But if that Oracles true things do tell, Then this in our name see thou do declare? That he doth promise Delius to give, To be thy spouse, with whom thou'lt happy live. CAP. 33. Testimony from humane Law and Sentences. Q. What be the kindes of humane testimony? A. Humane testimony is common or proper. Q. What is common? A. Law, and a famous sentence. Q. What is a legal testimony? A. Legal testimony is both unwritten and written. Q. Bring forth authority for this? A. Pro Mil. for there is (O ye Judges) a law not written, but born with us; which we have not received, learned, read; but taken, drawn, expressed from nature: as if our life should be in some hazard, force, danger, either of thieves or enemies, all honest reason were to be sought of safety; but if the twelve tables will have the night thief, yea, the day thief too, if he defend himself after any manner, killed with∣out punishment; who is there that will think him that is slain to be punished, when as there is a sword reached to us, to kill that man, by the lawes themselves. Q. What are famous Sentences? A. Proverbs. Q. Give example? A. They be such as these: Pares cum paribus facilime con∣gregantur. Spartam nactus es, hance ex orna. Q. What may farther be under this head? A. Sayings of Wisdom also. Q. Give example? A. Nosce teipsum. Nequid nimis. Sponde praesto ad detri∣mentum. Q. What is proper testimony? A. Such as this of Plato 1. ad Quint. frat. And then truly Plato the prince of Wisdom and Learning thought those
Commonwealths blessed, if either learned and wise men governed, or those that did govern, placed all their study in wisdom and learning. Q. Proceed to further example? A. Such were in the Poets, Aeneid. 4. Learn justice and admonitions, and contenm not the rich. So in Homer. . Ajax led out of Salaminus twelve ships. The Magatenses were overcome by the Athenians. Q. What are the testimonies of the living? A. Testimonies of the living, are not onely when it is in∣quired of ground, felling of wood, and such like business, but also there are testimonies of obligation, confessing oath. Q. Give an example of obligation? A. Phil. 5. For I dare binde my faith (P. C.) to you and the people of Rome, that truly when no force constrained me, I durst do; and I feared an opinion of timerity, in a thing greatly hurtful: I promise and swear (P. C.) to become alwayes such a citizen to Caesar as he himself is, and as we ought chiefly to wish or desire. Q. Have we not an obligation set forth sometimes with a pledge? A. Yes. Virg. Aeglog. 3. Wilt then by turns, we hand to hand do try, What either can, and prove each by our deed; I'le pawn this heifer, (which lest thou deny) She twice hath come already to the pail, And two twins suckles: at this time now say, What pawn thou'lt gage with her to countervail. Q. What are the kindes of confession? A. Confession is free or extorted by torments. Q. What is this latter properly called? A. A question. Q. Give example? A. Such an argument there is against Milon whom Cicero derided. Go to then, what, or how is the question? How? Where was Roscius? Where was Casca? Doth Clodius lay snares for Milon? He hath done, surely the gallows. He hath done nothing. Q. What further may be reduced hitherto? A. Hitherto may be referred the argument which we
used when we bring fourth our approbation, and experience of our affirmative. Q. Give example? A. Ver. 4. Even Volcatio if he had come freely, would he have given a little book? he shall come, he shall be tried; no man truly receiveth it. Ter. Spend thy time in letters, in the woods, in musick; it is meet for youth to know these li∣beral things, I will give diligence. Q. Give a Poetical example? A. Ovid. Trist. 3. The which that thou mayest better credit me, Try thou my pains, believe it then to be. Q. Give an example also of the testimony of an oath. A. Aeneid. 6. I swear by th' gods, and all in earth unseen, I have departed from thy shore, O queen. Q. This reciprocation seemeth to be more obscure, as because the testimony is true, the witness is also true? A. So it is. And thus much sufficeth to have spoken of Invention, the first part of the Science Logick.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE Art of Logick. CAP. 1. What Judgement is. Q. Hitherto the first part of Logick in Invention hath been ex∣pounded, the other part followeth in Judgement; what then is Judgement? A. Judgement is the second part of Logick, of dispo∣sing arguments to be judged well. Q. How are they judged? A. Every thing is judged by a certain rule of disposition. Q, It may be thought then that this part of Logick is called both Judgement and Disposition from hence? A. So it is. CAP. 2. An affirmative or negative axioma. Q. What are the kinds of Judgement? A. Judgement is axiomatical, or dianoctical. Q. What is an axioma? A. An axioma is the disposition of an argument, with an argument, wherein somewhat is judged to be, or not to be. Q. What is it called, and whence receiveth it the name? A. In the Latine of Enuntiatum, it is called Enuntiation? of Pronuntiatum, Pronuntiation. Q. What are the affections of an axioma? A. An axioma is affirmative or negative. Q. What is affirmative? A. Affirmative is when the force of it is affirmed. Q. And what negative? A. When it is denied, From hence springeth the contradicti∣on of axioma's when the samé argument is affirmed or deni∣ed.
CAP. 3. True and false. Q. What may be a second kind of the effections of an Axioma? A. An Axioma secondly is true or false. Q. How true? A. When it pronounceth as the thing is. Q. How false? A. Contrary. Q. What are the affections of a true Axioma? A. A true Axioma is contingent or necessary. Q. How contingent? A. When it is so true that it may sometimes be false. Q. Give example? A. Fortune helpeth the hold; for it may be, that which is true to day, tomorrow may be false: and therefore the judge∣ment of this contingent verity, is called opinion: those things of the time past or present, may be certain to a man, but of time to come, they cannot by nature, although with God all things are present. Therefore Martial doth worthily mock Priscus. Priscus, thou often asks what I shall be, If now most rich, hereafter what truly; Things for to come, canst thou not tell them me, If thou a Lion art, what wilt thou be? Q. How necessary? A. When it is always true, neither can be false. Q. What is this affirmative called? A. This affirmative is called Katapantos of every thing. Q. How impossible? A. Contrarily, where it can be true of nothing. Q. What belongeth to an Axioma of the arts? A. An Axioma of the arts ought to be Kantapantos, as al∣so Homogene and Catholique. Q. What is an Homogene Axioma? A. An Homogene Axioma is when the parts are essential among themselves: as the form to the thing formed, the subject to its proper adjunct. Q. What is this called? A. This Genus of the Species is called ath' auto' by it self. Q. What is a Catholique Axioma?
A. A Catholique Axioma is when the consequent is al∣ways true of the anticedent; not only in every thing and by it self, but also reciprocally. Q. Give example? A. A man is a living creature, reasonable, number is equal or unequal. Q. What is this called? A. This is called Katholou proton universally first. Q. What then are the laws of the proper documents of the arts? A. These three, the first Ketapantos, the law of verity; the second Kath' anto, the law of justice; the third Katholous pro∣ton called the law of wisdom; and such is the judgement of Catholique Axioma's, the most true and chief knowledge. CAP. 4. The Simple Axioma. Q. You have expounded the common affection of Axioma's, the kinds follow, what are then the kinds of an Axioma? A. An Axioma is simple or compound. Q. What is simple? A. Simple is that which is contained in the force of one word; and therefore by an affirmative or negative word it affirmeth or denieth. Q. Give examples? A. Fire burneth, fire is hot, fire is not water. Q. Shew the force of these examples? A. Here fire is the anticedent, burneth the consequent: and this is the first disposition of invented things; of the cause with the effect, as in the first example; the subject with the adjunct, as in the second; the disagreeing with the dis∣agreeing, in the third: after a certan manner any argument may be enuntiated, (except those full of comparison and di∣stribution) agreeings truly by affirming, disagreeing by deny∣ing. Q. What are the kinds of a simple Axioma? A. A simple Axioma is general or special. Q. What is general? A. General is when the common consequent is attributed generally to the common antecedent. And this contradiction doth not always divide the true and false, but both parts of the contingent, as also not of contingents may be false.
Q. Give example of the first? A. Each place delighted is with Baiis pleasant rooms. No place delighted is with Baiis pleasant rooms. Q. Give example of the second? A. Every creature is reasonable, no creature is reasonable. Q. what is a special Axioma? A. A special Axioma is when the consequent is not attribu∣ted to every antecedent, and here the contradiction ever di∣videth the true from the false. Q. what are the kinds of special? A. Special is particular or proper. Q. what is particular? A. Particular is when the common consequent is attribut∣ed particularly to the antecedent: But to this Axioma it is generally contradicted. Q. Give example? A. Somewhat is to be pardoned. Nothing is to be pardon∣ed. Some clemency is not to be praised. All clemency is to be praised. Q. what is a proper Axioma? A. A proper Axioma is when the consequent is attribut∣ted to a proper anticedent. Q. Give example? A. Fabulla is fair, whose negative and contradiction is, Fabulla is not fair. CAP. 5. The copillative Axioma. Q. what is the compound axioma? A. The compound axioma is that which is contained in the force of a conjunction. Therefore from an affirmative or negative conjunction it is affirmed or denied. And a part of the contradiction is true, a part false. Q. what are the kinds? A. A compound enunciate is for his conjunction congre∣gative or segregative. Q. what is congregative? A. Congregative is that which enunciateth all agreeings by affirmings, and disagreeings by denying. Q. what are the kinds? A. Copulative or connexed.
Q. What is Copulative? A. Copulative is that whose conjunction is copulative. Q. Give example? A. Aeneid. 1. The East and South winds on the seas do blow, They rush through deep, till on the top they show. The Affrick oft with these his blasts conjoynes. This therefore shall be the negative and contradiction. The East and South winds not on seas do blow, They rush not through the deep, ne on top show. he Affrick doth not oft his blasts conjoyn. Q. But whereupon dependeth the judgement of the copulative enunciate? A. The judgement of the copulative enunciate being true, dependeth of the truth of all parts: false, at the least one part false. Q. What may further be comprised under this Head? A. The enunciate of a relate quality is of this kinde, whose conjunction is the relation it self, Q. Give example? A. Aeglog. 3. So me thy song as sleep on grass doth queme, The traveller his weary limbs to drench. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. Here the copulative judgement is, as if he should say, sleep is grateful to the weary; and so thy song is pleasing to me. Q. What is the negative hereof? Not me thy song as sleep on grass doth queme, The traveller his weary limbs to drench. CAP. 6. The Connexed Axioma. Q. What is a connexed Axioma? A. A connexed axioma is congregative, whose conjuncti∣on is connexive. Q. Give example? A. Aeneid. 2. If fortune doth feign Simon miserable, it dis∣honestly feigneth him to be vain and a liar; whose negative is, if fortune doth not feign Simon miserable, it dishonestly seign∣eth him to be vain and a liar. Q. Is not this conjunction also denied more manifestly by deny∣ing the consequent?
A. Yes. Q. Give example A. Pro Mer. I am not a murtherer though in their compa∣ny. De fato: Neither if every enunciation be true or false, doth it follow therefore that the causes are immutable; for affirmation signifieth, if the antecedent be, that the consequent is also. Negation therefore and contradiction determineth, if the antecedent be, that therefore the consequent is not. Wherefore when thou shalt judge the connexive to be abso∣lute true, thou shalt judge it also necessary, and thou shalt un∣der stand this necessity to spring from the necessary connexion of parts, the which may also be even in false parts. Q. Give example of this? A. If a man be a Lion, he is also a four-footed, this is a necessary connexion. Q. But if the connexion be contingent, and only put for probabi∣lity, how shall it be judged then? A. Its judgement then shall be only opinion, Q. Give example? A. Ter. and Pamphilus, if thou dost this, this day is the last thou shalt see me. Q. What may be further under this head? A. This relation connexive of consequence, is like to the connexed Axioma, as when Tullius is said to be an Ora∣tor, he hath also skill in pleading well. And thus much of th congregative Axioma. CAP. 7. The Discreet Axioma Q. What is a Segregative Axioma? A. A Segregative Axioma is that whose conjunction is Se∣gregative, and therefore enunciateth disagreeing arguments. Q. What are the kinds? A. A Segregative enunciation is discreet or disjunct. Q. What is discreet? A. Discreet is that whose conjunction is discretive, and therefore of disagreeings it chiefly enunciateth diverses. Q. Give example? A. Tusc. 5. Although they may be judged by the force o the body, yet they are referred to the mind: whose negativ and contradiction is, although they may not be juged by th
sense of the body, yet they are referred to the minde; or, although they may be judged by the sense of the body, yet they are not referred to the minde. For yet is here a chief conjunction. Q. How is the discreet Enunciat judged to be true? A. The discreet enunciation is judged to be true and law∣ful, if the parts be not only true, but may be also discreet. Q. How is the false or ridiculous judged? A. Contrarily. CAP. 8. The disjunct Axioma. Q. What is a disjunct axioma? A. A disjunct axioma is a segregative axioma, whose con∣junction is disjunct: Q. Give example? A. Georg. 1. There, as they say, is either silent night, Always most dark and void of any light; Or else the morning from us here doth go, And brings the day unto them there also. Q. Shew another example? A. De fato, ever enunciation is true or false, Q. Here it seemeth is signified from the disjunst, that one only is true? A. So it is. Q. What shall the negative and contradiction be? A. Not every enunciation is true or false. Q. And what doth the contradiction signifie? A. That one of them is not true by necessity, for if the disjunction be absolutely true, it is also necessary: and the parts of the disjunct are opposite without any means. Q. But although the disjunction be absolutely true, and also ne∣cessary, may there not be a necessity that the parts should be sepa∣rately necessary? A. No. Q. Give example? A. A man is good or not good, here the disjunction is ne∣cessary; and yet a man is good, is not a necessary enunciati∣on; also a man is not good, is not a necessary enunciation. Q. Whereupon then dependeth the necessity of the disjunction?
A. The necessity of the disjunction dependeth on the ne∣cessary opposition, and disjunction of the parts, not as their necessary verity. Q. But is not the disjunction oftentimes from condition? A. Yes. Q. Give example. A. As if it be thought whether Cleon will come, or Socrates, because it was so agreed that one of them only should come. Q. It seemeth by this that if the disjunction be contingent, it is not absolutely true, but is only opinionable? A. So it is, and that more frequently in the use of man. Qu. Give example? A. Ovid. Epist. Lean. Either good hap shall now unto me fall, Or else fierce death, the end of loving thrall. CAP. 9. The Syllogism and its parts. Q. You have manifested in its self the axiomatical judgement by axioma's; the dianoetical followeth: what therefore is dia∣noia? A. Dianoia is when one axioma is derived from another. Q. What are the kinds of dianoia? A. A Syllogism or Method. Q. What is a Syllogism? A. A syllogism is a dianoia whereby the question is so dis∣posed with the argument, as the antecedent put, it is neces∣sarily concluded. Q. Make this plainer? A. When the axioma is doubtful the question is effected, and there is need of a third argument to be placed with the question, for its trust. Q. How many parts hath the antecedent? A. The antecedent of a syllogism hath two parts, a propo∣sition and an assumption. Q. What is a proposition? A. A proposition is the first part of the antecedent, where∣by the consequent of the question, is at least disposed with the argument. Q. What is the assumption? A. The assumption is the second part of the antecedent, which is affirmed from the proposition.
Q. But what is the consequent part of the syllogism? A. The consequent part of the syllogism, is that which imbraceth the part of the question, and concludeth it. Q. What is it called? A. It is called from the nature of it, complexion and con∣clusion. Q. If any part of the syllogism want, what is it said to be? A. It is called Enthymema. Q. But what if any part happen to be besides its parts? A. Then it is called a Porsyllogism. Q. Is not the order of the parts oftentimes confounded? A. Yes. Q. What then if any doubt shall arise from it? A. Then that shall be filled up which wanteth, those cut off which abound: and every part digested into his place. CAP. 10. The simple contracted syllogism. Q. What are the kinds of a syllogism? A. A syllogism is simple or compound. Q What is simple? A. Simple is where the consequent part of the question is placed in the proposition, the antecedent part in the assum ption. Q. What are the affections of it.? A. It is affirmed, denied, general, special, and proper. Q. How is it affirmed? A. From all the affirmative parts. Q. How is it denied? A. From one negative of the antecedent parts, with com plexion. Q. How is it general? A. From the general proposition and assumption, Q. How is it special? A. From one of the generals only. Q. And how is it proper? A. From both propers. Q. What are the kinds of the simple syllogism? A. The simple syllogism is contracted by parts, or expli cated. Q. What is contract? A. Contract is when the argument for the example is so subjected to a particular question, that the antecedent may be
understood to affirm each part, and in the assumption. Q. Give an example? A. Certain confidence is vertue, as constancy; certain confidence is not vertue, as boldness. Q. Shew the force of this example? A. This argument is understood to go before each part of the question, as if it were expressed, constancy is a vertue, and confidence; and therefore certain confidence is a vertue: also boldness is not a vertue, and yet it is confidence; and therefore some confidence is not a vertue. So in the use of dis∣puting, the master of the Syllogism draweth the judgment, neither is it set forth otherwise. And this exposition the be∣ginning of the Syllogism is expounded by Aristotle, so that the Syllogism in its full judgement is more clear and manifest. CAP. 11. The first kind of the simple explicated Syllogism. Q. What is the explicated Syllogism? A. The explicated syllogism whose parts are explicated. Q. What are the proprieties in this explicated Syllogism? Q. Two, first the proposition is general or proper, second∣ly the conclusion is like to the antecedent or the weaker part. Q. What are the kinds of it? A. The kinds are two-fold. Q. What is the first? A. The first is where the argument always follow the ne∣gative in the other part. Qu. Shew some syllogism of this kind? A GEN. 1. Ce∣sa∣re. A troubled me useth not his reason well: But a wise man useth his reason well. A wise man is not therefore troubled. Q. Produce the example of some Orator for this syllogism? A. This Judgement is so brought forth of Cicero, Tuse. 3. And when (saith he) the eye is troubled, it is not honestly affected to the fulfilling of its duty, and the rest of the parts; as also the whole body, when it is moved from its state, wanteth its office and function. So a troubled mind is not honestly affected to fulfil his duty. But the duty of the mind is to use reason; and a wise man is always so affected, that he useth reason most excellently; he is therefore never troubled. Q. Give example of another general syllogism?
A. GEN. 2. Ca∣me∣stres A mortal thing is compound. A Soul is not compound. A Soul therefore is not mortal. Q. Produce the authority of some ancient avouching this syllo∣gism? A. Cicero judged the soul to be immortal by this syllogism. Tusc. 1. For we cannot doubt (saith he) in our minds, unless we be perchance ignorant in physical things, but that there is nothing knit to souls, nothing connexed, nothing copulate, nothing joyned, nothing double; which when it is so can sure∣ly never be parted, nor divided, nor severed, nor drawn asun∣der, neither perish therefore: for perishing is as it were, a departure and separation, or breach of those parts, which be∣fore the perishing were joyned together. Q. Give an example of a special syllogism? A. SPEC. 1. Fe∣sti∣no A pale man is not couragious. Maximus is couragious. Maximus therefore is not pale. Qu. Produce authority for this syllogism? A. By this judgement Ovid concludeth de Pon. 3. El. 3. Paleness and sloth are not in the high mind, Rather with Vipers them on ground we finde. In highest things thy mind excels we see; No name I finde t'express the wit of thee. Some miseries do taste, hurt and out-worn, Are made to feel sharp pricking of the thorn: Yet thou art wont to help complaining men, Amongst which number pray let me be them. Q. Shew another example of the special syllogism? A. SPEC. 2. Ba∣ro∣co. A Dauncer is Lecherous. Murena is not Lecherous. Murena therefore is no dauncer. Q. Produce some Orator for this syllogism? A. Cic. pro Mur. For no man almost being sober daunceth, unless perchance he be mad, neither alone, nor at a moderate and honest banquet; for dauncing is the companion of untimely banquets, pleasant places, and many delights: thou snatch∣est that from me, that it is necessary that vices should be; thou
leavest that whereby this removed, this vice ought not to be at all: no filthy banquet, no love, no gluttony is shewed; and when we finde not all these things which have the name of pleasure, and are vices, there thou canst not finde lechery, nay, thinkest thou to finde a shadow of lust in such. Q. Avouch some other authority after the like manner? A After this manner judgement, Ovid de Trist. 1. con∣cludeth triply, whilst he sets forth the excuse of his verses. They that make verses should not merry be, Our time is clouded with adversity. They that write verses should enjoy their ease, The seas, the windes, with winter fierce me press. Good Poets should not fear, but I fear death, I dread lest swords do take away my breath: Then what is here, a right judge will admire, If reading them they satisfie's desire. Q. Give example of proper syllogisms? A. PRO. 1. Agesilaus is not painted by Apelles. Alexander is painted by Apelles. Alexander therefore is not Agesilaus. Q. Give another example of a proper syllogism? A. PRO. 2. Caesar oppressed his countrey. Tullius oppressed not his countrey. Tullius therefore is not Caesar. CAP. 12. The second kind of the simple explicate syllogism. Q. What is the second kind of the simple explicate syllogism? A. The second kinde of the explicate syllogism is, when the argument goeth before in the proposition, the affirmative followeth in the assumption. Q. Give an example of an affirmative general after this kinde. A. AFF. Gen. Bar∣ba∣ra. Every just thing is profitable. Every honest thing is just. Every honest thing therefore is profitable. Q. Produce some Orator avouching this syllogism? A. Thus Cicero concludeth, offic. 2. The Philosophers tru∣ly with great authority, severely, soundly and honestly, do
distinguish these three confused kinds by cogitation. For whatsoever is just, that also they think to be profitable: also, whatsoever is honest, that is just; fom whence ariseth that whatsoever is honest, that is also profitable. Q. Give an example of a negative general syllogism? A. NEG. Gen. Ce∣la∣rent. A fearful man is not free. A covetous man is fearful. A covetous man therefore is not free. Q. Prove this by some Poet? A. It is thus concluded and judged by Horace, Epist, 1. Who freer is he, that as a servant dwelleth? Or he that in his moneys love excelleth? I do not see, he that desires doth fear, And he that fears his freedom doth not bear. Q. Give another example of this kind of syllogism? A. Ter in Eu. concludeth and judgeth this, That which is void of counsel, cannot be governed by counsel. Love is void of Counsel. It cannot therefore be governed bycounse Q. Produce the words of Terence. A. the former syllogism followeth in these words: Ma∣ster that thing which hath in it neither counsel nor means, that thou canst not govern by counsel. In love are all these vices, injuries, suspicions, enmities, flatteries, war, peace a∣gain: these uncertain things if thou shouldest guide by cer∣tain reason, thou dost no more then if thou shouldest labor to be mad with reason. Q. Give an example of the affirmative special syllogism? A. AFF. SPE. Da∣ri∣i. Consuls made by vertue ought studiously to defend the Commonwealth. Cicero is made Consul by vertue. Cicero therefore ought studiously to defend the Com∣monwealth. Q. Produce Tully's words avouching this syllogism? A. The Orator doth both conclude and judge his own diligence Agr. 2. For the great care and diligence as well of all the Consuls, ought to be placed in defending the Com∣monwealth, as of those who not in the cradle, but in the camp were made Consuls. None of our ancients promised to the
people of Rome for me that I ought to be trusted: to ask of me that I ought; even when I did ask, none of our ancestors commended me to you: therefore if I neglect any thing, there is none who shall intreat me for you. Yet while my life last, (I being he who am able to defend it from their wickedness) I promise this to you, O Quirites, that you have committed the Commonwealth to the providence of a good trust: to a watch∣ful man, and not a coward; to a diligent man, not a sluggard. Q Shew another syllogism of this kinde? A. That which comes wished for is grateful. Lesbia comes wished for to Catullus. She is therefore grateful. Q. Set forth Catullus his words wherein he thus concludeth? A. That which we long for with desires great, Is acceptable to us when we heat: Wherefore this grateful is more dear then gold, That Lesby is come, our friend of old. Thou dost our wishes grant, our hope restore: O light most clear! who is there that is more Happy then I, who have what I desire; Even what I wish, there's nought I can require. Q. Give an example of a negative special? A. NEG. SPE. Fe∣ri∣o. The deceiver of a loving maid is not to be praised. Demophoon is the deceiver of a loving maid, to wit. Phyllis. Demophoon therefore is not to be praised. Q. Set forth the words of Phillis in Ovid so judging? A. It is no glory Virgins to deceive, Who love a man, and wish him for to have; Simplicity should rather favour again, But I that love and all's a woman am; Deceived am by thee with flatering stile, The Gods thy praises make it all the while. Q. Give example of an affirmative proper? A. AFF. PRO. Octavius is Caesars heir. I am Octavius I am therefore Caesars heir. Q. Give example of a negative proper?
A. NEG. PRO. Anthony is not Caesars son. Thou art Anthony. Thou art not therefore Caesars son. CAP. 13. The first connexed Syllogism. Q. You have expounded hitherto the simple syllogism, what now is the compound syllogism? A. The compound syllogism is a syllogism where the whole question is another part of the affirmed and compound proposition, the argument is another part. Q. But what if any thing were taken away in the compound syllogism? A. That were to put a special contradiction. Q. What are the kinds of a compound syllogism? A. A compound syllogism is a connexed or disjunct. Q. What is a connexed syllogism? A. A connexed syllogism is a compound syllogism of a con∣nexed proposition. Q. How many are the manners of distinction? A. It is of two manners. Q. What is the first? A. The first manner of the connexed syllogism is that which assumeth the antecedent, and the consequent concludeth. Q. Give an example of this? A. After this manner Cicero concludeth. Lib. 2. de Divi∣natione. If they be Gods it is divination. But they are Gods. It is divination therefore. Q. Give another example? A. Offic. 3. And if also nature prescribeth this, that a man to a man, whatsoever he be for that same cause that he is a man, will use consultation; it is necessary according to the same nature, that the profit of all should be common: which if it be so, all of us are contained in one, and the same law of na∣ture; and this if it be so indeed, we are certainly forbidden by the law of nature to violate one anther: but the first is true, the last therefore is also true. Q Give another example? A.. Aeneid 4. Dido judgeth Aeneas to remain with her.
Dost thou me fly, by these fears I thee pray, By thy right hand I thee beseech to stay: Else thou wilt leave me wretched here alone, By our dear marriage, our dear love like none. If I do ought deserve, if thou hast been Sweet unto me, have pitty on me then: Look on thy slippery house, and now I pray; If any place for prayers be, I say. For Libians sake, for Nomades his kings, Who hated me, and for all other things Which I for thee did bear; my credit's lost, I am alone, for thee thus am I crost. Besides all this, my fame is quite decayed; Rather I had my flesh in dust were laid. Q. Doth it alwayes assume the same? A. Oftentimes not the same but a greater. Q. Give example? A. Cat. 1. If thy parents feared and hated thee, neither couldst thou please them by any reason; in my opinion thou wert to abstain a little from their sight. Now the country (which is our comon parent) hateth and feareth thee, and of a long time judgeth nothing of thee, except it be touching thy death; canst thou neither avoid its authority, neither follow its judgment, neither fearest thou its force. Q. What may further be under his Head? A. This manner of concluding is the very same when the proposition is a relate of time. Q. Give example? A. After this kind the nymph OEnon in Ovid concludeth the error of her foolishness. When Paris OEnon hoped to forsake, It would to Xanthus with all speed betake. Xanthus make hast, return thou back again, That so this Paris OEnon may sustain. CAP. 14. The second Connexive Syllogism. Q. What is the second manner of the connexed syllogism? A. The second manner of the connexed syllogism taketh a∣way the consequent, that it may take away the antecedent. Q. Give example? A. If a wise than assent to any thing, sometimes also he shall be opinionated.
But he shall never be opinionated. Therefore shall he assent to nothing. Qu. Give another example? A. By the like syllogism Ovid. Trist. 12. judgeth his foo∣lishness. If I where wise those sisters I should hate; Deities hurtful to whom on them wait. But now so great my foolishness is seen: I build them altars whom my hurt have been. These two kinds of the Syllogism are most usual of all. CAP. 15. The first disjunct Syllogism Q. What is the disjunct syllogism? A. The disjunct syllogism is the syllogism composed of a disjunct proposition. Q. What are the manners of distinction? A. Two. Q. What is the first? A. The first taketh away one and concludeth the rest. Q. Give example? A. Either it is day, or it is night. But it is not day. It is therefore night. Q. Give another example? A. The judgement of Cicero in defence of Cluventias is such: but when as this condition was proposed to him, that either he should accuse justly and piously, or die sharply or unworthily: he would rather accuse after that manner, the die after this. Q. Make the disjunction appear clearer? A. Either he must accuse or die. He must not die. He must accuse therefore. Qu. Give another example? A. There is the like reasoning, Phil. 2. Dost thou not under∣stand it is determined, that either those who have done this thing are homicides or revengers of liberty? But attend a little and take the thoughts of a sober man for a little time, and I who am of them, as my self doth confess, will familiarly ar∣gue with thee as a fellow: I deny that there is any mean: I grant that they are, except they be deliverers and con∣servers
of the Roman Commonwealth more then villany, more then homicides, more parricides: if truly it be cruelty, rather to be a father to the countrey, then a murtherer of ones self. Thou art a wise and considerate man what sayest thou? if they be parricides, why were they honored of thee, and called to this order by the Roman people? why was Marcus Brutus by thy means freed from the law, if he were absent more then ten days from the city? why did Apolinares receive Mar∣cus Brutus with incredible honor? why was the provinces given to Cassius and Brutus, why were their questors added? why were the number of Legates increased, and this done by thee? they are not therefore homicides. It followeth then that by thine own judgement they are deliverers, when as truly there can be no third admitted. Q. If the parts of the disjunct proposition shall be more then two, how shall they be judged then? A. The art of judging them and concluding them shall be the same. Q. Give example? A. So Cicero judged Rabitious to be among the Consuls. And we see (saith he) these three to be in the nature of things, to wit, that either he should be with Saturninus, or with the good, or that he should lie hid. But to lie hid is proper to the dead and rotten: to be with Saturninus of fury and wickedness: vertue, and honesty, and shamefastness con∣strained him to be with the Consuls. CAP. 16. The second disjunct syllogism. Q. What is the second disjunct? A. The second disjunct, from the proposition the affirma∣tive assumeth one, and taketh away the rest. Q. Give example? A. It is day or it is night. But it is day, It is not therefore night. Q. Give another example after this manner? A. Thus Juno concludeth with Jove touching Turnus, Aeneid. 10. What if thou sayest the thing thou dost not mean, nd should to Turnus give his life again? Now I remain in misery and woe,
And hope for that which will not happen so: But rather then this ill should come to pass, I'le mock my self, and hope past hope alas. Q. Shew another syllogism of this kinde? A. There is the like syllogism effected from a proposition copulative negative, which is called negative complexion, and which obtaineth the force of an affirmative disjunction. Q. Give example? A. It is not both day and night, But it is day, It is not therefore night. CAP. 17. The only method according to Aristotle. Q. What is method? A. Method is a dianoia of diverse homogene axioma, preposed for the clearness of their nature, from whence the agreeing amongst themselves of them are judged and com∣prehended in memory. Q. What is to be considered in method? A. As verity and falsity is beheld in the axioma, conse∣quence and inconsequence in the syllogism; so in method it is to be considered that by it the more clear may precede, the more obscure may follow, and that altogether order and confusion be judged. Q. Make this plainer? A. After this manner is disposed from homogene axioma's in the first place, by an absolute notion, the first; in the second place the second, in the third place the third, and so forwards Q. It seemeth by this that method doth continually pass from universals to singulars? A. So it is, for by this sole and only way it proceedeth from antecedents altogether, and absolute notions, to the declar∣ing of unknown consequences: and this is the only method that Aristotle taught. CAP. 18. The first illustration of methods by illustration of arts. Q. But do not examples set forth this head more clearly? A. Yes, the examples of doctrines and arts do chiefly de∣monstrate and set forth the unity of method, in the which, al∣though all the rules are general and universal, yet the degrees
of them are distinguished: and by how much every thing shall be more general, by so much it shall more precede. Q. Why shall the first be in the most general place and order? A. Because in light and knowledge it is first. Q. Why shall the subalternates follow? A. Because in their clearness they are next. Q. It seemeth by this that those things which by nature are more known shall precede, those which are less known are substitute, and at length the most special follow? A. So it is. Q. What then shall precede pand be first? A. The most general definition must be first. Q. What shall follow? A. The distribution. Q. But how if there be many? A. Then the partition in perfect parts shall precede. Q. What shall follow? A. The division into kinds. Q. What then? A. The parts themselves and the kinds are in the same order to be handled and defined again in which they were distributed. Q. What further is required? A. If there shall be a long explication of them, they are to be chained together by the chains of transcition. Q. What benefit redoundeth from hence? A. It refresheth and recreateth the auditor. Q. But may not example be under this head? A. Yes, as a more familiar thing is taken, so a more fami∣liar example must be used. Q. Give example of what you have here shewed out of the art of Grammer? A. All definitions, distributions, are found in the rules of Grammer, and every one of them severally judged; and all these documents inscribed in diverse tables, are confounded and mingled together as it were in a certain pot. Q. What part of Logick teacheth us to compose these con∣fused Rules and digest them into order: first there is no need of the places of invention, when as they are all found: neither in the first judgement of axioma's, when as every axioma is proved and valued: neither of the second judgement of the syl∣logism,
when as all of them are disputed and concluded contro∣versies of several things by these only syllogisms; it seemeth there∣fore to be only method, is it not? A. Yes it is onely method, Qu. How is it done? A. The Logician by this light of artificial method selected out of this pot the definition of Grammer; (for that is most general) and placeth it in the first place: Grammer is the do∣ctrine of speaking well. Then he taketh out of the same Oven the partiton of Grammer, and placeth it in the second place. The part of Grammer are two; Etimology and Syntaxis. Then outs of the same vessel he seperateth the definition of Etimology of words, and joyneth it in the third place to those that go before: then he seeketh out parts of words in letters and syllables, and the kinds in words of number, and without number; and placeth them with their transcitions in their several places. And so the definitions of all the parts of Eti∣molog, together with their distributions, colligations, and most special examples he placeth in their several places, and so likewise in the Syntax. This way all the arts have propo∣sed to themselves. CAP. 19. The second example of Method by example of Poets, Orators, Historiographers. Q. But is method only set forth in matter of the arts and do∣ctrine? A. No, it is also declared in all things which we would teach easily and plainly. Therefore Poets, Orators, and all manner of writers, as often as they propose any thing to teach to their auditors, do follow this way; although they do not enter and insist upon it all alike. Q. Give an example out of some Poet? Virgil in his Georgicks distributeth, as I said before, the proposed matter into four parts; and in the first book follow∣eth common things: as Astrology, Meteorology, and of Corn and Tillage; this was the first part of his work. Then the transcition is adhibited in the beginning of the second book. Thus far of tillage and of stars were we; Now of the Bacchus we'll sing presently. Then he writeth generally of trees, as also specially of plants; the second transcition is adhibited to the third part, but
more imperfect and without an Epilogue. In the beginning of the third book of Oxen, Horses, Sheep, Goats, Dogs. We'l sing of Goddess Pales, all's of him, Who by Amphryso kept his sheep most trim. At length in the beginning of the fourth book, there is the third transcition of the fourth part; but also imperfect from the only preposition of their Bees. Now of their eyre honey Bee I'le speak. So therefore the Poet studieth to place the most general first, the subalternate middle, the most special in the last place. Q. Give another poetical example? A. Ovid. in Fast. Useth this kinde of disposition, propo∣sing in the beginning the sum of his work. I'le sing of times that pass throughout the year, Fall of the stars, and rising I'le declare. By and by having made imploration, he determineth the partition of the year made first by Romulus into ten months, which he reprehendeth. When as Romes builder did the year divide, In it he made five moneths, and five beside. And a little after he adjoyneth Numa his more full devisor. But Numa neither Janus did omit, Nor yet the ancient shadows out did put: But to th'old moneths two more appointed be. Here the Poet having interpreted the common differences of Holy-dayes, Working-dayes, Banquet-days, Kalends, Nones, Ides; at the last he followeth every moneth in his place, and with a preface after this order he passeth from generals to the study of specials. I th' what I have you shewed what things be, It now remains, we part them presently. At length after the exposition of every part, the transci∣tion is joyned as in the end of the first, and beginning of the second book. The first part of my task is ended now, The moneth is done my little book also: Junus is done, another moneth beginneth? Another book now with that moneth reneweth; And in every one of his books after the transcitions are adhibited, but less accurately. Q. How do the Orators follow this method?
A. The Orators in Poems, Narrations, Confirmations, Perorations do follow this order, as the nature both of the art, and the order of the thing do require, and sometimes more studiously too. Q. Give example? A. Cicero in an accusation first by propounding, then by parting, followeth this order. Questor Cu. paxeris, saith he, thou hast been Consul unto this time fourteen years, and from that day unto this day in which thou hast made me, I call thee un∣to judgement; there was no void hour found in robbery, wickedness, cruelty, iniquity. This is the proposition and defi∣nition of the chief matter, as in this judgement most gener∣ral. The partition followeth: These are the years consumed in the questorship, and a Sciatican embassage, and the Urban pretorship, and in the Sicilian pretorship: wherefore this shall be the fourfold disposition of my accusation; which four parts with their particular partitions he hath also handl∣ed in their several order and place, and coupled them with transcitions; the three first in the third book. Wherefore (saith he) his questorship being shewed, and his first magistracy, together with his theft and wickedness looked unto, let us attend to the rest. Then having expounded the faults of his embassadorship, the transcition to his pretorship, followeth. But let us now come to that famous pretorship, and those faults which were more known to those which were present, then to us who come meditated and prepared to pleading. This trans∣cition is more imperfect without an epilogue: at length in the beginning of the fourth oration, there is the like trans∣cition to the fourth part of the Sicilian pretorship. Many ne∣cessary things, O Judges, I must pretermit, that I may in some manner speak of those things which are commited to my trust, for I have received the cause of Sicilia, that province hath drawn me unto this business. Q. Give an example ott of some Historiographer? A. Livy doth so embrace the sum of seventy years in the beginning, then divideth them by tens. CAP. 20. The Secrets of Method. Q. It seemeth that in the divers axiomatical homogenes, as also in the judgement of the syllogism, the notes of method shall be as often as any thing is taught clearly: but is there no other kinde of method?
A. Yes, when as the auditor shall be deceived in a certain part with delectation, and a greater motion then certain homogenes are rejected, as the lights of definition, partition, and transcition: and certain heterogenes are assumed; as digressions from the matter, and commemorations upon the thing; but chiefly the order of things in the beginnings is turned over, and certain antecedents are put after consequents. Therefore to that rule of perfect method, this may seem somewhat more imperfect; the form is not only lame things being detracted; or abounding, things being added; but also the order of it being inverted by certain degrees, is preposte∣rous. Q. Give an example of it? A. The like the Poet maketh with a certain greater kind of artificialness, while he propoundeth to himself to lead the people. Viz. the beast like heads of the multitude, and there∣fore he deceived diverse ways, he beginneth in the middle, and there oftentimes he comprehendeth the first; to con∣clude the last he placeth in an uncertain and an unthought of chance. So as (Horace saith) Homer disposeth his Iliads. Ne doth this man Troy's Wars divide so well, He always maketh haste the vent to tell: Even in the midst his reader he doth catch; Leaves off his tract, with haste from it doth snatch. And thus he lies, thus mingles false with true; So that ne first nor midst in it I view. Q. Proceed to further example? A. So Virgil taketh Aeneas from Sicilia, and makes a nar∣ration of him in the banquet of Carthage; and at last bring∣eth in his diverse troubles. So the Commedian Poets, al∣though with great judgement they have distinguished their Comedies by Acts and Scenes, yet do so effect, that all things seem to be done by chance. The Orators attribute all to victory. Therefore this seemeth to be placed chiefly by them, not so much to teach as to perswade; when as also those things which do equally excel, are kept even unto the last, and the means are conferred into the middle, accord∣ing to Homers disposition. FINIS.
GENEROSI LUDENTES A Description of those Joviall al-a∣mode sports and games, that are most celebrated by Per∣sons of Honor. A brief Description of the sport of Cross Purposes. EVery one round the Company are to whisper their Questions about, which are to be conceal'd, till e∣very Question is gone round, and afterwards every man is to tell aloud what question he was askt, and what answer was given him to his question; it may be in more, but I will only for brevity give you a plain example in three Persons; The first was askt in secret of all complexions, which he lik't best, the answer was whispered a black Wo∣man; the second was ask't in secret, how many women he had lain withall in his life, to which he whispered, as many as he had fingers and toes; the third was secretly ask't, what kind of pleasure he found in lying with a woman, to which he whispered this answer, pretty pleasant encounters; Now for the publishing of this sport, it must be thus man∣naged, the first was ask't what complexion he lik't best in a woman, the cross answer to his purpose was, as many as he had fingers and toes, the second was ask't, how many women he had lain with, the cross answer was pretty plea∣sant encounters; the third was ask't, what kind of pleasure he found in lying with a woman, the cross answer was a black woman, and so it goes circling round according to the number of the Persons.
The Description of the sport called the Lovers Alphabet. FIrst it mst be said, what good quality a Mistresse is to be loved for. Secondly, what bad qualities she is to be hated for. Thirdly, her name. Fourthly, what part about her you love best. Fifthly, what sign you invited her to. Sixthly, what dish of meat you treated her with. This may be done successively by all the Company through∣out the Alphabet, I will only instance a plain example in the letter A. First, I love my Love with an A, because she is Amiable. Secondly, I hate her with an A, because she is Apish. Thirdly, her name is Alcinda. Fourthly, the best part about her is her Are. Fifthly, I invited her to the signe of the Artichoak. Sixthly, I gave here a dish of Asparagus. The sport of Questions and Commands is inserted at the begin∣ning of the Book, Page 13, as also the sport of Crambo is contained in a Dictionary, Page 223. The Description of the sport of the Bird in a Tree. FIrst the name of the Tree. Secondly, the name of the Bird. Thirdly, what the Bird said; all which must begin with the same letter; as for example, though it may be done through∣out the whole Alphabet, I will only give an instance in P. Going through an Orchard, I spyed a Peacock which sat upon a Plum-Tree, and cryed Peeter, Pluckt, Placket.
The Description of the sport of Gliphing. IT chiefly consists in the quick pronouncing of a sentence, hard to be uttered without a wanton or some other un∣lucky kind of merry mistake, it runs on chiefly with one letter of the Alphabet; as for example, the Cock sat at the barn door picking, Poppy Cock, Pick Poppy, &c. the severall gamesters posting through the Letters of the Alphabet, by turns, as fast as they can speak, that the mistakes may the sooner provoke laughter. A Description of a sport, called the Crab, or a thing done, and who did it. FOR the better understanding of this recreation, the places are to be distributed, and sundry names to be in∣vented, as they shall follow in the sport; for example Phan∣taste she begins, I imagine saith she a thing done: Heidon thinks, who did it; Moria, with what was it done; Anaides where it was done; Argureon, when it was done; Amo∣phus, for what cause was it done; Philantia, what followed upon the doing of it; Asotus who would have done it better; One askes what is it conceived about, they all answer yes, yes. Then speak you sir, sayes Phantaste; who would have done it better, sayes Asotus, how does it begin at me, Phan taste, gives him a reason, and says yes sir, this play is called the Crab, it begins backwards; Asotus sayes may I not name my selfe, Phantaste answers yes sir if you Please to abide th venture of it, Asotus then sayes I would have done it better whatsoever it is, Phil. no doubt on't sir, a good confidence, what followed upon the act, Phil. a few heat drops, and a months mirth, Pha. for what cause, Amo. for the delight o Ladies, Phag, when, Arg. last progresse, Pha. where. Ana. why in a pair of painted slops, Pha. with what, Mor, with  Glister, Pha. who, Hed. by a Traveller, Phantaste then re∣veales the subject, till then concealed, sayes she, the thing done
was, an Oration was made, afterwards they all of them in or∣der rehearse an Oration was made, Hed. by a Traveller, Mor. with a Glister, Ana. in a pair of painted slops, Au g. the last progress, Amo. for the delight of Ladies, Phi. a few heat drops and a months mirth, followed, Pha, and this silent Gentleman Mr. Asotus would have done it better. A Description of the witty sport of Substantives and Adjectives. FOR the more easy apprehension of this recreation, I will make use of the former names used in the game at Crab. Phantaste sayes I have thought, speak your Adjectives sirs. Phi. but do not you change then, Pha. not I, who says, Mor. Odoriserous, Phi. Popular, Arg. Humble, Ana. white∣liverd, Hed. Barbarous, Amo. Pythagoricall, Hed. yours seignior, Asotus sayes, what must I do sir, Amo. bids him give forth his Adjectives with the rest as prosperous, good, fair, sweet, well—Hed, tels him he may speak any thing that hath not been spoken. Aso. answers why then well spoken shall be his, Pha. sayes what have you all done, they all cry yes. Phantaste then tels them that the Substantive is breeches, and then she sayes to moria, why are they Odori∣ferous. Mor. Answers that which containes most variety of savours and smels, we say is most odoriferous, now bree ch∣es are presumed to be incident to that variety, and therefore odoriferous breeches: Pha. answers well, we must take it, what's next Philantia. why popular breeches. Phil. marry that is says she when they are not content to be generally noted in Court, but will press forth on Stages and Brokers stals, to the common view of the world. Pha. good, why humble breeches Argurion. Arg. he answers humble, because they use to be sat upon, besides if you tye them not up, their property is to fall about your heeles. Pha. but why white li∣verd Anaides. Ana. answer, why are not their linings white, besides when they come in Company, and will pocket up any injury or abuse, may they not properly be said to be white liver'd. Pharoh, yes we must not deny it, but why
barbarous Hedon. Hedon. answers, because commonly when you have worn your breeches sufficiently, you give them to your Barber. Pha. that's good, but Amorphus why Pytha∣golical breeches. Amo. oh most kindly of all, it is a con∣ceit of that fortune I am bold to hug my brain for. Pha. how is it exquisite, Amorphus. Amo. oh I am rapt with it, it is so fit, so proper, so happy—Pha. you trifle and prolong time for to study, come you shall no longer rack our expe∣ctations. Amo: I never truly relisht my self till now, give me your eares, breeches pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration into severall shapes. Pha. Most rare, but now Mr. Asotus for your well spoken breeches. Aso. well spoken, I marry well spoken—because whatsoever they speak is well taken, and whatsoever is well taken, is well spoken. Mor. oh most excellent beleeve me! Aso. not so Ladies neither. Pha. but now why breeches. Asot. most fortunately etymo∣logized, breeches quasi beare riches, when a gallant beares all his riches, in his breeches.
The Triall of wits, a new invented Alpha∣bet of Epithets, properly applyed to their severall subjects, that they may be rendered no lesse usefull on the suddain occasions of discourse, or writing; then delightfully pleasant in the witty sport commonly named Substantives and Ad∣jectives. Aspect. SMiling, favourable, sad, Tragical, sterne, grim, gracious, generous, winning. Allurements. Sweet, false, flattering, lovely, deceitful, attractive, woo∣ing, Sirenian-inveigling, Cozening, Treacherous. Affections. Passionate, transporting, vehement, ardent, hearty, burning, intranceing, amorous, inordinate, disordered, melting, blind, doting, tyranicall, wanton, thoughtfull. Aire. Moist, fleeting, pliant, free, whispering, spicie, guilded, diffused, yeilding, moving, unwounded, dewy, sounding, empty, dispersed, nimble, breathing, melting, sharpe, soft, wandering, liquid, inlightned, transparent, subtle. Absence. Tedious, prolonged, constrained, unwelcome, forgetfull, envious. Apparell. Magnificent, costly, gawdy, fashionable, neat, sumptuous, gorgeous, spruce, decent, rich, trim. Accomplishment. Absolute, perfect, blest, admirable, desired, wisht.
Adeiu. Sad, last, tedious, lingering, sighed, greived, loathed. Bawd. Shameless, impudent, alluring, training, old, drunken loathsome, fat, painted, goatish, lustfull, rampant, beastly, obscene, pocky, lascivious, brotheld, withered, lying, cheat∣ing, pocket-picking. Breath. Ambrosian, sweet persumed, spicy, nectar'd, muskie, rosied, stinking, poysoned, strong, blasting, Body. Strait, crooked, slender, voluptuous, sensuall, healthfull, diseasefull, rotten, Breasts. Soft, snowie, milk-white, alablaster, tender, pressed, veined, spicie, delicious, flowing, luxuriant, warm, azure, melting, pregnant, amorous, maiden, inticeing alluring, flowery, delightfull, inveigling, enamouring. Beauty. Fresh, smiling, entranceing, spotlesse, triumphant, admi∣rable, incomparable, glorio us, inexpresseable, wyring, enamour∣ing, perswasive, counting, resistless, cometed, desired, wished, celestiall, divine, rosye, angelicall, supreame, ravishing, heavenly, spotless, unsullied, bright, shining, sparkling, flaming, immortall, lascivious, wanton, radant, civill, modest, attractive, intrancing, inchanting, charming, chast, dazling, assailing, murdering, imperious, commanding, inticeing, al∣luring, murdering, killing, blazening, heart-winning, soul-invading, commanding, conquering, wounding, cap∣tivating, enslaveing, bewitching, inaccessible, perceiving, exquisite, transparent, spruce, neat, comely, pleasing, de∣lightfull, magnetick. Coynesse. Peevish, pettish, slighting, dissembling, squemish, froward, scorning, contemning, disdainful, untoward, angry, tempting. Courtier. Complemental, glittering, lascivious, wanton, costly, expensive, sportive, smooth, royal, proud, glorious, gaudy
Oily, supple, n, polish't, spruce, silken, smooth-faced, fair∣spoken, well-rounged: silk-worme, perfidious, fantastick, rng, spritey talking, glittering, flaunting, starcht, deceitfull, accomplisht. Cruelty. Murdering, destroying, rageing, barbarous, oythian, marble∣hearted, flinty, savage, wolvish, inhumane, tigress, odious, abhorred, detested, remos, dogged, incensed, bloody, grim, sterne, haughty, dreadfull, devouring, frowning, awfull, tyrannical. Charmes. Powerfull, enchanting, perplexing, potent, binding, im∣perious, commanding, forceing, ceremonious, misterious. Cheeks. Bashfull, rosie, smiling, lovely, silken, delicious, blushing, tempting, ambrosian, gentle, swelling, plump, smooth, soft, beautiful. Complaint. Mournfull, whining, puling, pitious, sighing, sad, dolefull, soft, womanish, amorous, passionate, bitter, male-contented, groaning, just, inward, weeping, wailing. Complement. Generous, ceremonious, courtly, refined, curious, eloquent, needless, trustless, fantasticall, apish, improper. Chinne. Dimpled, bonnie, hairy, well-tacht, bushie, slauerd, stubled, smooth, dainty, delicate, lovely. Comedy. Jovial, Hymineall, fresh, gay, clapping, amorous, Nuptiall, plauditizing. Cherries. Plump, soft, tender, blushing, delicious, pleasant, luscious. Countenance. Gracefull, modest, comely, handsome, beautifull, amorous, lovely, generous, sweet, lively sprightly, disdainfull, joyfull, smiling, pleasing, winning, wooing, sparkling, attractive, admirable, ugly, sterne, audacious impudent, grim, grave, severe frowning, lowring, disguised, affected, distracted
pouting, mournfull, dreadfull, lightsome, chearefull, super∣cilious, blushing, sad, sowre, dissembling. Curles. Shining, crispy, neat, gracefull, waveing, beautious, frizled, uncomposed, twisted, pleated, braded, rued, dispersed, dang∣led, scattered, silken, flowing, Destiny. Remorsless, unrelenting, surprising, truthless, inevitable, blind, unmoved, severe, deafe, inflexible, inexorable, cruell, unbribed, imperious, commanding, unchanged, triumphant, misterious, adamantine, fixed, unconquered, compelling, irresistable, eternal, fatal, uncontrouled, impartial, tyranizing, over-ruling, exacting, importuning, arresting, blind, unavoided, inevitable. Delay. Freezing, dull, lingring, tedious, comfortless, weary, sad, pensive, slow, snaile-paced, lazy, tardy, cold, fruitless, vain. Dove. Trembling, courteous, gentle, wanton, simple, sprightly, panting, timerous, billing, amorous, fearfull, airy, peircing, harmeless, melancholly, silly, venerous, mourning, clipping, gentle, whispering, swift, weak, wheeling, turtle, fleet∣winged, tender, Idalian. Desires. Melting, effeminate, wanton, soft, sensuall, enamoring, dallying, intrancing, pleasant, luxurious, wisht, tickling, loose, tempting, riotous, superfluous, courtly, princely, royall, voluptuous, carnal. Danceing. Swimming, lascivious, gracefull, courtly, flowing, nimble, tripping, measured, inamouring, sportive, wanton, attractive, well-ordered, moving, modest, wel-timed, pleasing, winning, allureing. Delights. Melting, effeminate, wanton, soft, sensuall, inamouring, dallying, intrancing, pleasant, luxurious, desired, tickling, loose, tempting, riotous, superfluous, courtly, princely, royall.
Disdaine. Coy, scornfull, arrogant, proud, envious, unkind, chast, wry-mouthed, sore-eyed, pettish, insolent, haughty, peevish, swelling, squint-eyed. Despair. Hopeless, dark, grim, ugly, pensive, heavy, dull, sorrow∣full, comfortless, cold, faithless, damned, ugly, dark, gloo∣my, meager, stern, sighing, groaning, weeping, sullen, dull, drousy, dolefull. Dreames. Vain, deluding, fantastick, pale, disastrous, distracting, doubtfull, flattering, busie, senceless, flying, carefull, lying, wandring, ominous, pleasing, sensuall, bewitching, auspici∣ous, black, slippery, carnall. Eloquence. Perswasive, nectar, drooping, captivating, bewitching, charming, enchanting, intrancing, commanding, winning, wooing, delicious, smooth, oily, ravishing, soft, rich, quaint, courtly, insinuating, victorious, triumphant, glorious, tick∣ling, insulting, invading, subtle, conquering, tempting, painted, insinuating, glozeing, inveigling, deceitful, pollisht, sweet∣tongued, grave, ciceronian, happy, attractive, circumventing, fancy, tickling, overcoming, successfull. Extasie. Soule-rapt, amazed, ravisht, removed out of the right mind, astonisht, lost in admiration. Eares. Listening, attentive, glowing, whispering, inquiring, wind∣ing, judging, Elegie. Waling, lamenting, whining, mourning, puling, weep∣ing, amorous, bawdy, wanton. Eunuch. Smooth-faced, delicate, effeminate, soft, unmanly, wo∣manish, smooth-chinned. Entertainment Glorious, costly, gratious, courteous, welcome, loving, friendly, pompeous, fair, kind, rich, profuse, liberal, hearty, sumptuous, magnificent.
Eyes Sparkling, flameing, dazling, burning, twinkling, passi∣onate, weeping, lascivious, lively, lovely, wounding, melting, inveigling, charming, traiterous, wanton, perswasive, rol∣ling, inflaming, pleading, greedy, scorching, smiling, beau∣teous, glistering, starry, discoursive, betraying, beamie, attractive, wandering, inflaming, commanding, inamour∣ing, transparent, chearfull, soul-wounding, modest, assail∣ing, bashfull, lustfull, intentive, courting, tempting, trium∣phant, conquering, notorious. Embraces. Wanton, warm, strict, joyfull, greedy, mutuall, delicious, deare, sweet, pleasant, amorous, ardent, fervent, inseparable, growing together, soft, close, circling, grasping, twisting, twining, loving, fruitfull. Farewell. Sad, grievous, loathed, tedious, lingring, last, pensive. Feet Delicate, tender, soft, beauteous, swift, flying, tripping, wanton, nimble, swift, paced, active, ivory, snowy, silver, stalking, trampling, Fancy. Quick, working, pregnant, nimble, contriving, active, stirring, roaming, vagrant, roving, industrious, plotting, studious, plodding, wandring, projecting, ranging, forging∣working, teeming, bsie, coyning, spinning, inriched, weal∣thy, industrious, travelling. Forehead Smooth, sleek, stately, beauteous, delicious, majestick, comely, polisht-ivory. Fairies. Dairy, hunting, green, clothed, nimble, right-walking, dancing, tripping, sprightly, nipping, pinching, sporting, silent, soft-footed, light. Fortune. Inconstant, fickle, blind, hood-winkt, disastrous, slippery perfidious, froward, malicious, wanton, flattering, deluding, injurious, wayward, unlucky, malignant, imperious, domi∣neering, tyrannizing, treacherous, commanding, insolent,
envious, stepdame, dreadfull, peevish, uncertain, wheeling, giglet, deluding. Fountain. Silver, glideing, purling, pearly, christall, gushing, prat∣ling, twatly, weeping, rolling, sweet, sparkling, flowing, glideing, bubling, chideing, running, sacred, grass, fringed, moss, margend, trickling, delicate, stragling, wandring, dancing, whispering, fluent, cleare. Frencie. Hot, roveing, chaseing, chollerick, furious, untamed. Flower. Perfumed, sweet, smileing, verdant, spicy, enameld, gaudy, checkred, fragrant, pregnant, pyed, painted, blush∣ing, vernall, freckled, glittering, delicious, musky, short∣lived, tufted, unspotted, lovely, swelling, odorous, vermi∣lion, purple, silver, diapred, fadeing. Face. Beautifull, bewitching, inamouring, smiling, lovely, rosiat, inchaunting, inamouring, entrancing, attractive, heart-wounding, charming, sweet, admirable, captivating, unparaleld, wanton, pensive, lowring, frowning, winning, soul-conquering. Fate. Irresistible, inexorable, cruell, restless, rugged, flinty, remorsless, unmoved, unchang'd, uncontrolled, surly. Fingers. Slender, soft, delicate, nimble, quavering, sleek, long, small, active, pliant, industrious, ivory, wanton, trembling, alablaster. Fruit. Sweet, well-tasted, delicious, dangling, sweet-smelling, lean, inwrapped, mellow, green, yellow, golden, blushing, lean, inwrapt, hanging, painted, delightfull, autumnall, expected, desired, nectard, ambrosiall. Frowne. Disdainful, proud, angry, coy, surly, lowring, scowling, killing, murthering, discontented, clowdy browed, tempe∣stuous, imperious, domineering, supercilious, tyranizing, awfull.
Glory. Shining, painted, ambitious, costly, swelling, amazing, pompeous, dazeling, radiant, triumphant, victorious, im∣mortall, windy, fleeting, fading, insolent, desired, inflaming. Grass. Pleasant, green, plusht, rich, verdent, springing, flowery, tufted, dasied, tender, deary, herby, pleasant, moist, check∣erd, inameled, crisped, fadeing, withered. Grape. Soft, plump, nectareous, pleasant, cluttered, blushing, swelling, purple, youthfull, viny, dangling, delicious, gene∣rous, juycie, wanton, chearing, lusty, bleeding. Grove. Solitary, unfrequented, silent, shady, close, leavy, melan∣choly, lovely, solitary, forsaken, sullen, dark, unknown, remote, gloomy, mossy, ecchoing, delightfull, tufted, quiet, obscure, dusky, clowdy, secret. Honor. Popular, inthroned, glorious, shining, prodigious, bright, blazing, gaudy, pompeous, swelling, magnificent, glittering, radiant, triumphant, inflamed, waxen-winged, timpanized. Heart. Bleeding, wounded, melting, marble, tender, obstinate, relenting, adamantine, flinty, cruell, passionate, pittifull, thoughtfull, obdurate. Haire. Spreading, witty, golden, dangling, glittering, radiant, curling, tresses, careless, braided, silken, scattered, shining, pleated, rufled, fluent, artless, snarled, disheveld, discom∣posed, dispersed, ambrosiall, fragrant, gracefull, waveing, beauteous, fragrant, crisped, spangled, delightfull, lovely, pleasant, fettering, bushy, frizled, rosiate, shady. Handes. Ivory, snowy, marble, lilly, alablaster, well proportioned, beauteous, ambrosial, veinie, nervious, delicate, velvet, trembling, white, active, slender.
Happiness. Desired, unexpressible, unfathomed, endless, enamoring, soft, ravishing, undisturbed, uninterrupted. Harmony. Enchanting, ravishing, seraphick, celestiall, according, agreeing, numerous, sweet, pleasant, melodious, joyous, gladsome, soule-raping, intranceing, charming, measured, invading. Head. Towring, majesticall, lofty, stately. Hate Heart, gnawing, cancred, festred, fretting, mortall, inveterate, deadly, irreconcileable, rancourd, fewd, revengfull. heart-gnawing, rooted. Jealousie. Hellish, trembling, inraged, suspicious, heart burning, selfe-wounding, soul martyring, pale, groundless, rageing, wakefull, wary, timerous, fearfull, causless, furious, peevish, cautelous, hatefull, revengfull, brutish, sottish, quicksighted, yellow, ghostly, raveing, suggesting, rivall, wakeing, out∣ragious, searching, impatient, unhappy, blind, boyling, tor∣menting, frantick, distempered, stern, insaged, lean-chopt, wrathfull, surmizing, transporting. Flattery. Smooth, Oily, Courtly, base, slavish, servile, subtle, crowching, clawing, tempting, collogueing, honey-mouth∣ed, sweet-tongued, glozing, insinuating, lisping, obsequious, dissembling, gilt-tongue, melting, officious, windy, cogging, pick-thankt, sugred, pliant, fawning, treacherous, circum∣venting, deluding, wily, crafty, sly, glasse-faced, fair-spoken, smooth-tongued, dawbing, winning, deluding. Fields. Gawdy, painted, flowry, tufted, checkred, grassy, sportive, spacious, wide, green, pleasant, delightfull, open, inamel'd, dasied, smiling, verdant, Herby, fragrant, diapred, fruitfull, pregnant, embroidred. Flames. Aspiring, mounting, towring, raging, licentious, insul∣tive, catching, devouring, wirling, sparkling, embraceing,
subtle, amorous, courting, greedy, lurking, nimble, search∣ing, glowing, ruddy, radiant, flashing, furious, imbofomed, pierceing, scorching, glittering, climbing, impetuous, vio∣lent, untamed, bright, self-consuming, chearfull, lightsome, proud, ambitious, destroying, pursuing. Flea. Blood-thirsty, nipping, biteing, disturbing, peevish, sipping sucking, twitching. Forrest. Leafy, woody, shady, hoary, verdant, savage, gloomy, mossy, shaggy, beast-hunted, bushy, silent, shrubby, eccho∣ing, spatious, mast-bearing, dreadfull, grassy, wild, desert, rough, rocky, wide, devious, melancholy, uncouth, pathless, unfrequented. Feare. Pale, trembling, startling, wary, palsied, presageing, faint, chilling, jealous, sallow, reverentiall, ominous, superstitious, heartless, cold, guilty, hovering, sullen, suspitious, anxious, bloodless, distracted, unresolved, doubtfull, ignominious, restless, creame-faced, pale-hearted, ghostly, projecting, icy, suggesting, degenerate, puling, unresolved. Gentleman. Courtly, gallant, generous, noble, valiant, honor'd, brave, free-hearted, high-spirited, ingenuous, famous, illustrious. Garden. Painted, flowry, gawdy, embroidred, bordered, squared, knotted, enclosed, diapred, levelled, sweet, lovely, verdant, fragrant, well-drest, delicious, smiling, herby, pleasant, fruitfull, enameld, checkred, painted, delightfull. Gesture. Stately, courteous, speaking, flowing, gentle, seemly, comely, graceful, winning, unaffected, gracious, composed, free, handsome, lovely, ingratiating, pleasing, haughty. Griefe. Whining, puling, complaining, heart-tearing, contra∣cting, rending, killing, imbosomed, heart-confounding, drooping, melancholy, eye-wringing, unbounded, gnawing torturing, impatient, inexpressible, heart-breaking, pinch∣ing, pettish, peevish, dreary, dolefull, oppressing, fretting,
froward, sullen, gloomy, whimpering, melting, froward, wayward, gnawing. Gloves. Fringed, embrodered, persumed, fragrant, white, surred, musky, trimmed, fashionable, gentle, handsome, spruce, neat. Ingratitude. Odious, shamefull, fowle, base, loathsome, nasty, filthy, stinking. Instrument. Well tuned, melodious, harmonious, consorting, accord∣ing, laborious, sounding. Jewels. Sparkling, glittering, rich, costly, pendant, radiant, flaming, precious, airy, inlightning, unvaluable. Insolence. Haughty, arrogant, disdainfull, triumphant, swelling, stately, proud, puft, souring, tyrannizing, brow-beating, scornfull, imperious, strutting, ambitious, presumptious, rash, disrespective, audacious, rufling, rustling, supercilious, surly, bold, respectless, fantastick, lofty, towring, mounting, insulting. Innocencie. Dove-like, soft, quiet, peacefull, spotless, unsullied, un∣stained, harmless, untainted, snowy, pure, cleare, bright, simple, chast, lillied, calme, unimpeached, guiltless, blanch∣ed, meek, blameless, religious, pious, sacred. Importunity. Undeniable, unmannerly, unhandsome, uncivill, uncome∣ly, impatient, unanswerd, courtly, urging, odious, forceing. Inconstancy. Wavering, wheeling, turning, changeing, light, vaine, airy, mutable, moveing, floating. Influence. Heavenly, celestiall, virtuous, gracious, propitious, sa∣vourable, generous, vigorous, powerful, masculine, unresist∣ing, smiling, happy, frowning, malignant, disastrous. Impudence. Brazen, seared, steeled, unblushing, shamless, audacious.
bold, brasse-browed, bold-faced, insolent, proud, arrogant, undaunted, fancie, fearless, unawed, shallow, head-strong, immodest, shame-confounding. Joy. Transporting, heart-chearing, active, lightsome, diffusive, nuptiall, fresh, inchanting, soft, imparadising, balmy, de∣luding, deceitfull, pleasing, fleeting, trembling, transitory, attractive, frisking, danceing, leaping, melting, inlarging, smiling, intranceing, ravishing, bursting, delicious, luxuri∣ous, tickling. Knee. Ceremonious, supple, complementall, humble, obsequi∣ous, adoring, bended, cringing, crouching, honoring, si∣newy, willing, obedient, supplyant, bowing. Kisses. Tempting, wooing, delicious, spicie, balmy, impressive, zealous, uniting, soul-transfusing, ravishing, inchaunting charming, heart-stealing, melting, nectard, sugred, lingring moistning, fond, ceremonious, wanton, leacherous, amo∣rous, bawdy-breathing, roseat, fragrant, treacherous, arrest∣ing, smiling courting, stragling, bashfull, modest, virgin, maiden, chast, favourable, delightfull, voluptuous, joyous, lascivious, deawy, repeated, love-darting, printing, sealing, dinting, love-dropping, smacking, wounding, intranceing, forced, untoward, wrested, musky, warm, chearing, sweet, billing, Ambrosian, yeilding, welcome. Lute. Lesbian, many-string, warbling, quavering, harmonious, melodious, trembling, pleasant, delightfull, charming, de∣licious, ivory, golden, melancholy, amorous, sweet, sounding. Looking-glass. Representing, smooth, christall, shining, sleek, shape∣reflecting, portraying, unflattering, silver, glittering, re∣sembling, impartiall. Lust. Wild, burning, scorching, brutish, untamed, itchy, flame∣ing, goatish, stallion, disordred, greedy, hot, secret, dark, impure, poysoning, provoking, obscene, inconsiderate, licen∣tious,
infamous, uncouth, unbridled, rammish, loathsome, unruly, lawless, beastly, unrestrained, filthy, damned, odious, contagious, furious, portentious, impetuous, voluptuous, sen∣suall, beastiall, lascivious, whorish, insatiate, bawdy, brotheld, liver, scalding, raging, luxurious, tempting. Logick. Arguing, disputing, contentious, wrangling. Labyrinth. Winding, amazing, turning, intangling, confounding, curious, mazy, doubling, intricate, snaky, subtle, ingenuous, pathless, crooked, meandring, Language. Smooth, oily, insinuating, fluent, sweet, flowing, strewed, with flowers, stately, winning, perswasive, taking, nectarean, delicious, intranceing, inchanting, charming, soul-ravishing, overcoming. Lustre. Resplendent, bright, dazling, victorious, pompeous, varn∣isht, triumphant, radiant, beamy, darting, transparent, re∣flecting, glorious, gracefull, flowing, shining, adorning, beauteous, flaming, fiery, sparkling, glitering, eye-conquer∣ing, starry, chearfull, twinkling, Lullaby. Pensive, carefull, charming, soft, drowsy, sleepy. Lilly. Unsullied, unspotted, bright, tall, untainted, pale-faced, silver, smiling, painted, fruitfull, royall, mayden. Loadstone. Attractive, embracing, tenacious, subtle, drawing, wanton, uxorious. Longing. Amorous, desirous, unsatisfyed, insatiate, passionate, greedy, ardent, burning.
Laughter. Lowd, side, holding, loose, shrill, wanton, sawcy, disor∣dered, fawning, silly, ignorant, unseasoned, unruly, fleering, sneering, noisefull, disturbing. Lethargy. Dull, forgetfull, drowsy, lither, sluggish, unactive, doat∣ing, dreaming, sleepy, cold, moist, heavy, lumpish, sottish. Love. Blind, inflaming, ardent, servent, zealous, officious, ob∣sequious, resolved, doating, passiionate, tedious, unexpres∣sible, unmeasured, silent, transported, impatient, gamesome, unfathomed, secret, mistrustfull, jealous, carefull, ambiti∣ous, audacious, ticklish, sugred, wanton, lascivious, honyed joyous, slippery, untainted, flattering, sawning, thoughtfull, fearfull, solicitous, idolatrous, captivated, winged, superstiti∣ous, conquering, deceitfull, heart-stealing, thievish, inchant∣ing, bewitching, imperious, adventrous, uncontrolled, com∣manding, affectionate, sporting, marrow-boyling, melting, cruell, remorsless, venerous, fond. Lover vide love. Fantastick, gorgeous, persumed, complementall, pale, faint∣ing, eye-ravisht, thoughtfull, grieved, secret, neat, spruce, flattering, trim, brisk, languishing, frisled, crisped, impati∣ent, sportive, inconstant, submissive, fresh, sleek, joyous, glancing, melancholy, obsequious, watchfull, captivated, jealous, boasting, youthfull, blin, uxorious, pensive, mo∣dest, mute, bashfull, pleasant, frollick, whispering, courte∣ous, distracted, sad. Lookes. Smiling, chearfull, modest, disdainfull, speaking, whisper∣ing, discoursive, mournfull, attractive, supercilious, winning, wooing, sterne. Lockes. Frisled, braided, wiry, golden, glittering, sparkling, bright, sleek, spreading, flowing, snary, dangling, nets to catch a lover in, curled, scattered, pleated, amber, floating, flared, disheveld, bushy, discomposed, artless, careless, dispersed, fluent.
Lips. Balmy, tempting, melting, carnation, vermilion, ruby, scarlet, amorous, rosy, cherry, blushing, corall, delicious, charming, enchanting, intrancing, smiling, wanton, life, breathing, infusing, honey, flowing, trembling, swelling, love, dropping, juycy, nectarean, gentle, purple, warme, soft. Limbs. Graceful, well-shapt, lovely, snowy, beauteous, hansome, harmonious, comely, ivory, well-proportioned. Marigold. Sun, inamoured, yellow, shining, flaming, blazing, Sun∣courted, dew, drowned, opening, shutting. Marble. Corinthian, Parian, sleek, enduring, obdurate, curled, smooth, breathless, unrelenting, hard, cold, stiffe, sensless, glittering, phrigian, weeping, azure, speckled, coloured, un∣midian, solid, polisht, spotted, rocky, lasting, Magick Secret, hidden, inchanting, charming, dreadfull, execra∣ble, mumbling, cursed, hellish, murmuring, commanding, ceremonious, superstitious, powerfull, deceit full, jugling, presaging, misterious, inforcing, victorious, efficacious. Magazia. Well-stored, wealthy, thronged, furnisht, crowded, spaci∣ous, copious, large. Metaphors. Quaint, far-fetcht, strained, forced, translated, painted, flowery. Melancholy. Solitary, pensive, sad, dreary, black, subtle, froward, love∣ly, dampish, heart-breaking, unsociable, drooping, dejected, whining, puling, powting, cross, armed, sullen, down-cast, lumpish, swarthy, fearfull, dull, reposed, recluse, retired, dis∣contented, dark, gloomy, weeping, discontent, dusky, heart∣contracting, distracted, despairing, fickle, untoward, heart∣rending,
killing, imbosomed, complainfull, whimpering, macerating, heart-eating, oppressing, fretting, smarting, torturing, hellish, eye-squeesing, gnawing, unexpressible, heart-afflicting, soule-wounding, heart-confounding. Melody. Sweet, pleasant, gladsome, harmonious, according, soul∣invading, ravishing, intrancing, delicious, charming, Seraphick. Martyr. Constant, joyfull, faithfull, willing, patient, valiant, cou∣ragious, languishing, burning, pittied, unmoved, glorious, honor'd, persecuted, tormented, wretched. Marmoset. Grinning, antick, toying, foolish. Mind. Active, thoughtfull, roveing, discoursive, pregnant, teem∣ing, wealthy, studious, industrious, minting, coyning, hew∣ing, ranging, poysoning, floating, wandring, forgeing, work∣ing, busy, quick, moving, stirring, posling, inventive, care∣full, winged, subtle, deceitfull, contriving. Marriage. Solemne, ceremonious, ingrafting, uniting, shackling, fettering, coupling, sacred, cementing, fruitfull, joyfull, chaining, riveting, captivating, geniall, feastfull, fruitfull, happy, succesfull, lawfull, stollen, manacling. Mirth. Joviall, frolick, joyfull, pleasant, tickling, jolly, gamesome, sportive, delightfull, sprightly, giddy, heart-easing, defusive, melting, frisking, soft, melting-heart, inlarging, inchanting, lovely, loose, toyish, gigling, sprightfull, gracefull, frantick, heart-chearing, dancing, lightsome, gladsome, youthfull. Madness. Furious, wild, savage, distempred, frantick, giddy, disor∣dred, head-strong, untamed, unruly, flaming-eyes, ghostly,
inraged, tempestuous, stormy, boyling, impetuous, trans∣porting, haire-brained, distracted. Mistery. Concealed, hidden, secret, high, admired, amazing, stu∣pendious, unconceived, uncomprehended, solemne, ceremo∣nious, sacred, divine, unvulgar, unexpressible, deep, un∣known, profound. Moon. Horned, waining, increasing, decreasing, waxing, dewy, pale-eyed, pale-faced, silver, inconstant, wandring, radiant, silent, bright, inseld, glistering, Diana, aged, new-born, growing, decreasing, woman-governing. Moore. Black, Negro, swarthy, tawny, cruel, subtle, jealous, bar∣barous, sallow, curled, lustfull, broyled, flat-nosed, black∣eyed, ox-eyed, unshaved, cruell, speedy, swift-footed, nimble, fierce. Modesty. Virgin, maiden, sober, pure, blushing, silent, vestall, grave, chast, bashfull, trembling, civill, strait-laced, well-temper∣ed, respective, sweet, cold, gracefull, winning, shame-faced. Monkey. Chattering, toyish, gamesome,, unlucky, lustfull, counter∣feiting, medling, sprightfull, wily, imitating. Mirtle. Paphian, tender, Venus, tree, drowsy, sleepy, fading, short∣lived, cold, trembling, narrow-leaved, frost-fearing, qui∣vering, odorous, fragrant. Musick. Heart-ravishing, charming, inchanting, intrancing, cele∣stiall, heavenly, crocheting, melodious, harmonious, soule∣invading, well-tuned, according, consorting, well-measured, sweet, pleasant, delightfull, chearfull, seraphick, sence, be∣reaveing, fancy, tickling, wanton, descanting, well-propor∣tioned, quavering, diapasoned, delicious, warbling, eare∣commanding, angelicall.
Multitude. Wilde, credulous, hair-brained, mad, furious, tumultuous, ignorant, stiffe-necked, stubborn, heady, rebellious, humo∣rous, self-willed, many headed, misled, giddy, frantick, shal∣low-pated, unlearned, promiscuous, inconstant, unsetled, weak-brained, crowding, hronging, thick-shouldred, thick∣sculled, clustred, lawless, seditious, factious, implacable, storming, wild, credulous, soon-perswaded, soft-pated, the rascall herd, misjudging, unletterd, unconceiveing, barking, buffle-head, impertinent, mangy, stinking, admiring, news∣affecting, pratling, innovating, clownish, outragious, railing, silly, deluded, malignant, saucy, foolish, way-ward, whirli∣gig-pated. Nimph. Fair-haired, bright, lovely, sleek-haired, nimble-footed, painted, shining, spangle-glittering, tripping, sportive, chast, gamesome, fair, wanton, spring-haunting, dancing, merry, frollick, gleesome, neat-drest, amorous, skipping, Diana, following, wood-haunting, quiver-bearing, soft, haired. Navel. Round, tying, knotty, nursing. Nuptials vide marriage. Amorous, wanton, solemne, ceremonious, joyful, hyme∣neall, gorgeous, pompcous, sacred, divine, fruitfull, feast∣full, fettering, shackling, managing, uniting, happy, unhap∣py, succesfull, ominous, lawfull, geniall, sheets. Night. Aethiopian, Negro, gloomy, shady, dark, drowsy. Nox. Still, black-eyed, sullen, shady, swarthy, starry, silent, black-browed, gloomy, sable, dreaming. Nightingale. Sweet, harmonious, warbling, quivering, ravishing, chant∣ing, amorous, pleasant, wailing.
Nature. Pregrant, solicitous, officious, vigorous, teeming, provi∣dent, courteous, industrious, fruitfull. Nose. Stately, majestick, Roman, snotty, snivelling, snufling, sagacious, crooked, smelling. Obsequies. Sad, ceremonious, religious, pompeous, mournfull, ho∣nor'd, solemne. Orange. Yellow, golden, delicious, odorous, thirst, allayinging, face-washing, juicy, squeesed. Orator vide Eloquence. Sweet-lipt, insinuating, perswasive, sweet-tongued, subtle, learned, flowing, smooth, melifluous, bewitching, inchant∣ing, intrancing, double-tongued, glozing, commanding, victorious, eare-tickling, charming, soul-ravishing, Cicero∣nian, smooth, oyled, courtly, flowing, captivating, sententi∣ous, grave. Odours or Smels. Aromatick, luxurious, voluptuous, spicy, subtle, rich, cost∣ly, pretious, perfumed, ambrosiall, joviall, pleasant, wanton, delicious, assyrian, chased, musky, Arabian, Panonian, Indi∣an, Sabean, melifluous, ingratefull, malevolent, loathsome, noysome, stifling, infectious, sulsome, suming, sence-stifling, sulphurous, overcomeing. Oath. Strict, religious, awfull, sacred, binding, inforcing, ob∣liging, ceremonious, truth-confirming, faithfull, inviolable. Ornament. Beauteous, gorgeous, stately, gracefull, glorious, gallant, pompeous, magniticent, curious, embolisht, shining, dazling, glittering, costly, sumptuous, ambitious, curious.
Ode. Lyrick, wanton, amorous, charming, pleasing. Obleigment. Binding, tying, deep, strong, great, forcing, slavish. Obsequiousness. Active, humble, nimble, pliant, servile, slavish, yeilding, officious, obedient, crouching, fawning, flattering, oily, clawing, soft, smooth, melting, soothing, ready, winning. Oblivion. Dark, dusky, solitary, gloomy, obscure, unkind, forget∣full, buryed. Opinion. Giddy, vaine, doubtfull, floating, inconstant, wavering, reeling, groaping, staggering, distracted, discomposed, tot∣tering, suspitious, common, received, false, vulgar, erroni∣ous, jealous, heartless, faint, fading, hovering. Opportunity. Favourable, propitious, smiling, inviting, crowning, woo∣ing, seasonable, smooth, convenient, suddain, unexpected, offered, occasioned, fair, courting, mature, commodious, sit, pleasing, desired, wisht, well-suiting, proper. Paradise. Celestiall, immortall, glorious, beauteous, happy, death∣less, delicious, eternall, triumphant, flowry, joyfull, ena∣mouring, ever-springing, intrancing, soul-ravishing, soule∣invading, transporting. Pace. Grave, measured, quick, nimble swist, soft-footed, thee∣vish, slow, speedy-winged, breathed, tardy, slow-footed, stealing, gliding, swimming, silent. Pallace. Aspiring, magnificent, gorgeous, sumptuous, royall, ma∣jesticall, stately, beautifull, losty, clowd, kissing, exalted, glorious, ambitious, glittering, gilded, towred.
Purple. Tyrian, Persian, royall, princely, stately, blushing, shi∣ning, pompeous, glittering, vermilion, bloody, ruddy, rich, sumptuous, glorious, magnificent. Phantasies. Empty, insubstantiall, vain, ravishing, imaginary, airy, flying, uncertain, dreadfull, pale, greasy, affrighting, ghostly. Pitty. Affectionate, yeilding, bleeding, melting, calme, soft, charitable, feeling, affectionate, weeping, compassionate, ten∣der-hearted. Poison. Rageing, sleepy, drowsy, cold, hot, secret, slie, working, treacherous, lurking, deceitfull, banefull, pale, rageing, deadly, tainted, eating, black, swelling, spreading, destroy∣ing, viperous, benumming, stupifying, burning, inflaming. Poetry, Poesy, Poet. Immortall, deathless, sacred, enamouring, soule-bereav∣ing, sprightly, lively, almighty, well-composed, couched, labord, powerfull, embalming, fluent, nimble, learned, nu∣merous, sinewy, sweet, flowing, smooth, swelling, flatter∣ing, enthusiastick, lascivious, stately, lofty, wanton, plea∣sant, brisk, amorous, sacred, numbers, measures, heaven, bred, muse, inspired, harmonious, melodious, honor'd, biting, lashing, satyrick, lyrick, heroick, Jambick, prohetick, winding, artfull, knowing, well-tuned, tickling, nectareous, Ambrosian, sugred, divine, facetious, loose, fabulous, ficti∣ous, lascivious, witty, well-drest, lawreat, soul-ravishing, charming, inchanting, intrancing, musicall, soul-invading, imparadising, grave, immortalizing. Pomander. Perfumed, delicious, sweet, well-sented, pleasing, odori∣ferous, well∣smelled, fragrant. Pomgranate. Many, kerneld, juicy, pelicious, vermilion, blushing.
Parke. Pleasant, delightfull, herby, woody, grassy, inclosed, fruit∣full, verdant, flowry, empaled, green, plusht, spacious. Page. Quick, diligent, speedy, officious, observant, ready, care∣full, serviceable, obsequious, brisk, dutifull, attending, nim∣ble, waiting. Paradox. Improbable, stoicall, unvulgar, unbelived, incredible, false-seeming. Paleness. Trembling, chill, cooled, bleak, fainting, meager, assright∣ed, gastly, difigured, discolor'd, fearfull. Palate. Delicious, nice, curious, luxrious, judicious, insatiate, greedy, gluttenous, well-tasted. Prejudice. Partiall, corrupting, blinding, injurious, disadvantagious, indammaging. Praise. Lasting, immortall, never-dying, monumentall, deserved, windy, layish, admired, glozing, inflaming, triumphant, swelling, attractive, magnetick, big-bellied, deathless, un∣measured, unsounded, timpanized, lasting, induring, blaz∣ing. Pride. Stately, high, swolne, dareing, unconfined, swelling, boundless, triumphant, envied, fantastick, insulting, impe∣rious, hatefull, lofty, shameless, unblushing, vaunting, flaunting, tyrannizing, sky-towring, boasting, purple, ambitious, heady, portly, mounting, respectless, haughty, insolent, squint-eyed, audacious, stern, scornfull, disdainfull, pre∣sumptuous, over-weening, strutting, rebellious, lucifernal, impetuous, flaming, glittering, brow-beating, frantick, super∣cilious.
Presumption. Adventurous, bold, arrogant, insolent, daring, rash, auda∣cious, savage, proud, swelling, puft, unmannerly. Pretence. False, lying, jugling, glozing, cogging, likely, colourable. Proportion. Beauteous, lovely, sweet, uniforme, measured, squared, handsome, equall, comely, gracefull. Picture. Lively, speaking, rich, painted, fair, dumb, artificiall, deluding, eye-deceiving, water-coloured, oyly, toyey, life, dead, varnisht, skillfull, counterfeiting, eye-deluding, repre∣senting, resembling, inimitable, beautifull, lascivious, unpa∣ralleld, coppying, imitating, stout, stern, majesticall, soul∣conquering, inchanting, charming, commanding, incom∣parable. Pardon. Gracious, favorable, mercifull, free, indulgent, smiling, remissive, willing, courteous. Plays, Sports, Games, Pastimes. Pleasant, frollick, delightfull, soft, mirthfull, sportfull, wanton, care-killing, facetious, idle, unthrifty, time-steal∣ing, harmless, voluptuous, sensual, loose, dissolute, lascivi∣ous, vain, empty, delicious, beguiling, refreshing, honest, sweet. Passion. Distempred, distracted, head-strong, frantick, untamed, unruly, uncollected, disordred, wild, furious, raging, mad, light-winged, usurping, unbridled, irefull, stormy, tyra∣nous, willfull, disquiet, transporting, roaving, affectionate, turbulent, vehement, violent, ardent, fervent, surprizing, impetuous, monstrous, importuning, impatient, blind, im∣perious, inconstant, irresistible, inexpressible, unlimited, unadvised.
Pastorals. Pleasant, jolly, rustick, rurall, innocent, plain, youth∣full, harmless, low-stiled, humble. Plaines. Flowry, fragrant, verdant, spatious, enameld, delightfull, humble, smiling, fruitfull, grassy, pleasant, green, tufted, frollick, stream-haunted, lovely, dasied, inameld, flowry, spangled, odorious, sweet, delicious, embrodred, diapred, le∣veld, green, plusht, fair, clothed, sprightly, joviall. Parasite. Dissembling, officious, fawning, obsequious, pliant, su∣gred, pick-thank, glass-faced, treacherous, smoothing, lisping, golden-tongued, quaint, oily, courtly, filed-tongue, smooth-tongued, flattering, serving, cogging, insinuating, slavish, lying, greedy, smell-feast, idle, collogueing, chear∣ing, jugling, circumventing, knee-crouching, crafty, wily, deluding, clawing, dowbing, tempting, fair-spoken, smooth∣worded, glozing, tickling. Parrat. Pratling, babling, green, painted, fair, plumed, chatter∣ing, takling, tatling, gawdy. Pandar. Sly, crafty, importunate, beastly, brutish, obscene, wary, perfidious, soothing, cunning, cheating, tempting, deceit∣full, lascivious, fawning, viilanous, youth-corrupting, immo∣dest, filthy, shameless, brazen-faced, inticing, alluring, training, impudent. Pyramid. Star, pointing, monumentall, aspiring, tall, towring, clowd, bearing, prodigious, lasting, heaven-peirceing, proud, ambitious, sky-bearing, sky-threatning, heaven-pierceing, mounting, exalted, lofty, sowring. Pomp. Stately, sumptuous, costly, magnificent, gorgeous, glo∣rious, golden, glittering, superfluous, smiling, courtly, am∣bitious,
expensive, excessive, needless, vaine, glorious, wast∣full, ceremonious, dazling, triumphant, solemne, proud, royall, fantastick, blazing, profuse, lavish, unthrifty, gal∣lant, shining, flaming. Perswasion Moving, courting, soft, insinuating, subtle, slie, winning, victorious. Periwig. False, counterfeit, hairy, curled, frizled. Perfume. Sweet, spicy, frgrant, Ambrosian, compounded, choice, rich, odorous, costly, sacred, ravishing, lascivious. Pen. Learned, quaint, polite, studious, laborious, eloquent, art∣full, industrious, nimble, quick, clarkly. Pelican. Solitary, lovely, melancholy, Aegytian, indulgent, sharp∣beakt, mourning, officious, loving, breast-peirceing, blood∣feeding, afflicted, distressed. Pearle. Precious, Indian, costly, inchasing, flaming, blazing, aire∣gilding, inlightning, orient, rich, beauteous, eastern, curious, delicious, sparkling, reflecting, orientall, radiant, beaming, dangling, bright. Pleasure. Soft, delicious, melting, wanton, alluring, inticing, easy, idle, itching, lulling, desired, inveigling, transitory, inam∣ouring, empty, charming, fancy, tickling, glozing, perni∣cious, treacherous, intemperate, gliding, blind, fulsome, toyish, disordred, revelling, care-killing, unbridled, effemi∣nate, honey-flowing, depraved, unmeasured, delightfull, fresh, choice, intrancing, imparadising, balmy, beckoning, magnetick, attractive, sportive, chearing, heart-inlarging, luxurious, voluptuous, lascivious, fadeing, vaine, nectareous, Ambrosian, spicy, active, lightsome, beguiling, ravishing,
tempting, captivating, transporting, bewitching, syrenian, flashy, soul-invading, smiling. Patron. Propitious, benevolent, favorable, protecting, liberall, beneficious, bountifull, smiling, defending, securing. Perjury. Impious, cursed, damned, hellish, black, hollow. Perfection. Divine, rare, absolute, admired, compleat, exact, accom∣plisht, unexampled, unequal'd, unparaleld, unmatcht, sin∣gular, beauteous, desired, unpattern'd, unparagon'd. Qualme. Suddain, oppressing, unexpected, surprising, overcoming. Quiver. Painted, sounding, arrow-bearing, dangling, hanging, gilded. Quince. Strong-sented, yellow, downy, soft-skinned, woolly. Queen. Stately, majestick, imperious, awfull, scepter-bearing, sacred, glorious, virtuous, glittering, commanding. Question. Doubtfull, perplexing, puzling, obscure, debated, auxi∣ous, argued, discussed, brawling, jangling, controverted, discoursive, contentious, wrangling, disputed. Quick-silver. Nimble, squeamish, stirring, active, coy, skipping. Renegado. Perfidious, false, apostate, faithless, damned, infamous, branded, revolting, perjured. Rusticity. Clownish, lubberly, untaught, barbarous, ignorant, un∣mannerly,
blundering, plain, simple, saucy, rude, slovenly, absurd, boysterous, blustering. Rose. Fragrant, sweet, blushing, odorous, early, delicious, painted, dew, empearl'd, thorny, prickly-bearded, smiling, vermilion, carnation, perfumed, maiden, virgin, untainted, unspotted, lovely, dew-dropping, fading, blowing, sence∣ravishing, languishing, weeping. Race. Speedy, sinewey, nervy, swift, nimble, quick, light-footed, puffing, breathless, sweating, contentious, posting, active, short-winded. Rock. Hanging, lofty, craggy, mossy, aged, hollow, vaulted, se surveying, high-browed, uncouth, forsaken, sky-braving, sk-invading, obdurate, flinty, hard, impregnable, melan∣choly, daing, splitting, sea-confronting, sea-over-hanging, wave-breaking, sea-daring, over-looking, repelling, chur∣lish, surly, aspiring, steepy, barren, unfrequented, impreg∣nable, ship-wracking, unfruitful, ambitious, dreadful, por∣tentuous, exalted, wave-spurning, gutter'd, crannied, slippe∣ry, inaccessible. Rape. Deflowring, inforcing, violent, ravishing, impetuous, un∣willing, inexorable, resistless. Rainbow. Chequer'd, embroidred, purple, Iris, painted, arched, va∣rious, Junoes hand-maid, moist, presaging, gawdy, crooked, sun-opposing, streaked, eye-pleasing, sun-confronting, many∣coloured. Recreation. Sportful, gamesome, toyish, harmless, civil, moderate, temperate, sweet, lovely, lavish, unthrifty, fruitless, heart∣chearing, solacing, reviving, pleasing, time-beguiling, de∣lightful.
Repulse. Sharp, coy, scornfull, churlish, sower, stern, dogged, cruell, angry, couragious, impetuous, manly, obstinate, re∣solved, valiant, sturdy, brave, glorious, victorious. Request. Solicitous, importunate, seasonable, suppliant, earnest, humble, submissive, urging, pressing, unreasonable, faire, pertinent, impertinent, unseasonable, seasonable, honest, civill, fawning, crouching, bold, audacious, easie, unde∣niable. Rapture. Poetick, raveing, high-rapture, flowne, enthusiastick, re∣fining, lofty, intranching, inchanting, flameing, sparkling, soul-moving, bewitching, melting, ravishing, transporting, glorious, pleasing, elevating, mounting, towring, inspired. Reproose. Angry, sower, stern, grim, couragious, magnanimous, stout, furious, just, unjust, deserved, undeserved, merited, sharp, harsh, smart, satyricall, biting, surly, dogged, chol∣lerick Ruby. Pretious, wealthy, blushing, orient, glittering, beauty, shining, Indian, radiant, invaluable, inestimable. River. Silver-breasted, christall, swelling, winding, amorous, wheeling, wrigling, sliding, smooth, floating, swan-embro∣dred, hasty, swift, whispering, gulphy, uxorious, bank-court∣ing, bank-saluting, glassy, vaulting, dancing, wandring stragling, whirling, leaping, snaky, gliding, parling, hurry∣ing, incensed, rolling, tumbling, cleare. Revenge. Bloody, insatiate, black, dismall, boyling, raging, furious, passionate, sparkling, selfe-willed, impatient, impetuous, swelling, burning, stormy, barbarous, siery, hot, flaming, thirsty, cruell, hellish, just, stinging, rash, implacable, sad
unappeased, snake-haired, desperate, flame-eyed, rim, stern, frowning, wrathfull, threatning, menacing, ragefull. Rites. Misterious, sacred, solemne, venerable, ancient, received, pious, religious, Rivall. Suspicious, jealous, envious, ambitious, fearfull, cautious, circumspect, amorous, wary, heart-wounded, eye-observing, calumnious, malicious, revengfull. Rigour. Flinty, cruell, marble-breasted, furious, imperious, stern, savage, obstinate, obdurate, relentless, remorsless, bitter, angry, tyrannous, merciless. Riddle. Subtle, profound, knotty, dark, perplexed, puzling, hard, posing, ambiguous, secret, doubtfull, scrupulous, concealed, misterious. Reverence. Ceremonious, pious, solemn, submissive, auspicious, ob∣sequious, fearfull, awfull, knee-bowing, prostrating, adoring, silent, dreadfull. Rhetorick, vide Eloquence. Charming, enchanting, Nectareous, Ambrosian, quaint, terse, fancy, tickling-eare, captivating, soule-moving, heart∣stealing, perswasive, soul-ravishing, sweet-lipt, soul-invading, bewitching, tempting, overcoming, courtly, varnisht, smooth glozing, insinuating, victorious, painted. Repose. Soft, quiet, secure, easy, silken, happy, peacefull, desired, warme, lazy, calme. Simpathy. Mutuall, agreeing, uniting, according, loveing, naturall, inbred, amorous, secret, silent admired, affectionate, innate.
Symetry. Attractive, harmonious, comely, gracefull, beauteous, perfect, compleat, accomplisht, eye-pleasing, proportioned, becoming, handsome, lovely, harmonious, equall, measured. Suspition. Groundless, squint-eyed, jealous, dark, wary, frantick, causless, secret, pale, fearfull, trembling, probable, prying, wakefull. Summer. Flowry, green, plusht, verdant, pleasant, friutfull, sultry, tanning, scalding, scorching, hot, boyling, parching, swel∣tring, beamy, pestilential sweaty, thirsty, yawning, fiery, peirceing, embroidred, inameld, diapred, chequerd, fair, temperate, chearful, harvest-bringing, barn-filling, corn∣hoarding, infections, diseased, yellow-eared, glorious, quick∣ning, reviving, impartial, gladsome, dusty, joyful, refresh∣ing, plentiful, fruit-bearing, laborious, requiting, crowne∣rejoycing, youthful, leavy, fragrant. Strawberry. Creeping, spreading, crawling, blushing, cooling, moun∣tainous, creamy, soft, delicious, pleasant. Straines. Warbling, harmonious, melodious, high-tuned, inspired, sprightful, sence-bereaving, charming, bewitching, entrance∣ing, pleasant, delightful, lofty, celestial, heavenly, ange∣lical, soul-ravishing, sence-captivating, stately, homely, rural, rustick, humble, pastoral, martial, warlike, tune∣full. Stile. Elegant, eloquent, erse, delicate, soft, smooth, natu∣ral; facituous, unforced, easie, fluent, learned, polite, accu∣rate, grave, humble, groveling, stately, satyrical, well∣coucht, curious, lofty, farre-fetcht. Stoick. Rigid, obdurate, dull, sullen, unmoving, senceless.
Sacrifice. Humble, appeasing, solemne, bloody, religious, sacred, victim, pious, burning. Saint. Honord, exalted, blessed, glorious, divine, immortall, ce∣lestiall, inthroned, exalted, triumphant, canonized, in∣shrined. Silk-worm. Industrious, laborious, pompious, wealthy, working, nimble, active, teeming. Silence. Peacefull, slumbring, reposed, dull, concealing, mona∣stick, awfull, blind, selfe-deceiving, shady, still, listening, appeased, attentive, secret, calme, forced, willing, yeilding, night-enamoured, phlegmatick, trusty, faithfull, night∣courting, timerous, fearfull. Sighs. Blood-sucking, thirsty, consuming, scalding, burning, airy, scorching, blasting, fiery, deep-fetcht, heart-rending, wounding, breaking, burning, whispering, amorous, dissemb∣led, concealed, secret, interrupted, sweet, trembling, inclo∣sed, breathing, weeping, repeating, heart-breaking, languish∣ing, fainting, penitent, bewailing, lamenting, remorsfull, zealous, religious, pious, amorous, heart-fretting, mourn∣full, sad, pensive, melancholy, penitentiall, melting, fervent winged, stormy, restless, hearty, affectionate, groaning, compassionate. Strumpet. Shameless, impudent, notorious, bawdy, lascivious, ram∣pant, salacious, dissolute, uncivill, wanton, lustfull, immodest, intangling, insnaring, inticing, alluring, rammish, goatish, rotten, loathsome, painted, cancred, itchy, dallying, infa∣mous, night-walking, captivating, inthralling, mercenary, perfidious, dissembling, perjured, pocky. Streames. Silver, christall, purling, foaming, winding, curled, wri∣thing,
wrigling, uxorious, courting, hasty, embrodred, swift∣paced, tumbling, frothy, bank-courting, bustling, murmur∣ing, rumbling, surgy, chiding, impetuous, resistless, snaky, hurrying, silent, sweeping, chiding, azure, wany, rustling, amorous, careering, angry, boyling fruitfull, fishy, flowing, running, gliding, slippery, raging, incensed, vaulting, dan∣cing, soft, whispering, wandring, stragling, gushing, drench∣ing, whirling, rushing, glassy, pearly, silver-breasted, yel∣ling, swelling, wheeling, spreading, glancing, gently∣sliding. Servant. Active, willing, nimble, ready, officious, industrious, quick, stirring, obedient, pliant, diligent, laborious, toyl∣some, obsequious, carefull, painfull, watchfull, faithfull, honest, assiduous, idle, negligent, insolent, proud, disobe∣dient, regardless, repining, fancy, uncivill, doanish, lither, lazy, drowsy, sleepy, rebellious, grumbling, murmuring. Service, Servitude. Rigorous, hard, honourable, happy, drudging, easy, cruell, slavish, wretched, constrained, dejecting, vexing, detested, unsupportable, intollerable, burdenous, toylsome, shamefull, tyrannous, ignominious. Sence. Active, nimble, voluptuous, erroneous, seducing, sportive, gamesome. Secret. Hidden, misterious, private, concealed, sequestred, undi∣vulged, private, reserved, coverd, inclosed imbosomed, im∣prisoned, committed, deep, profound, silent, treasured, pen∣sive, lurking. Sea. Angry, raging, swelling, boyling, working, floating, sur∣rounding, stirring, winding, sail-bearing, ingorging, in∣circling, ingulphing, girdling, unconfined, boundless, de∣vourin, roaring, bellowing, insatiate, shelfy, soundless, rocky, billowy, frothy, wealthy, tossing, swelling, swallow∣ing, awfull, dreadfull, ship-wracking, insulting, licentious, toyling, floody, pathless, surgy, irefull, stormy, ebbing,
flowing,, tumbling, glassy, plowed, unbottomed, unfathomed, unmeasured, impetuous, blew-waved, Neptune, Thetis, brackish, tumultuous, yeilding, aged, hoary, rugged, rufled, vaulting, fretting, belching, untamed, foamy, high-waved, troubled. Sparrow. Salacious, lustfull, fruitfull, ingendring, procreative, en∣creasing. Spaniell. Questing, ranging, fawning, shaggy, loving. Squirrell. Active, lightsome, nimble, nut-cracking, vaulting, leap∣ing, skipping, stirring, bush-tailed. Scold or Shrew. Angry, curst, frowning, peevish, way-ward, sower-lookt, brow-beating, sullen, furious, brawling, clashing, wrangling, storming, fretting, railing, tippet, upright. Sycophant, vide Parasite. Smooth-tongued, oyly, pick-thank'd, calumnious, jug∣ling, deceitfull, slanderous, detracting, defaming, cogging, glozing, collogueing, cheating. Soule. Divine, immortall, deathless, lively, subtle, active, spright∣ly, sparkling, unfathom'd, apprehensive, unbodied, dislodg∣ed, undiscern'd, celestiall, nimble-winged. Slye. Lofty, stirring, christall, glittering, glorious, azure, ina∣meld, embroidred, marble, transparent, spangled, beamy, empty, dusky, transparent, vaulty, starry. Slave. Servile, infamous, oppressed, branded, drudging, deje∣cted, abused, ignominious.
Sleep. Soft, peacefull, reposed, leaden-fingred, silent, arresting, gentle, downy, calme, silken, forgetfull, golden, drowsy, surprizing, yawning, healthfull, all-subduing, refreshing, de∣licious, senceless, counterfeiting, death-imitating, benum∣ming, heavy, pale, deceitfull, curtained, balmy, charming, heavy. Smell. Sweet-breathing, delicious, pleasant, perfumed, odorife∣rous, fragrant, Arabian, Indian, Aromatick, spicy, sence∣affecting, delightfull, balmy, geniall, musky, aire-perfuming, unwhole some, loathsome, fullsome, noisome, infectious, contagious, sence-overcoming, stinking. Snow. Soft, white, fleecy, driven, flaky, wooly, untrodden, Al∣pian, Thracian, Scythian, plumy, feathered, melting, itchy, freezing, hoary, scattred, showring, drizling, mountainous, curled, blanched, ragged, shivering. Sorrow. Weeping, wailing, whining, sighing, groaning, lament∣ing, pining, inward, inexpressible, lumpish, wrinkling, gri∣ping, drooping, eye-wringing, brinish, killing, heart-con∣tracting, wounding, heart-rending, tearing, gnawing, fret∣ting, unquiet, impatient, gawling, eating, devouring, heart∣breaking, pensive, melting, pinching, discontented, sable, mournfull. Speech. Witty, winning, popular, rationall, taking, well-coucht, learned, captivating, tedious, ingenuous, terse, pleasing, tarte, polite, fawning, rhetoricall, eloquent, sharp-eare, in∣ticing, bewitching, pleasing, charming. Spheares. Spangled, whirling, rapid, harmonious, beauteous, glo∣rious, wheeling, embroidred, inamel'd, christall, lofty, mo∣ving, turning, musicall, azure, chimeing, tunefull, rolling.
Solemnity. Lofty, ceremonious, thronged, exact, sacred, superstiti∣ous, famous, honourable, royall, religious, venerable. Song. Inchanting, intrancing, harmonious, delicious, lulling, sprightfull, enamouring, ravishing, bewitching, sweet, flow∣ing, warbling, sence-bereaving, melodious, quavering, plea∣sant, rural, pastorall, mournful, joviall, sence-chearing, heart-reviving, life-infusing, voice. Shade, shadow. Gloomy, darksome, Syluan, lightsome, whispering, sow∣ling, sullen, cooling, refreshing, dewy, befriending, courte∣ous, kind, sad, melancholy, genial, hospitable, verdant, de∣ceitfull, drowsy, flying, glancing, fading, vain, sun-dispersing, empty, griefly, ghastly, unfrequented, silent, glimpsing, flitting, stirring, dusky, brown, pale, feeble, dogging, pur∣suing, fable, meager, gliding, wandring. Shame. Bashull, blushing, infamous, disgracefull, opprobrious, pale, concealing, ignominious, fearfull, trembling, re∣proachfull, modest, ingenuous, dishonest, ugly, lasting, Shepheard, swaine. Piping, glesome, mirthfull, jolly, frollick, silly, game∣some, rurall, rustick, active, loving, carefull, harmless, contented, secure, buxome, jocond, brisk, trim, neat, bus∣kind, spruce, honest, unenvied, blith, Phillis-enamour'd, love-sick, despairing, careless, whistling, burnt, parcht, dusky, tawny, lovely, sportive, Snare. Subtle, deceitfull, lye, treacherous, intangling, catch∣ing, surprizing, inthralling, sence-beguiling, captivating, imprisoning. Sunne. Glorious, lofty, bright, golden, Apollo, Titan, beamy, glittering, radiant, scorching, broyling, parching, rosting,
chearfull, vapour-attracting, heaven-surrounding, crested, inlightning, peirceing, infusing, burning, thirsty, drying, life-infusing, flamy, fiery, golden-haired, careering, wheeling, galloping, mitred, faire-tressed, flame-haired, dazling, quick∣ning, reviving, discerning, illustrating, all-seeing, garish, gladsome, unweared, rolling, glowing, restless, galloping, sparkling, speedy, posting. Sport. Delightsome, pleasant, gamesome, toyish, wanton, de∣lightfull, choicest, joyous, mirthfull, active, time-beguiling. Springs. Bubling, murmuring, purling, silver, christall, cleare, sa∣cred, fruitfull, flowing, rolling, rising, Nimphs, pratling, tatling, sparkling, whispring, chiding, weeping, pearly, gli∣ding, delicious, dancing, grasse-fringed, streaming, mossy, margind, gushing, soft, rustling, trickling, dropping, distil∣ling, running. Stallion. Lustfull, rampant, ingendring, breeding, covering. Starre. Lofty, bright, sparkling, floating, swimming, spangling, heaven-embrodering, enamelling, lucky, unlucky, auspitious, malignant, smiling, frowning, radiant, silver-tressed, burn∣ing, gliding, shining, wandring, twinkling, blazing, glori∣ous, succesfull, ill-bideing. Stranger. Unacquainted, unfriended, disregarded, wandring, un∣known, travelling, journying, housless. Spring-time. Pregnant, fragrant, youthfull, flowry, verdant, smiling, wealthy, eeming, embrodred, enameld, geniall, pearly, showry, oviall, earth-awaking, amorous, refreshing, revi∣ving, lusty, gladsome, gaudy, leavy, painted, beauteous, lovely, infant, inamouring, bridall, dawning, lively, blith, buxome, joyous, mirthfull, joccund, blooming, budding, quickning.
Skin. Alablaster, Ivory, white, delicious, soft, sleek, smooth, azure, veined, beauteous, lovely. Smile. Chearfull, sweet, pleasing, lovely, delightfull, peacefull, bewitching, inchanting, charming, soul-ravishing, intrancing, dimpled, simpering, gladsome, alluring, intrancing, shining, deceitfull, becoming, gracefull, traiterous. Tragedy. Buskind, sockt, sad, bloody, woefull, dolefull, ruthfull, lofty, stately, sententious, high, severe, grave, elaborate, heroick, pensive, weeping, swelling, great, mournful, subtle, worded. Treachery. Secret, alluring, inticing, intrapping, deceitfull, conceal∣ed, surprizing, dissembled, smooth, glozing, training, inveig∣ling, gilded. Theater. Publick, spatious, thronged, gorgeous, pompeous, applau∣sive, populous, open, crowded, mirthfull, joyous, clamo∣rous, well-filled, crammed. Temptation. Inticing, alluring, secret, solliciting, slye, subtle, crafty, sedncing, treacherous, wooing, pernicious, gilded, smiling, courting. Temper. Milde, willing, loving, ingratiating, quiet, peacefull, pleasing, sweet, winning, stormy, chasing, angry, sullen, surly. Tast. Pleasing, delicious, accurate, judicious, quick, sharp, nice, offensive, curious, exquisite, savory, unpleasant, insipid. Thoughts. Swift-winged, roving, discoursive, nimble, teeming, plod∣ding, projecting, contriving, musing, studious, contempla∣tive, working, devising, ranging, scattred, wandring, run∣ning,
rolling, tumbling, confused, flitting, vain, silent. Touch. Smooth, yeilding, soft, gentle, harmless, rough. Tongue. Seraphick, Nectarious, sweet, harmonious, heavenly, ce∣lestiall, melodious, victorious, perswasive, enamouring, in∣chanting, intrancing, charming, bewitching, soul-ravishing, conquering, captivating, sayricall, rolling, bitter, invective, lashing, filed, gilded, oily, venemous, glozing, collogueing, lying, deceitfull, enviuos, treacherous, unbridled, insnaring intiing, delicious, detracting, malicious, calumning, re∣proachful, babling, delicate, lavish, smooth, flattering, soothing, froward, clamorous, scolding, brawling, stammer∣ing, lascivious, luxurious, wanton, pleasant, atling, noise∣full, full-mouthed, shrill, allaruming, juditious, eloquent, rhetorical, mellifluous, fluent. Teeth. Pearly, white-Ivory, even-ranged, smooth-tongue, in∣closing, alablaster, sowy, grinding, tongue-lodging, guard∣ing, sharp-set, burnisht. Teares. Melting, trickling, numerous, transparent, pearly, chri∣stall, perswasive, victorious, moving, dissembling, falling, pittyed, wailing, weeping, rolling, solemne, swelling, drea∣ry, dolefull, constained, carefull, silver-shedding, relenting, tender, fluent, obsequious, tributary, sable, complaining, instructed, bursting, comeing, pleading, springing, brinish, forced, gushing, penitentiall, pensive, sad, dewy, passionate, scalding, drowning, troubled, obsequious, tributary, dumb, speaking, salt, soft, captivating, commanding. Thighes. Plump, sinewy, smooth, Ivory, Alablaster, marble, state∣ly, majesticall, portly, supporting, moving, delicate, grace∣full, well-proportioned, twin-born, fleshy, musly, solid.
Turtle. Pensive, mournful, murmering, whispering, sighing, billing, amorous, silver, wanton, chast, meek, gentle, plain∣ing, constant, loving, faithful, fleeting, venerous, sullen, querclous, hoarse, courteous. Tyrant. Insulting, insolent, imperious, stern, lawless, cruel, bloody, wrathful, flint-hearted, rigorous, marble-hearted, remorsless, unrelenting, inexorable, passionate, oppressing, awless, savage, surly odious, haughty, fearless, self-willed, blood-sucking, unlimited, proud, ambitious, aspiring, u∣surping, Trihumps, Trophies. Magnificent, gorgeous, pompeous, solemn, joyful, ma∣jestical, stately, laureat, honour'd, swelling, crowned, proud, peaceful, sceptred, sacred, joyful, mirthful, glorious, feastful, victorious, insulting, lasting, memorable, never∣dying, immortal, famous lofty, deathless. Tresses. Crisped, curled, frisled, ruffled, scatterd, disheveld, gold∣en, dispersed, lovely, beautiful, nets, snares, wavering, las∣civious, wanton, dangling, twisted, shining, glistering, ra∣diant, amber. Trees. Pregnant, spreading, budding, green, fruitful, flourishing, blooming, branching, leavy, verdant, shady, sturdy, shrub∣by, sky-kissing, reaching, wavering, towring, lofty, high∣topt, knotty, vegetive, deep-rooted, ingrafted, inoculated, planted, bushy, full-grown, curled, gloomy, arched, bend∣ing, fragrant, ambitious, flourishing, fading, withering, sap∣py, shaggy, well-grown. Tune. Enchanting, delicious, ear-ravishing, melodious, plea∣sing, bewitching, alluring, inticing, charming, sence-berea∣ving, heart-intrancing, warbling, quavering, harmonious, celestial, according, musical, heavenly, consorting, light∣some
merry, mournful, sad, pensive sprightly, melancho∣ly, heavy. Tobacco. Cavaleering, smoaking, spitting, spauling, smoaky, flame∣ing, swaggering, huffing, puffing, generous, whiffing. Teats. Milky, corral, cherry, vermilion, nipled, gushing, nursing, milk-spinning. Tennis Racking, bandying, active, sportive, gamesome, time∣spending. Thanks. Hearty, lusting, obleiged, dutious, officious, obsequious, ingaged, unmeasured, unumbred, bounden, serviceable, obedient, humble, immortal. Tiger. Libian, Hercanian, Midian, fierce, cruel, savage, bloody, Affrican, Indian, Armenian, speckled, furious, impetuous, merciless, blood-thirsty, streaked, swift-footed, greedy. Time. Speedy-winged, consuming, all-ripening, injurious, do∣mineering, grey-headed, aged, crazy, wastful, restless, gliding, posting, stealing, flying, creeping, feathred, wheel∣ing, succeeding, incroaching, invading, light-heeled, run∣ning, opportune, seasonable, convenient, all-gnawing, rus∣ty, irrevocable, present, future. Twilight. Dapled, grey, gloomy, ambiguous, neutral, doubtful, darksome, dewy, grizy, dusky. Virago. Manly, masculine, heroick, valiant, couragious, sturdy, stout, audacious, bold, adventurous, fearless undaunted. Vesture vide Garment. Sumptuous, magnificent, costly, gentile, stately, rich, glorious, shining, glittering, pompeous, gorgeous, spruce, neat, handsome, decent, fashionable, a-la-mode, curious, becoming, gaudy, gay, trim.
Verdure. Pleasant, youthfull, smiling, flowry, joyfull, springing, blooming, leavy. Violet. Azure, creeping, soft, pale, nodding, purple-streakt, beauti∣full, odorous, glowing, sweet-smelling. Verse. Lofty, exalted, immortall, high,, smooth, swelling, har∣monious, well-labour'd, well-drest, deathless, powerfull, intrancing, inchanting, nectar-dropping, charming, fancy, tickling, sacred, measured, sprightly, sententious, sinewy, buskin'd, nerved, facetious, eare-inamouring, muse-inspired, prophetick, embalming, numerous, well-composed, fluent, learned, amorous, wanton, lascivious, delicious, sweet, flow∣ing, ravishing. Vertue. Fair, bright, untainted, cold, chast, active, maiden-sa∣cred, immortall, deathless, spotless, generous, glorious, divine, heroick, conspicuous, unregarded disrespected. Vow. Pious, religious, solemn, sacred, ceremonious, binding, chast, obleiging, strict, severe, irrecoverable, fervent, rash, inconsiderable, unadvised. Urne. Peacefull, sacred, forgetfull, quiet, mournfull, sable, dark∣some, silent, shrowding, shady, cooled. Voice. Celestiall, heavenly, harmonious, sweet, delicious, in∣chanting, intrancing, bewitching, charming, pleasant, deli∣cious, soul-conquering, heart-captivating, sence-bereaving, Syren, eare-taking, sprightfull, mournfull, puling, whining, alluring, inticing, victorious, triumphant. Veines. Azure, violet, purple, swelling, flowing, winding, warm, fluent, dancing, trembling, seething, boyling, branched, meandring, interlacing. Vales, Vallies. Fruitfull, flowry, sportful, verdant, green, plusht, ina∣meld, chequer'd, diapred, motly, fragrant, pleasant, sweet,
delightfull, smiling, embrodred, tured, dasied, grassy, herby, green-cloathed, gamesome, soft-coated, spangled, persumed, ecchoing, green-breasted, streame, embrodred, gloomy, dark, humble, narrow, groveling, crowtching, low, deject∣ed, solitary, shaded, gloomy, over-looked, bushy, tufted, le∣veld, green-mantled, flower-spangled, hollow, stooping, crooked, resounding, winding, melancholy. Virgin. Bashfull sober, untained, spotless, chast, modest, civil, blushing, pure. Vaile. Virgin, maiden, shadowing, dangling, beauty, concealing, masking, spreading, clowdy, faintly. Vulgar vide Multitude. Rude, unconceiving, lawless, misjudging, illiterate, shal∣low-pated, tumultuous, rebellious, saucy, confused, igno∣rant, surly, giddy, haire-brained, distracted, inconstant. Unicorne. Long-horned, Virgin, loving, Indian, savage, Lyon, hating, pretious, rich, horned, furious. Wife. Carefull, loving, happy, solicitous, indulgent, chearing, embracing, loyall, sweet, dear, delicious, scolding, brawling, unquiet, disloyall, unhappy, jealous, litigous, contentious. Widdow. Pensive, melancholy, sad, desolate, comfortless, lovely, distressed, mournfull, afflicted, oppressed, bouncing, lusty, joviall, frollick. Whore. Incestuous, leprous, obscene, lustfull, lascivious, wanton, rammish, brotheld, uncivill, strumpeting, bawdy, dallying, rampant, infamous, Leprous, fallacious, dissolute, rotten, impudent, shame less, mercenary, immodest, notorious, filthy, painted, unblushing, impudent, cankerd, itchy, Goat∣ish, loathsome, musty, nasty, pocky. Women. Inconstant, crafty, deceitfull, wanton, beauteous, soft, tender, passionate, weak, frail, pittifull, delicate, melting, prat∣ling, inconsiderate, rash, smooth-faced, revengfull, whining, puling, scolding, brawling, unquiet, unchast, lascivious, melt∣ing, weeping, impudent, jealous.
Whisper. Secret, close, hollow, silent, soft, guilty, fearful, magical, drowsie, pleasing. Welcome. Chearful, smiling, bounteous, hearty, loving, kind, free, liberal, gracious, courteous. Will. Unforced, uncontrouled, free, active. Wanton, wantonness. Sportive, toying, dallying, lascivious, rude, unruly, ungovern'd, unattained, tempted, unbridled, luxurious, full∣fed, revelling, fearless, insatiate. Wish. Longing, greedy, desirous, ambitious, passionate, ardent, hearty, insatiate, sollicitous. Wrest. Ivory, sinewy, snowy, azure, streaked, veined. Wonder. Attractive, amazing, intrancing, stupendious, prodigi∣ous, silent. Womb. Teeming, pregnant, fruitful, swelling, painful, barren. Wine. Generous, spruce, neat, brisk, rich, odorous, sparkling, fragrant, sprightly, lusty, care-drowning, heart-chearing, delicious, green, prickt, hearing, inspiring, blood of the canubian, caudian, lesbian, chain, joyous, grape, inliven∣ing, smiling, genious-exalting, nectareous, pleasant, for∣getful, reason-depriving, furious, raging. Wit. Sagacious, contriving, peirceing, pregnant, active, quick, plotting, stirring, rich, happy, nimble, humerous, mature, inventing, pregnant. Youth. Vigorous, blooming, fresh, loose, wild, unbrideled, gid∣dy, amorous, green, raw, unexperienced, untutor'd, active, smiling, wanton, downy, beardlesse, untrained, untemperate, dissolute, proud, ambitious, voluptuous, unreclaimed, in∣discreet, riotous, tender, soft, lascivious impatient, smooth, jovial, inconsiderate, witty, inconstant. FINIS.
A GARDEN of TULIPS OR, The Pleasant Prospect. An Alphabetical Collection, beautified with flourishing Similitudes and Comparisons, for the better imitation, admirably applied to their several Subjects. ANger is blood powred, and perplexed into a froth. Reason to rage is like bands to a sore, which often stro∣king makes the anguish more. Anger is like a deadly weapon, we hear his voice before it doth execution, and then we arm. So looks the chased Lion on the daring Hunts-man that hath galled him, then makes him nothing. As a Savage Bore (that hunted long assail'd and set upon) with his only eyes swimming in fire, keeps off his baying hounds, though sunk himself, yet holds his Anger up, and shows it forth in foam, makes firm his stand of battalious bri∣stles, feeds his hate to die, and whets his tusks with wrath∣ful majesty; So fares a furious Anger. Anger is like a full hot horse, who being allowed his way, his self mettal tires him. Ambition's gilded spheres are like to painted hells, which please the eyes, even while they show the heart where horror lies. Ambitions thoughts, like woods, whilst they maintain the flame of high desires, grow ashes by the same.
Ambition, like water floods, not channel-bound, neighbor∣ing banks, doth over-run, and groweth nothing when its rage is down. So have I beheld an exhalation, that would be a star fall, when the Sun forsook it, in a sink. Ambitious men like furious cannons, are often burst with over-charging. Ambition like an ignis fatuus, misleads our ond mortality, hurries us about, then sets us down just where we first begun. Allegiance tempted too far, is like the trial of a good sword on an anvil, as that often flies in pieces without service to the owner; so trust inforced too far, proves treachery, and is too late repented. Affections injured, like tempest threatned, trees not firmly rooted, ne're spring to timely growth. Our love like sparkles are, they brightest shine when they go out. The pleasures of Adulterers, are like to the sea, groundless and wide. Look how a wolf doth like a dog appear, so like a friend is an Adulterer. We see that trees bears no such pleasant fruit there where they first grew, as when they are new set, perfumes, the more they are chafed, the more they render their pleasant scents; & so Affliction expresseth vertue, whether true, or else adulterate. It is not the Apparel, the brisk pert Linnet in his ruset fea∣thers, flies as warm as the bird of Paradise with all his painted and his gilded train. A Broker is a City Pestilence, a moth that eats up gowns, doublets, and hose. What are our Bodies? A little curded milk, fantastical puff-past, like paper prisons they use for to keep flies in. A Boasting Swaggerer is like a walking spur, he gingles much, but never pricks. A Swaggerer that fights, as the geese did that saved the Capitol, only with prating. Beauties are like to books, those that do study them do know them best: and to say truth, it is still much as it pleases the Common Reader. Beauty concealed, is like a Jewel in the dark. A Bawd is like a Broker, she takes fees on both sides.
A Bawd is both Ware and Merchant, Flesh and Butcher. Chamber-maids are to show Mistresses, like porches, unto doors, you pass the one before you can have entrance to the other; or like mustard to a piece of rawn, if you will have one taste well, you must not scorn to be dipping in the other. Chamber-maids are like lotteries, one may chuse twenty be∣fore they shall find one good one. To say a Waiting-woman is handsome, and yet chaste, is to affirm all pages gelt; or that the Knight keeps to his Lady in the high bed, and never truckles. A good Consceince is a well built castle, no battery nor in∣vasion can take it. A Princes Court is like a common fountain, whence should flow pure silver drops in general; but if it chance some curse example poison it near the head, death and diseases are spread through all the Land. Courtiers are fickle things to deal with, a kinde of March∣pane men that will not last. Courtiers in Citizens houses are summer fires, that may be well spared, and being quite out are best; they do the house no good, but help to consume and burn the wood up, and overheat the rooms. Credit is like the chastity of a maid, which if once broke, is ever after lost. Credit not kept up is like a Pallace, which for want of re∣pair falls to ruine. Credulity is securities blind nurse, the dream of fools, the drunkards ape, that feeling for his way, even when he thinks in his deluded sense to catch at safety, falls without defence. Great Elephants and Lions murther least; the ignoblest beast is the cruelest. To be a Cuckold is as natural as to be a married man, as to eat, sleep, or wear a night-cap. It is all one to trust ones arm in the throat of a Lion, ones purse with a Curtizen, ones neck to the chance of the dice, ones religion to a Synagogue of Jews, as ones wife with a friend. So tall a Cuckold, that he ducks at the penthouses, like an Ancient that dares not flourish for fear of the sign-posts. As hearty Sea-men in desperate storms stem with a little rudder the tumbling ruines of the Ocean; so with their cause and swords good men meet Dangers.
Our Desires are like our fates, our own stars, all our for∣tunes, which as we sway them, so abuse or bless us. Who riseth from a feast with that keen appetite that he set down; such are Desires obtained. Where is that horse that doth untread again his tedicus measures with the unbated fire, that he did pace them first; so our Desires fix on their objects with far more spirit then they do enjoy them. How like a yonker, or a prodigal, the scared barque puts from her naaive bay, nugged and embraced by the strumpet winde, how like a prodigal doth she return with our wither∣ed ribs and ragged sails, lean, ren, and beggered by her blus∣tring voyage; with such satisfaction our night Desires do the next morning leave us. Despair is a plummet in the heart, that weighs and pulls us living to the dust we came from. Disdain is like to water powr'd in fire, Quenches the flame a while, to raise it higher. Dissimulation is a canker, which for the most part, seizeth the choicest fruit with its infection, still ordained for to dis∣ease the natures of best complexions. Goodness is but an out side, we all set In rings of gold, stones that are counterfet. A Dissembler is like a goodly apple, rotten at the core. Womens tongues for their garulity are like to clocks, if they go too fast, they never go true Envy doth feed on entrails like a Kite, in which foul heap, if any ills lie hid, she strikes her beak into it, shakes it up, & hurls it so abroad that all may view it; corruption is her nutriment, but touch her with any precious ointments, and you kill her. Envy is like a flie that passeth all the bodies soundest parts, and dwells upon his sores, and if her squint-eye have power to finde out none, she then forgeth some; she makes that crooked, ever which before was streight, calls valour giddi∣ness, and justice tyranny. Extreams in our delights have violent ends, and in their triumphs die, like fire and powder, which as they kiss con∣sume; the sweetest honey is loathsome in its own delicious∣ness, and in the taste confounds the appetite. As the east and west upon the globe a Mathematical point only divides: thus happiness, and misery, and all extreams, are still contiguous.
They are as sick that surfet with too much, as they that starve with nothing: So, it is a happiness to be seated in the Mean, su∣perfluity comes soon by white hairs; but competency lives longer. A false Dissembler is like the serpent that parted with its subtilty, and closed it in the fruit. 'Tis with our souls as with our eyes, that after a long dark∣ness, over dazled with the approach of sudden light; when in the midst of fears we are surprized with unexpected happi∣ness; the first degrees of joy are meer astonishments. Fidelity in secrets, though it be honest, bears its punish∣ment with it; such a person is like to one, that in cold nights will needs have all the fire, and there is held by others, and embraced only to burn himself by their direction. Flattery is the bellows that blows up sin; we seldom see a flattering Knave turn Courtier, but many Courtiers have turn'd flattering Knaves. Fools are like obedient children brought up under a hard mother in law, and a cruel; who being not used to break∣fasts and collations, when they have course bread offered them are thankful, and take it for a favour too. A man of Fortitude doth imitate the weather, that sings in tempests, and being clear is silent. Fear dwells with earth-quakes, shipracks at sea, or prodi∣gies in heaven; a valiant man, he cannot see so many fathom beneath the height of his own heart, as fear is. Valiant hearts Kings may dissolve, but not defeat; a man that is void of fear when he doth fall, he lies great in his ruines (like the sacred carkasses of scattered temples) he still reverend lies, and the religious honour him no less, then if he stood in all his majesty. Without misfortune vertue hath no glory, valor is of no use, opposed trees make tempests, shew their powers, as waves forced back by rocks, make Neptunes towers. It is not breath can fright a noble truth, nor is there Magick in the person of a king that plays the tyrant; if that therebe a good sword can easily uncharm it, as the calm air stills tempests. Fortune hath hours of loss, and hours of gain; the brave man feels them both, who like the angry bull, never goes back for breath, but when he means to arm his fury double. Fortune is a slut, and being a whore her self, would have no Lady marry, and live honest
Glory is like Alcides shirt, if it stay on us, till pride hath mixed it with our blood; nor can we part with it at our plea∣sure, when we would unease, it brings along with it both flesh and sinnews, and leaves us living monsters. Gamesters have hearts more spacious then Kings: did they divide the Empire of the world, they would make one throw for all. To define a Gallant of the times right, a Mercer formed him, a Tailor makes him, and a Player gives him spirit. The shrub securely grows, the tallest Cedar stands most in danger of the winde. Thus we distinguish the noble from the base, the noble finde their lives and deaths still troublesome: but Humility doth sleep while the storm grows hoarse with scolding. The rates of Honor are arched so high, that Giants may let through, and keep their impious Turbands on, without good morrow to the sun. Why do we scorn inferiour men, since to be lower then the worms, is to be higher then the greatest Monarchs. Humility is yong Ambitions ladder, whereon the climber upwards turns his face, but when he once attains the upmost round, he then unto the ladder turns his back, looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees by which he did ascend. When once the Spring, main Hope, is fallen into disorder no wonder if the lesser wheels (Desire and Joy) stand still: our thoughts, like Bees when they have lost their King, wan∣der confusedly, and settle no where. The Powers, like to best Tutors, do inflict hard tasks upon great natures and of noblest Hopes, read triviall Lessons. Hope is in opposition with Despair, and like the zealous advocate in the cause of his afflicted client, labors still to over∣throw the quirks and fallacies Despair is nimble in, whilst Fear with trembling expects trials issue. Honor in noble persons, as the pure oar refined, exceeds in value treble proportions of the courser dross. Men in themselves intirely Honest, may march safe with naked feet on coals of fire; so flames do reach at heaven ere they expire. An Honest soul is like a ship at sea, that sleeps at anchor when the ocean's calm, but when she rages, and the wind blows high, he cuts his way with skill and majesty.
As the light serves not only to shew, but renders us mutual∣ly profitable; so our lives spent in acts examplary and Honest win our selves good names, and do to others give matter for vertuous deeds by which they live. How subtilly Hell doth flatter Vice, mounts it aloft, and makes it seem to fly; so the fowl the Tortois mockt, who to the sky the ambitious shell-fish raised: the end of all is, on∣ly that he may from thence dead fall. As men in scorn of a true flame that is near, run to light their tapers at a glo-worm; so pleasures are valued above hea∣ven. Hatred, like clocks wound up to watch the sun, hasting a head-long, course on many wheels, hath never done, until all be undone. Hatred hatcht at home is a tame tyger, may fawn and sport, but never leave its nature. Our Hair grows in our grave, and that alone Looks fresh, when all our other beauty's gone. There is no Joy on earth, never so rational, so pure, so holy, but is like a Jeaster, Parasite or Whore, in the most worthy parts with which they please, a drunkenness of soul & a disease. What unsubstantial bubbles are the beast of humane Joys? Things that we daily see the affections cloy, Hope long desired, doth bring the greatest Joy. Without Injuries the world would languish, and have enough to do; discord in part, makes harmony in the whole, and some must laugh whilst others do condole. Wrongs, like great whirlewinds, shake the highest battle∣ments; few for Heaven would care, should they be ever happy; they are half Gods, who both in good dayes and good fortunes share. Ingratitude, is like a dog that flies at his master, which it is just with us to strangle, neither his kind nor use considered. Shame of Infamy doth extinguish lust as oyl doth fire. Where shame and Infamy are too much inforced on a delin∣quent, they breed too often an audacious defence of sin, but no sincere repentance; so the rain slides to the root, and nouri∣shes, where great storms make a noise, wet but the skin of the earth, and run away in a swift channel. Our Industry, is as our soul; which is not put into the body to be idle; it hath too many rare and curious pieces of Mathe∣matical motions to stand still.
Incontinency is a vice sooner condemn'd then banisht, easi∣ly spoke against; but yet will fawn as smoothly on our flesh, as Circe on the Grecian travellers, when she detained them in the shapes of beasts. Lust and Incontinency, like the plummets hanging on clock lines, will never have done, till all our faculties are undone and ruined. Oh with what vertue should lust be withstood, Since 'tis fire seldom quencht without blood. Lustful Incontinency is like an overswoln river that breaks all bounds; it is a devil bred in blood, nurst in desire, that like the Salamander lives in fire. Lust is a gilded pill, which sinful nature doth prescribe, desire strokes the sense with pleasure; but at last, the shining out-side leaves a bitter taste. Of such an Inconstancy, as boyes gay bubbles, blown in the air and broken. The winde is more sixt then her Inconstancy, the beaten Marriner with his shrill whistle calms the loud murmurs of the troubled main, and sooner strikes it smooth again, then her soul to have peace in love with any. Our constitutions vary, herbs and trees admit their frosts and summer; and why then should our desires that are so nimble, and more subtil then the spirits of our blood, be such staid things within us, and not share their mutual Inconstancy. He wears his Faith like the fashion of his hat, it changes with the next block. Jealousie's fits present a man (like so many bubbles in a ba∣son of water) twenty several crabbed faces, many times makes his own shadow his cuckold maker. The Devil gives this Jealousie to man as nature doth a tail unto a lion; which thinks in heat to beat away the flies, when he doth only more inrage himself. A Jealous fellow is like a cowardly Captain in a Garison Town, fears every assault, trembles at every battery, and doubts most lest the gates should be opened, and his enemy let him in at midnight. Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves omi∣sion to do that is necessary, seals a commission to a blank of dangers; and danger like an Ague subtily taints, even then when we sit idly in the sun.
Kings lives are fortunes misery, like dainty sparks, which when men dead do know, to kindle for himself each man doth blow. The lives of Kings should like to Dials move, whose regu∣lar example is so strong, they make the times by them go right or wrong. Princes, like lions, never will be tamed; a private man may yield and not care how, but greater hearts will break before they'l bow. If a Kings Government be easie, the many headed monster, Multitudes, like Aesops foolish Frogs, they trample on him as a sensless block; and if he prove a Stork, they croak and rail against him as a Tyrant. Knighthood is like Marriage now-adayes, which though it honourable be with all men, yet it is beggarly with a great many. Law is as the worlds great Light, a second Sun to this ter∣restrial Globe, by which all things have life and being; and without the which, destruction and disorder soon would seize the general state of men. Learning and Languages cannot set a nap upon a thred-bare gown. Art is like common Fidlers, draws down others meat with liquorish Tunes, whilst they the scraps do eat. Liberty and Publique good, are like great Ollio's, must have the upper end still of our Tables, though they are but for show. Life is the frost of cold, Felicity and Death the thaw of all our vanity. Life is but a walking shadow, a poor Player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage, and then is heard no more Life is a tale told by an Ideot, full of sound and fury, signi∣fying nothing. Like to an Ass whose b ack with ingots bows, we bear our heavy riches but journey, and death unloads us. Life is but a dark and stormy night of sensless dreams, ter∣rors, and broken sleep; a tyranny, devising pains to plague and make men long in dying. Love is a rasor cleansing if well used, But fetcheth blood if that it be abused. Love, like to sin, inveterate is, and strong, He prevents danger that destroys it yong.
Love can no more be dissembled, then to bear hot burning coals in our bare palms or bosoms; and less concealed and hid∣den, then a flash of inflamed powder, whose whole light doth lay it open to all discovery even of those who have but half an eye, and less of nose. Loves service is much like our honored Lord, where Mig∣nions carry more then servitors; the bold and careless ser∣vants still obtains, the modest and respective nothing gains. Lovers are like Astronomers, that when the vulgar eye dis∣covers, but a skie above, studied with some few stars finde out besides strange fishes, birds and beasts. Lovers in favour are like Gamesters in good fortune, the more you set them, still the more they win. Love is but a card play, all is lost, Unless you cog, he that pricks best, wins most. At the games of Love we set all, but the best is, we cannot stake; and there is no loss of credit in the breaking. Love is like to wax, the more it is rubbed, it sticks the faster to: or like a bird in bird-lime, or a pit-fall, the more one la∣bors, still he is the deeper in. Love is an idle fantasie, bred by desire, nursed by delight, an humor that begins his dominion in Leo, the Lion, the sign of the Heart; and ends in Aries, the am, the sign of the Head; his power is to stir the blood, prick up the flesh, and fill the body with libidinous heat. A yong mans Love it is like Ivy, it must have something to cleave to, or it prospers not. Love is like fasting dayes, but the body is like flesh dayes; and it is our English Gallants fashion, to prefer a morsel of flesh, before all the fasting days in the year. This Love is a troublesome thing, Jupiter bless us out of his fingers; there is no estate can rest for him, he runs through all Countries, will travel through the Isle of Man in a minute, but never is quiet till he comes into Middlesex, and there keeps his Christmas; it is his habitation, his mansion, from which he will never out, until he be fired. A Platonick Love is no other, then to have men brought in Litters disguise, to cuckold us in vertue. Luxurious Riots are the shames of men, that have the seeds of vertue in them, springing to glory, that drownd their spi∣rits in lees of sloth, and yield the glories of the day to wine,
to lust, and banquets; that dress themselves up like to Pa∣geants, with thousand antick and exotick shapes, that make and Idol of a Looking-glass, sprucing themselves two hours by it, with such gestures and postures, that a waiting wench would be ashamed of; and then come forth to adore their Mistresses fan, or tell their dream, ravish a kiss from her white glove, and then compare it with her hand, to praise her gown, her tire, and discourse of the fashion; discovery make, which Lady paints, which not, which Lord playes best at Gleek, which at Racket; these are fine Elements. A Lie is like a Lap-wing, which still flies, Far from her sought nest, still here 'tis, she cries. Lies hide our sins like nets, like perspectives, they that draw offences nearer, make them greater. Truth though it trouble some mindes, that are both dark and dangerous, yet it preserves it self, and comes off pure, innocent; and like the sun, though never so eclisped, it breaks in glory. Man is a tree, that hath no top in cares, nor root in com∣forts. It is the deepest art to study man, the world's divided into knaves and fools. Men are like pollitick states, or troubled seas, tossed up and down with several storms and tempests, change and variety, wrack and for tunes, till labouring in the Haven of our homes, we study for the calme that crowns our ends. Man is a ship that sails with adverse winds, and hath no Haven till he land at death, then when he thinks his hands fast grasp the bank, comes a rude billow betwixt him and safety, and beats him back into the deep again To Marry is to be long-lived, variety is like rare sawces, provoke too far, and draws on surfets more then the other. The marriage rites are like to those that do deny a purga∣tory, they locally contain a heaven or hell, there is no third place. The joys of Marriage are a heaven on earth, lifes paradise, there is no rest orative like to a constant woman; (but where is she) it would puzzle all the Gods to create such a new monster. Misfortune vexes us like to Quotidians, they intermit a lit∣tle, and return e're we have lost the memory of our first fit.
If a Man be thrust into a well, no matter whose hand is to it, his own weight brings him to the bottom, Fortune makes this conclusion, All things shall help the unhappy man still to fall lower. Mischiefs are like to darts shot at repelling walls, in their return they light on them that did direct them. To think of crimes when they are done and past, and to be punisht doth but mischif breed, we are then like beasts, when they are fat they bleed. Mischief is like Cockatrices eyes, sees first and kills; or is seen first and dies. Mischief overflows our thoughts, and like a sea devours the dew, the rain the snow, the springs, and all the sweetness of the loveliest things. Money is a chick of the white hen, old fortune he that hath it, whatsoever he treads upon shall be a rose. Murther is open eyed, and as the sea, whose covetuous waves imprisoned by the land, bellow for grief, and roar upon the sands; so from the earth it cries, and like a childe wrong'd by its careless nurse, will not be stilled. Natures crescent doth not grow alone in shews and bulks, but as her temple waxes, the inward service of the minde and soul withal grows wider. What a fine book is heaven, which we may read best at night, then every star is a fair letter. How much they wrong thee (Night) which call thee guilty of rapes and murthers; it is the day, that like a glorious whore engages men to act them; and taking thee, the darkness to obscure them, unjustly lay the shame upon thy brows, thou art so innocent thou never sawest them. Old men lustful, do shew like yong men angry, eager, vio∣lent, out-bid alike their limited performances. Old men are discreet sinners, and offend with silence; but yong men when the feat is done; do crow like pregnant cocks, boast to the world their strength of their most vicious follies. He that hath got the Elixir of Opinions, has got all, he is the man that turns his brass to gold. Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan The outward habit by the inward man. He that weighs mens thoughts, hath his hands full of no∣thing; a man in the course of this world should be like a Chy∣rurgeons
instrument, work in others wounds, and feel nothing himself; the sharper and subtler, the better. All are not Bawds, I see now, that keep doors, Nor all good Wenches that are markt for Whores. Where Order is once shaked (which is the ladder to all high designs) the enterprize is sick. With what a compelled face a woman sits, whilst she is Drawing, I have noted divers, either to feign smiles, or suck in their lips, to have a little mouth, dimple their cheeks, and so disorder their face with affectation; at next sitting it hath not been the same. I have known others have lost the entire fashion of their face in half an hours sitting; in hot weather, the painting of their faces was so mellow, that they have left the poor man harder work by half to mend the Copy they wrought by. Indeed, if ever I would have mine drawn to the life, I would have the Painter steal it at such time, when I am devoutly kneeling at my prayers, there is then a heavenly beauty in it, the soul moves in the super∣ficies. Paintings and Epitaphs are both alike, they flatter us, and say, we have been such. When Princes heads sleeps on their Councels knees, a State's deep rooted must grow up high, when Providence, Zeale, Uprightness, and Integrity hus∣band it. He that suffers Prosperity to swell him above a mean, like those impressions in the Air that rise from Dunghill Vapors, scattered by the wind, leaves nothing but an empty name behinde. Prosperity is the Bawd of Love, whose fresh complexion, and whose heart together, affliction alters. It fares with some in their Prosperity, as with others I have known of rare parts, who from their successe of fight∣ing of Duels, have been raised up to such a pride, and so transformed from what they were, that all that loved them truly wisht they had faln in them. Like dust before a winde those men do flie, That prostrate on the ground of Fortune lie; And being great (like trees that broadest sprout) Their own top-heavy state grubs up their root. Gentlemen, as soon as they come to their lands, get up to London, and like squibs that run upon lines, they keep a spitting
of fire, and crackling till they have spent all, and when the fire is out, what sayes the Punk, Foh, how the Prodigal stinks. How blinde is Pride, what eagles are we still in matters that belong to other men, what beetles in our own. Swelling spirits hid with humble looks, Are Kingdoms poisons hung on golden hooks. Vallies that let in rivers to confound The hills above them, though themselves do drown'd. Of an excessive Pride, his marble Portals richly gilded ore, his Assyrian Carpets, Chairs of Ivory, his Garments perfum∣ed, his Jewels valued not for use, but needless Ornaments, a sumptuous Stable, a stupendious House, with all the baits of sense, that catch a vulgar eye. Poverty is like the rack, it draws a man to danger, to the Gallows, rather then endure it. Oh happiness of Poverty, that rest securely on a bed of li∣ving turf; while we with making cares, and restless thoughts, lie tumbling on our don, courting the blessing of a short minutes slumber which the Plough-man shakes from him, as a ransomed slave his fetters. Poverty puts a multiplying glass upon our faults, and makes them swell, and fill the eye; our crimes shows highest then, when we our selves are lowest. Pleasure, farewell to thy inticing vanity, thou round gilt box that dost deceive mans eye; wise men knows when thou art broken open, the treasure thou includest, is dust and smoak, even so I do esteem thee. Books, musick, wine, brave company, good chear, Make Poets to soar high, and sing most clear. Poetry (though it be of a quite contrary nature) is as pret∣ty a jewel as plain dealing, but they that use it, forget the Proverb. Verses, though freely born, like slaves are sold; I crown thy Lines with bayes, thy Love with gold. Players were never more uncertain in their lives, they know not how to play for fearful fools, where to play, for puritan fools, nor what to play for critical fools. When I Achilles hear upon the stage, speak honor and the greatness of his soul, methinks I too could on a Phrygian spear run boldly, and make tales for after times; but when I come to act it in the deed, death mars my bravery, and the ugly
fears of the other world, sits on my frighted brow. Phisiognomy do you call it, there is no more credit to be given to it, then to a sick mans urine, which some call the Physitians Whore, because she couzens him. A witty person may with ease distinguish all men by their Noses, as thus; your nose Tuscan, is lovely, large, and broad, much like to a goose's beak; your valiant generous nose, crook∣ed, smooth, and puffing; your Scollars nose is very fresh and raw for want of fire in winter, that quickly smels his chop of mutton in his dish of pottage; your Puritan nose is very sharp and long, (much like your widows) and with ease can find an edifying Capon five streets off. I have skill in Faces, yet the world is so deceitful, that I can hardly distinguish a Baud from a Midwife; or an hypo∣critical Puritan from a devout Christian. Physitians are for the most part, like beasts for sacrifice, there is nothing left in them but tongue and belly. A Physitian is too often a lingring executioner to death, the greatest disease to nature; one that strives by art to make us long a dying; he practises on our bodies, as men pull roses, not for their own relish, but to kill the flower: so they main∣tain their lives by others deaths. Your Physitian is like your hawk, the greater the fowl is that he kills, the greater is his reward. He that takes Phisick trusts to one that hath art, and leave to kill. Your Physitians are as good as false doors behind hang∣ings, to Ladies necessary uses. Since the great master of Philosophy (Aristotle) died, that fool'd the drunken Macedon out of a thousand Talents to buy books; what have the multitude of his learned successors done? only write comments on his Works, scribling to no but to make paper dear. Oh brave Phylosophers, I will name you three of them: First the merry fop of Thrace, (Democritus) that always laughed, pretending it was at Vanity; alas, it was his disease, going to steal Mushrooms for his supper, the blew mouth'd serpent skulked under a dock leaf, and bit him by the thumb, from whence he took that lauguishing malady. And his Anta∣gonist Heraclitus, that would ever seem to weep out of a pious cause, he was a fine dissembling fellow; no sorrow made him
weep, there is a Manuscript now kept in the Vatican, that shews he had nine years a Fistula in his eye. As for Diogenes that fasted much, and took his habitation in a Tub, to make the world believe he loved a strict and severe life, he took the diet, Sir, and in that very Tub sweat for the French dis∣ease; and some unlearned Apothecary since, mistaking its name, called it Cornelius Tub. There was never yet Philosopher that could endure the tooth-ach patiently; however they have writ the stile of Gods, and made a pish at chance and sufferance. The Vulgar sort of People in Rebellion, are like unknown Lands, those that first possess them have them. What can be expected from the Herd but contraries; he that trusts them, where he should finde them Lions, findes them Hares; where Foxes, Geese. The Vulgar have, for the most part, sick mens apperites, they desire that most, which doth them most hurt. He that Repents e're he commits a fault, doth like a thrifty sinner store his soul with mercy, to absolve that sin himself, which he hereafter is so like to fall into. The Drunkard after his lavish cups, is dry, and then is so∣ber: so at length when we are awak't from our lascivious dreams, repentance then will follow like the sting placed in the Adders tail. Divinity which calls our anger sin, and courage pride, hath sent this silly Cherub on earth, Patience. (The Cowards sword) which only doth disarm Dull sleeps, that neither can nor will do harm. Patience it is the greatest enemy to law that can be, for it doth embrace all wrongs, and so chains up Lawyers and Wo∣mens tongues; it is the perpetual Prisoners liberty, his Walks and Orchards; it is the bond-slave's freedom, that makes him seem proud of his iron chains; it is the Beggars musick, who thus sings, Although their bodies beg, their souls are Kings. He is more Patient then a Brown Baker when he heats his Oven, and hath forty Scolds about him. The fears and joys, hopes and desire mixed with despairs and doubts do make the sport in love; they are the very dog with which we hunt the hare, but as the dogs woud stop and streight give over were it not for the little thing before; so would our Passions, both alike must be flesht in the chase.
The grief that melts in tears, by it self is spent, Passion resisted grows more violent. Faults are in flesh as moes are in the sun, where light doth shew each little thing amiss; Presumption and Despair live opposite, as times false glasses, wherein frailties see their faults too great, or else too little. A Rape is like to unripe fruits, they have proportion, co∣lour, but no taste. Rebellion walks with claws bowed in, and a close mouth, which only she keeps for opportunity of prey. Tumults are not laid with half the easiness that they are raised; all may begin a War, but few can end it. Revenge will never slack till it hath spent its fuel, Intemperate Agues make Physicians cruel. Pluto, the God of Riches, when he is sent (by Jupiter) to any man, goes limping; to signifie, that wealth that comes in Gods name, comes slowly: but when it is sent on the Devils errand, it rides post, comes in by scuttles full. Lovers Swearing and Forswearings, are like Mariners Prayers uttered in extremity; but when the tempest is over, and the Vessel leaves tumbling, they fall from protesting to drinking: and yet amongst yong Gentlemen, protesting and drinking do go together, and agree as well as Shoe-makers and Westphalia Bacon, they are both drawers on; for drink draws on protestations, and protestations and oaths draw on more drink. Success is a rare paint, it hides all ugliness. Success, like Lethe, to the souls in bliss, makes them for∣get things past, and crowns our sins with the name of valor: be we never so impious, a scelus foelix stiles us vertuous. They are like to Thrive, whom fate in spite of storms doth keep alive. Never yet was any Nation read of, so besotted in reason, as to adore the setting Sun; many adored him rising. The Soul is a tree whence several branches spread; loving affections, suffering sorrows: these affections and sorrows, as they are branches, sometimes are lopt off, or of themselves do wither, in whose rooms, others spring forth. Like to a Lark in a cage, such is the Soul in the body; this world is like her little turf of grass, and heaven o're our heads, like her looking-glass, which only gives us a miserable
knowledge of the small compass of our prison. How slow paced is Sorrow; grief is a Tortois to the nimble senses, and chills their motions. Some cloud of rain (since my own eyes refuse to drown me) melt and overwhelm this miserable Island. There is no Rhetorick can express my woe, Small rivers murmur, deep streams silent flow. Soldiers that feed the victories of the conquerors, as witches do their serviceable spirit, with their prodigal blood, what do they get but (like the wealth of Captains) a poor handful, which in their palm they bear as men hold water, seeking to gripe it fast, the frail reward steals through their fingers. Sleep lies in smoking cribs, upon uneasie pallats stretching her, where husht with silent night, she courts her slumbers, rather then in the perfumed chambers of the great, under the canopies of costly state. Sleep that sealest up the sea boyes eyes, and rockest his brains in the cradle of the rude imperious surges, and in the visitation of the winds; who takest the russian billows by the tops, cur∣ling their monstrous heads, and hanging them with deafning clamors in the slippery clouds, that with the hurly death it self awakes: Canst thou, Oh partial Sleep, give thy repose to the wet sea boy in an hour so rude, and in the calmest and the silentest night (with all appliances and means to boot) deny it to a King. Uneasie lies the head that wears a Crown. Oh fie upon this Single life! we read how Daphne, for her peevish flight, was turned into a Bay-tree; Syrinx into a pale empty Reed, Anaxarete was frozen into Marble; where as those which married, or proved kind unto their friends, were by a gracious influence transformed into the Olive, Pomegra∣nate, Mulberry-trees, became Flowers, precious Stones, and eminent Stars. Sin, like a pregnant mother, From the success of one beget another. Fowl deeds will rise, Though all the world o're-whelm them to mens eyes. There is no gamester like a politique Sinner, for who ever games, the box is sure to win. I want no worth (if I have not too much self-love) still to merit honour; 'tis honor that wants worth to merit me. Fortune thou arbitress of humane things.
Thy credit is at stake, if I but rise, The worlds opinion will conceive thou hast eyes. The man that trusts a woman with a Secret, and hopes for silence, may as well expect it at the fall of a bridge; a Secret with them is like a Viper, it will make way, though it eat through their bowels; and when they have insinuated them∣selves into our counsels, and gained power over our lives, the fire is more merciful, which burns till it goes forth. Thunder speaks not till it hits, be not Secure; none sooner are opprest then those whom confidence betrayes. Security is the suburbs of Hell. We must with Temperance smooth our passions, if we intend to attain our wished ends, through things called good and bad; like the Air, that evenly interposed betwixt the Seas and the opposed Element of Fire, at either toucheth, but partakes of neither; is neither hot nor cold, but with a sleight and harmless temper mixt of both the extreams. Philosophy, Religions Solitude, and Labor, wait on Tempe∣rance; in these, Desire is bounded, they instruct the minde and bodies actions. The greatest fault that some can finde with Theft, is, that it cozens the Scriveners; for it borrows money without giving any Obligation. Your greatest Theives are never hanged, for why, they are wise, and cheat within doors. The Sun is a Theif, that with his great attraction robs the vast sea: the Moon is an arrant Theif for her pale fire she snat∣ches from the Sun, the Sea is a Theif, whose liquid surge dissolves the Moon into salt tears: the Earth is a Theif, that eeds and breeds by a composture stoln from the general ex∣crement. Every thing is a Theif, only the Laws are curbs and whips; by their rough power all punishments are determined. It is a dull thing to Travel like a mill horse, still in the place we are born in, round and blinded; living at home is like it: pure strong spirits that covet like the fire, still to fly upwards, and to give fire as well as take it; cased up at home like lusty mettled horses only tied up in stables to please their masters, beat out their fiery lives in their own litters. There are many half Travellers, that went out men, and good men, that when they have returned, lookt like poacht eggs; their souls suckt out, empty and full of wind; all their relati∣ons
bak't like rie crust, to hold carriage from this good town to the other; & when they are open'd, they are ill cook't & musty. Truth is not made of glass, that with a small touch it should fear to break. Truth is like your Coat of Arms, richest when plainest. Whom heaven is pleased to stile Victorious, to such applause runs madding; like Bacchus drunken Priests, who without reason in their Sacrifices, voiced their Leader on a Demigod; when as indeed each common souldiers blood drops down as currant coin in that hard purchase, as his, whose much more delicate condition hath sucked the milk of ease; judgement commands, but resolution executes. He that fights well at the end of the Wars, His head wears Sun Beams, and his feet touch Stars. Vertue is a sollid rock, whereat being aimed, the keenest darts of Envy cannot hurt, Her Marble Hero's stand built on such Bases, That they recoil, and wound their shooters faces. The World is a Labyrinth, where unguided men walk up and down till they are weary. The World is a Foot ball, we run after it with whoop and hollow, he that is next to it is sure to catch a fall. The World's a City full of straying Streets; And Death's the Market place where each one meets. The World is like an Inn-keepers Chamber-pot, it receives all waters, both good and bad, it hath need of much scowring. The World shoots up daily into more cunning, the very spider weaves her cawls with more art to entrap the wan∣ton silly flie; so that we had need to keep our wits wound up to their strecht height. Where the Whore ends, the Bawd begins; and the corrup∣tion of a Bawd is the generation of a Witch. Pythagoras holds an opinion, that a Witch turns to a wild cat; as an old Oastler turns to an ambling Nag. As of the Lion and Eagle, it is said, that when they go they draw their sears and tallons close up, to shun rebating of their fierceness; so our wits sharpness which we should em∣ploy in noble knowledge, we should never waste on vile and gar admiration. They talk of Jupiter, and a golden shower; give me a Mer∣ury with wit and tongue, and he shall charm more Ladies on
their backs, then the whole bundle of the Gods besides. You have a pretty ambling Wit in summer, do you let it out, or keep it for your own riding; who holds your stirrup whilst you jump into a jeast, to the endangering of your Quodlibets. Like Jupiter you want a Vulcan; but to cleave your head, and out peeps bright Minerva. The War is a school, where all the principles tending to Ho∣nour are taught, if truly followed; but for such as do repair thither, as to a place in which they do presume, they may with licence practise their Lust and Riots; such will never merit the noble Characters of Souldiers. All Wars are bad, yet sometimes they do good, And like to Surgions let sick Kingdoms blood. Whores are sweet meats, which rot the eater, poisoned perfumes, cozening Alchimy, shipwracks in calmest weather, Russian winters, which appear so baren, as if that nature had forgot the spring. Whores are the true material fires of Hell, worse then the tributes paid in the Low Countries; exactions upon meat, drink, garments, sheep, I, even one mans prediction, his sin. Whores are like those brittle Evidences of Law, that forfeit a mans wretched estate for leaving out a sillable. Whores are like those flattering bells, that ring one tune at Weddings and at Funerals. A Whore is like the guilty counterfeited coin, that whoso∣ever first stamps it, brings in question, and troubles all that do receive it. A Whore is as modest as one can be, that hath lest to blush at twelve: felt motions at eleven, and hath been hardned before three congregation, and done pennance. A Wench that will make a Hermit run to Hell for a touch of her. For a Whore for to turn honest is one of Hercules Labours; it was more easie for him in one night to make fifty Queans, then to turn one of them honest again in fifty years. A Whore is one of the devils vines, all sins like so many poles, are stuck upright out of hell to be her props, that she may spred upon them; and when she is ripe, every Knave hath a pull at her; till she be pressed, the yong beautiful grape sets the teeth of lust on edge; she will be tasted though she be rank poison. Sives can hold no water, nor Harlots hoard up money; she
hath too many sluces to let it out; yet she is the Gallipot that drones do fly to for the sweet sucket that they thinks within it. Your Widdows are a politick generation, proved so by Si∣milies, many voyages make an experienced Sea-man; many offices a crafty Knave; so many marriages, a subtil cun∣ning Widdow. A Widdow is a garment worn thred-bare; Selling at second hand like Brokers ware. A good Wife she is a golden sentence, writ by our Maker, which the Angels know how to discourse of; only men know not how to make use of. A Woman was made of the rib of a man, and that rib was crooked: the Moral of which is, That a man from the begin∣ning must be crooked to his wife, let him be an Orange to her, and she will be as sower as Vinegar to him. Women are the baggage of our lives, they are troublesome and hinder us in our great march; and yet we cannot be with∣out them. Women are like to burs, where their affections throw them, there they stick. Women carry springs within their eyes, and can out-weep the Crocodile, till too much pity betrays us men to their mer∣ciless devourings. A Woman is a Labyrinth, we can measure the height of any Star, point out all the demensions of the Earth, examine the Seas great womb, and sound its subtil depth; but Art will never be able to finde out the demonstration of a Womans heart. FINIS.
A general Table of the Con∣tents of this Book. Courteous Reader, the Epithets and Similitudes being pla∣ced at the latter end of this Book, and beginning Folio 1. thou mayest easily find the Word there, having this addition in the Table, The Epithets, or, the Similitudes. A AN Abstract of all the perfections of ones Mi∣stress together Page 22 To make an Acquaintance 37 An Address to a company of Ladies 16 An Address to make known his affection to his mistress 18 Address of salutation 19 An Address of Courtship to his mistress 22 Several Addresses of perfect Courtship 25 Aspect the Epithets 6 Allurements the Epithets 6 Affections the Epithets 6 Affections the Similitudes 50 Air the Epithets 6 Absence the Epithets 6 Accomplishment the Epithets 6 Adieu the Epithets 7 Apparel the Similitudes 50 Apparel the Epithets 6 Anger the Simil 49 Ambition and Ambitious men the Similitudes 49 On her arms 22 The Art of Reason or Logick 252 Demand of assurance 29 Allegiance the Simil. 50 Affliction the Simil. 50 Adulterers the Simil. 50 B. The ballad of S. George 104 Beauty the Epithets 7 Beauty the Simil. 50 On her Beauty 73 Bootless complaint 76 On her Breasts 22 Breasts the Epith. 7 On her Brow 22 A Broom-man in Kent-street to a yong Lady 166 Bastard children why more in∣genuous, for the most part, then Legitimate 184 Bald why 191 Bawd what she like 194, 198
Bawd the Epithets 7 Bawd the Similitudes 51 Broker the Similitudes 50 Body described 183 Body's signs to know the mind by 182 Body the Epith. 7 Body the Simil. 50 Boasting swaggerer Sim. 50 On her Breath 21 Breath stinking why 195 Breath the Epith. 7 C. CHaracters from 182 to 196 Cheeks the Epith. 8 On her Chastity 72 Coyness the Epith. 7 Charms the Epith. 8 Complaints the Epith. 8 The choice of a Gentleman Usher 53 Chin the Epith. 8 Comedy the Epith. 8 Cherries the Epith. 8 Cherry women and Orenge wo∣men, their address among the Ladies in Hide Park 3 The Clowns description of his mistress 100 Commendations on the several parts of ones mistresses body 20, 21 On her Chin and Cheeks 21 A Cockney to his mistress 161 Complements between Ladies and Gentlemen going to Hide Park 12 Complements in the Park 34 between a Gentleman and a Lady before a Ribband-shop 43. Between a Prentice and a yong Lady at a Boarding-School 44. Between a Horse∣courser and a Parsons Wid∣dow See. Mock Complements the Epith. 8 Complements defined and dis∣coursed of atlarge in the ad∣vertisement to the Reader. An amorous Complement 33 Complements, Vide the adver∣tisement to the Reader. Constancy resolved 78 Curles the Epith. 9 A Countrey Parson to a Far∣mers Daughter 167 A Countrey Bumpkin to his Mistress 169 To request a Courtesie 39 For Courtesies receiv'd to give thanks Ibid. The Sport called the Crab 3 The Crambo Dictionary 223 Children why liker their Fa∣thers then their Mothers 179 Creatures which live the long, est 186 Creditor defined 194 Cupid contemned 76 Cupid why paint with the words, Spring Time and Win∣ter 181 Cupid why painted bare headed 181 Cupid why represented with Arrows 182 Cupid why pictured flying 183 Cupid why painted a Childe 186 Cupid why Life and Death painted in his Robe 195
Cupid why represented with flowers in one hand and with a fish in the other 198 Courtier Epith. 7 Cruelty Epith. 8 Countenance Epith. 8 Chambermaids Simil. 51 Conscience Simil. 51 Court, Courtiers Simil. 51 Credit Simil. 51 Credulity Simil. 51 Cuckold Simil. 51 D. DEmand of assurance 29 The Departure 27, 27 A Decription of Love 57 Dialogues between the Gen∣tleman and the Jockey in Hide Park 6 To a friend before Dinner 41 After Dinner ibid. To enter into discourse with a Lady being in Company 17 To Discourse concerning the noise of a Match 23 The discourse of a Gentleman bringing his friend into Com∣pany 35 Diseases indintce to a Gen∣tle man Usher 54 The Dressings of a Gentleman Usher. 54 Against drinking of Sack 136 Drolling Complements 43 See Mock Complements Drolling Letters 160, 161 Duns what compared to 192 Delay the Epithets. 9 Dove the Epithets. 9 Danceing the Epithets 9 Dreams the Epithets. 10 Dying to Love 72 Destiny the Epithets 9 Desires the Epithets 9 Desires the Simil. 52 Dissimulation the Simil. 52 Dissembler the Simil. 52 Dangers the Simil. 51 Delights the Epithets. 9 Disdain the Epithets 10 Disdain the Simil. 52 Brawing a womans face the Simil. 61 Despair the Epithets. 10 Despair the Simil. 52 E. THe Efficient cause 254 Epithets 6 On his mistress Eyes 20 Of Expressions several set forms, from 201 to 208 Eunuchs why shrill voiced 191 Eunuchs the Epithets 10 New England brother defined 192 Eccho why she reports the last words 193 Earths Center where 195 Earth how many miles in com∣pass 196 Eloquence discoursed of, and defined in the davertisement to the Reader Eloquence the Epithets 10 Extasie the Epithets 10 Ears the Epithets 10 Elegy the Epithets. 10 Entertainment the Epithets 10 Eyes the Similitudes 53 Eyes the Epithets 11 Embraces the Epithets 11
Envy the Similitudes 52 Extreams the Similitudes 52 F. ON her Face 20, 21 Fancy awakened 181 The Fond design 65 In praise of Fools 80 On her Forehead 20 Forms for the concluding of Letters 129 Several Forms of Letters 132 133, 134 To begin a Friendship 37 Fools the Similitudes 53 Fortitude the Similitudes 53 Faith the Similitudes 55 Full Satisfaction 32 Fencer defined 182 Feeling from whence derived 195 Farewell Epithets 11 Feet the Epithets 11 Fancy the Epithets 11 Forehead the Epithets. 11 Fortune the Epithets 11 Fortune the Simil. 53 Fidelity the Simil. 53 Fountain the Epithets 12 Frenzie the Epithets 12 Flowers the Epithets 12 Face the Epith. 12 Faces the Simil. 63 Fate the Epith. 12 Fingers the Epith. 12 Fruit the Epith. 12 Frowns the Epith. 12 Flattery the Epith. 14 Flattery the Sim. 53 Fields the Epith. 14 Flames the Epith. 14 Flea the Epith. 15 Forrest the Epith. 15 Fear the Epith. 15 Fear the Simil. 53 G. GAmes used among Gal∣lants to pass away the time 13 See Sports A Garden of Tulips 49 Glyphing 3 The Golden Age 69 The old Gill 109 Glory the Epith. 13 Glory the Simil. 54 Gamesters the Simil. 54 Grass the Epith. 13 Grape the Epith. 13 Grove the Epith. 13 Gentleman the Epith. 15 Gentleman the Simil. 68 Garden the Epith. 11 Gesture the Epith. 15 Grief the Epith 15 Gloves the Epith. 16 Gallant the Simil. 54 H. ON her hands 22 Hands the Epith. 13 The Hectors Farewel 89 A Hector to his Mistress 147 Hide Park Mode 163 &c. Horse-races, their Mode in Hide Park. 6 On his Mistresses Hair 20 Hair of the head why of one colour, and the beard of an∣other 184 Hair why it curles 185 Hair curled why sooner gray 188 Hair Epithets 13
Hair Sim. 55 Heart why in the midst of the body 188 Heart Epith 13 Hicup 199 Hermophradites why begotten 188 Hoast defined 191 Honour Epith. 13 Honour Simil 54 Happiness Epith. 14 Harmony Epith. 14 Head Ep. 14 Hatred Sim 55 Hatred Ep. 14 Humility Sim 54 Hope Sim. 54 Honesty Sim. 54 Heaven Sim. 55 Hell Sim. 55 Heard Sim. 56 Harlot Sim. 68, 69 I. THe Impolitick Beauty 18 A Private Intercourse between the Page, and the Waiting Gentlewoman 42 Invitation of a Friend to Din∣ner 40 On the death of Jo. W. 92, 93 The Jolly Ale Drinker 97 The Jovial Companion 102 Jesting and Jovial Questions from 181 to 200 Intermixt Jealousie Ep. 14 Jealousie Sim. 56 Injuries Sim. 55 Ingratitude Ep. 16 Ingratitude Sim. 55 Infancy Sim. 55 Instrument Ep. 16 Jewels Ep. 16 Insolence Ep. 16 Joy Sim. 55 Joy Ep. 17 Innocence Ep. 16 Industry Sim. 55 Importunity Ep. 16 Incontinency Sim. 56 Inconstancy Ep. 16 Inconstancy Sim. 56 Influence Ep. 16 Idleness Sim. 56 Impudence Ep. 16 K. KIssing how used 183 Kisses Ep. 17 Kings Sim. 57 Knight-hood Sim. 57 L ON a fair Lady at a Mask 73 To a Lady in Prison 77 A Lady to her inconstant Ser∣vant 136 A Lawyer to his Mistress 163 On her Lips 20, 21 Several Forms of Letters amo∣rous 132, 133 Familiar Letters to Friends 143, 144 &c. Letters in Verse 150, 151 &c. On her Locks 20 What Logick is 252 On her Looks 21 Loose no time 78 Lungs their flesh why white 195 Law what compared to 193 Against Love 63 Loves Martyr 68 Protestation of Love 69
Lying on the back why we dream 191 Lying on the back why un∣wholesome 191 Logick Ep. 18 Logick 252 The Definition ibid The parts of Logick 252, 253 The Efficient Cause 253 The Matter 257 The Form 258 The end 259 The Effects 260 The Subjects 261 The Adjunct 262 The Diverses 264 Desparates 265 Relates 265 Adverses 267 Contra∣dicents 268 Privants 269 Equalls 270 Greaters 273 Lessers 274 Likes 276 Dis∣likes 279 Conjugates 280 Notations 281 Distribution 282, 283, &c. Definition 289 Description 289 Testi∣mony 291, 292 Judgement 295 Axioma 295, 296, &c. Syllogisms 301, 303 Method 313 Love defined 201 Loves Attendants 182 Love why compared to a Maze 197 Lovers why they so use to blush 181 Lovers why some of them look so pale 186 Lovers breasts why they leap so 190 Lovers Oaths what they are like 196 Lovers why they kiss the eyes 190 Love the Sim. 57, 58 Lovers Sim. 58 Lovs Ep. 19 Lute Ep. 17 Looking-glass Ep. 17 Lust Ep. 17 Lust Sim. 56 Labyrinth Ep. 18 Language Ep. 18 Lullaby Ep. 18 Lustre Ep. 18 Lilly Ep. 18 Loadstone Ep. 18 Longing Ep. 18 Laughter Ep. 19 Lethargy Ep. 19 Lovers Ep. 19 Looks Ep. 19 Locks Ep. 19 Lips Ep. 20 Lims Ep. 20 Law Sim. 57 Learning Sim. 57 Liberty Sim. 57 Luxury Sim. 58 Lie Sim. 5 Life Sim. 57 M. THe master of the Balls ad∣dress to the company as they come in 9 The Maidenhead 64 The Melancholy lover 58 Miscelania's 181 To his Mistress, acopy of Ver∣ses, 55. To his Mistress falsly accusing him, 59. To his false Mistress, 61. On his Mistress singing, 66. On the perfections of his Mistress, 70, 71. Who his Mistress is, 80. To his Mi∣stress
desiring Enjoyment, 151. To his Mistress reco∣vered of an Ague, 132. To his retired Mistress, ibid. See Letters. The Mode of Hide Park 139 The Mode of Balls 9, 10, &c. Mock Complements, 43. Be∣tween a Gentleman and a Lady before a Ribband-shop at the Exchange, 43 between a Horse-courser and a Par∣sons Widdow, 44 between an Apprentice and a yong Lady at a Boarding-school, ibid. between a Gentleman and a Sempstress, 46. between a journyman Haberdasher and a Ladies Chamber-maid, ib. between a Gentleman Usher and a waiting Gentlewo∣man, 47. between a Lawyers Clerk & his mistress daugh∣ter, 48. between a Countrey Bumpkin and his Mistress, 49. between a Coach-man and the Kitchin-maid, 51. between a Gentleman and a Lady meating in severall coaches going to Hide Park 45 Mock letters 160, 161 Marriage what compared 198 The Mountebanks letter to the Chyrurgeons 165 Musician what like to 196 Members first formed 187 Memory's seat 193 Misfortune Sim. 59, 60 Marigold Ep. 20 Marble E. 20 Mean Sim. 52, 53 Magick Ep. 20 Magazen Ep. 20 Metaphors Ep. 20 Melancholy Ep. 20 Melody Ep. 21 Martyr Ep. 21 Marmoset Ep. 21 Mind Ep. 21 Marriage Ep. 21 Marry Sim. 59 Marriage Rites Sim. 59 Mirth Ep. 21 Madness Ep. 21 Mystery Ep. 22 Moon Ep. 22 Modesty Ep. 22 Monkey Ep. 22 Mirtle Ep. 22 Musick Ep. 22 Multitude Ep. 23 Man or men Sim. 59 Mischiefs Sim. 60 Money Sim. 60 Murther Sim. 60 N. NOt to be altered 67 Nature Ep. 24 Nature Sim. 60 Nature produceth monsters 196 On her neck 22 Nymph Ep. 23 Navel Ep. 23 Night Ep. 23 Nuptials Ep. 23 Nightingale Ep. 23 Nose Ep. 24 Noses Sim. 63 O. ORator, See the Advertise∣ment to the Reader.
Orator Ep. 24 Odors Ep. 24 Oath Ep. 24 Ornament Ep. 24 Ode Ep. 25 Obliegement Ep. 25 Opinion 25 Opinion Sim. 60 Opportunity Ep. 25 Old men Sim. 60 Order Sim. 61 P. PArting 66 Passages between Ladies and Gentlemen in the Ring in Hide Park 2, 3 A Passionate love letter 166 A Pedagogue to his Mistress 163 The Picture of the Poets mi∣stress. 51 Phisiognomy Sim 63 Plurality of Love 65 Posies for Rings 170, 171 The pleasant Prospect 49 Page Ep. 27 Paradox Ep. 27 Protestation of love 69 Pomgranate Ep. 26 Park Ep. 27 Proverbs 174 to 180 Puritan defined 193 Poetry, Poet Ep. 26 Poetry Poet Sim. 62 Pomander Ep. 26 Cross Purposes Ep. 1 Prayers Sim. 62 Players like Philosophers 196 People dim sighted why given to venery 194 Pyrat defined 183 Princes Sim. 57 Paradise Ep. 25 Pace Ep. 25 Palace Ep. 25 Purple Ep. 26 Phantasies Ep. 26 Pitty Ep. 26 Poison Ep. 26 Poverty Sim. 62 Prosperity Sim. 61 Paleness Ep. 27 Pallate Ep. 27 Prejudice Ep. 27 Praise Ep. 27 Pride Ep. 27 Pride Sim. 62 Presumption Ep. 28 Presumption and Despair Sim. 65 Pretence Ep. 28 Proportion Ep. 28 Picture Ep. 28 Painting Sim. 58, 59, 61 Pardon Ep. 28 Physician and Physicans Sim. 63 Playes, Sport, Games, and Pa∣stimes Ep. 28 Patience and Patient Sim. 64 Passion Ep. 28 Passions Sim. 64 Passions Sim. 65 Postorals Ep. 29 Plains Ep. 29 Parasite Ep. 29 Prodigality Sim. 61 Parrat Ep. 29 Pyramid Ep. 29 Pomp Ep. 29 Perswasion Ep. 30 Periwig Ep. 30
Perfume Ep. 30 Pen Ep. 30 Pelican Ep. 30 Pearl. Ep. 30 Pleasure Ep. 30 Pleasure Sim. 62 Patron Ep. 31 Perjury Ep. 31 Perfection Ep. 31 Philosophy and Philosophers Sim. 63, 64 People vulgar Sim. 64 Q. THe Queen of Fairies 74 Questions and Commands 13, 14 Several Questions, Enigmati∣cal, Natural, Amorous, Mo∣ral, Paradoxical, Jovial, from 181 to 214 Quakers why 184 Qualm Ep. 31 Quiver Ep. 31 Quince Ep. 31 Question Ep. 31 Quick-silver Ep. 31 R. ON a Race-Horse 99 To request a Courtesie 39, 145 Resolution in Love 62 The Return 28 Return of thanks 144, 149 Riddles. See Enigmaticall Questions from 183 to 196 The Ring in Hide Park, what passages happen in it 2, 3 Reason what compared to 195 Riches Sim. 65 Rose Ep. 32 Race Ep. 32 Rock Ep, 32 Rape Ep. 32 Rape Sim. 65 Rainbow Ep. 32 Recreation Ep. 32 Repulse Ep. 33 Request Ep. 33 Rapture Ep. 34 Reproofe Ep. 33 Ruby Ep. 33 River Ep. 33 Revenge Ep. 34 Revenge Sim. 65 Rites Ep. 34 Rival Ep. 34 Rigor Ep. 34 Riddle Ep 34 Reverence Ep. 34 Rhetorick Ep. 34 Repose Ep. 34 Rebellion Sim. 65 Riches Sim. 57 Repentance Sim. 64 S FUll Satisfaction 32 A Sea-man to his Mistress 162 To offer Service and begin a Friendship 37 A Letter of Smiles from a Scrivener to his mistress 168 On her Smiles 22 Select Sentences 221, 222 The Shepherds Song in praise of Pan. 98 A Song made upon the fatal Disaster that befell the Gal∣lants upon May Day last in Hide Park 7 Songs mistake me not 55 From the fair Lavenian shore 70
Celia thy sweet Angels face 74 No roses coucht, &c. 78 read in the roses the sad Story 79 The Song of the Caps 94 Song of the Puding 111 Song on a Weding 113 Song on the Courtier 116 Song on the fryer 119 Song of Tom of Bedlam 120 Song on the Schollar 122 Song the Ep. 40 To Sorrow 77 A Song of a Souldier to his Mis∣tress 160 The Strangers reply to the Company 35 Similitudes and Comparisons. Superscriptions for Letters 125 Superscriptions for drolling Letters 158 Swearing and foreswearing Sim. 65 Superscriptions for Letters 159 Superscriptions for drolling Let∣ters. 158 Sports and Games 13 Questions and Commands 13 Cross Pur∣poses 1. The Lovers Alphabet 2 The Bird in a tree 2 The Sport called the Crab 3 The Sport of Glyphing 3 Substan∣tives and Adjectives 4 Souldiers Sim. 66 Sleep on the right side best 192 Skin Ep. 42 Smiles Ep. 42 Stomach why it disgests 196 Sins Sim. 66 Single life Sim. 66 Sneezing 197 Success Sim. 65 Senses why in the head 197 Star Ep. 41 Stranger Ep. 41 Spring time Ep. 41 Sparrow Ep. 38 Simplicity Ep. 34 Simetry Ep. 35 Suspition Ep. 35 Summer Ep. 35 Srawberry Ep. 35 Strains Ep. 35 Stile Ep. 35 Stoick Ep. 35 Sacrifice Ep. 36 Saint Ep. 36 Silk-worm Ep. 36 Silence Ep. 36 Sighs Ep. 36 Strumpet Ep. 36 Streams Ep. 37 Servant, Service Ep. 37 Servitude Ep. 37 Sense Ep. 37 Secret Ep. 37 Secret Sim. 67 Sea Ep. 37 Spaniel Ep. 38 Squirril Ep. 38 Scold or Shrow Ep. 38 Sicophant, Vide Parasite Ep. 38 Soul Ep. 38 Soul Sim. 65 Skie Ep. 38 Slave Ep. 38 Sleep Ep. 39 Sleep Sim. 66 Smell Ep. 39 Snow Ep. 39 Sorrow Ep. 39 Sorrow Sim. 66
Speech Ep. 39 Spheres Ep. 39 Solemnity Epith. 40 Shade or shadow Epith. 40 Shame Epith. 40 Shepherd or Swain Epith. 40 Snare Epith. 40 Sun Epith. 41 Sport Epith. 41 Spring Epith. 41 Stallion Epith. 41 Secure Simil. 67 T. TAking leave of his friends Wife 41 Taking leave of a Lady with whom you are familiar 2 To give thanks for a Courtesie received 39 Thrift or thrive Sim. 65 Theft or thieves Simil. 67 Travel or travellers Sim. 67 Temperance Sim. 67 On the Tombs at Westminster 82 On her tongue 22 Tongue Epithets. 43 Teeth Epithets. 43 Tresses Epithets. 44 Thighs Epith. 43 The trial 31 The trial of wits 6 Tragedy Epithets 42 Treachery Epithets 42 Theatre Epithets. 42 Temptation Epithets. 42 Temper Epithets. 42 Taste Epith. 42 Thoughts Epithets. 42 Touch Epith. 43 Tyranny in Love 63 Tyrant Epith. 44 Tinker what 191 Tears from whence they proceed 193 Tears Epith. 44 Truth Simil. 68 Truth Epith. 43 Turtle Epith. 43 Triumphs Epith. 44 Trophies Epith. 44 Treet Epith. 44 Tumults Simil 56 Tobacco Epith. 44 Tennis Epith. 44 Thanks Epith. 45 Tygar Ep. 45 Time Ep. 45 Twilight Epith. 45 A A Visit 39 On her Uoice 22 Voice Ep. Voice when changed in men 188 Urban the eight his expression 190 Virago Ep. 45 Vesture Epith. 45 Verdure Ep. 45 Violet Ep. 45 Verse Epith. 45 Vertue Ep. 45 Vertue Sim. 68 Vow Ep. 46 Urn Ep. 46 Veins Ep. 46 Vales, or Valleys Ep. 46 Vulgar Ep. 46 Unicorn Ep. 46
Virgin Ep. 46 Victorious Sim 68 W. THe Watchmans song 101 Wit Ep. Wit Sim 69 Wit and Language from 215 to 222 On her Words 22 The Song of Women 99 Women why smoother then men 183 Women how they look after the bridal night 187 Women why they endure cold more then men 198 Women why more silent in love then men 197 Women Ep. 47 Women Sim. 70 Wife Ep. 46 Widow Ep. 47 Widow Sim 70 Whore-master definition 186 Whores trade why opposite to all others 189 Whores barren why 192 Whores why so many, and so few Bawds 194 Whores Ep. 46 Whores Sim. 69 Womb Ep. 47 Welshman Bragadcia defined 200 Wars Sim. 69 VVorld Sim. 68 World how long the learned guess it will last 193 Waiting Gentlewoman Simil. 51 VVrongs Sim 55 VVish Ep. 47 VVrist Ep. 47 VVelcome Ep. 46 VVinter Ep. 47 VVindes Ep. 48 VVhisper Ep. 46 VVill Ep. 47 VVine Ep. 48 VVanton or wantonness Ep. 47 Y. Youth Epith. 48 FINIS.
Books Printed for Obadiah Blagrave at the Black Bear in St. Pauls Church-Yard. Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversie and Sermons. DOctor Gell's Remains; being sundry pious and learned Notes and Observations on the whole New Testament, Opening and Explaining all the Difficulties therein; where∣in our Saviour Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Illustrated by that Learned and Judicious Man Dr. Robert Gell Rector of Mary Aldermary, London, in Folio. Christian Religions Appeal from the groundless prejudice of the Scepticks to the Bar of common Reason; Wherein is proved that the Apostles did not delude the World. 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture matters of Faith have the best evidence. 4. The Divinity of Scripture is as demon∣strable as the being of a Deity. By John Smith Rector of St. Mary in Colchester, in Folio. Saint Clemont the Blessed Apostle St. Paul's Fellow Labour∣er in the Gospel, his Epistle to the Corinthians Translated out of the Greek, in 4o. A Sermon Preached before the King at Windsor Castle. By Richard Meggot, D. D. in 4o. A Sermon Preached before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, January the 30th. 1674. By Richard Meggot, D. D. in 4o. A Sermon Preached to the Artillery Company at St. Ma∣ry Le Bow, Sept. 13. 1676. By Richard Meggot, D. D. in 4o. The Case of Joram; a Sermon Preached before the House of Peers in the Abby-Church at Westminster, Jan. 30. 1674. By Seth Ward Lord Bishop of Sarum. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of George Lord Gene∣ral
Monk. By Seth Ward Lord Bishop of Sarum, in 4o. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of that faithful Ser∣vant of Christ Dr. Robert Breton, Pastor of Debtford in the County of Kent, on Matth. 24. 36. By Rich. Parr, D. D. of Cam∣berwell in the County of Surrey, in 4o. The True Christians Character and Crown; in a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Deputy Cade on Rev. 2. 10. By John Lake Rector of St. Botolph Bishopsgate; with a large Preface of Mr. Cades to it, in 4o. Mercy in the midst of Judgment, with a Glimpse of, Or a Glance on Londons Glorious Resurrection, on Matth. 4. 5. By Christopher Flower Rector of St. Margarets Lothbury, in 4o. Naphtali seu Colluctationes Theologicae cum Tribus Ingentibus dubis, viz. de Reditu decem tribuum de Conversione Judaeorum de mensuris Sacris Ezekielis Authore Jacobo Calvert. Rules of Lise, being good wishes to the Clergy and Laity; for whose use the Asses Complaint was written. By Lewis Griffin, in 4o. The Jesuits Catechisin according to Ignatius Loyola, for the instructing and strengthning all those that are weak in that Faith: Wherein the Impiety of their Principles, per∣niciousness of their Doctrines, and iniquity of their Practices are declared, in 4o. A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at St. Katharine Cree-Church London, April 14. 1667. being Low-Sunday, upon Malachy 4. 2. By Will. Kings D. D. The Case of Ministring at the Communion Table when there is no Eucharist, Stated and Discussed: upon occasion of a Treatise entituled, Parish Churches turned into Con∣venticles, &c. together with some preliminary Reflections made upon two Papers in Anwser to that Treatise; in 4o. Weighty Reasons for tender and Consciencious Prote∣stants to be in Union and Communion with the Church of England, and not to forsake the publick Assemblies, as the on∣ly means to prevent the Growth of Popery; in several Ser∣mons on 1 Cor. 1. 10. That ye all speak the same things, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joyned to∣gether in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment, on Heb. 10. 25. not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is; in 8o large. The Psalms of King David paraphrased, and turned into
glish Verse, according to the common Meetre, as they are usually Sung in parish Churches, by Miles Smith; in 8o large. The Evangelical Communicant in the Eucharistical Sacra∣ment, or a Treatise declaring who is fit to receive the Supper of the Lord, by Philip Goodwin; in 8o. A Fountain of Tears, emptying it self into three Rivulets, viz. Of Compunction, Compassion, Devotion; or Sobs of Na∣ture sanctified by Grace, Languaged in several Soliloquies and prayers upon various Subjects, for the benefit of all that are in Affliction, and particularly for these present times, by John Featley, Chaplain to His Majesty. A Course of Catechising, or the Marrow of all Authors as have Writ or Commenced on the Church Catechism; in 8o. A more shorter Explanation of the Church Catechism, fit∣ted for the meanest capacity; in 8o price 2 d. by Dr. Combar. The Life and Death of that Reverend Divine Dr. Fuller, Au∣thor of the Book called the holy War and State; in 8o. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears; from whence doth flow Englands complaint, Jeremiah's Lamentations, para∣phrased with Divine meditations, by John Quarles; in 8o. A good Companion, or a Meditation upon Death, by William Winstandly; in 12os. Select Thoughts, or Choice Helps for a Pious Spirit, a Cen∣tury of Divine Breathings for a Ravished Soul, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus: To which is added the Breath∣ings of the Devout Soul, by Jos. Hall Bishop of Norwich; in 12o. The Remedies of Discontent, or a Treatise of Contentati∣on; very fit for these present times; by Jos. Hall Bishop of Norwich; in 12o. Admirable and Learned Treatises in Occulpt Scien∣ces, Philosophy, Astronomy, Physick, Astrology, Navigation and Military Discipline. THe admired piece of Physiognomy and Chyromancy, Ma∣taposcopacy, the Symmetrical proportions and Signal Moles of the Body fully and accurately explained, with their Natural predictive significations both to Men and Women, be∣ing
delightful and profitable; with the Subject of Dreams made plain: Whereunto is added the Art of Memory, by Richard Saunders; in folio: Illustrated with Cuts and Figures The Sphere of Marcus Manelius made an English Poem; with Learned Annotations, and a long Appendix: reciting the Names of Ancient and Modern Astronomers; with some∣thing memorable of them: Illustrated with Copper-Cuts. By Edward Sherborne Esquire; in Folio. Observations upon Military and Political Affairs: Writ∣ten by the most Honourable George Duke of Albemarle; in Folio: Published by Authority. A General Treatise of Artillery or Great Ordnance: Writ in Italian by Tomaso Morety of Brescia, Ingenier; first to the Em∣peror, and now to the most serene Republick of Venice, tran∣slated into English, with Notes thereupon; and some addition out of French for Sea-Gunners, By Sir Jonas Moore Knight: With an Appendix of Artificial Fire-works of War and De∣light; by Sir Abraham Dager Knight, Ingenier: Illustrated with divers Cuts. A Mathematical Compendium, Useful or Practices in Arithmetick, Geometry and Astronomy, Geography and Navigation, Embatteling and Quartering of Armies, Fortifi∣cations and Gunnery, Gauging and Dialling; explaining the Loyerthius with new Judices, Napers, Rhodes or Bones, mak∣ing of Movements, and the Application of Pendulums: With the projection of the Sphere for an Universal Dial. By Sir Jonas Moore Knight. The Works of that most excellent Philosopher and Astro∣nomer Sir George Wharton Baronet: giving an account of all Fasts and Festivals, Observations in keeping Easter; Apote∣lesma, or the Nativity of the World of the Epochae and Erae used by Chronologers: A Discourse of Years, Months, and days of years; of Eclipses and Effects of the Crises in Diseases: With an excellent discourse of the names Genus Species, effici∣ent and final causes of all Comets; how Astrology may be re∣stored from Morinus; in 8o large, cum multis aliis. The Practical Gauger, being a plain and easie method of Gauging all sorts of Brewing Vessels: whereunto is added a short Synopsis of the Laws of Excise: The third Edition, with Additions: By John Mayne. A Table for purchasers of Estates, either Lands or Houses; by William Leybourne.
Blagrave's Introduction to Astrology, in Three parts; con taining the use of an Ephemerides, and how to erect a Figure of Heaven to any time proposed; also the signification of the Houses, Planets, Signs and Aspects; the explanation of all useful terms of Art: With plain and familiar Instructions for the Resolution of all manner of Questions, and exemplifi∣ed in every particular thereof by Figures set and judged. The Second treateth of Elections, shewing their Use and Application as they are constituted on the Twelve Celestial Houses, whereby you are enabled to choose such times as are proper and conducible to the perfection of any matter or business whatsoever. The third comprehendeth an absolute remedy for rectifying and judging Nativities; the significa∣tion and portance of Directions: with new and experienced Rules touching Revolutions and Transits, by Jo. Blagrave of Reading Gent. Student in Astrology and Physick; in 8o large. Blagrave's Astrological Practice of Physick; discovering the true way to Cure all kinds of Diseases and Infirmities which are naturally incident to the Body of Man; in 8o large. Gadbury's Ephemerides for thirty years, twenty whereof is yet to come and unexpired; in 4o. Philosophy delineated, consisting of divers Answers upon several Heads in Philosophy, first drawn up for the satisfacti∣on of some Friends, now exposed to publick View and Exa∣mination; by William Marshall Merch. London; in 8o large. The Natural History of Nitre, or a Philosophical Discourse of the Nature, Generation, place and Artificial Extraction of Nitre, with its Virtues and Uses, by William Clerke M. Do∣ctorum Londinensis. The Sea-mans Tutor, explaining Geometry, Cosmogra∣phy and Trigonometry, with requisite Tables of Longitude and Latitude of Sea-ports, Travers Tables, Tables of Easting and Westing, meridian miles, Declinations, Amplitudes, refra∣ctions, use of the Compass, Kalender, measure of the Earth Globe, use of Instruments, Charts, differences of Sailing, estimation of a Ship-way by the Log, and Log-Line Currents. Composed for the use of the Mathematical School in Christs Hospital London, his Majesties Charles II. his Royal Foun∣dation. By Peter Perkins Master of that School.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physick, Chyrurgery and other more familiar experi∣ments in Cookery, and preserving Husban∣dry and Horsmanship. Mr. NIch. Culpeppers last Legacy, left and bequeathed to his dearest Wife for the publick good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets, which while he lived were locked up in his Breast, and resolved never to publish them till after his death, containing sundry admira∣ble experiments in Physick and Chyrurgery. The fifth Edi∣tion, with the Addition of a new Tract of the Anatomy of the Reins and Bladder, in 8o. Large. Mr. Nich. Culpeppers Judgment of Diseases, called Symoteca Vranica; also a Treatise of Urine. A Work useful for all that study Physick, in 8o. Large. Mr. Nich. Culpepper's School of Physick, or the experimen∣tal Practise of the whole Art, wherein are contained all in∣ward Diseases from the Head to the Foot, with their proper and effectual Cures. Such dyet set down as ought to be ob∣served in sickness and in health, in 8o. Large. The Compleat Midwifes practise Enlarged, in the most weighty and high concernment of the birth of man, contain∣ing a perfect Directory or Rules for Midwives and Nurses; as also a Guide for Women in their Conception, Bearing and Nursing of Children, from the experience of our English, viz. Sir Theodoret Mayrn, Dr. Chamberlain, Mr. Nich. Culpepper, with the Instructions of the Queen of Frances Midwife to her Daughter in 8o. Large. Illustrated with several Cuts of Brass. Blagraves suppliment or enlargement to Mr. Nich. Culpeppers English Physitian, containing a description of the form, place and time, Celestial Government, of all such Plants as grow in England, and are omitted in his Book called the English Phy∣sitian, Printed in the same Volume, so as it may be bound with the English Physitian, in 8o. Large. De Succo pancveatico, or a Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the nature and office of the Panecratick Joyce or Sweet∣bread in men, shewing its generation in the Body, what Di∣seases arise by its Visitation; together with the Causes and
of Agues and intermitting Fevers, hitherto so difficult and uncertain, with several other things worthy of Note. Written by that famous Physitian D. Reg de Graff. Illustrated with divers Cuts in Brass; in 8o, Large. Great Venus unmaskt, being a full discovery of the French Pox or Venereal Evil. By Gidion Harvey M. D. in 8o. Large. The Anatomy of Consumptions, the Nature and Causes, Subject, Progress, Change, Signs, Prognostications, Preservati∣ons and several methods in Curing Consumptions, Coughs and Spitting of Blood; together with a Discourse of the Plague. By Gidian Harvey, in 8o. Large. Eleuchus of Opinions concerning the Small Pox; by Tobias Whitaker Physitian to his Majesty; together with problemical questions concerning the Cure of the French Pox; in 12o. Praxis Catholica, or the Country-mans universal Remedy, wherein is plainly set down the nature of all Diseases with their Remedies; in 8o. The accomplisht Cook or the Art and Mistery of Cookery, wherein the whole Art is revealed in a more easie and perfect method than hath been published in any Language; expert and ready ways for the dressing of all sorts of Flesh, Fowl and Fish, with variety of Sauces proper for each of them; and how to rase all manner of Past; the best directions for all sorts of Kickshaws; also the terms of Carving and Sewing. An exact account of all dishes for all seasons of the year, with other Admirable Curiosities, approved by the fifty five years experience of Robert May in his attendance on se∣veral persons of great Honour; in 8o. Large. The Queens Closet opened, incomparable secrets in Phy∣sick and Chyrurgery, Preserving, Conserving and Canding; which was presented unto the Queen by the most experienced persons of their times; in 12o. Large. The Gentlemans Jockie and approved Farrier; instructing in the Nature, Causes, and Cures of all Diseases incident to Horses, with an exact method of Breeding, Buying, Dieting, and other ways of ordering all sorts of Horses; in 8o. Large, The Country mans Treasure, shewing the Nature, Cause and Cure of all Diseases incident to Cattel, viz. Oxen, Cows and Calves, Sheep, Hogs and Dogs, with proper means to prevent their common Diseases and Distempers, being very useful re∣ceits,
as they have been practised by the long experience of forty years; by James Lambert, in 8o. Large. St. foyne Improved, a discourse shewing the utilityand be∣nefit which England hath and may receive by the Grass cal∣led St. foyne, and answering all objections urged against it; in 4o. Books of Ingenuity whether Romances, Satyri∣cal, Poetry, or pleasant for diversion. PHaramond that famed Romance, being the History of France, in twelve Parts; by the Author of Cleopatra and Cassandra; Folio. Pathanessa that famed Romance. A short History of the late English Rebellion; by M. Needham, in 4o. The Ingenious Satyr against Hypocrites; in 4o. Meronides, or Virgil Traversly, being a new Paraphrase upon the fifth and sixth Book of Virgil Aeneas in Burlesque verse; by the Author of the Satyr against Hypocrites. Gerama, a new Discovery of a little sort of People cal∣led Pygmies, with a lively description of their stature, habit, manners, buildings, Knowledge and Government; by Joshua Barns of Emmanuel Colledge in Cambridge, in 8o. The Woman is as good as the Man, or the equality of both Sexes: Written originally in French, and translated in∣to English. Cleaveland's Genuine Poems, Orations, Epistles, purged from many false and spurious ones which had usurped his name. To which is added many never before printed or pub∣lished, according to the Author's own Copies; with a Nar∣rative of his Life, in 8o large. Newly Reprinted the exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Love∣day, the late admired Translater of the three first Volumes of Cleopatra, published by his Brother Mr. Anthony Loveday, in 8o large.
Wallographea, or the Britain described, being a Relation of a pleasant Journey into Wales; wherein are set down several remarkable passages that occurred in the way thi∣ther; and also many choice observables, and notable com∣memorations concering the state and condition, the nature and humour, Actions, Manners and Customs of that Coun∣try and People, in 8o. Troja Rediviva, or the Glories of London surveyed, in an Heroick Poem, in 4o. Wit and Drollery, Jovial poems, corrected and amended with new Additions; in 8o large. Adaga Scholica, or a Collection of Scotch Proverbs and Proverbial phrases, in 12o. very useful and delightful. The Batchelors Banquet, or fifteen degrees of Marriage, in 4o. PLAYS. The Queen of Aragon in Fee The Coffee-house. Any thing for a quiet life. Cure for a Cuckold. Thrasean Wonder. Tom. Tyler and his Wife. Loves Mistriss. Gammer Gurtons Needle. Spanish Gypsie. Unfortunate Usurper. The Rump. Obstinate Lady. City Night-Cap. Poor Scholar. Noble Ingratitude. Lascivious Queen. Birth of Merlin. Excellent Tracts in Humanity, History, State-Affairs, and Description of Countries. THe Institution, Laws and Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the Garter; adorned with many Sculptures in Copper; by that Noble and Ingenious Gentleman Elias Ash∣mole, Esq in Folio. The History of King John, Henry the Third, and the most
Illustrious King Edward the First; wherein the Ancients Laws for the soveraign Dominion for the King of England over all persons and Causes, is Asserted and Vindicated; Collected out of the Ancient Records of the Tower of Lon∣don, in Folio. Mare clausum, or the Right and Dominion, or Owner∣ship of the British Sea, laid down in two Books, by John Selden, Esq a very Learned piece, in Folio. The Perfect Statesman, or Minister of State; wherein are briefly set forth the true Nature of the Subject, the endow∣ment inherent to the person, the method of his Election, Institution and Reception; the object of his Office distin∣guished under such principles as are immediately requisite to the Establishment of a Commonweal, by Leonard Willin, Esq in Folio. A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, shewing the Nature and Measures of Crown Lands, Assessments, Customs, Poll-monies, Lotteries, Benevolence, Penalty, Monopolies, Offices, Tythes, Raising of Coines, Hearth-money, Excise; and with several intersperst Discourses and Digressions con∣cerning Wars, the Church, Universities, Rents and Purchases, Usury and Exchange, Banks and Lumbards, Registers for Conveyances, Buyers, Insurances, Exportation of Money and Wool, Free Ports, Coynes, Housing, Liberty of Conscience: by Sir William Pette Knight, in 4o. Englands Interest and Improvement, consisting in the in∣crease of the Store and Trade of this Kingdom; by B. For∣trey. Proposals or increase of Wealth by a new Method, in subscribing according to the several particulars there men∣tioned, in 4o. England described through the several Counties and Shires thereof, briefly handled; some things also premi∣sed to set forth the Glory of this Nation, by Edward Leigh, Esq Englands Worthies, Select Lives of the most eminent persons from Constantine down to this present year 1684, by William Winstandly Gent. in 8o large. The Glories and Triumphs of his Majesty King Charles the Second, being a Collection of all Letters, Speeches, and
all other choice passages of State since his Majesties return from Breda, till after his Coronation, in 8o large. The Portugal History, describing the said Country, with the Customs and Uses among them, in 8o large. A New Survey of the Turkish Government compleated, with divers Cuts, being an exact and absolute discovery of what is worthy of knowledge, or any way satisfactory to Curiosity in that mighty Nation, in 8o large. The Antiquity of China, or an Historical Essay, endea∣vouring a probability, that the Language of the Empire of China, is the primitive Language spoken through the whole world before the Confusion of Babel; wherein the Customs and Manners of Chineans are presented, and Ancient and Modern Authors consulted with. Illustrated with a large Map of the Country, in 8o large. An Impartial Description of Surynham upon the Con∣tinent of Guiana in America; with a History of several strange Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, Insects and Customs of that Colony, in 4o. Ethecae Christianae, or the School of Wisdom. It was de∣dicated to the Duke of Monmouth in his younger years, in 12o. The Life and Actions of the late renowned Prelate and Souldier Christopher Bernard Van Gale Bishop of Munster, in 8o. Very useful Books of Law. THe Conveyancers Light, or the Compleat Clerk and Scri∣veners Guide, being an exact draught of all Prece∣dents and Assurances now in use, likewise the Forms of all Bills, Answers and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were pen∣ned by divers Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern, in 4o large. The Priviledges and Practices of Parliaments in England, Collected out of the Common Law of this Land, in 4o. A Letter from Oxford concerning the approaching Par∣liament then called, 1681, in vindication of the King, the Church, and Universities, in 4o. The Antiquity, Legality, Right, Use, and ancient usage of Fines paid in Chancery, upon the suing out or obtaining
some sorts of Original Writs retornable into the Court of Common-Pleas at Westminster, in 4o. Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, in 13 Sections; con∣taining several Catalogues of the numbers and dates of all Bundles of Original Writs of Summons and Elections that are now in the Tower of London, in 4o. Excellent Tracts for the use of Scholars and Schools. TThe new World of Words, or a general English Dictio∣nary, containing the proper signification and Etymo∣logies of Words, derived from other Languages, viz. He∣brew, Arabick, Syriack, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, British, Dutch, Saxon, useful for the advancement of our English Tongue; together with the definition of all those terms that conduce to the understanding of the Arts and Sci∣ences, viz. Theology, Philosophy, Logick, Rhetorick, Gram∣mar, Ethic, Law, Magick, Chyrurgery, Anatomy, Chymistry, Botanicks, Arithmetick, Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, Physiognomy, Chyromancy, Navigation, Fortification, Dy∣aling; cum multis aliis, in fol. Cocker's new Copy-Book, or Englands Pen-man, being all the curious Hands engraved on 28 Brass plates, in folio. Sir Robert Stapleton's Translation of Juvenals Satyr, with Annotations thereon, in folio. The Rudiments of the Latine Tongue, by a method of Vocabulary and Grammar; the former comprising the Primi∣tives, whether Noun or Verb, ranked in their several Cases; the latter teaching the forms of Declension and Conjugati∣on, with all possible plainness: To which is added the Her∣monicon, viz. A Table of those Latin words, which their sound and signification being meerly resembled by, the En∣glish are the sooner learned thereby, for the use of Mer∣chant Taylors School, in 8o large. Indiculis Universalis, or the whole Universe in Epitomie, wherein the names of almost all the works of Nature, of all Arts and Sciences, and their most necessary terms are in
English, Latin and French, methodically digested, in 8o large. Farnaby's Notes on Juvinal and Persius in 12o. Clavis Grammatica, or the ready way to the Latin Tongue, containing most plain demonstrations for the regu∣lar Translating of English into Latin, with instructions how to construe and parse Authors, fitted for such as would attain to the Latin Tongue, by I. B. Schoolmaster. The English Orator, or Rhetorical Descents by way of declamation upon some notable Themes, both Historical and Philosophical, in 8o. The Sphere of, Marcus Manilius made an English Poem with Annotations, and an Astronomical Appendix; giving an account of the Lives of the Ancient and Modern Astrono∣mers, in fol. M. Tulli Ciceronis Epistolarum Selectarum Libri tres, in 8o. Abcedarium Scholasticum, or the Grammar Scholars Flower Garden: Wherein are these following Flowers, viz. Pro∣verbs Proverbial; Sayings also on several Subjects. Both pleasant and not Less profitable to all the weaker (yea and the Abler Schollars too) as being very useful also in several Respects for their more easie attainment of the La∣tine Tongue; by Thomas Hunt Schoolmaster of St. Saviours Southwark. Mapps. A New and exact Mapp of the whole world, with the late newest discoveries of all the parts in Persia, with a Description thereof in French and English. A new Mapp of Oxford. A New Mapp of the Royal Exchange. A large Mapp of the City of London, and its ruins, faithfully surveyed, wherein is declared its Original, An∣tiquities, Monuments, Customs, Rights, according to the Ancient Charter granted to the said City by former Kings of England.
An Advertisement of a most Excellent Wa∣ter for the Preservation of the Eyes. THere is sold by the said Obadiah Blagrave, a Water of such an excellent Nature and Operation for preservation of the Eyes, that the Eye being but washed therewith once or twice a day, it not only takes away all hot Rhumes and Inflamations, but also preserveth the Eye after a most wonderful manner; a Secret which was used by a most Learned Bishop: By the help of which Water he could read without the use of spectacles at 90 years of Age. A Bottle of which will cost but 1 s. FINIS.
