P3130 11880850 50325
THE Present Prospect OF THE Famous and Fertile ISLAND OF TOBAGO: WITH A Description of the Situation, Growth, Fertility and Manufa∣cture of the said Island. To which is Added, Proposals for the Encouragement of all those that are minded to settle there. By Captain JOHN POYNTZ. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin for the Author, and are to be Sold by Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1683.
To the READER. Courteous Reader. THou art here presented with The Present Pro∣spect of the Island of Tobago, about forty Leagues distant from Barbadoes; but far excelling that Island, and indeed any other of the Caribee-Islands, in the Fertility and Richness of the Soil, and in the Commodiousness of its Bays and Harbors: And it is no Paradox to affirm, That though it lies more South, the Air is as Cool and Refreshing as that of Barba∣does: and yet Exempted from those affrighting and destructive Hurricanes that have been often Fatal to the rest of the Caribee-Islands. Nor is it unfurnished with any thing necessary for the Sustenance and Preservation of Humane Life; as you will see by the Ensuing Prospect of it, in which there is nothing set down but what will be attested by several that have been upon the Island, and what thou wilt find there, if Providence should bring thee thither: For there is variety enough of the real Products of the Island to di∣late upon, without Interlarding it with fictitious Stories:
And I am perswaded there is no Island in America, that can afford us more ample Subjects to contemplate the Bounty and Goodness of our Great Creator in, than this of Tobago; And this I speak not by hearsay, or as one that has liv'd always at home; but as one that has had Experience of the World, and been in the greatest Part of the Caribee-Islands, and most parts of the Conti∣nent of America, and almost all his Majesties For∣reign Plantations; and after having view'd them all, have chosen this Island of Tobago to take up my Qui∣etus est in. To which end I have purchased a Grant from the Duke of Courland (to whom by vertue of an Agree∣ment with His present Majesty of Great Britain, the said Island does solely belong) of 120000 Acres of the said Island for my self and Company, upon very Advan∣tagious Conditions, for which I refer thee to the Proposals at the end of the Book; and to the Grant it self, in my own Custody; Being very willing to give all reasonable Satisfaction to those whose hearts shall incline to settle there. JOHN POYNTZ.
The Present Prospect OF TOBAGO: WITH A Description of the Situation, Fertility, Growth and Manufacture of that Island. AS I design only to describe the Flou∣rishing Island of Tobago, so I re∣solve by the Methods I have taken, not to build the Porch too big for the House: For that end let this small Introduction admit you to a Prospect of Tobago, which is a Sub∣ject that needs no Encomium to il∣lustrate so fertile a Soil as deservedly may speak her own Praise, because consented to by most that have known her, to vye with the Glory of all the Caribes: So that I approve it convenient she be heard to speak, and in her own Dialect too; then upon Exa∣min by those that consult her, she'll be found to evince the Incredulous beyond suspicion. And since in the Frontispiece I have promised to in∣troduct
you to the Situation of the Island, I do it by telling you that it lies in Eleven Degrees Thirty Mi∣nutes North-Latitude, and in Fifty Three Degrees Six Minutes Longitude, West from the Lizard; and about Forty Leagues distant from the flourishing Barbados, as Captain Lloyd asserts in his Breviat; who also affirms it the most Convenient, Commodious, and Salubrious Island in the Caribes; and truly so it may, being so sweet∣ly tempered with those moderate and Soveraign Breezes of Wind that refresh the Planter by Day, and purges the Air by Night: So that the Day-Breez springs by fa∣vour from the Ocean, and rises with the Sun, as does the Night-Breez refresh by softer Gales, sent from her Rocks and Mountanous Elevations. Nor is the rage of a Tempest at any time heard to dread the Inhabitants, nor the terror of a Hurricane ever known to invade them; which of all things is most dreadful, and con∣sequently most fatal, to the rest of the Caribes; this be∣ing the Southermost Island (and nearest to the Spanish Coast) which no Hurricane has hitherto invaded, as ever was heard of by any of the Inhabitants. How∣ever it exceeds not Thirty two miles in Length, and I should err to say more then Eleven in Breadth; which disproportion is sufficiently recompenc'd by the Natu∣ral Scituation of the Bays and the Harbours for Shipping; as are the Rivers, Rivulets, & larger Openings convenient for Navigating of Sloops and smaller Vessels, whereby to furnish the Inhabitants, and commode them for desence. Inasmuch therefore as by reason of her Fertility she acquires to her self the Sirname of Fortunate, except otherwise the Dutch superscribe her Unfortunate, when, because to involve them in her Redolent Em∣bracements, or to invite forreign Princes to emulate their Prosperity: However at present she lives in peace,
and to out-live her troubles, and by the Provi∣dence of God sleeps in the Arms of Security; whose Soil is so rich without Art or Cultivation, that some have fancied her the Paradise of the Indies; drest up in a beauteous Complexion of Soil, that represents in some parts a most pleasant Redness, whilst to admiration in other places it shines with Blackness; and because min∣gled for the most part with a Marley Substance, pene∣trates the Earth a considerable depth; which evidently proves by convincing Argument, the prodigious growth of her massy and ponderous Timber-Trees, of which we shall speak in their proper Classis; as also of the Natural Plenty and Produce of Provision, the Delicacy of Fruits, and the Soveraign Vertue of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and Medicinal Drugs; besides Natures Boun∣ty in Variety of Beasts, and Heavens Benediction in the multiplication of Fish and Fowl, that abound both in fresh and in salt Water; which because of another Or∣der, will the rather admit of a distinct Discourse: So the Staple of the Island, and the Natural Product, will give us an occasion to offer it somewhere else. But the Planters and the Inhabitants present a new Prospect; whose Charge will be much lessned to those that live Northwardly, by reason of a warm yet tempe∣rate Heat, because moderated by a continued Breez of Wind; So that here's no Summer spent on purpose to accumulate or heap up Provision for Winters Accom∣modation; because all the year long both Herbage and Fruits sprout and bud up by a perpetual Spring; and the Warmth in it self so natural to nourish Age, as is the Germinating (or budding) Spring to give encou∣ragement to Youth. And the Island is so replenish'd with materials for Building, that provided you bring dextrous Hands and good Artificers, you may in a lit∣tle
Time, and with sinall Charge, build both Houses and Towns, or Fortifications. The next thing to consult is, The Growth and Ma∣nufacture of the Countrey, improvable by Industry, and the Mediums of Art; which will fall in course at the Opening of Individuals; so that we may proceed to the several particulars, referring the Reader for satis∣faction to the Proposals, if desirous to consult the Grant, Government, Religion, Liberty of Conscience, the Settlement, Insurance, Accommodation, Factories, Shipping, and Encouragement for Transportation; which is fully exprest, without Fraud or Ambiguity. Of GRAIN. FIrst therefore let us begin with Indian Corn, which is either such as grows in Virginia, New-York, Caro∣lina, &c. and so proceed to Guiney-Corn, or any other that hath growth in the Island. But I shall delude you if to tell you that English Grain grows here: However there are English Pease, and of various sorts; and Beans, and Pulse enough, as you may observe if you please, by the ensuing Discourse. The Indian-Corn buds, and grows out with a small stem upon a strong stalk, (which stalk they burn in Barbados under their Coppers in Crop-time, to boil up their Sugar) and has a fibrous or stringy Root; some of it brings one Ear, some two, and some others three: But the green Leaves in most of the Caribe Isles, they fre∣quently strip off, and give them to their Cattel. Of this sort of Corn, you may expect at least two, if not three Crops yearly, to a very great Increase; whereof
very good Bread is made; and with indifferent Art, a most delicate Drink. The Guiney-Corn is much of the figure and the nature of Rice; save onely Rice has a slender stalk, and a smal∣ler Ear, and grows in Swamps and moist Bottoms; but this will grow on the Tops of Rocks, and produce its Increase upon any Soil. The stalk is strong, very large and tall; and the Corn sprouts forth on the top, or ex∣treamest part of the stalk, (it has a fibrous Root) and augments to a prodigious increase; for one Grain by natural Product, without the Art of Cultivation, mul∣tiplies of it self into many thousands. Of this they make Bread, Dumplins, and Puddings; and some hull it like Rice, and boil it with Milk. The Bonivis represents the shape of a Pea, save only its some what longer; which if once put into the ground, the Art of Man can hardly destroy it; for it seldom dies, but continually buds, and blossoms, ac∣commodating the Planter with green, and ripe Pease all the year about. Nor think I them inferiour to the best of French Beans, if indifferently boiled, and eaten with sweet Butter; but then it must be while they are green and tender; for when they are ripe, their Case or Rind turns white; which if dried, and as other Pulse boiled, are eaten with Pork, and are a Nourishing Food. Then there's the French Pea, so much admired in Martinego; I confess it a wholesome and strengthen∣ing Food, both for Native and Planter; which also thrives to a prodigious increase, and bears without in∣terruption all the year about. So of the Jamaica (or the five weeks Pea) by slender Art or Industry you can never want them; and he that wants them not, has always something that's good and wholesome to seed on. But as Idleness is the Darling
of Ease, so through a vain Remisness some slide into Poverty. There is also the Kidney-Pea, and the Black-ey'd-Pea, much of one nature and vertual property; and be∣cause of its figure, formation, and likeness to the Kid∣ney-Bean, have almost to superstition made some fancy it a Specifick. The Pidgeon-Pea grows here also, and is a pleasant Food; but they must be gathered whilst as yet they are young, and eaten with sweet Butter whilst their Buds are tender. Then there's the French-Bean (of a very large size) which, if eaten with sweet Butter and Bacon, makes a Harmony in the Stomach. Besides several other vari∣ous and curious sorts of Pulse this Island produceth, to the admiration of all men: So that if Summer Grain be so happy to fall into that fertile Soil, it never misseth of a generous increase. Moreover, here are all manner of Pulse, as if naturally strewed up and down the Coun∣trey; and which also springs up all the year about: So that People need not to be tempted into the considera∣tion of Starving, except through Obstinacy, or a vain Neglect, or degenerating from Mankind, they offer an Unnatural Violence to Themselves. I remember the wonderful preservation of Otto Eden, (a Dutchman) that sled in a small Vessel from Surinam, to preserve himself and Family; which by Gods Pro∣vidence were miraculously preserved in this Fortunate Island of Tobago; but a Stranger on the place, and be∣cause having no Bread to eat, and his half-famish'd Children lamenting about him, it struck him into a deep Melancholy: So that whiles under a heavy pressure of mind, and considering what to do, a Protestant-Indian that fled along with him, asked Mr. Eden, Why out of
measure so sorrowful? Mr. Eden replies, I that have fed so many scores of People, have not at present where withal to eat: To which the Indian answered, That God that gave you Preservation, has brought you into a Land of Plenty; Despair not, Mr. Eden; Furnish me with a Ne∣gro or two, and a couple of Axes, and I'll suddenly bring you some Provision to eat: Which was presently perfor∣med by striking down a large Macaw Tree (about the bigness of a mans middle) and of the whitish pithy substance near to the Top, he beats in a Mortar, then pressed out the Juyce, and boiled it to the consistency of a Hasty-Pudding: But the residue he dried, and rub'd to a perfect Flower; which with nothing else but fair Water only, he moulds into Cakes; of which like Bread I eat at my arrival in Tobago, at the same Eden's House, and did verily perswade my self (before I heard this Relation) that it was Dutch Wheaten Bisket. Of FRƲIT. I Am now entred upon the Classis of Fruits, and shal first begin with the Cushen Apple, which is meat and drink; only made distinguishable by the Art of boyling, whose Nuts if preserv'd you may eat, and of the Rind whiles green make an excellent Lamp Oyl, which by small Artifice is easily obtainable. But the Bmano is a fruit of that singular Admiration that the Superstitious Papist durst not cut it with a Knise; lest desponding with himself he divide the Cross. This Fruit also may be eaten raw, or bettered by an easy Decoction of Fire.
Here is also the Figg-Tree, such as is that in Spain, and Portugal, and several parts in America; which Fruit may be eaten while as yet its ripe; or exposed to better Husbandry, it serves for good Drink. Then there's the Prickle-Apple, of a sharp brisk taste; (and an Indian expedient against the Bloody-Flux) it makes a brave Marmalade: and helps for staining and colouring any thing. But the Prickle-Pear, to speak its due praise, is one of the most Soveraign Fruits in the Indies. The Pome-granate, is a Fruit of that singular Eminen∣cy, as hardly to be exprest, without a Scriptural Phrase: They are plentiful here, a Restringent and Cooler; Consulted by the Natives in Fevers, and Fluxes. The Pine-Apple, I must confess is a Fruit of that Ex∣cellency, that I want Rhetorick and Oratory to express it. Some bears a Crown, and is the King of Fruits; but to them with three Crowns, the Idolatrous pay their Superstitions, The Fruit of it self is of Fruit most delicious, and the Liquor botled up, makes an admira∣ble Drink. Here are also Pum-Citrons, that make an excellent l'reserve. But of Oranges here are three sorts; The sower for sauce, and the Flowers for Essences, the sweet ones are eaten for Reereation. But the China-Orange that grows here in America, super-excels those in Europe be∣yond express. Of Lemons also, here are two several sorts; the sower one, for Lemanadoes; and the sweet one for Delectation. So of Limes also, here are sweet and sower: with the last of which, they make Limeads and Punch. Guavers are a Fruit that's very stony, there's the white and the Red; but they differ in Virtue: and if baked
or boyled green, are either of them Specificks against immoderate Purgations. Moreover if you weed, or pick out the stones; you have then a basis for Marmalade, to equalize Quinces. Tamerinds, grow here by natural instinct; they'r a delicate fruit, and vertual in Feavers. But the Planton of all fruits, the Nigros love best; and is a nourishing Soveraign wholesome food. Some eat them raw when Nature has ripned them; and some a∣gain roast them before they be ripe. Some eat them green, and some take and boyl them, and othersome eat them as often as they get them. Now to roast them they are bread, and to boyl them they are sawce; or Marmelade may be made: but to barbacue or dry them in the Sun you may rub them to a Flower. Here are Grapes great store, but are eaten off the Clustre; for the Planter has another Prospect more pro∣fitable than Wine. The Custard Apple, to my taste I must confess is very delightful. Then there's the Sower Sop, a mediocrity of nourish∣ment: to some its meat, when to othersome drink. And the Papaw-Apple, which to my liking is very grateful, and apetizing when shaped into sawce, by boyling it with Salt-beef: and if so happy to mingle it with sweet and fresh Butter: except the Squash, there's nothing beyond it. The Mamme Apple grows to the Magnitude of a Pound Pear, its of a yellow colour, and eats like Marmalade. Then there's the Mamme Supporter, much of the same Nature with the former, save only the last has two stones, and the first as in order is indewed but with one. The Yellow-plum, grows every where here, and is of
Plums a most Luscious Food. But then there's more cry then wool, for what with the greatness of the Stone and the thickness of the external rind, the fruit can scarcely get a Habitation betwixt them. There are Cherry-trees also, (which bear the year a∣bout) whose fruit is somewhat of a sharpish taste; then there's the Cherry which the Spaniard calls Purgas, which, when throughly ripe, are mellifluous and sweet, of a cooling and opening Nature, which if preserv'd would be a Rariety for England. But the Cocur-Nut-tree, and the fruit that hangs up∣on it, the Indians idolize it, and call it Gods-tree: be∣cause to produce both meat, drink, and Cloth: its true beyond dispute, that the Nut of it self is a sweet be∣yond the sweetest Almond; and the Liquor that lodgeth in the bosom of this fruit, is to my liking beyond Flo∣rens at Frontiniack: but the Shell serves for Cups, Spoons, and Dishes; and the Rind encompassing the Shell, serves the Indians for covering, and with the Leaves they thatch their Houses, and make Baskets, but some more ingenious make Ropes, and Lines for Fishing. Of the Maccaw-Nut Shell, the Indians make the boles of their Tobacco pipes; the kernel is eatable, Yet not very admirable; but the Nut of it self makes an excel∣lent Lamp-Oyl. Then there's the Physick-Nut, of whose tree they make sences: the Nut of it self is a violent Emetick, as also a Cathartick: but the whole macerated, and boyled with Water, by a culinary Operation affords you Lamp Oyl. Here are also two sorts of Melons; the one is called Musk, but the other the Water-Mellon. The first is a food of incomparable taste; but the last affords you
both Drink and Meat; of which you can never eat to a Surfeit. Penguins are a brisk and sharp fruit, extoll'd by the Indians for their excellency in Feavers. There are Cucumbers of two sorts; the one to eat raw, and the other to pickle. And prodigious Pumkins, I blush to express their mag∣nitude: with Simnels and Squashes much of a Nature concordant: these make excellent sauce to eat with Salt Beef; and if rightly ordered, far Excel Cole∣worts. Then there's two sorts of Gourds; the sweet one which the Planter boyls to make broth Medicinal; and the wild Gourd for Instruments, and vessels to con∣tain Liquors. Of Roots. THis Island of Tobago Accommodates the Planter with three sorts of Potatoes; the white, the Yel∣low, and the red Potato: but the White and the Yellow they boyl for food; and are the general Nourishment all the Indies over. Now of the Yellow sort the more ingenious with a Tincture of the Red make a pleasant Liquor, which when sweetned with Sugar, they bottle it up; and after twenty four hours its ready for drink∣ing: this is a Liquor known only by the name of Mobby, and is the universal drink in the Island of Tobago. There are Eddies also, a most incomparable Root; and Yames, the whole World has not better to boast of, for a wholesome, toothsome, and a Nourishing Root, besides divers other Roots that I have no name for
These and Potatoes are their natural bread, if not impro∣per to call it so; however it's food, if not bread of ano∣ther fashion. Then there's Turnips, Parsnips, Onions, and Carrots: but these last are nourisht by art, in as much as none of them are America's natural product. The Cassado Root ranges it self in another order, whose Liquor intoxicates, and is as truculent as Death. But the Bread thereof, if by a diligent hand well ordered, is as pleasant, and wholsome as our English Flower; and the Drink which afterwards is made of the Bread; is a Liquor steddy (and heady enough) known by the name of Pereno. Of Herbs and Spices. HEre for the most part you may by your industry cause all sorts of sallating to grow, since Nature has been bountiful by the preordinate Councel of Hea∣ven to influence, and impregnate this Island with vari∣ety; and truly I have wondred how the soil comes to be so rich, till considering its nourished by a Nitrous Air. And this is the place wherein Tea grows naturally (& plentifully) meaning such Tea as is frequently sold in our English Coffee-houses. There is also a certain Bark that's called by the name of Tobago-Cinnamon, that grows upon a Shrub or a small Tree. Then there is long Pepper, that sprouts up in every Angle; and Codd Pepper, Bell Pepper, and Round Pepper; some red, and some green, that grows naturally withour cultivation. Then there's that fa∣mous American Spice, (or Jamaico Pepper) that gives both the redolency, Flavour, and tact of Cloves, and
Cinnamon; with a complicated mixture of several and various sweets; but these fall from the Bay-tree. Ma∣ny other profitable Rarities, as Fruits, and Roots, be∣sides what's set down in this short Paragraph, this I∣sland, because adorned with Roots & Herbage, liberally and freely presents them to the industrious Planter; but not as a gratuity to compensate his labour; rather out of a bounteous and innate generosity. Of Flesh. ANd now we present you with the Clasis of Flesh, give me leave therefore in the first place to begin with the Wild-Hogg, of which sort of Cattle their num∣bers are innumerable; when yearly the people cut off at least twenty thousand, and yet they increase soprodigi∣ously fast, that neither Gun, nor Engin, nor any other Ar∣tifice can be found to destroy them. It's truth beyond sus∣pition that the Barbadians kill some of them; but the rest of the Caribes and others are daily visitants; who to save it for transportation, or preserve it for their own accom∣modation, commonly Jerk, and dry salt it in the Sun, or in Bulk or Pickle. But here you are to consider in the description of Flesh, I onely touch upon the natural produce of the Countrey. The Pickery is a Beast much resembling a Hogg, save onely he draws his Breath at his ventricle; which for the most part concentrates on the middle of his Back; which Creature by observation is swifter of foot than the Hog is; But then his Flesh is leaner, and relishes more of Venison then of Pork; and is taken with more diffi∣culty then usually Hogs are; because swifter of Foot,
and many times endangers the Doggs that attempt him. So that he's seldom destroyed without Gun, or Dart, by reason of the excessive largness of his tusks that branch themselves upwards, as also downwards: yet as formidable as he presents himself to the apprehension of some men, hitherto none has known him to set up∣on a man. Then here's great quantities of the Armidillas (which the Hollander calls Tattoos) that are Arm'd with Armour on their Backs; and the largest amongst them but of an indifferent size, seldom exceeding one foot in height. They are a Creature that generally feeds upon Fruits, and Roots: and when roasted have the natural taste of a Pigg, but then the Flesh is much more Physical; as if Nature had made it a Specifick for a Surfeit. Moreover, for accomodating Horses, Cows, Ass-Ne∣goes, Sheep, Deer, Hoggs, Goats, Rawbits, &c. I should lame my Description, and unworthily conceal the plenty of a Countrey that represents to every one the bounty of Nature by Heavens generosity. In this Island you will meet with two sorts of Guanos; the one of a green, but the other of a grey colour, which is shaped like a Lizard, somewhat resembling the Alle∣gator. I have seen some of those Creatures four and five foot in length: they live upon Herbs, Insects and Fruits; and burrow like a Coney in the hollow Pits in sand. The Indians extol them for Food, but the green Guano is a more delicate, and nutricious meat; who lives only by eating of Fruits and Flies; nor is he all out so bigg as the gray one (resembling the Creature we call the Ca∣melion) he lodgeth upon Trees, not in Cavities of Rocks, nor will he soil himself in marley Earth. The Indian Coney is a delicate Creature, much big∣ener, much taller, and larger than ours are. Their meat
is pleasant, wholsome, and delicious. And their Skins aromatically smell of Musk; which occasioned some strangers to call them Musk Squirrils (or sweet Rats, though somewhat improper) however their Skins are a good sort of Furr, and the rather because of their natu∣ral Perfume. Then there's the Apossum, another sort of a Crea∣ture, who is in resemblance much of the cast and figure of our English Badger (but his Leggs are equal) and the most of any thing assimulates the Racone, and naturally because so affected with mankind in general, that he follows him, comes to him, and delights to gaze on him. So that by industry and an easy arti∣fice, there's but little difficulty to make him tame: However the Femal has a false, or loose belly, where she suckles her young ones, and secures them from at∣tempts. Of Armed Creatures. SUch is the Land Tortois; which vulgarly goes by the name of Turtle. But they are of two sorts, and inhabit different Soils. For the lesser (to his liking) padds the dry ground, whiles the larger contents him∣self in low and moist bottoms: some sort of people eat them, and commend their food for good Diet; some of them are bigger, and some less: but the weightiest to my Observation exceeded not thirty pound. Here in the Island are three sorts of Land-Crabbs (viz.) the Red, the black, and the white Crab; but the Red of himself is naturally so, because Nature adorns him with more Beauty externally, then internally she
inriches him with Aliment and Nutrition. Yet some have fancyed them very good food, and highly applaud them; but this sort of Crab loves a rockey, and dry Land; who seldom or rarely consults the Water. The next in order we call the black Crab, from which the blew Crab differs but a little; they are both good food, yet their excess breeds Fluxes; the one storms the Hills because high minded, but the other more Sub∣missive contents himself in Dales. Then there's the White Crab (larger then the rest) that generally lives in swamps, and miery places: I know not what they feed on, but are of themselves most delicious food. Of this sort the Carbs because so nume∣rous the Lazy Indian wont leave his Hamacca to catch them; except in rainy Weather, when they creep into their houses; it may be then they'l take so much pains as to stretch forth an arm to fling them into the fire; so roast and eat them. These Crabs we call Delvers, because of their Undermining. Of the same Classis is the Land Shell Souldier whose Claws resemble the Claws of a Crab, but is of himself a very little Creature; some say they are eatable, but I Warrant not that: however their fat is a soveraign Oyl, and of that singular Vertue and excel∣lency, as to blunt the Venom of a Poysoned Dart. Of Fishes. ANd now I am got into the Classis of Fish, I shall offer you a present of the Groper first, because he's a Fish generally much bigger than the
Salmon; whose Head super-excels the head of a Cod for goodness; but an Angler may distinguish Salt-water-fish from Salmon. Next to the Grooper, we bring you the grey Porgo; who though in Stature and figure seems a lesser fish, yet is he nothing inferiour for delicate food. Then there's the Red Porgo, of a faint pinck-colour, and scaled like the Grey, as is the Grey like the Grooper; this fish of fish is the Fishermans charm, and every mans purchase, whose hook and line may easily reach him. But there are two sorts of Cavallas, the Green and the Grey; the last we call House-eye, of the size of a Sal∣mon, and scaled much alike. But the Green Cavalla is less than a Grooper, and is infinitely prefer'd before the Grey for delicacy of taste; more excellent food, and much more Nutritious. Of the Mullet here are plenty; some bigger, and some less: from the size of a Mackerel, to the extent of a Pickerel. This fish I prefer for its delicacy of food, and by an ingenious artist makes excellent Scaveche. So the Sea-chub in Tobago is a fish of that excellency, that any ways drest is a food extraordinary; but then he must be fresh and bleeding new; otherwise he nei∣ther affords good food, nor will he make but indifferent Physick, this fish of all fish makes the royal Scaveche, as the Row of the Mullet makes the best Buttargo. The Manatee or Sea-cow, is of an Amphibious Nature, that eats grass like an Ox, and swims like an Otter: that lives sometimes under Water, and grows to a prodigious greatness; for some of them have weighed ten and twelve hundred pound weight; they are struck with Harping Irons, or other Engines, and so taken, whose flesh of fish necessity only extols it; but the skin if well managed, makes a kind of Bendleather; and
the ill Management thereof is when they Manatee the poor Nigros, with straps made thereof. Of the fish called Turtle, there are various sorts; the Hawks-bill, the Vandoras, the Logerhead, and the green Turtle; which the Native Indian out of a strange admi∣ration, have to a degree of Superstition thought among themselves, that the last was sacred; for they call it Gods fish, by reason of the extraordinary vertue that's found therein; as if compendiously sum'd up to serve all America. And truly I can assert it a Medicinal food, for it cured me of Poyson; from that intoxicated Palm-Wine that the Nigros gave me, when last in Guiney; which Poyson was expelled at the Caiamanos, about ten months after, by eating of Turtle; but for the Gho∣norea, the Yaws and the French-pox, there is not in Na∣ture a food more effectual. This rariety of a Creature has three large hearts that hang together in one string; and as the Manattee is, so is she, an Amphibion that lives in the Water, and without it; that swims like a fish, yet in the Sand lays Eggs like a Fowl; whose fish is flesh, and admits of various tastes; as of Veal, of Beef, but the fat is green, and eats like Marrow; and their Eggs undistinguishable from those of a Hen; which if pickled, strung up, and barbacued in the Sun, are little or nothing inferiour to Buttargo. And though notwithstanding the Vandoras Turtle assimilates some what the Nature of the Green, yet is her fat not by half so sweet; and is of a more yellowish Complexion. But the Hawks-bill is smaller, and not so Soveraign; but then it excels the former in Substance, for our Tortois Combs are shaped from that shall: who also lays her Eggs in the Sand as the rest do. But the Logerhead, because larger in the front then his Fellows, shews more bulkey, and is a bigger fish. Now we
propound you three ways to take them; either by fools, which are shaped into Netts: or by a strong prong of Iron, fastned to a Pole; or otherwise by turning of their Calopeia upwards. These are the usual ways we take them, and their plenty is such in this Island of To∣bago, that one nights work may supply a thousand peo∣ple with food for more than twice twenty four hours. The next that presents in order, is the Barracooto, and they are of two forts, and some about two foot in length, they have a long beak, or snout, filled full of Teeth: which when you would surprise them by a hook, and line, be sure you arm well with wier, for at least two foot in length. The white mouth'd Barracooto is the wholsomest Fish; for the black mouth'd Fish his Teeth are venemous, and the fleshy substance, especially near the Back bone. Then there's the great Garr, which the Spaniard calls Needle Fish, about some two foot long; whose bill is shaped like a Snite, good and wholsom Diet. But the smaller Garr-fish, which also has a long beak, and sel∣dom exceeds twelve inches in length; if by an Artist drest and fried with fresh Butter, its difficult to distinguish his taste from a Smelt. The Pilchard we have also here (but then its smaller then ours in England) which rush into the Bays for self-preservation, when chased or pursued by a Master Fish: So that sometimes part of their Shoals are forced a Shoar, and taken up by casting Nets (and others) in very great quantities. But the Pilchards in Barbados are feavourish some months in the year. Here also we have a Fish which we call an Anchovy, much smaller than a Pilchard, and of an Anchovy shape; which if taken in season, and pickled by Art, may for
ought I know, vye with those from Forreign Part The Hedg-hogg Fish we have here also, that are arm'd with prodigious strong Prickles: which in bigness and largness exceed the Land Ʋrchin. Some have eaten them, and say they are very good food; But I rather ap∣prove of their Oyl for Aches. So of the Coney Fish, which is of a smaller size, that has purchased his name from the shape of his mouth. He's a Fish as seldom fed on as any Fish, but his Flesh drawn out and neatly stuft, they send them to England, and other Parts for Rarities. But the Indian Sturgeon (so called by the English) frequents the Bays, and are some of them five or six foot in length. The Fish wants only the art of well cu∣ring, to preserve it for transportation into Remoter Parts. However if you eat him fresh, you will find him excellent Food: they are taken with the line, and sometimes with Nets; but take them at all times they are seldom out of season. Now were there a Fishery erected in this Island, without dispute it would turn to a very good accompt. The Dolphin is a Fish that gives chase to the flying Fish; which are numberless here. But the Dolphin in his chase, shines of a golden colour, when at other times (he preys not) his Scales shew like Silver. They are taken with the Hook, as we sail round the Island; some of them two, or three foot long, and more. They are delicate food, and make a fine Scaveche; which to admiration when their lives expire, they reflect a tin∣cture of what presents unto them. By which we may perceive, that the privation of water (which is their natural Element) causes an immediate Cessation of the actions of life. The Flying fish is not all out so bigg as a Herring, nor
by much so boney, but is delicate food: which makes se∣veral Fishes in the Sea prey upon him: who in a fresh gale dilates his finns, which Nature has lent him, as wings to fly with; & which conveys him sometimes half a furlong, or further. So that dipping his wings again into the salt Ocean, he readily prepares for another flight, and mind∣ful of the Fish persuing after him, he flies into the chains or midship of a vessel: and sometimes on the quar∣ter Decks; as it happened to me in my passage to Bar∣bados, that a flying Fish as I sat at the Table; sprung out of the Sea, and flew into my Lap. The Boneto likewise he prays upon flying Fish, and is taken with the Hook, though sometimes we stick them with Fisgigs, which with sharpened & barbed Prongs of Iron are fastned to a Pole, having some Lead on the ex∣treamest part. Some of this kind are thirty inches long; which boyled and eaten with fresh Butter, and the juyce of a Lemmon, maks a Food most delicious. So the Albacore that has the figure and shape of a Bo∣neto; yet is he bigger, longer, and larger; much of the nature and relish of the Boneto; and preys on the fly∣ing Fish, as the Boneto does. By which you may con∣clude, that the flying Fish of all Fish is surrounded with Enemies. Then there's the Amber Fish, an excellent Food; so is the Angel Fish, and the green Swallow-Tail; but the last is a Fish not much bigger than a Herring: all of them take the hook, and if they like their commons dispond not of death, when to sacrifice their lives to the Angler. The Parrot Fish whose Scales shine with green and yellow, his head resembles the head of a Parrot, let the delicacy of the Food praise it self. So of the Golden Fish, called Dorado (by the Spaniard) his Scales all
glister like Gold. This and the other is about the size of a Mackarel, equivalent in Food with the former Fish. And of fresh Fish, every River and Rivulet swarms with Plenty. The next Armado that in order approach us, are the Shell-Fish; for that end let us martial the Lobster or Craw-Fish, first; which are of a prodigious growth in these parts, yet have not their fore Claws, as those in England; but they are extreamly delicious, to the Gusto, because they have a sweet, and if with liberty I may presume to say it, a pleasant and delightful taste. But then the Tobago Crab as much excells our English Crab, as the Lobster is approved above comparison. But they have green Crabs which in shape are like those in England, save onely by nature they have a larger growth; these sort of Crabs are delicious Food. The Sea-souldier assimilates the Crab, by reason of the great and smaller Claws: whose Shell resembles a Snail the most of any thing, and looks like Pearl of an ob∣scure colour. The Cunck is a Shell Fish, of which we have plenty, nor have I known a sweeter Food; two boys in two hours may take enough for 500 men. This Fish may be boiled, stewed with wine, or fryed with fresh Butter; eat them any ways, or any how, there's no Fish I per∣swade my self, better of his kind; whose Shell has the tincture of Pearl colour, slame colour, and white, some part thereof being taken out, the Indians makeof it their Wampam Pieg; which Shell is a staple Commodity The Horn-fish, I have seen some of them ten inches long, and not unlike the resemblance of a Post-boys-horn: The Shell of this Fish is of a sine figure, and partly of a Pearl colour, but not very Orient; yet the meat very excellent.
The Orney also is a sort of Shell-fish, that sticks and adheres to the sides of Rocks; some of them you may pick up as big as an Egg, which if eaten with sweet butter, are a delicious food: and the shell of this fish has an Orient Tincture. So of the Scollop-fish, whose shell is as big as a saucer, and partly resembling a Pearl in colour. This Fish has but half a Shell, and sticks on the Rocks as birdlime to a twigg: which if neatly drest, and well ordered, you'l have little cause to complain of your diet. Cockles grow here to the bigness of an Egg, but then there's an inferiour growth that never arrive to that Maturity: both lye in Sand, but examin'd by the fire, and if you have no aversion to fish, I'll pass my word you will find good food. Of the Sea-Snail, here are very great quantities: and some of them you will meet with as big as your fist: they lye very thick, and close together, on very Sholes and Rocks, and sometimes on banks that are almost dry: which without difficulty may be attempted, and taken at low-water. Their Shells are of a curious Fi∣gure to form Cups of: and as much as any fish imitates the Oriental. The Rock Oyster, adheres to the cliffs of the Rocks: the inside of whose Shell is of a shining colour; his Li∣quor brackish, and his flesh good food. But that other Oyster that produceth the Pearl, they lye in some four or five fathom Water, which the Indians dive for, to obtain that treasure: but we think to examin a readier expedient, if when once we come to have Dredges a∣mongst us. But the Mangrove Oyster, that grows upon Trees on the tops of boughs, & the smaller branches; for you must know the Red Mangrove grows always in Salt-water, and
the tops of the trees because bending their boughs down wards (peradventure lick on the Surface of the water) which by natural instinct incline towards their roots By this means the Oysters Cluster, and clung together about them: that not a bough is barren. Now some folks eat them out of Curiosity, but truly I cannot commend them for good food. Their Shells partly Pearl colour, and almost transparent, and because very thin and clear, the Spaniards substitute them in lieu of Glass. The Sea-Egg is of two sorts: some black, and some grey. But either sort are guarded, and arm'd with Prickles. But the grey eggs are the Oysters, because re∣sembling them in taste: and are eaten raw, with Vine∣gar and Pepper; but better stewed with Wine, and Shellots, and sometimes with a cast of East-India Spices; which so ordered, I confess, there's no richer food. So that you may read in the Compendions Catalogue, Some Fish are for food, and some others for Physick. Of Fowl. NOw Gentlemen, as we have described the Race and Family of Fish; so if you please let us con∣sult the Genealogy of Fowl; their vertue, and variety; because multiplied here, as if Tobago was a Paradice for English-men to inhabit in. First therefore give me leave to begin with the Bill-Bird, whose Bill, or Beak shews as bigg as his Body; an evidence whereof is in St. James's Park: but the Indians eat them, and extoll them for Food. Then there's the Black-Bird, about the bigness of a Crow, which feeds on the Berries that fall from the Palmeto;
whose flesh is nothing inferiour to a Pidgeon. But the smaller Black-bird resembles ours in England; save on∣ly it has a longer bill, and the Fleshy part of the taste of our English Starlin so that you must strip him of his skin, otherwise he eats bitter. The Booby so called, is a bird over credulous; be∣cause when to proffer him your hand, he'l perch on your fist. He feeds upon fish, and his flesh eats fishey; and some of them you shall see as big as a Capon, whose Down is rich, beyond degrees of Comparison; and less than two ounces from each individual Bird, you need never doubt of, and their Numbers so numerous that in ten days time, and by easy Artifice, an ordinary man may procure ten thousand. The Blew headed Parrot, is a very pretty bird, but in largeness he's somewhat inferiour to the Green: they may be taught to talk any dialect: because naturally affect∣ed with the Vanity of tattle. Roast, or boyl them, you'l commend the Diet. So of the Parraketoes, of which there are two sorts; one about the bigness of our En∣glish Thrush, but plumed like a Parrot, and because inclinable to prattle, the difficulty's the less to learn them to speak. But the smaller Paraketo exceeds not a Spar∣row in bigness; and like the green Parrot may be taught to talk, whose flesh is equivalent with that of the Par∣rot, save only you have not so much at a meal. Then there's the Main Parrot, whose head is Yellow, and has a yellow brest: which to make him more beautiful Nature has cloathed him though in green. This bird speaks the best, and is more Docible then the rest; and if I mistake not, is a rich food to feed on. Then there's the Macaw, that's headed like a Parrot, but his body in proportion is four times bigger, whose Feathers because shaded with blews, reds, and green,
makes him shine with lustre, since beautified with such e∣minent colours One of them is to be seen in St James's Park. But the Flamingo of all fowls is the fairest; and as they generally fly in Covees together, so they frequent∣ly feed in flocks together: whose stature is tall and upright; equal to the height of a man. Some call them good food, but I assert they have curious Feathers, and of various colours. Truly to admiration when I have viewed this Creature, I have been led into speculation to Contemplate the Creation: whose outside, because most beautiful, interprets a more glorious inside. But to the Flamingo whose wings are skin'd with a glori∣ous Pin-colour, inclinable to Scarlet: and because, fring∣ed and tipt with sables: make them show rich, as to the Majesty of birds. Tobago also has a Duck which is delicate food: but then they are smaller than ours in England; and dege∣nerate as to setting, for ours will set all night on the Sand, but these sort aloft, and lodge in Trees. The Sea-gull is much of a Cast with those in England, somewhat larger then a Duck, and of a dunnish co∣lour. And so the Sea-mew is plentiful here, and much of the Nature with those in England: if different in any thing, their food eats better. The Plover we have here, are of two distinct sorts, and are generally grey, but the one is distinguishable from the other, by reason of different proportion, they are both good food, and delicious to feed on, The Turtle-dove also admits of a double distinction, because here are two sorts, one bigger then another, but the larger they only coo, and the lesser sort have a kind of mournful murmuring Note; both of them are eatable, and delicate food.
The Man of War Bird (so called) makes to the ship∣ping some distance from the Coast, ere ever the Sea∣men can discover Land: he preys upon Fish, and has a fishy taste. His Body seemingly is as bigg as a Tur∣key; whose Feather is of a blackish grey, but his Gills look red, like a Turkey Cock when he Bristels. The Bird of Paradice (or the King-fisher) is much a∣bout the bigness of our English Starlin, whose Feathers represent all colours imaginable: he lives upon Flies that swim on the surface of the water, and that's his Food which Nature affords him. The Pelican is a Bird about the bigness of a Goose, that has a great head, and a very large swallow, and a Crop or Craw larger than other Birds. Some of our people has made Caps of their Craws, which they wore to cover their heads. This Bird feeds upon Fish, and has himself a fishy taste; but his Down is excellent. The Cockerrico is the Indian name for the Tobago Phe∣sants, which are as large, and as fair as our English Phe∣sants; and those that have fed upon them, say, they are better food. They are easily taken in Glades with Nets, or struck with shot from the Bows of Trees. There are two sorts of Curlews, the one of them is red, and as bigg as a Capon; that has a crooked long beak, and gets his living by sucking in salt-water-plashes. But the grey Curlew, which is shaped like the red one, differs onely in colour, and in feeding in the freshes. They are both choice food, for those that feed on them. The Wood-Pidgeon so called here, feeds most upon Ber∣ries; and is to my thinking the choicest food in Ameri∣ca. This Bird is bigger than an English Pidgeon, and are sometimes so fat that they burst with their fall, when we have taken them off from tops of Trees with our
Shot. Here are many other Birds, and Fowls fit for food, but I want names for them; moreover their Fea∣thers are serviceable and profitable to the Planters, either for present use, or transportation. Moreover this Island of Tobago for raising of stock, may make such improvement by Geese, Ducks, Turkies, Pullin, &c. (I speak within the bounds of modesty) Ame∣rica cannot produce a richer Soil. Of Timbers. I Begin with the Cedar first, because its a Tree of emi∣minency (and stature) that naturally grows in the Island of Tobago, and affords excellent Timber from two foot, to five foot diameter; with this sort of Wood they generally build their houses, and shipping; except what's transported to Barbados and other Parts. The Green Hart is next, which I take to be Hercules; and of this sort of Wood they make all manner of In∣struments, either for inlaying, or the use of Turnery. Then there is the Locust of two several sorts, the one white, and the other is red, from two to three foot dia∣meter; either of them are very good Timber for building Houses, Shores for Milnes, Spindles, and Shafts: they are good to make Beams, and Knees for shipping, or in∣deed, to speak generally, any thing else. The Mastick is a Timber Tree of so fine a grain, that it plains like our English Box; some of them are three and four foot Diameter, it's sit for all uses, and of a na∣ture so durable, that the Caribe-Planters call it Wood e∣verlasting. Mohogeny is a Tree that resembles the Cedar in colour,
and is excellent Timber for building of Ships: the Indi∣an Spaniard uses it much in their building, in regard it's a Timber the worm will seldom touch under water. Now I fancy this Timber an excellent sheathing for Shipping. The Man-grove, by some called Red-wood, the proper use of the Wood is for Diers: which if further exami∣ned, the Bark is useful in Tanning. But white Mangrove is of little use, save onely good to make Ropes with. The White-wood is a Tree of that singular vertue, the worm will seldom touch it, therefore have the English A∣mericans consulted with this Timber to build their ship∣ping, in regard of the singularity and durability of the Wood. The Yellow Sander Tree, is from two to five foot di∣ameter; a Timber of excellent use, and may be fitted to any purpose; it's very useful in the place where it grows, and it's profitable also to those that transport it. The Bay-tree is a Tree of that admirable vertue, most people admire it: whose Bark is like Cinnamon, and whose Berries, as are those in Jamaica, of a Clove, and a Cinnamon scent and taste, qualifies it with a double na∣ture of Spice. The Box-tree here is a solid, and firm wood; but sel∣dom or rarely grows to that degree of Timber. The Fiddle-tree, so called, has a sweet Flower, and grows up to Timber also, and is useful in building, &c. The Brazil Tree, Nature has given it the growth of Timber; and a tincture of that vertue, that it's useful for Diers, in staining of stuffs, or colouring of Cloth. Brazilleto, is a Minor or Junior Brazil, seldom or rarely arriving to the magnitude of Timber; but as useful in dying as the former. Bully-Tree is a ponderous, durable and compact Wood; that sinks if put into the Water: they use it
in Barbados for Rolers, but principally for Coggs, to Spindles, and Shafts in their Windmills: besides seve∣ral other uses. The Cocus Tree, we thought it unnecessary to range that among the Timber Trees, having considered it very useful to inlay with; and as profitable as plentiful to the industrious Turner. The Cassia Fistula is a Tree, but I cannot warrant it Timber; however the Fruit is for Physical Use. The Callabash Tree, is a kind of tough Timber, which we shape into Pumps, Pump-boxes, Knees, and Timber for small Vessels; and with the shell of the fruit, some folks make drinking Cups, which are called Calabashes. The Granadilla is a bastard Cocus; much of its nature, and useful in the like cases. Green Fustick is a sort of Timber fitted for Instru∣ments, or the art of inlaying; but the Yellow Fustick is more proper for Diers, as it may be directed; or suited at pleasure to other uses. Lignum vitae is a compact and ponderous Wood, good to make Bowls with, and as good to make Bowls of; I mean your Punch Bowl, and also Pestles and Mortars; but the Gum, Flowers, & Bark, are preserved as Druggs, &c. and Ale or any other Liquor, if provided it have stood ten or twelve hours in a Lignum-vitae-Cup, and drunk, it helps against Consumptions. Manchioneel, is a sort of Timber for Plank, and Shea∣thing, so naturally seasoned with some bitter taste, that the Worm willby no means touch it. Yellow Plumb-tree, is a very good Timber, and fitted for several uses. The Cabbage Tree, grows to a prodigious heighth, some to one hundred foot in length, yet has but a fibrous root and the Cabbage you shall observe at the extreamest part;
save onely a lovely Plume of green leaves over shade it. But it's no Timber tree, by reason it contains so very much Pith: however it's useful for Palasades, and to make Pumps, Gutters, Troughs, and Pailing with: but of the hard, and outmost Rind, the Indians by the use of fire make Piles for their Arrows; and with the leaves they cover the tops of their Houses, or Wiggwams; but the Cabbage it self is a most delicious food, and su∣per-excells our in England. The Ebony tree grows naturally here, I need not to speak the use of that. But the Shrubs that grow here, are the Physick Nut and Flowerfence: which are planted in rows (or lines) as our Hedges are to divide and distinguish Plantations, And the Sensible Plant, which contracts it self as soon as you touch it, is but a Shrub neither, that grows plenti∣fully here The Staples of Tobago. THe Cocao (that maketh Chocolatto) is a Nut so generally known, that it needs no discription: but yet I thought good to incert for encouragement, that in the Latitude of the Island of Tobago, one Acre of Land by modest computation may yield to the Planter 400 pie∣ces of Eight per Annum, (which in Barbados is valued at 100 l. Sterling) after the Trees have been planted six years. Then there's another thing worthy your conside∣ration, that never any Herricane nor the Blasts (satal to Ja∣maica and Hispaniola) has been ever known in the Lati∣tude of Tobago to strike the tender blossom, and buds, with its perishing stroke: which experience confirms
unto us, that by opening of the Woods in those parts thereby to plant Canes, or ground provision; they let in the Blast, that invaded the Cocao (but in this latitude, were we open to the Ocean, it's never the worse; for it never blasts here) which Cocao was so plentiful in Jamai∣ca, and Hispaniola formerly, that in the year 1654. I was at the taking of a Spanish Vessel loaden with Cocao, which came from Hispaniola; so great was the plenty, then, and to admiration; but the reason I have already laid down, why there is such a searcity now, and think it needless to make repetition, save onely to tell you that the Cocao Tree grows naturally wild in the Woods here in Tobago, and the Indians here gathered of the Nuts and brought to us; which Nuts were transported to Bar∣bados, as Mr. Rodderigo the Jew now in England can evi∣dence. The Sugar Cane was planted here by the Dutch, and I almost blush to express their wonderful increase, that the produce of one Acre of Canes should amount to six thousand pound of Sugar, besides Rum and Mollassos: which in Barbados and the Leward Islands they esteem it great profit if at any time one Acre yields them three thousand. And yet the Sugar Cane we approve to be none of the best Staples in the Island of Tobago. And the Tobacco that grows in this Island is nothing inferiour to Spanish Trinidado, that lies distant about some seven Leagues, and not above twenty miles North from the Verines; from whence comes the best Tobacco in the world. Several small Vessels have I seen loaden from Trinidado, and the Tobacco sold in the Role for 2 s. per pound, which Merchandize they transport to old Spain and other Parts to advance the price, which turns to considerable profit. So that in Tobago I perswade my self that a stout labouring man may make 3000 l. of To∣bacco
into Roll every year, and do it with a great deal of ease, which if sold but at seven pence per pound ster∣ling, comes to a considerable sum; as the Holander when they had the Island ingrossed the same, and gave six Sti∣vers for it there: which was afterwards transported to considerable profit. Indigo is a certain vveed that grows in Barbados, and in most of the Leward Islands: but the best to my obser∣vation grevv in Guatimale, vvhich lies in or near the la∣titude of Tobago; by vvhich I may rationally conclude that as good Indigo may be made here, as there; that one hand may dress up, and cure 1500 pound vveight in one year, all materials fitted, and the vveed brought to the place. There are tvvo sorts of Cotton; Ravil and Vine, of either sort of vvhich an industrious Planter may Plant tvvo thousand vveight in a year: and this I look upon is the meanest staple in Tobago for a man to go upon, and employ his hands. Ginger, That's another Staple; and as good grows here as in any part of the World, which admits of two several ways of curing to better it: so that some scal'd and dry it, othersome scrape it; but the last is best, and more then doubles the price, let Markets rule as they will. But of the first its ordinary for one man to make seven Thousand pound vveight a year. Sarsaparilla, is a Spanish drug that grows in the In∣dies, of which by reason of the great plenty in Tobago, one man I perswade my self, may gather and dry as much as by modest Computation comes to eighty, or a hundred pound Sterling a year. Semper Vioum, is a certain Juicy Plant, that's guard∣ed with a priekle Leaf; I need not tell you the use, and vertue of this Plant, of which the Planter here, as in
Barbadoes, &c. may make as good Aloes, as that which comes from Succotrina. So that a Thousand weight of Aloes Succotrina, will countervale the value of two Thousand of Hippatica. Bees-wax, is another Staple; of the Honey we make Metheglen, or expose it to other uses. The Vinillios grows like the Cod of a French bean, and is somewhat flat, and thinner, and full of small seeds. It generally grows upon bushes, or Brambles that spread themselves upon Rocks. So that when it blossoms, it sends forth such a fragancy as perfumes the Air; and when the Codds are ripening, they first turn green, after that brown, and last of all a more Ob∣scure Colour. Some use them as a perfume for Choca∣lata, or other wise to put amongst Cloths. But the Spa∣niards pickle them for Transportation, and their way, and manner is by scalding them in a pickle made up with Salt and Lime-water, which afterwards they dry up, and bind them in Bundels of about one hundred in a bundle; which bundles have been sold in England for twenty, thirty, or fourty Shillings a Bundle: of these sweet Cods I perswade my self that an active man may gather as much in a season, as will amount to the value of ten thousand Codds, and not loose much time. The Natural Balsam (as we call it) is a certain sappy juice, that issues forth of the body of the tree, after you have wounded it, by making a hole therein; so tap it, and the Liquor descends into a clean Gourd, or any o∣ther Vessel that's placed under it. The leaf of this tree differs but a little from that of the Fig-tree, and the Bal∣sam of most soveraign use for wounds, both in ward and outward. Yet the true Valuation of this excellent Balsam, is hitherto unknown. However great quanti∣ties,
as thirty or fourty Gallons, may be gathered in a year, by a diligent and industrous man. And then there's the Balm, (like that) of Gilea, (and equal in Vertue for ought I know) that comes from the Flower of the Balsam-tree, whose Leaf is Yellow, of a golden colour, and as big as a Rose when the flower is full blown, in which yellow Rose, there appears about some three or four bubbles, or drops of an Amber colour, each of the bigness of a Pea, which springs out of the Rose, and is that excellent and miraculous Balm, more valuable then Money. But the vertues I acquired of an Indian, who instructed me in the use on't, which at that juncture of time proved fortunate to me, when to consider the cut, and bruise of my finger that made me languish under intollerable pain, yet in one Minutes time to be released from pain: and within less than twenty four hours to receive an absolute cure, confirm∣ed it a Medicament of admirable vertues. Of which pre∣cious Balm, I modestly judge near forty pound weight might be gathered (by an industrous man) in less space of time then eight or ten months, besides other Labor. The Silk-Grass, so called, is a Plant that flourishes most in moist bottoms, and has a large broad long and thick Leaf, guarded with Prickles, not much unlike the teeth of a Saw, yet spread themselves every way; out of the Centre of these Leaves there grows a stalk, twelve or fourteen foot high, to four or five inches Diameter, to∣wards the Bottom. When this stalk begins to Wi∣ther, then the leaves are cut away, and laid in Water as you do Hemp; afterwards they dry it in the Sun, then hackle off the rotten pitthy substance which adheres to the more purer part of the silk-grass, which may be spun to the fineness of silk, &c. whereof you may make furniture for houses, or habits for your self and others.
But the general use of it is to make Ropes, and fishing Lines, of which to my certain knowledge there's no stronger, nor better in the World, and is a good Staple. Arnotto or Annotto, its all one, (the Hollanders call it Rocoo) it strikes a deep red, and is profitable for Dyers. The plenty of this Plant is such here that one man on an Acre of ground may in one years time make a thousand pound Weight: but the Annotto is cured two several ways: First the Barrel, which is an inferiour sort, and barrel'd up whiles as yet its moist: but the Cakes are dryed in the Sun. I have set down the method, and or∣der for both. This Annotto groweth in prickly Burrs, like Teasels, which Burrs when they be ripe, are full of Red seeds that are to be gathered in dry Weather, and put on a clean floor to thrash out the seed, which af∣terwards ought to be put into a Fatt, and steeped there till the water elicites a deep red Tincture: which the rather and sooner is done, if provided you sometimes stir it. Then with a sieve, (or somewhat else of a like nature) they separate the seeds from the tincture by let∣ting the water run through a Fosset till nothing visibly remains, but a Recrement or Sedement in the bottom, which substance when like batter, they put it into Bar∣rels, and so transport it. But others more curious, dry it in the Sun, which makes it better, and fitter for sale; and to yield almost a double price. The Green Tarr issues out of the earth from the Mun∣jack Rocks, and is commonly gathered after a shower of Rain, by skimming it off from the surface of the Water; and then put it into a great Gourd, or such like Vessel, that has a hole at the bottom, they separate the Oyl from the Water, by suffering the Water to slide gently out, but vvhen the Oyl appears, they cautiously stop and pre∣serve it for several servile uses, as to burn in Lamps, &c.
and has a most foveraign vertue to help against pains, and Aches in any part of the Body. In the Island of Tobago great quantities of this Oyl is procurable. The Munjack is nothing else than a Confirmation or Coagulation of the Tarr (we spoke of) into a more so∣lid body, which Munjack were it in a frigid, as it is in the torrid Zone, would be absolute Cole, such as we burn in England. This Munjack after its beat into pow∣der, they incorporate or mingle it with Earth, to burn under their Coppers in Barbadoes; otherwise it runs in∣to an oily Substance, by reason of the heat; as has been observed by melted Pitch, instead whereof the Spaniard substitutes Munjack. The Soap Earth, represents to me a kind of Clay, that Nature has indued with vertue, and the Qualifica∣tion of cleansing, and purifying other bodies: which dissolves in Salt, or in fresh Water; and makes a lather like sope-sudds, wherewith I washed my hands; and it not only scoured them, but took off the tanning to Ad∣miration, and so it happens either to Linnen or Wool∣en; by reason of its Mundificative Vertue and Quali∣ty. There is also a Clay that serves to clay Sugar with, or you may if you please make Earthen ware thereof. Moreover it will make good Brick or Tile, or to mingle it with Sand, you may shape it into Glass. Many curious Shells, stones, Markasites, and Mine∣rals are found up and down the Island of Tobago, whose vertue and worth is as yet unknown, and as by the Bounty of Heaven here's plenty enough for the Susten∣tation of Man, and Beast: so by a natural instinct, and inclination Nature opens her doors of Treasure, where∣with to adorn, and inrich the industrous: God is pleas∣ed to endue this Island with plenty, so let her Inhabi∣tants
be mindful not to Surfeit with excess: for if ful∣ness, and ease, be the parents of idleness; idleness must of Necessity be the darling of a soft and remiss Genera∣tion, that slides into the foolish Embracements of Ho∣nour and Ambition, which is the overthrow of civil So∣ciety; and from which two evils, Libera nos Domi∣ne. Directions for Improvement in the Island of TOBAGO. SUppose a Man that has an hundred pound Sterlin is minded to transport himself; and Family, consist∣ing of eleven in number, to this Island of Tobago, and suppose their passages may cost him fifty pound; and Manuals with other things requisite and necessary for Planting, as also Provision for the first twelve months, together with the charge of Houshold stuffs, and all o∣ther Necessaries, may stand him in 47 l. 10 s. more: Suppose also this man takes a Lease of fifty Acres of Land for a thousand years, at the rate of twelve-pence an Acre anually, it amounts but to two pound ten shil∣lings a year, (except otherwise he purchase the Fee simple of the Proprietors) which compleats the hun∣dred pound; This is the first Money laid out; nor need he be at any more charge, for in twelve months time he will have ground provision enough, and in all Pro∣bability two Crops of Tobacco. The next thing to consider of, is the Improvement of the said Land; which is as followeth. After your Arrival in the Island of Tobago the first six Months may
be spent to clear fifteen Acres of Land, and to put Provisions into the ground; to build Conveniencies to accomodate your self, and Family, to adapt and fit the ground for planting a Nursery of Cacoa-nuts; as also a bed sowed with Tobacco seeds, and be sure to keep your Nursery clear from Weeds. Then about a Months time after you have sown your Tobacco seed (provided the Seasons be good) you may then draw your Tobacco Plants, and plant them about some four foot distance, one from another, regularly and in rows: which said Tobacco Tobago produces, is nothing inferiour to Spa∣nish Trinidado, that lies about seaven Leagues distance from the said Island of Tobago, where I have seen the Spaniards (when I was a Prisoner amongst them) sell great quantities of Trinidado Tobacco at the rate of two Shillings a pound; which said Tobacco the Spaniards transport from thence, to old Spain; and sell it there to considerable advantage. Now amongst your Tobac∣co plants, you may plant your Cocoa, and transplant them when about six Months old, into new ground, fitted at ten or twelve foot distance; and be sure to keep clean from Weeds; In which latter six Months time, you may have on your cleared ground two Crops of Tobacco. Now admiting you make but eight thousand weight of Neat Tobacco on the said Ground; yet in all probability (provided your People be healthy) it may double the number to sixteen thou∣sand. But if it do not, and put the case your Tobacco fell but for an eighth part of what the Spaniards sell for in Trinidado (which is but three pence per pound fold here in our Island) yet will this Crop yield you one hundred pounds Sterlin, which is your Money gained the very first year, and in six month time, all charges being born. Now suppose that at the beginning of the second year
the said fifteen Acres be all cleared; and Provision e∣nough put into the ground sufficient for double your num∣ber of hands: you may rationally then expect four Crops in twelve Months time, when as formerly you made two Crops in the last six Months. So that with the hundred pounds you gained last year, you may now purchass seven or eight slaves, or Servants; which may in all probability treble the first year. But put the case it but only double, yet at the worst it may yield you (and all charges born) two hundred pounds Sterlin. Now we cannot otherwise conclude (if things suc∣ceed well) but that the third year will double the second year by improvement, as above is exprest; and if so, then your Crop will amount to four hundred pounds Sterlin. And the fourth year doubles the third year, by rea∣son the Cocoa that was planted the first year on the fif∣teen Acres of Land, may produce to the value of thir∣ty pounds Sterlin an Acre; besides the encrease of To∣bacco, and clearing of more ground, together with your encrease of Servants, and slaves; and planting of more Cacao Trees, which at least will arise to eight hundred pounds sterlin, the fourth year. The fifth year, in all Probability doubles the fourth; by reason the Cocoa that was first planted, yeilds now to the value of sixty pound Sterling an Acre, as the se∣cond years planted Cocoa yielded but thirty pounds per Acre. So that clearing of more ground, and purcha∣sing more slaves, and Servants; your produce of Cocoa and Tobacco, clears you at least one thousand six hun∣dred pounds Sterlin, as now the price goes. The sixth year you may very well clear three thousand pounds sterlin, and all charges borne; by reason the Cocoa planted the first year, is now come to perfection, & is at its full height of bearing; Which in this Latitude may yield
one hundred ponnd Sterling an Acre. (viz.) the first fifteen Acres which were Planted the first year. And the second years Plants Planted the second year, will yield you sixty pound sterling, & the third years Plants, as by the same calculation, may yield you thirty pound Sterlin an Acre. So that by purchasing the more ser∣vants, and slaves, you may if you please decline so much planting of Tobacco as formerly you did. The seventh year you will have all your Land Planted with Cocoa; and that encreasing, you need not plant a∣bove ten, or fifteen Acres of Tobacco this year, amongst your Cocao; but you may Plant provisions amongst them for support and maintenance of your self and Family. So that from that increase of your seventh years Crop, you may hope, and expect by a modest computation, to clear from the said fifty Acres of Land, at least five thousand pounds Sterling a year. And now we come to the Reasons for this great im∣provement; you must consider, that the Spaniards in Trinidado, &c. give among themselves one hundred pounds Sterling, for a Nigro Slave, and yet the said slave will not stand his master in one single penny, at the years end for his purchase. And all the labour and ser∣vice the Spaniard imploys him in the year about, is on∣ly in Cocoa, and Spanish Tobacco, in this our Latitude. Now pray consider, that we can have Nigro Slaves brought and delivered to us at fifteen pound sterling a head; by reason we have an open trade, and the Spani∣ard allows not of a free trade. VVhere note the Spani∣ard pays sixpence, or more for every thing he wants; when we can have the same for a single peny. That's one reason. The second Reason is, the Spaniard cannot have any Tunage for goods from old Spain to the West-Indies, and
home again, for less then forty or fifty pounds sterling per Tun; besides the Duties run very high. And we can have Freight for five or six pounds per Tun, and no Duties from us to a free Port. VVhen therefore to consider and compute the charge on either side, we pro∣fit by what we transport, six to one. VVhich makes the Spaniard generally so poor in the Indies; and we ge∣nerally to flourish so much the more. The third reason is, that in a Ship of three hundred Tun, the Spaniard has seldom less then two hundred men belonging to her; and the wages of each man comes at least to Fifty Shillings Sterling per month: which in the whole amounts to five hundred pound a month, barely for wages; then you are to Consider the month∣ly Provision to accomodate these men cannot come to less then one hundred and sixty pound Sterlin, and ten months at six hundred and sixty pound per Month, amounts to six thousand and five hundred pounds Sterlin for ten Months. Moreover this Ship of three hundred Tun, seldom carries less then forty Pieces of Ordinance, which with their Provisions, &c. by modest computation takes up no less room then one hundred and fifty Tun. So that the Ship in all Probability cannot bring home more then one hundred and fifty tun of Merchants goods, and the fraight of these goods comes to forty pound Sterlin a tun. So that by this Calculation they must be loosers at least six hundred pound Sterlin, and at fourty five pound-per tun, to pay ware and tare of the Ship, and mens wages. So that for the ships ware and tare it comes barely but to one hundred and fifty pound Sterlin clear: Now admit an English ship of three hundred tun, be bound for Jamaica, and suppose the fraight of this ship be at six pound sterlin per tun, this ship shall make her voy∣age
better in eight months time then the Spaniard shall in ten Months; now the fraight of the English ship comes to one thousand eight hundred pound sterlin, and the Wages and Victuals of the said Ship at sixty pound per Month, comes to four hundred and eighty pound ster∣lin, so that you see the Ship clears for her ware and tare the sum of one thousand three hundred and twenty pound sterlin: See here therefore the great difference. The fourth and last reason is this; The King of Spain contracts with a body of Merchants to furnish the West-Indies with four thousand Nigros every year; and the Nigrillos or Merchants there engage to pay the King one hundred peices of Eight Custom for each Ni∣gro slave brought unto them. VVhich comes to four hundred thousand pieces of Eight by the year, which is paid to the said King, the King therefore prohibits all Merchants, and others, for bringing Nigros to the West-Indies: And each piece of Eight is valued at five shillings sterlin in Barbadoes; but in the Lee-ward Islands it goes for six. Here followeth the Proposals made by my self and Company, To all such People as are minded to Tiansport or Concern themselves in the Island of TOBAGO, Which lieth about forty Leagues South from Barbadoes. WHereas his Majesty the King of Great Brittain, that now is, hath given and granted unto James Duke of Courland, his Heirs and Successors, the said Island of Tobago, on Con∣dition
that none shall inhabit the said Island, save only the Subjects, of the King of England and the Duke of Courland, their Heirs and Successors: On the said Condition, I have contracted with the said Duke, that my self and Company set∣tle One hundred and Twenty Thousand Acres of Land in the said Island, and to have several great and large Priviledges; Some of which are here incerted, viz. Imprimis, That One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Acres of Land in the said Island of To∣bago, is given and granted to my self and Company, and our Heirs for ever; and Seven Years to be free from Payment of any Rent; and after the Expiration of Seven Years each for him∣self is to pay Two Pence per Acre every Year to the said Duke, his Lawful Heirs and Successors. Secondly, That my self and Company, and all the Inhabitants, shall enjoy Liberty of Consci∣ence, without Interruption; Roman Catholicks only Excepted. Thirdly, That my self and Company, &c. are to be Governed by a Governour, Deputy Gover∣nour, and Assembly, to be yearly chosen by the Majority of Freeholders Votes, of the People in the Island, to make good and wholesome Laws for the good Government and Defence of the said
Island; and all Controversies in the Premises to be decided by the Majority of Voices. Note, These are but Breviates and part of the Heads of the Grant from the Duke of Courland, Ra∣tified to my self and Company, whereby we hold and enjoy our Land; for that end I do refer all Peo∣ple to the Grant, as more at large; as also to them that have been on the Skirt or Body of the said Island, to confirm the Truth of what is before spoken of the Products of the said Island. Proposals for further Encouragement. First, Those which are desirous to concern themselves in the said Island, shall and may have as much Land as they themselves please, either by Lease or Purchase; onely they are to put upon e∣very Fifteen Acres of Land one White Man, and so in proportion to the rest; and this to be done in Three Years time. Secondly, All Persons that are desirous to Tran∣sport themselves to the said Island in the quality of Servants, shall have Better Encouragement from my self and Company, than has been yet Propoun∣ded by any of His Majesties Subjects in any Set∣tlement in the American Plantations. Thirdly, And for a further Encouragement, All those Persons and Planters that are any ways con∣cerned
in the Premises, shall have Credit given un∣to them from Crop to Crop, as the Factory is stor'd, for what they shall stand in need of; for which the said Company will Erect a Bank or Fa∣ctory of Credit in the said Island, the Debtor allow∣ing only two and a half per Cent. Fourthly, All Merchants and others that shall import any Negroes or other Merchandise into the said Island, shall have their Goods and Debts Insured, and disposed of, for Two and a Half per Cent. with Factorage, Storage, Wharfage, &c. And Exported again for Two and a Half per Cent. more. And all Tradesmen and Others tha. Contract any Debts amongst themselves, shall have Credit given them out of the Bank or Factory, from Crop to Crop, for Two and a Half per Cent. And the Proprietors do engage their Whole Interest for the True Performance of the aforesaid Premises. Fifthly, All Merchants and others that have Goods fit to Accommodate the said Island, and have not ready Money to purchase Land, nor to pay for their own or Servants Paslage, such may barter with Goods in lien of Money: Always pro∣vided, This implies only such Persons as contract with the Proprietors, or some of them, before the first Shipping departs out of the River of Thames, to Ship off, as above, their proportion of Goods or People, as is already sufficiently above-expressed.
For the Accomodation of all Persons that de∣sire to be Concern'd in the above-named Island of Tobago, some of the Proprietors, or their Agents, will give their Attendance every day in the Week, at Mr. Nathaniel Morin's, at the Blew Anchor in Finch-Lane, near the Royal Exchange, from Eight a Clock in the Morning, till two in the Afternoon: And at Jones's Coffee House in Ship yard in Bartholomew Lane, from two in the Afternoon till four. And at the Amsterdam-Coffee-House in Bartholomew Lane from four in the Afternoon till six. Where any Per∣son may receive more Particular Satisfaction: Where also may be seen a Schedule of the Pro∣prietors, for the setling Twenty Thousand Acres of Land in the said Island, for a Joynt Stock, for Subscriptions of any Persons that are willing to be Adventurers in the same. And at each of which places these Books are to be Sold; Price Stitcht, Six-pence. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. ☞ A nevv Map of the Island of Tobago (with a Chart of all the Caribee-Islands) is to be sold by John Seller, at the VVest-side of the Royal Exchange.
