Q27 R31139 11780656 49036
Licensed, June 20. 1678. Roger L'Estrange.
QƲAKERS meer Obbists: OR, A LETTER TO A Preaching Quaker, FROM A Moderate Gentleman TREPAN'D Into one of their Meetings, in hopes to work him to the Party. WHEREIN A True and Short Account is given of their Foolish and Ridiculous way of Worship. Written some time since; And to gratifie the Importunities of Several, and remove the many and great Errors occasion'd by often Transcriptions, Now Printed by a Correct Copy. Seria Mixta jocis. London, Printed for the Author, 1678.
A LETTER TO A Preaching Quaker, FROM A Moderate GENTLEMAN. SIR, MY Civility to Mrs.—betray'd me into the error of being present at one of your Meetings, where, after above an hour spent in profound silence, Humming and Whiftling, and the inspir'd Cryer's loud declaration in
these words, If any Man have a Word from the Lord, let  behold we are all ready to hear, it was my ill fortune to see You thereupon nimbly as a Squirril skip upon a Stool, and from thence hear you, tho not Out of one, tell a silly Tale of a Tub, in a long non-sensi∣cal Harangue to the people; this brought into my mind what the Wise Syracides observes, That an unsea∣sonable Tale will be alwayes in the mouth of the untaught, and that Sand and Salt, and a Mass of Iron are not so hea∣vy to bear as a man without understanding; I shou'd not trouble my self nor you, to tell you, That tho you talk'd above two tedious hours, you said just nothing: but that I perceiv'd my presence gave occasion to the wild ribble rabble you made; And notwithstanding you pretended the motion of the Spirit for your vain babling, yet I have reason to believe it proceeded wholly from a self Conceited opinion of your own Abilities, to draw the Publican you mentioned to your Faction; Therefore I now send you my thoughts, lest you might hereafter defame me, by reporting to the World, I was so great a Fool, as by you to be made a Proselyte, to a way of Worship, which all who have not like you, either lost, or dissembled their Reason, must Conclude to be Folly, Schism, Madness, and Blasphemy. I tell you truly, before I was acquainted with your Phrenzy, I entertain'd a softer Opinion of you and your Party, than now I do, or ever shall, if I may judge of the rest by you, who Impudently stle your self a Doctor and Propagator of the Pure Truth, sent and inspired, by the Almighty, with a Power (to make
I rather think, than as you say) to unfold Mysteries. I confess I thought you were a sort of people, that, be∣ing tir'd out with the Infinite vain Janglings, and fri∣volous Disputes of this late wanton Age, had at last withdrawn your selves, from the nice and endless intri∣cacies of Opinion, and settl'd upon the plain Practice of Piety, and the few uncontroverted Articles of Christian Faith, perhaps with many degrees, of Weak∣ness and Ignorance, but with much Sincerity and Re∣solution, to promote in your selves and others the fruits of good life, and the Perfection you so much boast of; And thus far I own I had Charity for you, and would not have your other Errors, whil'st you Continu'd Modest, and Innocent, severely punished; hoping that Inward Rectitude, (if there be any such thing among you) would in time work out partial Mistakes, and conduct you to a sober Understanding, at least wou'd keep you prepar'd and unprejudic'd, for the entertainment of so noble a Guest, whenever and however it should please God to Convey it to you: But really I find you quite another thing; and I, who, I thank God, do harbour no distast against the person of any man, do assure you, that I have a wondrous mean esteem of J. A. the inspir'd Doctor, as he calls himself, a great suspition of his dishonesty, and a suffi∣cient demonstration of his profound Ignorance, insuf∣ferable impudence, his self-conceitedness, and his wild, bold, frantick, schismatical and factious spirit; and if J. A. be one of the most eminent of his order, and a pattern of the rest of his Brethren, I think they ought to change their name; for Quaking is the effect of Fear and awe of something we dread; but you seem
by all your actions and gestures in your wild kind of Devotion, to be bold, and frantick, and to fear nothing so much, as treating God Almighty with Reverence and Honour; indeed I do not wonder, you give no re∣spect to Men, since you deny it to God. About Three Thousand Years ago when the Devil play'd Tricks at Delphos, and inspir'd his Sacrists with the spirit of Ob, to utter Oracles, per pudenda, which for Modesty sake I can't translate, but it may be you have profane learning enough to understand, they, as you are, were bodily possess'd by their spirit, disfigur'd by strange Convulsive Eits, raving and foaming, not knowing what they did, chang'd in their Counte∣nance, and horrid in their Aspects, when the throes of their Deity came upon them, were instantly deli∣ver'd of the mysteries of their god, which when they were out, were usually as great mysteries, as they were before; such are all your ravings to me, and I believe to all men, that are not dazzl'd in their Un∣derstandings, and frighted from their little Witts, by your presumptuous taking upon you, to tell the poor ignorant people, and silly Women laden with many infirmities, that thus saith the Lord, when the Lord hath not spoken, but your spirit of Ob. And thence you may derive your Church, and stand upon your Challenge of Antiquity, and take place of Christianity; you have a more ancient origi∣nal, and may, if you like the name, be Obbists; and since you entitle every thing to God, that is but your private spirit or fancy, probably a little while hence
(for there is but the addition of H, which is no letter) you'l become Hobbists: A sort of men I suppose you have heard of, who by the offences they have taken at such wild, and inconsistent Capricio's as yours, assert God, to be nothing distinct from the Universe and Eternal Matter. Now tho I seem to be sharp in the derision of your Madness, yet I do assure you, I am no enemy to mens persons, upon the account of their differing from me in opinion about the Modes, and Circumstances of Re∣ligion, (tho in them they ought to be govern'd, as to their outward Compliance, by the Rules prescrib'd by the Power under which they live, which only can make them not indifferent to its Subjects, as to the Use, tho still they remain so, in their own nature, and al∣terable at the pleasure of the Composers,) provided they are sound, and sincere in the Fundamentals of Religion, and the practice of a holy life, without which I can never be perswaded, their errors are the effect of a weak Understanding, and not the products of a stub∣born and perverse Will; For let me tell you, Reverend Sir, Religion is not what you fancy, a Rapturous ex∣travagance of Enthusiasme, and an Antick bodily Wor∣ship, (which tho you so much decry, yet do most of any use;) but 'tis a sincere, and a reasonable Service, a Worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth, i. e. an Inward Rectitude and Holiness, a Conformity of our Lives and Actions, to the Divine Goodness, and the Lawes of our Superiors that are consistent with the same; not a foolish imagination that it consists in scrupulous nice∣ties about Nothing, in a Garb or Fashion, in Rudeness,
and Incivility, in a Contempt of all Civil respects of decent usages; or indeed in any thing, wherein both good and bad men may equally be concern'd in pra∣ctice, and yet be neither good nor bad, by any such ex∣ternal Character. But by talking Reason to you, you'l tell me I'm as vain, as you were to me last Night, if I expect my Discourse shou'd work on you, more than your ridi∣culous Nonsense did on me; the effect of which was to confirm me, that in my opinion, you have nothing of Honesty, Reason or Religion; for he that wants Cha∣rity, wants All, that being the bond of Religion; which in your talk you perfectly loosened, by rayling at, and defaming all others, who have more Witt, than to Worship the God of their Fathers, after your phantasti∣cal, and ridiculous manner. Among all the Gifts of the Spirit, that God bestow'd on the Primitive Christians, did you ever hear of the Gift of Whistling? Was that their practice, when they waited for, or invited the Holy Spirit? Or is the Spirit so very observant of you, that you may have it for Whistling for? But now I find what spirit yours is, a meer puff of aire; and 'tis no wonder that all the Nozzil results of it, be such as yours, empty, idle, and insignificant, as the Wind which passes thro the Norril of a pair of Bellowes: Which I do not speak at ran∣dom; because indeed you use it, to no other purpose, than to blow up the fire of an ignorant and perverse Zeal; which you are pleas'd to call the Light within um; but 'tis indeed more a'kin to our Sea-Coal Kitchin Fires which burns and scorches, than to the glorious
Sun, which gently heats, and warms the subjects of its influence. I have sometimes seen a Mad-man act and speak as long as you, but with much less noise, I'm sure with as much Sence and Reason; and certain I am, all that were there, had they not been possess'd with the same kind of Phrenzy, would have Judg'd you, as I do, di∣stracted, and rarely well provided, to preach upon that Text which one of your illuminated Enthusiasts did; who tho he had abundance of the Spirit, even so much, that it utterly excluded all human Reason and Learn∣ing, insomuch that he could not correct the error of the Press, and perceive that the letter e, was negli∣gently left out, took for his subject those words of the Psalmist, I am fearfully and wonderfully mad, and that my Soul knoweth right well; from whence he ob∣serv'd, (I make no question you'l say, very rightly) That the Saints may thro excess of Zeal, be even as it were mad. That you were, even as it were just in the same Case, you might a-spar'd a great deal of your sweat, and pains to assure me; a tenth of it would have given sufficient evidence of that; for no man needs drink up all the Sea, to know that it is salt. Learned and onely Orthodox Doctor, can you tell me, what Words were invented for? or why you speak to me, or any man, if it be not to convey your Con∣ceptions of things to my apprehension, by the usual and publick signification of words or signs, which all men do agree in, that can Converse by them? but I perceive yours are not like other mens, or not so put together; for I never heard any but you, (tho I fear
there are many more like you, who pretended to Rea∣son much more, that boasted the Spirit was within them, speak so many words, every one of which I singly understood, and yet altogether signified nothing: which induced me to think, that either really, you had no steady Notion, or apprehension of what you had to say, or else would impose upon the Weakness of those that heard you; and make them believe, by lea∣ving them to every one of their own phantastical suspitions, that truly you powr'd forth precious my∣steries, which tasted like Manna, differently to every man's Pallat, when indeed you said just nothing; and what you said to me, was as insipid as a Cork, and tastless as the white of an Egg. But however to your poor simple people, you appeared by your extasies, to be carried up, with your honest Paul, into the third Heaven, where you pretended to have heard words, that could not be spoken, and therefore I presume you spoke so many words that could not be understood; but for all your soaring to such a pitch, I look upon it no otherwise, than the attempt of Simon Magus; who amongst other of his Tricks, that he might appear some great One, attempted to fly in the Aire, and came down headlong, and brake his bones; or rather like a Boyes Kite, hovering aloft with a Lanthorn at the tayl on't, the Country people admiring it for a strange Wonder, ignorant of the Trick, and of this whole Apparition's being govern'd and led about, just as the Boy pleases either to lengthen or wind up his pack∣thread, and vary the motions of it to the greatest amusement of the silly Country Folk, till at last the string breaks, down comes all, and out goes the Can∣dle.
Such is your Light, and such a wonder you are in Heaven, and so ridiculous is your issue with me, who understand it. I'm sure you are contrary to what was suppos'd of St. Paul, your too little Learning had made you mad; I believe you are well read in Jacob Behm, and have no small skill in Magick, for your Dialect is like that of the Negromancers, onely to be understood by your Familiars. You began like one of the Apostles in their Epi∣stles, with Grace, Grace, &c. and tumbl'd out your vain babling, and idle repetitions, with as much hast and Confidence, as if you should never be empty; and were hurried on with the violent spirit of Jehu, who drave just as furiously as you did, but made more pro∣gress; for you bounc'd and praunc'd and plung'd, and flung about, head, words, arms and hands, and yet never mov'd one step forwards, but after two hours beating and foaming, was just where you set out at first, onely something worse: for you over-plung'd your self in wading too far into the Revelations; the bottom of which is so very dark and deep, that all your new Light (which I will easily believe with you is not Natural, if you'l be perswaded with me that 'tis affected) do's burn blew, and at last goes out in those profound depths, and will not serve to shew you the way thence; and therefore as a Friend I advise you never to play the Fool again, in venturing to expound those mysteries; which you last Night prov'd suffici∣ently to continue such, in spight of all your attempts to unriddle them. At your first skipping up upon your Stool, you pro∣mis'd
to tell us, the meaning of the Wonder in Heaven, a Woman with a Crown on her head &c. and the Dragon, &c. but your light rambling spirit, led you from that into your Wilderness-Condition; where I do not admire that amongst so many bryars and thorns, you found your self entangled, and sent your Wits a wooll gather∣ing. After you had about half an hour rav'd and ram∣bled in a maze, you recollected your self, and afresh started the Wonder, but presently lost the sight again of the Woman in Heaven, and took another frisk into the Wilderness, where you staid about an hour, and then return'd like a Wood-man, fully taught by your spirit, that your Church, tho but of 19 or 20 years standing, was that Primitive Church or Woman, which your honest John (as you call'd him) said went into the Wilderness; where I'm sure you left her in a very pitiful, dabl'd, and bewilder'd Condition; and there you say, she is to stay, time, times and half a time, which in all by your exposition amounts to three times, but by what rule of Arithmetick, I confess I am yet to learn. Now because you say you have so great a measure of the Spirit, and do with much ignorance and folly, declaim against the Use of Learning, and acquaintance with ancient Records, in unravelling the meaning of the obscurer passages of Scripture, which I think are necessary, for a right understanding of many places thereof, I would take the pains to peruse your Expo∣sition of the 12th Chapter of the Revelation, if you please to permit me, with the Author, whereof you seem to be so familiarly acquainted, by your homely Compellation of him honest John, that one might guess,
you knew all his mind, as well as himself who wrote it. I should be also glad to know, if indeed you do so, why you give any observance to the Lord's Day, and by virtue of what Command? and also how your spi∣rit teaches you, to reconcile the different Genealogies of our Saviour? the quotation out of Jeremy, of the 9th Verse of the 27th Chapter of St. Matthew, which you must have better Eyes than mine, to find in that Prophet, and the 2d. of St. John, which sayes the Tem∣ple was 46 Years a building; and yet the 1st of Kings, 6. Chapter, 38 Verse, sayes it was all Compleatly finish'd in 7 years. Many other places I could propose to you, which, however you boast of your Universal skill in understanding all Scripture, yet I make no question, cannot be made understandable, without the Forrein Aids of ancient Learning. I hope you believe the Scriptures were written by Men inspir'd, who there∣fore could not write a lye; and since your spirit is pre∣tended to be the same with theirs, then give me leave to say these two things; First, that it can find and make out the harmony and agreement, which is or ought to be in all the parts of that holy Writing. And secondly, if it be so, I would fain know what reason or necessity there was at all, that any Records of Scripture should ever be written or transmitted to us, seeing all the pro∣bable ends of such Writing are better serv'd by the Certitude, and Permanency, of the unerring spirit in your selves. If you find any difficulty in this task, and therefore forbear it, I shall justly suspect your spirit, and tell you, You know not what spirit you are of: Last Night you bid me try the spirits, and this Proposi∣tion is for an Indication of yours. But if you will
allow me to try the spirits, I must try them by some∣thing which I count infallible, and that infallible rule I must also judge of, and therefore upon the matter you bid me try your spirit, by my spirit, and to that tryal I am sure you will not stand, and therefore you might as well have sent me on a Fool's Errand, for a Yard of Ell∣wide pack-thread. To encourage you to this work, tho you say you are no hireling, yet I know you believe the Labourer worthy of his hire; and the effects sufficiently shew, that your whole Sect is endu'd with the spirit, but 'tis with that of the World; since none love it bet∣ter, scrape nearer, and hold faster that which they seem very much to despise; your godliness has prov'd great gain to you; and I fancy your great Rabby Solomon, would venture the second Whipping, were he sure of receiving from the Brethren the other 80 l. for his late rude and uncivil disturbances, in the public Worship of God. I perceive I begin to have something of your spirit, to ramble and forget what I was saying; but as I said, if you can shew me Convincingly, in what me∣thod, and by what measures I should proceed to the tryal and assurance of spirits, I will be your follower, and encrease your glory, by becoming your Proselyte, so long as you and I shall be of one mind; for you know we can promise nothing in these matters absolutely, from which we may not be disoblig'd, by the self-same spirit, that does at present perswade us; and if you and I shall happen hereafter to differ, which spirit will then be the right spirit, wou'd be as great a Controversie, as now it is; and very likely the greatest Impudence and Confidence, which is the way you take, must carry it. When you bragg'd and ruffl'd high, I was in sober
sadness, and without any canting grieved in spirit, and wou'd have oppos'd you, but that I thought it an un∣equal Match, against so much Impudence, to oppose my own Modesty, and to publish by the noise of it my own folly, in suffering my self to be drawn in, as I told you before, by my Civility to another, to hear you prate for two hours together, and dam all others that were not of your own humor and Opinion; who have more Charity for you and the rest of your Sect, than not to tell you now, what I should have done then, that Charity puffs not up, but is meek and humble, and all your talk of Religion without Charity is but sounding brass, and tinck∣ling Cymbal; Consider you are but a man, and there∣fore subject to error, Charity thinks no evil, and there∣fore, slander not all who are not of your Way, with the odious Names of Impious and Profane. Charity vaunt∣eth not, but loves all the World; think then as well of others, if not better than of your self; you will never be exalted to Heaven, if you pass not thro the Gate of Modesty and Humility. What reason have you for your opinions, that others have not (or if they think they have, they have as much as you,) for theirs? how came you to be wiser than other men, who think they have the Spirit also? and you can do no more; and may not such a person, with as good reason ask you the question, as you may do him, Friend, how went the Spirit from me to you? and what can this produce but endless Janglings, and uncharitable heats? which how safely they may be permitted in a Common-Wealth, let the Supreme Magistrate judge: I cannot reprove his rea∣soning, if he think fit to give what needful check and restraint he thinks Convenient, to the evil Effects and
Consequences of furious and quarrelling Religionists, who living in the spirit of a Sect, are alwayes found, and ever to be presum'd, dearly to love themselves, ag∣grandize themselves, and advance the Party; and there∣fore are ever to be held in suspition of seizing upon all Power, and doing vile things, and finding Scripture and Promises for it, as the Meek ones of Germany did, who however they had utterly detested and disclaim'd, as contrary to their Principles, the use of Carnal Wea∣pons; yet at length, when fairer opportunities invited them to change their mind, the Heavenly Father re∣veal'd unto 'um, that they should inherit the Earth, by resisting their Prince in the Field, seizing upon their Neighbours Proprieties and Possessions; and when this Promise was made good to them, then should be fulfilled, what was spoken by the Prophet, They shall beat their Swords into Plowshears, &c. i. e. when they have what they wou'd, none to resist them, and no more to desire, they will be as gentle as Lambs, and as innocent as sucking Children. Some preparatory Principles towards this ill Issue I discover amongst you already, by your crying up, and absolving all the Subjects of the law by a passive obedi∣ence, as you call it; which first is not the intention of the Law at all, for that designs no man's suffering, but the fulfilling of it self. And secondly, is so far from being a doing of what the Law requires, that it is no act at all; for it is either not doing, or which is worse, a doing what the Law forbids, and suffering the punish∣ment of disobedience; which you are pleas'd to name a Passive obedience; if this be true, then the Thief, the Traytor, the Murderer has fulfilled the Law, when he
suffers as a Criminal, and may be truly said in the phrase of the Scotch People to be justified. And to great advan∣tage you may use this Doctrine, for the Brotherhood may quickly swell to a considerable bulk, with the ad∣dition of Cheats and Rogues, and yet be still Justified persons, and passively obedient honest men. So that by their Engines you may command both Heaven and Earth, this World, and the World to come is only yours: and you seem very much offended, that men will not forgo the little Reason and Prudence, which they have, upon the bare credit of your pretended Piety; which is in∣deed but a piece of Pageantry, a Pharisaical demure look, and newer kind of Superstition; most of your Sect being contrary to the Pharisees, onely in refusing Salu∣tations, but not good pennyworths, in the Market-places, and the uppermost Seats in Synagogues; into which your Schism and Pride forbids you to enter, unless you abate, to gratifie your unmannerly rudeness, when you in∣trude into 'um, to do dishonour to the Solemn Assem∣blies, and publick Worship of God. If I had call'd you lyer, and ignorant Impostor, when you told the giddy people, St. Luke was one of the Apo∣stles, and that our Blessed Saviour, at Eight and twenty years of age, call'd his Disciples, and began his Ministry, how would you have acquitted your self? and if I had asked you, which of the Ministers taught the People, that Perfection, (I mean Evangelical Perfection) was not attainable in this life, and which of 'um went from the Pulpit to the Ale-house, or to Cards and Dice? which you maliciously (I make no doubt) spoke indi∣stinctly, that you might fortifie your people, in that de∣gree of detestation, to which you have already rais'd
them, against a whole order of men; or if you had known any such irregularities by any single and extra∣vagant person; do you think it any more fit, and just, that the privat miscarriages of some few, (which how severe soever the Laws are to the contrary, will, I fear, for ever be in great and Congregate Bodies) should be objected to the disparagement of the whole Family; than it wou'd be for me, to Conclude the like of all men, that pass under your denomination, because I know some of them to be unjust and Knaves, leud per∣sons, and dissembling Hypocrites? Know Friend, this was the spirit of Malice, and Faction suggested by the Devil; if you would bring men to your side, you must not do it by foolish artifices, and malicious suggestions; you must not spitefully rayl at other men, and think to out-brave their Principles, but recommend your own, by the reality and sincerity of them, in effecting the issues of a good Life, and laying down Rules and Precepts for the attaining of that, with more integrity than others do, and have done; in procuring a sober Judgment of true Religion and undefiled; which once more I tell you consists in the inward Rectitude of the Mind, and the Conforming of our selves to the Image of the invisible God, by all the imitations in us, which are the bright rayes of the Sun of Righteousness, which enlightens every man that comes into the World; i. e. is ready to teach, and sufficient to perswade us, to perse∣vere in the wayes which God has promis'd to reward, and we believe will do it; Thus we are lifted up to a nearer approach to, and participation (so far as our ab∣sence in the body will permit) of the Divine Nature. This is the state of happiness, the end for which Man
was made, and the great Design of Religion; which is intended as a Mean, to bring Man to this state of Feli∣city; it being a joyning of him, and all his powers and faculties to God; by conversing with whom on Earth, as he is able, he is made more Spiritual, and better pre∣par'd by congruity of Nature, for the perception of of those purer delights, ordain'd and preserv'd for him in Heaven. And because Religion is the way and tendency to this End; that must needs be the best, that leads us thither the surest way; the excellency of which is to be discover'd by the credit and worthi∣ness of the Law-giver, and by the reasonable Methods it proceeds in; and since 'tis a state of Action, not of Contemplation meerly; the true estimate of it must be made, in proportion to the good Deeds it teaches and prescribes to her professors; and these being the observations of the Lawes of a Superiour power, and consisting in some things to be believ'd, and more things to be done; I should be glad to receive from you, the sums, and Heads of your Religion, (if you be yet agreed upon them) that I may compare them with the Apostles Creed, which I have already re∣ceiv'd; examine them by Scripture, by Reason, the Light within me, of which by all I cou'd find from you, I have without arrogance as great a measure as you can pretend to. But after all this, I have these two things to say; First, That I thank God, the Author of all good, that I have and shall ever be careful to preserve a very ten∣der sense, and regard to that good Spirit, which en∣lightens, comforts, moves and perswades, teaches and
presides in the Minds of good Men; this You pretend to, if it be the Spirit of God you mean, when you talk so much of it; but I do verily believe you are impos'd upon by a false and Counti spirit; and this is that of which I have spoken something more than ordina∣ry contemptuously in this Letter. I would not for all the World grieve, or villifie the meanest of God's Servants, or reproach the Grace of God by the Igno∣rance and imperfections of any simple, and plain-hearted Christian; but because I look upon you, as drawn aside from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, and the sobriety of men; I can't endure without severe reflection, to see you intrude into the place and privi∣ledge of the Saints of God, that do betray the methods of his Grace, and Goodness, to the wild and fanciful extravagance of your own spirit, and the gratification of your Malice and Uncharitableness, towards much better proficients in the School of Christ, than you who have not yet learn'd that Lesson, which he taught him∣self, and has made the Badge and Character of all his obedient followers; namely, By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. And as the Character of Combination, in the Common bond of Christianity, is wanting in you, you must needs be destitute of all true peace, but what you found, your selves, upon self-exaltation, and preferring your selves before others; forgetting or despising the Lesson which our Saviour taught, Be meek and lowly, and you shall find rest to your Souls: You'l say, You have, and do all this, and still lay claim to the Spirit; but be∣cause I think otherwise, I have dealt very freely and roundly with you, as I shou'd do with one that seri∣ously
shou'd pretend himself a Gentleman of good Rank and Quality, keep his Countenance, and require great respect, because he had stol'n and put on a rich Suit of his Masters , tho I knew him to be but his Groom. And this I have said not for your sake, but out of a hearty respect to the good Spirit of God, which I make no question you will Conclude, I scorn and deride. The next is this, That what I have written, I have written to you, and such as I conceive you to be; but have not intended it against all that pass under your name; of whom I wou'd fain believe there are some, like those who went after Absalom, in the simplicity of their hearts, impos'd upon by their own Ignorance, and incogitancy, and the infinite Impudence and sub∣tle craftiness of such as lye in wait to deceive; such of them as are and do continue truly honest and sincere; and do resolve to do their duty, in all the Moral acts of Life and Conversation, and will not obstinately stand against and reject a greater measure of Light and Un∣derstanding, when offer'd to 'um, than yet they are Masters of; I hope God in good time will take care to rectifie, and not suffer their simplicity to be abus'd to their extream loss; and in the mean time they shall, wherein I am concern'd, receive from me all offices of Friendship and Charity: For I consider, that all men are obnoxious to Error, and that I my self may possi∣bly have many misapprehensions of things, which I can't be rid of, till time and opportunity do instruct me; That humane Lapses are to be pitied, and cur'd by Love, and the tenderness of a soft and gentle spirit; but
then I ever thought that this deportment is onely due to them, that do confess themselves weak and in∣firm; which is so far from being Your case, that you do very much abate  to gentle usages, by the greatest Arrogance, and Presumption I could justly attribute to any man I ever met with; and cannot here forbear, to fasten upon you J. A. If you think fit to give me an account of the Articles of your Faith, in clear and intelligible words, and soberness, as your Honest Paul did, when his Faith was call'd in question, and did advise, That we should be ready to give a reason of the Hope that is in us, possibly you shall know more of the mind of—&c.— FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 5. line 16. r. Imposers. p. 6. l. 24. r. the results of. l. 25. r. Nozzil. p. 8. l. 9. r. Phansiful. l. 13. r. was to me. l. 26. r. which the Countrey People admire. l. 31. dele, till. p. 9. l. 5. r. has. p. 13. l. 8. for who. r. But I. p. 15. l. 6. r. these Engines.
