R2138 R8517 13530905 99998
THE ROYALL OAKE OR A Crowne's worth of Loyalty FOR A TESTEN. EDINBƲRGH, Printed in the Year, 1682.
THE PRINTER TO THE READER. THIS being ordered to my hand for the Courteous Reader, none is left for the poor Printer to ad∣dresse himselfe unto, but the Critick and Morose. Be thou then Whigg or Torrie, Buy and Read: Buy it Torrie for shame, least upon thy refusall thou be fore-judged a Whigg; And to be sure the Whig will buy it, were it but to flout at, cavill, or confute it. But whether should you or I now, be most asham'd to find Loyalty so cheapned: but the truth is, there be few now a dayes who are willing to pay deare for it, and accordingly I have consulted your purse in this long vacation. You see how I glean for your di∣vertisement, partly from the Genealogicall Arbor presented to the City of Edinburgh, and partly from the printed Ethodius; which innocent way of borrowing, I know the ingenuous Author will not grudge for the good of his Country-men, who may not so easily come by the others, and if you here have a Pennie-worth, be but thank∣full, merrie, and continue Loyall.
Know Courteous READER, THAT, as Histories and Chronicles informe us, The Kingdom of the Scots was first erected in the Person of our K. Fergus the First, in the dayes of Alexander the Great some 330. years before the birth of our Saviour; So hath the Royalty of Scotland been lawfully enjoyed (what in Descendants, what in Colla∣terals) by the Off-spring of this same First Fergus, without the interruption of any other Line, for beyond twentie Centuries, unto this very day. Nor was this our King Primier, Ʋnus ex Plebe, but the Son of a Noble Irish Prince, Ferquhard, deriving (as they say) his pedegree from Gaal-Glasse or Gathelus, the Father and Prince of the Scots from Gallicia, even as well the Albinenses, as the Hibernenses, and some think our Isles were as soon by them inhabited as Ireland, for Ierne signifies but a place to the West∣ward. Lo here then, is our very first King blessed to be the Son of Nobles. But the reason of representing this Genealogicall descent, and why it did not run from Fergus the First, be pleased to understand thus. The Commons of England having in some late Successive Par∣liaments, very much pressed his Sacred Majesty to disinherit his only Brother JAMES Duke of Albany and York, from the Imperial Crown of England, as being alledged a Papist, it was thought worth the while to publish (at the opening of our last Parliament) a Brief account of His Majestie's, and his Royall Brothers descent, from Kings or true Princely Cadets, in a Line-Male,
without interruption, for beyond Fifteen Hundred years That so, some men (if possible) might see but at least their un¦mannerliness, in urging such a Christian Monarch, to disinher such a Brother; And that his Majesty might, to his other argu¦ments, from Religion and Justice, adde and presse home bu this single one, from Affection, Nature and Providence,  asking how his Feudatorie Subjects, who have given him the oaths of Homage and Fealtie, promising to be faithfull to Hi and his Heirs, come now so earnestly to addresse him to seclu his only Brother, and in the present case, not only his next ap¦parent heir, but in the case of survivage, the only Childe of the  late martyred Soveraigne, yea and the onely immediat Heir Ma of Britain and its Crowns, And who besides the other adva¦tages, he may Challenge from such a Race of Kings, doth equa¦ly with his Majesty enjoy this very singular blessing, of bein lawfully descended of Kings & true Princely Cadets, in ane un-in¦terrupted Line-male, through the various vicissitudes of 1500 years, and that before Christianity it self, (much more befor Popery, Protestanisme, or any subdivided profession of either was well known, at least by authority embraced, or counte¦nanced here. May never then a misled, or too forward a zeale, prompte on by discontented Grandees or others (for perhaps their ow more sinistrous ends) wheedle the unwarry to engage in method and lay foundations, for shaking of the hereditary Monarchy under the specious pretence of preserving us from Popery, i otherwayes threatned upon us, then from our own remote je¦lousies and fears, in a case, but on the one hand dubious, an on the other uncertain. Let us not then studie too much, to patronize that repudia and dangerous error, That Rule and Dominion (which is but  Ray of Gods Power in the Kingdom of his Providence) is, or ne¦cessarily ought to be, founded in Grace, by denying the Suprem Magistrate, and Hereditarie Prince, his true and undoubte right of Blood and Succession, except he be precisely of the Rel¦gion and perswasion of his Predecessors; or greater part of h Subjects. For questionless, Religion as such (being a thing  choise and perswasion) is neither essentially constitutive, nor i¦dispensably seclusive of Magistracie, where the Royalty is S¦preme and Hereditary. And so much is owned in the Westminst Confession, asserting that difference in Religion, does not nul¦fie, nor make void the office of the Magistrate. Confident then, yea perhaps too peremptory, was that A¦dresse
which offered to assure, his Majesty, that it was beyond the verge of possibility to seeure the Protestant interest in Eng∣land,, unlesse the Duke were disinherited. Oh Christians! cannot the true Religion, taught by the Holy JESUS, planted by his Apostles, contained in the Scriptures, propagated by the Fathers, confirmed by the Councils, and sealed by the Martyrs, be preserved, secured, and to succeeding Generations here trans∣mitted, without hazarding upon an Act, in its consequences, more then probably full of unavoidable inconveniences, both to Crown and Church. Or is, O Protestants, a concerning Zeale, grown now in this cold age, more warme then that of the Re∣formers? Why did not Cranmer, Ridley, and Jewell fall upon this Topick, from difference in Religion, to disinherit Marie, but choosed rather to water the Church with their blood, then to unhinge, or in the least offer to justle the hereditary Monarchy, in its ordinary, right, and providentiall course of descent? And consider but, had this dangerous Maxime been entertained by any of the Popish Marie's when in power, what had be fal∣len Elizabeth, or her Successor? Yea, and may it not here deserve a considering thought, how far in this case the Duke might claime the benefit of the 29. Chap. of the Magna, Charta, gainst some things in, if not the whole procedure of the vote of Seclusion; for sure the Son of the King, and in the stated case next Heir of the Crown (els why should he be secluded) cannot be in a worse condition in point of Right, and Priviledge, then the meanest native of England. Read me but seriously at your leasure, the above-cited Chapter with the ordinary glosse there∣upon, and compare them impartially with the Addresse and Vote of seclusion, and be like you may incline to think there were both Reason and Law for the King to refuse the one, and the Peers to reject the other. Let then our Loyalty here be ne're a whit he lesse, because we have Princes from an un-interrupted Stem Royall, through a series of moe years, then stand betwixt the Pro∣ise made to the Father of the Faithfull in Haran, and the Finisher f our Faith his Inning in the Manger. And whatever truth may e in Gathelus his marrying of SCOTA, the daughter of haraoh, and uptaker of Moses; or of the fatall Marble (which hey brought along with them) being the Stone whereupon acob saw his vision; Sure the Kings of this Isle, yea and of this orner of it, have brought acceptable presents to the Virgin's Em∣manuel, for early did this Island hear of his Fame. And let us ot therefore be the more slack, and backward in our obe∣dience, because the Pair of Royall Brothers enjoy so much of the
blessing pronounced by Ieremy, for Ionadab the Son of Rhehab, as can run them in a direct Line-Male, from the Loyns of the first Ethodius, who coming to the Crown, in right of his Mother, did make necessarly a gape and stop in the Ascent-male to the First Fergus. I. For Ethodius the first of that name, and 25 King of the Scots, was Sister-son to K. Mogallus, and succeeded to his Cousin K. Co∣narus, about the year of our Lord 162. (when the two Collegiat Antonin's, Philosophus and Verus governed the Roman Empire) This Ethodius was our last heathnish King by descent, for Sa∣trael was his Brother, as was also Donald 1. our first Christian King. So early did even this line embrace Christianitie, never thence forward returning to Heathnisme. For II. King Ethodius 2. Son to the First, succeeded in the Faith, after the death of his Unckle Donald, but being a King of too easie a nature, & having indulg'd too much of the reins of Government to his Nobles, was at last killed by his Guard and Servants. But his Son III. Athirco, a King of another temper, before he would be reduced (or as the gentler word now goes, Reformed) by his No∣bles, did rather out of discontent dispatch himself. Whose third Son IV. K. Donald 2. being wounded in battell and overcome, died of displeasure in the first year of his Reigne. But his Son V. King Fincormachus, as so commonly called, who should yet more justlie have been named but Cormachus only, for the Syllable Fin does not here signify Filius, for though he was Feun-Cormeich, that is but, the Faire Cormeich, for Pheun or Feun is in the old Highland Language Faire, & the Highlanders use but the Syllables Mack and Vick, when they expresse Patronimicks, So our Historians, either not well understanding, or adverting to the old Irish, have wrote him Fincormachus quasi Filius Cormachi for Feun-Cormeich. i. e. Cormachus Pulcher. But be this our King the Son of Cormeich, or Cormeich the Faire, he was still Grand-Child by a Son to Athirco, and much favouring Christianity, died in peace in the 47. year of his Reigne. For in his time it was that many Christians persecuted by Dioclesian fled hither, and were kindly received, and from whose, & their Successours Solitary and devout retirements dignified by their godlie lives, we yet have (as from the Latine Cellae, derived to us the names of severall Kirks, and of old, Religious places, under such words as Icolm-kill, Kill-marnoch, Kill-mairs, Kill-Patrick, and such like. VI. Achadius or Ethodins, second Son to Feun-Cormeich was after the death of his Brother K. Eugenius the first, banished by that
Victorious Roman Legat, Maximus, together with his Son VII. Erthus, and some say his Oy VIII. King Fergus the 2. who (whether borne in Scotland or Denmark) was present with Alarick and his Goths at the ran∣sacking of Rome, from whence he brought severall Manuscripts of value, particularlie of Titus Livius, which having first lodged in Icolm-kill, they were after the ruine of the Picts transported to Restennoth in Angus, and at last either destroyed, or carried away with Langshanks of England. But this our second Founder, having after severall battels recovered the Thron of his Ancestors, was at last killed by the Romans. And here the English Geographer Heylen, with some of his Countrey-men, endeavour to wrong our antiquity, in not allowing our Kingdom elder then this, its but for∣tunat Recoverer, and not first Founder, who was the other Fer∣gus from Ireland, many ages before, But though our partiall nighbours grudge to allow us older then their own Saxon Hengist, yet disinteressed Historians do not so farre unbefriend the truth, for does not Tacitus mention our Corbred Gaald, under the name of his Galgacus, and does not Orosius and Eutropius speak of our el∣der Caractacus, and their own venerable Beda of our yet more antient Reutha, who lived near 200. years before the birth of our Saviour, and does not the most and better part of Chronologues still state the founding of our Kingdom contemporary with the Establishing of the Grecian Monarchy. IX. King Dongardus, 2. Son to Fergus 2. succeeded his elder brother King Eugenius the 2. An. Chr. 451. in the Reignes of thir two brethren flourished Palladius sent hither (by Pope Celes∣tine, as they say) for resisting the Pelagian heresie. Padi-Kirk at Fordon in the Mearnes was built by him, and in which he was interred, and where his memorie was much honoured thereafter, But Dongardus second Son X. King Conranus or Goranus, succeeding to his Brother Con∣gallus, concluded a good and honorable peace betwixt Ʋther-Pen∣dragon, of the Brittons, and Lothus King of the Picts. XI. King Aidanus was Crowned by Columba, to whose honour thereafter King Alexander the Fierce, builded the Abbacie of St. Colmes Inch in the Firth. XII. King Eugenius the 4. who having had the benefit of St. Columba's education, liv'd a good & valiant King & died in peace, much lamented of his People, An. Chr. 621. and of his Reigne the 16. year, whose second Son XIII. King Donald the 4. succeeding his Brother King Fer∣quhard the 1. sent to Oswald King of Northumberland, Aidanus
(first Bishop of Landisfarne or Holy-Island) with diverse learned and godlie Monks, to instruct Oswalds Saxons in Christianitie, but was himself, when fishing upon Tay, unfortunatly drowned Anno Chr. 646. Whose second Son XIV. Dongardus or Drugardo (brother to King Maldwine) was father to XV. King Eugenius the 5. who lived contemporary with the Saxon Egfrid, and was killed in battell by the Picts, the 4. year of his Reigne, leaving a Son XVI. Findanus, whose Second Son XVII. King Eugenius the 7. succeeding to his Brother Am∣birkelethus, seasonablie concluded a peace with the Picts, by marry∣ing Spondana, daughter to their King Garnadus. He ordained that the Acts of our Kings should be recorded by the Monks, in their Monasteries, perhaps the first rise of our publick records, but his Son XVIII. K. Ethfinus, having governed in peace 31. years, left his 2. Son XIX. K. Achaius, to succeed his brother K. Fergus 3. and who partly by vertue of his Marriage with Fergusiana Daughter to Hungus King of the Picts, and partly of ane old league be∣twixt the two Crowns did upon the failzure of issue secure that Kingdom for his Son, as the next Heir. He also made that famous League with Carle-maine, so often renewed by his Successors, and which continued till the first Monarch of Brittain, carryed his Court from Haly-rude-house to Whitehall; yea so fortunat a Co∣venanter was Achaius, that he hath for ever Leagu'd the Lillies to his Lyon, in that his Noble Counterfloured double Tressure. But his Son XX. K. Alpin who being (contrary to his right and the agree∣ment) refused the Crown of the Picts, due unto him, after the death of his Cousins Dorstolorgus and Ethanus, he was necessitat to vindicat his right by Arms, till at last he was taken with many of his Nobles at a Battell, near Dundie, called of old Alectum, and basely beheaded by the Picts, who affixt his head upon a Pole, on the West port of Abernethie, then their Chief City. But observe the severe vengeance of God, for the unjust and Barbarous usage of him, whose right it was to rule, soundly executed by his Son XXI. K. Kenneth 2. who having wheedled his refactory No∣bles into a warre, by the stratagem of making one covered with dryed fish skins, awake them out of a deep sleep in a darke night, with ane exhortation through a hollow reed, to undertake it, which as from an Angell they forthwith so chearfully engadged in, that he utterly subdued and possest himself of the Pictish Kingdom,
equallie upbraiding the disloyaltie of the Picts, and quickning the courage of the Scots, with his military Tessera or word at the Battell, Remember Alpine; and so indeed they did, not only with their sword and bow, but in transmitting to posterity the whole some constitutions of his Son, under the Title of Mc. Alpins Laws, and giving to the place of his Murder, the name of Bassal∣pin, to remember his death to this day. XXII. K. Ethus, second Son to the valiant Kenneth, succeeded to his Brother King Constantine 2. (from whom is His Majestie in another branch, for here is only the Line-male) and who was killed by the Danes near Craile, where Ethus rallied the broken Army after the Danes retired to their Ships, and did not outlive his bro∣ther many Moneths. He was for his swiftness in running surnamed Alipes or Light-foot. He left issue K. Constantine the 3. and XXIII. Dorus, his second Son, who had also two Sons Ga∣rethus and XXIV. Murdocus, who likewayes left two Sons Donald, who in some hopes of the Crown, privately murdered K. Duf∣fus at his Castle of Forresse in Murray and XXV. Pheaquhar or Ferquhard, whose Son XXVI. Kenneth, was Father to XXVII. Bancho, the famous and valiant Thane of Lochaber, who was told by the Weird-sisters, that though he could not be a King himself, yet his Posterity should be Kings over the Land, for many Generations, which Macbeth remembering, and having experienced the truth of the Prophecies given to himself, begins to fear those of Bancho, and being jealous of his greatness, and knowing his relation to the Crown, he causeth murder him at Innernesse, designing the same Fate for his Son XXVIII. Fleance who escaping, fled to Wales, where he had by the Prince's Daughter (Maria Mesta) a Son XXIX. Walter, who returning to his Cousin K. Malcome Kanmore was kindly by him received, and for his good services rewarded and dignified with the office of Stewart of his house and Chamberlain of his Revenues, leaving thereupon to his Posteritie the Surname of Stewart, whose Son XXX. Allan, went to the Holy Warres, with Godfrey De Bul∣loigne, and was slaine at the Seige of Antioch, Anno Chr. 1099. yet left he behinde him a Son XXXI. Walter 2. advanced by K. Malcome the Maiden, to be Magnus Senescallus Scotiae, Great Stewart of Scotland, or He∣reditarie Captain Generall of the Kings Forces, where ever the Royall Banner stands displayed.
XXXII. Alexander the first (who as sayes our Clerk-Regi∣ster Skene, and our Historian Leslie,) builded the Abbay of Paisly. XXXIII. Allan 2. a great Benefactor to the Abbacie of Paisly, and honourably mentioned in severall Charters, in K. Alexander the 2. time, under the Titles of Senescalus, Justitiari∣us Scotiae, owned also by Fordon in these words, (Obijt Walte∣rus filius Allani junioris, Anno Dom. 1241.) to be Father to XXXIV. Walter the 3. commonly called of Dundonald, who was sent by K. Alexander the 2. to the holy wars, in that first expedition of K. Lewes the 9. of France, He had three Sons, John who was killed in Africk by the Moors, in the second expedition of the same K. Lewes; Alexander who beat Acho, with his Danes and Norvegians at the Largs in Cunyngham, Anno 1263. and of which Alexander are descended the Kings of the surname of Stuart unto, and with Q. Marie: And a third Son had this Walter also, named XXXV. Robert, Lord Torboultoun, who added to his E∣state Cruixtoun and Darnly by marrying of the Heretrix, And died Anno 1304. Whose Son XXXVI. John Lord Darnly, was one of the Chief hostages to King Edward the 3. of England, for the ransome of K. David the Bruce, taken at the battell of Durham. This Lord Darnly died Anno 1360. and left Issue XXXVII. Robert Lord Darnly, who was Father of XXXVIII. John 2. Lord Darnly, slaine in battell against the English at Crevant in Burgoyne in France, Anno 1422. but lest issue John the first Lord Aubignie, and the first who augmented his Paternall Armes, with the Coat of France, within a bordoure G. charged semy de Fermoul O. with the Motto Avant Darnlie, from the mouth of Charles the 7. as appears by his Patent dated at Ploys, An. 1427. He was slain at a battell near Orleans, An. 1429. Sans issue. But his brother XXXIX. Allan Lord Darnly, added more of fortune and means to the Familie, by marrying a Daughter of Murdoch, Duke of Albanie, and Isabel Countesse of Lennox, daughter to E. Duncan: which being a little disclosed, will make the Storie be understood, why so brave a Prince as K. Iames 1. was so severe as to send her the four heads, of her Father, Husband, and two sons, to Tantallon, some 40. miles from Stirling, And why so sober an expression came to be uttered by so stalwart a wife: they were sent then, not that mulier ferox (as sayes Bucha∣nan) animi Secreta revelaret, if he meant the discovery of any plot or Treason, but that upon so gastly a sight, her passions might tempt her to utter such expressions, as might bring her under
the compasse of Law; for to their disapointment they found she stood infeft in the Earldome of Lennox, undenuded in favours of her Husband. But the Politick King catcht no advantage of the warrie Virago, who said no more, But, if the crimes were true, the King was just. And so the wylie Dutches, by keeping her tongue, preserved her estate, and to make up the loss of her Husband, and Sons, for the Family wisely joyned (by her daughter) the Stewart of Fife, from the Stewart of Len∣nox, to the Stewart of Darnly, yet this Allan, though called an Earl by the vulgar, was never so created by King James the 1. having outlived him but a year, dying Anno 1438. But his Son XL. Iohn, was in right of his Maternall Progenitors created, Earl of Lennox, And dying Anno 1488. left his eldest Son XLI. Mathew Earl of Lennox, who had to wife the Lady Margaret Hamiltoun, daughter to Iames Earl of Arran; and the Lady Mary, daughter to K. Iames the 2. This E. Mathew was killed at the Field of Floudon, whose Son XLII. E. Iohn, was (in his service to King Iames 5.) killed at Linlithgow, by Iames, Bastard to the Earl of Arran, Anno 1526. whose eldest Son XLIII. Earl Mathew, married Lady Margaret Douglas only daughter to Archbald 7. Earl of Angus of the name of Douglas; and Q. Margaret Relict of King Iames 4. and eldest daughter to K. Henry the 7. of England; and was (when Regent to his Oy) slain at Stirling, Anno 1572. whose eldest Son XLIV. Henry Lord Darnly, was created Duke of Rothesay, and taken by Q. Marie (Daughter and Heir to K. Iames 5.) for her Second Husband, but basely murdered, by the Earl of Bothwell, Anno 1567. yet leaving a most happie Son XLV. K. JAMES the Sixth (borne in the Castle of Edin∣burgh, the 19. of Iune, 1566) who after the death of Q. Eliza∣beth, succeeded to the Crowns of England, and Ireland, as nearest Heir, in the Right of his Progenitors, to K. Henry the 7. of England, and by his own Queen, Ann of Denmark, left An: 1625. XLVI. K. CHARLES, his Second Son, Heir of his Crowns and Vertues, who having a hopefull, and numerous issue by his Queen, Marie, daughter to the Great K. Henry of France, was to the high Scandal of Christianity, and shame of his people, forced, by a cursed crew of his Rebellious Subjects, to lay his head to the Block, for defending the Right of the Crown and Church, Anno 1648. Yet notwithstanding to this Royal Martyr Succeeded.
XLVII. Our present gracious Soveraigne CHARLES the Second, By the Grace of GOD of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. who, to instance and confirme by three immediat successive Monarch's the Florentin's politick Secretarie's Aphorisme of, Tres boni Principes miraculum constituunt in Republicâ, was miracu∣lous from the Star at his Birth, miraculous in his Escape at Worcester, but more miraculous in his unparallelled Restau∣ration whom God long preserve for a mercy to thi Lands, together with his Royall Consort Q. Catharin of Portugall, His Royall Brother JAMES Duke of Albany and York, and all the Branches of the Royall Familie, that there may never want of this Line, to sway the Scepters of their Ancestors. Dum Coelum Stellas, dum vehet aequor aquas. AMEN.
POSTSCRIPT. YEt Reader, least by not well adverting to the occasion of representing here this Descent-male, you may be apt, with others, to say, and why not as well from the first Fergus, as from the first Ethodius. Know with patience, that could not be done in an un-interrupted Line-male, but for your satisfaction ob∣serve it in a true lineall descent thus: K. Ethodius I. was by his Mother and Grand-mother, Great-grand-child to K. Corbred the I. second son to Cadallanus and Eropeia, who being Sister to K. Me∣tellanus, and K. Ederus Brother-daughter, was by hir Good∣shyre Dochamus, Great-grand-child to K. Durstus, who had to his Father K. Finnanus; Grand-father, K. Josina; Great-grand-father K. Reutherus, whose Father K. Dornadilla, was by K. Mainus, Grand-child to our King Fergus the first, who can by the Descent-male from Ethodius salute his Majesty, Trinepotis noni Atnepos. Where upon another ranch, (fully as straight, though more inoculat by Females, which yet to compense, more also or∣namented with Diadems) his Majesty is able (so correspondingly) to resalute him, Tritavi Noni Attave. Yea and if you run the ascent by Walter, Husband to Marjorie Bruce, he is able to go another step, in saying, Tritave salve Decime. So this triple threed of descent by Marie, Marjorie, Maud, now twisted with the other Lines of his three Crowns, makes such a threefold cord as 'tis hoped shall not be easily broken, And though Predecessors, be not all one with Progenitors, yet if the Criticks will allow the Collateral Kings of the same Familie, Stock and Linage Royal to stand but by their Descendant Cousins, King Charles the Second can tell the World Ter tribus, & decies denis, Diademate cinctis, Stemma trahens Scotis, Scotica Sceptra gero.
DE Augustissimi Britanniarum Monarchae, CAROLI II. Stemmate Scoto, Trifariam, hac in Scala Ternariâ, a FERGvSIO I. graphice deducto. QUot Veteres, Terno Numero miraĉla dedere, Tot Numero Trino, Secula nostra dabunt. Annumeres igitur volventia secula Terna, A quo suscepit Sceptra STUARTA DOMUS. Tres orti Fratres, queis nomina rite, STUARTI; Deque SENESCALLO bis Tria seĉla trahunt. Tergeminâ pulsi Tres Fratres sede Paternâ; Trecenta ah passi! proh pudor, atque dolor! Maximus è Trinis, horrendis truditur armis, Ter Brumas Ternas, Triplice de Patria. MAIUS at Ille redit! Ter Ternus, & usque notandus; Sacra dies, Regnis usque colenda Tribus. CAROLUS & CLEMENS, revoluta decennia Trina Emensus, librat patria Sceptra Tria. CAROLUS a CAR⁁LO, nulli qui Stirpe Secundus, Treis Trinus Soliis ecce Monarcha venit. Ecce Monarcha venit, longo qui germine Trino, Ipso a FERGUSIO nobile Stemma petit. Una, eadem; Mirum! de fronte en littera servit Nexilibus Nuptis, vel repetita Tribus. Taleolis virgis Trinis, ut pullulat Arbor; Regnaque sic Moriens, unit ELISA Tria. Grammati inest virtus? Genialis Littera Triplex Cum Tribulis Trinis, dent Tria Regna putes! Sed sileant Parcae: CAR⁁LO Tria Regna Paterna, Reddidit ALMA TRIAS, servet & ALMA TRIAS. Quid superest Regnis his Ternis, nisi precari; REX superet Pylij Secula Trina senis.
Desunt. BUt when I designed a Letter, lo it swells to a Book. And trust me, the Singularities in His Majesties Line, might challenge a Volume, in its Antiquity (whether you view His Scotish, British, or Irish, Extract) preferable to any now extant in the Universe, unless they go higher then Fergus, Cas∣sibilane, or Gathelus, a Line singularly blest to show to the World the first two Christian Kings, with the first Christian Em∣perour: Fortunat even in its losses; for when the straight Line was broke off, to make way to Collaterals, (or otherwayes upon greater alterations for a time stopped or diverted) even such opped Branches Ornamented the Stock with better names then those of Sons and Daughters. Witness that Great Light, Levit Maure, or the British Lucius, with our first Donald and Constan∣tine the Great, a Briton by his Mother Helena, Daughter to King Coilus. To which we may add the Gallantry of Arthur, which listed him one of the nine worthies of the world: The Devotions of Cadwallader, and their Confessing EDWARD; with the Chastity of our Maiden King. And (to take in both Sexes) their Virgine Queen, a Line, which next to that of Judah's, stands the liveliest Commentary I know, upon Solomons, Per me Reges reg∣nant; a Line, whose Crowns from Gathelus down, are all but acquests in the right of Succession, by the common road of Justice and Equity. For whether the Sons of Gathelus entred in Posses∣sionem vacuam, or compacted with the Natives, when they first came to Ireland, Quis rem tam veterem pro certo affirmet? But sure their authority was from Heaven. For what Fanatick can have a forehead to refuse, that the Spirit of God assisted the Pen∣man of, nI faLLat fatVM sCotI qVoCVn{que} LoCatVM InVenIent LapIDeM regnare tenentVr IbIDeM. Where the four M's, the two D's, three C's, four L's, six visible V's, with the seven I's, by a strange numerical Prophesie, holds to the Year of the World, 5537. in which was born King James the sixth, who found the fatal Chair at Westminster before him. Fergus was called in by his Kinsmen the Scots, and by them of their own consent, lawfully constitute their King. Kenneth the Second did but recover the Possession of the Pictish Kingdom due to him in right of his Grand-mother Fergusiana, Sister to Hungus
King of the Picts, after the death of her Nephews Dorstolorg and Ethanus: From which Crown, Kenneth and his Father A¦pin, were debarred by Usurpres of the Peoples Election. So th Kenneth's attaining the Crown of the Picts, was not a Conques but a severe example of Gods just indignation against Rebells,  secluding the righteous Heir from his Inheritance, the Picts aft that, never regaining the face or name of a People, Nation, o Kingdom. And the Monarchy of England was no gift of Quee Elizabeths to King James, because a Protestant; but his due I¦heretance from K. Henry the seventh, by his eldest Daughte neither were the Queens words, Iames of Scots the Protestant but James of Scots my Cousin. It is true, happy was the Co¦junction in that blessed Peace-maker, whom Heaven it seems ha Preordained to be Ʋnionum Ʋnio, a Pearl of price amongst th other Gems. But woe be to Princes, if Religion, nay rather th Forms, Modes, Sects, conceited Opinions, nick-named Prin∣ciples, and parties of assumed Designations, from either the dis∣membred parts, hems, or Fringes thereof (which in thir dreg of Time, are atomed beyond Arithmetick) come once to be the only Standart of their Scepters. But blessed be God, Crowns o the Lords anointing do not so easily totter; consider that strange Eteostick for His Majesties Birth; eCCe VeL angLorVM aC haCtenVs VLLVs oVat. 1630. As strangely answered by the Minted, Hactenus Anglorum Nullus, which equally befool'd the Devils Nullus, in his Vir, Puer. Alecto, &c. And Oliver's more hellish Nollus, most strangely suffering an Ecclipse and direful Synalaepha, more sadly Histori∣cal, then Gramatically Prosodiacal, before the English can scance the Ovat of the Restauration. And if it were lawful for the Subjects of Charles to vote their King by pole, would not the Scots do injustice to themselves, should they prefer any, to One lawfully descended from their own First Fergus, when they have here Lochaber imped in the House of Galloway, by the last Great Stewart, and Mariory Bruce; And this from David of Huntigtoun, Ingraft in the Stock by King David the First; that by Bancho, and his Progenitors from King Ethus. And if there be yet any of the Pictish Blood remaining would they refuse a Prince from the Loyns of their own King Hungus ather; or if there be beyond Tweed, who delight in variety (and sickly Stomachas, nauseat a constant Diet) let them here pick and choose, which of the Roses smelleth swetest, since
our James the Fifth, by his Mother can furnish them with either. Will they have the Normans, from France, or from Flanders; be¦ore, or after the Conquest; Then our James the First, gives the one by a Daughter of Somerset, from John of Ghaunt, Son to Edward the Third; and our Kenneth the Third, by the Daughter of William Longespee, does (without a stain) supply them with the other: Would they have the out-law'd Edward restored; our Malcom Canmoir in his St. Margaret, hath done it to their hand. wish they the Danes, our James the Fourth by his Mother may please hem. Which of the Heptarchies desire they? Egbert the Great can direct them. And what Welshman will refuse the Ofspring of Cadwallader, be he North or South, Hursell will be pleased when Hu hears, it is by the Wife of Fleance, but the Progeny of Griffith p Lewelin ap Sitsylthd, Prince of Guinedh, & the Lady Angharad, Daughter to Meredith ap Owen, Prince of Dehewbarth. And both the Grand-fathers from Roderick Maure (without a doubt) de∣scended of Cadwallader. Or what will they have? the yet more antient Britons whether then from the Greater Britain, or the Lesser Bretagne? And whether before, or after Lucius Legacy to the Romans? even to the Ancestors of the Founder of their belov∣ed Trinobantin-Caerlud. Cadwallader then from Constantine, the Son of Aldroenus King of Armorica in France does for me sufficiently the one, and their own Geoffrie of Monmouth spares me the labour to do for them the other. Or if yet any wild Irish, dare offer to disown the juster and nobler Scepter of Hibert, Si∣mon Breck, and Ferquhard the Father of our Fergus, it will be easie to Harp them a spring upon the harsher Title of Conquest. Yea, is not our Sacred Soveraign a King, who by his Predecessors through the Mother of the Third English Edward, from the Fourth Philip of France, hath (as the nearest Heir) by the Law of Nati∣ons and Nature, a fairer pretence to the Lillies, then could in justice the Posterior, and more unequitable Salique constitution, give either to the House of Valois, or Bourbon. Yes, a Line Sir, wherein the Prince Regnant for the time, may with greater justice then any Potentate under the great beam∣ing Luminary, without complement, name his Vassals his Cou∣sins. For let the Baronages of his Treeple Crowned Kingdoms be but impartially surveyed; And if they be of any standing, the greatest Nobility they can glory in, will be found soon or syne, derived to them, by some blood-rillet or other, from this very same Royal Fountain. So that the Peerage (not to say how dim those Stars hang in the Firmament of the State, during the least
Ecclipse of the Monarchical Sun, as was by a total, both latel and sadly experimented) So that the Peerage, I say of Britain an Ireland, are not faithful to their own honour, if they do not he (even without Oaths of Allegiance) acknowledge they owe the Native Prince all Homage and Loyalty, since most of them hav leave to say, that they are Flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bo And yet I know not how it comes to pass, that this very Lin seems to have equally intail'd upon it the Fate & blessing of Josep For the Archers have shot at it; yea, verily the Archers have she and grieved it sorely, yea, hated it too; but blessed be the Go of Jacob, its Bow yet abideth in its strength; And by the hands  the Almighty, hath it become a fruitful Bough, whose Branche have run over the Christal walls of Albion. Is it not then the dut s well as honour, of all in this British World, to pray th there may never want one from this Stock. — Dum Saeculae Mundus Volvet, qui Patrij Sceptri moderamen habebit.
ADVERTISEMENT. IF any Noble-man, Gentleman, Citizen, or Others desire to have the Table here of His Majestie's descent, handsomely formed in a Genealogicall Arbor (that so it may the better appear, as it is, a Royal Oake indeed) they may have the same from Mr. John Shambothie an Hunga∣rian (to be found at Alexander Clerks, near the Foot of the Colledge-wind in the Cow-gate) what way they please, illuminat or in talliduce, and with the Posterity of King James the Sixt, where if they take it but in the Line-male only, as he presented it to the Town Councill of Edinburgh they may find.
Ethodius lying at the root; thus divining, and to the second Fergus whis∣pering. POst Ferquhardiaden Regem, Rex ordine Quintus Quinqueis enumerans, facta notanda cano. Ah Druides, Druides! veniet modo Parior Ara, Auguror, & Scotis singula fausta dabit. Ponè Mares novies quinos, ter quinaque Saeĉla, Haeres Maternum Mas Diadema tenet, Ut Proavus Patriis Corbredus primus in oris, Romulidas aequilas senserit rapacidas: Sic Atnepotis Nepos Nidum Cernet hololampum. Fergus the second, martially attended with his Gills, both More and Beg, and to Achaius relating. Cimbria nutrivit, Patriâ jam Caesare pulsis, Cum Genitore meo, Progenitore meo: Sed Gothicis armis vici victricibus, ipsam Invictam Romam: Spolia rara ferens. Per varios Casus repetens Patriamque Laremque; Ausonides per me sanguine tinxit humum. Majorum Solium conscendens Marte secundo: Pristina regna, meâ condo, reformo manu. At mea Sceptra Nepos terni Pronepotis adauget, Artibus innocuis, nobiliore modo. Achaius sitting in his robes and glorying. Firmavi Regnum, munivi Insignia, Franco Faedere; quò Scotis Gallia fida cluat: Conjuge sed Pictâ, Prolem foelicius auxi; Quâ mea Posteritas Pictica Sceptra geret. Answered by Fergusiana. Pictica Progenie, Soror Hungi, Sponsa & Achaii, Do dotem Scotis, Pictica Regna tuis.
The Ghost of Alpin telling um peto Materno Pictorum sanguine Regnum, Alecti, Alecto me truce caede tulit. Patris, & Patriae, Kennethus Filius, Ultor; In Pictos, Scotos concitat arte nova: articipemque facit nostri vel nominis umbram Vindictae, manes sic relevando meos. Kenneth the second informing. Legna negata Patri, foelici Marte subegi, Sanguine justa mihi, Sceptra cruore tuli: atalem & Lapidem Breccus quem portat Iernam, Quem Ferquhardiades transtulit Argadiam; Carmine Fatidico caelatum, sede decorum, (Hinc progressurum) colloco jure Sconae. Bancho rejoycing. Quae mihi Vatidicae cecinerunt Fata Sorores, Implebunt Natis tempora longa meis. Mathildis assuring. Scottorum ducens genus alto è sanguine Regum, Responsi dicar firmior arrha tui. The wife of Fleance incouraging. — Me pignore credas, Pignoribus Sceptrum terra Britanna dabit. The Heretix of Bute pledging. Ut mihi dos, sic arrha Tibi sit parvula Bota, Quod Regnum Natis Insula tota manet. The daughter of the Bruce foretasting. —Reddet mea laeta Propago, Vaticinata, rata— Robert the second apprehending. Reddita primus Ego, Banchoni Oracula vera Experior, Soboli caetera vota manent.
The confidence of K James 1. his Queen. Edita Sceptiferis Anglis, confido daturos Saxonidas, stirpi Sceptra aliquando meae. Budding in the nosegay of K. James 4. his Consort. En Tibi jungo Rosas, Pronepos Diademata junget. Queen Maries Ingadgement. Faemina quantumvis Ego sum, mihi Mascula virtus; Atque in Regina, Regius est animus. Nec dubitent sexum, Mavortia pectora Scoti; Regia cum Proles, ecce Maritus adest: Dic, quis enim melius Scotorum Sceptra gubernet, Quàm qui de Scotis Regibus ortus erat? Discharged by the Lord Darnly. Quis Thalamum nollet, dederit qui ferre The Spea of the Heir of Cruixtoun, Wife to Robert of Torboultoun. A Cruce designor, jactant & praedia nomen; Praesagit Soboli Crux mea fausta meae. Inlarged by the Oy of the Earl of Lennox, Wife to Allan Lord Darnly, who gives a Saltyre. betuixt four Roses. Crux mea juncta Rosis, Divinat prospera Natis; Queis manet addenda & Crux, aliaeque Rosae: Quas cum Fata dabunt (ni spes me vana fefellit) Tunc mea juncta Rosis, Crux tria Regna beet. Somewhat further cleared by the Wife of E. Mathew, kill'd at Flowdoun. En Comitis dicor Conjux, & Regia Neptis; Regia cui Neptis, Pronurus alma venit: Abnurus ipsa venit, Regina, & Filia Regis; Quot titulis à me Quartus adauctus erit?
More nearly and closly illustrated by the Wife of the Earl Regent. Stat Rosa per Matrem, redolens in utroque Parente, Quae conjuncta tuis, sex dabit inde Rosas: Inque Rosa Ternâ, quae Sexta est quae quoque Prima Sub Cruce duplari, Pax tria Regna Beet. All authorized by the confession of K. James the Sixth. —de Me, praesagia Vates, Quot cecinere olim. — Secured by the good fortune of His Majesty. Sacra Jovi Quercus; Quercusque cacumina, CARLO Sacra manent: Arbor servit utrique Deo. Fortified by the Duke of Albanie. Solus Ego, nullâ qui interveniente Puellâ Proximus a latere existo— Supported by the Prince of Orange. —Ego perque Puellas, Proximus a Socero— Strengthned by the Queen of Spain. Alter Avus Justus, Martyr laudatur & alter, Catholicae ex meritis dicar an esse Patrum? Propped by the Glosse of the Palatine. perij Dapifer Romani, duco Stuartam; Quippe Senescalli munus utrique favet. Verdant in the hopes of Lady Ann. egia Virgo, rubens; pro Me, Tu fare Poeta, Ni falllat votum, Regia Mater eris.
Mostlie thus recapitulat by Achaius to the King. Carole, de Nobis per tot prognate Nepotes, Qui regis imperio Regna Britanna tuo. Quae Tritavi quarti profert, Abavique, Atavique Antiquus Genius, paucula mente tene. En Ego, post decies Senos, Rex ordine Quintus, Transmissa a Proavis, Scotica Sceptra ferens: In solio Sobolem, stabilivi foedere duplo; Contulit hoc Francus, contulit illud Hymen. Teutonico Carlo, pepegi quae foedera, Scotis, (Dum tantum Scoti) continuata manent. Perque faces Thalami, confirmat Sceptra Nepoti, Tum Themis, & Mavors, Pictica jure pari. Pectore quam laeto Suscepit verba Sororum Lochabrius Bancho, de Trinepote Nepos. Cambria quam Scoto bene nupsit; Nesta, Fleancho, Consignans Soboli Sceptra Britanna meae, Ille Senescallus, Bruseâ de Matre, Robertus, Promissum toties en Diadema capit. Ecce Caledonio Tribulo, mage Gallica vilent Lilia; Saxonicae quae minus apta Rosae. Darnlaeo Agnato, nubens Cognata Maria; Fortius en firmat Regna Britanna Suis. Aspice quam placidè contendunt Sceptra Beato Reddere Pacifico, Martia Regna tria. Hinc gratus recolens, mi Carle Secunde, secunda Numina, quae solio Te imposuere tuo. Forsitan & dices, sunt Numina faussa Stuartae Stirpi; quin potius dicito, fausta meae. Nam meus est Dorus, Garethus, Bancho, Mathildis: Et mea dicetur tota Stuarta Domus. Quid, Mea dicetur? dicetut & ipsa Gatheli Progenies: a quo ducimus omne genus. Utpote Fergusius Scotorum, natus Ierno Ferquhardo, Nobis sanguinis Author erat, Cui fuit in Proavis Gentis Pater; Ille Gathelus, Celtiber, Hesperio littore Ductor ovans. Regibus his Atavis, nulli tu Carle secundus: Quot Fasces Generi Fata dedere tuo. Sceptraque sic Sceptris, cumulavit Conditor Orbis, Coelitus ut dicas, haec data Regna Tibi. FINIS.
