R808 R29262 11058137 46187
A RELATION OF Several Hundreds of Children & Others THAT PROPHESIE and PREACH IN THEIR SLEEP, &c. First examined and admired by several Ingenious Men, Ministers and Profes∣sors of Philosophy at Geneva, and sent from thence in two Letters to Roterdam. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, next Door to the Black Bull in the Old Bayly, 1689.
A LETTER FROM GENEVA TO ROTERDAM, Containing an exact Relation of the Prophets of Dauphiné, &c. February 13. 1689. SIR, I Heretofore designed to send you an exact Journal of the Shepherdess of Cret, but you looked upon it as a fabulous Story, so that I laid aside my Memoirs till another time. I have since found in that same Journal of the Month of July last, That the Shepherdess had several times said, and particularly before her Judges, That they might put her to Death, but that God would raise up others after her, that should say greater things than she had done. I therefore sent you the first News of the young Prophets, who began to Prophtsie about the beginning of October last. But you likewise demanded the continuation with so many Reserves and Precautions, that I don't know how to include in the space of a Letter all the Circumstances that are necessary for a
thorough Examination of such an extraordinary thing: If I should send you all the Informations and Proofs thereof, they would make up a Volume. Indeed the last News we had from Dauphine, that both the Preachers and Hearers were at present severely persecuted, is a great Proof of the mattter of Fact even to the most incredulous; and your Letter could not come in a more seasonable time than it did, to put me in mind of my Promise to you. Since yesterday was the first Day that those that are the most incredulous here vouchsafed to examine the exact Journal I had made of this strange thing, having been sollicited to make it by one of our Ministers and Professors of Philosophy, who was sometimes present at the Depo∣sitions I received from time to time about it. Yesterday, as I told you, a great many Ingenious Men, Ministers and others, came to my Lodgings to Philosophise upon my Journal, but I don't, as yet, know each Man's particular Sentiment, they only read in it till Supper time which separated us; so that they had not time enough to give their Opinions concerning it, and I doubt whether or no they would otherwise have had sufficient time, since every one would have been desirous fully to say what he thought of it. But our Friend Mr. du Cret came into my Chamber about an hour ago, and told me that at length all that before doubted of the tenth of the thing and our Philosophers left my Lodgings in a much different humor from what they were in when they came thither; being come, said he, to see you with a Spirit of U∣belief and in a design to Criticize and confound all my Proofs, but that indeed they returned▪ not perfectly perswaded of the Miracle, but astonished and amazed at the great many Circum∣stances and Proofs, which rendred the thing almost altogether un∣questionable. As for the Circumstances, it must be confessed, as the greatest part of those Gentlemen said, That there is something in this Story that at first sight seems ridiculous; as for Example, to see two or three hundred young Prophets, like Mushromes, spring up all in a Night; to see a Man in his right senses, and who thinks of nothing less than Prophesying, when other Prophets are going to Prison, withdrawing himself, in the Night-time, from an Assem∣bly into the Mountains, with only those of his own Parish, on a sudden to fall down as if he was taken with the Falling Sickness, and there lie sprawling upon Snow that is two Foot deep upon the Ground, till such time as some one lifts him up,
and sets him upon his Breech; then with his Eyes shut, as a Man that sleeps, fall a Preaching and Prophesying, not at all consi∣dering that the Priests, that with his Villains had dissipated the Assembly, will inform against them all, the next Day. It looks like a thing only fit to be laughed at to see Bonpar, Mazet and Pascalin, Three Shepherds, of Eight, Twenty six and Fifteen Years old, assembled and holding a Consistory with Sixty Penitents on their Knees, that one after another present themselves before them confessing their sins, begging pardon of God for their Apostasie, just as the custom is here at Geneva. (But, say they, with much more zeal and fervor than they had done here) The Penitents likewise make Confessions of other particular sins, according as the Shepherds think fit to cite them; such a one, being a great Blasphemer, they make him confess his sins and beg Pardon of God. Such a Woman, as has been so many times at Mass and so often Confessed to a Priest since they first preached, and whose Tears, say they, (after she has declared her Fault) are Tears of Hypocrisie; Such a Woman that has lain with such a one, who after having denied the Fact for some time, is at last obliged, by the force of the Proofs those Children produced, to confess the Fact, and is, at the same time, contracted to her Lover, but is withal prohibited to go any far∣ther for a time, or to be married by a Romish Priest. The Pe∣nitent, scandalized at your incredulity, will tell you, Gentlemen, if you had been there, you would have been no more able to have concealed your selves from them than others: I was the second that came before them, but I believe if I had killed my Father I should have confessed it; they speak to you with as great Authority as a whole Council assembled. The Penitent may say what he please; how honest and sincere soever he be, 'twill be impossible for him to alter the Ideas Men must needs have of Mazet, Bonpar and Pascalin met in Council together. But, Sir, it must needs make a Man sad, when one afterwards sees the Prisons of Grenoble, of Cret and of Valence full of those Preachers, of all Ages and Sexes, and of those that have heard them Preach, of what Quality or Condition soever they be; When one sees Barns and Farm-houses pulled down or burnt, because those Children have preached there, and all that Vally full of Souldiers that are there on purpose to ruine the Inhabitants.
After that, oe cannot but examine the matter of Fact with more attention, and especially when one se thi new Persecution word for word foretold by these Children, with the strongest and liveliest Exhortations to continue stedfast, and when one sees that two of them are Arrested, there presently appear six others, and that among those that heard them and that were carried to Prison, there are some that before they came thither fall down, fall asleep, and Prophesie. That I may not exceed the bounds of a Letter, I must declare to you, Sir, That as for what I have already said, and for what I have yet to say, there shall be nothing that has not been proved by what credible Persons have either said or written to me, and that has not been examined and verified in my Journal by all those persons I have mentioned to you; this is necessary for the brevity I intend. I will now enter upon the business with something more of order. Of the Preachers, of their number, of the manner they are taken with that Distemper which makes them sleep and Preach, and of their Persecution. GEntlemen, Merchants, Physicians, Lawyers, Tradesmen, Hus∣bandmen, Men and Women, I mean persons that have seen, and who are all worthy to be believed, unanimously Depose con∣cerning these Preachers, their number, and the manner that that Spirit or Distemper spreads it self, and has successively in∣creased and spread it self along the River Drmme, and in the neighbouring places as far as Lyvrn; I might here bring the se∣veral Proofs I have in my Journal, but now they would he to no purpose, because we have from that Country others of later date. Here is an Extract of two Letters, which will be sufficient.
An Extract of a Letter of Mr...... written from Annonai in Dauphiné; 'Tis a Learned and honest Man, and one that is capable to examine a matter of that nature in all its circumstances. SIR, I Have seen at a place, about half a League from Este, a Boy that preached the Eighth and the Ninth of this present Month of January s he was asleep; who told us that we should be yet Persecuted for two Month, that if we had repented we should have been delivered in September last; that we should hear some of our Ministers in May next; that unless Basil repented, its Candlestick should be taken away; that Basil should betray Geneva; that the Strangers should be shut out and Massacred; that Geneva should hold out; that the great Men of the Earth should assemble and hold a Council there; that there should be in a short time great Assemblies on the Hills on both sides; that we should see our Enemies melt away like Wax before the fire, and that the King of France should one day come to an agreement with the Prince of Orange. He made very vehement and strong Exhortations to repentance. There is a little Child, of three years old, has likewise preached, and about two hundred Shepherds and other persons of all ages: 'Tis along the River Dromme, and some places near, that this preaching is, and it communicates it self from one place to another; it extends it self as far as Lyvron. Some of these preachers have been carried to Grenoble, others are clapt in Prison, and search is made for them every where. A Woman that is a Papist and married to a Protestant, has been likewise imprisoned, because in her sleep she had stiffly preached against going to Mass. I have been told likewise that there are of these People about Castres. I saw your friend the other day, he salutes you; one of his Farmers, his Shepherd and his Boy, about five or six Leagues from Cret, are Preachers, and are now in Prison. I will leave the Prophecies till last, and only pursue the Proofs of those things I first laid down, namely of the Preachers, their Number, their increasing, and their Persecution.
An Extract of a Letter from Mr. Cabons, Dean of Valence, to one of our Acquaintance of 22. of January, 1689. ........MR. Bouchu will be here in a short time to judge some Protestants that met in a Farm house that belongs to Mad. de Bais at Lyvro, there are seven or eight taken, and a little Girl of Lauriel, who preached by Prophecies; She is now in the Hospital General; She being in her Bed, with the Curtains drawn about her, and in the night time, there was a Man under the Bolster that prompted her to say what she said: She was easily brought to confess it. There is a great Maid that pretends to the same thing, that is likewise arrested, Mr. de la Re ['tis he that is the Com∣mander of the Troops that are in those parts] began to pull down the Farm-house of Mad. de Bais, but at the intreaty of Mr. de la Roche he has discontinued......... All the company were mighty attentive to this Letter, which is a solid confirmation of these Preachers, of their increasing and their Persecution; and at the same time discovers the Imposture the Papists have recourse to, that they may take, away the ad∣vantages they believe the Protestants of France would reap from such an astonishing Prodigy, and that they may shew some pretext for those severities they exercise against those Innocents, and those that thought there was no Crime to go hear such extraordi∣nary Discourses, and against which the King's Declarations had not provided. 'Tis not only Mad. de Bais that they have so treated; we have been informed here that the Barn of Mr. de Cheilane, near la Motte, has been burnt, and the reasons of those proceedings against the Barn and against the hearers of those Preachers were, because Mr. Arnaud de la Motte had sent for Mr. Julien from Lauzane, (who is there still) to preach in that Barn and other places thereabout, where those Children preach, and where Mr. Julien has formerly preached. Methinks I have brought together and proved a great many things in few words; I suppose, Sir, that you believe that I say nothing but the Truth, and what I have from credible per∣sons. I will therefore conclude here with what regards the
Preachers, their number, their increase, their Persecution and the Prtexts the Papists make use of to persecute them, with a true Description of their Cruelties, and the allarm that these nw Missionaries has given them. 'Tis a different thing to examine what these reachings and Prophecies are, and from whence they may proceed. As for the Preaching and Prophesying I will treat of both as amply as I can in a Letter; but to determine with what Spirit these Preachers are possessed, whether with the Spirit of God or with the Devil, whether it be Art or Disease, I leave it to wiser than me to judge; or if I say any thing of it, it shall be only in alledging the Effect this Prodigy has had upon the Minds of Men. From whence this astonishing Prodigy may proceed. 'Tis a thing that I can affirm to be true, and to which I made all the company agree, that generally all those whose Testimony I had read to them, as well Gentlemen as Merchants, Tradesmen, Physicians, Lawyers, Men and Women that had seen and heard these Prophets, not to mention the Rabble of Peo∣ple, unanimously Depose, That they never heard so good Prayers, nor more lively Exhortations, accompanied with an Action (which comprehends the Voice and the Gesture) the most taking in the World, and which is little less to be wonder'd at, than the Prodigy of talking whilest asleep, and of speaking French for Men that have never spoke it; that all those People won∣der when they are asked whether they have prayed, whether they have sung Psalms with those Preachers, and doubt no more but that it is the Holy Ghost, than if they had a particular Revelation of it from Heaven. 'Tis true that those that have heard a great many of them and several times, make a great distinction betwixt such a one and such a one, either for the Language, or for the the singing of the Psalms, or else for the things they say; but however all tend to the same end, neither the one nor the other of them preaching any thing but what is Orthodox. However to make this more clear, I will as briefly as possibly I can, let you see the Testimony of some of those that I my self have heard, of others whose original Letters I have transcribed, which will satisfie you in the first point I proposed, to wit, after what manner their preaching is.
The Testimony of one Galand, a Carder of Wool, drawn from his Depositions and his written Relations; He is a good and under∣standing Man, well instructed in his Religion, and acknowledged to be so by a great many persons of all conditions in that Town. He was the first that sent us word of the first number of six Prophets that he had heard, and of one or two more that he had heard of. I examined him several days one after another, and he is now among us honestly working at his Trade. He was in that Vally the Twelfth of November last. Here is an Abridgement of his Depositions. I. THat there were but seven or eight of those Preachers when he went thither: He says that he had heard only six of them. II. That he had harrowly examined whether they were really asleep, and found that they were certainly so; in which he agrees with all that have spoke of them since. III. That as for their Language in singing the Psalms, they were very different, though indeed the worst fort of French was above their capacity, describing them to me to be so poor, so miserable, so rustick, that nothing could be more. (All which very honest People come from thence have unani∣mously confirmed.) IV. That their Sermons were not as Sermons ordinaily are, of an Exordium, Explication and Applicatio (these were his proper Terms) but a continuation of fine Exhortations, and all as a long and perswasive Application of our Ministers: but, Sir, says he, with a Voice and Action so well applied, that twice or thrice all of us were forced to weep. Let me see, said I to i then, How have you collected all this? Sir, said he, I had much ado to follow them, because I can't write fast, so that what I have are only some pieces separated one from the other, having lost a thousand admirable things. You must know, Sir, that I exactly follow the expressions of my Tradesman,
who expresses himself according as things wrought upon him, and the belief he had of the Miracle: You shall see by and by how Men of a higher degree talk. I took therefore his Journal, and therein the Copy of one of those Sermons which be∣gins thus: In the name of God, &c. Brethren let every one of us, &c. Then he began the 54. Psalm, as a Minister. After that he prayed as follows: O God, whose Compassions are with∣out number, and whose Mrcies are infinite; We thy poor Creatures by thy Grace met together in this Place, by an ex∣traordinary means in the darkness of the night and in a litle House, to humble our selves before thy Face, and to confess to thee that we have highly offended thee. We pray thee en∣ter not into an Account nor Judgment with us; for of a Thousand Articles we shold not be able to answer to one. But, great God, there is Mercy with thee that thou should'st be seared. Lord, thou at this time vouchsafest us the hearing of thy Voice, in an extraordinary manner sending us thy Holy Spirit by the Mouths of thy Children whilest they sleep. Where∣fore, O God, teach us how great all thy wonders are, and let this small Assembly understand the Marvels that I shall utter, who am a poor innocent; and let us lay them up in our Hearts that we may have Hearts of Wisdom, and render thee always thanks for so many benefits, saying the Prayer thy dear Son has taught us, Our Father, &c. Then without taking any Text he begins his Exhortation and in these words, and by Articles, because he could not follow the Preacher in writing; for whilest he was writing one sentence he lost severl others. You must know that the Shepherd that preached was not above thirteen or fourteen years of age. Brethrn, here we are assembled under the Protection of our great God, to confess our sins to him, which are so great and so many; and to repent us seriously for our offending him. For if we repent, that great God will have mercy on us. Artic. It hath pleased that great God to make use of my Mouth to preach to you his word, he hath sent me his Holy Spirit and his Holy Angels to guard me and declare to me his Will. Brethren,
let us not be like perverse Children, who when their Father has hatn them, turn their Backs; but let us behave our selves as good Children, who when their Father has beaten them, return always to him and ask him Pardon. Art. I have nothing else to say to you, only that we must repent; for if we do not, God will come in his Wrath, and exterminate us all. Art. Brethren, you will see great Signs and Wonders; but be not afraid, for God will give to all of you the Courage that is necessary for you, and will keep you from all Danger. Art. When Abraham had his Hand listed up to sacrifice his Son, and had his Knife ready to say him, 'twas told him, that his good Intention was sufficient: Brethren, let us do like him, and that great God will preserve us in the, greatest Dangers. Art. Brethren, we have alwaies apprehended more the Threats of Men than those of God; for if we had been afraid of God, what has happened to us would not have hap∣ned, &c. Add to this, Sir, Exhortations to the Love of God and our Neighbour, to hold out against all new Persecutions that may hap∣pen hereafter; Description of the Romish Idolatry; the terrible Threatnings they make against those that participate of their My∣steries, and all this by various Repetitions, by several Passages of Scripture; a great many short Prayers and elevations of the Heart to God, in which he craves, and that very pathetically and patly, the Assistance of God for his Church, for its delivery, and for the strengthning his Children in their Combats, &c. And then you have an exact Idea of the best of their Sermons; for that from which I drew this, is one of the best: And the others, as Galand told me, are neither so long, nor so good, nor in such Order; and he made me the same Distinction we made in France of our Preachers, who all spoke very good Things, but with more or less Grace and Edification. If Galand has made a faithful Relation, there is only this Doubt remaining: Whether, or no, they have not been taught these things by their Parents? But that is easily answered, for their Pa∣rents are almost as ignorant as they. But other People, you will say, may perhaps have under-hand given these things to their Pa∣rents, to teach them their Children. But it may be answered, That they must have been furnished with a vast Stock, when I con∣sider, That the Memoirs of Galand contain alone two different Sermons of the same Shepherd, and that I have seen others of the
same Shepherd (whereof I shall make mention in its proper Place) and of a different Style adapted to the Country olks that heard him. They must likewise have a prodigious Memory, not to men∣tion their Boldness, their Voices, their Gests and their singing of Psalms: But all this remaining undecided, by Reason of the Dubts, which from time to time are raised about it; all this, I say, is clear∣ly decided by the sleeping of the Preacher, if it is real; now that above all seems the best confirmed by the universal Testimony of all those of our Religion that have heard them: And it is yet more clearly evidenced to be true, by the solemn Proof that was made of it by the Papists themselves, at Baron Poet's, and by the ridi∣culous and base way they made use of to spoil the Reputation of the Huguenot's Miracle, not being able to do it otherwise. But we must do more, we must prove (if Galand, and all those that have reported yet more than Galand, Men worthy to b be∣lieved, and without Reproach, have told us the Truth) we must prove, I say, that these Children cannot be suspected to have been instructed or prompted, and that by certain Parts of their Dis∣course, which cannot but proceed from the Mind of the Preacher, and from a Reflection that comes just then into their Heads. Here is an Example of it drawn from the same Discourse, the beginning whereof you have just now had. After that the number of these Preachers was increased, those poor People, without going out of the same House, made these Children sleep by turns. Once when Galand was there, and when he that I just now spoke of had made an end of speaking, he told them: Brethren, it's Midnight, I will repose my self; there is another that shall preach to you as well as I can. There was then another that spoke, and continued till 'twas Day. Then the same Boy said, Brethren, 'tis Day, there are some that are already gone (and it was true) you that are yet here, tarry till the Blessing of God, and then we will pray, That God would be pleased to preserve us, not only this Day, but all the Daies that he is pleased to let us remain here upon the Earth, as likewise to give us the Deliverace which he has promised us; but we must pray him with all our Hearts. For 'tis not to be doubted, if we pray him as we ought, but that he will hear our Prayers, and then, Brethren, though we should meet an Army of Enemies at the Door, God will place a million of Angels to guard you behind and before, and though you passed in the midst of them, they should not see you. Observe that in these Words he seems to take
notice of the Fear of those that were gone away before, for Fear, says Galand, of being surprized and accused of being in an Assem∣bly, to which thing likewise what follows seems to relate to. Keep your Tongue, don't communicate to your Enemies what you have heard, lest they put you in Troubles; but make it known to our Brethren, to the end they may be comforted, and dispose thmselves to follow Jesus Christ in his Sufferings, and that we all enjoy the happiness of his Glory, which God grant us. If Galand has not invented, methinks this seems plainly to shew, That there is no Artifice; but though Galand should have lied, Mr. .... and Mr.... and .... who have all reported the same things both by Word of Mouth and in Writing, cannot be so much as suspected of any such thing; and they all confirm the Honesty and Sincerity of Galand, by the following Testimony. The Testimony of Mr..... a Physician and Philosopher, naturally incredulous, and who has particularly examined both the Children and the first Shepherdess; 'tis upon his Memoirs that I composed mine of the Month of July and August, concerning the Shepherdess, by the Correspondence that an honest Merchant of that Country, my Neighbour and my Friend, had with him concerning her. 'Tis he who the 28. of May 1688. begins his Relati∣on thus: SIR, 'TIS with a great deal of Pleasure that I give you an Account of what I have seen and heard of, what passes in the other World: I have hitherto been of the Order f S. Thomas, but at this present Moment that I write to you, methinks I have had a Vision or Dream, so much the thing surpasses all Human Belief: The Prodigy is so much the more wonderful, in that it happens to be in a Subject altogether inca∣pable of the like effects, and that you may have a greater certainty of the thing, I have mte you the following Description.
After that Description, he saies of the Preachings and Exhorta∣tions of the Shepherdess, all that Galand has said of the Shepherds, with this over and above, That he examined the Eyes, Pulse, the beating of the Heart of the Shepherdess, five different Nights, and saies, That notwithstanding the Agitation she is in all the Night, she has her Pulse as quiet as one that is in a deep sleep, and her Body insensible. She has preached, saies he, from the third of February to the twenty eighth of May, the time that he wrote, but does not find her self the least weary, rising as fresh in the Morning as if she had neither said nor done any thing. She never opens her Eyes in speaking, she moves her Upper-Lip a little, without scarce moving her Chin, and speaks in a shriller Tone than when she ordinarily talks. It seems, saies he, in another Remark, as if her Voice went no farther than her Throat. And as for her Exhortations, he saies, They are the most taking things in the World, with as much Eloquence and Energy as can be imagined, and in as good Terms. Indeed, sometimes you would think that Terms and Thoughts failed her, but in a little time she reassumes both the Word and the thing with an admirable Continuation: There are only, as I have said, some Places where the Phrase does not seem natural, taking one Tense for another, but all that after the manner I have said. The Remarks of that Honest Man would be sufficient to fill a Volume, saying as Galand does, That she can∣not be followed in Writing, and that one can only write the essen∣tial things. I shall speak again of that honest Man, when I speak of Prophecies. I will only say, That having caused the Merchant, my Neigh∣bour, to write several times, to know of Mr. ... his Friend, Whether he saw nothing of that which the Shepherdess had foretold of those that were to follow her; he never answered any thing, But that it was said, that there was a Child of eight Years old that had begun to preach at Mid-summer, but that the Parents concealed him: He has since sent Word to his Friend, That the reason why he had neglected to go see those first, was, because he thought that it had been only a false Imitation of the Shepherdess; but that at present 'twas another guise thing, and that in a short time he would entertain him with it; and in the mean time charged Galand, who went to see him before he came away, To salute his Friend from him, and communicate his Collection to him. All which makes much for Galand, who indeed has a hundred times more
Testimonies than he needs: But here is a Letter from that same Gentleman, which begins to shew the Propagation and Increase of these Prophets. The Letter of Mr. N. of the Month of December, 1688. THere are about twenty five or thirty of these Missionaries sent of God to preach Repentance; 'tis not to be imagined what powerful Exhortations they make. The most part of them are altogether ignorant: There are of them from eight Years old to sixty five. It oftentimes happens, That in the Meetings that are in the Villages, in the Night, to break Wall-Nuts, some one that has not preached at all falls down on a suddain in a Sleep, and then being thrown upon the Bed, presently begins to preach. 'Tis a wonderful and an edifying thing to see how the Spirit of God is so generally poured out upon so many different Persons, and in such sort, that it can no longer be concealed. I just now heard from very credible Persons, That last Thursday the Baron of Poet and Mr. S. Audiol, Father and Son, the Curate of Poet, or rather his Nephew, and several other Papists, sent for four of these Chil∣dren, and that they heard them whilst they were asleep in the Castle of Poet: They were all terribly astonished at it. The Baron of Poet wept, lifting up and holding one of those Children in his Arms, and told the poor People to have no Meeting in the Night, &c. The Curate of Bordeaux was likewise there, who pressed the Finger, and sorely prick'd a young Maid of fourteen Years old; who notwithstanding felt nothing of it: And he asked her likewise, Whether she knew him? She answered, That he was Mr. Brun. I cannot tell you all the Story, the Post is going away: The thing is now publick, and when these Children are told, They shall be hanged, they are not at all afraid, and answer, That it is but a lit∣tle Harm for a greater Benefit. Methinks there is enough to prove the Sentiment of those that have heard these Children, in confirming what I have laid don concerning the Preachers, the Number of them and their Increase▪ Yet notwithstanding the low Condition I
am in, having kept my Bed or my Chamber these fifteen Daies, by reason of my accustomed Rheum, I must send you the Testimonies of those that I have particularly distinguished from the rest. You have already heard a Carder of Wool and a Physician; I produce you now a Lawyer, an able Man in his Profession, and of great Repute, and besides not Credulous, and a Philosopher. An Extract of a Letter from Mr.... Lawyer of .... of the Month of December. Whereas 'tis more necessary than ever to take Care of exposing Men in publick Writings, I have suppressed both the Dates and Places. PRay likewise tell Mr.... ('tis a Person whom this Lawyer par∣ticularly respects) tat we have at present in his House one of those young Shepherds, on whom God hath poured out his Spi∣rit, and that all your Pastors▪ and Teachers make no Exhortations so lively, so taking, so powerful, as those we have heard from the Mouths of these Children. We must a little examine this, but that cannot be so soon; for we have as yet the sound of that Voice in our Ears, it having but just now ceased: 'Tis here the House of Obed Edom. After the Lawyer, let us hea an Apothecary, according to the Time things hapned.
The Testimony of one Grevier, an Apothecary of Bourdeaux. 'Tis a young Man betwixt twenty five and twenty eight Years of Age, Son to a Merchant of the aforesaid Place, and who was both Apothecary and Surgeon, and practised not only at Bordeaux, but likewise in the neighbouring Villages Mornans and Sceles, from whence came out the first Swarm of Prophets. All People of that Country, and there are here of all Conditions and Qualities, know him very well, and look upon him as an honest Fellow: But the best Testimony of him is, That a Person of Qality, a Refugié here in this Town, having written to a Learned and Famous Man in his Profession, to desire him to inform him concerning these Prophets; he wrote him only this Answer, That he would direct him to a Collection this Grevier had made concerning these Prophets, consisting almost of a Quire of Paper; thinking that it was sufficient, having first read and examined the foresaid Collection. I have heard it several times, and likewise in the presence of our Mr. Legier, Pastor, and Professr of Philosophy. I. HE saies the same things as Galand and the other say, but he adds other Circumstances. Concerning their Sleep, 'tis he that first gave occasion of that Commentary upon the Sickness for fifteen Daies before the Mi∣racle or pretended Inspiration; but he only saies, That being one Day called to let a Child Blood of about eight Years old, whose Eyes were all as red as Blood, the poor Pople said to him, That they thought it might be a preparation to the other Distemper, (for so they call the Inspiration of those Children, and the manner that those Children have of speaking in their Sleep) and indeed, saies he, three Daies after he fell asleep and preached. 'Pray by the way take notice, that Galand saies, concerning their sleeping, That one of those Maids, of about eleven Years of Age, which prophesied whilst he was by; said, That before she fell asleep, she felt something, which by little and little came up from her Feet to her Throat, where when it was, Sleep took her, and she felt no more of it. Grevier adds, Tat if those Children should be hindred from speaking when they sleep, especially the little ones, that are not able to support the Spirit that moves them, they would suffer
for it; and saies, That once some having put to sleep nine of them together, who spoke by turns, answering to one anothers Exhor∣tations, there was a little Child of eight Years old, that seemed mightily tormented, and that called out for his Mother, praying her, for God's sake, to wake him, because he could not hinder himself from speaking, and his Mother being not present, he cried out, O Eternal, wake me. Such are the Comments and Reflecti∣ons of those People, according to their Capacities, and such doubtful things are reported by them, yet there appears likewise much Sincerity. II. At that very Time that Grevier came away, he observes an Increase of more tan eighty Preachers; and he remarks, That in one Day there fell twelve, at once, at Besaudun, a neighbouring Village, where there had never been any before, and that he had the Curiosity to go see them, two Daies before his Departure. III. He saies, as others do, That it is impossible there should be any thing more persuasive or taking than what they say: His Col∣lection is made up of different Sentences, that he took sometimes from one, sometimes from another, assembled or else in private: He observes, That there are some that speak far worse than others, that make sometimes horrid Barbarisms: He is so knowing, as to tell us that that follows the Disposition of the Organs, and the more or less Wit they have. I cannot but take notice here, what our Physician saies in one of his Letters..... Such Trouble has this Spirit given others (speak∣ing into what amazement the Shepherdess put the Intendant, the Bishop and the Judges of the Place) but I believe a Man must be perfectly reprobate, not to be moved at the lively Exhortations of this Spirit, and that after the hearing of it a Man can no longer be wicked, nor continue in the Exercise of a false Worship: I ve∣rily believe, That 'tis a Spirit come from the Father of Light, that has been poured out upon the Mind of this Maid, or rather united to her Body, to preach, by her Organs, to Sinners, the Remission of their Sins, if they repent; and though this Spirit does not pro∣duce Sentiments of any Superlative Sublimity, yet it saies enough in respect of the Soul and Body that it organizes. You know there are diversity of Spirits.
After such authentick Confessions, I will say something hereafter concerning the Place where these People live. IV. This Grevier is one of the Penitents whereof I have alrea∣dy spoken: I have here taken out of his Memoirs, the Form they make use of, in receivng Persons for having abjured their Religi∣on. When the Penitent is come before them, they adjure him from God, to tell, How many Times he has been at Mass, and thereupon they lay before him the greatness of that Sin; then the Penitent kneeling down, they make him say these Words, Lord, Lord, I cry to thee for Grace and Mercy, be thou pleased, O great God, to pardon me all the Sins that I have committed from the Day that I was born to this present Hour, and particularly for having re∣nounced thy Holy Truth, and grant that I may be received into thy Holy Paradise. Then the Child that speaks, saies, God grant you your Desire. But as for the Remonstrance that they make concerning that Sin, and the enormity of it, and the Threats they pronounce against those that shall return thereunto, That, saies Grevier, cannot be expressed, alwaies adding these Words at the last; You have sinned against the Father, you have sinned against the Son; take heed of sinning against the Holy Ghost, for God will pardon you no more. The Testimony of Mr. ..... 'tis sufficient, Sir, to mark you out this Witness, by the admiration you had of what he has lately done, after the powerful Persuasions, which as he told all People here, He had received from one of those Shepherds; which will likewise suffice to justifie that Shepherd and his Comerades from the Reproach that might be made them, That they are Instruments of the Devil for the retaining of some in France, which unless they had promised a speedy Delive∣rance, would have come out of it. I. I Think there ought to be made a great Difference of those that have remained in France: some tarry there, because 'tis their Hearts Desire to do so; others, because their Affairs hinder them from leaving it; others act according to the different Light God may have given them: But in whatever I have read concern∣ing these Prophets, I alwaies found that they constantly persuaded their Hearers to come out of Bbylon, and that they made terrible
Declarations against those that returned after they were once got out of it; the only thing that has retained those that had designed to leave it, was because the Papists every where desisted from their usual Rigour, in respect of Worship, so that these Shepherds have preperly preached as to Men that are under Persecution; but with the most terrible Threats in the World against those that should return to the Mass, and into Idolatrous Temples. Advertizing them, That they should undergo other Persecutions, against which they ought to prepare themselves betimes; you have but to see concern∣ing it the Abridgment, that has been collected by Mr..... and his Friends, who are Philosophers and ingenious Men, of a Sermon of one of those Children. I thought that Mr..... had exagge∣rated things to you as to that Matter; but this Relation being come, our Wits must hold their Tongues, they must now confess that they are amazed, and that they are reduced to chuse either the Spirit of God or of the Devil, there being nothing of Cheat, or of the contagious Distempers of the Imagination, according to Father Malebranche, to be admitted in this present Case. Mr..... and his Relation informs us, That he hath seen a Shp∣herd of fourteen Years of Age, spaking whilst he was a slep, speakng French almost as well as any of his Auditors, singing the Psalms as a Man of thirty, that understood Musick, and hav∣ing a Tone of Voice, and an Action answerable to the rest of the Prodigy. The Shepherd, in all his Sermon, seems precisely to speak to his Auditors, he has not to do now with Country Fellows, but with a considerable Gentleman, with a Merchant that is an inge∣nious Man, and with two Philosophers, not being in my Power to describe these People to you otherwise. He began, saies the Relation, with the Cosideation of the weakness of Man; and enlarged his Discours in good Expressions about Vice: After that he said, directing hiself to God with a great deal of Zeal and Fervor, ('tis what M..... bids us ob∣serve in this Relation, the Pieces whereof don't exprss what he meant) Lord put away from us the stinking Dust of Sin, we are but Dust and Ashes, and to Dust shall we return. O God strengthen us by thy great Mercy; O Eternal stretch out thy Hand to succour us, lest we fall again into Temptation.
These are Articles or several interrupted pieces of the Sermon, being only some sentences of it taken here and there. Rejoice, Brethren, that God has sent you a little Candle to light you, make use of it, repent ye, and take heed lest the Rod of sin turn against you. Pray to God with all your Hearts, and mend your Lives. God says in his Scriptures, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and the rest of the Passage. Jacob's Ladder was neither of Wood nor of Stone, but of Prayer and Supplication; God has taken away his Candlestick from you, Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. Some of our Doctors found something extraordinary and very strong in this Article. I pass over some to be short, and mention only those that are precisely to the purpose, though all the rest is equally good, whether it be when he speaks of the cause of the de∣struction of our Churches, or whether it be when he promises us the re∣establishment of them in case we repent. Brethren, is it not a strange ting that you, who have pro∣mised to follow Jesus Christ, should have renounced him for the sake of a little spot of Ground? (He speaks no more to Country Folks) He who shed the last drop of his Blood for you? Don't trouble your selves in heaping up earthly riches; but lay up Treasures where the Moth and Rust do not corrupt. The Scripture tells you, Be not surprised when you see your selves under Persecution for my name's sake; Pray God heartily, the Devil is about to be shut up in the midst of Hell. I must speak freely to you, I have not the Wit to say all these things, but 'tis God that speaks by me: since your riches have ruined, it must be by your Prayers that you must redeem your selves; and what are ye afraid of for a little wealth? Be afraid of nothing though you were to die: Happy are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labours. Hardn'd, Stubborn, Blind Men that we are! We harken not to the Voice of God, and we put no confidence in his promise: Read the 68. Psalm, Let God arise, &c.
The way of Paradise is a streight way, it is no larger than a Hair, and as fine; the faithful only can walk therein, there is no entering into it for those that are loaden with sins; But the way to Hell is large and spacious, there is a high Road thither. One of our Dctors, because one of the company wonder'd at that comparison, satisfied him with that of the Camel passing through the eye of a Needle, and brought on the same or the like occasion. It has been told us, That in the last times many shall fall away from the Faith, and we see it now but too much, and above all when we see those base Souls, who after having been gone and partaken of the Blood of the Lamb, afterwards come back and plunge themselves into the Abyss of Corruption and Filthiness. 'Tis a long time since you, who are here present, have been at Mass, but I am afraid the first Persecution will make you return thither again; But be sure not to do it, suffer your selves rather to be cut in pieces, suffer your selves rather to be brought to the Block, than return thither again: Lord have pity on these poor sinners, O Eternal strengthen them by thy Grace. Jsus Christ has poured out all his Blood for us, and we can't endure the prick of a Pin: fear not Men, who can only kill the Body, but fear God that can destroy both Soul and Body (and concerning that, says the Relation,) He cited the 1. and 2. Verses of the 146. Psalm, and continued to the begin∣ning of the 3. Verse: Brethren, Princes have no power over your Souls, &c. and he spoke a great deal thereon. Speaking of those that had sold their Children for Mony, he saith, They have sold their Children and made an Ofering unto Idols, as the 106. Psalm mentions. But God shall redeem the Children, and their Fathers shall perish. I believe, Sir, here is enough to shew what effect these Shep∣herds have produced not only amongst the common People, but amongst all sorts of Men, even the most understanding, there being no-one that has ever written or spoken any thing con∣trary to what I have here mentioned; which I desire our small Assembly to take notice of. Whereupon some of those that had heard what Mr..... had said, reported that 'twas really impossible to see a Man more touched or perswaded of the
thing than he was, being to that degree, that speaking to our chiefest Doctors here, he told them; You may say, Gentle∣men, what you please, but if you heard those Children, you would be just as those that have heard them, there is no pos∣sibility of resisting. I know what you say concerning the be∣lief we had of the Miracle before hand, concerning our sad con∣dition in France, concerning the novelty of the matter of Fact; All this might cause an admiration and astonishment, but there is more than that: For. to tell you the truth, you must know that for an hour and a half, we wept every one of us like so many Children. 'Tis time now to come to their Prophecies, but I must first say a word or two concerning the Fast that the first Company of Prophets ordained, all of that Vally, the 25th of Novembr last. Concerning the Fast ordained by these Children. 'Twas about the Tenth or Twelfth of November that they named the Day for the Fast, and this is that which Galand has collected of what one of the Shepherds said, after having finished his Ex∣hortations, by this comparison; 'Tis to no purpose, Brethren, to excuse our selves as Adam, saying, The woman that thou hast given me made me do it, and to cover our selves with Fig-tree-leaves; for there is nothing hid from the eyes of the Eternal, &c. You are unclean, continued he, from the soal of the foot to the crown of the head, and therefore you must make a solemn Fast on the 25th of this Month of November, and you must celebrate it as it ought to be, whether in general or particular. If you cannot meet together, do it in your Houses reading of Sermons and Chapters of the Holy Bible such as I shall mention to you; to wit, Eight Chapters of the Revelations, the 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 21. Nine Psalms, the 137, 42, 51, 38, 69, 29, 23, 46, 64. Four Chapters of the Gospel accord∣ing to St. John, the 6, 7, 17, 19 Eleven Chapters of St Mat∣thew, the 23, 24, 25, 17, 10, 11, 13, 14, 3, 4, 28. and don't make any boast of it, keeping your Doors sbut, because an unbeliever may enter in and force you to eat; I tell you once more not to boast of this Fast, all your other Fasts have availed you nothing, let us endeavour by this to disarm that great God, and let it be accompanied with Prayer and Charity.
Pray take notice that this Fast was exactly observed, and almost at the same time that there was a Fast in Suisserland and Geneva, this last being on the 22. of November. I leave to the learned to examine the distribution of the Chapter, desiring them to re∣member that the Shepherd had to do with Men that read only the New Testament: and 'twas much if they had any to read. Concerning their Prophecies. I find my self so weary and so spent with attention, that I have of necessity had for so long a Letter, that I will shorten this Chapter as much as I can. We must distinguish first betwixt the Predictions of these Children that relate to particular things, and the Predictions that regard the Church in general. Concerning particular Predictions. The Prediction of the Shepherdess, concerning those that were to speak after her, seems to me the most considerable; because, in my opinion, 'tis accomplished, and because I had recorded it in July last. Mr...... our Physician, says, That the People of that Vally had assured him, that she had foretold a great many things that were passed. That term which I thought Equivocal, seems to relate to things that she should have divined, but in the Idiom of the Country, it likewise means happened. Mr...... Reports, That being once upon the Bed by the Shepherdess minding her Eyes, Mouth and Pulse, it happened that she said that some People should be awaked that slept, and those People were directly behind the Shepherdesses Bed. There came something late, from a certain neighbouring Village, a Man that was desirous to hear that Maid, and just as he was come to the House, the Shepherdess told it, saying, There is such a one that arrives, he is a good Man, let him come in. And the Man happened to be just then at the Door. Mr..... says, That he saw it, and some that were there present assure him, That she had said almost the same things concerning him before he came, coming thither likewise in the night for fear of being disco∣vered.
Galand assures us, That James Mazel of Mornans, who had a Son and a Daughter that Prophesied, wept bitterly for the loss of a Son, which he doubted not of after that his Daughter had told him that he was dead, and was so grieved only because he verily believed that those Preachers always tell truth; the afore∣said Mazel desired Galand when he came to enquire about that Son which he had been told was dead: Galand enquired very carefully after him of People of the same Vally that had retired themselves to Geneva, who told him that they had not heard of him for three Months, never since that he went for Brandenburgh. Grevier confirms what Galand had told me concerning the belief of those People by his own, and by what he has seen of it. For he confesses and protests, That though 'tis some time since he seriously thought of leaving France, he should not have made such haste if these Children had not oftentimes reiterated the Order for him to withdraw; 'tis thus he expresses himself: For, adds he, Sir, they had told me so many things concerning my self, that I believed them upon that account, and when they told me that the Curate of Bordeaux had some ill design against me, and that I should make haste away, I did so: And by the Event 'tis found that he was well advised. For frequenting that Vally as he did since the springing up of these Prophets, under pre∣tence and sometimes likewise through necessity of his going to carry them Physick, he would certainly have passed his time very ill e're this. He says he was present when Orders came to those poor People to send Four of their Children to the Baron of Poet's House, which put them all into a great consternation, and made them assemble their small Council, whither they called Galand, asking him his Advice, which was that they should obey the Orders and send him the least. Some thereupon said, That they ought first to make Prayers to God, and consult the Holy Ghost; and immediately Three of those Children that were amongst them fell asleep, afterwards told them, That they should not be afraid to send them, and that they should see them come back gay and dancing on the way like Lambs; which happened according as they had said. I have observed in the Letter of Mr..... how a little Girle named Mr. Brun by his name: he is the Curate of Bordeaux who
was out of the Chmber on purpose for that or for o∣ther reasons, when the little Girle went to sleep: But 'tis easie to be seen that the Curate of Bordeaux did not expect to be known. Grevier adds, but only by hearsay, from a Protestant of Bordeaux, who designs to live in good intelgence with the Curate, because he is very rich; that the said Curate being returned, had be∣twixt them confessed that there was something extraordinary in the Business, that among those things they said they mixed some old Pophecies of du Mouiin, but that in a short time good order would be taken about it. The aforesaid Grevier likewise mentions a Matter of Fact that passed whilst he was present: One of these Maids, whilst she was preaching, directed her Discourse to a Maid of Besaudun, a neigh∣bouring Village, of whom she asked, Why her Sister was not come? who answered, That she was sick: 'Tis true, replied the Shepherdess, but 'tis of my Distemper; and the thing proved to be what she had said. The same Grevier speaking to me in presence of Mr. Legier, concerning a Schoolmaster that had been at Geneva, and whom Mr. Legier found to be one that had returned after he had received some Money from the Consistory, made us read in his Journal, a Place where one of these Shepherds reprehended him very severe∣ly, both for his Return, and likewise because he refused that very Day to make a Prayer amongst those poor People, that had desired him, according to their ancient Custom, which was to read and pray to God, when they were assembled, till such time as the Children slept and preached to them. Mr. ..... tells us a remarkable Story: After having so dispo∣sed of his Apartment for us, so that we could pass through a Hall into his Chamber, and out of his Chamber into his Anti Chamber or Garderope, where his Servant lay; he, to wit, Mr...... remembring, in the middle of the Shepherd's Srmon, whom they had put to Bed in the Garderope, of some urgent Business he had to do in the Kitchen; He observes, I say, That whilst he was in the Kitchen, his Man and the Governess of his House went into the Hall, laying their Heads close to the Wall, endeavouring to hear something; whereupon the Shepherd making a Stop, said, There is one of our Brethren gone, but there are two others come. They that remained, not knowing what he meant, went out into
the Chamber, and from thence into the Hall, where they saw those two endeavouring to hear. Mr. ..... looks upon this as a miraculous thing; but might there not be another Explication made of it, since the Shepherds say, That the time approaches, when the little Flock shall be no longer the little Flock, nor our Assemblies, &c. which he might mean by, for one lost two recovered. Concerning their general Prophecies. I believe that I must necessarily distinguish again betwixt the Pophecies that regard the Church in general, and those that re∣gard those People, joyned with the rest of the Protestants of France; and I believe, that doing so, I shall not deviate from the Style and Practice of the Scriptures. In general, they foretel to one and to the other a speedy Deli∣verance, all the Collections are full of it: The Shepherdess in seve∣ral Places, speaks of the Accomplishment of the Prophetical Months and Daies, as of a thing near at hand, however, she withal mixes violent Persecutions; she foretels of Wars and Plagues, but all so ill collected, that 'tis Pity that Mr. ..... had not heard her speak of that as well as her General Predictions. He particularly observes, That what she singularly marked out was the Deliverance of the Church in September. Now, that she did not understand a General Deliverance is plain, in that she adds Persecutions and other Signs, which were not to come to pass in so short a time; and if one should say, That she had two things in view at once in her Prophecies, in my Opinion the like things may be found in Scri∣pture. These last Prophets seem to have had the same thing in view, when they say, Tat ur Deliverance had been in September, if we had repented. But that it should be at Christmas, if we repented, (for they alwaies annex Repentance to it) yet when they say, That that Deliverance shall be at Christmas, or as others say, At Christ∣mas or at the beginning of the Year, they all unanimously say, at the same time, That there shall be a violent Persecution, but a short one, and that we must prepare our selves for it. But how shall we make this agree, unless it be, that in one Place they re∣gard the Deliverance of the Church in England, at Christmas or at
the beginning of the Year; and in the other the Persecution that it ought to suffer in Dauphiné; and perhaps likewise in other Places of France. If Grevier saies true, here is a very remarkable thing; he assures us, That at that time that he left Dauphiné, there was a Report, That the King of England had entirely defeated the Prince of Orange. Thus far Grevier may say true, for at that very Time M. de Verace shewed me a Letter from a Senator of Chambery, a Friend of his, who sent him a Copy of what the Cardinal of Gre∣noble had written to their first President, to wit, That he had re∣ceived an Express from Court, to tell him the News, That the King of England had beaten and defeated the Prince of Orange by Sea and Land. Divers Letters from Grenble hither confirmed the sme thing, That there was a Report there, and all over Dauphiné, That the Prince of Orange had been defeated. I wrote likewise to Mr. D L. about it, asking hm, What was the Reason of such mean Politicks? Now what does Grevier say more? That at that time those Reports were in Dauphiné, one of these Shepherds or Prophets said; There are some that spread about Reports, That the Prince of Orange has been defeated, but they that spread about such Reports commit a great Sir; for the Prince of Orange has chased, chases and shall chase the King out of England, and that is the beginning of the Deliverance of the Church. I say it once more, That if Grevier has spoken the Truth concerning this last Point, it resolves a great many Difficulties. I have observed, in the first Letter written from Annonay, that they have since spo∣ken very right concerning the Prince of Orange, (for he that writes it may be believed) they may then have spoken aright of him here∣tofore. At present they say something more particular, saying, That we shall hear our Miisters in the Month of May: That may in∣deed be true of some of them, though not of all; and if I am not mistaken, a young Woman that lived at Castres, whom I heard speak of it, before I was confined to my Chamber, by my Distemper, said, That the Shepherdess had said so; that is, That in the Month of May next they should hear some of their Pa∣stors. That which happened at Castres, whereof there was a Report in Dauphiné, as I have already observed, was told me by a young Gentlewoman of that Country, a Merchant's Daughter of Croisette,
two Leagues from Castres; she is one that has all the Characters of an honest Person, and who expresses her self, for a Person of her Condition, with as much Grace as Sincerity. When I made this Relation in our Assembly, a Gentleman of Castres told me, That he knew one Corbieres a Merchant, as well as the Judg of Castres, whereof the young Woman makes mention in her Relati∣on. Others likewise of the Company came to me, and told me, beforehand, That the thing was reported by others. This it is: A Shepherdess of eight Years old, being at the foot of a Tree, had a Vision of an Angel, cloathed with a fine white Robe, who bid her to tell her Brethren, That in the Month of May they should hear some of their Ministers, and taught the Shepherdess a Prayer, which lasts, saies Madamoiselle Corbieres, almost half an Hour, and is the best in the World. The Father and the Mother would not believe her; but she gave them for a Sign, That she should be three Daies without speaking; and so it happened. The Report that was spread through the Village, spread it self farther, and Madamoislle Corbieres went thither, saw the Shepherdess, and praied with the Assembly, according to that excellent Prayer of the Shepherdess: Which, said she, was extreamly taking; and I ob∣served the aforesaid young Woman to be moved at the very remem∣brance of it. The young Gentlewoman adds, That that Shep∣erdess has an admirable Grace with her, speaks much better French than she: That 'tis impossible to have a more noble Air, than that Child has, so that it would charm one to see her. The Noise of this Shepherdess and her Prophecy, spreading it self abroad, orders were given to take her: But three daies before she told her Mother, That there should happen a great Misfortune in the House by the Death of three Persons. The third Day being come, there came a Captain of Dragoons to take away the Shep∣herdess; her Father was in Bed, almost dying, but he endeavoured to keep his Daughter; so that the Dragoon, who was resolved to have the Maid, pshd and abused him so much, that he dyed that very Evening. An Unkle of the Maid, who was then in the Cham∣ber, and who was angry, and resisted the Dragoon, was shot dead by him with a Pistol. A Neighbour that was present, being af∣frighted thereat, run to the Door, endeavouring to get out; but one of the Dragoons, that kept the Door, thrust him through and
killed him. The Shepherdess however comforts her Mother, tel∣ling her, Mother, be comforted, let me go, I shall have no hurt done me; and as for that which is happened, the Angel had told me, That it would be so; 'tis God that would have it so, and there was no altering his Decree. Whereupon the Shepherdess is brought to Castres before one Barbarac (a meer Barbarian, saies the Gentlewoman, as likewise a Gentleman of Castres) and Bar∣barac seeing her, How now, said he, poor Innocent, What hast thou to say with thy Prophecies? What Stories dost thou tell us? What wouldest thou say? I say, replied the Child, without being at all concerned, That thou shalt be hanged within this Year. 'Tis reported, That that did not please the Judge: She is mad, said he to the Gaoler, put her into the Dungeon, from whence she shall not foon come out. I will come out, replied she, within eight Daies. And who will bring thee out, said Barbarac? Thou, re∣plied the Shepherdess, or the Angel that has told me so. And it happened precisely that in eight Daies Barbarac received Orders to send her to the Intendant of Nimes. The aforesaid young Woman saies, That the Shepherdess having foretold, That there should be preaching within eight, ten, or a certain number of Daies, in a Castle of that Country called Castelfranc, there was a Garrison of Dragoons sent thither, to prevent the Effect of the Prediction; and that in the mean while she came away for Geneva at that very time, and had been seven Weeks before she could come thither, having been stopt in her Way at some Place in Dauphiné by the fault of her Guides, but that she got away with a little Money. 'Tis about fourteen Daies since she came to Geneva; and she is the last that I have heard. I must not forget what she told me con∣cerning the Captain of Dragoons, That he was extreamly sorry for what he had done. I have taken the Names of three Men of Montaubon, come from those Parts, who all confirm the Matter of Fact: Other People confirm it likewise; The Report is all over Dauphiné. Here I must conclude, desiring you to accept this my small En∣deavour to please you.
Continuation of the Journal of the 22d. of February, 1689. MOnsieur..... will shew you a Relation that is now tran∣scribing in my Chamber, which will be sent you by M. of M. because last night M. of B. and I were of Opinion to do so, and 'twas he that desired me. That the Journal I have sent you might be communicated to M. of M. 'twas because I would not write more than what is necessary; and pray, Sir, be pleased to permit it to be so. As for the Memoire concerning the Vivarez, 'tis such an asto∣nishing thing, that I should doubt of the Belief that you ought to have of it, if M. of B. had not assured me several Times, that I might believe it as firmly, as if I had seen it my self; and that M. of M. will tell you the same thing, the Person that wrote it being his Acquaintance. I have likewise seen this Post some Letters from Nimes that in a sort confirm the thing, since they tell us, That there were twenty People brought thither from the Vivarez, and imprisoned for having been at Meetings. I have only then to make some Reflections on this wonderful Matter; but indeed it is so surprizing and amazing, that I leave it to others more knowing and more learned than my self. I will only say, following my Journal, That Mr. Legier, our Professor of Philosophy, a very worthy Man both for the School and for the Plpit, told me Yesterday, after Dinner, That he had seen some People of Dauphiné that testified, That those Children or Prophets had foretold, That there should not be only great Assemblies on both Sides on the Hills, as you may see in my Journal, but like∣wise that there should be some that should preach awake, which is in all Points accomplished by this thing of the Vivarez. I must confess, Sir, That, in finishing my Journal, I could not but doubt
a little of such extraordinary Matters of Fact. When I saw those poor Preachers foretel us of numerous Assemblies on the Hills on both Sides, and that I considered with my self, That they them∣selves were imprisoned, and all their Auditory scattered, and he∣hold the Day after that there are Assemblies in the Vivarez of a thousand, of one fifteen hundred, and of two thousand Per∣sons, and in several Places at once; and in the Day-time to hear Prophets, that are risen up on a suddain, and preach both asleep and awake, with Signs and wonderful Miracles. I must confess, Sir, that this thing, which we know to be reported by a Person worthy to be believed, has perfectly confounded even the most incredulous. I have seen the chief of our Sadduces, after having been convinced of the Matter of Fact, say, That 'twas a natural Distemper, directed by Providence to procure the Repentance of those poor People, that had fallen under Temptation: Well, let it be so; they shall explain us that admirable Philosophy another time. As for our Professor, That it surpasses his. And I will do no more than only send you the Matters of Fact, and the Pre∣dictions of these Preachers, which from Day to Day are accom∣plished: But to continue to observe what is passed and passes in Dauphiné; you must know that the Persecution increases there. You have seen the Prior of Valence's Letter, which attributes that Miracle to the Cheat of a Man that was placed behind the Child, and that suggested to him his Sermons and his Prophecie. Now that Fiction is not specious enough for them, by reason of the great and innumerable Proofs that there are of the Preaching of those People without being prompted or shut up in Curtains: Where∣fore they forced some of those Children, by cruelly scourging them, to say, That Mr de Bays had instructed them beforehand, and had taught them the things they had afterwards repeated: And all this to make People believe the same thing of the others. But, Sir, God seems to laugh at their Projects; here is that which Mr. Legier has collected within these two or three Daies; he has promised to bring the Witnesses to my Lodgings. 1. That there are People that continue to fall. 2. That a Man escaped out of Prison, where he was with some of those Prophets, had heard them preach in the Night-time. 3. That three Men that went out of Switzerland into that Country, about some Business, had lodg∣ed, as they returned to Geneva, with some of those Children that were carried Prisoners: They assured Mr. Legier, that they did
not in the least appear moved; and that a Woman that was lodg∣ed in the same Inn, having asked leave of the Bayliff to hear one of those Children, they brought one, who, after that he was fallen asleep, had preached, to the great astonishment of all the People: and when they asked the Bayliffs what they thought of it, they thrunk up their Shoulders, saying, They say nothing but very good things. 4. The same People say, That having been in an Assem∣bly, one of those Children had said aloud, That there were three come out of Switzerland, whereof two had made their Abjuration in Switzerland; but that there was one that had not done it, and whom the Child made do it with the same Authority the whole Consistory of Lausanne assembled could have done. For 'tis an ad∣mirable thing, That there is no one able to resist the Words of these Preachers. 5. That a Papist Woman had been to hear one of these Prophets, and that whilst he prayed she would not kneel down: That the Prophet censured her, and she making him Answer, That she kneeled down only before the Altar; the Pro∣phet redoubled his Censure, concluded it with a Prediction regard∣ing that Woman, That even on that very Day that he had preached to her the Truth, it should be preached to her by her own Son; which happened accordingly. A Person of my Acquaintance told me Yesterday this Story, which she had had from some one of those dispersed People, that fly from the present Persecution. 6. Others have likewise told Mr. Legier, That those Children had caused a Psalm to be sung in haste, to see the Miracle they had foretold of one of their Brethren, who was to fall as soon as the Psalm was ended; which came to pass accordingly. 7. This Expression of Falling, is a general Expression of all People that talk of these Chil∣dren; and Mr. Legier has been told, That one of these People hav∣ing been surprized with that Distemper in the Way, had fallen into a Hole, where he had broken his Leg; which did not at all hinder him from continuing his Preaching, without feeling any Hurt: After which he became sensible as another Person. If I should now make a Collection of all that is said of these People, 'twould be infinite▪ I will add only this, which has been likewise told Mr. Le∣gier, That the King should have amongst his Guards that should fall down and Prophesie, and that it shold be concealed for once or twice, but that the third time it should break out.
A Copy of a Letters from the Vivarez. 'TIS about a fortnight ago, that near where your Cousen the old Captain's Wife lives, some persons began to preach the Gospel with so many signs and wonders, that it would make you tremble; and the thing has by little and little increased and so increases that at this very hour that I write to you, there are betwixt that place and this more than threescore. They are People of all ages and sexes without distinction, except married Men and Women; I have not heard sy there are any of them; that is to say, however that the greatest part of them are Boys and Girls from six or seven to twenty five years of age, and old Men, all of the meaner sort of People, there being few of them that can read: But they are all of Families, that have been exemplary for their good living. For they cry aloud and say, That they have received the Grace and Gifts they are possessed of, but by the sincere repentance of their Fa∣milies, it being impossible they should obtain it, if any one remained in sin. They are four or five days without eating before they speak; and af∣terwards they scarce eat any thing, and their sad looks, at least of the greatest part of them, clear up and become pleasant, so that you might read their happiness in their Faces. They preach almost day and night without ceasing, in publick and in the midst of the Villages where they are. These Assemblies are so numerous that yesterday there was one about a League from hence of fifteen hundred persons, and that held from seven a Clock in the Morning till six at night. The days and nights before, they were not so great. But if I should tell you that these to day will be of above two thousand, I should not lie. People go thither from all parts, as if they were processions, and at Noon day. There does not come one back, but positively declares, That he had rather be drawn in pieces with four Horses, than ever return to Mass. If you saw how they wept you would be concerned at it. They boldly say, That there will be a Communion within six Weeks; that the Gospel will be preached every where, and that some Ministers whose names are known by all the People, and whom they name, shall enter the Kingdom to administer the Sacraments to their
first Flocks, and that on such a day which they name. There are some that preach whil'st asleep, others being awake. Their Hearers are always on their Knees, suffering no one to be otherwise. And if there be any notorious sinners in their Assembly, these poor Preachers call them to them, and fall into terrible torments, till such time as the sinners come to them. When they are come they cry over their Heads, Mercy and Grace, always exhorting those sinners seriously to repent, and all the People to pray God that he would pardon them. They make the Congregation sing Psalms, and very often the 51. They make publick Prayers for sinners: if those sinners really repent them, and that God pardons them, they themselves fall to the Ground as Dead without any appearance of Life. Ad when they come to them∣selves again they feel a happiness and contentment, which they are not able to express. It happens likewise that other Members, who are not so great sinners, fall to the Ground, after the same manner, at intervals of time: the most part fall more than once, there are some likewise that have fallen four times, though the were not called as other great sinners. And those do not make the poor Prrachers suffer as the others do. There fall down sometimes twenty or thirty at once, and as fast as they fall, and especially when 'tis a great sinner, these poor Preachers make great expressions of Joy, and remain some time in a swoon as in an Ecstasie, saying, That they see the Heavens opened and our Lord pouring out his Blessing upon them. They say, That within....... days the great Persecution will be over, and that Sunday last was one of those days. I know not whether this is to be understood of this place in par∣ticular, or of the general. But they exhort their Aditos not to be afraid of it. I forgot to tell you that Sunday last, that I spoke to you of just now, two Maids, after having preached the Gospel in a Village, a League and a half from hence, all the day till the Sun was setting, they gave the Benediction and told the Assembly, That it was time to be going, and that there was a Detatchment of Dragoons made at the Quarters that were the nearest, to come break in upon them, having been discovered: that every one should go home and go to Bed. The thing was punctually so, as she had said: The Dragoons came, and hunted about in that Canton part of the night, and finding no body, they entered into Houses, and brought away four Prisoners. There had been some taken before in other Assemblies. In fine, Sir, you may be sure that what I say is true, and that I don't tell you the fiftieth part of what there is of it; for the ablest Man in the Kingdom would never be able to mention every thing, though he had
been at all their Assemblies. They speak very great things of the King, the Conclusion whereof is, That he shall know the Truth and be converted. The Curate of the Parish of about a League from hence, is already absented, as I have been assured; I don't know it for certain. All this seems to me considerable and important enough to desire you to be so charitable as to send me your opinion concerning it, after having first consulted with two Doctors you have the most esteem for. The Prophecies which are that which the Reader will, with∣out doubt, look most after, are perhaps that which he ought to mind least; because we are not certain that the Collections have been well made. A Word, nay a Letter, oftentimes changes the whole Sense of a Discourse. What is not to be questioned in that great number of matters of Fact, is that those People fall, that they are in an Ecstasie, that they discourse in their sleep, and others awake, and speak things that have not been suggested to them, and that they them∣selves knew not. No other Prophecies are to be looked upon as well reported, but only those that have had their Accom∣plishment. 1. The Deliverance that was to begin in the Month of September, as it did really begin by the business of England, and by the Declaration of War. 2. The new Pro∣phets which the Shepherdess had Prophesied of. 3. The King of England driven out by the Prince of Orange. 4. The As∣semblies that were to be made in several Places. 5. And the cruel Persecution which is now in the Provinces greater than ever, since there has been a Massacre of 400. persons, without reckoning those that have been Executed, according as 'tis reported. These matters of Fact, and several others, so precise∣ly happening, as they had been foretold, shews that if any thing does not happen, 'tis because the Prediction was not well taken nor understood: For one and the same Spirit cannot be False and True. FINIS.
