S4121 11764876 48718
To the Right Honourable the Lords and Com∣mons now Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of John Smith of Sandwich Draper, in the bebalfe of himself and the Inhabitants of Margate. Sheweth, THat for neer two and thirty years since, untill within six years last past, the Sea-works of Margate in the Isle of Thanet, were maintained by Scots on the Houses and Lands there, to∣gether with part of the benefits of the Peer (the said peer being a great and continuall cause of the devastation of the said works) which Scots were imposed by the Commissioners of Sewers, who then viewed and took care of the said works; during all which time, by the blessing of God, the said Town was preserved, and little or no hurt done by the violence of the Sea. That about six years since, divers persons whose estates lies more backward from the Sea, and in lesse danger; aiming more at their private ends, than the publicke good, questioned the power of the Commissioners, alledging the said Seaworks were not in compasse of the Statute, on which their Com∣mission was granted: whereupon the Commissioners wholly rejected the said workes: and since that time the Sea hath done above four thousand pounds worth of hurt there; and threatens the destruction of the Town. That at the time of the rejecting of their charg of the works, your petitioner was Expen∣ditor of the same works, & had some estate there in housing, did for safeguard thereof, and the Town go on in repair of the said works; towards which he was forced to borrow two hundred pound upon his own band (for which he still paies use for) his Scot granted him by the Commissioners being deni'd to be paid him; But after great charges upon the said works, by the late violence of the Sea, a great part of the Jetty-works were taken away for want of due reparations, whereupon your petitioner, finding the burden in supportable for himselfe alone to undergo, & considering what the miserable event would be if neglected, did gain a Certificate from the Maior and Jurats of Dover, under the Town Seal (in whose jurisdiction Margate is) of the great danger the
said Town was in, with a Petition subscribed by many of the Inhabitants of Margate, wherein was desired Timber for the present making up of the said works, and a Scot as formerly continued; which Petition and Certificate was presented to the right honourable Committee of Admiralty & Cinque Ports; and thereupon an order was made & directed to some Knights and Gentlmen neer Margate to view the said works, and to report the danger, and charge of repair to that Committee, as by the Order annexed appears: who with expe∣rienced workmen measured and cast up the charge, and made report of it ac∣cordingly, as by the Report also appears: upon which report the Commit∣tee of the Admiralty (after along and chargeable attendance) made a further Order: wherein they declared what they conceived fitting to be done therein. And in regard the same works lay within the jurisdiction of the Sinque-Ports, they thought fit to recommend the businesse to both Houses of Parlia∣ment, either to be by them confirmed, or otherwise ordered, as to their wis∣domes should seem meet; as by that Order also appears. But by reason of the Kingdomes more weighty businesse, your Petitioner as yet hath had no fur∣ther order or redresse heerin, although the Sea hath done above five thou∣sand punds worth of hurt within four years past, though in the in∣terim, and for these six years past, your Petitioner hath defended a great part of the Town at his own charge, and expended the summe of four hundred eighty pounds eighteen shillings and eight pence, as by a particular accompt under the workmens hands appears; besides his charges in soliciting of the businesse, amounting to above three hundred pounds, and in the neglect, losse and hinderance of his trade, to at least six hundred and fify pounds, without any peny recompence; which will be to his sudden ruine and destruction, if not relieved by your Honours. May it therefore please your honours to consider of the premisses, and that a place of such consequence where Embassadors and persons of great quality take shiping, and are landed, may not be quite overwhelmed, and the estate of your Petitioner, and many others quite destroyed, and their wives, children and families ruined) to be pleased speedily to Order, that sufficient Timber may be allowed, so as the present breaches may be timely repaired, and for time to come upheld, by Scots on the houses and lands there, and by a poundage upon commodities exported and im∣ported from and to the said Island; That the Peer Wardens may be yearly ac∣comptable to the Maior and Jurats of Dover, for the money by them received and expended about the same, a moiety of the overplus to be allowed yearly to∣wards the said Works; and that your Petitioner may be speedily satisfied his said disbursments about the said Works. And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c.
Die Jovis, 18. Novemb. 1647. At the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Ad∣miralty and Cinque-Ports IN reading the Petition of John Smith Expenditor for the Works against Margate, concerning the deficiency of the said Works, his chargs in attend∣ing that businesse of the Isle of Thanet, the delaies used by some that have ad∣dressed their Petition to this Committee in opposition of his; by their not standing to what had been mutually agreed before some of this Committee, and proposing away for repaire of the said Works, and keeping of them for the future. Ordered that Henry Crisp Esquire, George Summer, William Coppin, Thomas Wheatley, Edward Brooks, and Stephen Bishop, doe attend this Committee on this day three weeks, by themselves or some of them, or some other on their be∣half, sufficiently instructed to answer the said Petition, and failing thereof, this Committee will proceed to settle such resolution upon John Smiths said Petition, as shall appear most meet, without further delay. Signed by my Lord of Warwick, and others of the said Committee. A true Copie of the Agreement which the Island-men, before the Committee of the Admi∣ralty agreed on, but now fall from, and refused to set their hands to: Here followeth, UPon debate before the Honourable Committee of Lords and Commons, for the Admiralty and Cinque-ports, of the matter in difference touch∣ing the repairing, sustaining, and keeping of Jetty-workes against the Sea at Margate, in the Isle of Thanet, for preventing the destruction and swallowing up of the said Town of Margate, by the violence of the Sea breaking in upon it. And upon hearing of John Smith, Expenditor for the said Town, and his councell on the one side. And of Sir Henry Crisp, Henry Crisp Esq. Richard Har∣tie, Jeffery Sandwell, John Broxland, Marke Ambrose, Tho. Smith Senior, George Somner, John Tomblin, Wil. Copin, John Pannell, James Hannaker, and Richard Jenvey, and their Councell on the other side. Upon the whole businesse there arose two Questions. The first, How the said Jetty-works might for the pre∣sent be repaired, and for the future maintained, so that the Sea might be kept from breaking in, and the said Town might be preserved? The second, How the said Smith, the Expenditor might be satisfied and reimbursed the monies
and charges he had laid out, and been at in this publique and common busi∣nesse, for the time past? And as to the first, the said Sir Henry Crisp, Henry Crisp Esq. Richard Hartie, Jeffery Sandwell, John Broxland, Marke Ambrose, Tho. Smith, Senior, George Somner, John Tomblin, Wil. Coppin, John Parnell, James Hannaker, Richard Jenvey, and their Councell did offer, That if the repairing of the said Jetty-workes and the keeping thereof, might be entrusted to them, they would with 200. Tunne of Timber, to be allowed unto them for the said worke for the present sufficiently repair the said Jetty-works, and make them defensive against the Sea, and safe guard and preserve the said Town of Mar∣gate, and every part thereof, and of the Lands thereto belonging, against the violence and breaking in of the Sea, as well for the present as for the future for ever hereafter, without any further tax, allowance or charge, to be yeild∣ed, made, paid or imposed therefore, but only a scot, or tax of 12. pence in the pound, to be levied and paid out of the Houses erected against the said workes, and to be paid but once in the year and no oftner. And for the per∣formance thereof in every particular, viz. as well for the present repairing, as future sufficient keeping the same for ever, upon the rate aforesaid, and without any further demand. The said parties before mentioned did by them∣selves and their Councell, make offer, to put in sufficient Security, as this Committee or the Honourable Houses should approve and like of; which being accepted and yielded unto by the said Smith the Expenditor; the Com∣mittee thought fit that the same should be subscribed by the said parties, to remain with this Committee, or be presented to the Honourable Houses, as should be requisite. And as to the second Question, touching the charge and disbursments of the said Smith, for that the parties could not agree upon the same, nor how and in what manner they had been laid out. It was humbly praied, That a Commission might be ordered to issue out of the Court of Admiralty of the Cinque-ports, to examine witnesses upon such matters, interrogations, and questions, as the said Smith for his part might see cause for the better ascertai∣ning of the said disbursments, and charges by him expended; And wherein the said other parties might joyn and counter examine likewise if they thought meet. That so examinations being duly taken, they might be returned to this Committee, whereupon this Committee might be truly informed of the true state of the matter; and so give such order for relief of the said Smith, as they should hold just and equitable. A certificate from the Inhabitants of Margate, shewing the sad and lamentable condition that the said Town is in, by reason of a late breach which the Sea made; which might have been prevented, had the Island men stood to the forementioned Agreement. A true copie whereof here followeth.
To the Right Honorable the Committee for the Admiralty and the Cinque-Ports. THese are further to informe your Honors, That whereas the Jetties of Margate, in the Isle of Thanet, and County of Kent; and the great danger of the said Town, have many times and late been discussed before your Ho∣nors, and whereupon your Honors out of a commisseration, and due conside∣ration, of the danger of the said Town and Inhabitants there; have been fa∣vourably pleased to grant some convenient quantity of Timber, for the bet∣ter defence of the said Town and Inhabitants there, against that raging and mercilesse Element, the Sea. And whereas it hath pleased God on Sonday last past, (being the 12. day of this instant March,) to send a most tempestu∣ous tyde, against the said Town, (as at other places) by reason whereof, a great part of the said workes is broken down, and some part of a House of this bearer John Smith, is demollished; and whereas not only the estate there of the said John Smith, but of many other the Inhabitants of the said Town, are (if not very speedily secured) like to come to utter ruine and decay. The premises considered, May it yet again please your Honors, to take the deplorable condition of the said Town and Inhabitants, into your speedy and mature consideration, and to afford such a quantity of Timber for the defence of the said Town and Inhabitants; and also to appoint and ordain some able man (whom your Honors shall thinke fit) to take care of the said workes, as in an exigence of so much concernment and danger is required. In witnesse whereof, we your Honours humble petitioners have sub∣scribed our hands (Inhabitants of the said Town) the 13. day of March, Non salutis, 1647. Subscribed by the Inhabitants of Margate. To the Right Honourable the Committee of the Cinque-Ports and Admiralty. May it please this Honorable Committee: WE whose names are here under written (Inhabitants of the Town and Port of Sandwich) doe humbly certifie (being thereunto requested) unto your Honors in the name, and behalf of John Smith, (one of our said
Town). That (to our knowledge) he hath been a man alwaies wel-affected to the Parliament, in their actings, and proceedings for the publique Interest, welfare, and happinesse of the Kingdome; And in order thereunto he hath declared his forwardnesse, (we believe beyond his abilities) in contributions and subscriptions for Horse, Plate, and Monies, and in regard he hath (as we are informed, through the opposition of some ill-affected persons) suffered much in his estate (sundry waies) by his long attending on his businesse of Margate, in the Isle of Thanet; (which if effected we believe would tend to a Publike good, and benefit.) We, (your humble fervants, considering the premises) doe hum∣bly beseech and request, this Honorable Committee, for to con∣sider his cause, and to answer his desire, (which we are confident of) as your Honors apprehend them just: and with what conve∣nient expedition it may be; which otherwise (considering also his great charges and expences in prosecuting therof) may prove to be to the extreame wrong and dammage (if not the utter un∣doing) of himself, and his Family. Humbly represented and subscribed, by the Major and Jurets, &c. Die Sabba. 27. February 1646. At the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Ad∣miralty and Cinque-Ports. ON consideration of a Petition presented to this Committee, by John Smith Expenditor for Margate in the Isle of Thanet in the County of Kent, in behalf of himself, and the Inhabitants, and owners of the houses and lands lying against the Sea at Margate aforefaid; the same setting forth the great danger the said Town is in of being carried to Sea, and the great losse alrea∣dy befallen the estates of many the Inhabitants; by the carrying of many of their houses already to Sea, through the decay of certain Jetty works hereto∣fore made for defence thereof; and praying that Timber may be appointed for repair of the same; as also that money may be raised for the perfecting thereof, out of the arrears of a Scot of two shillings per pound, heretofore charged upon the houses and lands there; and of another Scot of thirty six
pound per Annu. laid upon the Peer of Margate, by the Commissioners of Sew∣ers for the East of Kent, about twenty five years ago, the paying thereof having been for some years discontinued: and that for the future maintaining there∣of, the said Scots may be continued; or that in liew of a moiety of two shil∣lings per pound, reasonable poundage may be set down upon certain com∣modities going in and out of the said Island, a list of which commodities, and of rates proposed to be set upon them respectively was now presented, and upon reading a Certificate from some Gentlemen of the County of Kent, to whom the State thereof was referred by the Committee, to be viewed and certified; they thereby setting forth, That the said Jetty works, being by them surveied, and workmen consulted with; They found that fifty five Rods of Timber-work is in decay, which requiring double work will take up six hundred and five Tun of Oaken Timber, that the workmanship will a∣mount to as much or more charge, than the Timber; and there will need a continuall charge to keep it for the future: And for that this Committee is informed by some Members of both Houses, that they have viewed the same, and finde the defect and danger of the said Town to be very great; and for as much as the same is within the jurisdiction of the Cinque-Ports, this Com∣mittee doth thereby conceive it their duty to represent it to both Houses of Parliament, and doth recommend it to them, that the present defects may be repaired, and sufficient Timber for that end allowed; and that the Town may in time to come be secured, by a Scot upon the said Houses and lands, or by a poundage upon commodities exported and imported, from and to the said Island, or otherwise, as they in their wisdomes shall think fit; as also that consideration may be had of the Petitioner John Smith, his disbursments for the upholding of the said works (which by his Petition is alledged to a∣mount unto four hundred and twenty pounds) in such a way as they shall think meet; he having offer'd (as by the said Certificate is mention'd, upon al∣lowance of a moiety of the said Scot, & of a poundage on the said commodi∣ties, to perform the said work (being first furnished with timber as aforesaid) and to engage an estate of a thousand pound value to keep the same for ever. And it is lastly Ordered, That a Copy of the said Certificate and of the Schedule of rates upon the said commodities be annexed to this Report. WARWICK. Whereas the Jetty-works of Margate in the Isle of Thanet, according to an Order of the Right Honourable Committee of the Admiralty and Cinque-Ports, being surveied by us James Oxenden Knight, Major Boyce Esq Henry Crisp, Esq; and we calling three sufficient Carpenters to measure the works, it was found to be in decay, as following.
1. That there was 55. rods of worke measured and found in decay, each of which rods was conceived would take up 5. Tunns and half of Timber for single workes, and for double workes so much more, and the same requiring all double worke, it will take up in the whole 605. Tunns of Oaken Timber. 2. That the workmanship for Carpenters, Sawyers, and other workmen, will amount to as much or more charges, then the Timber to compleat the said workes. 3. That it will require a constant and continuall charge in repairing, up∣holding and keeping the same workes. 4. That if the now Expenditor John Smith, may be yearly allowed 12. pence in the pound upon all Houses and Lands, which for 25. years past paid 2. shillings in the pound, as appears by Scot. And also if he may receive ac∣cording to the rates of, and upon the particular commodities set down and expressed in a Schedule hereunto annexed, and as this Honorable House shall thinke fit, and as is used in other maritan Towns, he is willing to undertake to performe the said worke, being furnished with Timber sufficient as afore∣said, and will engage 1000l. Lands and Houses in the said Island, for perform∣ance and keeping of the said workes for ever, he being the fittest man for the same, as being already entrusted for by the said Town, and the said Town be∣ing now in most eminent danger to be lost, if not speedily helped, as afore∣said. JAMES OXENDEN. Having about eight months past, with the Lieutenant of Dover Castle, and Mr. Henry Crisp, surveighed the dangerous condition of Margate, I did finde that there is fifty five rods or thereabouts, which of necessity must be main∣tained against the rage of the Sea, and did also finde by the judgement of able workmen then present, that the premises will require the Timber and ex∣pence here above mentioned. HENRY HEYMAN.
