S4232 11380390 47668
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Greek Church, AS TO Its Doctrine and Rites of Worship: WITH Several Historicall Remarks interspersed, re∣lating thereunto. To which is added, An Account of the State of the Greek Church, under Cyrillus Lucaris Pa∣triarch of Constantinople, with a Relation of his Sufferings and Death. By THO. SMITH, B. D. and Fellow of S. Mary Magdalen College Oxon. LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher for Richard Davis in Oxford. MDCLXXX.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of London, Dean of His MAJESTIE's Chappel-Royall, AND One of the Lords of His MAJE∣STIE's most Honourable Privy Council. My Lord, IF I had no particular obligati∣on to your Lordship, the very Argument of the following Ob∣servations, upon a Presumption at least, that they are faithfully made and collected, would soon have determined my choice, and suggested to me where I ought
to address my self in a Dedica∣tion. How highly your Lordship has merited of the Greek Church by taking it into your care, and by opening a Sanctuary for the poor distressed Bishops and Priests of that Communion to fly unto, is not unknown at Con∣stantinople: and whatever the success of it may be, They cannot be so unjust, as not to applaud your Lordships de∣sign, as worthy of your great Charity and Piety, to relieve the necessities of those, whom either curiosity and love of lear∣ning shall draw into these parts, or Turkish cruelty and persecuti∣on shall drive and force out of their own Country; and at the same time to reduce them from those errours and corruptions, which have of late crept in a∣mong them, by bringing them
into a nearer and more familiar acquaintance with the Doctrin, and rites of Worship establisht in the Church of England. It cannot be doubted in the least, that the most likely way to effect this excellent design, was not onely to permit but to encourage the building of a Church in Lon∣don for their Nation; where they might enjoy the free exer∣cise of their Worship in all things that are decent and inoffensive, and any way essential to their Religion. That this has been done with such Christian gene∣rosity and prudence, they owe, next to His Majesty unto your Lordship: whom they must for ever look upon as their great Patron. And if the Governours of their Church have not such a grateful resentment of the fa∣vour, as it highly challenges and
deserves, or if They, who en∣joy the happiness and benefit, should render themselves less wor∣thy of it, yet your Lordship will not lose your reward with God: and all good men consider it as the effect of that publick and generous mind, which has been so conspicuous in all parts of your Lordships conduct. With what a steday courage your Lordship has defended the Church of England, in this day of Trial, against the furious assaults of her restless enemies, the Papists on the one hand, and the Giddy Sectaries on the other, (who both agree in the same designs of pulling down the Hie∣rarchy, and overturning the Go∣vernment, in order to her more effectual ruine,) all her true and genuine Sons, who love and pray for her peace and prosperity,
cannot but most gratefully ac∣knowledge. And though the spirit of fury rages still, and is not to be charmed or allayed by that mildness and sweetness of temper, which is so natural in your Lordship, yet they cannot but inwardly admire you, against whom they have onely this to object, that you are a Bishop. It is for the great honour of our Church, that we can ballance your Lordship against any of your renowned Predecessours, and against the most celebrated Bishops of the Church of Rome, as Antonine, Borromeo and Sales: and it is the great happiness of our Church too, that a Person of such Illustrious Birth and Merit is advanced to so high a Station and Dignity in it. It will be the proper work of those, who shall write the History of our Times,
to transmit a full character of your Lordships worth to Posteri∣ty, which, when envy and ma∣lice are laid aside, and an impar∣tial judgment is made of Persons and Things, will always pay a great respect and honour to your Name and Memory: and there∣fore it will better suit with my Meanness, with my Function, and with my Obligations, to pray to Almighty God to conti∣nue such a publick Blessing to his Church, and to profess my self in the highest degree of duty, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Tho. Smith.
TO THE READER. HAving obliged my self by Promise in a Letter, which I wrote from Con∣stantinople in the year 1669. to an Ho∣nourable Gentleman at Whitehall, upon my return into England to present him with an account of the State and Condition of the Greek Church, as to matter of Doctrine and Rites of Worship and Dis∣cipline, (an inbred curiosity, which made me undertake that Voyage at first, and afterwards sufficiently exposed me to dan∣ger in that barbarous Country, where they are so jealous of every inquisitive Franke, that appears in any of their inland Towns out of a place of Trade, as if he were a Spy, and come to view the several places, where they might be attaqued with the greatest ad∣vantage, or rather the duty of my Function inciting me to make use of those happy oppor∣tunities,
which I there enjoyed, in order to a full and satisfactory discovery:) to comply with this obligation, and to satisfy the im∣portunity, as it is very well known, of se∣veral excellent persons, who were pleased in Discourse and by Letters, to mind me of a Promise also, which I had made in my Latine Epistles, of publishing at some time or other an account of those Observa∣tions, which I had collected upon this Argument, I drew up about five years since a short Scheme of them in Latine, and not long after presented it to the Right Re∣verend Father in God, the present Lord Bishop of Oxford, one of the greatest ex∣amples of the Age for promoting and en∣couraging Learning, and whose merits to the Vniversity will make up a great part of the future History of it, who did me the honour to print it at the Theater, where so many excellent Books have been by his Lordships direction and care published. That I now publish the same in English, (though with large additions) it is more to doe right to the world, then to my self, who have no private passion to gratify in it: my design in the one and the other being to contribute somewhat to the publick good. It cannot be imputed to me as a piece of
vanity and ostentation, that I say, that I have taken all imaginable care to represent things truly as I found them, and relate nothing but what is confirmed by the Offices used in the Service of that Church, and other Ecclesiasticall Writings, as Con∣fessions, and Catechisms, and the like; or by notoreity of practice and fact, there being a necessity to premise so much to make the following Narrative credible. In the contexture of which, I wholly aimed at truth without serving any Party or Hy∣pothesis, and have dealt impartially in the case without the least tincture of Affection or Prejudice. To which purpose I have studiously endeavoured to couch things in a plain close style, without enlarging upon them unnecessarily, being more ambitious in a subject of this nature, of the reputa∣tion of being accounted an honest and care∣full, then spruce and elegant Writer. I have sometimes indeed referred to the judgment of Antiquity, but it was wholly in order to the better understanding the present practice of the Greeks: and I can say most conscientiously, that those few reflexions, which I have made, are wholly owing to a just zeal and love for the ho∣nour of truth, and the advancement of strict and discreet Piety, whereby my
my Reader may not onely be bettered in his judgment but in his life too. You will here clearly see, with what great difficulties the poor Eastern Christi∣ans struggle, against what mighty opposi∣tion they still maintain the profession of Christianity, and how the Cross of Christ triumphs, notwithstanding the cruel mockings and insultings of the profest Enemies of it: though it must be most sadly confessed, that several corruptions and errours in point of Doctrin and Su∣perstitious Rites and Practices in Worship have crept in among them, to the great disadvantage, scandal, and dishonour of our Holy Religion, which is hereby conti∣nually exposed to the censure and contempt of the Mahometans, who, dull and stupid as they are, do not pretend to examine the grounds and reasons of the Christian Belief, but judge of the whole by such odd phantastick misrepresentations, and fortify their old prejudices every day more and more with fresh matter of dislike. The common people among the Greeks doe as they are directed, without the least examination or demurr, and depend al∣together upon their Teachers and Spiritual Guides in matters of Religion: being wholly ignorant of and unacquainted with
the Scriptures, few having the leisure and fewer ability to reade them. It was the pious design of that great man Cyrillus Lucaris, (of whom more at large hereaf∣ter,) in causing the New Testament to be translated into vulgar Greek for the use and benefit of the meaner sort, that they might be built up in the most Holy Faith, and thence be fully instructed in the know∣ledge and Doctrin of God our Saviour. But though they had curiosity and learning enough to consult these Sacred Writings, the Copies are very rare and scarce to be met with, and no care is taken to furnish out a new Edition: and it is too too ap∣parent, not without design, to keep them more in subjection and awe, not to say, ignorance. They are bred up in the same perswasion as formerly, and so zealously do they retain the outward Services of Reli∣gion in all its punctilio's and circumstan∣ces, that even the Bishops themselves, who would be content to relax somewhat of the severities of their Fasts, dare not attempt to make any alteration in the least, lest their people, obstinate to excess, should be offended at it, and doubt of the truth of what they would have them still profess and believe. And indeed, considering the present state of things, there is little sign or hope
of a Reformation. For the misery of it is, that though it is manifest to all, who understand Antiquity, how much the pre∣sent Greeks have in several points of Doc∣trin varied from the Belief of their An∣cestours, and have corrupted the simplicity and purity of Religion by a mixture of odd opinions and fancies, they pretend not∣withstanding; that their Tenents are agreeable to the Fathers; and that they follow the Traditions of the ancient Church. But without looking back much beyond this last Century, whoever will compare the answers of the Patriarch Je∣remias to the Letters of the Divines of Wittenberg in the year 1576. with their Confession of Faith published in the year 1662. and with the Bethleemitick Synod held in the year 1671. will find such a vast difference between the modesty of that Pa∣triarch, and their bold determinations, as will encline any sober and considering man to believe, that they have of late more then ever been wrought upon by the sly artifices and insinuations and underhand dealing of the subtile Emissaries of Rome, who watch continually over the poor Greeks, and take advantage of their poverty and distress to bring them to a further com∣pliance, and in time, to a down-right
subjection. I do not doubt, but that time, which is the great revealer of se∣crets, will discover the mystery of the last Synod held by the Patriarch of Jeru∣salem: who, when I waited upon him at Constantinople not long before my de∣parture, knowing me to be a Priest of the Church of England, and Chaplain to his Excellency, the English Embassadour then at the Port, entertained me very re∣spectfully, and acquainted me, that he had several Papers against the Roma∣nists, which he would take care to tran∣scribe, and put into my hands to be prin∣ted in England: but he did not, I con∣fess, tell me the particular Subject and Argument of them, nor thought fit after∣ward to send them, as he had at first de∣signed. Reflecting upon this discourse, I was the more amazed at the determinati∣ons of this Synod held by his Authority: and perchance it would not be want either of good manners or charity to guess by what arguments they were prevailed upon, and how they were influenced. This design of the Romanists, which has been carrying on for so many years, was soon discovered by Cyrillus Lucaris Patriarch of Constantinople, a man of great parts and of an extraordinary cou∣rage,
who was resolved to give a check and put a stop to it, as much as in him lay, and by degrees to reform those abuses and errours, that had prevailed among the Greeks, and introduce a stricter alli∣ance and union of the Eastern Church with the reformed Churches of Christen∣dome. This drew upon him the indigna∣tion of Urban the Eighth, then Pope, and the Congregation of Cardinals de pro∣pagandâ fide, as they speak at Rome, who knew no good could be done, while he sate upon the Patriarchall Throne; and there∣fore finding after several attempts to bring him over by fair means to relinquish his pretensions, that he was too stout and too honest to submit to their overtures and pro∣posals, they made use of several evil arts to dethrone him; and in order thereunto blackened and defamed him with a thou∣sand calumnies, and pursued him with un∣wearied diligence and malice, and never desisted till they had got him strangled. Out of respect to the memory of this good man, who suffered so much in his life-time by the Jesuits, the great instruments made use of in his Persecution, and Tragicall end, and is still most unworthily treated by Monsieur Arnaud, (from a man of such excellent Learning and Piety so much
disingenuity could scarce be expected) in the height of his zeal for the Roman Doctrin of Transubstantiation, and by the Latinizing Greeks, who contrary to all laws of humanity, return him hatred for his good will, and tear his reputation in pieces by most reproachfull language and slanderous imputations, to gratify, at this distance of time, not so much their Passion, as a little base paltry worldly interest, as I have just reason to suspect and believe, I have added a short account of the state of the Greek Church under his Govern∣ment: which I have drawn out of authen∣tick Papers and Memorials. After all these triumphs gained over the poor Greeks, who now declare so fiercely for a , let it be remembred how∣ever, that, (besides their ignorance of the true state of the Controversy, the conse∣quences of which they never thoroughly studied nor yet understand, as appears by their silence and stupid amazement, when they are urged with them) they do not ex∣pose it publickly to be adored, that they have no fête di Dieu, or Corpus Christi Festival, which to me was the most morti∣fying sight in the world, (for who would not be confounded to see the most Holy In∣stitution of our B. Saviour turned into a
pompous piece of Pageantry?) and lastly, that they do not as yet sing in their Churches any thing like that, which the Romanists teach their people to sing in the solemn Procession of that day: Non est panis sed est Deus homo, & salvator meus: not to mention the other differen∣ces at present in the matter of the Sacra∣ment between the Greek and Roman Church, as communion in both kinds, communicating Infants, and the like; which I chuse rather to leave to the Rea∣ders judgment and observation upon his perusal of the following Discourse. Notwithstanding these errours and de∣fects, we preserve a great charity for this distressed part of the Catholick Church, and wish and pray heartily for their deli∣verance from Turkish slavery; and that in the mean while they may see from what purity of Doctrin and Worship they are faln, and may be restored to their ancient integrity and splendour. This Christian compassion obliges us to doe. We leave it to the Jesuits and to the other fierce Religi∣onaries of the Church of Rome to ascribe the ruine of the Empire to their Heresy, as they term it, about the Procession, to their Schism and defection from S. Peter's See. Next to the justice and all-wise
Providence of God in the disposal of Em∣pires, and putting periods to Govern∣ments, we can assign other more probable causes of their oppression, and among them chiefly, the want of timely assistence from Italy, though two or three of the Empe∣rours had been there in person to beg it. But this is properly the work of a Civil Hi∣storian, and is besides the intent of this Preface; which I shall soon put an end to after I have added this one thing; That I cannot reflect without horrour upon what I have read in Cardinall Pole's third pag. 78. Fol. of the German Edition an. 1555. though no place be mentioned in the title page. Si Caesarem audirem cum omni suà classe in altum jam pro∣vectum, cursum ad ipsam Turcarum Regiam Constantino∣polim direxisse, etsi omnia mihi pericula proponerentur, nunquam quiescerem, donec eum invenirem, ac si jam Helle∣sponti fauces tenentem conspicerem, ut primum conveniendi facultas daretur, in haec verba prorumperem: Caesar quid par, quid cogitas, &c. Book pro defensione Ecclesiasticae Unionis, where he says, that if Charles the Fifth had been at that time unde sail with his Fleet, and steering his course toward Constantinople, he would never be at rest, how great soever the difficul∣ties of the Journey were, till he had found him out, and then being brought into his
presence he would importune him to leave off that design, and employ his Armies against the Germans and against King Henry the Eighth (his natural Liege Lord and Sovereign) as being a far more glori∣ous work. And all this out of a pretended love to his Country, and charity for the Church infused into him, as he speaks, by the Son of God. And the more to en∣courage the Emperour, in this eloquent haranguepag. 79. he tells him, that several Legions lay hid in England, that had not bowed their knees to Baal, that the Eng∣lish for lesser crimes then Heresy and In∣justice to Catholicks had deposed their Kings, as for mispending the publick Trea∣sure, that they still retain'd the same in∣clination, and that nothing was wanting to execute their design, but his Imperial Presence.pag. 80. Soon after he addresses to King Henry himself, and tells him in downright terms, that if the King of France would suppress his designs against the Church (that is, the Church of Rome) it would be no less glorious to him, then if Caesar had recovered Constantinople out of the hands of the Turks. At what a
high pitch of indiscretion and fury do men arrive by their intemperate heat and bi∣gotry! They forget themselves not onely to be Subjects but even Christians, at the same time they would appear extraordinary zealous Catholicks; and care not how far the great Turk prevails, provided that a pretended Heresy, which consisted onely in a recovery of the essential Rights of the Crown from the usurpations of the Papal See (which was the onely case at that time here in England) had been extirpated, and the Germans reduced to the same subjection to Rome they were in before the appearing of Luther: which had been the readiest amd most effectual way to have made Solyman Master of Vienna, which was one of his earnest wishes, if the Emperour and his Council had not been persons of greater Policy and more Mode∣ration, and had not foreseen the fatall con∣sequences of such Catholick advice. Certainly it is a more innocent and Christian wish, that there were a happy end put to the differences now on foot, which disturb the quiet and peace of Chri∣stendom, that so some of the powerfull Princes of it may turn their Forces East∣ward upon the great enemy of their Faith and Saviour, and restore the poor oppressed
Christians there to their ease and liberty. This indeed is too great a good to be ho∣ped for at present, and as things now stand, not to be effected without a mi∣racle. And may this miracle be wrought in our days. O Christ hear us. Amen, T. S. Magdalen College Oxon. Febr. 23. 1679-80. The Reader is desired to mend the following Errata, most of which have hapned by reason of the hasty transcribing the Authour's Copy for the Press. PAge 25. lin. 4. for call reade style. p. 26. l. 5. Panteelemon. So p. 128. l. 10. p. 38. l. 3. and Patriarchs, adde, in the matter of images. p. 41. l. 26. blot our, being. p. 55. l. 21. Tophana. p. 82. l. 5. for recovers, reade renews. p. 83. l. 10. He will. l. 24. expose. p. 88. l. 8. Tzia. p. 97. l. 21. Sheichler. p. 127. l. 2. reade life and salva∣tion. p. 136. l. 13. fanned them. p. 150. l. 27. for pag. 145. reade A. 1645. p. 179. l. 24. penance. p. 211. l. 17. little less. p. 241. l. 5. Pegas. p. 242. l. 8. Pope. p. 250. l. 4. for being, reade had been. p. 260. l. 26. the titular—p. 279. l. 5. but I. p. 288. l. 17. for upon the Persians, reade against—p. 202. l. 2. for faith, reade religion. p. 294. l. 15. à Graeco. Page 22. lin. 26. p. 26. l. 29. . p. 23. l. 27. . p. 27. l. 28.  p. 28. . bis. p. 34. l. 27. . p. 129. l. 1. . p. 139. l. 25. . p. 146. l. 27. . p. 127. l. 26. lege . p. 184. l. 30. dictus, . p. 280. l. 14. . In Appendice occurrit plusquam semel Psalterium S. Not∣keri pro Antiphnario seu libro Hymnorum.
An Account of the Greek Church, as to its Doctrine and Rites of Worship; with several Historical Remarques interspersed relating thereunto. THE Eastern Church antiently and strictly so called,The Eastern Church what, and why so called. was onely that which, being in the most Easterly part of the Roman Empire, was under the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Antioch, and was usually styled the Diocese of the East, containing Syria, Cilicia, Palestine, and part of Mesopota∣mia and Arabia. But afterwards, upon the Division of the Empire, and the Removal of the Imperial Seat from Rome to Constantinople, the Churches which held Communion with the Patriarch of Constantinople, and acknowledged that the chief See, and looked upon him as their Head, and were subject to the Greek Emperours, had all of them the Title of Eastern, by way of distinction and oppo∣sition to those of the Latine or West. In which comprehensive sense I use the word,
These Churches are governed by four Patriarchs;Governed by four Patri∣archs. each of which has full power in his Patriarchate of calling his Metro∣politans and Bishops together, of recei∣ving Appeals, of conferring holy Or∣ders, of determining Controversies, and of Excommunicating grievous and no∣torious Offenders: a Primacy of Order being onely allowed to the Patriarch of Constantinople, upon the account of his being3. Canon Concilii Constantinopolitani, & 28. canon Concilii Chalcedonensis. Bishop of the Imperial City, and by Ecclesiastical right beco∣ming and made next in dignity to the Bishop of old Rome. The four Patriarchs are of Constanti∣nople,Their Ju∣risdictions, Limits, and Titles. Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusa∣lem: who, according toHistor. Ecclesiastic. lib. 5. cap. 8. Socrates Scholasticus, had the Limits and Boun∣daries of their several Districts and Ju∣risdictions set them by the Fathers of the first general Council held at Constanti∣nople. But 'tis certain, from other Au∣thorities, that they had not then the Power of the Patriarchs of the following Ages. Nor was the word in common use (it being introduced to diminish and
overtop the Title of Exarchus) till the times of the Council of Chalcedon, which Vid. actionem 16. Concil. Chalcedon. & 28. canon. cjusdem Concil. advanced Jerusalem to the super∣eminent dignity of a Patriarchal See, and assigned the Asian, the Thracian and the Pontic Dioceses to the Patriarch of Constantinople. It cannot be suppo∣sed otherwise but that these Boundaries and Limits have in the several successions of Ages from that time to this been sub∣ject to great alterations and changes. The Patriarch of Constantinople,Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. as he is the chiefest in Dignity, so he has a larger Jurisdiction than any of the other three. It takes in all the lesser Asia, ex∣cept two of the most Easterly Provinces, which border upon Syria, Thrace, Ma∣cedonia, and all the other Provinces of Greece, and the Islands that are scatter'd up and down in the Archipelago, Dal∣matia, Albania, Walachia, and Molda∣via. His usual Title, when he subscribes any Letter or Missive, is,. by the mercy of God Archbishop of new Rome, Constantinople, and Oecumenical Patri∣arch. But of this I shall have occasion
to speak more distinctly in another place. The Patriarch of Alexandria exercises his power over the Christians through∣out Aegypt,Alexandria. Libya, and part of Arabia. The Title which he still retains, is this, by the mercy of God Pope and Pa∣triarch of the great City of Alexandria, andThis Title of Oecumenical Judge, Nicephorus Callistus Hist. Eccles. lib. 14. c. 34. says, has belonged to the Bishops of this See from the time of Cyrillus, who presided in the Council of Ephesus, Pope Coelestine writing to him to supply his place there. Which does not in the least suppose a Supremacy in the See of Rome, but onely a Precedence or a Primacy of Order. Oecumenical Judge. Some∣times he styles himself Oecumenical Pa∣triarch; it having been theV. Epist. Cyrilli Lucaris, tunc temporis Patriarchs Alexandrini, ad Johannem Vytenbogaert. in Epistol. Ecclesi∣astic. pag. 407. chief See before the times of Constantine, and founded by S. Mark. Hence Alexan∣dria is called frequently the Throne, the Seat, the Chair of that Apostle. Some∣times the Title runs in larger terms, . Vide  ad finem Codini de officiis & officialibus Curiae & Ecclesiae C. P. Parisis 16. 18. pag. 411. & 419. Patriarch of Alexandria and all
Aegypt, Pentapolis, Libya and Aethio∣pia: the Abyssines using from the time of their first Conversion, till of late years, to send their chief Bishop or Me∣tropolitan to be Consecrated and Con∣firmed by him. This Patriarch, for his own better ease and accommodation, and for the greater benefit of the Chri∣stians of his Communion, makes his u∣sual residence at Grand Cairo, where they are very numerous, and where, in case of any grievous oppression, they may have recourse to the Bassa, who keeps his Court in that City. The Patriarch of Antioch governs the Churches of Syria,Antioch. Mesopotamia, and of the two Provinces of Isauria and Cilicia, which are in the lesser Asia. He writes himself thus,. by the mercy of God Patriarch of the great City of Antioch, called Theopolis, and of all the East: alluding to the ancient and restrain'd sense of the Eastern Diocese. His usual residence is at Damascus. The Patriarch of Jerusalem has Pale∣stine and part of Arabia within his Di∣strict.Jerusalem. His Title is,. by the mercy of
God Patriarch of the Holy City of Jerusa∣lem, and of all Palestine: and some∣times he is saluted by the name and V.  ad finem Codini pag. 419. Title of Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Holy Mount of Sion, Syria, Arabia, beyond Jordan, Cana of Galilee, and of all Palestine. For these Four Patriarchs they pray in their Publick Liturgies,Prayers made for them. without any mention of the Bishop of Rome. Which omission being look'd upon as an argu∣ment of disrespect and ill will, among other heads and articles of Agreement and Union between the Churches of old and new Rome, it was required by Alexander the Fourth, the then Pope, of the Emperour Michael Palaeologus, that in their Publick Offices and Hymns the Pope should be named at the same time with the Four Patriarchs, as. Histor. . lib. 5. cap. 1. pag. 89. Colon. Allo∣biogum 1615. V. Phransen. in histor. lib. 1. cap. 6. This is called by Cardinal Bessarion , in the letter he wrote, to the Governour of the Sons of Prince Thomas Palaeologus, in the vulgar Greek, published by Meursius. Ni∣cephorus Gregoras relates. And since this, upon a disuse, the same was agreed
to at Florence; at least the Instrument of Vnion in the close, where the Five Patriarchs are reckon'd up in their Or∣der, may seem to suppose it. But the Proceedings of that Council, and the Vnion which followed, being generally disliked upon the return of the Greeks to Constantinople, they have not since pray'd for him publickly by name, but adhere to the old number and form. The other Sects of Religion have their distinct Patriarchs;Patriarchs of other Sects. as the Arme∣nians, Maronites, Jacobites, &c. And there is usually a Titular Patriarch of Constantinople, the Pope pretending a power of constituting such a one, not onely upon the account of his usurped Oecumenical Pastorship; but because the Latines were once in possession of that City, which they held between fifty and sixty years; that is, from the year 1203. to 1260, at which time it was recovered out of their hands by Michael Palaeologus. And for the most part there resides at Constantinople a Bi∣shop sent from Rome, who has the power of a Legate. In my time a Fran∣ciscan Fryer resided there for this pur∣pose with the title of the Bishop of Ca∣lurmina, a City in India, upon the
Coasts of Coromandel, where S. Thomas was martyred. The Greek Church,Extent of the Greek Church. consider'd in it self and with reference to the vast ex∣tent of those Countries, where the doc∣trine and rites of it are profest and main∣tain'd, is a very considerable part of the Catholick Church. All the Christians of the vast dominions of the Emperour of Moscovy, the Cossacks, the Inhabi∣tants of Podolia, and of the black Russia, who are Subjects of Poland, the people of Aethiopia in the inner part of Africk, lying South of Aegypt, of Circassia, of Georgia, formerly Iberia, and of Men∣grelia, the Colchis of the Ancients, and of the Islands of the Mediterranean un∣der the Venetians, being of its Commu∣nion. In all which places it may be justly said to flourish, being the esta∣blisht Religion, and where the Christi∣ans are either absolute Lords and Ma∣sters, or else onely make some acknow∣ledgment to the Grand Signior or Sophy of Persia for their peace and quiet, as do those Asiatick Princes, who live beyond the Euxine Sea, and whose Country reaches towards Mount Caucasus, and so are as it were miserably harassed and ground between the two mighty Em∣pires
of the East. But I am to consider the Greek Church, chiefly as it is con∣tain'd in the dominions of the Turks, where it is most sadly afflicted. For though the Greeks have the free use and exercise of the Christian Religion, and are allowed their Churches for the pub∣lick Worship of Christ, and in Molda∣via and Walachia especially which the Turks leave wholly to be inhabited by them under the Government of the re∣spective Princes, (who indeed are in effect but their Tax-gatherers, and who swear Allegeance to the Port, and whom they prefer and degrade as their interest or covetousness incline them,) yet in all other respects they are no other than as Slaves. 'Tis meerly out of interest and a sense they have of the benefit of their service,Oppression of the Greeks. and not any regard to the last Testa∣ment of Mahomet, which commands all his followers to shew kindness to the Christians (for to That they are stran∣gers, it being most probably the inven∣tion of some good meaning persons of our Religion, who hoped by this pious kind of fraud to take off the Conque∣rours from that fury and barbarity wherewith their own ough temper and
the Chapter of the Sword in the Alcoran might inspire them) that they admit the Greeks to the favour of enjoying their lives and their Religion together. Which they dearly pay for, being sub∣ject to innumerable arbitrary taxes upon all occasions, besides their head mony, which is severely exacted every year, even of boys, if above 14 years of age: (not to mention either the extortions of the Cadies, who suck their very bloud upon every slight miscarriage, when they fall into their clutches, and often∣times upon unjust and frivolous avanias or pretensions, when they are wholly innocent, or the insolencies of the Soul∣diers, who enter their houses, in the Country especially, and rob and spoil and tyrannize over the poor people, these injustices, though too much con∣nived at, being besides the intent of the Government.) They are forced some∣times into the wars to doe all the drud∣gery of the Camp, or to serve as Pio∣neers in working their Mines, or to look to their Carriages, and the like: exposed daily to horrid indignities and injuries, against which they have no re∣medy, every rascally Turk making use of his Privilege to triumph over them,
oftentimes out of zeal to his false Religi∣on, but oftener out of wantonness and a proud insolent humour. This wretched state and condition of life,How height∣ned and ag∣gravated. though it cannot but strike a hor∣rour into the minds of all, who enjoy the happiness of freedom and a mild go∣vernment, might be digested well e∣nough and born with some kind of pa∣tience, if they suffer'd onely in their bo∣dies or in their purses; if they were not upbraided with their being Christians, if they could be free from either their menaces or invitations of renouncing their Faith and their Saviour: if their Children were not ravaged and torn from their arms, and bred up in the false and bruitish Religion of Mahomet, to be afterwards their plagues and tor∣mentors. For to supply their Seminaries,Collection of Christian children. for∣merly as often as the necessity of af∣fairs required, though of late years they have forborn to practise it, they send forth Officers into the several Provinces of Europe (they yielding generally the most hardy and best Souldiers) who co∣ming to any Town command the poor Christians to bring their male-children from seven or eight years old and up∣wards
before them. If any should dare to conceal them at home, or send them away into the woods or upon the moun∣tains, they are punished. But of these they chuse the best complexion'd and strongest and the most likely to answer the ends of their Collection. Some of their Parents indeed out of natural pity and out of a true sense of Religion, that they may not be thus robbed of their children, who hereby ly under a neces∣sity of renouncing their Christianity, compound for them at the rate of fifty or a hundred Dollars, as they are able, or as they can work upon the covetous∣ness of the Turks more or less. Though others to the great shame and dishonour of their Religion, Christians onely in name, part with them freely and readi∣ly enough, not onely because they are rid of the trouble and charge of them, but in hopes they may, when they are grown up, get some considerable com∣mand in the government. After some trial some of the most hardy are taught the use of arms in order to their being Janizaries; others, that are of a softer but more docile temper are bred up in the studies of the Persian language and fitted for civil affairs, and advanced to
some place and office about the Empe∣rour's Person: the more stupid are sent into the Seraglio to be Cooks, Bakers, Gardiners, Confectioners, and such like inferiour servants; or else are cut, that they may be the better qualified to at∣tend at the women's apartments. What a Glorious design would it be,A Vnion of Christian Princes desi∣red in order to the freeing the Greeks from the sla∣very of the Turks. and how much for the honour of our Religion, if the Christian Princes would unite and enter upon a Holy War, and redeem the Oriental Christians from the burthen of this intolerable tyranny and slavery! But alas! there is little hope of such an Union in this great declensi∣on of Christianity, when the life and spirit of it seem to be lost and swallow∣ed up in those horrid feuds and factions, that disturb the peace of Christendom, and expose it to the assaults of the com∣mon enemy, whenever he shall be at leisure to attaque it, and when interest seems wholly to govern and influence all Publick Councils. However the Bishops of Rome,A Holy War. who then exercised an entire and absolute dominion over the consciences of all of their Communion, might have private designs of their own in Publishing their Crusades and putting the several Princes
of the West upon the recovering the Holy Sepulchre out of the hands of the Sarazens: yet this ought not to dimi∣nish from the glory of their piety and generous Courage, who undertook those long, painfull, and hazardous Voyages. This we may miscall easiness of temper, and misguided and ill-mana∣ged zeal: but in the meantime do not the Infidels inlarge their conquests and gain ground continually, and advance their half Moons, where the Cross be∣fore was placed? Where have we re∣cover'd for several scores of years so much as a village or slight fortification from them, except perchance one or two in Dalmatia? The poor Christians in those parts of the World are in a desperate and reme∣diless condition,The Greeks quite dispiri∣ted, their temper low and mean. as to any help and as∣sistance they may receive from us, who have not that compassion for them, which their condition deserves. And indeed all they have to doe to make their condition tolerable is to flatter their Imperious Patrons, and scrape a little mony together, to buy their fa∣vour and good will. For long slavery, continued for several years, has broken their spirits, and quite alter'd their tem∣pers,
and taken them off from the natu∣ral courage and vigour and love of li∣berty, wherewith their Ancestors were inspired. They are content (not to say well pleas'd) with their slavish con∣dition of life, they dare not entertain any generous thoughts of revenge, they are afraid to venture, though there were probable hopes of gaining their liberty by it: They are so overaw'd and stupi∣fied and lost to all sense of honour, that they have abandon'd all thoughts and hope of a change, which uses to be the poor and miserable comfort and support of the distressed. 'Tis sad to consider the great number of wretched people,Renegados. who turn Turks: some out of meer desperation: being not able to support the burthen of sla∣very, and to avoid the revilings and in∣sultings of the Infidels: some out of a wanton light humour, to put themselves into a condition of domineering and insulting over others, or of wearing a pair of yellow shoes; which is the pe∣culiar finery and gallantry of the Mu∣sulmans; the Christians and Jews wea∣ring either red or black (though the Greeks, belonging to the Christian Am∣bassadours, relying upon their protec∣tion,
presume to doe otherwise; a mis∣carriage which has sometimes been com∣plain'd of by the Turks and severely pu∣nish'd with drubbing) some to avoid the penalties and inflictions due to their heinous crimes, and to enjoy the bru∣tish liberties, that Mahomet consecrated by his own example, and recommended to his followers. These are the great and tempting arguments and motives of their Apostasy, meer considerations of ease, pleasure, and prosperity, or else of vanity and guilt: for it cannot be presumed, that any through conviction of mind should be wrought upon to em∣brace the dotages and impostures of Turcisme. By these Accessions the Turkish Em∣pire and Religion are chiefly supported,The Turkish Empire how supplied by them. the Renegado Christians being to be met with every where; the natural Turks, not having such numerous issues, as in the Ages past (whether this happens by their laying restraints upon themselves as to the number of women to avoid ex∣pence and charge, or by some other natural or supernatural cause I know not) would sensibly diminish, but for these supplies and that of Christian slaves; most of which change their Religion,
who are yearly brought into their Coun∣try by the Tartars, or taken as prize by themselves in the time of War. And indeed considering the great confusion in which the Lay-Christians are,The causes of the decay of Christianity in the Levant. especially the poorer sort, how de∣stitute of all helps of Learning, there being no publick Schools among them, how ignorant of the grounds of Religi∣on, to what grievous temptations their Poverty and Persecution do continually expose them, how unacquainted with the Holy Scripture, how little instructed in the doctrine of Christianity, not one in twenty being able to reade, and Ser∣mons being very rarely preach'd, and oftentimes in the learned Greek, and those onely in the Patriarchal Church at Constantinople, or where the Metropo∣litans or Bishops make their residence, and at particular times, as at Christmas or Lent, &c. the povidence of God is to be admired, that there is yet any Chri∣stianity left in the East, and that the number of Apostates is not greater, and that Mahometanism has not yet prevai∣led in these Countries as absolutely as it has done all along the coasts of Africk, and up the Main land, from the Syrtes beyond Tripoli Eastward, to the further∣most
points of Barbary West, where a Christian is not to be found, unless in the English or Spanish Garrisons, or Slaves seiz'd upon by the Pirats, the very refuse and dregs of all mankind, and carried into their Ports to the great scandal and shame of Christendom, which suffers those Canaglia not onely to live, but to live in triumph. Next to the miraculous and gracious providence of God,The preserva∣tion of the Christian Re∣ligion there owing to the strict and re∣ligious obser∣vation of the Festivals and Fasts of the Church. I ascribe the preser∣vation of Christianity among them to the strict and religious observation of the Festivals and Fasts of the Church; this being the happy and blessed effects of those antient and pious Institutions, the total neglect of which would soon introduce ignorance and a sensible decay of Piety and Religion in other Coun∣tries besides those of the Levant. This certainly is the chiefest preservative of Religion in those Eastern Countries against the poison of the Mahometan superstition. For Children and those of the most ordinary capacities know the meaning of these holy Solemnities, at which times they flock to Church in great companies, and thereby retain the memory of our Blessed Saviour's Birth, dying upon the Cross, Resurrec∣tion,
and Ascension, and keep up the constant profession of their acknow∣ledgment of the necessary and funda∣mental points of Faith, as of the doc∣trine of the Blessed Trinity, and the like. And while they celebrate the sufferings and martyrdoms of the Apo∣stles of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and other great Saints, who laid down their lives most joyfully for his name, and underwent with unwea∣ried and invincible patience all the Tor∣ments and Cruelties of their Heathen Persecutors, they take courage from such glorious examples, and are the better enabled to endure with less trou∣ble and regret the miseries and hard∣ships they daily struggle with.
The chief, sixt,Festivals. and unmoveable Festivals are placed in this order in their Menology or Calendar. SEPTEMBER. They begin their year the first day of this month. VIII. The Nativity of the Blessed Vir∣gin Mary, Mother of God. XIV.XIV. The Greeks date this Festival from the times of Constantine and Helena, and so seem to confound it with the invention and first discovery of it at Jerusalem by a miracle, and derive the reason of its name from the Patriarch Macarius; in placing and setting it on high above the Ambo or Pulpit . pag. 13., , that it might the better be seen and adored by the people: But the Latines celebrate the Festival in memory of the Holy Cross, brought back out of Persia to Jerusalem by Heraclius, A. C. 628. after the victory he had gained over Cosroes, which is the account given in the Roman Martyrology, but 'tis certain it was in use long before, and might receive some additional honour from the triumphs and successes of that Emperour. The Exaltation of the Holy Cross. XXVI. Migratio. Ita enim planius reddenda erat ista vox, de Ecclesiae Graecae hod. statu, p. 16. licet idem innuebam per translationem, nempe ex hâc vitâ in al∣teram. In the Latin Edition I rendred this word by two Latine words, translatio seu obitus: alluding by the first to the opinion and fancy of several of the Brethren in the Apostle's time, (who from a mis-apprehension of our B. Saviour's words, concerning this beloved Disciple, to S. Peter in the 20. Chap. of S. John v. 22. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? concluded, that he was not to die, . Graecâ Venet. 1621. fl. 24. b. (which mistake he corrects himself v. 23.) and in the Ages following, as we learn from Tertullian in his book de Anima, and several others. Others fancied, that when they opened his grave they found no body or relique of it, p. 24. a. b. But that he died at Ephesus really and truely, and was buried there, Polycrates Bishop of that City discourses in a Letter to Victor Bishop of Rome, which is preserved by Eusebius in his Church-history, lib. 3. c. 31. not to mention other Authours, who have confuted this errour about the tran∣slation of S. John, who onely of all the Apostles survived the last destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem, when Christ came to take Vengeance upon his Murtherers, and lived to the times of Trajan, sixty eight years after the Crucifixion of our Saviour, according to S. Hierom de Scriptor. Eccles. in Joanne. The migration or death of S. John the Evangelist.
OCTOBER. VI. S. Thomas Apostle. IX. S. James, the Son of Alphaeus, A∣postle. XVIII. S. Luke Evangelist. XXIII. S. James the Brother of our Lord and Bishop of Jerusalem. XXVI. S. Demetrius, Proconsul and
Martyr,, p. 71. b. pierced through with lances at Thessalonica by the command of Maximian. NOVEMBER. VIII. Archangels, Michael and Gabriel, and all Angels. XIII. S. John Chrysostome. XIV. S. Philip, Apostle. XVI. S. Matthew, Apostle. XXI. The Entrance of the Blessed Vir∣gin into the Temple at Jerusalem. S. Luke Chap. 2. XXX. S. Andrew, Apostle. DECEMBER. VI. S. Nicolas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia, and Confessor under Dioclesian and Maximian. XII. S. Spiridion, Bishop and Confessor under Maximian, having had his right Eye struck out, and hamstring'd in his left Leg, and condemned to work in the Mines; afterwards pre∣sent at the Council of Nice. XX. S. Ignatius, to whom they give the Title of , the third Bishop
of Antioch from S. Peter, thrown to the wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre at Rome under Trajan. XXV. The Nativity of our most Blessed Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. XXVII. S. Stephen, first Martyr. JANVARY. I. The Circumcision of Christ: as also the Festival of S. Basil. VI.. Epiphany, or Baptism of our Saviour. Upon this day after they have celebrated the Holy Sacrament, they consecrate and bless the Waters, and especially for the uses of Holy Baptism. XVII. S. Anthony, one of the first Founders of the Monastick Order in Aegypt under Decius. XVIII. S. Athanasius and S. Cyril, Bi∣shops of Alexandria. XXV. S. Gregory Nazianzene, whom they style  or the Divine. XXX. S. Basil, S. Gregory, and S. Chry∣sostome: the memory of which three great and famous Bishops they cele∣brate together.
FEBRVARY. II. The Presentation of Christ in the Temple by the Blessed Virgin, after the forty days of her Purification, when Simeon met them there; there∣fore called . XI. S. Blasius, Bishop of Sebaste in Ar∣menia, who having confest Christ there, obtained the glory of Martyr∣dom under Diocletian. MARCH. IX. The forty Souldiers, Martyrs, who being exposed naked in a Lake or Ditch near Sebaste in the lesser Arme∣nia, were frozen to death under Li∣cinius. XXV. The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, S. Mary. APRIL. XXIII. S. George of Cappadocia, crown'd with Martyrdom under Diocletian, styled peculiarly by the Greek . XXV. S. Mark, the Evangelist.
MAY. VIII. S. John, the Divine. XXI. Constantine the Great, and his Mother Helena, whom they call , or equal to the Apostles. JVNE. XI. S. Bartholomew and S. Barnabas, Apostles. XIX. S. Jude, Apostle, and Brother of our Lord. XXIV. The Nativity of S. John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ. XXIX. S. Peter and S. Paul, Apostles. JVLY. XVII. S. Marina, Virgin and Martyr, of Antioch in Pisidia, the Daughter of Aedesius, an Idol-Priest I suppose him, between whom and Julian the Apostate Emperour, there was a great intimacy and familiarity. The La∣tines call this martyred Saint, Mar∣garet.
XV.Decimo tertio Kalendas Augusti, quo die leves Graeci raptionem Eliae ad Coelos ludis scenicis celebrant. Luit∣prandus in legatione ad Nicephorum Imperatorem, p. 146. Elias the Prophet. XXVI. S. Parasceve, Virgin and Martyr, had her Head struck off somewhat a∣bout the times ofpag. 317. . Antoninus. XXVII. S. Panteleemenon, Physician and Martyr, who suffer'd at Nicomedia in Bithynia under Maximian. The La∣tines call him Pantaleon. AVGVST. VI. The Transfiguration of our Blessed Saviour. XV. The Death of the Blessed Virgin: , dormitio. This the Latines call the Assumption: in the relation of whose triumphal carri∣age into Heaven by the Angels, Pag. 330. a. the Greeks are very idle and fancifull, even to a great height and degree of credulity and folly. The institution of this solemnityHistor. Ecclesiast. l. 17. c. 28. vide etiam l. 15. c. 14. Ni∣cephorus attributes to the Emperour Mauritius, some little time before the year 600. XXIX. The beheading of S. John the Baptist.
Almost every day has a peculiar Saint and Martyr,Other Festi∣vals observed in Monaste∣ries. at whose commemoration the Religious in their Convents use a proper office, as in the Roman Breviary, which makes their Church-books swell to a great bulk. These are the entertain∣ments of their devotion in their retire∣ments from the world, performed in∣deed without that great solemnity as the above-mentioned Festivals are, at which the people are usually present, and are obliged to keep sacred by their or abstaining from the servile works of their callings, according to the prac∣tice and direction of their Church in the Rubrick of theirSee also the  printed at Ve∣nice 1626. Meno∣logy. Their offices are long and tedious.Their Offices used in time of the Divine Ser∣vice long. The Priests and Deacons and other de∣vout persons observe the Vigils prece∣ding the great Festivals, spending the whole night in prayer and reading the History of the Gospels, or the proper Lessons for the Solemnity, without any interruption, taking their turns, and re∣lieving one another when tyred, and so keeping up the  or sacred mi∣nistration.
I have been present for se∣ven hours together at their service upon a Festival day from between four and five of the clock in the morning, till to∣ward twelve. When there is a full Congregation, the ordinary prayers ap∣pointed for the Solemnity begin, and the life of the Saint is read to them in the vulgar Greek translated out of Simeon Metaphrastes, or the Synaxaria, which are collections briefly containing the most remarkable passages and accidents of the Saints lives, and the particulari∣ties of their sufferings and martyrdom, to which the people are very attentive. For this purpose among others they make use of the translation of Maximus Bishop of Cerigo,Anciently Cythera, printed at Venice 1621. Quarto. a Book called or the Treasure composed by Da∣mascen. of Thessalonica, (Venice 1618. Quarto,) which contains Moral discoures intermixed with the Historical, and in∣deed are in the nature of Sermons; and aVenice 1621. Quarto. third Book, which they call by the name of  or the new Treasure.
At such solemnities the holy and au∣gust Sacrament is always celebrated, and that with great pomp and ceremony:The Holy Eu∣charist at such times alwaies administred. and indeed is not onely a necessary, but the principal part of the Festival.Their Offe∣rings and Every one strives to bring his present or gift as he is able, according to the Primitive custom, as Bread, Wine, Oyl for the Lamps, Wax-candles, Frankincense, and such like, to be mae use of in the following sacred rites, or any other way as the service of the Church may re∣quire. At such times also they are very cha∣ritable and liberal to the poor:Charity. the meaner sort giving away what they can scarce spare from themselves; it being usual for such as are faln into any extra∣ordinary distress to get Letters from the Patriarch (I speak of the places in and about Constantinople especially) to re∣commend their case, and to stir them up to compassion. And I have obser∣ved several Turks to bring their Christi∣an slaves with a bolt or chain about their leg to the Church-doors of the Greeks, to beg their alms in order to their relief and maintenance: but this being the usual artifice of their covetous Patrons, there is little notice taken of them.
They go to Church always betimes in the morning,Their time of going to Church. and in the Winter time an hour or two before day, (which was the practice of the first Christians in the times of Trajan according to the97. Epist▪ re∣lation which Pliny the younger, then Pro-Praetor in the lesser Asia made to that Emperour) and this they doe that the people may be present at the entire service, and dismist in good time to at∣tend and look after their concerns: but chiefly, that they may perform their devotions more securely and be less dis∣turbed and molested by the Turks. If I may judge of others by my self, I am perswaded that no Christian of what Communion soever can be present at their religious worship, but he will melt into tears and sighs, and find great strugglings and yearnings in his bowels, and put up a hearty prayer to Christ our common Saviour, that he would be pleased to deliver his poor distressed suppliants out of the hands of these proud and insulting Infidels, the ene∣mies of his Cross, and despisers of his Godhead.
The other Festivals are moveable,Moveable Fe∣stivals. and depend upon the great Anniversary of our Blessed Saviour's Resurrection. In the assigning of this, they make use of the old Paschal Cycle, and limits of it, as they were establisht by the Fathers of the first general Council at Nice; who taking no notice of the inequality and difference of the true Astronomical year from the Civil, then and still in use, which admits not of the nice cal∣culation of the supernumerary minutes, made no provision for the praecession of the Aequinoxes, in the succession of af∣ter Ages: our account being the same with theirs. Easter day is called. the holy and great Lord's day or Festival of the Pass∣over,Easter. or. the Passover of the Re∣surrection: and sometimes. the Resurrection day; hence the Lord's day or Sunday is called oftentimes by the same name, as being the weekly re∣petition and celebration of the Easter Festival. Upon this and the two fol∣lowing days at their first meeting, whe∣ther
in the Streets, if they can do it conveniently without any great obser∣vation of the Turks, and hindrance; or in their Churches or Churchyards, to express their mutual love and joy and belief of this great Article of our Faith, the men kiss each other, using the old form of words taken out of the Gospell ofCap. 20. v. 34. S. Luke, , Christ is risen; to which the answer is, , He is risen indeed. Sometimes it is called  or the bright or white Sunday, alluding to the custom and practice of the first Ages, the Catechu∣meni, upon their being baptiz'd at this solemn time, being cloathed in white, the whole week being thence called , which name is still retai∣ned in their publick Offices, and in other of their Ecclesiastical writings. The Sunday after Easter or , the same with Dominica in Albis, the Albs being then left off, or, the new Sunday, or . the Sunday of S. Thomas, because of the Gospell of the day taken out of S. John Chap. 20. relating to the history
of his doubting, and of the confirmati∣on of his faith in the Resurrection, done, as upon this day, the eighth day from our Saviour's rising out of the grave, vers. 26. The second Sunday after Easter, . the Sunday of the Women who brought the Ointment, and of Joseph the Just, of Arimathea. The third Sunday,. the Sunday of the man sick of the Palsy, cured by our B. Saviour. The fourth Sunday,. the Sun∣day of the Samaritan woman. The fifth Sunday,. the Sunday of the Blind man restored to sight. These four also so called from the several Go∣spels read upon them. The Thursday following is the. Fe∣stival of our Saviour's Assumption or Ascension into the Heavens. The sixth Sunday, the Sunday. of the Three hundred eighteen divine Fa∣thers,
who were assembled at Nice. They are particularly commemorated and extolled upon this day, for their Piety and Zeal in the defence of the true Catholick Faith against the Impie∣ties and Blasphemies of Arius and his fol∣lowers. The Friday following, All Souls day. The. Sunday of the Holy Pen∣tecost. The day following,. the Festi∣val of the most Holy and undivided Tri∣nity. The Sunday after Whitsunday,. All Saints day. Another great instrument of preser∣ving the remainders of Christianity a∣mong them is,Fasts. the strict observation both of the annual and weekly Fasts. They retain them most religiously, and think it a grievous sin herein to trans∣gress the laws of the Church in the least; partly out of a principle of Conscience, and partly through long custome and practice, which make the greatest hard∣ships
and severities of life tolerable and easy. They have gained a perfect ma∣stery as it were over their appetite, and are so far from complaining of the tedi∣ousness and rigour of these Fasts, that they will not hear of any abatement and relaxation, but would be the rather apt to entertain strong jealousies and misap∣prehensions, that their whole Religion would be in danger, if there were the least indulgence permitted in so necessa∣ry a part of it. Their solemn yearly Fasts are these four,Yearly Fasts four. which we may call so many Lents. The first. great and holy Fast,Lent, or Fast before Easter. as they speak, is that before Easter, accor∣ding to the ancient practice and exam∣ple, and takes up full eight and forty days, besides the Sundays: all which time (unless upon the Festival of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, and Sundays, when they are indulged to eat some sort of Fish which they may not upon other days of Lent) they wholly abstain from all sorts of Flesh, and Fish too, except Shell-fish, as Cockles, Muscles, Oysters, Scallops, and such as have no bloud; (for of these they may
lawfully eat;) as also from Eggs, Cheese, and whatsoever is made of Milk; and use themselves for the most part. to a dry kind of diet. On Sundays and Saturdays the use of Wine and Oyl is permitted: but the devouter sort of people, and especially the Priests and they of the Monkish Order, refuse both. Some are so strangely devout, or rather superstitious, that they will not touch any thing that is forbidden: so that if by chance a drop of Wine or Oyl should fall upon their Bread, or any of their lawfull food, they think them polluted and profaned, and accordingly throw them away; and had rather (out of ob∣stinacy and desperateness) perish, either through hunger or by sickness, then be guilty of so grievous a sin, as they e∣steem it. The Sunday before Septuagesima is called. the Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee, from the Gospell taken out of S. Luke chap. 18. Septuagesima,. the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, S. Luke chap. 15. or
or , and the whole week , because notice is usually given at this time of the nigh approach of the Fast. Sexagesima, , which we may render Dominica carnis∣privii, or the Sunday in which they bid farewell to Flesh, which no longer be∣comes lawfull to be eaten; White meats being still permitted. On the Saturday. they celebrate the memory of all who have been famous for their Retirement from the tumults and business and vanity of the world, and for their severe and Ascetick lives. Quinquagesima, , so called, because to this day in∣clusively they are indulged to eat Cheese, Eggs and White meats, and no longer. For on Monday. the rigid and so∣lemn Fasts begin. On this day they reade. the History of the Expulsi∣on of Adam out of Paradise, which they ascribe to his Luxury and greedy wanton appetite. Quadragesima, or. the first Sun∣day
day in Lent; they call it also the Sunday . of Orthodoxy, celebrating upon it the memory of Orthodox Kings and Patri∣archs. Upon the same day also they excommunicate the , or such as deny the worship of Images, in compliance with the second Nicene Council, wherein that strange doctrine (which was afterwards opposed and confounded by the Bishops assembled at Francford by the command of the Em∣perour Charlemaine) was established un∣der the penalty of an Anathema. The second Sunday in Lent. The third Sunday in Lent is called the Sunday of the precious and life-producing Cross, as they speak; or , according tode Officiis Aulae CP. cap. 9. Codinus: because on this day and the week following they kiss the Cross more frequently then at other times, and pay a respect to it which falls little or nothing short of Adora∣tion. The fourth,. Mid-lent Sunday.
The fifth Sunday in Lent. The Saturday following,. the Sa∣turday of S. Lazarus raised from the dead. The sixth,. V. Luit∣prand. in libro de Gestis Imperat. & Regum, lib. 6. cap. 5. pag. 110. Palm-Sunday, so called from their carrying branches of Palms in their hands, in imitation of what we reade S. Mark 11. Chap. The week following is called the Week of the holy and salutary Passion,The Holy week. or the great and holy Week. Every day of which has the same title and denomina∣tion given to it; as Monday is called the great and holy second day, and so of the rest, in the order of their num∣ber: for the Greeks have no proper and peculiar names for them derived from the Planets.How they call the days of the Week. Sunday they always call the Lord's day; the five next, the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth: though they call this latter commonly , or the Preparation, as Thursday , the day before the Pre∣paration, following the Jewish custom, and in allusion to them, Saint John
chap. 10. 31. and in stead of the seventh, they generally say the Sabbath. On Thursday in the evening,The ceremony of washing the feet of twelve persons. in the Patriarchal Church at Constantinople, is the Ceremony of the , or wa∣shing the feet of twelve Kaloirs, or other Officers belonging to that Church, per∣formed by the Patriarch; in imitation of that wonderfull act of condescension in our Blessed Saviour, who in this de∣monstrative instance took on him the form of a Servant, according to the Cu∣stome of those Eastern Countries. Each of the twelve bears the name of the A∣postle whom he represents. And though, as they make it, it be but a meer mock∣show, and soon over; to prevail with one to stand for the Traitour Judas, is no small difficulty, this reproachfull and infamous name, for the most part, stic∣king by him as long as he lives. But this being a necessary part, the Patriarch is forced to bribe some one or other with the promise of preferment; or else to interpose his Authority, that they de∣cide it by lot. All things thus prepared, and the Prayers and the Hymns sung, which are prescribed in the Office, the Patriarch, having put off his Robe, girds himself about with a Towell, ac∣cording
to the direction of the Go∣spell, which is then read by pauses, by him of the number who represents Saint John, and pours warm wa∣ter into the Laver: and as soon as he hears those words read, S. John chap. 13. v. 5. Then he began to wash the disciples feet, he falls to his work. Ad∣vancing towards Judas, who throws out his Legs with some kind of hast and dis∣order, in a very foolish and indiscreet manner, the Patriarch, both by his look and behaviour in the action, shews a manifest dislike; which causes laughter and sport among the people present at the solemnity, who hitherto are usually grave and serious. He who represents S. Peter is usually the chief person in dignity among them, and is the last who has his feet washt. He, upon seeing the Patriarch approach him, contests it for a time, and deprecates it in the words of S. Peter, vers. 8. and so on they dis∣course it in the words of the Gospell. The Ceremony being over, the other persons being present dip their Hand∣kerchiefs in the Wash-pot, believing that there is a great deal of virtue in the Water which has been used in the Solemnity. This Custome is not confi∣ned
to Constantinople, but is performed elsewhere in their Monasteries, and by Bishops and Priests in their respective Churches, where there is a considerable number of Christians: such sights signi∣fying little, and losing much of their splendour, except there be crouds of spectatours. Good Friday,Good Fri∣day.. the great and holy Preparation, the Passover of the Cruci∣fixion; but most commonly, the most holy Passion-day. The Vigil of Good Friday is spent in fasting and mortification, and prayer, and reading the history of, and meditating on our Lord's Passion, and the dolorous and shamefull circumstan∣ces of it. The Women submit very readily to these rigours; and Boys of six or seven years of age endure as much as they are able, and care not to be ex∣empt from these bodily exercises, in which they place a great part of their Religion: herein keeping up the prac∣tice of the Primitive Christians, who were wont to afflict themselves at this
solemn time, and shew an extraordinary Devotion; asHist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 17. Eusebius relates of the Therapeutae mentioned by Philo, whom he fansies to have been Christi∣ans, and Disciples of S. Mark. But whether that be a truth or a mistake, he says the same severities were used in his time. Great numbers watch all night in the Church: the neighbouring streets in the night-time are full of such as pass to and again. Those who are weak and sickly are allowed a little bread and water, to prevent swouning in the day-time: but generally, except in such like cases, where an absolute neces∣sity may justify the fact, they abstain from all sort of food till after Sun-set the next day. Others, of a more vigo∣rous and athletick temper and constitu∣tion, fast four and twenty hours longer, and eat nothing till Easter-Eve, that is, at night. Toward the evening of Good Friday,An Image of our Saviour carried about in their great Churches on Good Fri∣day at night. they carry an Image of our B. Saviour about the Church in procession with ta∣pers and torches; and then they repre∣sent the , or the manner of taking our Saviour down from the
Crosse: in which they betray a great deal of superstition and folly, this being onely to gratify a childish and gross fancy. On the Saturday they eat but once,Easter Eve. which is purely to sustain nature. At three of the clock in the afternoon, when their Vespers begin, the devout people flock to Church; some continue there all night, and carry with them bread, dates and figs, and the like, to make use of upon occasion of any fainting fit. To∣ward break of day they sing the Hymn which begins, Glory in the highest. Af∣ter which the Patriarch begins that ex∣cellent Hymn, the Quire immediately following;. Christ is risen from the dead, having by his death trampled upon death, and given life to those who were in their graves. Which they re∣peat twelve times together. This Hymn is sung every day from Easter-day to the Feast of the Holy Ascension. The. second solemn Fast is of forty days,Fast before Christmas. beginning on the fifteenth day of November, and serves to usher
in the Solemnity of Christmas. The reason that some give for the determi∣nate number of days appropriated to this Fast, is no better then this, That as Moses remained forty days upon mount Sinai fasting, in the way of an holy initiation, before he received the two Tables of the Law; so it becomes Christians, by the like Abstinence, as much as humane infirmity will permit, to prepare themselves to receive Christ, the true and great Law-giver. This Fast is very mild and easy, in compari∣son of the great Lenten Fast before Ea∣ster: for though they are obliged to ab∣stain from Flesh, Butter, Eggs, &c. yet there is a free use of Oyl, Wine, and all sorts of Fish, as at other times. The third solemn Fast is in ho∣nour of the B. Virgin,The Fast of the B. Virgin. and called by her name. It lasts fourteen days, that is, from the first of August to the fifteenth day of that month, the Festival of her Obit or Dormition, or, as they sometimes explain it more largely, of her Translation from Earth to
Heaven: which the Roman Church chu∣ses rather to call the Assumption of the Virgin. Onely there is some little re∣laxation indulged upon the Festival of our B. Saviour's Transfiguration, that falls within this time. The fourth solemn Fast is the Fast of the holy Apostles,The Fast of the Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul. S. Peter and S. Paul. The duration of this Fast is not fixed and certain, as the rest are; for it is longer or shorter, as Easter falls higher or lower in the year. It begins on the Monday after All Saints day, which is with them the Sunday after Whitsunday, and is continued to the Festival day of those two great Saints, which is on the 29. day of June. They find out the length of this Fast by this easy Method and Rule: Look how ma∣ny days there are from Easter to the se∣cond of May, so many make up the intervall or number of days allotted to this Fast. As for instance, when this Canon or Rule was first told me at Con∣stantinople, in the year 1669, by a Greek Priest, Papas Jeremias Germanus, (who had travelled into England, where he met with considerable relief, and
particularly here at Oxon, being a man of more refined parts and learning then the Kaloirs usually are,) Easter hap∣pened to fall on the 11. of April; from which day to the second of May inclu∣sively are two and twenty days: which was the number of the days they fasted that year, in memory and honour of the Apostles. For All Saints day falling con∣sequently on the sixth of June, if we reckon from the day following to the Festival, in reference to which the Fast is instituted, we shall find the same num∣ber. But whether this Rule. holds in all other cases, and is infallible, as he pretended, I am not at leisure to ex∣amine or enquire; nor is it worth my study or time, if I were. Thus much for the Annual Fasts. The Weekly Fasting-days are . Wednesday and Friday;Weekly Fasts. which are strictly still retained, in compliance with the ancient Custome and Practice of the Catholick Churches in the first Ages of Christianity. The reason and original of which may be ascribed to the Zeal and Piety of the Christians of
those times, either that they might not be behind-hand with the more religious sort of Jews, who, according to the prescription and tradition of their Elders, fasted twice a week, S. Luke chap. 18. vers. 12. or that they might with a due and becoming sorrow reflect and medi∣tate upon our Blessed Saviour's being betrayed and crucified, as upon these days, and afflict and humble themselves under a sense of their guilt, the merito∣rious cause of his Sufferings and Death. Out of this number they exempt the Wednesdays and Fridays of the three great and famous Festivals,Some days exempted out of the number. that is, of Christmas,. comprehending the whole twelve days, of Easter, and Pen∣tecost, that there be no interruption of that innocent and sober Joy, which de∣servedly attends these Solemnities, by the interposition of Fasts usual at other times; as also of Septuagesima and Sexa∣gesima, that they may not seem to agree in the least with the Armenian Christi∣ans, fasting most rigorously at these times, whom they look upon as Here∣ticks, and hate mortally. The reason of which possibly I may account for hereafter at large.
They are obliged also to fast. on the Vigils of some peculiar Festivals;Vigils. such as are the Vigil Of the Epiphany, that being purged and cleansed from sin by fasting, they may drink with greater success and be∣nefit of the Waters which upon the fol∣lowing Festival are blessed and conse∣crated: and this they doe very heartily, attributing great virtue to them. The antiquity of this custom, of Blessing the waters upon this day, may appear from the. Homily of S. John Chrysostome, Patriarch of Constantinople, upon this very argument. Of Pentecost, and the Monday fol∣lowing, to prepare them the better to receive the influences of the Holy Spi∣rit. Of the Transfiguration. Of the Exaltation of the Cross, the figure of which they kiss fasting. Of the Beheading of S. John the Bap∣tist. They hold it utterly unlawfull to fast on any Saturday throughout the year,Vnlawfull to fast on Satur∣days, except that of the Holy week. excepting that of the Holy week; fol∣lowing
herein the ancient custome: it being prohibited under the grievous pe∣nalty of Deposition to an Ecclesiastical person, and of Excommunication to a Lay-man, by the. 66. Apostolical Canon, which was renewed and con∣firmed by the sixth general Council, as they reckon, held in Trullo, Canon the 55. By which, saysin Scholiis: . Zona∣ras, they endeavoured to correct the Errour of the Latines. The alteration of one of the days of the weekly Fasts being, among others, a great occasion of the breach and disunion of the Eastern from the Western Church. But to put an end to this discourse a∣bout their Fasts,The end and design of these Fasts. reserving the conside∣ration of the severities and restraints in∣flicted and imposed by the Kaloirs upon themselves to a fitter place; I shall onely adde thus much, that whatever the present opinion or abuse be about these Fasts, the design of the Catholick Church in the institution of them, and
especially of the Lenten Fast before Easter, was truly pious and Christian, that a publick check being thus given to the corrupt inclinations of nature, and the Body kept under by mortification and abstinence, the Mind might be more at liberty to reflect upon it self, and be taken up with thoughts of God and Religion; and that all, after such ex∣ercises of Penitence, may be the better prepared to partake of the great Myste∣ries of the Body and Bloud of our Lord, especially at Easter. In so great Confusion,Their Chur∣ches. which has long since overwhelmed the outward glory and splendour of the Greek Em∣pire, 'tis not to be expected, that their Churches should be rich and stately. The Churches which now belong to the Greeks are narrow and mean, and without any rich furniture; whereby they become less liable to be made a prey to the covetousness of the Infi∣dels, who are wont to envy the Christi∣ans the use of any thing that is rich and beautifull: Christianity here, as to the exteriour part of it, being redu∣ced to the same state and conditi∣on, as it was in before the times of Constantine the Great, when their
, Hetarriae. Vid, Plin. 10. lib. Ep. 97. . V. Origenem adv. Celsum lib. 1. non procul ab initio. Sacred Conventions, sometimes forbid by the cruel Edicts of the Hea∣thenish Proconsuls and other Magi∣strates, under most severe penalties, and made Treason against the Government, were kept secret in Grotta's and Caves under ground; and when tolerated and connived at, in obscure and un∣adorned Chappels, which had nothing to attract either envy or emulation, or to please and gratify the eye and fancy, but where God was worshipt in the Beauties of holiness. These Churches they still enjoy, by virtue of the Grant made them by the Emperour Mahomet, at his triumphal entrance into, and ta∣king possession of this Imperial City: (it being their interest not to depopu∣late it wholly of Greeks:) but in case of any ruine or breach caused by Fire or Earthquake, or any other unforeseen accident, they are utterly forbid to re∣build or repair them without leave; which is not obtained without great difficulty, and vast summs of money too: the Turks presuming, I suppose, that if
their Churches were once demolisht, their Religion would sensibly decay, and in process of time be wholly ex∣tinguisht. It concerns the Greeks there∣fore to be carefull (as indeed they are) of these Sacred Structures, upon the least defect in the walls or roof, as soon as 'tis visible; lest it being neglected, they be necessitated to purchase the good will of the Cadyes, with expence∣full Bribes, to keep up and maintain the Fabrick. There are about six and twenty Chur∣ches in Constantinople,Churches in Constantino∣ple, and whose names here follow, as they were communica∣ted to me by a Greek Priest, when I was upon the place. The. Patriarchal Church, dedi∣cated to the B. Virgin. S. Nicolas, not far from Sancta Sophia, if I do not misremember. S. George. . The Holy Virgin. S. Nicolas. S. Carpus. These four are in the Streets towards the Propontis, not far from Psamathia-Gate.
S. Constantine, in Caramania-Street, hard by the Seven Towers. The Holy Virgin, in Belgrade-Street. The Holy Virgin, in New-Street. —Another, near the Gun-Gate. S. Demetrius, in the Street called . S. George, near Adrianople-Gate. The Holy Virgin, Queen or Lady of Heaven, in the same Street. S. Demetrius, near the Wood-Gate. The Holy Virgin, near the Crooked-Gate. The Holy Virgin, in Arabage Meidan, or Arabian Market-place. The Holy Virgin, near Balini. . S. Nicolas of the Achridians. . The Chappell of the Holy Se∣pulchre. . The Holy Virgin— . S. George— S. Nicetas, near the house of the Prince of Walachia. The Holy Virgin, near the house of the Prince of Moldavia.
The Holy Virgin, near the Patriarchal Church, called, for distinction, , or the little Church. S. George, near the Lantern-Gate. . S. John, belonging to the Pa∣triarch of Alexandria. There were about seven Christian Churches burnt down in the dismal fire that happened about fifteen or sixteen years ago, near Condoscali by the Sand-Gate; some of which they thought to have re-built, having procured leave from the Caimacam or Governour of Constantinople: but the Imams and other zealous Turks remonstrating against it, they were commanded to desist. They have likewise six Churches at Galata,Galata. which are . The Holy Virgin— . Christ hanging upon the Cross. S. Demetrius, near Sophana, the place where the Turks cast their Guns, and where I have seen several Cannon and Field-pieces taken from Christian Princes. S. Nicolas.
. Christ's— S. John. They have a small Church in the Bagno, where a Greek Priest is some∣times permitted to come and officiate before the poor Slaves of their Commu∣nion, at such time as the Armata of Gallies is returned from visiting the Isles in the Arches, or any such like Summer-expedition. Not to mention the Chur∣ches belonging to the Towns and Vil∣lages near Constantinople, on either side of the Bosphorus. Those glorious and magnificent Piles of building mentioned by Procopius,Most of the ancient Chur∣ches destroy∣ed, or turned into Moschs. the Authour of the Survey made in the times of Theodosius Junior, Cedrenus, and Codinus, (which latter lived a little before Constantinople was taken,) which the Piety of several Emperours had rai∣sed in honour of our Religion, at so vast an expence, in Constantinople, (and the like is to be said of the other great Cities under the dominion of the Grand Signor) are either levelled with the ground, and new Foundations built upon them; or else seized upon by the Turks, pleased with the curious Archi∣tecture,
and turned into Moschs, upon the taking of that City, with some little alteration, the better to accommodate them to the Uses of their Religious Worship; the Chancells being laid open, and the curious Images in Mo∣saick disfigured. We may guess at the richness and beauty and glory of the rest, by those few which remain, of which I shall onely mention the Chur∣ches of Saint Sophia and of the Holy A∣postles. The former, which is now the chief seat of the Mahometan Worship,The Church of Sancta So∣phia. as it was before of the Christian, was called so, Niceph. Histor. Eccl. l. 7. c. 20. , Chronic. Constantin. p. 4. , p. 12. , Procopi∣us de Aedificiis Justiniani l. 1. c. 1. See the Praises of this glorious Church in the eloquent Letter of Manuel Chrysaloras to the Emperour Johannes Cantacuzenus. in honour of our Blessed Savi∣our, who is the Wisedom of the Father; built by the Emperour Justinian accor∣ding to the contrivance and modell of the two famous Architects of that Age, Anthemius of Tralles, and Isidorus of Miletum: upon which he had set his
heart so much, that he judged no cost great enough in order to the accom∣plishment of his design, as if this had been the crown and perfection of all those glorious actions, both in peace and war, for which his Reign is so de∣servedly famous. At the Dedication whereof, (after he had given solemn thanks to Almighty God, who had ena∣bled him to finish it, and had continu∣ed him alive to see the holy Triumphs of that day,) he could not contain him∣self, but brake out into rapturous ex∣pressions of joy, saying,, Codin. de Origin. Con∣stant. p. 71. edit. Paris. O Solo∣mon, I have got the better of thee. And if we may give credit toCodin. pag. 21. fine. Codinus, he caused the Statue of that King to be placed near the Regia Cisterna, sitting in a Chair, and, in a melancholick posture, leaning upon his elbow, with his eyes turned toward Sancta Sophia. By which kind of Emblem he designed to repre∣sent the great Grief that would seize upon him, if he were to be restored to life for some time, to see this Church so much out-shine the Temple he had the
honour to build at Jerusalem. The Turks call this Church, with very little alteration from the Greek, Aïa Sophia: the Greeks in their ordinary discourse, as formerly in their writings, before it fell into the hands of the barbarous Infidels, the great Church, or the great Holy Church. The Church of the Holy Apostles,The Church of the Holy Apo∣stles. Vid. Cedrenum ad 23. annum Justiniani. where the Reliques of S. Andrew, S. Luke, and S. Timothy were anciently deposited, being before of Wood, was pulled down, and rebuilt of Marble Vid. Procop. de AEdif. Justiniani l. 1. c. 4. & Codinum de Origin. CP. p. 73. by the Empress Theodora, the Wife of Justinian, incited by his example to doe something worthy of her, to make her name known to, and admired by poste∣rity. This Church, according to the tradition of the Greeks, was first gran∣ted by the Emperour Mahomet, upon his taking the City, to the Patriarch Gennadius Scholarius: but he soon revo∣ked his Grant, and turned it into the Mosch which now bears his name. The Patrïarchal Church formerly be∣longed to a Convent of Nuns,The Patriar∣chal Church: where is where
the Patriarch has a convenient dwelling.part of the Pillar to which our B. Saviour was bound. It is situated upon the rising of a hill, near the Lantern-Gate, toward the Ha∣ven; of an ordinary bigness, and with∣out any great Ornament, for the reason above mentioned. The Emperour A∣lexius Comnenus here lies interred. They shewed me here also the Reliques of S. Euphemia, and of some other Martyrs, lockt up in Chests, which they open with great solemnity, to gratify the cu∣riosity of Strangers, who reward the ci∣vility sufficiently. But that which they most esteem is a piece of black Marble, as they pretend, part of that Pillar which formerly stood in the Praetorium or Hall of Pontius Pilate, to which our Blessed Saviour was tied, when he was whipped; about two foot long, and three or four inches over; (if my me∣mory serves me right, for I did not think it worth my pains, though never so small, to take the exact dimensions of it;) inclosed in brass lattice Grates, that it may not receive prejudice either from devout or sacrilegious persons. For they have a strong imagination, that the dust rased from it, and put into wine, or any way conveyed into the stomach, cures Agues and Fevers almost
infallibly. In a brass Plate under it I found these six Verses engraven, alluding to the tradition I just now mentioned, which they believe as undoubtedly as if it were Gospell. , . , , . Near hereunto, the Emperour Selim,Artifice of the Greeks in di∣verting Selim from building here. emulous of the glory of his Ancestours, once intended to have built a Mosch, for the advantage of the situation. The Greeks, fearing lest their Church should be demolisht for the enlargement of the Area of it, play'd a master-game of cun∣ning, by bribing the Vizir and the other Bassa's, who had a mighty Ascendent over him. They accordingly diverted him from his purpose, and perswaded him to build it at Adrianople, to the great joy of the poor Christians, who were thus happily delivered from their fears. The Churches are of different figures;The form and figure of their Churches.
some. rising up with Cuppola's in the midst, as Sancta Sophia: others are built. Cross-wise, like our Cathe∣dralls; others square and oblong. That the Rites and Ceremonies,A particular description of a Church. which I shall have occasion to mention hereafter, may be the better understood, I will briefly describe the make and fashion of one of their Churches, with the several parts of it; (for where any of them is wanting, it is wholly for want of room, or some other convenience;) referring the curious Reader to the La∣tine Copy. In the first fabrick and constitution, they had regard to theSee Symeon Thessalonicensis, in his tract . threefold condition and order of persons admitted within the Church-doors: which are, . Ecclesiastical persons, or Priests, and other inferiour Ministers belonging to them. Lay-persons, which lie under no Church-censure, but enjoy the privile∣ges of their Baptism, and have the liberty
of serving God in the publick Congre∣gation; or the Faithfull. . Penitents and Excommunica∣ted persons, deprived of the use of the holy Sacrament in the way of a spiritual Punishment: among whom, anciently, the Catechumeni, and persons possessed with Evil Spirits, were placed. Accor∣dingly every compleat Church consists . of an Entrance, Nave, and Chan∣cell, distinguisht by the several uses to which they peculiarly belong, and ap∣propriated to particular persons. Before you enter the Church,Porch. is . a covered Porch, usually arch'd, running out at each side the Portall with Seats against the wall, upon which are painted several Images, as of our Blessed Saviour, the Virgin Mary, S. John, S. George, and the like, (these two last being the great Saints of the East,) and of that Saint particularly, to whose me∣mory the Church is consecrated; but very wretchedly, and without beauty or proportion: Painting, as well as the other ingenious and polite Arts, ha∣ving
been long since banisht Greece and the Lesser Asia. The outward Gate,Outward Gate. which they call . the great or Silver Gate, opens into a long narrow space,Narthex. which they call.  distinct from the Body of the Church, and separated by a half partition. In the inner∣most part stood the. See the Commentary of Zonaras on the 9. Canon of the Council of Nice. Penitents, to hear the holy Scriptures read; next to the Gate were the. This place hence called  or . Candidates of Baptism; and between both, those who were. possessed: this being their proper place, beyond which it was not lawfull to advance one step forward. But these uses long since ceasing, the rooms are taken up by the Women, who never sit promiscuously with Men, there being Lattices at the farther end, through which they look into the Church, without being seen themselves. Here they leave the Coffin of the person who is to be interred, (unless he be a
Church-man, and then they carry it in farther,) while they perform some Funeral offices in the Church; which ended, they carry it into the Church-yard. In this place the Font is placed,Font. of which I shall speak more distinctly, when I come to shew the Ceremonies which they use in Baptism. The middle Gate,Middle Gate, and Body of the Church. which they call the. Beautifull Gate, opens into the. Nave or Body of the Church, which lies open, unless almost toward the upper part, where there are some few Stalls,Stalls. as in the Patriarchal Church, where is one higher then the rest for the Patriarch, and others for the Princes of Walachia and Moldavia, or for the Metropolitans and Bishops, when any happen to be present. Above which, but more toward the Wall, in little oblong Squares, those who belong to the Quire have their station; and a little higher in the middle is the Desk,Desk. where they reade the Holy Scripture to the People. In the great Churches a . Pulpit is usually placed in the mid∣dle,Pulpit. but which they very seldome make use of.Partition be∣tween the Nave and You advance onely from a single step to the wooden Partition. Which
intervall I suppose to be the Soleas, a∣bout the meaning and right placing of which several learned men have conte∣sted at large. This reaches almost from the roof to the pavement, and takes up the breadth of the Church. It is full of Pictures done at large, especially those lately mentioned; sometime daubed over with Gilt, as I have obser∣ved in their Monasteries, which, being either in the Islands, or in the Country in by-places, out of the sight of the Turks, are better and more richly ador∣ned. Three Doors open out of it; whereof the middlemost, called the . holy or royal Door, is not open'd, or passed through, but upon special oc∣casion: See the Diataxis of Philotheus Patriarch of Constantinople. as in the solemn introitus of the Vespers of the great Festivals; or at such time as they celebrate the Com∣munion, when the Deacon goes out thence to reade the Gospell to the Con∣gregation: or when the Priest, after the Procession, immediately enters in order to consecrate; or when such as commu∣nicate approach thither to receive the sa∣cred Symbols from the Priest or Dea∣con, who stands just in the entrance of
it. There are two lesser Doors at each extremity, the one at the North, the other at the South side of the Church; by which at all other times they pass in∣to the Sacrarium or Chancell. This enclos'd space they most fre∣quently call. Bema:Chancell: within which either because of the little rising and ascent to it; or ra∣ther because it is look'd upon as the Throne and Tribunal of Christ, which is the signification of the word in the New Testament, (forSee the above-cited Symeon Thessalonicensis. this and such like honourable appellations, as the Holy of Holies, the Seat and Place of God, and his Rest, &c. they bestow upon it,) it being the holiest and most venerable part of the Church, peculiar to the Priests and others who serve at the Altar; it not being permitted the Laicks to enter there during the Com∣munion-Service, according to an express Canon 19. Canon of the Council of Laodi∣cea. Out of respect to which, and the Custome of those Times, founded upon it,Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 18. The curious Reader may see this more at large in the Latine Copy, p. 59, 60, 61. S. Ambrose thought fit to ad∣monish
the Emperour Theodosius, upon his stay there in order to receive the Sa∣crament, after he had made his Offe∣rings: which the good Emperour took very patiently and quietly, and readily submitted to. Hence it is called sometimes  or the Propiti∣atory, because of the Holy Eucharist, the representative Sacrifice of the Death of our Saviour, who once offered up himself upon the Cross, for the sins of the World; and sometimes , for the same reason:de Graecae Eccles. hodierno statu, p. 61, 62. as I have elsewhere proved at large. Within this place, in the greater Churches,three Tables. there are three Tables; which differ much in use and dignity: it being onely lawfull to consecrate up∣on the middlemost, which is of Stone, fastned to the Wall, which they call . the holy,The holy or mystical Ta∣ble. Divine, and mysticall Table; where, as in their proper place, the Gospels lie, and over which there is a Cross, as a memorial of the Death of Christ. On the left hand of it,Prothesis. toward the North, is a little Table, called ,
where they deposit the holy Gifts or Presents, (as under the Mosaick Law, the Shew-bread, which the Greek In∣terpreters of the Old Testament call ,) and where seve∣ral things are done preparatory to the Holy Communion. On the opposite side is thecalled also . ,Sacristy. or , or Sacristy, that has a Table also. Here they put their Books and holy Vessels and Vest∣ments, which they use in the time of Divine Service. This is properly the place of the Deacons and other inse∣riour Ministers (hence called ) employed in lighting the Lamps and Tapers, and in heating water to pour into the Chalice, and the like. The Sacristy was not always ancient∣ly within the Church,The Sacristy not always within the Church. but sometimes without; hence called  as the round Stone-building within the first Gate of the Seraglio is supposed to have been to Sancta Sophia; and the like I observed still standing hard by the great Church at Pergamus. They burn Lamps for the most part before the Altar, and sometimes in the Nave of the Church.
In the Patriarchall,Seats with∣in the Chan∣cell. Metropoliticall and Episcopal Churches, there are Seats in the Concha or space about the Altar: the chief Seat higher then the rest, which they call by the name of , or holy Throne, to distinguish it from the other Seat of the Patriarch, Metropolitan, or Bishop, below in the Church: in both which. V. Syropuli Histo∣riam concilii Florentini pag. 3. Symeon Thessalonic. in Euchologio, p. 223. , &c. and afterwards, , &c. speaking of the Bishop, , pag. 217. Hence the phrases  and , to be created Pa∣triarch; and , the same with  or to be deposed. he is pla∣ced at his Inauguration; which is never omitted, as being a necessary Ceremo∣ny, and gives them a full possession of their Dignity. They are forbidden the use of Bells.A wooden Brd or iron Plate in stead of a Bell. But to supply that defect, in the Villa∣ges which they enjoy to themselves, to call the people together to Church, they make use of. a wooden Board, or iron Plate full of holes, which they knock with a Hammer or Mallet. As the sound is greater or less, or more or
less repeated, those who are disposed to go to Prayers, knowing the meaning and distinction of the several blows, prepare themselves accordingly. But of the figure of the Greek Chur∣ches hitherto. The Greeks retain and keep up the same form of Ecclesiasticall Government under the Tyranny of the Turks,Their Ecclesi∣asticall Go∣vernment. which they had formerly in the flourishing times of the Empire; there being still the same Orders and Degrees of the Clergy, distinct in office and dignity. So that there is a face of a Church, though sadly distressed and harassed, every-where visible, and a due Subor∣dination observ'd among the Ministers of holy things, and Discipline exerci∣sed: by which, the mercifull Provi∣dence of God so ordering it, they have prevented that Confusion which other∣wise had overwhelmed them, had they levelled all Titles, confounded different Orders, introduced a Presbyterian Pa∣rity, and relinquished the Canons of the ancient Church, by which their Ancestours were governed. I will give a brief account of the state and condition of all sorts of Ecclesiasticall persons among them; and, for method
sake, will begin with the supereminent Dignity of the Patriarch. All the Eastern Christians of the Greek Communion look upon the Pa∣triarch of Constantinople as their Chief and Head,Patriarch of Constantino∣ple. upon whose wise Conduct and Government the Happiness and Quiet of the Church mostly depend. And though he does not constitute the other Patriarchs, yet they pay him ex∣traordinary Respect; and, carrying on the same common and joint interests, often consult him in Person, and fre∣quently by their Deputies, in case of any difficulty that may happen; as be∣ing unwilling to determine any thing of moment without his advice and ap∣probation. This Right he still claims by virtue of a Canon made in the Council held at Chalcedon,His Primacy in the Eastern Church. and retains, in the midst of his poverty and affliction, the pompous Title of Oecumenical Patriarch, as if rea∣dy to dispute it with the Bishop of Rome, with the same eagerness as Joan∣nes and Cyriacus, and others of his Pre∣decessours: the same Ambition cleaving also to the several Metropolitans under him, who value themselves as much upon the ancient dignity and preemi∣nence
of their Sees, as if they enjoyed the same Revenue and state, and exer∣cised an equal Power, and had the same number of Suffragans still under their Jurisdiction. The Patriarchate of Constantinople (as I mentioned in the beginning of this Dis∣course) comprehends under it all the Lesser Asia,The extent of his Jurisdic∣tion. except the Provinces of Isau∣ria and Cilicia, as also Thrace, Macedo∣nia, and the other Countries of Greece, the Islands of the Aegaean and Ionian Seas, Dalmatia, Albania, Walachia and Moldavia.What places exempt. But as for those Countries that lie North of Thrace, toward Mount Haemus on the one hand, and bounded by the Danube on the other, they re∣main exempt from his Jurisdiction, and enjoy the privilege of being indepen∣dent on any other then their own Me∣tropolitans, according to the Constitu∣tions of the Emperours, who rais'd them to that dignity. Such are the Archbishop of Justiniana Prima or A∣chridae, (who claims this privilege from the times of the Emperour Justinian, See Authent. Collat. 2. tit. 6. novel. 11. who, to doe honour to the Coun∣try where he was born, equalled it in
dignity to an Apostolical See, and made it altogether absolute and free.) He is Primate of all Bulgaria, and has under him about eighteen Bishops: though it must be acknowledged, that some, who have enjoyed this Title, have come to the Patriarch of Constantinople to be con∣secrated. But this can no more be al∣leged as a prejudice and bar to their just liberty and power, then it might be to the Patriarchs of Alexandria, who have sometimes received their Conse∣cration in the same place. Next, the Archbishop of. Ità scribitur  ad fiem Codini, pag. 419. Pecium, a City of Servia, who governs that whole Coun∣try with the assistence of sixteen Bishops. These two Countries make up the higher and lower Moesia of the Ancients. Then the Archbishops of Georgia and Mingrelia. And lastly the Archbishop of the Island of Cyprus, who has three or four Suffragans, being free from the pretensions of the Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, as well as of Antioch. But not∣withstanding these immunities, all of them yield a mighty deference to the chief See, and upon occasion, accor∣ding
as they are able, contribute to support the necessities of it. For besides the Present they are obli∣ged to make upon the Presentation of a new Patriarch,The expence of the Patri∣arch for the maintenance of the Christi an Religion. who is always to be confirmed by the Grand Signor or Vizir, (who indeed do oftentimes impose such as they think fit;) a yearly summe is now exacted in the way of Tribute. Emanuel Malaxus, in his History of the Patriarchs of Constantinople from the ta∣king of the City to his own time, that is, to the year 1577, tells us, that the Elections of the four first Patriarchs were free; and how that afterward, upon a Present of a thousand Ducats of Gold made in favour of a certain Kaloir of V. Historiam Politicam Constantinopoleos in Turco-Graecia, pag. 22. 24. 39. Trapezond, named Symeon, whom his Countrymen especially desir'd to make Patriarch, the Turks took advan∣tage of their forwardness, and made it a standing rule and precedent for the fu∣ture: and the summ was soon doubled and trebled, and not long after turned into a yearly Tribute. And this has been encreasing ever since, by the cove∣tousness and rapaciousness of the Turks,
to which the horrid Differences and Dissentions among the Greeks have gi∣ven too great an occasion, as I shall have occasion to shew immediately by late examples. The Sultana, and the Favourites and great Officers of the Port, besides the yearly Presents made to them also, are to be bribed lustily upon all occasions: so that the standing and accidental Charge of the Patriarch, put both together, make a great summ, for which he is responsible. For the raising of this mony,The Revenue of the Patri∣arch. with which they buy the liberty of their Re∣ligion, there is a certain Tax or portion of mony payable by every Metropoli∣tan and Bishop, besides what is given at their Consecration, (for he usually makes them,) every year, which they receive from the several Priests under their Jurisdiction, according to the va∣lue of their Incomes. To collect these summs, or. honourable Presents, he deputes one of his Dependents eve∣ry year, as his Legate, whom they call and sometime upon occasion he goes himself in person to visit for the same purpose. Mony comes in also
from the Ordination of Priests, that are within his particular Diocese, who pay him so many Dollers a year as their Li∣vings are worth; from granting Licen∣ces of Marriage, and Dispensations; and from Law-suits judicially heard be∣fore him. For, to prevent the ill con∣sequences of running to the Turks for Justice, they usually appeal to him as to their Judge in Civil causes,The Patri∣arch Judge in civil affairs. and are concluded by his sentence and determi∣nation, under the grievous penalty of being excommunicated; which they dread more then death it self. For if they refuse to stand to his arbitrement and decision, they are ipso facto depri∣ved of the benefit of the Sacraments: and in case any should be so hardy and obstinate, as not to endeavour quickly to be reconciled to the Church, (un∣less he has a mind to turn Turk to gain his pretended right, by suing his Adver∣sary before a Cady or in the Divan,) the Patriarch and those about him will spare for no charge to get such a one condemned to the Gallies for a certain time, till they have conquered his re∣fractoriness of humour, and brought him to terms of submission; this being the main pillar and support of their Go∣vernment.
But they seldome make use of this rigorous and expencefull course, a Principle of conscience in the persons concern'd hindring the prosecution of it, and making them afraid to transgress therein; while they remember that chi∣ding expostulation of S. Paul, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. 6. 1. as if it had been particularly directed unto them,1 Cor. 6. 1. Dare any of you, ha∣ving a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? The Patriarch,His Assistents. in the determination of causes brought before him, has the assistence of twelve of the chief Officers belonging to the Patriarchal Church and dignity. These also assist the Archbi∣shop of Heraclea, in vesting and crow∣ning him at his Inauguration, and still retain the same high titles as they did before the Turks came among them. These are as it were his standing Coun∣cil, to whom he refers the great affairs and concerns of Religion. Lastly, se∣veral devout persons, that by their hand∣labour and frugal way of living, or otherwise, have advanced their fortunes,
and have scraped some mony together, leave it oftentimes in the way of Legacy to the Church, to serve the needs of it. By all which ways and means the Patri∣arch, as I was made to believe, may re∣ceive between thirty and forty thou∣sand Dollers a year. But this being matter of conjecture, and wholly un∣certain, I lay not any great stress upon it, and determine nothing in the case. The Patriarch most commonly is cho∣sen out of the number of the Bishops,The Patri∣arch usually chosen out of the number of Bishops, and a Kaloir. who, according to the present consti∣tution and practice of that Church, are Kaloirs of the Order of S. Basil, and bred up for the most part at mount A∣thos, and consequently under a vow of Celibacy. To derive a greater lustre upon the Episcopal Dignity and Function,His retinue and title, when they ad∣dress to him. their menial servants and such as attend them are usually in Deacons Orders. When they address to him, the usual style is, , most Holy Father; or , or , your Holiness; and , or , most Blessed Father, or your Blessedness: that they may not be behind-hand with the Romanists in expressing the great esteem and venera∣tion
they have of the Patriarch, whom they make equal in all respects with the Pope. As formerly ambition and greedy thirst after the highest Dignities and pre∣ferments in the Church occasioned great disorders and distractions amongst the People,Dissentions in the choice of a Patriarch. according as they took part, and sometime introduced a Schism, whereby Altar was set up against Altar, to the great scandal of Religion and breach of Christian Communion, the Heathen making sport at these Divisions, and taking advantage hereby to oppress and ruine both parties: So it is still; the Peace and Quiet and the great and real Interest of Christianity being often∣times sacrificed to this restless Passion. The oppression which the Greeks lie un∣der from the Turks, though very sad and dismal in it self, becomes more un∣easy and troublesome by their own hor∣rid Quarrels and Differences about the choice of a Patriarch: there being of∣tentimes several Pretenders among the Metropolitans and Bishops, and they too making an interest, by large summs of mony, in the Vizir, or the other Bas∣sa's, to attain their ends. He who by his mony and his friends has prevail'd,
and has defeated his Competitors, will endeavour to reimburse himself, and lay the burthen and debt, which he has contracted, upon the Church, which must pay for all: while the rest, who envy his preferment, and are vext at their disappointment, unite their inte∣rest and strength to get him displaced, by remonstrating against his injustice and ill management of affairs, and put up fresh Petitions to the Turks, and bribe lustily to be heard. The Turks, glad of such an opportunity of gain, readily enough admit their Complaint, and put out and put in, as they see oc∣casion. In the mean while, large sums of mony are usually taken up at a great interest by the contending Parties, to carry on these foolish and un-christian Quarrels. Sometime, beside the reign∣ing Patriarch, there have been three others alive at the same time, who have enjoyed the Title. Such were in the years 1669, 1670. Païsius, Dionysius, and Parthenius: the Patriarch then be∣ing the most Reverend Father Metho∣dius, before Archbishop of Heraclea. But I concluded from the murmurings and dissatisfactions I observed among the Greeks, that he would not continue
long in that dignity; and the event soon justified my fears. For Parthenius, being a man of an unquiet temper, and not able to brook his former disgrace, makes in with the Vizir, and recovers his former pretensions, and by the usual arts prevails, and was restored to the Patriarchal throne: Methodius being thrown into prison by the Caimacam or Governour of Constantinople. But he being after some time restored to his li∣berty by the new Governour, and thinking himself not safe from the ma∣lice and revenge of Parthenius, who had got him displaced, takes sanctuary in my Lord Embassadour's Palace at Pera, where he had all manner of good ac∣commodation. Parthenius by his im∣perious carriage and cruell exactions grew hatefull to the Bishops of his See, and to the generality of the Greeks; whereupon they accuse him of fraud and injustice, and that he had detained for his private use the yearly tribute due to the Emperour, which had been col∣lected: whereupon the Turks were con∣tent to displace him, provided that they made good the same summ. Thus after eight months sitting he was banished to the Island of Cyprus, and Dionysius Arch∣bishop
of Larissa made Patriarch. In this state of affairs I left Turky: what has happened since, I leave to the rela∣tion of others. While I reflect upon these Revolutions and Changes, I am filled at the same time with amazement and pity, and cannot but put up this hearty prayer to Almighty God, (and I doubt not, but that whosoever shall cast his eyes upon these Papers, will joyn with me as heartily in it,) that He would be pleased to inspire the Gre∣cian Bishops with sober and peaceable counsels, that, laying aside all partiality, and the consideration of base worldly interest, they may study the good and quiet of their Church, and see at last in this day of their most severe Visitation the things which belong to their peace, before they be hid from their eyes, and before their name and Religion be quite lost and extinguisht. To which sad doom these horrid Differences seem fatally to enclose them. The State of the Greek Church,The several Metropolitan∣ships and Bi∣shopricks un∣der the Patri∣arch of Con∣stantinople. as to the number and order of the severall Metropoliticall and Episcopal Sees now subject to the Patriarchate of Con∣stantinople, is vastly different from
See the Notitia of the Emperour Leo, who lived about eight hundred years since, in the Jus Graeco-Romanum, published by Leunclavius: (where also is a Constitution about the Preeminence of the several Sees, as to their Session in Councils:) the  of the Emperour Andronicus Junior at the end of Codinus; as also that published by Carolus à Sancto Paulo in his Ge∣ographia Sacra, and more fully by Mr. Beverege in his Notes upon the 36. Canon of the Council held in Truth. what it was in ancient times; as may easily appear by comparing the fol∣lowing List, which I received from a very able and learned hand, whilst I lived in Constantinople, with any of the ancient Notitia's or Surveys. For, alas! besides the Alterations and Changes, which happen in the succession of seve∣ral Ages, since the ruine of their Em∣pire, such great Confusions have fol∣lowed, that there seems to be a new face of things. Some Ecclesiasticall Dignities being lost in the ruine of those Cities from whence they were de∣nominated; others retaining onely the Title; severall Metropolitans being without Suffragans, as the Archbishop of Caesarea, to whose Jurisdiction for∣merly eight Bishops were subject; o∣thers having onely two or three; some few retaining a greater number, accor∣ding as the Christians are more or less in the several Districts.
A Catalogue of the Metropolitanships and Bishopricks at this day subject to the Throne of Constantinople; which consisting onely of bare Names, when I received it, I have inserted a few ex∣plications, to make it the better under∣stood. Caesarea. Ephesus. Heraclea. The Archbishop of this Vid. Nicephor. Gregoram lib. 6. Historiae p. 117. This honour being done to his See, as having been the Metropolis of the Thracian Diocese, before Constantinople was made the chief Seat of the Empire. See challenges a right of conse∣crating the Patriarch: which custome is still continued. He writes himself Exarchus of all Thrace and Macedonia, and has five Bishopricks under him; which are, Callipolis, a maritim City on the Propontis, Rodesto, situated upon the same Sea, Tyriloe, Metra, and Myriophyton up in the Continent of Thrace. Ancyra. Cyzicus. Philadelphia. Nicomedia, (before which formerly
was Sardes, now utterly extinguisht. Chalcedon, now a poor Village, one∣ly with one Church in it, dedicated to S. Euphemia. In the whole Province there may be about sixty Churches, and no more. Thessalonica. This Archbishop has Jurisdiction over all Thessaly, and has for Suffragans the Bishops of Citros, an∣ciently called Pydna,. Servia, Cam∣pania, Petra, Ardamerion, Hierissus, and Mount Athos, Plantamon, and Po∣leanina. Athens. Under this Metropolis are the Bishopricks of Talantium, Syrros, Solon, and Mendinitza. Prusia. Trapezond. Philippolis. Philippi and Drama. Thebes. Methymna. Lacedaemon; under which are the Bishopricks of Cariopolis, Amiclae, and Brestena. Larissa; under which are the Bisho∣pricks of Demetrias, Zetonion, Stagon, Thaumacus, Gardicion, Radobisdion,
Sciathus, Loidoricion, Letza, and Agra∣pha. Adrianople; to which onely belongs the Bishoprick of Agathopolis. Smyrna. Mitylene. Serrae. Christianopolis; the same with Arca∣dia. Amasia, in Cappadocia. Neo-Caesarea. Iconium. Corinth; under which the Bishoprick of Damalon. Rhodus. New Patras, in Thessaly. Aenus, Drystra. Tornobus; under which are the Bisho∣pricks of Lophitzus, Tzernobus, and Pre∣silabe. Joannina, a City of Aetolia, former∣ly called Cassiope; under which the Bi∣shopricks of Bothrontus, Bella, Chimar∣ra, and Drynopolis. Euripus. Arta, the same with Ambracia, a City of Epirus. Monembasia, the same with Epidau∣rus, a City in Peloponnesus: under it
the Bishopricks of Elos and Marina, Rheon and Andrusa. Nauplium. Phanarion and Neochorion. Sophia. Chios, now called Scio. Paronaxia. Tria. Siphnus. Samos. Carpathus, now Scarpanto. Andros. Leucas. These eight are Islands in the Archipelago. Varna, near the Danube. Old Patras; under which the Bisho∣pricks of Olene, Methona and Corona. Proconnesus. Ganus and Chora. In the same Paper, that was put into my hands, these Bishopricks were added. Media, towards the Euxine. Sozopolis, not far from Adrianople. Praelabus, somewhere toward the Da∣nube. Capha, in the Cimmerian Bosphorus, a City of Tartaria Praecopiensis. Gotthia, in the same Country.
Bindana, near Sophia. Didymotichum. Litiza. Bysia. Selybria. Zychnae, in Macedonia. Neurocopus. Melenicus. Beroea. Pogogiana, in Illyricum. Chaldaea. Pisidia. Imbrus. Myra. Santorina, an Island near Melos. Aegina. Walachia: for this I suppose is meant by . In Moldavia are four Bishopricks; as in Candia there were lately three un∣der the Metropolitan of that Island. Several of the Bishops mentioned in the Catalogue being freed from the Ju∣risdiction of the Metropolitans to which they formerly belonged,How some Bi∣shops have the title of Arch∣bishops. and so become in respect of them , free and independent, and onely subject to the Patriarch, are called, by way of di∣stinction, Archbishops; as he of Samos, for instance, who before was under
Rhodes, and so of the rest. The Archbi∣shops which have Suffragans under them still, or had formerly at least, being ge∣nerally called Metropolites. But of the Metropoliticall and Episcopal Sees thus much. Considering the Poverty of the Greek Church,Priests. and the scanty provisions made for such as enter into holy Orders, there being no rich Livings to invite them to doe so, it must onely be a principle of Conscience at first, that makes them willing to take up that holy Calling, which deprives them of all other ways and means of getting a subsistence. For the Clergy must be content with their allowance,Their poor Allowance and Maintenance. and not think to better their condition by busying themselves in any Secular employment, as being altogether inconsistent with their holy Profession. But custome and long use make things most troublesom, and difficult to be born, easy at last. It is accounted a good Preferment, if in a Country-vil∣lage the poor Priest can make in the whole year forty Crowns, out of which he pays a proportion to his Bishop. For there being no Lands belonging to the Church, besides the small allowance agreed upon at first by him and the
people, they pay him so many Aspers for Christening their Children, giving them the Sacrament upon extraordinary occasions, Burying their dead, and per∣forming other Funeral rites, and the like. And on the great Festivals they present him with mony, or what is mony∣worth, that he may expresly mention their names, or their relations, whether alive or dead, when he comes to that part of the Liturgick-service in the ce∣lebration of the Sacrament, where such Commemorations are used; as belie∣ving such a Recommendation, made by the Priest at that solemn time, to be of great force and efficacy.Marriage no impediment to holy Orders. Marriage does not hinder any person, if he be not otherwise unqualified, from being put into holy Orders: not in such a one ob∣liged to live from his Wife. But the general practice of the Church is against Marriage after Orders. So that if any Priest, once married, should marry a second time, much more, if a Priest not before married should enter into this state, they are liable to censures, and, as if the character imprinted upon them, when they were made Priests, were by this act rased out, they are esteemed as meer Laicks, and accounted
or flagitious persons, and transgressours of the Laws and Canons of the Church. They have a distinct Habit from the peo∣ple,Their Habit. which is black; wearing a Cassock, and having a Felt-cap upon their heads of the same colour, over which they throw a kind of Veil, which hangs down behind their back, if they be Ka∣loirs; and are permitted by the Turks to wear their Hair long, and over their Shoulders. Which the other Greeks of late years presuming to imitate, the chief Vizir Achmet, upon his return from Candia, fearing that it might be of ill effect and consequence, if this Innova∣tion were any longer indulged, com∣manded them under a grievous penalty to shave their heads as formerly: which they with haste and trembling submit∣ted to, well knowing, that such orders were not to be dallied with.The Respect shewn to them. They are in great veneration among the people every-where, who have a just opinion of the necessity of their Order, and of the dignity of their Function, that they are set apart by God for his more imme∣diate Worship and Service, and that without their Ministery the Christian Re∣ligion would soon be at an end in Tur∣ky; and salute them always by the name
of  or Father, giving them Respect where-ever they meet them, and often∣times kissing their hands, and then put∣ting them to their foreheads: which is one of the greatest signs of Reverence in that part of the world. Next to the Priests are the Deacons,Deacons, Sub∣deacons, and Readers. of which there are great numbers be∣longing to the Bishops, who are never advanced to the Priesthood; and Sub∣deacons, which assist in the service of the Church; and Readers, whose office is in the great Church to reade the Scripture to the people. But of these inferiour Orders I shall have occasion to say somewhat hereafter.Superiour Or∣ders how con∣ferred. I shall one∣ly adde thus much of the superiour, that they are never conferr'd together and at the same time; but there is to be ne∣cessarily the interposition of a day at least. And therefore if, upon a Capric∣cio of the Grand Signor, any simple Kaloir should be design'd to be Patri∣arch, he is to be advanced by degrees, and not immediately placed in the Pa∣triarchal Chair, till after some little time. The strict and severe course of life which the Religious lead is greatly ad∣mired by the Greeks,Kaloirs or Monks of S. Basil and S. Antony. as the height of
perfection in this world, and what equals them to Angels. Of which sort are great numbers in Greece and the Les∣ser Asia, which follow the Rules and Constitutions of S. Basil the Great; as those do of S. Antony, who live upon Mount Sinai and Libanus, and are dis∣persed up and down Aegypt from the Desart to the Red Sea. The name , or Kaloir, (the Greeks in their ordinary discourse mightily hu∣mouring this pronunciation) was at first, I suppose, appropriated to the old men of the Order; but now it lies in common among all, and is the general name by which they are called. They have their Convents in several By-places out of the publick roads, or in the Islands of the Arches, that they may the bet∣ter enjoy their solitude and devotion; and are indeed not onely in their Re∣tirements, but manner of life, divided and separated from the rest of the world. And indeed their innocency and strict∣ness of life have procured them such an esteem among the Turks, otherwise bar∣barous and insolent, as that they sel∣dome give these poor men any trouble, who, abandoning all secular business, give up themselves wholly to the severe
exercises of Religion, and having nei∣ther will nor power to doe the least in∣jury to others, deserve well of all by their incessant prayers for the peace and prosperity of mankind. There are three degrees of them,Three degrees of them. ac∣cording to their age and standing, and the progress they have made in the Ascetick discipline, to the highest of which they advance and proceed in due order.. The Novices, upon their first admission into the Monastery, are immediately shaven, and oblige them∣selves by vow to continue in this state of Religion all their lives long, to lead a chast life, and to be obedient to their Superiours, and to all the rest of their Brethren in Christ, and willingly and chearfully to undergo all the mortifica∣tions and severities of a Monastick life for the Kingdom of Heaven. After they have compleated their Novitiate, in stead of the course Hair-cloath they have worn hitherto, they put on the or Coat, which they call . the lesser Habit, and hereby be∣come compleat Monks. But the holy
and Angelicall or Divine habit,. as they variously word it, is reserved for such as are more eminent in piety and austerity of life. Hence they are called , such as are admitted to put on the great Habit, which is onely a Hood thrown over their heads and shoulders. Some of these I have ob∣served to have a little square piece of cloath sewed in the inward side of their Caps, or else worn next to their hearts under their woollen Shirts, upon which is the figure of a Cross, with these let∣ters at each side, IC. XC. N. K. that is, , Jesus Christ over∣comes; which they look upon as an holy Amulet to preserve them from evil and mischief. At the time of their being Profest,New names given them, when Profest. new names are usually given them: examples of which we have frequently in the Writers of the Byzantine History. ThusCodin. de Origin. Constantinop. p. 80. the Emperour Manuel Com∣nenus, upon his receiving the Habit, was called Matthew; and so his Wife, the Emperess, Mary, when she became a
Nun, was called Xene: and soPag. 82. Jo∣annes Paleologus was called afterward Joasaph. The chief Seat of these Religi∣ous is upon Mount Athos,Mount Athos, the chief seat of their Resi∣dence, which is in∣deed the principal Seminary of the Greek Church, which is hence usually suppli∣ed with fit persons to succeed in the va∣cant places and Dignities; to the accep∣tance of which some have been forced out of their Cells. I am most assured, that Kaloirs bred up here have a grea∣ter fame and reputation for piety and learning, then any others throughout the Empire. Upon which account it is known by no other name among the Greeks,called the Holy Mountain. then that of , or the HolyHence  for a Monk, who is professed and lives there. Mountain: and the Turks, in way of compliance with the fame that passes generally of that place, call it Sheicher dâg, or the Mountain of Priests or Religious. Here are about one and twenty or two and twenty Monasteries, whereof several belong to the Bulgarians, and one peculiarly to the Russians. They
who speak most moderately say, there may be in the whole about four thou∣sand constantly resident; no Woman of what quality soever being permitted to come among them, or indeed to set her foot within sight of any of these Reli∣gious houses: whereof such as are near the Sea-shore are fortified, to prevent the Robberies of the Pirates, who sometime land, and doe mischief. But not having been my self upon Mount Athos, for reasons mentioned in other Papers, I forbear writing any thing upon hear∣say, but refer the Reader to the descrip∣tion of it written by the Archbishop of Samos, who lived severall years there, in the vulgar Greek, and translated into French at Paris, and published in En∣glish almost two years since at Lon∣don. The behaviour and employment of the Kaloirs is generally the same in all Monasteries.The behavi∣our and em∣ployment of the Kaloirs. They are exceeding in∣dustrious, painfull, and severe in their lives, and seem to keep up the credit of the first Institution, and fall not short of the great examples of some of their Predecessours, so much admired in the Ages past. They are strict and diligent in their publick Devotions, at
the appointed hours both of day and night. The spare time from their De∣votion they employ in the necessary bu∣siness of the Convent, each according to his quality: for every one has his em∣ployment. The Monks who are not in holy Orders, are some of them Mecha∣nicks, and understand Iron-work or Building; others look to the Fields and Vineyards that are about their houses; others make their Cloaths, and the like. Such Convents which lie toward either of the Bays at the end of the Isthmus of Mount Athos, or are upon the Bospho∣rus, or in any of the Islands, maintain Boats, which they put to Sea in to take Fish. Though sometimes, for want of fit persons, in the lesser Monasteries especially, they provide themselves with such things as they want with their money; but with some kind of regret, scarce caring to be at any expence for any thing that may be procured by labour and industry. The Priests and Deacons among them are, by reason of their character and function, exempt from all such servile employments, and, by way of distinction from such Eccle∣siasticks as are not profest, and so not under the obligation of any Rule or
Vow, are called, the former, , or , the latter, . The leisure-time they en∣joy after they have performed their Of∣fices is spent in reading, or collating or transcribing old Greek books, or else in visits, according as their Superiour shall direct, and as civility or business shall require. Notwithstanding this good husbandry and parsimonious way of life, in an ill year, when their corn and vines are blited, they are not able to subsist, and are forced to send out some of their number to beg the charity of others in order to their relief. But this is done very seldome, and onely when a real necessity urges. We may justly suppose those,Their severe way of living. who have renounced the pleasures and deli∣cacies and vanities of the world, not to be over-curious and nice in their Diet. They never touch any kind of Flesh, or Fish that has bloud in it. Their chief food is Shell-fish, Olives, Beans and Pulse, Onions, Melons, Raisins, and what their Fields and Gardens afford. With this dry diet they make hearty meals, and enjoy good health, and find the happy effect of moderate and thin feeding in a lasting vigorous old
age. Their Bread is course and hard, be∣ing usually twice baked. Thrice a week, that is, on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, they do not end their Fast till after three a clock in the afternoon. Af∣ter Evening-prayers they are content with a crust of bread and a draught of water. On other days they eat the Fish that they account lawfull, and White-meats, and then allow themselves to drink Wine. In the great Lenten Fast before Easter, some will eat but once in eight and forty hours; others will forbear all kind of sustenance for two or three or four entire days. There are several of these Monasteries in the Islands,Monasteries in the Islands not far from Constantino∣ple. which in the Sea-charts are called l'Isole rosse, or the Red Islands, about six or seven leagues from Con∣stantinople, divided from each other by little Streights: whereof the five which lie toward the Bay of Montagnia (which I take to be the same with the Sinus Ni∣copolitanus) are uninhabited, being little, and very rocky; their names not worth mentioning. Pyrgos lies directly over against the Bay of Nicomedia. The Island which lieth nighest to Con∣stantinople is called by the Greeks , by the Turks Kinali, where is a
single Monastery. The greatest Island, called Prencipe, (the Antigonia, if I mistake not, of the Ancients,) may be about ten or twelve miles in compass, where are two Convents, and but one Town at present; the other having been consumed by fire. Next to this is Chalce, which the Turks call Heibili, about half as big as the former; where I found three Convents. In the ground before the Monastery dedicated to the Holy Virgin, (to the South-west of the Island) which maintains about thirty Kaloirs, is the Sepulchrall Monument of Mr. Barton, sent Embassadour from Queen Elizabeth to the Ottoman Port; by whose wise conduct the Trade of the Levant-Company of Merchants was first established in those parts: For the good success and prosperity of which I acknowledge my self very much obliged to pray. To doe right to the memory of this Honourable Gentleman, I pre∣sume the Reader will pardon me, if I here put down the Inscription, as I found it somewhat faultily engraven up∣on the upper Stone, which the worthy Factory take great care to keep in good repair.
Edvardo Barton, Illustrissimo Anglorum Reginae Oratori, Viro Praestantissimo, qui post reditum à bello Vngarico, quo cum invicto Turcarum Imperatore profectus fuerat, diem obiit, Pietatis ergô. Aetatis An. XXXV. Salutis vero anno 1597. XVIII. Cal. Jan. The Greeks,The Greeks living upon these Islands how maintai∣ned. who live upon these Islands, get a good livelihood by Fish∣ing, being free not onely from the co∣habitation, but from the visits of Turks, who, very fearfull of storms and foul weather, hate the Sea, and seldom care to go thither for pleasure or curiosity, but when they collect the Haratch or Head-mony of the poor Christians. The Monastery situated upon the Thracian side of the Bosphorus,Afamous Mo∣nastery situa∣ted at Mabro Molo upon the Bospho∣rus. at a place called Mabro Molo, or the black Rock, is of a mighty reputation among the Greeks of Constantinople and the neighbouring Villages, and frequented by them in great companies on the Fe∣stival of the Assumption of the H. Virgin, to whom it is dedicated. Between fifty and sixty years since, a certain Kaloir belonging to Bujukdere, a neighbouring
Village upon the same side of the water, either by chance or curiosity, walking up and down among the over-grown bushes, at last lighted upon an or holy Fountain, where was engraven the figure of the B. Virgin; which as soon as he had discovered to those of his own Nation and Religion, they grew satisfied of the truth of an old Tradition which passed current among them, that formerly there stood in that melancholick Recess a Church or Con∣vent. Whereupon, with great expence and difficulty, they obtained leave to raise the present Building. The ground on which it stands belongs to the Mosch of the Emperour Bayazid in Constantino∣ple, for which they pay a yearly rent of thirty Dollers. And to procure the protection and favour of the Bostange Bashi, or chief Gardener of the Grand Signor, a great Officer in the Seraglio, whose jurisdiction reaches to the mouth of the Black Sea, to whom they have recourse in case of any injury and oppression, they present him every month with ten Oaks of wax, (each containing between two and three pounds English,) with sheep and kids for the use of his family. The Patri∣arch
once a year makes a visit to this Convent, and celebrates the Sacrament in their Chappell: for which honour they make him a Present of five hun∣dred Aspers. Here are maintain'd about five and thirty Kaloirs, whereof onely seven Priests, as the good man Macarius the  or Superiour acquainted me, when I was upon the place with him: from whom also, at the same time, I received this following Narra∣tive. That in the year 1661. or 1662. (for I have forgot the exact year) the present Emperour Sultan Mahomet Chan, hunting not far from the Euxine, (to which kind of exercise he is very much addicted,) in the pursuit of his game, at last, wearied and tired, lighted to rest at a Fountain at some little distance from their Convent. Upon the news of which, they consulted, whether they should wait upon him with some poor Present or no: at last one of the pert Monks undertook it. Advancing to∣ward the Emperour, having made his reverence after the custom of the Coun∣try, and making an excuse for the pre∣sumption he was guilty of, he presented him with a little Cheese and a basket of Cherries: then which latter nothing
could have been more welcom to him, being thirsty and over-heated with ex∣cessive riding, and who yet in such an extremity abhorred the least thought of Wine. After some little time he calls the poor Kaloir, and very calmly asked him, whether he would become a Mu∣sulman, out of design questionless to have preferred him. But he, no way wrought upon by this powerfull tempta∣tion, continued speechless in his humble posture, with his eyes fixt upon the ground. The Emperour no way dis∣pleased with his behaviour, which he lookt upon as a modest denial, Well, said he, I perceive you have a mind to continue as you are; and then bidding him look up, made a half circle with his hand, telling him, he gave the grounds lying about, which he thus markt out, to the Convent; and then commanded one of his favourite-Atten∣dants to give the poor man thirty pieces of Gold. There are severall. Women,Women Pro∣fest. which wear a Veil, but most of them Widows and old, and forced by po∣verty
to take a Vow upon them; this way getting a tolerable subsistence from the Church, which they attend upon the Festival-days: and they are often∣times employed in looking to the sick, and such like pious and charitable drud∣geries. I was told of some few Con∣vents of Virgins profest, and particu∣larly of one in Scio:Anchorets. as also of Ancho∣rets, living in desolate Hermitages upon herbs and water, and such like course fare; but out of the sight of the world, and far from any company. But these matters not being within the compass of my own observation and knowledge, I chuse rather to be silent, then venture to relate uncertain Stories and Hear∣says. The present Greeks reckon up Seven Mysteries,Seven Myste∣ries or Sacra∣ments. which with them is another name for Sacrament: but this limited and set number, in the defence of which in the last Century they were very per∣tinacious, as they are now in this, was unknown to the Greek Church for above a thousand years after Christ, and was afterwards in all probability taken up in compliance with the Latines. Of these they admit onely two, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, as
Respons. 2. Patriarchae Jeremiae, pag. 240. . generally necessary to Salvation, and as instituted by our B. Saviour: the rest, as delivered by the Church, and as founded in Scripture, and in the practice of the first Times. The word Mystery, formerly in a large sense ap∣plied, in the Writings of the Ancients, to any sacred or religious Rite or usage whatsoever, that, besides the bare out∣ward act of Ceremony, may have some farther hidden meaning, (in which sense S. Paul calls Marriage (and the neces∣sary adjuncts and consequences of it) a great Mystery, because it is a type and representation of the near relation which is between Christ and the Church, as he explains himself 5 Ephes. 32.) in after∣times became appropriated to these Se∣ven: . Baptism. . Unguent of Chrism. . Eucharist. . Penance.
. Holy Orders. . Matrimony. . Oyl with Prayer. Of all which I will discourse particu∣larly in the same order as they are here mentioned. Although there be no time prescribed for the Baptism of Infants,Baptism. yet they sel∣dom either defer it beyond the eighth or tenth day, or hasten it before, un∣less in case of violent sickness, and for fear of sudden death. For they believe such an absolute necessity of this Sacra∣ment, which they ground on those words of our Saviour, S. John 3. 5. Ex∣cept a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, as that they entertain hard and cruel thoughts of the state of Infants, which by some misfortune and casualty are deprived of it.In case of ne∣cessity Lay-persons may baptize. To prevent which mischief, and secure their fears, where there is a real and certain danger of im∣minent death, in the absence of a Priest, who is at all other times the onely law∣full Minister of this sacred Rite, it is al∣lowed
to Lay-persons of either Sex, as it is expresly laid down in their publick Confession of Faith, written in the vul∣gar Greek, and printed in the year 1662. , pag. 118. It is not lawfull and proper for any one to baptize, but a lawfull Priest, ex∣cept in time of necessity: and then a Se∣cular person, whether man or woman, may doe it. At all other times the Infant,Baptism pu∣blick and in the Church. if well, is to be brought to Church: in the en∣trance of which toward the Narthex is the Font,Font, its se∣veral names. usually large, and about a foot and a half deep, which they call by several names, as , or the Laver, , and or Pool, (alluding to that in Jerusalem mentioned in the 5. chap. of S. John, whose waters had a miraculous virtue in them of healing divers disea∣ses; or to that other in Siloam, S. John 9. 7. where the blind man by the com∣mand of Christ washt, and received his sight; the waters of Baptism having the same effect upon the mind by virtue
of our B. Saviour's institution, as they had upon the body.) The Water made use of is usually con∣secrated for this purpose on the Feast of the Theophania,The Baptis∣mal water when conse∣crated. or Baptism of our Savi∣our, and that with great solemnity, after the celebration of the other blessed Sa∣crament: for which there is a peculiar office. This they call , or the great Sanctification. But because a sufficient quantity of water for the whole year may not be blessed at that time, and (besides) what is reserved may be apt to putrefy, and so be unfit to be used, every month, or sooner, in greater Cities, they furnish themselves with more. In the Winter,The manner of Baptism. that the tender body of the Infant may not suffer by cold, they for the most part warm the water, (perfumed with sweet herbs) upon which the Priest breaths, and makes a Cross, and then poureth Oyl upon it in form of a Cross three times; with which having anointed the Child, and holding him upright with both his hands, and his face turned to∣ward the East, he performs the my∣sticall Rite with this form of words,
. The Servant of God, such a one, is baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and for ever.Threefold Im∣mersion. Amen. At the mention of each Person of the Trinity the Priest dips the Child under water: at which time, Compater, seu Pater Spiritualis, qui infantem è lavacro suscipit. the Godfather, if it be a Male-child, who is here always single, answers, Amen, in all thrice.The 50. Canon of the Apostles, as that Col∣lection is called, commands , that is, as it is there explained, . Which threefold Immersion they for the most part rigidly retain, according to the cu∣stom and practice of the first Ages; though they do not scruple to vary from it upon occasion, being content some∣times to pour water upon the face of the Infant three times,Though some∣times Pouring or Affusion. in acknowledg∣ment of the Mystery of the H. Trinity, in whose name the Infant is Christened. But whether the Sacramental Rite be either by Immersion or by Affusion, the effect of the Sacrament is the same, that is,Vid.  pag. 117. the washing away of Original
sin derived from the first Parent of man∣kind, (which they call ,) and an undoubted seal of eternal Life, the Baptized persons be∣ing regenerated and made members of the Body of Christ. The form of Baptism is always pro∣nounced passively in the way of decla∣ration,The form of words passive. The Servant of God, such a one, he or sibe, is baptized, &c. not actively, I baptize thee. For whichin opusculo . Venetiès A. C. 1600. p. 24. a. Gabriel Arch∣bishop of Philadelphia assigns these two poor reasons, or shifts rather: the one, that although our B. Saviour, at the in∣stitution of this Sacrament, used the active voice, when he said, Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name, &c. yet it is read passively in S. Mark, chap. 16. 16. He that believes and is bap∣tized shall be saved: the other, that this way of expression savours more of mo∣desty and humility; which he pretends to fetch from S. Chrysostome. Whereas there is but little difference in the forms, and none in the sense: Such a one is baptized, that is, as he adds by way of explication, , by me,
being indeed the very same with, I bap∣tize such an one. The zealous men of both Communions are certainly to blame, while they are so eager and fierce in de∣fence of their own form, and use bitter and severe Invectives one against ano∣ther for a matter of so small moment, as this variety of expression seems to be. But as to the latter words, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in which both agree, the Greeks universally hold them so ne∣cessary and essential to the Sacrament, that unless they are entirely and di∣stinctly pronounced, they think that it is not so much the Sacrament of Baptism which is celebrated, as a ludicrous imita∣tion, or heretical and profane abuse of it. They never use the same water a se∣cond time:The same wa∣ter not used twice. but if two or three Infants are to be baptized at the same time, so often they empty and fill the Laver. But the water which has been made use of for this or the like sacred purpose, is not thrown away into the street, like other common water, but poured into a hollow place, which they call , or , under the Altar, where it is soaked into the earth, or finds a passage.
Soon after,Vnguent of Chrism, or Chrismation. a Prayer or two being in∣terposed, the Priest proceeds to anoint the newly-baptized Infant, lately cove∣red with its Mantle and Swaddling∣cloaths: for in the Greek Church Chris∣mation is inseparable from Baptism, and though reckoned as a distinct Mystery, as indeed it is, is in a manner a necessa∣ry appendage and complement of it; according to the 48. Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which orders , the baptized persons to be anointed with the heavenly Chrism.. Which Chrism, as Matthaeus Blastares explains it out of Zonaras and Balsamon, whose words for the most part he retains, being sancti∣fied by Prayer and the invocation of the Holy Spirit, sanctifies the persons anoin∣ted with it, and makes them partakers of the heavenly Kingdom of Christ; unless impenitence and impiety of life after∣wards alienate and render them unworthy of it. Confirmation among the Greeks con∣sistsConfirmation
of this one single Rite; and is there∣fore called by them , Vnguent or Chrism, or joyntly, , or the unguent of Chrism, and peculiarly  or , the Seal or Obsignation. This being practised onely upon In∣fants newly baptized,In this no im∣position of hands used. and that with∣out Imposition of hands, (this material part of the Rite having been for several Ages neglected by the Greeks,) and not reiterated and repeated when they are adult and grown up, some Zelots of the Roman Communion, (making no distinction between the mysticall Rites of the Christian Religion, neither ma∣king allowances for different customs and usages, which seldom keep at the same stay, but alter and vary in the whole, or in part at least,) as if every punctilio and circumstance in the Cere∣monial part were essential, hereupon have objected the want of it to the Greeks, and maintain with great zeal and fury, that they have no such thing as Confirmation among them. These differences have been carried on with great animosities on both sides, and have helped to make the Schism irreconcile∣able; the Greeks, upon the reproaches
made them by the Latines, that the Chrismation used by their Priests is un∣lawfull, and a meer usurpation of Epi∣scopal right and power, growing more and more obstinate: as may be seen from the Encyclicall Epistle of the Pa∣triarch Photius, who does as sharply re∣flect upon the Roman practice, fomen∣ting and keeping up the controversy, which had been started long before with great heat. For that he was not the first, who by his wit and power intro∣duced the present custom among his Greeks, as some have imagined, I could demonstrate by undeniable testimonies, if it were agreeable and proper to mix controversies in this present Compendi∣um and Narrative. This Anointing and Obsignation is made upon the forehead,Anointing how made. eyes, nostrills, mouth, ears, breast, hands and feet, the Priest repeating these words, . The Seal of the gift of the Holy Spirit. Amen. Which form they derive from the As∣sessors of the Council of Constantinople held in Trullo, and thus explain:. as
if the Priest had said at large, With the anointing of this holy Ointment thou art sealed and confirmed in the graces of the Holy Spirit, which thou receivest for con∣firmation of thee in the Christian Faith. The reason of which form is assigned in their  or Confession.ibid. —. As the Holy Spirit formerly descended upon the Apostles in the shape of fire, and pou∣red upon them his Gifts: in like manner, when the Presbyter anoints the baptized person with holy Oyl, the Gifts of the Ho∣ly Spirit are poured out upon him from above. And to this they apply the words of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Now he which establisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, in God, who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. But as for the anointing part, they quote no higher authority then the writings which bear the name of Dionysius Areopagita. Though this Oyl be used by Presby∣ters in the performance of this Rite,This Oyl onely sanctified by the Patri∣archs and Bishops. yet it is onely blest and sanctified and made
fit for use by the Patriarch or Bishops; as is expresly asserted by Gabriel Phila∣delphiensis, and inpag. 121. the Cateche∣ticall Confession, and. pag. 247. in the Bethleemitick Synod. This is done on Thursday in the Holy week.The composi∣tion of it. They are wonderfull curious in the composition of it, it being made up of Storax, Balsam, Cassia, Myrrh, and the decoction of twenty several Drugs, Seeds and Plants added to and mixed with Wine and Oyl: a Catalogue of all which Ingredients you may find in the Euchologion. This is afterward distributed and put into round bottles or vialls, either glass or glazed over, called , but often or Alabasters, in allusion to the Alabaster box of ointment, which S. Mary Magdalen brake and poured upon our Saviour's head. When they deny the reiteration of this Rite,This Rite not reiterated, except in one particular case. it is with an exception of one particular case:. pag. 122. for when Here∣ticks or Apostates, sensible of their er∣rours
and impieties, are re-admitted, after just proofs of a hearty and sincere repentance, into the bosome of the Church, they are confirmed again, after the same manner as when they were first Christned, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, in the holy Faith, which they now profess. And herein they follow the 7. Canon of the Council above∣mentioned. But this is scarce ever prac∣tised of late, it being death for a Rene∣gado to renounce Turcism, and embrace Christianity. Before I mention the Rites and Cere∣monies used at the celebration of the holy and august Sacrament of the Body and Bloud of our Lord,Eacharist most commonly expressed by the word , and sometimes by , and . it will be neces∣sary to premise somewhat concerning their Liturgick Books. The word , though in the general it is used of Prayer, or any part or office of the sa∣cred ministery of Religion, is restrained to this great and tremendous Mystery, called sometime, for distinction-sake, , or the holy, sacred and divine Liturgy or Ministrati∣on: and the Priest, from this principal and eminent prerogative of his Function, being set apart to offer up this comme∣morative Sacrifice, is peculiarly called
or Liturgist, as well as and , the Minister of the , or the most solemn Rites of the Christian Worship. These Liturgick Books or Offices are onely three:Their Litur∣gick Books. for though there be Li∣turgies that go under the names of S. Pe∣ter, S. Mark, S. Matth. and S. James, &c. they, being confessedly spurious, are rejected by the Greeks, as well as by some of the sober Romanists. The pre∣tended one of S. Peter was scarce heard of for fifteen hundred years and more: it is stuffed up with Intercessions and Prayers to the Virgin Mary, who is there called , and other Saints. Where is also the Ave Maria, the Glo∣ria Patri, and other notorious and ma∣nifest proofs of its late invention, the Forger having contrived it to agree in many things with the Roman Canon of the Mass. S. Mark's Liturgy is equally supposititious, there being mention in it of the inferiour Ecclesiastick Orders, of the Trisagion, of the Nicene Creed, of the title and appellation of  de∣servedly given to the B. Virgin, of the Diptychs, and of the Imperial City of Constantinople, , and the
like signs of its noveltie. If it be said, that these are onely insertions and interpolations, but the body and con∣texture of the Liturgies may be justly referred to the Apostles as to their Au∣thours; they cannot expect, either wisely or civilly, that this should be yielded to them meerly upon the strength of their fancy, (for they have not the Authority of any ancient Wri∣ter to countenance it,) that every Apo∣stle made a distinct Liturgy: for this does not suit with the simplicity of the celebration of it in the Apostles times, and in the second and third Century, according to the account we find ofV. Apolog. 2. versus finem. it in Justin Martyr. More in∣deed may be said for the pretended Li∣turgy of S. James, as being mentioned in the 32. Canon of the Council in Trul∣lo, and byde Traditione Divinae Missae. Proclus: but it was not received among them, as appears from Balsamon's first answer to Marcus Patriarch of Alexandria, and from Je∣remias Patriarch of Constantinople, who lived in the last Century, in his answer V. Respons. 1. pag. 98. 103. to the Divines of Wittenberg. Nor
could I ever learn, that it is at any time used by any of the Christians of the East; thoughde Libris Ecclesiasticis Graecorum, pag. 16. Allatius tells us it is one day in the year recited at Jeru∣salem, out of respect to the memory of S. James, the first Bishop of that City: that is, I suppose, on the twenty third day of October, which is the day of his Commemoration. The three Liturgies I was mentioning are those of S. Basil,Onely three. S. Chrysostome, and S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, whom they distinguish from the rest of that name by the additional title of , or the Dialogist, from the Books he wrote in that form and style. For he is com∣monly supposed to be the Author of the , or Li∣turgia Praesanctificatorum; though, I think, it ought to be ascribed to Ger∣manus Patriarch of Constantinople, as shall be proved elsewhere, his Junior by some hundreds of years. All of which, but especially the two first, (by the cunning contrivance of those who governed the Church, to advance the superstitious fancies of their Times, un∣der a pretence of ancient Piety recom∣mended
by those holy men, whose names they have in great veneration,) seem horribly altered and corrupted from what they were anciently; as is demonstrable from those many and va∣rious interpolations, which plainly sa∣vour of Novelty; and from that great variety of manuscript copies, two of which scarce agree, unless in some of the most solemn Prayers. For the better establishment of de∣cency and order in the Worship and Service of God,These Litur∣gies read at set times, and for prevention of all confusion, there is a certain and fixt rule appointed to be observed eve∣ry-where in the reading of these Litur∣gies at set times, it not being left to the li∣berty and humour of any Priest to make use of which he thinks fit. The Liturgy of S. Basil is read onely ten times in a year;and when. that is, on the five Sundays of the great Lent, from Qua∣dragesima to Palm-Sunday exclusively, on Thursday and Saturday in the Holy week, on the Eves of Christmas and E∣piphany, and on the first day of January, which day is devoted to the memory of the great Saint. The Liturgy of S. Chrysostome, which is more contracted then that of S. Basil,
is recited on all other Sundays and Fe∣stivals, and other days, when they cele∣brate the Sacrament;V. 52. Can. Synodi Trullanae. except in Lent, at which time, except Saturdays and Sundays and the feast of the Annun∣ciation, they use the Liturgy of the Prae∣sanctificata. But of this I shall speak more distinctly hereafter. The Sacrament of the holy Eucharist is performed after this manner.The manner of consecrating the holy Sa∣crament. The Priests and Deacons, having washt their hands, (by which Ceremony they de∣sign to shew, with what Purity of Soul and Body they ought to approach these holy Mysteries,) carry the gifts of Bread and Wine presented by the people to the Altar of the Prothesis; by this obla∣tion (which they call , or ) separating them from pro∣fane and common use. The top of the Loaf is marked either with a Square in a Circle, or Square only,The holy Bread mar∣ked at the top. with two right lines crossing each other, with several letters in each quarter, thus,
Which being pierced in several pla∣ces,and cut into several parts. is at last cut and divided from the rest into various Particles by a Knife, set apart for this purpose, which they call  or the holy Launce, al∣luding to the Launce which pierced our Saviour's side. With this Launce he makes a Cross upon the Seal, saying thrice,. in memory of our Lord God and Saviour Jesus Christ. Then he strikes his Launce upon the right side of it, and cuts it, saying,. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter: afterward upon the left, saying,. and as an innocent sheep before the shearer is dumb, so He opened not his mouth: then upon the upper part, saying,. His judg∣ment was taken away in his humiliation; and upon the lower, saying,; But who shall declare his generation? After this he lifts up the Bread, thus cut off, saying,. For his life is taken from the earth; and lays it in the Patin, say∣ing,
. The Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world, is offered for the life and sin of the world. Then thru∣sting his Launce into it, he says, And one of the souldiers pierced his side with a launce, and straitway there issued forth bloud and water: upon which the Dea∣con pours wine and water into the Cha∣lice. This blessed Bread is onely de∣sign'd to be consecrated. Afterward the Priest, out of the same or another Loaf, (for it is indifferent, several be∣ing offered by the people for these pur∣poses,) takes a small piece, saying, . In honour and memory of our most Blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God, the ever-Virgin Mary; by whose in∣tercession receive, O Lord, this Sacrifice upon thy supercelestial Altar. Then he elevates the Particle, and lays it on the right side of the Holy Bread. Then he takes another piece, and so to the ninth; which are placed on the left side▪ all which he offers up in honour of S. John
Baptist, the Apostles, S. Basil, Gregory the Divine, Chrysostome, Athanastus, Cyrillus, Nicolas, and all holy Bishops; S. Stephen, George, Demetrius, Theodo∣rus, and all holy Martyrs; S. Antony, Euthymius, Saba, Onuphrius, Athana∣sius of Mount Athos, and all holy Monks; holy Physicians, who cured gratis, Cosmus and Damianus, Cyrus, John, Panteleemenon, Hermolaus, Sampson, Diomedes, Thallaleus, Tryphon, and the rest; S. Joachim and Anna; and of the Saint of the day, and all Saints;. for the sake of whose prayers and supplications, O God, protect us: and in behalf of the Bishop of the place, and of the whole Hierarchy, of Benefactors, and Friends, and Relations, living and dead, (here he names the persons whom he is desired particularly to commemorate)—. that the mercifull God would indulge them par∣don. Then he puts a little silver instru∣ment upon them, that the Coverings may not touch the Particles, (which are put in three rows,) and so disorder them, it being made of two short arches crossing each other in the figure of a
star, hence called  repeating these words,S. Matth. 2. And the star came and stood over where the young child was. And then they cover the Patin and the Chalice distinctly with linen or silk, saying at the first, The Lord is King, and hath put on glorious apparel, &c. and at the second,— Thy power, O Christ, hath obscured the heavens, and the earth is full of thy glory now and for ever: and afterward both together with a larger covering or veil, which they call , saying,. O our God, hide us under the shadow of thy wings now and for ever. Amen. All which, that is, both Bread and Wine,The Oblation of Bread and Wine how blessed. making the Oblation, are blessed soon after, &c. by this solemn Prayer,
which they call . O God, our God, who hast sent our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, our Saviour and Redeemer, (who does bless us and sanctifie us) to be the heavenly Bread and nourish∣ment of all the world; do thou bless this Oblation, and receive it upon thy super∣celestial Altar. Remember, O gracious and mercifull God, those who offer it, and those for whom it is offered, and preserve us blameless in the celebration of thy Di∣vine Mysteries: (this being said by the Priest in a soft and still voice, as it were to himself, he afterwards says a∣loud) For thy most venerable and glorious Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is sanctified and glorified now and for ever. Amen. This Prayer of Benediction being pronounced,The first or lesser Proces∣sion. the Elements, though barely blest and yet unconsecrated, be∣come . venerable and divine Gifts or Oblations, as they speak. The Dea∣con having received the book of the Gospell from the hands of the Priest, holding it on high, that the people may the better see it, goes out at the North-door of the Chancell, the inferiour Offi∣cers
carrying Tapers before him, and is followed by the Priest: and so having made a short Procession in the Body of the Church, they enter into the Chan∣cell at the middle door, and deposit the Gospell upon the middle Altar, where the Consecration is always made. (This they call. the first and lesser Introitus or Entrance.) Then the Priest says this Prayer secretly. O Omnipotent Lord God, who onely art holy, who re∣ceivest the sacrifice of praise from those who call upon thee with their whole heart, receive our Prayer, who are Sinners, and bring us to thy holy Altar, and make us fit to offer up to thee Gifts and spiritual Sacrifices for our Sins, and the Trespasses of the people: and grant that we may find favour before thee, and that our Sacrifice may be acceptable unto thee, and that the good Spirit of thy grace may dwell in us, and in these Gifts thus offered, and in all thy People. Next, the Quire sings the Hymn, which begins,, &c. Come let us adore and fall down before Christ: save us, thou Son of God, &c. and the other short
Hymn, (which they call ,) , &c. which may be ren∣dred declaratively, God is holy, he is holy and, &c. Holy God, holy and powerfull, holy and immortall, have mercy upon us. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and, &c. Which being ended, the Deacons reade the. Epistle and Gospell appoin∣ted for the day. So far, in ancient times, when the Discipline of the Church flourished and was kept up in its per∣fection and vigour, the Catechumeni were admitted to be present in their proper place, (this being the Missa Ca∣techumenorum,) and then were dismissed with a peculiar Prayer, the Deacon crying aloud and making proclamation, . Whosoever of you are Catechumeni, depart; (and this was repeated thrice) let none of the Catechumeni stay: you who are of the number of the faithfull or com∣pleat Christians, stay. Let us more and more call upon God in peace. Then the Priest says several private Prayers to himself:The second or great Proces∣sion. after which he, ad∣vancing
towards the Altar of Prothesis, takes off the Chalice, which he holds in his hand covered, and is attended by the Deacon carrying the Patin, in which is the holy Bread, that is to be consecra∣ted, upon his head, and that covered too with a piece of silk, that it may not be seen; and by the other inferiour Mini∣sters, going before in order with the Launce, the Sponge wherewith they wipe the Dish and the Chalice, gilt Crosses, Incense, Pots, Tapers, and little Bells, and the like. They all pass out at the little North-door, and pro∣ceed slowly into the Nave or Area of the Church, about which they take a compass: the Quire in the mean while singing the Hymn which they call Che∣rubicus. The people during this Pro∣cession shew all imaginable reverence, bowing their heads, bending their knees, and sometimes prostrating themselves upon the pavement, and kissing the hem of the Priest's Stole, as he passes by, besides crossing themselves continu∣ally during this pomp, and repeating these words,. Remember me, O Lord, in thy Kingdome; the Priests
and Deacons interceding for themselves and the people in this form,. The Lord God be mindfull of us all in his Kingdom now and for ever. Then they enter in at the , or middle Door, and place the Elements upon the Altar directly opposite to it, in order to their consecration. This Procession they call. the second or great Introitus or Entrance or access to the Altar. This seems to be,The undue ve∣neration shewn by the Greeks here∣in. and really is, as they order the matter, the most solemn part of the Grecian Worship, and at which they express the greatest devoti∣on, if we may judge of it by these out∣ward and visible signs. A practice that really gives great offence, and is wholly unjustifiable, notwithstanding all the little and trifling excuses and pretensi∣ons made by. Symeon Thessaloni∣censis and Gabriel Severus in favour of it: as, that  signifies any A∣doration and Respect in general; and that the Elements, by their being blest and separated from common use, are already sanctified and dedicated to
God, and so. are in a readiness and disposition to be consecrated and made the Body and Bloud of Christ; and that they are fit matter prepared and determined to this Sacramental end and purpose. Therefore, say they, this Adoration is justly due to them. Whereas after the Consecration, when the Symbols are exposed and shewn to the people, the Reverence is not half so great; onely a little bowing of the body, which is soon over. But the miscarriage seem'd to me, when I was present, so gross and scandalous, as that it needs no other confutation then the bare relating. When the Priest consecrates,The Consecra∣tion. the Door of the Bema or Chancell is shut up, or at least the, januae adyti velum: quandoque scri∣bitur , sed malé;  enim in sequioribus Graeciae seculis pro velo ponebatur: antiquitus . &  But this latter also signifies the Al∣tar-cloath, in whose four corners the names of the four Evangelists are embroidered. Vid. Symeonem Thessal. , p. 215. in Eucholog. Veil or Curtain drawn before it; the people being wholly debarred from the sight of the Priest's consecrating the holy Elements,
and no person of what quality soever suffered to be present, but such as be∣long to and attend upon the holy ser∣vice. After the recital of several Pray∣ers and Antiphons, and the Constantino∣politan Creed, (the same with that which is commonly, through a mistake, called the Nicene Creed, unless in the Article of the procession of the Holy Spi∣rit from the Son, which is inserted by the Latine Church,) the Priest pro∣ceeds to the consecration of the Ele∣ments, (the Deacon having fanned with a little Fan, called ,) saying softly to himself, (after the Quire has sung the  or triumphant Song, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabaoth, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory: Hosanna in the highest; Bles∣sed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.) With these blessed Powers, O mercifull Lord, we cry aloud and say, Thou art holy, alto∣gether holy, and great is thy glory; so is thy onely-begotten Son, and thy Spirit. Thou art holy, altogether holy, and great is thy glory; who so lovest the world, that thou gavest thy onely-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life; who,
when He had come and fulfilled the Dispen∣sation which He undertook for us, in the night in which He was betrayed, or rather in which He delivered up himself for the life of the World, took Bread into his holy, pure and spotless hands; and when He had given thanks, and blessed it, and sancti∣fied it, and brake it, He gave it to his holy Disciples and Apostles, saying, (here he inclines his head, and, laying his hand upon the Bread, says with a loud voice) Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you for the remission of sins: likewise also after supper, He took the Cup, (which taking up in his hand he says aloud) Drink you all of this; this is my Bloud of the New Testament, which is shed for you and for many for the re∣mission of sins. Afterwards he says secretly, Mindfull therefore of thy saving command, and of all things done for us, of thy Cross, Re∣surrection the third day, Ascension into Heaven, Session at the right hand of God, and of thy second and glorious Coming again, (then with a loud voice) we offer to thee thine of thine own, in all things and through all things—the Quire singing, We praise thee, we bless thee, we give thanks to thee, O Lord, and
we make our supplications to thee, O God. Then the Priest prays again, We also offer to thee this rational and unbloudy worship and service; and we beseech thee, and pray thee, and make our supplications to thee, send forth thy Holy Spirit upon us, and upon these Gifts that lie before us. After some Adorations and short private Prayers, (as,. O Lord, who sentest thy most Holy Spirit upon the Apostles at the third hour, do not, O mercifull God, take this thy Spirit from us; and, Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me, which he re∣peats thrice to himself,) the Priest, standing upright, signing the holy Ele∣ments with the sign of the Cross three times, says privately,. Make this Bread the precious Body of thy Christ; and then,. Make that which is in this Cup the precious Bloud of thy Christ; (laying both his hands upon them;) . changing them by thy Holy Spirit:
and soon after, that this Sacrament ▪ &c. may be to those who partake of them for the health and sobriety of the Soul, the remission of Sins, the fulness of the Kingdom of heaven, and assurance in thee, and not for our sin and condemna∣tion. Then it follows,The Comme∣moration of living and dead. We offer also this rational service for those who rest in Faith, for our Ancestours, Forefathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evange∣lists, Martyrs, Confessours, Virgins, and for every Soul made perfect by Faith; and especially for the glorious and spotless ever-Virgin Mary, S. John Baptist, all the holy Apostles, the Saint whose memory we now celebrate, and all thy Saints, &c. Here he names several of the living and dead. For the dead he says, for the rest and ease of the Soul of thy Servant in the bright place, So in the Liturgy of S. James.—▪ in Biblioth. Patr. edit. Paris. pag. 9, 11, 17. of S. Mark, pag. 34, 35. and of Gregorius Dialogus, p. 129. whence all grief and sighing are banish'd; and make it to rest where the light of thy Countenance shines. Then he prays God to remem∣ber all the Orthodox Clergy: and then,
We offer also this rational service for the whole world, for the holy Catholick and Apostolick Church, for all Christian Prin∣ces, their Courts and Armies, that God would grant them a peaceable reign, that we may live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, &c. Several other Prayers and Responses follow, together with the Lord's Prayer. The Priest comes to the middle door of the Chancell,Elevation. and elevates the Bread, which he afterwards breaks and divides into four parts, and lays them down in the figure of a Cross: one of which he puts into the Chalice,They mix Water with the Wine before the Consecration at the Prothesis, and then again after Con∣secration, as is plain from the Liturgy of S. Chrysostome. See also the  in Euchol. pag. 190. wherein is poured again some warm water; after which he himself communicates. At the reception of the Cup, he drinks thrice, saying, at the first sip, In the name of the Father, at the second, and of the Son, at the third, and of the Holy Ghost. The Priests and Deacons receive the Elements apart and distinctly in this form. At the delivery of the Bread,
. The precious, holy, and undefiled Body of the Lord God, our Saviour Jesus Christ, is given to thee for the remission of sins and everlasting life: and at the de∣livery of the Cup,. The precious and holy Bloud of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is given to thee for the remissi∣on of sins and everlasting life. This te∣nour of words is not always retained, but admits of a variation, the Priest saying sometimes, I give unto thee the precious and holy Body of our Lord, &c. sometimes, Thou receivest the precious and holy Body of our Lord, &c. After they within the Sanctuary or Holy place have been partakers of the Divine and tremendous Mysteries, the Deacon, standing at the middle door with the Chalice lifted up in his hands, invites the Communicants to approach; . Come hither, in the fear of God, with Faith and Charity. He then dips a spoon, , into the Chalice, and
taking out a bit or bits, which are usually very small, of the consecrated Bread (called  or pearls) soaked in and floating upon the Wine, he puts it to their mouths, saying to each,. The precious and holy Body and Bloud of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ are given to thee for the remission of thy sins and eter∣nal life; or, with a little alteration, Thou receivest the precious and holy Body and Bloud of, &c. Thus the people communicate in both kinds;The Sacra∣ment in both kinds. which is the express doctrine and constant practice of the Greek Church: which they ground on the words of our B. Saviour, S. John chap. 6. v. 53. Ve∣rily, verily I say unto you, Except you (that is, all of you, for no particular order of men being mentioned, they understand this declaration universally) eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his bloud, you have no life in you; and on the example of the Apostles; and on the history of the Institution, explained by S. Paul in his first Epistle to the Co∣rinthians, 11. Chapter.
It is an usual custom with them,Of their mu∣tual asking Forgiveness, before they communicate. and certainly in it self highly commendable, and which argues a great sense of the dignity of these Holy Mysteries, that before they receive the Sacrament, they ask Forgiveness one of another. The Deacon begs it of the consecrating Priest, who always takes care to be re∣conciled to any one who has a matter against him, before he approaches the Altar. The Priests, who assist, turn their heads to the right hand and to the left, signifying by this gesture their de∣sire of Forgiveness, if they have offended any there present. And the people, who communicate, every one for him∣self, says aloud, in the hearing of all, before the act of receiving, , Forgive, O Christians: which the rest with one voice answer, , God forgive you. When the Communion is over,The blessed Bread distri∣buted after∣ward among the people. the Priest distributes promiscuously to such as are present the blessed Bread uncon∣secrated. (For onely the upper part of the Loaf, circumscribed within the Seal, hence called , is used for the Sacrament.) This is called by several names; as , or divine bread; and , from its being
sanctified and blessed; and most com∣monly , being given in stead of the consecrated holy Gifts or Ele∣ments to those who do not communi∣cate: to which the people ascribe great efficacy and virtue; and which they of∣tentimes carry home, and bestow upon their sick Friends, thinking it as effec∣tual, if not more effectual then any Physick. The sacred Solemnity is soon after concluded, the Priest dismissing the people with a Blessing. Thus much in the general. I shall now proceed to mention several things relating to this Argument, which if I had inserted in the precedent Para∣graphs, might have interrupted the series and order of this most solemn Admini∣stration, which now lies close, as to all the material parts of it, and falls under one easy view. As to the moment of Consecration,In what mo∣ment of time the Consecra∣tion is made. in which the Symbols become and are made the Body and Bloud of Christ, 'tis certain that the Greeks, herein fol∣lowing the authority of several ancient Writers of their Church, do not hold this Divine Mystery to be perfected and consummated by or after the pronunci∣ation of those words, Take, eat, this is
my Body; the Change, what-ever it be, not being made, according to S. John Damascen, but by the descent and il∣lapse of the Holy Spirit upon the Gifts or Elements placed upon the Altar. Therefore in order to the completion of this Sacrament, they adde Benediction and Prayers, in which they do expli∣citely implore the Divine grace of the Holy Spirit of God: the Priest, after he has recited the words of our B. Sa∣viour in the Institution, invoking God in these words, Send thy Holy Spirit upon us, and upon these holy Gifts lying before us; and after a little pause, ha∣ving three times made the sign of the Cross, adding, (which I purposely re∣peat) Make this Bread the precious Body of thy Christ, and that which is in this Cup the precious Bloud of thy Christ; then with his hand lift up, and held over them, changing them by the Holy Spirit. These are the formall words of the Liturgies of S. Chrysostome and S. Basil now in use. It is of no great moment what some object, that the last words of all, changing them by thy Holy Spirit, are omitted in several ancient Manuscript Exemplars; for the same thing, that is, that the Elements be∣come
sacramental by the intervention and descent of the Holy Spirit, is said expresly in the short prayers which pre∣cede, which are confessedly ancient, and free from any interpolation. Thus in their &c.  Confession of Faith, 'tis positively asserted, that the Change is made by the operation of the Holy Spirit of God, whom the Priest invokes at that time, consummating this Mystery, and praying, Send thy Holy Spirit upon us and, &c. For after these words there pre∣sently follows a . Of this change I am next to speak. 'Tis most certain,Of the change made after Consecration, which they call . that the doctrine of Transubstantiation, by virtue of which, according to the fancies of the Roma∣nists, the natural substance of the Ele∣ments is supposed to be annihilated and wholly destroyed, the Species or Acci∣dents onely remaining, was not admit∣ted in the Greek Church till of late years:But this doc∣trine altoge∣ther new; there being nothing in their Liturgies tending that way; onely that a Change is made, and that the Elements after
consecration become the Body and Bloud of Christ: (which no Christian of what Communion soever does doubt of in the least.) And this they thought fit to express by the names of , without de∣termining the manner of the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. For that these words do not infer such a substan∣tial Change, that is, that the Elements notwithstanding their Consecration re∣tain their essence and nature, though they are, as they are justly said to be, the Body and Bloud of Christ, is clear, not onely because at the same time they are acknowledged, in the Liturgy of S. Basil, to be , antitypes and representati∣ons of his holy Body and Bloud; but be∣cause the person baptized is said , or to be changed; and so of , Eucholog. pag. 350. And so in the Office  they repeat the same words, pag. 449. , —pag. 353. the Water: which cannot be un∣derstood of a natural change: and in the Office of Baptism, they pray, that
the water may be sanctified by the power and operation and access of the Holy Spirit. (And so the like they say of the Vid. Euchol. p. 354. Oyl used at that time.) Which very manner and form of words being used of the Ele∣ments of Bread and Wine, that they are sanctified and consecrated, and become the Body and Bloud of our Saviour by the power and operation and descent of the Holy Spirit upon them, can no more infer a substantial change in the one then in the other. There is no mention made of a in any Liturgy,and the word wholly new too. Creed, or Prayer, the word being wholly new, and alto∣gether unknown till the latter end of the last Century, when it was first used (as I hope I may pardonably conjec∣ture) by Gabriel Archbishop of Phila∣delphia, in his Treatise of the Seven mysteries; who, though otherwise a zealous defender of the Rites of the Greek Church, yet living at Venice, and not unacquainted with the niceties and subtilties of the Latine School-men, might easily be wrought upon to bring
in this new word, in a way of compli∣ance with the Doctrine of Rome; of which Jeremias Patriarch of Constantino∣ple, who made him Archbishop, seems to be utterly ignorant. For he, far more agreeably to the rules of modesty and truth, in his Declaration of the Faith of the Greek Church in the matter of the Sacrament, in his Answer to the German Divines, says onely thus much, that, Re∣spons. 1. ad Theologos Wittenberg. p. 86. , Respons. 2. pag. 240.—, ibid. the Catholick Church believes, that after the Consecration the Bread is changed into the very Body of Christ, and the Wine into his very Bloud, by the Holy Spirit, without defining more particu∣larly the nature and manner of the Change. Nor do I find that this word began to be of common use, at least in the publick and authentick Writings of the Church, for several years after. For the two Synods that were held at Con∣stantinople, on purpose to condemn and anathematize the Confession of Faith
published by that great man Cyrillus Lu∣caris, Patriarch of that See, the one un∣der his immediate Successour Cyrillus of Berrhoea, in the year 1638. the other under Parthenius, in the year 1642. seemed to abstain religiously from the use of it, each of them onely declaring, Vid. Synod. primam pag. 76. 80. & Synod. 2. pag. 129. edit. una cum Confessione Cyrilli, pag. 145. that the Elements by the blessing of the Priest, and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon them, became the true Body and Bloud of Christ. Afterward indeed, in the year 1643. there was a Confession of Faith made in the name of the Eastern Church, in the way of Question and Answer, in the lesser Russia, approved of by Parthenius and the three other Patri∣archs and several Metropolitans, though not published till the year 1662. where∣in, together with this new word, they establisht the doctrine of Transubstantia∣tion. , p. 124. After these words, (the Prayers above mentioned,) there pre∣sently follows a  or Transub∣stantiation, and the Bread is changed into the true Body of Christ, and the Wine
into his true Bloud: the Species, which appear, onely remain, and this according to the Divine dispensation. But if we reflect upon the state and condition of the Greek Church at that time, and con∣sider by what arts and by whose assi∣stence Cyrillus Lucaris was first deposed by the Turks, and afterwards strangled, and his ingratefull Successour advanced into his throne, it will cease to be a matter of wonder to us, that this man (who had studied Philosophy in his younger days under the Jesuits at Ga∣lata, and was wholly governed by them; whose end too was as dismall as his Predecessour's, he being banisht to Tunis, and there by order of the Port strangled) and the rest of the or Latinizing Bishops should re∣nounce the Faith of their Ancestours, and determine thus boldly. And how they have been wrought upon since, in the Synodus Bethleemitica, to come up more fully to this and several other Te∣nents of the Roman Church, shall ap∣pear hereafter. The Romanists are now aware, that there is no hope and like∣lihood of reconciling Greece by blustring and force; and therefore they betake themselves to closer arts and methods of
subtlety: the Greeks bred up in the Col∣lege of that Nation at Rome, especially after they have finished a course of stu∣dy, being sent into Turkie, upon a de∣sign of working an Union, and of redu∣cing their Countrymen from the scandal and guilt of Schism and Heresy; who are permitted to dissemble their Com∣munion, and oftentimes are advanced to great Dignities in the Church; to whom, being men of great eloquence, and wit, and learning, and policy, I believe these Alterations are chiefly to be ascribed. In the mean time, let the Zelots of the Roman Church triumph, that the present Greeks declare abso∣lutely for them: we need not envy them a victory, which they have gained by such base and treacherous Arts, not to say Bribery. But however, this is one great argument, that the opinion of Transubstantiation is wholly new among them, that they have not much studied the point, but heedlesly take it upon trust with an implicite faith. For when their Bishops and Priests are urged with the horrid and monstrous consequences of it, fully made out from Scripture and Philosophy, they stand amazed, and return no other answer but this, that it
is a great Mystery, and not to be dispu∣ted. 'Tis certainly a great, an holy, a venerable Mystery, this we most readily and heartily acknowledge; but how much better had they consulted the ho∣nour of the Christian Religion, and the peace of the Church, had they not pro∣ceeded so boldly and blindly to such a peremptory definition? The Greeks use Leavened bread in the Sacrament:They use Lea∣vened bread in the Sacra∣ment. which practice of their Church they defend with great fierceness, as if our B. Saviour had clearly and in express terms forbad the use of Azymes. For so they interpret the words of the Institution, that Christ said of Bread, not of Azyme, that it was his Body: as if there could be no Bread truly and pro∣perly so called without a mixture of Leaven in it. But that which they most rely upon is, an imagination, that our Saviour, in the celebration of the Passeo∣ver, anticipated the usual time of the Festival, and kept it a day before, (which they think may be proved from S. John 18. chap. v. 28. and chap. 19. 14.) that is, Lunâ decimâ tertiâ, or the thirteenth day of Nisan at the eve∣ning, and consequently, that he u∣sed leavened bread. And some of
theVid. Allat. de Libris Ecclesiasticis Graecor. pag. 20. Greek Writers, who managed this controversy formerly, were so ridicu∣lously impudent, as to assert, that there was a piece of that very leavened bread, which our Saviour at his last Supper con∣secrated, reserved, among other Re∣liques, in the Chappell belonging to the Emperour's palace in Constantinople, at what time that City was taken by the Latines. While they urge the necessity of using Leavened bread in the Sacrament with an intemperate (not to say, an unreasonable) zeal against the Latines, (whom they therefore reproach with the name of , or Azymites, and aggravate, as a horrid and grievous defect and fault, the quality of the Bread, whether leavened or unleavened, being in it self a matter of small moment, and meer indifference, and no way es∣sential to the Sacrament,) the Schism, upon the heat and contest arising hence several Centuries of years before the overthrow of the Greek Empire, grew wider and wider, and at last became ir∣reconcilable, being fomented in the
following Ages by the ambition of the great Ecclesiasticks of both parties, who upbraided each other with prevaricating, and departing from the mind and will of Christ herein. The Sacramental Bread is to be , clean or pure;The Sacra∣mental bread pure, and by whom made. which purity does not so much refer to the fineness of the corn, as to the manner of its being kneaded and baked, either by Men le∣gally pure, or else by the  or Old women professed, or the Wives of married Priests, not otherwise unquali∣fied: the former being supposed upon the account of their Vow, the other of their relation, to be of more then ordi∣nary Sanctity. They celebrate the Holy Sacrament on the same day but once upon the same Altar,The Sacra∣ment celebra∣ted but once the same day upon the same Altar: and anciently but one Altar in a Church. which is always the middlemost of the three; or where there are onely two, on that which is opposite to the middle Door; and never upon the Pro∣thesis. Anciently there wasSee S. Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph. pag. 40. edit. Voss. , &c. Et in epist. ad Magnesianos, pag. 34. . onely a single Altar in each Church: (as one High Priest and Mediatour, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who by his own bloud ente∣red in once into the Holy place:) as ap∣pears, not onely from the order and disposition of their Fabrick; Antiquity being wholly unacquainted with Side-Altars, (wherewith the Churches under the Papacy are crowded, for the sake of that great number of Masses, daily sung, as they pretend, for the relief of poor Souls in Purgatory;) but from the sacred use to which it was appropriated, (for, for some hundreds of years, the Sa∣crament was not celebrated twice the same day,) as is evident from the elo∣quent Panegyrick of Paulinus Bishop of Tyre, concerning the structure of Chur∣ches, preserved by Eusebius, in the tenth book and fourth chapter of his Ecclesia∣sticall History. In the great Churches the Priest ce∣lebrates the Sacrament upon the solemn Festivals and upon Sundays,The Sacra∣ment celebra∣ted often, and when; and and at o∣ther times upon occasion, when he is hired either to pray for the Soul of any dead person, or for success in a journey, or the like. Sometimes they go to ruined places without their Towns or in the Fields,in ruined pla∣ces, where formerly Chur∣ches were sea∣ted. where formerly were Churches, or near a holy Fountain. A Table there placed
in stead of an Altar is covered with sive . De horum consecratione vide  in Euchologio.  or consecrated cloaths, without which they cannot consecrate in unhallowed places. At these times I have observed persons troubled with Agues, and other feverish distempers, laid at some distance from the Altar with their faces toward it, hoping, by the merit of the Blessed Sacrament, and the prayers of the Priest officiating, to be restored to their health. The Laicks are obliged to receive the Blessed Sacrament four times a year.People obliged to receive the Sacrament four times a year. With which law of their Church they most readily comply, none omitting it, especially at Christmas or Easter, unless hindred by a real and urgent necessity. In order to their better Preparation, the preceding Fasts are appointed and ob∣served. It is not allowed,The Priest does not conse∣crate till after day-light. that the Priest be∣gin the service of Consecration till after morning: the usual time being about the third hour of the day; which is not without a design: the Priest using this short form of Prayer, O Lord, who sentest thy most Holy Spirit upon the Apo∣stles
at the third hour, O mercifull God, take not thy Holy Spirit from us. But at the Festival of Easter their piety is early▪ this Service being usually performed be∣fore the Sun-rise, after the example of S. Mary Magdalen and the other devout women, who came with their ointment to the Sepulchre, where Christ had been entombed,. as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, S. Matth. chap. 28. v. 1. or, as S. Luke ex∣presses it, chap. 24. v. 1. on the first day of the week very early in the mor∣ning. In the time of the Great Lent,In Lent the Sacrament is not celebrated till the after∣noon. except on Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feast of the Annunciation, the Sacrament is not celebrated till in the middle of the after∣noon. But of this more at large here∣after. The Greeks communicate fasting,The Greeks communicate fasting. loo∣king upon it as a thing very unlawfull and scandalous to tast a drop of wine, or eat the least bit of bread, for several hours before they receive; so that 'tis oftentimes to be admired, with what great courage and obstinacy they doe
as it were violence to themselves, and get the mastery over their natural passi∣ons and inclinations. When they receive the Sacrament,Their Posture at receiving. they do not kneel, but onely incline their body; at which moment they are taught to exercise an act of Faith after this manner:. I confess and acknow∣ledge, that thou art Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who camest into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Which form, were it as ancient as the times of S. Chrysostome, which will never be proved, cannot justly be urged by the Patrons and Asserters of Transub∣stantiation, in favour of their opinion; because the words are, most probably, referred, not to the Elements, which they are just about to receive, but to our B. Saviour, God and Man, in Hea∣ven, whom the sacred Elements not onely truly and really represent, but also exhibit. The People are obliged by the law of the Church to confess to a Priest right∣fully and lawfully constituted,The People ob∣liged to Con∣fession, before they commu∣nicate. before
they communicate: But the Confessours (whom they call  or spiritual men) do not require and exact of their Penitents a rigid, anxious, or particular confession of their Sins, but have regard to modesty, and an ill memory, that may not retain every circumstance of fact; and are not over-difficult in gran∣ting their Absolutions. What remains to be farther said about Confession, may be seen in its proper place. The Priest too is obliged,The Priest himself obli∣ged also. by the or Order prefixed to the Litur∣gy which bears the name of S. Chryso∣stome, to confess, before he goes to con∣secrate. But I am apt to fear, that this piece of Church-discipline is not kept up among them, and that Priests and people, notwithstanding the obligation, are not very strict and zealous in the practice of it, unless in the case of hai∣nous Crimes which wast the Conscience, it being oftentimes intermitted. This is the fault of the Persons: and as to the practice it self, the Church of England does no way disallow it, but rather re∣commend it to those of her Communi∣on, in the Office of the Holy Sacra∣ment; provided it be done after a due manner, and that the Consciences of
the people be not burthened with un∣just scruples, as if the whole benefit of the Sacrament would be lost, and the Confession it self rendred ineffectual, ex∣cept they disburthen and lay open the secretest thoughts of their heart, and reveal the minutest punctilio and cir∣cumstance of their guilt. They give the Eucharist in both kinds to little Children of one or two years of age,They commu∣nicate Chil∣dren in both kinds. sometimes to new-born Infants, that is, after they have been Christened, in case of imminent danger of death; grounding their belief of an absolute necessity of this Sacrament also upon the words of our B. Saviour, S. John ch. 6. v. 53. Verily, verily I say unto you, Ex∣cept you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his bloud, you have no life in you. If it be objected against them, that these words are not to be under∣stood of a Sacramental manducation, and that the custom which they retain seems to be so far from being necessary, that it is scarce proper and justifiable, Children not possibly having any actual Faith or understanding of these Mysteries; they will appeal, for their justification, to the universal practice of the Church in the Primitive times for several Ages,
wherein the communicating of Infants was lookt upon as a necessary and essen∣tial point of the Christian Religion. That there may be a provision made at all times for the necessities of Sick and Dying persons,They reserve the Sacra∣ment for the use of sick persons. that they may not depart out of this world without the comfort and support of this heavenly Viaticum, they take care that a sufficient quantity of Bread be consecrated for this purpose on the Thursday of the Holy week; which being broken into little Particles, and sufficiently tinged and moistned in the consecrated Wine, they take out of the Chalice, and dry them in a small dish, put under a pan of coals, and then put them into a Pix or Box to be reserved. This. Box, whether of silver or wood, is put up into a silken case, the better to defend what is in∣closed from cobwebs or any thing that may defile it, and is hung up usually behind the Altar against the wall, with a Lamp or two for the most part bur∣ning before it. Upon occasion the Priest, taking out one or more of the Margaritae, carries them to the houses of such as are sick, who desire to com∣municate;
but they are first dipt and moistned in common Wine: which is done upon a double account; either, that by this vehicle the little Particles may the better pass into the stomach; or else, that the Particles of the consecrated Wine, which were dried up and con∣densed by the heat of the fire, may this way be excited. I hope it will not be unacceptable to the pious Reader,A digression about the ori∣ginal of this custom. if I make a little Di∣gression, and shew the antiquity and original of this practice. So great was the Faith and Zeal and Piety of the first Christians, that they, in all probability, every day received the Blessed Sacrament, which evidently set forth before their eyes Christ cruci∣fied in the chiefest and most remarkable passages and circumstances of his Death. Acts 2. v. 42, 46. , in the A∣postles Creed, perchance ought thus to be understood, for the participation of the Sacraments, and other holy things of God, as they lie in common to all Saints, in the language of the New Testament, that is, Christians; who have herein a Communion one with another. They continued stedfastly, , (diligent and assiduous) in the Apostles doctrine, and in communication, perchance of the several gifts of Bread
and Wine, among other things, especi∣ally for the uses of the Sacrament, and the Agapae or Love-feasts, which follow∣ed, and in breaking of bread, and prayer, that is, in receiving the Sacrament, and in joint and publick devotion. This was done partly out of the great love and affection which they bare to our B. Lord and Saviour, who shed his dea∣rest Heart-bloud for us; and partly out of obedience to his blessed will, who therefore was pleased to institute and command it, that it might be a perpetu∣al Memorial of his precious Death, un∣till his coming again; (for they did not think it a meer matter of indiffe∣rency, whether they received the Sa∣crament or no, as many in this degene∣rous Age are apt to deceive and flatter themselves;) and partly out of a deep sense they had of the many Benefits flowing from a worthy Participation of it. For being convinced by the most satisfactory way of proof, experience, that the Sacrament was a most effectual instrument of conveying Grace into their Souls, that hereby they were strengthened in Grace and Vertue, that hereby they held a close Communion with Christ, and became one with him,
and were fulfilled with the Divine Grace and heavenly Benediction, and, lastly, were more and more confirmed and en∣couraged to undergo all the troubles and torments either of life or death for his Name; they were frequent and assi∣duous in their approaches to the Altar. At that time it was made death by the law for the Christians to have their Re∣ligious meetings; an horrible Persecu∣tion raged every-where throughout the Empire; they were dragged before Tri∣bunals, and sentenced to be burned, or crucified, or tormented worse. All this they beheld with their eyes, without shedding a tear, without a sigh, with∣out regret and trouble of mind; re∣joycing greatly, that they were counted worthy to suffer reproach and death it self for the Name of Christ, and that they were thus made conformable to the image of their Saviour, and partakers of his Sufferings. It was altogether uncer∣tain whether their lives were not to end before the day: they therefore daily contemplated Christ in the holy Ele∣ments: this inspired them with new courage, and their zeal became more ardent and vigourous then the flames that consumed them. They were in∣deed
oftentimes prevented by the mali∣cious industry of their Idolatrous ene∣mies, and pursued to the very Grotta's and Caves, and continually hunted out by the Heathen Officers, from whose violence nothing could be safe, and thus deprived of these happy opportu∣nities. In such perplexity of affairs what was to be done? They would joyfully lay down their lives for Christ, so that they might but first receive Christ in the Sacrament. Hereupon it was permitted them to carry away with them some part of the consecrated Bread, and reserve it either about them or in their houses, that if they were discovered, and seized upon, and hur∣ried before a Judge, and immediately sentenced, and dragg'd to execution, they might have wherewithall to com∣fort and strengthen them in their last Agonies. This was afterward indulged to Hermites, who had retired to the Woods or Mountains, and other solita∣ry places scarce accessible, to enjoy themselves and their Devotion with∣out the least molestation from company. With which kind of life frequent jour∣neyings to Cities and places of resort did no way suit and comport. Very few
of them being dignified with the Priest∣hood, it seemed very hard and severe, that they should be deprived of so com∣fortable a repast as the Body of Christ is, in their recesses and solitudes. A mass of consecrated Bread was either sent to them accordingly; or else, when they thought fit to come and converse with the World for a few hours, they carried it away with them upon their quick and speedy return. When this custom of reserving the Sacramentall Bread in private hands began, it cannot, I suppose, be exactly stated: it is most probable, that it might be about the beginning of the Third Century. But however this is certain; that there be∣ing not onely just suspicion, but just and full proof, that the Holy Bread which was reserved was abused to very evil purposes, it was forbid by the Coun∣cil held at Saragosa, the chief City of the Province of Tarragona in Spain, in the year of our Lord 381, Canon the third, that any should presume to carry any of the Holy Bread away with him. Upon the same reason, several pieces of the consecrated Bread were reserved and kept by the Priests, to distribute a∣mong Sick people, and especially to
Laps'd persons, (who, through humane frailty, had been guilty of some sinfull compliance in the times of Persecution, and ipso facto were deprived, in the way of penance and humiliation, of the Sacrament, till the hour of death,) who possibly otherwise could not have gone out of the world with peace and com∣fort. A famous instance of this we have inVid. Eusebii Histor. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 44. a Letter of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria to Fabius Bishop of An∣tioch concerning Serapion, who had miscarried under Decius. He, being in these circumstances, and at the point of death, in the night-time was in great disorder and trouble of mind for want of a Priest to absolve him, and give him the Communion: whereupon a Messenger was sent immediately to fetch the Priest to administer comfort to the dying Penitent. But the Priest hap∣pened to be sick himself. He, fol∣lowing the orders and direction of his Bishop, the Relater of this story, in such like cases,. that the dying persons might not despair, but depart with good hope of their Salvation,
gaveS. Basil, in his Liturgy, calls the Sacramentall bread distributed to the Communicants, . , or a little piece of the Sacramentall bread, to the youth, commanding him to dip it in water, and convey it into the mouth of the poor old man, who was just upon the point of yielding up his Soul into the hands of God. This shews us, that they had such an high esteem and reverence of the Sacrament in ancient times, as to judge it almost absolutely necessary in articulo mortis: which was the effect of their great Piety, which deserves the highest commendation and encouragement. I cannot here forbear my wonder at the odde fancies of a late learned Wri∣ter concerning the Blessed Sacrament,A just Censure on a little posthumous Piece of Mr. J. H. in which, as in many other arguments of Religion, he chose to be singular, presuming too much upon the strength and nimbleness of his wit, to make out plausibly any Paradox, he, to run coun∣ter to the Times, unluckily pitcht upon. And I think the Publisher of these Posthumous Remains was not aware of the ill effects that such Notions, whereby
the Blessed Sacrament is so horribly slighted, may produce, to the cooling those ardours of Devotion and zeal, which all truly devout persons have to this Holy Institution of our Saviour. No person certainly whatever can re∣ceive the Symbols of our Blessed Savi∣our's Passion and Death too often, so he come with that due preparation of mind which these pure and tremendous Mysteries require: and the time of one's last Sickness especially is very proper. Our Church, indeed, has de∣clared, that a frequent and conscienci∣ous use of the Sacrament in the time of Health is sufficient; and that such devout and religious persons, in case of sudden Sickness, have less cause to be disquieted for the lack of the same. Our Salvati∣on does not necessarily depend upon, nor is restrained to an externall and oral Communion; whether there be or be not an opportunity, God accepts the will and desire of a contrite and de∣vout heart, in stead of this commemo∣rative Sacrifice. Nor do we attribute so much efficacy to the Sacramentall Sign, as to the internal Grace, for fear we should detract from the perfection of the Sacrifice of the real and natural
Body of our Saviour, once offered upon the Cross, of which this is a Type and a Representation, though not onely so. I urge it no farther, but that it is very convenient for sick persons, when they foresee that their Sickness may prove mortal, to receive; and undoubtedly they would find the great benefit of it. I put an end to this Digression, with reference to the present practice of the Greek and Roman Churches, as to the Reservation of the Blessed Sacrament; that the reason which held formerly, has ceas'd long since. For there are Priests enough at hand, even in Greece it self, to consecrate the Sacrament in the presence of the sick man, if he de∣sires to communicate; and this may be done (I mean, as to what is onely ne∣cessary and essential, the Ceremonies being omitted, which are used at the publick Communion in the Church, where a greater regard is had to splen∣dour and decorum) with less trouble, and sooner, then taking the Sacramental Bread out of the Ciborium, and carrying it in Procession to the houses of dying persons. The ten Particles,About the ten Particles. which are placed in the Patin with the Holy Bread, be∣come
sanctified relatively and in a way of participation, asin tractatulo . Gabriel Phi∣ladelphiensis speaks, because they are blessed at the same time with the Holy Bread that is to be consecrated just after the great Offertory. The Priest is to take care,. that he does not give one of these Particles, through a mistake, to any of the Communicants in stead of a consecrated one; as the same Authour does advise. Whence it follows,Among these Arcudius lib. 3. cap. 10. &c. and Cd. Bona de rebus Liturg. l. 1. c. 1. p. 311. that those who assert so many Hosts to be offered up as there are Particles, are mistaken; for. they are onely close joyned to the Body and Bloud of our Lord, and are not consecrated, but are reckoned to be of the same nature with the unconsecrated blessed Bread. After the celebration of the Sacra∣ment,About the Co∣lyba or boiled Wheat. upon great Festivals, there is usually an entertainment for the people then present in the Church, which is called by them , or
the oblation of the Colyba, that is, a heap of boiled Wheat and Pulse, Rai∣sins, Nuts, Almonds, and the like. For the Priest, having a Charger full of this confused mass, goes about the Church, and distributes more or less of it to the men, women, and children, that are in his way; which they receive very readily and gratefully, kissing either his hand or vest.The original of boiled Wheat they derive from the times of the Apostate Emperour Julian, who had caused the bread, flesh, and fruit exposed to sale in the market, to be polluted with the bloud and steams of the Idoll-sacrifices. The Bishop being warned of this from God, by the appearing of S. Theodore, who had been martyred under Maximine, commanded the people, lest they should be polluted by this unlawfull food, to satisfy their hunger this way. Thus the story is related by Nicephorus Callistus in his Church-history, l. 10. c. 12. . By this Ceremony they pretend to Vid. peculiare opusculum Gabrielis Archiepiscopi Philadelphiensis . make out their belief of the ge∣neral Resurrection of the dead at the last day,The pretended reason of it. of which they suppose this to be a symbol; deriving the occasion of it from the words of our B. Saviour, S. John 12. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abideth alone; but
if it dies, it bringeth forth much fruit: and of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickned, except it die: and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. But God giveth it a body, as it hath plea∣sed him, and to every seed his own body. Nothing indeed does represent more clearly to the eye, or render more pro∣bable to our belief, the great mystery of the Resurrection of the body, then the stupendous raising and growth of seeds of Corn, hid and buried in the furrows, into ull ears. Gabriel Phi∣ladelphiensis finds a Mystery in the addi∣tion and mixture of the other things, without any other ground then that of his own triling fancy: for they are onely added as sauces, . to the Wheat, to make it more gratefull to the palate, and more easily digestible in the stomach. But 'tis certain that these things are offered in honour of particular Saints upon their Festival-days, andIn the . in Euchol. p. 658. in remembrance and behalf of the dead:
and accordingly they carry them to the graves of their deceased Friends. During the solemn time of Lent,No consecrati∣on in Lent but on Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feast of the Annun∣ciation. set apart for the severe exercises of Penance, there is no consecration of the Sacra∣ment, except on Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feast of the Annunciation. For which cause the other days are called . But lest by this inter∣mission there should seem to be a neg∣lect of our B. Saviour's Institution, which it concerns the Christian Church to ob∣serve every day, to implore God's mer∣cy by the oblation and merit of this un∣bloudy Sacrifice; there is this provision made for it, yet so as that the severities of the Lenten Fast shall be preserved; that there shall be onely celebrated in the intermediate space , or Missa Praesanctificatorum. Thus at this day, according to the an∣cient custom, about three a clock in the afternoon, when the Fast is ended, a∣bout the time of Vespers, (though sometime, the old severe discipline be∣ing somewhat relaxed as to this circum∣stance, they doe it sooner,) the Priest does receive and exhibit the Elements, which were before consecrated: so that this Solemnity is nothing but an
image and repeated celebration of the former Consecration, except that there are peculiar Prayers allotted for this service, which are to be found in the Office. Of the Sacrament of the Eu∣charist hitherto. Under the title of , or Ecclesi∣astick or sacred Order,Holy Order. the Greeks com∣prehend the inferiour as well as superi∣our Ministers, which any way soever may belong to the Church. In the whole they reckon up seven, which are, . The Sexton,Sexton. whose office is to light the Lamps, keep the Church clean, and doe any such like mean work. . Vid. Balsamonem in quartum ca∣nonem Synodi Trullanae. The Reader,Reader. who reads the Lessons out of the Gospels or Epistles to the people; though sometimes this is performed by a Deacon at the Desk. . The Quire-man,Quire-man. whose office is to sing the Prayers and Hymns, , whence they are cal∣led , and the Praecentor or Canonarcha. I have observed a little Boy sometimes passing from one side of the Quire to the other, and re∣peating
several versicles, which they chant after their poor way. For their vocal Musick is very rude and harsh, without any art or gracefulness. . The Sub-deacon, who takes care of the Utensils of the Altar,Sub-deacon. and of the se∣veral Vestments used by the Priest and Deacon in the time of their officiating. He remains in the Sacrarium during the Service, which is cumbered and per∣plexed with so many Ceremonies, that his being there to assist is almost ne∣cessary. Of the three superiour Orders,Deacon, Priest and Bishop. Dea∣cons, Priests, and Bishops, I have dis∣coursed already. I will onely observe,Office of a Priest, in what it con∣sists. that the office of a Priest, according to theSee the ▪ p. 129. Greeks, consists of these three parts; that is, in the power of absolving or remitting the sins of Penitents, of teaching and instructing the people, and of consecrating the Blessed Sacra∣ment. In conferring any of these three Or∣ders they take a strict care,Imposition of hands always used in the conferring these three last Orders.. pag. 130. that the person ordained have no lameness
or other defect in his body, whereby he may be made less fit and capable to doe the duty belonging to his Order and Office. And this is always done by Im∣position of the hand of the Bishop, according to the Canonicall practice, and as the particular condition and order of the persons ordained shall require. This is so essential a part of the Rite, that with them  and are promiscuously used, and serve to express the same thing. The doctrine of Confession and Pe∣nance conduces very much to preserve the esteem and dignity of the Priest∣hood,Penance. notwithstanding the great want of secular advantages among the Greeks, who are very sensible of the great quiet and satisfaction they find within them from their Ghostly Fathers Counsels and Absolutions. In order to which. pag. 132. they make oral Confession necessary:Confession. not a nice and scrupulous Confession of every sin, with every particularity and circum∣stance of it; but a general and free dis∣burthening of the Conscience, as the
Penitent, who knows his own case best, shall think fit in prudence to make, in order to his recovery and confirmation. TheyVid. . pag. 109. oblige all in general to go to Confession four times a year: but they think fit to dispense with the or simpler sort of people, if they onely confess in Lent. But for such as have advanced in Piety, they expect from them a monthly Confession. Every Priest is not a Confessour, nor indeed can be without the licence of the Bishop, who usually chuses out grave and elderly and prudent persons, to exercise this solemn part of the Priestly Function. Men of this faculty and of these qualifications being for the most part made Parish-Priests, for the greater ease and comfort of sick and dying per∣sons, of whose Souls they have the care. They are called , or Spiri∣tual men or Fathers, and are readily obeyed and complied with in the Pe∣nances, which they inflict according to the practice and Canon of the Church; which is therefore called in the vulgar Greek  as also , be∣cause it is exacted in the way of punish∣ment
and satisfaction. But here I could wish I had not reason to complain of the avarice and jugglings of the Priests, who commute these Penances with Pe∣cuniary mulcts; which yet perchance are as grievous to the poor people, as the severest austerities of Fasting. After the Penance inflicted is perfor∣med,Absolution. or some way or other satisfied, the Priest absolves the Penitent after this manner;. The Grace of the All-holy Spirit by my Meanness, that is, by the mediation of my Ministery, pardons and absolves you. This form of Absolu∣tion is not constantly observed, but is varied oftentimes, it being left in a manner wholly to the discretion of the Penitentiary. Christophorus Angelus, a Greek of the Morea, in the ac∣count he published of the State of this Church in the year 16—mentions this form.Cap. 22. . According to the power which
Christ gave to his Apostles, saying, Whose sins you loose upon earth, they shall be loo∣sed in heaven, and according to the power which the Apostles gave to the Bishops, and according to the power which I have re∣ceived from my Bishop, thou shalt be par∣doned by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. and thy portion shall be with the just. But in the Prayers of Pardon, which the Priest recites over Penitents, and such as have confest, it runs thus;. Thou, O Lord, remit, pardon and forgive the Sins committed by thy Servants:. again; Be pleased to absolve thy Servants according to thy word:. again; Do thou pardon, as being our good and gracious God:. a∣gain; Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ pardon all these Sins which thou hast con∣fest before him to my Meanness, and those which thou hast forgotten:. again;
Thou, O Lord, pardon this thy Servant all those Sins which he hath committed, by me thy poor unworthy Servant, and be reconciled to him, and unite him to thy Holy Church:. again; God pardon thee by me, who am a Sinner, that is, by my Ministery: and sometimes very briefly in the vulgar language, , Be thou pardoned, or ab∣solved. Out of this great variety, it is most clear and evident, that the sentence of Absolution is not pronounced by the Priest, who is the onely Minister of this sacred Rite, in his own proper person, much less judicially; but onely in the way of supplication or deprecation. So that we may here justly conclude this form,. My Meanness absolves thee, or the other, which is more plain and express,. I absolve thee from all the Sins which thou hast confest before God and before my Vnworthiness, or. the third, I pardon all thy Sins, to be up∣start and novell, and borrowed from
the Latines, whom they love to imitate in most things. This authority of the Church in in∣flicting and relaxing Censures is gene∣rally esteemed sacred,The good effect of Church-censures a∣mong them. venerable and di∣vine, and consequently of great efficacy, and does very much conduce, as I have intimated before, to the preservation of the Christian Religion among them. For fear of these Censures, they are not onely affrighted from the commission of those Sins which would bring a scandal upon their holy Profession, (this argu∣ment prevailing more with slavish and degenerous minds, then considerations of modesty, or the loveliness and agree∣ableness of Vertue to humane nature,) but from running to the Turkish Judges for justice. For they look upon the person to be in a most desperate condi∣tion, and as undone for ever in the other world, who dies unabsolved from the sentence of Excommunication, that was canonically past upon him. Such great power has the dread and reverence of Ecclesiasticall Authority over this querulous and contentious people. If any person happen to die before the Excommunication be taken off, the general belief is, that his body feels the
sad effects of it in the grave, and quick∣ly becomes black, the bloud no way clotted or dried up notwithstanding its stagnation, and all the parts remaining entire in their natural posture without the least alteration; and this for ten or twelve months after, or longer; except that the skin hardens, and swells like a drum; (whence the person is called ) and that this is caused by the Devil's entring into it. Stories pass current among them of the walking of theirwhich they call , or , à fetore, qualis è limo putrescente in fossa oriri solet, sic dictas. Ghosts, especially in the night-time, not onely in the Church∣yards, but in the Streets, and knocking at the doors of the houses, and calling them by their names. The Greeks are so timorous and superstitious herein, that they will not answer any one in the dark at the first call, though they know his voice never so well, for fear it should be this Spirit; for then they look upon themselves as dead men, and fall into an irrecoverable melancholy. This opinion is so rooted in their minds, that there is no perswading them to the contrary: They will tell you of matter
of fact, how several graves have been opened, and the bodies found undissol∣ved: though I could not hear of the success of the experiment, notwithstan∣ding my diligent enquiry. But I found the Priests equally credulous, not so much out of design to keep the poor people in awe of the Church-censures, as out of weakness, being led away with the same popular errour. The Bishops Thus Metrophanes, Patriarch of Constantinople, menaces the Christians of Candia, unless they ceased from molesting the Jews of that Island, that they should be . In Turco-Graecia pag. 281. accordingly in their Briefs, when they forbid any thing to be done, threaten the transgressours, that they shall be separated from God and cursed, and deprived of the use and benefit of the Sacrament, and after death their bo∣dies shall swell and be undissolved. And this latter is inserted in the sentence of Excommunication, to adde to the horrour and terrour of it. AtSee an instance of this at large in the History of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, since the taking of that City by the Turks, written in vulgar Greek by Manuel Ma∣laxus, in the Life of Maximus, in Turco-Graec. p. 133, &c. also the Historia Politica of Constantinople, in the same Volume, p. 27, 28. Vide etiam Christophor. Angelum in Enchiridio. the
same time they will tell you, that as soon as the Dead person has been absolved, at Constantinople by the Patriarch, or by the Bishop of the Province, the bo∣dy, though buried in some of the Islands in the Arches, or at what great distance soever, immediately corrupts and dis∣solves, and crumbles into ashes.Vid. , in Euchologio, pag. 684, &c. This . indulgence is procured and granted to the Dead, and read over his grave, with several Prayers to the same pur∣pose. They have the same fearfull appre∣hensions of an evil Spirit, called Our Interpreters at Constantinople fansied this word to be corrupted from the Turkish Kara Congia, which signifie a black old man, in which shape they pretend this Daemon often to appear. , which they pre∣tend to be let loose the twelve days of the Christmas-Solemnity, and possess Children born within that space: du∣ring which time also the little Boys and Girls dare not go abroad in the night∣time, for fear of meeting this Hobgoblin, but hasten home before Sun-set. The Turks seem to be infected with the like
Superstition; for they will scare ven∣ture to Sea till after the waters are blest by the Christians, that is, till after the Twelfth day, the Festival of the Bap∣tism of our Saviour, when that Cere∣mony is performed; grosly imagining, that in their voyage they shall be met and sunk by a brazen Ship. They usu∣ally also fright their Children with sto∣ries of Apparitions and Spectres, which they call , which word properly denotes any thing drest up in an odd ridiculous shape and ha∣bit. All. clandestine Espousals are se∣verely forbidden,Espousals. and therefore they are never lawfully done but before wit∣nesses; and sometime, to ratify and confirm them the more, before a Priest. At such time they go to Church, and standing before the middle door of the Chancell, the Priest, having made the sign of the Cross upon their heads, de∣livers lighted Tapers into their hands, and descends with them into the body of the Church: where, after some Collects, he produces two Rings, the one of gold, the other of silver, which
before had as it were been consecrated, by being put upon the Altar, and gives the former to the Man, and the latter to the Woman, repeating these words thrice,, &c. The Servant of God, such a one, espouses the Servant of God, such a one, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and for ever. Amen. Which form, mu∣tatis mutandis, he, turning toward the Woman, uses as often. Immediately after the Paranymph or Bride-man takes the Rings from off their fingers, and makes an exchange; the Priest then joyning their hands. And this is done, as well that the Woman might not too much resent the inferiority of her condi∣tion, represented by the Ring of the less noble metall; as to signify, that she is to be admitted into an equal right and share of her Husband's goods and possessions, which, upon a consum∣mation of this Matrimonial contract, are to become common to both. Their Marriages are always performedMarriage.
publickly;Vid. Harmenopulum, apud Gabrielem Phila∣delph. pag. 55. a. . this being an express Law of their Church, Let none presume to marry but before Witnesses. If the Priest should transgress herein, he is lia∣ble to Ecclesiasticall Censures provided in such like cases. Be the persons of what quality or condition soever, Crowns or Garlands made for the most part of Olive-branches, stitcht over with white silk, and interwoven with purple, are a necessary and essential part of the Nuptial Solemnity, (hence is oftentimes used for Marriage, and and  signify the same thing,) they being the Symbols, not to say the complement, of this mysticall Rite. The Priest, covering the head of the Bridegroom with one of these Garlands, says,. The Servant of God, such a one, is crowned for, that is, marries, the Servant of God, such a one, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Then he crowns the head of the Bride with the other Garland, repeating the same words with their due alterations; and then putting their hands across, he blesses them in this form thrice,▪ O Lord God, crown them with glory and honour. After the Epistle and Gospell and several Prayers are read, the new-married cou∣ple drink out of the same Cup which the Priest had blest, in sign and token of Love, Agreement, and Joy, and as a pledge of their mutual Conversation, and of their right to one another's estates and fortunes. After two or three short Hymns, the Priest takes the Gar∣lands from off their heads, and they, saluting each other, are dismist with his Blessing. They are not over-favourable to se∣cond Marriges,Second and third Marri∣ages how e∣steemed. following the rigour of the ancient times. But as for , or third Marriages, they look upon them as forbidden by the Canons of the Church, and arraign such persons as guilty of Incontinence; and severely condemn the fourth as altogether un∣lawfull
and sinfull: making no allow∣ances for temper, or accidentall deaths. This variety or change of Wives they most invidiously call by the name of , or Polygamy, contrary to the primary signification of the word: against which they so fiercely declaim, as a thing hatefull to God, (to whose providence in taking away their first or second Wife by death, they say, every one should submit, and curb his natural desires and inclinations,) and as unwor∣thy of men governed by reason. In this sense I find the word used by Pho∣tius, Epist. 1. ad Michaelem Principem Bulgar. p. 39. . who opposes it to as that to , and passes this severe Censure upon the thing, that it is very base and detestable, and onely proper to impure and lustfull irrational crea∣tures. To make the Marriage-vow the more binding and solemn,Consent of Pa∣rents and Friends ne∣cessary. the Bridegroom and Bride receive the Holy Sacrament. He must be always above fourteen years of age, and she above thirteen: and the consent of their Parents, Guar∣dians
or Tutors, is esteemed so necessary, that without it is accounted unlaw∣full, and no other then Fornication.Spiritual Af∣finity an hin∣drance of Marriage. Among other impediments of Marriage they reckon. Vid.  l. 28. tit. 5. cap. 17. & Determinationem Joasaphi Metropolitae Corinthii apud Crus. in Turco-Graec. lib. 4. pag. 324. Vide etiam p. 330. & 339. spiritual Affinity, that is, such as arises at the Font: as for instance, he who is a Godfather to any one, and his Son, cannot lawfully mar∣ry either the Mother or the Daughter. Such two as have had the same Godfa∣ther, are incapable of marrying each the other; and if they do, they are accoun∣ted incestuous. The practice of the Greeks does hor∣ribly contradict their establisht doctrine of the Indissolubility of the bond of Matrimony;Divorces fre∣quent among them. for Divorces are easily and frequently obtained and granted upon several light and frivolous accounts, be∣sides that of Adultery; as if it were left wholly to the idle and extravagant fan∣cy of every lustfull and discontented person, who is weary of his Wife, to retain her, or divorce himself from her, as he pleases. This evil seems past all remedy; there being no other way left
at present to satisfy a people, who are so prone to revenge where they have conceived a grudge, or to make new love after a dislike of the former match, then by this most unjust and horribly∣abused indulgence. It is the proper work of the Priest,Oyl with Prayer. who has a power to make and consecrate the Holy Oyl, to anoint dying persons with it;. p. 137. all other persons what∣soever being excluded. Which prac∣tice they found upon the example of the Apostles, who were sent out by Christ, andS. Mark 6. 13. anointed with oyl many that were sick, and healed them; and upon the Advice or Order of S. James, chap. 5. v. 14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders (or Presbyters) of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oyl in the name of the Lord. And from this Text they pre∣tend to conclude most strongly, that se∣veral are necessary in order to the right performing of this last office. The Of∣fice requires, that they be no less then seven, and assigns to every one of them
their particular employment at that time. But this number is not rigidly exacted, and three oftentimes serve. They onely anoint the forehead, ears, and hands of sick persons. Severall Prayers are used at the time of Unction, and this particularly among the rest. . O Holy Father, Physician of Soul and body, who hast sent thy onely-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to cure all diseases, and to redeem from death, heal thy Servant of his infirmity both of body and Soul, and quicken him by the grace of thy Christ, for the intercession of our La∣dy the Mother of God, the ever-Virgin Mary, &c. and here they recite the names of several Saints—for Thou, O Christ, our God, art the Fountain of all healing; and we give the glory of it to Thee, and to the Father, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever. AfterVid. . pag. 110. this
they give the sick person the Holy Sa∣crament, as the last Viaticum. The Houses of the sick persons are also anoin∣ted with the same Oyl, the figure of a Cross being made with it upon the walls and posts: at which Ceremony the Priest sings the 91. Psalm, He that dwel∣leth in the secret place of the Most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Al∣mighty, &c. This Oyl is not onely used upon per∣sons lying in extremis: for the people,This Oyl some∣times used up∣on persons in perfect health, or but lightly indisposed. believing that there is great virtue in it to heal the Distempers of the Body, in case of any Sickness or Indisposition, that does not bring in danger of Death, use it almost in the nature of a remedy or medicine; and think themselves also by it better enabled to resist the Assaults and Temptations of the great Enemy of their Souls, the Devil. But of the Se∣ven Mysteries of the Greek Church hi∣therto. In the midst of the sad Pressures which daily afflict the poor Greeks,The Greeks orthodox in the great Ar∣ticles of Faith. and the continual Scoffs and Blasphemies of the Turks, (who, being stupid and dull, are guided wholly in their judgments of things by a gross fancy, and reject with a brutish kind of pride and scorn what∣ever
is raised, though never so little, a∣bove the reach of Sense,) it is no slight argument of the truth of the great Ar∣ticles of the Christian Religion, against the subtle contrivances of a party of men in Christendome, (who, under a pre∣tence of sober reason, undermine the foundations of it,) that the Christians of the East do still retain, with all ima∣ginable constancy, and firmness of assent, the entire profession of the Mysteries of Faith, as they were believed and ac∣knowledged in the first Ages. They retain exactly the Catholick Doctrine concerning the most Holy and undivided Trinity,Constantino∣politan Creed. and the Incarnation of the eternal Son of God, according to the Constantinopolitan Creed, which they onely retain in their Liturgies and Catechisms, this being but an Expositi∣on of the Apostles Creed more at large; which is the true reason, why the Apo∣stolicall form came anciently to be omit∣ted among them. As to that of S. Atha∣nasius, they are wholly strangers to it. They are content with the profession of Faith as it is laid down there, without troubling themselves with curious and nice distinctions, which oftentimes, in stead of explaining, confound and ob∣scure
the Mystery. Yet with a beco∣ming zeal they condemn the madness and impiety of Arius, Nestorius, Paulus Sa∣mosatenus, and the other Haeresiarchs: whose Opinions if any one be known to favour in the least, they presently ex∣communicate him; and do not restore him to the Communion of the Church, till he has renounced his Heresy with tears, and given other ample satisfac∣tion. Indeed, as to the manner of the sub∣sistence of the Holy Spirit,They believe the procession of the Holy Spirit to be onely from the Father. the Greeks vary from the Latines, and from the Churches of the Reformation; and by what we may judge, from the reluctan∣cy and unwillingness of the Bishops, after all attempts of Reconciliation, the difference herein is like to be perpetual. They object, with a great deal of bit∣ter passion, that the Bishops of the Ro∣man Church have not dealt honestly in this matter; for that, without consul∣ting them, and without regard to the Canon of the Council of Ephesus, which forbad such Additions under the penalty of an Anathema, they have inserted the words Filióque into the Constantinopoli∣tan Creed. For the justification and proof of this Charge, they appeal to
the Writings of the ancient Fathers, to Acts of Councils, to Ecclesiasticall Hi∣story, to the faith of the best and most authentick Manuscript Copies, nay to Rome it self,Vide Epistolam Photii ad Archiepiscopum Aqui∣liae. Respons. 2. Patriarchae Jeremiae, p. 222. Et . where that Creed was engraven on two silver Tables hung up in S. Peter's Church by the command of Pope Leo the Third, where this Ad∣dition is wanting. This was hotly dis∣puted by the Greeks in the Council held at Florence; and no one argument or point of controversy have they main∣tained, or do still maintain, with grea∣ter variety of learning or subtilty. At present I shall content my self with one or two irrefragable testimonies. Cyril∣lus Lucaris, who afterwards fell a sacri∣fice to the malice and revenge of the Jesuits, in the Epistle he wrote to Vy∣tenbogaert, out of Walachia, when he was Patriarch of Alexandria, saith, Ipsa (i.e. Ecclesia Graeca) Spiritum Sanctum à Fi∣lio essentialiter & internè & quoad esse procedere negat; The Greek Church de∣nies that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son essentially and internally and as
to his subsistence. And so afterward, when he was advanced to the Patriar∣chall throne of Constantinople, in his Confession of Faith, which brought upon him all that envy and mischief which afterwards befell him, chap. 1. . The Holy Spirit proceedeth from the Father by the Son. Which form of words he very wisely and warily thought fit to use, in compliance with the anci∣ent Writers of his Church; as it was proved in the Council of Florence by Isidorus Bishop of Russia, and Bessarion of Nice, and Marcus Eugenicus of Ephe∣sus, from the authorities of S. Maximus, and S. John Damascen, and several o∣thers. This being so expresly asserted by Cyrillus, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the rashness and disingenuity of the Assessors of the second Synod held against this good man at Constantinople under Parthenius, who most unjustly censure and condemn him for maintaining, against the Sentiments of the Catholick Church, the eternal and substantial pro∣cession of the Holy Spirit, as well from the Son as the Father. Lastly, they de∣clare
in their Confession,, &c. pag. 90. that the Holy Spirit proceedeth eternally from the Father, as the fountain and principle of the Deity; according to what our Sa∣viour teaches us, saying, When the Com∣forter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of me, S. John 15. 26. The great argument made use of by Phatius and other Writers,The chief Ar∣gument made use of by the Greeks. both ancient and modern, is briefly summ'd up by Cyrillus; The Greek Church does there∣fore deny the procession of the Spirit from the Son, quòd veretur, nè dicendo à Filio ut à Patre, duo asserat in Divinis principia existentiae Spiritûs Sancti, quod esset impiissimum, fearing lest they should assert and introduce two distinct Princi∣ples of the existence of the Spirit of God in the Deity, which they look upon as an horrid impiety. But to prevent all unjust suspicions,They believe the Holy Spi∣rit to be God, and coessential  the Fa∣ther and the Son; as if they entertain'd any evil or hete∣rodox Opinions about the Third Person of the glorious Trinity, they declare
fully against the Heresy of Macedonius and the rest of the , and most readily acknowledge the Holy Spirit to be of the same substance with the Father and the Son, to be God from eternity proceeding from the essence and nature of the Father, without be∣ginning, and to be equally adored. Likewise they acknowledge, that He is the Spirit of the Son,and to be the Spirit of the Son. and. that He is sent, poured out, and given by the Son. But this they refer to the temporary mission of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles and upon all the Faithfull. So that they neither con∣found the Persons of the Holy Trinity, nor take away the Personal Relations and Proprieties of the Son and Spi∣rit; forasmuch as the manner of Gene∣ration, whereby the Son subsists, is di∣stinct from the manner of the Procession of the Holy Spirit. From these premisses it will fully ap∣pear,Apology for the Greeks. that the Greeks are most unjustly accused by some of the Roman Church in the height of their intemperate zeal, as deserters of the Catholick Faith, and
as guilty of Heresy in a necessary Arti∣cle of Faith; for that the difference herein is rather verbal then real, and lies not so much in the substance of the Article, as in the way and manner of expressing themselves. To justify this their imputation, they with an equal rashness are not afraid to assert, and that as boldly as if they had been admitted into the Secrets of God, that the Holy Spirit has sufficiently shewed his anger from Heaven against this supposed grie∣vous and fundamentall Errour, because Constantinople, the chief Seat of the Grecian Empire and Religion, was ta∣ken by the Turks on a Whitsun-Tuesday, in the year 1453. But 'tis ill arguing from such an accidental circumstance; and they may as justly conclude, that the people of Rhodes, and particularly the Knights of Jerusalem, were guilty of some grievous Errour concerning our Blessed Saviour, because the chief City of that Island, which they had so bravely defended, was at last lost upon a Christmas-day. As to the state of the vitâ functi,Their opinion about the state of the Dead. they know not well what to determine: for taking for granted, that the Souls of the Righteous are not in Heaven,
where they shall be after the Resurrec∣tion of the body, they know not where to fix them. But whereever that place is, which sometimes they call Paradise, from the words of our Saviour to the Thief upon the Cross, S. Luke 23. 43. sometimes Abraham's bosome, from S. Luke 16. 22. sometimes the hand of God, from that of Ecclesiasticus, The Souls of the Just are in the hand of God; it is certainly distinct, according to them, from the presence of God. For thus they pray in their Liturgy; . Remember, O Lord, all that sleep in hope of the Resurrection and everlasting Life, and grant that they may rest, where the light of thy Countenance shines forth: and so, &c. in the Office of Burial; O God of Spirits and of all flesh, who, having trampled upon Death, and van∣quisht the Devil, hast given life to the world; Thou, O Lord, make the Soul of thy deceased Servant to rest in the glorious, in the pleasant place, in the place of re∣freshment,
whence grief, trouble and sighing are banisht. And yet at other times, as it were compelled by the force and evidence of truth, they re∣tract, at least colour over, this Opinion with this acknowledgment,. pag. 8. in their late Confession: By which of these three names above mentioned any shall call the Receptacle of righteous Souls, he will not erre; provided that he believes and understands thus much, that they enjoy the favour of God, and are in his heavenly Kingdom, and, as the Church-Hymns mention, in Heaven. But as for the Souls of the Wicked and Unrighteous, they hold, that they descend immedi∣ately into Hades or Hell, the place of Condemnation, and of God's Wrath. They reject, in words at least,They do not believe a Pur∣gatory by fire, but they are otherwise he∣terodox; as appears from their Prayers and Suffrages, and from the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory by fire, as having no foundation in Scripture, and teach their people accordingly in their Catecheticall Confession, and thus ar∣gue ab absurdo against it;. p. 86.—— If the
Soul satisfies for Sins committed in this life in such a place, then, by parity of reason, part of the Mystery or Sacrament of Penance might be performed there, which is, say they, , contrary to orthodox doc∣trine. But notwithstanding this declarati∣on, they fansy the Souls of the departed detained and shut up in most secret and unknown recesses under ground, and there to be perplexed and to suffer or grievous things, and to find ease and refreshment from theV. Gabrielem Philadelph. pag. 20, 21. Pray∣ers and Suffrages and Oblations and Sacrifices of the living. Upon this ac∣count it is,the offering up of several Particles of Bread at the Prothesis. that in the celebration of the Sacrament the Priest, standing at the Prothesis, offers several Particles of Bread;pag. 19. one in honour of the Vir∣gin Mary, which they place on the right side of the Bread that is to be consecra∣ted; the rest in honour of S. John the Baptist, the Holy and glorious Apostles, S. Basil, S. Gregory the Divine, S. John Chrysostome, Athanasius, Cyrillus, Ni∣colas of Myra, and all holy Bishops, S. Stephen the first Martyr, S. George,
Demetrius, Theodorus, and all other holy Martyrs, S. Antony, Euthymius, Saba, Onuphrius, Arsenius, Athanasius of Mount Athos and all holy Monks, the holy Physicians Cosmus and Da∣mianus, Cyrus and John, Pantaleon and Hermolaus, Sampson and Diomedes, Thallaleus and Trypho, and the rest, S. Joachim and Anna, the Saint of the day, and all Saints; and for his parti∣cular Archbishop and all the Clergy, and for the Founders of the Church or Monastery, for the living and dead, where he mentions their names, and for all who sleep in hope of the Resur∣rection to everlasting life, to whom, O mercifull God, give pardon. These are placed in the Patin,The custom of the Greeks a perverse imi∣tation of the Ancients. and are carried to the Altar of Consecration, and by reason of their vicinity to the Bread that is to be consecrated, and is afterward actually consecrated, partake of that blessing and sanctification. 'Tis manifest that this practice of the Greeks differs vastly from the ancient Rite of the Christians of the Second and Third Centuries, which they would seem to imitate. For they imagining that the Souls of deceased persons were not ad∣mitted into the Divine Presence, but
did exspectare in candida diem Judicii, as Tertullian speaks, their surviving friends and relations, fearing lest their present condition might require it, at least to shew their love and care of them, brought their Oblations: but this was done onely once a year, labo∣rantibus animabus refrigerium quoddam adpostulantes; but they were not parti∣cular and distinct, but for all together; nor were they esteemed by them in the nature of satisfactory or expiatory Oblations, but onely to shew the ho∣nour they bare to the memory of the holy Apostles and Martyrs in this solemn kind of pomp, and at the celebration of the Holy Sacrament, at which time they onely prayed to God, that He would be pleased to remember them. And certainly no more can well be un∣derstood by the Commemoration, which follows just after the Consecration of the Elements in their present Litur∣gies. The present Greeks too account it a great piece of Piety and Religion,They visit the Graves of their deceased Friends. to visit the Graves of their dead Friends upon a set day every year, and there perform several Funeral rites, and pray for their Souls: and after that the Priest
has performed his Office, and the reli∣gious part of the Ceremony is over, they cover the Grave with their Nap∣kins and Handkerchiefs, and make a festival entertainment, made up with part of the Colyba or boiled Wheat with These Fruits were anciently called  as Balsamon explains the word, , in 4. Canonem Apostolorum. mixt Fruits before mentioned, with a great deal of mirth and jollity, very unbecoming the Solemnity. But to return to the modern Greeks. The reason of this their practice is thus assign'd byin tractatulo . Gabriel Philadel∣phiensis;The reason as∣signed by them for their offering up Particles. We offer these Particles for our Fathers, Brothers, Friends and Kins∣folks who sleep in Christ. The end and design is, that God would place their Souls in a bright and pleasant place, in a place of rest, whence grief and lamentation are banisht, and send them a relaxation and deliverance from those grievous things that at present seize upon them, and give them freedom and redemption from the lamentation of Hades and from tears. in Epist. ad Joannem Vytenbogaert. Cyrillus Lucaris was ashamed of
this superstitious practice, and the idle pretension commonly used for the de∣fence of it; and therefore adds another: Esset hîc referendum quae  novem minimae parti∣culae sunt panis, & decima B. Mariae Ma∣tris Domini; quas, post aquae & vini in calice infusionem, ab uno Pane oblato sumptas, penès Eucharistiae Panem poni∣mus, ad significandum jam beatam esse sortem Sanctorum, qui, ut Membra Capiti Christo conjuncta, unà in coelesti gloria triumphant. By which he supposes onely the Blessedness of the Saints to be designed, that as the Particles are pla∣ced near the Bread that is consecrated, so they, as the Members of the Body Mysticall joyned to Christ as to the Head, triumph together with Him in the Heavenly glory. But besides this,Offerings for the Dead. they say a particu∣lar Mass for the Dead: which does not differ from the form used at other times, but that there is a peculiar Epistle and Gospell, and the dead persons, for whose benefit it is intended, are particu∣larly mentioned, each having a single Particle offered up in his behalf. But a general Mass for the Dead is solemnized on the Saturday before Pentecost, which
day is sacred to the Memory of All Souls. While they seem to reject with so much caution a Purgatory, they are faln into the Errour of Origen about the Redemption of the Souls of the wicked from Hell. For they thus boldly de∣termine: Certainly many Sinners▪ are freed from the Chains of Hades, not upon the account of any Repentance or Confessi∣on made in those infernal regions, but for the good Works and Alms of the living, for the Prayers of the Church made in their behalf, and chiefly for the sake of the unbloudy Sacrifice, which the Church daily offers up for the living and the dead. Again, The Sacrifices, the Prayers and Alms which are perform'd by the living, greatly comfort and benefit the Soul, and free it at last from the bonds of Hades. Though to salve this, they say, such persons as are freed went out of the world with good dispositions, and were prevented by death from completing their Repentance, and procuring the Favour of God. Sopag. 247. Patriarch Jeremias explains himself. Three times that year their Friends die they celebrate their Exequies, the third, the ninth,
and the fortieth day, and repeat the same Prayers for the peace and quiet of their Souls. I omit the Howlings of the Women really concerned at the Funerals of their Husbands, or of their Slaves, and of persons hired to act their parts in this most extravagant scene of Grief. This being a relique of an old Custom used in the days of their Hea∣thenish Ancestours, and not falling pro∣perly within the comprehension and compass of my design. The Greeks have so great prejudice to all engraven Images,They have no engraven and emboss'd Ima∣ges in their Churches▪ but and especially if they are emboss'd and prominent, that they inveigh severely and fiercely a∣gainst the Latines, as little or less then Idolaters, and symbolizing with the ve∣ry Heathen; applying that of the Psal∣mist, Psal. 135. v. 16, 17, 18. They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not,they  Pictur▪ &c. But as for the Pictures, whether in colours or printed, of our Saviour, and of the Saints, they account them sacred and venerable. These they reverence and honour by bowing and kissing them, andSee the Rubrick of the , in the Horologin printed at Venice 1646. in 12. saying their prayers
before them. With these the Partition that separates the Bema or Chancell from the Body of the Church is adorned. At set times the Priest, before he en∣ters into it, makes three low Reveren∣ces () before the Image of Christ, and as many before that of the Virgin Mary: and he does the like in the time of Celebration, and oftentimes perfumes them with his Incense-pot. Upon some of the great Festivals they expose to the view of the people, upon a Desk in the middle of the Quire, a printed Picture of that day's Saint done in Christendom, whi∣ther upon their approach they bow their body, and kiss it with great devo∣tion. . pag. 237, 238. This practice they defend from the Authority of the Seventh ge∣neral Synod, which is the Second held at Nice: and from this vain and idle pretence, that they worship the Saint in the Image which represents him, by the help of which they presently have an Idea of him in their mind; and that they worship the. So Photius in his Epistle to Michael Prince of Bulgaria, pag. 15. figure and re∣presentation
not with the worship of but of , and that onely , relatively: which is all they have to say for their gross and scanda∣lous behaviour herein; to the great prejudice of the Christian Religion a∣mong the Turks, who are too gross and dull to understand these subtil and nice distinctions, which they alledge in de∣fence of this Worship. But I intend onely a Narrative, and not a Confuta∣tion. A great part of their Worship consists in external Adoration,Their Adora∣tions. which they call of which they make two sorts: . Vid. , pag. 36. the greater, which they call or , bowing the body very low, almost to the ground; and the less, with a little inclination of the head and knee. This they doe when they come into the Church, or when they are in sight of a Church or Chappell, either upon land or sea, repeating these words, or, , Lord, or God, be mercifull to me a Sinner; or else onely these, ,
sometimesV.  Philothei, & Officium dictum  ive Lucernarium, & , p. 34. forty times, sometimes a hundred times together, out of an excess of Devotion, crossing themselves all the while. The custom of praying toward the East isThus in the above-cited Diataxis of Philotheus, the Deacon bows toward the East thrice, p. 2. 4. And o in S. Chrysostome's Liturgy, at their first entrance into the Church, the Priest and Deacon , and so often: the Priest also crosses and prays toward the East, p. 67. still practised,Praying to∣ward the East. and held sacred and inviolable among them: and of the two, they had rather turn their backs upon the Church, then upon that point of the Heavens when they are at their Devotions: and because the Altar is in the Eastern-most part of the Church,S. Basilii Liturg. p. 169. S. Chrysostomi Li∣urg. p. 67. 68. 73. 77. they worship toward that. They seldome sit in the Church,They seldome sit or kneel in their Chur∣ches. ex∣cept when quite tired by their long standing: there being no accommoda∣tion of Pews or Benches there, except a few Stalls in their greater Churches. And they do as seldom kneel, except V. Gabr. Philadelph. p. 20. perchance on the day of Pente∣cost,
or some such solemn time; herein being wholly swayed and governed by the custom and practice of the Coun∣try; the frequent reverences and incli∣nations they make with their body serving in stead of Genuflexion. They have a peculiar manner of crossing themselves,Manner of crossing them∣selves. which is, with the two Fingers of their right hand and Thumb closed; to denote, as they tell you, the mystery of the Three Persons in the Holy Trinity in one Essence. They first sign their forehead, then the lower part of their breast, then their right shoulder, and then their left, saying, , Holy God, holy and powerfull, holy and immortal, have mercy upon us; or some such ejaculation, as, , O Lord Jesu Christ, thou Son and Word of God, have mercy upon me: but more espe∣cially the short forms above mentio∣ned. They keep their Culpacs or Caps on their heads in the Church,Their behavi∣our and ge∣sture in their Churches. except at the Procession, and at the time when the Gospell is read, and at the celebra∣tion of the Sacrament: then they all
stand up uncovered, and shew a particu∣lar Reverence. Their Singing,Singing man and inartifi∣cial; no mu∣sical Instru∣ments. as I said before, is very mean and pitifull, without figure and the relishes of art, and is at best but a kind of harsh Plain-song. They have no Organ or any kind of musicall Instrument in their Churches, that they may not give any offence to their cruel Masters, the Turks: which is the rea∣son also why they have no Bells. They have no Holy water at their Church-doors,No Holy wa∣ter at their Church-doors. nor do they use to sprinkle themselves; though oftentimes they drink very greedily of it, after the ceremony of its benediction is over, and rub their eyes with it. Upon their recovery from any grie∣vous distemper and sickness,Offerings upon recovery from dangerous sickness. they offer up thin broad Plates of silver, which are hung up in their Churches. Oftentimes they represent the figure of the Part affected, in imitation of the Romanists; from whom the modern Greeks have derived many of their religious Customs and Ceremonies. They number their years not onely from the Birth of our B. Saviour,Their accounts of time. but also from the Creation. They reckon from the Creation to our Saviour's
Birth 5508 years, following the ac∣count of the Septuagint in their Chrono∣logy. Thus they write, that Constan∣tinople was taken in the year 6961, that is, of our Lord 1453. They acknowledge butV. Epistolam Photii ad Michaelem Principem Bulgariae, pag. 3, &c. Epistolam Jeremiae Patriarchae Constantinopolitani ad Theologos Wirtenbergenses, & Epistolam Meletii Patriarchae Alexandrini ad V. Cl. Janum Douzam, quae exstat in Itinerario Georgii Douzae, M. D. IC. seven General Councils,They acknow∣ledge but se∣ven general Councils. which I shall here briefly reckon up. The first held at Nice in Bithynia, under Constantine the Great, in the year of our Lord 325. against Arius and his Followers, who denied the Divinity of our B. Saviour. The second held at Constantinople, under the elder Theodosius, in the year 381. against Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. The third at Ephesus, under Theodo∣sius Junior and Valentinian, in the year 431. against Nestorius, who asserted Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, to be , or meer Man; and so made the Son of God distinct from the Son of the B. Virgin, and refused to
give her the title of , or the Mother of God. The fourth at Chalcedon, (a City si∣tuate over against Constantinople, on the other side of the Propontis,) under Marcianus, in the year 451. against Eutyches and Dioscorus, who maintained onely one Nature in Christ. The fifth at Constantinople, under Ju∣stinian, in the year 553. against the Disciples of Origen; whose corrupt and heretical Doctrine about the Prae-exi∣stence and Transmigration of Souls, the Temporariness of Hell-torments, and the Salvation of Devils, and the like, was here condemned and anathema∣tized. The sixth at Constantinople, under Constantine Pogonatus, in the year 680. against Sergius, Pope Honorius, Maca∣rius Bishop of Antioch, and their Fol∣lowers, who asserted but one Will in Christ, hence called Monothelites. The seventh at Nice, under Constan∣tine then a minor, and his Mother the Empress Irene, in the year 787. a∣gainst such as would not allow the Wor∣ship of Images, whom they hence nick∣named or . But the Decrees of this Council, not
founded upon Scripture, but upon weak and uncertain Tradition, and without any ground of sound or judi∣cious reasoning, were confuted soon after by a Council of Bishops of the West, held by the Authority of Charle∣maine at Francford in Germany. There was a Council held at Constan∣tinople under Basilius in the year 869.A Council at Constantino∣ple, in which Photius was condemned; and another, in the same place, in which he was restored. Each called the eighth general Council by different Wri∣ters. wherein Photius the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople (who had appeared very ac∣tive against the See of Rome, and had provoked the Latines especially, among other things, by imputing to them the guilt of Heresy, for adding Filióque to the Constantinopolitan Creed) was de∣throned and anathematized. This the Romanists honour with the title of the Eighth Oecumenical Council. But that which theSee the Annals of Zonaras and Glycas. Greeks call so was held ten years after, that is, in the year 879. in which all the Acts against Pho∣tius, who was restored to the Patriar∣chal dignity not long before, were re∣scinded and abrogated, and the Creed recited and fixt without that addition. But because nothing relating to matter of Doctrine was established anew in this
Council, which was held chiefly in favour of Photius, the Greeks content themselves with the acknowledgment of seven only. Some of the Latinizing Greeks call the Council held at Florence in the year 1439.Council of Florence. under Pope Eugenius the Fourth, in which were present the Em∣perour Joannes Palaeologus, Joseph Patri∣arch of Constantinople, and several Me∣tropolitans and Bishops of the Greek Church, the Eighth general Council. Here the Greeks, out of politick ends, that is, to please the Emperour, who urged them to a Subscription, to gain the assistence of the Latines, which onely was to be had upon these hard conditions, against the Turks, then ready to take an entire possession of the Empire, were forced to comply. But upon their return home, there were great stirs and tumults in Constantinople, and all over the Empire, about this Agreement, and the Subscribers were look'd upon as Betrayers of the esta∣blisht Doctrine of the Eastern Church. In a Letter published by Chytraeus, sent from Constantinople to the Bohemians, about two years before the taking of that City by the Emperour Mahomet, they very zealously renounce the Union
of Florence, calling it , or a Disunion from the Truth. This was subscribed, among others, by Silvester Syropulus, who had been present at that Assembly, and wrote the History of it, publish'd in the year 1660. In their Monasteries they keep up the piety and rigour of the ancient Discipline,The manner of their reciting the Psalms and Scriptu∣ral Hymns in their Religi∣ous houses. being very punctual in the performance of their daily Offices. They are frequent in the reciting of the Psalms, and Hymns of the Old and New Testament, as consisting chiefly of Praises and Thanksgivings: which they divide into twenty Sections or each Section into three parts, which they call  at the end of which they repeat the Gloria Patri, standing all the while. This Psalmody is one of the principal parts of the Mo∣nastick life and institution, and they are so continually used to it, that there is scarce a Kaloir but has the whole Psalter exactly by heart. They observe this order: They reade the Psalter twice in each of the first six weeks in Lent, and but once in the Holy week, ending it on Wednesday; from which time to the Saturday in Easter-week, according to ancient custome, it is
wholly intermitted. Afterward to the 20. day of September, two Sections are read in the morning, and one in the evening: but from the 20. of September they reade three Sections in the mor∣ning, and in the evening the Psalms called , and sometimes , (which are the Psalms of Degrees, so called fromThat is, according to the Greek account; for according to the Hebrew it is the 120. Which account is also to be understood of the rest which follow. the 119. the first of them, which begins, . This method they continue to the Sa∣turday before Sexagesima, in which week and the week following it is but once repeated also; except that from Christmas to the 15. of January they re∣cite in the evening the 135. Psalm, which is called by them , from the frequent repetition of the Hemisti∣chium, . for his mercy endureth for ever. So that the whole is finisht in the space of seven days; except in strict and high Lent, when it is repeated every week twice, as is above declared. Thethat is, according to the Hebrew, the 119. 118. Psalm, which makes up the seventeenth Section, is called
, from the first verse, . The104. 103. Psalm is cal∣led , so called because with it they begin their evening service, and their prayers at other solemn times. There are six Psalms (the whole there∣fore called ) V. Philothei Diataxin, pag. 7. which they usually recite betimes in the morning, and especially if it be preceded by a Vigil: these are thethat is, 3. 38. 63. 88. 103. 143. according to the Hebrew. The reason of which difference is this: The 9. Psalm according to the Greek contains the 9. and 10. according to the Hebrew: and the 146. and 147. Psalms according to the Greek make up but one Psalm, that is, 147. Psalm, according to the Hebrew. Anci∣ently the 62. Psalm according to the Greek was called . S. Athanasius epistolâ ad Marcelli∣num— . Et —Et Constit. Apo∣stol. l. 8. c. 37. , &c. 3. 37. 62. 87. 102. and 142. Otherwise, if there be no Vigil, and it happen to be Sunday, they sing the , or Hymn in praise of the most B. Trinity. That excellent Hymn,The great Doxology. which our Church retains in her Communion-Ser∣vice, which is said or sung after we have been made partakers of the holy Mysteries of Christ's blessed Body and
Bloud, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will towards men; We praise thee, we, &c. makes up a necessa∣ry part of their morning-devotion, up∣on Sundays and the other more solemn Festivals: and indeed, as it appears by their , or Office used eve∣ry morning, on all other days, onely with this difference, that it is then bare∣ly read, and not sung; which is their present practice, as I found particularly upon enquiry: as also , or in their solemn Prayers after supper, before they go to their rest. This is called by them , or the great Doxology, to distinguish it from the other, which they call , or the lesser, that is, the Gloria Patri; which they repeat at the end of every Station of the Psalms, and at other times prescribed in the Litur∣gick and other Offices: this latter being a more contracted glorification of the Holy Trinity, which they thus express, somewhat different from the Latine form;. Ità quoque apud S. Athanas. , &c. nisi quòd  illic desit. Quandoque  ante  omittitur. Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, both now and always and for ever, or to eternal ages. Amen. This greater Doxo∣logy, (from the constant usage of it cal∣led It has the title of  in the Apo∣stolicall Constitutions, lib. 7. cap. 47.  orAnd so particularly in the Alexandrine Manu∣script of the Septuagint; and in several other Greek Manuscripts. , the morning Prayer or Hymn, (it being made up both of Supplications and Lauds, though the latter be the more common appellation,) and by some, the Angelical Hymn, from the Preface to it, sung by the Angels at the Birth of our B. Saviour, S. Luke ch. 2.) is of great antiquity, being mentioned de Virgin. versus finem. by S. Athanasius, as universally known and used by the generality of Christians of both sexes, in those Ea∣stern and Southern Countries of the world, in their private Devotions; and is to be found after the Psalms and Hymns, in the third Volume of that most venerable monument of Piety and Antiquity, the Greek translation of the Bible in His Majestie's Library at Saint James's sent to King Charles the First,
Martyr, of blessed and glorious memo∣ry, by that great man Cyrillus Lucaris, Patriarch of Constantinople, who was also murthered, which he brought with him out of Aegypt, upon his leaving the Patriarchate of Alexandria, written in capital letters, and, as he guesses, in a paper placed by him in the begin∣ning of the first Volume, giving an ac∣count of it, above thirteen hundred years since. This I conjecture to be the  mentioned by Lucian in his Philopatris, in these words of Triephon to Critias, which I understand thus, that the Chri∣stians of that time, whom the wicked Infidel sports with and abuses in that Dialogue, used to begin their Devotion with the Lord's Prayer, and conclude it with this divine Hymn, or , or Ode full of the appellations of God the Father and Christ. This I think to be no way unlikely, as judging the  and to be distinct and different forms. But because it is possible, that it might be but one composition or Prayer, con∣cluding with an Hymn, I am more in∣clined
to believe, notwithstanding, that it ought to be meant of this, rather then of the Lord's Prayer; and how∣ever, that it more then seems (though the most learned ArchbishopV. Dissertationem ejusdem Reverendissimi Anti∣stitis de Symbolis, pag. 34. Vsher will have it onely to seem so) to be one of those Psalms and Hymns mentioned by anApud Eusebium in Histor. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 28. . ancient Authour, who confuted the Heresy of Artemon, to have been composed and sung by the and , or Christians, in ho∣nour of our Blessed Saviour's Divinity; (whatEpist. 97. lib. 10. Affirmabant hanc fuisse sum∣ma vel culpae suae vel erroris, quòd essen soliti stato die ante lucem convenire, carmnque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem— Pliny testifies of them also in a Letter to Trajan;) to which that part of this divine Hymn, —does very fitly and pro∣perly answer. There immediately follows in the same Manuscript this Hymn,The Greek of this and the prece∣ding Hymn with the fol∣lowing, see in the Appen∣dix. collected for the most part out of the Psalms, which is still retained by the Greeks in their
Morning-service, and repeated after it, as a part of it. Every day will I bless Thee, and praise thy Name for ever. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin. Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our Fathers, and blessed and praised be thy Name for ever. Amen. The present Greeks here insert this Versicle, Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, as our trust is in Thee. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, O teach me thy Statutes. This Versicle is repeated thrice. O Lord, Thou hast been our refuge from one generation to another. I said, O Lord, be mercifull to me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against Thee. Lord, I fly unto Thee; teach me to doe thy will: for Thou art my God. For with Thee is the fountain of life, in thy light we shall see light. Extend thy mercy to such as know Thee. The following Hymn is always reci∣ted in that part of the Evening-service,The Evening Hymn. just upon Sun-set, which they call
, and the Latines Lu∣cernarium; which I onely here put down for the antiquity of it: it not be∣ing my business to transcribe their Offi∣ces, which the learned and pious Rea∣der may consult at large, to his great satisfaction and advantage. Pleasant brightness of the holy glory of the immortal, heavenly, holy, blessed Fa∣ther, Jesu Christ, we having arrived to Sun-set, and seeing the evening light, praise the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit of God. Thou, O Son of God, giver of life, art worthy to be praised always with holy voices. Wherefore the world glorifies Thee. This seems to be the very form of the , which S. Basil re∣fers to in his Book de Spiritu Sancto ad Amphilochium, cap. 29. as having been established by the Fathers long before his time: This form being accoun∣ted
ancient by S. Basil, who lived in the fourth Century, it may not unfitly be referred to the first and early times of Christianity. In compliance with this supposition, the Authours of the Constitutions commonly called Apostoli∣cal, lib. 2. cap. 59. and lib. 8. cap. 35. or∣der this to be done: where the ; is not to be understood of this Hymn, as Archbishop Vsher is willing to grant; but of theaccording to the Greek: the 141. according to the Hebrew. 140. Psalm, whereof the second verse runs thus, Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as incense, and let the lifting up of my hands be an evening-sacrifice: this being called and is always repeated after the , or 103. Psalm above mentioned. By this it appears that the Greeks doe ill, in their Horologion, printed at Venice 1646, to ascribe the composition of this Hymn to Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem. It must be sadly acknowledged,Superstition of the Greeks, and chiefly in their prayers to Saints. that there is a great deal of Superstition mixt
in their publick Service and Offices: such is their perfuming the Church, the painted Figures, the holy Table, the Deacons and others with their Incense-pots; their frequent Crossing them∣selves; the extravagant respect they pay to the unconsecrated Elements in the great Procession; their closing seve∣ral of their Prayers with these words, . for the intercession of our Lady, the spotless Virgin-Mother of God; and sometimes they adde, and of all Saints; the oblation of Particles, and their Prayers to Saints, and especially to the B. Virgin, and the like. After the offe∣ring up of the Particle, Liturg. S. Chrysost. Which Hymn is also thrust into the Li∣turgy of S. James. the Quire sings, It is meet indeed to praise Thee, the Mother of God, who art always to be blessed, free from all blemish, the Mother of our God, more to be honoured then the Cherubims, and beyond all comparison more glorious then the Seraphims, who
broughtest forth God the Word, without any diminution of thy Virginity: we magnifie Thee, who art truly the Mother of God. They oftentimes make direct Prayers to her; as,. This occurrs frequently in several of their Offices. O Mother of God, holy above all, save us. When they are rising out of their beds in the morning, they are taught to say, . Vide Horologium pag. 3. Occurrt saepe in Tropariis. Thou, O God, art holy, holy, holy: for the sake of the Mother of God have mercy upon us. Besides, there are pecu∣liar Prayers and Hymns directed to her in their Offices, hence called , full of extravagant expressions, and which argue a great declension from the purity and simplicity of the Christi∣an Worship, too fulsome to be here re∣cited at large; onely for a tast I shall adde one or two.. In officio aquae benedictae minoris, inter alia  ejusdem , in Euchol. p. 442. In Thee, O Mother of God, have I put all my trust; save me by thy intercession, and grant me pardon of my sins. And,
. V. varias lectiones in S. Chrysostomi Liturg. pag. 87. O blessed Mother of God, open to us the gate of thy mercy: let not us who hope in Thee, erre; but let us be delive∣red from dangers by Thee: for Thou art the safety of all Christians. And the like horrible Superstition they are guilty of in their Addresses to Angels and Saints. This superstitious custom is oftentimes practised among the Kaloirs:About the tri∣angular piece of bread cal∣led . One of them after dinner takes a triangular piece of bread, which they call (for by this Ceremony they pretend to shew their great devotion to the B. Vir∣gin, who is most commonly among the Greeks expressed by that name.) which they had laid before her Picture du∣ring the whole time of dinner, in away of oblation; and lifting it up between his fingers, says first,▪ Great is the name; they answering, of the Holy Tri∣nity. Afterwards he says,. O most holy Mother of God, help us; they an∣swering,
. By her intercession, O God, have mercy upon us, and save us. Then they all, having been censed by the keeper of the Refectory, and sing∣ing Hymns in her praise, and particu∣larly that above mentioned, It is meet, &c. break and eat it, and soon after drink as it were a grace-cup, that has been blessed in her name. This ceremony is also performed at the request and in the behalf of such as are taking a journey, whether by land or sea, for their good success; who are thus superstitiously carefull to commend themselves to the protection of the B. Virgin, who is ad∣dressed to under the title hence bestowed upon her. They most rigourously abstain from Bloud and things Strangled;Abstinence from bloud and things strangled. and in their greatest hunger and extremity have an utter loathing and abhorrence of all sort of Flesh, whose bloud, when it was killed, was not poured out upon the ground, after what manner soever dressed and prepared: relying herein upon the Canon made by S. James and the other Apostles assembled in the
Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 20. 29. for the direction of the Gentile Con∣verts; (which they hold to be of per∣petual use and obligation;) and upon the practice and example of the Primi∣tive Christians, who were wont to be tempted and tried by this kind of diet, whether they were Christians or no, as Cap. 8. Erubescat error vester, qui nè animali∣um quidem sanguinem in pabulis habemus, qui propterea quoque suffocatis & sanguine abstinemus, nè quo sanguine maculemur vel intra viscera sepulto. Denique, inter ten∣tamenta quoque Christianorum botulos etiam cruore distentos admovetis, certissimi scilicet illicitum esse penès illos, per quod exorbitare eos vultis. Tertullian tells the Heathen in his Apology; Inter tentamenta quoque Chri∣stianorum botulos etiam cruore distentos admovetis. And Octavius, in Minucius Faelix, in his answer to the Objections and Cavills of his Heathen friend Caeci∣lius, replied, Tantum ab humano san∣guine cavemus, ut nec edulium pecorum in cibis sanguinem noverimus. The Greeks, not content with this custom still retai∣ned in the East, fiercely reproach the Western Church with the violation of this Apostolicall Constitution; this lit∣tle controversie contributing something to the heightning of the Schism: for∣getting,
that the reason of the Decree ceasing, (which was the great tenderness and respect shewed to the Jewish Con∣verts, that they might not be scandali∣zed, if such a liberty had been allowed,) the obligation ceases also; and that the matter of it being altogether indifferent, and without the least moral evil in it, it plainly appears to be onely provisio∣nal and temporary. Collateral here∣unto is their abstinence from flesh of any creature that dieth of it self, because, though it be not properly strangled, the bloud remaineth in it. These meats they account  defiling; and if at any time through ignorance and inad∣vertence they eat of them, or of things strangled, and such kind of unlawfull food, which they equally abominate, these ▪ think themselves ob∣liged to confess and doe penance for the involuntary transgression. When they swear,Their swea∣ring upon a Cross. they lay their hand upon the Cross, and kiss it after∣ward, and put it to their forehead: hence the word  or , a term of horrible disgrace among them, is used for a perjured person, who treads as it were upon the Cross, and stamps it under his feet. Such an
one the Italians call Sputa in croce, from another usual sign of contempt and de∣fiance. No Service is performe either by Bishop,No Church-service per∣formed with∣out peculiar Vestments. Priest or Deacon, without their , or proper Vest∣ments; in which they are as fancifull as the Romanists: and particularly the Priest when he consecrates always wears or a Stole. To give a particular account of their Habits when they officiate, would be too nice and perplext, and of little use. To advance the dignity of the Pa∣triarchal Throne,Several Mo∣nasteries ex∣empt from the Jurisdiction of the Dioce∣san. several both Churches and Monasteries were anciently exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Diocese, in the nature of Peculiars, and immediately subjected to the Patri∣arch of Constantinople. This preroga∣tive was taken away from Joannes Vec∣cus Patriarch for his siding too much with the Bishop and Church of Rome, by a Decree of Michael Palaeologus, about the year 1279, recorded by Histor. lib. 6. cap. 11. Pachymeres, who observes, that it did intrench upon the , or power belonging to him as Oecume∣nicall
Bishop. But this held onely for a time, and was made use of to serve a present turn, the Privilege being af∣terward restored, and still remaining. The Monasteries which enjoy these Im∣munities are called , from the fixing of a Cross behind the Altar there by the Patriarch in person, or by his Deputy, at the request of the several Founders, who by this Ceremony ap∣propriated the whole power of it to himself.
An Account of the state of the Greek Church under the Government of Cyrillus Lucaris, Patriarch of Constantinople, with a rela∣tion of his Sufferings and Death. CYrillus Lucaris was born in Can∣dia, the chief City of the Island to which it has given its name: which, when the neighbouring places became a Prey to the Ottoman arms, for several years before and since, kept up and maintained a well-establisht peace and quiet under the mild Government of the Venetians. The Greeks there sensible of the great blessing and benefit of Liberty, and of the full exercise of their Religion, according to the Rites of their Church, without the least dis∣turbance or controll, endeavoured to render themselves worthy of it. They were stout and couragious, and very faithfull to the State whose Subjects they were, which gave them protection. They cherished all inclinations to inge∣nuity
in their Youth, and sent them (as their Nation did formerly to Athens) to Venice and Padua, to be educated and trained up in the exercises of Wit and Philosophy, and in the Studies of all polite and solid Learning. This happiness befell Cyrillus, who at Venice was committed to the Care of Maximus Margunius, afterwards Bishop of Cerigo, (an Island in the entrance into the Archi∣pelago, still in the possession of the Vene∣tians,) who, among other, wrote a learned Discourse about the Procession of the Holy Spirit, in the old Greek. After he had finished his Studies here, and had acquired a perfect knowledge of the Latine and Italian Tongues, he travelled out of Italy into other parts of Christendome, the better to fit himself for the service of his Country; where he learned enough, by discourse and conversation, added to his own inquisi∣tive genius and wise Observations of things, to make him more and more dis∣relish the Tenents of the Roman Church, and the Fopperies and Superstitions of their Worship, and to pity the defects and miscarriages which his distressed Countrymen lay under by reason of their Ignorance and Oppression, and to
be more and more in love with the Re∣formation. These Accomplishments and Qualifi∣cations gained him the favour of Meleti∣us Pegus, Patriarch of Alexandria, a Candiot too by birth, who had also stu∣died in Italy, whence he carried away with him a settled dislike of Rome, which he afterwards in the whole course of his life declared with great zeal and fierce∣ness. By him he was made a Priest, and afterwards Archimandrite or Prior of a Convent. ThatOf this Meletius see more at large in the Itine∣rary of Georgius Douza pag. 42, &c. where is the Letter which this Patriarch wrote to his Father. p. 112. this Meletius was a man of excellent Learning and Judgment, those Books, which he published, sufficiently shew. Such as his Book against the Jews, written both in Greek and Latine, and afterwards published in the year 1593. at Leopolis, in the Greek and Ruthenick or Slavonian languages: his Dialogue called , or Orthodox Christian, printed at Vilna 1596: and several Let∣ters written in Greek, printed at Lon∣don about the year 1624, and others in Latine; as that, for instance, which he
wrote from Constantinople to Janus Dou∣za in the year 1597; and thatapud Regenvolscium in systemate Historico-Chronologico Ecclesiarum Slavonicarum. Trajecti ad Rhe∣num 1652. 4o. pag. 467. which he directed out of Aegypt, in the year 1600, to Sigismund the third, King of Poland and Sweden, wherein he disputes very solidly and judiciously against the Supremacy and universal Headship of the Popes. The occasion of this Let∣ter, which our Cyril carried, and where∣in he is so highly commended, was this. pag. 463. Several Bishops of Lithuania and Russia nigra, who had hitherto conti∣nued in the Communion of the Greek Church, wrought upon by several tem∣poral advantages and honours, which they proposed to gain in the Diet and Government of Poland, sent two of their number to Rome in the year 1595. in order to their being reconciled to that Church, and to offer their Submissi∣on and Obedience to Clement the eighth the Pope then reigning. But their go∣ing thither, and doing this in the name of all the Ruthenick Churches,pag. 466. was protested against, and a publick Act
made of it by Constantine Duke of Osto∣rovia, and Palatine of Kiovia, (at whose expense the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were translated into the language of those Countreys, and pu∣blished 1581.) and several others, who utterly disliked this intended Union. Upon the return of the two Messengers from Rome, where they had been en∣tertained with all sorts of caresses,pag. 470. a Synod of the Bishops was summoned to meet at Bresta, in October new style 1596. by the authority of King Sigis∣mund; who constituted three persons of the highest quality for title and office in Lithuania, as Duke Radzivil, the Chancellor, and the Treasurer of that Dutchy, his Ambassadours, to fix and establish this affair, which he desired with great earnestness to effect. At this Synod the Duke of Ostorovia with the rest of his Party, who were resolved to continue in the same Obedi∣ence which their Ancestours had profest and shewn to the Patriarchal Throne of Constantinople, were commanded to ap∣pear: which they did accordingly, but thought fit to hold their meeting apart,
and after several contests and strugglings refused to submit to the Union propo∣sed, which several, who had before re∣tained the Rites and Doctrin of the Greek Church, now so greedily embra∣ced. Our Cyril was of the number of the Non-uniti or Dissenters, being sent thither by Meletius as , pag. 156. Of which Authour and Book more below. Caryophilus speaks, to break off and disturb the Vnion of the Russians with the Church of Rome: whenceV. Hottingeri Analecta in append. pag. 553. where the number of the year is amiss: though Regenvol∣scius says, that at that time he kept a School and taught Greek in that Country: which is not so likely. he hardly escaped with his life; whereas Nicephorus, sent thither by the Patri∣arch of Constantinople for the same pur∣pose, was taken and strangled. Afterwards those of the Greek Com∣munion, in order to their securing their civil interests and privileges the better, against any attaque which might be made upon them, had a meeting with several Protestant Nobles and Divines,
who had embraced the Augustan Con∣fession, at Vilna, in the year 1599. Here several Proposals were made about their uniting in Spirituals, which met at first with opposition from the ignorance and obstinacy of the Lithuanian Bishops and Priests, and became afterwards, up∣on a sedate reflexion on things, more inclinable to terms of peace and recon∣ciliation. But they being unwilling to determine any thing of this nature without consulting the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Alexandria, there was a stop put to the Debate for a time, while Letters were dispatch'd away from the Evangelici about this excellent design which afterward fell to the ground, and proved abortive. It was much about this time, that Sigismund, out of his great zeal to the Roman Church, had published an Edict for the preventing the farther spreading of the Greek Religion in his Dominions, and forbidding Strangers to enter there without leave; and soon after wrote a Letter to Patriarch Meletius, to per∣swade and advise him to acknowledge and submit to the Pope of Rome. This Letter he answered with all due and be∣coming respect, desiring the King to
bestow his Royal favour upon Cyril his Exarchus or Nuntio, a Person both for learning and integrity very worthy of it. A tua verò clementia hoc quidem tem∣pore petimus, ut reverendum Patrem Cy∣rillum Lucari, Exarchum hujus Aposto∣licae sedis & filium nostrum, favore Re∣gio dignetur, hominem & Probitate & eruditione Regio favore dignissimum. In this second journey from his Patriarch meeting with great opposition from the other Party, who were favoured by the Government, and finding, that the an∣swer of Meletius to the Protestant Di∣vines would disgust the King and all of the Roman Communion, he forbore either to deliver or make it publick. And here it was, in all probability, that, reflecting upon the great hazards which he ran during his stay in those parts, his heart failed him, if it be true whatapud Regenvolse. pag. 471. 479. Petrus Scarga a Jesuite, who had been Chaplain to the three Ambas∣sadours at Bresta, saith, that in a Letter written at Leopolis in January 1601, and left with the Archbishop of that City, he published a Confession of Faith agree∣able to the Roman. However if it were
so, he redeemed this slip of humane in∣firmity with undaunted resolution and courage in the future course of his life, which he afterwards sacrificed as it were in a way of expiation. His active way of life, and know∣ledge of the world, gained by his tra∣vels and employments in several matters of concern relating to Religion and the State of the Greek Church, render'd him every-where conspicuous, and worthy, in the judgment of those who knew him, of the highest dignity of that Church; for which he seemed every way fit and proper. The Patriarchal See of Alex∣andria becoming vacant, he was chosen to succeed Meletius; as being a person of a publick spirit, and of equal zeal and learning and prudence. Here he continued above nineteen years. The great deference which the other Oriental Patriarchs of the Greek Communion pay to the chief See, that of Constantinople, puts them upon frequent voiages thi∣ther, as the affairs of their respective Churches require. Here he came about the beginning of the year 1612.This I find in a Letter written by Sir Paul Pindar from Constantinople in April that year. In
the Lent following a certain Kaloir, a Neapolitan born, in a Lent-Sermon, ha∣ving received his instructions from the Jesuits, with whom he had daily con∣versation, said many things in favour of the Romish Religion, to the great di∣straction of the minds of the People. But he was opposed herein by Cyrillus, who perceiving the designs of the Je∣suits, who began to grow confident of success, was resolved to set himself against them, and ever after detested them vehemently. It pleased God, that during his last being in that City Neophytus the Patri∣arch died. At such a time horrid quar∣rels and dissensions usually happen among the Metropolitans and Bishops about the choice of a new Patriarch: of which the Turks, greedy of mony, know how to make a mighty advantage. For the chief Vizir and the Bassa's expect in such cases, that the several Pretenders should make application to them. Without the Grand Signor's confirmation, no one dares accept the title or exercise the power of a Patriarch: nor dare the Greeks refuse whom they impose, be the person otherwise never so unfit, or the Election of another never so Cano∣nical.
Cyril had a great party among the Bishops, who wish'd that the Prima∣ry conduct and management of the affairs of their Religion might be com∣mitted to him: and therefore were very zealous in his promotion to the Patriar∣chate. To prevent which, the opposite Faction made use of the accustomed evil arts of bribing the Turks, and proffer'd to advance considerably the yearly Tri∣bute, which they pay the Emperour for the Exercise of their Religion, so Timo∣theus Bishop of Marmara might be the man. Mony doing all things in Turkie, they got him establisht Patriarch. The new Patriarch, which is usual, makes use of the Interest, which he has lately gained, with his masters the Turks, and prosecutes such as opposed him, and ba∣nishes and displaces, as his passion sug∣gests, and as he finds himself able. A∣mong them the Competitor especially could not hope to find any favour, and therefore retires, or rather is driven a∣way. Timotheus not long after dies: though Allatius, (a most passionate and virulent Writer, who cares not what stories, though never so false and scan∣dalous, he picks up from any disconten∣ted Greek, so they reflect upon the ho∣nour
of Cyrillus, or such as favoured him) will have him poisoned at an En∣tertainment at the Dutch Ambassadour's; and further adds, as if they being afraid that the poisonous wine, which he drank, should not have the desired effect, that the Physician, who was sent for, was hired with a thousand ze∣chins to accelerate his death by stron∣ger medicaments. Whereupon Cyril was chosen, unanimously and without any opposition, to succeed him, the 26. day of October in the year 1621, doubt∣less to the great regret and trouble of the Latinizing Greeks, and especially the Jesuits and Friers, who, by the permission of the Grand Signor, under the protection of several Ambassadours of the Roman Communion, kept up the Service of their Church in their respective Convents. For they were very sensible what an active man Cyril was, and with what zeal he had decla∣red himself against their several Innova∣tions and Encroachments; and thence they could not but conclude, that, now having attained to this supereminent Dignity in the Eastern Church, he would vindicate the honour of his See, and by degrees work off the Greeks
from those Errours and Mispersuasions into which they had insensibly faln, and introduce a Reformation among them. And now began with this new Ho∣nour the most laborious and trouble∣some part of his whole life, from the bit∣terness and fierceness of the Roman Zea∣lots, who were so exasperated against him, that they were resolved by all imaginable artifice and policy either to gain him, or ruine him: and to that purpose they thought fit to infuse jealou∣sie into the Turks of his conspiring against their Government and Religion, there∣by to render him and his followers ob∣noxious to their implacable rage and cruelty: whereby the Christian name and Religion were in great danger of being extinguished in the East. A brief account of these Troubles, which befell the Greek Church in the beginning of his Patriarchate, was written at Galata, in Latine, in the year 1628. by an eye∣witness, and printed in 1633. at the end of a little Book, entitled Mysteria Patrum Societatis Jesu. This Book in∣deed, which, containing a declaration of matter of fact, states the cae very much to the disadvantage of the Jesuits, is rail'd at by Allatius, after his usual
manner, which is an easy way of confu∣tation: but there is nothing in it, but what I can confirm by an uncontrolla∣ble testimony, with the addition of se∣veral circumstances and particulars which escaped that Authour: and this out of a large Relation written by Sir Thomas Row, in Constantinople, July 1627. at that time Ambassadour at the Port, where he arrived 22. December 1621. Of whom I cannot forbear to say this little, (for I do not pretend to write a full Character,) out of gratitude to his memory both as a Member of the famous University of Oxon, (to which, upon his return into England, he made a noble Present of excellent Manuscripts both Greek and Arabick;) and by whom Cyrillus presented to King Charles the First that incomparable monument of Piety and Antiquity, the Bible in Greek, supposed to be written by the hand of Thecla; and as having lived sometime in Constantinople, where to this day our Nation enjoys the happy effect of his Negotiation: that he was a Gentleman of excellent parts, and of great honour and integrity, and one who served the interests of his Prince and Country in Turkey with great courage and fidelity,
and with an agreeable success; before whose times the affairs of our Merchants were in great disorder, and little regard had to the Capitulations and Privileges accorded by the Grand Signor, either to our Nation or to any other; he having to his immortal reputation recovered the Respect due to Ambassadours, which had been utterly lost for several years before, by a succession of insolent Vizirs; and that he deserved most high∣ly, not onely of the Greek Church, by his generous protection of it against those who endeavoured, as much as in them lay, to destroy its very being; but of Christendom in general, and par∣ticularly of Poland, which King Sigis∣mund acknowledged with great respect and thanks in a Letter to his Excellency, written from Warsaw Sept. 1622. which I have had the good fortune to peruse. I shall here give an Extract of it out of Papers now in the possession of the Right Honourable William Earl of Den∣bigh; whose Lordship's generous favour shewed to me herein, I do here, as it becomes me, most thankfully acknow∣ledge. February 1622. The Jesuits, who bore Cyrillus a grudge for his former
zealous opposition of their Designs, as well as present, laboured openly, by the help and assistence of the French Ambassadour, to have him deposed, in order to their preferring Gregorius Bi∣shop of Amasia, who had submitted al∣ready to the Pope, and was very willing to truckle under them. Cyril's intimacy with the English and Dutch Ambassadours and those under their protection, height∣ned their malice; and indeed was the goodly pretence they made use of to justifie their proceedings against him, as one tainted with Heresy: which forced him in his own defence, with the assi∣stence of four Archbishops and the rest of the Clergy assembled in the great Church, to excommunicate the ambi∣tious Pretender. This Ecclesiasticall Censure made them the more outragious; and to effect their purpose better, they accuse Cyrillus to the Vizir, whom they had gained, of a design of delivering up an Island in the Arches to the Duke of Florence, whose Gallies used to rove in those Seas. Whereupon he was seized, deposed, and banished to Rhodes; and the excommunicated Bishop was advan∣ced to the Patriarchall dignity, upon promise of paying twenty thousand
dollers: a certain summ, more or less, being usually paid to the Turks, from See pag. 75. the time of Symeon of Trapezond, preferred by Bribery, in the nature of an acknowledgment, upon every new advancement. The Greeks upon this grew discontented, and refused to con∣tribute towards the levying this summ; and no supplies coming from Rome, as were expected, Gregorius, after ten weeks sitting, was willing to give way to Anthimus Archbishop of Adrianople, whom they knew to be rich, and had prevailed upon to accept of the Resigna∣tion. He making his Covetousness veil to his Ambition, pays part of the pro∣mised summ down in hand, and the rest, being armed with the authority of the Vizir, he forces from the Christians in what proportion he pleases. {inverted ⁂} The news of this victory, which they had gained so basely, quickly flew to Rome, and the service done the Catho∣lick Cause in the Levant by the French Ambassadour, the Count de Cesi, was highly magnified; and afterwards taken notice of and acknowledged by Vrban
the Eighth, inThis Letter is printed at the end of Codinus de officiis & officialibus Curiae & Ecclesiae Constantino∣politanae, Paris. 1648. a Letter sent to him from Rome, dated July 1624. not long after his assumption to the Pontifi∣cate: in which his Holiness breaks out into very opporbrious languages against poor Cyrillus, whose name now grew more and more odious at Rome, calling him Son of darkness and Champion of Hell. Quid autem Constantinopoli ege∣ris, as he complements the Embassadour, jampridem plaudens laudibus pietatis tuae Romana Ecclesia audivit. Filium illum tenebrarum & Inferni athletam, Pseudo∣patriarcham, scimus quae calamitates per∣culerint, quantúmque Haeresi vulnus in∣flictum sit, dum venerabilem Patrem An∣timum isti Ecclesiae praefici curâsti. This triumphing did not long last: for Sir Thomas Row, having received Orders from King James in favour of the oppressed Greeks, to oppose these violent courses of the French Embassa∣dour and the Jesuits, happily stept in and countermined them; and by his assistence chiefly Cyril obtained his li∣berty, and returned to Constantinople in
September following. Whereupon An∣thimus, now grown conscious of his Simony, and of having invaded his See, waited upon him privately, and sub∣mitted himself to him, acquainting him with his readiness to resign to him, as being the rightfull Patriarch. This so alarmed the French Embassadour, now grown warm in the quarrell, as well out of a point of honour as of bigotry, that he sends for Anthimus to his house over the water at Pera, and what by promises of protection from the Pope and his Master the French King, and to spend forty thousand dollers in his de∣fence, and what by threats, he prevai∣led upon the weak man to make good and retain his Title and Charge. But notwithstanding this encouragement and assurance, Anthimus being afraid of the evil consequences of his obstinacy in case Cyril should be restored by a high hand, came in the night, and humbled himself, and begg'd his absolution for the miscarriage he had been guilty of, and absolutely devested himself of the Patriarchall Dignity. Cyrillus here∣upon, though not without a great sum of mony paid to the Turks, this Resto∣ration being look'd upon as a new Ad∣vancement,
was re-established in his former Seat. January 1623. A Kaloir, preferred to be an Archimandrite, arrived at Con∣stantinople from Rome, whence he brought the assurance of a considerable sum of mony, in case they could once more secure the displacing of Cyril: but the design taking vent, it was happily prevented. However the cause was not given over as desperate, but new de∣signs were carried on at Rome with greater subtilty, and endeavours were used to corrupt the Patriarch, and this way, having blasted his reputation a∣mong his friends, (who had hitherto afforded him their utmost assistence, and who had a great opinion of his ho∣nesty and integrity,) the more effectu∣ally to ruine him. Accordingly three were sent from Rome about Febr. 1624. Padre Berilli, a Jesuit, a man of great subtilty and wit, who was to insinuate himself into the acquaintance of the Patriarch, and to perswade him to stir up the Cossacks, over whom he had a mighty influence, they being of the Greek Communion: which if it had been really practised and discovered, had been punisht with a thousand deaths,
if he had had so many lives to lose. A second, who was a Lay-gentleman, to make some overtures about a League and Peace with Spain. A third, a Greek of Nauplia, bred up in the Greek College at Rome, founded by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth in the year 1581. called Cannachio Rossi, who had instruc∣tions in Italian, under the hand and seal of Cardinal Bandini, in order to ad∣just matters with Patriarch Cyril. These may be seen at large in the Narrative above-mentioned: the sum of them in short is this, That the Pope was willing to expend considerable sums of mony to reunite the Greek Church to the Roman; that they saw not how this Union could be made, if the reports which they had received of the present Patriarch were true, as that he denied the Invocation of Saints, and the worship of Images, Transubstantiation, (which they chose to express by the name of the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, for at that time the word  was scarce known among the Greeks;) Liberty of will, Authority of the Councils and Fathers, the necessity of auricular Con∣fession: thus drawing up a confused charge of Articles against him, whereof
some were wholly untrue, (for no per∣son professed a greater respect to the ancient Councils and Fathers then he;) that he sent several Young men to the Universities of England and Germany, in order to his propagating the same Doctrin all the East over; and that he distributed Catechisms amongst his Bi∣shops full of the same Errours, in compli∣ance with the Hugonot Embassadours. And if that he would gain their esteem and favour at Rome, he should admit the Florentine Council, and condemn and anathematize the Errours and Blas∣phemies of the Calvinists and Lutherans. Upon these proposals of Rossi, the Pa∣triarch consulted our Embassadour, and was over-perswaded by him, contrary to his own temper, to make no reply at the present. But this silence was taken for a contempt and a refusal, which they could not brook; and therefore in the way of revenge, they stirred up some of the Bishops, whom they had made of their party, to de∣throne him, and offered twenty thou∣sand Dollers to fix one of them in his place. During this hurly-burly, he thought fit to retire, till the Jesuiticall intrigue was made known to the Govern∣ment;
who yet would understand no∣thing of it, till their eyes were opened with a Present of ten thousand Dol∣lers. The Greeks now expected to enjoy the Peace which they had bought at so dear a rate; but the event shewed, that their expectations were vain and ill grounded: for at Rome they were re∣solved not to give over a game as a lost, which they had some kind of hope to retrieve by foul play. To effect this, they thought fit to send an Anti-Patri∣arch, though onely with the Title of Apostolicall Suffragan, and with him a Treasurer, with full and absolute Power and Authority to doe as they should think fit, and agreeable to the Interests of the Roman Church. And to pro∣mote this design, new Titular. Bishops of Smyrna, Naxia, and the other Islands, were created. Monsignor Suffraganeo arrives at Naxia, December 1626. where he was complemented by the French Embassadour, who sent thither his Chaplain, titular Bishop of that place, and two Jesuits, to receive him. They brought him to Scio; where at first he met with the same respect as the Towns∣men of Lystra would have shewn to
S. Paul and Barnabas, as if the Pope had come amongst them and appeared in his likeness. But the man swelling with the thoughts of the extraordinary Power wherewith he was intrusted, and not able to contain himself, begins to lay about him, to the great scandal of those of his own Communion, as well Eccle∣siasticks as others. The Greeks especi∣ally were alarmed at this unparallel'd boldness; and, seeing that the Liberty of their Church was now struck at and invaded, made friends to the Vizir, and represented their case so effectually, that the Suffragan was forc'd to fly, and the titular Bishops, who had the ill luck to be apprehended, were commit∣ted to Prison, notwithstanding the me∣diation of their great Patron. The Affairs of the Greek Church were in a likely way of settlement, to the great vexation of the Jesuits, who were horribly perplext and confounded at their late shamefull baffle and over∣throw. They seemed to acquiesce, but it was onely till a fair opportunity pre∣sented it self of renewing the onset with greater fury and violence. This they wisht for, and knew could not be long wanting in Turkey, where there is
such frequent alteration among the chief Ministers, and such change of humour too, upon any fresh emergence: it be∣ing a maxime of Turkish Politicks, to suspect a Design in every little accident, and take ombrage at it; and accor∣dingly so it hapned. In June 1627. there arrived at Con∣stantinople, upon a ship of London, a certain Kaloir, called Nicodemo Ma∣taxa, born in Cephalonia; who having learned in England, where he had lived several years, the art of printing, had brought with him a Press and Types in order to the publishing of Books for the use and information of the poor igno∣rant Greeks. The design was excellent and most Christian: but it being wholly new, the great difficulty was, how to get the luggage ashore, without giving any jealousy to the Turks. The good man was brought to our Embassadour by the Archbishop of Corinth from the Pa∣triarch, to beg of him to own the goods, otherwise in great danger to be seised. Which accordingly he did, upon a far∣ther application of the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Alexandria, this lat∣ter, Gerasimus, hapning then to be up∣on the place, who with the Dutch Em∣bassadour,
the Sieur Van Haghe, came to his Lordship's Palace to consult him. But to prevent all sinister interpretati∣ons of the Turks, he thought fit to doe it openly, having first given the Vizir notice of it. There was a longer demurr about working at the Press, it being very ob∣vious to foresee how liable they were to be accused by the jealous Turkish Ca∣dyes and Imams, that is, Justices and Priests, of printing Books against their Religion. The Embassadour would by no means be perswaded by the Patriarch to permit this to be done in his house, but advised them to take a house in the neighbourhood, promising them his assi∣stence. It was impossible that this should escape the knowledge of the French Embassadour and the Jesuits, who hearing that the Press was set up, and all things ready for their work, grew strangely dissatisfied at it, as if the de∣sign had been chiefly to print Books against the Church of Rome, and by publishing Catechisms and Rudiments of Learning spoil the trade of the Jesuits, who had set up a School in their Con∣vent, and taught Greek Children gratis, and by these means oftentimes made
Proselytes of their Parents. They first tried to win Mataxa by fair means; but this way not succeeding, they cal∣led him Heretick and Lutheran; and soon after it was told him, that they had designs upon his life: which put the poor man into such a fright, that he made it his earnest request to the Em∣bassadour, that he might be permitted to lie in his house, not daring to adven∣ture to stay in the night in his own lod∣gings, where he worked in the day∣time, for fear of having his throat cut. The Patriarch, to vindicate himself from the aspersions cast upon him by the Je∣suits, as if he had introduced new and scandalous Doctrines in the Greek Church, sent a little Book to the Press concerning the Faith and Doctrine of that Church, which some years before Mataxa arrived he had composed, and designed to have sent into England to be printed there, and to dedicate to King James: but now he inscribed it to his Son and Successour, Charles the First, of blessed and glorious memory. They look'd upon this as such a bold Defiance of Rome and France, that they were resolved not onely to destroy the Press, but to sacrisice the Authour
and Printer to their revenge. And ha∣ving procured a copy of a Book written by Cyril, and printed in England, in defence of our B. Saviour's Divinity, which he chiefly intended against the Jews, and finding some few passages in it against the Opinions of the Mahome∣tans, they gained a Buffone, who was a cunning Rascal, and in esteem with the Vizir, by promising him twenty yards of Sattin, to acquaint him, that Mataxa was a Souldier, and sent to stir up the Greeks to mutiny: that un∣der a pretence of printing Books for the use of Children, he had disperst others of a quite different argument, and such as opposed the Alcoran, (meaning this little Book of Cyril's, several copies of which he had brought over with him:) that the English Embassadour protected him, that the Patriarch was the Authour: and that great numbers were sent into Vkrain, to perswade the Cossacks to in∣vade the Empire upon the absence of the Grand Signor, who then designed an expedition into Asia. The Vizir upon the first notice, without examining whether the accusa∣tion were true of false, or so much as likely, (which I intimated before to be
the rash and heady practice of the Turks,) sends a Company of Janizaries, no less then one hundred and fifty, comman∣ded by a Captain, to seise upon Ma∣taxa: and this at the instigation of the French Embassadour, who contrived that the designed assault should be de∣ferred till Twelfth-day, having learned, that our Embassadour had invited the Venetian Bailo, (a Roman Catholick, but a man of a more mild and Christian temper then the French Count, and with whom he maintained a friendly and in∣timate correspondence, notwithstanding their different sentiments in some few poi of Religion, no way essential to it,) the Patriarch, and several other persons to an entertainment. But Ma∣taxa, very happily absent, at Galata, with the Embassadour's Secretary, in his return to Pera, not knowing that his house was beset, passed unknown through the Souldiers, being in a hat; and though pointed at by some as the man, yet others saying, that he belon∣ged to the English Embassadour, he escaped at last, and got into the Palace, half dead with the fright he was put in∣to. The Captain missing his chief prey, binds his Servants, rifles his Chests,
empties the Room, and carries all away with him, as the goods of a Traitour, to the value of seven thousand Dollers. The Patriarch lying under the accusati∣on of a Crime so capital, and fearing the sad effects of Turkish fury upon the first impressions, before the fit is over, durst not go home to his own house that night. The next day the Book was examined, and the particular place, in which was the supposed Blasphemy against Mahomet, interpreted by two Greek Renegado's, in the presence of the Vizir and several Churchmen: but no great matter upon their examination could be made of it. Cyrillus himself, relying upon his innocency, appearing the same day, against whom several crimes were objected, but without the least proof. The day following, the Embassadour thought fit to demand audience of the Vizir, to expostulate the case with him, and to satisfy him in several particulars relating to Mataxa, which he did with an admirable success; the Vizir confessing with shame, that he had been over-credulous, wondring at the impudence of those, who had abused him by false informations, and promising to see restored all the goods
which had been taken away three days before in that great hurry. And to wipe off the prejudice out of the minds of the Turkish Priests, he thought it and condescended to go soon after to the Mufti to satisfy him also. Upon these heinous provocations, the Embassadour and the Patriarch were so justly offended, (the Embassadour, for that they endeavoured to ruine his reputation in the Turkish Court, and had spoken not onely reproachfully of him, which he generously slighted, but of the King his Master, whom Rossi, in a discourse with the Patriarch the day after the Turks had seiz'd upon the Press, had called the Head of the Hereticks; the Patriarch, for that they conspired against his life,) that they were resol∣ved to shew their resentments upon the Authours and Contrivers of the Plot; and prevailed so far, notwithstanding the reiterated instances of the French Embassadour, as to have Cannachio Rossi and the Jesuits thrown into prison. The Turks designed to strangle them, as having contravened the Laws of their Government; but at the intercession of the English Embassadour chiefly, they forbore to execute this bloudy sen∣tence,
and banisht them and the rest of their Order the dominions of the Grand Signor, as disturbers of the publick peace. Soon after, Sir Thomas Row leaves Turkey, succeeded by Sir Peter Wych, a Gentleman of great worth and rare accomplishments, and every way fit and qualified for that weighty and diffi∣cult Employment: who, following the example of his Predecessour, took the Greek Church into his Protection, and had a particular value and esteem for Cy∣ril: But not having had the happiness hitherto to meet with any account of his Embassy under his own hand relating to the Greeks, I shall out of others give a brief Relation of the Troubles which befell the good Patriarch, and the man∣ner of his death. V. Hotting. pag. 558. For some few years after this blow given his enemies, Cyril was at quiet, but far from being secure. De∣signs were then carrying on in the dark, and the discontented Greek Bishops were made use of in order to his Deprivati∣on: and particularly Joasaph Archbishop of Philippopoli, who struck at him, but
miss'd his blow, the other keeping his ground. They grow furious and cla∣morous hereupon, and knowing what were the most effectual arguments with Turks, they offer twenty thousand Dol∣lers, in favour of Isaac Metropolite of Chalcedon, who had espoused the Roman Interest, and was in great vogue and reputation among them. But the Em∣perour having had one of his Pages kill'd in his presence in his Seraglio at Beshiktash, (a place about four miles from Constantinople upon the Bosphorus,) being much troubled at the sad accident, and looking upon it as ominous, and the Greeks, who were friends of Cyril∣lus, lamenting the sad misfortunes they were likely to fall under by the loss of him, refused at last to give his consent for his Removall. In the mean while his Exchequer was not to suffer, and if they would continue the old Patriarch, the same summ was to be paid in, which was profered to make a new one. The Dutch Embassadour Cornelius Van Haghe, having obtain'd a copy of the Confession of Faith in Latin, which he had begun to print in Greek at Con∣stantinople, at the time the Press was broke, sent it into Christendom; and it
was first printed at Geneva, about the end of the year 1630. This alarm'd them at Rome, as much as if an Army had been on their march towards that City. At first it was look'd upon as a thing feign'd, because onely writ in Latin; and it was given out, that the Patriarch's name was onely made use of for a blind: but however an answer was published by one of his Country∣men, a Candiot, Joannes Matthaeus Ca∣ryophilus, bred up in the Gregorian College at Rome, and Titular Archbi∣shop of Iconium; and printed at Rome 1631. under the Title of Censura Con∣fessionis Fidei, seu potiùs Perfidiae Calvi∣nianae, quae nomine Cyrilli Patriarchae Constantinopolitani circumferatur: which was also put into Greek by the same hand, and dedicated to Vrban the Eighth, and printed at Rome 1632. by the Printers of the Sacred Congregation, as they speak, de propaganda fide. Afterwards Cyrillus thought fit to translate this Confession, which had made so great a noise in Christendom, word for word into Greek, with a con∣siderable addition of four Questions and Answers: which was done in Jan. 1631. though not printed till 1633. at Geneva.
It was now no longer a question or doubt, who was the Authour. He himself own'd it in all companies, when he was consulted about it: and not∣withstanding all the artifices and violence used upon him, he would never be brought to deny or dissemble the thing, or retract his judgment. Which will more fully appear from the following Memoire, which I have copied out of a Letter written by the Sieur Van Haghe, Embassadour of the States of the Netherlands, at Constantinople, Jan. 17. 1632. wherein he says that Cyril visiting the new French Embassadour, the Count de Marcheville, was received very re∣spectfully, the Embassadour giving him the Title, which was then newly appro∣priated to the Cardinals, of Eminentissi∣mo Signore. After dinner, the Embas∣sadour shew'd him his Confession, which the French Embassadour at Rome had sent him, by order of the Pope, with express order to demand of him, if he had made it, and if he would persist in it. The Patriarch, after he had taken up the Book in his hand, and look'd carefully upon it, repli'd, That truly it was his Confession: but before they demanded, whether he would persist
in it, they ought first to shew and convince him by the Scriptures, where∣in he had erred: that it was more then five hundred years, since the Greek Church had been entirely separated from the Roman; and that he had no∣thing to doe with the Pope, and was no way obliged to render an account of his Faith to him, or to any who depend upon him: adding further, that he had more then a hundred Metropolitans and Bishops, besides a great number of other Ecclesiasticall persons, under his Jurisdiction, to whom, if it were requi∣site, he would be always ready to give satisfaction in a general Synod of the Greek Church, referring all to the Word of God, and the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church. To this just dis∣course the Embassadour made no other answer but this, That at Rome, and in France they held his Eminence for a Cal∣vinist; which Sect was much hated by the King his Master: and I wish, said he, that your Eminence were a Roman-Catholick, as the King is, whose favour and liberality might be gain'd this way. The Patriarch repli'd in these few words: In the affairs of my Belief, and eternal Salvation, I shall neither follow the
King of France, nor any person in the world whatsoever; and I shall never doe any thing otherwise then what my Conscience directs me. Here the Con∣versation ended; the Patriarch imme∣diately taking his leave of the Embassa∣dour, having given him thanks for his kind and noble entertainment: but to prevent all misreports that might pass upon the account of this Visit, he ac∣quainted his friends with the particula∣rities of it. I do not doubt in the least, but that this stout and honest Profession, which Cyrillus made before the French Embas∣sadour, in which he continued to the last minute of his life, will, in the esteem of all indifferent persons, whose judg∣ment is not perverted either by preju∣dice or passion, fully vindicate him from all those unjust, and malicious Ac∣cusations, wherewith he is charged by his enemies, whom his zeal and love for Truth had provoked beyond all de∣grees of respect and Christian charity, to an irreconcileable hatred of his person. What artifices were used by the Roma∣nists to gain him, and make him theirs, cannot be denied or contested, and 'tis as certain, that if he had studied any
base or secular interest, or had had any regard to ease, and quiet, and a secure enjoying of his dignity, that if he had not been a man of great integrity above the temptation of mony, and of an in∣vincible courage to sustain all thofe fre∣quent assaults, wherewith they thought to tire and weary out his patience, and to expose himself without any concern of fear, to continual dangers, even of death it self, wherewith he was threat∣ned, onely that he might preserve the peace of his Conscience, he would have sunk under these powerfull Temptati∣ons, and might have made his peace upon very advantageous terms, and in all probability have died in his bed for any crime the Turks had to lay to his charge but through their false suggesti∣ons. By this let the world judge, whether there be the least degree of probability in the charge of Grotius,In discussione Apologetici Rivetiani. Sumenda est Ecclesia Graeca, non qualem ex suo Capite Cyrillus nuper inductus pretio confinxerat— that he framed this modell of his Faith, pretio inductus, merely out of considerations of gain. For what Collections were
ever made in England or Holland for his support, or to induce him to defend the doctrine of the Reformation? who were they that furnished him with mony to bring him to this compliance? The violent persecutions, under which he lay, forced him upon making applicati∣ons to the English and Dutch Embassa∣dours, for their assistence; that he might not be run down by the power of his enemies: and these publick persons, though both justly zealous for the Reli∣gion and Doctrine of Protestants, scor∣ned to doe any thing unworthy of Gen∣tlemen, or inconsistent with the strictest point of honour. His opposition of Rome bore a much ancienter date then his acquaintance with them, and with∣out doubt was founded upon a just and clear conviction of his understanding. So that this Imputation of his being bri∣bed to doe what he did, is wholly groundless and fictitious, and procee∣ded from an excessive courtship and ci∣vility in that great and incomparable Scholar to the Jesuits, of whose good opinion, and friendship he seem'd at that time very ambitious. The Invectives of Monsieur Arnaud are equally unjust and groundless: who
fetches all his proofs from Allatius: but certainly the passion and partiality of that Writer, which are both so notori∣ous, ought to have rendred his Testi∣mony suspected, which is now invali∣dated and confounded by the attestation of two publick Ministers, then living upon the place, which I am confident no Roman Catholick, if he be a person of quality or sense, will scruple to pre∣ferr, notwithstanding their being Prote∣stants, before that of a hungry Greek, who lived at Rome, and wrote for bread. And whereas MonsieurLa perpetuité de la foy, livre 4. chapitre 11. Ar∣naud makes Cyrillus an Hypocrite, in communicating with his Greeks still, and using such Ceremonies as he esteemed superstitious, I shall onely make this Appeal to himself, whether there are not in the Church of Rome several rites of Worship and other religious Cere∣monies practised by himself, and especi∣ally in the service of the Mass, which he in his Conscience knows to be vain and idle, and wishes were altered or aboli∣shed, and onely thinks fit to practice in compliance with the present custom and establishment: and yet I presume he
would take it in great scorn to be accu∣sed of Hypocrisy for so doing. But it is not my business at this time to answer the objections of Monsieur Arnaud, but shall refer the Reader to his learned and eloquent Antagonist, my very worthy and honoured Friend, Monsieur Claud. What the Assessors of the Bethleemi∣tick Synod or writer of the book in their name prefixed to their determinations have said of Cyrillus, is so ridiculously idle and scandalously false, that whoso∣ever is but a little acquainted with the history and transactions of those times, he must be amazed at the strange confi∣dence and boldness of these men, who dare thus contradict plain and notorious matter of fact: as for instance, when they say, thatSynodus Bethleemitica. Parisiis, 8o. 1676. p. 33. Cyrillus said nothing of what goes under his name either in publick or private; that none of his friends and acquaintance say any thing of him like this; thatpag. 34. his Con∣fession was not under his hand; that they have a thousand witnesses of his , I suppose, they mean, of his being pious and orthodox
in the doctrine contrary to that in his Confession; andpag. 37. that they have a great book of his , or Sermons preached on Sundays and Holy-days in Constantinople, containing things repug∣nant to his Confession. But with their good leave there is nothing in all those or excerpta, which they have printed, except perchance one citation, (if they have not injured him in it, by inserting a word or two not extant in the Original,) which contradicts in the least his Confession, or , those Arti∣cles or Chapters, which, as they idly pretend; falsly go under his name. The bare recital of these fooleries is a sufficient confutation. And whereas they object often, that the Eastern Church never received or acknowled∣ged this Confession of Faith, and that it was his private fancy, and done by his own sole Authority, which is also ob∣jected byCredenda definire Papae non solent, nisi in conciliis universalibus, aut si ea haberi non possint, cum consensu tali, qui ad Concilii Vniversalis auctoritatem proximè accedat: contra quam nuper fecit Constantinopoli Cyrillus, qui sine Patriarchis, sine Metropolitis, sine Episcopis novum nobis propinavit Symbolum. D. Grotius in append. ad Comment. de Antichristo. Amstelod. 1641. 8o. p. 48, 49. Grotius, I shall by way
of answer communicate what I find in the close of the Sieur Van Haghe's Letter, where he says, that there was scarce any one among the Metropolitans, of which a great number were then present at Constantinople, who would not adven∣ture his estate, life and person in the de∣fence of the said Patriarch and his Con∣fession. But of this more hereafter, if they who have a power and right of command over me shall think fit and necessary. Out of the Letter of the Sieur Van Haghe. Not long after the arrival of the French Embassadour, there came from Rome to Constantinople two fugi∣tive Greek Bishops, the one having been Metropolite of Sophia, the other of Acrida, sent thither by the Pope and the College of Cardinals de propaganda fide, to give the Patriarch further dis∣turbance, and to get him displaced, in order to the advancing any one of their Caball, otherwise never so unqualified either for life or learning. These two recommended to the French Embassa∣dour, had lodgings assigned them in his Palace, and were fully assured of his protection. To shew their zeal to the
cause, which they came to advance, they fell upon the Patriarch with most revi∣ling language, calling him Heretick, Lutheran and Infidel; and threatned the Metropolitans, that they would give a great summ of mony to the Grand Signor for the Patriarchship, and take it to farm: and this they would doe, as soon as they received new instructions and orders from Rome. The French Embassadour appearing so much in their behalf, the Patriarch, together with the Bishops and chief of the secular Greeks, who readily and jealously joy∣ned with him, thought, that it highly concerned them and the peace of their Church, to inform the Emperour, Vi∣zir, and the principal Ministers of the designs of the Pope and his adhe∣rents. It wasV. Hotting. Analecta in append. pag. 558. who was fully informed of these particulars by Monsieur Leger, a French Divine, who had lived for several years in Con∣stantinople, and was very intimately acquainted with Patriarch Cyril. not long after, that the Metropolites of Adrianople, Larissa, Chalcedon, Cyzicum and Naupactus en∣tred into a conspiracy against the Patri∣arch: but by the help of friends and a
Present of ten thousand Dollers the tempest was allayed. pag. 559. October 1633. Cyrillus Contari Metropolite of Beroea, who had been formerlySee the Letter of Dionysius Guillius, a Jesuit, one of those, who had been banished Constantinople, where he gives a large account of his studies and behavi∣our, and of the great deference, which he shewed to those of his Order, apud Leonem Allatium de Ecclesiae Occidentalis & Orientalis perpetua consensioe, lib. 3. ca. 11. sect. 5. pag. 1077. a Scholar of the Jesuits, made use of the mony, which, by vir∣tue of Letters commendatory from the Patriarch, he had collected in several Provinces for the uses and necessities of the Church, to dethrone his Patron, who had employed him. The occasion of his disgust and hatred of the Patriarch proceeded from his not being preferred by him to the Archbishoprick of Thessa∣lonica, which he earnestly desired, and now he was resolved in the way of re∣venge to step into his Seat: for which advancement he was to pay no less then fifty thousand Dollers. But not being able to make good his undertaking and satisfy for this great summ, after seven days huffing and domineering, the Turks banished him and the Bishop of Amasia
his Confederate, who died there, to the Island of Tenedos: whence writing penitential Letters to the Patriarch, in which he acknowledged his guilt and the justice of his punishment, he was by his favour restored to his former Dio∣cese. V. Hotting. Annal. pag. 559. where through a mistake he is called Athanasius. March 1634. Six months after this, Anastasius Pattelari of Candia, Archbishop of Thessalonica, bought the Patriarchship at the price of sixty thou∣sand Dollers: and this by the instigation and with the assistence of the Romanists, as Cyril writes in a Letter from Tenedos, whither he was banished. But this per∣fidious and ingratefull man, whom Cyril had preferred to be a Bishop, and had otherways obliged, continued scarce a month in the dignity, which he had gai∣ned by horrid Simony, Cyrillus being restored in June following upon the hard condition of paying, besides the summ which the sacrilegious Usurper had contracted for, an overplus of ten thousand Dollers, almost to the utter ruine of the poor Greeks, of whom it was to be exacted and levied.
March 1635.pag. 561. Cyrillus Contari begins again to raise new troubles in the Greek Church, to gratify his own ambi∣tion and pride, and his Masters, the Jesuits, and bribing the Turks with fifty thousand Dollers, invades once more the Patriarchall Throne, which is now wholly influenced and governed by the Jesuits. In the midst of his wine in April following, not able to keep the secret, he confesses, that all was done by an agreement with the Pope, to whom Cyril was to be sent, whom they had got banished to Rhodes. This man was every way fit for their turns, being of a base mercenary temper, and wholly depending upon Rome: making fre∣quent profession, that if the Pope would but furnish him with mony enough, he would not onely kiss his hands, but his feet too: and I suppose he would have been content to have styled himself Patriarch, Imperatoris Turcarum & Romani Pontificis gratiâ. Cyril now an Exile in Rhodes gives an account, by Letters to the Dutch Em∣bassadour, of his hard and cruel usage, and of the designs of some of the Chri∣stian
Corsayrs to have seised upon him in order to his transportation into Italy: which being made known to the chief Officer, who commanded the Souldiery in that Island, was happily prevented by his removing him thence. About eighteen months after, July 1636. he was restored, though not without the powerfull intercession of his friends, and great sums of mony, without which be the cause never so just and clear, nothing is done in Turkey. Cyril, though restored, had the same difficulties to encounter with as before: the same enemies still remained, who kept up their animosities and malice to∣ward him: those of Cyrillus of Beroea his party, advanced during his usurpa∣tion to titles and dignities in the Church, who were now disgraced and ran the same fortune with him, endeavouring by all means possible to promote his in∣terest: and we cannot easily imagine, that the Jesuits were now reconciled and become his Friends. No, they saw to their hearts grief, how Cyril had still prevailed, notwithstanding his frequent depositions and banishment: and there∣fore they all were resolved to be rid of him one way or other and get him dis∣patcht.
For now they were grown fu∣rious and desperately mad against him: and nothing less then his bloud would satisfy their revenge. Which yet God would not suffer them to effect, till about two years after. The Tragical time drew nigh, in which this excellent man was to be made a Sacrifice. Of the manner of his Death I am able to give a particular relation, as having received it from the mouth of the Reverend Doctour Pocock, Pre∣bendary of Christ Church Oxon, a per∣son of excellent judgment and incom∣parable learning in the Orientall Lan∣guages, as those many usefull and curi∣ous Books, which he has published, fully declare, who then lived at Con∣stantinople, when the bloudy fact was committed, and of which he sent a large account to that excellent man, Arch∣bishop Laud, of famous memory, who was very inquisitive to know the mi∣nute circumstances of the Patriarch's Death, little thinking at that time, that his own sad fate was coming on so fast. The copy of this Letter was unhappily lost in the time of the Civil Wars: but this reverend and excellent Person has been pleased often in discourse to give
me the summ of it. Which very much confirms the relation of the same Mur∣ther, written byV. Epistolam Conopii ad Antonium Legerum apud Hotting. in appendice Analectorum, pag. 564. Nathanael Cono∣pius, Protosyncellus of the Patriar∣chall Church under this Patriarch, in Greek. Cyril's Enemies not able to get any advantage over him, during the Empe∣rour's stay at Constantinople, the chief Vizir being his Friend, they foreseeing their departure from that City, had with their mony gained an interest in Bairam Bassa, then in great favour, who undertook the business for them, which he thus by a wile effected. For the Grand Signor, having resolved in the year 1638. upon a War upon the Persi∣ans in order to the recovering of Bagdat out of their hands, into which it had faln not long before, sent this Bairam Bassa before him to prepare the way, and to make all necessary provisions for the intended Siege: while he and the Vizir advanced in slow and easy mar∣ches with the gross of the Army, then gathering from the most distant parts of the Empire, though in two distinct
Bodies, and at some distance, for the convenience of forrage and quarter. The Emperour finding all things to his mind, and agreeable to his expectation, was hugely pleased and satisfied with his conduct. He taking the advantage, and being often admitted into the Em∣perour's presence, assisted herein by Husain Bassa, represented to him, among other things relating to that conjuncture, that Cyrillus had a great power over those of his Religion, that by his insti∣gation the Cossacks had but lately faln uponIn the ordinary Maps it is called Azoph. Azac, (a considerable Town upon the River Tanais, not far from the great lake of Maeotis,) which they took and pillaged, that he was a dangerous man, and might stir up the Greeks, which were so numerous in Constantino∣ple, to mutiny, at that time especially, when the Imperial City was left bare and defenseless, most of the Janizaries being in the Camp, and therefore that it was fitting and necessary to prevent such a mischief, as might easily happen, by putting him to death. The jealous Emperour possessed with these plausible stories, immediately in a rage signed
an Hatte Sherif or Order for his being strangled: and a Courier was dispatcht away with it in great hast to the Caima∣cam or Governour. He, pursuant to his Order, forthwith sent his Officers to seize upon Cyrillus, and sent him Priso∣ner to one of the Castles upon the Bos∣phorus. In the EveningAnno Domini 1638. Januarii 27. Cyrillus Pa∣triarcha Constantinopolitanus, inimicorum calumniis op∣pressis, Imperatoris tum absentis mandato strangulatus est. D. Pocockius in supplemento Historiae Dynastiarum ad finem Gregorii Abulpharagii, pag. 53. Oxon. 1663. Vbi vir ille longè praeclarissimus pro Januario mense reponendum fuisse Junium me plusquam semel admonuit, uti in chartâ rectè seriptum erat quam malè intellexit Typotheta, nec mendum inter legendum sustulit Corrector. June 27. they took him thence, and put him in∣to a Boat, telling him, that they were carrying him on board a Vessel lying at Santo Stephano, a small Port upon the Propontis, a little below the Seven Towers, in order to his transportation. But as soon as they had launched forth, he perceiving their design to murther him, fell upon his knees and prayed with great fervency and earnestness, pre∣paring himself for death. After some revilings and buffettings, they did not long delay to put the fatal string about his Neck, and soon dispatcht him.
Having done the bloudy work, they stript him and threw his naked Body into the Sea: which was afterward ta∣ken up by Fishermen, and by some of his Friends buried upon the Shore, where it had lain exposed for some time. But it soon appeared, that the malice of his enemies was not yet satisfied: for en∣vying him the honour of a Grave, they addrest to the Caimacam; and got an Or∣der from him to have his Body dug up, and thrown into the Sea again: and it was done accordingly. But the Body was afterwards recovered, and buried obscurely in one of the Islands, that lie over against the Bay of Nicomedia. Thus fell this great man Cyrillus Lucaris by the hands of violence, whom both for his Piety and Sufferings, which were wholly upon the account of Religion, I shall not be afraid, having just reason so to doe, notwithstanding the passio∣nate censure of Monsieur Arnaud, to esteem a Saint and Martyr.
APPENDIX. PRaeter ea, quae de hac vetustissima juxtà ac piissimâ Doxologiâpag. 223, &c. su∣periùs annotavi, paucula haec subnectere visum est. Exstat Doxologia haec Graecè edita in fine Liturgiae S. Chrysostomi, ab Ambrosio Pelargo Niddano, ordinis Praedicatorum, Wormatiae, 4o. an. 1541. quem Symeon Syracusanus (uti ille lo∣quitur) Popponem Trevirorum Archi∣episcopum è Terrâ Sanctâ, quam religio∣nis fortè causâ inviserat, redeuntem co∣mitatus, Treverim attulisse fertur. Co∣dicem autem hunc mirae vetustatis esse de∣praedicat, & ante mille annos descriptum fuisse, & ante octingentos plus minus an∣nos Treverim allatum. Pauculas varia∣tiones in margine apposui sub notâ Tr. Librum autem istum, rarissimum quidem & vix alibi reperiendum, ex ipsius Bibli∣othecâ quantivis pretii ceimeliis refertissi∣mâ, utendum dedit vir consummatissimae eruditionis, & omni laude major, D. Tho∣mas Marshallus S. Theologiae Professor, & Collegii Lincolniensis Oxon. Rector perquam dignissimus. Facilè quoque vi∣debis
formam istam, quae in Libro Consti∣tutionum Apostolicarum paulò amplior oc∣currit, cum Codice Treverensi magis con∣venire, quàm cum nostro Alexandrino. Sed discrimen utriusque adeò leve & nul∣lius momenti est, ut in caeteris mirifica consensio perplaceat, & invictissimum Ca∣tholicae veritatis argumentum contra nu∣peros Dogmatistas, qui sub purioris The∣ologiae titulo antiquam & Apostolicam de Sanctissimae Trinitatis & divinitatis D. nostri Jesu Christi mysterio fidem subdolè & impiè corruperunt, meritò debeat aesti∣mari. Reperi quoque hunc divinissimum Hymnum ad finem duorum Psalteriorum Graecorum MSS. in Bibliothecâ Bodlei∣anâ, quorum alter num. 15. in 8o. inter Codices Baroccianos, scriptus erat ante quingentos & septuaginta plus minus an∣nos, ut ex circulis Paschalibus post Prae∣fationem S. Basilii, Theodoreti, & Cosmae Indico-pleustae illic descriptis abunde li∣quet. Horum enim primus incipit ab anno Creationis 6613. sive Christi 1105. ultimus verò desinit anno ejusdem Epo∣chae 6648. sive Christi 1140. Circa hu∣jus intervalli initia codicem descriptum fuisse hae tabulae ad computum Ecclesiasti∣cum spectantes, quae futuris annis, uti solent Ephemerides & Calendaria, pro∣spicere
meritò censendae sint, liquidò te∣stantur. Alter verò in 4o. manu quidem recentiori & vix ante tria secula, uti ex characteribus conjectari fas est, exaratus. Denique S. Notkeri Psalterium MS. in Archivis Seldenianis pulcherrimè, additis notulis musicis, descriptum, monitu eru∣ditissimi mei Amici, D. Edvardi Bernar∣di, S. T. B. & Saviliani Professoris Astro∣nomiae, consului, quo praeter versionem Latino Sermone expressam, quam Eccle∣sia Anglicana juxta rituale in Ecclesiis Occidentalibus ferè ubivis locorum usu receptum, ad amussim sequitur, nisi quòd è Graeco paulò variatum sit, Graecè quo∣que, characteribus licèt Latinis exstat. Variantes Lectiones literâ N. notatas ha∣bebis.
juxta exemplar Alexandrinum, sive, uti illic inscri∣bitur, . , Ita pro more in isthoc codice vetustissimo scribitur pro , uti quoque in Constitut. Apost. lib. 7. cap. 47. & apud S. Athanasium , Psalter. Oxon. 8o. Treverensis Codex & S. Notkeri Psalterium & Psalterium Oxon. 4o. habent . Vice  substituitur apud S. Athanas. in Psalt. Oxon. 8o. & in Horologio  In Cod. Tr. inter  interponitur , uti etiam in Constit. Apost. & Psalter. Oxon. 4o. , , Postponitur  in Constit. Apost. post, immediatè verbis planè interpolatis sequitur,  deinde  — Psalt. Oxon. 8o. malè deest om∣nino in Tr. & Const. Apost. at habet vetus exemplar Wor∣matiense, uti annotavit Pelargus. , . ,
, Tr. Const. Apost. Psalter. Oxon. N. & Horolog. post  in Const. Apost. cae∣tera, quae sequi debuerant, ita conunduntur, . , Ita quoque Psalter. Oxon. 4o. at Tr. Psalter. Oxon. 8o. unà cum libris impressis rectius . N. habet imperfectè . , , Desunt haec verba de Spiritu S. in Psalt. N. ut∣pote quae in fine reponuntur. Caeteri codices hic habent uti in proprio & debito loco. , Deficit articulus , Tr. , , Tr. mendosè: & fortasse non Librarii sed Typothetae mendum. , numero singulari Constit. Apost. Psalteria Oxon. uti etiam N. & quantum est codicum impressorum, juxta Evangel. S. Joannis cap. 1. v. 29. con∣cordant verò omnes in sequente versiculo, habéntque Plura∣liter—  — . Tr. mal. , ,
Psalter. Oxon. 8o. . ,Graeci in , & alibi, nescio quâ authoritate freti, semper hîc praefigunt , quod planè re∣dundare videtur. deest  in Const. Apost. uti supra videre est. Oc∣currit quippiam simile in Constit. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 13. . , post  sequitur in N. —habet quoque Psalt. Oxon. 4o. . , .
Hymnus Matutinus, è Psalterio S. Notkeri. Gloria in excelsis Deo, Et in Terra Pax, Hominibus bonae Voluntatis. Laudamus Te, Benedicimus Te, Adoramus Te, Glorificamus Te, Gratias agimus Tibi, Propter magnam gloriam Tuam, Domine Deus, Rex Coelestis, Deus Pater Omnipotens. Domine fili Vnigenite Jesu Christe, Domine Deus, Agnus Dei, Filius Patris, Qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis, Qui tollis peccata mundi, Suscipe deprecationem nostram▪ Qui sedes ad dextram Patris, Miserere nobis, Quoniam Tu solus Sanctus, Tu solus Dominus, Tu solus altissimus, Jesu Christe, Cum Sancto Spiritu, In Gloriâ Dei Patris. Amen.
Sequuntur in eodem venerandae Antiquita∣tis Codice hi Versiculi, è Psalmis maxi∣mâ ex parte collecti, tanquam Hymni pars, isdem uncialibus characteribus & planè  descripti; neque du∣bitandum videtur, quin simul ac eodem tempore olim recitarentur; quod hodiè faciunt Graeci, uti ex Horologiis mani∣festissimum est: malè ergo Hymni Ves∣pertini, à Viro eruditissimo, titulo insig∣nitus est. Variantes lectiones hîc quoque annexas habes. Quando recitatur , reponunt . , , post hunc Versiculum sequitur in Psalter. Oxon. 8o.  ad finem; inde repetunt, — . , Psalt. Oxon. & Codices im∣pressi. . . .post in  & in  &  inseritur hic Versiculus, . Ita etiam in Psalt. Oxon.
. . . . , . ita quoque Psalt. Oxon. 4o. at alterum habet . , . . .
Per singulos dies benedicam Te, Et laudabo nomen tuum in seculum, Et in seculum seculi. Dignare Domine die isto Sine peccato nos custodire. Benedictus es Domine Deus Patrum no∣strorum, Et laudandum ac glorificandum est Nomen tuum in secula. Amen. Benedictus es, Domine, Doce me justificationes tuas. Benedictus es, Domine, Doce me justificationes tuas. Benedictus es, Domine, Doce me justificationes tuas. Domine, refugium Tufactus es nobis, In generatione & generatione. Ego dixi, Domine, miserere mei, Sana animam meam, quia peccavi in Te. Domine, ad Te confugi, Doce me facere voluntatem tuam; Quia Deus meus es Tu. Quoniam apud Te est fons vitae; In lumine tuo videbimus lumen. Praetende misericordiam tuam Scientibus Te.
. ,, ita apud S. Basilium de Spiritu S. ad Amphiloch. cap. 29. ,, apud S. Basil. uti etiam ad finem Psalterii in Bibliothecâ Bodleianâ in 4o.   apud S. Basil. & in Psalt. Oxon.  , Psalt. Oxon. , . Psalt. Oxon. Ita Hymnum hunc exhibent codi∣ces impressi. Hymnus Vespertinus. Lumen hilare Sanctae gloriae, immorta∣lis Patris, Coelestis, Sancti, Beati, Jesu Christe, quum ad solis occasum pervene∣rimus, lumen cernentes Vespertinum, Lau∣damus Patrem & Filium & Spiritum Sanctum Dei. Dignus es tempore quovis sanctis vocibus celebrari, Fili Dei, Vitae dator, quapropter Mundus Te glorificat.
Viginti  sive Sectiones,Vide pag. 221. integro Psalmo comprehensae, hoc modo disponuntur. I. Continet Psalmos 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. II. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. III. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. IV. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. V. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. VI. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. VII. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54. VIII. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63. IX. 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69. X. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76. XI. 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84. XII. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90. XIII. 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100. XIV. 101, 102, 103, 104. XV. 105, 106, 107, 108. XVI. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117. XVII. 118. XVIII. 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133. XIX. 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142. XX. 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150.
AN INDEX OF THE Chiefest matters contained in this Book. A. ABsolution. pag. 180 Abstinence from bloud and things strangled. 234 Accounts of time. 216 Adorations used by the Greeks. 213 One Altar onely in a Church anci∣ently. 155 Alexandria. The Patriarch of it. 4 Anachorites. 107 Anointing of the sick. 193 Of others in health. 195 Anointing after Baptism. 117 Not repeated except in one particu∣lar case. 119 Antioch, the Patriarch of it. 5 Archbishops, who so called. 89 Armenians hated by the Greeks mortally. 48 Assumption of the B. Virgin. 26, 46 Athos. 97 B. Baptism. 109 The Greeks believe an absolute ne∣cessity of it. ibid. The manner of it. 111 Form of words. 112, 113 Effect of it. 112 S. Basil's Liturgy. 124 Bishops, always Kaloirs. 79 Bishopricks subject to the Patriar∣chate of Constantinople. 85 No Bells, what used instead of them. 70 Bread blessed and distributed. 143 Sacramental Bread pure. 155 C. Catechumeni. 132 Church Censures, their good effect. 178, 183 Chancell. 67
Charity of the Greeks upon Festival-days. pag. 29 Chrismation inseparable from Bap∣tism. 115 Christianity the causes of its decay in the East. 17 Of its preservation. 18 S. Chrysostom's Liturgie. 123 Church. Their time of going to Church. 30 Churches mean. 51 Not to be repaired without leave. 52 The manner of their Fabrick. 62 In Constantinople. 53 And Galata. 55 Church of Santa Sophia. 57 Of the Holy Apostles. 59 Collection of Christian Children. 11 Colyba. 172 Commemorations of the Living and Dead. 91, 128, 139, 207 Communicating of Children. 161 Communion in both kinds. 142 Confession to a Priest. 160, 178 Confirmation. 115 Consecration of the Elements. 135 When made. 144 Constantinople. The Patriarch. 3, 73 Expence. 75 Revenue. 76, 79 His Assistents. 78 Retinue and Title, when they ad∣dress to him. 79 Dissensions in the choice. 80 What places exempt from his juris∣diction. 73 Atitular Patriarch. 7 Constantinopolitan Creed. 136, 196 Council of Florence. 7, 220 Seven general Councils admitted by the Greeks. 217 The Eighth Council, which. 219 Crossing, the manner of it. 215 Cyprus. Archbishop of it, his pri∣vilege and jurisdiction. pag. 74 D. Days of the week how called. 39 Deacons. 93 Dead. Their opinion about the state of the Dead. 202 Divorces frequent. 192 Doxologie greater and lesser. 223 E. Easter. 31 Eastern Church what, and why so called. 1 Elevation of the Sacramentall Bread. 140 Eucharist celebrated upon Festival-days. 29 The manner of Consecration. 125 European Children prove the best Souldiers. 11 Exaltation of the Holy Cross. The Festival of it. 20 Excommunication, and the supposed effects of it. 184 F. Fasts. 34 Festivals, the happy effect and con∣sequence of them. 18, 19 Calendar. 20 Font. 65, 110 Forgiveness, they ask it one of ano∣ther before they communicate. 143 Good Friday, the severities used upon that day. 42 Gates of their Churches how cal∣led. 64
Godfather but one. pag. 112 Government Ecclesiasticall. 71 Graves visited. 207 Greek Church, the extent of it. 8 Greeks, how sadly opprest. 9 Their temper low and mean. 14 Orthodox in the great articles of Faith. S. Gregorie's Liturgie. 123 H. Head-mony paid by the Greeks. 10 Heraclea. The Archbishop of it crowns the Patriarch of Constan∣tinople. 78, 85 Hymn morning. 44, 225 Evening. 228 Howlings of women at Funerals. 211 I. Jerusalem. The Patriarch of it. 5 Images, painted. 63, 66 No Images engraven or embossed in the Churches. 211 Immersion threefold. 112 Imposition of hands. 177 S. John the Evangelist his death. 20 Islands not far from Constantino∣ple. 101 Justiniana prima. The Archbishop of it, his privilege and jurisdic∣tion. 73 K. Kaloirs. 93 L. Lenten-fast. 35 Lamps burning before the Altar. pag. 69 Lay-persons baptize in case of neces∣sity. 109 Leavened bread in the Sacrament. 153 Life of the Saint read upon his Fe∣stival. 28 Liturgies several sorts. 121 Three onely in use. 123 M. Mahomet's Testament counterseit. 9 Marriages. 180 Metropolitans and Bishops under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 83 Monasteries exempt. 237 Vpon Mount Athos. 97 Monks. 93 Mysteries or Sacraments seven. 107 N. Nicene Fathers. 34 O. Oblation of bread and wine how blessed. 129 Offerings of the Greeks. 29 Vpon recovery from sickness. 216 For the dead. 209 Offices long and tedious. 27 Holy Orders. 93, 176 Oyl onely made and blest by the Pa∣triarch and Bishops. 118 The Composition of it. 119 P. Painting mean. 63 Palm Sunday. 39
Particles of bread. pag. 127, 171, 205, 208 Old Paschal Cycle still made use of. 31 Passion-week. 39 Day. 42 Patriarchs four, their jurisdictions, limits and titles. 2 Particularly prayed for. 6 Inauguration. 70 Judges in Civil affairs. 77 Patriarchs of other Communions. 7 Patriarchal Church at Constanti∣nople. 59 Penances. 178 Pictures admitted in their Churches and reverenced. 211 Pillar, to which our B. Saviour was tied, part of it remaining. 60 Pope not mentioned in the publick prayers of the Greeks. 6 Prayer to Saints. 231 Posture and behaviour in their Churches. 214 Priests. 90, 177 Praesanctificatorum Liturgia. 123, 125, 175 Procession of the H. Spirit. 197 Processions used in their Churches. 130, 133 Purgatory. Whether the Greeks be∣lieve Purgatory. 204 R. Readers. 93, 176 Renegado's. 15 S. Sacraments or Mysteries seven. 107 Sacrament but once celebrated the same day on the same Altar. 155 Vp Holy-days. 156 Received four times a year. 157 And Fasting. 158 At what time of the day celebrat. 157 In Lent not till the afternoon. 158 Their posture at receiving. 159 Reserved for the uses of sick per∣sons. 162 Sacristy. 69 Salutations at Easter. 32 Singing mean. 216 Slaves Christian. 16 Sub-deacons. 93, 177 Sunday how called. 31 Sundays after Easter. 32 Before Easter. 36 Superstition of the Greeks. 231 Swearing upon a Cross. 236 T. Communion-Table. 68 Table called Prothesis. 68 Transubstantiation, a novel Doc∣trine. 146 Triangular piece of Bread in honour of the Virgin. 233 Turkish Empire how supplied. 16 V. Veneration of the unconsecrated Ele∣ments. 134 Vestments. 237 Vigils. 27 Of Good Friday. 42 Of other Festivals. 49 Vnion of Christ. Princes desired. 13 W. The ceremony of Washing the Feet of twelve persons. 40 War. The Holy War defended. 13 Water poured into the Chalice. 127, 140 Waters when blest. 23, 49, 111 The same Water not used a second time in Baptism. 114 No Holy Water at their Church∣doors. 216 Women Profest. 106 FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and to be sold by Richard Davis in Oxford. IN FOLIO. DR. Hammonds Works the 1. Vol. Containing a Collection of Dis∣courses chiefly Practical, with the Life of the author, 1674. —His Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testament, the fourth Edition, 1675. —On the Psalms.—His Sermons. Lucian's Dialogues, made English from the Original, by Jasper Mayn, D. D. Mereator's Atlas, Englished by W. Saltonstall. A Poem to the Duke of York on our late Sea-fight with the Dutch, by J. M. C. C. Oxon. Five New Plays. The Siege of Urbine. Selindra. Love & Friendship. Pandora. Imperiale a Tragedy. By Sir William Killigrew, Vice-Chamberlain to Her Majesty, 1666. An Elegy on the Death of the Duke of Glocester, by M. Lluellin Dr. in Physick. The History of the Pretended Saints, by Hen. Foulis the second Edition. 1674. The Works of Mr. William Pemble. Songs for 1. 2. and 3. Voyces to the Thorow-Bass with some short Sym∣phonies. Collected out of some of the select Poems of the Incom∣parable Mr. Cowley and Others. And Camposed by H. Bowman Philo-Musicus. Engraved upon 85 Copper Plates. The 2d. Edition corrected and amended by the Author. 1679. A Letter of all the Lay. Nobility of England to the Pope, 1300. then denying his Suppremacy in things Temporal in the Kings Domini∣ons, in Latin, with the same in English, and all the said Nobilities Names with their Coats of Armes (being 104.) Engraved on a large Copper Plate: to which is adjoyned a brief account of the Pope's Pretences to the Crown of England, and an Answer there∣unto. With a Dedication of All to the present Nobility. Printed on two broad sheets of Royal Paper. 1679. Annalium Mundi Vniversal. Origines Rerum (& progressus) sacras juxta ac Seculares, ab Orbe condito tradentium, Lib. XIV. Authore Hug. Robinsono, olim Wintoniensi Archididascalo, postea Archidia o. Jussu Regio Recognovit, emaculavit, lacunosum explevit, multaque nocte adopertum in lucem edidit, THOMAS PEIRCE, S. T. P. Deca∣nus Sarisburiensis. 1677.
Jamblichi Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptor. Tho. Gale Anglus Graece nunc primum eddit, Latine vertit, & notas adjecit. (1678.) è Theatro. Provinciale, (seu Constitutiones Angliae) &c. Auctore Guliel. Lyndwood, J. V. D. Cui adjiciuntur Constitutiones D. Othonis, & D. Othoboni, Car∣dinalium, Annotationibus Johannis de Athona. Huic editioni nunc primum accesserunt Constitutiones Provinciales antedictorum Archiepiscoporum, & aliorum sine Glossematis in ordinem digestae. Omnia ab innumeris, qui∣bus undique scatebant, erroribus atque mendis purgata ac restituta. 1679. IN QUARTO. A Collection of severall Replies and Vindications of the Church of England, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 4. Vol. The hurt of Sedition, or the true Subject to the rebel, by Sir John Cheek, with a Preface of D. Langbane's. A Funerall Sermon on Phil. 1. 23. by John Millet. The Vaulting Master, or the Art of Vaulting illustrated with sixteen brass Figures, by W. Stoaks. Christ and his Church, or Christianity explained in 7. Evangelical and Ecclesiastical heads, by Edw. Hyde, D. D. sometime Fellow of Trini∣ty College in Cambridge, & late Rector of Brightwell in Berks. Cheerfull Ayres or Ballads, for three Voices, by J. Wilson Dr. in Mu∣sick, late Professor of the same in the University of Oxford and one of the Gentlemen of His Majesties Chappel, in 3. Vol. Hosanna, a Thanksgiving Sermon on the Kings Return on Psal. 118. v. 22, 23, 24, 25. by Jo. Martin. A Sheet of directions for Daily Examination of Sin, by Bishop Vsher. The Throne of David, or an Exposition on the second Book of Samu∣el by W. Guild. Howel's Vocal Forrest the First part. Davenant, Morton, Drury, &c. Good Counsel for Peace. Sicily and aples, or the Fatal Union. A Play. Some Considerations touching the Usefulness of Experimental natural Philosophy, propos'd in Familiar Discourses to a Friend, by way of Invitation to the study of it, by the Honorable Robert Boyle Esquire, The 2d. Edition. —Considerations of the Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, the 2d. Vol. 1671. —The 2d. Vol. of his Experiments of Air, with many Figures en∣graved on 8 Brass Plates. Also his Treatise of the Atmospheres of consistent Bodies. 1669. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Numb. 6, 7, 8. 1666. Nehemiah, or the Excellent Governour: A Sermon Preached at Dublin, Aug. 69. before the Right Honourable Thomas Earl of Ossery then Lord Deputy of Ireland, by Jo. Parry, D. D. and Dean of the ho∣ly Trinity in Dublin, 1670.
A Sermon Preached at a Visitation at Grantham in the Country and Diocess of Lincoln, 8 Octob. 1641. on Mat. 15. 9. by the Right Reve∣rend Father in God, Robert Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of that Dio∣cess, in Folio and Quarto. 1671. Two Patterns of Goodnesse and Charity; one of Job in the midst of his Honour and Wealth, the other of the Widdow of Sarepta in the Extremity of her Poverty. In two Sermons by David Stokes, D. D. A censure upon certain passages contained in the History of the Royal Society, as being destructive to the Established Religion and Church of England, by Henry Stubbs, Physician in Warwick, the second E∣dition with additions, 1671. —His Replyes to Glanvil, More, &c. 1671. A Collection of Sermons upon several occasions by Tho. Pierce, D. D. Dean of Sarum. 1671. —His Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees. —His Decad of Caveats to the People of England, being a 2d. Vol. of Ser∣mons; to which is added an Appendix for Conviction of the Atheist, the Infidel, and the Setter up of Science to the prejudice of Religion. 1679. A Sermon Preached in Lent Assizes at Alesbury, Mar. 8. 1671. being Ash-wednesday, by A. Littleton, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Maj. The Attique antiquities in seven Books, the three first by Fra. Rous, the four last by Za. Bogan. The Eighth Edition. 1675. A Sermon of the Credibility of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. With an Appendix to the same by Tho. Smith Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College. Propositions concerning Optic-Glasses, with their naturall Reasons, drawn from Experiments. At the Theater, 1679. Of the Benefits of our Saviour Jesus Christ to Mankind. At the Thea. 1680. The Ends of Christian Religion justified in 10. Sermons, by R. Shar∣rock, L. L. D. 1673. Moxon of the Globes Celestial and Terrestrial, the 3d. Edition. 167. Joan. Buridani Quaestiones in octo Libros Politicorum Aristotelis. Porta Mosis; sive Dissertationes aliquot R. Mosis Maimonidis, nunc primum Arabicè prout ab ipso Authore conscripta sunt, & Latine editae, una cum Appendice Notarum Miscellan. Opera & studio E. Pocockii Ling. Hebr. & Arab. in Acad. Oxon. Professoris. Historia Dynastiarum Arabice. Auth. Gregorio Abul Pharagio. Edit. Intr∣pret. & continuat. per E. Pocock, L. Hebr. & Arab. Profess. in Acad. Oxon. Idea Trigonometriae demonstratae. Item de Cometis, & inquisitio in Bulliadi Astronomiae Philolaicae Fundamenta, Authore Setho Ward. nunc Ep. Salis. Savili Oratio coram Eliz. Regina. Britannia Rediviva. Musarum Acad. Oxon. Epicedia Acad. Oxon. in obitum Hen. Ducis Glocestriensis. Epicedia Acad. Oxon. in obitum Mariae Principis Arausionensis. Academiae Oxoniensis Notitia. Edit. 2da. 1675.
Dissertationes quatuor, Quibus Episcopatus jura, &c. contra sententiam D. Blondel & Aliorum, Auth. H. Hammond, S. Theolog. D. Oxonium Poema per J. Vernon. ex Aede Christi. De anima Brutorum quae Hominis vitalis est, exercitationes duae. Authore Tho. Willis, M. D. & Professore Sedlaiano. 1673. Pharmaceutice rationalis sive diatriba de Medicamentoram operationibus in Corpore humano pars 1a. & 2a. vol. 2. Auth. T. Willis M. D. 1674. & 75. De Causis Remediisque Dissidiorum, quaeorbem Christianum hodie affligunt, exercitatio Theologica. Authore Tho. Smith S. T. B. & Col. B. Mar. Mag. Oxon. Socio. 1675. Examen Censurae: sive Responsio ad quasdam Animadversiones antehac in∣editas, in Librum cui titulus Harmonia apostolica &c. per Geor. Bullum Anglicanae Eccl. Presbyterum. Accessit Apologia pro Harmonia ejusque Authore contra Declamationem Thomae Tullii, S. T. P. in libro nuper Typis evulgato, quem justificatio Paulina, &c. inscripsit, per eundem. 1676. Catalogus plerorumque omnium authorum (tam antiquorum quam recentio∣rum) qui de Re Heraldica Latinè, Gallicè, Italicè, Hispanicè, Germani∣cè, Anglicè scripserunt. Interspersis hic illic, qui claruerunt in Re Anti∣quaria, & jure civili, ea saltem parte quae HERALDRIAE facem accen∣dit, &c. A Tho. Gore, Armig. 1680. IN OCTAVO. DR Hammond's Practical Catechism, with the reasonableness of Christian Religion. A View of the threats and punishments recorded in the Scriptures, Alphabetically composed, with some Observations upon several Texts, by Zachary Bogan of C. C. C. in Oxon. —The Mirth of a Christian Life, and the sorrows of a wicked Life, by the same Author. Fides Apostolica, or a Discourse asserting the received Authors and Au∣thority of the Apostles Creed: together with the grounds and ends of Composing thereof by the Apostles, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of Faith, &c. by George Ashwell, B. D. —Gestus Eucharisticus, a Discourse concerning the Gesture at the receiving of the Lords Supper. A Treatise of the preservation of the Eye-sight, by Dr. Baily. The Circles of Proportion, and the Horizontal Instrument, &c. Both invented, and their use written, by W. Oughtred Aetonensis. The natural Mans blindness, in 3. Sermons on Rom. 7. 7. by H. Hurst. Essays and Observations on the Humours of the Age, Discovered and Characterized, by W. Masters, A. M. late Fellow of Merton College. Ovid's Invective against Ibis, translated into English Verse, by J. Jones Schoolmaster in Hereford, 2d. Edition. A plain and profitable Catechism, with a Sermon on Ex. 23. 2. by Mr. James Bacon, published by Dr. Henry Wilkinson. A Divine Theater, or a Stage for Christians, a Sermon at C. C. in Ox∣ford by John Wall, D. D.
Shepheard of Sincerity and Hypocrisie, with a Tract annexed, to prove that true Grace doth not lie so much in the Degree, as in the Nature of it. By a Reverend Divine. Downham, of Christian Liberty. Homer à la mode, a Mock Poem upon the first and second Books of Homer's Iliads, 2d. Edition. Christian Liberty rightly stated and enlarged, in a brief Vindication of the Lawfulness of Eating things strangled, or Meas confected with Blood, by W. Roe. The Nullity of the Romish Faith, or a Blow at the Root of the Ro∣mish Church, being an Examination of their Fundamental Doctrine concerning the Churches Infallibility, by Matthew Pool, late Minister of the Gospel in London, 1671. the 4th Edition. The Origine of Forms and Qualities (according to the Corpuscular Philosophy) Illustrated by Considerations and Experiments, by the Hon. Robert Boyle Esq Fellow of the Royal Society, 1671. the 2d Ed. —Hydrostatical Paradoxes, made out by new Experiments (for the most part Physical and easie▪) 1666. Tracts about The Cosinical qualities of things. Cosmical Suspicions. The Temperature of the Subterraneal Regions. The Temperature of the Submatine Regions. The Bottom of the Sea. To which is Prefixt, an Intro∣duction to the History of particular Qualities. 8o 1. vol. —New Experiments of the Relation betwixt Flame and Air, and a∣bout Explosions, with an Hydrostatical Discourse in Answer to Dr. More. Of weighing water in Water, of the Levity of Bodies under Water. Of the Airs spring on Bodies under Water. Of the Differing Pressure of Heavy Solids & Fluids (1673.) in one vol. —Tracts of the saltness of the Sea, Of a staticall Hygroscope and its Uses. Of the force of the Airs moisture. Of the Natural and Preter-natural state of Bodies. Of the positive Nature of Cold, &c. 1674. —The Sceptical Chymist, or Chymico-Physical Doubts and Paradoxes, touching the Experiments whereby Vulgar Spagirists endeavour to evince their Salt, Sulphur, and Mecury, to be the true Principles of Things. To which in this second Edition, are subjoined divers Ex∣periments and Notes about the producibleness of Chymicall Prin∣ciples. 1680. Whitby's Answer to sure footing, and Fiat Lux. A Funerall Sermon on 1 Cor. 7. v. 29, 30, 31. by Tho. Hawkins. Holland of taking the height of a Comet. —His Globe Notes. 1678. The City Match, and Amorous War, two Plays by Jas. Maine of C. C.Ox. The Devil of Mascon, or a true Relation of the chief thing an unclean Spirit did and said at Mascon in Burgundy, in the house of Mr. Fr.
Precand, Minister of the Reformed Church there, Published in French by the said Minister, and made English by one that hath a particular knowledge of the Truth of this Story, the fifth Edition. 1679. The History of the Propagation and Improvement of Vegetables by the Concurrence of Art and Nature, &c. written according to Observa∣tions made from Experience and Practice, the second Edit. much Enlarged by  late Fellow of New Coll. 1672. Characters of a  Heart and the Comorts thereof, Collected out of the Word of God by Hen, Wilkinson. D. D. late Principal of Magd. Hail. 1674. An Explication of the Divine Goodness, in the Words of the most Renowned BOETIVS. Translated by a Lover of Truth and Vir∣tue. 1674. Animadverons upon Sir R.  Chronile, and his Continuation, wherein are many Errors discover'd and some Truths advanc'd by T. Blunt, Esq 172. A View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law: by Sir Tho. Ridley Knight, with the Notes of J. Gregory late of Chr. Ch. Oon. the 4th Edition. Experiments, Notes, &c. about the Origine of particular Qualities of Alkali and Acidum, &c. by the Hon.  Esq 1676. Notitia Hricorum , or Animadversios on the Antient and Famous Greek and Latin Historians, Englished with some Additions, by W. Davenant, of Sermons Preached upon Several Occasions by  D. D. Prebend of Chr. Ch. Decrees of Pope Innont the 11th. containing the suppression of an Office of the  Conception of the most Holy Virgin; And of a Multitude of Indulgences. According to the Copies at Rome: from the Printing-Prs of the most Reverend Apostolick Chamber. Translated  English out of the French Copy; (to which the Latin was  as also here it is) by the direction of an Eminent Person of Honour. 179. A Guide to the Holy City, of Directions and  to an Holy Life, by J Reading B. D. Scripture vindicated from the Misapplicatn of Mr. St. Marshal in his Sermon . The Christian  by  D. D. A Sermon on the 2  with the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy, by W. Certain Sermons and Letters of Defence and Resolution to some of the late Controversies of our times, by Jas. Maine, D. D. Col. Henry Martin's Letters to his Lady of Delight, with her kind Re∣turns, &c. published from the Original Papers, by Edm. Gaytn. A short Introduction of Grammar generally to be used, Compiled and se forth for the bringing up of all those that intend to attain to the
knowledge of the Latin Tongue. To which are added usefull Ob∣servations, by way of Comment, out of Ancient and Learned Gram∣marians, the third Edition at the Theater, . 1679. De Confirmatione, sive Benedictione post Baptismum solenni, &c. H. Hammond. S. T. D. Ailmeri Musae Sacrae, seu Jonas, Jeremiae Threni & Dai▪ Gr reddit carmine. Ad Grammaticem ordinariam supplementa  3. mulis ∣ctior, à Guil. Phalerio. Contemplationes Metapsice  Natura Rerm & rects Rationis lumine deductae, Auth. G. Ritch, Bohemo. Delphi Phoenicizantes per Edm. Dickinson, M. D. Coll. Mert. Socio. Artis Lgic Compend à Roberto Sanderson,  Epis. Lincoln. Edit. Nona. 1680. —Compendim Exercitath Epistolica in Tho. Hobbii Philsph;  Auth. Seth. Ward. S▪ T. D. —Astronomia Geometrica. Vi Methodu proponitur qua primariorum Planetarum Astronomia sive iliptica Circularis possit Geometrice absolivi. Carmen Tograi Poetae Arabis , una cum  Latina & Notis Praxin illius exhibentibus. Opera Ed. Pookii L. Heb. & Arab. Profess∣ris. Accessit  de prosdia Arabica, per Sam. Clericum. 1661. Juelli Apologia Ecclsiae Angl. Graec. Lt. Lat. ex Oti & Opera H. Edmunson. 166. Atii Stratagemum Satanae. Aai Phenomena  Scholiis Grae. Scholiis Grae. 1672. 1679. Fastiri & Mari Libll Precum. —de Trinitate contra Arian. 1678. Zosimi Historiae  libisex. Gr. Lat. Richardson de  1678. Ashwell de Ethica, sive  S. T. D.  1680. Sharrock de Officiis  de Moribus. —De Incontinentia. Analsis Libri Aristoelis de Sphistic. Elenchis, Opera & 1664. HOMERUS EBPAIZON sive Sacris quoad Normam Loquendi. Subnect. HESSIODUS Ath. Zach. Eogan, è C. C. C. Oxon. Puriles Consabulatiunculae, Graeco-Latinae Ad calcem adjectius est Id Graecus & Latinus in quibus omnia fere Gr. & Lat.
Occurrunt, compreenduntur. Authore W. Jackson. Diaconi Epitome . Gr. Lat. Scheibleri Compend.  167. Alcinous de Doctr. Platon. Gr.  1667. Nemesius de Natura Hominis Gr. Lat. 1671. Antiquitates  è  BONO JUVENTUTIS. Opera &  correctior. 1674. Epistolae Quatuor▪ quarumduae  Trcarum agun. Duae Septem Asiae  continent. Auth. Tho. Smith, Coll. D.  1674. Bleau de Gls. Edit.  1675. C.  Opera Omnia. Notis  1676. De  J. Seobaldo Com. Pal. 1676. D. Nortono Knatchbull,  &  1677. & Notis Idustrati. è 1678. IN DUODECIMO. A Christian  or pparations for, and Consolations against Death; with the  Cordial, by Edw. Hide, D. D. —A Vindcon of Truth against Erro: in seven Controversies, 1. Of Sinners Prayers. 2. Priests Marriage. 3.  4. Images. 5 Praying to Saints and  6. Justification by Faith. 7. Of Christs New Testament or Directions to a Godly Life, Instructions for the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper, by H.  The ninth Edition. 1680. Two Assise Sermons Prached at Reading and Abbingdon, on Cant. 7. 4. Ps. 82. 1. with two other Sermons Prached at St. Mary's in Oxon. on 1 Cor. 15. 10. Ps. 58. 11. by A short review of some Directions for performance of Cathedral Ser∣vice, by Ed Lwe. The 2d Edition, with additions. 1664. A compleat Herbal, by Robert Lovel. The 2d Edition. Dr. Stoke's Directions for private Devotions and Retirements, to which are adjoyned some private Devotions of the late Learned Bp. An∣drews; never before extant. 1668. Dexelius of Eternity, in Welch. The Trial of a Christians Sincere Love to Christ in four Sermons, by W. Pink. The fifth Edition. The Gentile Sinner, or Englands brave Gentleman Character'd in a
Letter to a Friend: both as he is, and as he should be, by Clem. Ellis, M. A. late Fellow of Qu. Coll. Oxn. The sixth Edition. 1679. The Christian Sacrament and Sacrifice, by way of discourse, Medita∣tion and Prayer, upon the Nature▪ Parts and Blessings of the Holy Communion, by  D. D. The 3d Edition at the Thea. 1679. A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have been Printed or translated into English upon any place or book of the Holy-Scrip∣ture now to be had in the Publick Library in Oon. by John Vernevill. Cross, de Febre intermittente. Pavil Disputat. Ethi. Paradoxa Hydrostatica per Rob. Boyle. —Origo formarum Qualitation, &c. —Cogitationes de S. —Tractatus Novem de Qualitat. &c. Clementis Epistolae G. L. 1669. Theses  à Curolo Potter. Smith. Element  Author Edvardo Brerewood. Roberti Baroni  Thelog. Ancillans. —De Peccato Mortali Prolusienes  in duas partes distrib, 1. de Judiciis. 2. de Origie Dominiiservititis, &c. Tho. Jon. L. I. D. —Institut. Metaphyscae. 1675. Bradshaw de Justificatie. Issendoori Cursus Logicus. Combachii Metaphysica Minutius Foelix  &c. Galateus de Moribus & Bartholini Enchiriion . Q. Curtius Notis  1672. Pembli Tractatus Tres de , &c. 1669. Pharmaceutice Rationasive Diatriba de in Human, &c. Corpore Authore Tho. Willis M. D. duo Vol. 1674. & 1675. Rev. Patris Lan. Andrews, Epise. Winton. Preces Privatae Graecè & Latinè, è Theatro. Richardi Gardiner Hereforden, Aedis Christi Oxon. Canon. Specimen Oratorium cum Supplemento  1675. M. Antonini Imperatoris, de scipso & ad seipsum, libi XII. Gr. Lat. & Notis illustrati, è Theatro. 1680. In 24. LIps de Constantica. de Consolatione Phil . FINIS.
