T1395A 99831548 36011
To the Generall Clothiers of England of the Old and New Drapery. Gentlemen, VVHereas Mr. Bedle hath set out a book in print, entituled His Remonstrance and Vindication, and sent it to the General Clothiers of England; which is regard it is of such dangerous consequence, that may beget an ill opinion of those men that have beene Agents for the Clothiers, and have pro∣secuted their Petition with their persons and purses, as well as Nat: Bedle, to the utmost of their power: it hath caused them to set out this Remonstrance, to certifie
the truth of the matter, which they shall be ready to prove upon oath, as well as Mr. Bedle hath done, Concerning his Remonstrance and Vindication. They doe not desire that Mr. Bedle should be undervalued and dis-esteemed of the Clothiers, for his worth, care, charge, and paines, in the prosecution of so great a businesse, that doth concerne the generall good of the Kingdome; neither do they question his Estate, Progenitors, nor Gentility, it being a matter of no va∣lue to be enquired after: But because he hath declared himself to be the only man that hath done the whole worke, and not only slighted, but disgraced those that have supported him in the prosecution of it, with their advice and money; they doe here declare the truth, as followeth,
THis businesse hath been followed for the Clo∣thiers by able, honest, and sufficient men, long before Mr. Bedle was acquainted with it, who did as much look to the publike good in it as he hath or will do: all the grievances were preferred by way of Petition & Bill to the honourable House of Com∣mons at the beginning of this Parliament; and it is to be believed, it had beene finished before N. B. did enter upon it, had it not bin for the miserable distra∣ctions of the times: Concerning Mr. Bedle, he entred upon this businesse a little above two yeares since: and whereas he doth write, he was drawn into it by the Company, especially by W. T. Surely, that is ve∣ry unlikely, for he being acquainted with the busines by a friend of his R. B. who after he had informed him was very earnest and desirous from time to time that he might joyne with the Agents in the prosecu∣tion of it for the Clothiers, and for the money that he disbursed, there was a great deale of money ex∣pended before he was acquainted with the businesse, and that which hee paid was not halfe so much as di∣vers of the Agents had disburst long before. And whereas he writes, that he had bin employed by the Parliament: He was a Committee man, and a Sequestrator for Norfolke; and as he did acknowledge himselfe, the place was very beneficiall unto him. But a litle before he did enter upon this employment he was dismissed of that place: whether it were for his pride, or his unfaithfulnesse, is best known to him∣selfe: And to the Parliament, who put him out of that employment, and put another in his roome: Surely, this is certain; his proud and lofty carriage
hath made him disesteemed, and not approved of; not only of the Agents, but of divers eminent Clothiers of the Kingdome: for hee being first chosen Agent by the Company, before ever he was acquainted with the Clothiers; and albeit he was from time to time furnished with money from them; not onely for his weekly allowance, which was 4. s. a week, besides his extraordinary expences: but also such sum and sums of money, as he did still demand for the charges, in the prosecution of the said businesse: yet notwith∣standing he had such a proud and lofty mind, that he would seldome, or never meet the Agents, to make known unto them the proceedings of the businesse; & he was grown to that height of pride of late, that he did disdaine that any man should be seene in the businesse but himselfe, unlesse they were those whom he did please, that so he might have all the glory pro∣fit, and credit to himself: but to leave the generals, and come to particulars. In August 1645. R. S. having one or two with him, went to Colchesterin Essex, to gather the hands of the Clothiers to the Petition; who having procu∣red a meeting of the chiefest of them, and the petition being drawn up, with their advice and approbation: the said R. S. gathered above twelve hundred hands in that Town: This was done before Mr. Bedle went into the Country: therefore he hath not done all the worke. Then Mr. Rozer, and others of the Company sent Mr. Bedle to Colchester, to assist R. S. for the gathe∣ring of hands in Essex & Suffolk, Mr. Rozer giving
him Bills of Exchange to receive money for their char∣ges: he bringing in his account for that journey 45. l. This was the first going on of the work after Mr. Bedle was entred upon it, and then Mr. Rozer was the onely man that did support him. Albeit he hath so much slighted him since; and not only then, but from time to time after, both with money, advice, and his countenance, for which hee was not well thought of by many of the Agents. When he was in Essex and Suffolk with R. S. he had his instructions from him, who spent a great deal of time with him both by day and by night, to instruct him in the busi∣nesse: and albeit he was in the Country to assist R. S. in get∣ting of hands: yet R. S. by the help of another got the hands of most places in those Counties without him. Sure∣ly Mr. Bedle hath not done all the work. R. S. and R. B. gathered the kands to the Petition in most of the Counties of England. W. T. E. R. R. B. With the helpe of others got more friends to promote it in the House, then he did, and hath still attended from time to time when the Committee sate to prosecute the businesse. But what hath Mr. Bedle done? In the first place, he spent above ten pound, and five weekes time to mend the Petition: and when he had done all that he could doe, he made it worse then it was before: He doth make the world believe, he hath done great matters for the Clothiers: pray God it doth not prove that he hath done more harme then good to the businesse: Surely he hath spent the most part of the time these two yeares in writtings, and printing frivolous Bookes, and letters that have done moee harme then good, especially the last book that is able to make a mans eares itch to hear it, and benum his senses to read ir: those that have support∣ed
him this time with advice and money have found him to be a proud and self-conceited man: he thinks unlesse he doth it, it cannot be done: there is not a wise man amongst the Agents, but only he: but the truth is, he hath proved himself to be the verist fool of all, in procuring those to be his enemies that were his best friends in the supporting of him in this bu∣sinesse: He writes that he hath beate his braines, and tyred out his spirits in contriving the businesse, and answering objections of the Staplers: It were better that his own workes did praise him in the gate. How came he by this knowledge? Was he bred up a Clo∣thier? Could he speak experimentally; if not then, he must have it from some body. You have heard be∣fore in part how he gt ir; the truth is, he hath been a Solicitor of the Law, and they are men that will have a hand in any businesse to get money. No soo∣ner was he entred upon the businesse, but he sought for weekly allowance, and he had it: Others have spent their time, paines, and money in the businesse, and hath had nothing yet: He hath written a Remon∣strance and Vindication, and he hath quoted divers places of Scripture; but as the Divell did to Christ: He hath writen some truths; but that truth that would not advance his applause and honour amongst you, that he hath left out: Therefore they have ad∣ded something more unto it; and so they leave him and all his bookes together. But concerning the great businesse that is now in agitation that doth concern the generall good of the Clothiers of this Kingdome: There be divers honest able and sufficient men that have undertook the pro∣secution
of this businesse for you, and will goe on without Mr. Bedle, and they are willing and ready to further the businesse in the prosecution of it to the utmost of their power: They do not think it best that one man should prosecute it alone, as Mr. Bedle saith he hath done: Albeit others have done more for the good of the businesse, then he hath done: onely this they do present to your consideration, that they are willing and ready with you: and by the helpe of God will be ready, looking at the publique good, & not ayming at their own ends: as also with your ad∣vice to go on with the worke, desiring God that it may be effected for the Publique good, which they shall nothing else desire; and so I rest, Your loving friend and servant, A Clothier, R. S.
