T3443 12607504 64266
Two Famous, and Victorious BATTELIS FOVGHT IN IRELAND THE I. By Sir William Saintleger, Lord President of Munster, against a great Number of the Rebels, neer the City of Cork, and after a long and tedious fight, lasting three dayes, put the Rebels to flight, beating them out of their Quarters, slew neer upon 2000. April 20. The second, by the Lord Inchequid and Colonel Vavasour against the Lord Muskry, neer Rochfort, April 22. With the Number that were slain in this Battle. Also a Challenge sent by the Lord Musgrave to the President of Mun∣ster, with the manner of the sending it on the top of a Pike. Likewise, the Names of the chief Commanders of the Protestant Army in Ireland. Wherunto is annexed the Copy of a Letter sent from Ire∣land, and read in the House of Commons, it being Ordered by them to be forthwith published in Print. Hen. Elsing Cler, Parl. D. Com. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in , That the Votes shall be printed, and sent to the Sheriffs, and Iustices, to be publi∣shed in all the Market towns, of the Covnties of York and Lincoln. John Brown Cler Parliament. Printed for Iohn Wels, 164.
IT is declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the stopping of the passages between Hul & the Parliam. & the intercepting of Messengers imployed from the Parliament to Hull, or from any that are in the Service of the Parliament, or any Letters whatsoever sent by any to, or from the Parliament is a high breach of the Priviledge of Parliament, which by the laws of this Kingdom, and the Protestation, we are bound to de∣fend with our Lives and our Fortunes, and to bring the Violat or therof to condigne punishment. And hereby all Lords Lieutenants, and their De∣puties authorised by the Ordinance of both houses of Parliament, all Sheriffs, Iustices, Majors, Bryliffs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever, are re∣quired to give their uttermost Aid and Assistance to all that are imployed in the said Service, for their better and more speedy free and safe Passage: And to apprehend all such as by colour of any Warrant or other Authority whatsoever, shall endeavor or go about to hinder any that are imployed about the same, and them to apprehend and in safe custodie to send up to the Parliament. Resolved upon the Question. THat Sir Iohn Hotham Knight, according to this relati∣on, hath done nothing but in obedience to the Command of both Houses of Parliament. Resolved upon the question. That this declaring of Sir Iohn Hotham traitor, being a Member of the House of Commons, is a high breach of the priviledge of Parliament. Resolved upon the question. That this declaring of Sir Iohn Hotham Traitor with∣out due processe of law, is against the liberty of the Subject nad against the law of the land. Brown Cler. Parl
Exceeding Joyfull, and comfortable Newes from Ireland. Dear and loving Mother. MY duty remembred unto you, &c. It is the Duty of a Son to write unto Parents; wherby to give them to understand of the troubles in those dangerous times. God be thanked I have my helth, with my wife and child in the citie of Cork, under the company of sir Charles Bannister, my very good friend. The enemy is here round about us, expecting every day a Battle. This City of Cork is strongly Fortified with Ammunition, so that the enemy dare not attempt against us, but making some flashes in matters of contempt. Dungarven we took, with the losse of two men, and two more hurt, many were slain on their side; but sithence our departure, the enemy
have taken it again, The whole town was ours with the Castle. To give you notice of the State of this Kingdome of Ireland Sir Richard Boyls Knight, Lord Barronet on Yewfll, Lord Vicount of Dangarve, Earl of Cork, Lord high Treasurer of Ireland, and one of His Majesties. privie Counsell of England. The Earl of Lster, Lord Deputie and Generall. James Earl of Ormon Lieutenant Generall, Sir William Lord President of Munster, and Sergeant Ma∣jor Generall of the Kingdome of Ireland. Here is nothing expected but fire and sword, wee kill them and lay them in heaps. My Lord President hath made choice of this City of Cork for his abode, I be∣leeve that 10000 men are not able to take it, if here be no trecherie with the Inhabi∣tants; which Inhabitants are carefully loo∣ked unto: here is a Fort Sytuated upon a Rock, with Brasse Ordnance ready moun∣ted, with Morter-Pieces to send forth wild-fire, the Fort and Castle will com∣mand the Country round, the main Slyeth three or four miles off this , we
have watched day and night, 300. Soul∣diers within the City, and without the Walls. Vicount Musgraue of Musgraue is of late turned Rebell against his Maiesty, for he sent A letter presented vnto my Lord President upon the top of a Pike a Challenge, but he and his Company dare not attempt, though they be in Number 40000. This Musgrave is able to ride upon his own Land 30. miles outright; besides 25. miles of breadth: it is spoken he is the greatest monyed man in the whole Land. My Lord President will have about with him very suddenly. So with my kind love to my Brothers, and Sister my loving Ma∣ster and Mistris, and all the rest of our Neighbours and good Friends, Desiring God to blesse you all in prosperity in these our troubles, I conclude, Your obedient, and dutifull Son, till death, BENJAMIN FOY. From Cork April 23. 1642. If you write or send to me, direct your Letter to Lieu∣tenant Coronel Mym, Sir Charles Bannister Company.
More true News from Ireland. Right Honourable, SInce my last Letter, my own indispo∣sition and imbecility hath bin such, as in mine own person I have not bin able to attempt any thing, but have by my sicknesse bin confined to my chamber; but the forward earnestnesse and zeal to the service in my Lord of Inchequid, Collonel Vavafor Captain Jerpson, and the rest of the Officers of the small army here, hath ac∣complished some exploits wherof you may please to receive the ensuing relation, I being besieged on the north side of the City by my Lord Muskoy, M. Carty Lath, and all the rest of the western forces, and having notice that my Lord Roche, my Lord of Ikarn Donbay, the Baron of Logh∣my, M. Richard Butler, and all the tip∣perary forces were drawing uptobeleager me on the south, I dispatched away the two Troops then newly landed, under the
command of my Lord Inchequid and cap∣taine Jephon into the Lord Roches Coun∣try, inexpectance to divert him from his intended course hitherwards, which sorted to so good purpose, as that I since understand the tipperary forces have for∣saken him, and that he remains himself upon his keeping in his own Country. During the stay of these Troops there, they were desired to the relief of a Castle called Rathgogan by one M. Mead. which M. Iephson having performed with a Squadron of each troop, and 80 Musquetiers drawn out of his house and mine. In his retreat hee was encountered by two or three Companies from Mimeallock, onwhom he with a horse, and another officer with a foo charged in severall places, and routed them, slaying above 150 beside 50 slain in relieving the Castle. On the 13. of this instant my Lord of Muskry (who hath kept this Camp a long time at Rochforts Town 3. miles from this City) caused a part of his army to chase home our scouts to the very Suburbs where in a bravado they made a stand, wherat my Lord Inchequid, Collonel Va∣vasour, and the rest of the Officers being much in∣censed, obtained my leave to issue forth immediatly with 300. Musquetiers, and two Troops of horse: upon the sallying out they found the enemy retrea∣ted, and pursued him to his quarters, where the main
body consisting of 36 Colours as they were num∣bred forthwith appeared, and after severall parties sent from the main body to skirmish with our men had bin beaten back, they began to pack up their Baggage, and forsook their Camp, after whom our men made all the speed they might: and having chased them two or three miles, charged upon the Rear routed the whole Army, which betook it self to flight, and took all their Carriage and Luggage, wherof the Lord of Muskeries own Armour Tent, and Trunks were apart. slew about 200. of their men that took to firm ground, and retired without losse of a man, &c. Your Lordships most humble Servant, W. S. It is this day Ordered by the Cammons now assembled in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith publisheh in Print. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
