W1904 17291019 106341
CHRIST Ascended Above the CLOUDS. His Divinity— Vindicated From the cloudy, errone∣ous, heretical, and blas∣phemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren. His Light in Man Vindicated From the cloudy, errone∣ous, heretical, and blas∣phemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren. His being The Word Vindicated From the cloudy, errone∣ous, heretical, and blas∣phemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren. His being In Saints Vindicated From the cloudy, errone∣ous, heretical, and blas∣phemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren. His being The only way and Rule, Vindicated From the cloudy, errone∣ous, heretical, and blas∣phemous Conceits of John Newman, and his Brethren. AND The ONLY RULE of FAITH DEMONSTRATED, For the general Information of Professours (and People) of all sorts. And the said J. N. his Book stiled, The Light within, &c. (with his Manifest Contradictions) both scripturally, historically, and rationally examined. By a Servant of Christ, G. WHITEHEAD. Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. Luke 19.22. His mischief shall return upon his own head. Psal. 7.16. Behold, they belch out, &c. Psal. 59.7. The mouth of them that speak lyes shall be stopped. Psal. 63.11. Let them be confounded, &c. Psal. 129.5. London, Printed in the Year, 1669.
The PREFACE to the Unprejudiced Reader. IT is real Love and Zeal for God's living Truth and People, which constrains me thus to appear in these Controversies, against such inveterate scornful Spi∣rits and Antichristian Principles, as tend to invalidate and make void the very Life of Christianity and Power of Godliness, by their slighting and reviling the Light within, professed by us the reproached People called Quakers: Which Light, being the very Principle which vvould di∣rect the mind to God and Christ, by whom it is given. Reader, such occasions of publick contest are not of our seeking, nor is it desirable to us, thus to appear against any People professing Religion (called Sectaries) but it hath been some few angry men called Baptists, and some other Professors partly of their Faith, who have publick∣ly both in Preaching and Print given us such occasions, by their implacable Enmity vented against us and the truth professed by us, as also by their dis-ingenuous, false, and injurious dealing with us and our Principles, by mistaking and perverting of them in many things, making them∣selves matter and work to make War with us, as this John Nwman hath in several things, which he hath forged a∣gainst us as our Principles, which are none of ours. But its prejudice and pride makes such blind men presumptuous. Reader, we find no new thing, nor any more profun∣dity
brought forth, by these prejudiced Baptists against us, than the persecuting Hireling Priests did nigh twenty yeas ago, in their Railing Pamphlets, and Pulpits; One main Subject of this John Newmans, in his Book, is to prove the Light in every man, not to be Christ; which he should not need to have done, until it had been so af∣firmed by us; for though we do affirm a spiritual divine Light of God, and of his Son, to be in every man, yet it is not our Principle to say that Christ is in every man, or that every man hath the Son; but a measure of his Light, Grace, or heavenly Gift in all, which would lead out of darkness, and give the knowledge of God's Glory in the face of Christ, and so reveal the Son of God within, whom he that hath, hath the Father also. But this J. N. his en∣mity against the Light within hath led him so far besides any true sense of God, or reverence to his Gift, as to call it but a feigned Light within, (though he hath neither de∣monstrated what the Light within is in its self, nor shewn any reason against it) and also to endeavour to exclude both God and Christ out of all his People, endeavouring to perswade us, that neither God nor Christ can be in any man, contrary to the manifest Testimonies of both the holy Prophets and Apostles. Reader, in moderation peruse what follows, and let the Truth and its Light within (not prejudice and dark∣ness jdge concerning these matters which are principal things in Controversie between us called Quakers, and the Baptists, with other Professors of th same Spirit) and here thou mayst see the Controversie is about the Word; 2dly about the only Rule of Life; 3dly, About Jesus Christ; 4thly, and about the Scriptures, whether they be properly
to be called the Word, the Foundation and only Rule of Life for all men (as J. N. asserts of them) or Jesus Christ his Spirit within to be the only Way and Rule, yea or nay. These Controversies are Scripturally and Rational∣ly discussed in the Sequel. The Principal Passages of this John Newmans Book against our Principle, are in the same Book contradicted, and plainly confuted by himself, and his chief Principles and Contradictions are herein laid down, as collected out of his own Book and briefly noted. Reader, It may seem very wonderful to thee, that any men should have the confidence to undertake to con∣fute others, when they can write very few Pages without contradicting and confuting themselves, and thereby ma∣nifesting their own Folly, Distraction, and Confusion, as this J. N. hath done against us, as much as ever I knew any of our Opposers do: What reason can any have to follow or depend on such who have neither Soundness, Stability, nor Consistancy in their own Principles, let the Moderate and Rational Reader judge. This J. N. had been answered, when his Book was newly Published, but that we had several more noted Anagonists to deal withal, wherefore I waved his Book, and did not take time so much as to read it over till very lately, being desired by some Friends, a little to take notice of it; we have a large Answer to part of it by another Friend, which is laid by till the rest of his Books be published. Reader, I have waved much Falshood and Nonsence, and many Tautological Impertinencies in J.N.'s Book, as not willing further to obtrude upon thy Patience there∣with; also thou mayst take notice that divers of the Sub∣jects here treated on, (as that about the Light within, and
the Scriptures, with other matters of Controversie) are more fully Discussed and Resolved in our dear Friend Samuel Fisher's Book, entituled, Rusticus ad Academicos, in Answer to John Owen, Tho. Danson, John Tombs, and Rich. Baxter, wherein Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists are concerned, though none of them could ever Reply to it, but it lyes upon their heads, not Answered by them until this day: Also several considerable Books besides, have divers of us writ, in Answer to many pee∣vish Reviling Pieces of the Baptists, which they never yet Replyed to; but the Truth is and will be over their heads, and over those envious Spirits among them. Moreover, The Contradictions of some Principal Baptists, and others (about their Assertion of the Scrip∣tures being the only Rule) [in Two late Discourses in Lon∣don] may be taken notice of in the sequel. —As also here is Finally a Bill of Excommunication given forth by divers of the principal Baptists about BOW, against one that forsook them and their dead wayes; wherein the Reader may also take notice of their envy and falshood. London, the 12th month, 1669.
CHRIST Ascended above the Clouds, &c. JOHN NEWMAN's Instance to prove the Scrip∣tures the Word, Isa. 28.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.Of the Scriptures. The Word of the Lord was to this People, Precept upon Precept, &c. Pag. 6. Answ. [Scriptures] signifie writings, and not the Word; nei∣ther doth this Instance prove them to be the Word, for the Pro∣phets of God (who speak as the holy Spirit moved them) did both inwardly receive and speak forth Precept upon Precept, here a little, and there a little, from the immediate Spiit and Power of God, as immediatly taught by him, which is before and above the Scriptures thereof, which no where ffirm themselves (being the writings in an abstract sense) to b the Word. Also preaching Jesus Christ the Word, and the Scriptures ae two things; the one being in a living Power and Voice, and the other in written Cha∣racters. Moreover, the Lord sendeth out his Word, and melteth the Snow, the Hoar-frost, and Ice, Psal. 147.18. Surely this Word is not the Scriptures. J.N. There are a People labour to blind this Truth, by affirming, That Christ is the Word, not the Scriptures, for they say the Scrip∣tures are the Sayings or Words of God, pag. 13. Answ. To affirm Christ to be the Word and not the writings, but that in them are the words or sayings of God, words of his Co∣venant, &c. or that they contain a Declaration of God and Christ, is no blinding of Truth, but what is ffimed in, and by the Scriptures themselves, and the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets before they spake forth or writ the words; see Jer. 1.1, 2. The words of Jeremiah, to whom the Word of the Lord came.
J. N's Instance from Mark 4.14. What Word was this that the Devil taketh out of mens hearts? None will think it Christ, but the Scriptures of the New Testament, pag. 17. Answ. The Seed sown in the heart by the Son of man, hath virtue and life in it, in the very being of it, for rooting, growth, and increase of fruit, which is more than the writings which no where in Scripture are called the Seed, and can he say the Son of man did sow some Scriptures in the High-wayes which the Devil took? Also many retain Scripture in the profession of it, who notwithstanding are but as the high-way ground unfruitful, in whom the Seed of Life doth not take root, so that the Devil doth not steal away the Scriptures or Bible from them, not properly Christ out of their hearts; but he steals away their hearts and minds, blinding them from the sense and sight of the vertue, life, and light of the Seed, or Word of Life withi. J. N. The Word of God grew and multiplied, Acts 19.20. Cannot be understood of Christ, a multiplication of Christ, p. 17, 18. Answ. Can he then think that Bibles grew and multiplied? Surely the Word had Life and heavenly Virtue in it, that was capable of growth, and its multiplying was both in the increase of gifts, and adding to the number of them who received it; and though Christ be but one, yet his Life, his living Word, and Gifts, both grow and increase where he is received. J.N. Christ cannot be the Word, because Christians may and ought to receive his Word into their hearts. Christ is not received into the hearts of men, nor in Person dwell in their hearts, p. 21. Answ. How grosly Erroniously and Irrationally hath he asser∣ted and reasoned that Christ cannot be the Word, because the Word is received into the hearts; and how contrary to plain Scripture to say, Christ is not received into the hearts, see 2 Cor. 13.5. Rom. 8.10. Col. 1.27. Christ in you except you be Reprobates; Christ in you the hope of glory, &c. but that Christ in Person doth not dwell in the hearts, who ever affirmed that he doth? J.N's Instance from Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. None that will mak use of Reason, can believe that Christ did intend that Christians should keep himself, for every Christian is kept  and Christ, 1 Pet. 1.5. p. 15.
Answ. Though Christians be kept by God and Christ, its through Faith and Obedience in the Light, whereby they continue in both, and retain God in their knowledge, holding the Head which is Christ, and holding fast the faithful Word, keeping the Word of his Patience, such keep the Truth: all which amounts to the same, or is equivolent with keeping Christ, the Word, the Truth, the Life, wherein is the Patience of God, and Faith of the E∣lect exercised against all Temptations and Tryals, which are not overcome by the writings without, whic cannot truly be called the Word of his Patience as J. N. doth without distinction, when they express words of his Wrath, Judgment, and Displeasure against sin and wickedness; But the word of Faith, Life, and Patience in the Soul, immediately expresseth the Love and Patience of God and Christ unto it, to am it in times of Afflictions and Tryals; and this we are to keep. For many both profess and keep Scriptures or Bibles, who are out of the Patience of Crist. And now I Query, What Reason is it this Opposer would have us make use of, and what is the ground of it in man? for he speaks of carnal Reason which cannot rech God, and also a Reason to be made use of, Pag. 64. Surely we cannot look on him to be such a Mastr of Reason, as infal∣libly to distinguish, how highly soever he thinks of himself, whilst he denies and opposeth the Light within, as being but a feigned light! John Nwman, where's thy Reason, and what and wence is it? We must not take thy carnal, dark, and pre∣judiced Conception for Reason; nor be swayed thereby when thou art ignorant of the very Grounds and Principles of true Rea∣son, and so much opposest plain Scripture, which hypocritically thou pretendest for thy only Rule. J.N. To deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is to deny the very fountain and well-spring of comforts Note.] to the Soul in Afflicti∣on, which is brought out of the Promises in the Scriptures to the Soul by the Spirit through Faith, p. 44. Answ. How grosly Erroneous is it to deem the Scriptures the very Fountain and Well-spring of comforts; and to say,Jer. 2.18. Psal. 36.9. that the Spirit brings the Com∣forts from thence to the Soul; whereas God is the Fountain,
which to say of the Writings, is all one, and as blasphemous as to say they are God, as some of the Ranters have said; & as once one of them affirmed to me, at Emnith, near Wisbitch, That the Bible which I had in my hand was God; but he quickly after came to be distracted. — 2dly, The Spirit and Gift of Christ, is as a Well of Living Water in true Believers,Joh. 4.10.14 & 7.38, 39. and it is the Spirit of Promise the Comforter, having the Life of all Gods Promises and Truth of Scriptures in it self from God the Fountain; and this Spirit is infinite, and so not ontained in the Scriptures, though it contains the truths that are in the Scriptures of Truth▪ for they came from the Spirit; and it opens the understanding in the Scriptures as it's waited in. J.N. — His sad Consequences (which he thinks do follow the denying the Scriptures to be the Word and Rule) proved incon∣sequent, and his great Ignorance therein detected.— In Answer to his 43, 44, 45 pages. There are no sad Consequences as he asserteth in denying the Scriptures to be the Word and Rule for Salvation. And Fist, I doth not take away the ground of Faith for Re∣mission. 2dly, Nor Assurance, for Christ and his Light within, is the Ground and Foundation of Faith and Assurance. 3dly, Nor doth it make void the Exercise of Faith in the pre∣cious Promises; for the Spirit of Promise, both as a Rule mani∣fests the Promises, exerciseth Faith in, and fulfils them. 4thly, Nor doth it deny the Comforts of Faith from the Pro∣mises, the Spirit of Promise being both the Comforter, and sheweth us things to come. 5thly, Nor doth it destroy the support & supplies of Grace to the Soul in affliction; For these we receive from God in his own Spirit, and not from the writings outward. 6thly, Nor doth it deny the knowledge of Acceptance, for that is given to us by the Spirit of God, by which we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, and know that we are o God, and the Mystery of Life and Salvation is revealed unto us by the Spirit.
7thly, Where the Spirit of Truth and its Light within is o∣beyed and truly owned to be the Guide and Rule, it leaves not men in the dark, nor out of the knowledge of God, or enjoy∣ment of Life eternal: But to deny the Spirit, or Ligh  Christ, to be the Rule for Life and Salvation, doth leave  dark, void of saving Knowledge and Life. J.N. 8thly, Without this (viz. the Scriptures to be  &c.) we know not that there is any God, or Christ, or Salvation by God in Christ, nor by what means it may be obtained (all men are left in the dark) and no man knoweth how to enjoy Life Eternal, pag. 45. Neither do we know what God counteth unclean, and what holy; And in short, without the Scriptures we know not any promise that belongeth to this life, or that to come; these dreadful conclusions will follow, de∣nying the Scripures to be the Word and Rule to Salvation, and it leaves men to walk by fancy and imagination. Answ. Poor men! you hve shewn your selves sfficiently herein, and what an empty implicit Faith you are in, and how void both of the knowledge of God, Christ, and Salvation you are, and how yet in your sins, having denied Christ and his Light within to b your Rule, Way, and Foundation, as he is to his fol∣lowers; and so you are walking by your fancies and imaginations, wo et the Scriptures in the place of Christ, as your only and ab∣solute Rule and Ground of your Faith and Knowledge. And then, if one should ask you, How you prove the Scripures to be true, if they must be the absolute and only Rule, and none other, then you mst prove them by themselves, or plead their own authority from an implicit Faith you have of them; which is but still an ab∣surd way of reasoning, or assaying to convince gain-sayers, be∣ing but Petitio principii, a begging the Question. And how would this convince either Papists, Turks, Jews, Infidels, or Athiests, to tell them our Bible, or Scriptures, are infallibly true, and the only Rule to know there is a God and a Christ, and Salvation by him; and to know what God counteth unclean, and what holy. And then what a sad sentence of no less than Condemnation doth this pass upon all People and Nations, who have not the Scrip∣tures, as being all void of knowledge tht there is either God, Christ, Salvation good or evil, whereas there is a living Evidence
throughout the Creation, or Works of God therein, of the eter∣nal Power, or Maker; see Psal. 19. Rom. 1. Job 12. and many do know, and have known these things written of (which concerns Salvat by the Light of God and Christ, in them that never could  or had the Scriptures outwardly; as those Gentiles which  the Law, yet did those things contained in it, and shewed  ffects of the Law written in their hearts, Rom. 2. though the Scriptures are profitable to the Man of God, who hath them, being led by his Spirit which opens them. J.N. The Eternal Power and Spirit that was in Christ, cannot properly be called Christ; this Power or Spirit is God, and not Christ. Answ. Contrary to plain Scriptures, opposing both the Divini∣ty and Deity of Jesus Christ, who is both the Power and Wis∣dom of God, 1 Cor. 1. The second Adam, the quickning Spi∣rit, ch. 15.45. And the Father, the Word, and Spirit, are One, 1 Joh. 5.7. J.N. The will and mind of God is contained in the Scriptures, in order to mans Salvation, p. 49. Answ. The Word [contained] is erroneously place; for the Writings contain only a Declaration of the Mind and VVill of God in order to Salvation. God and his Mind, Thoughts, VVill, and Wayes, are Infinite; and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Him. J.N. The Word was in the beginning, but Christ was in time, not till he had taken Nature upon him, and became in the likeness of sinful Man, being born of the Virgin Mary. — Christ was not the Word before Christ was, pag. 50, 51. Answ. This Assertion opposseth the Deity and Divinity of Jesus Christ,Of Christ. and contradicts the faith∣ful Testimonies of the Holy men of God in the Scriptures of Truth. For if the Son of God was not the Word, nor in the Beginning, nor before the Virgin Mary, then Jesus Christ was not God, but is represented as a finite Creature. But the Erroneousness of this is apparent, for the Word was with (and was) God in the beginning, by which he created the Hea∣vens, and framed the Worlds, Joh. 1.1, 2, 3. Heb. 11.3. And that this Word was Jesus Christ, is plain; seeing it's expresly
said, God created all things by Jesus Christ, Eph. 3.9. Yea, all things visible and invisible were created by him, Col. 1. But if Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was not in being before he took flesh in the womb of the Virgin (or was not before Mary) how could all things be created by him? And Nebuchadnezzar was of a better belief than to think that the Son of God was not in his time; for he said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God, Dan. 3.25. And was not this before Mary, or Christ's outward-birth of her? All ye Baptists answer me, what Scripture had he for that? And Christ is called the Wisdom and Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 30. And was not this He (the only begotten of the Father) that said, I was set up from Everlasting? before the Earth? and when there was no Depths was I begotten, before the Mountains were setled, and before the Hills was I begotten (or brought forth) Prov. 8.23, 24, 25. And also see that Prophesie of Christ, Mich. 5.2. Thou Bethlehem-Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto Me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting: which plainly proves the Eternity and Di∣vinity of Jesus Christ, against such Baptists, and Professors, as this our Opposer J. N. who also in his Antichristian Doctrine of de∣nying Christ to be the Word, or to be in the beginning, hath followed the steps of those old reputed Hereticks mentioned in the Ecclesiastical Chronography, viz. The Allogians, who denied Christ to be the Word (as this J. N. hath done) and of them it is said,See Euseb. Soc. Ecc. Ecc. Cro. fol. 572. They con∣demned the Gospel after John, (who gave such a plain Testimony for the Divinity of Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.) Also Theodatas denied the Divinity of Christ, and he, it's said, was the first Author of that Heresie of Artemon, who took Christ but for a bare and naked Man, which is like this Assertion, That Christ was in time, not (the Word) in the beginning, nor till He became in the likeness of Man, being born of Mary; which hath also affinity with that of Arrias, and his Sect, called Arrians; who said, That the Son of God had a beginning of Essence, that there was a time that He was not: And doth not J. N. affirm
as much, That there was a time when Christ was not, the Word was in the beginning, not Christ: which is like also to that of Photinus, Bishop of Sirmium, who (as its said) maintained the Heresie of Sabellius aginst Christs Divinity, and said, The Word was at the beginning with the Father, but not the Son, Eccl. Chro. fol. 584. Soc. l. 2, c. 24. Ephiphan. Haeres. 71. Also several others noted in History for Hereticks held the like. Also if J. N. or the Bap∣tists, should use these words, as his Doctrine impors, when they Baptize (viz.) I Baptize you in the Name of tne Uncreated God, in the Name of the Son Created, &c. would they not then plainly appear like Eunomius, Bishop of Cyzicum, teaching his Heirs (viz.) That the Son was Created; as when he Baptized all that came to him, In the Name of the Uncreated God, in the Name of the Son Created, &c. Eccl. Chro. fol. 583. Now if John Newman did think to be more Poplar, and gain Repute by this Piece, intended against the Quakers, he will be frustrated of his end, when his Anti∣christian and corrupt Doctrines come to be viewed in this Treatise, and the Baptists, and others, that have owned him therein, may be ashamed of him, and his works; and it would be more reputable and commendable for him and them all, to study to be quiet, and charitable, to follow peace with all men, and not to revile the Light and Christ within, as but a feigned Light, or Christ; nor to to oppose the Divinity of Christ, the Son of God, as he hath done. J. N. His Names, Jesus Christ, are not attributed to his God-head, but to his Man-hood; For his Name, Jesus, signifies a Sa∣viour; , Anointed; He was not Jesus, or a Saviour, as he was God, p. 51.65. Answ. Though Jesus signifies a Saviour, and Christ Anointed; yet to confine those Names only to the Manhood, still agrees with the erroneous Doctrines before, That Christ was not the Word from the beginning; whereas He took upon him the Man-hood in time; in which, though we own Him as the Anointed of God, yet He was also God's Anointed as He was His only begotten, and delight, (and so the Son from His Eternal Being or Substance) be∣fore the Mountains and Hills were settled. Also J. N. (though to his own confutation) grants, That He was the Son of God from
the beginning, pag. 66, 67. (and the He was God's Anointed from the beginning) But his saying, That He was not Jesus, or a Savi∣our as He was God, is still as gross and false Doctrine as the for∣mer, denying God to be a Saviour, which is contrary to plain Scripture. O God of Israel the Saviour, a Just God and a Savi∣our, there is none bsides me, see Isa. 45. And also this J. N. notwithstanding he thinks he hath proved his matter by Scripture elsewhere, (wherein he would shew himself some noted Divine) now he would shew us what a profound Logician, or Mr. of Arts he is, as if he would confirm his matter, stop our mouths, and bind us down thereby with an invented Argument. His Argu∣ment runs thus: Argument. If Christ as Christ was not from the beginning, then Christ was not the Word from the beginning. But Christ as Christ, was not from the beginning. Therefore, &c. pag. 52. Answer. The first Proposition, in that it renders Christ and the Word both one, contradicts himself in his denying Christ to be the Word. For, however it must follow from this Argument, That Christ was, when the Word was. Christ being the Word, and so the Word, Christ. So that, if the Word was from, and in the be∣ginning; then Christ was from the beginning; but the Word was from the beginning, &c. And then this flatly contradicts his whole Assertion, and proves it false, which with the pretended Reason thereof being not grounded upon any general Rule, or Maxim, of either Truth, Scriptures, or Reason (as all Arguments ought to be) but upon a meer Heretical Opinion that denies the Divi∣nity of Christ, in denying him to be from the beginning, either as Christ, or as the Word. Now, doth not this deny Christs very being in the beginning, and make way for that old Heretical O∣pinion, That Christ, or the Son of God, was not in being before the Virgin Mary. But to give my Opposer his Due every way, I judge he has out-run himself in this matter at unawares, for he
hath (though to his own Confutation) confessed, That Christ was the Son of God from the beginning; and was He not then the Anoin∣ted? For, if the Son, then the Anointed; And his words (Christ as Christ was not) supposes that He was in some other capacity; yet his denying Him to be, either as Christ, or the Word, from the beginning, is contrary to plain Scriptures. For, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, &c. Joh. 1. And He was in the VVorld, and the VVorld was made by Him, and the VVord was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, (speaking of Christ:) So that He was in the beginning the VVord, and is still Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. J. N. This Word cannot be Christ, because it is here called the Seed by which they were begotten in the New-birth, pag. 56. Answ. See how contrary to plain Scriptures he reasons; for Christ is called the Seed; unto which the Promises are, Gal. 3.16. And He is that Word, which begets into the New-birth, and not the Letter; and this Seed is Living and Incorruptible, though the Devil steals away the hearts of many from the sense of the the Seed or Word of Life, as he hath blinded the minds of Infi∣dels, 2 Cor. 4.4. J.N. Ministers are called Angels, Rev. 2. yet there is no Man that is an Angel, p. 59. Answ. Yes: If he be an Embassador, Messenger, or Minister, he is an Angel. J.N. Christ cannot dwell in Man, for Christ is perfect Man, as well as perfect God, p. 61. Answ. To say Christ cannot dwell in Man, doth not only op∣pose His Spirituality, Deity, and OMNIPOTENCY; but also is contrary to the Apostles plain Testimonies of Christ's be∣ing in the Saints: And if He be perfect God, he can dwell i His People as He hath promised; and suely His being perfect Man, doth not put a limitation upon Him, as a let or hinderance, to disable Him from being in His People, whilst He who was Christ, as come in the Flesh, was also truly Jesus Christ within, in his Spiitual appearance; and we do not confine Him under this, or that particular Name. His Names are divers in Scriptures,
according to His Manifestations, Offices, and Works: He is called Emmanuel, God with us.Christ called by several Names. He is called Jesus Christ; The Way; The Truth; The Light; The Life; The Seed; The Son; The Everlasting Father; The Word; The Power of God; A Quickning Spirit, &c. J.N. Christ Jesus, after He rose, He was still a Body of Flesh; [Contradiction] the God-head took Flesh in the Womb of Mary; the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in Flesh, &c. pag. 52, 60, 63. Answ. Christ Jesus was more than a body of flesh, for he was Spirit as well a flesh [He was Lord from Heaven.] Neither is Man made up simply of a body of Flesh, being a complex or composition of parts, of Body, Soul, and Spirit. Also, there is a manifest inconsistency between these words (He was still a body of flesh] And [He took flesh, or was God manifest in flesh.] J. N's Argument. If he rose Jesus Christ, then he rose Flesh and Blood, and also Man. But he arose Jesus Christ. Therefore Flesh and Blood, &c. — And he did ascend with the same body, and is still at the right hand of God with a body of flsh, &c. p. 64, 65. [Contradiction] As we have born the Image of the Earthly-man, so we are now to bear the Image of the Heavenly, which is Christ Jesus, p. 89. Answer. Though I grant, That Christ arose with the same body that was Crucified and put to Death, and that he ascended into Glory,Christs Resur∣rection owned. even the same Glory which he had with the Father before the World began; And that the same that Descended, was the same that Ascended far above all Heavens, Eph. 4.and Ascention. And as Christ said, What and if ye see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before? Joh. 6. Yet the Argument is fal∣laciously, and corruptly staed, in the manner of it; the In∣ference of the first Proposition, and so the Consequence being
inconsequent to it (carrying no proof along in it) for it still strictly limits, or tyes up the Name Jesus Christ to a body of flesh and blood, and so covertly denies His being, before he took on him, that visible body of flesh, blood, and bones, and so opposeth his Divinity as before. Whereas He was the Spi∣ritual Rock which all Israel drank of long before.1 Cor. 10.4. And as to His being at the right hand of God, I grant according to the Scriptures, but cannot believe His body to be a carnal body in Heaven, or that He consists of a carnal exist∣ence. And further, these words are not the Scripture language (viz.) to say, That Christ is a body of flesh, blood, and bones in Hea∣ven, and a Personal being at the right hand of God, without all Men, remote, as J. N's terms are. But these words [Spiritual Body, Glorious Boy, One Body, and One Spirit, and that the Saints discerned and ea the Lord's Body, were Members of His Body, &c. And, except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no life in you, saith Christ] These are Scripture terms, and language; So neither is Chrit, nor God's right hand, so limitted to a remoat∣ness from them; And as we have born the Image of the Earthly-man, so we must bear the Image of the Heavenly, which is Christ Jesus [this is true.] But the definition that J. N. hath given of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man, is, That He is a body of flesh and blood, a personal being, not in man. From whence it follows, That this Heavenly Image men must bear, or be changed into, is a personal Image of flesh, blood, and bones; as if they had not such a body, or Image before. Whereas the Heavenly man is spiritual, and so is His Image. And the Apostle distinguisheth between the Natural body and the Spiritual body; as he doth between the bodies that are Coelestial, and the bodies Terrestrial, 1 Cor. 15. And further, to take off Objections and Scruples, I confess that according to the Flesh, Jesus Christ came of the Seed of David,Christs Body real. and the body that He took upon him, or that was prepared for him to do the will of God in upon Earth, was a real [and not a fantastical] body, and that according to the flesh He was put to death, or died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and was buried, and rose again the third day, and was after seen of the Disciples,
and of above five hundred Brethren at once, and that He was seen of James, then of all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. To which the Apostle Paul adds, vers. 8. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time. And how did he appear unto Paul? Even by Revelation; God revealed his Son in him. It was the same Son of God, who appeared vaiously, (both vi∣sibly and invisibly); after His Resurrection he appeared in various forms, and shewed Himself diversly: First to Mary Magdalen; 2dly, to other Women; 3dly, to the Disciples, as they went to Emaus; 4thly, to James; 5thly, to Peter; 6thly, to the Apo∣stles when the Doors were shut; 7thly, to more than five hun∣dred Brethren, as aforesaid: after he appeared to Thomas, when he said, Reach hither thine hands, &c. Mat. 28. Mark 16. Luke 24. Iohn 20. 1 Cor. 15. Once he said to them, Handle Me, Luke 24.39. another time to Mary Magdalen (when she thought him to be the Gardener) Touch Me not, Joh. 20.17. And it's said, Luk. 24.30, 31. as he sate at meat with them, He took bread and bles∣sed and brake it, and gave to them, and their eyes were open, and they knew Him, and He vanished out of their sight. Now see∣ing that he appeared so diversly, being capable by the mighty Power of God, to be changed beyond the reach of man's natural reason; for any to shew themselves so nice, curious, and intru∣ding in these matters, with unscriptural and unlearned Questions, or presumptuous Assertions, to shew themselves wise above what is written, as many of these forward Baptists have done; they cannot therein be gratified, for both their foolish, and unlearned Questions are to be avoided, and they may be answered as the Angel did to the Devil, when he disputed about the body of Mo∣ses, The Lord rebuke thee, &c. And as the Apostle did those fools who enquired, what body the dead are raised with, 1 Cor. 15.35, 36, 37. And it's manifest hypocrisie in Men, to pretend the Scripture to be their Rule, when they'l not keep to the terms and language thereof: But at a publick Dispute between some of Vs and some Baptists, at Chersey in Surry, when a Question about the body of Christ in Heaven, was ignorantly obtruded by W. Bur∣net, his Brother Jer. Ives [in Answer to my treating of Christ's various Appearances after He rose] said, What change or alteration
His body might have, We cannot determine, nor what glory He is in; for to enquire with what body the dead are raised, is absurd, &c. Yet for all this, how apt are many of them to urge their unlearned Questi∣ons in these matters, notwithstanding the great Confusion & vain Imaginations that many Professors have fallen into, through their unlearned Questions, and perverse Disputes, about the Body of Christ. If tis were considered, it might be some stop to them from uch intruding, as, How He appeared among the Disciples when the Doors were shut? Some of the Professors have said, It might be, that He came in at the Chimney top. Others,Professors Confusion about the Body. It might be, He glyded in at the Key∣hole of the Door. Others, That He might come in at the Door, and hold their eyes in th mean time, that they could not see when He opened it: And because flsh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, many Professors have said, That Christ's Body in Heaven, is a body of flesh and bones, without blood in it. And also, some of the Priests have affirmed Christ to be in Heaven with a carnal body. But these are all unscriptural Suppositions, and Imaginations of vain minds; who neither know the Scriptures, nor the Power of Godliness, nor the Mysteries of Christ, or his Image revealed within; but by their corruptions, and perverting Scripture, endeavour to shut both God and Christ out of his People, and so to confine and limit the Holy One (who is not to be limited) as this J. N. doth. J.N. If he (Jesus Christ) be with the Father, then he is not in Man; —a feigned Christ, and Light within, pag. 47, 66, 72. [Contradiction] Let your Conversation be in Heaven, from whence we look for a Saviour. Answ. Why? Doth His being with the Father, or at His right hand in Heaven, hinder Him from being in his People? This is a gross Error, and contrary to plain Scripture, 2 Cor. 13. Know you not, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Repro∣bates; and this is neither a feigned Christ, nor a feigned Light, as blasphemously and scornfully he words it. And what doth J.N. think or imagine con∣cerning God His right hand and being?Of God's right hand. And
Christ at God's right hand, that he thus would exclude, limit, and seem to confine them out of all men? Doth not this oppose the Infiniteness and Omnipresence of God, and Jesus Chri, nd bring them under the limitation of finite creatures? an  their Deity; whereas Christ ascended far above all Heav, that he might fill all things, Eph. 4. And He being the exps Image of his Fathers substance. Now if God, and his right hand be so carnally thought on, under such a limitation as before, Wherein doth J.N. and his Brethren differ from those old Hereticks. Andaeus,Euseb. Eccl. Chro. fol. 584, 588. and the Anthropomorphites (as they are called) who were Monks that Inhabited the Deserts of Egypt, who thought that God had a body, and was like a Man in shape; misconstruing that saying, Let US make Man after Our Image, &c. Upon whose gross Opinion it rose, That God hath been painted like an Old Man with a gray beard, &c. As also, the late blasphemous Dreamers, Reeve and Mugleton, [who have named themselves the two last Witnesses] have affirmed God to be of the form, bigness, and stature of a Man, and so having hands and parts of a Man, and Christ (as such) at his right hand, they denying God to be an infinite Spirit: But against all such carnal gross conceits We testifie, and confess to God's Infiniteness, and Christs Ascension, both into Heaven, and far above all Heavens, that He might fill all things; and that God both dwells, and walks in his People, and his right hand of Power is where he is, and Crist there inseparably with [and in] the Father; His being so Anoin∣ted, Dignified, and Exalted, doth not exclude Him out of His People, whose Conversation is also with him in Heaven. And David said, O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in thee, and thy right hand hath holden me up, Psal. 17.7. & 18.35. & 20.6. & 60.5. & 63.8. & 73.23. So that neither the Infinite God, nor his Son, nor his Right hand of strength can be circumscribed, or limitted into a separation, or remoteness from the Children of the Light, who are saved by the right hand of God, whose Hand and Power is spiritual. J. N. From Rev. 1.7. Those that pierced him in his body of flesh, shall see that body visibly come again.
Answ. These are not the words of Scripture, but added; al∣though, to add or diminish be forbidden under a penalty, Rev. 22.18, 19. yet this man's presumption leads him to incur that: See also for Answer to him, Rev. 1.7, 8. & 13.14, 16. In none of which is Jesus Christ either called (or represented as) a body of flesh, blood, and bones, visibly to come again; but that he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, vers. 11. And Christ in the dayes of his flesh (wherein he visibly appeared to the World) said, Yet a little while and the World seeth me no more, Joh. 14.19.Of Christ his second coming. But his second Coming and Ap∣pearance without sin to Salvation, I own and witness; and that he is therein to be seen spiri∣tually in his Kingdom,Heb. 9.28. Matth. 16.27. Luke 9.26. & Father's Glory (which is an invisible Glory, not seen carnally) [mark that] Howbeit his Appearance shall be univer∣sally seen, both to the joy of the Righteous, and universal conviction and condemnation of the wicked, who have rejected his Light within, and his saving Appearance thereby made manifest. Yea, every Eye shall see him (both of good and bad) both those that have waited for his second Coming without sin to Salvation; and they also which have pierced or crucified him; which all those in general are chargeable with (as really as his Persecutors that pierced him outwardly) who profess his Name,Heb. 6.6. and yet Crucifie to themselves his Life, or spiritual Appearance. He was spi∣ritually pierced and crucified in spiritual Sodom and Egypt.Revel. 11.8. — And this sin, you carnal conceited Professors and Hypocrites are guilty of, who de∣spise him and his Light within,Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. Job 24.13. counting them a feigned Christ, and a feigned Light within, as this our Opposer hath blasphemously done; but the same Jesus, as he was seen ascend, (when a cloud received him out of their sight who stood gazing, Acts 1.9, 10, 11.) it is said, shall so come in like manner, &c. which though every like manner is not the very same, nor all clouds the
same, yet the same Jesus certainly cometh, and in like manner, his coming being in the clouds: Behold, he cometh with clouds; and you shall see him to your sorrow, who talk of his Name and Coming, and yet depart not from Iniquity; for out of his mouth proceedeth a sharp two-edged Sword, Rev. 1.16. to cut you down with all your Hypocrisie, carnal conceits, and feigned Pro∣fession of Christ, without the sense of his Power, Life, or Light within. J.N. Hope to the end, for the grace that shall be brought to light at the revelation of Christ; and this revelation will be from Heaven, not in man, pag. 71. Answ. This Inference and Conclusion is false, and contrary to the Apostles plain Testimony. For as whatsoever might be known of God, is manifest within; So the Revelation of Jesus Christ the Son of God, is within, to the true believers in his Light: And no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him; And God revealed his Son in Paul, Gal. 1.16. his Glory was to be revealed in the Believers and Sufferers for Christ. And surely, as they hoped, looked, or waited in the measure of Grace or Light received for the Revelation, Appearance, or second Co∣ming of Christ to Salvation in their dayes, their hope and ex∣pectation therein was not void, nor they disappointed thereof; as theirs is like to be, who are expecting that Christ's second Co∣ming, or Appearance to Salvation will be a Personal Coming, and his Reign a Personal Reign; which word [Personal] they add to the Scripture, and to the Book of the Prophesie of John; to wit, the Revelation; not truly minding the penalty they incur by ad∣ding, as mentioned, Rev. 22. And so where they add the word [Personal] or [in Person] to his Coming again; [or Personal be∣ing, &c.] do they not herein shew their carnal expectations, mean thoughts, and unscriptural conceptions touching Christ, his Divine Life, Being, and coming to Salvation? And their know∣ledge not to be divine, nor after the Spirit? For where doth the Scripture say, That Christ shall come the second time in Person to save? Or, that he shall Reign in Person, or Personally Reign? &c. [But about this Point, and several other things, Baptists do
not accord, and other Proffesions also are divided.] And so like∣wise some imagine, That the new Jerusalem (Prophesied of, that should come down from Heaven) must be some ouward City or Place, consisting of fair buildings outwardly; and so might they not as well imagine of the Temple thereof, that it is some fair outward structure? whereas the Lord God, and the Lamb, is the Temple and Light thereof; and the Nations of them that are sa∣ved, shall walk in the Light of this holy City. J. N. By denying any personal being of Christ without all men at the right hand of God, but only a feigned Christ within; then Remissi∣on of sins must die, and Faith also, for want of the object Christ, p. 73, & 74. Answ. This manner of excluding God's right hand, and Christ to a limitation out of his People in a personal being (which are no Scripture terms) still implyes him to be a Personal God or Chist: like the Anthropomorphites and Muggletonian's conceits of Him. And J.N. his scornfully and blasphemously calling Christ and his Light within, a feigned Christ; not owning Jesus Christ within as the object of Faith. This is both contrary to the true Faith and its Righteousness, and savours not of any real knowledge of Christ, in this scornful man. For the true Faith, and its object or foundation, are inseparable; see 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith: Prove your selves: Know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. So that their knowledge and proof of their being in the Faith, was their knowledge of Jesus Christ in them, as their foundation, &c. and this was not a feigned Christ, and in him the Remission of sins is known, to them that are in the Faith. Paul was sent to turn the Gentiles from darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might re∣ceive the remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are Sanctified. And this was the Light of Christ within. And the Righteousness which is of Faith, speaketh in this wise, Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven (that is, to bring Christ down from above) or who shall descend in∣to the Deep (that is,Rom. 10. Deut. 30.14. to bring up Christ again from the Dead) But what saith it? The Word is nigh
thee, &c. (yea, very nigh thee.) Mark, The Righteousness of Faith doth not shut Christ the Word (or object of Faith) out of the hearts of true Believers; but the Word of Faith is nigh, even in the heart, &c. And we know the Power of God, and true Re∣mission thereby, is inwardly felt by all the Children of the Light; and that Living Faith that stands in the Power, and Word of God within shll not die, nor be void; nor miss of its blessed end, which is Salvation. J.N. he Spirit of God, I my self own, and daily pray for: The same Spirit I own, though not distinct from the Scriptures: They ca∣not be separated one from the other in their Nature and Purity, p. 91, 94, 1.10. Answ. Are the Scriptures and the Spirit inseparable? and yet thou hast the Spirit daily to pray for, when thou hast the Scrip∣tures. What Confusion is this? Whereas, if they be inseparable, it follows, that all at have the Scriptures, must necessarily have the Spirit also; which is false, for the unbelieving Jews, who had Scriptures, & thought to have had Eternal Life in them (like such as you, who make them the ground of your Faith and Assurance) yet they would not come to Christ that they might have Life. Also, where thou affirmest, The Scripture and the Spirit cannot be separated one from another in their nature and purity: This is all one as to say, The Scriptures are as incorruptible as the Spirit; which is a gross Error, and contradicted by thy self, in thy 104, 105, 106 pag. where thou hast granted, That Abel, Enoch, Abram, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, &c. had a sufficient Rule before the Scrip∣tures were written, (viz.) The Spirits Rule; God's Speaking and Directions to them from his own mouth; and that they had a more in∣fallible Word to walk by, than is now to us; for it's possible, that some Scriptures may be corrupte, having been in the hands of corrupted men, &c. Thus far thou J. N. hast confuted thy self, and mani∣festly broke the neck of thy own Cause: —First, in that thou hast confessed to a more infallible Rule, or Word, than the Scriptures; so that the Scriptures are not the only Rule, nor yet the ground of Faith & Assurance, as often thou hast falsly misrepresented them. 2dly. In that the Scriptures might be corrupted, they are not in∣separably one with the Spirit in Nature and Purity. 3dly. Thou
having granted, That the Directions, or Word th Ancients had from God's own mouth, was impossible that should be corrupted, p. 106. From whence it follows, That the immediate Word and Directi∣ons of God, are the only infallible Rule (in all such as receive them) and not the Scriptures, which might be corrupted, as is confessed. But whereas thou sayest, The New Testament Letter that now is, is to be our Rule, p. 103. And often sayest, The Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith for all men to walk by, unto the end of t World, and none other, &c. Herein thou hast set the Letter or Writing above the Spirit and its immediate Directions from God, contrary to what thou hast acknowledged; as if thou wouldest now place all Rule upon the Letter, and leave no room for that which thou hast confest to be more infallible: and thus thou art found shuffling, saying and un∣saying, reeling to and fro, like a man drunk in Confusion; For, though many times wherein thou hast granted to truth, contrary to thy own corrupt Principle, thou dost not keep to it, but turnest round again to thy own Confusion, which in the tenour of it run∣neth thus, viz. The Letter is the only Rule for all men to the Worlds nd, nay, the Rule of the Spirit, or immediate Word, which the Ancients had before the Scriptures were written, was a more infallible Rule than the Scrip∣tures, for they might be corrupted. But to go round again, They cannot be separated in their Nature and Purity, &c. Is it not easie to see here, what a labyrinth of Confussion and self-Contradicti∣ons thou art run into, who hast presumed to confute others, though to thy own final Confutation. — And seeing thou pre∣tendest to pray for, and own the Spirit of Truth in its help or work (as thou sayest) in the Word; Doest tho mean that the Spirit is in the Scriptures, not distinct from them? Or, That it cannot be separated from the Letter, according to thy words before? What then, Doest thou think that the Spirit is essential in the Writing? and so, that all that have the Scriptures, must needs have the Spi∣rit? as it follows from thy own words; whereas there's a multi∣tude of Examples to the contrary, even in this Age and Nation, of both many Hypocrites, and empty Professors, and others, who
are not led by the true Spirit, and yet have the Scriptures? As also thou thy self, who professest the Scripture to be thy only Rule, yet art found in Confusion and Error, which God is not the Author of, not yet his Spirit, and what Scripture hast thou that sayeth these words, viz. The New-Testament Letter is to be our Rule? Produce plain Scripture for these words, and it shall end the Controversie; or otherwise be ashamed of professing the Scriptures thy only Rule, when thou wilt not be ruled by them, but presume to assert what thou canst not prove therein. And yet for all thy high Assertions and Titles put upon the Scriptures, thou hast confessed, That another Foundation can no man lay, than that which is already laid, which is Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. But, hast not thou often essayed to have laid another Foundation for Faith and Assurance, even the Scriptures, or the Letter? yet knowest not but that they may be corrupted; what an implicite Faith wouldst thou beget all People into, of that which thou canst give no infallible demonstration of. If thou shouldest thus preach to the Jews, Turks, or Infidels, and tell them the Scripures, or Letter of the New Testament, must be their only Rule for Sal∣vation, as thou sayest it must be for all men to the Worlds end; and then shouldst tell them that corrupt men (for ought thou knowest) have corrupted the Scriptures: What Conviction thinkest thou would this work upon them? and how would it answer either that Light or Reason that is in them? and whilest thou seemest not to own the immediate teaching of God, or his Spirit, now for the Rule, but the New Testament Letter, or Scriptures, only; How camest thou by thy Faith concerning them? And if thou meanest That the Doctrines contained in the New Testament, are the Rule, and not the Letter abstractively, then how shall a man know these Dostrines, and which do particularly relate to his state and condition? seeing there are diversities of states written to? Do not many misapply them, whilest they place the Rule only in the literal Prescriptions, and do not begin in the Spirit, which gave forth the wholsome Doctrines in Scripture? which Spirit is still sufficient to lead into all Truth, and doth immediately teach the same wholesome Doctrines; and now, though every whole∣some Direction, or Doctrine prescribed, may admit of the term
[A Rule] as it is rightly received; which thing I granting, I thereby do no more grant the Scriptures to be the only Rule, than that they are the only Word, because I grant that words of God are recorded in them. For, to say the Scripture-Letter or Writing is the only Rule of Faith for all, is a gross mistake, and excludes the immediate Teachings, Rule, and Law of the Spirit (which every spiritual mind is led by) and supposes no true Faith, but what the Letter or Writing is the Ground or Rule of; whereas it can be but an historical traditional and implicite faith, that is meerly founded upon Tradition and Letter, and not Spirit; or, tht that is without the divine and immediate Illumination of the Sirit without, which is no Divine Faith, but mens Knowledge, Faith and Religion, are all but traditional, literal, and lifeless; for in the true Knowledge of the Scriptures there must be an immediate reflection of Divine Light upon the Understanding from that In∣fallible Spirit which they were Ministers of, who could truly di∣stinguish between the Ministration of the Spirit, and that of the Letter, which thou hast not done, p. 104. who sayest the Scriptures of the New-Testament are the Spirits New Administration: from whence it follows, that all that can preach those Scriptures, are Ministers of the Spirit or New-Testament; whereas many both can red and preach them litterally, who are yet but Ministers of the Letter, and never knew the immediate and living Admi∣nistration of the Spirit from which the true Ministers preached, who immediately were commissioned, and whose Gospel came not in word only, but in Spirit and in Power, it having the immediate evidence of the Spirit in it from God, which the Letter or out∣ward writing hath not, for it is directed and given to us traditi∣onally; though I intend no invalidating of it hereby, but do op∣pose that spirit and doctrine which sets it out of its place, that calleth the Letter the Only Rule for Salvation, and so leaveth no room for the Immediate Teachings of God's Spirit or Light, as the Rule in these days: Which is the old defign and work of An∣tichrist, which thou (J. N.) and others of thy Brethren are car∣rying on, to keep people in blindness, in a dark faith under your trditional teachings, who can give no certain demonstration for the ground of your Faith; and yet thou hast granted the Spirit to be
more vertuous and greater than the Letter, p. 112. Enough to con∣fute thy opinion of the Scriptures being the only Rule, for now the Spirit is greater. But then again thou tellest us, The suffici∣ency of the Saints Rule and Guid, standeth in the Spirit and Scrip∣ture both; For (sayest thou) they cannot be separated in their Na∣ture, Purity, &c. p. 110. At if thou wouldest not freely grant the Spirit's sufficiency without the Scriptures, or to those that have them not; but seemest to limit, or tye up the Spirit to the Scripture, as being inseparable in their Nature and Purity, as if the Nature of the Writing were he Nature of the Spirit, and e∣qually Pure with it; whereas the Spirit cannot be corrupted, and its Rle is more infallible than the Scriptures, according to thy own Confession: and also thou hast confessed, That in all Dispensations God never left his People without a word of Direction, either written, or immediately from his own mouth, p. 106, & 110. So that here it appears, some had immediate Directions from God who had not the letter; and so may many now for ought thou knowest, for God is not limitted, though thou wouldest limit his Spirit and the Saints to the letter; as if none were Saints and Belie∣vers but who had the Scriptures (Oh! Ignorance) and yet thou hast confessed, That the Spirit is of more efficacy and greater than the Letter, p. 110, & 112. How then is the Letter the only Rule? And I ask, Is that Word the Scriptures, or Letter, which thou sayest Christians are nursed with the sincere Milk of? Does Milk flow from Letter, or Spirit? And is the nourishment of the new-born Babes (1 Pet. 2.2.) the Letter? Or, are none true Babes but who have the Letter? What ignorance, narrowness, and pinching work art thou found in, who hast so tyed up all to and in the Letter? —as Spirit, only Rule, sincere Milk, Well-spring of Comforts, &c. And yet grants, p. 115. That the Spirit is the Key of Divine Knowledge; which overthrows thy work about the Scrip∣tures, in thy setting them out of their place; As also to the Query, p. 117. Whether the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, be a sufficient Rule and Guide? To this thou answerest, viz. Who is so ignorant as to deny the sufficiency of God's Spirit? If thou doest not deny it, Why doest thou go about to tye up all men (to the Worlds end) unto the Scriptures as the only Rule, when now
thou doest not deny the Spirits sufficiency as Rule and Guide, nor darest thou assert the Scriptures sufficient without the Spirit, though thou grantest, That the Spirit is sufficient apart from the Scriptures (which thou callest e Word) pag. 118. Then the Scriptures are not the only Rule, the Spirit being the Key of di∣vine Knowledge; the sufficient Rule above the Scriptures, and greater than they. As, Also, in pag. 116. thou confessest, That there are secrets and private discoveries that God makes to the Soul by his blessed Spirit, which are not manifest to any but to the heart that doth enjoy it. These secrets are to those that fear him, &c. Where note, That these se∣crets and private discoveries, are not manifest to all that have the Scriptures, but to those that fear God. 2d. That they are not made manifest, or revealed by the Letter, or Scripture, outward; but by the blessed Spirit inward, unto the heart and soul that fear∣eth God, or hath Communion with him in his own Light, Life, and Spirit, which is greater and above the Letter. Again, A further Confutation to thy self, appeareth pag. 108. where thou grantest in the best sense, That the Spirit is the Rule in its own Administration. To which I say, This still confutes thy work, for that Administration is immediately and inwardly re∣ceived from the Spirit, which in the best sense is the Rule; and this Spirit being the greatest, all wholesome Doctrines, Teachings and Directions are contained, and summed up in it; and so the Scriptures of Truth are not hereby made void (though not the on∣ly Rule) but fulfilled in them who walk after the Spirit or Rule of the New Creature; for, if you walk in the Spirit, then are you not under the Law; and they begun well, who begun in the Spirit. But whereas thou turnest ound again, tying up the Spirits Rule to this, viz. Doctrine and Teaching delivered in words also written in Scriptum est (sayest thou) [As also, that the word Regeneration signifies twice born; to wit, both after the flesh, and from a state of sin; whereas , to regenerate, is to beget again, not after the flesh.] Here Thy Divinity and Scholarship may both go to∣gether, for where the Rule of the Spirit thou limittest to the Writing, how consists this with the Spirits sufficiency to them that have not the Scripture, or to its sufficiency apart or alone?
But 'tis no strange thing for thee, and such, to be found in such manifest self Contradictions. — However thou wouldst have us take notice that thou art both a Divine and a Scholar. And thy saying, That Christ cannot be a Rule for any man in his Personal being, p. 94. What makes this for thy purpose? May it not be here implyed, that he hath a spiritual being? and that he can be, and is a Rule in it to his People, as He is their Way to walk in? And, where hast thou these words, Personal being, in thy Rule? Is the Essence or Being of the Son of God, Personal? Was not his Being Divine, before his Incarnation or Appearance in Person? But thou appearest as ignorant, both what Essence (or Being) is, and what Person is, which are different. Again, Thou appearest as grosly mistaking the state of the Con∣troversie, where thou sayest, viz. What if my Spirit lead me to Mahomets Rule? Or if my Spirit perswade me to believe the Popes mouth to be infallible? &c. Now it is not thy Spirit that may thus egregiously mislead thee, that we are pleading for the Rule of, but it is the infallible Spi∣rit of Truth which gave forth the Scriptures; neither is thy As∣sertions concerning the Scriptures, any valid Plea or Argument to convince either Turks or Papists, who are both out of the Truth, and the Spirit of it; and neither of them owning the Scriptures as we have them; and never like to be Converted by such shal∣low Contenders, and impertinent Preachers as thou art. And as for the Law and the Testimony thou speakest of, pag. 125. they are yet unknown to thee; for the Law is Light, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ is the Spirit of Prophesie, Prov. 6.23. Rev. 19.10. which were before the Scriptures. And, How are Spirits to be tryed, as John exhorted, 1 Joh. 4.12. To this thou sayest, The holy Touchstone by which they are to be tryed, is that golden Rule by which the noble Bereans tried the Doctrine of Paul, even the Scriptures, to know by what Spirit he spake. And then thou addest, By this we shall know the Spirit of Truth from the spirit of Error, and not to prove a Spirit by a Spirit within.—From whence thou ob∣servest, That that Spirit which will not be tried by the Scriptures, is the Spirit of Antichrist, p. 125.
Answ. What gross Ignorance, Error, and perverting the Scrip∣tures hast thou herein shewed thy self guilty of! For first, Where provest thou in all the Rule (thou pretendest) That the Scriptures are the Touchstone and golden Rule to try the Spirits by? Produce us plain Scripture for this thy Doctrine, or else confess thy Er∣ror. 2dly. The tryal of Spirits is more mysterius than meerly the trying of Doctrines, by comparing them with Scriptures; for ma∣ny false Spirits bring Scripture, who are not discerned to be such without the Spirit of God, which searcheth all things. 3dly. John did not say, That the Scriptures were the Touchstone, by which they were to try the Spirits, whether they were of God; But he saith plainly, These things have I written unto you, concerning them that seduce you; but the Anointing, which you have received of Him, abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teacheth you of all things, &c. 1 Joh. 2.20, 26, 27. Now then, the tryal of Spirits being uch a weighty thing, which they were con∣cerned in; this Unction in them was the Touchstone, and that is the Spirit of Antichrist that opposeth this. 4thly. The Scripture doth not say, That the Bereans tried Pauls Spirit by the Scriptures, but that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, (mark that) and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so, Acts 17. It is not said, They searched them to try Pauls Spirit by them; for their receiving the Word with all readiness of mind, implyes some good belief they had of the Spirit in Paul by which he preached; And when they had received the Word, they daily searched the Scrip∣tures (not with prejudice against the true Ministers, or Light with∣in, as many of you do) [but simply] to see whether those things were so: Now this kind of searching them we own; the Word being received within, which gives the understanding of the Scrip∣tures. And as for thy scoffing at the word Pure Seed, calling it, New-coyned without Book, &c. pag. 97. And thy saying, Which Seed we vainly say is Christ begotten in us, &c. p. 98. Thou hast scofft herein without any ground, and thereby disco∣vered thy own folly; For, Is not the Incorruptible Seed a pure Seed? and doth not the Apostle call the Seed Christ? Gal. 3.16. And is not Christ in the true Believer where the Body is dead be∣cause
of sin? But thou that so nicely carps at words, as pure Seed, which is Christ within, as being without Book; what Scripture or Book thereof hast thou for thy calling the Scriptures the only Rule for Salvation for all men▪ to the Worlds end, and no other; the Touch∣stone, the golden Rule, to try or know the Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Error, the ground of Faith, &c. Produce plain Scripture for these words, or else confess thy Error, who so exctly pre∣tendest the Scripture thy Rule, how dost thou square thy work by it? & what Rule canst thou produce for us to believe thou speakest truth, when thou givest those Characters of the Scriptures, which are not to be produced in them? And was not the end of Paul's labouring with the Jews, to turn them from Darkness to the Light within? which thou contemptuously callst a pretended Spirit, p. 127. Was his perswading them to believe in Christ, in opposition to his Light within? surely no: but all in order to turn them to his Spirit, or Light within. But thou hast confessed, his perswading them, was concerning the Kingdom of God, to teach them to believe on the Name of Jesus, and direct them to the Kingdom of God: see how manifestly thou art here Contradicted by thy own words; for, was not the Kingdom of God within? Luke 17.21. And the Name of Jesus, and its Power thou seest not, who hast vilified His Light within; and the Scriptures thou citest are against thee, as that of Rom. 9, 10, 11, Chap. for, both the Righ∣teousness, the Word of Faith, and Grace, were inward and spiri∣tual. Again, To prove that the Scriptures make manifest the Righ∣teousness of God, thou citest Rom. 1.17. which is thy gross abuse of that Scripture; for it saith, that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God unto Salvation; and therein is his Righteousness revealed from Faith to Faith, &c. It is not said, the Scriptures are the Power of God; for the Power of God, or Gospel, was preached to Abraham before the Scriptures were written. And to thy saying, Faith hath a holy End, which it leadeth to, even the Salvation of Souls, not now in man, but at the last day, when our bodies shall be raised out of the dust, p. 123. And where provest thou this Doctrine? Is not the Soul in man? And is not its Salvation deliverance and safety from sin, wrought within by the Power and Arm of God? How dost thou
essay to frustrate the End of the true Faith, which is Salvation, whilst thou sayest, It leads to the Salvation of Souls, not now in man; but at the last day, when our bodies shall be raised out of the dust? And when thinkest thou shall that be? Must all the Sints have their Hope, Expectation, and Faith for Salvation of their Souls un∣answered till then? what is become of their Souls all this while, since their decease, if they have not received the End of their Faith, to wit, Salvation in them? Surely, thou art yet in the dust, and death and dakness have power over thy mind or else thou wouldst never shew thy self such an ignorant Papist as here thou hast done; for thou hast (though at unawares) run thy self into rank Popery, putting Salvation of Souls so far off, till thou know∣est not when, according to thy earthly and carnal conceits, which thou wouldest have us believe for gracious Truths, which thou sayest, Quakerism doth not own, unless in a Mystery, to deceive, But this is not thy first slanderous Conclusion against the Quakers, who only oppose the graceless Errors and Absurdities of thee, and such blind insolent Opposers, who oppose the Light within, and the power of Godliness, as thou (J. N.) hast manifestly done. And now J. N. here follows a few of thy gross Lyes and slanderous Accusations laid down and implyed against us, which I return back upon thy own head. 1. THat nohing that is of man, shall at the last be saved, but only the Pure Seed. This is a gross abuse; for the Redempti∣on, Retoration, and Salvation of the whole man, we own. 2. False it is, That our Family Preacheth and Printeth down the Scriptures, and the Commands of Christ, as Carnal &c. 3. False it is, That the Scripture is not to be owned by Saints.
4. False it is, That they bid People turn to a feigned and pretended Light, or Spirit within. 5. False it is, That our Family doth use the Scripture but as a Cloak, to carry on a design of darkness, when we own the Scripture in its proper place. 6. False it is, That the proper place of Scripture, is but to stand by us as a Stalking-Horse. 7. A malitious slander it is, To charge us as crafty Fowlers, with shooting the simple Soul through by deceitful darts. 8. False it is, That we cast behind our backs, all the Order and Discipline of the Primitive Churches of our Lord and Master. For the Worship in Spirit, and the Living Way, which Chist set up and Consecrated, we Testifie to, and for. 9. We do not make use of either God's Word or Scriptures in hypocrisie; as most slanderously is implyed against us. 10. And that of binging a mist and fog upon the Scripture, out of the bottomless Pit, and bringing it to such a low rate by Evasions and Contradictions. These things (J. N.) thou, and such peevish sln∣derers, are guilty of (and not we); as thy work and self-Contra∣dictions sufficiently have discovered. 11. A gross and manifest slander it is, That we will not own the Man Christ to be risen. 12. False it is, That we own not a Rising (or Resurrection of the the Dead, &c.) at the last ay, according to the Scripures. Though not according to the unscriptural conceits of some busie Intrudes or Fools, who now (as formerly) are contending and asking, How are the Dead raised, and with wt body do they come? 1 Cor. 15.35, 36, 37. 13. And as to these dreadful Opinions and Delusions of not owning an Eternal Life, &c. of drawing all the glory, after this life, into a present enjoyment; and in this life to make an end of all our happiness, &c. These are none of our Opinions, nor ever owned as Prin∣ciples among us, but judged as Atheistical; and therefore are most injuriously and falsly drawn (or inferred) against us. But I have heard of some of the Baptists that have held the Mortallity of the Soul, that it dyes with the body, &c.
14. Also a false Inference it is against us, That the Grave will be the farthest Journey that man shall go towards Eternal Life. For as touching the Righteous or Ransomed of the Lord, who believe in his Light within, they own and witness to an Immor∣tal state, and receive Power in Him, who is the Resurrection and the Life, over Death, Hell, and the Grave: And as we do own a Resurrection both of the just and unjust, according to the Scrip∣tures, and that each shall have rewards according to their works; so neither Death, nor Hell, nor Grave, nor Earth, nor Sea, shall detain or keep back the wicked from their just rewards and punishments due for their Iniquity, Rebellion, and Transgressi∣ons, who have rejected the Light within, and hated to be Refor∣med: For there is a Lake of perpetual torment for the Devil and wicked men; for the Beast and false Prophet (that War against the Lamb [the Light] and his followers) for such as receive his Mark, and such as are not found written in the Book of Life, Rev. 19.20. & 20.10. to the end. Yea, and further it is said, That the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Mur∣derers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Lyers, shall hve their part in the Lake, which burneth with Fire and Brim∣stone, which is the second Death, Rev. 21.8. Wherefore J. N. and thy Brethren, take heed how you go on in your Envy, Lyes, and Slanders against an innocent Peope; but Repent, repent, of your wickedness therein, which hitherto divers of you have of∣ten appeared in, in our malicious Spirits: But the Lord will sweep away your Refuge of Lyes, and Slanders; and he know∣eth how to deliver the Godly out of temptations, and to re∣serve the Unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. And whereas thou J. N. chargest us with dreadful Delusion, as bringing all to an invisible state, — all within man; and that there is no visible God, no visible Christ, &c. p. 133. Answ. Dreadful Delusion is without any proof against us, — its thy own, who opposest the invisible state, and inward enjoyment of God, who is invisible; and that which may be known of God is manifest wihin: And what Rule in Scripture hast thou for these
words [visible God, visible Christ, &c.] Here thou hast not squared thy Work by the Rule thou pretendest; for, is not Christ the I∣mage of the Invisible God, Col. 1.15. — And did not Moses by Faith see him that is Invisible, when he had respect unto the re∣compence of Reward, Heb. 11. And is not that recompence of reward (viz. Eternal Life, Peace, and Felicity) inwardly and spiitually received, by those that patiently now suffer for Christ; whose sufferings of the present time, are not to be compared unto the Glory that shall be revealed in them, Rom. 8.18. But thou that art so carnally imagining, and thus shutting out the weighty things of Salvation out of man, and like the old Here∣ticl Egyptian Monks, (the Anthropomorphites, and late Muggle∣tonians) art telling of a visible God, and Christ remote, not in any; and despising the Light within as but feigned: What could we ex∣pect better from hee than such darkness, ignorance, and confu∣sion, as hath appeared in this thy malicious, irrational Book a∣gainst the Light within; and the Children, or Family of Light, called Quakers, against neither of whom hast thou urged any rea∣son or validity, so as to disaffect any that are unprejudiced against us, but the more against thy self and them that will own thee.— Wherefore my advice and caution to all that are simply-minded, who read this, that they seriously minde and follow the Light and Unction from the Holy-One within, that thereby their minds may be kept out of prejudice and enmity, and over and out of the per∣verse wayes of imaginary conceited, dark and prejudiced spirits, who pervert the Scriptures, and deride at the Light within, and abuse the Children of it, as thou hast done: But the Truth is set over thy head, and all those of thy Fraternity, whose spirits the Devil hath inveterately set against that, which you shall one day know will be too strong and mighty for you. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be Honour and Glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Tim. 1.17.
The Baptist and Presbyter, &c. conjunct against us, to their own Disjunction and Confusion. OR, A Relation of some Heads of Two Discourses (in London); the first whereof was the 28th of the 10th Month (69.) at which Thomas Danson (formerly Priest of Sandwich in Kent) and William Kiffin Baptist [with the Assist∣ance of Ald. Hayes] joyned against us. THe Question disputed on both times was, Whether the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, yea or nay? VVhich was affirmed by them, but denyed by us▪ Now let the impartial Readers note how confused and contra∣dictory they were in the management of their Affirmation: As first, when we had excepted against their Affirmation, the particle Only being exclusive of any higher Rule; yea, even of the Spirit of Truth it self, and importing the Scriptures as the chief, or sole, singular, and alone Rule of Faith, excluding all other. Now when any of these our Opposers did at any time include the Spirit, or the divine illumination thereof in the understanding (when they had asserted the Scriptures to be the only Rule) this Contra∣distion they divers times appeared in. And T. D. when he could not stand by the Assertion in the terms proposed, instead of the word Scriptures, he would have it, The Doctrines contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the only Rule of Faith: which he also could not prove according to his general Assertion
therein; and his disserting the terms of the Question, to wit, of the Scriptures being the only Rule, he rendred no sufficient Rea∣son for it: for the Doctrines as contained therein, have still relati∣on to the Scriptures, which are of divers kinds; as those of the Law, for the Circumcision and other Shadows; and those of the New Testament, forbidding them. But yet, though one while the Scriptures, and another while the Doctrines contained in them, were asserted to be the only Rule of Faith; in Contradiction to this, he would assent to the guidance of the Spirit of God, and would in∣clude the Holy Ghost in the comfort of the Scriptures, and con∣fess at length, That the Scriptures, without divine illumination, are but the foundation of an historical Faith, and not a saving Faith; and that a man may believe the historical part, and not be saved; and that the divine illumination of the Spirit, is the Foundation and Rule of saving Faith. Observ. Mark, Here is a Foundation, or Rule of the Spirit assented to above the Scriptures: If the divine illumination of the Spirit, be the Rule of the Understanding, the Rule for Conviction, and consequently the Rule of Faith; then the Scriptures are not the only Rule. And T. D. granted, That the Scriptures are not the Rule of Conviction for those that denied their divine Authority, it being but a begging the Question, to argue from Scripture for the Con∣viction of such, &c. Therefore it follows, that the inlightning of the holy Spirit, which is able to convict Gain-sayes, is a Rule a∣bove the Scriptures, which therefore are not the only Rule. But W. Kiffin (to prove their first Assertion, so much confuted by T. D. himself) told us, That the Director and Rule to Faith and Salvation, were two distinct things; as the Way to Bristol, and my Director into the Way; and that the Scriptures are the only Rule and Way in which we are to walk, and the Spirit of God is the Guide and Director, &c. Answ. To ths he was Answered, That Christ is both the Leader and Director into the way of God, and the Way also; and that we are to walk in the Spirit: and therefore his asserting that the Director is not the Way, in this Instance against the Spirit being the Rule, is all one as to say, Christ cannot be the Way, because he is the Guide; which is contrary to his own Testimony. And
while W.K. did state the Way and Rule as the same, or equivolent, he mnifestly ran to his own confutation; Christ Jesus and his Light being the Author of Faith, and only Way to Salvation. As to the Question [If the Scriptcres come where men question them, or their Relation of those Miracles or Works of God's Power, &c. which T.D. argued as ground or matter of Conviction, &c.] How shall such be Convicted by that Relation which they question, without the Living Evidence of the Spirit? T. D. replied, Would you question whether there were such a man as King Henry the Eight? &c. Answ. This is not an Answer to the only Rule of Faith, and proves no farther than a traditional Faith; and by this, it appears what is the nature of these mens Faith, and how weak; for they did not know that there was a King Henry the Eight by divine il∣lumination; and sure the Spirit and Power that gave forth the Scriptures, hath an influence upon the understandings, and opens the Holy Scriptures where it is submitted to within. His In∣stance of King Henry the Eight, was a very mean and pitiful one in this case, to answer the Ground and Rule of true and living Faith, which is the Gift of God, and whereof Christ is the Au∣thor. Farther, Mark what corrupt Doctrines and Extravagancies the said T.D. runs into against the universal extent of the Spirit of God, and sufficiency of his Light, having granted or supposed many places in the World where there is neither Bible nor Mini∣ster to Preach; he proceeded as followeth. T. D. I say, that God ordinarily doth not by his Spirit immediately reveal the Doctrines contained in the Scriptures (meaning without them) His Spirit doth not go into the farthest parts of India, where the Scriptures are not; the Spirit of God doth not go into the remotest parts of the World: We suppose there are some placs where there is neither Bible nor Minister; I do not understand any ground that the Spirit in those places doth immediately reveal those things, &c. p. 9. Answ. 1. See if this be not a limitation put upon the Spirit of God, and a denial of its alone sufficiency to teach or reveal all Truth without the Scriptures; And how this man supposes that there are remote places where the Spirit doth not come, which is contrary to plain Scripture: Whither shall a man go from the
Spirit, or flee from the presence of God? see Psal. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. for his Presence fills Heaven and Earth. 2dly. Supposing that in some places they have neither the Scriptures, nor their outward Preaching; it were a sad sentence to conclude them all in a state of Damnation for want thereof; and to conclude, that therefore God doth not afford them of his Spirit or Light, to be an inward Rule of their Faith without the Scriptures: What cruelty doth this charge upon God against his Creatures? And what a narrow limitation doth this put upon his Spirit, to allow him his path but only where the Scriptures are? Or Presbyterian or Independant Teachers, or such-like, go? What a pitiful narrow Spirit and Principle is this among them? And had not those Gentiles (spoken of Rom. 2.) those things contai∣ned in the Law, written in their hearts, when they had not the Law or Scriptures outwardly? And were they not either accused or excused before God by his Law written in their hearts? T.D. They not walking up to the Light they had, was the cause of their Codemnation, and they were left without excuse. T.D's [Contradiction] —But it was not sufficient to lead them to Life or Salvation, —it was a Natural Light, &c. Answ. Then from this it follows, That all was a case whether they walked up to the Light they had or not, they were like to be Condemned, do what they could (a sad Doctrine, charging God with no less than Cruelty and Injustice); then for what Reason was the Light given to them? and what was God's End therein, if it was insufficient? ow should they be left without excuse? And for what end were they brought into the world, if a capacity of Salvation was not afforded them? As to his calling it a natural Light, what rule hath he in Scripture for so calling it? For the Law in their hearts was spiritual; and it's said, When they do by Nature, it is not said, By a Natural Light; and what Nature was it, by which they obeyed the Law of God in the heart? Surely it was not a Nature repugnant to the Law. And when I demanded of these men, to produce us that Scrip∣ture that saith, The Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, and it shall end the Controversie.
Ald. H. Answ. I will, in the last of the Revelations, If any man shall add to this Rule, &c. Obs. Here he was mistaken, for it is not said, this Rule, but these things, &c. the words of the Book, &c. see Revelations 22.18, 19. T. D's Arg. That which the Scriptures direct to as the Rule of Faith, that is to be the only Rule: But the Scriptures direct to them∣selves. Ergo. Answ. The first part I own; that which the Scriptures direct to is the Rule, and that is the Light within; the Spirit or Uncti∣on from the Holy One, 1 Joh. 2. that gave them forth; there∣fore I deny that the Scriptures direct to themselves as the only Rule. T. D. That the Scripture directs to its self as the only Rule (and no other) I prove from Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, &c. Rep. Christ did not say the Scriptures were the only Rule, but rather reproved these unbelievers (whom these men resemble) in these words viz. In them (to wit the Scriptures) ye think to have Eternal Life; and ye will not come to Me, that ye might have Life, vers. 40. T. D. The more sure word of Prophesie, 2 Pet. 1.19. was the Scriptures, &c. Rep. Here he hath confounded and perverted the Scriptures, as if the word of Prophesie, and the Writings, and Prophesies were all one; and as if it were to be read, You have more sure Scrip∣tures of the Prophets; whereas they were not more sure than the Scriptures of the Apostles; and the word of the Prophesie (or Holy Ghost that moved in the Prophets to speak or write Scrip∣ture) was before the Prophesies of it (or the Scriptures) were written; the Word came to the Prophets before they Prophesied, it was in their hearts, and the same Word now appears in many as a Light shining in a dark place, whereunto ye shall do well to take heed until the day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. Obs. So this Light within was in all Ages (and still is) the most absolute, perfect, and universal Rule to all the Righteous, who
believed in the Light, and were the Children of the Day, where God hath appointed the Great Light of Himself, to Rule His People in Faith and Practise. At the Second Discourse which was the 20th of the 11th Month, 1669. Will. Kiffin and his Brother Jeremiah Ives, with some others appeared against us: Some of their Con∣tradictions follow. W.K. THe Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith (from 2 Tim. 3.15, 16.) the Spirit considered as a Rule, is absolutely excluded, but as a Director, as my Way and my Guide are distinct, &c. (as before.) Obs. First, This Scripture cited by him, proveth not his Asser∣tion; to wit, That the Scriptures are the only Rule. Secondly, His so absolute excluding the Spirits Rule is contrary to this Scripture, which saith, All Scripture given by inspiration of God, &c. (the par∣ticle is being added.) Here the Inspiration of God is owned to give Scripture; as also it's the Man of God that knows the use thereof, who doth not exclude Divine Inspiration, or the Holy Spirit from being his Guide, Rule, and Way, for he walks in the Spirit: So that if Rule and Way be one and the same, as here they are rendered, that which is the only Way to Life and Salvation, must needs be the only Rule; and surely neither Christ, nor his Light, or holy Spirit within, must be excluded from being this Way in which we are to walk. And now mark how Jer. Ives (coming into the Meeting, after his Brother W. K. had thus absolutely excluded the Spirit) did positively contradict him. Jer. Ives. Our saying the Scriptures are the only Rule, doth not exclude the Spirit, or the Spirit's Illumination, the Scripures inclu∣ding
the Spirit, are the only Rule, &c. that is our meaning. Obs. See how manifestly they have contradicted one another; here the one wholly excluding the Spirit as a Rule, and the other including it: But this Jer. Ives was not aware of his Brothers ha∣ving excluded the Spirit before he came in; upon which we urging them to confess their Error and Contradiction: Jer. Ives endea∣voured to salve up the business as well as he could, (saying, We are reconciled) And in order thereto he proceeded thus, viz. J. I. Our saying the Scriptures are the only Rule, does not exe every thing else (or the Spirits Illumination) from being a Rule; any more than to say, God Only hath Immortality, doth exclude all else from having Immortality, &c. Obs. Still he could not hide himself from contradicting his Brother W.K. and the terms of their own Question; For if the Spirit's Illumination be included (as in Rule) then to say, the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, is not true; and wholly to exclude the Spirit as a Rule, is erroneous: And to instance in this case, That God only hath Immortality, which is dwelling in the Light, 1 Tim. 6.16. Was this a fit comparison for their Assertion of the Scriptures being the only Rule? For, hath not God Immor∣tality above and before all others? And hath he not it only dwel∣ling in the Light? And have any it out of him, or out of his Light? But hath he it not only as more eminently and above all others? As he is the only Wise God, the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6.15. where [Only] is both used in a most eminent sense, and excluding all others from that eminence. And if in this sense (according to Jer. Ives his In∣stance) the Scriptures be taken as the most eminent Rule, before and above all other Rule; what is this but to set the Scriptures above the Spirit that gave them forth? and above all Divine Il∣luminations? (although without it the Scriptures cannot be un∣derstood) which is as much as to set them above God and Christ. And yet Jer. Ives, in Contradiction to their own Assertion, gran∣ted, That they did not intend that none have Faith but they that have the Scriptures (some may have Faith who have them not, &c.) It fol∣lows therefore, that that [some] have the Rule of Faith without the Scriptures. See what a deadly blow he hath given to his (and their) own Cause?
Jer. Ives. God doth not require any thing to be believed (as a Point of Faith) or to be practised as a Duty, for which there is not a Rule laid down in the Scriptures; and that there is not any sin committed but what is there mentioned; there is no sin that I commit, but I may correct it by the Scriptures, &c. Obs. See how both these passages do egregiously vary from the state of the Question, and their general Assertion before; Of the Scriptures being the only Rule of Faith. For a Rule in the Scrip∣tures, and they to be the only Rule, are much different. And how∣ever, if it were granted (which 'tis not) That God doth not re∣quire any thing to be believed, &c. or practised as duty, for which there is not a Rule laid down (which imports a particular Rule or measure specified for every particular point or practice, or else not to be believed nor practised) then it follows, That if there be not a particular Rule in Scripture to prove, That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, nor which so saith of them; We are not bound to believe these men's Assertion therein as any Point of Faith, for God doth not require us to believe it, however they contend for it, and would impose it upon our Faith. But further, 1. If by a Rule laid down, it be intended that there is a particular Rule, Command or Precept specified, exactly to measure every particular duty or thing to be believed or practised by all Christians (as there are many express Commands and Pre∣cepts expressing the particular duty, and forbidding the offence;) this is not so expressed under a general Command (nor yet pro∣ved) as Jer. Ives endeavoured; as when I put the Qestion, viz. Whether God doth not (or may not) by his immediate Power, in these dayes, raise up and Commissionate Prophets to declare peculiar Mes∣sages to particular Places, People, or Governments, yea or nay? To this Jer. Ives granted, That God might (for any thing he knew) do so: But suppose there may be Prophets now, sent with immediate Commission to a particular Place, as Rome, &c. (said he) The Scripture hath a Rule in it, that such Prophets ought to obey their Master; and that the Scripture commands to hear Christ in all things, and not to quench the Spirit nor despise Prophesie, &c. (Thus far Jer. Ives.) — But while he cannot prove that all those things are particularly prescribed in Scripture, which they are to hear
and learn of Christ, and which are to be prophesied: but hath granted the contrary (to wit) That there may be immediate Com∣missions and peculiar Messages from God to particular Places, &c. (suppose Rome, or London) which are not particularly specified in Scripture (however Christ is to be heard in all things, and his Spirit not to be quenched) — Therefore it follows, that the Scriptures are neither the Rule of those Prophets Faith, either for such their Commission or peculiar Messages, for they have nei∣ther from the Scriptures, but immediately from God: (And therefore if they should go to question their Commission, and try such their Messages by the Scriptures, and not find them there, this would argue unbelief, and cause disobedience) whereas their particular Commissions and Messages, are evidenced to them by the Spirit and Power of God (whether it be by Vision or Reve∣lation) which is the immediate Object, Rule, and Foundation of their Faith therein. 2dly, And in our dayes there hath been such Prophets raised up, both to this Nation, and City of London; witness Humphry Smith's Vision of Fire to London; Jo. Rance his Prophecy in Meeter (before the Contagion) of the great Wo and debace∣ment of London; T. Ibbot's Vision of the Fire; which he came to proclaim, and went through the Streets as a sign thereof (and of the great Distraction upon it) the day before it broke forth: (But W.K. his surmise, or may be that these might have a hand in it, was malitious and wicked, as divers present took notice.) Yea, many more have truly foretold of the Judgments and Calamities of this Nation and City; and it would be voluminous to repeat what hath been truly foretold by divers of the Servants of the Lord, concerning O. C. and those persecuting Professors that persecuted us in his Name (and what's yet to come upon the Per∣secutors who follow their steps) and of the Confusions that his Priests, and those persecutors of the Innocent, would fall into (as also the temporizing of many of them) which is manifest both upon many of the Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists at this day; whose insatiable enmity is still continued against us, though they be confounded among themselves; and their horns broken, that they cannot push as formerly.
3dly, As the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith, nor is there a particular Rule therein for every individual motion or action; so are they not the sole Rule of discovery of sin and evil in men particularly (though they witness against all sin.) — Nor are they the immediate, or original Obligation upon the Conscience to Righteousness or Duty in the sight of God; for it is the Light of Christ within (that immediately opens an inward eye) that discovers to men their particular sins and guilt; and that imme∣diately obligeth to Righteousness (and did so oblige man in the beginning before it was so written in letters) because of God, who both telleth unto man his thoughts, and what he ought to do as his duty; And, whatsoever makes manifest is Light; all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light, yea, by that Ligt which Christ giveth, Eph. 5.13, 14. Howbeit, every one that doth evil, hateth the Light; neither cometh to the Light lest his deeds should be reproved: but he that doth truth, cometh to the Light that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. So that it's evident, the Light is that Rule that tryes and manifests all things; and this was before the Scriptures, and is where they are not. Many over-look (and will not see) their own evils, though they read those very Scrip∣tures that testifie against them: but if they turn to the Light of Christ within, it will make them manifest, and bring them under a sense of their own guilt therein, that they may repent and cease from sin, and so receive remission. 4thly, And now, as for this great Point or Article of our pre∣sent Opposers Faith (viz. That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, — the Spirit being absolutely excluded as a Rule by W. K.) It is to be noted, that since Jer. Ives, in a Letter to me saith, viz. Though I might own this Question in their sense, yet I never owned it in their words, &c. Whereby the Reader may see, That Jer. Ives upon a more de∣liberate Consideration, hath disserted his Brethrens Cause; he perceiving (as it seems) that they cannot maintain the Scriptures to be the only Rule. But 1st. where he saith, He might own it in their sense; this is not true; For his sense of owning it, was That he did not exclude (but included) the Spirit: But his Brother
Kiffin's sense was absolutely to exclude the Spirit as a Rule; so their senses herein absolutely opposed each other. 2dly, His saying, He never owned it in their words; is as false (however he now evades or disowns it) for many Persons of Credit that were present, can testifie (as also the Relation of the Discourse, taken by an expert Short-writer) that he did own the Question (whether the Scriptures are the only Rule) in these their terms for some time, however now he would acquit himself of it; and there∣by has failed his Brethren, and broke the neck of their Cause. These few Questions are for W. Kiffin, and the rest, who own him in his Principle. Quest. 1. BY what Rule would you have us believe you, when you say the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith and Practice, and absolutely exclude the Spirit as a Rule? 2. Whether any can truly know and believe the Scriptures, without having their understandings divinely enlightned by the Spirit that gave them forth, yea or nay? 3. Is not the true beginning of Believers, in that Spirit? In order to Righteousness, Life, and Salvation? 4. Do you own the immediate Teaching of the Spirit, or divine Re∣velation to be attainable in these dayes? Or, 5. Can any come truly to know the true God, or Jesus Christ, with∣out immediate Revelation? 6. What is the key of true knowledge? 7. What was the Rule of Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, &c. their Faith before the Scriptures were written? 8. Do you think the Spirit is to be received in the Scriptures? Or, that the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, yea or nay? 9. What Rule would you make use of, for the Conviction of those that either oppose the Divine Authority (supposed) or Translation of the Scriptures, seeing such cannot be Convicted by the Scriptures themselves?
10.  Measre and le whereunto the tre Mini∣ers and belieing Geiles had attained, hich they were to walk by, mentioned, 2 Cor. 10, 13, 15. Phil. 3.16. Gal. 6.16. was that Rule the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, or Bible, yea or nay? Here follows a few Doctrines asserted by one — Wheatly at Lambeth, in a Book directed in Manuscript to one Mr. Cox (as he calls him): this Wheatley seems to be a Brother of these Baptists, by his opposing the Light with∣in, and pleading for their outward Forms, and their Water-Baptism, from the Exam∣ple of Christ's going down into the Water to be Baptized of John. Wheatley his Doctrine, viz. DO not blame the Devil to exclude the example of the Children of God, if he can by any pretence; do not blame the Devil to per∣swade men to trust to the Light within, &c. pag. 4, 5. Answ. However this man seems to be a Friend to the Devil, in that he exhorts not to blame him, he is grosly mistaken in say∣ing, The Devil perswades men to trust to the Light within; for the Devil, and such his Instruments, perswade men against the Light as much as they can; for his Kingdom is held up in the dark, and his way is darkness it self, wherein his Followers walk, who will not bring their deeds to the Light, lest it should reprove them: but the Light of Christ in every man, and the sufficiency thereof, and the Scriptures of Truth which testifie to it, we beat witness unto; and against both the Devil and this Opposer, and against
all such as are in the same spirit of darkss and enmity with him and the Devil, who oppose the True Light. And he that saith, The Devil perswades men to trust to the Light within; he hath highly advanced the Devil, and conferred as much dignity upon him as the Ranters, when they have told us, That the Devil is Gods good Servant, his faithful Servant, &c. This is like his blasphemy who setteth the Devil in the place of God's faithful Servants and Ministers, whose work it was to per∣swade men to his Light within; but both the Devil, and Ranters, are enemies to the true Light within. W's Doct. There may be a Light amongst men and not within, for Jesus Christ said to the Pharisees, the Kingdom of God was within them; when indeed it was but among them, (saith he); And to prove it, he citeth Luke 17.22. Answ. See how he hath proved the Light not within, viz. The Kingdom of God was within the Pharisees; Christ saith, It is within; but this Man saith, Not within: Shall we believe Christ or him? But as if he would plainly let us know how he is set to oppose Christ, after he hath told us, That Jesus Christ said, The Kingdom of God was within them; In Contradiction to Christ, he saith, When indeed it was but among them; and this to prove the Light not within. It is no marvel this man sets himself to op∣pose Christ's Followers and Servants for asserting his Light with∣in, when thus he opposeth Christ himself, for saying, That the Kingdom of God is within; but this man saith it was not within, it was but among them. Now then here is the case and state of the Controversie; Christ and his Followers do bear witness to the Kingdom of God, and his Light within: But the Devil and his Followers, strive and war against the Light and Kingdom of God within, as much as they can; the Devil he hath blinded their eyes from seeing the Light: he hath made fools, vassals, and slaves of them to do his drudgery, to shew their enmity, and vomit out their shame and principles of darkness against the Light within. Oh! how hath the Devil deceived such wilful Opposers and Unbe∣lievers? W's Doct. If God, and Christ, and Holy Spirit be within them, then there is none above them; Is not this spiritual pride? &c.
Answ. No: it was not spiritual pride in the People of God, and Followers of Christ, to witness God and Christ to dwell in them; neither did this argue at all that God and Christ were not above them; for, God is above all, and through all, and in all his own, Eph. 4.6. And he that dwelleth on High, and inhabiteth Eter∣nity, dwells with such also as are poor in Spirit, and tremble at his Word. Oh! how ignorant are these Opposers of the Scriptures, and of the Power of God? W's Doct. I do believe, That essentially from Eternity, the Scrip∣ture was as really God, as a man's mind is himself, before it is re∣vealed; so before that Spirit that proceedeth from Father and Son, gave forth the Scriptur, the Scripture was really God. Can the Qua∣kers shew you, That Christ the Word is not Scripture, &c. pag. 17. Thus far his Assertion. Answ. Let this be kept on Record for his Brethren to peruse, and for all other that reade this to judge of, that the Scripture was really God from eternity, yea, and that essentially; as much as to say, the Essence of the Scripture is the Essence of God. What say you Baptists and Professors? do you own this doctrine? If you do not, then give forth your Testimony against him and it, and correct and stop such Nvices and ignorant men amongst you from med∣ling with Controversies, and from scribling their Confusion and Blasphemies against us: For, do you own that the Scriptures are God? or, that the Scriptures made all things? Or, when you carry a Bible in your pocket, do you carry God and his essence there? Is not this Rantism in the highest, that your Brother hath affirmed? and doth it not tend to lead into Atheism? let Truth in all judge. Many of this Opposers Impertinencies, gross Lyes, Slanders and Abuses against us (called Quakers) in his Pamphlet I here pass by; my recital of these few passages of his, being, that the rest of his Brethren may take notice thereof, and be cau∣tioned not to suffer enmity and darkness to lead them to war a∣gainst the Light and its Children, as too many have done, lest that shame and confusion of face (instead of Justification and Peace with the Lord) be their reward.
Here followeth a Copy of the Baptists Bill of Excommunication. WEE the Church of Christ, meeting near Bow, of which you Hester Bird were once a Member, Do by these pre∣sents, signifie and declare, That you have tur∣ned out of the right way of the Lord both in Doctrine,Jer. 8.8, 9. 1 Joh. 2.19. 2 Tim. 2.17. 1 Tim. 1.20. Acts 3.22, 23. and Practice, viz. Departing from the Foundation, Doctrine of Justification by Grace; From the Resurrection of this Body; The Personal coming of the Lord Jesus; And the Holy Ordinances of Christ, viz. Baptism, Communion of Saints, and the Lords Supper: And you having been by Us, or some of Us, Admonished; and remaining Incorrigible, WEE do hereby declare, That you are gone out from Us, because you were not of Us; having rejected the Word of the Lord and Us his People, WEE also do reject you, ac∣cording to the Sentence of the Lord, exprest by the Apostles in these Scriptures mentioned in the Margent. George Barrett. Benj. Dennis. Edw. Annesley. Rich. Mathyson. Ralph Chapman. Signed in the Name, and by the Ap∣pointment of the Church, the 17th of the 7th Month, 1669,
Here followeth a Copy of the said Hester Bird (now Hester Andrews) her Answer. GEorge Barret, Benjamin Dennis, and the rest concerned; I do not own you to be the Church of Christ as you call your selves: For the true Church never gave out such a false Bill of Excommuni∣cation as you have against Me; therefore your pretended Authority therein I deny. Whereas you falsly charge me with turning from the Communion of Saints; I have sensibly known and felt the Communion of Saints, blessed be the Lord, since I have been from amongst you. As to the Personal Reign of Christ, I never owned it when I was amongst you; but his Spiritual Appearance I am a witness of. Your outward Bread and Wine satisfies not the Soul; I have had more peace when I did not touch your Shadows, than when I did. As to the Water-Baptism, I never found any thing in it, I was the same when I came out as when I went in; Blessed be the Lord, I have known one Baptism, the Baptism of Christ, viz. being Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; for he will throughly purge his Floor. As to departing from the Foundation, Doctrine of Justification by Grace, as you falsly and slanderously charge me; I know the Foundation of God standeth sure, and another Foundation can no man lay than that is already laid, which is Christ in us, which is the Hope of Glory, by whose Grace I am Justified freely: and this I find to be the Doctrine of Christ, and his Ministers, which I own. A Word from the Lord unto you, That you would come out from a∣mong your dark Customs of this World, and come to the Appearance of Christ in you, As to your Excommunication, it's known I came from you some years ago; take heed your Censure falls not on your own heads: but it shews of what spirit you are.
Your charge of departing from the Resurrection of this Body, as you state it; Its neither truth nor sense, nor have you told me your meaning: For, what Resurrection and Body have I come to, that I have departed from: Howbeit the Resurrection I believe according to the Testimony of Christ and his Ministers; see Joh. 11.25. 1 Cor. 15.42. to the end: And Christ's Answer to the Saduces, Mat. 22.29, 30. H. A. A few brief Observations on the Scriptures in the Margent of the Baptists Bill (or rather Bull) against the said Hester Bird, alias Andrews; which they have perverted and misapplyed: As, FIrst, That of Jer. 8.8, 9. was against the Rebellious Jews, who were backslidden, and knew not the Judgment of the Lord, and had rejected his Word, who were all given to Covetousness, and to deal falsly, from the People to the Priest, vers. 7, 10. None of which Evils have these angry Baptists proved against this Person whom they have Rejected, or Excommunicated; for she did first reject them, as she was perswaded she had good reason for; and that therein she did not reject the Word of the Lord, but such as have rejected it, whom she denyes to be either Called by Christ to the Ministry, or to be of his Church. Secondly, That, 1 Joh. 2.19. was against those Antichrists who went out from the true Apostles, and Church: where note, these Baptists have neither proved their Call to the Ministry, nor themselves to be either true Apostles, or a true Church;
nor yet Convicted this Woman to be such an one mentioned 1 Joh. 2.18, 19. for she is now directed to (and owneth) the Vnction within from the Holy One, which preserves out of An∣tichrist's Delusions, Lyes and Deceits, &c. which if she con∣tinues in, and obey to the end, she shall continue in the Son, and in the Father, and not deny Jes Christ, or the Father, as the Antichrists did, vers. 22, 23. But this Anointing within, these Bap∣tists have never turned People unto, that they might follow and obey it in all things; for they impose upon People their own Practises, without the immediate guidance of the Spirit: And therefore this Woman hath cause for ever to bless the Lord th she turned from them, if she continue in this Anointing within; which is true. Thirdly, As to that, 2 Tim. 2.17. & 1 Tim. 1.20. These concerned such as did blaspheme, and used profane and vain bab∣lings; of whom was Alexander, and also Hymeneus and Philetus, who said, That the Resurrection was past already, and overthrew the Faith of some: But no such thing as vain Bablings, Blasphemy, or saying, That the Resurrection is past already, have these Baptists proved against this Person whom they have Excommunicated: And therefore it is, 1st. A great sin in them thus to misaply the Scriptures against such as they were never intended. And, 2dly, A great presumption in them, to assume an Authority from the Apostles words, 1 Tim. 1.20. to deliver up to Satan, when they have no Commission, Power, or Authority given them of God so to do, as the Apostles had, &c. 3dly, What great folly and madness do they shew and bewray, in Rejecting, Excommunicating, or Delivering up to Satan, such as have before rejected and denyed them, and refused to have any Communion with them, as this Hester for some time hath; for such as were rejected and cast out of the true Church, they were either such as would have continued a∣mong them in scandalous Practises, as Fornication, &c. 1 Cor. 5. Or, 2dly, Such false Brethren, as by Blasphemies,
or Heresies, troubled the Church, and would have sown Se∣dition and Strife amongst them; for Testimonies in truth (against such) we own. Fourthly, As to that of Acts 3.22, 23. It's on the behalf of Christ, that great Prophet, hom every one ought to hear in all things; And it's said, Every Soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People, &c. Now it is not every Soul that will not hear you Baptists (and come under your Water and Ordinances, as you impose them) that must therefore be de∣troyed, however you pretend to deliver such to Satan; but e∣very Soul that will not hear Christ, that great Prophet of God in all things, that Soul must be cut off: And can you say that you have ever heard the Voice of Christ, who pretend your selves to be his Church (which we both deny you to be)? As also, we de∣ny that you have any Call from Christ to the Ministry. Do you judge that none hear his Voice but such as you plunge in Water? And that all must be condemned who cannot own you in your im∣posed Shadows, called Ordinances, upon pretence of the Scrip∣ture being your only Rule? when you never yet did either prove or demonstrate that ever you heard the immediate Voice of Christ, or had a Call from him for your plunging People under Water (which is but a Shadow) Much less can we believe that you hear him in all things else, which you practise and impose; for Christ is the Life and Substance, and they who hear him in all things, receive Life, and the One Spiritual Baptism, which yours is not.
John Newman set against himself: HIS Book and corrupt Principles being Answered by John Newman himself. His Principles and Contradictions are Collected and set opposite in his own words, and the Pages of his Book cited where they are, and briefly Noted, and Annimadvertized upon particularly, as followeth. Whereto is added, Tho. Danson, W. Kiffin, and Jer. Ives their Contradictions. [J. N. his Contradictions.] THE Scriptures of the two Testaments is pro∣perly and principally called the Word of God, and that distinct from Christ [This is asserted above twenty times over] Pages 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 42. Jesus Christ in Scripture is stiled the Word of God, a Name that's gi∣ven to him, his Name is called The Word of God, Rev. 19.13. [but then again to shufle off this, J.N. adds] Christ is not alwayes really that which in Scripture he is called — compara∣tively — He is called a Door, a Vine, &c. pag. 3, 46, 47, 49. Animadversion. Surely the holy Men who spake and writ Scriptures from the Spi∣rit of God, knew how to speak properly and truly, better than J.N.
who in effect reflects on them all, as for speaking improperly; (what bold presumpion and pride is it in him?) when they called God, or Christ, or his Name, the Word; and said, In the begin∣ning was the Word, &c. Therefore Christ was principally the Word; for the Scriptures were not in the beginning: nor do they any where call themselves the Word, as improperly J. N. doth: For Scriptures signifie Writings: And is not Christ really the Door (in the sense intended) to them that enter in by him? Howbeit he was really the Word, before his Name was held forth in the many Parables. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures of the two Testaments, in which is con∣tained the Will of God, pro∣perly and principally the Word, &c. Or Way of God, in which is con∣tained the will of God, p. 5.—The Pro∣phet saith, God's Word is a Lanthorn to his feet, and a Light unto his paths, Psal. 119.100, 105. Animad. Christ is the Way, the Word, and Light, and not the Writings, they are not Christ: And the Word that was a Lanthorn and Light to David, was within him before he wrote the words, and when much of the Scriptures of the two Testaments were unwritten; And said he, I have hid thy Word in my heart, that I may not sin a∣gainst thee, Psal. 119. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures of the Two Testaments, principally called the WORD, distinct from Christ. God's perfect Way enlightned Da∣vid, p. 4. and this is called the Word, Psal. 18.28, 30. Thou wilt light my Candle, the Lord will enlighten my darkness. Animad. God's perfect enlightening Way and Word, and the Light and Candle of the Righteous, which was Spiritual, Living, and Powerful, was before the Scriptures were written. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures principally called the Word. The words that God hath spoken by his holy Prophets, blessed Son, and A∣postles, p. 3.
Animad. Is there no distinction between the Word and words? In the beginning was the Word; but since, were the words spoken, and Scriptures written. Besides, the holy Prophets and Apostles who preached the Word from the immediate Power of God, were li∣ving witnesses of what they spoke; and their Ministry was at∣tended with the same Power, and the plain Evidence of the Spirit went along with it, which was more than barely the writings re∣ceived by tradition. [J. N's Contrad.] The Commands of God in the first Testament, or Scriptures of the Pro∣phets —the Word, p. 7. I shall labour to prove, That the Scriptures of the new Testament is also called the Word— distinct from Christ. The Teaching and Preach∣ing Jesus Christ according to the Scriptures, is called the Ministry of the Word—is stiled —is called the Word of God, Act. 4.25, 26, 27. & 5.45. Animad. The Word was in the beginning before the Commands, Words or Writings were given forth; the Commands are called words that God spake. Is not there a manifest difference between the Word (that made all things) and the words spoken, or writ? As also between the Ministry of the Word (which is the preaching Jesus Christ) and the Writings of the Two Testaments? which this ignorant man makes no distinction between; for was not the Apostle Paul a Minister of the Word, though not of the Letter? Did not he distinguish between them? which this confused Op∣poser hath not done. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures in which is con∣tained the will of God, in order to man's Salvation, is properly and prin∣cipally called the Word — and not Christ. — There are a People labour to blind this truth, by affirming that Christ is the Word of God, and not the Scriptures; for they say, The Scriptures are the Sayings, or the
Words of God. — Christ cannot be understood to be the Word of God,— whereas some do affirm Christ to be the VVord of God: —Such an Assertion would make Christ a Mon∣ster, rather than a compleat God, and Man, &c. p. 12, 13, 15, 17, 17, & 49.
I shall freely grant, That Christ is called by this Name, the Word of God; — Christ being the Word of God,— Christ may be said to be in men, — He may be called the Word of God, because he will be that dreadful Executioner; —By the Word of God's Eter∣nal
Power, &c. — He shall by by the Word of God slay all his enemies; — in this he may be truly called the Word of God, p. 14, 46, 47. Animad. Thou art a blind Opposer, who perverts and darkens Truth with thy monstrous prejudice, who denies Christ to be the Word of God; and blasphemously sayest, Such an Assertion would make Christ a Monster, &c. Yet for all this, thou shalt freely grant Christ to be called the VVord, yea, the VVord of God's Eternal Power: doest thou herein make him a Monster? And did not the holy Men of God call him the Word? And did they blind the Truth, or make a Monster of Christ, supposest thou? Must we re∣ject their Testimonies as improper and monstrous, and believe thine as only proper, which is so repugnant to the Scriptures, which are the Writings, that do contain sayings or words of God, which to affirm is no blinding of truth? And where provest thou these words in the Scriptures, That the will of God is contained in them? Is not the will of God Infinite? and the Heaven of Hea∣vens cannot contain God. So take thy Contradictions back a∣gain, viz. That to affirm Christ to be the Word of God, is to make him a Monster: — (yet) I shall freely grant Christ is called the Word of God, the Word of God's Eternal Power. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures proper∣ly and principally called the VVord. The Word of God therein contained— Or the Teachings therein contained— The Will and Mind of God contained in the Scriptures, p. 19, 45, 49. Animad. See the Contradiction and falshood of these; for one while to say the Scriptures are the VVord; another while, they contain the Word and Mind of God; these are different: and thou mightest as well say that God is contained in the Scriptures, as to
say the Word, and his Mind, and Will is; and so grosly go to cir∣cumscribe and limit him who is Infinite and unlimitable, who is the Eternal Word. Mark also how J. N. his Doctrine (of the Scriptures being principally called the VVord) is absolutely confuted by himself in what follows. J. N's Contrad.] How was Heaven, and Earth, and the VVorld made by the VVord of God? and also by the same VVord are kept in store, p. 48. —The wicked shall be destroyed by this VVord. —The Rod of his mouth, Isa. 11.11. The Spirit of his mouth, Rev. 2.12. The sharp Sword with two edges. — The word of God's Grace in con∣vincing, and converting of Souls, quick and powerful, sharper than a two edged Sword. —In this sense Christ may be called the VVord. Animad. But surely the Scriptures are not all this, nor ever had this sense given of them, that is here given of the Word which made Heaven and Earth, and keeps them in store; and this did not the Scriptures. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures principally called the VVord of God, may be corrupted by man.—This Word may be, and is corup∣ted by man, &c. p. 19, 20. Being born again not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible; by the Word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever, p. 57, &c. [Contradiction a∣gain.] This maketh nothing to prove this word here to be Christ. Animad. The Incorruptible Seed, or Word by which we are born again, is not the Scriptures which have been corrupted by such Perver∣ters and Corrupters of them as thou art, who goes to set them in Christ's place; and yet (Hypocrite like) art not willing to keep to the language and terms (or Doctrines) of them. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scripures are an absolute perfect Rule for all men, &c. — unto the end of the world. Faith is bgotten by Preaching the VVord with the work of his blessed Spirit: —Christ the Way to bring us to Life, &c. pag. 42, 43, 50.
Animad. The Spirit of Truth leads into all Truth; therefore this Spirit, or Christ within, is both the Guide, Way, and Rule to all that are Spirtiually minded; All men have not the Scriptures to the World's end; but Christ is given both for a Covenant and Light for Salvation to the ends of the Earth. [J. N. his Idolatry, in exalting the Scriptures into the place of Christ. The Scriptures the enlightening way of the Lord, —The perfect way of God, — A Light unto his paths, p. 4, 5. The Gospel, —The Seed in the hearts. The will of God, in order to Salvation, pag. 11, 17, 20. Eter∣nal Life therein (viz. in Scriptures) pag. 24. The Scripture's an absolute perfect Rule (in order to man's Sal∣vation) for all men to walk by, and none other, pag. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. The Scriptures may be cor∣rupted by man. False Tea∣chers corrupted the Scrip∣tures. The Scriptures may, and is corrupted by man, p. 19, 20. The Devil taketh out of mens hearts — the Scrip∣tures of the New Testament, pag. 17. Animad. To the first part, these are high Names put upon the Scriptures, but not so proved thereby: — For the Enlightening, perfect Way, and Word of the Lord God, the Gospel, the Seed, the Will of God, Eternal Life, &c. were before the Scriptures were written, and did preceed the writing thereof it them who spake or writ them, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and Eternal Life is in Christ, not contained in the Scriptures, as the unbelieving Jews vainly thought, Joh. 5. (who set up the Scriptures above Christ the Life) And the Scriptures are not the absolute sole Rule for Salvation (and none other) especially if they be corrupted by the Devil and Wicked men. But the Rule of the spiritual mind is spiritual, of that Spirit which leads the true Believers into all truth. For that which must be owned for the Rule of Faith, Life, and Salvation, must likewise be infallible, pure, and incorrup∣tible; Christ being the Author of the holy Faith, and his Light the Rule of the right Understanding, Conviction, and Perswasi∣on, and consequently of the Belief.
[J. N's Contrad.] The Gospel which was preached un∣to every Creature under Heaven, was the Scriptures of the New Testament: The Everlasting Gospel.—The general ground of Faith and Assurance. Now to deny the Scriptures to be the Word, is to deny the very Fountain and Well-spring of Comforts to the Soul in Af∣flictions, pag. 12, 35, 42, 44. The Scriptures is corrup∣ted by man.—Prayer and Sup∣plication to God by his Spirit, by Faith in Christ God appro∣veth. —Christ saith, Ye will not come to me, that ye may have Life, pag. 20, 24, 44. Animad. Both many Creatures, and the Gospel, were before the Scrip∣tures were written; and the Light of the Gospel is more general to ground Faith upon than the Scriptures: and it is the Light of the Power (or Gospel) of God in the hearts. And the Gospel is preached in every Creature under Heaven. And eternal Life is in Christ the Incorruptible Seed, the VVord, Spirit, Life, and Light. And God is the very Fountain (whose fulness is in Christ) and the Well-spring of Comforts to the Soul; not the Scriptures: This Opposer might as well say the Scriptures are God, as the very fountain and well-spring of Comforts. And those Unbelievers that thought to have Eternal Life in the Scriptures, were like J. N. and his Brethren, who will not come to Christ that they might have Life. And if we must Pray and Supplicate God by the Spi∣rit, then the immediate guidance of the Spirit of God must be to us a Rule therein; not the Letter. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures are a per∣fect absolute Rule (in order to man's Salvation) for all men to walk by, and none o∣ther. — For the sons of men to walk by unto the ends of the world, pag. 32, 33, 34, 35. A Second Covenant of his VVill he foretold, Jer. 31. is still in force for all men to walk by, and none other.— The Second Covenant was confirmed by the Blood of that spotless Lamb, &c. —The Second Covenant of God's Will in order to man's Salvation, was con∣firmed by the Death of his only begot∣ten Son, pag. 27, 28.
Animad. If the second Covenant or new Testament, may be the perfect Rule for all men to walk by, and none other (as is confest) then must the immediate Teachings of God in his Spirit be followed and o∣beyed as the perfect Rule; for the New Covenant-way is spiri∣tual, to wit, the Law and Spirit of God in the inward parts; and this is above the Writings (or Letter) outward, which many in remote parts of the world, have not. (Many have not the Bible who have a spiritual Light or Law of God within as the Gentiles had, Rom. 2.) And Paul was not a Minister of the Letter, but of the Spirit; wherefore thou that sayest the Scriptures are the ab∣solute Rule (for Salvation) for all men to the worlds end, when many of whom have them not; therein thou hast shut out the spi∣ritual Rule of the New Covenant, and art one of them that tread the blood of Christ under foot; by which the second Covenant was confirmed and ratified. And why hast thou such hard thoughts of God, as to think tha all Nations that have not the Scriptures outwardly, are deprived of Salvation for want of them? But in plain Contradiction to thy self, The second Covenant is a perfect Rule still in force for all men to walk by, and no other. [J.N's Contrad.] The Scriptures of the New Testament so confirmed, are a perfect Rule for all men to walk by, and none other, p. 29. The New-Testament Letter is to be our Rule, pag. 103. In the second Covenant of his VVill, in order to man's Salvation, there is the Man, Christ Jesus, at the right hand of God, &c. In his second Cove∣nant he hath promised himself to be he God of his People, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. pag. 29, 30. Animad. The Scriptures, Writings, or Letter (outward) (whether of the Old or New Testament); And the second Covenant which is spi∣ritual and inward, are two distinct things: In this second Cove∣nant God is the Teacher of his People himself, immediately by his immediate Spirit, Power, or Unction within, which teacheth the spiritual minds of all things, which is true and no lye. And what Scripture have Baptists for saying that the New-Testa∣ment- Letter is to be our Rule? Let them produce plain Scripture- proof for their Assertion herein, or else confess their error. For
Pal expresly testified, that God had made them able Ministers of the New-Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, &c. 2 Cor. 3. He doth not say they were Ministers of the Letter of the New-Testment; his words will bear no such meaning: for he plainly distinguisheth between the New-Testament and the Let∣ter, as he doth between Spirit and Letter. Many both Priests and Baptists, have (and preach from) that he calleth the Letter of the New-Testament, who never knew the Spirit in its living mi∣nistration, although the Scriptures testifie thereto. [J. N's Contrad.] The Scriptures are a per∣fect Rule, in order to Salva∣tion, for all men, unto the end of the world. —The very fountain and well-spring of Comforts to the Soul, pag. 44. Act. 3.23. It is said, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren (saith Moses) like unto me, him shall you hear in all things; whatsoever he shall say unto you (observe that) Him shall you hear, &c. In the second Covenant— Sal∣vation and Eternal Life to those that obey the same,— in his Son: Christ a way to bring us to Life, pag. 23, 31, 39, 40, 50. Animad. See how manifestly this Opposer hath, in these passages, broke the neck of his own Cause: For if the Son of God must be heard in all things, and he the way to Life, and Salvation be in him (as confest) then the Scriptures are not the fountain and well-spring of Comforts: God is the Fountain, not the Scriptures, as most ig∣norantly and blasphemously is assetted of them. Also note how J. N. hath totally confuted and destroyed his Cause (of the Scriptures being the only Rule) in what follows. [J. N's Contrad.] Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, and the rest of the Holy Men before Moses day, — I grant they had a sufficient Rule be∣fore the Scriptures were written, —They had a more infallible Word to walk by (viz. from God's own mouth) than is now to us; for it's possible, that some Scriptures might be corrupted: — This may be gran∣ted in the bst sense, that the Spirit is the Rule. —The Spirit is of
more efficacy than the Letter. —I shall freely grant that the Spirit is greater than the Letter, &c. pag. 104, 106, 108, 110, 112. Animad. Here's enough granted to make void all the Baptists work for the Scriptures being the only Rule, seeing there was a certain Rule to the Holy Men of God long before the Scriptures were written, which was more infallible than they; even that of the Spirit, which is above and greater than the Letter, as is confessed. Rea∣der, take notice of this his ample confession to the Spirit, against himself and his carnal conceits, in his so highly exalting the Let∣ter as he hath done in much of his Book. [J.N. his Doct.] There are a People that have need to have more Christ's than one; otherwise I know not how they will have a Christ in every man, especially those who cry up a Light in every man [which this Opposer stiles] a feigned Christ, or Light within, p. 18, 29, 61, 72, 74. Answ. See the ignorance and scornful spirit this man shews forth in this erroneous stuff: For, 1. Jesus Christ that was in every Saint and true Believer, was not more Christs than one; He was still one and the same Christ, how, or in whomsoever manifest. 2dly, His Light in every man, is a true divine and spiritual Light, and not a feigned Light, as blasphemously he accuseth it. 3dly, It's a falshood still to accuse us, with affirming, That Christ is in every man: For we say a true Light or Gift of Jesus Christ is given to every man, whereby to enlighten the Consciences of mankind. [J.N's Contrad.] The Word in their hearts, Rom. 10.7. was not Christ. — The true Christ doth not dwell in a∣ny man as he is Christ; as he is properly and princi∣pally Christ, he cannot dwell in man. — If he be with the Father, then he is not in man, pag. 54, 60, 61, 66. Christ may be said to dwell in man. I shall freely own the giving forth of his blessed Spirit into the hearts of his children where∣by they are directed in his most holy will by the enlightening of their spirits,-So far as the Spirit of God and Christ dwelleth in men, or any of his Attributes; so far God and Christ both may be said to dwell in his Saints. — If we Love one another, God dwelleth in us. — He that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him, p. 77, 78, 79, 80.
Animad. To the first part, I say his insinuation against us of Chris e∣ing in every man, is still false, and not our Principle; but that a spiritual Light of Christ is, his Contradiction and Confutation to himself is obvious, in 1st. asserting that the true Christ doth not dwell in any man. 2dly. The true Christ doth dwell in man (viz. in good men) in that the blessed Spirit doth dwell in his Children, and direct them in his most holy Will; and is not this their Rule then? [J. N's Contrad.] God dwelleth in them. — Now the Apostle doth not intend the real Being Gross igno∣rance! is God any where without His real Being? of God (viz. in Saints) in his Glorious and Im∣mortal Substance. — God and Christ are out of all men in order to their Glorious and Immortal Being. — Those that receive Christ's blessed Spi∣rit, such are said to receive his Father, yet neither of them in their real Being, pag. 79, 80, 87. This Indwelling of Christ in his People, is by his Word and blessed Spirit, and other pure Graces that are of his pure Nature and Being dwelling in his Saints, — and his Saints dwelling in the pure Life of the same, so Christ may be said to dwell in them, and they in him: —When we dwell in the Life of his Word, and powerful operation of his Spirit, and the Life of those Gifts and holy Graces being of the same Nature with Christ. —God and Christ cannot be separate in in their givings forth. — Christ in them the hope of Glory, p. 81, 82, 83, 86, 87. Animad. The manifest Contradictions in these passages run thus, viz. God and Christ in their Immortal Being are not in Saints, yet the Spi∣rit and pure Graces that are of his pure Nature and Being, dwell in Saints. So then this eternal Spirit of God and Christ (who are inseparable) is of the glorious Immortal Being of both, and in the Saints. And when God and Christ are said to dwell in them, dare J. N. say they are divided from their own Being? What place is God in where his Being is not? And, who art thou that wouldst limit the infinite being of God from his place and habita∣tion in his Saints?
[J. N's Contrad.] oh. 1.1. proveth the Word to be God, for Christ was not Christ in the beginning; but Christ was in time, when the Godhead took flesh to it self, and not before he was born of the Vir∣gin Mary: And it cannot be in reason concluded, that Christ was the Word before Christ was, &c. p. 50, 51. [Of Christ] He was not the Son of man from the be∣ginning, for then he was only the Son of God, and the Son of Man a he was of the Seed of Abraham, pag. 66, 67. Animad. What a gross Error is it to affirm, That Christ was not from the beginning; (or that he was not the Word in the bginning?) And what a denyal of his Divinity, like the old Hereticks? And how plainly contradicted in confessing the Son of God was from the beginning, and was then? I ask, If the Son of God was not Christ? Or, the Anointed of God? Seeing he was the Son of God before he took flesh, or was born of Mary (and the Anointed then also) (for God created all things by Jesus Christ, Eph. 3.9. and by the Son he made the Worlds, Heb. 1.2.) The Anointing was Spiritual, and spiritually received by the Heavenly Birth Christ's Spiri∣tual Birth owned. the Anointed, the holy Seed which is spiritual; as that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, &c. Much more might be said, on the behalf of the Divinity of the Son of God, or Christ, who was the Word in the beginning, and with the Father in his Glory before the world began. [J. N's Contrad.] Christ was remote from them, (Christ doth not dwell in any man) Christ in person remote at the right hand of God, viz. in his body of flesh, —Personal being, — tran∣shapen manhood, —a glorified body of flesh at the right hand of God, &c. pag, 55, 60, 63, 66, 67, 71, 73. The Indwellings of Christ by his Word and Truth, being of the same nature with him, Joh· 15.4. to v. 11. Christ is setting forth himself to be the Vine, and his People the branches, and adviseth them,—A∣bide in Me and I in you, — from Eph. 5.30. for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of hi bones, pag. 75.83.
Animad. If the Indwelling of God and Christ be such in his People, and the Saints, in such near union and conjunction with Christ, as the branches with the Vine, and members with the Body; Then 'tis false and a lying Imagination, to imagine either Christ, God, and his right hand so remote, as not to dwell in any man, no not in their own People; [and these word, Christ in Person, remote in his body of flesh, &c. and not in any man] are not Scripture, but added: What strange conceits and limitations would J. N. put upon the unlimited God (like the old Heretical Monks of Egypt, called Anthropomorphites) contrary to his own confession. [J. N's Contrad.] Christ sitteth Advo∣cate with the Father, to plead the vertue of his blood, that as there are new sins committed, we might, through Faith, have fresh grace in the pardon thereof, pag. 73. The Condscention of God and Christ into the hearts of his People, to work up his Saints into the same nature with himself, &c. —God and Christ is holy, so his Word is holy, Heb. 4.12. and through Faith in this Word Christians are wrought up into the nature of it self, and into God. Gal. 4.19. Little Children in whom I travel in birth, till Christ be formed in you, and this —to bring them forth into a Gospel purity, in heart and life.—Finally Brethren fare∣wel, be perfect, be of good comfort, &c. pag. 78, 84, 87, 88. Animad. Wherein the Baptists, or others, do preach up (or plead) the continuance of sin in all men (even Believers, &c.) term of life: This is flatly contradicted in J. N's following words, viz. That God and Christ works up his Saints into the same pure Nature with himself [which is not a sinful Nature] however he tells us of new sins committed, which (he saith) Christ pleads for pardon of; And that through Faith in the Word, Christians are wrought into the Na∣ture of it self, and into God [in whom is no sin, nor imperfection] And where Christ is formed in man [he doth not say in a personal being remote] and men thereby brought forth into Gospel purity in heart and life, &c. Such do not alwayes commit (or renew) new
sins (which renew the old man) but are renewed in Grace, and in the new-man by the Spirit of Holiness, knowing Christ's Inter∣cession answered (viz. that they might be kept from evil, Joh. 17.15. to the end.) The sins of such being done away, and blotted out by the blood of Christ, which in his Light within is experi∣enced (in its vertue and power) by such as believe and walk in it, 1 Joh. 1.7. Now, if J.N's Contradictions, as implyed, should be thus placed, viz. Finally Brethren farewell, be Perfect, be of good Comfort, — There are new sins committed, &c. How would this answer the end of the Command [Be Perfect?Mat. 5.48. 2 Cor. 13.11. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. Lev. 11.44. &c.] Or, be any comfortble Doctrine to any that truly desire perfect freedom from sin, and not to live any longer therein? Here followeth the Contradictions of Tho. Danson, W. Kiffin, and Jer. Ives, upon their Principle, which was, viz. Contradict. THat the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith. T.D. The Scriptures without divine illumination are but the foundation of an Historical Faith, and not of a saving Faith. The divine illumination of the Spirit, is the Foundation or Rule of saving Faith. Contradict. T.D. & W. Kiffin. The Director and Rule of Faith and Sal∣vation, are two distinct things, as the way to Bristol, and my Di∣rector into the way. Yet that Christ is both the Director into the way to God, and the Way it self, they could not deny. Irational In∣consistences, & Contradictions. T.D. That the Light which the Gentiles had, Rom. 2. was not sufficient for Salvation. That their disobedience to the Light they had, was the cause of their condemnation. Yet, That if they lived up to their Light, it would not lead them to Acceptance with God.
Their Contradictions at the latter Discourse. Contradictions. W. Kiffin. The Spirit (of God) considered as a Rule, is ab∣solutely excluded, &c. Jer. Ives. The Scriptures, including the Spirit, are the only Rule. Our saying the Scriptures are the only Rule, does not ex∣clude all other Rule (or the Spirits illumination) any more than to say God only hath Immortallity, doth exclude all else from ha∣ving Immortality. Jo. Newman [his Contradiction to W.K.] This may be gran∣ted in the best sense, that the Spirit is the Rule; It is of more efficacy than the Letter. Contrad. W. K. and Alderm. Hayes Quest. Whether the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, yea or nay? [affirmed by them.] Jer. Ives [in his Letter] I never owned this Question in their words. Animad. Here it's manifest how these men have shaked their own Foun∣dation, destroyed their own Cause, and are confounded in their Babylonish building; they having rejected the chief Corner-stone: but they who believe in the Power of God (which is known in his Light within) and trust in his Everlasting Name, shall never be confounded. THE END. The faults of the Press the ingenuous Reader may perceive by the sense of the matter, whether they be points, letters, syllables or words; which are not to be imputed to the Author, but corrected, whereof these are some. ERRATA. In the Preface, pag. 4. l. 25. the parenthesis is misplaced, read it thus; Light within (not prejudice and darkness) judge. P. 13. in the Margent, read Soc. Scho. l. 30. r. Theodotus. P. 14. l. 11. for heirs, r. haeresie. P. 22. l 4. blot out [&] P. 28. l. 12▪ dele without. P. 35. l. 34. r. (or Inferred) P. 62. l. 25. for it, r. i.
