W2262 12087647 53784
Glorious Inscriptions (Arts ornaments) ayt, Truth to disguise, onely on prosprous Fate; Such Traines from Iauning, mercenary witts His Fortune or his Temper not besitts No Judge praeposest; if approu'd; his Fame Shall wante no other Monument but his Name.
ASTRAEA, OR, True Love's Myrrour. A PASTORAL. Composed BY LEONARD WILLAN, GENT. Pace floret Amor, Humilitate Innocentia. LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at their Shop in Popes-Head-Alley. 1651.
TO The Illustrious Princess, MARY Dutches of Richmond and Lennox. Madam, THis figurative Star presented to your view (no sooner formed generally distin∣guishable to our Horison) becoming suddenly obscured by the Eclipses of those greater Lights, from whom essentially it should have had both Influence and Lustre, hath mov'd concealed many years; till now by the Reflection of your affinitive eminence
in Vertue and Beauty; It hath presu∣med to assume a Being more commu∣nicable. Reject not, Madam, the Ac∣cess hereof, because transacted to your hand by so despicable an Introdu∣cer. It soly is your Property, not only by the advantage of Worth (in civil rights of Honour and Respect) your Present: but by the advantage of Simi∣litude (in rule of Dialect) your proper Attribute. The pretended perfection of Astraea's Vertue and Beauty intitled her to a celestial Figure: the essential Graces whereof in you, shall really translate you to so transcendent a Glory, that those refulgent Lights are thereof but imperfect Shadows. Those Ob∣jects of true Love figured in her so hap∣pily to encounter as perfect a subject, to receive their Impressions, and mu∣tually communicate the like effects to the forming of one mysterious Union: are visibly exprest in the admired, ra∣vishing, and harmonious agreement
of your Hymeneal Amitie. Astraea is fi∣gured to discend from noble Progeny, who to avoid the Military Fury of de∣bording Multitudes (which passing frequently through Gaule, descended like an irresistible Torrent on the Ro∣man Empire) were constrained to be∣take them to the humble Sanctuary of a Pastorical condition: This Circum∣stance will meet no trivial Analogie in the Eminence of your Extraction, and Consequence of your present Rural Re∣treat: So that (with permission) may evidently be concluded, that in refe∣rence to your Natural perfections, Ci∣vil Transactions, or Accidental Occur∣rence, Astraea may (in equity) presume to be either your Type, Parallel, or Cha∣racter. Disdain not, Madam, her Re∣semblance, in respect of the Humility figured in her condition; since 'tis the perfect'st, and most proper Note of her Nobility: which (where divided) shew the Original of such ostentive
Attributes (with what glorious Titles soever illustrated) had but a reproach∣ful Acquisition. And although your vertues need no other Monument but their own perfection to constitute their Memory eternal: yet since Fortune is the chiefest Agitator in humane Occur∣rences, whose Power is still exercis'd in opposition of such eminent Facul∣ties, your Counterfeit (in Astraea) may happily outlast your marble Epitaph or Figure: If so, It soly is the Crown and Glory of his Enterprise, whose va∣nity can aspire to no higher Honour, then to survive the Malice of his Fate in his unworthy Ministry to your Fame, under the Title of Your Graces Humble Servant LEO: WILLAN.
Persons Represented. Adamas, a Priest. Lindamor, Lover to Galataea, a Noble man. Ligdamon, a Noble man, Lover to Sylva. Paris, alias Ergaste, supposed son to Adamas, but son to Bellinda. Celadon, a Shepherd, Lover to Astraea. Sylvander, a Shepherd, Lover to Diana. Lycidas, a Shepherd, Lover to Phillis, brother to Celadon. Tyrsis, a Shepherd, who laments the loss of Cleon. Hylas, a Shepherd, an inconstant Lover. Bellinda, Mother to Diana. Galataea, Princess of the Country. Leonida, one of her Nymphs, Niece to Adamas. Sylva, one of Galataea's Nymphs. Astraea Shepherdesses. Diana Shepherdesses. Phillis Shepherdesses. Leonice, a Shepherdess, in Love with Tyrsis. Stella, a Shepherdess, the last Mistris of Hylas.
The Scene. THe frontispiece is a wreath of fresh Foliage, much like the enterance in∣to a close Alley, the tops whereof in∣terlac'd, represent the perfect figure of an Arch; at whose intersection is a kind of knot, whereon is enscribed in letters of gold, FOREST: over which two little Cupidons by either hand support a Garland little di∣stant from the same. At either foot hereof is plac'd on little pedistals the figure of a Shep∣herd and Shepherdess; the one in a pretty posture, merrily playing on a Flute, the other very intentively ordring her scatter'd flowrs in form of a Garland. To which succeeds, in prospective order, close united Trees, which by degrees oretop each other, the former not much exceeding the height of a man, through which the sight is conveyed to a ve∣ry fair Palace; at foot whereof runneth a winding stream; the Canopy of the whole a Serene Skie.
THe Scene being a pretty while discovered, appears at far end thereof a Shepherdess, with a little Dog parried in Ribbons of seve∣ral colours; when sodainly, privately within, are heard sundry voices, one answering the o∣ther, till each have sung his part: at the end whereof all joyn their voices; each voice is so ordered as may seem far distant from the Auditors, and a like distant from each other.
SONG. Sung by a Mean. WHen Days bright Star appears, Th' ayrie Choristers fill our Ears With cheerful Melodie. Our earthly Star, say, say, Like Tribute, now, shall we not pay, In our best Harmony. A Treble answers. Yes, yes, alas we prise But to behold her beauteous Eys, Aurora's lesser Light. See, see, how envious Shame With blushie Guilt her Cheeks doth stain, To see our Star more bright. A Base answers. Shepherds, your Flocks unfold; These glorious Beams you now behold, Their Enemies disarm.
Whose savage Rage with fear Allaies you Star i'th upper Sphere, This, with Love beauties Charme. All. Those dreaming Shadows leave, Your Fancies which deceive; Your stupid Souls awak, If true Ioys you'l partake.
Or thus in Dialogue by a Treble and a Base. SONG. 1. WHat Star is that shoots through the Skie? 2. Blind Shepherd, 'tis Astraea's Eye. 1. How like approaching Day, she clears the calm smiling Aire! 2. Yet where she appears, threats clouds of dark dispair; 1. Clear'd by pure Fire: 2. Or consum'd by rash Desire, 1. A blest Death 2. By her Breath Our Souls so to expire. Both. Let's mix our Voices, each agree, Merrily yield her his Liberty.
1. Vnto her Altars Flowers bring, 2. There dwelleth everlasting Spring. 1. In Love's mysterious Orders, see, that they ranked be, 2. She may in them read our silent Elegie: 1. In Garlands woond, 2. Wherewith then our Summets crown'd, 1. We gladly 2. So may die Her Victims without wound. Both. Let's mix our Voices, all agree, Merrily yield her our Liberty. Which ended, the Shepherdess avanceth to the Frontispiece of the Scene.
ERRATA. PAge 4. line 6. read now no time. p. 32. l. 1. r. Fate's. p. 49. l. 5. r. still keeping. p. 53. l. 7. r. How Mistris! p. 91. l. 25. r. her Orb. p. 93. l. 8. r. be Reproach. p. 93. l. 23. r. yet know. p. 99. l. 3. r. on Bounties. p. 100. l. 7. r. doth spring. p. 102. l. 3. r. their Summons. p. 102. l 5. r. not pretend p. 103. l. 17. r. laying waste. p. 111. l. 18. r. did draw
Scene 1. Act. 1. Astraea. CEase Shepheards, cease, your Praises flatt'ring bait Deceives our Sex but through our self Conceipt; I am become distastful to my Sence; You lose your Purpose in a vain Prtence: If otherwhise, I glori'd in your Fame, 'Twas but to fann my Lovers gentle Flame, Which now's extinguisht with a new Desire, Leaving my faln Hopes to their fun'rall fire. You that in Princes Palaces reside, With wealth and honors to be dignifi'd, Y'ave some Pretence, when with obsequ'ous Phrase, On weak Believers, you your Ends do raise: On my abus'd Faith what can any gain, Save from my Weakness, more reproachfull Stain? shamefull Conquest 'tis by wyle t'erect Trophy there, where Innocence blinds Suspect. You Gods! (not to capitulate your Will, ut it enlightened better to fulfill) ay why, oh why did your first Law inspire v'n senseless things with this myster'ous Fire, Which we call Love? Was't not in Peace to tie ach disagreeing part by Harmonie? ach might by Nature's hid propensi'on know What it supports, what it doth overthrow:
Which else would (head long rushing to their End) The rafters of this well fram'd World distend. How come's it then that Reason hath less pow'r? What you gave to preserve, doth me devour; It seems that Reason in this corrupt state, Forsaking Nature, doth prevaricate. But why him clad in Natures best array? As if through finest Lawn you would display Your purest Essences obviou o Sense, Which to all Fancies, else, were too immense; Since he so much degen'rates from their kind, In so fair Form bearing so false a Mind. As Mortals, you your best works do not use Our facile Faiths the sooner to abuse; She lying on the Bank, which is raised with a little hollow to present a ivulet, cals er Dog to er. Rather thus much this seems to intimate, Ingratefull Man all Ties will violate. Come my Melampo! Gratefull more art thou, Who only Natures motives dost allow. Celadon. With equall rev'rence, as the swarthy Lay Bow's to the early messenger of day, I offer at thy shrine a purer Flame Then his, to whom they Homage for the same. You Gods allow't, since in her milder Eye Y'ave rais'd a Throne more fit your Deitie. Why shrowd's those beams, like to a sullen Morn, When, with contracted Clouds, she threats a Storm? Astraea. S rises. Thy fain'd Ignorance doth thy self accuse, Whilst with thy Craft thou wouldst me twice abuse; Could else thy Souls so oft vow'd Unity, Cease to inform thee by Loves Sympathie? But since th'estrang'd Thoughts have that Vertue spilt, Look in thine Heart, and learn it of thy Guilt.
Celadon. If yet to try my never fading Love This Anger thou put'st on; invent and prove. If thou would'st have me die, my Sentence give, And I shall think it ev'n a Crime to live. Astraea. Whereas the Truth so plainly doth appear, We need no farther Proofs our doubts to clear; For Punishment, no pow'r is in my Breath, Thy Life will make it greater, then thy Death. Celadon. Thy Cruelty speaks truth in that! yet stay, She seems to flie fro him, who holds her, and knels. My Life, my Death, give ear what I shall say; For unknown Crimes no pardon I pretend; 'Tis guilt unpardonable, thee but t'offend. Severest Ex'cution do not defer, Sure I deserv't, for sure thou canst not err. Astraea. Unskilfull is that Pilot, 'gainst one shelf, And by th'same storm, haps twice to loose himself. Disloyall wretch (till bid) no more come nigh She forces her sl from im. The vastest compass of my mournful eye. Celadon. Stay, stay, shee's gone; and all of her me left, Is this poor Riband, her Force made my Theft; Me kiss it Sacred Relique of my departed Saint, Be not offended with my just Constraint. But in my all, of all forsaken death, Witness to whose lov'd will I yield my breath. He ties it t his rm. Let no rude hand from this part ere thee force, But e thou still the Orn'ment of my Corse,
And if the curious World do seek to know e cst himself into a little de∣scending place repre∣senting a River. Astraea, being retir'd o erken what e would say, comes back with jelousie to see what was become of him. She seeing him fall into the River, als upon the bank thereof, and so ros into the same place where he ell. How, or for what, I dy'd, do thou it show. Astraea. My jealous fear thus hasteth my return, The more I seem to quench, the more I burn: I was too harsh! to hear him I denide: Let's haste to help, 'tis now time to chide. Lycidas, Phillis encounter. Lycidas. WHat wanton God pursues thy flying Fear, Making more Beauties, then thou wouldst, ap∣pear Let these mine arms thy Sanctuary be; No violence here but what proceeds from thee. Phillis. Hstily and in some di∣stction.Licidas, well met, let' haste; from yonder wall I saw a Shepheard in the River fall. Lycidas. Whereabouts was't? observ'd you well? Phillis. Here, here▪ The sad Object of my ill-boding Fear. They li her up, who seems to come to he .Astraea! oh, my dear companion! speak; Or to associate Thine, my Heart shall break. Astraea. Why doth untimely Charity affright My resting Soul with horror of the light▪
Natures decree enjoyneth but one Death; Why force you me surrender twice my breath? Lycidas! thy brother from the proud Stream save, Or these sad Floulds yield me a second Grave. She ses  wep. Phillis. Courage, my dear Companion; kinder Fate, In this your safeguard, seems to cease his hate. Scene 2. Act 1. AFter some intermission, three Nymphs appear on the Scene, their heads crown'd with garlands; The sleeves of their garments turn'd up above the elbow, from whence fals a fine transparent lawn plated and frows'd towards the hand; whereto with bracelets of pearl they seem fastned: with gilt Quivers by their sides; And each an ivory bow in her hand; the lower part of the garment turn'd up on their hips; which discovers their gilt buskins to the mid-leg. Galatea, Leonida, Sylva. Leonida. THis sure's the place; see how th'impetuous Brook Seems that outlying Bank to over-look; Then turning swiftly in his am'rous Chase, Doth ev'n with clasped arms the Shelf embrace. Consider well, that little uft of Trees, How well toth' glasses Figure it agrees.
Galatea. Yet is this unfrequented place, in sense, Unlike to satisfie our chief Pretence. Sylva. 'Tis not without appearance; for no Tree The glass did represent, we here not see. Galatea. Well, since this seems most likely to the place, Let's, for the issue, here attend a space. Sylva. Pointing with er hand, isco∣vers Ceadn in the River. See! how that shepheard hangeth o're the deep; As rekeless of his life, he seems asleep: Galatea. Peace, Sylva peace, disturb him not awhile, We will his pretty Secrets him beguile. Leonida. His hanging limbs float on each beating wave; What you his Bed think, I believe his Grave; They haste and take him p. Madam, 'tis guilt this doubt not to decide, Slow Charity may prove an Homicide. Galatea. Shee seems truck with love. Wonder of Nature hath Death took this shape To make of mortals a more facile Rape? Cupids unbanded Beauties being displaid, Compar'd to this dead Figures seem to fade. Or could these Graces in their Sphears but move, They'd force again from heav'n the Queen of Love, And make the horned Goddess of the Night Forsake her Orb; here she might place her light.
Bow gently his fair Corps; comes yet no heat?She lies her hand on his breast. Me thinks I feel his panting heart to beat. You Gods, by whose appointment here I stand To take that Bliss you promis'd to my hand, Afford him breath with mutual Flames to burn, Or else inclose our ashes in one Urn. Sylva. Madam, he breaths? Leonida. Some fitter place must give A second succor, 'ere he seem to live. Galatea. Bear him to Coach! his welfare is my own; Or live, or die, our beings are but one. Scene 3. Act 1. Lycidas encounters Astraea and Phillis. Lycidas. HIs Bodie's lost, him churlish Fate denies Ev'n pious Rites of mournful Obsequies; Celadons hat he holds in his hands, he flings it on the Scene with a little astonish∣ment. This slender Monument is all it gives, In whose despite, yet in all hearts he lives. How? Astraea! Can you restrain a Tear For him, to whom, then Life, you were more dear? Though his so faithful Love you have forgot, Yet on Humanity lay not such a spot: Thus unbewail'd of thee liv'd he again But to behold, he surely twice were slain.
Astraea. Gentle shepheard! thy brother truly had Parts considerable might afflict the bad. 'Tis not his Love, his Death can make me mourn; That Loss is light, where many Shares are born. Lycidas. For Charities sake disquiet not the Dead, By unknown Ils, thus heaping on his head. The world thy jealousie will much deride, If thou but think, his heart he could divide, His parents Threats, Inemnity of blood, His purer Fire ever hath withstood. Those unsought conquests, which his Beauty made, His jealous Love to cherish was afraid: Nay, I believe the less-priz'd-Deity Thus punisht his Idolatry of thee. Astraea. It is no new thing Shepheard, what I say, Whereto each eye was witness ev'ry day; VVhich, undiscover'd, often heard I have, VVhile to Aminta his vow'd Love he gave. Lycidas. Just heav'n, you have disclos'd I plainly see, The guilty author of this Tragedie. Celadon, of Love, and Courage had too much, To live, and hear, that Tongue this Theame but touch: For his Obedience he is justly paid, His greatest Crime was that he thee obey'd: How oft on bended knees hath he besought Thee to revoke this burthen from his Thought, And to impose on him a milder Death, Then fan a loathed Flame with fained breath?
Thou answer'd'st, no, thou shall perform this Wyle, Our hostil Parents that we may beguile; And those respects of Love that I you see Tender to her, Ile take as done to me. Take this, not thy unstable doubts to clear, He flings er a Lettr But that thy Guilt more Horror yet might wear, If more thou seek'st; that Cypress tender Ryne, More sensible then thou, more speaks thy Crime. May'st thou, what Punishment guilt e're hath try'd, Sue for, as Mercy, and be it deny'd. VVhile thy remorseful Soul by civil Jar, Setteth thy Self against thy Self at war. Lyci. xit. Astraea. How wild a Sea chases my unstable Mind! VVhat I must seek, were even hell to find. If just, I'm clear; if unjust be my Hate, Each day a Death my Crime shall expiate. These Lights are stop'd with issue of my Tears; Whilst I unlade Them, unlade thou my Fears. She gives her the Let∣ter. Phillis. VVould heav'n I could so soon bring to thee Rest. 'Tis Celadons writing; be not so opprest. LETTER. ENquire no longer the actions of my life, in asking me She reads the Letter. what I do; know, still I continue in my wonted pain, to love, yet not dare to shew the same. Not love, yet vow the contrary. Dear brother, this is all the exercise, or rather punishment of thy Celadon. Men say two con∣traries cannot be in one and the same place at one and the same time: Nevertheless, true love, and fined, are the frequent actions of my life; Wonder not thereat; for I am forced to one by the perfection, to the other, by the command of my Astraea: If this seem strange to thee, remember that
Miracles are the ordinary works of Divinitie; And what can we less expect from my Deity! Astraea. peking to her self sewhat r'd. Art thou so hardned with the use of Ill, As to withstand this Guilt, and not distill Into a Sea? while thy unbounded Course The narrow banks of guiltless Lignon force, And from him, with his Channel, take his Name, Lest after Ages, him, for thee should blame. Here she rns to the Cypres tree, where Lici∣das had told her that should ind more concern'd  subject. And thou, sad subject of Apollo's verse, Who mak'st ev'n sorrow lovely on each Herse, Still fresh in mourning, as thou didst request, When thy rash Hand had rob'd thee of thy Rest, Thou more innocent Embleme of my Fate, Denounce, if more thou know'st, t'inlarge Self-hate. Phillis. Shee seems to look on the trunk of the tree. Shee seems  read them. These Characters are fresh; the same subject, And the same Hand, did sure the same direct. Why tyrant Love constrain'st me to a Fact Against those Laws thou dost thy self enact, Forcing those Rites are onely due to thee, Be tender'd to a strangers Deity? Be more Just to thy Self, to me less Cruel, And take my Life for thy displeasures fuel. Astraea. Each sensless thing upbraid's me my Offence, Whil'st my own Guilt yields them Intelligence; hee takes the hat p. Thou unsuspected messenger of Love, VVhich to and fro in harmless Sports be'ng drove hee looking in the hat, betwixt the linings dis∣covers a Let∣ter, with a little asto∣nishment. Into each others hands, conveyd'st our Lines, Yet standers by partook not our Designs; Did'st thou so little of thy Master know, That to revenge his Death, thou'st naught to show?
LETTER. FAir Astraea, if the Dissimulation which you enjoyn be to kill me, you may more easily effect the same by one word from your mouth; If it be to punish my Pre∣sumption, you are too just a Iudge to inflict less punish∣ment then Death. If it be to trie the Power you have over me, why make you not choice of a more sudden Ex∣periment then this, whose length can be but wearisome to you. I cannot believe'tis to conceal our Amity, as you pretend; Since not being able long to live in so much Con∣straint, my Death will, without doubt, give too sudden and deplorable Testimony thereof: Believe it, fair Astraea, what I have suffered is enough; 'tis now time you suffer me to act the personage of Celadon; having so long, and with so much pain, represented One that of all those in the world is most contrary to him. Astraea. Thou nought canst add, I was so full before, Thou shalt again exhausted Grief restore, Whilst restless I Lifes weary minutes tell, In Swan-like plaints sounding my Funeral knell. Phillis. Sorrows first shock to no Advice will yield; To her self; then takes her by the hand, who seems to re on her. Who struggle with't, wound, what they thought to shield.
Scene 4. Act 1. Celadon, Leonida, Sylva. Celadon. NAture and Art seem marri'd here to be, VVhere each agreeing part's a Harmonie; To himself. Yet is't to me, like Horror of the Night To the Guilty; Banish't Astraea's Sight, To them a∣gain. It seems design'd an amorous Abode, To shrowd the pleasures of some rural God. VVhat place is that, whose close compacted shade, Phoebus in highest pride can scarce invade? Leonida. Gentle Shepheard, i'th' thickest of that Grove Is plac'd the fountain of the Truth of Love, VVherein each Lover may their loved see; And if by them any then loved be, Their Forms seem coupled; But as then, if None, The single Figure doth appear alone. It was erected by the famous Skill Of a Magitian, Jealousie to kill. Celadon. I've heard the fame thereof; being so nigh, Are we not licenc'd the vertue to trie? Leonida. No gentle Swain, this fair Nymphs cruelty On incen'st Love forbids that Liberty.
Celadon. As how I pray? Leonida. That I shall strait relate. Pointing to Sylva. Nay frown not Sylva, now it is too late. This Nymph, whose Beauty, Worth and Grace, In all their hearts, that see her, hold a place: Amongst the rest, two noble Spirits rise, In Emulation, to make her their Prize: In Natures gifts and Fortunes both were rich; And their own vertues such, as might bewitch Any with Love, save Sylva's equal eye; Which bred 'twixt Rivals equal Amity; Long had they both without Advantage strove Each of the Other, or of Sylva's Love; At length, with one assent they both agree, To the best priz'd of her, her to leave free; Which her impartial Grace could not decide; They therefore to this Fountain them apply'd; Wherein each gazing with a greedy eye, VVho should be honour'd with Preheminencie, Found neither lov'd, her Figure still Alone, Together, and asunder, them being shown: At which, their Love gave place unto their Ire; VVith Magitians they secretly conspire, This to make void; which not allow'd to Art, They to fell Lions do the Guard impart, By art confin'd; nor can this Charm untie Till the two perfect'st Lovers for it die: Celadon. Sorrow attends my wonder!
Sylva. Me the blame, VVhile this home-friend seeks to extend my shame. Galatea. She imbra∣ceth Cal∣lon. My better self, I've been too long away, Each Minute spent from thee, is a lost Day, He seems to faint, they support him. How fares my Life? some grief doth thee oppress, I fear it is thy Fevors Re-access. Celadon. Th'are welcome Summons; such I would not flie. Galatea. Render not fruitless so our Charity. Leonida. Madam, this Shepheards safety doth depend On some skil'd hand may give his griefs an end. Galatea. Thee to believe my Fear doth me invite, But m'Honor's stain'd, he being expos'd to sight. Leonida. Madam, to me'tis dearer then mine own, As by my careful service shall be shown. My Uncles Skil, his Faith, and Love to you (I know) your Grace misdoubts not to be true. He's your Creature, whose Prudence will conceal, And further your intents as his own weal. I'le thither haste with speed, if so you please, That his presence your Griefs, in his, may ease.
Galatea. Th'advice is good; yet him my Love not show, Extent All but Leo∣. Haste, Leonida; Fear saies thou art too slow. Leonida. I will not tax thee for unequal Flames, To her self. Titles are but Policies empty Names, VVhilst Love, like Death, casteth those Scepters by, And gives all Natures works Equality. Had not the same Object, with equal Fire Inflam'd my Soul, I'd cherish'd thy desire: VVhich in pretence of duty to the State, My jealous Love by Craft must violate.
Scene 1. Act. 2. Phillis, Diana, Astraea. Phillis. OUr discontinu'd Sports we must repaire, Lest yielding Sorrows should our thoughts in∣snare, Diana. I saw some Company in yonder Plain; Let's bend our Courses them to entertain. Leonida. Leonida ap∣pears: With a little stop. rook with a kind of wonder. To her self. My uncles absence gives me leave awhile, In rural Sports my Passion to beguile; As if a second Emulation drove T'a new Trial each goddess from above▪ Nature is but a Niggard in our Courts, Prodigal here, beyond weak Fames reports; To them. Your flourishing Graces have made me poor, In my weak wishes to salute your store. Phillis. Fair Nymph, if any such in us you see, 'Tis from your Presence they imparted be. Leonida. Nay, fair One, to vie ('tis not my Pretence) With such false Coyn, might cost your Innocence.
Leave that unto the self-deceiving Court, I come to partake of your Love and Sport. Diana. Your honour'd Presence will their VVorths exter. If your high rais'd Thoughts can so low descend. Leonida. Rather such humble Calmness will inure▪ Sylvander appears on the Scene, walking as ot heedi them. To greater Thoughts, true Greatness to ensure. VVhat Shepherd's that? Diana. 'Tis One in whom appears Nothing that's rustick, but the Coat he wears, Yet so insensible (I mean to Love) That any's Conquest he disdains to prove. Leonida. Of whence? Phillis. That were impossible to show, Since he himself the same ne're yet could know: His Extraction he thinks hath been from hence, Which makes him here to place his Residence. Diana. He sees us not; else his civil Aboard Would of himself more knowledge you afford, Phillis. air Nymph, wilt please you him to entertain? Leonida. our Character's too fair that to refrain.
Phillis He salutes them, but passeth by, the speaking to him turns back. Is this the fashion of those greater Towns Where you were bred, who us intitle Clowns, Our Entertainments thus to interrupt, And second it with a Depart abrupt? Sylvander. Since 'twas m'ill hap, such Error to commit, The fault is less, not to continue it. Diana. 'Twas rather that no Object here you saw, You from your self thought worthy to withdraw; Yet if on this fair Nymph your eyes you turn, Y'are too insensible if you not burn. Sylvander. Fair Shepherdess, Loves sole attractive Ties Are onely bred by equal Sympathies: The Disproportion 'twixt her worth and mine, May easily discharge me of that Crime. Leonida. VVhere's the Difference? in Body or in Mind? Y'ave equal Properties of both I find. Sylvander. Fair Nymph, of ev'ry thing the reall Prize, Not from th' Appearance, but the use doth rise; Else many Beasts'fore Man we might commend, In many Properties they him transcend. Yet since They for Mans Use, Man for the Gods Was made, in Dignity this gives Man th' odds. The Gods which thus distinguish't have each thing, Imparting worth as they design their Being,
Were taxable, if equal Worth th' ordain In you for Nymph, in me but for a Swain. Leonida. But why, these fair Ones then since as you say Of like Condition, could not they you stay? Sylvander. The Lesser still gives place unto the Great. Diana. Disdainful Swain, so lightly us to treat. Sylvander. That is not such, which of her is a Part. Diana. VVe have enough to force a milder Heart. Sylvander. The principal you want that to fulfil. Diana. And what may that be? Sylvander. Fair One 'tis your will. Phillis. Which is so contrary to that Effect, To Sylva∣er. As ev'n Sylvander's is i'th' same respect. Sylvander. air Astraea I be you my Sanctuary, He em t ly behin Atre▪ o shield me from invading Treachery.
Diana. Mine's the Outrage; whilst me thus to protect, She renders both my Cause and Force suspect. Sylvander. Rather by th' last Stroke, seeing me o'rethrown, Shee'd steal that Glory you had made your Own. Phillis. As though your VVorth were so consid'rable, To vanquish you were somewhat ho'rable: But leaving Words, it by th' Effects let's prove, What Shepherdess hath it engag'd to love? Sylvander. All those to which it hath apply'd my Thought. Phillis. As you would say, you yet ne're any sought, Which shews your want of Courage or of Wit, Seeing what's lovely, and not loving it. Sylvander. Or want of Will the same to undertake. Phillis. Such is the proud Pretence you seem to make. To this Troop I appeal; what words can't clear, Let Demonstration make it to appear. Leonida. That is but just. Diana. To that we all agree.
Phillis. Then fair Diana you the Judge shall be; Injoyn him strait some Shepherdess to serve, On whose forc't Love he prove he doth deserve. Diana. Love violence to suffer doth disdain, But what his Object sweetly doth constrain; Yet thus much I ordain, on One he trie, With due Respect to gain an Amty. Sylvander. Though you pass Judgement e're you hear me speak, I do assent; Nor this decree will break, Provided such she be, you me design, Have Worth and Knowledge to distinguish mi. Phillis. You seek Evasion you in vain to free; For ev'n Diana's self the same shall be; She wanteth neither; none can it gain-say, Diana eem a verse to that motion. She hath Worth worth to judge, Worth worth to pay. Leonida. Nay fair One y'are ingag'd too far to flie. Astraea. 'Tis the Nymphs request, you must not deny. Diana. So that three Moons decreas'd he not presume (My judgement past) such liberty t'assume.
Sylvander. To which he vows, with Purity no less He kneels and kisses  hand. Then sacred Veftals, when they do profess. To you, fair Mistris, one Plaint I prefer For wrongs I suffer. Diana. Say what you'd infer. Sylvander. If 'cause my Worth 'gainst one did it despise, I vainly held, to Proof condemn'd arise; Why ought not she, who, then I, vainer far, Suffer the like, being Author of this war? Astraea. So just a Sutor cannot be deny'de. Leonida. It pretty Musick is, thus to divide. Diana. Say ther what is't? Sylvander. That she research in Love Some Swain, th' advantage of her Worth to prove. Diana. 'Twere unreasonable; Reason doth not tie To make good ought with breach of Decency: On some Shepherdess she shall try the same. Phillis. Let it Astraea be.
Astraea. That were your shame, That you suspect your Merit 'twill be thought, To choose VVork to your hand already wrought. Leonida. This difference by one Judge should be decreed. Astraea. Diana, 'tis your second Charge. Phillis. She kisses Diana. Agreed. Tyrsis, Leonice, Hylas. A SONG. They appear at far end of the Scene. TH'all-conquering Archers, All's Birth and End For Mastery By Tyrsis. Their Force do try Their Empires to extend. Death, in my Cleon, Loves Force did defeat: Love in my Heart, By her Desert, Frames yet a living Seat, Where she still lives; nor was it she that dy'd; Our mutual souls Exchanging mouls, 'Tis I that death have try'd.
But thou, my Cleon, though thou scapd'st this▪ As thy Death me, My Sorrow thee Will quickly overthrow. Leonida. What Shepherd's that which Sings? Sylvander. 'Tis one bewails His Mistris Death, whom Love again assails By th' Importunities of a new Desire, Inviting him to quench his former Fire. Leonida. That Shepherdess you mean. Sylvander. Fair Nymph, the same; You more shall know, when we them entertain. A SONG. By Hylas. FIe, fie upon this whining Love, Which Love's best flower fades; Love should Delight, but no Grief prove: Such Love weak Souls invades. Each how'r a Beauty, as in May You would a fragrant Rose, Chuse, chuse; for wingy Times decay Hastes e're It doth disclose.
Leonida. This last it seems is of another Mind. Sylvander. Fair Nymph, the pleasant'st that you e're shall find. To all Objects he doth his Heart enure, That who gives him the wound, may give the Cure. Leonida. He's no Deceiver that declares the same. Sylvander. He makes hi Glory what we think his Shame. Hylas. Should I, as you, each Mistris Loss lament, l'th' intrim they come up to the fire of the Scene. Eternity not bound could griefs extent. Tyrsis. Were you as I, you need lament but One. Hylas. Were you as I, you would lament for None. Heartless Mistris, will you not Courage take, This Shepherds scornful usage to forsake? Leonice. I grieve that thus my want of Pow'r is shown, Not for your Consid'ration, but my Own. Hylas. Well, since you are of the same Humor still, Though you command not yours, I do my VVill, I take my Leave, or else will give it you, Holds out his hand. My love grows Stale, I must exchange a New.
Sylvander. To Tyrsis. Gentle Shepherd, the cause of your sad Fate, Our Countries custome wils you to relate. Tyrsis. Kneels. First unto Heav'n my thanks, and then to you; What you desire to hear, we both must sue: By you it is th'Oracle doth intend To give our Diff'rence and our Sorrows end. Sylvander. How hap's e're now so much you me ne're told! Y'ave seen me often. Tyrsis. He takes a little billes out of his Scrip and reads the O∣racle.Oracle. Ev'en so Heav'n it would. VVhere Lignons crooked Stream doth flow, You shall a curious Shepherd see, Who first shall seek your Griefs to know; Him hear, for he your Judge shall be. Here of the Issue we have long desir'd, But you're the first that it of us requir'd. Sylvander. You must make vow t'observe what I decree. Tyrsis. As to the Gods. Leonice. We both to It agree. Sylvander. To Diana, and takes her by the nd. Fair mistris, are you not dispos'd to sit?
Phillis. Your honor to the Nymph you do forget. Sylvander. It should be so indeed in civil Tyes; They sit all but Leonice, and Tyrsis. But Loves rights are prefer'd 'fore Ceremonies. Leonice. Most worthy judge, I hope you'l condiscend Addressing her self, to Sylvander, who is more eminently seated then the rest. To mee, as Plaintiffe, first your ear to bend. Sylvander. It is your right: Leonice. Be pleased then to know, Unto what Country we our Beeings owe. Night that great City, which, as saies old Fame, From the Goddesses Judge first took the Name, Of one Cottage we are, and equal State; Nature seem'd each for Other to create, Till like a harsh Stepdame she did produce A third, whose memory these Floods unsluce:She seems to weep. Whether with greater Endowments or less, do not know; yet Greater you may guess, Since he thought so, whose thoughts alone give prise To all Beauty, at leastwise in my Eyes: He, as I him, pursues with eager Flames My happier Rival; me and my Love disdaines. She yield's at length? for who could him resist n Love? I'me sure my bonds I often kist Neglected; here his cruelty not staid, But with new slights he me the author made Of my ruine; to cover, or provoke heir exchang'd Fires; he stoopes to fained Yoke,
Makes me the Object, yet with her advice, So cunningly; that, thriving his disguise, As they intend, the worlds eye to divert, He then on me the same craft would revert, Though for unequal Purposes; for now, Holding my facile Faith, with displeas'd brow, He dislikes what he sought; The world, he saies, Doth over clearly on our Freedomes gaze; VVhich to prevent, though true, he seems to faign Love unto Clëon, Clëon was her name: And this his Craft yet better to disguise, He me intreates her him to love advise; But juster heav'n, whilst me he thus deceaves, By Clëons Death; Clëons Love him bereaves. Yet, as to wrong my Love, he did delight, Fantastique Love he cherisheth with spight. She making reverence, retires Justice, just Judge, for this Abuse, I crave; Yet but his Love I seek, or else my Grave. Sylvander. Gentle Shepherd, y'ave Liberty to speak. Tyrsis. More Gentle Judge, more words we need not break, With obei∣ance The Truth is said; The Truth we must avow; Yet this Request vouchsafe us to allow; That each, by lot an Advocate may have, So he appointed who th' Oracle gave. Sylvander. Giving each a glove, they draw Lots. Ti's granted you; who takes his Own must plead.
Hylas. Hylas for'th living; Phillis. Phillis for the dead. Hylas. Nature her self, whose true Rules cannot err, Hylas ∣deth forth and makes his obey∣sance. Two invincible Arguments doth inferr In this Different; and by a double Tye, This our Cause grants, the others doth deny, In this Shepherdess, both Beauty and Love: The 'ffect of One the Gods themselves do prove, Pigmalyon like from the work of their hand: The other is wise Natures firmest band, VVherewith Sh'unites the world; whose purest Fire (No other Incense) do the Gods require; And shall weak Man then dare thus to reject, VVhat Gods and Nature hallow with Respect? Th' other Objection, that doth him deny VVhat he affects, Is Contrariety, Love's only Opposite his Enemie; Can there twixt Life and Death be amitie? Besides, Mans Piety should even dread Thus to disturb the quiet of the Dead. Just Judge, to you thus I my Reasons show, He make obeysance, and reti. My charge to clear; not, that you them not know. Phillis. That self same Nature, whose spotless Decree Phillis wi obeance  the Judge tands You would wrest to your Purpose; she, ev'n she,
By equal pow'r of Beauty, and of Love, Reignes in this shepherds heart; though yet above To Hylas. Your Apprehension; or your Loves Pretence, VVhich makes Love only th' Object of the Sense. But thou would'st have him them again to trie, As though in Natures Laws were a diversity. No, Shepherd, no; Disorder would orethrow VVhat Nature Linkes, if she proceeded so. True Love, of two souls is the unity, VVhich may without the Bodies Union be. If this you grant (as who can truth deny?) His Loves Object still lives; Souls cannot dye: But thou think'st, th' are disjoyn'd by heav'ns distance, Know'st not her peircing nature, whose swift glance Can pass each Sphear in twinckling of an eye, Nor can hers less, puts on Divinity; Besides, Love is an Act so freely born, Ev'n our own VVills subjection it doth scorn. How then can loath'd Importunity gain, VVhat our conspiring Selves cannot constrain. Just judge, they do themselves themselves deny, That ask of us Impossibility. Sylvander. The chiefest point wherein ye agitate, With obey. ance she retires. Stands up. Is, if Loves Essence subject be to Fate, Perishable or not; Love hath two objects, The Body and the Soul; since both Effects This Shepherd feeles; The Gods in me pronounce The Body perishable, such Love he renounce; But since Souls Love, as herself, cannot dye, He that continue to Eternity; And that this Shepherdess her Pretences cease, Your vowes observe, and sanctifie your Peace.
Tyrsis. As eav'ns Edict! Leonice. VVhile my unruly Fire Threatning Revenge exchangeth into Ire. Scene. 2. Act. 2. Paris, Adamas: encounter: Paris. IN your absence, Leonida hath been here, With ree∣rence. VVith such a haste as might beget a feare. Adamas. Pray heav'n the Nymph be well; where is she gone? Paris. To yonder Plain she bent her course, alone, As I suppose her self to recreate n rural Pastimes innocent Debate, Till your return; Adamas. Haste, it to let her know. And in thy search, Paris, be not too slow;— Eit Pris. am in pain, till I the Subject hear Leonida ap∣pears: He bra  her: Of her arrive; and scarce delay can bear; So unexpected! how Fares the Nymph?
Leonida. Lost If by your happier hand that Sate's not crost. Adamas. Be brief; Leonida. Oh sir! I've scarcely had the time To know my self, since I disclos'd a Crime Scarce hatch'd, from the Authors own glorying tongue. From which, perhaps, our Ruines might gave sprung. As in my way, daies heat did me invade, I sought the shelter of a milder shade; Where being no sooner laid, a voice I heard, VVhich I well knew, though nought of him appear'd It was Polemas, Lyndamors Rival, Their Love to Galatea's known to all. Polemas guilty of his own Desert, His slighted Courtship did at length convert To Stratagem; such, suspected of none, Till now to me, unseen, It was made known. While Clemanthe, (his Instrument) declares Him the procession of their false affaires. I blush to speak it; It was in this wise; In Hermits habit, he did him disguise; Nigh us, betakes him to a lonely Cell; 'Twere too tedious, each circumstance to tell; How (when the Nymph did thither oft repair, As she intends, to sanctifie her praier.) This Impostor did strangely us beguile; In sum, as he could wish, so throve his wyle; The Nymph wih Faith he did possess, that she Should see that man, which should her husband be, If she would happyness enjoy; if not, Foretells, sh'incurtes a miserable Lot.
The Place he did discover in a glass: Appoin'ts the Time, and Person, Polemas, Who should have us incounter'd there; but he Failing his Time; our well-led Charity Succurred an half drown'd Shepherd, in whom, Galatea, prepossess'd, beleeves her Doom; But the inamor'd Shepherd doth reject Her Flames, seeming some other to respect: Yet she 'gainst Honor, Reason, or his Hate, Vowes to inthrone him in her Bed, and State. Yet my commission bids not this declare; Sir, he's fal'n sick; which threats a new despair; In whose Succor I'me sent t'implore your aid; Which cannot, but by miracle, be allaid; Save him; or save him not; such is her Doom; Her Honor, or her Self you must intombe. Adamas. Do not despair, these clowds I'le quickly clear. Leonida. Alas? my own love painteth thus my Fear!To herselfe. Scene 1. Act 2. Sylvander. Victorious Archer, whose self-pleasing Spoiles Filleth my Bosome with these homebred broiles! Accept thy Conquest: I do not resist; But 'gainst a yeilding Heart no more insist: Why represent'st thou still her glorious trayn Of charming Graces to reinforce my Pain?
I 'fore thy shrine, like innocent victime stand; To sacrifice my self with mine own hand. Thus sporting in thy Flame, like silly flie, I singe my wings, and for that Folly die. If this the sacred Storehouse of thine Arms I have by stealth attempted, Mine own harms Punish that Crime; while rashly I aspire, Prometheus Pain must follow my Desire. If for some Gods Abode this Structure's rais'd, M Impiety's punish't o're curiously t' ave gaz'd, While this Diana's presence I invade; Unto my rav'nos thoughts I am betraid; If, as her worth, thou seek'st t' inlarge Despaire, I will, with thee, against my self prepare This second Fuel: Her too much worth implies, That I must prove her double Sacrifice. Yet, Love, thou art too covetous b' unjust force He seem to le him down to sleep. All Duties to thy self thus to ingross: Forget not Natures rights, lest hers orethrown, Thou do'st thy self deprive thee of thine Own. Leonida, Celadon. Leonida. Leonida and Celadon ap∣pear upon the Scene with a wo∣mans gar∣ment loosly cast about him. By this Disguise from those Bonds I thee free, Which all, (neglecting all) court, Sov'raignty: Nor wonder I, that thou do'st it despise, Thou more Subiect'st with those commanding Eyes; Yet foolish I, thus to obey thy will, Steal thee from other; but my self do kill: Celadon. Fair Nymph, do not that Beauty so debase, To sue, who should be sought to; nor desace The image of that Love, I did discover; I know you'd not accept a faithless Lover.
Leonida. Well; since to other destin'd is that heart, Gentle Swayn, vouchsafe me this to impart, That in your mem'ry friendly place I have. Celadon. Worth'est of Friends, ev'n such unto my grave, Else may Heav'ns heav'est Veng'ance me persue. A thousand Thankes. They im∣brace Exit , Leonida. A thousand times adue. Celadon. Alas! my flight my Prison but extend's, Since with my life my Bondage only end's. Can the World's vastest limits other be, For bad b' Astraea Astraea not to see. Thus being depriv'd my Sun, Dayes clearest light Shall be to me but as the blackest Night. I'le in this Desert seek some hollow Cave Shall be to me a Mansion, and a Grave. Asleep! if Griefe these lights have not ore'thrown, H spies Sylvand sleep. Surely, me thinks this Shepherd I have known. It is Sylvander, whose vet closed Lids, His Sorrows swelling Ruptures not forbids: Alas, poor Friend I have heard of the change Thou hast made of thy Peace; nor think it strange, Thy Heart hath still harbor'd noblest Desires: And such Love thinketh fittest for his fires: Yet may'st thou happier therein be then I, VVhose only Love prove's only Misery. Th occasions fair; I will it not debate, I feel the hasty Summons of my Fate,
Though Celadon b' exil'd Astraeas sight, He puts his hand in his scrip, takes out pen and paper, and writes, and folds it up. Yet sure t' Astraea Celadon may write. More happy paper! haste unto her hand, Not to recall her over-harsh Command, But to assure her, since such is her VVill, Approaching Death her Sentence shall fulfill: VVhile, unrepining, Hers I do depart, Though ruder Fate hath rob'd me of her Heart. If but one tear her cheek thou chance to lave, I wish no other Monument to my Grave; Puts it in his hand. and goes ou. Wakens and rising disco∣vers the let∣ter: He reads it. To thee, Sylvander, this office I commend, Ev'n as the last any shall me befrend. Sylvander. Ha! a letter! am I asleep or wake? If I still dream not, how came I this to take▪ LETTER. To the most lov'd and most fair Shepherdess of the universe, The most unfortunate, and most faithful of her Servants, wisheth that weale, which Fortune him denies. My extream Affection shall never consent to give the name of Pain or Punishment to what by your Com∣mand I suffer: Nor shall ever permit Complaint to come from that mouth was only destin'd for your Praise: But It may permit me to say, that the State wherein I am (which an Other would perhaps, think insupportable) contenteth me; insomuch as I know, you will, and ordain It such. Be not scrupulous to extend yet farther (if possible) your commands; I shall still continue my Obe∣dience, to the end that if my Life hath not been capable to assure my fidelity, my Death may. 'Tis doubtless I; the Demon guardes my Soul, Reading my passion, doth it here inroule.
To the most fair; Diana must be she:Looks upon the letter. And most belov'd; that, sure is meant of me. Then she, n' other object such love can give: Then I, n' other subject such love receive. Thanks my good Geni'us; better skilld then I, With their own figure dost my thoughts supply. Scene. 4. Act. 2. Leonice, Lycidas: encounter▪ Leonice. PRopitious Fate; as I could wish! 'tis he; To herself. Now thrive my Vengeance by my subtlety. Gentle Shepherd! saw you not pass this way To him. A lonely Swain, seems from himself to stray? Lycidas. Fair Shepherdess, how should I know the same? Leonice. Tis One, doth his dead Mistris Loss complain; I heard he in the Company should be Of Phillis, and her Servant: Lycydas. who is he? Leonice. He's sensible I see;— Tis one they call Silander or Sylvander, slender, and tall; To her self. Lycidas. By what judge you him her Servant to be?
Leonice. By some seene freedomes of their Amity; Which to my own Practice therein applyd, That they are Lovers should not be deny'd, Lycidas. To himself. She speakes my feares; yet she a stranger is To them, or me, which confirmes true it is. Leonice. You saw none such? Lycidas. Not any, pass this way. Leonice. Good morrow Swaine. Lycidas. To you a better day. Exit Leonī∣ce What Perfection can Man in VVoman find, That may arrest the Levity of her Mind? Phillis. Diana, Astraea, She aboards Lycidas who Walks in a discontented posture. She takes him by the arme. He flings from her, goes out and she follows him. Phillis. VVhy walkes my Shepheard with so sad a cheare? Lycidas. As thou wer't innocent! —away, forbear. Diana. VVhat suddain change is this?
Astraea. His hate to me, Since his brothers death. Diana. Or his Iealousie. Our purer Fire bent to each other sex, This churlish Inmate us can never vex. She kisses her. Astraea. I must not so conclude; for even now I feel those Flames, that you so disavow, Diana. As how? Astraea. I fear by that intended Tress, Diana ha∣ving a brace∣let of hair in her hand. Others then I more favour should possess. Diana. 'Tis but for Wager; I am wholly Thine; Smiling. Imbraces her. They sit down seem∣ing to finish it. Come, thou shalt help the Residue to twine. Astraea. You blame th' Effects, yet still the Means supply To administer to that Jealousie. If Sylvander see this his Rival wear, Impossible 'twere this Passion to forbear. Diana. I think she sought it with the same Intent. Astraea. And as unjustly you her it assent.
Diana. As how? Astraea. In this to make his Enemy Sylvander stralingly approacheth. Triumph before determin'd Victory; You are their Judge, and should with equal Eye, As doth the Sun, reflect your Clemency. Diana. And surpri∣seth them. She for this Favour made to me her suit. Astraea. And you, like Fortune, must reject the mute. Sylvander. Kneels to Diana. If nothing else remain, on bended knee I shall for It devoutest Suppli'ant be. Astraea. How, Sylvander! are you become so bold T'intrude your Mistris privacies, t'unfold Her secrets? Sylvander. Fair Shepherdess, th'are mine Own, Which not of her learnt, are to my Self unknown. But my rude Fate leads now but me to show In m'Enemies Glory mine own overthrow. Fair Mistris, if but your self to free Fro'th' violence of Importunity, You granted this: to greater Flames designe Your equal Bounties; hers cannot equal mine.
Astraea. Why so? one Object doth you both inflame; Why follows not, th' Effects should be the same? Sylvander. Diff'rence is not from th' Agents Quality, But from the Pati'ent's Incapacity; So doth the equal Sun on either shine, Corrupt the Dunghil, but enrich the Myne. Astraea. Then must her Love of yours th' Advantage gain, Since hers produceth what yours can't obtain. Sylvander. Not by defect of Love, but unjust Fate, Which 'gainst the worthi'st still doth bend his hate. Astraea. You have a double Conquest still in me; Your En'my will your Intercessor be. Shall Phillis Int'rest 'gainst us both prevail?Yo Dia. My Share's but light if't cannot turn the Scale. Diana. You wrong my Love Competitor to take; To Astraea. The expir'd terme must restitution make. She flings Sylvander the bracelet. Sylvander. As for my Beeing such Gratitude I owe, To Phillis returning somewhat disturbed.  shews the bracelet. I pay it you, since you it better so. Where's now your boasting Ensignes of Desert? Phillis. The want thereof that doth on thee revert.
Sylvander. How mean you that? Phillis. To th' Ballance light in weight Must still be added a superflu'ous Freight. Sylvander. So doth the Envi'ous miserable blame What his own fruitless Travel can't obtain. Phillis. To Diana and Astraea. It is to you my just Ire should extend, Who violate the rights of Judge and Friend. Sylvander. Fair Mistris, prudent Love that reads our hearts, Hath justly thus rewarded our Deserts; For now you see her Jealousie doth prove, That she incapable is of true Love. Phillis. How so? Sylvander. Love still is an active desire, Kindled by vertue of a secret Fire; But Jealousie (you know) a passive Fear, Which always barren coldness Ensigns bear; In one at once Contraries cannot be, Nor Phillis feel both Love and Jealousie. Phillis. The coldest Flint oft Fire doth unfold.
Sylvander. ut yet the fire ne're produceth cold. Phillis. Ashes, which are, it doth. Sylvander So't may be sed, Jealousie is sign of Love, but Love that's dead. Diana. As ancient Ruines signs of Buildings are; Not that still Such they be, but such they were. Phillis. My Judge m' Adversary? my cause must fail, Sylvander lets fall a Letter. When they should It protect, do it assail. Astraea. No more of this Subject; for as I fear, Phillis in this Case hath a Cause more near. Phillis takes it up. Phillis. 'Tis Celadons; how comes it to his hand? Astraea. His Mistris that of him may best command. Diana. Servant: whose Letters this? to whom addrest? Sylvander. With a lit∣tle astonish∣ment, miles the Letter. That n my Heart your Beauties have exprest, Confer'd with th' Inscription, 'To you which are Of all the most Beloved and most Fair; From your faithful, unhappy servant, me.
Diana. If so, this would your own hand-writing be. Sylvander. Finding a better Secretar'e then I, With his Expressions I mine own supply; Which must proceed from some Agent divine, Since it to your Hand comes, as't came to mine. Diana. What riddle's this? Sylvander. Last night o're charg'd with thought, In yonder Grove my Sense asleep was brought; Waking, with wonder I was seis'd to find So lively Characters of my dying Mind, Which I intended to your Self; but see My better Genius hath prevented me. Diana. Could you not, think you, guide us to that place? Sylvander. Takes her by the hand and leads her out. They follow My best Endeavours shall that Hope imbrace.
Scene 1. Act. 3. Leonida, Adamas. Leonida. IT was not far from hence I saw him last, Whoe scarce known Visage Grief had so o'recast, As't had not left one Character to be Decypher'd for another Misery. So well delineated the angry Gods To see in Criminals would let fall their Rods. From yonder Stream oft he his Thirst allaid, And what his Hands took forth, his Eyes repai'd. Him hasting to aboard, his flying Fear Avoided me, his Sorrows to endear. Adamas. The heav'ns will guide us, who do me ordain To heal my Own, in curing of his Pain. Their Oracle I late consulted have, Who me, as readily, this Answer gave. Oracle. Seek that Shepherd, and him unite To his Mistris in Hymens right; Só shall be ended his Annoy, And thy Age crown'd with endless Joy.
Leonida. I hear a voice, but the o're charged Bows T'approach the same no passage us allows. SONG. The Scene is chang'd by the discove∣ry of an Ar∣bor, whrin eladon sits nd sings. DUll Jaylor of Mortality, Why wilt thou not accept this thy right? Wait'st not sometimes on charity? Or art thou always armed with spight? I am nothing but voice, To cry, to cry, Night and Day to cry Ah! Astraea, Astraea, Astraea! If Celadon be dead to your Eye, Raise him with a milder Ray. Or do'st her Image Reverence bear? Thou dar'st not strike my flaming Heart. Eternal be my Pain, thy Fear; For from't I ne're will consent to part, Eccho like waste to voice, To cry, to cry, &c. Celadon. He comes forth his Arbor. Not onely Death, but each thing doth forsake Their proper Nature, wretched me to make. To himself. That angry God, whose force I long have tri'de, Against his Pow'r his Pow'r seems to divide. Love doth It self, elsewhere, by Absence kill: But ah! in Mine, Love doth but Love fulfil. These unfrequented Shades, m'infernal cell▪ With hollow whist'ling Winds my fun'ral knell, Though Emblems of Horror, cease to affright▪ And to augment my Grief, do it delight.
And thou fair Stream, Repriever of my Life, Thy Nature bad thee then to end this Strife; But thou denyd'st, foreseeing from mine Eyes, T'inlarge thy flood a second Source should rise. He discovers them and seems to ie. Takes hold of him. Leonida. Fly not, but from thy self, whose Cruelty Hath thus betray'd our failing Charity; Adamas. Was it for this that thou didst me require, Free thee from Others, 'gainst thy self conspire? But thou t'obey thy Mistris seemest bent; Not thee to lose, but try, was her Intent. Improvidence 'twere that Triall t'undergo, VVherewith we should the tried overthrow. Celadon. Not me to try, but 'cause I incurr'd her Hate, She thus ordains me to this banish't State. Adamas. That act of hate, was but th'effect of Love, Jealousie, which this Evidence doth remove: Celadon. Not her Sentence, Adamas. Thus observ'd, did she know, A second Sentence would that overthrow. Celadon. She cannot err, nor other witness needs, Save this my Heart which t'her immolish't bleeds.
Leonida. Will you then Murder to her charge thus lay, For so you must, if thus your self you slay. Celadon. No more then when before their Shrine doth fall Th' innocent Lamb, the Gods we guilty call. Leonida. Those are their own, and they may them require. Celadon. So am I hers, to whom I now expire. Adamas. But you 'gainst Heav'ns will, can't your self dispose. Celadon. Such is Heav'ns will; those Beauties who disclose, Printing thereon their vis'ible Majesty, Not disobey'd without Impiety. Adamas. Beauty, 'tis true, is of the Gods a Ray, But not the Matter must the Form obey: That were to change th' order of Providence, Since the one gives the other's Excellence. Perhaps youl'l say 'tis th' Intellectu'l part That holdeth this Predominance o're your Heart: That neither must; for Forms Equality Must not exact of Forms Sov'raignity. Celadon. But by the power of Love ours One became; And what One wils, the other wils the same.
Adamas. I must seek to supplant by Craft, not Strength. To himself. Unto this course of Life, of Time what length Do you assign? Celadon. Alas! I must not chuse; My souls Functions, who I them gave, must use. Adamas. Still seeking her Command, would you her see? Celadon. Extend not Hope t'impossibility. Adamas. The Gods by special order have decreed You to my Charge, and if you be agreed, I shall Means find t'effect what I do say. Celadon. I do assent, so I still her obey. Adamas. Name the same Words, which her Command'ment bear. Celadon. Till commanded 'fore her I not appear. Adamas. The Gods themselves do favor thy Content. I have a Daughter for thy Safety lent, Doth so resemble thee in Form, like clad, Knowledge of Either scarcely can be had.
She by the custome of our Law's design'd (From her Childhood) to live by vow confin'd; Yetis dispensed the same to forego, If slightest Sickness threat anOverthrow: Great Ill't portends, if any there do dye; She, Ile give out, is sick; while you supply Her place, and Habit, t'entertain each day Your fair Mistris, yet her notdisobey. Celadon. How can that be?'fore her I must appear. Adamas. As Alexis, not Celadon you were. Celadon. I submit to yourPrudence. Adamas. Thenretire, And straight Ile send you disguisingAttire. Scene 2. Act 3. Sylvander, Diana, Astraea, Phillis. Sylvander. Leads her by thehand. SAy fair Mistris, what Judgement may we prove In yourfair Thoughts on diff'rent of ourLove? Diana. Phillis,methinkes, scarce counterfeiteth well; The mast'rie's yours; youher in It excel.
Sylvander. It were Impiety so toprophane Divine Beauty with inexpi'able staine. It's true, at first, Love did lay down his Arms, To Sport, not Fight, to shewth'force of your Charms In this his facile Conquest; But ev'nnow, That I his purest Flames do feel, do vow Ev'n by thoseyour own sacred Beams, whose light Hath found a way to Murder withDelight. Diana. 'Tis better still toconfirm what I say, But better lose this Subject then ourWay. Have we yet far unto theplace? Sylvander. You hill Will our Journey, with your commandfulfill. Diana. It seemsimpassible. Sylvander. Ile force aWay. He makes  though he would gobefore. Astraea. And leave yourEnemy here you tobetray. Sylvander. Friendly warning; Fair Mistris her command To this your Service that she joyn herhand. Phillis. Now you are guilty ofthe same Suspect, Of which you sought me lately todetect.
Sylvander. Not my Mistris, but Enemy 'tis Ifear. Phillis. Therein your Jealousieof her is clear: If you do not suspect your MistrisLove, Why am I thus redoubtable It toprove? Sylvander. Not of her Love, but of your Treachery. Phillis. Y'are Jealous then of her Sufficiency; For to your advantage you heardher say, I had no skill the Counterfeit toplay. Sylvander. On that belief dothyour Advantage rise, With greater ease, neglected, tosurprize. Phillis. To Diana andAstraea. xtunt Sil. and Phil. I do assent to It, least at thelength, He say I him o'recome with Slight, not Strength. Diana. What doth thisShepherd to thy Thoughts appear? Astraea. Leonice alingly listens be∣ind them. What youme ask ūnto your self is clear, Ev'n so as Children in the Tapersflame Sport with their finger till they burn the same. Butwhat think you? how do you thisaffect? Diana. Alas! my self I beginto suspect.
Astraea. Blush not, dear Companion, Love'sno Guilt; Leonice ∣ires. If such it were, Beauty andWorth were spilt. Leonice. This wasbut wanting, full Revenge to take, On which I will the sureFoundation make. Sylvander, Hylas Phillis. Return Hylasen∣counters them. Sylvander. FairMistris, the Passage now is free, Something w'ave found worthCuriosity. Hylas. Now Mistris, leavethat Shepherd; I suspect To Phillis. That with his Venomehe will thee infect; His false Axiomes have buri'd one alive; So will they thee, if thou with him survive. Sylvander. What's he? Hylas. Tyrsis, who Mortals hath forsook, And to his grave, his Cell, hath him betook, In yonder Forrest, where with howling note, As do his fellow Wolves, set's forth his throat; A pretty effect of Love to court th'ayre, And for what can't be had so to despaire. Phillis. Servant, I think, my pray'rs were but in vain, To Hyla. Should I implore you not incur the same.
Hylas. Spare them good Mistris, you may well suppose, That my wise Love some End will still propose. To Sylvan∣er. What End hath his? you that his cause maintain's. Sylvander. Love is a God, who himself entertains Within himself; nor doth he ought require Without himself to cherish his Deire. He is the Center of his own Being, Whence his delight doth ever fall and spring, As you may see in a well figur'd Sphere, His End's beginning and end is ev'rywhere. Hylas. A pretty Myst'ry! Love doth nought require Forth his own self; Love then is no Desire, Since no Desire from what we have is known, Sylvander. But this Desire, that makes of Two but One, Which both the Lover and the Lov'd so chains, That whas desir'd It in It self contains. Hylas. So, so, this proves my Grandames Saying true, Of one Error another doth ensue. If Lovers to their Lov'd we chang'd could see, Then I not Hylas, but Phillis should be. Sylnder. That follows not; for you do not her love; But such Effects I in Diana prove.
Hylas. Is not your Hat become her Hood?Looks on his hat. Sylvander. Oh fie, You know 'tis not my Hat that love's, 'tis I. Hylas. A modest Sepherdess, and Breeches wear! 'Tis very strange! Sylvander. Thus I these doubts will clear, It is the Soul all Actions doth produce, The Body but the instrument for her use; So that 't being the Soul which only loves, 'Tis the Soul onely Transformation proves. Hylas. But since I love the Body with the Mind, Why do not I now my self Phillis find? Sylvander. It is Equality, that Love begets; The Body, Soul's inferior, it not admits; The Soul onely the Soul can love; But see A more plain Reason for this Unity: The Understanding, Will, and Memory Are said the Soul in ev'ry Faculty. Of only what we know, can Love remain, The knowledge and thing known are but the same. Like Transformation doth each Function prove, Since they all joyn th' Affection but to move: Will to the will'd, the Memory is brought Into the thing whereon 't imploys the Thought:
If thus each Function, then must needs the Whole Transmute it self into the loved Soul. Hylas. You fetch this far; yet this not much avails, Since still the Bodies Transformation fails. Sylvander. Phillis Body of her's no part; for dead, Not that 'tis, but was Phillis, 'twould be sed. Hylas. Unite me to her Body, take the Rest, And see which of them both shall please us best. Phillis. They ad∣vance to the far side of the Theater. You have too long withheld us; Night draws near. Sylvander. Hah! a Temple, whose Inscription doth bear; From hence, far, far, avoid all ye Are untouch't with Love's purit. Within this sacred Grove each day Burneth a true immolish't Heart, Which liveth onely by loves Art T'adore the Goddess Astraea. Diana. Is this the place y'intended us to lead? Sylvander. I ne're, before, on it did ever tread, I have mistook that way. Phillis. May we draw nigh?
Sylvander. Not without Rev'rence to this Deity. Thou divne Pow'r, who herein worship't art, Make ∣ance to the emple and goes in. Accept as thou requir'st so pure a Heart. Hylas. I do suspect my own Love's purity, He hath so oft told me the Contrary. Phillis. Why how now Servant! is your Love so weak, They enter while Hyl lies dow a the door. It forceth you our Company to break? Hylas. It is an Argument of my Piety; No jesting, Mistris, with a Deity. Sylvander. The table of Love's laws, which to imbrace He takes ou a able and eads. He doth command on penalty of Disgrace. Who will a perfect Lover be, Must what he loves, love infnitely: Extremity gives Love the prize, Mediocrity therein doth rise Rather from wa'ing Treachery, Then from a firm Fidelity. That he ne're love but in one place, Which Love as a God let him imbrace, That he adore It above all▪ Nor thereof but one object shall; That ev'ry Bliss such do pretend, Still in, and for that subject End.
All Pleasure he in it confine, And that he fix his chief design Unto that service, which t'increase, Self proper Love in him must cease; Unless as lov'd of's loves Object, Himself h'esteem for her Respect. Hylas. I do believe what thou hast read, is ta'ne From whence 'twas hatch't, thy melancholy Brain; Which thou ventest as from this Diety, To give thereto better Authority. Sylvander. That might well be, if none could read but I. Hylas. Confirm me with the sight thereof. Sylvander. Not I. If your Body this holy place prophane, Their holier Laws much more your Eyes will stain. Phillis. Hydas steals forth the ta∣ble, where nseen he al∣ters them.'Tis Celadons hand. Diana. And that Picture we see Upon the Altar, should Astraeas be. Phillis. Then 'tis an Argument h' is yet alive. Astraea. My dying Sorrow do not again revive.
Phillis. This rather is a cause of Joy, then Grief. Astraea. If you make him alive in my Belief, And prove it not; he is twice slain to me. Sylvander. Our Druy'ds do teach us this Divinity; Those Bodies on earth unburie'd remain, Their Souls still wander up and down the same; Such may be his; whose body being drown'd, Could not b' interr'd, 'cause it could not be found. Yet in this Case, the Ceremonies will Appease his Ghost, if all rights we fullfill. Astraea. Which my sad Piety shall undertake. Diana. A Druy'd there is hard by; lets thither make. Hylas. Mistris! I see, here dwels some Diety; I feel a scruple of m' Impiety In Love; and would an unfaign'd Convert be, If that the Tables Lawes I might but see. Phillis. Why you have heard them▪ Hylas. From an Enemy, Against me fram'd of Contrariety.
Diana. That is but just, Sylvander. Though unprofitable, To fix a mind s'extreamly vari'able. Hylas. Wilt thou ingage thy self with me by vow, What is therein to follow and allow? Sylvander. I will dispense with yours: Love is my tye. Hylas. Phillis brings the able to him, and he reads. And what I find therein, such Ties will I, If thou wilt perfect lover be: What thou lov'st, love not inf'nitely. Sylvander. Read right Shepherd: Hylas. Mistris; do you oresee. Else he'l suspect, 'tis but my Trechery. Phillis over∣lookes him. Med'ocrity, gives love the prise, Extremity therin doth rise Rather from a selfe Treachery. Then from a firme Fidelity: Sylvander. Can it be so? Phillis. I'me sure, so I it find.
Sylvander. Then you must make me beleeve I was blind. Hylas. Mistrists! had I not Reason to suspect? And you, Shepherd, to your vow have Respect. Diana. Here's that will end the Diff'rence; oh Deceit?Diana look∣ing on the table finds the deceit. Neither need fail; here each reads his Conceit; Both what 'twas and is; Sylvander. It must repair'd be With his own hand; All. Et. To that we all agree. A SONG. THe purest love that ere adorn'd the Earth. Sung in the inermis∣. Lies buri'ed in a wave. Thus, what gave to his Beauteous Mother birth, Gives him untimely Grave. The Reason, We suppose, is palpable; So purely burn't his Flame, A Sea of floods was only capable, To extinguish the same. Rest gentle Ghost, to consummate thy Night; And gentle Earth unto his Bones be light. Farewell Celadon, Celadon, farewell; Our Dolefull Notes thus ring thy sun'rall Knell;
Scene 3. Act 3. Adamas, Alexis, Leonida. Adamas. Celadon in vestal. ha∣bit. Leonida en∣counters them. To Leonida, WHat Musick's that which so far off we hear? Leonida. My haste to you doth that Relation bear, Astraea this your Guest believing dead, Thus celebrates his Fun'ral in yo Mead. Adamas. 'Tis better still to further our Intent; Leonida. VVhich finished, their Course is hither bent, To visit this our fair disguised Druy'd. Alexis. M' approaching ruine! Adamas. Your Fancies still indu'd With those vain shadowes! To Leoni∣da: Where's Paris, my Son? To Celadon. Cast off thy Fears; our Joyes are now begun: To Leonida Bid him to haste before, them to receive; Leonida. His Love hath discharg'd that Duty, believe. Adamas. Love! to whom?
Leonida. T' one, were not Celadon here; I should say, she Astraea's equal were In Beauty; ti's the fair Diana: Adamas. She! He meets my wishes in that Amity; Nor is't the meaness of a Stock so low Shall me ingage not suffer it to grow; These Shepherds which on Lignon seated be, Are of th' Extraction of Nobility; VVho from the world seeking a calme Repose To shelter them, this humble Being chose. But our Devotions to their Rites me call, So let them know; and kindly welcome all. Exit Ada∣mas: Leonida. Comfort, fair Dry'd; what you now fear to see, Should your wishes, Alexis. Rather my Ruine be; Paris, Diana, Phillis, Stella Astraea, Hylas, Sylvander. Paris. uch Joy this Place your presence doth afford, Leading D∣ana by the hand. To her: s if descending Jove did it aboard: ut for our Entertainment fain we would, ike him, on you distil a show'r of Gold;
Diana. Gentle Paris! your worth and Curtesie Have in my thoughts far greater Efficacy. Paris. If Perfection of both extracted were, In my eye, yet, too mean they would appear, Did not Magnificence and Majesty meet, Like humble vassals, prostrate at your feet. Leonida. They in∣sequence. Our hasty Loves, long expecting, would blame. Had not this unexpected, clear'd the same; Diana. The bad Courtiers humor, is with us met; Rather to make Present, then pay a Debt. Astraea. Fair Nymph, you us t'excuse Custome invites, Particulars are low to Common Rites. Leonida. Yet, if most not mistake, this fair Abstract, At your hands, more then common Rites exact. Astraea. To Astrea presenting Alexis, she tates her. Such Perfections heav'n reserves for His use; Particular Right to them were an Abuse. Hylas. Hylas inter∣preseth them. With Heav'ns favor, and yours, I do prepare, In those of this fair Dry  to have a share.
Alexis. Returnes  Astrea. Those Graces which in you excelling are, Can only speak a worthy Devotaire. Hylas. Phillis My late Mistris adue, adue; Takes her by the hand. Hylas before the Old preferrs the New; Phillis. VVill you leave me? Hylas. I took you to that end. Alexis. And so e're long to me you will pretend. Hylas kises Alexis hand. Hylas. Suspect not Hylas, Hylas cannot change. Phillis. For Hylas, so long Hylas, still will range. Alexis. Those things by us may easily be spar'd, 'Gainst whose loss Expectation is prepar'd. Phillis. That he a suddain Penitent may be, My worth in your Judgement now let him see, To Dla Mistris, this is the day, the term's expir'd, And from your self our sentence is requir'd.
Diana. It must be granted; To Alexis. If you not distaft, Your better houres in tres so to waste. Alexis. Not to partake your innocent Pastime, VVere 'gainst mine own Peace to commit a Crime. Diana. To Leonida. Fair Nymph, it is but just; you see the end, Since you the birth saw: Leonida. Gladly I attend. But what saies Sylvander? Sylvander. He cannot fear, Spotless, before so just a judge, t' appear. Leonida. She gives Diana a gar∣land▪ being all : Unto you first a Garland, then a Seate; And now the progress of your Loves repeate; 'Twas Phillis first began this Difference, And Phillis first must speak her own pretence. Phillis. She stands  and   Fair mistris, now my Judge, wonder takes place, To see one yet alive of Ixions race, Vain and pres puous, that durst undertake Those divine Graces the Object to make Of his aspiring Hope; All it so deeme, By his Service, thus to seek your Esteem. But leaving this, Let's first disclose the spring, Whence issu'eth forth true Lóves proper being;
Equality, and Sympathy (himself doth say) The sourses are; which Argument I may Use 'gainst himself; So resemblance in Sexe Must give me to your Love fairest pretexe; Whose nourishment from Conversation growes: My habits therein on me most bestowes; Since ev'n but yesterday he did obtain Knowledge of your Beauties, or of your Name; Besides, if worth herein may be a Plea, Th' advantage therein can mine only be, Be'ing of your Sexe; nor can he it deny, VVithout offence unto Loves Deity, And yours: Besides, did ever any hear Dissimulation Love-worthy should appear, VVhich took not be'ing from his mistris Beauty; But from our wager, and his vanity; Or if I grant in true Loves flames he burn, This doth but still to my advantage turn; Since I the Author am he undertook On those divine Beauties with Love to look, VVhich his own want of Courage or of wit VVould not have seen; or to Love him admit, But that I did provoke him; more t'inferr, She with a ow reve∣rence retires. VVould now but serve my Glories to deferr. Sylvander stands forth▪ and after low re∣v'rence  kneels Sylvander. Those Poets fain the last of heav'nly Race VVas fled from Earth, foresaw not hers, your place. 'Fore our Astraeas Temple, I must joyn VVith M' adversary; 'gainst my self combine; Our difference was who should deserve your Grace, By our poor Services; 'twas to imbrace (I yeild to what she doth alleadge) a clowd, And give our too rash Thoughts too fair a Shrowd; The Gods, who only such Perfections frame, In their Breasts Fire bear worthy of the same.
'Tis nature I should blame, were I not sure, All Mortals the same rig'rous Law indure. Yet thus I may, why such Perfections gave, And wrought nought worth Relati'on them to have; What she in you requires, though I can't give: Yet what in me affords, I shall, whil' I live; Nor can be tax'd of Presumpti'on, herein; Since from those forcing Beauties Love did spring; VVhich can't be slight, as M' Adversare objects, Produc'd from such all excelling Subjects; Nor is my pure Flame from Equalitie, (As she insists) Natures common decree; In mine, your excellence doth most appear, That thus my thoughts bove Natur's laws can rear. VVhy do you say they want of Reason prove, VVho see what's am'iable, and it not love, Yet not allow, ev'n in the same Respect, That this my Love, as such, she should protect. For Love be'ing bred from what is good and fair, VVhat is bred of't, such Nature still must wear. It follows then, she like Resentments have For those Effects which her own Beauties gave, Unless you'l prophane her Capacity, In giving it the same Deficiency; But that, you'l say, inferrs my Love, not me, Should be esteem'd; you yet do not foresee My Love is joyn'd with such mysterious ties; Me thus to love, but proper Love implies; You plead th' advantage of your Sexe, as bent To love semblable were natures Intent; In Beasts see where her motives simple be, Their Preservations binde t' each contrarie. The gentle Turtle mourns, her male Mate dead, From whom remov'd, the Palm hangs down her head. But 'tis perhaps, elective Love you claim, By your so long Conversat'ion, the same
Your imperfections better do discover, Shewing you are an Insufficient Lover; Th' Advantage of your Sexe, again's your Aid, Then ours more worthy; that is not gainsaid; Nature to you most Perfections doth lend, Whence best Discourses take their births and end: But you forsaking th' Impress'ions She gave, By your defect in Love are more deprave. You pretend to the glory of my Love; Th' Author thereof seeking your self to prove. This must be judg'd according to th' Intent, Which but to Dissimusat'ion here was bent, For which you deserve Punishment; My H'art Did only true, unsaigned Love impart, VVhich being produc'd beyond eithers Design, Shows that the secret author was divine: But both our Pleas and Services are vain, Striving by either her Esteem to gain, Perfect'ions bove Natures, her Laws her free; Makes low rev'rence▪ and retires. Ours, not as Presents, but Rights tender'd be. Diana. The Subject now in Diff'rence judg'd should be, Not from words only, but th' Effects we see; VVhich since I both in equal ballance way: This Sentence, as your Judge, pronounce I may: Phillis more ami'able, I do approve, But Sylvander knows better to make Love. She takes Phillis by the hand and sets her in her seat. For which respects, to each, with equal hand, You I ordain my Seat; you my Garland. Alexis. An equal Judge: Nere Sentence was like this:On Sylvan∣ders head kneeling he places hr garland, and gives him her hand to ki VVhere thus each Party full contented is;
Hylas. A goodly Recompence! and must this be, My fair Mistris, an Example for me? Alexis. So much of me to your self not propose, We are the God's; they only us dispose. Hylas. Insomuch as when I would kiss those eyes, To consult th' Oracle, I must Sacrifice. Alexis. They will not grant what is against our Vow. Hylas. What then for all my service do y'allow? Alexis. The satisfaction to have loved me. Hylas. With that, the voyage not discharg'd will be. Alexis. I see you seek Pretences, me to leave. Hylas. Mistris, I will no longer you deceive. If you Shepherdess continue me to please, As she hath done within this hour, I seise He kisses her hand and turnes to Stella. Kisses Stellas hand. On a new Object; yet grant me but this For all my Services, your hand to kiss. Fair One, to you I tender all the Grace I'ere receiv'd, and seat you in their place.
Sylvander. They are but violencies. Hylas. Him give no ear. Stella. I know him well, your Enemy not fear. Since you'l me serve, I think  fit we draw Cov'nants of Love, may he to each a Law. Hylas. My future Mistris, So I must you call, Till by this Covenant, yours you me install, So much delight from our Loves I foresee, He hastily takes a paper ou of his Scrip, and seems to write, still reading, as he wris. This shall no longer diontin'd be. That neither do usurpe Authority O're each other, which we call Tyranny; That each the Lover and the Lov'd shall be; Without Constraint shall be our Amity; That each may Love so long as each shall please; And that when either will, either may cease; That when each will, each one may others love, And keep our old Loves or the same remove. That Jealousie, Sorrows, Complaints banish't be, As incompatible with our Amity: That in our Words and Actions each be free, Without the others Incommodity. That none be lyars in Word or Effect, Terms of Fidelity and Love reiect; That both or one without the other may Cease, or continue our Loves to obey; That when both, or one, of love is depriv'd, Of both, or one, again't may be reviv'd:
That long Love and long Hatred we omit, We will both Love and Injury forget. Do you like them? Stella. It cannot be deny'd. Hylas. She seems to set her hand to't. Then next your Servants name your own subscribe. Sylvander. Hold, I think fit this other added be, Without Constraint to keep your Liberty. Hylas. What may that be? Sylvander. That each may, when each lift, From any One or All these Laws desist. Hylas. He ems to write.'Tis not amiss, the Counsel is so good, Though from m' En'my, it must not be withstood. Astraea. O're envious Night with clowdy brows deni Farther Delight to our Societies. Alexis. The loss is ours, but each Day shall renew Our pating Pleasures with fresh Enterview.
Scene 1. Act. 4. Leonice. I too long do neglect my Love, I find, So sweet is Revenge to an injur'd Mind. A new Occasion I have found this day, VVhich for the Execut'ion shall make way; I wait fit time, Then Tyrsis to thee flie, In solitude to gain thy love or die. Fortune my Hope doth still anticipate; Here is the ground where I must sow Debate. They ap∣pear. Phillis, Hylas, Diana. Phillis. And what will Stella say that you her leave?Hylas leads Diana by the hand. Hylas. My late Mistris, you do your self deceive; I do but give her Company; and will VVhat is contained in our Laws fulfill. Phillis. But what Sylvander, when he this shall see, VVho is your Rival and your Enemy?
Hylas. 'Twil make my fading Love more fresh, more keen. Diana. Where should he be, so long we have not seen? Leonice. Sylvander is't you seek? Phillis. Him we would find. Leonice. I saw him late with so perplext a Mind Take leave of his Madontha, who this day, Alone accompany'd her on her way: Her Denyals, nor Modesty avail'd: Against them both his Love and Tears prevaild. Phillis. Sure you mistake; Sylvander Love doth flie. Hylas. Of all Attaints but fair Diana's eye. Phillis. Which but for wage is. Leonice. So, oft he vow'd Unto Madontha, when she 't disallow'd. I would, said he (then Tears gush out atain) You in her place, she in yours might remain; Then should you see how each Day should invite To feast our Fancies with a new Delight.
But I must cherish now thy Memory, In whom Fate grants a mean Resemblancy; Which with persev'ring int I will imbrace, As the imperfect Figure of thy Face. While what's to you indiff'rent I make known, I forget what's important of mine own. Know ye not, gentle Swains, where Tyrsis is? Hylas. M' ancient Mistris, Ile show you for a kiss. Leonice. You may oblige me. Hylas. Mistris, with your leave, But to restore what Hatred would bereave. Leonice. Fair companions, To Dier. good day. Phillis. To you the same. Diana. Oh mans Ingratitude! my only Shame! Was it for this I suffer'd thee to cover All thy proceedings, as a feigned Lover, With greater Liberty me to entertain Of (thought) true Love; true Love thou didst but feine. Was this so oft prais'd Beautie no more priz'd, Then for Madontha's thou should'st it despise? Or has't Inconstancy so long assail'd n Others, It against thee hath prevail'd?
Phillis. I have no Faith in this. Diana. Faith did foretell No less at first, he counterfeits so well. Phillis. I see no ground for this Report. Diana. VVhat Ground Canst thou demand where Levity is found? Let not th'Incredulity him excuse; Unless thou would'st Diana twice abuse; But force from him the Bracelet which he wears, On that possess'ion depend all my fears, Least he should triumph in his Victory Rais'd on my VVeakness and his Treachery. Phillis. But will you him condemn before you hear? Diana. As thou me lov'st, me to disswade forbear. Phillis. It is a Charm, but see unhappy Fate Affords no time your Ire to mitigate. Sylvander. Sylvander appears. Diana hides herself. Fair Enemy, retain you still that Name? Or since our Quarrel's ended, ends the same? VVhy so alone, and with dejected Eye?
Phillis. Poor Shepherd, it foretels thy Destiny, That Bracelet which you wear, you must restore Unto my hand, whose Right it was before. Sylvander. Our Contenti'ons must then have no respite, Since ev'n your Sorrows thus in them delight: By whose Authority? Phillis. Hers you it gave. Sylvander. My Mistrisses!With asto∣niment. Phillis. I know none such you have; The Term's expir'd, and both you must resign. Sylvander. Oh wherein is't? of Love you Pow'rs divine, I have transgrest. Phillis. In vain you do him prove, VVho still neglecteth all Deceits in Love. Sylvander. VVhy, doth she think me false? Phillis. Else all not true.
Sylvander. She taking off the race∣lt. he fals in a swonn. Then to my dying Soul, such, Gods, be you. Phillis. He faints! Sylvander! oh, Sylvander! hear, And let thy setting Soul once more appear. Leave not the world unto eternal Night Diana ap∣par. Of Love and Vertue; you only it inlight. Alas Diana! we have Sylvander slain. Diana. She knels by him.'Twere double Guilt these chast Tears to refrain. Phillis. Now you'l beleive, unless, as of us sed, You think he still dissembles being dead. Diana. My self, then thee, I far more wounded have; Thy dying proves to me  living grave. Which to adorn, I will imbalm thy Herse With these warm Tears, whil'st I thy Love reherse. Phillis. Diana re∣tire. He begins to  to himself. I feel him breath; you with your Grief retire; Concealed still should be a Virgin Fire. Sylvander. Where, or from whence, I know not: but still why Thus disturbed, I have fresh Memory; Why took ye not this Function of my Soul, Which serveth but my Misries to enrole? If I the common Instrument have left, Why not of what subsists by is beret▪
This is an Argument I still do live, But to a second Death my self to give. Phillis. His wild Aspect denotes distracted Sense, As on Himself he would act Violence. To herselfe. Sylvander. What bright shadow art thou? Phillis. He doth me take or his good Angel; such my selfe Ile make, To herself. To remove his Despaire:—your better Guide, To him. Who cometh for your Safety to provide; Ere three days, if you frustrate not the same, Your Mistris Favor shall return again. Exit. Sylvander. I thank thy Charity; Hope me quickned hath; He rises. Heav'n leads me now in a directer Path. Exit. Scene 2. Act 4. Alexis. WHy sad? thou grasp'st a full Felicity In her Favors, in her Society: Liberty thou hast on her to gaze, nd lose thy Senses in a lovers Maze; eginning where ending; ending where begun, o long, till like a Statue I become; ile she with blushing Smile awakes delight, And left o're suddenness should it affright,
Softly she whispers, yet fearing too loud, Her am'rous Accents 'twixt my lips doth shroud, VVith so long fixt self-ravishing Desire, As that great VVorkman did his work inspire; VVhilst I new Being take, my self again To lose my self cannot my self refraine. Such heav'nly Raptures onely are exprest VVhen Immortality doth the Soul invest, VVhich to make perfect, she oft playes my part, Exchanging Beings by our am'rous Art: No place is left for Wish, Hope is but vain, Yet all is fruitless wanting Celadons name. 'Twixt my divided self there is Debate; Celadon envieth Alexis State; Alexis fearth His; Nor can have bliss In any place where Celadon absent is. Desirable is the state of Celadon, But redoubtable if to her made known. Desire must cease where nought it higher rears, And where so wretched is no place for Fears: Yet still fresh Torments of them Both me press, The One would regain what he did possess; The Other strugleth what he hath to hold, And still denies the Other to unfold. But while my self thus doth my self revise, He lais imself to sleep. Nature's 'oft Slumbers would us reconcile. Astraea. I am become a Truant in my Love, So long dull Sleep the Object doth remove. 'Tis full an hour since Days alarum rung Her lofty Notes to greet th'approaching Sun. Yet why by them do I account my Time? It must be late, my Star hath left her Clime: But see, her watchful Thoughts are forc'd repay VVhat they took from the Night unto the Day.
Thou universal Minister of peace, T'exact these thy untimely Tributes cease; VVhisper unto her while she it enlight, The world is cover'd in a mourning Night; Yet least thou should'st astonish her with Fear, See that in my shape thou to her appear. VVhile I stoln Tributes of my Love exact, Kisses her. And yet but satisfie half the Contract; Since thou from me withhold'st the better Share, These little more then dreaming Shadows are: How my Tongue unawares leads me to truth! This, though awake, is but th' object of Ruth; VVhich rather then my Senses should delight, It should with Horror of my Guilt affrigh: Yet since to cherish Celadon Death denys, Ile worship here his sweet resembling Eyes. Why, oh why! doth now churlish Fate refuse Him thou present'st the Figure thus to use; Kisses her. These Kisses would not be less innocent, If on more Heat and Moisture they were spent; My better Self, my Pardon, I have broke She awake▪ Those balmy Slumbers, Love did it provoke. Alexis. Dear Astraea! how long here thus alone? Astraea. No longer then two Kisses I have stoln. Alexis. Love was consenting, who these Pleasures knew, Kisses her. But dreaming false, awaking to be true: Yet why so early?
Astraea. My unquiet Heart Admits no Truce foreseeing your depart To your devout Society, unless With you I may enjoy like Happiness, To which lend me your Aid. Alexis. For my Aid sue! Alas! 'tis that I must attend from you. Astraea. To you wherein can I be Profitable? Alexis. That we for ever be Inseparable. Astraea. 'Tis mine own Wish, which but on you depends. Alexis. In our Agreements both must have their Ends. Astraea. To mine ye holy Pow'rs Witnesses be, Which broke, punish with just Severity. Alexis. It is enough, yet one thing more remains. Astraea. Hasten it quickly, then our Souls enchains; Nothing if not impossible it be, Can hinder this our sweet Felicity.
Alexis. Then command me; but— She abpti stops, and seems to faint: I supported by Arr. Astraea. Your grief to asswage. Do you want nothing? Alexis. Nothing but Courage. Phillis, Lycidas, Diana. Phillis. 'Twas just; the Author of your Jealousie Hath from her own mouth giv'n the Remedie. Lycidas. Which gives a new Displeasure; my Remorse, Gi him he  to kis. That durst attempt our Loves so to divorce: Phillis. Which thus I cancel. Lycidas. With a firmer Tie, To Diana; To bind our Loves unto Eternity. Phillis. Next is your part. Diana. Which I shall expiate t first Encounter.
Phillis. Pray heav'n not too late. Astraea. From whence, my dear Compan'ions, pleas'd so well? Phillis. From discov'ring Treason by Miracle, As we to shun the rigour of Days pride Did us a well united shade provide; VVe heard to Tyrsis Leonice recite The foul Effects of her incensed Spite 'Gainst me, and Sylvander; VVho (as you know) Did by his Judgement her Love overthrow. Astraea. Diana was there. Phillis. Or else still (I fear) VVould last her Jealousie. Diana. VVhich now is clear. Alexis. Sylvander must have Right. Diana. I not deny, Preserving still a Virgins Modesty.
Sylvander. Appears in  discontente posture. Phillis. Sylvander, the Triumph at length is mine, And you your usurp'd Trophies must resign; VVhether by Force or by Subtility, Matters not which; glorious stil's Victory. Do you remember by fein'd Love to me You strove t'increase Licidas Jealousie. I now am quit, that Message which I brought VVas but the Stratagem wherewith I fought. Sylvander. What do you mean? Phillis. Those VVords I said to you, VVere things invented Diana ne're knew. Sylvander. No more my Foe, and justifie but this, VVho by you is subdued, crowned is. Phillis. For better proof, first I surrend my Theft, Flins him  bra Those Tears content me which it hath berest. Sylvander. To heav'n, to you, and to Diana give My humble thanks, I by your Favours live. Ktel, kisses the bracel, and puts it on his arm. Who was  distance be∣fore appro∣ches. Diana. VVhat part have I in your Discourse? I hear You named me.
Phillis. Not now such are, but were; As pleased me to represent you still, In Words or Actions both fram'd by my Will. Diana. I thank you, but I hope you have well chose, Since you so freely of them both dispose. Diana. As for mine own Advantage best might prove. Phillis. I thank you dear Companion for your Love. Sylvander. The Satisfaction's greater which I have, To Phillis. Then the Displeasure which before you gave; But know, th' unhappy Effects of this Strife Can never cease but with m' unhappy Life. Phillis. My Veng'ance never did so far pretend. Lycidas. Those Ils ar great which cease but with our End. Diana. 'Tis just, me thinks, that Phillis bear her share, Since she the Author was of his Dispaire. Lycidas. Unto the Cure at least.
Phillis. Provided still, That you t'effect the same will grant your Will. To Dia. Diana. Your Skill on others Help you do repose. Alexis. You can't deny what Char'ity doth propose. Diana. I mst submit. Phillis. The Cure Ile undertake, If he have courage his Ils known to make, Sylvander. Know then, by this your Wyle, o're charg'd with Grief, I to th' Oracle flew for my Relief, But in the Answer more cause of It found, With this irr'evocable Edict be'ing bound. Oracle. Thy present Ils e're long shall end;  take a little bilk and read. But Her thou would'st, Paris shall wed. To thy Desires do not pretend, Untill such time Sylvander's dead. Thou fair Disposer of my Soul, though Fate els  Dian. On this poor trunk seem thus to vent his Hate. Lest I you Others see, suffer me die, Then suffer still of Death's varietie: 'Tis but the hast'ning of mine own Desire, Which is accomplish'd when I do expire.
Phillis. Phillis ha¦ving paw'd a hil. No, no, this Oracle no such Sense bears, Each Oracle mysterious Senses wears; Diana, you'l not from your Promise flie? Astraea. VVe all become therein her Suerty. Phillis. First, that your present Ils e're long should end; On what is now past plainly did depend: Next is, but whom thou would'st, Paris shall wed▪ VVed is oft in a double sense used, The Priests office herein it doth include: Paris, whom you would, wed's to you as Druy'd. Sylvander. But where (your Desire's not pretend) 'tis sed, VVhat Remedy until Sylvander's dead. Phillis. O thou Ignorant in Love's Mysteries, VVho loves an Other, to Himself he dies. 'Tis your own Doctrine. Lycidas. Nothing is more clear. Alexis. As she with Heav'n Intelligencer were. Phillis. Diana's promise must the Rest fulfill.
Diana. Wherein? I see no need thereof. Phillis. Your will: Without you aid him this cannot be tre, That he should dye in Him, and live in You; Such Myst'ry in Love, as yet, was ne're known, This could in any wise subsist by One. Alexis. We are ingag'd. Astraea. And must not see you fail. Diana. What is requir'd of Both must needs prevail. Phillis. Since he unto Himself must cease to live, You must likewise your Self unto him give. Diana. It is too much. Sylvander. For my Worth. Phillis. But no less, From her own Self exacteth her Promess; Phillis tak Diana by th hand, and gives it Syl∣vand  kiss. Here, take her Hand, and thereon seal your Vows.
Sylvander. Thus guarded, Heav'n i vain you bend your brows. Scene 3. Act 4. Paris in epeards pprrel. Leonida, and Pars encounter. Leonida. VVHat M'etamorphis's this? Paris a Druy'd Become a Shepherd? Paris. Even such, well view'd, All pow'rful Love transform'd all pow'rful Iove, No wonder Mortals such Effects do prove: But could you view my Inside, you should see, Paris within yet far more chang'd to be. My thoughts do feel an universal Spring, And charm themselves with Harmony they sing: Each Fancy doth beget a various Flow'r, (As doth, in April, a distilling Show'r) T' enamel richly our Hymenal Wreath, Which shall with every wanton Zephire breath More fragrant odors, then th' Arabian hils, When each perfumed Lef with hony fils The no more busie Bee, who thus o'reflow With plenty of delight, becomes a Drone; While we therewith be'ing crown'd by Virgin hands, Unite our Souls in everlasting Bands. Leonida. Oh excellent! But whence all this? or why?
Paris. To welcome my fulfraught Felicity; Thou know'st my Love to Diana, and how My Father gladly did the same allow; My wingie Passions, greedy of their Prey, Have got the Mothers Will; Children obey: So said she, when my Love I did disclose; She had no Pow'r, Bellinda must dispose. Our Parents are agreed, the Contract's don, And nothing wanting but to morrows Sun. Who shall with such a Rev'rence be beheld, As other Lights, Himself he had excel'd. Leonida. Inure your Pass'ions to a milder Strain, You are not sure Diana's Will to gain. Paris. She is the Image of true Piety; Her Obedience to doubt were Her'esie: But here in vain my howers I do waste, To find her out I will renew my haste. My stay here was my Happ'iness to make known, Which was imperfect till to others shown. Exit. Leonida. 'Tis very suddain, this Report be'ing true, To Sylvander, pray Heav'n, no Ill ensue. Alexis ap∣pears. Now fair disguised Druy'd, what monstrous Race Must we expect of this Cloud you imbrace? Thrice hath the Moon fil'd full her horned Crest: And thrice again her Orbs she hath deprest, Since you this Habit took, and yet I see Of this our Purpose no Fertility,
Unless you do delight your selft'inflict, (As did the Gods their Host, they did convict) Plac'd in happiness to the very Lip, Yet not suffer your thirsty Soul to sip. Alexis. Here cause is of your Pitty. Leonida. Or my Blame, That you so often have abus'd the same; Frustrating It with your own self-Neglect. Alexis. Blame rather my Love's too severe Respect. Leonida. Respect, to what? Alexis. To what I do obey. Leonida. Which her Repentance cancels ev'ry day; Those Tributes of her Love she pays to thee, Are Sacrifices to thy Memory, Unto her dead; not by hers, but thy Guilt Art thou become so, since so it thou wilt: Nor do I think she would thee e're forgive, Knew she thou from her hold'st whom thou could'st give: How oft thee in her am'rous Arms inchain'd, Hath she thee in her stifled Sighings nam'd. Wishing thee Such, yet jealous of each Ear, Scatter'd the Motions of her modest Fear Into her Cheeks, which there such Thoughts betray'd, As such, she would thou wert, she were afraid.
Alexis. This be'ing granted, why doth she not revoke Her own Sentence, and ease me of my Yoke? Leonida. She knows not that you are, or if she did, Not knowing where you are, why it forbid? Advise betimes, you long not conceal'd can, A womans Habit long not hides a Man: Besides, if such discov'ry you befal, To Adamas 'twill be a reproach, to All. Alexis. Alas! I often it attempted have, But want of Courage oft Repulses gave. Leonida. See, see, is this an Object to affright?Astrea ap∣pears. It rather is an Object to invite; Still so intentive on your am'rous Chase, Astrea a∣bds Alex∣is and  her. I know you Celadon rather had imbrace Then this fair Druy'd; Nay, let not his fair Name Dye those fair Roses in a deeper Stain, Unless it be it silently t'avow, That is no Crime to which the Gods do bow. Astraea. Fair Nymph, I know not why I should aver Before Alexis Love I His prefer. Leonida. In vain you do from me your Passions hide, I have to trace them a more subtile Guide Then you yet known of, who hath to me shown Each passage of your Loves to your selvés known:
For proof whereof, the Cause of his late Death Was not, as you report; your Aid, but Breath. Astraea. I am amaz'd with wonder; but whereby Comes this to your Knowledge? Leonida. Ile satisfie Your Thoughts in that, provided you conceal, As religi'ous Secrets, what I reveal. Astraea. I shall. Leonida. My Uncle hath a secret Art, Which he to me not long since did impart; By which, of what is, was, or yet shall be. We have true Knowledge: this said Mysterie Inlightned me in what I you disclos'd, And more had said, had you it not oppos'd. Astraea. It were a second Inj'ury to his Love, Should I deny that I such Passion prove; Nor shall ought I can hear of him offend, Unless it be the Subject of his End. Leonida. If you him love, you would him wish to see. Astraea. Beyond imaginary Felicity.
Leonida. Then know, the Power of my Art Ile try, Provided you your Succor no deny. Astraea. I am afraid we shall disturb the Peace Of his eternal Rest. Leonida. Those your Fears cease. Astraea. Nor shall I Courage have to see the Ayre With horror maskt, while you your Charms prepare. Leonida. Nothing less, th' Ayre shall be more calm, more bright, And smile on each thing with more fresh delight. Each Tree, and Flower, reassume their Spring, Each eary Chorister more cleerly sing. Astraea. do assent. Leonida. Then you must first untie What your Command impos'd; That to your eye He may appear. Astraea. If my Love still have force o reunite, as it had to divorce; eladon, I command thee to appear, nd leave those Bonds of thy respectful Fear.
Leonida. Leonida with a book of Chara∣cters in one hand, and a bough in the other, af∣ter many tur∣nings, kneels and invokes. Enough. You happy Spirits, who still prove The everflourishing delights of Love; Afford us One from your Society, We will rear Altars to your Diety. There he is, do you not him see? Astraea. Not I. Leonida. Your Intents wanting to his Liberty, Although your Words seem essent'al to be. Astraea. They both are truly present. Alexis. So is he; Alexis fals n his knee and imbraces Astraea's. Recieve thy Cel'adon, whom the milder Wave, Least it should quench his Flame, deny'd a Grave. Astraea. Why do you mock me? sweet Alexis rise. Alexis. Alexis I am not, but in Disguise; See here the spoiles unwittingly I forc'd She shews her from her breast fir a ribbon, then a picture. From thy fair self, when from't I was divorc'd; Or if thy Celadon thou knowest not, See if thine own Face thou hast not forgot. Astraea. Ah cruel wretch! thy Impr'dence hath betray'd, With thy false Charms, the Modesty of a Maid:
Thou Impudent Attempter 'gainst my Fame, How dar'st thou to thy Treach'eries feal thy Name? Or before me thy self thus represent, Whose knowledge all my life I must repent: Diss'yal Deceiver! haste thee from mine Eye Unto thy Ruine, hence, away and dye; Since thou had'st Courage to incur my Hate, Take it again the Same to expiate. Alexis. Still honour'd Mistris, I ne'e did attend, He holds her who sirng∣les to be gone. To what you me reproach, a fairer End; Yet since you do Deaths Sentence me pronounce, Tell me what kind of Death you do denounce. She flings from him, whom Leo, id runs af∣ter. Astraea. Such as thou wilt, so thou maist cease to be. But seeing Celadon flie another way, she pursues him with distraction, Leonida. Astraea, Celadon, why thus disagree. Scene 4. Act 4. Lycidas, Phillis, Diana. Phillis en∣counters them in Lycidas. SEE whom we seek? Phillis. Lycidas, my hasty fear Must fill with Wonder thy astnish't Ear, And yours Diana; Celadon yet lives, But whom Heav'n did, Astraea not forgives;
Celadon did, in Alexis disguise, Both him present, and withhold from our eyes, VVhich known t' Astraea, her offended Shame, That she too lavishly had fed her flame On this false Object, who from her again As lavishly had still r'exact the same: Hath rashly him pronounc'd a second Doom, Thus of our Joys, Grief must possess the room. But he by none to be resisted, fled Into the Woods: And as soon lives, is dead, Unless your hasty search do him prevent, But my Relation pretious Time hath spent. Lycidas. So strange Amazement hath my sense bereav'd, That I can scarce believe I'm not deceiv'd. Diana. Nor I. Lycidas. Sure Nature did herself bely, To such Beauty gave no Humanity. Dina. 'Tis very strange. Lycidas. Prodigious Amity That works th' Effects of stern Hostility. Phillis. Her now collected Sense the same repents, And what she did desire, done, she laments, Stay not, in her reviles, your search.
Lycidas. Exit. I flie. Phillis. VVith your leave; her to comfort. To Diana. Exit. Diana. I to die. Fond Astraea! thus to build thy Mishap On Beauties Fortune showred in thy lap, Thou art thy self unto thy self ill Fate, Too hasty Ils thus to anticipate; And why thus doth thy Happiness distaste? Because, before thou would'st, thou happy wast. Alas! had Fate to me been half so kind, I had not, sure, as thou, been half so blind: VVhat lessens thine, me double Grief doth frame, In that the author I must never blame. My Mother 'tis; my Mother who me bred, By whom I am to Execution led▪ VVhose former Pie'ty nothing doth avail, If on pretended piety sh' assail My ruin; must from my Obedience rise, To fill, and justifie her Sacrifice; But she, alas, claims Natures laws her due, As if 'gainst her Laws, what she fram'd destrue, 'Tis none of hers; abandon'd hers we have, Who sweetens Evils, even those she gave VVere but to salve those that our selves we give, VVhil'st we more careless of our selves here live. Blind Customes (from blind opinion sprung) They are, observed because once begun. What more njust 'gainst Nature or all Right, Thus wilfully t'extinguish eithers Light,
Those, One observes with so much Piety, Another thinks offends his Deity; If our mild mother-Nature's laws they were, All would agree in what they were to bear. The gentle Dove elects her loved Mate, Without Controul, or Envy, or Debate: Which from a secret Sympathy doth spring, At whose approach Love Harmony doth sing, Without Discourse, Direction or their Will; B'instinctive Motives, they their Loves fulfill: Happy Couples, thus joyn'd, happy forlorn, Who may alone each others Losses mourn! Sylvander appears in a discontented posture. He not seem∣ing to look up, she goes to him and joggs him. But while in Plaints Grief would it self subdue, The Object, see, doth it again renew. Sylvander, Sylvander, must Diana be Thy oft Invoker, yet thou her not see? Sylvander. He starts as amid Ha! who call'd? I heard Diana nam'd, It is her self, and by her self am blam'd. Pardon thou sweet Attracter of my Soul, Kneels and rises. My too wild Thoughts labor'd but to inroul My own Losses, with such intentive Care; Unhappy Stewards, as thy Treasures were. But thou in this fair Volume hast laid ope Briefer Accompts of my dispensed Hope: Diana is Anothers, the whole Sum Not able to discharge, I'm quite undone. Diana. I am thy equal Partner; one poor Bark Bore both our Fortunes fired by one Spark. Sylvander. Alas, it was with such Abundance fraught, I still misoubted it would ne're be brought
To Harbor, Heaven doubting our Content Should It forget, thus did our Loves prevent; Nor was it just that Diana should be Link'd to a Vagabond in her Amity. Go give to Paris happier Birth, and Wealth, What would have been to me but counted Stealth. Diana. Why wrongs Sylvander his Diana's Choice, Staining thy self with thy distempered Voice? Though thou a Stranger be, poor and unknown, Yet by thy richer Virtue 'tis well shown, Thy Stock could not be mean; Nor in my Eyes, Can any Riches equal thy Loves prise? Sylvander. Be merciful, and cherish not my lame, It thus to fan, thou do'st 'inflame the same; Tell me thou do'st me hate, invent some Spite, With less Displeasure I may leave the Light. Diana. And leave me charg'd, with a distastful Crime Would never be wip'd out with any Time; Nor must you reassume the right you gave To your disposure; which I only have; By force whereof, I charge you not exact Of your own self any unlawful Act Against thy self; Do'st thou believe my Love Is yet so faint, it gladly would not prove, Ev'n what thou now against thy self dost threat, I would it often on my self repeat, Until this Trunk, Sacrifices became Num'rously infinite, as our fair Loves flame, But that those Pow'rs divine who have us plac' In these fair Holds, forbid to have them rac'd
By us, to whose Charge they did them commit, Which Office we, till cal'd, must not remit. Sylvander. Such are the Summons, th' Oracles Decree, VVhich must by Mortal not rejected be. Sylvander, his desires must not peetend, Until the same Sylvander have an End: VVhy should we struggle with their immov'd Will. To them be pious, grant I may it fulfil; Else kind to me, withhold not my Desire, Accomplish it; but bid me to expire. Diana. No more with these Fears my frail thoughts distract, Till I am Others, see thou it protract; Mean while, take this assurance which I give, Then not as thine, rather I had not live: She gives him her hand to kiss. Farewel, I fear my Mothers sad Surprise. Sylvander. Nought fear I worse, then parting from those Eyes.
Scene 1. Act 5. Alexis. LOnely Dsert! affrighting Solitude! Such winding Path like Error hath indu'd My wilder Thoughts; whose Turnings as thine might Lead to the entrals of eternal Night; How you become my Fortunes thus o' regrown With Time, and Neglect, and thus still alone: No rude Hand comes to fell your high rais'd Crown, To lop your Branches, or your Trunks cut down, Unless some Tempest do a Member tear; Yet none, but such, as long corrupted were, Which like a faithful Surgeon takes away, Let it the Whole to ruin should betray; While you close rank't in your united Band, His rude Incounter securely withstand. Alas, my scatter'd Thoughts disbanded are, And wage against themselves a civil War, In their divided discord lying waste, What should, like thine, a mournful Peace have grac't; The Cause I would relate; But that, I fear, It would to you it self so much endear; In tears you would your fertile Juyce dispend, So with your fragrant Burthens you would end Continual Food her Altars to supply, Whose acceptable Sacrifice, I dye.
Ne're Victim yet immolish't twice became, 'Tis only I must suffer twice the same; And since my Love all others doth exceed, 'Tis fit more often I for it should bleed: Nor yet Astraea, shall less cruel Fate, As once before, again renew thy Hate. Not thy Sentence to shun, I yet do live, But greater glory I the same may give; My better Genius prompts me to an Act Doth hitherto mine own sought End protract, Wherein, as Authors, those fair Eys shall be True VVitness to true Loves Fidelity; I hear the Boughs rustle; my self Ile hide, Retires. Lest to prevent me Fate some hither guide. Sylvander. Wy 'gainst the Heav'ns irrevocable Decree Yet struggles ths my weak Humanity? If it not pow'r have these twins to divorce, Yet sure Diana's Sentence is of force. I charge thee, said she, till I others be, Against thy self act no Hostility; I am from that Protraction now dismist, And from the Execution long will not desist, As curious Fear me to you Valley led, I met a Swain, whose care-discharged head Rung on his Oaten Reed such merry Notes, As Birds when Emulation strains their throats. His nimble Feet did equal Measure beat, To what his nimbler Fingers did repeat; I him approacht, and of him sought to know Why he in Mirth did so much overflow? Who said, our Shepherds Glory's wed to day, And 'tis our universal Holiday. A secret Fear seis'd my distracted Sense Presaging strait without Intelligence
That it Diana was; which true I found, VVhen of his Mirth he had disclos'd the Ground. Cruel Diana! did thy command intend To witness this should be deferr'd my End? But 'tis no Time for Plaints; both Heav'n and thee Do glut your selves with your slow Cruelty; Yet stay! what shall the welcome Agent be? Or Sword, or Floud? in neither's Certainty; Ile to you Heav'n neighb'ring Mountains summit, And where he doh his head out hanging jet, I will precipitate my self to Dust, And make my hasty Execution just; He, that pretends to such Divinitie, Must fall like him, who to the Heav'ns would flie. Alexis dis∣covers her self, and holds him. Alexis. Stay thy rash Execution yet a while; Of thy charitable Office, not beguile (In Mis'ry) thy Companion. Sylvander. Celadon! For such, disguis'd, thou we't to me made known. Alexis. And such I am. Sylvander. Wherein can I thee aid? Who to my own Misfortunes am betray'd? Alexis. If that my own Griefs had left any room For an Increase, they greater would become; Let thy Favor give to my Grave a Peace, And from me bid m'incensed Brother cease
His renew'd Enmity t' Astraea's Race, Whose Command, dying, tell her I imbrace; And will revive to all Posterity The forbid Fountain of Loves Verity With my own Death, wherein she plain shall see, My Love most priz'd by that Divinity. Sylvander. I envy this thy Glory, and do blame My self, I thought not to attempt the same. Like Charity I must request of you, That which you sought of me, to me now shew; Admit me Partner to your Enterprise, From you the Glory only shall arise. Alexis. Preserve thy Vertue to a greater End, It may a Nation, nay a World defend. Sylvander. I must not leave you. Alexis. They  Nor must be deny'd, VVith thee 'tis Glory Glory to divide. Scene 2. Act 5. Astraea, Diana. Astraea. WHile yet Death's elder brother doth exact His welcome Tributes; with Death we contract,
Hid with the Vale of yet unmasked Night, From all Attachments we secure our Flight. Yet by fair Cynthia's glim'ring light we see, I judge this our intended Path should be. Diana. How hardy Love the frailty doth subdue Of our weak Sex? No Fear doth us pursue, Th' horror of Night, unguarded and alone Dismaies us not, because no Evil known. Astraea. Such are thy happy Suff'rings; but my Guilt Is onely clear'd, when for't my Bloud is spilt: Thou art not faulty, cause anothers Force, Not thine, as mine, wrought thy fair Loves Divorce. 'Tis just for it that I should onely die. Diana. Envy me not in Death Society; Thine own Words plead thy Life, all do agree, That Victyms spotless, innocent should be. Astraea. And such shall make me these repentant Floods. She seems to weep. Desist to dye; needless are both our Bloods; One onely of our Sex must satisfie Of true Loves Fountain the Divinity; Whose VVisdome will provide a Lover fit For the Releasment worthy to submit. Diana. With your Pardon, why should it not be I? My Heart tels me it feels an Amity, s such as is requir'd; a faithful pair Of te most perfect Lovers ever were,
VVhose only Deaths the secret Charm unties. Astraea. Disputes are vain to make known Amities. Fair Diana, the Gods betwixt us judge, Who will I hope preserve thee. Diana. Do not grudg Me thy fair Glory thus but to partake. Astraea. Love in his Glory will no Rival make. Our diff'rence ends! see, see, the new born day, The foun∣tains disco∣vered, they approach, & Astraea first kneels. The Fountains figure to us doth display: All pow'rful Love, who Nature do'st preserve, But me destroy'st; unband thee and observe, As my pure Love is perfect in thine Eyes, Receive me worthy for thy Sacrifice, T'appease thine Ire; this Fountain to set free, And render Lovers thy hid Mysterie. Diana. She kneels. Thou divine pow'r of Love, I need not tell My Love is perfect, for thou know'st it well. Command thy Lions insensible to be To fair Astraea, spare her sweet Beauty, Else you destroy the Power you have got, Amongst Mortals your Name will be forgot; Your Temples rac't, your Tapers no more shine, Your Altars smoke, nor you no more divine. Accept my Death, your Anger to asswage, I yield my Corps to satisfie their Rage.
Astraea. Dear Diana, wrong not your self and me, 'Tis ev'n herein your own preheminency That pleads your preservation, if the Gods Be just, and can distinguish Beauties odds; Therefore I do again your Pow'rs implore, Preserve her, and preserve your Treasures store. She kneels a∣gain. Diana would kneel, but is withheld by, Astraea. They im∣brace one a∣nother, and fall one  the  side of the foun∣tain, the o∣ther on the other, fa asleep. No more; I do conjure thee by our Love, 'Gainst my Desire, and Peace, the Gods not move. Alexis, Sylvander. Alexis. Each Mountains pride with new gilt Crown appears, And fair Aurora hath dry'd up her Tears; Let us renew our Speed; I fear some sent In search of us, should our Design prevent. Ha! Astraea! Sylvander. They draw nigh the fountain, and discover A∣strea and Di∣. Good Gods! Diana see. Alexis. Or doth Heav'n mock our weak Humanity? If she, you Gods, why grant you such Repose To her unjustly caus'd me mine to lose? Sylvander. What hath ye hither brought, ye beaut'ous Pair? Was it again our Lives to reinsnare? They are become your Triumphs and your Spoils. Cease yet again thus to renew their Broils.
Alexis. Kneels. You Soul-charming Power! unclose her Eye, Not to appease, but see her Cruelty. You do withhold an Object more would please, Then doth this your untimely flatt'ring Ease: But you know better it doth her delight, Thus to deprive me of her loved Sight; In vain I you implore; Astraea hath shown Div'nities now insensible are grown. Sylvander. Thou fair Inchainer of my Soul, receive Kisses Diana. My last Farewel; And do not me bereave Thy blest Mem'ry; VVhich Favor if thou give, I shall not dye, but in thee still shall live, Kisses her hand. Fil'd with those Joys, which Mortals do recite, When to the Gods they shall themseves unite. Alexis. Kisses Astrea. The like Farewel to thee, thou glorious Pride Of her that fram'd thee, now we must divide. But to what Heav'n so ever I do go, Depriv'd of thee, I shall not think it so. Ile there attend thee like a mournful Dove, Kisses her hand. Perhaps when dead, thou wilt approve my Love; Why tempt we so our Frailty? thus to greet, Approaching Death makes Heaven with Hell to meet. Sylvander. They both rise. Yet be perswaded gentle Friend to live, She that was once offended may forgive; Can any think, who sees that heav'nly Face, Anger there moves a Circulary Race.
Alexis. A greedy Partner thus to dispossess Him that did give thee to thy Share Access. My jealous Love would me provoke to chide▪ They ∣brace. He kneels  the fountai. But that we must Unite e're we divide, You Pow'r inclin'd to Pitty, who inspires This only Cure to unquiet Desires, Least that my Grief, as your Divinity; Both immortal, and infinite should be, Receive this Body for your Sacrifice, My Soul too you should have, but that her Eye With sacred Charms so captive it retains, (Though cruel she) It other Bonds disdains, Yet let my Death, to satisfie her Crime Against my Love, be to you a Victyme. Let the Subject of our unhappy Strife Be subject to prolong her Peace and Life. Sylvander. Kneels to  fountain. Thou cruel Pow'r, whose irrevocable Law, My Soul through all those Ils could hap, didst draw. He rises. See your Sentence fulfill'd, and see that you, As in the Evil, in the Good be true. Alexis. I fear these Beasts should forth their Limits stray, And hurt these fair Ones. Sylvander. Let's bear them away. Alexis. The eager Beasts approach. Sylvander. Let's them defend.
Alexis. Alexis ha∣stily enters, Sylvander follows and  down as the entry. Rather secure them avancing our End. Phillis, Adamas, Bellinda, Paris, Lycidas, Hylas, Stella, Leonida. Phillis. Undoubtedly th'are there, the Shepherd said He saw them both asleep, but be'ing afraid, Durst not approach, the Lions being nigh Unto the same place, whereon both did lie. Adamas. 'Tis very strange! from thence we are not far. Phillis. Approach∣ing, She spice them. Whereof Each one may be Discoverer. Bellinda. The compa∣ny afar off seem distra∣cted with wonder. Bllinda would run to her daughter, but i withhold by Adamas. Oh my Shame I thus unto the world made known, And in thy Disobedience onely shown. Adamas. Stop your rash Speed, you must approach no nye'r, We must invent some Means them to retire. Paris. Betwixt my Wonder, Sorrow and my Love, I strange Distractions in my self do prove. Lycidas. But see, me thinks i'th Fountain doth appear, As if two other Persons yet there were,
Phillis. By their Habits they should your Brother be, And Sylvander. Lycidas. VVould Heav'n I could him see! Adamas. How strangly hath the Day forsook his Light, Our scarce born Noon is ev'n become our Night!After thun∣der & light∣ning, a fla∣ming Cupid, on a Porphir Pyramid, ap∣pears as 'twere in the mid'st of the fountain. They fall on their knees; after some intermission the Oracle is delivered. See, how contracted Clouds do mask the Skie, Almost forbidding their Discovery. Oracle. Let this your Wonder cease, Your Murmurs not increase Against my Miracles: Those Corps convey away; And next ensuing day, Consult my Oracles. Cupid v. nisherb; they approach the fountain, and find the bo∣dies as dead, and without blemish, Li∣ons convert∣ed to marble. Adamas. Ha! they are unblemish't. Lycidas. And yet are dead. Phillis. Without a Bruise. Paris. Or any Bloud being shed. Adamas. These Lions which so fearful did appear, To coldest marble now converted are. Bellinda. Of Diana. Thy just Punishment, but my double wrong.
Lycidas. Too soon I find, what I have sought too long. Paris. Oh my afflicted Soul! Phillis. Oh cruel death! Adamas. Heav'n hath you charg'd to cease your murm'ring breath. Hylas. They carry forth the corps. See now the wise Effects of constant love, Which in their ends such Tragedies still prove. Scene 3. Act 5. Leonice. VVHat I have often heard, now true I see; The Wise are to themselves their Destiny. The favourable Gods do still assist Those that untir'd with Industry persist: How long them unrelenting I assail'd With Tears, Vows, Prayers, and yet herein fail'd Of what my Subtilty hath brought to pass. My Joy is doubled, I the Author was▪ Who secretly, and in the dead of Night This Desart did invade; what could affright Being arm'd with Love, and my Tyrsis to find, Whose Plaints became my Guides; till then ne'er kind, Unseen at Distance following to his Cave, VVhich when securest sleep had made his Grave, I enter'd, him with fain'd Voice to awake, Reciting oft Tyrsis, Tyrsis, then spake
These hollow Accents, I the shadow am Of her thou vainly lovest, and now came But to conjure thee to yield up my Right To Leonice; cease unto her thy Spight: Heav'n wils it so, and Cleon it commands, VVho shall delight in your united Bands. VVhen strait he it confirming with a Grone, I vanished, and left him there alone; But lest he should believe it but Conceit VVrought on his Fancy, again my Deceit Attempts a second Proof: But see th' effect, VVhich in my Search his wandring steps direct; Yet what with Crast I sought, with Crast Ile shun, She retires on one side, Tyrsis enters. Lest I should mar what is so well begun. Tyrsis. Thou blessed Shadow, whom I yet adore, Why do'st thou thus command me to restore Thy Right unto Another? can it be That thou art tyr'd with Importunity Of Love? or do'st my Sighs and Tears disdain, As too mean Offrings, empty, fruitless, vaine? Alas! though these effects oft fail, and die, The cause endureth to Eternity: My love which now an unknown Trial proves, Since to destroy it self thy Will it moves, Tempt yet the same to possibility, Inflict some yet unheard of Cruelty: (If any yet is left, I did not trie) And I shall count it Guilt thee to deny: VVhich now is such, thee even to obey, Since thou command'st my Love, my Love betray. Who shall dispense those holy Vows did tie Our sympathising Souls in Harmony? Ev'n she whose Power only did them frame, Her Power only must dissolve the same.
If but t'unloose my Love she did intend, Why since hers could not, seeks she not my End? Perhaps, when Souls cast off this Earth, delight T'in infinite objects their loves to unite: No Jealousie can touch their pure Essence, Which only but the Object is of Sense: All all possess in so equal degree, Ev'n 'twixt themselves Distinction cannot be. Why then defer I her to satisfie? He discovers Leonice. Propitious Heav'n! see that Divinity, VVho my Commander was, is now my Guide. She seems to ie, he takes hold on her and kneels.Leonice! ev'n she that did us divide, Is now become the means us to unite. If for my Punishment your exchang'd Spite, Then mine more just, have not o'rethrown your Love. Leonice. VVhat Miracle is this? you Gods above Mock not our Frailty; if this Tyrsis be, What I of him sought, why seeks he now of me? Or is it but his shadow you have tane, T'increase my Sorrow, and reproach my Shame? Tyrsis. 'Tis that Tyrsis, who for Cleons Respect, Did long so much thy injur'd Love neglect; But be'ing by her discharged from my vow, No other Object can my Love allow. Then thy fair self; let no Reproach reveal He kisses her hand. My Shame; on this true Penitence I seale. Leonice. This doth confirm that you are truly he; But your intention yet I cannot see.
Tyrsis. Ever to be yours, if my former Hate My true Love and Remorse may expiate. Leonice. How shall either be known? Tyrsis. Heav'n's holy Bands Shall both confirm, joyning both Hearts and Hands. Scene. 4. Act. 5. Stella, Hylas. Stella. YOur pleasant Humor you have left, I find; If not to me, be to your self more kind: Shake Dulness off; can his own Enemies Death Thus droopingly stop merry Hylas breath? Hylas. It was from his my Harmony did spring, And now is ended where it did begin; Opposites support each other; one Wit Enter Phillis with a mer∣ry counte∣nance smilng on Hylas. Begets Another, and subsists by It. How, Phillis! doth that Countenance become These Times? Or hath thy Inmate left his room? In your Sex ne're Inhabitant was Sorrow, For still 'tis here to day and gone to morrow. Phillis. Hylas! I'de persecute thee thus an Age, And change thy wonted Mirth into a Rage,
Leonice and Tyrsis listen at distance to their dis∣course. Could I my Joy within it self contain; Know then, whom thou thought'st were, are now not slain: Hylas. Hah! Phillis. Astraea, Diana thou shalt see, VVith Celadon and Sylvander living be. Hylas. By what strange Miracle? Phillis. It seems the force Of Magick Charms were here, not to divorce The Soul and Body, as thought, but t'invade The depriv'd Senses with Death's seeming shade, A breathless Slumber, which now having end, New life to us in their revivings send. Hylas. I do begin m' Heresie to forsake, But such another will a Convert make. Leonice. Leonice and Tyrsis ener. By such Another, such you Other see. Phillis me pardon your Loves Jealousie. Tyrsis. And let the Innocent your Grace partake. Phillis. Ye both are such, if such I both can make. Hylas. I'm thunder-strucken! how, joyn quick and dead? I will believe now any thing can be sed. Leonice. We did partake your Sorrows when t'us shown,
Which by your Joy had death so soon as known. Tyrsis. To perfect which, let us them haste to see, Phillis. To that your eys may present witness be. The whole troop of Shepherds enter in solemn manner, with great silence; which at distance making a stand, after a while Adamas alone ap∣proacheth the Temple, and kneeleth: which done, all the rest do the like at that distance they were at. Adamas. Ador'd Divinity, fair Venus son, Who Agent art of all that e're begun, Foe to Confusion; first of Heav'nly race; As thou did'st Chaos, so vouchsafe thy Grace Our amaz'd Doubts to order and enlight. We come not Cur'osity to delight, But thy prescribed Ord'nance to obey, In consulting thy Oracle this day. Pronounce thou God in favour of our Groves, VVhat Destiny thou dost disign their loves. Th' object of our Demands is to please thee; A aming Cupid ap∣pears in the mid'st of the fountain   Porphis pedestal. Let our Content thy Answers Subject be. Oacle. Since that faithful Lover requir'd, Alexis, is to all expir'd, Celadon receive thy happy Choice, Astraea thee Heav'n doth present, The price of thy long Discontent, To which let none oppose his voice. Celadon. My humble thanks, just Love, for this thy Grace; Heavante and again kneels in Shepherds habit. Thy Ordinances still I will imbrace
Above all Deities: To thee each day I will fresh Tributes of Devotion pay; In stead of Sighs and Tears, I will renew The purest Flames thy Altar ever knew, Which shall like Vestal's fier never dye, Replenish't still by her Sun-staining Eye; And since thou hast in Love giv'n me the Prize, I will for ever be thy Sacrifice. Adamas. Celadon ri∣sing, retires to the rest of the compa∣ny: all con∣tinue kneel∣ing. Great God, propitious still, once more disclose, How of Sylvander doth your VVill dispose. Oracle. Sylvander must no longer live. To Paris I Diana give, And Adamas my just Command Bids that he die by thine own Hand. Sylvander. Cupid va∣nisheth. Sylvander hastily runs and casts himself on his knees be∣fore the Al∣tar, while all the rest rise. Thou ireful God, who become envi'us art Of my Fdelity; glut thee with a Heart Inshrines a Beauty would thee dispossess Of thy usurped Pow'r, did'st not supress By unjust Force her humble Devotairs, Winding them thus in these thy cruel Snares; Yet this I have to thank thee for, that I He rises. Shall have the Glory thus for her to die. Diana. You cruel Gods, mix Mercy with your Spight, Both Lives and Loves see that you disunite. Paris. My Soul doth grieve it cannot happy be Without this his preceding Misery. Celadon. My Joy's imperfect.
Lycidas. Alas poor Lover! He hath try'd one Death, now must try 'nother. Adamas. The Gods more cruel are! who me to live Do suffer yet, then that they Death thee give; Yet must our Piety obey their Will. Prepare you strait their Sentence to fulfill. Sylvander. He approa∣cheth to Di∣ana, kneels and kisses her hand still holding it. First then to thee fair Author of this Strife, Not to the Gods, I offer up my Life; They it compell'd, but thou it willing hast, With more Piety, since heav'n's in thee plac't. Diana. I will precede thee in thy hasty Flight, She faints, and is sup∣ported by her mother. Astrea, and Phillis. And vail my Soul in ever mournful Night. Sylvander. Let nought disturb your Joys, to all Adue, Now in my bloud your zealous Sword imbrue. Adamas. An Officer stands ready with a baa. Sylvander kneels. First to observe our wonted Ceremony, With Victims bloud the Altar sprinkled see, Truss up your Sleeve, and then extend your Arm. That wel-known Mark my feeble Senses charm; Here he stops, and after some a∣mazement, fals on his neck; Syl∣vander still kneeling. He rises▪ shews the company his arm. My Son! Paris my Son! Gods cannot lie, For by my hand doth now Sylvander die: Let Wonder cease; see, see, a Branch! see here, Of that fresh Tree, we welcome the new Year! This confirms thou art mine, whom Soldiers Rage In unjust War made innocent Pillage: Paris, but for thy sake, is Paris nam'd; Thou art my Son▪ him only such I fram
To salve my Sorrow with a false relief; Turns to Paris. Still thou art such in Love; forsake thy Grief. I will unite thy Alliance to my bloud. She pawses, while he gives Paris hand to her. Here Niece to thee. Leonida. You must not be withstood. Adamas. With half my Wealth; nor is he of Stock mean, As I suppose; I found him nigh yon Stream; A child of equal Age and Fate to mine Whom I had lost, and ev'n about that time. About his neck did hang in Chain of gold A rich Jewel did this Inscription fold, Born of a Lion; Which he still doth wear They look on it. Bel∣linda know∣ing it fals upon his neck. As to all Eys it plainly may appear. Bellinda. My son Ergaste! My too long lost Son! Not of a Lion born, but of Alion. Astraea. Fie, Diana! lift up thine Eys, see, see, Sylvander shall again thine living be. Diana. Sighing a∣wakes as out of a dream. Why do you thus my dying soul distract. Bellinda. Taking Syl∣vander and joyning his hand with Diana's. I will it cure with this welcome Contract. Diana. Sylvander presenting himself on his knees is by Adamas separated. They kneel. Adamas takes him by the hand, & again leads him to the Altar, with a silent astonishment of all the troop, expecting some new trouble. If yet I dream, then let me never wake, Lest these unexprest Joys I should forsake. Sylvander. They are Essential. Adamas. Yet a while forbear;
Once more before the Gods you must appear. You holy Pow'rs, doth this you satisfie, That thus Sylvander doth in Paris die? If not, although it seal'd be with mine own, Paris with Sylvander shall be o'rethrown. A still kind of musick is heard with great Reve∣rence, and once more Cupid appears in white; In either hand a Garland of Myrrh, which he cast∣eth to Celadon and Sylvander, at which he va∣nisheth. Then is heard this Song. SONG. 'TIs enough, Mortals, dry up your Tears; The smiling God is satisfi'd, Whose Cunning now may be descri'd, Inciting so oft succeeding fears; It was but to prepare your heightned Appetites More eagerly to feast on plentiful Delights. Each now a double Tribute exact, Of your Flames, which so purely burn, Since what ye take, ye do return, Though extort, you justifie the Fact. Rifle those uncoucht Treasures then, make them your spoils, A Harmony springeth from Lovers civil broils. At which many little Cupidons appear joyning their Voices, and casting Garlands of Myrrh to the whole Troop. Adamas. Thus Heav'n and I you joyn. Adamas takes Silva. and gives him to Dia∣na. Hylas. More wonders still!Hylas ex∣tends his hand to Stella. Which I mean with a greater to fulfill;
Stella, thy hand; no longer Mistris now, The whole  smile to see Hyla rious. That Name Ile cancell with another vow. Phillis. Myraculous! Adamas. Now Celadon approve The fountains Force. Celadon. 'Twere Injury to Love. Adamas. Astraea, your Command. Astraea. 'Twere Jealousie Of Both our loves, not suffer both to try. Adamas. Celadon first enters, they all follow. A perfect Myrrour of each perfect Mind, Which shall a Heav'n in their nigh Unions find, By mine own Hands; But first your sports prepare To greet our Princes, Galataea fair; I at my house do Her expect to Night; Let each Invention spring a new Delight. Scene 5. Act 5. Lindamor, Galataea, Silva, Ligdamon. Lindamor. WHat strange Disorder we in each part find! Galataea. As if the world were forsook of Mankind. Ligdamon. With one Consent all from themselves are fled.
Lindamor. Nor hath the chasing of a Foe this bred, Unless the feavor of distemp'red Broils Hath made him to forget his better Spoils. Silva. The wandring flocks do stray without their Guides. Lindamor. Some Panick Terror thus their Fear derides. Galataea. Here's one will clear our Doubts; Adamas, why Adamas enters, kneels and kisses her hand. Thus all hid, lost, or dead? Adamas. Madam! that I Must leave our Lovers to relate; But know, Fair Princess, thus our Joys do overflow. Galataea. VVe have in part had thereof a Report, VVhich is one Cause why hither we resort. Adamas. Madam, your Vassal still receives from you Additions of Honor; One more endew My zealous Duty, your Aventure show. Galataea. 'Tis crowned in Polemas overthrow, By this blest Hand, with which I come to tie, Takes Linda∣mor by the hand. In Hymens rights, our purest Amity. Adamas. My feeble Sense, like an o'refruitful Tree, Threatens my Ruine, thus o'recharg'd to be. Galataea. t why us thus your Company berest?
Adamas. He turnes be∣hind him & shews the maskers who plac't in se∣veral po∣res as dis∣cosing with their Mistrisses. The figure is a round mount in∣compassed with Sica∣mo, and in the mid'st is a greater, that o're∣spreads all the . To render more agreeable my Theft, See Madam. Galataea. Hah! a lovely spectacle! Lindamor. A fair Troop! Ligdamon. A smiling Miracle! A Chorus appearing (consisting of Shepherds) in or∣der, at some distance one behind another, on either side of the Scene, by degrees approach to the fron∣tispiece thereof, singing as followeth: Which ended, and they retir'd, the Shepherds descend and dance their Masque. SONG. Cynhi' a give place You glitt'ring spangles of the sable Night, Hide now your face; Mortals no more shall want your feeble Light; Nor yet Presage of you require; With your Infl'ence We will dispense, Cherish't by a heav'nlyer Fi're. Chorus.No Cloud shall mask our serene Aire, Unless the more pleas'd Senses to unite; Nor whisp'ring Sigh murmur Despair, Unless expir'd in Excess of Delight. Each happy Mind By Loves mysterious Unanimity, Here Heav'n doth find, Reflected from mut'al Divinity: Which our mean Thoughts to that height rears,
As ravished Our souls are led Dancing to their harmonious Spheres. No cloud shall, Chorus. &c. Adamas. First, I restore what I berest by Craft. Takes Cela∣don by the hand and leads him to Galatea. Galataea. Celadon, Cupid hath exchang'd his Shaft; But still I love thee, though with other Flames. Adamas. These my exchanged Sons have changed Names. The like by Paris or Er∣gaste. She courte∣ously re∣ceives them; they kiss her hand. Galataea. Mysterious Joys! Adamas. My Niece doth humbly crave She kisses her hand. Your Pardon and your Favour she may have. Galataea. Receive it with my Grace, and thanks to all; Such meeting Joys Mortals seldom befall. Lindamor. Now let us to the holy Temple haste, Each may Loves long wisht fruitful Harvest taste. Galataea. Which shall with full Delight our Spirits move, When each recites the Story of his Love. Where at the Chorus of the Shepherds placed in their first stations, sing as followeth. 1. Song. YOur Extasie of Wonder cease, Astonished Spectators, know, True Judgement may Delight increase, But blind Amazement it o'rethrow:
Though these fair Troops have charm'd Your ravish't Sense, So powerfully arm'd With Excellence: Yet we must truly tell You, they are Humane; our Desire Is not to make them yet divine, That, then they are, would make them less, And them of Glory dispossess, Their Natures they excel. Chorus. Your high rais'd Fancies wake from birthless Dreams Here tast of Pleasures more essential Streams. Haste, haste away, with them your Band unite; So chang'd, not ended, shall be your Delight. 2. Though their Appearance we translate, The suppos'd Natures they retain Desiring to communicate Their Graces in your Entertain; Flie from your Orbs, fix here, That you may lend New motion to this Spheare, Sprung from its end: Here it redoubled shall Not add to Time plumes, but to Love, VVhose active Flames do higher move, And purge their own Refulgency, VVhen quickned by sweet Harmony, Their food material. Chorus. Your high rais'd fancies wake, &c. Whereat the Theater is opened, and both Compan uniting themselves, spend the rest of the Night  their accustomed Dances. FINIS.
