W3413 R221198 99832549 37023
THE DEAD-MAN TESTAMENT: OR, A LETTER WRITTEN, To all the Saints of GOD in Scotland, Fellow-Heirs of the Blessing with those in England: For a view of the present Work of GOD against the My∣stery of Iniquity; and for Unity and Love amongst them∣selves, in this day of the Lord's mercifull dispensa∣tion; and of the judgement of the Whore. BY THOMAS WOOD, Sometimes Inhabitant of Leith, lately departed▪ this present life. Ad supplied by one of his own Countrey-men, a lover of the true spirituall Beautie of Zion. Published by Authoritie. Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, 1651.
HAving perused this Book, Intituled, The Dead▪ Mans Testament; I do finde it to be Orthodox and sound, and likewise usefull for the Lords People, namely, those to whom it is directed, I do therefore allow it forthwith to be Printed and Published. Given under my hand at Leith, Novemb. 25. 1651. TIMO. VVILKS.
A LETTER, WRITTEN, To all the Saints of GOD in Scotland, Fellow-Heirs of the Blessing with those in England, Grace, peace, and love, with a rich Increase of all spirituall and heavenly gifts, be plentifully multiplied upon all you the Israel of God for ever. I Desire to write to you (dearly beloved) not in any considence of mine own ability, being so unworthy; but in the love and light of his Spirit, who is our wisdome, our righteousnes, our sanctification, and redemption I desire to say something to you the sons and daughters of GOD, as the Lord himself hath named you, 2. Cor. 6. For I know (beloved) even by experience in my self, that in this day of the fierce wrath of GOD upon this Land, the working of his Divine Providence, in much love and mercy toward you, may be too much looked upon, even by you his precious People, with the dark eye of naturall reason and sense rather, then in the clear light of the Spirit of Truth, as his love is con∣stant with you in Jesus. Because of the great distress upon this Nation, and wrath over this People, and because of your own sufferings in your bodily condition with the rest of the Nati∣on; as also because the outward glory of this National Church, and beautifull appearance of holiness and worship therein, is
now much defaced; Therefore even ye the freely Beloved of GOD, are in danger (looking naturally upon these things) to conceive hard and dishonourable thoughts of your kind and mercifull Lord, as if he were not fully pacified nor well pleased with you, in his dearly beloved Son; but were yet pleading a Controversie with you in his displeasure for your Iniquities, as he is doing indeed with all the ungodly of the Land. But (Be∣loved) although ye suffer in your bodily condition with the rest of the Nation, yet your spirituall condition is nothing im∣paired thereby, nor the free love of your Welbeloved any whit diminished: For those sufferings, which in the Justice of God are curses to the wicked, are in the mercies of your God, turned unto blessings to you: They are the fatherly chastisements of your gracious Lords Hand upon you, in abundance of love, for teaching you more of himself in the Spirit, and of his Hea∣venly Consolations; and therefore they can do you no evill, but good. Your Fathers wisedome and love, make all things work for your good: He hath delivered you out of the power of evill, and darknes, and translated you into the Kingdome of his dear Son, Col. 1. 13. where ye have your life hid with Christ in God, above the teach of either temporall or eternall evills; for by one offering, your Lord hath perfected for ever all you that are sanctified, Heb. 10. And therefore rejoyce evermore in the comfortable assurance of his free love, even with strong consolation; for your Lord called you to have free accesse al∣wayes, even with boldnesse unto the most Holy Place, within the Vale of his Flesh, and hath covenanted with you, to remem∣ber your sins no more, Heb. 10. 18, 19, 20. What reason then (Beloved) have your hearts to be troubled or afaid for any out∣ward shadow of evils; for ye have your abiding in the shadow of the Almighty. And as for the decay of the glory of this Na∣tionall Church, and Formality of Worship, wherein naturally we did too much glory, as did the Jewes in the Temple, I trust (Beloved) your GOD will let you see, that in all this great and terrible Work, both he, and his Instruments have had
thoughts of love toward you his dear People, and is only plea∣ding with all the prophane in the Land, for the abuse of his ho∣ly Things, and purging all you his Saints (who are his true Church indeed, in whom he taketh delight to dwell) from much corruption and deformity of the multitude, that so yee may shine as Light amongst a perverse Generation: for the beauty of this Nationall Church (Beloved) hath not been that purely spiritual and holy beauty of the Immaculat Spouse of Christ, and Kings Daughter, all lovely and fair within, Psal. 45. And therefore, be not ye offended (dear People) although your Lord, for his own glory and your comfort, cast down, or pluck up that which not himself by his Spirit, but men by hu∣mane wisdome or policy had builded or planted: Neither mis∣take ye the working of his Divine Hand, as if he were robbing you his People of any of his own spirituall or heavenly Orna∣ments of free love, which himself hath put upon you; for his gifts toward you in these things are without repentance. But as he is renting his holy Things from the prophane multitude of the Land, to whom men had blindly cast them, and who care∣lesly trod them under foot; so is he in much love purging you his peculiar People from these Nationall, Whoorish or Baby∣lonish Ornaments of worldly power and glory, humane wise∣dome and policy, and counterfeit holines, and worship where∣with ye were fallen in love, and much defiled: for the Mystery of Iniquity hath been very depthly and deceitfully working in this Nationall Church, both in regard of her constitution or Members, being builded (by the Policy of men, rather then by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus) of all the prophane multitude of ignorant Atheists, Witches, Blasphemers, Drunkards, Scol∣ders, and Mockers of Godlines in the Land, under the name of a true Reformed Church of Christ, and a communion of the Faithful; and in regard of that confused, mixed Power and Go∣verment, under the name of a true Spirituall Church-power and Government of Christ, wherewith this Multitude was ru∣led and governed; And lastly, in regard of that confused or
mixed Doctrine and Worship, wherewith this Multitude was taught, and wherewith they prophanely worshipped, or rather highly provoked the Lord to anger: for alac (beloved) this beauty of this National Church, hath consisted more in Multitudes of People, Humane Power and Policy, and forms of godlines in Worship, then in any reall beauty or work of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; For the Office-bearers of this Church, not contenting themselves (as did the Apostles) with such a number of you the Saint, to te Members of their Church-Communion or Body, as it pleased the Lord Jesus to separate out of the worldly Multitude, and call into a Church Communion, by the power of his own Word and Spirit, neither with that alone spirituall and divine power of him who is our Noble Ruler, left us in his Testament, where∣with to govern his own Spouse in spirituall and holy beauty, as separate from the World; but that the Church might have some appearance of glory in the eyes of the Multitude, and that their persons might be holden in admiration by all men, because of advantage, these Office-bearers thought fit to have all the whole Nation to be Members of their Church. And because it was impossible for them, as the Lord's Ministers, to rule those by the power of the Word, who had never found the power of the Word, or to govern the ignorant Multitude, as Members of the Church, by the spiritual or Church-power of Christ, whom he himself had never brought into be Mem∣bers by his spirituall power, therefore they were necessitate, (otherwise the Church could not stand in a Nationall Con∣stitution) to joyn to their Ecclesiasticall or Church-power, the Temporall power of the Civill Magistrate, for governing the Church, and compelling all the multitude of Fornicators, Whoremongers, Drunkards, Blasphemers, Brawlers, Scolders and Calumniators (Fighters excepted, as not belonging to Church-censures) to appear before their Sessions and Synods, for giving satisfaction, although not to GOD (who appro∣veth no compelled service) yet to the Church or Ministery,
by extorted verball acknowledgment of sin, making their re∣pentance upon the Pillar severall Sabbaths before the Con∣gregation; which few or none would perform, till they were compelled thereto: And so, making a confused mixture of both Powers, Spirituall and Temporall, imploying the Civil Power in the government of the Church, and the Ministeriall or Church-power in the government of the State, what they could not do by the Word, they performed by the Sword, for confining all to their iudgment, and for ordering all the whole unreformed Multitude, in one Church communion and Body, casting the holy things of the House of GOD, prophanely and confusedly unto all. And so (beloved) whereas GOD hath proclaimed a perpetuall enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, these men would make agreement betwixt them: But what communion hath Light with Darknes, the beleever with the unbeleever, or the Temple of GOD with Idols, 2. Cor. 6. And these things being consi∣dered (dearly beloved) it may appear to all you who are spiri∣tually minded, that this Nationall Church-government and power, whereby it was acted over all People, hath not been the purely Spirituall and Divine Power of our Lord Jesus, which he himself (upon whose shoulders is the Government) hath left us in his Testament or New Covenant, whereby to rule his own Church, but hath rather been worldly o natio∣nall; or like that detestable, counterfeit, mixed Power of that many-headed Beast, or Man of sin, who by taking to himself the power of both Swords Spirituall and Temporall, hath by that false power, under pretence of Religion, and the Work of GOD, subjected all Nations to his obedience, tyrannized over consciences, persecuted the Saints, compelled all to his judge∣ment, and to receive his Mark; and so ordered all as one com∣munion or body, under the name of the Catholick Church, and under that colour, hath deceived the whole Inhabitants of the World, ruling ambitiously over Peoples and multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, Rev. 17. Which power and govern∣ment,
with all his false doctrine, and worship, The Lord Je∣sus (who cometh to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all you that believe) is now to consume by the Spirit of his mouth and by the brightnesse of his comming, 2 Thess. 2. And as there hath been a detestable confusion, and adulte∣rous like mixture, of the civil and Ecclesiasticall power, in the government of this Church, which hath maintained a con∣fused mixture in her Members, so hath there been the like con∣fusion also in her Doctrine: for by the doctrine that hath been publickly maintained, that this Church so constitute of all peo∣ple, and so governed by a mixed Power, hath been a Church most gloriously reformed, and worthy to be a Patern to all o∣thers, and that there ought to be in her no separation, but all to be continued in one Communion. And although the meet∣ings of all people upon civile occasions, were lawfull and ex∣pedient, yet by this Doctrine, the meetings of you the Lords People, upon occasion of mutuall conference, mutuall edifi∣cation, and comfort, were taught to be unlawfull, and unex∣pedient, and that the civile power might suffer none to enjoy their liberty in the Nation, but such as were compelled to the judgement of the Church. Whereupon severall of the Saints out of Conscience, refusing in some things, to conform, have been exposed to sufferings, and in the more substantial Point, the Preaching of Christ Jesus, and free Justification by Faith, in him, hath been much obscured, and darkened, by the doctrine of works, free Grace, and the everlasting love of God, with∣out, and before all good Works, hath been so sparingly, and darkly taught that almost, it could not be perceived, but the doctrine of the Law, and Works of Reformation, so largely and frequently holden forth, that almost nothing els could be heard, or known. In which confused mixture of the Law, Gospel, Faith, and Works, in the point of Justification, and acceptance with God, the mistery of iniquity hath wrought very deeply, and obscurely, without being perceived, as it did in the time of the Appostles: for the comforts of the Word
have been applyed to all the multitude, upon their perfor∣mance of dueties, and the threatnings of the Word, likewise unto all the multitude, Beleevers, and unbeleevers, upon their failings in these performances. So that neither the miserable condition of the wicked, hath been clearly holden forth, for casting them down, neither the glorious condition of you the Saints of God, for building you up in the Faith, and increa∣sing your strength and comfort: For whereas the whole pro∣phane multitude should have been plainly informed of the Law and curse, in the full extent thereof, that they evidenced them∣selves to be yet lying in bondage, in the estate of wrath and condemnation, under the power of the devill, and sin; and therefore could not be esteemed members of the reformed Church of Christ, nor of the number of Gods people, but by the contrary, the whole prophane multitude, who evi∣denced themselves to be open blasphemers of God, and mock∣ers of you his people, and of all sincerity and Godlinesse, hath been taught and denominat, by this doctrine, to be Covenant∣ed people of God, faithfull Brethren, faithfull Sisters, mem∣bers of the true reformed Church of Christ, and of the Com∣munion of Saints, to whom the Seals of the Covenant aright∣ly appertained. And as the condition of the wicked hath not been holden forth, but a crying, Peace, Peace, to whom there was no peace, so neither hath your condition, who are the peo∣ple of God, but as the Promises have been applyed, to the pro∣phane multitude, as one body with you, so the threatnings have been applyed to you, as one body with them: for where∣as the blessing of the Gospel, abundance of Grace and ever∣lasting Righteousness, and free unchangeable Love, should have been plainly holden forth, and applyed to you his pre∣cious People, only upon your embracing of Christ, and the free Promise by Faith, without, and before all good Works, Ye being freely justified by Grace, without the Works of the Law, Rom. 3. But by the contrary, the Law, and wrath have been applyed to you, with the prophane body of the land, and ye
have been taught as one body with them, that because of your breach of Covenant, and failings in Reformation, and dueties, your God was not yet pacified with you, but was yet provoked to anger, and entring in controversy with you, for your sins, as with the rest of the land, as if the Constancy of Gods Favour and Love, which he hath sworn and promised to you, depended upon your performances, or Works of Re∣formation. And as by this preaching of promises, upon perfor∣mances, the wicked have been hardened in their course of for∣mality, in hearing the Word, Singing of Psalmes, receiving the Sacraments, and such like, being thereby esteemed holy, both by themselves, and the Ministery, and to be members of the Church, so likewise by this preaching of threatnings, upon your failings and infirmities, even ye the Lords people, (whom the Son hath made free indeed) have been keeped in much weaknesse and bondage, and in a legall temper, under continuall fears and terrours of Gods displeasure, and anger to the great weakning of your Faith; and diminishing of your Spirituall Strength, and comfort. Of Good Works, it is grant∣ed, must be taught, but not as proceeding from fear of wrath, and displeasure, for not performing thereof, but as proceed∣ing from the Strength of God in us, thrugh the assurance of his constant Love: For this love of our God increaseth our joy, and this joy of our Lord, in us, is our strength against sin, Neh. 8. And as there hath been a confusion in the members, and the government, and the doctrine, so hath there been in the wor∣ship of this Church: for this it is evident, that a worldly, carnal, and corrupted people can perform nothing (whatsoever they pretend) but a worldly carnall and corrupted worship. They cannot worship in Spirit and Truth: For the naturall man re∣ceiveth not the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. And therefore, if it be granted, that many of the people maintained to be members of this Nationall Church, and Performers of wor∣ship, in singing of Psalmes, receiving the Sacraments, were but a worldly and carnall people, not acquaint with the life
of God, nor with the Ministery of Faith, then it followeth, that much of the worship performed by this nationall Church was but a carnall, corrupted; and sinfull worship, detestable in the eyes of the Almighty: for, whatsoever is without Faith, is sinfull, and abominable. And therefore the Lord hath been highly provoked, by the carnall, and faithlesse worship, per∣formed by the multitude, in our Solemn Assemblies: For the sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. But, beloved, that which much hath served to fill up the cup of the Lords wrath, against this nationall Church, hath been in taking the Covenant: for the Ministery not trusting the Power of God, in the hearts of his Saints, for defending his Truth, thought good (as going down to Egypt for help) to combine all the whole Nation together, as one body, one Church, in that solemn band, wherein all the ignorant mul∣titude, who knew not what they were doing, were taught by the great and solemn Oath of God, to protest. Firstly, that they had long and duely examined their Consciences, in mat∣ters of true and false Religion. Secondly, that they were now fully perswaded by the word, and Spirit, in the Truth of Religion. Thirdly, that under all the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of soul and body, in the day of Gods fearfull judgement, they should defend the Truth of Religion. And was it not evident, (Beloved) that the mul∣titude of this land, invited by the Ministery, to enter into that solemn Covenant, had never examined their Consciences, in matters of true and false Religion; Neither were they ever perswaded by the Word, and Spirit of God, in the Truth of Religion; and therefore could never defend that which they knew not: for the naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. So that, in binding themselves by such a so∣lemn Oath, under such horrible pains, to defend that which they never knew, they bound themselvesover to the curse of the Law, wherein the Ministery was cheefly instrumentall. The leaders of this people have caused them to erre, and they
that are led of them are destroyed. And therefore the bloud of the ignorant multitude, so engadged by their leaders, and thrust forth by them, as sheep to the slaughter, for defen∣ding that whereof they had no knowledge, lyeth heavily up∣on the heads of the Ministery. And lastly, Concerning the Assemblies of this Church: Ye know (beloved) how corrupt, mixed, and confused they were; and that in these respects. Firstly, in respect of their fre∣quency. It is much to be admited upon what accompt Church-Assemblies were, so frequent in this Nation. We can finde no president for it in Scripture: No more is read, but of the Assembly at Jerusalem, Acts 15. and of Pauls calling the El∣ders of the Church of Ephesus together, Acts 20. v. 17. It cannot be denied, but the Church now and then, may call As∣semblies, upon some grave and weighty occurren or other; whether it be, v. g. for discussing and composing matters of controversie, as did the Councell at Jerusalem, or for some seasonable, extraordinary and necessary word of exhortation and admonition. Upon which accompt, the Elders of Ephesus did meet. But I would fain know upon what accompt be their weekly Presbyteries, half-yearly Synods, yearly Gene∣rall Assemblies, and continuall Church-Commissions in this Land. Is it imaginable there can be fit matter for such frequent meetings? No verily▪ What Cases of Conscience in finding out the poynt of justification, and matter of controversie, in discovering the Mystery of Iniquity have provoked such meet∣ings? What grave and extraordinary word of admonition hath flowed from them, so often as they have been called? Or shall we think, the Lord's people (whom we judge, the the onely fit object and subject of Church meetings) so ig∣norant, so backward, and so unruly, that they stand in need of such frequent Assemblies? We dare not think so, unless we should impung, their willingnes in the day of the Lords power, Psal. 110. Their cheerfulness in obedience, by the love of Christ, which constraineth them, and the terrour of GOD, whereby they perswade men, 2 Cor. 5. and the eminency of
their knowledge, (being all taught of GOD, Isaiah 54.) whereby none of them needeth to teach another; but all of them know the LORD, from the highest of them, to the lowest of them, Jeremiah 31. That which engageth them to their duty, is the law put in their inward parts, and written in their hearts. It indeed, and not to multiplication of Church-Assemblies keepeth them loyall to the Crown royall of Hea∣ven. Such Ecclesiasticall powers use often to restrain Christi∣an Liberty, but seldom, or rather never promove the just freedom and liberty of the Saints. Secondly, in respect of the matter propounded, and discussed in these Assemblies. Know ye not (Dearly beloved) in them nothing for the most part was to be heard, but needlesse debates, and vain janglings? Any thing heard in them, was rather to minister Question, then godly edification, which is in faith. How many tables and endless genealogies were heard amongst them? which the Holy Ghost disclaimeth. We learn no matter in Church-Assemblies from the Word, but grave Cases of Conscience, or matter of Controversie, Acts 15. and of seasonable and ne∣cessary admonition for the good and edification of the Church Acts 20. But the LORD knoweth the Assemblies of this Church did not content themselves therewith, but went far out of their sphere. They could away with nothing so much, as to examine the Books of Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and Commissions. They were not ashamed to rob the Magi∣strate of his right, as their due. Nothing could satisfie them, but proceeding against Fornicators, Malignants, and all such delinquents; as if they, and they onely had had right to the temporall sword. Nothing could be done in Parliament, but what was ratified and allowed by them. They pushed indeed with the two horns of the beast: for the matter of such Assem∣blies, is an acting with both swords, Temporall and Spirituall. And to colour all this, there was a doing great wonders, by making fire come down from Heaven, on the Earth, in the sight of men, in establishing Popish Pennances, or mok Re∣pentances. O! what deal of the Spirit, did they pretend in
these things? And thus they deceived them that dwell on the earth. Thirdly, in respect of the manner of proceeding in these Assemblies. It is known, they carried on things in a State-way, and not in a Church way: They did not take every thing to the Law, and the testimonie, but they disputed every thing as Law∣yers standing close by formalities, Law quirks, and Church▪ Constitutions i not of State also as the grounds and wayes of their procedure. They did not proceed, because it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to them, but because it seemed good to them, and was according to the Acts and Practice of the Church. Oh! was not this the over-word in, and touch-stone of these Conventions. Fourthly, in respect of the Members of these Meetings indeed they were answerable to their National Church; such as were Members of the one, so of the other. And it can not be forgotten, how their Ruling-Elders did not only sit as Ciphers in them (the Ministers taking all upon them) but also they had no more Office-power, but pro tempore, yet I can see no reason, why all other officers of Christ's Church, so wel as Ministers, may not injoy their office-power, vel ad vitam, vel ad culpam. And for my self, I saw no use they made of them, but to carry on things by plurality of voices, as if the matters of Christ's House had depended from the consent and opinion of men, & not from his own authority, according to the Word and Spirit. Fitly, in respect of the power they did arrogate to themselves: What they did, they did not as Coun∣cels, but as Court-Judicatures; they did not proceed by way of advice and counsell, and upon this accompt, for it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, but by way of command; and up∣on this accomp, We enact and ordain. Sixtly▪ in respect of their outward pomp & glory. O! how much were they backed with the powers of this World? And it is observable, these Assem∣blies of late, did begin with the accession of the Kings Com∣missioner thereto, An. 1639. and I hope their pride hath perish∣ed with the accession of the Vice-Roy to the General Assem∣bly, 1651. The reign and rise of Classicall Power are from the earth, Rev. 13. 11. and therefore it cannot but parish
with the earth. The fall of carnal & worldly powers will beget its ruine. Seventhly, in respect of their tyrannie; O! how much did they lord over GOD'S heritage; they thought it their duty to Lord over their Consciences, to plant over, and transplant Ministers from them at random. And I beleive, the Lord, of late hath given them plantation, and transplantation, beyond what they desired. They thought it no sin, to restrict people to forms of worship. To emit Declarations, Catechisms, and stinte formes of Family-Worship, and directions anent wor∣shipping in publick, in their own stinted and Presbyterian way, They made it their great businesse; even as their lips onely had preserved knowledge, and all had been obliged to lay what they said, or rather to swear what they spoke. They thought it no Heresie, to emit Acts against the private Assemblies of the Saints, and their going, from one first day of the week, to another, to hear those Preach, of whom they expected most for Edification, although their Parish-Priest had been an idi∣ot, void of the Saving knowledge of God. They exhorted re∣pentance out of all, and whosoever would not take their mark upon them, they restrained their Liberty, by bills of excom∣munication, and casting them over into the hands of the State. Such indeed had not liberty to buy and sell, amongst them. Any who denyed their Acts, and did not idolize their Cove∣nant (of which they made a State-Engine, for establishing worldly powers) was forthwith to be excommunicat. No wonder: For, though they had Lambes hornes, yet did they speak as dragons, Rev. 14. 11. Eightly in respect of the proud title, they did assume to themselves. They were not asham∣ed, Popish-like to call themselves the Church, even as if ho∣lines and knowledge had been only to be found amongst them in their own accompt, they were the Inheritance and Church of GOD, by way of eminency and speciall propriety. What is this, I pray you (beloved) but the Man of sin, sitting in the Tem∣ple of God, exalting himself above God as God, or that is wor∣shipped. Beware of this Whore (dearly beloved) and Come out of her, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
POSTSCRIPT. Dear Christian Reader, I Must needs tel thee shortly what the Author of this Letter was, how far he proceeded in it, and how it came to my hands. The Author of it was a most Religious body, and much persecuted for the Truth. He lived here in Leth, in a most privat and mean condition. And though he was blinde in the eyes of his body, yet (as appeareth) not in the eyes of his minde. In him our Lord hath made it appear, that he perfecteth his praise by the mouth of Babes, and chooseth the foolish things of this World, to confound the Wise. His purpose was to emit this (he did not fear to profess Christ openly, though many of the rulers, who beleeve in Him dre not profess Him because of the Seribes and Pharises, yet before he closed it, he gave up the ghost. And he wrote no more of this Let∣ter, but till you come to that which is spoken Pag. 12. concerning the Assemblies of this National Church, which I have supplied, at the desire of a Religious Officer of the English Army.  in the interim know, I did read an imperfest and undigested Scroll of the Authors, wherein he had hinted at severall of these things, concerning the foresaid Assemblies, which I express, viz. Their ruling by plurality of voices, their debating things of no , and passing by the out searching the Mistery of Godlines, and of Iniquity, together with their imploying the temporall sword of the Magistrate in the mat∣ters of Christs Church and Kingdom. But I durst not adventure to set down these things in the Authors own words and way, though I had once intended it: for he had   and confusedly d∣ed them being called by GOD from hence before he had  them, and had taken them to his second thoughts. Upon which accompt I have digested the last part of this Letter, in mine own way and man∣ner (though in nothing dscrepant from his purpose) lest had I done: other wayes (he having departed hence before he had   lea∣ving the lea∣ving the close of it,    the last part of it, should have been inferiour to the rest, as possibly it is as yet. Howsoever (Dear Christian Reader) take thou my good, thin for my good say, em∣brace this Letter kindely, and fare thou well. FINIS.
