W363 09626655 43858
A SERMON PREACHED IN LONDON BY A FAITHFVLL MINISTER OF CHRIST. AND PERFECTED BY HIM: AND NOW SET FORTH TO THE PVBLIKE VIEW OF ALL, FOR THE IVSTIFICATION of the Truth, and clearing the Innocencie of his long suffering for it, Act. 5. 29.We ought to obey God rather then men. Printed by Margery Mar-Prelate. 1641.
A SERMON PREACHED IN LONDON BY A FAITHFVLL MINISTER OF CHRIST. GEN. 3. 17. Because thou hast hearkned to the voyce of thy wife, and hast eaten of the Tree of which I commanded, saying, Thou shalt not eate of it, cursed is the ground, &c. VVHen Adams eating of the forbidden Fruit, was so manifest by his nakednesse, shame, and feare of Gods presence, that he could not hide it, nor deny it, Hee had no excuse but onely this, That the Woman whom God had given to be an helpe meet for him, Shee gave him of the Tree and he did eate, vers. 11. Some perhaps will thinke that this was a sufficient excuse for Adams part; for why should not he respect her, and hearken to her voyce whom God had given him for a meet helpe? What affection of men and women one to another can be so great as the affection of Adam to his wife? She was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, chap. 2. 23. framed and made of a rib taken out of his side, in the same Image of God with him,
and was his second selfe, the Queene and Lady of the inferi∣our World, who had with him equall dominion and rule over all visible creatures in the earth, and in the Sea; why then should not Adam be excused for his eating, seeing hee did it not of himselfe, nor by the perswasion and example of any o∣ther, but one by his wife, and out of respect and affection to her, and to her words and voice. But the Text here shewes, that no such excuse could free him from the foul staine of sinne in the eyes of God the righteous iudge of all the earth. For as the eating it selfe contrary to Gods Commandment, so the hearkning to the voyce of his wife, and respecting her and her perswasion more then the Word of God, is laid to his charge as a sin, and an heavie curse is laid on the ground for his sake, and many grievous paines and sorrowes on him and all his posteri∣ty, yea and death it selfe also, as a just punishment of his trans∣gressions; Because thou hast hearkned (saith God) to the voyce of thy wife, &c. Cursed is the ground for thy sake. The conside∣ration whereof offers to us this generall Doctrine. That no affection or respect to any man, no word, com∣mand, Doct. or threatning of greatest Kings and Potentates, no per∣swasion of them that are most neere and deare, no importunity of them to whom men are most obliged in love and duty for many great favours, can excuse any act which thereby they are drawne to doe against the commandement of God, from the foule staine of sinne, nor the doers of such an act, from the guilt of sinfull transgression: or to expresse it in fewer words briefly, No affection of one man to another, whether feare or dread of Superiours, or reverence of Benefactors, or love of them that are most neer and deare, can excuse any person from the guilt of sinne before God, when by them he is moved and drawne to doe a thing which God hath forbidden in his word and Law. If any such affection or respect could excuse any unlawfull act before God, then had Adams excuse been very good, for the reasons before named, (viz.) because hee did eate by the perswasion of his wife, who deserved more love and respect at his hand then any fraile sinfull person of all his posterity can be worthy of, or expect at the hand of any other: But this ex∣cuse was of no force with God (as heere wee see) that great and righteous Judge, whose will is Law, and the rule of Justice, pronounceth him guilty and worthy of death, and
of all the paines, sorrowes and punishments which are ex∣pressed in this verse, and the two next following: And this God is no respecter of persons, but most just to all without parti∣ality to any. Wherefore this Doctrine holds most true, firme and sure, among all men, even all Adams posterity of all ages, and in all Nations of the World. For the further illustration whereof, and confirming of our hearts in the truth and stedfast beliefe of it, wee have the plaine word and testimony of God himselfe in his Law, Deut. 13. Where hee gives a strict charge to all his people, under greatest penalties, to take heede, that neither reverence and respect of extraordinary Prophets which have certainely fore∣told before-hand things which afterwards have come to passe, nor the love and affection of any one to his brother, the sonne of his Mother, or to his wife which lyeth in his bosome, doe at any time draw them into the transgression of his Law by worshipping other Gods: And if a whole City be seduced by some wicked person, and drawne to serve strange Gods, and the people thereof be found to commit Idolatry, (in which Cases many are moved and drawne out of affection and respect, Some to Superiours, some to Parents or Masters, some to Hus∣bands, or Wives, or Brethren, or Friends, and Benefactors) the Lord declares all to bee deeply guilty, foulely stained, and worthy of death, out of what affection or respect soever they are drawne to serve False Gods, and adjudgeth them all to the sword; For he commandeth the whole Nation of his people, to destroy every soule therein with the edge of the Sword, and to burne all the substance thereof as a cursed thing, and to make the Citie an heape, for a terrour to all others. Thus wee see God in his Law admits no excuse or plea for the breach of his Commandement, whether men plead, that the feare and Commandement of Superiours, (as Judges, Magistrates, Parents, or Masters, or love and respect of Hus∣bands, Wives, Brethren, Benefactors, and dearest Friends, or reverence of extraordinary Prophets, and Teachers esteemed for men of God) did move and perswade them, they shall not be found nor judged innocent. And to this purpose are those words of God in the body of the morall Law in the second Precept, where he forbids making of any Image, of any thing in Heaven or Earth, to bow downe to it, or to worship it, as being a similitude of him▪ or a signe of his
divine power and presence; I am (saith he) a jealous God, and visit the sinnes of the Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. Marke the words; First, the Lord saith, I am a jealous God. Now jealousie is the indignā∣tion and wrath of some person against those who with-hold and with-draw from him that love and respect which is due to him, and bestow it on others who doe not deserve it, and to whom it is not due: As for example; when a wife bestowes the love and affection due to her husband upon other men, this provokes him to jealousie, and fills him with anger and indignation against her and her lovers. Here God compares himselfe to such a person; saying, I am a jealous God, which is all one in effect, as if hee had said, I am the Lord, the Creator of all things, there is no God besides me, no religious or divine worship is to be given to any but to me alone; and therefore, whosoever gives such honour to any besides me, and doth breake any of my Com∣mandements out of feare, love, or other affection and respect to any creature whatsoever, hee provokes me to jealousie: And then, what followes? I will (saith he) visit the sinnes of the Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth genera∣tion of them that thus hate me. Now the meaning of these words is not, that hee will pu∣nish the innocent children for the Idolary of the Parents, For hee is the righteous Judge of all the earth, hee will not de∣stroy the righteous and innocent with the wicked and the guilty, Gen. 8. 25. He himselfe protesteth with an oath, That the Father shall not dye for the Child, nor the Child for the Father, for all soules (saith hee) are mine, the soule of the Child as well as the soule of the Father, Ezek. 18. How then can this saying stand, that he will visit the sinnes of the Fa∣thers on the Children to the third and fourth generation? Surely the meaning is, That because men often times live to see their Children and their Childrens children to the third and fourth generation, and if they be wicked Idolaters, haters of the true God, they are examples of evill to their Chil∣dren, and by exhortations, commandements, and examples draw such Children to commit the same sinnes, and their Children are led by affection and respect of their evill wayes. And hence it is that the Fathers sinnes becomes the sinnes of their children, and the sinnes which the Children commit in imitation, and by the perswasion of their Fathers, are called
the sins of the Fathers: And it is no excuse of the Children; that the example, and their respect of their Parents did draw them to follow their wayes, but the Lord in fury and jealousie will proceed against them as hatefull sinners, and will visit their sinnes upon them: And least any should thinke or imagine, that the justice of God is not so strict in this point now under the Gospel, but the rigour thereof is much remitted: Wee have a most cleare testimony from the mouth of the chiefest Evangelicall Preachers and Publishers of the Gospel; the holy Apostles, wherewith joynt consent and one voyce they protest, that they might not for feare of men, nor upon the commands and threatnings of the chiefe Rulers in the Church and State of Israel transgresse the Commandement of Christ, and by obeying men, disobey God, Acts 4. 19. and 5. 29. Yea, though their preaching of the Gospel publikely in the Tem∣ple (as the Angel commanded them from God, Acts 5. 20.) and to all the people in all publike Assemblies and their pro∣claiming of the Lord Christ (whom Pilate by instigation of the High-priests and Elders had condemned, crucified, and slaine) and their declaring of him to be the just and holy one of God, and the Redeemer promised to the Fathers, was no lesse then Scandalum Magnatum in the highest degree, for hereby they brought the bloud of Christ on Pilate the Chiefe Governour of the Romans, and on them the chiefe Rulers of the people, and in that respect they did out of State-policie charge them, and straightly command them, not to preach any more in the Name of Christ. as our Saviour had commanded them, Matth. 28. 19. Yet Peter and the rest of the Apostles answered reso∣lately, We ought to obey God rather then you; and they ap∣pealed to themselves (though most unjust adversaries) to judge whether it were not right so to doe: And therefore it is as great a sinne now under the Gospel, as it was under the Law, to breake Gods Commandements, for feare, or any other affection or respect of men, or upon the commandements and threatnings of the greatest Kings and Potentates. If you will yet see this Truth made more cleare and mani∣fest, look into the examples of those severall persons, and also of those multitudes of people which are noted for great sin∣ners, and were most severely punished for doing wicked acts, contrary to the Law of God out of obedience to their Rulers, and at the commandement of their Kings who had power and authority over them; the holy Scriptures afford many ex∣amples
of this kind in severall places, where they commend Subjects and Children for refusing to obey their Superiours and Parents in things which they commanded against the Law of God; and condemne others for obeying such wicked commandements out of Feare, or for any other respect. When King Saul commanded Ionathan his sonne and all his servants that they should wait for an opportunity to slay David his innocent servant and sonne in Law, and Gods great and Noble Champion, he had a faire pretence of State-policie for it (to wit, that David did steale away the hearts of his people, and aspired to the Kingdome, and sought to depose him and to disinherit his sonnes: But because Ionathan feared God, hee would not obey his Father in murthering an innocent, contrary to Gods Law, but used all meanes that he could devise to dis∣cover his Fathers wicked purposes to David, and to reserve him out of his cruell hands; and this disobeying of the word and threatnings of the King, his Father commanding him to slay an innocent, is highly commended in Ionathan, and recor∣ded for his praise and honour in the Holy History, I Sam. 19. So likwise we read that Ionathan did ignorantly breake his Fa∣thers rash and foolish vow before he knew it, by eating honey which God unexpectedly offered to him when hee was faint and weary in his pursuit of the Phihstines, whom hee and his Armour bearer had rowted and put to flight, and thereby brought great deliverance to Israel; and when King Saul his Father for this act done out of inuicible ignorance, adjudged him to death, and swore with a great oath, that hee should dye; the people of Israel his Subjects fearing God more then his anger, did not onely abhorre the act, and refuse to yeeld to his commandement, which had some shew and pretence of Religion, but also did stand out and oppose themselves against it, and did save and rescue Ionathan out of his hands, saying, God forbid that Ionathan should dye, As the Lord liveth there shall not one haire fall from his head to the ground, for hee hath wroughe with God this day, I Sam. 14. 45. Which speech of theirs im∣plies, that it had been a great sinne to slay Ionathan, as Saul their King commanded, or to suffer him to dye for such a cause. But the most pregnant example of all is that of Doeg the Edomite, Sauls chiefe Heards-man, I Sam. 22. where wee read that when King Saul commanded the men of his Guard (whom hee had obliged to him by many preferments and gifts, as
his upbraiding words in the seaventh verse seeme to imply, that they should slay the Lords innocent Preists whome he out of false and unjust suspition and jelousy supposed to conspire with David against him, they would not put forth their hands to fall upon them, as the Text saith verse. 17. and Doeg the Edomite who at the Kings Commandement slue the Preists and mang∣led and murthered their wives, and children and innocent Sucklings, and like a bloudy oppressing Tyrant spoyled their City and all their substance, is by the Spirit of God in the mouth of David cursed with most dreadfull curses, though hee did these things in obedience to the King his Lord, upon whose favour all his preferment did depend, the sentence of judge∣ment passed upon him, Psal. 52. that God would destroy him for ever, pluck him out of his dwelling, and root him out of the Land of the living, doth most plainely shew, that his Act was a most heinous sinne and wickednesse. In like manner when Ieroboam commanded the Israelites who had chosen him for their King, to worship God who brought them out of Aegypt in the Images of golden Calves, such as Aaron had before made at Mount Horeh, it is said in the Text, that he made them to sinne, his Commandment did not ex∣cuse them, and their worship of Images, neither did God spare to punish them for it, but (as the Prophet Hosea testifieth, cap. 5. 11.) Ephraim, (that is, the Israelites of the ten Tribes) was oppressed and broken in judgement, because he willingly wal∣ked after the Commandement (that is) of Ieroboam, and also of Baasha, and other wicked Kings, who walked in the wayes of Ieroboam, and made Israel to sinne. And although Omri, Ahab, and Iezabel were cruell Tyrants, and by Statutes, tyrannicall commands, terrours, threatnings, and slaughter of the Lords Prophets, teachers of Gods true worship, did not onely draw▪ but drive and force Israel their people and subjects to worship Baal, yet this excused not the peoples Idolatry, but the Lord threatens them by the Prophet Micha 6. 16. that because they kept the Statutes of Omri, and walked in the counsels and wayes of the house of Ahab, therefore hee will make the Land a de∣solation, and an hissing and reproach; and for their forsaking of Gods covenant, and worshipping of Baal, Idols and Groves, Eliah the man of God accuseth them all as great offenders deeply guilty, saying, The Children of Israel have forsaken thy Co∣venant and broken downe thine Altars, 1 King. 19. 14. And God in his answer to Eliahs accusation exempts none from the guilt
of these sinnes in all Israel, but onely those seveven thousand men who had not been drawne by the terrours, threatnings, and cruell commands of Ahab and Iezabel to worship Baal, but had kept their knees from bowing to him, and their mouthes from kissing him, as we see vers. 18 What man can plead more plausible for any disobedience to any Commandement of God, then the man of God which came from Iudah to Bethel to pro∣phesie against Ieroboams Altar, might plead for his eating bread and drinking water in that wicked Idolatrous place, contrary to Gods particular Commandement given to him; First, the thing forbidden, was a matter in it selfe very indifferent, there was no appearance of any evill in it, so long as he did not eate and drinke with infectious and infamous Idolaters which might be a snare and scandall to him: Secondly, his resolution and endeavour to keep this Commandement was such that when King Ieroboam thankfully invited him to eate and drinke out of kindnesse for healing his withered hand, he could not be overcome with any intreaty, nor promise of great gifts and re∣wards. Thirdly, when he was seduced and drawne to eate and drinke in the place forbidden, it was the authority of the old Prophet, and his respect to his words which he confidently af∣firmed to be the words of God which perswaded him to re∣turne with him and to eate bread with him; and yet all this could not excuse this man of God from sinne in doing contrary to Gods Commandement given to him, for God presently makes the old Prophet which deceived him, a Messenger of death to declare unto him his untimely death for his disobe∣dience, and that his dead carkasse torne by a Lyon should not come to the Sepulchre of his Fathers, 1 King. 13. Whereby it is manifest that no power or authority of any man how fairely soever it is pretended to be from God can excuse any act done against any knowne Commandement of God, though it be a Commandement of a small indifferent thing, given onely to try mans obedience, but whosoever upon any respect to any creature, or by any perswasion doth transgresse any Precept or word of God, he is guilty of sinne and worthy of death before Gods just Tribunall: Sauls letters from the High-priests which gave him a Commission and authority to persecute Christians did not excuse him from sin though he did it in ignorance and blind zeale for he calls himselfe the greatest of sinners for that act of persecution, 1 Tim. 1. 15. But I hold it needlesse to spend time in rehersing more examples to prove this doctrine, though
it is of all Doctrines the chiefest and most necessary to be be∣leeved, continually kept in mind, and observed of all Adams posterity. I will onely adde one strong and invincible argu∣ment and demonstration to convince all men of the truth there∣of grounded upon divers solid principles of Reason and Re∣ligion. First, it is a thing which none but Atheists can or will deny, Reason. that when any creature stands in competition with God, and seekes to bee respected and obeyed before God, and to have his demands and commands yeelded unto, which are contrary to the will and Law of God, as he in that case seekes to rob God of his due honour and glory, and to exalt himselfe above God, which is Luciserian pride & rebellion; so they who in such a case obey him, whether for feare, or love, or any respect and affection in a thing contrary to any Word or Commande∣ment of God, they do undobtedly rob God of his glory and of the honour which properly belongs to him, for God as the Creator of all things, and giver of being, life and breath to all creatures severally, who also upholds and preserves them all in being and well being, and sustaines them by his providence; so he is the chiefe Father of all, worthy to be respected, loved, and obeyed above all other Parents and Benefactors, who are but instruments of his bounty, and subordinate meanes of our be∣ing and other benefits: He also by the right both of Creation, and also of redemption is the chiefe King, Lord, owner and possessor of all things in heaven and earth, to whom all hearts, hands, wills, desires and affections ought to be subject and obe∣dient in all things, and at all times. Besides, if we consider God in himselfe as he is revealed in his word and workes to be the one only true Jehovah, eternall, omnipotent, immortal, immu∣table, infinite in goodnesse, bounty, wisdome, mercy, justice, faithfulnesse and truth, most mighty wise and prudent to or∣der, rule and governe all the world, most bountifull to reward all obedience, and most just to punish, and dreadfull and terrible in revenging all disobedience against his Word and Law; Wee cannot but acknowledge and confesse, that hee is the supreame Lord of all Lords, King of Kings, and the eternally blessed and onely Potentate, who is in all things to bee obeyed above all, and be∣fore all; and all Lords, Kings, Fathers, and Benefactors are to bee obeyed onely in and under him as his Substitutes,
subordinate Vicegerents, Stewards, and Messengers, whosoe∣ver doe, out of feare, love, or any affection and respect to any creature, doe any thing contrary to his kowne will, word and commandement, they rob him of his honour and glory, set up the creature above the Creator, and make it their God, which must needes by all reasonable men be confessed to be a most heinous and grievous sinne worthy of Gods wrath and all pu∣nishments. This is the solid argument and invincible demon∣stration which fully proves the Doctrine, which I will briefly reduce into the strict forme of a Sylogisme, thus, Whosoever robs the King, and Lord of Lords, the blessed and onely Potentate and cheife Father and Authour of all being goodnesse, and bounty, by taking from him the honour and glory which doth properly belong to him, and setteth up the creature and servant above his Lord and Creator, he is guilty of most heinous sinne and transgression. Every one who out of feare, love, or any affection and respect to any creature, doth any act contrary to the revealed will, word, and Com∣mandement of God, robbeth thereby God the supream Lord, King, Fa∣ther, and Benefactor; and setteth up the creature and servant above his Lord and Creator. Therefore he is guilty in this of heinous sinne and transgression; and by consequence it followeth necessarily, that (as this Doctrine teacheth) no feare, threatning, or commandement of earthly Potentates, no love, or respect of Parents and Benefactors can free from the foule staine of sinne in any act, which they draw men to doe contrary to the Commandement of God. This Doctrine is of speciall use: First, to admonish all Vse 1. Gods people to be carefull and diligent above all to know and acknowledge God aright, and to set their hearts and affections chiefly on him as the supreme Lord and Father of all, and the chiefe Author and Fountaine of all goodnesse, and to put on a setled resolution to obey all his Commandements, though all the world should perswade & command them ro the contrary. It is true that Kings, Rulers, and Potentates of the world are set up by God to rule by him and under him, as his Vice-ge∣rens, Stewards, and Messengers, and all men who are under them, especiaily Christians (Gods free and willing people) ought to give them all honour and reverence and to feare and obey them for conscience sake in and under God; the very law of Nature binds all men to love, reverence, honour and obey
their Parents and Benefactors, who are Gods instruments of their being and well being; and not onely Civility and the Common Law of Nations bindes men to honour and respect them who are honourable in wisdome, gravity, and authority, but Religion and Gods Word teach men to honour and affect such as are Prophets, Preachers, Embassadours and Messen∣gers of God unto them: But yet all these are to be loved, feared honoured and respected in and under God, and with feare, love, and affection subordinate to the feare, love, and affection which they have towards God above all: Where∣fore let all Gods people take heed and beware, and carefully looke to it, that they give not too much way to humane pas∣sions and affections by regarding and respecting secondary meanes and inferiour causes more then God the first and chiefe cause, Author and bountaine of all blessings, or by accusto∣ming themselves to esteeme too highly, or to love, feare and admire too excessively the persons of men, how great, wise, and learned, or how aimiable and honourable soever they ap∣peare in their eyes; If men once give way so far to the reve∣rence, awe, feare, and dread of earthly Kings, Rulers and Po∣tentates, that they become more affraid of their faces, angry countenances, menacing and threatnings, then of the terrours of Gods Law and of his wrathfull judgements; this is that which will draw them to disobey Gods Word and Law, out of respect to mortall men and will bring them under the staine and guilt of unecusable sinne laid open in this Text and Do∣ctrine: So likewise excessive love, carnall affection, and re∣spect of Parents and Benefactors (while men set their eyes and hearts on the things which are visible and sensible, and on the outward meanes more then on the invisible hand, power and goodnesse of God) may easily supplant them and make them fall in like sort into heinous sinne and inexcusable transgression. But most dangerous of all is that superstitious feare, reverence and respect which men out of blind and undifereet zeale with∣out knowledge doe shew to such as are set over them to rule and direct them in things which concerne God, Religion, and godlinesse, and hold the place of Prophets, Messengers, Bi∣shops, wise Pastors and learned Teachers in Gods Church; when men are so enthralled in their wills, and become Slaves in their affections, that they are ready to beleeve and embrace whatsoever they hold and teach without proofe from Gods Word, or examination of things taught by the word or consent
with the word and rule of Faith, they are in the high way to horrible and dangerous errours and disobedience to the Law of God, into which whosoever fall being led by immoderate affection and more then due respect to any persons whatsoever, he may here learne from Gods proceeding against Adam (the common Father and root of all mankinde) that God will admit no excuse for breaking any of his Commandements out of any respect, or any feare, reverence, love or affection to any persons, how great, wise, learned, honourable or aimiable soever they appeare to him. As Adam by his excuse could not turne away the guilt and punishment of his disobedience, but had a curse laid on the ground, and all paines, sorrowes and death it selfe on himselfe and all his posterity: So it shall fare with all Adams seed and children in the like case, For there is no respect of per∣sons with God. Secondly, this Doctrine discovers unto us abundance of er∣ror Vse 2. in the judgements, and iniquity in the practice of many worldly-wise and learned men, especially in those State-poli∣titions, admirers of worldly power, greatnesse and authority, who doe thinke and hold, that they may lawfully doe things commanded by such as have the rule over them, without ex∣amining whether they be allowed or forbidden in the Law of God. If Kings and great Potentates command them under great penalties, as losse of goods, liberty, or lives, torturing, impri∣soning and death to make Images of God, and to bow down to images and Altars of wood and stone, and to practice supersti∣tious will-worship, or to do as proud and potent Nebuchadnezar commanded all his people to worship his Image under paine of burning to ashes in an hot firie Furnace: Or if a law and decree were made (like that which Darius made by the advice of his wicked and malicious Princes) for a snare to Gods people, for∣bidding the true worship of God. It is the common opinion of self-conceited wordlings abundantly wise and politick in their own opinion, that there is no danger in obeying, no feare of un∣excusable sin, and that they who are afraid to obey such com∣mands, and to stirre their consciences with guilt of sin by brea∣king Gods Law, are too scrupulous, worthy of contempt; yea that they are mad men, who in such cases wil hazard their lives, goods, or liberty. But the 3. faithfull servants of God, full of the holy Spirit were of a contrary opinion and resolution, (as Dan. 3.) Though Nebuchadnezar was a mighty Potentate, and had highly promoted them to honour and dignity, and the
thing which he commanded was only to fall downe and wor∣ship his golden Image, yet they utterly refused to doe such an act forbiden in Gods Law, and did rather chuse to yeeld their bodies to death and to be burned in his hot fiery Furnace: And so likewise Daniel that holy seruant of God, so famous in his time for learning wisdome and favour with God, he regarded not the Decree of the wicked Princes which restrained him from the worship of his God and from praing to him for the space of thirty dayes under paine of being cast into the den of Lions, but notwithstanding it was confirmed by his great Lord and King Darius and sealed with his Seale, he would not refraine from his constant course & custom of prayer and wor∣ship of his God, wich he knew to be a duety daly and continu∣ally required by the divine Law, and did chuse rather to forgoe all the honours and promotions which the King had bestowed on him, and to be cast into the den of Lions, then to disobey Gods Commandement by obeying the Kings decree: and such hath the opinion, resolution and practice of all Gods noble Wortheys and faithful serevants been in all ages. Wherefore let me here be bold to spend some few words in arguing against, and conuincing the blind carnal wicked world, and in discove∣ring that wisdome which is commonly callen State-policy, to be folly and enmity against God, which I wil do very breifly by answering and taking away those foolish excuses of carnal men which are as vaine and unable to shroud and defend them from the staine of sin and Gods just wrath, as the fig-leaves patched together by our first parents were unfit to cover their nakednes Some when they are commanded by great Potentates & cru∣ell Tyrants to worship God in Images and in Altars of wood and stone or the like, or are forbidden to professe the truth and true religion and to practice the holy worship of God, that un∣der pain of death, persecution, imprisonment, spoyling of their goods, and losse of all worldly substance, they are very fward and earnest to plead, that authority must be obeyed & the pow∣ers must not be resisted, and that it is no wisedome to undergoe losse of goods, liberty and life for conscience and needlesse fear of breaking Gods Commandements. But let me tell such plea∣ders, that Ephraim, & the Israelits of the ten Tribes had as good a plea, and the same excuse for their forsaking of the Covenant of the Lord, & for worshipping of Baal, Calves, Idols & Groves, in the daies of Ieroboam, Ahab & other wicked kings, their Kings did comaund them so to do for a politike reason of state even to
keep them from going up to worship God at Ierusalem, lest by that means they might be drawne away and revolt to the house of Dauid, and reunite themselves to the Kingdome of Iudah: Also some of their Kings were cruell Tyrants which persecu∣ted the true. Prophets and worshippers of God, and by feare of death and other great penalties forced and compelled men to commit Idolatry, as we read in the dayes of Ahab and Iezabel, and as appeares by Eliahs complaint unto God, 1 King. 19. And yet this was no excuse of the peoples Idolatry and sinne, for Ephraim was oppressed and broken in judgement because hee willingly walked after Ieroboams commandement, as Hosea te∣stifieth, Hos. 5. 11. And because they kept the Statutes of Omri, doing the workes of the house of Ahab, and walking in their counsels, the Lord gives this sentence against them by the Prophet Micha, That he will make their land a desolation, and them an hissing and reproach, Micha 6. 16. Our Saviour in the Gospel discovers to us how vaine and frivolous all such excuses will be found before his Tribunall, where hee saith, that whosoever loves houses, lands, goods, or life it selfe more then him, inso∣much that they will rather deny, and not confesse him before men, then indanger or lose their life, liberty, or wordly goods, they are not worthy to be counted his Disciples, and hee will deny them in the presence of his Father and before his holy Angels; and as they feared them who could kill the body on∣ly and were not able to kill the soule, more then God who could destroy both soule and body in hell; so they shall lose their life which they loved more then him they shall also be exclu∣ded from life eternall, and so cast wholly both soules and bo∣dies into hell, into the fire which never shall be quenched, and dye and perish eternally, Matth. 10. 28 Mark 8. 35. Luk. 9. 24. Secondly, whereas oathes are to be given and taken in truth, in judgement, and righteousnesse, Ier. 4. 2. That is, men must not sweare any false thing but onely what is true, neither to raise up strife, nor to doe injury, or to hurt any man, but to put an end to strife by laying open in judgement things as they are, neither must they bind themselves by oath to doe any vain, un∣just or wicked against Christian charity, or to execute any un∣lawfull office. Now there are and have beene in all ages di∣vers politick worldlings and cowardly Hypocrites, who when vaine or sinfull oathes are imposed on them, such as the El∣ders and Nobles of Iezrael imposed on the wicked men whom they set up to sweare falsely, that Naboath blasphemed
God and the King; or such as the Iewes tooke to kill Paul, Act. 23. 12. or such as Traytors take to conceale or act Trea∣sons; or as many corrupt men take to execute unlawfull offices and unjust designes, which are hurtfull and injurious to divers others either in Church or Common-wealth. If these oathes be imposed by men of authority, who rule over them, or under great penalties, as trouble, vexation, impri∣sonment, and losse of liberty, or with hope of some prefer∣ment, profit, and gaine, which they may reape by executing an unlawfull office; they are ready to plead for themselves that they are excusable, because they did take such oathes, and doe execute such offices by command of Superiours and in obedience to authority, and that otherwise they should for∣goe a profitable office and trade which doth maintaine and enrich them and their Family, and should be vexed, troubled, fined, impoverished, imprisoned, and deprived of their liber∣tie. But let mee answer such in the words of Holy Iob, chap. 27. 8. What is the hope of the Hypocrite that he hath gained, when God taketh away his soule? What will his gainefull office advantage him when God findeth and judgeth him guilty for profaning his holy Ordinance and taking his Name in vaine? Yea, our Saviour fully answereth such Hypocrites, and discovereth the folly of such worldly Polititions in expresse words, saying, What is a man profited to gaine the whole World, and lose his owne soule; or what shall a man give in exchange for his soule, Matth. 16. 26. All the liberty and freedome from bands and imprisonment, all the worldly profits, pleasures, goods, and wealth which men purchase and procure to themselves by their obsequious obser∣ving of great ones, and obeying the authority and commande∣ments of men in things contrary to the Word and Law of God, will yeeld them no comfort at all, but rather adde to their tor∣ment in that flaming fire wherein God will render vengeance to them, and punish them with everlasting destruction from his presence and the glory of his power, and shut them up with the Devill and damned spirits in the prison of blacknesse and darknesse for ever world without end. Lastly, whereas many who are wise in their owne conceit, and most politicke for the world and in wordly matters, when they are comman∣ded as Doeg was by Saul his lawfull King to mangle, murder, and massacre the innocent servants of God, and to oppresse and spoile them of goods, lands and lives, as the Nobles of Naboaths City were by Iezabels Letters written in Ahabs name
and fealed with his Seale, or to execute cruell and bloudy sen∣tences given by Judges of unrighteousnesse under the name and colour of the Law, by haling to prison, torturing and pu∣nishing Christian people men and women; as Saul did when he was a persecutor armed with Commission and Letters from the High Priests, they perswade themselves and plead confi∣dently, that it is no sinne in them to doe such things, though in themselves most unjust and contrary to the Law of God, but that the sinne and guilt lyes wholly on their Superiours, and on the Judges, which by their authority and imperious commands, doe impose upon them such executions, and they the executioners shall never be called to account, nor under∣goe the punishment of just revenge from God: Let all such be admonished by this Doctrine, that this their plea and per∣swasion will never excuse them before God, but as they have an hand in wicked workes, and are executioners of cruell and ungodly sentences, so they shall have their share in the just punishments of such heinous transgressions, and the righteous and supreme Judge will cause just vengeance to be executed on them also: It is true that seducors and perswaders of others to sinne; and all they who by their power and authority, feare and awe cause others to commit wickednes, as they are cheife Au∣thours there of next under the Divill, the Father of all iniquity, and the blood of those whome they haue seduced, compelled and caused to transgresse Gods holy Commandements, shall ly heavy upon them, and God will certainly require it at their hands, so shall they chiefly bear the curse and punishment: But they who are seduced and led by them through blind obe∣dience shall not escape, but shall also fall with them into the pit of destruction; And all they who are voluntarily instru∣ments of cruell oppression, violence, or any wickednesse, they shall undoubtedly dye and perish in those sinnes of which they are partakers with them, who set them on worke to doe wic∣kedly, there is no way for them to escape Gods revenging curse but by godly griefe and sorrow to repentance, and by seeking and finding pardon in Christ. Wherefore behold your folly and wilfull madnesse yee worklly Polititions who are so wise to worke your owne ruine, who by vaine excuses and subtile fallacies of fleshly reason doe blinde your owne eyes, and hardon your hearts not to repent; Alas! what comfort will it be to you that your great Lords whom you feared and obeyed, and the unrighteous Judges, whose cruell sentences yee
executed, doe chiefely beare the curse and punishment of that cruelty, injustice, and iniquity, which they acted by your hands? what ease or mitigation of sorrow, paine, and griefe, will it be to you, that you see them leade the way and goe be∣fore you? when you also follow them at the heeles, and dance after them attendance unto Hell, there to remaine for ever in the lake which burnes with fire and brimstone, where the worme dyeth not, and the fire never goeth out, but burneth eternally, and is unquenchable world without end. From which wrath and eternall woe the Lord deliver us for his mercies sake, and through the meritorious satisfaction of the Lord Jesus Christ our Redeemer and Saviour; To whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit be all glory, honour and praise now and for ever. Amen. INIS.
