W994 R212401 18198176 107022
A declaration of the Right Honourable RO∣BERT, Earle of Warwick, Lord High Admirall of ENGLAND, and of all the Plantions belonging to any his Majesties, the King of ENGLANDS Subjects up∣on the Coasts of AMERICA, Governour of the Com∣pany of LONDON for the Plantation, of the Summer ISLANDS; And of the said Company: To the Colony and Plantation there AS the Happinesse of a Christian People is ever best advan∣ced, by their constant Progresse in the waies of Peace and Holinesse: So are they in nothing more miserable themselves, and offensive to others, then in their un∣charitable Contentions, and Discords interrupting the same. We have therefore thought meet, out of our most affectionate desires of your Welfare, to make this en∣suing Declaration; wherein, first, and above all things, we do, with all earnnesse, bespeake all, and every one, That in their severall Places and Conditions, they will endeavour, by fol∣lowing the Truth in Love, to advance the Glory of God, and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. We intend not to anticipate, or prevent the Honourable Houses of Parlia∣ment, in any their Determinations, in matters Ecclesiasticall, or Civill; but with Prayer, and Patience attend that Resolution, which it shall please the Lord to direct them unto. And whilest we thus waite, we desire, and hope that you will doe the like. What the thoughts of the Parliament have been, and are, for all the Plan∣tions upon the Coasts of AMERICA, The Ordinance of Parliament there∣with sent, will abundantly declare; And what our endeavours are for your hap∣pinesse, this writing is a Witnesse; wherein we shall expresse our Desires in some particulars. We have thought meet, for the present, to continue the Government, as now it stands, by Commission, together with all Officers, and Commanders former∣ly chosen by us, untill we shall give further direction therein; as to prevent that
disturbance which an alteration might occasion; so for the better moderation, and improvement of Authority, to encourage Piety, Goodnesse, and Industry, and to suppresse Prophanenesse, wickednesse, and idlenesse in all sorts of People, and places of the Colony. We thinke it not meet, for the present to give any intimation, either to Mi∣nisters or People, touching the the publike Administration of Gods Worship, being in expectance of that Directory, which the Parliament, with the advice, of the Assembly of Divines, shall hold forth according to sacred Scriptures. In the meane time, we desire you would follow Peace with all men, and Holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord; looking diligently, lest any man faile of the grace of God, lest any root of Bitternesse springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. As a good meanes to promote Pietie in the minds of all, and to prevent Pro∣phanesse: we doe, in a speciall manner, recommend unto your best care, the observance of the Lords day; whereon, as wee hope the Ministers will so im∣prove their Labours at every Church within their severall Tribes, that all the peo∣ple may have the best conveniency to heare the Word of God Preached: So we also trust, that Masters of Families will be carefull by Catechizing, and other∣wise, so to instruct their Children, and Servants, that all may come to the know∣ledge of God, and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, whom rightly to know is life eternall. And that both Magistrates, and Masters of Families will restraine them under their Commands, from carelesse and sinfull expence of that precious time, in sloth, idlenesse, or any way to Gods dishonour, and their own hurt. For your better direction herein, we herewith send you an Ordinance of Parliament. The Company is very sensibly affected with your want of a Minister: And that thereby any particular person, or part of the Colony should suffer a Famine of the Word of God, is very grievous unto us. We intend, God willing, by the very first opportunity, to supply your want herein. In the meane while, we earnestly desire the Ministers would double thir diligence in teaching the knowledge of God through the Land; knowing, that as their Labour therein cannot be in vain in the Lord; So shall they thereby exceedingly indeare them∣selves into the good Affections of the Company, who desire nothing so much as the Salvation of your soules. For Counsellors, Captains, and all other Officers, as we require all due ho∣nour, and respect to be given them: So, as a meanes thereof, we desire they may be as a Sanctuary, and City of refuge to all such as love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; improving all their Power, and Authority, as for the se∣curing of the Islands, preserving of Peace, and promoting the power of Godli∣nesse in all places, and Persons; so, for suppressing of all manner of sinne and wic∣kednesse. And, for that Tipling Houses, Idlenesse, and ill Company, are those Anvils, whereon Satan, with our owne Lusts, Forgeth out all manner of sinne and wickednesse; We desire great care be taken to prevent the same: That so, by the Officers faithfull performance of their Duties in their severall pla∣ces, The people being kept in Peace and Amitie, The multitude of Indict∣ments
and Pesentments, commonly brought to the publi Assize, may be pre∣vented. And though we would not encourage Appeales, which proofe so trou∣blesome, and chargeble to them that make them: Yet in that case, we shall expect to receive from the publike Officers what ever may cleare the businesse to us; who, by Gods Grace, shall proceed according to the merit of the Cause, without respect of Persons. In all Causes wherein Oathes are Administred, wee desire great care may bee used to informe both the Jury, and Witnesses, of the horrible sinne of Perjurie, with the dreadfull severity of Gods punishments thereupon, That so they may not adventure to sweare, but in Truth, Judgement, and Righteousnesse. We had good hope that ere now, by the small quantity, meane condi∣tion, and short returnes you have found of Tobacco, you would have beene put upon that diligence and industry, which might have introduced some more pro∣fitable and staple Commodity: whereunto, as we formerly have, so we are still ready to affoord all possible encouragement, and assistance. We shall now de∣sire all those that have made any essayes therein, with such others as have af∣fection thereunto, That they would improove their best Observations, and Ex∣perience, to finde out somewhat which may be of more benefit to you, and sa∣tisfaction to us; which, as we shall accept as an evidence of Affection to the Publike Good; So, we shall consider of some way for compensation, accor∣ding to their charge, and endeavours therein. We have just cause to complaine of the wrong we have suffered in the Case of Wrecks; not only by more private persons, but by publike Officers. And, truely, we are much troubled to finde so great injustice among you, as might occasion us to revoke that Law, which, in great favour, allowes a Moitie to the Reco∣verers. We shall expect, and hope for better Accompts then yet we have re∣ceived, both of that which lately happened, and what hereafter may. We have seriously considered of the want of Linnen Cloth, and other ne∣cessaries, by the publicke Letters, intimated to be in the Colony; which seems the more strange unto us, when we heare the Adventurers declare, that of great Proportions of Goods which they have sent to you, they have received very short Returnes. If there be a scarcity, we conceive it ariseth from your selves, est Factours are so unfaithfull in making returnes; private Persons so back∣wr in paying their dues; publike Officers so remisse in executing Justice here∣in; and all or most so desirous to trade rather with Strangers then with the Com∣pany, which appeares by keeping their Tobaccoes untill our Ship be come away; whereby, both the Merchant is discouraged from sending, and the Company prevented of the duties. If any complain, that the Adventurers, or their Fa∣ctours doe overprise their Commodities, we feare your slow payments are acces∣sary to that errour, which we are so farre from excusing; that, when you have taken order, that speedy Returns be made, we shall endeavour, what is in our power, that no oppression be used. And, because we would remove all colours of complaint, we have desired particular Members of our Company, that they will, at present, send such Proportions as may supply your occasions; We hope they shall receive such Returnes by this Ship, as may both manifest your good
Affection, and encourage their future  others. We are not unmindful of your desires for a free Trade, which you have both in∣timated to us, and sought for from the Governours with you: But the truth, is for the present, the Constitution of the Company, the Obligations upon them, and the propriety of the Owners are such, as be inconsistent with that freedome of Trade which is required. When, upon a serious consideration of all particulars, with a dis-ingaged re∣spect to the common good, it shall appeare, that what is required, is according to Right and Justice, and such as the Company can in faithfulnesse assent unto, you may rest assured, That we shall be most ready to manifest our Affection to any Liberty or Priviledge, which is for the good of the Colony: In the meane time whilst we concurre in allowing freedome of Trade for such Proportions of Cattell, Hogs, Fruits, and other Provisions as may be very well spared, without dammage to the Colony, danger of a Famine, prejudice to the poorer sort, or preventing the Owners of their dues; and, untill farther order hence, onely restraine Trade for Tobacco, which (as necessitie compels) we doe hereby abso∣lutely prohibite; That so, both we may receive our Rents; and by the duties thereupon, the Ministers may have their exhibitions, Ammunition, and other ne∣cessaries for the safety of the Ilands, satisfaction of the Officers there, and the charge of the Company be provided for, we hope no man will finde just cause of Offence. But however, we desire to approve our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God, and so to carry on al matters, as that we may be free from each mans want, and from neglect of any thing, which is in our power to procure, for the good and happinesse of the Colony; whereto, as we are in neerenesse of relation, so we desire to manifest our good will and affection in every kinde of way. We shall conclude with that of the Apostle, Finally, Brethren, Fare yee well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde, live in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Given under the Hands, and common Seale of the Governour and Company at a generall Court, the 23 of October, 1644. Warwicke Governour. Wil: Say and Seale. Arthur Wodenoth, Deputy. Thomas Allen, Tresurer. Perien Trot, Husband, Gilbert Gerard. I. Danvers. Ben. Rudyerd. Richard Knightley. Holland. Iohn Heydon. Anthony Wither. Edw. Carter. Owen Re, Ga∣briel Barber. Richard Casewell. Gedeon de Lawne. Maurice Thompson. Fancis Allein. Iohn Iohnstoun. William Iessop. Iohn Graunt. Robert Coyt∣mor. William Felgate. George Turbervile. Iohn Alcock. Robert Haughton. George Prynne. Anthony Pennyston. Elias Roberts. Iohn Welden. William Web. William Burges. Nath. Hawes. Tho. Turner. George Ward. William Price. Will. Wilkinson. Ioseph Todd. Michael Evans. Richard Hunt. Abra. Sheeres. Iohn Bardwell. Charles Calley.
which have  her breat and ved as their naturall, so the  birth , f ever they were new borne. We ought to acknowledge, with thankesgiving the aboundant grace and mercy of God towards the Church of England; who hath made it no lesse honourable then any other Reformed Church whatsoever, whether we con∣sider the first Reformers, being men of singular Piety, and blessed Martyrs of Christ; Or the purity of Doctrin there publikly professed even to this present. Or the number of holy Martyrs who have advisedly sealed that Doctrine with their blood: Or the eminent lights in the Ministry successively shining there in great number: Or the many and sincere Professors and Practisers of Religion there, ever since the Reformation; Or lastly, if we consider the many great Deliverances which the Lord hath vouchsafed us, from the wicked plots and hostile attempts of the common adversary, crowning all with much prosperity, and causing the fame and glory of it to be spread throughout the world. These and the like have not beene seene in their separate and Independent Churches. In the meane time, we deny not, but that besides our many other grievous sinnes, there have beene also many grosse faults and intollerable in the Ecclesiasticall Policy and Discipline, as it was abused by those that were intrusted with it, and many foule effects have thence proceeded, which have (especially of late yeares) corrupted Religion, eclipsed our glory, and laid it in the dust, caused the Lord to hide his gracious and loving countenance from us: And was like to have proved the remidilesse ruine of Church and Com∣mon Wealth: Of which sinnes though we all stand guilty before God, as having beene Authors or Procurers of them; yet it becomes not any, that is, or lately was a member of that Church, to upbraid her with these things in a despightfull manner: Such men according to that saying of the Apostle, Are jealous over us amisse, yea, they would (alienate our affections,Gal. 4.1 and) ex∣clude us (from the Church of England) that wee should altogether love them. But these corruptions as they have beene for the most part forced upon the Church, by the usurped power of those which were intrusted, and pretended the greatest care of the Church; so they have beene, and wee trust will bee cast out and Reformed by the present Parliament. How I would not be mistaken, as if I desired to derogate any thing from the dignity of that most eminent calling of the Ministry; I have no such meanng, neither doe I thinke a worthy Minister to be unworthy or unfit for ther the most eminent Offices or callings in Church or Common-weath, were it not that he hath a most eminent calling already sufficient o take up he whole man, and unmeete to be yoaked with other callings, as the Apostle saith, who is sufficient for these things;2 Cor. 2.16▪ And the Apostles doe re∣ject such employments with a kinde of contempt saying. It is not meet that we should leave the word of God to serve Tables, and a litle after,Act. 6.2 wee will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word, intimating that these things would hinder them from prayer and the Ministry of the Word; whereby it appeares, they would not be Decons, nor take upon them any other Office in or over the Church, but pend themselves wholly
in the  and prayer; the like might be manifested by snd other Scrip∣tures. And the evill of it hath beene so generally observed in England, that (as I heard) Queene Elizabeth, when she had conferred upon a Ministers authority and power to rule, was wont to say, I have spoiled a good Preacher to day. And surely (if we observe it) the desire of Superiority and Dominion in or over the Church, in Ministers and Clergy-men, and the readinesse of Princes and people to conferre it upon them; hath beene a principall, if not the principall cause in corrupting Religion from time to time, and of setting up the great Antichrist, and many others, as might easily be shewed if it were not an argument too long for this place. Thus farre (through the gracious assistance of God) I have expressed my mind in this matter, to the intent I might stop, so much as in me lyes, the set∣ting up of a new Discipline and Government of our owne framing, seeing we are already freed of all those things that have usually beene burthensome and offensive to good Christians in England; and that we expect dayly the further determination and decree of the Honourable Assembly of Parliament in these things. Or if I cannot prevaile so farre as to stop it, yet that wee might looke before we leap, and understand well what we doe before we doe it. O if neither that may be obtained, yet hence it will appeare, that my selfe and some others deserve no blame, much lesse such evill speeches as are usual∣ly vented against us by some, because we will not rashly runne with them we know not whither. And lastly, I desire that this may be a publique testi∣mony of my judgement in these things. For to be present, and heare them dayly pressed, and to be alwayes silent, is taken for a signe of consent and ap∣probation. March 1. 1642. RICH. NORVVOOD Postscript. SInce this Advertisement of mine came abroad (though but a moneth,) what horrible forespeakings, threatnings, imprecations, and censures have beene publikely denounced against me in severall parts of the Countrey,  not need to repeat, being too well knowne. Neither will I answer t ac∣cordingly lest I also be like them; I will onely in the feare of God,  by the comfortable assistance of his holy Spirit apply that saying,Num. 23.8. How ld they curse where God hath not cursed? Or how should they detest wher  Lord hath not detested?2 Sam 16.12. And those words of David, It may be that the Lord will looke on mine affliction, and doe me good for his cursing this day. A desperate thing it is for men to blaspheme against some good light; and what is it, to acknowledge the good gifts and graces of God in those which they so bitterly preach against; and to overwhelme them all with most foule and feigned sus∣spicions and aspersions without cause? As when they say, Satan will not use prophane and wicked men, but he makes choise of those that are of good and able parts, men of a religious life, of a blamelesse conversation; these close hy∣pocrites
e makes his instruments to oppose the Kingdome of Christ (that is their intended Discipline) &c. with other like speeches. I say it is very dan∣gerous for men thus to give way to wrath and malice. The Scribes and Pha∣risees did see, and would no doubt have acknowledged the eminent gifts and graces that shined in our Saviour, if he would have applied them to the esta∣blishing of their Faction. But because he would not doe so, they maliciously traduced him, and said he had an uncleane spirit; but he reproves their de∣sperate wickednesse, shewing how nearely they did approach, or became guil∣ty of the sinne against the Holy Ghost. And let every man take heed how they doe cunningly fasten slanders, or otherwise shew despight unto the spirit of Grace, because it would not be subordinate unto their ends. I could wish also they would consider the words of Marsilius Patavinus, in his Booke entituled, Defender of the Peace. Where speaking of those that presume to frame or presse Orders, Decrees, and other parts of Discipline, without license of the true Law-giver or Prince, ad endeavour to draw people to the obser∣vation of them by surreptitious words, as it were compelling them by threat∣ning eternall damnation to such as transgresse them, or denouncing execra∣tio▪ reproachfull speeches, excommunications, slanders, revilings, or other maledictions against them, or any of them, in word or writing; such (saith he) are to suffer corporall punishment in a most high degree, as conspirators and stirrers up of civill schisme, or division in a Common-wealth. For it is saith he, a most grievous kinde of treason, because it is commited directly a∣gainst the Royall Majesty of the Prince and his Soveraigne Authority; and tendeth to set up a plurality of supreame authorities or powers, and so of ne∣cssity to the dissolution or overthrow of every civill Government. They object also, that I am but a Lay-man, and therefore should not med∣dle with matters of Divinity, applying that Proverbe Ne sutor ultra crepidam, and saying, that even the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, wherein he hath skill, should teach him that lesson, which alwayes move in their owne spheares, ex∣cept they be wandring starres, for whom the blackenesse of darkenesse is reser∣ved for ever, with many oher bitter expressions. But this is an old plea of the Popish Clergy, to hold the people in ignorance and thraldome, and should not be taken up by those that would seeme to be more opposite to Popey then Protestants are. That eminent and blessed Divine Doctor Sibbes was of ano∣ther minde, who speaking in commendation of Mr. Sherland (that was no Preacher) disdaines not to say he had good skill in controverted points of Divinity, and that he was a good Divine. And surely the calling of a Chri∣stian is of that importance, that he must, if need so require, omit whatsoever calling he have besides, to make good that one most necessary, neither can hee justly be charged to move out of his spheare whensoever he meddles with mat∣ters of Christianity and Religion, especially such points as he is pressed to em∣brace and submit unto. The Apostle exhorts us all, that wee should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints. And I may fitly answer them in the words of that renouned Souldier of Christ Doctor Bast∣wicke, who being checked by the Bishop of Canterbury in like sort as I am by
these that he being a Physitian, a Lay-man, should  points in Divinity, answers in Latine, to this purpose I writ a Booke (saith he) not to finde my selfe employment, or to stirr  strife, but of a Christian mind and affection, according to my duty to Go and my Prince. The reproach of a Lay-man toucheth not me, for he which hath vowed himselfe to Christ is one of Gods Clergy. The ancient Church doth not acknowledge that surname of a Lay-man, but reckons it among the Soloecismes of the Beast. Wee have given, promised, and vowed unto Christ in Baptisme our name and faith; and have solemnely denounced battell against the flesh, the world, the devill, heresie, &c. against which we must fight unlesse wee put off the reverence and respect of our Vow. How unsea∣sonable is it then to aske by what authority we fight against these? (And a litle after) shall that be a fault in mee, which is a praise to Divines? They exercise Physick, Grazing, merchandize, they husband their grounds, plant, gather in their fruits, they all may doe  things, I envy not; yet I wonder wee should be so streightned, whilst they have such liberty. But if some blunt fellow should aske a Divine, Hear'st thou good man, what hast thou to doe with the Court, with privy Councell, with seates of Judgement? wha hast thou to doe with renting lands, with planting vineyards, with breeding cat∣tell, with money the provocation of al evills? would he not checke such a bold question with some sharp answer? yes, doubtlesse he would. What then should we doe when we are asked, What we have to doe with God, with Christ, with Religion, with the Truth? Wee will laugh to scorne such envious questions, and performe with diligence what God calls us to. Wee will endeavour with all chearefulnesse the defence of the truth, the conserva∣tion of Religion, the observation of our fidelity and allegiance to that Sove∣raigne Authority which is over us; rendring an account of our endeavours to him, to whom we have vowed our selves &c. He that desires to see his de∣fence more at large, may peruse his Apology to the English Prelates. Rom. 16.17.Now I beseech you brethren, marke them diligently which cause division and offences, contrary to the Doctrine which yee have learned, and avoyd them 18. For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but ir owne bellies; and with faire speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the March 30. 1643.
