W999 12680530 65641
THE Earl of VVarwick's LETTER From aboard His Majesties Ship, called the James, in the Downs, to an Honorable Lord in Parliament; Dated July 4. 1642. Concerning His calling a Councell of War, and how His Rear-Admirall, and four other Captains refused to obey his Lordships Summons. With many other passages of great consequence. ALSO, Another LETTER from aboard the same Ship to Master Nichols a Mem∣ber of the House of COMMONS; Dated July 5. 1642. With many Remarkable Passages amongst the Captains and Officers. Read in the House of Commons, and commanded to be forthwith Printed. LONDON, Printed by Luke Norton and Iohn Field, for Edward Husbands and Iohn Franck. July 7. 1642.
THE Earl of VVarwicks LETTER To an Honourable Lord in Parliament. My very good Lord; BEfore these shall come to your Lordships hands, I make no doubt but Master Nichols of the House of Com∣mons hath made both Houses a Relation of what hath passed here, since I received His Majesties Letters for the discharging me of the Command of the Fleet wherewith I was intrusted; how I called a Councell of War, and acquaint∣ed them with His Majesties Letters, and likewise with the Or∣dinance of Parliament sent from the Houses, for me to continue my Charge; I confesse it was a great streight that I was put in between two Commands that have so much power over me, But when I consider the great care which I have ever seen in the Parliaments of the Kingdom, for the good and safety of the King and Kingdom, and every mans particular in them; and that they are that great Councell by whose Authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to their Subjects. And likewise, that the trust of this Fleet for the defence of His Majesty and the Kingdomes, was committed to me by them, and know the in∣tegrity of my own heart to His Majesty and Parliament, I re∣solved not to desert that Charge committed to my trust, where∣in God (blessed be his name for it) hath made me hitherto so successfull, but to continue it untill I shall be revoked by that Authority that hath entrusted me with it, which having declared to my Captains at the Councell of War, all of them unani∣mously,
and cheerfully took the same resolution, excepting five, which was the Rear-Admirall Captain Fogge, Captain Burley, Captain Slingsby, and Captain Wake; al which five refused to come upon my Summons, as having no uthority over them, and got together round that night to make their defence against me, onely Captain Burley came in and submitted to me; whereupon in the morning I waighed my Anchors, and caused the rest of my ips so to do, and came to an Anchor round about them, and besieged them, and when I had made all things ready, I sum∣moned them; Sir Iohn Menues and Captain Fogge came in to me, out Captain Slingsby and Captain Wake stood out, where∣upon I let flye a Gun over them, and sent them word I had turn∣ed up the Glasse upon them, if in that space they came not in, they must look for me aboard them, I sent to them by my Boat, and most of the Boats in the Fleet; their answer was so perem∣ptory, that my Masters and Saylers grew so impatient on them, that although they had no Arms in their Boat at all, yet God gave them such courage and resolution, as in a moment they entred them, took hold on their shroud, and seized upon these Captains being armed with their Pistols and Swords, and struck their Yards and Top-masts, and brought them both to me, the like courage and resolution was never seen amongst unarmed men, so as all was ended without effusion of blood, which I must attribute to the great God of heaven and earth onely, who in the moment that I was ready to give fire on them, put such courage into our men to act it, and so saved much blood. I hope the Parliament will think of some course for all our Indempni∣ties, and especially for the Officers of the Navie, my Vice-Ad∣mirall a very able and good man; for my self, I doubt not but they that put me in this imployment, will preserve me for ser∣ving them faithfully. I send your Lordship herewith inclosed a Letter to Captain Wheeler Captain of the Greybound. I beseech your Lordship be a means that some money may be sent us, for it hath been often promised, but we hear not of it; the weather continuing stormy so long together, that we spend our Masts and Top-Masts, or
some detriment or other befals us daily, so that we are in great extremity for want of money. Thus, having nothing else to trouble your Lordship, onely that you will be pleased to acquaint the Parliament of our proceed∣ings here, I take leave, and remain Your Lordships most humble servant, WARWICK. From aboard His Majesties ship, the Iames, in the Downs, this fourth of Iuly, 1642. Another Letter to Mr. Nichols. SIR, I Am sorry it was my ill hap to be employed from aboard of your Ship when you tooke your leave of my Lord, for I was then employed by his Lordship to those refractory persons with a second summons unto them to come aboard his Lordship; all of them that I spake with used me civilly, and gave me a reasonable satisfaction, that they would attend my Lord within few houres, which they made good; but Captaine Slingsby used other language, that he would live and die in his Ship, and that he made a great deale of difference between Iohn Brown and Charles Rex: I replyed unto him that Iohn Brown did write his name there by the authority not only of Charles Rex, as he tearmed it, but that he had also the Great Seal of En∣gland for it, besides the authority of the Peers and Commons of this Kingdom, I desired him that I might see the Kings Letter which he had; he answered me, that he had received none, wher∣upon I demanded of him by what colour he could refuse to obey my Lord: I having then shewed him the Ordinance of both
Houses of Parliament; his answer unto me againe was, that by all the Laws that he had read he could not find that an Ordinance of Parliament was Law; and that it wat sufficient for him, that he had seen the Kings Letters to others in the Fleet, by which he did understand His Majesties pleasure, and should be a sufficient warrant for him; Captaine Burley Captaine of the Antilop did promise me to submit himself forthwith to my Lord, and writ his letters by me to that effect, and indeed he durst do no other wayes, for the Muster, the Officers, and all the company of the said Ship would have cast him over board if he had done other∣wise, for they were unanimously for my Lord, whereupon his Lordship did send the Captaine of his own Ship for him, and he came with him immediately to my Lord; the next morning my Lord Commanded His Anchors to be weighed, and came very neer those foure Ships that stood out, and Commanded the rest of His ships to do the like and so these four ships were close∣ly surrounded by the whole Fleet: Whereupon Sir Iohn Me∣nues the Rear-Admirall, and Captain Fog Captaine of the Con∣stant Reformation came aboard unto my Lord according to their promise unto me over night, and submitted themselves un∣to his Lordship; whereupon his Lordship called a generall Coun∣of War of all the Captains and Masters, as the day before when you were there, and then it was resolved that they would turne up the glasse, and if these two Ships would not yeeld obedience unto his Lordship within that time, they would board them. In the meane time, the Vice Admirall Captaine Butler who is a most discreet and resolute gentleman, made this proposition to my Lord and the Councell of War, that all the Masters that were there should take their Boats all unarmed and go and sum∣mon them once more, and to let them know that the glasse was turned upon them. Captaine Slingsby who they first summo'nd, and Master Hadock Master of the Victory the Rear-Admirall would not brook to heare the language from a Captaine to their Admirall, entred the Ship immediatly, and Captaine Slingsby came forth upon the Deck, and presented a Pistoll at his breast, but he layd hold of it before he could discharge it, so all the com∣mon
men did board him also,These 2 Cap∣tains, Slings∣by and Wake, are both pri∣soners aboard some of the Shipps here, and there my Lord will keepe them untill he doth hear from both Houses of Parlia∣ment. and did strike his top-masts and let fall his yards, and so they took him away in their Boates, and went from him to the Expedition where Captaine Wake Com∣manded; and all these naked men enter'd a board of him present∣ly and strook his yards and Top-masts, and took him likewise, and so brought them both a board without any effusion of bloud, God be praised for it, so that now I hope my Lord hath weeded away those ill members that would make a devision between the King and His Parliament here at Sea: We have too many of them on shoare, and therefore we need the lesse of them at Sea. I doubt not but you and the rest of the discreet members of Yonr House of Commons will take notice of the resolution of those Sea men that stands so unanimously for the King and Par∣liament. The last night Sir Iohn Penington came to Deal with between 30 and 2 Cavaliers in his company as the report goes, Captaine Edwin Sands who lives withins 2 mile of Deal, hearing of Sir Iohns coming there in that posture, did summon the Countreys thereabouts to watch all night and came himselfe between one and two in the morning aboard my Lords Ship to acquaint His Lordship that Sir Iohn was there with that Company, and said that if he did but offer the least breach of the Peace he would raise the Countrey upon him, for he is one of the Deputy Lieu∣tenants, presented by the Earle of Leister to Your House for the County of Kent; but I believe he hath no Commission from His Lordship nor any Order from the House to Act any thing for the good of the King Parliament and Kingdom, I hope that you and the rest of the discreet members of Your House of Commons will not onely returne him thanks but give him authority to have care of his Countey. And so this is all that hath passed since you have been here: And craving your pardon for being thus tedi∣ous I take my leave and rest. Yours to command, ROB: COYTMORE. From aboard the Iames in the Downs, this 5. of July, 1642. FINIS.
