T2805 12226655 56562
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE POPISH-PLOT AGAINST King CHARLES I. AND THE Protestant Religion: As it was Discovered by Andreas ab Habernfeld to Sir William Boswel Ambassador at the Hague, and by him Trans∣mitted to Archbishop Laud, who Communicated it to the King. The whole Discovery being found amongst the Archbishops Papers, when a Prisoner in the Tower, by Mr. Prynn (who was ordered to search them by a Committee of the then Parliament) on Wednesday, May 31. 1643. WITH Some HISTORICAL REMARKS on the JESUITS, and a Vindication of the Protestant Dissenters from Disloyalty. ALSO A Compleat HISTORY of the Papists late Presbyterian PLOT DISCOVERED BY Mr. DANGERFIELD, Wherein an Account is given of some late Transactions of Sir ROBERT PEYTON. LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange: M. DC. LXXX.
THE PREFACE. IT may appear strange to some, that this Conspiracy against King Charles I. was never divulged till found by Mr. Prynn in 1643. seeing it was known both to the King and Archbishop in 1640. But if they do but reflect upon the Actions of those Times, the Wonder will cease: For these Romish Traytors having by their Devillish Cunning raised a Rebellion in Scotland, and fomented the Divisions between His Majesty and Parliament to that heighth, as soon after brake forth into a most bloody and unnatural War between Prince and People: His Majesty (as they design'd) was sufficiently Diverted for the present; and afterwards (the Devil of Discontent raised by these wicked Incendiaries of Rome, proving too Head-strong for them, and threatning their ruin) the Conspirators were so disperss'd, that it would have been a difficult thing for His Majesty (if he had been free from the Re∣bellious Clamours of Be-Jesuited Men) to have brought them to Conviction. The Person who had the greatest Opportunity of Advancing this Design, was Sir F. W. a Man in all outward appearance a Protestant, and verily believed to be so by the Archbishop, whose Interest with the King made him Secretary of State; as we find it set down by the Archbishop in the Journal of his Life, in these words, June 25. 1631. Mr. Fr. Windebank, my old Friend, was Sworn Secretary of State, which Place I obtained for him of my Gracious Master KING CHARLES. How Industrious this Secretary was in carrying on the PLOT, may partly appear by the Charge against him in Parliament, Novem. 12. and De∣cem. 1. 1640. viz. Seventy four Letters of Grace to Recusants in Four Years, Sixty four Priests discharged by his Warrants, Twenty nine by his Verbal Order, and Twenty three by his Authority under Read's Hand: But he prevented the the necessity of Answering to this or any other Charge by his Flight into France, where he was Generously Entertained by Cardinal Richelieu, (no doubt for the good Service he had done the Catholick Cause in England) and lived and died a profest Papist. His Son went to Rome, where he was received with the like Kindness by Cardinal Barbarino, the chief Contriver of this POPISH PLOT. As for Read, he was an Actor in this Plot, much in the same nature as Cole∣man was in that lately discoved by Doctor Oates, and others; and because he was a profest Papist, the Secretary above-mentioned, (to whom I think he appertain'd
as Clerk) procured for him the following Protection, which for his greater Immu∣nity was Recorded in the Crown-Office, and in the Clerk of the Peace his Book for Middlesex in open Sessions. BY THE KING. WHEREAS We have received good Testimony of the Loyalty and Duty of our Trusty and Well∣beloved Captain John Reade, and because he may be subject to the Laws for Recusancy; These are to signifie, That We are Graciously pleased to extend our Special Grace towards him: And do hereby Command, That no Indictment, Present∣ment, Information, or Suit in Our Name, or in the Name of any other, be henceforth Commenced, Prosecuted, or accepted a∣gainst him, by any of our Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for or concerning Recusancy: And if any such shall happen, then Our Will and Pleasure is, That upon sight hereof, the same shall be discharged and made void, or otherwise not prejudicial to him. Given under Our Signet at Our Court at Theobalds, the Thirteenth Day of July, in the Tenth Year of Our Reign. To all and singular Our Judges of Assize, Justices of the Peace, &c. whom it doth or may concern, and to every of them. Thus was that good King so far abused (by having a Traytor represented to him as a Loyal Subject) as to grant a Protection to this Read, who intended to make no other use of it, than thereby to destroy with the more safety his ROYAL PROTECTOR. This Plot against King Charles the First, was buried in a Bloody Civil War, but raised again against King Charles the Second, in time of Peace, by the Blood∣thirsty Jesuits; the Discovery whereof has been sufficiently made known by the Tryal and Execution of several of them, as well as by the Printed Narratives thereof. To get up their Reputation again, they plotted to throw their Guilt upon the Dissenting Protestants; but the All-seeing Eye of God prevented their Villanous Designs by a timely Discovery: The Design and Discovery whereof, you will find particularly related at the End of this BOOK.
A TRUE RELATION OF THE POPISH-PLOT AGAINST King CHARLES I. AND THE Protestant Religion. IF there be any professing the Protestant Religion within His Majesties Dominions, who are yet so wilfully blinded, as not to believe the Reality of the late Conspiracies, or that it has not been a long time carrying on to extirpate the Protestant Religion, reestablish Popery, and inthral the Peo∣ple in all the Three Kingdoms, let them but advisedly fix their Eyes and Minds, upon the Ensuing Letters and Discoveries, and they will easily find Papistical Plots have been no new things in this Nation. To omit their attempts upon King Edward, Queen Elizabeth, and King James, these Papists make it evidently out, that the same Design, and the same Contrivances were on foot in the Reign of our late Sovereign Charles the First, of Blessed Memory; a True Narrative whereof these Sheets contain, as they were found in the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury's Study in the Tower, May 31. 1643.
The first who discover'd it, was an Actor in it, sent hither from Rome, by Cardinal Barbarini, to assist Con, the Pope's Legat, in the pursuit of it, and privy to all the particulars; who being touch'd with remorse of Conscience, for being guilty of so detesta∣ble a Crime, reveal'd the whole Mystery to Sir William Boswell, the King's Leiger Embassador at the Hague, who gave private notice of the same to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, by whom it was declar'd to the King himself. Sir WILLIAM BOSWELL's first Letter to the Arch-Bishop, touching this Plot. May it please your Grace, THe Offers (whereof your Grace will find a Copy) here en∣clos'd toward a farther and more particular Discovery, were first made to me at the second hand, and by word of mouth by a Friend of good Quality and Worth in this place. But soon after, as soon as they could be put into order, were avowd by the principal party, and deliver'd me in writing by both together, upon promise and Oath, which I was required to give, and gave accordingly, not to reveal the same to any other Man living, but your Grace, and by your Grace's hand to his Majestie. In like manner they have tied themselves not to declare these things to any other but my self, untill they should know how His Majestie, and your Grace would dispose thereof. The Principal giving me withall to know, that he puts himself and this Secret into your Grace's power, as well because it concerns your Grace so nearly after his Majestie, as that he knows your wisdom to guide the same aright, and is also assur'd of your Grace's fidelity to His Majesties Person, to our State and to our Church. First, your Grace is earnestly pray'd to signifie His Majesties pleasure, with all speed, together with your Grace's disposition herein, and purpose to carry all with silence from all but his Majestie, until due time. Secondly, when your Grace shall think fit to shew these things to His Majestie, to do it immediately, and not trusting Letters, nor permitting any other Person to be by, or within hearing, and to intreat and counsel His Majestie as in a case of Conscience, to keep the same wholly and solely in his own bosom from
the knowledge of all other Creatures living, but your Grace, until the business shall be clear'd out. Thirdly, not to enquire or demand the Names of the Parties from whom these Overtures do come, or any farther discoveries or advertisements in pursuit of them, which shall come hereafter, until satisfaction shall be given to every part of them. Nor to tell to any Person but His Majestie, that any thing of this Nature is come from me. For as I may believe these Overtures are veryfiable in the way they will be laid, and that the parties will not shrink; so I may ac∣count, that if never so little glimpse or shadow of these Informa∣tions shall appear by His Majesties or your Grace's words or carriage unto others, the means whereby the business may be brought best unto Tryal, will be utterly disappointed. And the parties who have in Conscience toward God, Devotion to His Majestie, Affection toward your Grace, and Compassion to our Country dis∣clos'd these things, will run a present and extream hazard of their Persons and Lives. So easily it will be conjectur'd upon the least occasion given either by His Majestie or your Grace, who is the Discoverer. These are the Points and Offers which they have prest me to represent more especially to his Grace. For my own particular, having already most humbly crav'd Pardon of any Errour or Omissions that have befallen me in the managing this business, I do beseech your Grace to let me know, First, whether, and in what order I shall proceed with the Parties. Secondly, what points of these Offers I shall first put them upon to enlarge and clear? Thirdly, what other Points and Queries I shall propose to them, and in what manner? Fourthly, how far further I shall suffers my self to hear and know these things. Fifthly, whether I shall not rather take the parties answers and discoveries sealed up by themselves, and having likewise put my own Seal upon them, without questioning or seeing what they contain, so to transmit them to your Grace or His Majestie. Sixthly, whether I may not insinuate upon some fair occasion, that there will be a due regard had of them and their service by His Majestie and your Grace; when all particulars undertaken in these general Offers, and necessary for perfecting the discovery, and work intended, shall effectually be delivered to His Majestie and your Grace.
Upon these Heads, and such other as His Majesty and your Grace shall think proper in the Business, I must with all humility beseech your Grace to furnish me with Instructions, and Warrant for my proceedings, under His Majesties Hand, with your Grace's attestation, as by His Majesties Goodness and Royal disposition is usual in like Cases. May it please your Grace to entertain a Cipher with me upon this Occasion; I have sent the Counterpart of one here inclos'd. If these Overtures happily sort with His Majesties and your Grace's mind, and shall accordingly prove effectual in their Ope∣ration, I shall think my self a most happy man, to have any Ob∣lation in so pious a Work for my most Gracious Soveraign and Ma∣ster. More particularly in that your Grace under His Majesty shall be Opifex rerum & mundi melioris Origo. Which I shall incessantly beg in my Prayers at his Hands, who is the giver of all good things, and will never forsake or fail them, who do not first fail and fall from him, the God of Mercy and Peace, with which I remain ever more, Your Grace's most Dutiful and obliged Servant, WILLIAM BOSWELL. Hague in Holland, Sept. 9. 1640. Stylo loci. I have not dar'd to trust this business (without a Cipher) but by a sure hand, for which reason, I have sent the Bearer my Secretary Express, but he knows nothing of the Contents thereof. Superscrib'd For your Grace. Endors'd by the Arch-Bishop with his own hand. Received Sept. 10 1640. Sir WILLIAM BOSWELL, About the Plot against the King.
ANDREAS ab HABERNFELD's Letter to the Arch-Bishop, concerning the Plot revealed to him, written by him in Latin. Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord, ALL my senses are shaken together as often as I revolve the present business, neither doth my Understanding suffice, to conceive what Wind hath brought such horrid things, that they should see the Sun-shine by me: for unexpectedly this good Man became known unto me, who when he had heard me discoursing of these Scotch stirs, said, that I knew not the Nerve of the business, that those things which are commonly scattered abroad are superficial. From that hour he every day became more familiar to me, who acknowledging my dexterity herein, with a full breast poured forth the burdens of his heart into my bosom, suppo∣sing that he had discharged a burden of Conscience wherewith he was pressed. Hence he related to me the Factions of the Jesuits, with which the whole earthly World was assaulted; and shewed, that I might behold how through their Poison, Bohemia and Ger∣many were devoured, and both of them maimed with an irrepara∣ble wound; that the same Plague did creep through the Realms of England and Scotland, the matter whereof, revealed in the adjacent writing, he discovered to me: Which things having heard, my Bowels were contracted together, my Loyns trembled with horrour, that a pernicious Gulf should be prepared for so many thousands of Souls: With words moving the conscience, I inflamed the mind of the Man; he had scarce one hour concocted my admonitions, but he disclosed all the secrets, and he gave free liberty that I should treat with those whom it concerned, that they might be informed hereof. I thought no delay was to be made about the things: The same hour I went to Sir William Boswell, the King's Leiger, at the Hague, who being tied with an Oath of Secrecy to me, I commu∣nicated the business to him, I admonished him to weigh these things by the Ballance, neither to deser, but act, that those who were in danger might be speedily succoured: He, as becomes an honest Man, mindful of his Duty, and having hearer looked into the business, refused not to obey the Monitions. Moreover, he forthwith caused that an Express should be dispatched, and sent word back again what a most acceptable Oblation this had been to
the King and your Grace; for which we rejoyced from the heart, and we judged, that a sase and favourable Deity had interposed it self in this business, whereby you might be perserved. Now that the verity of the things elated might be confirmed, some principal heads of the conspiracy were purposely pretermitted, that the knowledge of them might be extorted from the circum∣vented Society of the Conspirators. Now the things will be speedily and safely promoted into act, if they be warily proceeded in at Bruxels. By my advice, that day should be observed wherein the Packet of Letters are dis∣patch'd, which under the Title of, To Monsieur Strario Arch-Deacon of Cambray, tyed with one cover, are delivered to the Post-Ma∣ster; such a Packet may be secretly brought back from him, yet it will be unprofitable, because all the inclosed Letters are written Characteristically. Likewise another Packet coming weekly from Rome, which is brought under this superscription, To the most Illu∣strious Lord Count Rossetti, Legat for the time; these are not to be neglected: To whom likewise Letters writ in the same Characters are included. That they may be understood, Reade is to be con∣sulted with. The forenamed day of dispatch shall be expected: In Reade's House an accumulated congregation may be circumven∣ted; which succeeding, it will be your Graces part to order the business. The intestine enemy being at length detected by God's Grace, all bitterness of mind, which is caused on either side may be abolished, buried in oblivion, deleted and quieted, the enemy be invaded on both parts: Thus the King and the Kings Friend, and both Kingdoms neer to danger, shall be preserved and deli∣vered from eminent danger. Your Grace likewise may have this injunction by you, if you desire to have the best advice given you by others, That you trust not overmuch to your Pursevants, for some of them live under the stipend of the Popish Party. How many Rocks, how many Scilla's, how many displeased Charybdes appear before your Grace, in what a dangerous Sea, the Cock-boat of your Graces life, next to Shipwrack, is tossed, your self may judge; the Fore-deck of the Ship is speedily to be driven to the Harbour. All these things (I whisper) into your Grace's ear, for I
know it bound with an Oath of Secrecy; therefore by open name, I would by these Presents become known to your Grace, Hague Sept. 14. S. N. 1640. Your Graces most observant, and most officious, Andrew Habernfeld. Superscribed by Andreas ab Habernfeld, a Noble Bohemian, Dr. of Physick to the Queen of Bohemia, Illustrissimo ac Reverendissimo Dom. Domino Gulielmo Archiepiscopo Cantuari∣ensi, Primati & Metropolitano totius Regni Angliae Dom. meo. The Arch-Bishops Indorsement with his own Hand. Received, Octob. 14. 1640. Andreas ab Habernfeld. His Letters sent by Sir William Boswell, about the discovery of the Treason. I conceive by the English Latin herein, that he must needs be an English∣man, with a concealed and changed name. And yet it may be this kind of Latin may relate to the Italian. Or else he lived some good time in England The Declaration of this Treason I have by His Ma∣jesties special Command, sent to Sir W. Boswell, that he may there see what proof can be made of any particulars. The general OVERTURE and DISCOVERY of the PLOT, sent with Sir William Boswell's first Letter, and written in Latin. The King's Majesty and the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury are to be secretly informed by Letters, 1. THat the King's Majesty, and the Lord Arch-Bishop are both of them in great danger of their lives. 2. That the whole Common-wealth is by this means endangered, unless the mischief be speedily prevented. 3. That these Scotch Troubles are raised, to the end, that un∣der this pretext, the King and Arch-Bishop might be destroyed. 4. That there is a means to be prescribed, whereby both of them in this case may be preserved, and this Tumult speedily composed.
5. That although these Scotch Tumults be speedily composed, yet that the King is endangered, and that there are many ways, by which destruction is plotted to the King and Lord Arch-Bishop. 6. That a certain Society hath conspired the Death of the King, and Lord Arch-Bishop, and Convulsion of the whole Realm. 7. That the same Society, every Week deposits with the Presi∣dent of the Society, what Intelligence every of them hath purcha∣sed in eight days search, and then confer all into one Packet, which is weekly sent to the Director of the Business. 8. That all the Confederates in the said conspiracy may verily be named by the Poll. But because they may be made known by other means, it is thought meet to defer it till hereafter. 9. That there is a ready means, whereby the Villany may be discovered in one moment, the chief Conspirators circumvented, and the primary Members of the Conjuration apprehended in the very act. 10. That very many about the King, who are accounted most faithful and intimate, to whom likewise the more secret things are intrusted, are Traytors to the King, corrupted with a Foreign Pension, who communicate all secrets of greater or lesser moment to a Foreign Power. These and other most secret things, which shall be necessary to be known for the security of the King, may be revealed, if these things shall be acceptable to the Lord Arch-Bishop. Likewise they may be assured, that whatsoever things are here proposed, are no Figments, or Fables, nor vain Dreams, but such real Verities, which may be demonstrated in every small tittle. For those who thrust themselves into this business, are such men, who mind no gain, but the very zeal of Christian Charity suffers them not to conceal these things: Yet both from His Majesty and the Lord Arch-Bishop some small exemplar of gratitude will be expected. All these premises have been communicated under good Faith, and the Sacrament of an Oath, to Mr. Leiger Embassadour of the King of Great Britain, at the Hague; that he should not immediately trust, or communicate these things to any mortal, besides the King, and the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Subscribed, &c. Present, &c. Hague, Com. 6. Sept. 1640. In the Style of the Place. The Arch-Bishops own Indorsement. Recieved Sept. 10. 1640. The Plot against the King.
The Arch-Bishop of Canterburies Letter to the King, concerning the PLOT; with the King's Directions in the Margin, written with his own hand. [I beseech your Majesty read these Letters as they are Endorsed by Figures, 1, 2, 3, &c.] May it please your Majesty, AS great as the Secret is which comes here∣with, yet I choose rather to send it in this silent covert way, and I hope safe, than to come thither, and bring it my self. First, Ye had reason so to do. because I am no way able to make hast enough with it. Secondly, because should I come at this time, and antedate the meeting, Sept. 24. there would be more jealousie of the business, and more enquiry after it: Especially, if I be∣ing once there, should return again before that day, as I must, if this be followed, as is most fit. The danger it seems is eminent, and laid by God knows whom; but to be executed by them which are very near about you. (For the great honour which I have to be in danger with you, or for you, I pass not, so your Sacred Person, and the State may be safe.) Now, may it please It is an unanswerable Dilemma. your Majesty, This information is either true, or there is some mistake in it: If it be true, the Persons which make the Discovery will deserve thanks and reward; if there should be any mi∣stake in it, your Majesty can lose nothing but a little silence. The business, (if it be) is extream foul. The I concur totally with you in opinion, assuring you, that no body doth, or shall know of this business; and to shew my care to conceal it, I re∣ceived this but this Afternoon, and now I make this dispatch before I sleep. Here∣with I send his War∣rant, as you advise, which indeed I judge to be the better way. Discovery thus by God's Providence offered, seems fair. I do hereby humbly beg it upon my knees of your Majesty, that you will conceal this business from every creature, and his name that sends this to me. And I send his Letters to me, to your Majesty, that you may see his sence
both of the business and the Secrecy. And such Instructions as you think fit to give him, I be∣seech you let them be in your own hand for his Warrant, without imparting them to any. And if your Majesty leave it to his descretion to fol∣low it there in the best way he can, that in your own hand will be Instruction and Warrant e∣nough for him. And if you please to return it herewith presently to me, I will send an express away with it presently. In the mean time, I have by this Express re∣turned I like your answer extreme well, and do promise not to deceive your considence, nor make you break your word. him this Answer, That I think he shall do well to hold on the Treaty with these men, with all care and secrecy, and drive on to the Dis∣covery, so soon as the business is ripe for it, that he may assure himself and them, they shall not want reward, if they do the Service. That for my part he shall be sure of Secrecy, and that I am most confident, that your Majesty will not impart it to any. That he have a special eye to the eighth and ninth Proposition. Sir, for God's sake, and your own safety, Se∣crecy in this Business: And I beseech you, send I have sent all back. I think these Apostyles will be warrant e∣nough for you to pro∣ceed, especially, when I expresly command you to do so. me back this Letter, and all that comes with it, speedily and secretly, and trust not your own Pockets with them. I shall not eat, nor sleep in quiet, till I receive them. And so soon as I have them again, and your Majesties Warrant to pro∣ceed, no diligence shall be wanting in me to help on the Discovery. This is the greatest business that ever was put In this I am as far from condemning your judgement, as suspe∣cting your Fidelity. to me. And if I have herein proposed, or done any thing amiss, I most humbly crave your Ma∣jesties pardon. But I am willing to hope I have not herein erred in judgment, and in fidelity I York, Sept. C. R. 13. 1640. never will. These Letters came to me on, Thursday, Sept. 10. at night, and I sent these away according to the date hereof, being extreamly wearied with writing this Letter, copying out those other which come with this, and dispatching my Letters back to him that sent these, all in my own
hand. Once again secrecy for God's sake, and your own. To his most blessed protection I commend your Majesty and all your Affairs: And am, Lambeth, Sept. 11. 1640. Your Majesties most humble faithful Servant, W. Cant. The Arch-Bishop's Postscript. As I had ended these, whether with the labour or indignation, or both, I fell into an extreme faint Sweat; I pray God keep me from a Feaver, of which three are down in my Family at Croyden. These Letters came late to me, the express being beaten back by the wind. The Arch-Bishops Indorsement with his own hand. Received from the King, Sept. 16. 1640. The King's Answer to the Plot against him, &c. Superscrib'd by the Arch-Bishop, For your Sacred Majesty: By the King, Yours Apostyled. Sir William Boswel's second Letter to the Arch-Bishop. May it please your Grace, THis evening late I have received your Graces dispatch, with the enclosed from His Majesty, by my Secretary Oveart, and shall give due account with all possible speed of the same, according to His Majesties and your Graces Commands, praying heartily that my endeavours, which shall be most faithful, may also prove effectual, to His Majesties and your Grace's content, with which I do most humbly take leave, being always Hague, Sept. 24. 1640. S. Angelo. Your Graces most dutiful and humblest Servant, William Boswell. The Arch-Bishop's Indorsement. Received, Sept. 30. 1640. Sir William Boswell his acknowledgement, that he hath received the King's Directions in my Letters.
Sir William Boswell's third Letter to the Arch-Bishop. sent with the larger Discovery of the PLOT. May it please your Grace, UPon receipt of His Majesties Commands, with your Grace's Letters of 9, and 18, Sept. last, I dealt with the party to make good his Offers formerly put in mine hand, and transmitted to your Grace: This he hopes to have done, by the inclosed, so far as will be needful for His Majesties satisfaction; yet if any more particular explanation or discovery shall be re∣quired by His Majesty or your Grace, He hath promised to add thereunto, whatsoever he can remember, and knows of truth. And for better assurance and verification of his integrity, he pro∣fesseth himself ready (if required) to make Oath of what he hath already declared, or shall hereafter declare in the business. His name he conjures me still to conceale, though he thinks His Majesty and your Grace, by the Character he gives of himself, will easily imagin who he is, having been known so generally through Court and City, as he was for three or four years, in the quality and imployment he acknowlegeth (by his Declaration in∣closed) himself to have held. Hereupon he doth also redouble his most humble and earnest Suit unto His Majesty and your Grace, to be most secret and circumspect in the business, that he may not be suspected to have discovered, or had a hand in the same. I shall here humbly beseech your Grace to let me know what I may further do for His Majesties service, or for your Graces particular behoof; that I may accordingly endeavour to approve my self, As I am, Hague, Octob. 15. 1640. Your Grace's mest dutiful and obliged Servant, William Boswell. The Arch-Bishop's Indorsment. Received Octob. 14. 1640. Sir William Boswell in prosecution of the great business. If any thing come to him in Cyphers, to send it to him.
The large particular Discovery of the PLOT and Treason against the King, Kingdom, and Protestant Religion, and to raise the Scotish Wars, written in Latin. Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord, WE have willingly and cordially perceived, that our offers have been acceptable both to his Royal Majesty, and likewise to your Grace. This is the only Index to us, That the blessing of God is present with you, whereby a spur is given, that we should so much the more chearfully and freely utter and detest those things whereby the hazard of both your lives, the subversion of the Realm and State both of England and Scotland, the tumbling down of his Excellent Majesty from his Throne, is intended. Now lest the discourse should be en∣larged with superfluous circumstances, we will only premise some things which are meerly necessary to the business. You may first of all know, that this good man, by whom the ensuing things are detected, was born and bred in the Popish Religion, who spent many years in Ecclesiastical dignities. At length being found fit for the expedition of the present Design, by the counsel and mandate of the Lord Cardinal Barbarini, he was adjoyned to the assistance of Master Cuneus (Con) by whom he was found so diligent and sedulous in his Office, that hope of great promotion was given to him. Yet he, led by the instinct of the good Spirit, hath, howsoever it be, contemned sweet promises, and having known the vanities of the Pontifician Religion (of which he had sometime been a most severe defender) having likewise noted the malice of those who fight under the Popish banner, felt his Conscience to be burdened; which burden that he might ease himself of, he converted his mind to the Orthodox Religion. Soon after, that he might exonerate his Conscience, he thought fit, that a desperate Treason, machinated against so many souls, was to be revealed, and that he should receive ease if he vented such things in the bosom of a friend: which done, he was seriously admonished by the said friend, that he should shew an example of his conversion and charity, and free so many innocent souls from imminent, danger To whose monitions he willingly consented,
and delivered the following things to be put in writing, out of which the Articles not long since tendered to your Grace, may be clearly explicated and demonstrated. 1. First of all, that the hinge of the business may be rightly discerned, it is to be known, that all those factions with which Christendom is at this day shaken, do arise from the Jesuitical Off-spring of Cham, of which four Orders abound throughout the World. Of the first Order are Ecclesiasticks, whose Office it is to take care of things promoting Religion. Of the second Order are Politicians, whose Office it is by any means to shake, trouble, and reform the state of Kingdoms and Republicks. Of the third Order are Seculars, whose property it is to obtrude themselves into Offices with Kings and Princes, to insinuate and immix themselves in Court businesses, bargains and sales, and to be busied in civil affairs. Of the fourth Order are Intelligencers, (or Spies) men of inferiour condition, who submit themselves to the services of great men, Princes, Barons, Noble-men, Citizens, to deceive (or corrupt) the minds of their masters. 2. A Society of so many Orders, the Kingdom of England nourisheth: for scarce all Spain, France, and Italy, can yield so great a multitude of Jesuits, as London alone; where are found more than 50 Scotish Jesuits. There the said society hath elected to it self a Seat of iniquity, and hath conspired against the King, and the most faithful to the King, especially the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and likewise against both Kingdoms. 3. For it is more certain than certainty it self, that the fore∣named society hath determined to effect an universal reformation of the Kingdom of England and Scotland. Therefore the deter∣mination of the end, necessarily infers a determination of means to the end. 4. Therefore to promote the undertaken Villany, the said society dubbed it self with the Title of, The Congregation of propagating the Faith; which acknowledgeth the Pope of Rome the Head of the College, and Cardinal Barbarini his substitute and Executor. 5. The chief Patron of the society at London, is the Popes Legat, who takes care of the business; into whose bosom, these dregs of Traytors weekly deposite all their Intelligences. Now the residence of this Legation was obtained at London in the name
of the Roman Pontiff, by whose mediation it might be lawful for Cardinal Barbarini to work so much the more easily and safely upon the King and Kingdom. For none else could so freely circumvent the King, as he who should be palliated with the Popes Authority. 6. Master Cuneus did at that time enjoy the Office of the Popes Legat, an Universal Instrument of the conjured society, and a serious Promoter of the business, whose secrets, as likewise those of all other Intelligencers, the present good man, the Commu∣nicator of all these things, did revive and expedite whither the business required. Cuneus set upon the chief men of the Kingdom, and left nothing unattempted, by what means he might corrupt them all, and in∣cline them to the pontifician party: he inticed many with various incitements, yea, he sought to delude the King himself with gifts of Pictures, Antiquities, idols, and of other vanities brought from Rome, which yet would prevail nothing with the King. Having entred familiarity with the King, he is often requested at Hampton Court, likewise at London, to undertake the Cause of the Palatine, and that he would interpose his Authority, and by his intercession perswade the Legat of Colen, that the Palatine, in the next Diet to treat of peace, might be inserted into the Conditions; which verily he promised, but performed the con∣trary. He writ indeed, that he had been so desired by the King concerning such things, yet he advised that they should not be consented to, lest peradventure it might be said by the Spaniard, that the Pope of Rome had patronized an heretical Prince. In the mean time, Cuneus smelling from the Archbishop, most trusty to the King, that the Kings mind was wholly pendulous (or doubtful,) Resolved, That he would move every stone, and apply his forces, that he might gain him to his party: Cer∣tainly confiding, that he had a means prepared. For he had a command to offer a Cardinals Cap to the Lord Archbishop in the name of the Pope of Rome, and that he should allure him also with higher promises, that he might corrupt his sincere mind. Yet a fitting occasion was never given, whereby he might insinuate himself into the Lord Archbishop. Free access was to be gained by the Earl and Countess of A — likewise Secretary W — The intercession of all which being neglected, he did flie the company or familiarity of Cuneus, worse than the plague: He was likewise perswaded by others of no mean rank, well known to him, neither yet was he moved.
7. Another also was assayed, who hindred access to the detestable wickedness, Secretary Cook, he was a most bitter hater of the Jesuits, whom he intercepted from acces, to the King, he entertained many (of them) according to their deserts, he diligently enquired into their factions; by which means every incitement, breathing a magnetical (attractive) power to the Popish party, was ineffectual with him; for nothing was so dear unto him, that might incline him to wickedness. Hereupon being made odious to the Patrons of the Conspiracy, he was endangered to be discharged from his Office; it was laboured for three years space, and at last obtained. Yet notwithstanding there remained on the Kings part a knot hard to be untied, for the Lord Arch-Bishop, by his constancy, interposed himself as a most hard rock. When Cuneus had understood from the Lord Arch-Bishops part, that he had laboured in vain, his malice and the whole Societies waxed boyling hot: soon after ambushes began to be prepared, wherewith the Lord Arch-Bishop together with the King should be taken. Likewise a sentence is passed against the King (for whose sake all this business is disposed) because nothing is hoped from him which might seem to promote the Popish Religion; but especially when he had opened his mind, that he was of this opinion, That every one might be saved in his own Religion, so as he be an honest and pious man. 8. To perpetrate the Treason undertaken, the criminal Execu∣tion at Westminster, caused by some Writings of Puritans, gave occasion of the first Fire: which thing was so much exasperated and exaggerated by the Papists to the Puritans, that if it remained un∣revenged, it would be thought a blemish to their Religion; The Flames of which Fire, the Scotch Book of Prayers increases, occa∣sioned by it's alterations. 9. In this heat, a certain Scotish Earl, called Maxfield, if I mistake not, was expedited to the Scots by the Popish Party; with whom two other Scotish Earls, Papists, held correspondency: He was to stir up the People to Commotion, and rub over the injury afresh, that he might enflame their minds, precipitate them to Arms, by which the hurtful disturber of the Scotish Liberty might be slain. 10. By this one labour, snares are prepared for the King; for this purpose the present business was so ordered, That very many of the English should adhere to the Scots; That the King should remain inferiour in Arms, who (thereupon) should be compelled
to crave assistance from the Papists, which yet he should not obtain, unless he would descend unto conditions, by which he should per∣mit Universal liberty of the exercise of the Popish Religion; for so the affairs of the Papists would succeed according to their desire. To which consent, if he should shew himself more difficult, there should be a present remedy at hand. The King is to be dispatched: For an Indian Nut, stuffed with most sharp Poyson, is kept in the So∣ciety (which Cuneus at that time shewed often to me in a boasting manner) wherein a Poyson was prepared for the King; after the Example of his Father. 11. In this Scottish Commotion, the Marquess of Hamilton, often dispatched to the Scots in the Name of the King, to interpose the Royal Authority, whereby the heat of minds might be mittigated, returned notwithstanding as often without fruit, and without ending the Business: His Chaplain at that time repaired to us, who com∣municated some things secretly with Cuneus. Being demanded of me in jest, Whether also the Jews agreed with the Samaritans? Cuneus thereunto answered; Would to God all Ministers were such as he: What you will may be hence conjectured. 12. Things standing thus, there arrived at London from Cardinal Richelieu, Mr. Thomas Chamberlaine, his Chaplain and Almoner, a Scot by Nation, who was to assist the College of the confederate Society, and seriously to set forward the Business, to leave nothing unattempted, whereby the first heat might be exasperated. For which service he was promised the reward of a Bishoprick; He cohabited with the Society four Months space; neither was it lawful for him first to depart, until things succeeding according to his wish, he might be able to return back again with good news. 13. Sir Toby Matthew, a Jesuited Priest, of the Order of Politici∣ans, a most vigilant man of the chief heads, to whom a Bed was never so dear, that he would rest his head thereon, refreshing his Body with sleep in a Chair for an hour, or two, neither day nor night spared his Machinations; a Man principally noxious, and himself the Plague of the King and Kingdom of England; a most impudent man, who flies to all Banquets and Feasts, called or not called; never quiet, always in action and perpetual motion; thrusting himself into all Conversations of Superiours; he urgeth Conferences familiarly, that he may fish out the minds of Men; What ever he observeth thence, which may bring any commodity, or discommodity to the part of the Conspirators, he communicates to the Pope's Legat; the more secret things he himself writes to the Pope, or to Cardinal Barbarini. In sum, he adjoins himself to
any mans company; no word can be spoken, that he will not lay hold on, and accommodate to his Party. In the mean time, what∣ever he hath fished out, he reduceth into a Catalogue, and every Summer carrieth it to the general Consistory of the Jesuits Politicks, which secretly meets together in the Province of Wales, where he is an acceptable guest. There Counsels are secretly hammered, which are most meet for the Convulsion of the Ecclesiastic, and Po∣litic Estate of both Kingdoms. 14. Captain Read, a Scot, dwelling in Long-acre-street, near the Angel Tavern, a secular Jesuit, who for his detestable office performed (whereby he had perverted a certain Minister of the Church, with secret incitements to the Popisn Religion, with all his Family, taking his Daughter to Wife) for a recompence, obtained a Rent, or Impost upon Butter, which the Country People are bound to render to him, procured for him by some chief men of the Society, who never want a spur, whereby he may be constantly detained in his Office. In his House the business of the whole Plot is concluded, where the Society, which hath conspired against the King, the Lord Arch-Bishop, and both Kingdoms, meet together, for the most part every day: But on the day of the Carriers (or Posts) dispatch, which is or∣dinarily Friday, they meet in greater numbers; for then all the In∣telligencers assemble, and confer in common, what things every of them hath fished out that Week; who, that they may be with∣out suspition, send their secrets by Sir Toby Matthew, or Read him∣self, to the Pope's Legat; he transmits the compacted Packet, which he hath purchased from the Intelligencers, to Rome. With the same Read, the Letters brought from Rome are deposired, under fained Titles and Names, and by him are delivered to all to whom they appertain: For all and every of their Names are known to him. Upon the very same occasion, Letters also are brought hither un∣der the covert of Father Philip; (he notwithstanding, being igno∣rant of things) from whom they are distributed to the Conspirators. There is in that very House, a publick Chappel, wherein an or∣dinary Jesuit Consecrates, and dwells there. In the said Chappel Masses are daily celebrated by the Jesuits, and it serves for the Bap∣tizing of the Children of the House, and of some of the Con∣spirators. Those who assemble in the forenamed House, come frequently in Coaches, or on Horse-back in Lay-mens Habit, and with a great Train, wherewith they are disguised, that they may not be known, yet they are Jesuits, and conjured members of the Society.
15. All the Papists of England contribute to this Assembly, lest any thing should be wanting to promote the undertaken Design. Out of whose Treasury, a Widow, owner of the Houses, wherein Secretary W. now dwelleth, dead above three Years since, be∣stowed forty Thousand English Pounds; so likewise others contri∣buted above their abilities, so as the business may be promoted un∣to its desired end. 16. Besides the foresaid Houses, there are Conventicles also kept in other more secret places, of which they dare not confide, even among themselves, for fear lest they should be discovered. First, every of them are called to certain Inns, (one not knowing of the other;) hence they are severally led by Spies to the place where they ought to meet; otherwise ignorant where they ought to assemble, lest peradventure they should be surprised at unawares. 17. The Countess of A — a strenuous She-Champion of the Popish Religion, bends all her Nerves to the Universal Reformation; whatsoever she hears at the King's Court, that is done secretly, or openly, in words or deeds, she presently imparts to the Pope's Legat, with whom she meets thrice a day. Sometimes in A — House, now at the Court, then at Tarthal. He scarce sucks such things by the Claw. The Earl himself, called now about three years since, this year ought to go to Rome, without doubt to consult there of serious things concerning the Design. At Greenwich, at the Earls cost, a Feminine School is maintained, which otherwise is a Monastery of Nuns; for the young Girls there∣in, are sent forth hither and thither, into Foreign Monasteries beyond the Seas. Mr. P — of the King's Bed-Chamber, most addicted to the Popish Religion, is a bitter enemy of the King, he reveals all his greatest Secrets to the Pope's Legat; although he very rarely meets with him, yet his Wife meets him so much the oftner, who being informed by her Husband, conveys secrets to the Legat. In all his actions, he is nothing inferiour to Sir Toby Matthew; it cannot be ut∣tered, how diligently he watcheth on the business. His Sons are secretly instructed in the Popish Religion; openly, they profess the Reformed. The eldest is now to receive his Fathers Office, under the King which shall be. A Cardinal's Hat is provided for the other, if the Design shall succeed well. Above three Years past, the said Mr. P — was to be sent away by the King to Marocco; but he was prohibited by the Society, lest the business should suffer delay thereby.
He is a Patron of the Jesuits, for whom, for the exercise of Religion, he provides Chappels both at home and abroad. Secretary W — a most fierce Papist, is the most unfaithful to the King of all men, who not only betrays and reveals even the King's greatest secrets, but likewise communicates Counsels, by which the Design may be best advanced. He, at least thrice every Week, converseth with the Legat in Nocturnal Conventicles, and reveals those things which he thinks fit to be known; for which end, he hired a House near to the Legats House, whom he often resorts to, through the Garden door; for by this vicinity, the meeting is fa∣cilitated. The said Secretary is bribed with Gifts to the Party of that con∣jured Society, by whom he is sustained, that he may the more seri∣ously execute his Office. He sent his Son expresly to Rome, who was to insinuate himself into the Roman Pontif. Sir D — Sir W — Mr. M — the younger, who hath been at Rome; my Lord S — a Cousen of the Earl of A — the Countess of N — the Dutchess of B — and many others, who have sworn into this Conspiracy, are all most vigilant in the Design. Some of these are inticed with the hope of Court, others of Po∣litical Offices; Others attend to the sixteen Cardinals Caps that are vacant, which are therefore detained idle for some years, that they may impose a vain hope on those who expect them. The President of the aforesaid Society was my Lord Gage, a Jesuit Priest, dead above three years since. He had a Palace ador∣ned with lascivious Pictures, which counterfeited Profaneness in the House, but with them was palliated a Monastery, wherein forty Nuns were maintained, hid in so great a Palace: It is situated in Queen-street, which the Statue of a Golden Queen adorns. The secular Jesuits have bought all this Street, and have design'd it into a Quadrangle, where a Jesuitical College is built in private, with this hope, that it might be openly finished, as soon as the univer∣sal reformation was begun. The Pope's Legat useth a threefold Character or Cipher; one of which he communicates with all Nuncioes; another, with Car∣dinal Barbarini only; with a third, he covers some greater secrets to be communicated. Whatsoever things he either receiveth from the Society, or other Spies, those he packs up together in one bundle, dedicated under this Inscription; To Monsieur Stravio, Arch-deacon of Cambray: From whom at last they are promoted to Rome.
These things being thus ordered, if every thing be laid to the Ballance, it will satisfie in special, all the Articles pro∣pounded. WHEREIN 1. THe Conspiracy against the King and Lord Arch-Bishop is detected, and the means whereby ruin is threatned to both, demonstrated. 2. The eminent dangers of both Kingdoms are rehearsed. 3. The rise and progress of that Scottish Fire is related. 4. Means whereby these Scottish Troubles may be appeased, are suggested: For after the Scots shall know by whom and to what end their minds are incensed, they will speedily look to themselves, neither will they suffer the Forces of both parts to be subdued, lest a middle party interpose, which seeks the ruin of both. 5. With what Sword the King's Throat is assaulted, even when these stirs shall be ended, Cuneus his Confession, and a visible De∣monstration, sheweth. 6. The place of the Assembly in the House of Captain Read is nominated 7. The day of the eight days dispatch by Read and the Legat is prescribed 8. How the names of the Conspirators may be known. 9. Where this whole Congregation may be circumvented. 10. Some of the Principal unfaithful ones of the King's Party are notified by name; many of whose names occur not, yet their habitations are known; their names may be easily extorted from Read. If these things be warily proceeded in, the strength of the whole business will be brought to light; so the arrow being foreseen, the danger shall be avoided; which that it may prosperously succeed, the Omnipotent Creator grant. The Arch-Bishops Indorsement with his own hand. Received, October 14. 1640. The Narration of the great Treason, concerning which he promised to Sir William Boswell to discover, against the King and State.
Historical Remarks ON THE JESUITS. WHoever shall Compare the before-recited PLOT against King Charles the First, of Glorious Memory, with that against His most Sacred Majesty now Reigning; shall find them so like in all the Parts and Circumstances, that never were two Brothers more: the Design the same, the Contrivance the same, the Working and Machi∣nation, all moving upon the same Wheels of KING-killing, and State-destru∣ction; and in reference to Condition, Quality, Religion, and Motive, the Con∣spirators the very same. From whence it follows, that there is no such Im∣probability of the Late discovered PLOT, as the Papists would have us believe. An ill Name is half a Conviction; Quo semel est imbuta recens, & naturam ex∣pellas furcalicet, are the Jesuits Morals: Plot, Contrivance, and Cruelty are so much the Essential Attributes of Jesuitism, as if like so many Romulusses and Remusses they had suckt the Milk of Wolves rather than of Christian Mothers, that when you hear of Plots and Designs against Kings and Princes, you may be assur'd what sort of Cyclops were the Forgers of such Conspiracies. Neither is this bare Allegation, but Matter of Fact, there being nothing more frequently taught, nor more frequently practis'd, than the rebellious Principles of the Jesuits and their Adherents. How abominably the Reigns of several of our Princes here in England has been pester'd with this Generation of Vipers and Blood-suckers, the Penal Statutes of the Kingdom, and the utter Expulsion of the Popish Priests and Jesuits out of the Nation, are convincing Evidences. And as to their Behaviour in other Countries, take this following Account. First then it is a Maxim most true and undoubted, That a Vacuum in Nature may be as soon allow'd, as that there is any Court of King of Prince where these Jesuits do not swarm and abound, if they can but creep in at the least Creviss. To come to particulars, we will begin with Portugal, a Kingdom altogether acknowledging the Papal Jurisdiction. In the Year 1578. the Jesuits perswaded Sebastian King of that Kingdom, to undertake that Fatal Expedition into Africa, to the end that by his ruin they might transfer the Kingdom to the Dominion of the Spaniard. The Success an∣swer'd their Expectation; for Sebastian being cut off, together with his Son, and the greatest part of the Portugal Nobility, presently Philip King of Spain prepares to invade Portugal with two powerful Armies: But well knowing how little Right he had on his side, and how much he should be censur'd as well in Italy as in Portugal for such an Action, he began to make it a Point of Con∣science, and referr'd his Scruples to be discuss'd by the Jesuits and Franciscans in the Colledge of Alcana de Henares, and of them he desires to know, Whether if it were apparent that he had a Right to the Crown of Portugal by the Death of Henry, he were not oblig'd in Conscience to submit himself to some Tribunal, that should adjudge the Kingdom to him. Secondly, Whether if the Portugals
should refuse to admit him for their King before the difference were decided be∣tween the Competitors, he might not by force of Arms Invest himself in the Kingdom by his own Authority. To which the Jesuits and Pranciscans made answer, That Philip was bound by no tye of Conscience to subject himself to the Will of another, but might act as he saw fitting by his own Authority. Which flattering Sentence of those irreligious Cusuists being approved by Philip, he presently began the War. In the heat of which War, the Jesuits were they that would have betray'd the chiefest of the Azores Islands to the Spaniards, which so incens'd the People, that some would have had them try'd for their lives, others would have had them and their Colledge burnt together. In France, Joane Albret Queen of Navarr, was poysoned with a pair of Per∣fumed Gloves, at the procurement of the Jesuits, for being the Patroness of those of the Reformed Religion. That Rebellious League of the Guizes against Henry the Third of France, was carried on and promoted by the Jesuits, both at Paris and other places: Inso∣much, that when the League got strength and began to appear, the Jesuits making a wrong use of their Power of Confessing and Absolving, would Ab∣solve none that professed themselves obedient Subjects to the King. This un∣fortunate Prince was not only harrass'd and tormented by this Villanous and Jesuitical League, not only driven out of his chief City, but at length at the Instigation of the Jesuits, stabb'd and murder'd by a Dominican Monk, by them procur'd. The Murder was also applauded by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, in a long Oration spoke in a full Consistory of Cardinals in these words: That a Monk (saith he) should kill the unfortunate King of France in the midst of his Army, was a rare, noble, and memorable Act. And a little further, This Act, saith he, was done by the Providence of God, design'd by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; a far greater Act than that of Judith, who slew Holofernes. Expressions rather be∣coming the Mouth of a Devil, than of a Vicar of Christ. After him Henry the Fourth was first attempted by Barrier, exhorted and confirm'd in the lawfulness of the Fact by Varada the Jesuit, and others of the same Gang. Secondly by John Castell, at the Instigation of Gueret and Guig∣nard, both Jesuits: And Francis Verona the Jesuit, publisht an Apology in vindi∣cation and justification of the Fact: And lastly, murder'd out-right by Francis Ravaillac a great Disciple of the Jesuits. And for no worse Pranks than these, they were banished out of France by Decree of Parliament, As Corrupters of Youth, Disturbers of the public Peace, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom. Truly very honourable Characters for those that pretend to be of the Society of Jesus. The Venetians expell'd them upon this occasion: The Senate observing that the Ecclesiastics, especially the Jesuits, began to engross Lands and Houses of their Territories under the pretence of Legacies, to the great damage of the Pub∣lic Income, thought it convenient to put a stop to this Jesuitical Engrossment; and provide by Law that Ecclesiastical Persons should not possess all the Tem∣poral Estates in their Territories to themselves, but give leave for others to share with them, it being positively against the Constitution of their Order, and the Institution of Christ their Founder. The Jesuits took this in great dudgeon, and wrote to Pope Paul the Fifth about it. The Venetians being summon'd to answer, would not relinquish their Right, Protesting withal, that they had the Supreme Jurisdiction in their own Terri∣tories, and consequently to make Laws; and that the Pope had nothing to do with them in those Matters. Upon which Answer, the Pope thunders out his Excommunication. The Duke and Senate by public Decree condemn the
Excommunication as unjust and invalid; which done, they call the whole Body of their Clergy, and to them declare how Affairs stood. The elder sort take part with the Commonwealth, and maintain the Argument against the Pope in writing, among whom Paulus Venetus was most eminently Signal: The Jesuits not enduring the kneeness of his Reasons, hire two Ruffians, and upon the fifth of October, 1607. set them to assassinate Paulus Venetus, who thinking they had done his work, left him for dead, and fled away. This was something near Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Case. The Senate hearing this, by a new Law banish the Jesuits for ever out of their Territories, and cut them off from all hope of ever returning: And this was their Fortune in Venice. In the year 1609. the Bohemians made a Complaint to the Emperour against the Jesuits, for the same Encroachments of which the Venetians had accused them before, desiring of Caesar that they might no longer be permitted to trans∣fer and translate into their own possession such ample Patrimonies, under pre∣tence of Donations and Legacies, as they did continually. Of which when the Emperour took little notice, they were by the Bohemian States themselves in the year 1618. utterly expelled out of that Nation for ever, with these Characters: 1. That they were lavish Wasters of the Public Peace and Tran∣quility of the Nation. 2. That they endeavour'd to subject all Kingdoms and Nations to the Power of the Pope. 3. That they did nothing but set the Ma∣gistrates together by the Ears. 4. That they made particular Advantage of Confessions, to the destruction of the people: with many other Crimes of the same nature. The same year they were expell'd out of Moravia for the same Reasons; and the next year out of Hungaria for the same Causes. In Silesia also a Decree was made, That the Jesuits should not enter that Province upon pain of Death, as being the onely means to preserve peace in the Nation. As to other Villanies in Poland, a Polonian Knight, himself a Papist, in an O∣ration by him made in a full Assembly of the Polonian Nobility, declares, That Cracow the most Famous City of Poland, and Ornament of the Kingdom, was so plagu'd by the Jesuits, that several good men, though Catholicks, affirmed, That they would rather live in the Woods among wild Beasts, than abide in the City. One time among the rest, these Jesuits having brought their Con∣spiracy to perfection, brake into the most ancient Monument of Antiquity in the City, and to the great danger of the whole City, set it on Fire, as being granted to the Evangelics by Consent of the King, and States of the Kingdom. In Posnania another great City of the same Kingdom, they set Fire on the Church belonging to those of the Augustan Confession, and committed so many Insolencies without Controul, that the Nobility refus'd to meet at the Dyet shortly after to be held at Warsaw, resolving to repair further off to Lublin, for the redress of these Misdemeanours. Neither indeed was there any thing more grievously burdensom to that Kingdom than the Pride and Avarice of those Miscreants. In Muscovy, upon the Death of the Great Duke Basilowich, the Jesuits set up one Demetrius against the lawful Heir, who had made them large Pro∣mises, if he obtain'd the Dukedom. Thereupon by the help of these Jesuits, the said Demetrius gets Aid from the King of Poland, which was not onely the Occasion of a great War in Muscovy, but had like to have cost them the Alteration of their Laws, and loss of their ancient Customs and Priviledges, had they not prevented it by a desperate Attempt upon the Impostor, and put him to Death; surrounded with Impostors and Jesuits. The Transilvanians publicly and with one Consent laid all the Cause of their
Miseries and Calamities, upon the Subtilties and Contrivances of the Jesuits, for which reason by a Public Decree of the States of that Province, they were Ejected out of the limits of their Territories. Nevertheless they secretly fo∣mented the Ruin of that Country, and were the reason that Sigismund Bathor involv'd himself in War and Trouble, and at length died an inglorious and miserable Death. By their Contrivance also Stephen Potski, Prince of Transilvania, opposing their Bloody Sect, was put out of the way, as they call it, by Poyson, in the year 1607. In Styria and Carinthia, Provinces of Germany, they never left till they had voided those Provinces of all the Inhabitants of the Reformed Religion. In Holland, they never left till they saw the Blood of William Prince of Orange, spilt by the trayterous Hand of Balthasar Gerard, a Burgundian and Disciple of their own. The same Attempts did Peter de Tour, and other Ruffians make upon the per∣son of Maurice his Son, a brave and Martial Prince, and all at the Instigation of the Jesuits, those Insatiable Sons of BLOOD and PERDITION. A VINDICATION OF THE Dissenting Protestants, From being Authors of the REBELLION against the late KING, and Plotters of Treason against His MAJESTY now Reigning. SEeing then no Corner of Europe has been free from the Plots and Conspira∣cies of these Jesuitical Fiends, it would be a kind of Crime and sleepy Deser∣tion of our own Safety, to suffer our selves to be charm'd by the Delusions of insinuating Libels and Rumors of Presbyterian Plots, to mistrust the Truth of the continu'd Jesuitical Contrivances against the Kingdom. Neither can they be thought the best Subjects of England, who are so willing to Gratifie the Popish Party, by giving Credence to such idle Surmizes which they can have so little ground to believe. The Jesuits have committed a great piece of Villany in this Nation; they have attempted the Life of the King, and have been Plotting to subvert the Established Religion of the Kingdom, and now they would throw it upon the Presbyterians: Which is a Fourbery so plain, that common Sense and Policy may easily discover the full intent and meaning of it: And there∣fore it is fairly to be hop'd, that neither Presbyterians, nor any other Protestant Dissenters will be so Unchristian-like Disloyal, as to receive any Exasperation
from these Calumnies; but rather unite against the Common Enemy, from whom they can expect no more Mercy, than the severest Champion of Episcopacy can hope for. But you will say, the Presbyterians are not accus'd of any Design to bring in Popery, but miraculously discover'd, as the Authors of a Plot to set up the Classes of their own Ecclesiastical Government. Well! if it were so, they were the arrantest Bunglers of Plotters that ever plotted Mischief in this World: For I do not find their Plot to be above a years standing; And it was a Plot that was driven on out of pure Kindness to the Papists. For the Presby∣terians understanding that the Papists, (their Incarnate Enemies) were under a Premunire, as being accused of Treason and Conspiracy against the KING and Kingdom; They therefore would needs enter into a Plot, which they would so order as to be discover'd a Twelve-month after, to ease the Papists of the Load they groan'd under. So that as considering the time, it fell out most con∣foundedly unluckily, that the Presbyteriaus should conceal this Plot from the Papists, till so many good, honest, pious and loyal Priests of Baal, and Sons of Belial were hang'd, which would never have been done, had there been the least Inkling given of the Meal-Tub in season. But when the Names of the Persons came to be seen that were to be Actors in this Presbyterian Tragedy, then to the Laughter of the whole World, there never appear'd such a Dow-bak'd Plot out of a Meal-Tub since the Creation, to bring so many Great Men plot∣ting against their own prosperity and enjoyments; so many wise and politie States-men, by whom the Nation has been so long steer'd, to be Plot∣ters and Conspirers against their own Preservation. These are Plots of such a strange Nature, that if they could be thought reall, they would occasion the unhinging of the whole Frame of Order and Government, while it were im∣possible for Honour, Probity, and Reputation to remain upon the Earth. Obe∣dience and Allegiance to Government are grounded either upon Religion, or Moral Vertue; or if these two fail, there is a necessity which obliges the ordi∣nary fore-sight of Prudence. Against these Ambition or Revenge are the only Combatants; but neither Ambition nor Revenge can bear so great a sway in persons that understand the Intrigues of Policy, or the more mysterious management of Prudence, as to delude them into Plots and Conspiracies where there is no prospect of a secure Change. The Presbyterians are a sort of people wary and deliberate: Neither are their Tenents, which had their rise and beginnings from men whom the Papists themselves confess to have been men of great Learning, Eloquence, and Exemplary Lives, of that Crimson Constitution, as to prompt them to lay the Foundations of their Hierarchy in Blood and Massacre; or so deeply to wound the Reputation of the Protestant Religion, by the clandestine Treachery and secret Contrivances of Disloyalty. For as for that Design of the Huguenots under Francis the Second, King of France, of which the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral Coligni were said to be Chief; that was no Design against the Life or Person of the King, but against the exorbitant Pride of the Guises, Duke and Car∣dinal, who were at the same time Papists, and were themselves contriving to take away the Life of the young King, and translate the Royal Dignity into their own Family. Neither could the Civil Wars of France be said to be the Re∣bellion of the Hugonets: But a War of the Queen Regents, and the two Guises own weaving, while they all strove to preserve their own Authority. And the Queen Regent her self was the first that caus'd the Prince of Conde to take Arms, as fearing the Guises would wrest the Government out of her hands, by recom∣mending to his Protection the young King Charles the Ninth her Son, her Self,
and the Kingdom. Nay they were so far from being Rebels to their King, that they joyn'd with the Catholiques for the Recovery of Haure out of the hands of Queen Elizabeth, who had been their Friend: And though the Admiral and Danaelot were not at the Siege, for fear of being tared by the Queen of Ingra∣titude, yet they sent both their Forces and Friends. Some indeed justly de∣served to be blamed for the violence of their Conduct in the late Wars; but it is a Question, of which some make no doubt, whether those Violences were not occasion'd by the Papists in Masquerade, who well knew how to intermix them∣selves both in their Counsels and Actions; whether they did not stand behind the Scene and prompt those Sons of Jehu? Whether they did not pour Oyl up∣on those Flames? For it appears that the Presbyterians (if Names of distinction may be us'd among people of the same Religion) were the first that relented, as is evident by Votes of Addresses, and their Treaty at the Isle of Wight, not broke off by them, but by One that was playing his own Game, and medita∣ting the destruction both of his Sovereign and them too: Who having made his Exit, they then considered what ill Phaetons they had been before, and return'd the more skilful Phoebus the Reins of his Chariot again. But that you may know that 'tis an old Dog-trick of the Papists to play the Devils Incarnate, and lay their most wicked Actions upon the Innocent; I will repeat this short Story out of one of the choicest French Historians, and a Catholique to boot. The Queen Regent of France having long design'd the Destruction of the Pro∣testants in France, and of all the chief Heads of the reformed Religion; and a∣mong the rest of Admiral Coligni, the Life and Soul of the whole Party, projects the Execution, with the Assistance of the Duke of Anjou, the Counts of Tavanes and Raix, and the Chancellor Birague, and easily drew in the young King, whom they made believe that there was no safety so long as those persons were alive, and the young Guises were as ready as she to revenge their Fathers Death. As for the King of Navar, they had so order'd it, that he was to be marry'd at Paris at that time, and that brought the Prince of Conde to the City. But the Admiral more wary kept aloof, till the King had begun the War with Spain in the Low Countries, which the Admiral had so passionately desir'd, and of which the King and Queen Regent, had assur'd him the Management. Then he came an end, seeing the War begun, and two of his own Favourites, Noue and Genlis, at the Head of some thousands in Flanders. And these three Great Personages, the King of Navarr, the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral Co∣ligni, brought such Trains after them, as throng'd all Paris with the Flower of all the Protestant Nobility and Gentry of France: Who being all thus with∣in the Net, Orders were given to make a general Slaughter of all without di∣stinction, excepting the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde. Hence pro∣ceeded that Horrible Massacre in the Year 1572. which lasted for seven Days together, to the destruction of above 5000 persons of all Ages and Sexes; and among these above 600 Persons of Quality. After this Deluge of Blood, and that the Queen had sent the Head of Coligny Embalm'd as a Present to the Pope, the Queen Regent had contriv'd to lay the Load of all the committed Impiety upon the Guises, who were Captains of the Massacre, believing that the Monmor ancies would certainly seek to revenge the Admirals Death upon them: So that while those two Factions ruin'd and de∣stroy'd one another, she might have all the Power in her own hands, and rule according to her own Will. But the Guises being aware of this Design, and having the Catholique Nobility, the Duke of Montpensier, and the Parisians on their side, caus'd the Queen to change her Note; and thereupon she caus'd the King to write abroad, That all was done to prevent the detestable Con∣spiracy
of the Admiral and his Confederates, againsh his Life and Royal Fa∣mily. Thereupon there was a Court of Justice erected, wherein the Ad∣miral was Condemn'd, and after they had murder'd him, Executed again in Effigies, his Goods Confiscated, and his Children degraded: And the better to colour this, two poor innocent Gentlemen that had escaped the Massacre, were apprehended for saving their Lives, Briquemaut, and Arnaud de Co∣vagnes, as his Accomplices, condemn'd to the same punishment, and exe∣cuted accordingly. Thus what these did, our late Plotters would have done: We may then say to all Protestants in general, Felices Agricole sua si bona norint, Happy would they be, would they but know their own strength, Would they but make the right use of these wicked Contrivances of their Enemies, and laying aside all froward Puuctilio's of private Opinions, joyn unanimously against the common Adversary. For if it be a Maxim falsly argu'd against, that Peace and Diversi∣ty of Religions cannot be preserved in the same Nation, as the Ambassadors of the Germane Princes urg'd to Charles the Ninth of France; much more truly may it be said, that little matters of difference between persons of the same Religion can be no impediment to their Union and Conformity. But further to clear the Dissenting Protestants, I shall here add a perfect Nar∣ration of the Management and Contrivance of the Jesuits, to render the greater part of the principal Men in this Kingdom, as well those of the Church of England, as the Dissenters, obnoxious to the Government, thereby utterly to ruin them and the Protestant Religion, which Design God of his infinite Goodness has been pleased to bring to Confusion, and the Instruments thereof through the same Divine Providence, we hope shortly to see brought to Condign Pu∣nishment.
A Compleat HISTORY OF THE LAST PLOT OF THE PAPISTS, UPON THE Dissenting Protestants. THe late PLOT of the Romish Priests and Jesuits for murdering His Majesty, subverting the Government and Protestant Religion, and introducing Popery, being proved by undeniable Evidences and Cir∣cumstances; the cunning Jesuits thought it their best way (since peoples Eyes were too open to be made believe there was no PLOT) to con∣fess there was a Plot, and to aggravate it too; but withal to use their utmost skill to prove, That this Plot was not a Popish-Plot, as was generally believed, but a pure Design of the Presbyterians, and other Dissenters from the Protestant Church of England, to ruin the Loyal Roman Chatholiques, whilst indeed them∣selves were the Conspirators; who (whereas they gave out that the Papists in∣tended by murdering the King, &c. to bring in Popery) really intended by killing His Majesty, to Introduce Presbytery and a Commonwealth, and so at one Blow subvert the Government both in Church and State, and then to set up a new one of their own under the Name of Conservators of the Liberties of England: And for this purpose they had secretly given out Commissions for raising an Army, the principal Officers whereof were such Persons who seem∣ed to have the greatest share in the Peoples Affections. This Design being agreed to by these Hellish Miscreants, all possible Dili∣gence was used to bring it to Execution; and for this purpose they drew up the Scheme of a Government they intended to Impeach several of the truly
Loyal Nobility and Gentry, and the whole Body of Dissenting Protestants, of conspiring. This being done, they began to form Letters of Intelligence con∣cerning this Presbyterian Plot, and also to provide themselves with Persons to Swear for the Truth of their Allegations. To this end Mrs. Cellier (a zealous Papist, and Midwife to the Lady Powis, and other Roman Catholic Ladies) procures the Enlargement of one Wiltoughby, aliàs Dangerfield, aliàs Thomas; aliàs Day, who had been a Prisoner in Newgate about six Weeks, and had been Convicted once at Salisbury Assizes, (where he was fined Five pounds, and sentenced to stand Three several times in the Pillory, which he did twice, and then brake Prison and escaped;) and twice at the Old Bailey, for uttering false Guineys, (where for the first Offence he was fined Fifty pounds, and for the second he got His Majesties Pardon.) He was no sooner released from New∣gate, but he was Arrested and thrown into the Counter, from whence by the means of Bannister and Scarlet she got him removed to the King's-Bench, where (after some fruitless attempts to get some Papers relating to Captain Bedlow from one Strode a Prisoner there) he was furnished with Money by the five Lords in the Tower, viz. the Lord Bellasis, the Lord Powis, the Lord Petre, the Lord Arundel, and the Lord Stafford, (Mrs. Cellier also giving him 5 l.) to Compound all his Debts, &c. Before Mrs. Cellier would discharge him from Newgate, she made tryal of his Wit, by ordering him to draw up Articles ac∣cording as she directed, against Captain Richardson, which he perform'd to her liking, and confirm'd her in the Choice she had made of his being a fit person to carry on the Designed Plot. The general Esteem the Conspirators had of him is evident by the Trust they reposed in him; for though they had several Others to carry on their New Plot, yet he appears to have the chief Manage∣ment of it. Being now sufficiently provided with Instruments to execute their Damna∣ble Designs, this Dangerfield was recommended to His Majesty by a Great Per∣son, as one who was much concerned in a Plot of the Presbyterians against His Life and Government, and that from time to time he would make discovery thereof. Thus they endeavoured to insinuate into His Majesties Mind a belief of the Plot, that he might not be surpriz'd at the Discovery they intended to make. Another of the intended Actors in this Tragedy, was Thomas Courtees, once a Clerk to Sir William Bucknal, one of the Excise Farmers, then a Servant to Mr. Henry Nevil, and after to a worthy Member of Parliament; from whose Service, he fell into a lewd course of life: But being thought a Man fit for the Design in hand, he was entertained for one of the Witnesses. This Person was very industrious in promoting a Belief of this Presbyterian Plot; for being well acquainted with Mrs. Bradley, who keeps the House called Heaven in Old Palace-Yard; and there being a Club of several honest Gentlemen kept at her House, he desired her to bring him into their Company, which she promised to endeavour. Discoursing with her about the late Plot, he told her, that it would shortly appear to be a Plot of the Presbyterians, and that they were pri∣vately giving out Commissions for raising an Army: Whereupon she demand∣ed, who gave out the Commissions; to which he replyed, it was Mr. Blood; and added further, That if she would use her Interest with Mr. Blood, to get a Commission for him, though it were but for an Ensign, he would give her 100 l. and told her also that he should get 5000 l. by it. Mrs. Bradley told this to Mr. Blood, who fearing the Consequence, acquainted His Majesty there∣with, and from Him received Encouragement to make a further Inquiry into this Matter. Mr. Blood hereupon desired the Woman to keep still her Corres∣pendency
with Courtees, and if possible to find out the Mystery of this Business. Courtees came several times afterwards to the House, and discoursed freely with her about the before-mentioned matter, and told her, that he knew seven or eight persons who were employed upon the same account as he was. But that which follows put a stop to his proceedings, and made these wick∣ed Agents carry themselves more warily. The Jesuits thought it not sufficient to throw the Plot upon the Presbyterians; unless they could likewise bring off the Evidence that had sworn against them, and by getting them to recant, put their Innocency out of Question. For this purpose Mr. Dugdale, one of the Kings Evidence, is attempted by one Mrs. Price, (for whom it is said Mr. Dugdale had formerly some kindness;) she warily discovers her Design, and he as warily entertains it; and after some Treaty, one Mr. Tesborough appears in the Case. They promis'd Mr. Dugdale a great Sum of Money, upon condition that he would Recant what he had Sworn, and Sign a Paper, which they had ready drawn up to this effect. Being touched with a True Remorse of Conscience, and an hearty Sorrow for the Great Evil I have done, in appearing as a witness against the Catholicks, and there speaking that which in my own Conscience I know to be far from the Truth; I think my self bound in Duty to God, to Man, and for the safety of my own Soul, to make a true Acknowledgment, how I was drawn into thesewicked Actions; but being well satisfied that I shall create my self many powerful. Enemies upon this account, I have retired my self to a place of Safety, where I will with my own hand discover the great Wrong that has been done the Catholicks, and hope it may gain Belief: I do likewise Protest before Almighty God, that I have no Motive to Induce me to this confession, but a True Repentance for the Mischiefs that I have done, and do hope that God Al∣mighty will forgive me. Having done this, they told him he might immediately withdraw himself beyond the Seas into Spain, where he should be honourably entertained, during his stay there, which should be no longer than till they had brought their De∣signs to their desired End, and then he should be recalled, and have both Riches and Honour conferr'd upon him as a Reward for faithfully serving the Catho∣lick Interest. Mr. Dugdale seemed willing to agree to their Proposals, (though at the same time he acquainted several honest Gentlemen of every particular that passed) if the Reward could be ascertained to him; but as for the two Proposers he would not take their Security for it; whereupon they offered the Security of a Forein Ambassador, but he told them that he thought him a Per∣son not fit for Security, because he might suddenly be commanded home, and then he could have no remedy against him. Then they proposed several others, whose Security they said he need not question; but still he found a plausible Excuse; his Design being onely to gain time, that he might make a further Discovery who set them on work. His Delays created a Jealousie in them, that he never intended to answer their Desires; wherefore least he should dis∣cover this Treaty, and render them liable to punishment, (as it happened in Mr. Readings Case) they were resolved to begin with him first; and by the assistance of a great Person, a Complaint was made against Mr. Dugdale, That he offered for a Sum of Money to Recant his Evidence, and that he would have Signed such a Paper as before-mentioned; adding withal, that it was a lamentable thing to consider how much Blood had been shed upon such Evi∣dence. Upon this Mr. Dugdale was summoned before the King and Council, where giving a full Relation of the Affair, and having those Gentlemen ready,
whom he had all along acquainted with the Intrigue to prove what he said; and it plainly appearing, that Mrs. Price and Mr. Tesbrough had endeavoured to take off the Kings Evidence, they were both committed to safe Custody. This it was that alarm'd Courtees. Mr. Dangerfield in this time had been employed to murder the Earl of Shafts∣bury, which he twice attempted, but could not meet with an opportunity, the Earl refusing to speak in private with him; which he urged, under pre∣tence that he had something to reveal to his Lordship of great Concern to his Lordships Person. He waited on his Lordship by the Name of Day, and went armed with a Dagger, which he received from Mrs. Cellier, to whom three or four were brought by Mr. Rigaut. To perform this Murther, he was pro∣mised 500 l. by the Lords Powis and Arundel, (the Lord Arundel giving him then 10 Guineys) and encouraged by the Lady Abergaveny, Lady Powis, Mrs. Cellier, and others, and his Confessor Sharp conjur'd him to stab him with all possible speed. After his first disappointment, they advised him to tell the Earl that he was in danger of being Impeached for High Treason, and that from Letters under his own hand; and that when he should find himself in the Tower, he would have cause to repent that he had refused to hear what he had to tell him. These Instructions he followed, and told his Lordship that his Servants had Copied out his Letters, from whence would be drawn Matter to form an Impeachment: But the Earl would not be Wheadled by this to give him a private Audience, and thereby administer to him an opportunity of ta∣king away his Life; but askt him which of his Servants they were that had Copied out his Letters: To which Dangerfield replyed, That he knew not. Then the Earl answered, That he knew that all he said was false, for that if his Letters were made known to all the World, there would not be found Mat∣ter sufficient to endanger the least Hair of his Head, much less to form an Im∣peachment. Whereupon Dangerfield told him, That if that was his Lordships Opinion, he would take his leave; and so departed, leaving his Lordship a little jealous of his Intentions. The Lady Powis would have perswaded him upon a Third Attempt, which he refusing, she struck him gently on the Hand with her Fan, calling him Cow∣hearted Fellow, telling him, she would do it her self; but Mrs. Cellier told her, that should not be, for She would perform it. In order to which, the very next day she went armed with a Dagger, to wait upon his Lordship, who re∣ceived her very civilly; but being made more wary than formerly, by Danger∣fields last carriage, he strictly observ'd her, and perceiving her fumbling about her Pocket, betwixt Jest and Earnest, he clapt his hands upon hers, and there held them, pleasantly drolling with her till she was ready to depart; but she was not gone so far as the Door, before she offer'd to return, which his Lord∣ship observing, stept to her again, and clapping his hands upon hers, quite dasht her out of Countenance; so that she departed without attempting further. Thus was his Lordship thrice, by Divine Providence, miraculously preserved from the bloody hands of Papists. The Plot being now ripe for Execution, and Treasonable Letters ready written, to be conveyed into the Custody of such Persons they intended to Ac∣cuse, and two or more Witnesses prepared to swear the Delivery and Receit of such Letters or Commissions against every man in their black List; Danger∣field under the Name of Thomas, takes a Lodging in Ax-Yard in Westminster, (pretending himself a Country-Gentleman) where lay one Colonel Mansel, whose Chamber he soon made himself acquainted with, and therein conveyed about Nine or Ten of the aforesaid Treasonable Letters, superscribed to several
honest Gentlemen and Persons of Quality, some of which were Favourers of the Dissenting Protestants: When he had so done, he informed some of the Officers belonging to the Custom-House, That in that House there was con∣cealed great Quantities of French-Lace, and other prohibited Goods, desiring them the next Morning to bring a Warrant with them and search the House, which they promised. At Night he brought one Captain Bedford to lie with him (as is supposed) that he might be a Witness against the Colonel: Next Morning after the Colonel was gone forth, came the Officers to search for pro∣hibited Goods; Dangerfield was very officious in assisting them to search the Colonel's Chamber, and at length from behind the Bed brings forth the before∣mentioned Pacquet of Letters; upon which, casting his Eyes, and seeming sur∣prized, he cryed out, Treason, These are all Treasonable Letters; Whereupon the Officers carried them away to the Commissioners: But the Colonel coming in soon after, and being acquainted with all that had past in his absence, found means to retrieve them again; and when he had so done, he made some En∣quiry after Dangerfield, of whose Quality being well informed, he carried the Letters to His Majesty, with Protestations of his own Innocency, and Danger∣field's Villany. Whereupon on the 23. of October, the Council ordered Danger∣field to be taken into Custody by a Messenger, and after a full hearing of the Business before them, Oobct. 27. they Committed him to Newgate. When Colonel Mansel had thus detected Dangerfield, the above-mentioued Captain Bed∣ford came in very generously of himself, and confessed several things he was privy to, amongst which, one was, That this Dangerfield would have perswaded him to swear that Sir Thomas Player spoke Treason, thereby to have taken away the Life of that honest Gentleman. The Letters before-mentioned gave Light enough to perceive what the Design was the Papists were then contriving; Whereupon Sir William Waller (who has been all along very zealous in discovering the Priests, and their wicked Plots, notwithstanding their Threats and Attempts to take away his Life) understanding that Dangerfield used to lodge at Mrs. Cel∣liers, went thither on Wednesday, Octob. 29. to search her House; and that he might leave no place unsearcht, he ordered a Tub of Meal to he emptied, which being done, at the Bot∣tom thereof was found a little Paper-book tyed with red Ribbons, wherein was a List of se∣veral Persons of Quality, and others, to the number of above 500. whom they designed to ruin by this their New Plot. They had set down his Grace the Duke of Monmouth for Ge∣neral of the Army to be raised; the Lord Grey, Lord Brandon and his Son, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, for Lieutenant-Generals, Sir William Waller and Mr. Blood for Major-Generals, &c. the Duke of Buckingham, Lord Shaftsbury, Lord Essex, Lord Roberts, Lord Wharton, and Lord Hallifax, were to have been accused for the chief Counsellors and Managers of this Plot. Many other things were contained in these Papers, relating to the Management of their Design: Upon this Mrs. Cellier was committed to the Gatehouse. Their Plot being now sufficiently laid open, Dangerfield (notwithstanding Mrs. Celliers Encouragement to be constant and firm to the Catholick Cause) thought it time to confess the Truth, and being brought before the Right Honourable Sir Robert Clayton Lord Mayor of London, on Friday Octob. 31. 1679. he made a large Confession, which held them from Five of the Clock in the Afternoon, untill Two next Morning. Part whereof was, That he was sent for to the Tower, whither he went in disguise, where after some discourse with the Lord Powis, the Lord Arundel asked him, If he were willing to do any thing to advance his For∣tune; to which he answered he would do any thing. Then the Lord Arundel asked him if he would kill the King for a good Reward; to which he replyed, He would kill any body but the King, or his Royal Brother. That then the aforesaid Lord asked him the same Que∣stion again; and he answered, No. Then said the Lord Powis, No, no, my Lord Arundel does onely this to try you: But my Lord (continued he) what would you give him to kill the King? 'Tis worth (said the Lord Arundel) 2000 l. That then the Lord Powis told him, he should have 500 l. to kill the Lord Shafisbury. That Mr. Gadbury told him, the Lords in the Tower were angry with him, as also chiefly the Lord Castlemain, for that he would not kill the King, when he might easily do it, and no hurt befall him. That here,
upon he asked Mr. Gadbury, How no hurt should befall him, when in his Opinion it could be no less than Death? To which Gadbury made answer, That he knew he might do it safely, for at the Request of the Lady Powis he had Calculated his Nativity, and that it was clear from thence. That the Lord Castlemain very angrily askt him, Why he was so unwilling to do that for which he was released out of Prison; and fearing some mischief from him, he left him, and went and told Mrs. Cellier, that the Lord Castlemain was angry; to which she re∣plyed, That it was his custom to fall out one hour, and be good friends the next. That his Confessor Sharp told him he must do Penance for denying to serve God, as the Scriptures taught. That he askt him, If they taught him to kill his King? To which Sharp replyed, Yes, if he were condemn'd by them. That when he told the Lady Powis and Mrs. Cellier, of having been alone with the King in his Closet; they both said, What an Opportunity have you lost? And the Lady Powis added, How bravely might you have killed him, if you had been provided! That he was sent by the Lady Powis to Mr. Webb's at Petterley in Buckinghamshire, with a Letter directed, For Mrs. Jean; which Mrs. Jean he found to be a Priest in Womans Habit. That upon reading the Letter, Jean administred the Sacrament to him, obliging him thereby to Secrecy; and then gave him Papers containing a rough Draught of the Plot against the Presbyterians, which he told him were to be drawn up into Particulars by the Lords in the Tower, and Mr. Nevil in the Kings-Bench. That Mr. Wood told him, The Lords in the Tower had consulted, that before Mr. Oates wat Indicted, something should be made appear of a Presbyterian Plot. That one Duddel brought him 27 Letters, written most by by Mr. Nevil, which Mr. Turner the Lord Powis his Priest, desired some Catholiques might Transcribe; whereupon Mrs. Cellier sent for Mr. Singe who wrote there about a Week. That the Contents of these Letters were, That there Business went on well here at London, as they hoped theirs did in the Country: That Commissioners would shortly be ready; (mentioning in some of these Letters the Names of divers Persons of Quality;) and that they would now be their own Choosers in Matters of Government, and use Papists as they pleased. That these Letters were to be sent into all parts of the Kingdom where any Presbyterians liv'd, and privately to be put into their Houses, and then their Houses were to be searcht, and these Papers produced for Evidence against them, as they intended against Colonel Mansel. Saturday, Novem. 1. His Lordship waited on His Majesty and Council with Dangerfield's Confession; and Dangerfield being again sent for to come before the Council, did further de∣clare, That all the Lords in the Tower gave him Money, more or less, and did desire him to go to Turner the Popish Book-seller to get his Remarks on the Tryals Printed. That the Lord Powis advised Lane should be sent out of the way, lest if Mr. Oates should find him at his House, they should all be ruin'd. That he saw Sir G. Wakeman at Mr. Stamford's House, (the Duke of Newburgh's Agent) in whose own Room he lay, and that Sir George told him, He hid him∣self there for fear of the People, who had posted a threatning Paper over his Door; and that he had received 500 l. by the Queens Order for his Transportation. That Sir George asking his Advice, how he might get away, he told him, He had best send for a Shallop from Calice to take him in about six Miles from Dover, which he did, and escaped to Newport. That Dormer was Author of Traytors transform'd into Martyrs; and that Gadbury had writ a Ballad and several Pamphlets. That the second time he visited the Earl of Shafssbury, he intended to stab him, and then put out the Candle, and under pretence of running down to light it, have made his escape. That the two Books taken (whereof one was found in a Meal Tub) was writ by him, and that the Names therein were all Dictated to him by the Lady Powis. That Mrs. Cellier and he used the words, Lady Mary for the KING, and Lady Anne for the DUKE. In the Afternoon Mrs. Cellier was Examin'd, and declar'd, That Dangerfield had for some time lain at her House. That she paid 3 l. 10.s. out of the Money to be distributed to Pri∣soners for his Release, but denyed the paying of Twenty pounds, or Five pounds, as had been alledged. That she employed Dangerfield onely to get in some desperate Debts belong∣ing to her Husband, and to Bail two or three persons out of Prison, and in nothing else. That she did lie at the Lady Powis; but denied she sent a Note to Dangerfield in Newgate, till the Note was produced, and then she own'd it. That she knew nothing of killing the Earl of Shaftsbury. That she did indeed go to the said Earl upon business. That Dangerfield did draw up Articles against Captain Richardson, but not by her Order. Then Dangerfield was call'd in again, who said further, That Banister and she visted him in the Kings-Bench, and that she order'd him to get the Papers from Strode about Mr. Bedlow; to which end, Hitton the Priest advised that Opium should be put into Strode's Drink. That
Margaret Mrs. Celliers Maid brought him Opium from Mrs. Celliers Son-in-law, Plasdel; and that Mounson told him how to use it. That Knowles and Sharp, Priests, told him if he conti∣nued firm to the Business, he would thereby merit Heaven. Mrs. Cellier confess'd, That she hid the Papers in the Meal-Tub: That she did agree with Mr. Dangerfield to use Lady Mary in stead of King, and Lady Anne in stead of Duke. And That Gadbury did Calculate Dangerfield's Nativity, but said, He would be hang'd. Then the Lady Powis was Examined, who denied all, except, That she paid Ten shillings per Week to Mrs. Cellier for Dangerfields Diet. That she saw him in the Stone-Gallery, but was not near enough to speak to him. That once and no more she discoursed him at Mrs. Cel∣liers, and that then he told her of some Treasonable Letters hid at Westminster, and that the Secretary refused to give him a Warrant to search for them, unless he would make Affidavit of it; and that then Mrs. Cellier advised him to make use of the Custom-House Officers to search for them. On Sunday, Nov. 2. Mr. Gadbury was examined, who acknowledged, That he had seen Mr. Dangerfield once or twice at his House with Mrs. Cellier, and that he thought he cast his Nativity under the Name of Thomas, and that looking on his Horoscope, he did say, it prognosticated a bold and adventurous Man, but does not remember that he told Mrs. Cellier he would be hang'd. That he likewise cast the Lord Powis his Nativity, and that it was a usual thing with him to cast the Nativities of such Persons of Quality, whose Time of Birth he could be assured of. But as to other things, he said, He was innocent. Nov. 1. Susan Edwards, Mrs. Cellier's Maid, deposed, That she carried Notes to Mr. Dan∣gerfield from her Mistress, when he was in Newgate; as also a Guinney, Twenty Shillings in Silver, and two Books of Accounts: As likewise a Message by word of mouth, importing, That Mrs. Cellier's Life lay in Mr. Dangerfield's hands. And said, That the Lady Powis had been three times at her Mistresses in five Weeks time that she lived there, and that once she had discourse with Mr. Dangerfield. Nov. 2. William Woodman deposed, That Mr. Dangerfield was two Months at the Lord Powis's House, and that Mrs. Cellier and he writ often; and that he carried Letters from them to the Lady Powis in the Tower; as also Letters from the Lady Powis to Nevile in the King's Bench; to whom also he had carried Letters from Mr. Dangerfield and Mrs. Cellier. Mary Ayray deposed, That Duddel and she carried Notes taken by Mr. Willoughby, aliàs Dangerfield, at Langhorn's Trial, to Mr. Nevil in the King's Bench, and that they left Dan∣gerfield at a Coffee-House in the mean time. That she carried a Letter from Nevil to Mrs. Cel∣lier, and another from Mrs. Cellier to the Lady Powis. That she had seen Sing often with Mrs. Cellier. That Dangerfield writ the Speeches of the Five Jesuits, as they were dictated to him by Mrs. Cellier. That she had seen Lane (by Mrs. Cellier's order called Johnson) at Powis-House. Bennet Duddel a Carpenter, deposed, That he had seen Mr. Dangerfield at Powis-house. That he went with Mrs. Ayray to the King's Bench, and Mr. Dangerfield stayed in the mean time at a Coffee-House there by. That they brought Papers back with them, and that soon after Mrs. Ayray went to the Tower. That at Powis-house he has often seen Mr. Dangerfield, Mrs. Cellier, and others, writing. That Mr. Lane lay in the house, and that Mrs. Cellier was once much con∣cerned when she thought him lost. That Dangerfield once asked him if he could make a Printing-Press. That he went to the Gate-house once or twice with Mrs. Ayray, who carried Money to the Prisoners. That by the Lady Powis's Order he made a private place in Powis∣house. To all these Depositions, the Lady Powis being called in, answered particularly. To Su∣san Edwards, That when she came to Mrs. Cellier, she never lighted from her Coach. To Wood∣man, That she never receiv'd a Letter from Nevil, or sent one to him. That she had received several from Mrs. Cellier, and perhaps she might have received one from Dangerfield. That going to see the Lady Gage in the Kings-Bench, some body pointed to Nevil as he stood at the Window: And excepting once she never saw him besides that time. To Duddel, That Mrs. Ayray did bring her some Remarks upon Langhorns Tryal, but she never saw any thing from Nevil. To Mrs. Ayray, That she never brought her any Message from Nevil. Being demanded, whether Mrs. Cellier had not been with her in the Tower from Mr. Wil∣loughby? She answered, Yes; but that she never saw Willoughby but twice. Hereupon Mrs. Cellier being called, and askt, Whether she had not been in the Tower with the Lady Powis; she stiffly denied it: but being told, the Lady Powis her self had own'd it, she then confess'd she had been there.
Captain Bedford was then called in, and said, That he was at several Clubs with Dangerfield. That he was at Thompsons the Printers, where was printing, The Presbyterian unmask'd. That Dangerfield paid Money to Dor∣mer in S. John's. That Dangerfield would have got a List of the Club at the Kings-head, but the Drawer would not give it him. That at the Green Dragon he got the Names of about 60 Persons that used to meet there. That he went with him to the Sun and Ship Taverns, where he enquired if the Duke of Monmouth had not been there the Night before he went away. That Dangerfield said, Gadbury brought him acquainted with Sir Robert Peyton. That Dangerfield told him, the Lord Shafisbury, Sir William Waller, Doctor Tongue, and others, had pri∣vate Meetings near Fox-hall about the Plot. The Earl of Peterborough being called in, and having an account of what was laid to his Charge, made a very plausible Speech in answer thereto; and as to the business of Sir Robert Peyton, he said, That Mrs. Cellier told him that among others which she had brought over to be serviceable to His Majesty and the Duke, Sir Robert Peyton was one, who had declared to her, that he would gladly come in, but that he thought the Duke of that temper, that he would never forget an Injury. That then he assured Mrs. Cellier, the Duke was no such per∣son; and then she replyed, that Sir Robert would willingly meet him at Mr. Gadbury's. That they did meet ac∣cordingly at Mr. Gadbury's, where Sir Robert did say, that he would serve the King to all purposes; but seemed to doubt of the Dukes being reconciled to him. That afterwards he waited on the Duke at his Lordships Lodgings, and from him received all the assurance of favour he could desire. These are the principal things that were acted before the King and Council, the Result whereof was, that the Earl of Castlemain (first) and (after) the Lady Powis was committed to the Tower, Mr. Gadbury to the Gate∣house, Mr.  and Mrs. Cellier to Newgate, and several others to the Custody of Messengers. About this time Sir William Waller (searching a House near the Arch in Lincolns-Inn Fields, leading to Duke-street) seized on several Habits, Vestments, Crucifixes, Reliques, and other Popish Trinkets, all very rich; as allodivers Trunks and Boxes full of Books and Papers, that did belong to Father Hercourt lately ex∣ecuted, wherein are set down several great sums of Money paid by him in about 7 or 8 years last past, for car∣rying on the Catholique Cause; as likewise many other things that confirm the truth of the Kings Evidence. Among the Relicks was found one great Piece of Antiquity, and by computation of time near 800 years old. It was a Cross of Gold, weighing about 4 Ounces, upon which on the one side was engraven these words, De∣fendite Gentes hanc partem Crucis Omnipotentis; in English, Defend O ye Nations this part of the Omnipotent Cross: On the other side were engraven the Arms of Alfred King of England, who dyed in the year 901. Be∣sides which engraving, it was empail'd with divers precious Stones of a considerable value. Within this Cross was another Cross of Ebony, to which the Gold one seem'd to serve onely for a Case; and as if it had been a little Nest of Serpentine Idolatry, the Ebony Cross was inlaid with another Cross of a quite different Wood, which it is suppos'd, they believ'd to be a piece of our Saviour's Cross. There was also a Gold Ring with a Motto wrap'd up in white Paper, upon which was written, The Ring of the Bishop of Glascow, with several other Curiosities, which are as yet preserv'd. On Novem. 5. Mr. Courtees was taken and brought before Justice Warcup, who having taken his Examination, sent him to the Gate-house. At his Examination, he gave an account of his first acquaintance with Mr. Willough∣by, (not knowing then that he went by any other Name) and that Willoughby told him, that the Presbyterians were conspiring against the King and Government, and were privately raising an Army, and that Mr. Blood was one that gave out Commissions for that purpose; and perswaded him to use his endeavour to get one, and if he could do so, he would bring him to the King, whereby he should get 5000 l. And that upon this he made his application to Mrs. Bradley in order thereto, believing what Dangerfield said, and that there was really a Presbyterian Plot on foot: so that what he did, he said was upon a Loyal Design. But there is some cause to sus∣pect what he said, if we reflect on what Mrs. Bradley deposed on Nov. 1. and what he acknowledged now; viz. That the last time Mrs. Bradley saw him, asking him when they should get the 5000 l. He replied, that he would not meddle in it, that it troubled his Conscience, and that it would be Treachery if it were done, and it is to no purpose to meddle in it now, for there is a List found out. However it be, he is since bailed out of the Gate-house: And for a confirmation of his Guilt, is gone aside. And now almost every day new Discoveries are made, either of Priests or their Appurtenances, Reliques and feditious Papers. Dormer a Priest was seized by Dr. Oates at the Door of the Council-Chamber, on Nov. 4. as he was busie in discourse with the Lady Powis, and was sent to Newgate. On Nov. 11. Sir William Waller seized at Turner's in Holborn, several seditious and scandalous Libels, Popish Books and Pamphlets; as also divers Beads, and Priests Habits, and some Reliques, one of which was a very fine Handkerchief, which had been dip'd in the Blood of the five Jesuits lately executed. Not long after Sir William seized on one William Russel, alias Napper, a Franciscan Fryar, and Titular Bishop of Norwich: With him were taken the Garments belonging to his Office; as also the Form of an Oath of Abju∣ration, for his Proselytes, to this effect; That they did from thenceforth renounce those damnable and heretical Doctrines, wherein they had been educated and instructed, and that they did oblige themselves under the penalty of Damnation to re∣mainsted fast in the Faith of the Mother-Church of Rome, &c. Together with a Latin Prayer, in the Margin where∣of was written in English, Whoever says this Prayer shall be free from the Plague. And several Popish Books, &c. On Friday. Nov. 21. Sir Robert Peyton, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Gadbury, Mrs. Cellier with her Maids, and others were severally Examin'd; when it was sworn, that Sir Robert Peyton had had frequent Conferences with Mr. Dan∣gerfield; and the further hearing of the Matter being put off till Wednesday, Nov. 26. Sir Robert was then or∣dered to give Bail for his Appearance at the Kings-Bench-Bar, the first day of the next Term, to answer to such Informations as should then be brought against him by the Attorney-General. Dr. Oates during these Transactions had two of his Servants, Lane (often mentioned in this History) and Osborn, confederated with one Knox belonging to the Lord Treasurers Family, against him, who Indicted him for no less a Crime than Sodomy: But it being proved a malicious slander, and his Accusers perjured Villains, who were hired by the Lords in the Tower, to invalidate his Evidence, the Jury brought it in Ignoramus. And Dr. Oates thereupon bringing in an Indictment against them in the Kings-Bench, Knox and Lane (Osborn being fled) were tried on Tuesday, Nov. 25. When the whole Design was so particularly laid open, especially by Mr. Dangerfield, (whose Pardon was perfected the day before) that every one present was convinc'd of the intended Villany, and the Jury (without the Lord Chief Justice's summing up the Evidence) declared them guilty of the Indictment: But their Sentence is deferred till next Term. We shall here close our History with our Prayers to God, to bring to Light all the Dark Contrivances of Jesuits and wicked men; and to their Plots, and our Divis Dangers, put FINIS.
