6395 99840939 5484
THE Second part of the good Hus-wiues IEWELL. Where is to be found most apt and readiest wayes to distill many whol. some and sweet Waters. In which likewise is shewed the best maner in preseruing of diuers sorts of Fruits, & making of Sirrops. With diuers conceits in Cookerie with the Booke of Caruing. AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Edward White, dwellimg at the little North doore of Paules Church at the signe of the Gun, 1597.
The Table. TO boyle mary bones for dinner. fol. 1 To boyle a Capon. Ibidem How to boyle a capon with orenges. fol. 2 How to boyle Teales, Mallards, pigeons, chynes of porke, or Neates tunges, all after one sorte, fol. 3 Mutton boyled for supper. Ibidem To boyle mutton with Nauons. fol. 4 To boyle a Lambes head with purtenan∣nances. Ibidem How to stew a capon for dinner. Ibid. To boyle a capon in white broth. fol. 5 How to boyle chickins. Ibidem To boyle chickins with spinage and Let∣tice. fol. 6 To make pears to be boiled in mear. Ibid To farse a cabbadge for a banquet dish. fol. 7 To boile a brest of Veale or mutton far∣ced. fol. 8 To boile a Mugget of a sheepe. fol. 2 To boile mutton for supper. Ibidem To boile a Neats tung for supper. fol. 10 To boyle mallards, teales, and chines of porke with cabbadge, Ibidem For a goose giblots and pigs petitoes. Ibi.
For fricases of a Lambes head and Purte∣nance. fol. 11 For fricases of Neats feet for supper. Ibi. A fricase of tripes. Ibidem How to roste a Lambes head. fol. 12 How to make a pye in a por. Ibidem To make allowes to roste or boyle. fol. 13 To make red Deere. Ibidem To farse all thinges, Ibidem A Sop of Onyons. fol. 14 To make gallantine for flesh or fish. Ibi How to stew Oysters. fol. 15. To bake aloes of veale or mutton. Ibid. To bake a cunnie, veale, or mutton, Ibi. How to make fine paste. fol. 16 Eor small pyes. Ibidem To make purses or cremitaries. fol. 17 How to make a tart of spinage or wheate leaues, or of coleworts. Ibidem For tartes of creame. Ibidem A tart of proines. fol. 18 A tart of Egges. fol. 19 A white Leache. Ibidem How to keep Lard in season. Ibidem To make Iombils a hundred. Ibidem To make butterd Egges. Ibidem How to boyle Neats feete. fol. 20
How to boile a carpe. ibidem How to boile a Pike with Orenges, a ban∣quet dish. fol. 22 How to boyle a Pike another way. fol. 23 How to boile Roches, perches, and Dase with other small fish. fol. 24 How to boile a Pike another way. ibidem How to boile a Tench. ibidem For Turbet and Cunger. fol. 25 For fresh Salmon. ibidem For white pease pottage. fol. 26 To make a caudle of Ote meale. ibidem How to dresse a carpe. fol. 27 How to farse Egges. fol. 28 Sallets for fishe daies. ibidem Another. ibidem Another. ibidem Another. ibidem Another. fol. 29 Another. ibidem Another. ibidem Another. ibidem Another. ibidem Howe to make tartes or balde meares for fishe daies. ibidem To make Alloes of freshe Salmon to boyle
or to baka. fol. 31 A troute baked and minced. ibidem How to make a sprede Eagle of a Pullet. fol. 32 How to make Martris of a Capon, Hen, or Pullet. fol. 34 How to make a Colluce. ibidem A made dish of the proportion of an Egge for fish daies. fol. 35 How to still a capon for a sick person. fol. 36 How to preserue Quinces in Sirrop all the yere. fol. 37 How to conserue Wardens all the yeere in Sirrop. fol. 38 To conserue Cherries, Damesins, or Wheat plummes al the yere in the sirrop. Ibi. To make a paste of Suger, whereof a man may make all manner of fruites, and other fine thinges with their forme, as Plates, Dishes, Cuppes, and such like thynges wherewith you may furnish a table. fol. 39 To confite walnuts. fol. 40 To make Mellons and Pompons sweet. fol. 41 To confite Orrenge peeles which may bee doone at all times in the yeare, and cheef∣ly in May, because then the said peeles be greatest and thickest. fol. 42 Howe to purifie and prepare Honny and
sugar for to confite sitrons and al other fruites, fol. 43 How to confite peaches after the Spanish fashion. Ibidem A goodly secret for to condite or confite ringes, citrons, and all other fruites in sirrope, fol. 45 How to bray golde. fol. 46 How to make a condonack. Ibidem How to make confection of mellons or pompions. fol. 47 To still a capon, a great restoritie. fol. 48 How to make good sope. fol. 40 To make Quinces in sirrope. fol. 50 For to make conserue of barberies. fol. 51 To make a pudding of a calues chaldron. How to boile calues feet. fol. 52 How to stew Veale. Ibidem How to boile chickins and mutton after the Dutch maner. ibidem How to make a cawdle. fol. 93 How to make a haggasse pudding. Ibi. How to make Haggas puddings. fol. 54 How to make Ising puddings. ibid. How to seeth muscles. ibid. How to make a pudding. fol. 55 How to stew steakes. ibid.
To boyle the Lightes of a calfe. fol. 56 How to make a Lenthen haggesse with poched egges. Ibidem How to boile onyons. fol. 59 How to boyle citrons. ibidem How to bake Lampernes. fol. 57 How to make fried to ste of spinage. ibid. How to bake a citron pye. fol. 49. Another way to bake citrons. ibid. How to bake alloes. ibid. How to bray golde. fol. 60 How to make conserue of Roses, and of other flowers. ibid. How to make conserue of cherries, and of other fruites. ibid. How to seeth a carpe. fol. 61 How to seeth a pike. ibid. How to boylecockles, fol. 62 How to boile a carpe in green broth with a pudding in his belly. ibid. How to make an almond custatd. fol. 63 How to make a blanch marget on the fish day. ibid. How to bake chickins. How to make a pudding in a pot, ibid. How to stew steakes. ibid. To roste a Pigge, fol. 65
How to roste an Hare. fol. 66 How to make tostes▪ ibidem How to make conserue of Mellons or pom∣pons. ibidem How to make Sirrope of Violets. fol. 67 How to make Sope. fol. 68 How to preserue Orrenges. ibidem The stilling of a capon a great restoritie. fol. 69 To make▪dry Marmelet of Peaches. fol. 70 How to make the same of Quinces, or any other thing. fol. 71 How to preserue Orrenges, Lemmons, and Pomecitrons. ibidem Howe to preserue Quinces all the yeare through, whole and soft. fol. 72 FINIS.
A Booke of Cookerie. To boyle mary bones for for dinner. FIrst put your mary bones into afaire pot of Water, and let them boyle till they bee halfe enough, then take out al your broath sauing so much as will couer your mary bones, then put therto eight or nine carret rootes, and see they be wel scraped and washed, and cut inch long or litle lesse and a handfull of Parselie and Isop chop∣ped small, and season it with Salte, Pep∣per and Saffron. You may boyle Chynes and racks of Veale in al points as this is. To boyle a Capon. LEt your capon be faire scalded and short trussed, and put into a fair pot of water with a marybone or two, & a racke of utton cut together in three or fower peeces, and let them boyle together tyll they be halfe boyled, then take out a ladle full or two of the best of the broth, and put it into a faire earthen pot. & put thereto  pinte of white wine or of claret, and cut a
twelue or fourtéene dates long wayes & a handfull of small raysons, a handfull of tyme, Rosemary and Isope bound toge∣ther, and so let these persels boyle by thē∣selues, and when your capon is enough, lay it in a faire platter vpon sops of white bread, and your mutton by him also, then take out the mary from the bones whole, and lay it vpon the capon, then take your made broth & lay it vpō your capon & mut∣ton, and so serue it forth, your latter broth must bee seasoned with cinamon cloues and mace, and salt and mace beaten also. To boyle a capon with Orenges. TAke your Capon & set him on the fire as before with marybones & mutton, and whē you haue skimmed the pot wel, put thereto the value of a farthing loafe, and let it boyle till it be halfe boyled, then take two or thrée ladleful of ye same broth and put it into an earthen pot, with a pint of the wine aforesaid, and pill six or eight Oringes and slice them thin, and put thē into the same broth with foure peniworth in sugar or more, and a handfull of parce∣ley, tyme, and Rosemary together tyed, and season it with whole mace, Cloues &
sticks of cinamon with two Nutmeg, beaten small and so serue it. To boile teales, Mallards, pigeons chines of porke, or Neates tunges all after one sort. LEt them be halfe rosted, sticke afew cloues in their brestes, then two or three tostes of bread being burned black, then put them into a litle faire water im∣mediatly take them out again, and strain them with a litle wine and vineger to the quantitie of a pint: put it into an earthen potte, and take eight or ten onions slyced small, being fryed in a frying pan with a dish of butter, and when they be fried, put thē into your broth, then take your meat from the spitte and put it into the same broth, and so let them boyle together for a time, seasoning with salt and pepper. Mutton boyled for supper. FIrst set your mutton on the fire, & trim it cleane, then take out all the broth sa∣uing so much as will couer it, then take and put thereto ten or twelue onions pil∣led, cut them in quarters, with a handful of parseley chopped fine, putting it to the mutton, and so let them boile, seasoning it
with pepper, salt and saffron, with two or or three spoonefull of vineger. To boyle Mutton with Nauons. FIrst pill your Nauons, and wash them then cut fiue or sixe of them into peeces to the bignes of an inche, and when your mutton hath boiled a while take out al the licour sauing so much as may couer well the mutton, then put the Nauons into the pot of mutton with a handfull of parselye, chopped fine, and a branche of Rosemary, seasoning it with salt pepper and saffron. To boyle a Lambes head with purtenaunces. FIrst skimme it well, then take of the broth, leauing so much as wil couer it, then put to it Parsely and Rosemarye, a branch of Isop and time, and a dish of but∣ter, with Barberies or Gooseberies, then let them boile being seasoned with cloues Mace, salte, pepper, and saffron, and so serue it foorth vpon sops. To stewe a Capon for Dinner. TAKE a knuckle of Veale and boil it with your capon: putting to it proines Raysons great and small, whole Mace, and let it boile together, seasoning it with
Salt and so serue it forth. To boyle a capon in white broth. TAke a wel fleshed capon and a mari∣bone, and a quart of faire water, put them together in an earthen pot, and let them boyle till the Capon be enough, but you must first take away the mary from ye bone, and when it hath boiled take the vp∣permost of the broth & put it into an ear∣then potte, and the mary with it. Put to it small raisons, proines, whole mace, dates, and halfe a quartern of suger, sixe spoone∣full of verdiuice, three or fower yolkes of Egges, put these all together, and when your Capon is boyled, lay him in a fayre platter: powre your broth vpon him, and so serue him. To boyle Chickens. BOyle them as the Lambs head & pur∣tenance is boiled, and when you are to serue them, strain three or foure yolkes of Egges with vergious, and put it into the pot, and let it boyle no more: after the egs be put in, season it with salt, pepper, mace and cloues, and so serue them. Thus may you boyle a connye or Muggets of Veale, as the chickins are boyled.
To boile chickens with Spinnage and Lettice. TAke a Platter of Spinnage and Let∣tice, and wash them cleane, and when the pot is skimmed▪ then put them in with a dish of butter, and a branch of rosemary with a litle vergious, being seasoned with Salt and ginger beaten. To make Peares to be boiled in meate TAke a peece of a legge of Mutton or Veale raw, being mixed with a little Sheepe sewet, and halfe a manchet gra∣ted fine, taking foure raw egges yolkes and al. Then take a little Time, & par∣sely chopped smal, then take a few goose∣beries or barberies, or greene grapes be∣ing whole. Put all these together, being seasoned with Salte, saffron and cloues, beaten and wrought altogether; then make Rowles or Balles like to a peare, and when you haue so done, take the stalke of the sage, and put it into the ends of your peares or balles, then take the freshe broth of beefe, Mutton or veale, be∣ing put into an earthen pot, putting the peares or balles in the same broth wyth
Salt, cloues, mace and Saffron, and when you be ready to serue him, put two or three yolkes of egs into the broth. Let them boile no more after that but serue it forth vpon soppes. You may make balles after the same sorte. To farse a cabbadge for a banquet dish. TAke litle rounde cabbage cutting off the stalkes, and by the cabbadge then make a round hole in your cabbadge, as much as will receiue your farsing meat, take héede you breake not the brimmes, thereof with your knife, for the hole must be round and deepe, then take the Kidney of a mutton or more, and chop it not smal, Then boile sixe egges hard, taking the yolkes of them being smal chopped & al∣so take rawe egges and a manchet gra∣ted fine, then take a handfull of proynes, so many great raysons, seasoning al these with salte, pepper, cloues and Mace, working all these together, and so stuffe your Cabbedge. But if you haue Saw∣sedge you may put it among your meate at the putting in of your stuffe, but you must leaue out both the ends of your saw∣sage
at the mouth of the cabbadge when you shall serue it out. In ye boyling it must be within the cabbadge, and the cabbadge must be stopped close with his couer in the time of his boyling, and bound fast round about for breaking: the cabbadge must bée sodde in a deepe pot with fresh beefe broth or mutton broth, and no more thē will lye vnto the top of the cabbadge, and when it is enough take away the thrid, and so set it in a platter, opening the heade & laying out the Sawsadge endes, and so serue it forth. To boyle a breast of Veale or Mutton farced. TAke a breast of Ueale or Mutton and farce it in like maner as your cabadg is, so that you leaue out the proines and great raysons, boyle your veale or mutton in the foresaide brothes, putting no more broath then will couer your meat, & when your meate is halfe boyled, then put twoo handfulls of Lettuce or Spinage, cutting it fower times asunder and no more, and when your meate and hearbes be boyled, then put a little verdiuice in the broth, sea∣soning it with salt and pepper, then serue
your meate vpon Soppes, casting your hearbes vpon it, and so serue it. To boile a Mugget of a sheepe. FIrst wash and sconre it clean, then per boyle it a litle, then choppe a péece of a Kidney of Mutton small, and put it into a platter, thē put the quantity of a farthing lofe grated, with prunes and raysons of eche a handful, Persely and time chopped smal, and thrée or foure hard rosted egges being chopped with bread and Suet, then a litle water put to and saffron, and cou∣lour it with thrée or foure rawe egges, both yolkes and whites, Salt, Pepper, Coues and Mace being minced together, putting it into the Mugget, and so boile it with a little Mutton broth and Wine, Lettice and spinnage whole in the same broth, and so serue it forth. To boile Mutton for Supper. TAke Carret rootes, and cut them an inch long, take a handfull of parselie and time halfe chopped, and put into the pot the Mutton, and so let them boyle, be∣ing seasoned with Salte and pepper, and so serue it foorth.
To boile a neates tongue to Supper. TAke a little wine or faire water, put∣ting vnchopped Lettuce faire washed into your Neates tongue, with a dishe of Butter or two, and season it with Salte, Pepper, cloues and Mace, and so serue it. To boile Mallards, Teales, and chines of porke with Cabbadge. FIrst vnlose your Cabbadge, & cut them in thrée or foure quarters vnlosing eue∣ry leafe for doubt of worms to be in them, then wash thē and put them into a pot of faire water, and let them boyle a quarter of an houre, then take them vp, and chop them somewhat great, then put them into a faire pot with the broath of the Mallard and whole Pepper, and pepper beaten, with Cloues, mace, and salte, and so let them boile together. &c. For a Goose gibluts and pigges petitose. LEt them be soddē throughly, then cut them in péeces and fry thē with but∣ter, and when they be half fried, then put to a little Uineger with Ginger, Sina∣mon and pepper and so serue it forth: thus
maye you vse Calues feete boyled in all pointes as this is. For fricasies of a lambes head and purtenance. TAke a Lambs head and cleaue it, and cut his purtenaunces in peeces, and perboyle it till it bee almost enough, then take the yolkes of two Egges, and baste your Lambes head and purtenance with it, and frye it in butter for sauce, put to the butter, pepper, Uineger and Salt, frying them together a little on the fire and so serue it. For fricasies of Neates feete for supper. TAke your Neates feete & cleane them and baste thē with butter and crums of bread, and lay them vpon a Grediorne, till they be throughlie broyled, then take Uineger, pepper, salt and butter, and put thē altogeather in a dish, set on a chafing∣dish of coles boyling, and so let them boyle there til you must serue it, you must put to sauce, barberies or grapes, &c. A fricase of Tripes. LEt them be faire sodden, and sauce thē take the leanest and cut it in peeces,
inch broad, frye them with butter or flats, and your sauce to bee vineger, pepper and mustard, being put a litle while in the fri∣ing panne with butter or flattes. To rost a lambes head. TAke the head and purtenaunces being cleane washed, cut the purtenances in péeces, so that it may be broached, and rost thē basting it with butter, and when it is enough, take the yolkes of two rawe egs, with a little parsely chopped fine, beating them together, and baste your Lambes head with it, euen so long till your egges be hardened on, then take it vp, and serue it with the sauce of pepper, vineger and butter boyled a little vpon a Chafingdish of coles. To make a pie in a pot. TAke the leanest of a Legge of Mutton and mince it small, with a peece of the kidney of mutton, then put it into an ear∣then pet, putting therto a ladlefull or two of mutton broth, and a little wine, of proy∣nes and raisons of ech a handfull, or bar∣beries. Let them boyle together, putting to it half an orenge, if you haue any, sea∣soning it with salte, pepper, cloues, mace,
and Saffron and so serue it. To make allowes to roste or boile. TAke a Leg of mutton and slice it thin, then take out the kidneys of the mut∣ton hauing it minced small, with Isope, time, parsely, & the yolkes of hard egges, then bind it with crumms of white bread and rawe eggs, and put to it proines and great raisons, and for want of them bar∣beries or Goosberies, or grapes seasoning it with Cloues, mace, pepper Sinamon, ginger & salt. You may make a mugget of a Sheepe as these allowes bee, sauing you must put no mutton into it. To make red deere. TAke a legge of béef, and cut out all the sinewes clean, then take a roling pin and all to beate it, then perboile it, and when you haue so doon, lard it very thick, then lay it in wine or Uineger for two or three howers, or a whole night, thē take it out & season it with peper, salt cloues and mace, thē put it into your past, & so bake it. To farse all things. TAKE a good handfull of tyme, Isope, Parselye, and three or foure yolkes of Egges hard rosted, and choppe them with
hearbs small, then take white bread gra∣ted and raw egs with sweet butter, a few small Raisons, or Barberies, seasoning it with Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Sinamon and Ginger, woorking it altogether as paste, and thē may you stuffe with it what you will. A sop of Onions. TAKE and slice your Onions, & put them in a frying panne with a dish or two of sweete butter, and frie them toge∣ther, then take a litle faire water and put into it salt and peper, and so frie them to∣gether a little more, then boile them in a lyttle Earthen pot, putting to it a lyttle water and sweet butter, &c. You may vse Spinnage in like maner. To make gallantine for flesh or fish. TAke browne bread and burne it black in the tosting of it, thē take them and lay them in a litle wine and vineger, and when they haue soked a while, thē strain them, seasoning it with sinamon, ginger, Pepper and salte, then set it on a chasing∣dish with coales, and let it boyle till it bée thick, and then serue it in saucers.
To stewe Oysters. TAke your oysters, and put them either in a little skellet ouer the fire, or else in a platter ouer a chaffingdishe of coles, and so let thē boile with their licour, swéet butter, vergious, vineger, and pepper, and of the tops of Time a little, till they be e∣nough, and then serue them vpon soppes. To bake aloes of Veale or Mutton. MAke your aloes ready to bake in all points as you boile them, laying v∣pon them in the paste barberies, Goosebe∣ries or grapes gréene, or small Raisons, and put in your Pie a dish af butter, and so set it in the ouen, and when it is baked, then put in a little vergious, and so seethe it in an Ouen again a while, and so serue it foorth. To bake a Connie, Veale, or Mutton. TAke a Conny and perboile it almoste enough, then mince the flesh of it verie fine, and take with it three yolkes of hard egges, and mince with it, thē lay another Conny in your Pie being perboiled, and your minced meat with it, being seasoned
with Cloues, Mace, Ginger, Saffron Pepper & Salt, with two dishes of swéete butter mixed with it, lay vpon your Con∣nie Barberies Gooseberies, or grapes, or the smal raisons, and so bake it. To make fine paste. TAke faire flower and wheate, & the yolkes of egges with sweet Butter, melted, mixing all these together with your hands, til it be brought dowe paste, & then make your coffins whether it be for pyes or tartes, then you may put Saffron and suger if you wil haue it a swéet paste, hauing respect to the true seasoning some vse to put to their paste Béefe or Mutton broth, and some Creame. For small pies. TAke the Mary out of the marybones hole, and cut it in the bignes of a bean season your mary with Ginger, Suger, and Sinamon, then put them in fine paste and frie them in a frying panne with the skimming of fresh béefe broth, or else you may bake them in your ouen a litle while take héede they burne not, and when you do serue them in a faire dish, cast blaunch pouder vpon them.
To make purses or cremi∣taries. TAke a little Marow, small raisons, & Dates, let the stones be taken away, these being beaten together in a Morter, season it with Ginger, Sinamon and su∣ger, then put it in fine paste, & bake them or frie them, so done in the seruing of them cast blaunch pouder vpon them. To make a tarte of Spinnage or of wheate leaues or of colewortes TAke three handfull of Spinnage, boile it in faire water, when it is boyled, put away the water from it and put the spin∣nage in a stone morter, grind it smal with two dishes of butter melted, and foure rawe egges all to beaten, then straine it and season it with suger, Sinamon and ginger, and lay it in your Coffin, when it is hardened in the ouen, then bake it, and when it is enough, serue it vpon a faire dish, and cast vpon it Suger and Biskets For tartes of creame. TAke a pinte of creame with sixe rawe egges, and boile them together, and stirre it well that it burne not, then let it boile till it be thick, then take it out of the
pot, and put to two dishes of Butter mel∣ted, and when it is some what colde, then straine it and season it with Suger, then put it into your paste, when your paste is hardned, and when it is enough, the serue it with Suger cast vpon it. If you will haue a Tart of two colours, then take the halfe of it, when it is in Creame, and co∣lour the other halfe with saffron or yolks of egges. A tart of proines. MAke your Coffine two inches déepe round about, thē take ten or twelue good apples, pure them and slice them, and put them into the Paste with two di∣shes of butter among the apples, then co∣uer your tarte close with the Paste, and breake a dishe of butter in peeces, and lay it vpō the couer because of burning in the Panne. And when the apples be tender, take it forth and cut of the couer, & beate the apples together till they be softe, and they be dry put the more butter into them and so season them with Sinamon, Gin∣ger and Suger, then must you cut your co∣uer after the fashion, leauing it vpon your Tarts, serue it with blaunch pouder.
a tart of egges. TAke twelue Egges and butter them together, then straine them with rose∣water, season it with Suger, then put it into your paste, and so bake it and serue it with suger vppon it. a white leach. TAke a quart of newe milke, and thrée ounces weight of Isinglasse, halfe a pounde of beaten suger, and stirre them together, and let it boile half a quarter of an hower till it be thicke, stirring them al the while: then straine it with thrée spoon∣full of Rosewater, thē put it into a platter and let it coole, and cut it in squares. Lay it faire in dishes, and lay golde vpon it. To keepe lard in season. CUt your lard in faire peeces, and salt it well with white salte, euery péece with your hand, and lay it in a close vessel then take faire running water, and much white salt in it, to make it brine, thē boile it vntill it beare an Egge, then put it into your Lard and keepe it close. To make Iombils a hundred. TAke twenty Egges and put them into a pot both the yolkes & the white, beat
them wel, then take a pound of beaten su∣ger and put to them, and stirre them wel together, then put to it a quarter of a peck of flower, and make a hard paste thereof, and then with Anniseede moulde it well, and make it in little rowles beeing long, and tye them in knots, and wet the ends in Rosewater, then put them into a pan of séething water, but euen in one waum, then take them out with a Skimmer and lay them in a cloth to drie, this being doon lay them in a tart panne, the bottome bée∣ing oyled, then put them into a temperat Ouen for one howre, turning then often in the Ouen. To make buttered Egges. TAke eight yolkes of egges, and put them into a pint of creame, beat them together and straine them into a possenet all, setting vpon the fire and stirring it, & let it seeth vntil it quaile, then take it and put it into a clean cloth, and let it hang so that the Waye may auoide from it, and when it is gone beate it into a dishe of rosewater and suger, with a spoon, and so shall you haue fine butter. This doon, you may take the white of the same eggs put∣ting
it into another pint of Cream, vsing it as the yolkes were vsed, and thus you may haue as fine white butter as you haue yellow butter. To boyle Neates feete. TAke your Neats feete out of the sauce and wash thē in faire water, then put them into your mutton broth, and take fiue or sixe onions chopped not small, then take a quantitie of tyme, Parsely and I∣sope chopped fine: boyle altogether, and when it is half boyled and more, thē a dsh or two of butter, and put to it, then season it with pepper, salt and saffron, with fiue or sixe spoonefulls of vineger, and so serue it vpon soppes. To boyle a Carpe. TAke out the gall, cast it away, and so scalde not your Carpe nor yet washe him, & when you doo kill him let his blood fall into a Platter, & splet your carpe into the same blood, and cast thereon a ladleful of vineger, then toste three or fower tosts of browne bread and burne it blacke, and  them into a little faire water, and thē immediatly straine them into the liquour where your carp shalbe sodden with thrée
or fower Onions chopped somewhat big, with parsely chopped small, then set your broth vpon the fire, and when it begins to boyle, put to your Carpe two or three di∣shes of butter, and a branch of rosemarie slipped, and slippes of time, and if it be too thick, put to it a little Wine, and so let it boyle faire and softlye, seasoning it with whole mace, cloues and salt, and pepper, cloues and mace beaten, and so serue it. To boile a pike with orenges a ban∣quet dish. TAke your pike, split him, and séeth him alone with water, butter, & salt, then take an earthen pot and put into it a pint of water, and another of Wine, with two Orenges or two Lemmons if you haue them: if not, then take foure or fiue Orin∣ges, the rines being cut away, and slyced, and so put to the licour, with sixe Dates cut long wayes, and season your broth with Ginger, pepper and salte, and two dishes of sweete butter, boyling these to∣gether, and when you will serue him, lay your pike vpon soppes, casting your broth vpon it, you must remember that you cut of your pikes head hard by the body & thē
his body to be spletted, cutting euery side in two or three partes, and when he is e∣nough, setting the body of the fish in order: then take his heade & set it at the foremost part of the dish, standing vpright with an Orrenge in his mouth, and so serue him. To boile a pike another. way. TAke your Pike and pull out all hys guttes, and doo not splette your Pyke, but cut of his head whole, and cut his body in three or foure péeces, and so let him be boiled in wine, Water, and Salte, to the quantitie of a pottell, then take a pinte of wine, and a ladlefull or two of the Pikes broth and put these together into an ear∣then pot, with two dishes of butter, and thrée or foure Orenges sliced, small Rai∣sons and suger, Time and rosemary, slip∣ped, and then put in the effect of the Pike in the same broth, and so let them boile to∣gether and when you be ready to serue, lay your Pike vpon soppes, and put your broth vpon it, seasoning it with whole si∣namon and mace, and a Nutmeg beaten, and so serue it foorth.
To boile Roche, Perche and Dase, with other small fish. TAke faire water & put to it parsely Time & Rosemary slipped, and so let it boyle a good while together, then take a dish or two of butter, putting to the same broth and your fish, and so let it boyle together seasoning it with cloues mace pepper and salte, and so serue them vpon soppes. To boile a Pike another way. TAke and splet your Pike through the back and take out the refect, so done, put your Pike into a pan of water with Rosemary, let it seeth till it be boiled, thē take your refecte with a litle wine & ver∣diuice with two dishes of butter, put these in a platter, setting it on a chafing dishe of Coles, and there let it voile, seasoning it with whole mace, this done, take vp your Pike, laying him vpon sops in a platter, then take your refecte and his broth and cast vpon it, and so serue it forth with salt. To boile a Tench. SEeth your Tench with a litle water & a good deale of vineger, whē it is sodden
lay it in a faire dish, take out all the bones and put a litle Saffron in your broth with a little salte, and put the same broth vpon your tench, and cast a little fine pepper v∣pon it while it is hot, and so let your tench stand til it be on a gelly, and when you do serue it, take an Onion & Persely chop∣ped fine, and cast it vpon your Tench, and so serue it. For Turbot and Cunger. SEeth them in faire water and salt, and let them boile till they be enough, then take them from the fire and let them coole then vse them in the seasoning as the sal∣mon héereafter following. For fresh Salmon. TAKE your Salmon and boile him in faire water, rosemary and time, and in the séething put a quart of strong Ale to it, and so let it boile till it be enough, then take it from the fire, and let it coole, then take your Salmon out of the pan, and put it into an earthen pan or woodden boule, and there put so much broth as will couer him, put into the same broth a good deale of vineger, so that it be tart with it.
For White pease pottage. TAke a quart of white Pease or more & seeth them in faire water close, vn∣till they doe cast their huskes, the which cast away, as long as any wil come vp to the topp, and when they be gon, then put into the peaze two dishes of butter, and a little vergious, with pepper and salt, and a little fine powder of March, and so let it stand till you will occupy it, and thē serue it vpon sops. You may sée the Porpose and Seale in your Pease, seruing it forth two péeces in a dish. To bake porpose or Seale. TAke your porpose or Seale, and per∣boile it, seasoning it with Pepper and Salt, and so bake it, you must take of the Skinne when you doe bake it and then serue it forth with Gallentine in sawcers To make a cawdle of Ote meale. TAke two handful or more of great ote∣meale, and beat it in a Stone Morter wel, then put it into a quart of ale, and set it on the fire, and stirre it, season it with Cloues, mace, and Suger beaten, and let it boile til it be enough, then serue it forth vpon Soppes.
To dresse a carpe. TAke your carpe and scale it, and splet it, and cut off his heade, & take out all the bones from him cleane, then take the fish and mince it fine, being raw, with the yolkes of foure or fiue hard egges minced with it, so doone put it into an earthen pot, with two dishes of butter & a pint of whit wine, a handfull of proynes, two yolks of hard egges cut in foure quarters, and season it with one nutmeg not small bea∣ten, Salt, Sinamon and Ginger, and in the boyling of it you must stirre it that it burne not to the pot bottome, and when it is enough then take your minced meat, & lay it in the dish, making the proportion of the body, setting his head at the vpper end and his taile at the lower end, which head and taile must be sodden by themselues in a vessell with water and salt. You may vse a Pike thus in al points, so that you do not take the proines, but for them take Dates and small raisons, and when you haue seasoned it as your Carpe is, and when you do serue it put the refect into the pikes mouth gaping, and so serue it foorth.
To farse Egges. TAke eight or ten eggs and boyle them hard, pill of the shelles, and cutte euery eg in the middle then take out the yolkes and make your farsing stuffe as you do for flesh, sauing only you must put butter into it insteede of suet, and that a little so doon fill your Egges where the yolkes were, and then binde them and seeth them a lit∣tle, and so serue them to the table. Sallets for fish daies. FIrst a sallet of green fine hearbs, put∣ting Perriwincles among them with oyle and vineger. an other. OLiues and Capers in one dish, with vineger and oyle. an other. VVHite Endiue in a dish with pe∣riwincles vpon it, and oyle and vineger. an other. CArret rootes being minced, and then made in the dish, after the proportion of a Flowerdeluce, then picke Shrimps and lay vpon it with oyle and vineger.
Another. ONions in flakes laid round about the dishe, with minced carrets laid in the middle of the dish, with boyled Hippes in fiue partes like an Oken leafe, made and garnished with tawney long cut with oil and vineger. another. ALexander buds cut long waies, gar∣nished with welkes. another. SKirret rootes cut long waies in a dish with tawney long cutte, vineger and Oyle. another. SAlmon cut long waies, with slices of onions laid vpon it, and vpon that to cast violets, oyle and vineger. another. TAke pickeeld herring cut long waies and lay them in rundles with onions and parsely chopped, and other herringes the bones being taken out to bee chopped together and laide in the roundles with a long péece laide betwixt the rundles like the proportion of a snake, garnished with Tawney long cut, with vineger and oile,
another TAke pickelde Herrings and cut them long waies, and so lay them in a dish, and serue them with oyle and vineger. To make tattes or balde meates for fish daies. TAke your dish and annoint the bottom well with butter, thē make a fine past to the bredth of the dish, and lay it on the same dish vpon the butter, then take Bée∣tes, Spinage, and Cabbadges, or white Lettice, cutting them fine in long péeces, then take the yolkes of viii. rawe egges, and six yolkes of hard Egges, with small Raisons and a little Cheese fine scraped, and grated bread, and thrée or four dishes of Butter melted and clarified, and when you haue wrought it togeather, season it with Sugar, Sinamon, Ginger and salt, then lay it vpon your fine past sprea∣ding it abroad, then the couer of fine paste being cut with prettie work, then set it in your ouen, bake it with your dish vnder it and when it is enough, thē at the seruing of it you must newe paste the couer with Butter, and so scrape suger vppon it, and then serue it foorth.
To make alloes of fresh Salmon to boile or to bake. TAke your Salmon and cut him small in peeces of thée fingers breadth, and when you haue cut so many slices as you will haue, let them be of the length of a womans hand, then take more of the sal∣mon, as much as you thinke good, & mince it rawe with sixe yolkes of hard Egges very fine, and then two or three dishes of Butter with small raisons, and so worke them together with cloues, Mace, Pep∣per, and Salt, then lay your minced meat in your sliced Aloes, euery one being rol∣led and pricked with a feather, fall closed, then put your aloes, into an Earthen pot, and put to it a pinte of water, and another pint of Claret wine, and so let them boile til they be enough, & afterwarde take the yolkes of three rawe egges with a litle vergious, being strained together, and so put into the pot, then let your aloes seeth no more afterwarde, but serue them vpon Soppes of bread. A Troute baked or minced. TAke a Troute and seeth him, thē take out all the bones, then mince it verie
fine with thrée or foure dates minced with it, seasoning it with Ginger, and Sina∣mon, and a quantitie of Suger and But∣ter, put all these together, working them fast, thē take your fine paste, and cut it in thrée corner waies in a small bignesse, of foure or fiue coffins in a dish, thē lay your stuffe in them, close them, and so bake thē and in the seruing of thē baste the couers with a little butter, and then cast a little blaunch pouder on them, and so sarue it foorth. To make a splede Eagle of a pullet. TAke a good pullet and cut his throate hard by the head, and make it but a lit∣tle hole, then scalde him cleane, and take out of the small hole his crop, so done, take a quill and blowe into the same hole, for to make the skinne to rise from the fleshe, then break the wing bones, and the bones hard by the knee, then cut the necke hard by the body within the skinne, then cut off the romp within the skinne, leauing the bones at the legges, and also ye head on, so drawing the whole body out within the skinne of the hole, the bones to be laid be∣neath
towardes the clawes, and the feets being left also on, you must cut of his bill: when you haue taken out all these bones, and brought it to the purpose, then take the fleshe of the same pullet, & perboile it a little, and mince it fine with Shéepes Suet, grated bread, thrée yolkes of harde Egges, then binde it with foure rawe Egges, and a fewe Barberies, working these together, season it with Cloues, Mace, Ginger, Pepper and salt, and saf∣fron, then stuffe your pullets skinne with it, putting it in at the hole at the head, and when you haue stuffed him, take him and lay him flat in a platter, and make it after the proportion of an Eagle in euery part, hauing his head to be cleft a sunder, and laide in two partes like an Eagles head thus done, then must you put him into the Ouen, leauing in the platter a dish of but∣ter vnderneath him, an other vpon him, because of burning, and whē it is enough then set it foorth, casting vpon him in the seruice blaunch pouder, Sinamon Gin∣ger, and Suger.
To make Mortirs of a Capon, Hen, or pullet, TAke a well fleshed Capon, Henne, or pullet, scalde and dresse him, then put him into a pot of faire water, and ther let it seeth til it be tender, then take it and pul all the flesh from his bones, and beat it in a stone morter, and when you thinke it halfe beaten, put some of the same licour into it, and then beate it til it be fine, then take it out and straine it with a litle rose∣water out of a strainer into a dishe, then take it and set it on a chafingdish of coles, with a little Suger put to it, and so stirre it with your knife, & lay it in a faire dishe in three long owes, thē take blanch pou∣der made of Sinamon and Suger, and cast vpon it and so serue it forth. To make a colluce. TAke all the bones and legges of the a∣foresaid Capon, Henne or pullet, and beat them fine in a stone Morter, putting to it halfe a pinte or more of the same li∣cour that it was sodden in, then straine it, and put to it a litle Suger, then put it in∣to a stone Crewes, and so drinke it warm first and last.
A made dish of the proportion of an Egge for flesh daies. MAke in all your things, your farsing stuffe as you do for your Cabbadge, euen so much as will fill a Bladder. Frst take a drie bladder & wash it cleane, that is of a Calfe or of a Stere, and cut a little hole in the toppe, and then put in all your farseing stuffe, and when you haue filled it then close the bladder toppe, binding it with a threede, and then put it into freshe Beefe broth, or Mutton broth, and there let it seeth till it be enough, then take it out, and let it stand still til it be somewhat stiffe, then cut away the bladder from it, and take another drie bladder and washe it clean: let it be bigger somewhat thē the other was before, and cut it broad at the toppe, wherby your farsing stuffe may in the hole goe, and when it is in then so ma∣ny whites of Egges being rawe as may run round about him both aboue and be, neath, within the bladder cleane couered with it, then bind vp your bladder mouth and put into your broth againe the Blad∣der, and there let it seeth till the white be hardened about the farsing, then take it
out and cut away the bladder, then set it in a faire dish, laying the parselie vpon it, and so serue it forth. Thus may you make small Egges to the number of sixe or eight in a dish in like maner, hauing a bladder for the same pur∣pose. To still a Capon for a sicke person. TAke a well fleshed capon faire scalded and drest, and put him into an earthen pot, put to it Burrage and Buglas, three handfull of mints, one handfull of Hartes tung, and Langdebeefe, a handfull of I∣sope, put thereto a pinte of Clarret wine, and a pinte of cleane water, and twelue Proynes, and when you haue so doon co∣uer the pot with a dish or saucer, and vpon that all to couer course paste that no aire come out, then take the pot and hang in a Brasse pot vp to ye brimmes of your paste, and so let it boile for twelue houres at the least, & alwaies as your water that is in the brasse pot doth cōsume, be sure to haue in readines another pot of hotte water at the fire to fill it as long as it doth seeth for the twelue howers, and when the howers be past take it from the fire, and let it coole
for one hower, then vnlose and strain the licour from the capon into a faire pot, ta∣king euery morning warme foure or fiue spoone fuls next to your hart, which shall comfort and restore nature to you beeyng sicke, vsing this aforesaide capon. To Preserue Quinces in sirrop all the yeere. TAke three pound of quinces being pa∣red and cored, two pounde of Suger and three quarts of faire running water, put all these togeather in an earthen pan, and let them boyle with a soft fire, & when they be skimmed, couer them close that no ayre maye come out from them, you must put cloues and Sinamon to it after it is skimmed, of quantitie as you will haue them to taste, if you wil know when they be boyled enough, hang a linnen cloth be∣tween the couer and the pan so that a good deale of it may hang in the licour, & when the cloth is very red they be boiled enough let them stand till they be colde, then put them in Galley pots sirroppe, and so wil they keepe a yeere.
To conserue wardens all the yeere in sirrop. TAke your wardens and put them into a great Earthen pot, and couer them close, set them in an Ouen when you haue set in your white bread, & when you haue drawne your white bread, and your pot, & that they be so colde that you may handle them, then pill the thin skinne from them ouer a pewter dish, that you may saue all the sirroppe that falleth from them: put to them a quarte of the same sirroppe, and a pinte of Rosewhter, and boile them toge∣ther with a fewe Cloues and Sinnamon, and when it is reasonable thick and cold, put your wardens and Sirroppe into a Galley pot, and sée alwaies that the Syr∣rop bee aboue the Wardens, or any other thing that you conserue. To conserue cherries, Damesins or wheat plummes all the yeere in the sirrop. FIrst take faire water, so much as you shall think meete and one pound of su∣ger, and put them both into a faire bason, and set the same ouer a soft fire, till the su∣ger be melted, then put the reto one pound
and an halfe of chirries, or Damsins, and let them boile till they breake, then couer them close til they be colde, then put them in your gally pottes, and so keep them: this wise kéeping proportion in weight of Suger and fruite, you may conserue as much as you list putting therto Sinamon and cloues, as is aforesaid. To make a paste of Suger, where of a man may make al manner of fruits, and other fine thinges with their forme, as Plates, Dishes, Cuppes and such like thinges, where with you may furnish a Table. TAke Gumme and dragant asmuch as you wil, and steep it in Rosewater til it be mollified, and for foure ounces of su∣ger take of it the bignes of a beane, the iuyce of Lemons, a walnut shet ful, and a little of the white of an eg. But you must first take the gumme, and beat it so much with a postell in a brasen morter, till it be come like water, then put to it the iuyce with the white of an egge, incorporating al these wel together, this don take foure ounces of fine white suger well beaten to powder, and cast it into ye morter by a litle
and little, vntil they be turned into ye form of paste, thē take it out of the said morter, and bray it vpon the powder of suger, as it were meale or flower, vntill it be like soft paste, to the end you may turn it, and fashionit which way you wil. When you haue brought your paste to this fourme spread it abroad vpō great or smal leaues as you shall thinke it good, and so shal you form or make what things you wil, as is aforesaid, with such fine knackes as may serue a Table taking heede there stand no hotte thing nigh it. At the ende of the Banket they may eat all, and breake the Platters Dishes, Glasses, Cuppes, and all other things, for this paste is very de∣licate and sauerous. If you will make a thing of more finenesse then this: make a Tarte of Almondes stamped with suger and Rose water of like sorte that March∣paines be made of, this shall you laye be∣tween two pastes of such vessels or fruits or some other things as you thinke good. To confite walnuts TAke them greene and small in huske, and make in them foure litle holes, or more, then steepe them in water eleuen
daies, make them cleane and boile them as ye Orenges héer after written, but they must séethe foure times as much. Dresse them likewise with Spices, sauing you must put in very fewe Cloues, least they taste bitter. In like sorte you may dresse Goords, cutting them in long péeces, and paring away the inner partes. To make Mellons and Pompons sweet. TAke fine Suger and dissolue it in wa∣ter, then take séedes ot Mellons and cleaue thē a litle on the side that sticketh to the Mellon, and put them in the sugred water, adding to them a little rosewater. Leaue the saide séedes so by the space of thrée or foure houres, then take them out, and you shall sée that as soone as the saide séedes be dry, it wil close vp again. Plant it and there will come of it such Mellons, as the like hath not béen séene. If you wil haue them to giue the sauour of Muske: put in the said water a little muske, and fine Sinamon, and thus you may doo the seedes of Pompones, and Cowcumbers.
To confite Orenge peeles which may be doone at all times in the yeere, and cheefly in May, because then the saide peeles be greatest and thickest. TAke thicke Orenge péeles, and them cut in foure or fiue péeces, and steepe them in water the space of ten or twelue daies. You may know when they be stée∣ped enough, if you holde them vp in the sunne and sée through them, then they be steeped enough, & you cannot sée through them, then let them stéepe vntil you may. Then lay them to drye vpon a table, and put them to dry betwéen two linnen clo∣thes, then put them in a Kettell or vessell leaded, and adde to it as much Honny as will halfe couer the saide peeles, more or lesse as you think good, boyle them a little and stirre them alwaies, then take them from the fire, least the Honny should séeth ouermuch. For if it should boyle a little more then it ought to boyle, it would be thick. Let it thē stand and rest foure daies in the said Honny, stirring and mingling the Orrenge and Honny euery day toge∣ther. Because there is not honny enough to couer all the saide Orrenge péeles, you
must stir them well and oftentimes, thus doo thrée times, giuing them one bobling at ech time, then let thē stand thrée dayes then strain them from the honny, and af∣ter you haue let them boile a small space, take them from the fier, and bestow them in vessels, putting to them Ginger, cloues and Sinamon, mixe all together, and the rest of the Sirrope will serue to dresse o∣thers withall. How to purifie and prepare Honnye and Sugar for to confite citrons and all other fruites. TAke euery time ten pound of hony, the white of twelue new laid egges, and take away the froth of them, beate them wel together with a stick, and six glasses of fair fresh water, then put them into the honny, and boyle them in a pot with mo∣derate fire the space of a quarter of an ho∣wer or lesse, then take them from the fire skimming them well. To cōnfite Peaches after the Spanish fashion. TAke great and faire Peaches and pill them clean, cut them in péeces and so
lay them vpon a table abroad in the Sun the space of two daies, turning them eue∣rye morning and night, & put thē hot into a Inlep of Sugar wel sodden, and prepa∣red as is aforesaid, and after you haue ta∣ken them out set them againe in the Sun turning them often vntill they bee well dried, this doon, put them againe into the Inlep, then set them in the sun vntill they haue gotten a faire bark or crust, and thē you may keepe them in boxes for winter. a goodlye secret for to condite or confite Orenges, citrons, and all other fruites in sirrop. TAke Cytrons and cut them in peeces, taking out of them the iuice or sub∣stance, then boyle them in freshe water halfe an hower vntill they be tender, and when you take them out, cast thē in colde water, leaue them there a good while, thē set them on the fire againe in other freshe water, doo but heat it a little with a smal fire, for it must nrt seeth, but let it simper a litle, continue thus eight daies together heating thē euery day in hot water: some heat ye water but one day, to the end that the citrons be not too tender, but change
the freshe water at night to take out the bitternesse of the pilles, the which being taken away, you must take suger or Ho∣ny clarified, wherein you must the citrons put, hauing first wel dried them from the water, & in wīter you must kéep thē from the frost, & in Sommer you shal leaue thē there all night, and a daye and a night in Honie, then boile the Honie or Sugar by it selfe without the orenges or Citrons by the space of halfe an hower or lesse with a little fire, and beeing colde set it again to the fire with the Citrons, continuing so two morninges: if you wil put Honnie in water and not suger, you must clarifie it two times, and straine it through a stray∣ner: hauing thus warmed and clarified it you shall straine and sette it againe to the fire, with Citrons onely, making them to boyle with a soft fire the space of a quar∣ter of an houre, thē take it from the fire & let it rest at euery time you do it, a day & a night: the next morning you shall boyle it again together the space of half an how¦er, and doo so two morninges, to the end that the Honie or suger may be well in∣corporated with the Citrons. All the cun∣ning
consisteth in the boyling of this sir∣rope together with the Citrons, and also the Sirrope by it selfe, and heerein heede must be taken that it take not ye smoke, so that it sauour not of the fire: In this ma∣ner may be drest the Peaches, or Lem∣mons Orrenges, Apples, greene Wal∣nuts, and other liste being boiled more or lesse, according to the nature of the fruits. To bray golde. TAke Golde leaues, fower drops of ho∣ny mixe it wel together, and put it in∣to a glasse, and when you will occupie it, stéep and temper it in gumme water and it will be good. To make a condonack. TAke Quinces and pare thē, take out the cores, and séeth them in fair water vntil they break, thē strain them through a fine strainer, and for eight pound of the said strained quinces, you must put in 3. pound of Suger, and mingle it together in a vessel, and boile them en the fire al∣waies stirring it vntil it be sodden which you may perceiue, for that it will no lon∣ger cleaue to the vessel, but you may stāp muske in powder, you may also ad spice
to it, as Ginger, Sinamon, Cloues, and Nutmegges, as much as you think méet, boyling the muske with a litle Uineger, then with a broad slice of wood spread of this confection vpon a table, which must be first strewed with Suger, and there make what proportion you wil, and set it in the sunne vntil it be drye, and when it hath stood a while turn it vpsidown, ma∣king alwaies a bed of Suger, both vnder and aboue, and turne them still, and drye them in the sunne vntill they haue got∣ten a crust. In like maner you may dresse Peares, Peaches, Damsins, and other fruites. To make confections of Mellons or Pompones. TAke what quantity of Mellons you think best, and take them before they be ripe, but let thē be good, and make as many cuts in thē as they be marked with quarters on euery side, and hauing mun∣dified them and taken out the cores and curnels, and péeled the vtter rinde, steepe them in good Uineger, and leauing them so the space of ten daies, & when you haue taken them out, take other vineger and
stéepe them a new againe other ten daies remouing and stirring them euery daye, then when time shalbetake them out, and put them in a course linnen cloth, drying and wiping them, and set thē in the ayre, the space of a day and a night, then boyle them in Hony, and by the space of x. daies giue them euery day a little boyling, lea∣uing them alwaies in the Hony, and they must boile at euery boiling but one walm then take the peeces and put thē in a pot with pouder of cloues, Ginger and Nut∣megges, and peeces of Sinnamon, thus doone, make one bed of the peeces of Mel∣lons, and another of the spices, and then powre white Honnie vpon all in the said pots or vessels, The stilling of a capon a great restoritie. TAke a yong Capon that is well fleshed and not fat, & a knuckle of yong Ueale that is sucking, and let not fat be vpon it, and all to back it bones and all, and fles the cap on cleane the skin from the fleshe, and quarter it in foure quarters, and all to burst it bones and al, and put the Ueale and it altogether in an earthen pot, and
put to it a pinte of Red wine, and eight spoonfulles of rose water, and half a pound of small raisons and Currants, and soure Dates quartred, and a handfull of Rose∣mary flowers, and a handful of Burrage flowers, and twenty or thirtie whole ma∣ces, and take and couer the pot close with a couer, and take paste and put about the pols mouth that no ayre come forth, and set it within a brasse pot full of water on the fire, and let it boile there eight houres and then take the ladle and bruse it alto∣gether within the pot, and put it in a faire strainer, and straine it through with the Ladle, and let no fat be vpon the broth, but that it may be blowne or els taken with a feather, and euery daye next your hart drinke halfe a dozen spoonefulles thereof, with a Cake of Manus christi, and againe at foure of the clocke in the afternoone. To make good sope. FIrst you must take halfe a strike of as∣shen Ashes, and a quarte of Lime, then you must mingle both these together, and then you must fil a pan full of water and seeth them well, so done, you must t take foure pound of beastes tallow, and put it
into the Lye, and séeth them together vn∣till it be hard. To make Quinces in Sirrope. TAke thirty Quinces to the quantity of this sirrop, take a pottel of water and put it in a pan, and then take the whites of six egges and beat them with an other pottle of water, & then put it altogether, and put therto twelue or fouretéen pound of Suger, as you shal see cause, and seeth it and skim it very cleane, and then put to it two ounces of cloues and bruse thē a very little, and let them seeth vntill the some do rise very black, and then skimme of the cloues again & wash them in faire water and dry them and put them in a∣gain and your quinces also. Put to them half a pint of rosewater, and then put the Sirrope in a faire earthen pot or panne, and lay a shéet foure times double vpon them to kéep in ye heat, and so let it stand a day or two, and then put them & the sirop in a vessell that was neuer occupied, & co∣uer them close, but in the beginning pare your quinces and core them, & séeth them in faire water, vntill they be tender, and then take them vp and lay them that the
water may runne from them cleane, and when they be cold, then put thē into your sirrope as it is aboue said. To make conserue of Barberies. TAke your Barberies and picke them cleane, and set thē ouer a soft fire, and put to them Rosewater as much as you thinke good, then when you thinke it be sodde enough, straine that, and then séeth it againe, and to euery pound of Barbe∣ries, one pound of suger, and meat your conserue. To make a Pudding of a Calues chaldron. First take ye chaldron & let it be washed scalded & perboyled, and let it be chop∣ped & stamped fine in a morter, and while it is hotte straine it through a cullender, and halfe a dozen of Egges both whites and yolkes, with all maner of hearbs to them a handful or two, let the hearbes be shred small, and put them to the chaldron and a good handful of grated bread, then take a handfull of flower, and put it to it all, then take an Drenge pil out of the si∣rope and mingle with it, then season it with Sinamon and Ginger, and a fewe
Cloues and mace, and a little Rosewater and Marrowe or Suet, Butter a good quantity thereof close it vp, so it be not dry baked, then take the thinnest of ye sheepes kel and wrapt the meat in, then rease the coffin of fine paste and put it in. To boile calues feete. TAke a pinte of white wine and a smal quantity of water, and small raisons and whole mace, and boile them together in a little Uergious and yolkes of egges, mingled with them, and a peece of sweete butter, so serue them vppon bread sliced. To stewe veale. TAke a knockle of Ueale & al to bruse it, thē set it on the fire in a litle fresh water, let it seeth a good while, then take good plenty of onions and chop them into your broth, and when it hath well sodden, put in Uergious, Butter, Salt and Saf∣fron, and when it is enough, put to it a lit∣tle suger, and then it will be good. To boile chickins and mutton after the Dutch fashion. FIrst take Chickins and mutton, and boyle them in water a good while, and let a good deale of the water be boyled a∣way,
then take out the Mutton and chic∣kens and the broth, make whit broth, put in thereto Sinnamon and Ginger, Su∣ger and a litle Pepper, and a litle Uergi∣ous, and a litle flower to thicken it, and a little Saffron, take Rosemarye, Time, Margerum and penirial, and Hisope, and halfe a dish of butter, with a litle salt, the liquor must be cold before the chickins be put in. To make a caudle. TAKE a pinte of Malmesie and fiue or sixe egges, and seeth them strained to gether, so sodden, stirre it till it be thicke, and lay it in a dish as you doe please, and so serue it. To make a Haggas pudding. TAke a peece of a Calues Chaldron and perboile it, shred it so small as you can, then take as much Beefe Sewet as your meate, shred likewise, and a good deale more of grated bread, put this together, and to them seuen or eight yolkes of egs, and two or three whites, & a litle creame, three or fower spoonefull of rosewater, a little Pepper, Mace and nutmegs, and a good deale of suger, fill them and let them
be sodden with a very soft fire, and shred also with a little Winter Sanery parse∣ly and Time, and a little Peniriall with your meat. To make Hagges Puddings. TAke th liuer of a Hog and perboyle it, then stampe in water and strain it with thicke creame, and put therto eight or nine yolks of egges, and thrée or foure whites, and Hogges suet, small raisons, Cloues and Mace, pepper, salte, and a li∣tle suger, and a good deale of grated bread to make it thick, and let them séeth. To make Ising puddings. TAke great Otemeale and pick it and let it soake in thick cream 3. howere, then put therto yolkes of Egs, and some whites, pepper, salt, cloues and mace, and a litle suger, and fil them nod too full, and séeth them a good while. To seeth Muscles. TAke butter and vineger a good deale, parseley chopt small and pepper, then set it on the fire, and let it boile a whild, then see the Muscles be cleane washee, and put them in the broth shelles and all, and when they be boyled a while, serue
them shelles and all. To make a Pudding. TAke Parseley and Time, and chop it small, then take the kidney of Veale, and perboile it, and when it is perboyled, take all the fat of it, and lay it that it may coole, and when it is colde shred it like as you doo sewet for puddinges, then take marrow and mince it by it self, then take grated bread and smal raisons the quan∣tity of your stuffe, & dates minced small, then take the egges and roste them hard, and take the yolks of them and chop thē small, and then take your stuffe afore e∣hearsed and mingle altogether, and then take pepper, Cloues and Mace, Saffron, and salt, and put it together with the said stuffe, as much as you thinke by casting shal suffire, then take six Egs and breake them into a vessel whites and all, and put your dry stuffe into the same egges, and temper them all wel together, and so fill your haggesse or gut, and séeth it wel and it will be good. To stewe Steakes. TAke a necke of Mutton and cut it in péeces, and then frye them with butter
vntill they be more then halfe enough fry them with a good many of Onions sliced, then put them in a little pot, & put there∣to a little parsely chopt, as muche broath of Mutton or beefe as couer them, with a little Pepper, Salt, and Uergious: then let it séeth together very softly the space of an hower, and serue them vpon soppes. To boile the lightes of a calfe. FIrst boile the lightes in water, then take Persely, Time, Onyons, Peny∣riall, and a litle Rosemacy, and when the Lightes be boiled chop all these together Lights and all very smal, and then boile them in a litle pot, and put into them ver∣gious, Butter, and some of the own broth then season it with Pepper, Sinamon, and Ginger: let them boile a little and serue them with sops. To make a lenthen Haggesse with poched egges. TAke a Skillet of a pinte, and fill it half with vergious, and halfe with water, and then take Margerome, Wintersaue∣rie, Peniroyall, mince, Time, of eche fixe crops, wash them, and take foure Egges, hard rosted, and shred them as fine as you
can, & put the hearbes thus into the broth, then put a great handfull of currants, and the crummes af a quarter of a Manchet, and so let it séeth til it be thicke, then sea∣son it with Suger, Sinamon, Salt, and a good peece of Butter, and three or foure spoonefulles of Rose water, then poch sea∣uen Egges and lay them on sippets, and poure the Haggesse on them, with Sina∣mon and Sugar strewed on them. To boile Onions. TAke a good many onions and cut thē in foure quarters, set them on the fire in asmuch water as you think will boyle them tender, and whē they be clean skim∣med, put in a good many of small raisons, halfe a spooneful of grose pepper, a good peece of Suger, and a little Salte, and when the Onions be through boiled, beat the yolke of an Egge with Uergious, and put into your pot and so serue it vpon soppes. If you will poch Egges and lay vpon them. To boile Citrons. WHē your Citrons be boiled, pared and sliced, séeth them with water and wine, and put to them butter, small
Raysons, and Barberies, suger, sinamon and Ginger, and let them seeth till your citrons be tender. To bake Lampernes. FIrst make your coffin long waies, and season your Lampernes with Pepper, Cloues, and Mace, and put them in the Pye, and put thereto a good handfull of small Raysons, two or thrée onions sliced a good peece of Butter, a litle suger, and a few Barberies, & whē it is enough put in a little Vergious. To make fried toste of Spinage. TAke Spinnage and seeth it in water and salt, and when it is tender, wring out the water betwéene two Trenchers, then chop it smal and set it on a Chafing∣dish of coles, and put thereto butter, small Raisons, Sinamon, Ginger, and Suger, and a little of the iuyce of an Orenge and two yolks of rawe Egges, and let it boile till it be somewhat thicke, then toste your toste, soake them in a little Butter, and Suger, and spread thinne your spinnage vpon them, and set them on a dish before the fire a litle while, & so serue them with a litle suger vpon them.
To bake a Citron pie. TAke your citron, pare it and slice it in peeces, and boile it with grose pepper and Ginger, and so lay it in your Paste with butter, and when it is almost baked put thereto Uineger, Butter, and Suger, and let it stande in the Ouen a while and soke. An other way to bake Citrons. WHen your Citrons be pared & slyced laye it in your Paste with small Raysons, and season them with Pepper, ginger, and fine suger. To bake Aloes. TAke a Legge of mutton or Ueale, and cut it in thinne slices: take parseley, Time, Margerom, Sauerie, & chop them small, with ii. or iii. yolkes of hard Egges and put there to a good many Currants, then put these hearbs in the slices, with a péece of Butter in each of them and wrap them together and lay them close in your Paste, season them with Cloues, Mace, Sinamon, Suger, and a lyttle whole pepper, Currans and Barberies cast v∣pon them and put a dish of butter to them & whē they be almost baked put in a lit∣tle
Vergious. To bray Golde. TAke Golde leaues, fower drops of ho∣ny, mix it wel together, and put it in∣to a Glasse, and when you will occupy it, stéep and temper it in gumme water and it will be good. To make conserues of Roses, and of any other flowers. TAke your Roses before they be fullye sprung out, and chop off the white of them, and let the Roses be dried one daye or two before they be stamped, and to one vnce of these flowers take one vnce and a halfe of fine beaten Suger, and let your roses be beatē as you can, and after beat your roses and Suger together againe, then put the Conserue into a faire glasse: And likewise make all Conserue of Flo∣wers. To make conserue of cherries, and other fruites. TAke halfe a pound of Cherries, & boile them dry in their own licour, and thē straine them through a Hearne rale, and when you haue strained them, put in two pounde of fine beaten Suger, and boyle
them together a prety while, and then put your Conserue in a pot. To seeth a carpe. FIrst take a Carpe and boile it in wa∣ter and salt, then take of the broth and put in a litle pot, then put therto as much Wine as there is broth, with Rosemary, Parselie, Time, and margerum bounde together, and put them into the pot, & put thereto a good manie of sliced Onyons, small raisons, whole maces, a dish of but∣ter, and a little suger, so that it be not too sharp nor two swéet, and let all these seeth together: if the wine be not sharpe enough then put there to a little Vineger, and so serue it vpon soppes with broth. To seeth a pike. FIrst seeth the Pike in water and salte, with Rosemarie, Parsely and Tyme, then take the best of the broth and put in∣to a litle pot, then put therto the ruffilt of the pyke, small Raisons, whole Mace, whole pepper, twelue or thirtéen Dates: a good peece of Butter, a goblet of white wine, and a litle yeast, and whē they haue boyled a good while, put in a little vine∣ger, suger and Ginger, so serue the pyke
with the Ruffilt, and broth vpon soppes. To boyle cockles. TAke water, vineger, pepper, and béere, and put the cockles in it, then let them séeth a good while, & serue thē broth and all. You may seeth them in nothing but in water and salt if you wil. To boyle a carpe in greene broth, with a pudding in his bellie. TAke the spawn of a carpe, and boile and crumble it as fine as you can, thē take grated bread smal raisons dates minced, cinamon, suger, cloues, and Mace, and Pepper, and a little salte min∣gled altogeather, and take a good handful of sage, and boile it tender, and straine it with thrée or foure yolkes of Egges, and one white, and put to the spawne, with a little creame and Rosewater, then take the carpe and put the pudding in the bel∣lie, and seeth him in water and salt, and whē he is almost boyled, take some of the spawne and of the best of the broth, and put it into a little pot with a little white wine, and a good péece of butter, and thrée or foure Onyons, whole Mace, whole Pepper, and small Raisons, and thrée or
sower Dates, and when it is a good deale sodden, put in a good deale of séeded spin∣nage, & strain it with thrée or fower yolks of Egges, and the Onyons that you put into the Broth with a little Vergious, and put it to your Broth: and if it be too sharpe put in a little Suger, and so laye your Carpe vpon soppes, and poure the Broth vpon it. To make an Almond Custard. TAke a good sort of almonds blanched, and stampe them with Water, and straine them with water and a litle rose∣water, and twelue Egges, then season it with a little synamon, suger, and a good deale of Ginger, then set it vpon a pot of seething water, & when it is enough stick Dates in it. To make a blanch marger on the fish day. TAke whites of egges and creme, and boile them on a chafingdish on coles, till they Curd, then will their whay goe from them, then put away the whay, then put to the Curd a little Rosewater, then straine it and season it with suger.
To bake chickins. FIrst season them with cloues & mace, pepper and salt, and put to them cur∣rans and Barberies, and slitte an apple and cast synamon and suger vpon the apple, and lay it in the bottome, and to it put a dish of butter, and when it is almost enough baked, put a little suger, vergious and orenges. To make a Pudding in a pot. TAke a peece of a Legge of Mutton or Veale and perboyle it well, then shred it very fine, with as much suet as there is mutton, and season it with a little pep∣perand salte. Cloues and Mace, with a good deale of synamon and Ginger, then put it in a little pot, and put thereto a good quantity of Currans and Prunes, and two or thrée Dates cut the long wayes, and let it séethe softly with a little vergi∣ous vpon sops, and so serue it with suger. To stew Steakes. TAke the great Ribbes of an Necke of mutton and choppe them asunder, and wash them wel, thē put them in a platter one by another, and set them on a chafin∣dish of coales, couer them and turne them
now and then, so let them stew til they be halfe enough, then take Parseley, Time, Margerome and Onyons, and chop them very small, and cast vpon the steakes, put therto one spoonfull of vergious, and two or thrée spoonfulles of Wine, a little but∣ter and Marrowe, let them boyle till the mutton be tender, and cast theron a little pepper, if your broth be too sharp put in a little suger. To roast a Pigge. TAke your pig and draw it, and wash it cleane, and take the liuer, perboile it and straine it with a little creame, and yolkes of Egges, and put thereto grated bread, marrow, small Raisons, nutmegs in powder, mace, suger and salte, and stirre all these together, and put into the Pigges bellye, and sowe the Pigge, then spit it with the haire on, & when it is halfe enough pull of the skinne, and take héede you take not of the fatte, then baste it, and when it is enough, thē crum it with white bread, suger, sinamon and ginger, and let it be somewhat browne.
To roste an Hare. TAke the Hare and flay her, then take Parseley, Time Sauery, Creame, a a good péece of Butter Pepper, small rai∣sons, and barberies work all these toge∣ther in the Hares bellye: when she is al∣most enough, baste her with Butter, and one yolke of an Egge, and make veneson sauce to her. To make Tostes. TAke the Kidney of Ueale and chop it small then set it on a chafingdishe of Coales, and take two yolkes of egges, Currans, Synamon, Ginger, Cloues and mace, and suger, let them boyle to∣gether a good while, and a little Butter with the Kidnie. To make conserue of Mellons, or Pompons. TAke what quantity of Mellons you thinke best, and take thē before they be ripe, but let them be good, and make as many cuts in thē as they be marked with quarters on euery side, & hauing mundi∣fied thē and taken out the cores and cur∣nelles, and péeled the vtter rinde, stéepe them in good Uineger, and leauing them
so the space of ten daies, & when you haue taken them out, take other vineger and stéep them ten daies more, remouing and stirring them euery day, then when time shalbe take thē and put them in a course linnen cloth, drying & wiping them, then set them in the ayre the space of one daye and a night, then boile them in hony, and by the space of ten daies giue them euery day a little boyling, leauing thē alwaies in the Hony, and they must boile at euery boiling but one walm, then take the pee∣ces and put them in a pot, with pouder of Cloues, Ginger and Nutmegges, and a peece of synamon, this doone, make one bed of the peeces of Mellons, and another of the spice, and then poure white honye vpon all in the said pots or vessels. To make sirrope of Violets. FIrst gather a great quantity of violet flowers, and pick thē cleane from the stalkes and set thē on the fire, and put to them so much Rosewater as you thinke good, then let them boile altogether vntill the colour be forth of them thē take them of the fire and strain them through a fine cloth, then put so much suger to them as
you thinke good, then set it againe to the fire vntil it be somewhat thick, and put it into a violl glasse. To make sope. FIrst you must take halfe a strike of As∣shen ashes, and a quarte of Lime, then you must mingle both these together, and then you must fil apanne ful of water and seeth them well, so doone, you must take foure pound of beastes tallaw, and put it into the lye and seeth them togeather vn∣till it be hard. To preserue orrenges. TAke your Pills and water them two nights & one day, and drie them clean againe and boile them with a soft fire the space of one hower, then take them out to coole, and make your sirroppe halfe with Rosewater and half with that liconr, and put double Suger to your Orenges, and when your Sirroppe is halfe sodden, then let your orrenges seeth one quarter of an hower more, then take out your orrenges and let the sirroppe séeth vntil it rope, and when all is colde, then put your Orenges into the Sirrop: The white of an Egge and suger beaten togeather will make it
to candie. The stilling of a capon, a great restority. TAke a yong Capon that is wel fleshed and not fat, & a knuckle of yong Veale that is sucking and let not fat be vpon it, and all to hack it bones and all, and flea the capon clean the skinne from the flesh, and quarter it in foure quarters, and all to bruse it bones and al, and put the veale and it altogether in an Earthen pot, and put to it a pinte of Red wine, and eight spoonfuls of Rosewater, and half a pound of small Raisins or Currans, or foure Dates quartered, and a handfull of Rose∣mary flowers, and a handful of Burrage flowers, and twenty or thirty whole Ma∣ces, and take and couer the pot close with a couer, and take paste and put about the pots mouth that no ayre conie forth, and set it within a brasse pot full of water on the fire, & let it boyle there eight howers, and then take the ladle and bruse it alto∣gether within the pot, and put it in a faire strainer, and straine it through with the ladle, and let no fat be vpon the broth but that it may be blowne or else taken with
a feather, and euery daye next your hart drinke halfe a dozen spoonfulles therof, with a cake of Manus Christi, and again at foure of the clock in the afternoone. To make drie Marmelet of Peches. TAke your Peaches and pare thē, and cut them from the stones, and mince them very sinely, and stéepe them in rose∣water, then straine them with rosewater through a course cloth or Strainer into your Pan that you will séethe it in, you must haue to euery pound of peches halfe a pound of suger finely beaten, and put it into your pan yt you do boile it in; you must reserue out a good quātity to mould your cakes or prints withall, of that Su∣ger, then set your pan on the fire, and stir it fil it be thick or striffe that your stick wil stand vpright in it of it self, thē take it vp and lay it in a platter or charger in prety lumps as big as you wil haue ye mould or printes, and when it is colde print it on a faire boord with suger, and print thē on a mould or what knot or fashion you will, & bake in an earthen pot or pan vpon ye em∣bers or in a feate couer, and kéep thē con∣tinually by the fire to kéep them dry.
To make the same of Quinces, or any other thing. TAke the Quinces and quarter them, and cut out the ccares and pare them cleane, and séeth them in faire water till they be very tender, then take them with rosewater, and straine them, and do as is aforesaid in euery thing. To preserue Orrenges, Lemmons, and Pomesitrons. FIrst shaue your Orrenges finely, & put them into water two dayes and two nights, changing your water thrée times a day, then perboyle them in thrée seueral waters, then take so much water as you think conuenient for the quantity of your Orrenges, then put in for euery pound of Orrenges one pound and a halfe of suger into the water, and put in two whites of egges and beat them altogether, then set them on the fire in a brasse vessel, & when they boyle skimme them very clean, and clense them through a Jelly bagge, then set it on the fire and put in the Orrenges. Vse walnuts in like maner, and vse lem∣mons and Pomecitrons in like sorte, but they must lye in water but one night.
To preserue Quinces al the yere through whole and soft. TAke as is aforesaide one pound of wa∣ter, and three pound of Suger, & break it into very smal péeces, and in all things as you did before, then take twelue Quin¦ces and core them very clean, & pare them and washe them, and put into you sirrup, when the skim is taken off let them seeth very soft vntill they be tender, then take them vp very softly for breaking, and lay them in a faire thing one by another, thē straine your firrupe, and set it on the fire again, then put in your Quinces & haue a quick fire, let them seeth apace and turne them with your sticke, and when they be almost ready put in some Rosewater and let them seeth. and when you thinke they be ready take vp some of the sirrope in a spoone, and if it be thick like a zelly whē it is colde then take of your Pan, and put your Quinces into pots and your sirrope to thē, and put into your pots litle stickes of Sinamon and a fewe cloues, and when they be colde couer them with paper pric∣ked full of small holes. FINIS.
THE Booke of Car∣uing and Sewing. And all the feastes in the yeere, for the seruice of a Prince or any other estate, as yee shall finde each Office, the seruice accor∣ding in this booke following. AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Edward White, dwelling at the little North doore of S. Paules at the signe of the Gunne.
Tearmes of a Caruer. BReake that Deare, Leach that Brawn, reare that Goose, lift that Swan, sauce that Capon, spoyle that Hen, fursh that chic∣kē, vnbrace that Malard, vnlace that connie: dismember that He∣ron, display that Crane, disfigure that Pe∣cock, vnioynt that Bitture, vntach that Cnrlew, alay that Fesaunt, wing that Partrich, wing that Quaile, mince that Plouer, thie that Pigion, broder that pas∣stie, thie that Wodcock, thie all manner of small birds. Timber the fire, tire that egge, chine that Salmon, string that Lampry, splat that Pike, sauce that place, Sauce that Tench lay that Breme, side that Haddock, tusk that Barbel, culpon that Troute, finne that Cheuine, transen that Eele, traunch that Sturgion, vndertraunch that purpes
tame that crab, barde that Lobster. Heere endeth the goodly Tearmes. Heere beginneth Butler and Panter. THou shalt be butler and panter al the first yere, and ye must haue thrée pan∣try kniues, one knife to square trencher loaues, another to be a chipper, the thirde shall bee sharpe for to make smooth tren∣chers, than chip your soueraignes breade hot, and all other bread let it be a day old, houshould bread thrée daies olde, trencher bread foure dayes olde, then look your salt be white and dry, the plouer made of Juo∣ry two inches brode, and thrée inches long and looke that your saltseller lid touch not the salt, than looke your table clothes, towels and napkins, bee faire folden in a chest, or hanged vpon a pearch, than look your Table kniues bee faire pullished, and your spoones cleane, then looke yee haue two tarriours, a more and a lesse, and wine cannels of box made according, and a sharpe gimlet and faucets. And when ye set a pipe on broche dooe thus, sette it toure fingers broade aboue the nether
chine vpwardes astaunt, and then shall the lies neuer arise. Also looke yee haue in all seasons, butter, chéese, apples, peares, nuts, plumes, grapes, dates, figges, and raysons compost, gréene ginger, and chard Quince. Serue fasting, butter, plums, damsons, cheries, and grapes. After meat, peares, nuts, strawberies, hutelberies, and hard chéese. Also blaundrels or pipins, with caraway in confects: after supper rest apples and peares, with blanch pou∣der and hard chéese, beware of Cow cream and of Strawberies, hurtelberies, iuncat, for cheese wil make your soueraigne sick, but he eate hard chéese. Harde chéese hath these operations, it will keepe the stomacke open, but∣ter is wholsome first and last, for it will doe away all poysons: Mylke, Creame and Jouncate, they will close the maw, and so dooth a posset, therefore eate harde chéese, and drinke Rumney Modom, beware of gréene Salets and rawe fruites, for they will make your Soueraigne sicke, therefore sette not much by such meates as will sette your teethe on edge, therefore eate an
Almond and hard cheese, but eat not much chéese without Romney modon. Also of di∣uers drinkes if their fumositiues haue dis∣pleased your soueraine, let him eate a raw apple, and the fumositiues wil cease, mea∣sure is a mery meane, and if it be well v∣sed, abstinence is to be praised, when God therewith is pleased. Also take good héede of your wines, e∣uery night with a candle voth red Wine and sweete wine, and looke they reboyle nor leeke not and wash the pype heades e∣uery night with colde water, and looke yée aclenching iron, ads, and linnen clothes if néede be, and if they reboile ye shall know by the hissing, therefore keepe an emptie pipe with the lies of couloured rose, and draw the reboiled wine to the lies, and it shall helpe it. And if the sweet wine pale, drawe it into a Ramney vessell for lée∣sing. Heere followeth the names of Wines. Red wine, White wine, Claret Wyne, Osey, Caprick, Campolet, Rennish wine, Malmesey, Bastard, Tyre, Rumney,
Muscadel, Clary Raspis, Vernage, Cute▪ piment and Ipocras. For to make Ipocras. Take ginger, pepper, graines, canell, sinamon, sugar and fornesole, that looke yee haue fine or sixe bags of your Ipocras to run in, and a pearch that your renners may ren on, than must ye haue sixe peuter basins to stand vnder your bags, then look your spice be ready, and your ginger well pared or it be beaten to pouder, than looke your stalkes of sinamon be well coloured and swéete, canell is not so gentle in opera∣tion, sinamon, is hotte and dry, graines of paradice be hot and moist, ginger grains, long pepper and suger ben hot and moist sinamon, Canell and redde wine colou∣ring. Nowe knowe yee the proportions of your Ipocras, than beate your pou∣ders, eache by them selfe, and put them in bladders and bange your bagges sure that no bagge touch other, but let eache basing touch other, let the first basin bee of a gallon, and each of the other a pottell, that put in your basin a gallon
of redde Wine, put thereto your pou∣ders, and stirre them well, than put them into the first bagge, and let it ren, than put them in the seconde bagge, than take a peece in your hande and assay if it be stronge of Ginger, and alay it with sinamon, and it be strong of sinamon, alay it with suger, and look ye let it ren through sixe renners, and your Ipocras shall bee the siner, than put your Ipocras into a close vessell and keepe the receit, for it wil serue for sewes, then serue your soue∣raigne with wafers and Ipocras. Also looke your compost bee faire and cleane, and your ale fiue daies olde, or men drinke it, than keepe your house of office cleane, and bee curteous of aunswere to each person, and looke yee giue no person no palde drinke, for it will breede the scab. And when yee laye the cloth wipe the boord cleane with a cloth, than lay a cloth (a couch it is called) take your fellowe that one ende, and hold you that other end, than draw the cloth straight, the bought on the vtter edge, take the vtter parte and hange it euen, than take the thirde
cloth and lay the bought on the inner edg, and lay estate with the vpper part halfe a foote broad, than couer thy Cubboord and thine ewrie with the towell of Diaper, than take thy Towell about thy necke, and lay the one side of the Towell vppon the left arme, and thereon lay your Soue∣raignes napkin, and lay on thine arme se∣uen loues of breade with thres or fower trencher loues, with the end of the towell in the left hande, as the manner is, than take thy salt seller in thy left hande, and take the▪ end of the towell in your right hand to beare in spoones and kniues, than set your salt on the right side, where your Soueraigne shall sit, and on the left side your salt, set your trenchers, then lay your kniues and set your breade one loafe by a∣nother, and your spoones and your Nap∣kins faire folden beside your breade, then couer your bread and trenchers, spoones, and kniues, and at euery ende of the Table sette a Saltseller, with two Trencher Leaues, and if yee wyll wrappe your Soueraignes Breade stately, yee must square and propor∣tion your breade, and see that no Lofe
be more then another, and then shall yee make your wrapper mannerly, then take a towel of reines of two yards and a halfe, and take the towell by the endes double, and lay it on the table, then take the ende of the bought a handfull in your hand, and wrap it hard, then lay the end so wrapped between two towels, vppon that ende so wrapped. This being doon lay your bread bottome to bottome, sixe or seauen loaues, then see you set your breade mannerlie in good forme, and when your Soueraignes table is thus arayed, couer al other boords with salt, trenchers and cups: also see thine ewry bee arayed with basins and ewers, and water hot and colde, and see yee haue napkins, cups, spoons, and see your pots for wine and ale be made clean, and to the surnabe make the curtesie with a cloth vn¦der a faire double napry, then take the to∣wels end next you, and the vtter end of the table, and hold these three ends at once, & folde them at once that a pleit passe not a foote broad, then lay it euen there it should lye. And after meate wash with that, that is at the right ende of the table, yee must guide it out, and the marshal must conuey
it and looke to ech cloth the right side bee outward and drawe it straight, then must yee raise the vpper part of the towell, and lay it without any groning and at euerye ende of the towell yee must conuay halfe a yarde that the sewer may take estate re∣uerently, and let it be: and when your so∣ueraine hath washed, draw the surnape e∣uen, then beare the surnap to the midst of the boord, and take it vp before your soue∣raigne, and beare it into the ewry againe: and when your soueraigne is set, look your towell bee about your necke, then make your souerain curtesie, then vncouer your breade and lay it by the salt, and lay your napkin, knife, and spoone afore him, than kneele on your knee till the purpain pas eight loues and looke ye set at the endes of the table foure loues at a messe, and see that euerie person haue a napkin and a spoone, and waite well to the sewer howe many dishes be couered, and so many cups couer yee, then serue yee foorth the Table mannerlie, that euery man may speake of your curtesie.
Here endeth the Butler and Panter yeo∣man of the seller and ewry: and heere followeth sewing of flesh. THe sewer muste sewe, and from the boord conuay all manner of pottages meats and sauces, and euery day common with the Cooke, and vnderstand and wit how many dishes shall be, and speak with the panters and officers of the spicerie for fruites that shal be eaten fasting. Than go to the boord of sewing and see ye haue of∣ficers ready to conuay, and seruants for to beare your dishes. Also if the marshall squires, and sergeants of armes be there, than serue foorth your soueraigne without blame. Seruice. First set yée foorth mustard and brawn, pottage, beefe, mutton, stued fesant, swan capon, pig, venison, hake, custard, leach and lombard, fruter vaunt, with a subtilty two pottages, blaunch manger and gelly. For standard, venison, rost kid, fawne, and conie, bustard storke, Crane, peacock with his tayle, herensew, itture, woodcocke,
partrich, plouer, rabets, great birdes, larkes, doucets, pampuffe, white leach, amber gelly, creame of almondes, curlew brew, snite, quaile, sparrowe, martinet, pearch in gelly, pety peruis, quince bake, leach deward, fruter fage, blandrels or pippens with caraway in confects, wafers and Ipocras they be agreeable. Now this hast doon, voye yee that table. Heere endeth the sewing of flesh, and here followeth caruing of flesh. THe Caruer must knowe the caruing, and the faire handling of a knife, and how he shall fetch all maner of foule, your knife must be faire and your handes must be cleane, and passe not two fingers and a thombe vpon your knife. In the midst of your hande set the haft sure, vnlasing the mising with two fingers and a thombe, caruing of bread, laying and voiding of crums with two fingers▪ & a thombe▪ looke ye haue ye cure set neuer on fish, flesh beast ne fowl, more than ii. fingers, & a thumb, than take your lofe in your left hande and holde your knife surely, enbrewe not the table cloth, but wipe vpon your Napkin,
then take your trencher lofe in your lefte hande and with the edge of your Table knife take vp your Trenchers as nie the point as ye may, then lay foure trenchers to your soueraine one by another, and lay theron other foure trenchers, or els twain, than take aloafe in your left hande, and pare the loafe rounde about, than  the o∣uer crust to your soueraine, and cut the ne∣ther crust and voide the paring and touch the loafe no more after it is so serued; than cleanse the table that the sewer may serue your soueraine. Yee must also knowe the fumosities of fish, flesh, and foules, and all maner of sau∣ces▪ according to their appetites, hese ben the fumositiues, salt, soure, restie, fat, freid, sinewes, skins, hony, roupes, young fea∣thers, heads, pigions bones, and all maner of legges of beastes and foules to the otter , for these be fumositiues lay them neuer to your soueraine. Seruice. Take your knife in your hand, and cut wne in the dish as it lyeth, and lay on your soueraignes trencher, & see there bee mustard.
Venison with furmitie is good for your Soueraigne, touche not the venison with your hand but with your knife, cut it out into the furmintie, doe in the same wise with peason, and bacon, beefe, henne, and mutton, pare the beef, cut the mutton and say to your soueraigne, beware of fumosi∣tiues, salt, sinew, fat, resty and rawe. In sirrup, phesant, partrich, stockedoue, chic∣kins in the left hand, take them by the pi∣nion and with the fore parte of your knife lift vp your wings, than mince it into the sirrup, beware of skin, rawe and sinewe, Goose, teele mallard and swan, raise the legs, than the winges, lay the body in the midst, or in another platter, the wings in the midst and the legs after, lay the brawn betweene the legges▪ and the wings in the the platter, Capon or hen of Greece, lyft the legs, than the wings, and cast on wine or ale, then mince the wing and giue your soueraigne: Fesand, partrich, plouer or lapwing, raise the winges and after the legs woodcock, irture, egrit, snite, curlew and heronsew vnlace them breake of the pinions, and breake the necke, than raise the legs, and let the feete be on still, than
the wings. A crane raise the winges first, and beware of the trumpe in his brest, pe∣cock, storke, bustard, and shouillard vnlace them as a crane, and let the feet be on stil. Quaile, sparrow, larke, martinet, pigion, swallow and thrush the legs first, than the wings, fawn, kid, and lambe, lay the kid∣ney to your soueraigne, than lift vp the shoulder and giue to your soueraign a rib. Venison rost, cut it in the dish and lay it to your soueraigne: a conny lay him on the back, cut away the vents betwéen ye hinder legs, breake the canel bone, than raise the sides, than lay the cony on the womb, on each side the chine the two sides departed from the chine, than lay the bulke, chyne and sides in the dish: also yee must mince foure lesses to one morsell of meate, that your soueraigne may take it in the sauce. All bake meate that bee hot, open them a∣boue the coffin, and and all that be colde o∣pen them in the midway Custard, cheeke them inche square, that your soueralgne may eate thereof. Doucets pare away the sides & the bottome, beware of fumositiues, Fruter, vaunt, Fruters they say bee good, better is Fruter pouch, Apple Fruters bée
good hotte, and all colde touch not. Tansey is good hot, wortes of gruell, of béefe or of mutton is good. Jelly, mortrus, creame, al¦monds, blanch, manger, iussell and char∣let, cabadge and vmbles of a déerr be good and all other potage beware of. Heere endeth the Caruing of flesh, and be∣ginneth sauces of all maner of foules. Mustard is good with brawn, béefe, chine of bacon, and mutton, vergis is good to boiled chickins, and capon, swan, wyth chawdrons ribs of béefe with garlike mus∣stard, pepper, vergis, ginger, sauce of lamb pig, and fawne, mustard and suger, to Fe∣sand, partrich and cony sauce game lin, to herensew, egript, plouer and craine to brew and curlew, salt, suger and water of camet, bustard, shouillard & bitture, sauce gamline, wodcock lapwing, lark, quaile, martinet, venison, and snite with white salt, sparowes and throstles, with salt and sinamon, thus with all meates sauce shalt haue the operation. Heere endeth the sauces for all manner of foules and meates.
Heere beginneth the feastes and seruice from Easter vnto Whitsontide On Easter day and so foorth to Penti∣cost after the seruing of the table there shall bee set bread, trenchers and spoones after the estimation of them that shall sit there, and thus yee shall serue your Soue∣raigne, lay trenchers, and if he be of a low∣er degrée or estate, lay fiue trenchers, and if he bee of lower degrée foure trenchers, and of another degrée thrée trenchers, thā cut breade for your soueraigne after yee know his conditions whether it bee cut in the midst or pared, or els to be cut in small péeces: also ye must vnderstand howe the meate shall bee serued before your Soue∣raigne, and namely on Easter day, after the gouernance and seruice of that coun∣try where yee were borne. Fyrst on that day yee shall serue a calfe sodden and bles∣sed, and sodden egs with greene sauce, and set them before the most principall estate, and that Lorde because of his high estate, shal depart them al about him, then serue potage as worts, roots or browes, wt béefe, mutton, or veale, & capons that be coloured with saffron, and baked meats: and the se∣cond
course, Jussel with mamony, & rosted endoured, & pigions with bake meates, as tarts chewets, and flaunes, and other, af∣ter the disposition of the cookes: and at sup∣per time diuers sauces of mutton or veale in broth, after the ordinance of the steward and than chickins with bakon, veale, rost pigions or lamb, & kid rost, with the heade and the purtenance of Lambe and pigges féet, with vineger and parcely theron, and a tansie fryed, and other bake meates, yée shal vnderstand this maner of seruice du∣reth to pentecost, saue fish daies. Also take héede howe yée shall araye these things before your soueraigne. Fyrst yée shall sée there be gréene sauce of sorell or of vines, that is, holde a sauce for the first course, and yée shall begin to raise the capon. Heere endeth the Feast of Easter till Pentecost. And here beginneth Caruing of all maner of Foules. Sauce that Capon. Take vp a capon, and lift vp the right
leg and the right wing, and so aray foorth and lay him in the platter as he should fly, and serue your soueraigne, and know wel that capons or chickens bee araied after one sauce, the chickins shal be sauced with greene sauce or vergis. Lift that swan. Take and dight him as a goose, but let him haue a larger brawne and looke hee haue a chawdron. Aley that Fesant. Take a fesand raise his legges, and his wings as it were a hen, and no sauce but onely salt. Wing that partrich. Take a Partrich and raise his legges and his wings as a hen, and ye mince him sauce him with Wine, pouder of Ginger and salt, than set him vpon a Chafingdish of coales to warme and serue it. Wing that Quaile. Take a Quaile and raise his legges and his wings as a hen, and no sauce but salt. Display that crane. Take a Crane and vnfold his legges, and cut of his wings by the ioyntes, than
take vp his wings and his legs and sauce him with pouder of ginger, mustard, vine∣ger and salt. Dismenber that Heron. Take a Heron and raise his legs and his wings as a crane, and sauce him with vineger, mustard, pouder of ginger & salt. Vnioynt that Bitture. Take a Bitture and raise his legges, and his winges as a Heron, and no sauce but salt. Breake that Egript. Take an Egript and raise his legges and his winges as a Heron, and no sauce but salt. Vntach that Curlew. Take a Curlew, and raise his legges and his winges as a Henne, and no sauce but salt. Vntach that brew. Take a Brewe and raise his legges, and his winges in the same manner, and no sauce but onely salt, and serue your So∣ueraigne. Vnlace that Conny. Take a Cony and lay him on the back and cutte away the vents, than rayse the
wings and the sides, and lay bulke, chyne, and sides together, sauce, vineger and pou∣der of ginger. Breake that Sarcell. Take a Sarcellor a téele, and raise his wings & his legs, & no sauce but onely salt. Mince that Plouer. Take a Plouer and raise his legs & his wings as a Hen, & no sauce but onely salt. A Snite. Take a snite and raise his winges, his legs, and his shoulders as a plouer, and no sauce but salt. Thie that Woodcock. Take a Woodcock and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, this done dight the braine. Heere beginneth the feast from Pentecost vnto Midsomer. In the second course for the meats before said, ye shal take for your sauces, ale, wine, vineger, and pouders after the meate, but ginger and canel, from pentecost to the feast of S. Iohn Baptist. The first course shalbe béefe and mutton sodden with capons, or rosted, and if capons be sodden, aray him in the maner aforesaid
and when he is rosted, thou must cast on salt, with wine or with ale, than take the capon by the legges, and cast on the sauce and breake him out, and lay him in a dish as he should flée: first ye shall cut the right legge, and the right shoulder, and betwéen the foure members, lay the brawne of the capon, with the croupe in the end betwéen the legs, as it were possible for to be ioined together, and other bake meats after. And in the second course, potage shall be iussell Charlet or Mertrus, with young Gees;e, Veale, Porke, Pigions or chickins rosted, with Pampuffe, fruiters, and other bake meates after the ordinaunce of the Cooke. Also the Goose ought to be cut member to member, beginning at the right leg, and so foorth vnder the right wing, and not vp∣pon the ioynt aboue, and it ought to bee ea∣ten with gréene garlike, or with sorrel, or tender vines or vergis in summer season after the pleasure of your soueraigne: also ye shal vnderstand that al maner of foules that hath whole féete should be raised vn∣der the wing and not aboue.
Hecre endeth the feaste from Pentecost to Midsomer: and heere beginneth from the feast of S. Iohn the Baptist vnto Michaelmas. IN the first course potage Worts gruell, and furmentie, with venison and Mortrus and pestles of porke, with gréene sauce. Rosted capon, swan with chaworon In the second course, potage after the or∣dinance of the cookes with rosted mutton, veale, porke, chickins or endoured pigions heronsewes, fruiters or bake meates, and take heede of the fesant, he shall be arayed in the manner of a capon, but it shall bee done drie without any moisture, and hee shall be eaten with salt, and pouder of gin∣ger: and the Herensew shall be araied in the same manner without any moisture, and hee should be eaten with salt and pou∣der: also ye shall vnderstand that all ma∣ner of foules hauing open clawes as a ca∣pon shall bee tired and arayed as a capon and such other. From the feast of S. Michael vnto the feast of Christmas. IN the first course, potage, béefe, mutton, bacon, pestles of porke, or with Goose,
capon, malard, Swan or Fesant, as it is before said, with tarts or bake meats, or chines of porke. In the second course, po∣tage, mortrus or Conies or few, than rost flesh, mutton pork, veale, pullets, chickins pigions, teles Wigions, Malards, Par∣trich, Wodcock, plouer, bitture, curlewe, Heronsew, Veson rost, great birdes, snite, feldfares, thrushes, fruiters, chewits, béefe with sauce, geloper rost, with sauce pogill, and other baked meates as is aforesayds: and if yee carue afore your Lord or your Lady any sodden fleshe, carue away the skinne aboue, than carue reasonably of the flesh for your Lord and Lady, and specially for Ladies, for they will soone bee angry, for theyr thoughts be soone changed, and some Lordes will be soone pleased, and some not, as they be of complexion. The Goose and Swan may bee cut as yee doe other foules that haue whole feete, or else as your Lord or your Lady wyll haue it. Also a Swan with chadron, Capon or Fesand, ought to be arayed, as it is afore∣sayde, but the skinne must bee had away and when they béene carued before
your Lorde or your ladie, for generally the skin of all maner whole footed foules that haue their liuing on the water their skins be wholsome and cleane, for by cleanes of water, and fish is their liuing, and if they eat any stinking thing, it is made so clean with the water that all the corruption is cleane gon away from it. And the skinne of a capon, henne, or chickin be not so cleane, for they eate foule thinges in the streete, and therefore the skins be not so wholsome, for it is not their kinde to enter into the Riuer, to make theyr meate voyde of the filth. Mallarde, Goose or Swan, they eate vpon the lande foule meate, but anone after their kinde they go to the riuer, and there they clense them of their foule stinke. A fesand as it is aforesaide, but the skin is not wholesome, than take the heades of all fielde birdes, and wood birds, as fesand, Pecocke, Par∣trich wodcock, curlew, for they eat in theyr degree, foule thinges, as wormes, toades and other such. Thus endeth the feasts and caruing of flesh.
And heere beginneth the sewing of fish. The first course. To goe to shewing of fishe, muscalade, menews in sew of porpas or of salmon, baken hering with suger, greene fish, pike Lampry, salens, purpos rosted, bake gur∣nard, and lampry bake. The second course. Gelly white and red, dates in confects, congre, salmon, dorey, brit, turbut, halibut for standard, base trout, mullet, cheuin, sele, eles and lamprey rost, tench in gelly. The third course. Fresh Sturgion, breme, pearch in gel∣ly, a oule of salmon, Sturgion, Welks, apples, and peares rosted with suger can∣dy. Figs of malike and raisons, dates capt with minced ginger, wafers and Ipocras they be agreeable, this feast is doon, voyde ye the table. Heere endeth the sewing of Fish, and heere followeth caruing of fish. The caruer of fish, must sée to peasō and furmenty, the tayle and the liuer, ye must
looke if there be a salt purpose or sele tur∣rentine, and doe after the form of Venson, baken Hering, and lay it whole vpon your soueraignes trencher▪ white hering in a dish, open it by the back, pick out the bones and the rowe, and see there be mustarde. Of salt fish, greene fish, salt Salmon, and cunger, pare away the skin, salt fish, stock∣fish, Marling, Mackrell, and Hake with butter, take away the bones and the skinnes: a pike lay the wombe vpon his trencher▪ with pike sauce enongh, a salte lampray gobon is in vii. or eight peeces, and lay it to your soueraigne: a place put out the water, then crosse him with your knife, cast on salt, wine or ale. Gurnard rochet, breame, cheuin, base melet, roch, pearch, soll, macrell, whiting, haddocke, and codling, raise them by the backe, and pick out the bones and clense the refet in that belly, Carpe, breame, sol and troute, back and belly together, Salmon, conger, sturgion, turbut, thirbol, thornbach, hound fish, and halibut, cut them in the dishes the porpos about, tenche in his sauce cut two els & lampraies rost, pull of the skin, pyke out the bones, put thereto Vineger and
powder a Crab breake him asunder in a dishe, and make that shell cleane and in the stuffe againe, temper it with vineger and pouder them couer it with bread, and send into the kitchin to heate, then set it to your soueraigne and lay them in a dish: a creuis dight him thus, depart him asunder and slit the belly and take out the fish, pare away the red skin, and mince it thin, put vineger in the dish and sette it on the table without eating: a ioule of sturgion, cut it in thinne morsels, and lay it round about the dish. Fresh lamprey bake open the pastie, than take white breade, and cutte it thin, and lay it in a dish, and with a spoone take out galentine and lay it vppon the breade, with red wine, and pouder of sinamon, thā cut gobon of the lamprey, & mince the go∣bon thin, & lay it in the galentine, than set it vpon the fire to heate, fresh hering with salt and wine, shrimps well picked, floun∣ders, gogines, menews, & muscles, eles, & lampries, sports is good in sew. Muscnlade in wortes, oisters in sew, oisters in grauy, menews in porpas, salmond in séele gellie white and red cream of almonds, dates in
confects, Peares and quinces in sirroppe, with parcely roots, mortrus of houndefish raise standing. Heere endeth the caruing of fish, And here beginneth sauces for all fish. Mustard is good for salt hering, salt fish salt conger, salmon, sparling, salt ele, and ling, vineger is good with salt Purpos, turrentine, salt sturgion salt thrilpole, and salt whale, lamprey with gallantine, ver∣gis to roche, dace, breme, molet, bace, floū∣ders, salt crab and chuin, with pouder of sinamon to thorneback, hering, houndfish, haddock, whiting and cod, vineger, pouder of sinamon and ginger, green sauce is good with gréene fish and halibut, cottell and fresh turbut, put not your gréene sauce a∣way, for it is good with mustard. Heere endeth all maner of sauces for fish ac∣cording to their appetite. The chamberlaine The Chamberlaine must be diligent & cleanly in his office, with his head kem∣bed, and so to his soueraigne, that he be not retchles, and see that ye haue a clean shirt
brech, petticote and doublet, than brush his hosen within and without, & see his shone and his slippers bee cleane, and at morne when your soueraine will arise, warme his shirt by the fire, and see yee haue a foote sheet made in this maner. First set a chair by the fire with a cushion, another vnder his feet, than spread a sheet ouer the chair, and see there bee readie a kerchiefe and a combe, than warme his petticote his dub∣let and his stomacher, and than put on hys dublet and his stomacher, and than put on his hosen and shone or slippers, than strike vp his hosen mannerlie, and tie them vp, than lace his doublet hole by hole, and lay a cloth vpon his necke and head, than look ye haue a basin and an ewer with warme water, & a towell to wash his hands than knele vpon your knee, & ask your souerain what robe he wil weare, & bring him such as hee commandeth▪ and put it vpon him, and take your leaue manerlye, and goe to the Church or Chappel to your soueraines Closet, and Carpets, and Cushions, and lay downe his booke of prayers, than drawe the Curtaines, and take your leaue goodly, and goe to your sousraigns
chamber, and cast all the clothes of the bed, and heate the feather bed, and the bol∣ster, but looke yee washe no feathers, then the blankets, and sée the sheetes bee faire and sweete, or els looke yee haue cléene shéets, than lay the head shéets and the pil∣lows, than take vp the towell and the ba∣sin, & lay carpets about the bed or in win∣dowes and cupbordes layd with quishins: also looke there bee a good fire burning bright, and sée if the house of easement bee sweete and cleane, and the priuy boord co∣uered with greene cloth and a Quishin, then sée there bee blanket, doune or cotton for your soueraigne, and looke yee haue a Basin or a ewer with water, and a towel for your soueraine, than take off his gown, and bring him a mantell to kéep him from colde, than bring him to the fire, and take off his shone and his hosen, thē take a faire kerchif of reines, and kembe his head, and put on his kercheife and his bonet, than spred downe his bed, lay the head shéet and the pillowes, and when your soueraigne is to hed, draw the curtaines then sée there be morter or waxe, or perchours ready, than driue out dog or cat, and looke there be ba∣sins
and vrinall set néere your soueraigne, than take your leaue mannerly, that your soueraine may take his rest merrily. Heere endeth of the Chamberlaine. Heere followeth of the Marshall and the vsher. The Marshal and the Usher must know all the estates of the land, and the high e∣state of a king, with the blood royall. The estate of a King. The estate of a Kings sonne, a prince. The estate of a Duke. The estate of a Marques. The estate of an Earle. The estate of a Bishop. The estate of a Vicount. The estate of a Baron. The estate of the thrée chiefe Judges and the Maior of London. The estate of a Knight bacheler. The estate of a knight, Deane, Archdea∣con. The estate of the master of the Rols. The estate of other Justices, and Barons of Cheker. The estate of the Maior of Callice. The estate of a Doctor Deuine.
The estate of a Doctor of both the Laws. The estate of him that hath bin Maior of London, and sergeant of the Law. The estate of a maister of the chancery, & other worshipfull preachers and clarkes that be granduable, and al other orders of chast persons and priests, worshipful mar∣chants, and gentlemen, all thesemay sit at the squires table. A Duke may not kéep the hal, but each estate by them selfe in chamber or in pa∣uilion, that neither see other, marques, Erles, Bishops and vicaunts, al these may sit at a messe: a baron and the Maior of London, and thrée chéefe Judges, and the speaker of the Parliment, all these may sit two or three at a messe: and all other states may sit thrée or foure at a messe: al∣so the Marshall must vnderstand & knowe the bloede royall, for some Lorde is of the blood royall, and of small lyuelyhood: and some knight is wedded vnto a Lady of roi∣all blood, she shall keep the estate of her Lords blood, and therefore the royall blood shall haue the reuerence as I haue shewed you before: also a Marshall muste take hee de of the birth, and next of the line of the blood royall: Also hee must take héede
of the Kings officers of the chanceler, ste ward, Chamberlaine, Treasurer, & comp∣troler. Also the Marshall must take heed vnto strangers and putthem to worship and re∣uereuce, for if they haue good cheere it is your Soueraines honor. Also a Marshall must take heede if the King send your So∣ueraine any message, & if he send a knight receiue him as a Baron, and if he sende a Yeoman, receiue him as a squire, and if he send a groome receiue him as a Yoman. Also it is no rebuke to a Knight, tosette a groome of the Kings at his table. Heere endeth the book of Caruing. Heere followeth how to make March∣paine and Ipocras. How to make good Marchpaine. FIrst take a poūd of long small almonds and blanch them in cold water, and dry the as posible as you can, then grinde them small, and put no licour to them but as you must néedes, to kéep them from oyling, and that licour that you put in, muste bee rose water, in manner as you shall think good but wet your pestell therin, when ye hau beaten them fine, take halfe a pounde
suger and more, and see that it bee beaten small in pouder, it must be fine, then put it to your almonds, and beat them together, when they bee beaten, take your wafers and cut them compusse rounde, and of the bignes you will haue your Marchpane, and then assoone as yee can after the tem∣pering of your stuffe, let it bee put in your past, and strike it abroad with a flat sticke as euen as ye can, and pinch the very stuff as it were an edge set vpon, and then put a paper vnder it, and set it vpon a faire boord and lay a latin basin ouer it, the bottome vpward, and then lay burning coales vp∣pon▪ the bottome of the basin: to see how it baketh, if it happen to bren too fast in some place folde Papers as broade as the place is, and lay it vpon that place, and thus with atttending ye shall bake it a lit∣tle more then a quarter of an houre, and when it is well baked, put on your golde and biskets, and stickin conficts, and so you shall make a good Marchpaine. Or euer that you bake it▪ you muste caste on it fine suger and rose water, that wil make it look like Ice.
To make marchpane. Take halfe a pounde of blanched Al∣monds, and of white Sugar a quarter of a pound, of Rose water half an ounce, and of damaske water as much, beat the almōds with a little of the same water, and grind them till they be small, set them on a fewe coales of fire, till they wax thicke, then beat them againe with the suger fine: then mix the swéet waters and them together, and so gather thē and fashion your march∣pane: then take Water cakes of the broa∣dest making, cut them square, paste them together with a litle liquor, and when you haue made them as broade as will serue your purpose, haue ready made a hoope of a green hasel wand of the thicknes of half an inche on the inner side smooth, and on the outward side round and smooth with∣out any knags: lay this hoope vpon your water cakes aforesaid, and then fill your hoop with the geare aboue named, ye thick∣nes of the hoope: the same driuen smooth aboue, with the back of a siluer spoone, as yee doe a tart, & cut away all the parts of the cakes, euen close by the outside of the hoope with a sharpe knife, that it may bee round: then hauing white paper vuder∣neath
it, set it vpon a warme harth or vp∣pon an instrument of iron and brasse, made for the same purpose, or into an ouen after the bread is taken out so it be not stopped, it may not bake but onely bee harde and through dried: & ye may while it is moist, stick it full of cumfets of sundry colours in comely order, yee must moist it ouer with rosewater and Suger togeather, make it smooth, and so set it in the ouen or other in∣strument, the clearer it is like Lantarne horne, so much the more commended▪ If it be through dried and kept in a warm and drie aire, a marchpane will last many yeares. It is a comfortable meat for weak folkes, such as haue lost the tast of meates by much and long sicknes: the greatest se∣cret that is in making of this cleare, is with a little fine flower of rice, rose water and suger beaten together, and laid thin o∣uer the marchpane, ere it go to drying: this will make it shine like Ice, and ladies re∣port. To make Ipocras. Take a gallon of wine, and an ounce of sinamō two ounces of ginger, and a poūd of sugar, twentie cloues brused, and twē∣ty corns of pepper grosse beaten, and let al
those soke one night, and let it run through a bag. To make Ipocras Take of chosen sinamon two ounces, of fine ginger, one ounce of graines, halfe an ounce, bruse them all, and steepe them in thrée or foure pints of good odifferous wine with a pound of suger, by the space of foure and twenty houres, than put them into an Ipocras bag of woollen, and so receiue the liquor. The readiest and best way is, to put the spices with the half pound of suger, and the wine into a bottell, or a stone pot stopped close, & after twenty foure houres it will bee readie, than cast a thin linnen cloth, and a peece of a boulter cloth in the mouth, and let it so much runne through as yee will occupye at once, and keepe the vessell close, for it will so well keepe both the sprite, odour, and ver∣tue of the wine, and also spices. FINIS.
