D705 11889816 50408
A DECLARATION OF THE Lords, and Gentry, And others of the Provinces of Lemster, and Munster, in the Realm of Ireland, of their intenti| ons towards the English and Scottish Protestants, inhabiting in that Kingdome, with a most perni| tious Oath which they would have them take, if to live amongst them, tending in effect to make all Papists: With an Order of the late Lords Justices of Ireland, Sir John Burlase, and Sir Henry Tichbourne, and Counsell of Ireland, inhibiting the taking the solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation and defence of Religion, the honour and happinesse of the King, and the peace and safe∣ty of the three Kingdomes of England, Scotland, & Ireland. With a Proclamation by them set forth, according to the aforesaid ORDER: With the Copy of a Letter written by the direction of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, in the Parliament of that Kingdome Assembled, to severall Commanders and Officers of his Majesties Army, and others in the Kingdome of Ireland, requiring obedience to the said Proclamation, with the substance of an Oath agreed upon lately at Dublin in Ireland, against the taking of the solemn League & Covenant. Published according to Order. Printed by R.W. for Christopher Meredith. 1644.
A Declaration of the Lords, Gentry, and others of the Province of Lemster, and Munster of their intentions towards the English, and Scot∣tish Protestants inhabiting in this Kingdom. WHereas we are informed, that it is ge∣nerally conceived and beleeved, by the English and Scottish Protestants, In∣habitants of this Kingdom, that we the Lords, Gentry, and others of the said Kingdom, have taken Armes, and raised forces for the extirpating, and banishing them out of this Kingdom, thereby to acquire to our selves their goods and estates, we therefore desire to be rightly understood, for we hereby delare that we never con∣sented nor intended, nor never will intend nor con∣descend to any such act, but do utterly disclaime therein, but that each man known to be a moderate conformable Protestant, may as well as the Roman Catholicke respectively, and enjoy their freedom of their own Religion, and peaceably, and quietly en∣joy their own estates, so farre forth as they or any of them shall joyne with us in this act following:
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, and all the An∣gels and Saints in heaven, and by the contents of this Bible, promise, vow, swear, and protest to beare faith and true Al∣leagiance to our Soveraign Lord King Charles, and the heirs and successors of his body begotten, and will defend him and them as far as I may with my life, power and estate, against all persons that shall attempt any thing against his or their persons, honours, estates, or dignities, and that I will in expo∣sing my self, power and estate, joyn with the Irish Army, or a∣ny other, to recover his Royall prerogatives forcibly wrested from him by the Puritans in the houses of Parliament in England, and to maintain the same against all others that shall directly, or indirectly endeavour to suppresse, or do any act contrary to reall government, as also to maintain Episco∣pall jurisdictions, and the lawfulnesse thereof, in the Church power, priviledges of Prelates, the lawfull rights and privi∣ledges of the Subjects, and I will do no act or thing directly, or indirectly to prejudice the publike exercise of the Romane Catholique Religion in any of his Majesties dominions, and that I will joyn with, and be assisting to the members in the Common weale, for redresse to be had of the grievances and pressures thereof in such manner and forme as shall be thought fit by a lawfull parliament, and to my power, and as far as I may, I will oppose and bring to condigne punishment even to the losse of life and Liberty, and estate all such as shall either by force or practise, Councels, Plots, Conspiracies, or other∣wise do, or attempt any thing to the contrary of any Article, Clause, or thing in this present Oath, Vow, and Protestation contained, and neither for hope of reward or feare of punish∣ment,
nor any respect whatsoever, shall relinquish this Oath and Protestation: So help you God. This Declaration, and Oath was entred in the Counsell Booke Kilking, and this is a true Copy thereof, witnesse my hand this ninth of May, 1644. Hierome Greenc. Cler. Counsell Kilking. By the Lords Iustices and Counsell. John Burlase, Henry Tichburne. Whereas we have lately seen a Printed Paper inti∣tuled a Solemne League and Covenant for Refor∣mation, and defence of Religion, the honour, and happinesse of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, which seems to have been Printed at London on the 9. of October, 1643. And forasmuch, as in the said League and Covenant there are divers things con∣tained not onely tending to a seditious combination against his Majestie but also contrary to the princi∣pall Laws of this Kingdom, no oath ought to be ten∣dred to, or taken by any person or persons whatso∣ever in this Kingdom, but before a Judge or other person thereunto Lawfully authorized by his Ma∣jesty, as for that the said League and Covenant is now endeavoured to be set on foot in this Kingdom without his Majesties privity, contrary to the Liber∣ty and freedom of the Subject, to be by any such League or Covenant preengaged, and so that the set∣ting on foot at this time in this Kingdom the said
League or Covenant without his Majesties allow∣ance, may not onely beget much distractions, and unquietnes amongst his Majesties good Subjects, but also may prove very penall to all those who shal presume to tender or take the same; we therefore for prevention of such mischiefes; do in his Majesties name strictly charge and command all his Majesties good Subjects, of what degree or quality soever within this Kingdom, upon their alleagiance to his Majesty, that they presume not to enter in, or take the said League, Covenant, or Oath; and we do here∣by likewise inhibit and forbid, all his Majesties Sub∣jects in this Kingdom, to impose, adminster, or ten∣der the said Oath, League, or Covenant; and if not∣withstanding this our Proclamation any person shal presume to impose, tender, or take the said League or Covenant, we shall proceed against him or them with all severity according to the known Lawes of the Land. Given at his Majesties Castle at Dublin the 18. day of December, 1643. Rich. Bolton, Chancel: Lo. Dublin, Ormonde, Rosco∣mond, Edw. Brabason, Anthony Medenses, Charles Lambert, Geo. Shurley, Gerart Lowther, Tho. Rotherham, Fer. Willoug∣by, Thomas Lucas, Iames Ware, George Wentworth. God save the King.
The Copy of a Letter written by direction of the Lords Spi∣rituall and Temporall, and Commons in Parliament As∣sembled, to severall Commanders and Officers of his Ma∣jesties Army, and others in the Kingdom of Ireland. AFter our very hearty commendations, the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament in this his Majesties Kingdom of Ireland have commanded to signifie unto you, that they have lately seen a Printed, Paper intituled a so∣lemne League and Covenant for Reformation, and defence of Religion, the honour and happinesse of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, which seems to have been Printed at London, on the 9. of October, 1643. that they also have seen a printed Pro∣clamation dated the 18. of Decemb. 1643. and set out by the Right Honorable the late Lords Justices, & Councel, expres∣sing divers great and weighty reasons against the said League and Covenant, and therefore commanding all his Majesties good subjects, of what degree or quality soever within this Kingdom, upon their allegiance to his Majesty, that they pre∣sume not to enter into, or take the said League, Covenant, or Oath, and inhibiting and forbidding all his Majesties subjects in this Kingdom to impose, administer, or tender the said League, Oath or Covenant, that upon serious debate, and con∣sideration taken by the Lords, and Commons of the said League and Covenant, and Proclamation, they finde the said Proclamation to have bin set out with great wisdom and rea∣son, and do highly commend the deep judgement of the said Lords Justices and Counsels therein; and as both Houses doth fully concurre therein, in all the parts thereof, so they have expresly commanded us to signifie the same unto you, and in their name to let you know, that it is their expresse pleasure, that you & all the Commanders, Officers, and Soul∣diers of his Majesties Army, and all other his Majesties Sub∣jects in this Kingdom whom it may concerne, do render all
due obedience and observation to the said Proclamation in all the parts thereof, and this being to no other end we re∣maine. Your very loving friends, Ric. Bol∣ton Councell: Maur. Eustace Spea∣ker of the house of Commons. Dublin Castle 28. day of April, 1644. The Substance of the Oath agreed upon and subscribed, as is re∣ported by the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord Bishop of Meath, the Lord Bishop of Limricke, Deane Jones, and all the Beneficed Ministers in Dublin, to be a religious Oath, and agreed upon by all the Iudges not to be against law, except Justice Mayort, who is reported to have declared it to be against Law, and contrary to the Liberty, and freedom of the Subject, on or about Thursday the 6. of June 1644, at which time all the Judges in the King∣dom, except the Lord Chancellor, was the Lord chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench, and Master Iustice Rives in the Common please, Master Iustice Mayort, and in the Exchequer Baron Hilton. You shall sweare to maintaine the Kings Majesties Armies, Castles, Forts, and Garrisons, against all opposition and insur∣rection, Forraigne or Domesticke, to the utmost of your power, and that you will not enter into, or take the League or Covenant, or Oath Printed at London the 9. of October, 1643. nor any other League, Oath or Covenant to that effect: So God you help. FINIS.
