F1989A R16265 11851749 49941
What the Ʋnchangable GOD is, and how all People may know him, and in what he is Worshiped and Served. THe Lord hath measur'd the waters in the hol∣low of his hand; So the Lord the Uncom∣parable God knoweth the measures of the waters in the Seas, Brooks, Rivers, Wells and Ponds, for he hath measured them, so they are measured in the hollow of his Infinite hand, and the uncomparable God with his Infinite hand hath meted out heaven with his Span, (Mark he hath meted it out) so he knoweth the Breadth and the Compass of it with his Infinite span of his great hand, and the Lord hath comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, so the Uncomparable God knoweth the measure of the dust of the Earth, and the Lord hath weighed the Mountains in Scales and the hills in a Ballance, So the Lord who hath weighed them knoweth the weight both of the hills and Mountains, Behold the Nations are but as the drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the Earth, Behold he taketh up the Isles as a very little thing, to whom then will ye liken God, or what Likeness will ye compare him to, who is the Infinite Uncomparable God, as in Isai: 40. In the
Lords hand is the Soul of every Living thing and the Breath of all mankind, Job: 12.10. So here you may see and feel the Lords hand is nigh unto all Men and Women in the whole World, and in them, if their Soul and Breath be in his hand, here you may see the Eternal Infinite hand of the Uncomparable God in whose hand is the Soul of every Living thing, and the breath of all mankind in the whole World, for God breathed into man the breath of Life, and he became a Living soul, God who is Immortal hath the breath of all (and all Immortal Souls) in his hand, and none can fall out of his Eternal hand without his Eternal Will. The Spirit of God hath made me and Breath of the Almighty hath given me Life, Job. 33.4. and Daniel told Belshazer the King how that he lifted up his self against the Lord God of Heaven in whose hand is thy breath, Dan. 5.23. And the Apostle saith, God that made the World and all things therein he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwelleth not in Temples made with hands, neither is he worshipped with the works of mens hands asthough he needed any thing, and hath made of one Blood all Nations of men for to dwell upon the face of the Earth, and he giveth to all Life and Breath and all things &c. that they should seek the
Lord if haply they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far from every one of us, for in him we live and move and have our being, Acts 17.24 to 28. Here again you may see how God gives Life and Breath unto all, who hath it in his hand, and he would have all to know him and serve him, and that he is nigh unto them all, who hath their Breath and Soul in his hand; so then he is nigh unto all that they might know that they live, move and have their being in the Lord, who poureth out of his Spirit upon all flesh, that all flesh might see his glory, and see the salvation of God, Isai. 43. Luk. 3.6. Acts 2.17. For the Lord poureth out of his Spirit upon all flesh, that in his Spirit and in truth all might know God, and serve him, and worship him in his Spirit and truth for such Spiritual Worshipers God who is an Infi∣nite Holy Spirit, seeks to Worship him. Now it is and hath been often said by the Priests that are bred up at Schooles and Colledges that the Priests Lips should preserve peoples knowledge and they should seek the Law at his Mouth; I answer that these were the Jews Priests that were made by the Law of a Carnal Commandment in the Old Testament and Old Covenant; but Christ was made a Priest after the power of an endless Life in the New Testament &
new Covenant, who came of Judah and is called the I you of the Tribe of Judah, and not after the Order of Aaron who offered Rams and Lambs and Bullocks and other Creatures but after the Order of Mel∣chisadeck, from Malack a King, Chisadeck Just or Righteous, so a Just and Righteous King. Of whom we do not Read that he offered up outward Crea∣tures as Aarons Priesthood did, tho he offered up Praises to God when he met Abraham. But Christ hath changed the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Law by which they were made and dissanulled the Commandment which gave him his Tythes; as you may see in Heb. 7. Now you that do say the Jewes Priests that are made by the Law; their Lips are to preserve Peo∣ples knowledge, and they are to receive the Law at his Mouth, this Law served until Christ the Seed came. Gala. 3.10. Who is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes. Rom. 10.4. And in the Old Testament and Covenant God gave the Jewes a Law in Tables of Stone, but in the New Testament and new Covenant; God saith, I will put my Law in their Minds and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God and they shall be my People, and they shall not teach every man his Neighbour and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least to the greatest saith the Lord, Heb. 7.10, 11.
So you may see here is no need of the Jewes Priests Lips, &c. to preserve Peoples knowledge, and to receive the Law at their Mouths, and to give them Tythes for receiving the Law, for Christ hath changed the Priesthood and the Law; by which it was made, and dissanulled the Commandment that gave him his tythes, and saith in his New Testament to his Ministers, Freely ye have receiv∣ed freely give, and in the New Covenant and New Testament the Lord puts it in their minds and writes it in their hearts, that they shall not need to teach every man his Neighbour and every man his Brother saying know the Lord; and Christ Jesus the treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge, for all shall know me from the Least to the Greatest saith the Lord, So this Law that God writes in their hearts and puts in their minds gives them knowledge to know the Lord, so this Law they receive from the Lord and not from the Colledge Priests and the Jewes Priests in the Old Testament. And the Lord poured his Spirit upon the house of Israel & the house of Judah in the Old Testament, but it is said in Joel 2. that God would poure his Spirit upon all flesh, &c, and after Christ was risen the Disciples and the Believers were met together, and the Jewes came gazing upon them, and others mocked and said they were full of new Wine, and
Peter and the Eleven told them that they were not drunk as they supposed, seeing it was but the third hour of the Day, but this is that which was spoken by Joel the Prophet, It shall come to pass in the last dayes saith the Lord that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daugh∣ters shall Prophesie, and your young men shall see Visions: and your Old Men shall dream Dreams, and on my Servants and on my Handmaids, I will pour in those dayes out of my Spirit, & they shall Prophesie, Act. 2 13. to the 18. Here you may see the Spirit that God poureth upon all Flesh gives people knowledge of Prophe∣sies and of Dreams, and of Visions, so the Spirit of God, That God poureth upon all flesh in the new New Testament and new Covenant gives them knowledge that they need not the Priests lips in the Old Testament to preserve their knowledge, and People will not perish for lack of Visions, if they mind the Spirit of God that he hath poured upon them, and the Spirit of Truth will lead them into all Truth, but if Sons and Daughters and Hand∣maids, and Sevants, and Old men, do rebel against the Spirit of God; that he poureth upon them in the New Testament, as the Jews did in the Old Testament, for God gave them his good Spirit, but they rebelled against it, then those goes from the
Key of Knowledge both Jewes and Christians, and all Flesh, And the Jews Priests when they went from the Spirit of God they neither preserved the Peoples knowledge nor their own, and became Deaf and blind, and turned against the Prophets Christ and the Apostles, though they might make an outward painting of the Sepulchres of the Righ∣teous; in an outward Profession of words and turn against the Righteous. So now all flesh Jewes and Gentiles and all Christendom whom God hath poured out of his Spirit upon, if they rebel against Gods good Spirit & err from it, and quench it, and vex it, they are be∣come a whore from God and Christ, and his Spirit, and have neither true Visions, nor true Prophesies, nor true Dreams, and are a Babilon all in heaps and Confusion, and cannot worship the Eternal God in his Spirit, and in his truth, and are out of the Unity and the Fellowship in the Spirit, which is the bond of Peace, and so have not Fellowship with the Father and the Son, nor fellowship one with another, but are broken into Sects and heaps one against another, whereas the Spiritual, that walk in the Spirit, are in the Spirit the Bond of Peace, and are in fellowship with the Father and the Son and one with another, and Worship and serve the Living God in his Spirit and truth. G. F.
