P548 U163 12368857 60492
JACOBUS USSERIUS, ARCHIEPISCOPUS ARMACHANUS TOTIUS HIBERNIAE PRIMAS London Printed for Nath: Ranew and Ionat: Robinson at the Kings Armes in S. Pauls church yard 1676
THE LIFE Of the Most Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES USHER, Late Lord Arch-Bishop OF ARMAGH, Primate and Metropolitan of all IRELAND. With a Collection of Three Hundred LETTERS, between the said Lord Primate and most of the Eminentest Persons for Piety and Learning in his time, both in England and beyond the Seas. Collected and published from Original Copies under their own hands, by RICHARD PARR, D. D. his Lordships Chaplain, at the time of his Death, with whom the care of all his Papers were intrusted by his Lordship. LONDON, Printed for NATHANAEL RANEW, at the Kings-Arms in St. Pauls Church-Yard. MDCL XXXVI.
THE PREFACE. WHEN the Son of Syrach undertook to recount the Famous Men of Old, and record their Worth and Renown, he says of them, That they were Men of Knowledge, Wise and Eloquent in their In∣structions, that of these there are, who have left behind them a Name beloved of God and good Men, whose Memorials are Blessed; honoured in their Generation, being the Glory of their times, whose Righteousness, shall not be for∣gotten, and although their Bodies be buried, yet their Names shall live for Ever. And as in the former, so likewise in these latter Days, there have been many Men of excellent Endowments, for Wisdom and Learning, for Piety and all other eminent Vertues, whose Memorials are with us in Church and State. Among these of the first Rank, this admira∣ble Primate, James Usher, (whose Life we are about to relate) ought to be reckoned, whether we consider him, as he was indeed, a profound Scholar, exactly skilled in all sorts of Learning, Divine and Humane, or as a Person of unfeigned Piety, and exemplary Vertue and Conversation, or as a Subject of steady and unmoveable Loyalty to his Sovereign Prince, or as a Clergy Man in all his Capacity, from a Presbyter to a Bishop and Primate. So that I think of him, it may be as truly said, as of St. Augustine, with a kind of Admiration, O Virum, ad totius Ecclesiae publicam utilitatem, natum, factum, datúmque divinitùs! This Character his Writings have justly purchased him among the best and most Learned, whether of these or other Nations, whose Encomiums of him are too many and large for this Place, let me therefore include all, in that of a memorable William Juxon Bishop of Lon∣don, and Lord High Trea∣surer in a Letter. Anno 1639. Bishop of our Church, who upon the Receipt of the Primates Book de Primordiis, thus writes of him; I may truly say, that the Church hereafter will owe as much Reverence to his Memory, as we of this present Age, ought to pay to his Person. And therefore when we have before us a subject of so Eminent Dignity, we shall no need Apology for reviving the Memory of this incomparable Pre∣late, and collecting such materials from his Life, his Papers, and the Infor∣mations of Wise and Knowing Men, as may render him, as well useful to future Ages in his Example, as a Person truly Illustrious in himself. 1. But perhaps it may be a needless attempt to write again the Life and Actions of this incomparable Primate, seeing it hath been performed already by several Persons.
2. And likewise it may be demanded, how it comes to my share, and what were the enducements to undertake this Province 1. To the first I say, that though Dr. Bernard in the Sermon be Preached at the Funerals of the Lord Primate, hath said many worthy things of him truly, which we have reason to believe (having the joynt Testimonies from Persons of Worth and unquestionable Credit, who had been acquainted with this great and good Man for many years both in England and Ireland) and must go along with the Dr. a good way in reciting many material passages, contained in the said Sermon; yet I take leave to say, that he hath omitted very many remarkable things, which perhaps either slipt his Memory, or came not at all under his observation; or because that those then in Power, would not indure that any thing should be said of the Primate, which might reflect upon that Usurpation. Therefore we thought it needful to make up those defects, by adding such Remarks as are wanting in that Description, and likewise to rectifie the mistakes of those Writers of the Lord Primates Life, who Writing after Dr. Bernard's Copy, are deficient also in their Accounts and lyable to Question in some instances. 2. If it be demanded how it comes to my share, to revive the Memory of this great Man, and to undertake the Task. To this I say, that I waited and heartily wished to see, if any Person better Qualified than my self (being sensible of my own weakness) would engage himself in this Affair, to whom I would most readily have Communicated those Materials and Observations, which I had gathered together and lay by me for a long time: but at length perceiving it not likely to be undertaken, I was perswaded by those who have a prevailing Power with me, to take upon me this Task, and to acquaint the World with my own Observations, touching this most Reverend Primate Usher, whom I had the Advantage of any Man now living to know, for I had the Blessing of an intimate Acquaintance with his Person and Affairs, by my Attendance on him, during the last thirteen years of his Life. So that I may be thought capable to give a considerable Account, not only of the Lord Primates particular Disposition and heavenly Conversation, but likewise of those Passages and Performances of which I was an Eye Witness, and may confidently relate upon mine own Know∣ledge. This is the thing I undertake to perform, especially in that part of the History of his Life and Actions, from the year 1642, to the time of his Death 1655. But not withstanding my long experience of this excellent Person, and what I had collected from several passages in Letters, and by conference with those who made Observations; yet I had not the confidence to attempt this work by my own strength or skill, without Counsel and Help, therefore when I had drawn together the Memorials, I consulted with Persons of better under∣standign than my self, with request to correct and amend what was misplaced or not well expressed, and to remind me of any remarkable passage that had escaped my Memory. And the assistance I had in this kind, was administred by that Learned and Judicious Gentleman James Tyrrell Esq Grandson to
the Lord Primate, one as deeply concerned for the honour of his Grand∣father as can be; he became helpful to me in hinting many passages touching his Grandfather, which he (tho then young) had himself observed, and had heard from Persons of great Worth and Credit, and of the Primates familiar Acquaintance. We also owe unto him the account given of the Lord Pri∣mates Printed Works, both of the time and occasion of Writing them, and subject matter treated on, as the Reader will perceive in the following History in their proper places. In the next place it is requisite to mind the Reader touching the following Collection of Letters herewith published, being for the most part Originals, written by the Lord Primate to learned Men of our own and foreign Nations, or of those written to him, relating mostly to matters of Learning. These Epistles I gathered together with what care I could, and when I had selected those out of a far greater number, that I thought might prove most fit for publick view, and useful both in respect of the Learning contained in them, and the various subjects whereof they consisted, I would not presume to publish the Collection, until they had passed the Inspection and Censure of those Learned Men, to whom they were first shown, being Persons of great Judgment and Integrity, and who retain a very high Esteem and Veneration for the Primate's Memory. Perhaps the Reader will expect to meet with, if not all, yet many more of the Primate's Letters, in this Collection than may be found; but by all our Industry and search they cannot yet be retrieved, partly because the Primate himself seldom kept Copies of his Lettes, and many of those he had reserved met with the same fate which many others of his loose Papers and Manuscripts, which were either lost in his often forced removals, or fell into the hands of the Men of those spoiling times, who had no regard to things of that Nature. There are other Epistles, not numbred with the former, at the end of this Collection, written by Men of great Names, found among my Lord Pri∣mate's Papers, which are thought worthy to be inserted and Printed. Before I dismiss the Reader, I have one thing more to advertise, touch∣ing two Letters in the Collection, one written by Dr. Bedell, then Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland, to the Primate Usher, then Arch-Bishop of Armagh, and his answer to it, (as you will find Numb. 142. and 143.) im∣porting an accidental difference between those two Eminent Bishops, and most intire Friends, touching the Administration and Jurisdiction in Ecclesiasti∣cal Courts, as then exercised in the Kingdom of Ireland; which Letters however otherwise Worthy of perusal, yet are now more especially published for the doing right to the Arch-Bishops Character, which might else have suffered by some injurious Reflections upon him, in the Life of that Bishop lately Written, taken up partly from some uncertain Reports, and partly upon the Bishops Letter to him upon that occasion. But how little Reason there was to say the Primate was not made for the Governing part of his Function, (as that Author affirms) besides his known abilities that way, his Answer
to the Bishops Letter, and other Composures of his upon those kind of Argu∣ments, will sufficiently testifie. Of which inadvertency as the Composer of that Life is already made sensible, so we hope that he will do him Right, ac∣cording as he hath promised, when time shall serve. The order observed in disposing these Letters in the following Volume, is according to their several Dates, that being concluded fittest beth for the use and delight of the Reader, only some of them through mistake, are transposed, and others that were brought in late, are Printed at the latter end, of which the Reader may consult the Advertisment at the end of the Book. Farewell.
THE LIFE Of the Most Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES USHER. Late Lord Arch-Bishop OF ARMAGH, Primate and Metropolitan of all IRELAND. Collected and Written by RICHARD PARR, D. D. his Lordships Domestick Chaplain. Psalm CXII. v. 6. The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. Proverbs X. v. 7. The Memory of the Just is blessed, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot. LONDON, Printed for NATHANAEL RANEW, at the Kings-Arms in St. Pauls Church-Yard. MDCLXXXVI.
THE LIFE OF The Most Reverend Father in God, JAMES USHER, SOMETIME Arch-Bishop of Armagh. PRIMATE of all IRELAND. THIS great Person, whose Life we now write, was Born in the City of Dublin, the Metropolis of Ire∣land, upon the fourth day of January, Anno Domini 1580. His Father, Mr. Arnold Usher, one of the Six Clerks of Chancery, (and of good repute for his prudence and integrity) was of the Ancient Family of the Ushers, aliàs Nevils, whose Ancestor (Usher to King John) coming over with him into Ireland, and setling there, changed the name of his Family into that of his Office, (as was usual in that Age) his descendants having since brancht into several Families about Dublin, and for divers Ages bore the most considerable Offices in, and about that City. His Mother was Margaret, Daughter of James Stanihurst, who was of considerable note in his time, being chosen Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons in three Parliaments, and was Recorder of the City of Dublin, and one of the Mastres of Chancery, and (that which ought always to be mention'd for his honour) he was the first mover, in the last of the three Parliaments, of Queen Elizabeth, for the Founding and Endowing of a Colledge and University at Dublin, which was soon after consented to by Her Majesty; and, being perfected, hath ever since continued a famous Nursery for learning and good manners; blessing both the Church and State with many admi∣rable men, eminently useful in their several Stations. His Uncle, by the Fathers side, was Henry Usher, (sometime Arch-Bishop of Armagh) a wise and learned Prelate; one who industriously pro∣moted
the founding of that University, and by his Zeal and In∣terest procured of the said Queen an established Revenue for the maintainance of a Provost and Fellows, Students, and Of∣ficers, as may be seen by the Charter and Statutes of that Foun∣dation; and so it has flourished ever since with ample improve∣ment: A happy Foundation and great honour to that Kingdom, having (in the space of somewhat more than 90 years) sent out divers Persons very considerable both in Church and State; and yielded more than fifty Bishops, besides others of inferiour Dig∣nities, who were many of them of great parts, and excellent learning. His Uncle, by the Mother side, was Richard Stanihurst, a Learned man, (of the Romish Perswasion) an excellent Histo∣rian, Philosopher and Poet, as appears by several of his Works still extant, though some of them (for that reason written) against his Nephew; yet notwithstanding their difference in Judgment, they had frequent correspondencies by Letters, some of which you will see hereafter in this following Collection. He often mentioned two of his Aunts, who were blind from their Cradle, and so continued to their deaths, and yet were blessed with ad∣mirable understanding, and inspection in matters of Religion, and of such tenacious Memories, that whatever they heard read out of the Scriptures, or was preached to them, they always retained, and became such proficients, that they were able to repeat much of the Bible by heart, and (as their Nephew told me) were the first that taught him to read English. He had but one Brother, Ambrose Usher; who though he died young, yet attained to great skill and perfection in the Oriental Tongues, and did render much of the Old Testament from the Original Hebrew into Eng∣lish, before King James's Translation was made, which I have seen, and is now in Manuscript with his Nephew Sir Theophilus Jones, Knight, one of his Majesties Privy-Council in Ireland. He also Translated out of Latin into English, that Book written by his Bro∣ther, James Usher, De Ecclesiarum Christianarum successione & statu; which Translation is yet only in Manuscript. And of this Am∣brose, being a very young man, the Learned Mr. William Eyre in a Letter to Dr. James Usher, writes thus, Interea vero agnosco me valde obaeratum esse tibi, & doctissimo juveni, fratri tuo Ambrosio, qui peri∣tissima manu sua quaedam in meum usum ex Alcorano Arabice excripsit; which knowledge in the Arabick Tongue in those days was very rare, especially in that Country: But our James Usher, as God had furnisht him with excellent endowments of Nature, a treatable Disposition, a strong Memory, and a ready Invention; so by God's blessing, on his improvement of them, by his Learning and Indu∣stry, he arrived to that admirable perfection, that gave him a reputation superiour to all that he could derive from his Family;
and rendred his name famous beyond the narrow bounds of his own Country, even throughout the Christian World, wherever true Piety and useful Learning were had in any esteem and vene∣ration. After he had learnt to read from his Aunts, he entered on the Bible (that Book of Books, as he ever called it) in which he made a happy beginning, and a more happy progress (like Timo∣thy, of whom it is recorded, That from a Child he had known the Holy 1 Tim. 3. 15, 16. Scriptures, which are able to make a man wise to Salvation.) According to which excellent Rule he always governed his life and conver∣sation. He began early to have a deep sense of Religion, and to consider the great concernment of his Soul, how he might serve God aright, Remembring his Creator in the days of his Youth, even, but in the tenth year of his Age: When he became fit for a Grammar-School, it happened that two eminent Persons of the Scottish Nation (though their business and quality were then un∣known) came to Dublin, being sent over thither by King James (then King of Scotland) to keep a correspondence with the Eng∣lish Protestant Nobility, and Gentry about Dublin, in order to se∣cure his interest in that Kingdom, when Queen Elizabeth should happen to die; these for a colour undertook the imployment of School-Masters, to instruct and discipline Youth in Learning and good Education (for the want of such was very great there at that time). The one was James Fullerton; (afterward Knighted, and of the Bed-chamber to King James,) the other was James Hamilton, (afterward also Knighted and created by the King Viscount Clan∣debois.) To their Instruction and Tuition was our James Usher committed by his Parents, with whom he made so great a profici∣ency in a short time, that he became the best Scholar of the School for Latin, Poetry and Rhetorick, (all this being within the space of five years.) He would usually say, when he recounted the Providences of God towards him, That he took this for one remarkable instance of it, That he had the opportunity and advantage of his Education from those men, who came thither by Chance, and yet pro∣ved so happily useful to himself and others. He told me, That in this first Scene of his life he was extreamly addicted to Poetry, and was much delighted with it, but afterward growing to more maturity and consideration, he shook it off, as not suitable to the great end of his more resolved, serious and profitable Studies, and then set himself industriously to pursue Learning of a higher Nature: Yet he always loved a good Poem that was well and chastly writ: And lighting once upon a passage in Tully, (viz.) Nescire quid antea quam natus sis acciderit, id est, semper esse Puerum; and also read∣ing Sleidan's History of the four Empires, he presently resolved on the study and search of Antiquity, and all sorts of Learning, and
how he might contribute to the advancement thereof: this was a brave, and a manly attempt for a Lad, but of 12 or 13 years of age; yet as he attempted, so he conquered all the difficulties which he met with in the search after, and bringing to light those many things, which ignorance had corrupted, and time well-nigh buried in oblivion; especially in a Country where there was then so great a scarcity of good Books, and learned Men. I mention these things so much above his years, for a remembrance of God's spe∣cial Providence over this Person, in endowing him with such ad∣mirable gifts of Nature, to dispose him so vigorously to Learning, and to fit and qualifie him for such highly serviceable Underta∣kings; so that he seem'd designed by God, by his Doctrine, and Example to teach men how to live, and by his deep Learning, and strong Reason to confute the clamorous Cavils of the greatest adversaries of our Religion. In the year 1593 was Trinity Colledge in Dublin finished, and James Usher then in the thirteenth year of his age adjudged by his School-Masters sufficiently qualified for an admittance into that University, and so was entered accordingly. Dr. Loftus (some∣time Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge) afterwards Arch-Bishop of Dublin, being the first Provost of that College, and Mr. Hamilton (one of this our Usher's School-Masters, and Senior Fel∣low) was Tutor to this early ripe Youth; whose name (as the first Scholar there) stands to this day in the first line of the Roll: not without a future presage, that he might prove an honour and ornament to that Colledge and Nation, as he afterwards did. And being thus fixed, he sets himself in good earnest to the study of the Languages and Liberal Arts, not neglecting Ecclesiastical History and Antiquity, in all which he improved to admiration; for between fifteen and sixteen years of age he had made such a proficiency in Chronology, that he had drawn up in Latin an ex∣act Chronicle of the Bible, as far as the book of Kings, not much differing from the method of his late Annals, excepting the en∣largements in some more accurate Observations and Synchronisms of Heathen Stories: Sometime after this (before he was Batchelor of Arts) he had read Stapleton's Fortress of the Faith, and finding his confidence in asserting Antiquity for the Tenents of Popery, and taxing of our Church with Novelty, in what it dissented from theirs, he was in a great dispute with himself where the truth lay, not then knowing but that those quotations, he made use of, might be true: but this he took for an undeniable truth, That the an∣cientest must needs be the right, as the nearer the Fountain the pu∣rer the Streams, and that Errours sprang up as the Ages succeed∣ed; according to that known Speech of Tertullian, Verum quodcun∣que primum, adulterum quodcunque posterius: He suspected that Staple∣ton
might misquote the Fathers, or wrest them to his own sense; which made him take up a firm resolution, That in due time (if God gave him life) he would himself read the Fathers all over, and trust none but his own Eyes in the search of them; and this was the occasion of his undertaking that great work, which he (afterwards) began at twenty years of age, and finished at thirty eight; strictly observing to read such a proportion each day, from which no occasions whatsoever should divert him; the fruits of which labour, as the World hath already tasted in his learned Writings, so had he lived to finish that great work of his Biblio∣theca Theologica, which he intended as the sum of all his Studies on that important subject, whereof we shall give you a further ac∣count hereafter; yet before he was Master of Arts he had read here and there divers Books of the Fathers, and most of our best Authors, who had writ in confutation of the Errors of the Papists, with many of their Writers also; by which he had so well ac∣quainted himself with the state of each Controversie, that he was able to dispute with any of the Popish Priests, as he often did with the chiefest of them. The Earl of Essex being newly come over Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and Chancellor of the university of Dublin, there was a solemn Act for his entertainment: Our Usher being then Batche∣lor of Arts, answered the Philosophy Act, with great approba∣tion. But while he was busily imploying himself in these studies and great designs, to fit himself for the Divine Calling of the Mi∣nistry, (when he should be qualified for so high and great im∣ployment) his Father recommended to him the study of the Common Law (designing to send him shortly over to the Inns of Court in England,) but to this his Son was very averse, it no ways suiting with his natural Temper and Complexion; yet duti∣fully would have submitted, if his Father could not be brought to alter his mind in that matter: But soon after he died, and the paternal Estate descended to this his eldest Son, being of a con∣siderable value; but this young Heir was so far from being trans∣ported by such an accession of Fortune, that it did not in the least shake him from his design; for he finding it somewhat incumbred with Law Suits, and Sisters Portions, and fearing those might prove an hinderance to the course of his Studies (which he still resolved to pursue) he chose rather to commit himself to the Pro∣vidence of God anew, and so very frankly gave his Inheritance to his Brother, and his several Sisters for their Portions; only re∣serving so much of it as might enable him to buy some Books, and afford him a competent maintenance in the College. This act of his perhaps by some may be censured for indiscretion; yet so much may be allowed him in his vindication, that it shews
how little he valued Earthly things, in comparison of true Wis∣dom and Learning: And besides, to let you see that he very well understood what he did in this matter, There is to be seen an ex∣act Terrier of his own hand writing, of all the Estate and Leases left him by his Father: And that it might not be thought he did any thing rashly, and with precipitation, he drew up an exact state of all the Suits and Incumbrances that lay upon it, with di∣rections what to do in them, which he committed to his Uncle (as Guardian for his Brother and Sisters) to be managed for their advantage, which he so well performed, that most of his Sisters (being seven in all) were afterwards very well married, and some of them to Persons that proved eminently considerable both in Church and State. And now being setled in the Colledge, and freed of his worldly cares, and left to his own choice, he devotes himself entirely to the pursuit of all literature both Humane and Divine; for the service of God's Church, and the good of Mankind, (which he chiefly aimed at next the Salvation of his own Soul:) and in these noble subjects he constantly exercised himself; and did so much increase in all sorts of knowledge, that his Fame (thô he sought it not) went abroad, and he soon became an Example of Piety, Modesty and Learning: But that which administred greatest cause of admiration, was, That so much fruit should be found upon a Plant but newly set, and scarcely ripe for blossoms; so that in this short space (from the thirteenth year of his age to the twentieth) he gave most ample proofs of his learning and abilities in all pub∣lick Exercises which he performed. About the eighteenth or nineteenth year of his age, he being but Batchelor of Arts, was thought the fittest person to enter the lists of disputation with a daring and learned Jesuite, one Henry Fitz-Symonds, then prisoner in the Castle of Dublin, who sent out a challenge Defying the greatest Champion, and best Learned to dispute with him about those points in controversie between the Roman, and Refor∣med Churches: Our Usher accepts the challenge, and according∣ly they met; the Jesuite made slight of him at first, as but a boy, and thinking it an easie task to baffle him, the Priest admits a pub∣lick Disputation, (the subject of which was Bellarmine's Contro∣versies) and because the several matters in debate could not be dispatched at one or two meetings, they appointed to meet once a week to argue the chief Points in Controversie: But it seems that after one or two Conferences the Jesuite had enough of it; for though he despised him at first, yet he did not care to have any more to do with him; for, after the second Conference, this boasting Goliah declined the Combate with this stripling; and not without cause, for he had felt the quickness of his Wit, the strength
of his Arguments, and skill in Disputation; so that this Jesuite quickly left the Field, as will appear by this modest Letter which Mr. Usher then writ to him. I Was not purposed (Mr. Fitz-Symonds) to write unto you, before you had first written to me, concerning some chief points of your Religion, (as at our last meeting you promised) but seeing you have deferred the same (for reasons best known to your self) I thought it not amiss to enquire further of your mind, concerning the continuation of the Conference began betwixt us. And to this I am the rather moved, because I am credibly informed of certain reports, which I could hardly be perswaded, should proceed from him, who in my presence pretended so great love and affection unto me. If I am a boy (as it hath pleased you very contemptuously to name me) I give thanks to the Lord, that my carriage toward you hath been such, as could minister unto you no just occasion to despise my Youth; your Spear belike is in your own conceit a Weavers Beam, and your abilities such, that you desire to en∣counter with the stoutest Champion in the Host of Israel, and therefore (like the Philistine) you contemn me as being a boy; yet this I would fain have you know, that I neither came then, nor now do come unto you in any confi∣dence of any Learning that is in me, (in which respect, notwithstanding, I thank God I am what I am) but I come in the Name of the Lord of Hosts (whose Companies you have reproached, being certainly perswaded, that even out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he was able to shew forth his own Praises; for the further manifestation whereof, I do again earnestly request you, that (setting aside all vain comparisons of Persons) we may go plainly forward, in examining the matters that rest in controversie between us; otherwise I hope you will not be displeased, if as for your part you have be∣gun; so I also for my own part may be bold, for the clearing of my self, and the truth which I profess, freely to make known, what hath already passed concerning this matter: Thus intreating you in a few lines, to make known unto me your purpose in this behalf, I end, praying the Lord, that both this, and all other enterprises that we take in hand, may be so ordered, as may most make for the advancement of his own Glory, and the Kingdom of his Son, Jesus Christ. Tuus ad Aras usque. James Usher. No answer to this Letter, nor any further conference can I find: but this, the Jesuite confessed after he got out, viz. Prodiit quidam Vide ejus Praefat. ad Britanno-Machiam, &c. octodenarius, praecocis sapientiae juvenis, de abstrusisimis rebus Theologicis, cum adhuc Philosophica studia vix emensus, nec ex Ephebis egressus, &c. In English to this effect, There came to me once a youth of about 18 years of age, of a ripe Wit, when scarce, as you would
think, gon through his course of Philosophy, or got out of his Childhood, yet ready to dispute on the most abstruse points of Divinity: But afterwards the same Jesuite, living to understand him better, calls him Acatholicorum doctissimus; a tender expression from a Jesuite; he does not say of Hereticks, but of the Not Ca∣tholicks most Learned. Anno Dom. 1600.] Being now twenty years old, and having lived in the Colledge seven years from his first admission, he took the degree of Master of Arts; and the same year he was chosen Catechist Reader in the Colledge; in which office and im∣ployment he treated of the pure Principles of the Christian Reli∣gion, in Faith and Practice, as professed and maintained by the Reformed Churches, in opposition to the Errors and Innovations, which had mixed themselves with Primitive Christianity; and sifting the Wheat from the Tares, He did so learnedly and plainly discharge that Exercise to the satisfaction of his then Auditors, that he was much importuned to appear, and Preach in publick, which was (as himself then thought) very much above his years to enter on so weighty a charge. But not being able to withstand the importunity of his Friends, and the commands of Superiors, he yielded, though with some reluctance; so that being thought fit for the Ministry in the twenty first year of his age, he was ac∣cordingly Ordained Deacon and Priest, by his Uncle Henry Usher, then Arch-Bishop of Armagh, with the assistance of others of the Clergy, Anno 1601, which though uncanonical, yet his own ex∣traordinary merit, and the necessity which the Church then had of such a Labourer, rendred a dispensation in that case very tolerable, if not necessary. And being not long after appointed to Preach constantly before the State, at Christ-Church in Dublin, on Sundays in the afternoon, he made it his business to treat of the chief points in controversie between the Romish Church, and Ours: In which Discourses he was so clear, powerful, and convincing, that he thereby setled many that were wavering, and converted divers from that Superstitious perswasion to the Church of Eng∣land. And now this young, but grave Divine applies himself to the study of gaining Souls, as the main end, and design of his Mi∣nistry, and this he continued through the whole course of his life, and was exceeding successful in it. The first Text he preached on Publickly before the State, presently after his Ordination, was Rev. 3. 1. Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead; which fell out to be the day of the Battle of Kinsale, and was especially set apart to pray for the good success of that Engagement, which God was pleased to answer with a noble Victory. And it must be here remembred, That in the year 1601, af∣ter that the Irish Papists, many of them in, and about Dublin, and
some other parts of the Kingdom, had seemingly submitted to the Laws; and came frequently to our Churches; yet there were still very many of the Irish that kept their distance from the English, and stuck to their old Principles, and earnestly solicited for a Toleration (or at least a Connivance) to use their own way of Worship; which this zealous Divine believed to be Superstiti∣ous, and Idolatrous. And fearing lest a Connivance might be granted to them, and so a lukewarm indifferency to Religion might seize on the Protestants themselves. This pious young man was deeply touched with the sense of the evil of such an In∣dulgence, and dangerous Consequence of allowing liberty to that sort of People, to exercise a Religion so contrary to the truth; and fearing that the introducing of that Religion tended to the disturbance of the Government in Church and State; on which occasion this newly Ordained Servant of God then Preached a ve∣ry remarkable Sermon before the same Audience on a great So∣lemnity, and did not dissemble, but freely gave his Opinion in reference to a Toleration: And this he did, from that of Ezekiel's Vision, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and that Nation, Ezek. 4. 6. And thou shalt bear the iniquity of the House of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a year. He made then this his conjecture in reference to Ireland (viz.) From this year I reckon forty years, and then those whom you now imbrace shall be your ruine, and you shall bear their iniquity. This then uttered by him in his Sermon, seemed only to be the present thoughts of a young man, who was no friend to Popery; but afterwards when it came to pass at the expiration of forty years (that is from 1601. to 1641.) when the Irish Rebellion broke out, and that they had murthered and slain so many thousands of Protestants, and ha∣rassed the whole Nation by a bloody War, then those, who lived to see that day, began to think he was a young Prophet. Neither must it be forgotten, that after the English Forces had beaten, and driven out the Spaniards, who then came to the assist∣ance of the Irish at Kinsale, that Army resolved to do some wor∣thy act, that might be a lasting memorial of the gallantry of Mi∣litary men; and that due respect which they had for true Re∣ligion and Learning. To promote which, they raised among themselves the Sum of 1800 l. to buy Books to furnish the Li∣brary of the University of Dublin. And when the Sum was rai∣sed, it was resolved by the Benefactors, That Dr. Challoner, and Mr. James Usher should have the said 1800 l. paid into their hands to procure such Books, as they should judge most neces∣sary for the Library, and most useful, for advancement of Lear∣ning, which they accordingly undertook; and coming into Eng∣land for that purpose; where, as also from beyond Sea they pro∣cured
the best Books in all kinds, which were then to be had: So that they most faithfully discharged that great trust, to the Donors and the whole Colledges great satisfaction. And it is somewhat remarkable, that at this time, when the said Persons were at London about laying out this money in Books, they then met Sir Thomas Bodley there, buying Books for his new erected Library at Oxford, so that there began a correspondence between them upon this occasion, helping each other to procure the choi∣cest and best Books on several subjects that could be gotten; so that the famous Bodleyan Library at Oxford, and that of Dublin, began together. About this time the Chancellorship of St. Patrick, Dublin, was conferred on him by Dr. Loftus, then Arch-Bishop of Dublin, which was the first Ecclesiastical Preferment that he had, and which he retained without taking any other Benefice, until he was thence promoted to the Bishoprick of Meath. Here he lived single for some years, and kept Hospitality proportionable to his Incomes; nor cared he for any overplus at the years end, (for indeed he was never a hoarder of money) but for Books, and Learning he had a kind of laudable covetousness, and never thought a good Book (either Manuscript or Printed) too dear. And in this place Mr. Cambden found him, Anno 1607. when he was putting out the last Edition of his Britannia, where speaking of Dublin he concludes thus, Most of which I acknowledge to owe to the diligence and labour of James Usher, Chancellor of the Church of St. Patricks, who in various learning and judgment far exceeds his years. And though he had here no particular obligation to preach (unless sometimes in his course before the State,) yet he would not omit it in the place from whence he received the profits, viz. Finglass, not far from Dublin, which he endowed with a Vicaridge, and preached there eve∣ry Lord's Day, unless hindered by very extraordinary occa∣sions. In the year 1607. being the seven and twentieth of his age, he took the degree of Batchelor of Divinity, and soon after he was chosen Divinity Professor in the University of Dublin; wherein he continued thirteen years, reading weekly throughout the whole year; his Lectures were Polemical, upon the chief Con∣troversies in Religion, especially those Points and Doctrines maintained by the Romish Church, confuting their Errors, and answering their Arguments by Scripture, Antiquity, and sound Reason, which was the method he still used in that Exercise, as also in his Preaching, and Writings, when he had to do with Controversies of that Nature, then most proper to be treated on; not only because incumbent upon him by virtue of his place, as Professor, but also in respect of Popery, then prevailing in that
Kingdom: But as for those many learned and elaborate Lectures he then read, written with his own hand, and worthy to be Prin∣ted, we cannot tell what is become of them; those and many o∣ther of his Pieces, full of excellent Learning, being dispersed, or lost by the many sudden removals of his Papers, or detained by such to whom they were lent; and as 'tis pity any of the Works of this great man should be lost, so I wish that those Persons, who have any of them in their hands, would restore them to compleat these Remains, since they cannot be so useful in private Studies, as they would be if published to the World. About this time there was a great dispute about the Herenagh Terman, or Corban Lands, which anciently the Chorepiscopi received; which as well concerned the Bishops of England, as Ireland. He wrote a learned Treatise of it, so approved, that it was sent to Arch-Bishop Bancroft, and by him presented to King James; the substance of which was afterwards Translated by Sir Henry Spelman into Latin, and published in the first part of his Glossary, as him∣self acknowledgeth, giving him there this Character, Literarum in∣signis Pharus: Which Treatise is still in Manuscript in the Arch-Bishop's Library at Lambeth. This year also he came over into England, to buy Books, and to converse with learned men, and was now first taken notice of at Court, preaching before the Houshold, which was a great ho∣nour in those days. And now whilst here, he made it his busi∣ness to inquire into the most hidden and private paths of Anti∣quity, for which purpose he inquired after, and consulted the best Manuscripts of both Universities, and in all Libraries both pub∣lick, and private: and came acquainted with the most learned men here, such as Mr. Cambden, Sir Robert Cotton, Sir John Bourchier; (after Earl of Bath) Mr. Selden, Mr. Brigs, Astronomy Professor in the University of Oxford, Mr. Lydiat, Dr. Davenant (after Lord Bishop of Salisbury,) Dr. Ward off Cambridge, and divers others, with most of whom he kept a constant Friendship and Correspondence to their Deaths. After this he constantly came over into England once in three years, spending one Month of the Summer at Ox∣ford, another at Cambridge, the rest of the time at London, spending his time chiefly in the Cottonian Library, the Noble and Learned Master of which affording him a free access, not only to that, but his own Conversation. This being the thirtieth years of his age he was unanimously chosen by the Fellows of Dublin Colledge to the Provostship of that House, but he refused it; fearing it might prove a hinderance to his studies, no other reason caN be given for his refusal: For at that time he was deeply engaged in the Fathers, Councils, and
Church History, comparing Things with Things, Times with Times, gathering and laying up in store, Materials for the repair∣ing of the decayed Temple of Knowledge, and endeavouring to separate the purer Mettal from the Dross, with which Time, Igno∣rance, and the Arts of ill designing men had in latter Ages corrup∣ted, and sophisticated it: For some years before he began to make large Notes, and Observations upon the Writings of the Fathers, and other Theological Authors, beginning with those of the first Century, and so going on with the rest as they occurred in order of time, passing his judgment on their Works, and divers Passa∣ges in them, which were genuine, which spurious or forged, or else ascribed to wrong Authors: So that in the space of about eighteen or nineteen years (in which he made it his chief study) he had read over all the Greek and Latin Fathers; as also most of the considerable School-men, and Divines, from the first to the thirteenth Century: So he was now well able to judge, whether the passages quoted by our adversaries were truly cited, or not, or were wrested to a wrong sense: And this he did, not out of bare Curiosity, but to confute the Arrogance of those men, who will still appeal (though with ill success) to Antiquity, and the Writings of the Fathers: But these learned Collections of his being a large Volume, and designed by him as the foundation of a more large and elaborate Work, which might have been of great use to the Church, were never finished, but remain still in Manuscript, though he fully intended (had God afforded him life) to have fallen up∣on this as the only considerable work he had left to do, and which perhaps he had performed many years before his death, had it not been for that unhappy Irish Rebellion, which bereft him not only of that, but of all his other Books for some time (except those he brought over with him, or furnished (himself with here;) so that, when at last this Manuscript (together with the rest of his Library) was brought over from Droghedah, they found him engaged in that long and laborious Work of his Annals; and when that was done, he had (as an Appendix thereunto) his Chronologia Sacra, to perfect, though he never lived to make an end of it; so that it is no wonder, if he wanted opportunity, and leisure to fi∣nish this great Task. But that he intended to give his last hand to this Work, will appear from this passage in his Epistle to the Reader, before his answer to the Jesuite's Challenge, in these words: The exact discussion, as well of the Authors, Times, as of the Cen∣sures of their Works, I refer to my Which was the Title he intended to give these Collections. Theological Bibliothcque; if God hereafter shall lend me life and leisure, to make up that Work, for the use of those that mean to give themselves to that Noble Study of the Doctrine and Rites of the Ancient Church. And how much he desired it might
be done, may farther appear; that being askt upon his Death-bed, What his Will was concerning those Collections He answer∣ed to this effect, That he desired they might be committed to his dear friend Dr. Langbaine, Provost of Queens Colledge, the on∣ly man, on whose Learning, as well as Friendship he could rely, to cast them into such a Form, as might render them fit for the Press. According to which bequest they were put into the hands of that learned Dr. who in order thereunto, had them transcribed, and then set himself to fill up the breaches in the Original (the quotations in the Margine being much defaced with Rats:) about which laborious Task, that learned and good man studying in the publick Library at Oxford, in a very severe Season, got such an extreme cold, as quickly (to the great grief of all good men) brought him to his end, Feb. An. 1657. So that though that excellent Person Dr. Fell, (now Lord Bishop of Ox∣ford) who has deserved so well of Learning, has endeavoured to get those Lacunae filled up, yet these Collections still remain unfit to be published; though the transcript from the Original, with the Marginal quotations, and additions are now in the Bodleyan Li∣brary, as a lasting Monument of the Lord Primate's Learning, and Industry; and may be like wise useful to those learned Per∣sons, for whom they were designed, and who will take the pains to consult them. But the Original of the Authors hand writing is, or was lately in the possession of the Reverend and Learned  Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Pauls. He was now in the 32d. year of his age, in which he took the Degree of Dr. of Divinity, in that University wherein he was bred, and to which he was admitted by Dr. Hampton, then Arch-Bishop of Armagh, and Vice-Chancellor, after he had performed the usual Exercises, part of which was to read two Solemn Lectures on some places of Scripture: which he then did on Dan. 9. 24. Of the Seventy Weeks. And on Rev. 20. 4. Explaining those Texts so mis-ap∣plied  by the Millenaries both in Elder and Latter times. The next year, being at London, he published his first Treatise De Ecclesiarum Christianarum Successione & Statu: being much mag∣nified by Casaubon and Scultetus, in their Greek and Latin Verses be∣fore it, was solemnly presented by Arch-Bishop Abbot to King James, as the eminent First-fruits of that Colledge of Dublin. It is imperfect, for about 300 years, from Gregory XI. to Leo X. i. e. from 1371. to 1513. and from thence to this last Century, which he intended to have added, had God afforded him longer life, though he had lost very considerable assistances towards that de∣sign, as you will find hereafter, in the Series of this Relation. This he wrote to answer that great Objection of the Papists,
when they ask us, Where our Religion was before Luther And therefore the design of this Book was to prove from Authors of unquestionable Credit and Antiquity, that Christ has always had a Visible Church of true Christians, who had not been tainted with the Errours and Corruptions of the Romish Church: and that even in the midst of the darkest and most ignorant times: and that these Islands owe not their first Christianity to Rome. About this time also he altered his condition, changing a sin∣gle for a married life, marrying Phoebe, only Daughter of Luke Challoner, Doctor of Divinity, (of the Ancient Family of the Chal∣loners in Yorkshire) who had been a great Assister and Benefactor to the late Erected Colledge at Dublin, having been appointed Overseer of the Building, and Treasurer for the money raised to that purpose: He was a Learned, and Pious man, and had such a friendship for Dr. Usher, that he courted his Alliance, and inten∣ded, had he lived, to have given him this his only Daughter, with a considerable Estate in Land and Money; but dying be∣fore he could see it concluded, he charged her upon his Death-bed, that if Dr. Usher would marry her, she should think of no other person for a Husband, which command of her dying Fa∣ther she punctually obeyed, and was married to him soon after, and was his Wife for about forty years; and was always treated by him with great kindness, and conjugal affection until her death, which preceded his about one year, and a half. He had by her one only Child, the Lady Tyrrel yet living. Thus he li∣ved for several years in great reputation, pursuing his Studies, and following his Calling; and whilst he sat at home, endeavouring the advancement of Vertue and Learning, his fame flew abroad almost all over Europe; and divers learned men, not only in Eng∣land, but foreign Countries, made their applications to him by Let∣ters, as well to express the honour and respect they had for him, as also for satisfaction in several doubtful points, either in humane Learning, or Divinity; as the Reader may see in this ensuing Collection. There was now a Parliament at Dublin, and so a Convocation of the Clergy, when the Articles of Ireland were composed and published, and he being a Member of the Synod, was appointed to draw them up; which Articles being signed by Arch-Bishop Jones, then Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and Speaker of the House of the Bishops in Convocation, as also by the Prolocutor of the House of the Clergy in their names: And signed by the then Lord De∣puty Chichester, by order from King James, in his name. As I shall not take upon me to defend these Articles in all points there∣in laid down, or that they were better than those of the Church
of England. So on the other side, I cannot be of the opinion of that Author, who would needs have the passing of these Articles to be An absolute Plot of the Sabbatarians and Calvinians in England, Dr. Heylin's Respondet Petrus. to make themselves so strong a Party in Ireland, as to obtain what they pleased in this Convocation; unless he will suppose that the Bishops and Clergy of that Church, could be so inveagled by I know not what Inchantments, as to pass those things for Articles of their Belief, which they had never so much as studied nor understood the true meaning of: And that the then Lord Deputy and King James, were likewise drawn in to be of the Plot, to Sign and Con∣firm those Articles, which they knew to be Heterodox to the Do∣ctrine, and Articles of the Church of England. But though Dr. Usher was thus remarkable for Piety and Lear∣ning, yet he could not escape the common Fate of extraordinary men, viz. Envy and Detraction; for there were some in Ireland, (though of no great repute for Learning or Worth) who would needs have him to be a Puritan (as then they called those whom they looked upon as disaffected to the discipline of the Church, as by Law establisht:) And to lay a block in the way of his future Preferment, they had got some to traduce him, as such, to the King, who had no great kindness for those men, as he had little reason. But the Dr. hearing of it, and having occasion about this time to come for England: (as he always had done once in three or four years) The Lord Deputy and Council were so sensible of this scandal, that for his Vindication they writ by him this Recommendatory Letter to His Majesties Privy-Coun∣cil here. May it please Your Lordships, THe extraordinary merit of this Bearer, Mr. Doctor Usher, prevail∣eth with us, to offer him that favour (which we deny to many that move us) to be recommended to Your Lordships; and we do it the rather, because we are desirous to set him right in His Majesties Opinion, who it seemeth hath been informed, that he is somewhat Transported with Singula∣rities, and unaptness to be Conformable to the Rules and Orders of the Church. We are so far from suspecting him in that kind, that we may boldly recommend him to Your Lordships, as a man Orthodox, and worthy to govern in the Church, when occasion shall be presented. And His Majesty may be plea∣sed to advance him; he being one that hath preached before the State here for eighteen years: And has been His Majesties Professor of Divinity in the University thirteen years. And a man who has given himself over to his Profession: An excellent and painful Preacher, a modest man, abounding in goodness; and his Life and Doctrine so agreeable, as those who agree not with him, are yet constrained to love and admire him. And for such an one
we beseech Your Lordships to understand him: And accordingly to speak to His Majesty: And thus with the remembrance of our humble Duties we take leave. Your Lordships most humbly at Command, Ad. Loftus, Canc. Henry Docwra, William Methwold, John King, Dud. Norton, Oliver St. John, William Tuameusis, Fra. Anngiers. From Dublin the last of Sept. 1619. But that you may see this odious nick-name was put upon ma∣ny Pious and Orthodox Divines that did not deserve it, it will not be amiss to give you this following Letter to Dr. Usher, then in England, from a worthy Divine, then in Ireland. Reverend Sir, I Hope you are not ignorant of the hurt that is come to the Church by this name, Puritan, and how his Majesties good intent and meaning there∣in is much abused, and wronged; and especially in this poor Country, where the Pope and Popery is so much affected. I being lately in the Country, had conference with a worthy, painful Preacher, who hath been an instru∣ment of drawing many of the meer Irish there, from the blindness of Popery to imbrace the Gospel, with much comfort to themselves, and heart-breaking to the Priests, who perceiving they cannot now prevail with their jugling Tricks, have forged a new device: They have now stirred up some crafty Papists, who very boldly rail both at Ministers, and People, saying, They seek to sow this damnable Heresie of Puritanism among them; which word, though not understood, but only known to be most odious to his Majesty, makes many afraid of joyning themselves to the Gospel, though in conference their Consciences are convicted herein: So to prevent a greater mischief that may follow, it were good to Petition his Majesty to define a Puritan, whereby the mouths of those scoffing Enemies would be stopt: And if his Majesty be not at leisure, that he would appoint some good men to do it for him; for the effecting thereof, you know better than I can direct, and therefore I commit you, and your Affairs to the blessing of the Almighty, praying for your good success there, and safe return hither, resting Your assured Friend, to his power, Emanuel Downing. Dublin 24th Oct. 1620. But to return whence we have digressed; this Character of the Lord Deputy, together with King James's own conversation with, and tryal of Dr. Usher (whom he sent for on purpose to
that end) did so fully satisfie the King, that after he had discour∣sed with him in divers points both of Learning and Religion, he (who was well able to judge of both) was so extreamly well sa∣tisfied with him, that he said he perceived, That the knave Puritan was a bad; but the knave's Puritan an honest man. And of which latter sort he accounted Dr. Usher to be, since the King had so good an opinion of him, that of his own accord he now Nomina∣ted him to the Bishoprick of Meath in Ireland, being then void;  with this expression, That Dr. Usher was a Bishop of his own making; and so his Conge d' Eslire being sent over, he was elected by the Dean and Chapter there. And that you may perceive how much the report of his advancement rejoyced all sorts of men, this following Letter from the then Lord Deputy of Ireland may testifie. To Dr. James Usher, Bishop Elect of Meath. My Lord, I Thank God for your Preferment to the Bishoprick of Meath; His Ma∣jesty therein hath done a gracious favour to his poor Church here: There is none here but are exceeding glad that you are called thereunto; even some Papists themselves have largely testified their gladness of it. Your Grant is, and other necessary things shall be Sealed this Day, or to Morrow: I pray God bless you, and whatever you undertake, so I rest Your Lordship's most Affectionate Friend, Ol. Grandisone. Dublin 3 Feb. 1620. But before his going over, and while Bishop Elect, a Parlia∣ment was Convened at Westminster, and began Feb. 1st. 1620. and I find this passage among some of his Memorandums of that time, viz. I was appointed by the Lower House of Parliament, to preach at St. Margarets, Westminster, Feb. 7. the Prebends claimed the pri∣viledge of the Church, and their exemption from Episcopal Jurisdiction for many hundred years, and offered their own Service: Whereupon the House being displeased, appointed the place to be at the Temple. I was chosen a second time: And Secretary Calvert, by the appointment of the House, spake to the King, that the choice of their Preacher might stand: The King said, It was very well done. Feb. 13th. being Shrove-Tuesday, I dined at Court; and betwixt 4 and 5 I kiss'd the King's hand, and had conference with him touching my Sermon. He said, I had charge of an unruly Flock, to look unto the next Sunday. He asked me how I thought it could stand with true Divinity, that so many hundred should be tyed (upon so short warning) to receive the Communion upon a day, all could
not be in Charity, after so late contentions in the House: Many must needs come without Preparation, and eat their own Condemnation: That him∣self required all his whole Houshold to receive the Communion, but not all the same day, unless at Easter, when the whole Lent was a time of Prepa∣ration. He bad me to tell them, I hoped they were all prepared, but wished they might be better: To exhort them to Unity, and Concord: To love God first, and then their Prince and Country: To look to the urgent necessities of the Times, and the miserable state of Christendom with Bis dat, qui citò dat. Feb. 10th. The first Sunday in Lent I preached at St. Margarets to them: And Feb. 27th. the House sent Sir James Perrot, and Mr. Drake, to give me thanks, and to desire me to print the Sermon, which was done accordingly; the Text being upon the first of the Cor. 10. 17. For we being many, are one Bread and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread. This Sermon was printed by the desire of the House, and with one more (preached before the King at Wansted, Jan. 20. 1624. upon Eph. 4. 13. concerning the unity of the Catholick Faith) were all the Sermons I can find to have been published by his allowance. But the Lord Bishop Elect returning some time after into Ire∣land, was there Consecrated by Dr. Hampton, then Lord Primate, assisted with some other of the Bishops; and being thus advanced to the Episcopal Degree, his Province and Imployment might be altered, but not his mind, nor humble temper of Spirit: Neither did he cease to turn as many as he could from Darkness to Light; from Sin, and Satan to Christ; by his Preaching, Writing, and Exemplary Life; observing that which St. Augustine said of St. Ambrose, Et eum quidem in populo verbum veritatis recte tractantem omni St. Augustine's Confession, lib. 6. cap. 3. die Dominico audiebam, & Magis, Magisque mihi confirmabat, &c. That he handled the Word of God unto the People every Lord's Day. About this time some violent Papists of Quality happened to be censured in the Castle-Chamber at Dublin, for refusing to take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: upon this occasion the State ordered the Bishop of Meath, on the day of the Sentence, to make a Speech to them, as well to inform their Consciences of the Lawfulness of it, as of the great penalties they would under∣go, if they persisted to refuse it: Which he performed in a Lear∣ned Discourse, and highly approved of by His Majesty: Which was as follows.
A Speech delivered in the Castle-Chamber at Dublin, November 22th. 1622. At the Censuring of certain Officers, concerning the Lawfulness of taking, and dan∣ger of refusing the Oath of Supremacy. WHat the danger of the Law is, for refusing this Oath, hath been sufficiently opened by my Lords, the Judges; and the quality and quantity of that offence hath been aggravated to the full by those that have spoken after them. The part which is most proper for me to deal in, is the information of the Con∣science, touching the truth and equity of the matters contained in the Oath: which I also have made choice the rather to insist upon, because both the form of the Oath it self requireth herein a full resolution of the Conscience; (as appeareth by those words in the very beginning thereof; I do utterly testifie and declare in my Conscience, &c.) and the persons that stand here to be censured for refusing the same, have alledged nothing in their own de∣fence, but only the simple plea of Ignorance. That this point therefore may be cleared, and all needless scruples removed out of mens minds: two main branches there be of this Oath, which require special consideration. The one positive, acknowledging the Supremacy of the Government of these Realms, in all Causes whatsoever, to rest in the King's Highness only. The other Negative, renouncing all Jurisdicti∣ons and Authorities of any foreign Prince or Prelate within his Majesties Dominions. For the better understanding of the former, we are in the first place to call unto our remembrance that exhortation of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be unto the King, as having the preheminence; or unto Gover∣nours, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. By this we are taught to re∣spect the King, not as the only Governour of his Dominions simply, (for we see there be other Governours placed under him) but , as him that excelleth, and hath the preheminence over the rest; that is to say, (according to the tenure of the Oath) as him that is the only Supreme Governor of his Realms. Upon which ground we may safely build this conclusion; That what∣soever power is incident unto the King by virtue of his place, must be acknowledged to be in him Supreme: there being no∣thing so contrary to the nature of Soveraignty, as to have ano∣ther superiour power to over rule it.
Qui Rex est, Regem (maxime) non habeat. In the second place we are to consider, That God, for the bet∣ter setling of piety and honesty among men, and the repressing of prophaneness and other vices, hath established two distinct powers upon Earth: The one of the Keys, committed to the Church; the other of the Sword, committed to the Civil Magi∣strate. That of the Keys is ordained to work upon the inner man, having immediate relation to the Joh. 20. 23. remitting or retaining of sins. That of the Sword is appointed to work upon the out∣ward man, yielding protection to the obedient, and inflicting external punishment on the rebellious and disobedient. By the former, the spiritual Officers of the Church of Christ are inabled to 1 Tim. 5. 17. govern well, to Tit. 2. 15. speak and exhort and rebuke with all Autho∣rity, to Matth. 16. 19. & 18. 18. loose such as are Penitent, to commit others unto the Lord's Prison until their amendment, or to bind them over unto the Judgment of the Great Day, if they shall persist in their wil∣fulness, and obstinacy. By the other, Princes have an imperious power assigned by God unto them, for the defence of such as do well, and executing Rom. 13. 4. revenge and wrath upon such as do evil; whether Ezra 7. 26. by death, or banishment, or confiscation of goods, or im∣prisonment, according to the quality of the offence. When St. Peter, that had the Keys committed unto him, made bold to draw the Sword; he was commanded to Mat. 26. 52. put it up, as a weapon that he had no authority to meddle withal. And on the other side, when Uzziah, the King, would venture upon the execution of the Priest's Office, it was said unto him; 2 Chron. 26. 18. It per∣taineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests, the Sons of Aaron, that are Consecrated to burn incense. Let this therefore be our second Conclusion: That the power of the Sword, and of the Keys are two distinct Ordinances of God; and that the Prince hath no more Authority to enter upon the exe∣cution of any part of the Priest's Function, than the Priest hath to intrude upon any part of the Office of the Prince. In the third place we are to observe, That the power of the Civil Sword (the supreme managing whereof belongeth to the King alone) is not to be restrained unto Temporal Causes only; but is by Gods Ordinance to be extended likewise unto all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things and Causes: That as the spiritual Rulers of the Church do exercise their kind of Government, in bringing men unto obedience, not of the duties of the first Table alone, (which concerneth Piety and the Religious Service which man is bound to perform unto his Creator) but also of the second (which re∣specteth moral honesty, and the Offices that man doth owe un∣to man: (so the Civil Magistrate is to use his Authority also in
redressing the abuses committed against the first Table, as well as against the second; that is to say, as well in punishing of an He∣retick, or an Idolater, or a Blasphemer, as of a Thief, or a Murtherer, or a Traytor; and in providing by all good means, that such as live under his Government 1 Tim. 2. 2. may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all piety and honesty. And howsoever by this means we make both Prince and Priest to be, in their several places, Custodes utriusque Tabulae, Keepers of both God's Tables; yet do we not hereby any way confound both of their Offices together. For though the matter wherein their Government is exercised may be the same; yet is the form and manner of governing therein always different: the one rea∣ching to the outward man only, the other to the inward: the one binding or loosing the Soul, the other laying hold on the Body, and the things belonging thereunto: the one having special re∣ference to the Judgment of the World to come, the other respect∣ing the present retaining or losing of some of the comforts of this life. That there is such a As on the o∣ther side, that a Spiritual or Ecclesiastical government is exercised in causes Civil or Temporal. For is not Excom∣munication a main part of Ecclesiastical government; and Forest laws a special branch of cau∣ses Temporal yet we see in Sententiâ lat â super chartas, anno 12. R. H. 3. that the Bi∣shops of Eng∣land pro∣nounce a so∣lemn sentence of Excommu∣nication a∣gainst the-in∣fringers of the liberties con∣tained in Chartâ de Fo∣restâ. Civil Government as this in Causes Spiri∣tual or Ecclesiastical, no man of judgment can deny. For must not Heresie (for example) be acknowledged to be a cause meer∣ly Spiritual or Ecclesiastical And yet by what power is an Here∣tick put to death The Officers of the Church have no Authori∣ty to take away the life of any man: it must be done therefore per brachium saeculare; and consequently it must be yielded with∣out contradiction, that the temporal Magistrate doth exercise therein a part of his Civil Government, in punishing a Crime that is of its own nature Spiritual or Ecclesiastical. But here it will be said, the words of the Oath being general, That the King is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his Highness's Dominions and Countries. How may it appear, that the power of the Civil Sword only is meant by that Govern∣ment, and that the power of the Keys is not comprehended there∣in I answer: First, That where a Civil Magistrate is affirmed to be the Governor of his own Dominions and Countries; by common intendment this must needs be understood of a Civil Government, and may in no reason be extended to that which is meerly of another kind. Secondly, I say, That where an ambiguity is con∣ceived to be in any part of an Oath; it ought to be taken accor∣ding to the understanding of him for whose satisfaction the Oath was ministred. Now in this case it hath been sufficiently de∣clared by publick Authority, That no other thing is meant by the Government here mentioned, but that of the Civil Sword only.
For in the Book of Articles, agreed upon by the Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, Anno 1562. thus we read. Where we attribute to the Queen's Majesty the chief Government, (by which Titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended:) we give not to our Princes the ministring either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments (the which thing the Injuctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth, our Queen, do most plainly testifie:) but that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself: that is, That they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and restrain with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers. If it be here objected, that the Authority of the Convocation is not a sufficient ground for the exposition of that which was en∣acted in Parliament: I answer, That these Articles stand confir∣med, not only by the Royal assent of the Prince, (for the esta∣blishing of whose Supremacy the Oath was framed) but also by a special Act of Parliament; which is to be found among the Sta∣tutes in the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, chap. 12. See∣ing therefore the makers of the Law have full Authority to ex∣pound the Law; and they have sufficiently manifested, That by the supreme Government given to the Prince, they understand that kind of Government only which is exercised with the Civil Sword: I conclude, that nothing can be more plain than this; That with∣out all scruple of Conscience, the King's Majesty may be ac∣knowledged in this sense to be the only Supreme Governor of all his Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiasti∣cal things or causes, as Temporal. And so have I cleared the first main branch of the Oath. I come now unto the Second; which is propounded Negative∣ly: That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminence or Au∣thority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. The foreigner that challengeth this Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Jurisdiction over us, is the Bishop of Rome: And the Title whereby he claimeth this power over us, is the same whereby he claimeth it over the whole World; because he is S. Peter's Successor, forsooth. And indeed, if St. Peter himself had been now alive, I should freely confess, that he ought to have spiritual Authority, and Superi∣ority within this Kingdom. But so would I say also, if St. An∣drew, St. Bartholoew, St. Thomas, or any of the other Apostles had been alive. For I know that their Commission was very large; to Mark 16. 15. go into all the World, and to preach the Gospel unto every Creature. So that in what part of the World soever they lived, they could not be said to be out of their Charge; their Apostleship being a kind of
an Universal Bishoprick. If therefore the Bishop of Rome can prove himself to be one of this rank, the Oath must be amen∣ded, and we must acknowledge that he hath Ecclesiastical Au∣thority within this Realm. True it is, that our Lawyers in their Year-Books, by the name of the Apostle do usually design the Pope. But if they had exa∣mined his Title to that Apostleship, as they would try an ordinary man's Title to a piece of Land, they might easily have found a number of flaws and main defects therein. For, first, It would be enquired, whether the Apostleship was not ordained by our Sa∣viour Christ, as a special Commission; which being personal only, was to determine with the death of the first Apostles. For howsoever at their first entry into the execution of this Commis∣sion, we find that Act. 1. 25, 26. Matthias was admitted to the Apostleship in the room of Judas: yet afterwards, when James, the Brother of John, was slain by Herod, we do not read that any other was sub∣stituted in his place. Nay, we know that the Apostles generally left no Successors in this kind: Neither did any of the Bishops (he of Rome only excepted) that sate in those famous Churches, wherein the Apostles exercised their ministry, challenge an Apo∣stleship, or an Universal Bishoprick, by virtue of that Succes∣sion. It would, secondly, therefore be inquired, what sound Evi∣dence they can produce, to shew that one of the company was to hold the Apostleship, as it were in Fee, for him and his Successors for ever; and that the other eleven should hold the same for term of life only. Thirdly, if this state of perpetuity was to be cast upon one; how came it to fall upon St. Peter, rather than upon St. John, who outlived all the rest of his follows; and so as a survi∣ving feoffee had the fairest right to retain the same in himself and his Successors for ever Fourthly, if that state were wholly setled upon St. Peter; seeing the Romanists themselves acknowledge, that he was Bishop of Antioch before he was Bishop of Rome; we require them to shew, why so great an inheritance as this, should descend unto the younger Brother (as it were by Burrough-English) rather than to the elder, (according to the ordinary manner of descents;) Especially seeing Rome hath little else to alledge for this preferment, but only that St. Peter was crucified in it: which was a very slender reason to move the Apostle so to respect it. Seeing therefore the grounds of this great claim of the Bishop of Rome appear to be so vain and frivolous, I may safely conclude, That he ought to have no Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Authority within this Realm; which is the principal point contained in the second part of the Oath.
JAMES REX. RIght Reverend Father in God, and Right Trusty and Welbeloved Councellor, We greet you well. You have not deceived our expecta∣tion, nor the gracious opinion We ever conceived both of your abilities in Lear∣ning, and of your faithfulness to Us and our Service. Whereof, as we have received sundry Testimonies both from Our precedent Deputies, as likewise from Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor, the Viscount Falkland, Our present Deputy of that Realm; so have We now of late, in one particular, had a further evidence of your Duty and Affection, well ex∣pressed by your late carriage in Our Castle-Chamber there, at the censure of those disobedient Magistrates, who refused to take the Oath of Supremacy. Wherein your zeal to the maintenance of Our Just and Lawful Power, de∣fended with so much Learning and Reason, deserves Our Princely and Gra∣cious thanks; which We do by this Our Letter unto you, and so bid you fare∣well. Given under Our Signet, at Our Court at White-Hall, the eleventh of January, 1622. In the twentieth year of Our Reign, of Great Britain, France and Ireland. To the Right Reverend Father in God, and Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved Councellor, the Bishop of Meath. This discourse had so good an effect, that divers of the Offen∣ders being satisfied, they might lawfully take those Oaths, did thereby avoid the Sentence of Praemunire, then ready to be pro∣nounced against them. After the Bishop had been in Ireland about two years, it pleased King James to imploy him to write the Antiquities of the British Church, and that he might have the better opportunity, and means for that end, he sent over a Letter to the Lord Deputy, and Council of Ireland, commanding them to grant a Licence for his being absent from his See: part of which Letter it may not be amiss to give you here Verbatim. JAMES REX. RIght Trusty and Welbeloved Cousins, &c. We Greet you well. Whereas We have heretofore in Our Princely judgment made choice of the Right Re∣verend Father in God, Dr. James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath, to imploy him in Collecting the Antiquities of the
British Church, before, and since the Christian Faith was received by the English Nation. And whereas We are also given to understand, That the said Bishop hath already taken pains in divers things in that kind, which being pub∣lished, might tend to the furtherance of Religion, and good Learning: Our pleasure therefore is, That so soon as the said Bishop hath setled the necessary Affairs of his Bi∣shoprick there, he should repair into England, and to one of the Universities here, to enable himself, by the helps to be had there, to proceed the better to the finishing of the said Work, Requiring you hereby to cause our Licence to be passed unto him the said Lord Bishop of Meath, under Our Great Seal, orotherwise, as he shall desire it; and unto you shall be thought fit for his repairing unto this King∣dom for Our Service, and for his continuance here, so long time as he shall have occasion to stay about the perfecting of those Works undertaken by him, by Our Commandment, and for the good of the Church, &c. Upon which Summons the Bishop came over into England, and spent about a year here in consulting the best Manuscripts in both Universities, and private Libraries, in order to the perfecting that noble Work De Primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum, though it was not published till above two years after, when we shall take occa∣sion to speak thereof more at large. After his coming over again, he was for some time engaged in answering the bold challenge of Malone, an Irish Jesuite, of the  Colledge of Lovain, which Treatise he finished, and published this year in Ireland; which he so solidly, and learnedly performed, that those that shall peruse it may be abundantly satisfied, that those very Judges, the Challenger appealed to, viz. the Fathers of the Primitive Church, did never hold, or believe Transubstan∣tiation, Auricular Confession, Purgatory, or a Limbus Patrum, Prayer for the Dead, or to Saints; the Use of Images in Divine Worship; Absolute Free-Will, with Merits annexed; with those other points by him maintained. And though about three years after the publishing of this Treatise, when the Colledge of Lovain had been long studying how to answer it, the said Malone did at last publish a long and tedious reply, stuffed with Scurrillous, and Virulent Expressions against the Lord Primate, his Relations and Calling; and full of quotations, either falsly cited out of the Fa∣thers,
or else out of divers supposititious Authors; as also forged Miracles, and lying Legends, made use of meerly to blind the Eyes of ordinary Readers, who are not able to distinguish Gold from Dross; all which together gave the Bishop so great a dis∣gust, that he disdained to answer a fool according to his folly, and made no reply unto him, though some of his worthy friends would not let it pass so: But the learned Dr. Hoyl, and Dr. Sing, and Mr. Puttock did take him to task, and so fully and clearly lay open the falshood, and disingenuity of those his Arguments and Quotations from the Ancient Records, and Fathers of the Church, which had been cited by this Author, that he had very little rea∣son to brag of his Victory. After the Bishop had published this Treatise, he returned again into England, to give his last hand to his said Work De Primordiis; and being now busied about it, the Arch-Bishoprick of Armagh became vacant by the death of Dr. Hampton, the late Arch-Bishop; not long after which, the King was pleased to nominate the Bi∣shop of Meath (though there were divers competitors) as the fit∣test Person for that great charge, and high dignity in the Church, in respect of his own great Merits and Services done unto it; and not long after he was Elected Arch-Bishop by the Dean and Chapter there. After which, the next Testimony that he recei∣ved of His Majesties favour, was his Letter to a Person of Quality in Ireland, who had newly obtained the Custodium of the Tempo∣ralties of that See, Forbidding him to meddle with, or receive any of the Rents, or Profits of the same, but immediately to deliver what he had already received unto the Receivers of the present Arch-Bishop, since he was here imployed in His Majesties special Service, &c. Not long after which favour, it pleased God to take King James (of Pious Memory) out of this World: Nor was his Son, and Successor, our late Gra∣cious Sovereign, less kind unto him than his Father had been; which he signified not long after his coming to the Crown, by a Letter under his Privy Signet to the Lord Deputy, and Treasu∣rer of the Realm of Ireland, That, Whereas the present Arch-Bishop of Armagh had for many years together, on several occasions, performed many painful, and acceptable Services to his Dear Father deceased, and upon his special directions, That therefore he was pleased, as a gracious acceptation thereof, and in consideration of his said Services done, or to be done hereaf∣ter, to bestow upon the said Primate, out of his Princely bounty 400 pound, English, out of the Revenues of that Kingdom. But before the return of the said Arch-Bishop into Ireland, I shall here mention an accident that happened about this time; to let you see, that he neglected no opportunity of bringing men from the darkness of Popery, into the clearer light of the Refor∣med Religion. I shall give you his own relation of it; from a
Note, (which though imperfect) I find of his own hand writing: Viz. That in November 1625. he was invited by the Lord Mordant, and his Lady, to my Lord's House at Drayton in Northampton-shire, to confer with a Priest he then kept, by the name of Beaumont, upon the points in dispute between the Church of Rome, and Ours: And particu∣larly, That the Religion maintained by Publick Authority in the Church of England, was no new Religion, but the same that was taught by our Sa∣viour, and his Apostles; and ever continued in the Primitive Church during the purest times: So far my Lord's Note. What was the issue of this Dispute, we must take from the report of my Lord and La∣dy, and other Persons of Quality there present; that this Confe∣rence held for some days, and at last ended, with that satisfaction to them both, and confusion of his Adversary, that as it confirmed the Lady in her Religion (whom her Lord, by the means of this Priest, endeavoured to pervert) so it made his Lordship so firm a Convert to the Protestant Religion, that he lived and died in it. When the Lord Primate had dispatcht his Affairs in England, he  then returned to be Enthroned in Ireland, having before his going over received many Congratulatory Letters from the Lord Vis∣count Falkland (then Lord Deputy,) the Lord Loftus, then Lord Chancellor, the Lord Arch-Bishop of Dublin, and divers others of the most considerable of the Bishops, and Nobility of that King∣dom, expressing their high satisfaction for his promotion to the Primacy; many of which I have now by me, no way needful to be inserted here. Being now returned into his native Country, and setled in this  great charge, (having not only many Churches, but Diocesses under his care) he began carefully to inspect his own Diocess first, and the manners and abilities of those of the Clergy, by fre∣quent personal Visitations; admonishing those he found faulty, and giving excellent advice, and directions to the rest, charging them to use the Liturgy of the Church in all Publick Administra∣tions; and to Preach and Catechise diligently in their respective Cures; and to make the Holy Scripture the rule, as well as the subject of their Doctrine, and Sermons: Nor did he only endea∣vour to reform the Clergy, (among whom, in so large a Diocess, and where there was so small Encouragements, there could not but be many things amiss) but also the Proctors, Apparitors, and other Officers of his Ecclesiastical Courts, against whom there were many great complaints of abuses and exactions in his Prede∣cessor's time, nor did he find that Popery and Prophaneness had increased in that Kingdom, by any thing more than the neglect of due Catechising, and Preaching; for want of which instructi∣on, the poor People, that were outwardly Protestants, were very ignorant of the Principles of Religion; and the Papists continued
still in a blind obedience to their Leaders; therefore he set him∣self with all his power to redress these neglects, as well by his own example, as by his Ecclesiastical Discipline; all which proving, at last, too weak for so inveterate a Disease, he obtained his Ma∣jesty's Injunctions to strengthen his Authority, as shall be hereaf∣ter mentioned. The Winter after his coming over, there were some Propositi∣ons made, and offered to be assented unto by the Papists, for a more full Toleration of their Religion; viz. The maintaining 500 Horse, and 5000 Foot, (wherein the Protestants must have born some share also) for the consideration of which, a great As∣sembly of the whole Nation, both Papists and Protestants was called by the then Lord Deputy Falkland. The meeting was in the Hall of the Castle of Dublin. The Bishops, by the Lord Pri∣mate's invitation, met first at his House, and both he, and they, then unanimously drew up, and subscribed a Protestation against the Toleration of Popery, which was as follows. The Judgment of divers of the Arch-Bishops, and Bishops of Ireland, concerning Toleration of Religion. THe Religion of the Papists is Superstitious, and Idolatrous; Their Faith and Doctrine, Erroneous and Heretical; Their Church in re∣spect of both, Apostatical. To give them therefore a Toleration, or to con∣sent that they may freely exercise their Religion, and profess their Faith and Doctrine, is a grievous sin, and that in two respects: For, 1. It is to make our selves accessary, not only to their Superstitions, Ido∣latries, and Heresies, and in a word, to all the abominations of Popery; but also (which is a consequent of the former) to the perdition of the seduced People, which perish in the Deluge of the Catholick Apostacy. 2. To grant them Toleration, in respect of any money to be given, or con∣tribution to be made by them, is to set Religion to sale, and with it, the Souls of the People, whom Christ our Saviour hath Redeemed with his most preci∣ous blood: And as it is a great Sin, so also a matter of most dangerous con∣sequence: The consideration whereof, we commend to the Wise and Judicious. Bejeeching the God of Truth, to make them, who are in Authority, Zealous of God's Glory, and of the advancement of true Religion: Zealous, Resolute, and Courageous against all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, Amen. James, Armachanus. Richard, Cork, Cloyne, Rossens. Mal. Casellen. Andr. Alachadens. Anth. Medensis. Tho. Kilmore, & Ardagh. Tho. Fernes, & Leghlin. Theo. Dromore. Ro. Dunensis, &c. Michael, Waterford, & Lysmore. George, Derens. Fran. Lymerick.
This Protestation of the Bishops, Dr. Downham, Lord Bishop of Derry, at the next meeting of the Assembly, April 23d. 1627. published at Christ-Church, before the Lord Deputy and Council, in the midst of his Sermon; wherein he spake much against mens subordinating Religion, and the keeping of a good Conscience to outward and worldly respects, and to set their Souls to sale for the gain of earthly matters, &c. The Lord Primate the next Lord's Day preached before the same Auditory; the Text was, 1 John 5. 15. Love not the World, nor the things that are in the World; when he made the like Application with the Bishop, rebuking such, who for worldly ends, like Judas, would sell Christ for thirty pieces of Silver. The Judgment of the Bishops prevailed so much with the Protestants, that the Proposals were drove on ve∣ry heavily: but yet upon serious consideration, when it was found that the weak and distracted condition of the Kingdom, could not well subsist without some standing Forces, it was resolved by the Lord Deputy and Council, that the Lord Primate (then a Privy-Councellor) should, in regard of his great esteem with all Parties, declare in a Speech to the whole Assembly, the true state of the Kingdom, and the necessity of a standing Army for the de∣fence thereof, against any foreign Invasion, or intestine commo∣tions, and consequently that a competent supply was needful to be granted for that purpose, and that without any Conditions whatsoever, as well by the Roman Catholick, as Protestant Sub∣jects, for which end the Lord Deputy having Summoned the As∣sembly to the Castle-Chamber at Dublin, the Lord Primate addressing himself to the Lord Deputy, made this ensuing Speech. My Lord, THe resolution of those Gentlemen in denying to contri∣bute  unto the supplying of the Army, sent hither for their defence, doth put me in mind of the Philosopher's observation, That such as have a respect to a few things, are easily misled: The pre∣sent pressure which they sustain by the imposition of the Souldi∣ers, and the desire they have to be eased of that burthen, doth so wholly possess their minds, that they have only an eye to the freeing of themselves from that incumbrance, without looking at all to the desolations, that are like to come upon them by a long and heavy War, which the having of an Army in readiness, might be a means to have prevented; the lamentable effects of our last Wars in this Kingdom, do yet freshly stick in our me∣mories: neither can we so soon forget the depopulation of our Land, when besides the combustions of War, the extremity of
Famine grew so great, that the very Women in some places by the way side, have surprised the men that rode by, to feed them∣selves with the flesh of the Horse, or the Rider: And that now again here is a Storm towards, wheresoever it will light, every wise man may easily foresee, which if we be not careful to meet with in time, our State may prove irrecoverable, when it will be too late to think of, Had I wist. The dangers that now threaten us, are partly from abroad, and partly from home; abroad, we are now at odds with two of the most potent Princes in Christendom; and to both which, in former times, the discontented persons in this Country have had recourse heretofore, proferring the Kingdom it self unto them, if they would undertake the Conquest of it: for it is not unknown unto them that look into the search of those things, that in the days of King Henry the Eighth, the Earl of Desmond made such an offer of this Kingdom to the French King, (the In∣strument whereof yet remains upon Record in the Court of Pa∣ris) and the Bishop of Rome afterwards transferred the Title of all our Kingdoms unto Charles the Fifth, which by new Grants was confirmed unto his Son Philip, in the time of Queen Eliza∣beth, with a resolution to setle this Crown upon the Spanish In∣fanta: Which donations of the Pope's, howsoever in themselves they are of no value, yet will they serve for a fair colour to a Potent Pretender, who is able to supply by the power of the Sword, whatsoever therein may be thought defective. Here∣unto may we add, that of late, in Spain, at the very same time, when the treaty of the Match was in hand, there was a Book published with great approbation there, by one of this Country birth, Philip O Sullevan, wherein the Spaniard is taught, That the ready way to establish his Monarchy (for that is the only thing he mainly aimeth at, and is plainly there confessed) is, first, to set upon Ireland, which being quickly obtained, the Conquest of Scotland, next of England, then of the Low Countries, is foretold with great facility, will follow after. Neither have we more cause in this regard to be afraid of a foreign Invasion, than to be jealous of a Domestick Rebellion. Where, left I be mistaken, as your Lordships have been lately, I must of necessity put a difference betwixt the Inhabitants of this Nation; some of them are descended of the race of the An∣cient English, or otherwise hold their Estates from the Crown, and have Possessions of their own to stick unto, who easily may be trusted against a foreign invader, although they differ from the State in matter of Religion: For proof of which fidelity in this kind, I need go no further than the late Wars in the time of the Earl of Tyrone, wherein they were assaulted with as power∣ful
temptations to move them from their Loyalty, as possibly hereafter can be presented unto them: For, at that time, not only the King of Spain did confederate himself with the Rebels, and Landed his Forces here for their assistance, but the Bishop of Rome also, with his Breves, and Bulls, solicited our Nobility, and Gentry, to revolt from their Obedience to the Queen, declaring that the English did fight against the Catholick Religion, and ought to be repugned as much as the Turks, imparting the same favours to such as should set upon them, that he doth unto such as fight against the Turks; and finally, promising unto them, that the God of Peace would tread down their Enemies under their Feet speedily. And yet for all the Pope's promises, and threatnings, which were also seconded by a Declaration of the Divines of Salamanca and Valledolid, not only the Lords and Gen∣telmen did constantly continue their Allegiance unto the Queen, but also were encouraged so to do by the Priests of the Pale, that were of the Popish profession: who were therefore vehe∣mently taxed by the Traytor O Sullenan, for exhorting them to follow the Queen's side; which he is pleased to term Insanam, & venenosam Doctrinam, & tartareum Dogma; a mad and venomous Doctrine, and a hellish Opinion. But besides these, there are a great number of Irish, who either bear a secret grudge against the English, planted amongst them, or having nothing at all to lose upon the first occasion, are apt to joyn with any foreign In∣vader; for we have not used that policy in our Plantations, that wise States have used in former times. They, when they setled new Colonies in any place, did commonly translate the Ancient Inhabitants to other dwellings. We have brought new Plan∣ters into the Land, and have left the old Inhabitants to shift for themselves; who being strong in Body, and daily increasing in number, and seeing themselves deprived of their means and maintenance, which they and their Ancestors have formerly in∣joyed; will undoubtedly be ready, when occasion is offer'd, to disturb our quiet; whether then we cast our eyes abroad, or look at home, we see our danger is very great. Neither may you, My Lords, and Gentlemen, that differ from us in point of Religion, imagine that the Community of profession will exempt you, more than us, from the danger of a common Enemy. Whatsoever you may expect from a fo∣reigner, you may conjecture by the answer which the Duke of Medina Sidonia gave in this case in 88; That his Sword knew no difference between a Catholick and a Heretick, but that he came to make way for his Master: And what kindness you may look for from the Country-men that joyn with them, you may judge, as well by the carriage which they ordinarily use towards
you and yours, both in the Court, and in the Colledges abroad, as by the advice not long since presented by them unto the Council of Spain, wherein they would not have so much as the Irish Priests and Jesuits, that are descended of English blood, to be trusted, but would have you and yours to be accounted Ene∣mies to the designs of Spain. In the Declaration published about the beginning of the Insurrection of James Fitz-Morice, in the South, the Rebels professed, it was no part of their meaning to subvert honorabile Anglorum Solium; their quarrel was only a∣gainst the person of Queen Elizabeth, and her Government: But now the case is otherwise, the translating of the Throne of the English to the power of a Foreigner, is the thing that mainly is intended, and the re-establishing of the Irish in their Ancient possessions, which by the valour of our Ancestors were gained from them. This you may assure your self, manet altâ mente repôstum, and makes you more to be hated of them than any other of the Eng∣lish Nation whatsoever. The danger thereof being thus com∣mon to us all, it stands us upon to joyn our best helps for the avoiding of it; only the manner how this may be effected is in Question. It was wont to be said, Iniquum petas, ut aequum feras, and such, perhaps, might be the intent of the project the other day propounded unto you; but now I observe the distate you have conceived against that hath so far possessed you, that hardly can you be drawn to listen to any equal motion. The exceptions taken against the Project, are partly general, made by all; partly special, that toucheth only some particulars: Of the former there are two, the quantity of the sum demanded, and the indefiniteness of the time, which is unlimited. For the pro∣portion required for the maintenance of 5000 Foot, and 500 Horse, you alledge to be so great, and your means so small, that in undertaking that which you are no ways able to perform, you shall but delude his Majesty, and disappoint the Army of their expected pay. And although the sum required were far less, and for a time able to be born by you; yet are you fearful that the payment, being continued for some number of years, may afterwards be continued as a constant Revenue to his Ma∣jesties Exchequer, with which perpetual burden you are unwil∣ling to charge your Posterity. The exceptions of the second kind, are taken against the Grants annexed unto the former demands: the granting where∣of seemed rather to hinder than further the Service, as not so agreeing with the rules of Equity. For first, some have the full benefits of the Grants, and have their charge little augmented, as the Countries which pay Composition-rents, which by those
Grants, during the time of the new payments are suspended. Secondly, others that have the charge of the payment imposed upon them to the full, are not partakers at all of the benefit of the Grants, as the British planted in the six Escheated Counties of Ulster. Thirdly, such as the most forward to further his Ma∣jesties Service; and to contribute with the most, are troubled in Conscience for yielding thereto upon the terms proposed, espe∣cially for that condition, whereby the execution of the Statute a∣gainst Recusants is offer'd to be forborn. Wherein, if some of my Brethren, the Bishops, have been thought to have shewed themselves more forward than wise, in preaching publickly against this kind of Toleration; I hope the great charge laid upon them by your selves in the Parlia∣ment, wherein that Statute was inacted, will plead their excuse. For there, the Lords Temporal, and all the Commons, do in God's name earnestly require and charge all Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that they shall endeavour them∣selves, to the utmost of their knowledge, that the due and true execution of this Statute may be had throughout their Dioces∣ses; and charged, as they will answer it before God, for such Evils and Plagues as Almighty God might justly punish his Peo∣ple, for neglecting these good and wholesome Laws. So that if in this case they had holden their Tongues, they might have been censured little better than Atheists, and made themselves accessary to the drawing down of God's heavy vengeance upon the People. But if, for these and such like Causes, the former project will not be admitted, we must not therefore think our selves dischar∣ged from taking farther care to provide for our safeties. Other consultations must be had, and other courses thought upon, which need not be liable to the like exceptions. Where the burden is born in common, and the aid required to be given to the Prince by his Subjects that are of different judgments in Re∣ligion; it stands not with the ground of common reason, that such a Condition should be annexed unto the Gift, as must of necessity deter the one Party from giving at all, upon such terms as are repugnant to their Consciences. As therefore on the one side, if we desire that the Recusants should joyn with us in gran∣ting a common aid; we should not put in the Condition of exe∣cuting the Statute, which we are sure they would not yield un∣to; so on the other side, if they will have us to joyn with them in the like Contribution, they should not require the Condition of suspending the Statute to be added, which we in Conscience cannot yield unto. The way will be then freely to grant unto
his Majesty, what we give, without all manner of Condition that may seem unequal unto any side, and to refer unto his own Sacred Breast, how far he will be pleased to extend or abridge his favours: of whose Lenity, in forbearing the executing of the Statute, our Recusants have found such experience, that they cannot expect a greater liberty, by giving any thing that is demanded, than now already they do freely en∣joy. As for the fear, that this voluntary Contribution may in time be made a matter of necessity, and imposed as a perpetual charge upon Posterity, it may easily be holpen with such a clause as we find added in the Grant of an aid made by the Pope's Coun∣cil, Anno 11 Hen. 3. out of the Ecclesiastical profits of this Land, Quod non debet trahi in consuetudinem, of which kinds of Grants, many other Examples of later memory might be pro∣duced: And as for the proportion of the Sum, which you thought to be so great in the former Proposition, it is my Lord's desire, that you should signifie unto him, what you think you are well able to bear, and what your selves will be content vo∣luntarily to proffer. To alledge, as you have done, that you are not able to bear so great a charge as was deman∣ded, may stand with some reason; but to plead an unability to give any thing at all, is neither agreeable to Reason or Duty. You say, you are ready to serve the King, as your Ance∣stors did heretofore, with your Bodies, and Lives, as if the supply of the King's wants with monies, were a thing un∣known to our Fore-fathers. But if you will search the Pipe-Rolls, you shall find the names of those who contributed to King Henry the Third, for a matter that did less concern the Subjects of this Kingdom, than the help that is now deman∣ded, namely, for the marrying of his Sister to the Empe∣rour. In the Records of the same King, kept in England, we find his Letters Patents directed hither into Ireland, for levying of Money to help to pay his Debts, unto Lewis the Son of the King of France. In the Rolls of Gascony, we find the like Letter directed by King Edward the Second, unto the Gentlemen, and Merchants of Ireland, of whose names there is a List there set down, to give him aid in his Ex∣pedition into Aquitaine, and for defence of his Land (which is now the thing in question.) We find an Ordinance likewise made in the time of Edward the Third, for the personal Taxing of them that lived in England, and hold Lands and Tenements in Ireland.
Nay, in this case you must give me leave, as a Divine, to tell you plainly, that to supply the King means, for the necessary defence of your Country, is not a thing left to your own discre∣tion, either to do, or not to do, but a matter of Duty, which in Conscience you stand bound to perform. The Apostle, Rom. 13. having affirmed, That we must be subject to the higher powers, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake, adds this as a reason to con∣firm it; For for this cause you pay tribute also, as if the denying such payment, could not stand with a conscionable subjection: there∣upon he infers this conclusion, Render therefore to all their due, Tri∣bute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom is due; agreeable to that known Lesson which he had learned of our Saviour, Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which Matth. 22. 21. are God's: where you may observe, as to with-hold from God the things which are God's, man is said to be a robber of God; Mal. 3. 8. whereof he himself thus complaineth in the case of substracting of Tythes and Oblations: So to deny a supply to Caesar of such means as are necessary for the support of his Kingdom, can be accoun∣ted no less than a robbing of him of that which is his due; which I wish you seriously to ponder, and to think better of yielding something to this present necessity, that we may not re∣turn from you an undutiful answer, which may be justly displea∣sing to his Majesty. This Speech, though it had not its desired effect, yet may suf∣ficiently declare the Lord Primate's abilities in matters of Govern∣ment, when ever he would give his mind to them, and how well he understood the present state of that Kingdom: And it had been well for Ireland, if his advice had been then hearken'd to, since those standing Forces then moved for being to have been all Protestants; would in all probability have prevented that Re∣bellion, that some years after broke out in that Kingdom; but a Copy of this Speech being desired by the Lord Deputy, was transmitted to his Majesty, who very well approved of it, as much conducing to his Service, and the publick safety. It cannot now be expected in times so peaceable, and quiet, as these seem'd to be (and in which my Lord Primate proceeded in one constant course, with little alteration) that every year should afford matter enough to be taken notice of in this account, there∣fore I shall only here give you in general the more remarkable transactions of his Life, from this time till his going over into Eng∣land, not long before that unhappy War. After his being Arch-Bishop he laid out a great deal of money  in Books, laying aside every year a considerable Sum for that end, and especially for the procuring of Manuscripts, as well from fo∣reign
Parts, as near at hand, having about this time, by the means of Mr. Thomas Davis, then Merchant at Aleppo, procured one of See Mr. Davis's Letter from Aleppo, where the MSS. are specified. Vid. Marm. Arundel. Edit. Lond. & Prae∣fat. in Bibl. Polyglot. the first Samaritan Pentateuchs that ever was brought into these Western Parts of Europe, (as Mr. Selden, and Dr. Walton acknow∣ledge) as also the Old Testament in Syriack, much more perfect than had hitherto been seen in these Parts; together with other Manuscripts of value. This Pentateuch, with the rest, were bor∣rowed of him by Dr. Walton, after Bishop of Chester, and by him made use of in the Polyglot Bible: All which Manuscripts being lately retrieved out of the hands of the said Bishop's Executors, are now in the Bodleyan Library at Oxford; a fit Repository for such Sacred Monuments. About this time the Lord Viscount Falkland, being re-called  from being Deputy of Ireland, was waited on by the Lord Primate to the Sea side, of whom taking his leave, and begging his Bles∣sing, he set sail for England, having before contracted an intimate friendship with the Lord Primate, which lasted till his death; nor did the Lord Primate fail to express his friendship to him on all occasions after his departure, doing his utmost by Letters to seve∣ral of the Lords of his Majesties Privy-Council here, for his Vin∣dication from several false Accusations, which were then laid to his charge by some of the Irish Nation, before his Majesty; which Letters, together with the Vindication of the Council of Ireland, by their Letter to his Majesty, of his just and equal Government, did very much contribute to the clearing of his Innocence in those things, whereof he was then accused. This year the happy news of the birth of Prince Charles, his late Gracious Majesty, then Prince of Wales, being brought into Ire∣land,  by an Express on purpose, the Lords Justices, and Council, order'd a Solemn Day of Thanksgiving for that great happiness, and the Lord Primate was invited (as I find by their Letter) to preach before them on that occasion, as he did accordingly. My Lord Primate published at Dublin his History of Gotteschalcus,  and of the Predestinarian Controversie stirred by him, (being the first Latin Book that was ever printed in Ireland.) Wherein, after a short account of Pelagianism, which had then much spread it self in Spain, and Britain, he proceeds to the History of Gotteschalcus, (a Monk of the Abby of Orbais, who lived in the beginning of the IX Century:) and his Opinions, shewing out of Flodoardus, and other approved Writers of that Age, that the points then held by this learned Monk, and that were then laid to his charge by Hinc∣mar, Arch-Bishop of Rhemes, and Rabanus, Arch-Bishop of Mentz; and which they got condemned in a Synod held in that City, as also in another at Quierzy, were, notwithstanding, defended and maintained by Remigius (or St. Remy) Arch-Bishop of Lyons, and
the Church of that Diocess, as consonant to the Scriptures, and Writings of the Fathers. And that indeed divers dangerous Opi∣nions, and Consequences were imputed to this learned Monk, which he was not guilty of. And after an account of the heads of a Treatise written by J. Scotius Erigene, in defence of Free∣will, and the contrary Opinions to those of Gotteschalce, the Lord Primate then likewise gives the sum of the Censure, which Florus, Deacon of Lyons, writ against the same, in the name of that Church: As also of several Writings of Remigius, Arch-Bishop of Lyons, Pudentius, Bishop of Troyes, and Ratramus, a Monk of Corbey, in defence of the said Gotteschalce's Opinions, and against the extra∣vagant Tenets of Scotus: Which Disputes produced two other Sy∣nods at Bonoil, and Neufle, in France; wherein the Opinions held by Gotteschalce were asserted, and the contrary, as maintained by Scotus, were condemned. Though those Councils were still op∣posed, and censured by Hincmar in a large Book, dedicated to the Emperour, Charles the Bald, the heads of which are there set down out of Flodoard: Which yet did not at all satisfie the contrary par∣ty; nor hinder Remigius, Arch-Bishop of Lyons, and his Provin∣cial Bishops, from calling another Council at Langres, wherein the Canons of the Valentinian Council, were confirmed, and those Propositions, maintained by Scotus, were again condemned: Which Canons were also referred to the judgment of the General Coun∣cil of the XII Provinces assembled at Thoul; and being there de∣bated, were not by it condemned, (as Baronius, and others will have it) but for quietness sake were again referred to the judg∣ment of the next General Assembly, that the Doctrines of the Church, and Fathers being produced, those should be agreed on, that should then appear most Sound, and Orthodox. And in the Conclusion, my Lord there shews the great constan∣cy of this poor Monk, who, notwithstanding his cruel whippings, and long imprisonment, to which he had been condemned, by the Council of Mentz, till his death, yet he would never Recant, but made two Confessions of his Faith, which are there set down, and by which it appears, That many things were laid to his charge, and condemned in those Councils, which he never held. In this Treatise, as the Lord Primate has shewn himself excel∣lently well skill'd in the Church History of those dark and igno∣rant Ages; so he there concludes, that men should not Dogma∣tize in these Points. And indeed there ever have been, and still will be different Opinions, concerning these great and abstruse questions of Predestination, and Free-will, which yet may be to∣lerated, and consist in any Church, if the maintainers of either the one side, or other, will use that Charity as they ought, and forbear publickly to condemn, rail at, or write against each other.
About this time the Romish Faction growing there very preva∣lent,  by reason of some former connivance by the State, as also for want of due instruction, as hath been already said, and like∣wise that divers abuses had crept into the Church, not only among the inferior Clergy, but the Bishops themselves; all which had been represented by the Lords Committees for Irish Affairs, to his Majesty, who thereupon thought fit to send over his Letters into Ireland, to all the Arch-Bishops of that Kingdom, as well to put them in mind of their duty, as to strengthen their Authority; which were as follows. CHARLES REX. MOst Reverend Father in God, right Trusty, and entirely Beloved, We Greet you well. Among such disorders as the Lords of Our Privy-Council, Deputed by Us to a particular care of Our Realm of Ireland, and the Affairs thereof, have observed, and represented to Us in that Govern∣ment, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; We have taken in special consideration the growth and increase of the Romish Faction there, and cannot but from thence collect, That the Clergy of that Church are not so careful as they ought to be, either of God's Service, or the honour of themselves, and their Profession, in removing all pretences of Scandal in their lives and conversa∣tion; wherefore as We have by all means endeavoured to provide for them a competency of maintenance, so We shall expect hereafter on their part a recip∣rocal diligence; both by their Teaching and Example, to win that Ignorant and Superstitious People to joyn with them, in the true Worship of God. And for that purpose We have thought fit by these Our Letters, not only to excite your care of these things, according to your Duty, and dignity of your Place, in that Church, but further to Authorize you in Our Name to give by your Letters to the several Bishops in your Province, a special charge, requi∣ring them to give notice to their Clergy under them in their Diocesses respe∣ctively, That all of them be careful to do their Duty, by Preaching and Ca∣techising in the Parishes committed to their charge: And that they live an∣swerable to the Doctrine which they Preach to the People. And further We Will, that in Our Name you write to every Bishop within your Province, That none of them presume to hold with their Bishopricks any Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical dignity whatsoever in their own hands, or to their own use, save only such as We have given leave, under Our Broad Seal of that Our King∣dom, to hold in Commendam: And of this We require you to be very care∣ful, because there is a complaint brought to the said Lords Committees for Irish Affairs, That some Bishops there, when Livings fall void in their Gift, do either not dispose them so soon as they ought, but keep the profits in their own hands, to the hinderance of God's Service, and great offence of good People; or else they give them to young and mean men, which only bear the Name, reserving the greatest part of the Benefice to themselves, by which
means that Church must needs be very ill, and weakly served; of which a∣buses, and the like, (if any shall be practised) We require you to take special care for present redress of them, and shall expect from you such account of your endeavours herein, as may discharge you, not to Us only, but to God, whose honour and service it concerns. Given under Our Signet at Our Pa∣lace atWestminster, the twelfth of April, in the Sixth year of Our Reign. By which Letter it is manifest, how highly his Majesty was of∣fended at the increase of the Popish party in that Kingdom, and therefore would have all diligence used to prevent it, as also other abuses reformed, which had (it seems) crept in, by degrees, a∣mongst the Protestant Clergy there. But how little his Majesty liked the Romish Religion, the Lord Primate was before very well satisfied by this Memorandum, which I have of his own hand writing, in a Book of his, viz. The King once at White-Hall, in the presence of George, Duke of Buckingham, of his own accord said to me, That he never loved Popery in all his life, But that he never detested it be∣fore his going into Spain. But to return to the matter in hand, the Lord Primate, in pur∣suance of his Majestie's Command, (which so fully agreed with his own desires) set himself diligently to put in execution what had been committed to his care, as well for the good of the Church, as his Majestie's Service: He therefore endeavoured to reform, first, those disorders which had been complained of in his own Province, and which had been in good measure rectified already, (as has been already mentioned) and in the next place, he made it his business to reclaim those deluded People, who had been bred up in that Religion from their infancy; for which end he began to converse more frequently, and familiarly, with the Gentry, and Nobility of that perswasion; as also with divers of the Inferior sort that dwelt near him, inviting them often to his House, and discoursing with them, with great mildness, of the chief Tenets of their Religion; by which gentle usage he was strangely suc∣cessful, convincing many of them of their Errors, and bringing them to the knowledge of the Truth. And he also advised the Bishops, and Clergy of his Province, to deal with the Popish Re∣cusants in their several Diocesses, and Cures, after the same man∣ner; that if possible they might make them understand their Er∣rors, and the danger in which they were: which way, in a Coun∣try where there are no Penal Laws to restrain the publick Profes∣sion of that Religion, was the best, if not the only means, which could be used. Nor was his care confined only to the conversion of the ignorant Irish Papists; but he also endeavoured the reduction of the Scotch and English Sectaries to the bosom of the Church, as
it was by Law established, conferring and arguing with divers of them, as well Ministers as Lay-men, and shewing them the weakness of those Scruples and Objections they had, against their joyning with the publick Service of the Church, and submitting to its Government and Discipline; and indeed the Lord Primate was now so taken up in Conferences with all sorts of Persons, or in answering Letters from Learned men abroad, or else such as applied themselves to him for his judgment in difficult points in Divinity, or resolutions in Cases of Conscience; that whoever shall consider this, as also his many Civil, and Ecclesiastical Fun∣ctions, together with the constant course of his Studies, must ac∣knowledge, that none but one of his large capacity, and who made a constant good use of his time, could ever be sufficient for so many, and so different imployments. About the end of this year, I find, the Arch-Bishop was in Eng∣land, by his publishing and printing, at London, a small Treatise of the Religion Anciently professed by the Irish, (which compre∣hends also the Northern Scots) and Britains, which he writ in Eng∣lish to satisfie the Gentry, and better sort of People, that the Re∣ligion professed by the Ancient Bishops, Priests, Monks, and other Christians of these Kingdoms, was the very same in the most ma∣terial Points with that which is now maintained by publick Au∣thority, against those novel and foreign Doctrines introduced by the Bishop of Rome in latter times. The next year, Anno 1632. the Lord Primate, after his return into Ireland, published his Veterum Epistolarum Hybernicarum Sylloge, containing a choice Collection of Letters, out of several Ancient Manuscripts, and other Authors, partly from, and partly to An∣cient Irish Bishops and Monks, Commencing about the year of our Lord 592. to the year 1180. concerning the Affairs of the Irish Church in those times; which abundantly shew the great esteem the Learning and Piety of the Bishops and Clergy of that Church had then both at Rome, France, England, and else∣where: Containing, likewise, divers choice matters, relating to the great Controversies of those times, concerning the keeping of Easter; as also divers things relating to the Ecclesiastical Disci∣pline, and Jurisdiction of the Church of that Kingdom, very wor∣thy the taking notice of. And I suppose about this time, if not before, he contracted a more intimate acquaintance with the Reverend Dr. Laud, Lord Bishop of London, who had for some time managed the most con∣siderable Affairs both in Church and State: And I find by divers of his Letters to the Lord Primate, as well whilst he was Bishop of London, as after he was advanced to the See of Canterbury, that there was scarce any thing of moment concluded on, or any con∣siderable
Preferment bestowed by his Majesty in the Church of Ire∣land, without his advice, and approbation, which you may see by some Letters in this ensuing Collection, which we have selected from divers others of lesser moment, as fittest for publick view; but the L. Primate always made use of his interest with the said Arch-Bishop, and other great men at Court, not for his own private ad∣vantage, but for the common good of the Church, by opposing, and hindering divers Grants and Patents to some great men, and Courtiers, who had under-hand obtained the same; and parti∣cularly, he caused a Patent, made to a Person of Quality, of the Scotch Nation, in Ireland, of several Tythes, to be called in, and vacuated, his Majesty being deceived in his Grant, who would not have done any thing prejudicial to the Church, had he been rightly informed of the nature of the thing; and the Lord Pri∣mate was so much concerned for a competent maintenance for the Clergy in that Kingdom, that he had some years before this obtained a Grant of a Patent from his Majesty, to be passed in his own name, though for the use of the Church, of such im∣propriations belonging to the Crown, as were then Leased out, as soon as they should fall; which, though it did not succeed, being too much neglected by those who were concerned more immediately, yet it sufficiently shews my Lord's pious intentions in this matter. About this time there was a Letter sent over, from his late  Majesty, to the Lord Viscount Wentworth, then Lord Deputy, and the Council of Ireland, for determining the precedency of the Arch-Bishop of Armagh, and Arch-Bishop of Dublin, in re∣spect of their Sees, the latter making some pretence unto it; therefore, in regard of a Parliament, intended by his Majesty shortly to meet, it was thought fit, for order's sake, that contro∣versie should be decided before their meeting: In order to which, he was commanded by the Lord Deputy, to reduce into writing what he knew upon that subject: But he not desiring to engage in so invidious an argument, and which so nearly concerned himself, and which he did not desire to have stirred, did what he could to decline it; but being still further urged, and com∣manded to do it, he did at last, though unwillingly, write a short, and learned discourse, full of excellent remarks, wherein he proved the Antiquity and Primacy of his See to have pre∣ceded that of Dublin divers Ages, which discourse being sent over into England, the precedency was determined by his Ma∣jesty on his side, as afterwards by another Letter from his Majesty and Council here; he had also, without his seeking, the precedency given him of the Lord Chancellor, which (he
being above such trifles) were not at all able to elate him. At the opening of the following Parliament, he preached be∣fore the Lord Deputy, Lords and Commons, at St. Patrick's, Dublin, his Text was, Genes. 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law-giver from between his feet, till Shiloh come, and to him shall the gathering of the People be. And in the Convocation which was now Assembled, the Lord Primate, at the instrance of the Lord Deputy, and Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, thought fit to propose, That to express the agreement of the Church of Ireland with that of England, both in Doctrine and Discipline, the Thirty Nine Articles should be received by the Church of Ire∣land, which Proposal was thereupon consented to by both Houses of Convocation, and the said Articles were declared to be the Confession of Faith of the Church of Ireland, but without abroga∣ting or excluding the former Articles, made 1615, either by that Convocation, or Parliament, as two several Writers of those times, viz. a Church, and Civil Historian, have without ground repor∣ted them to be: And though the Vide Respon∣det Petrus, Sect. IX. latter was at last brought to confess his Error of their being Repealed by Autority of Parlia∣ment; yet he still insisted, That the reception of the Articles of the Church of England, though it be not an express, yet is a tacite annulling of the former, instancing in the Old Covenant, which St. Paul proves to be abrogated by the giving of a New; which were a good Argument, if the Articles of the Church of England were as inconsistent with those of Ireland, as those two Covenants are with each other, but if they differ no more than the Nicene does from the Apostles Creed, (which, though it contains more, yet does not Annul the former) then without doubt the receiving of the Articles of the Church of England was no abrogation of those of Ireland. But since it is not my design to write Controversies, I shall not enter farther into this Argu∣ment, but shall leave the Reader to consider, whether the instan∣ces brought by the Historian, to prove the Articles of these two Churches to be inconsistent, are convincing, or not, and shall Ibid. Sect. XII. say no more on this ungrateful subject, but that it is highly im∣probable, that the Lord Primate should be so outwitted by the Lord Deputy, or his Chaplains, (as the In the Life of Arch-Bishop Laud. Historian makes him to have been in this affair) but that he very well understood the Articles of both Churches, and did then know, that they were so far from being inconsistent, or contradictory to each other, that he thought the Irish Articles did only contain the Doctrine of the Church of England more fully, or else he would never have been so easily perswaded to an Act which would amount to a Repeal of those Articles, which, as hath been already said, he himself made, and drew up: And for
a farther proof that this was the sense, not only of himself, but of most of the rest of the Bishops at that time; they al∣ways at all Ordinations took the subscription of the Party Ordai∣ned to both Articles; the Articles of England, not being received instead, but with those of Ireland, (as Dr. Bernard hath informed us;) which course was continued by the Lord Primate, and most part of the Bishops, till the confusion of that Church by the Irish Rebellion: And if, at this day, the subscription to the Thirty Nine Articles be now only required of the Clergy of that King∣dom, I suppose it is purely out of prudential considerations, that any divine, or other person of that Church, may still, either by preaching, or writing, maintain any point of Doctrine con∣tained in those Articles, without being either Heterodox, or Irre∣gular. It was likewise reported, and has been since written by some, (with the like truth) that the Lord Primate should have some dispute with Dr. Bramhall, then Bishop of London-Derry, concerning these Articles: Whereas the contest between the Lord Primate, and that Bishop, was not about the Articles, but the Book of Canons, which were then to be established for the Church of Ireland; and which the Bishop of Derry would have to be passed in the very same form, and words, with those in England; which the Lord Primate; with divers other of the Bishops, opposed, as somewhat prejudicial to the Liberties of the Church of Ireland; and they so far prevailed herein, that it was at last concluded, That the Church of Ireland should not be tyed to that Book, but that such Canons should be selected out of the same, and such others added thereunto, as the present Convocation should judge fit, for the Government of that Church; which was accordingly performed, as any man may see, that will take the pains to compare the two Books of the English, and Irish Canons together: And what the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury's judgment was, on this affair, you may see in a Letter of his to the Lord Primate, published in this Col∣lection. About the end of this year, the Lord Primate published his  long expected work, entitled, Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates: In which also is inserted a History of Pelagius, and his Heresie; which Work I suppose my Lord kept so long unpublished, be∣cause he still found fresh matter to add to it; as you may see by the many Additions, and Emendations at the latter end of it; and as it was long in coming out, so it did fully answer expectation, when it came abroad into the World, being the most exact account that ever yet was given of the British Church, beginning with the earliest notices we can find in Ancient Authors of any credit, concerning the first planting of Christianity in these Islands, with∣in
twenty years after our Saviour's Crucifixion, and bringing it down (with the Succession of Bishops, as far as they could be re∣treived) not only in our Britain, but in Ireland also, as far as to∣wards the end of the VII Century; collected out of the best Au∣thors, either Printed or Manuscript; and is so great a Treasure of this kind of Learning, that all that have writ since, with any suc∣cess, on this subject, must own themselves beholding to him for his elaborate Collections. The Lord Primate having now sate Arch-Bishop sixteen years,  with great satisfaction, and benefit to the Church, about the be∣ginning of this year, came into England, with his Wife and Fami∣ly, intending to stay here a year or two, about his private Affairs, and then to return again: But it pleased God to disappoint him in those resolutions, for he never saw his native Country again; not long after his coming to London, (when he had kissed his Maje∣sty's hand, and been received by him with his wonted favour) he went to Oxford, as well to be absent from those heats and diffe∣rences, which then happened in that short Parliament, as also with greater freedom to pursue his Studies in the Libraries there, where he was accommodated with Lodgings in Christ-Church, by Dr. Morice, Canon of that House, and Hebrew Professor; and whilst he was there, he conversed with the most Learned Persons in that famous University, who used him with all due respect, whilst he continued with them; so after he had resided there some time, he returned again to London, where, after the sitting of that long, and unhappy Parliament, he made it his business, as well by preaching, as writing, to exhort them to Loyalty, and Obedience to their Prince; endeavouring, to the utmost of his power, to heal up those breaches, and reconcile those differences, that were ready to break out, both in Church and State; though it did not meet with that success he always desired. This year there was published at Oxford (among divers other Treatises of Bishop Andrews, Mr. Hooker, and other Learned men,  concerning Church Government) the Lord Primate's Original of Bishops, and Metropolitans, wherein he proves from Scripture, as also the most Ancient Writings, and Monuments of the Church, that they owe their original to no less Authority than that of the Apostles, and that they are the Stars in the right hand of Christ, Apoc. 2. So that there was never any Christian Church founded in the Primitive Times without Bishops, which discourse was not then (nor, I suppose, ever will be) answered, by those of a con∣trary judgment. That unhappy dispute between his Majesty and the two Hou∣ses, concerning his passing the Bill for the Earl of Strafford's At∣tainder, now arising, and he much perplexed and divided be∣tween
the clamour of a discontented People and an unsatisfied Conscience, thought fit to advise with some of his Bishops, what they thought he ought to do in point of Conscience (as he had before consulted his Judges in matter of Law,) among which his Majesty thought fit to make choice of the Lord Primate for one, though without his seeking, or knowledge; but since some men, either out of spleen, or because they would not retract what they had once written from vulgar report, have thought fit to publish, as if the Lord Primate should advise the King to sign the Bill for the said Earl's Attainder, it will not be amiss to give you here that relation which Dr. Bernard had under his own hand; and has printed in the Funeral Sermon by him published; which is as followeth. That Sunday morning wherein the King consulted with the four Bishops, (of London, Durham, Lincoln and Carlisle) the Arch-Bishop of Armagh was not present, being then preaching (as he then accustomed every Sunday to do) in the Church of Covent-Garden; where a Message coming unto him from his Majesty, he descended from the Pulpit, and told him that brought it, he was then (as he saw) imployed about God's business; which as soon as he had done, he would attend upon the King, to un∣derstand his pleasure: But the King spending the whole After∣noon in the serious debate of the Lord Strafford's Case, with the Lords of his Council, and the Judges of the Land, he could not before Evening be admitted to his Majesty's presence. There the Question was again agitated, Whether the King in justice, might pass the Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford, (for that he might shew mercy to him was no question at all;) no man doubting but that the King, without any Scru∣ple of Conscience, might have granted him a Pardon, if other reasons of State (in which the Bishops were made neither Judges, nor Advisers) did not hinder him. The whole result therefore of the determination of the Bishops, was to this effect; That therein the matter of Fact, and matter of Law, were to be di∣stinguished: That of the matter of Fact, he himself might make a judgment, having been present at all proceedings against the said Earl; where, if upon the hearing of the Allegations on ei∣ther side, he did not conceive him guilty of the Crimes where∣with he was charged, he could not in justice condemn him: But for the matter in Law, what was Treason, and what was not, he was to rest in the opinion of the Judges; whose Office it was to declare the Law, and who were Sworn therein to carry them∣selves indifferently betwixt Him, and his Subjects: Which gave his Majesty occasion to complain of the dealing of the Judges
with him not long before: That having earnestly pressed them to declare in particular, what point of the Lord of Strafford's Charge they judged to be Treasonable, (forasmuch as upon the hearing of the proofs produced, he might in his Conscience, per∣haps, find him guiltless of that Fact) he could not by any means draw them to nominate any in particular, but that upon the whole matter, Treason might justly be charged upon him. And in this second meeting, it was observed, That the Bishop of Lon∣don spake nothing at all, but the Bishop of Lincoln not only spake, but put a Writing also into the King's hand, wherein, what was contained, the rest of his Brethren knew not. From all which we may observe my Lord Primate's modesty, who would not set down his own particular judgment in this matter, but only that it agreed with that of his Brethren, but al∣so his charity, and fidelity, who would not (though to acquit himself) betray his trust, and accuse the only person of that com∣pany, who was supposed to have moved the King to the doing of it: Nor is the reason those men have supposed, why my Lord Primate should perswade the King to do this, less false, and im∣probable, viz. Revenge, because the Earl of Strafford, whilst Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, had outwitted him, and made him the Instrument (before he was aware) of abrogating the Articles of Ireland, above mentioned; the falseness of which Calumny may sufficiently appear from what hath been already said upon this subject, for the Lord Primate did willingly, and upon due con∣sideration, without any surprise, propose the Admission of those Articles of the Church of England, nor was he ever convinced (neither did my Lord Strafford ever insist upon it) that the admis∣sion of these Articles, was an abrogation of the former; and if the Lord Primate had any private grudge against the Earl upon this Score, he carried it very slyly, insomuch that the Earl himself, nor any of his friends were ever sensible of it; for whilst the Earl continued in Ireland, there was never any dispute, or unkindness between them, but they parted good friends, as will appear by some Letters, which you will find in this Collection. The Earl writ to him after this business, and not long before his going for England, full of kindness and respect: So likewise after the Earl's Commitment to the Black-Rod, as also when he was a Prisoner in the Tower; the Lord Primate frequently visited him, and the Earl was pleased to consult with him in divers matters relating to his defence at his Tryal. And certainly had the Earl believed that the Lord Primate bore any malice towards him, much more had advised the King to put him to death, (which could not have been well concealed from him) though we may suppose the Earl
had so much Christian charity as to forgive so great an injury, yet it is not very likely, that he should exercise such a piece of morti∣fication, as to chuse him, whom he believed to be the promoter of his death, to prepare him for it; and to be the man to whom he addressed his Speech upon the Scaffold, and whose assistance he desired in that his last extremity. But I shall speak no farther of this matter, till I can in order of time tell you what the Lord Primate himself said unto me concerning it, when he lay (as he thought) on his Death-bed, and not likely to live an hour; and also what his Majesty declared, when he heard the report of his death. Not many Months after the Execution of this great, and un∣fortunate Earl, there came over the unhappy news of the brea∣king out of the horrid Irish Rebellion, in which, as his Majesty's (with the English, and Protestant) interest in that Kingdom, re∣ceived an unexpressible blow, so likewise the Lord Primate bore too great a share in that common affliction; for in a very few days the Rebels had plundered his Houses in the Countrey, seized on his Rents, quite ruined, or destroyed his Tenements, killed, or drove away his numerous Flocks, and Herds of Cattle, to a very great value; and in a world, had not left him any thing in that Kingdom, which escaped their fury, but his Library, and some Furniture in his House in Droghedah, which were secured by the strength of that place, notwithstanding a long and dangerous Siege by those Rebels; which Library was some years after con∣veyed over to Chester, and from thence to London: This must needs reduce him to a very low condition, happening not long after Michaelmas, when he expected a return of his Rents, so that he was forced, for his present supply, to sell, or pawn all the Plate and Jewels he had; this, though a very great Tryal, yet made not any change in his Natural Temper, and Heavenly Dispositi∣on, still submitting to God's Providence, with Christian Patience, and Magnanimity, having long before learned to use the things of this World, as if he used them not; and in whatsoever condi∣tion he was, therewith to be content: Yet these afflictions were sufficient to move compassion, even in the breasts of Foreigners, for some Months after his losses, the City, and University of Ley∣den offered to chuse him their Honorarie Professor, with a more ample stipend, than had been formerly annexed to that place: And Dr. Bernard, in the above cited Sermon, likewise tells us, that Cardinal Richlieu did about the same time, make him an In∣vitation to come into France, with a promise of a very noble Pen∣sion, and freedom of his Religion there; and that this is not un∣likely (though I never heard my Lord Primate speak of it) may be proved from the great honour that Cardinal had for him,
which he expressed by a Letter full of kindness and respect, ac∣companied with a Gold Medal of considerable value, having his own Effigies stamped upon it, which is still preserved; these were sent him upon his publishing his Work, De Primordiis Eccle∣siarum Britannicarum, which Present was also returned by the Lord Primate, by a Letter of thanks, with a handsome present of Irish Grey-hounds, and other rarities which that Countrey affor∣ded. But it pleased his late Majesty to provide for him much better in England, by conferring on him the Bishoprick of Carlisle (lately void by the death of Dr. Potter) to be held in Commendam; this, though very much abated by the Scotch and English Armies Quar∣tering upon it, as also by the unhappy Wars which not long after followed; yet he made shift to subsist upon it, with some other helps, until that Rebellious House of Commons seized upon all Bishops Lands; and though, in consideration of his great losses in Ireland, as also of his own Merits, and to make him some sa∣tisfaction for what they took away, they Voted him a Pension of four hundred pounds per Annum, yet I cannot hear that he ever received it above once, or twice at most; for the Indepen∣dant Faction getting uppermost, soon put an end to that pay∣ment. His Majesty having now left London, by reason of the Tumults  there, and the undutifulness of the House of Commons towards him, the Lord Primate being more deeply afflicted for these breaches, than for all his own private sufferings: Having now no more satisfaction in abiding longer at London, he resolved to remove thence for Oxford, not long before his Majesty's coming thither: and here, though the Lord Primate's outward condition was much lessened, to what it was before, yet his greatness being founded upon a more solid bottom than riches, and outward splendor, he was received with the same, or rather greater kind∣ness, and respect than before. The Reverend Dr. Prideaux, Bi∣shop of Worcester, (his good friend) lent him his House adjoyn∣ing to Exeter Colledge, which he accepted of, as being near his business at the publick Library, where he now pursued his studies, preparing divers Treatises for the publick view, some of which he also printed there, as shall be hereafter mentioned; nor did he less endeavour to be serviceable to mens Souls, than to the com∣mon-wealth of Learning, preaching commonly at one Church, or other, every Sunday, and for great part of the time, in the fore∣noons, sometimes at St. Olives, and sometimes at Alhallows, where he had constantly a great Audience, both of Scholars and others; where notwithstanding the Learnedness of most of his Hearers, he rather chose a plain substantial way of Preaching, for the promo∣ting
of Piety and Vertue, than studied Eloquence, or a vain osten∣tation of Learning; so that he quite put out of countenance that windy, affected sort of Oratory, which was then much in use, cal∣led floride preaching, or strong lines. And I remember, I then heard, that there was a person in the University, very much famed for that kind of preaching, who, after he had sometimes heard the Lord Primate's Sermons, and observing how plain, and yet moving they were, and being sufficiently satisfied that it was not for want of Wit, or Learning, that he did not do otherwise, he was soon convinced that this was not the most ready way of gaining Souls, and therefore quitting his affected Style, and studied Periods, took up a more plain and profitable way of preaching, so that coming afterwards to visit the Lord Primate, he gave him many thanks, and told him, he had now learned of him how to preach, and that since he had followed his example, he had found more satisfaction in his own Conscience, and comfort in his Mini∣stry, than ever he had before. And I remember one Sermon above the rest, which he preached in Exeter Colledge Chappel, about that time; the Text, Prov. 18. 1. Through desire a man having separated himself, seeketh and intermedleth with all Wisdom; in which Sermon he so lively, and pathetically set forth the excellency of true Wisdom, as well Humane, as Divine, and that desire which every ingenious, and vertuous Soul ought to have for it, that it wrought so effectually upon the hearts of many of the younger Students, that it rendered them more serious, and made them ply their Studies much harder than before. The first Sunday after his Majesty's return to Oxford, from the fights of Edge-hill and Brainford, the Lord Primate was called to preach before him, as he did likewise on divers other more solemn occasions, both in this, and the following year. About this time, likewise, the Lord Primate came acquainted  with the most Learned, and Pious Dr. Hammond, with whom he contracted so intimate a friendship, that it continued to his dying day; and though some persons (I suppose rather out of misinfor∣mation than malice) have reported, That the Lord Primate should give a scandalous, unbeseeming Character of the Doctor; he was ever so far from it, that he never mentioned him without due kindness, and respect, as you will find by some Letters in this Collection, wherein you may see the Lord Primate much con∣cerned for an aspersion, of the like nature with this, imputed to him, but cast upon him indeed by a foreign Writer; a learned, Blondellus. though violent and obstinate asserter of his own Anti-Episcopal Opinions, contrary to those of the Doctor's. This Summer the Lord Primate was nominated (though a∣gainst his desire) to be one of the Assembly of Divines at West∣minster,
as were also Dr. Brownrig, Bishop of Exeter, Dr. West field, Bishop of Bristol, and divers others of the Orthodox Clergy, but the Lord Primate neither approved of the Authority that named him, nor yet of the business they met about; so that he never troubled himself to go thither; but when that mock Assembly found he scorned to come among them, they complained of him to the House of Commons, who soon voted him out again; which yet the Arch-Bishop took more kindly, than their chusing him into it: And now when this prevalent Faction, sitting at Westmin∣ster, found that the Arch-Bishop was not for their turn, but to the contrary, had in divers Sermons at Oxford, preached against their Rebellions Proceedings, they were so inraged at him, that the Committee they had appointed for Delinquents Estates, (as they Nick∣named those who now faithfully served their Prince) made an Order for the seizing of a Study of Books of a considerable value, which he had either brought over with him, or bought here, and were left behind in Chelsy Colledge, which were seized according∣ly, and had been sold by them, had not Dr. Featly, who was then in some favour with them, by reason of his being one that sate in that Assembly, (though otherwise Orthodox, and Loyal) made an interest with them, by the means of Mr. Selden (a Member of the House, as also of the Assembly) to obtain those Books for his own use, either as a gift, or by laying down some money for them; and so got them into his hands, and secured them for my Lord Brimat's use, at least as many of them as were not imbezled, or stollen away whilst they were in their custody, as amongst other things divers Papers and Collections of his own Writing, with all his Letters, either to, or from his learned friends (which he had left behind him there) were then plundered, and for which loss, this ensuing Collection does fare the worse. About this time my Lord Primate published a small, but lear∣ned Treatise, Entided, A Geographical, and Historical disquisition, touching the lesser Asia, properly so called, Viz. The Lydian Asia, so of∣ten mentioned in the New Testament, and by Ecclesiastical, and other Writers, by the names of the Proconsular Asia, or Asian Diocess. Where having shewn his admirable skill in the Geography of the Ancients, and also in the Imperial Laws, in order to the right understanding the Ecclesiastical, and Civil Histories of those Times, out of which he hath fixed and setled the several Provinces of the lesser Asia, as Mysia, Caria, and Lydia, (under which latter were comprehen∣ded the adjoyning Countries of Ionia, and Aeolis.) He then proves, That the Asia mentioned in the New Testament, and the seven Churches of Asia particularly, are contained within the limits of Lydia, and that each of these seven Cities was a Metropolis, and that according to this division of the Civil Government, they
were made choice of to be the Seats of the most eminent Churches of all Asia. 2. That the Roman Provinces were not always the same, but ac∣cording as reason of State required, and for greater ease, and se∣curity of the Government, often varied, and admitted alterations, the division of the Empire being different in the Times of Augustus, from what it was under Constantine, under whom the Proconsular Asia was confined to the Lydian Asia only, the former great extent of its Jurisdiction being then very much abridged, and a distin∣ction made between the Proconsular Asia, which was under the Jurisdiction of the Proconsul, and the Asian Diocess, governed by the Vicarius, or Comes Asiae, or Dioceseos Asianae: As it was also sub∣ject in the Times of the succeeding Emperors, to variety of Chan∣ges, and that in this disposition, made by Constantine, it was order∣ed, That there should be but one Metropolis in each distinct Pro∣vince, whereas before there had been several: Though this did not hold always in the Reigns of some of his Successors, who per∣mitted sometimes two Metropolitans in one Province, to satisfie the ambitious humour of several Bishops, who contended for that Ti∣tle, upon the account of the riches, and greatness of each of their respective Cities. 3. That in regard to this Establishment of Constantine, Ephesus (where the Deputies of the several Provinces of Asia, who Con∣stituted, and made up the , or Common-Council, had their Assemblies, and which had formerly been lookt upon as the chief City) became the sole Metropolis of this new Proconsular Asia; the Proconsul of which was exempted from the Authority, and Juris∣diction of the Praefectus Praetorio. And accordingly, in the Eccle∣siastical Government, for the greater honour of this Renowned See, the Bishop of Ephesus was not only held the Metropolitan of the Proconsular Asia, (but as my Lord most judiciously proves) the Primate, or Enarchus of all the Provinces, that were compre∣hended within the compass of the whole Asian Diocess, of which Diocess he discourses at large; and that he acted suitably to this Patriarchal Jurisdiction, which was in effect conferred upon him. Lastly, That there was a great harmony between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government; and consequently, that the Bi∣shops of every Province were subject, subordinate to the Metro∣politan Bishop, (the same then with our Arch-Bishop;) as the Ma∣gistrates, that Ruled in the other subordinate Cities, were to the President, or chief Governor of that Province. The Arch-Bishop in these years, whilst he was now at Oxford, published in Greek, and Latine, the Epistles of the holy Martyrs,  Ignatius, and as much of the Epistle of St. Barnabas, as the great
fire at Oxford (which burnt the Copy) had spared; together with a premunition of the entire design. The old Latin Version of Ignatius, his Lordship publisht out of two Manuscripts found in England, noting in red Letters the interpolation of the former Greek Impressions. This work was much illustrated by his Col∣lation of several Greek Copies of the Letters and Martyrdom of Ignatius, and Polycarp; as also with a most learned dissertation con∣cerning those Epistles; as also touching the Canons, and Consti∣tutions ascribed to the Apostles, and to St. Clement, Bishop of Rome. About seven years after which, his Lordship also set forth at London his Appendix: Ignatiana; wherein, besides other Tracts, there are added the seven genuine Epistles of Ignatius (commen∣ded by Eusebius, Caesare, and other Fathers) according to the Am∣sterdam Edition, publisht by the learned Dr. Is. Vossius, from the Greek Manuscript in the Medicean Library, which the Lord Pri∣mate had some years before given him notice of, and also obtain∣ed the Great Duke's leave to Copy it. The signal use of these Epistles, so eminently asserting that perpetual order, of which his Grace was so great an Ornament, well deserved all that time which himself, Dr. Hammond, and the learned Lord Bishop of Che∣ster have so usefully imployed therein. This year my Lord Primate publisht his Syntagma de Editione LXX. Interpretum: in which he asserts (though with great mode∣sty,) this particular Opinion. That Greek Version of the five Books of Moses, under Ptolomeus Philadelphus, utterly perishing at the Conflagration of his Library, Dositheus the Jew made ano∣ther Greek Translation of the Pentateuch, and the rest of the Old Testament, about 177. years before the Birth of Christ, viz. in the time of Ptolomey Philometor; Collecting so much from a Note at the end of the Greek, Esther; which latter Version his Lord∣ship conjectures the Greek Fathers, and all the Eastern Churches cited, and made use of, instead of the true Philadelphian. Then he learnedly, and fully discourses concerning the several Editions of this latter Version found in the Library of Cleopatra, the last Egyp∣tian Queen. As also touching the , or vulgar, and that more correct one of Origen, those of Eusebius, Lucian, and Hesychius: and lastly, of the modern ones, as the Complutine, Venetian, and Roman. Hereunto also is added a Specimen of Esther in Greek, according to two Ancient Manuscripts in the Arundelian Library, as also after the Alexandrian Copy in the King's Library. This Syntagma was followed the next year before his death, by his Lordships dissertation De Cainane altero, or the second Cainan, mentioned in the LXX. and by St. Luke. And that was again followed with a Letter to Ludovicus Capellus, wherein the Lord
Primate very judiciously moderates, in the Controversie between that learned Professor, and Ar. Bootius, concerning the present He∣brew Bibles: Superadding his own conjectures, That Dositheus, the false Messias, was the corrupter of the Samaritan Pentateuch, as we now have it: And that especially by his Lordships great care, and expence. But to let you see how he further now imployed his time at Oxford, for his Majesties Service; I shall give you here his An∣swers to several Queries, made to him from some at London, or other Parliament Quarters, concerning the Lawfulness of taking up Arms against the King in that unhappy War, then newly begun. The Queries we have not, but you may easily judge what their sense was by the following Answers here inserted. To the First. NO man is bound to leave his Vocation, and turn Souldier, unless Summoned and Commanded by his Majesty, or those that have Com∣mission from him for the gathering of the People to War. Moses (and so successively the Supreme Governor) had the power of the Trumpet for that purpose (Nu. 10. 2. 9.) and accordingly the Duty and Oath of Allegi∣ance, binds every Subject to come in to the defence of his Sovereign, against what Power soever. The danger of Poverty, and ruine of Estate, must give way to publick respects: Nor must it be provided against, but in a just way; in the prosecution of which, Life and Goods, and every thing else must be committed to the Providence of God. To the Second. FOr the discerning of the justness of the Cause, We must not look only at the Ends pretended (which though never so fair and specious, do not justifie a bad Cause, or unlawful Means,) nor at the Wickedness or Evil carriage of Instruments, imployed in the prosecution; which doth not conclude the Cause to be bad and unjust: But we must look at the means used for such Ends; and then consider the Ends, whether intended by those that do pretend them. By these we shall see the Cause of the adverse Party to the King is unjust. For First, The means they use, is War maintained against their Sove∣reign; the End pretended, is the defence of Religion, Laws, Liberties: But War made by Subjects, though really intending such an End, is Unjust. I. It has no Warrant in Scripture, but is disallowed, Prov. 30. 31. No rising up against a King. 1 Sam. 8. 18. No remedy left them a∣gainst the Oppressions of their King, but crying to the Lord. The Pro∣phets
also, which bitterly reproved the Idolatrous, and unjust Kings of Israel and Judah, never called upon the Elders of the People, by Arms to secure the Worship of God, or the just Government of the Kingdom. In the 13th. to the Romans, and the 1 Ep. 2 Cap. of Peter, the same Do∣ctrine of Passive Obedience is taught, and accordingly was the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Christians. II. Arms taken up by Subjects, do invade the Power and Rights of the Sovereign; For it takes from him the Sword, which he is said to bear, Rom. 13. 4. and so doth every Supreme Magistrate: The Supreme Power being signified by bearing the Sword, as the best Interpreters do af∣firm: And as our Laws, and the Oath of Supremacy do acknowlege our King the only Supreme Governor, and to be vested with the Power of Arms. Now what saith the Scripture He that takes the Sword, shall perish by the Sword; that is, He that takes and uses it without Warrant, without, and against his consent that bears the Sword, that is Su∣preme. Also War undertaken by Subjects, invades the Rights of the Sovereign, his Revenue, Customs, &c. will not give to Caesar, what is Caesar's. But the Scripture is very express in preserving Rights and Power entire, even to the worst Princes; Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, said our Saviour, when Caesar was bad enough: And St. Paul bids us Render them their Due, Tribute, Customs, Honour, when the Emperours were at the worst: And our Laws determine Insurrection, or Levying of War, to be Treason, not against a Religious, and just Prince only, but in∣definitely against any. Secondly, Their Pretences are taken away, if we consider, That the continuance of the Established Religion, and Government, together with a just Reformation of all Abuses, and Grievances has been offered, promised, protested for by his Majesty: But the Religion and Government of Church and State, as by Law Established, will not content the adverse Party, how∣ever they pretend to fight for Religion and Laws: I mean those of the Party, which are the main contrivers of the Enterprise, and those also, upon whose number the main strength of the Faction rests, being of such Sects, for the most part, as are by the Law to abjure the Land, because not to be held within the bounds of any setled Government. There are (no question) many which follow them, and do really intend the advancement of Religion, going after them, as many did after Absalom, in the simplicity of their hearts, expect∣ing a speedier course of Justice, and redress of Grievances, which they suf∣fered by some evil Officers under David, 2 Sam. 15. 4. 11. But for the other, to whom we owe this War, and who will rule, and dispose all, if they do prevail; their end intended, and driven at, is, the abolishing of the Publick Service and Liturgy, which is Established by Law, the utter ta∣king away of Episcopal Government, which has always been: And for their greater security, they will have the Power, which by Law is his Ma∣jesty's;
and because these are not granted, Arms are taken up by Subjects to the invading of his Majesty's Rights and Power; and for the maintain∣ing of them, the Right and Liberty of Subjects are destroyed. To the Third. HEnce will appear what is to be Answered to the Third Query, That there is Precept and Example for Passive Obedience, but none for taking Arms to divert apparent Innovations. The Example commonly a∣bused to this purpose, is that of the Israelites, preparing to go out to War against their Brethren, the , and Gades; for raising an Altar, Jos. 22. 13. But it is altogether impertinent, for those Arms are taken up, and that War prepared by those that had the Supreme Power. To the Fourth. THe right being discovered, it would tend much to the ending of this War, and the restoring of our peace, if the King's Subjects would rise as one Man to maintain the Right: Every particular Man is bound to do it upon the Summons of his Sovereign, commanding his assistance. The danger, and loss of Estate, in discharge of Duty, is but an outward Consideration, and to be left to the Providence of God, as was said in the first Resolution. To the other part of this fourth Query. Answer, That necessary maintenance is due to him that lawfully: bears Arms, For who goeth a Warfare any time (as the Apostle saith) at his own charges And if the Army cannot be maintained but by free Quarter, it is Lawful to receive maintenance that way, though at the cost of others; whose private interests must give way to the publick. Indeed the abuse of free Quarter may make a Souldier guilty of the Sins here mentioned, but then it is by his own wilful Transgression. To the Fifth. HE must, in the prosecution of his Military Duty, so behave him∣self as to observe John Baptist's rule, Do violence to no man, that is, unjust violence; for he forbids not to use force against them of the adverse Party, who are in Arms ready to offer force. For sparing Friends, and Kindred, he must be guided by Christian prudence, so to do it as thereby not to endanger any present design, or at large, to hin∣der the publick Service. As for the King's Person, it cannot be every where, so that he must not limit his Duty, and Service, to the immediate defence of it; but know, That to serve any where in the defence of his Ma∣jesty's just Cause, is to defend Him.
To the Sixth. IT is Lawful to fight in the Company of notorious wicked men, and of a different Faith, looking at the Cause, whatever inordinate ends they have: The Primitive Christians fought in the Company of Heathens, and Idolaters, under their Heathen Emperors; and did by prayer obtain relief for the whole Army, when it was in distress: Which did also shew, That God approved that their Service, it being the duty they owed to their Lawful Emperors. From the performance of which duty to a Sovereign, the many evil Examples, and occasions of Sin, which the Military life abounds with, cannot excuse that Subject, that is justly Commanded to it: But the Conscionable Souldier must com∣mend himself to the Grace and Protection of the Almighty, who is able to keep him from the dangers, as of the Body, so of the Soul too: Remember the Examples of the good and faithful Centurion that came to our Saviour, Luke 7. And of the Godly Centurion, Cornelius, who is approved of God, Acts 10. To the Seventh. FOR obeying Extrajudicial Precepts of his Majesty: If they be such as command a Man to be Active in doing that which is unjust, by the known Laws of the Land; he yields truest Obedience, that denies to fulfil such a Command: Only this must not be generally pro∣nounced as a Rule in time of War, where necessity will be in many things a stronger Law, than that which is fixed for a peaceable Go∣vernment. But if they be such Commands as make me only Passive, by requiring some of my Estate, upon a Loan, or Tax; I may not hastily square with my Sovereign by denyal and standing out: For any Man, as he may recede from his right, and that which is his own, so ought he not to contest with his Sovereign upon matters of no very great Moment. As for the Infringing of the Liberties of the Subject, such Taxes, or Loans, or any other Extrajudicial Commands of the King, must be General, extending to all, or most Subjects, and Customary, being often imposed, before they can be judged so immediately to infringe the Subject's Liberty, as to make a Subject think he is bound to deny. To the Last. TO yield to Martialists, quartered upon him, if they be the King's, he is bound in duty; if of the Rebels, he is directed by prudence to yield unto it, when they can by force command it.
About this time he also preached before the King on a Fast day; the Text, 2 Chron. 7. 14. If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: Then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their Sin, and will heal their Land. In this Sermon, among other things suit∣able to the occasion, he had this remarkable passage, viz. The ca∣sting of our Eyes upon other mens sins more than upon our own, makes us to esteem the things we suffer, to be the injuries of men, and not the punishments of God: When the outward senses fail, we take it to be a sign of approaching death; and so when we are given over, to have Eyes, and see not, Ears, and hear not, it is an argument of decaying Souls: For as no Prayers or Fastings in the World can sanctifie a Rebellion, nor tempt God to own an unjust par∣ty, so neither will a good cause alone justifie us, any more than a true Reli∣gion without practice; we must first do our duties, otherwise, neither the one, nor the other will do us any good; with many other things against that looseness, and debauch'dness of manners, which he had observed in too many, who believed that the being of the right side, would atone for all other faults. Thus he neither spared, or flattered any, when his duty required him to speak the truth, and to re∣prove those sins that were most scandalous at that time, and place: He would also tell them in conversation, that such actions would frustrate all our hopes of success; for how could they expect, that God should bless their Arms, whilst they were fighting against him Nor was he less severe against the actions of the then Re∣bellious Houses against his Majesty,) and declared against the War they made, as wicked, and of fatal Consequence, and which cast an irreparable scandal upon the Reformed Religion; so that they thereby rendered themselves liable to the Censures of the Church, that might justly have been pronounced against them. And du∣ring the Treaty of Peace at Uxbridge, he preached likewise before the King, on a Fast day, upon Jam. 3. 18. The fruits of Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make Peace: Wherein he shewed from vers. 16. the great evils which come of Contention, Strife, and War, and from whence they proceed, and the great happiness, and bles∣sings of Peace; and wished that those then up in Arms in a Rebel∣lious manner against their Prince, would seriously consider this, and speedily accept of those gracious Concessions that His Maje∣sty then offer'd, though all to no purpose, for the Treaty quick∣ly after broke off, the Rebels being too stout to yield to any equal Terms, and so that unhappy War (for a short time suspended) broke out again with greater violence, never ceasing, till at last it ended, not only with the murder of the best of Kings, but also with the loss, and destruction of those very Rights, and Pri∣viledges, for which these men pretended to shed so much blood.
And now it being given out, that Oxford would soon be besie∣ged,  and that the King would speedily quit that place, the Lord Primate was advised by his friends (if it were possible to be avoi∣ded) not to run that hazard, and therefore having been before invited by his Son-in-law, Sir Timothy Tyrrel, (who had married his only Daughter) to come to them to Caerdiffe in Wales, (where the said Sir Timothy was then Governor, and General of the Ord∣nance, under the Lord Gerard, Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Forces in South Wales) which invitation the Lord Primate resol∣ved to accept, and so having taken leave of His Majesty, he, with his approbation, took the opportunity of waiting upon his High∣ness the Prince of Wales (our late Gracious Sovereign) as far as Bristol, and from thence he went to Caerdiffe, where his Son and Daughter welcomed him, with all that Joy and Affection which so good a Father, after so long an absence, could expect: Here he staid almost a year free from the dangers of War, this being a strong Garrison, and well manned, which invited many persons of good Quality to come thither for safety, so that the Lord Pri∣mate had a good opportunity to pursue his Studies, having brought many Chests of Books along with him, and he now made a great progress in the first part of his Annals: Whilst he was at Caerdiffe, his Majesty, after the fatal Battle at Naseby, came into Wales, to my Lord Marquess of Worcester's at Ragland, and from thence to Caerdiffe, where he staid some days: And the Lord Primate then enjoyed the satisfaction (though upon a sad occasion) of his Majesty's excellent conversation in the same House, who recei∣ved him with his wonted kindness, and favour: Whilst he was here, the Lord Primate preached before him in the Castle; and when his Majesty went away, and that the Lord Primate had ta∣ken his leave of him, I heard him declare, that nothing came nearer to his heart than the imminent danger of the King and Church, with the effusion of so much Christian Blood. His Ma∣jesty's necessities now not permitting him to leave many men in Garrisons, he was now forced to unfurnish this, as well as others, of its Souldiers, and Ammunition; so that Sir Timothy Tyrrel was forced to quit that Government; by reason of which the Arch-Bishop, being forced to remove, was in a great strait whether to go, the ways from thence to Oxford being all cut off by the Ene∣my, so that he had some thoughts (being near the Sea) of going over into France, or Holland, to both which places he had been for∣merly invited, as hath been already mentioned: But whilst he was in this perplexity, the Lady Dowager Stradling sent him a kind invitation to come to her Castle of St. Donates, as soon as he pleased, which he accepted as a great favour.
But by that time he was ready to go (with his Daughter the Lady Tyrrel) the Country thereabouts was up in Arms, in a tu∣multuous manner, to the number of Ten Thousand (as was sup∣posed) who chose themselves Officers, to form them into a Body, pretending for the King, but yet would not be governed by Eng∣lish Commanders, or suffer any English Garrisons in the Country; this gave the Lord Primate a fresh disturbance, the Welch-men ly∣ing upon the ways between that place, and St. Donates; but there were some at that time in Caerdiffe, who would needs undertake to convey the Lord Primate, and his company through by ways, so that they might avoid this tumultuous Rabble; which, though it might be well advised by the then Governor of Caerdiffe, and was faithfully enough executed by them that undertook it, yet happened very ill for my Lord, and those that were with him, for going by some private ways near the Mountains, they fell into a stragling Party, that were scouting thereabouts, who soon led them to their main Body, where it was Crime enough that they were English; so that they immediately fell to plundering, and breaking open my Lord Brimate's Chests of Books, and other things which he then had with him, ransacking all his Manuscripts, and Papers, many of them of his own hand writing; which were quickly dispersed among a thousand hands; and not content with this, they pulled the Lord Primate, and his Daughter, and other Ladies from their Horses; all which the Lord Primate bore with his wonted patience, and a seeming unconcernedness: But now some of their Officers coming in, (who were of the Gentry of the Country) seemed very much ashamed of this barbarous treatment, and by force, or fair means, caused their Horses, and other things which were taken from them to be restored; but as for the Books and Papers, they were got into too many hands to be then retrieved, nor were these Gentlemen satisfied with this, but some of them very civilly conducted him, through the rest of this tumultuous Rabble, to Sir John Aubery's House, not far off, where he was civilly received, and lodged that Night: When he came thither, and had retired himself, I must confess, that I never saw him so much troubled in my life; and those that were with him before my self, said, That he seemed not more sensibly con∣cerned for all his losses in Ireland, than for this; saying to his Daughter, and those that endeavoured to comfort him; I know that it is God's hand, and I must endeavour to bear it patiently, though I have too much humane frailty, not to be extremely concerned, for I am tou∣ched in a very tender place, and He has thought it to take from me at once, all that I have been gathering together, above these twenty years, and which I intended to publish for the advancement of Learning, and the good of the Church: The next day divers of the neighbouring Gentry and
Clergy came to Visit him, and to Condole this irreparable loss; promising to do their utmost endeavours, that what Books or Pa∣pers were not burnt or torn, should be restored; and so very civilly waited on him to St. Donates: And to let you see that these Gentlemen and Ministers, did not only promise, but were also able to perform it, they so used their power with the people, that publishing in the Churches all over those parts, That all that had any such Books, or Papers, should bring them to their Mini∣sters, or Landlords, which they accordingly did; so that in the space of two or three Months there were brought in to him, by parcels, all his Books and Papers, so fully, that being put altoge∣ther, we found not many wanting; those most remarkable, that I, or others can call to mind, were two Manuscripts, concerning the VValdenses, which he much valued, and which he had obtain∣ed toward the continuing of his Ecclesiarum Christianarum Successione: As also another Manuscript, Catalogue of the Persian Kings, commu∣nicated by Elikmannus; and one Volume of Manuscripts, Variae Le∣ctiones, of the New Testament: And of Printed Books, only Tully's Works, and some others of less concernment. Whilst the Lord Primate was at St. Donates, till he could get his own Books and Papers again, he spent his time chiefly in look∣ing over the Books and Manuscripts in the Library in that Castle, and which had been collected by Sir Edward Stradling, a great Anti∣quary, and friend of Mr. Cambden's, and out of some of these Ma∣nuscripts the L. Primate made many choice Collections of the Bri∣tish, or Welch Antiquity, which I have now in my Custody. Within a little more than a Month after my Lord Primate's coming hi∣ther he was taken with a sharp and dangerous illness, which be∣gan at first with the Strangury and suppression of Urine, with ex∣tremity of torture, which at last caused a violent bleeding at the Nose, for near forty hours together, without any considerable in∣termission, no means applied could stop it, so that the Physicians, and all about him dispaired of his life, till at last (when we ap∣prehended he was expiring, it stanched of it self) for he lay a good while in a trance; but God had some farther work for him to perform, and was pleased by degrees to restore him to his for∣mer health, and strength; but it is worth the remembering, that whilst he was in the midst of his pain, as also his bleeding, he was still patient, praising God, and resigning up himself to his Will, and giving all those about him, or that came to visit him, excel∣lent Heavenly advice to a Holy Life, and due preparation for death, e're its Agonies seized them, saying, It is a dangerous thing to leave all undone, till our last sickness; I fear a Death-bed Repen∣tance will avail us little, if we have lived vainly, and viciously, and neg∣lected our Conversion, till we can sin no longer: Thus he exhorted us
all to fear God, and love and obey the Lord Jesus Christ, and to live a Holy Life: And then (said he) you will find the comfort of it at your death: And your Change will be happy. While he was thus bleed∣ing, there came to visit him one of the then House of Commons, that was related by marriage to that Family: To whom he said, Sir, you see I am very weak, and cannot expect to live many hours, you are returning to the Parliament, I am going to God; my blood and life is al∣most spent: I charge you to tell them from me, That I know they are in the wrong, and have dealt very injuriously with the King, and I am not mistaken in this matter. After this, the Room being cleared of company, and only my self left with him, he spake somewhat to me about his own private concerns, giving orders how he would have his Books and Papers disposed of here, and elsewhere; and that those Books which he had borrowed, should be restored; and that if any friend would undertake to finish his Annals, he should have the use of his Papers, and Collections; he thought Dr. Langbaine the fittest man for that purpose, as being very well vers'd in those Studies, and so most able, (if willing) to undertake it: After some other discourse, I then made bold to ask him, if he had ad∣vised the King to pass the Bill against the Earl of Strafford (as it had been reported.) To which he replyed, I know there is such a thing most wrongfully laid to my charge, for I neither gave, nor approved of any such advice, as that the King should assent to the Bill against the Earl, but on the contrary, told his Majesty, that if he was satisfied by what he had heard at his Tryal, that the Earl was not guilty of Treason, his Majesty ought not in Conscience to consent to his Condemnation: And this the King knows well enough, and can clear me if he pleases. Nor was my Lord Primate mistaken in this; for when not long after it was told his Majesty at Oxford that the Arch-Bishop of Armagh was dead, he spake to Colonel William Leggt, and Mr. Kirk, then of the Bed-Chamber, (as they were since to his late Majesty) to this effect, viz. That he was very sorry for his death, together with high expressions of his Piety, and Merits: But one there present replyed, That he believed he might be so, were it not for his perswading Your Majesty to consent to the Earl of Strafford's Execution: To which the King in a great passion, returned, That it was false; For, said the King, after the Bill was past, the Arch-Bishop came to me, saying, (with Tears in his Eyes) Oh Sir, What have You done I fear that this Act may prove a great trouble to Your Conscience; and pray God that Your Majesty may never suf∣fer by the Signing of this Bill, or words to that effect. This is the sub∣stance of two Certificates, taken at divers times under the hands of these two Gentlemen of unquestionable credit; both which, since they agree in substance, I thought fit to contract into one Testimony, which I have inferted here, having the Originals by me, to produce if occasion be. And now, I hope, after what
hath been said to justifie my Lord Primate of this calumny, that no honest or Charitable person can believe it; but as for those who are so ill Natur'd, and Censorious, as to think, and speak ill of all men that do not fully comply with their Notions, and Opinions, it is no great matter what they either believe, or re∣port. Whilst the Lord Primate was in Wales, there was published at London, under his name, by Mr. Downame, a Book Intitled, A Bo∣dy of Divinity, or the Sum and Substance of the Christian Religion, which being formerly lent by the Lord Primate, and transcribed by some who had borrowed it, but was not intended by him to be published, being only some Collections of his, out of several mo∣dern Authors, for his own private use, when he was a young man: And though he did, at the importunity of some friends, communicate it to them, yet it was not with a design to have it printed; but the Treatise at the end of this Book, Intitled, Im∣manuel, or the Incarnation of the Son of God,, is wholly my Lord Pri∣mate's, and is an excellent Discourse, being the substance of di∣vers Sermons he had formerly preacht upon that subject. There came out likewise, not long after, under his name, a Cate∣chism, Intitled, The Principles of Christian Religion, and was an Epi∣tome of the former, and which he had extracted for his own pri∣vate Family, without any intention to be made Publick; but seeing, contrary to his mind, it had by many impressions been divulged, and that in a very faulty manner, he was resolved at last to review it, as well for his own Vindication, as the common good; and so much he thought fit to tell the Reader in his Preface to the Edition which himself published in the year 1653. After the Lord Primate had fully recovered his strength at St.  Donates, and been most kindly entertained, and tenderly used during his great weakness, by the Lady of that place, he began now to consider where next to remove, but the King's Affairs growing every day more desperate, and Oxford like speedily to be taken; there was no returning thither; nor yet had he a mind to trust himself at London, the Faction there being very much exasperated against him, therefore he began to reassume his former thoughts of passing beyond the Seas, and upon this endeavoured to get a Vessel for his Transportation (having before obtained a Pass from the Earl of Warwick, then Admiral, for that purpose,) but when we had now procured him a Vessel, and that we were preparing to go to it, there came into the Road, before Caerdiffe, a Squadron of Ships, under the Command of one Molton, Vice-Admiral for the Parliament: Whereupon my Lord Primate sent me to him (being then on shoar at Caerdiffe) to know if he would suffer him to go by him; and I shewed him the Pass aboye mentioned, to
which Molton returned a rude, and threatening answer, absolutely refusing it, and saying, If he could get him into his hands, he would carry him Prisoner to the Parliament; and threatned like∣wise to send me also to his Ship: By which you may see how high∣ly inraged those of that Faction were at this good Bishop, for ad∣hereing to the King. He being thus disappointed in this design, attempted it no far∣ther: And not long after came to him a most kind invitation from that noble Lady, the Countess Dowager of Peterborough, to come and make his abode with her, and she would engage that he should not be molested, but have all accomodations suitable to his condition, and the great affection and esteem she had for him, as a return for those benefits she had formerly received from him, in converting her Lord, and securing her self from Popery, as has been already related: So, after some consideration, he thought fit to accept this kind proffer; and after having obtained Passes for his Journey, he left St. Donates, after almost a years residence there. But it must not be here forgotten, That before he left Wales, the great expences of his sickness, and removals in the year past, had much reduced him, as to his Purse, nor knew he where to get it supplyed; when it pleased God to put it into the hearts of divers worthy Persons of that Countrey, to consider that the Lord Primate had not only suffered much by the rudeness of the Rab∣ble, (as hath been already related) but also by a long, and ex∣pensive sickness: So they sent him, unknown to each other, di∣vers considerable Sums; so that he had in a few weeks enough to supply all his present occasions, and also to defray the expences of his Journey into England. This the good Bishop accounted a special Providence, and was very thankful for it: And I thought good to take notice of it, that it may serve as a memorial of the high Generosity and Charity of the Gentry of this Countrey at that time. So that considering all those fore-mentioned occur∣rences, the Lord Primate might very well say with St. Paul, In 2 Cor. 11. Journeyings often, in perils of Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils among false Brethren, in Weariness, and Painfulness, in Afflictions, Necessities, in Tumults, in evil, and good Report: Yet in all these Tryals he could still say, Though chastned, yet not killed, as sorrowful, yet rejoicing, though poor, yet making many rich, &c. So that in all these dispensations he fainted not, his Faith and Patience were still Victorious. So the Lord Primate arrived safe at the Countess of Peter∣borough's House in London, in June following, where he was most kindly received by her; and from this time he commonly resided with her, at some or other of her Houses till his death; where now he met with a fresh disturbance, there was an Order of Par∣liament,
That whosever should come from any of the King's Gar∣risons to London, must signifie their names to the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, and there give notice of their being in Town, and where they lodged; accordingly, June 18th. he sent me to Gold∣smiths-Hall, to acquaint them, that the Arch-Bishop of Armagh was in Town, and at the Countess of Peterborough's House; but they refused to take notice of his being in Town, without his personal appearance; so upon a Summons from the Committee of Exami∣nations at Westminster, he appeared before them (being advised by his friends so to do,) they strictly examined him, where he had been ever since his departure from London, and whether he had any leave for his going from London to Oxford; he answered, he had a Pass from a Committee of both Houses; they deman∣ded farther, whether Sir Charles Coote, or any other, ever desired him to use his power with the King, for a Toleration of Religion in Ireland He answered, That neither Sir Charles Coote, nor any o∣ther, ever moved any such thing to him, but that as soon as he heard of the Irish Agent's coming to Oxford, he went to the King, and beseeched his Majesty not to do any thing with the Irish, in point of Religion, without his knowledge; which his Majesty promised he would not; and when the point of Toleration came to be debated at the Council-Board, the King, with all the Lords there, absolutely denyed it; and he professed for his part, that he was ever against it, as a thing dangerous to the Protestant Religion: Having answered these Queries, the Chair-man of the Committee offered him the Negative Oath, (which had been made on pur∣pose for all those that had adhered to the King, or came from any of his Garrisons) but he desired time to consider of that, and so was dismissed, and appeared no more; for Mr. Selden, and others of his friends in the House, made use of their interest to put a stop to that trouble: Not long after this, he retired with the Countess of Peterborough to her House at Rygate in Surrey, where he often preached either in her Chappel, or in the Parish Church of that place, and always whilst he continued here, there frequently re∣sorted to him many of the best of the Gentry, and Clergy there∣abouts, as well to enjoy his excellent Conversation, as for his Opi∣nion and Advice in matters of Religion. About the beginning of this year, he was chosen by the Ho∣nourable Society of Lincolns-Inn, to be their Preacher, which, after  some solicitations, he accepted, and the Treasurer, and Benchers of that House (whereof his good friend Mr. Hales, since L. Chief Justice, was one) ordered him handsome Lodgings, ready furni∣shed, as also divers Rooms for his Library, which was about this time brought up from Chesten, (being almost all the remains of his worldly substance, that had escaped the fury of the Rebels.) Here
he was most kindly received, and treated with all respect and honour, constantly preaching all the Term time, for almost Eight years, till at last his Eye-sight, and Teeth, beginning to fail him, so that he could not be well heard in so large a Congregation, he was forced, about a year and half before his death, to quit that place, to the great trouble of that Honourable Society. About this time he published his Diatriba de Romanae Ecclesiae Symbolo Apostolico vetere, & aliis fidei formulis, wherein he gives a learned account of that which is commonly called, The Apostles Creed, and shews the various Copies which were used in the Roman Church; with other forms of Confessions of Faith, that were wont to be proposed to the Catechumeni, and younger sort of People, in the Eastern, and Western Churches; together with several other Monuments of An∣tiquity relating to the same. This he dedicated to his Learned Friend Ger. Vossius. About the beginning of this year he published his Learned Dis∣sertation,  concerning the Solar Year, anciently used among the Ma∣cedonians, Syrians, and Inhabitants of Asia, (properly so called) in which he explains many great difficulties in Chronology, and Ec∣clesiastical History; and has particularly fixed the time of the Martyrdom of St. Polycarp: He hath also here compared the Gre∣cian, and Macedonian months, with the Julian, and with those also of other Nations, and having laid down the method, and entire disposition of the Macedonian, and Asiatick year, he thought fit to add certain Rules whereby to find out the Cycles of the Sun, and Moon, and Easter for ever; with several curious accounts of the Celestial Motions, according to the Ancient Greek Astronomers, Meton, Calippus, Eudoxus, and others; together with an Ephemeris at the end of it, being an entire Greek and Roman Kalendar for the whole year, with the Rising and Setting of the Stars in that Cli∣mate: In this small Treatise my Lord Primate has shewed him∣self admirably well skill'd in Astronomical, as well as Chronological Learning. About this time, whilst his late Majesty was kept Prisoner at  Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight, the Lord Primate was highly concerned at the disloyal actions of the two Houses, towards their Lawful Prince; to express which, he preached at Lincolns-Inn, on this Text, Isa. 8. 12, 13. Say ye not a Confederacy to all them, to whom this people shall say a Confederacy, neither fear you their fear, nor be afraid: Sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread: Wherein he sufficiently expressed his dislike of those Covenants, and Consederacies, which they had now entred into, contrary to that Oath they had taken already, and that we should not fear man more than God, when we were to do our Duty to our Prince, or Country: Not long after which, the Presbyterians
finding the Independant party too strong for them, had no way left to secure themselves, but by recalling their Votes of Non-Addresses, and to Vote a Treaty with his Majesty in the Isle of Wight: And because the differences concerning Church-Govern∣ment were not the least of those that were to be setled, and con∣cluded at this Treaty, and for which it was necessary for his Maje∣sty to consult with some of his Bishops, and Divines, the Lord Primate was sent for by the King, among divers others, to attend him, for that purpose; when he came thither, he found one of the greatest points then in debate, was about the Government of the Church: The Parliament Commissioners insisting peremptorily for the abolishing, and taking away Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c. out of the Churches of England, and Ireland. His Majesty thought he could not with a good Conscience consent to that demand, (viz.) totally to abolish, or take away Episcopal Government: but his Majesty then declared, that he no otherwise aimed at the keeping up the present Hierarchy in the Church, than what was most agreeable to the Episcopal Government in the Primitive and purest Times: But his Majesty (since the Parliament insisted so obstinately on it) was at last forced to consent to the See His Ma∣jesty's Message sent by Capt. Titus, 1648. And Whitlock's Mem. p. 337. suspension of Episcopacy for three years; but would by no means agree to take away Bishops absolutely. But now to stop the present career of the Presbyterian Discipline, the Lord Primate proposed an expedient, which he called Episcopal and Presbyterial Government conjoyn∣ed, and which he, not long after he came thither, delivered into his Majesty's hands, who having perused it, liked it well, saying, it was the only Expedient to reconcile the present differences; for his Majesty, in his last Message to the Parliament, had before conde∣scended to the reducing of Episcopal Government, into a much narrower compass, viz. Not only to the Apostolical Institution; but much farther than the Lord Primate proposed or desired, See his Maje∣sty's Message by Major Cromwal. 21. Nov. 1648. See his Mes∣sage by Sir Peter Killi∣grew in Whit∣lock's Mem. p. 339. even to the taking away of Arch-Bishops, Deans, Chapters, &c. To∣gether with all that additional Power and Jurisdiction which his Majesty's Predecessors had bestowed upon that Function: Which Message being read in the House, was by them, notwithstanding, voted unsatisfactory: So that the Presbyterian Party was so abso∣lutely bent to abolish the very Order of Bishops, that no propo∣sals of his Majesty's, though never so moderate, would content them; till at last (when they had wrangled so long, till they saw the King's person seized by the Army, and that the power was like to be taken out of their hands) they then grew wiser, and would have agreed to his Proposals, when it was too late; and so the Presbyterian Party saw themselves, within a few days after, forcibly excluded, and turned out of doors, by that very Army which they themselves had raised, and hired to fight against their
Prince; which, as it was the cause of his Majesty's destruction, so it proved their own ruine. But since some of the Church of Eng∣land have been pleased to judge very hardly of this Proposal made by the Arch-Bishop, as if it too much debased the Episcopal Order, and levelled it with that of Presbyters. To vindicate the Lord Primate from which imputation, I desire them to consider these particulars; first, the time when this Expedient was proposed, viz. When his Majesty had already consented to the suspension of Episcopal Government for three years absolutely, as also for set∣ling Presbytery in the room of it for that time, and for quite taking away Arch-Bishops, Deans and Chapters, &c. (as hath been already said,) whereas the Lord Primate's Expedient proposes none of these, but supposes the Arch-Bishops, or Primates ought to be con∣tinued, appointing them to be the moderators of the Provincial Sy∣nods of Suffragans, and Pastors: And though it is true, he men∣tions Bishops, as to be only Presidents of the Diocesan Synod, yet he no where denies them a Negative Voice in that Assembly; and though he mentions at the beginning of this Expedient, that the Bishops were wont in the Primitive times to do nothing of mo∣ment, without the advice of a Synod of their Clergy, (as he proves from divers quotations out of the Fathers, and Ancient Councils;) yet he does not assert this practice, as a thing of Divine, or unalte∣rable right, but only as the custom, and practice of the Church in those Times, which being only prudential, may be altered one way, or other, according as the peace and order of the Church, or the exigency of Affairs may require; and though in Sect. 11. of this Expedient, he proposes the making of as many Suffragans in each Diocess, as there are Rural Deanries in the same, and who should assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or Ministers of their Precinct; yet their power was only to be according to the Sta∣tute of the 26th. of Henry the Eighth, whereby they are expresly forbid to act in any matters, but by the Authority of, and in Sub∣ordination to their Diocesan Bishop; nor does the Lord Primate here extend their power farther, than to be moderators of this les∣ser Synod, where matters of Discipline, and Excommunication only were to be determined, still reserving the power of Ordina∣tion to the Diocesan, this being no where given from him in this Expedient; neither was this power of Excommunication left ab∣solutely to this lesser Synod, without an Appeal to the Diocesan Synod of the Suffragans, and the rest of the Pastors wherein the Bishop was to preside: only I shall say thus much, That it was not the Lord Primate's design, or intention, in the least, to rob the Bishops of any of those just Rights, which are essentially neces∣sary to their Order, and Constitution, and without abasing Episco∣pacy into Presbytery, or stripping the Church of its Lands, and Re∣venues,
(both which the Lord Primate always abhorred) for he was of his Majesty's mind in his excellent  That Pres∣bytery P. 141. Edit. Magut, 1648. is never so considerable, or effectual, as when it is joyned to, and Crowned with Episcopacy. And that the King himself was then con∣vinced, that this was the best Expedient for the setling of the dif∣ferences of the Church at that time. You may likewise see by what he writes in the same Chap. in these words, viz. Not that I am against the managing of this Presidency, and Authority in one man, by the Ib. pag. 138. joynt Counsel and Consent of many Presbyters: I have offered to restore that, as a fit means to avoid those Errors, Corruptions, and Partialities, which are incident to any one man. And so likewise in the Chapter about the Re∣formation of the Times, he has this passage, I was willing to grant, or restore to Presbytery, what with reason, or discretion it can pretend to, in a Pag. 166. Conjuncture with Episcopacy; but for that wholly to invade the Power, and by the Sword to Arrogate, and quite Abrogate the Authority of that Ancient Order, I think neither just, as to Episcopacy, nor safe for Presbytery; nor yet any way convenient for this Church, or State. And that the most Pious and Learned Dr. Hammond, was about the same time of the Lord Primate's judgment in this matter, may appear by this pas∣sage in the Preface to his Treatise of the Power of the Keys: That a moderate Episcopacy, with a standing assistant Presbytery, as it will certain∣ly satisfie the desires of those whose pretentions are regular, and moderate, (craving nothing more, and in some things less than the Laws of the Land,) so that it will appear to be that, which all parties can best Tolerate; and which, next himself, both Presbyterian, Independant, and Erastian, will make no question to choose and prefer before any of the other Pretenders. And though it may be true, that divers of the more sober of the Presby∣terian party, have seemed to have approved of these terms of Re∣conciliation, yet it has been only since the ill success their Disci∣pline hath met with, both in England and Scotland, that has made them more moderate in their demands; for it is very well known, that when these Terms were first proposed, the Ring-leaders of the Party utterly cryed them down, as a great Enemy to Presby∣tery: Since this Expedient would have yet left Episcopacy in a bet∣ter condition than it is at this day in any of the Lutheran Churches; but they were not then, for Divisum Imperium would have all, or nothing; and they had their desires: So that it is no wonder if the Lord Primate in this endeavour of Reconciliation met with the common fate of Arbitrators, to please neither party: But thô the Church is now restored (beyond our expectation, as well as merits,) to all its just Rights, and Priviledges, without the least diminution: Yet certainly no good Subject, or Son of the Church, either of the Clergy, or Laity, at that time when this Expedient was proposed, but would have been very well contented to have yiel∣ded farther than this, to have preserved his late Majesty's life, and to
have prevented those Schisms, and Confusions, which for so ma∣ny years harrassed these poor Nations, But if our King, and Church are both now restored, it is what then no man could fore-see, it is the Lord's doing, and is marvellous in our Eyes, but I have dwelt so long upon this subject, that I forgot to relate a passage, though not of so great moment as the Affair we last men∣tioned, yet as it happened in order of time before it, so was it too considerable to be passed over, viz. the Sermon which the Lord Primate now preached before the King at Newport in the Isle of Wight, presently after his coming thither, on the 19th. of Novemb. (being his Majesty's Birth-day:) which because it then was the occasion of a great deal of discourse, I shall give you the heads of it, being there present at that Sermon; which afterward was pub∣lished (though very imperfectly) by some that took Notes; the Text was Gen. 49. 3. Ruben thou art my first-born, my Might, and the beginning of my Strength; the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power: These remarkable passages he had in this Sermon, a∣mong others, in Explication, viz. The Regal power which comes by Descent, is described by a double Excellency; The Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power: By Dignity we understand all outward Glory; by Power, all Dominion: And these are the two branches of Majesty. The Greeks express it in the ab∣stract: And so in respect of Dignity, The Supreme Magistrate is called Glory; and in respect of Sovereignty, he is called Lord: Both these are joyned in the Epistle of Jude, ver. 8. There are a wicked sort there described, that despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities; and make no Conscience to Blaspheme the Footsteps of the Lord's Anointed: And what is their Censure, ver. 13. To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. We used to say, That those that have God's Tokens upon them, are past hopes of life; here you may plainly see God's Tokens upon these men, they are reserved to everlasting Dam∣nation. After he had shewen in many instances of the outward Splendor and Pomp, which peculiarly belong to Majesty, and are lawful, and requisite to maintain the Dignity of a Prince, &c. then he proceeded to shew the Eminency of Power belonging thereunto; For a King to have great State, and to have no Pow∣er, he were then but a poor, weak King: There is a subordi∣nation of Power in all Governments, which because it cannot go in Infinitum, it must needs rest some where, and that is in the King, Let every Soul be subject to the higher power, whosoever resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God. And the Apostle 1 Pet. 2. Ro. 13. 1, 2. 13. To the King as Supreme. If any Professors of Religion do Re∣bel against the King, this is a scandal to Religion; and 'tis the fault of the Professors, and not of the Profession, for the Church
of England doth teach the contrary: But when men shall not only practise, but teach Rebellion, this amounts to a very high Crime indeed: The King (as St. Peter saith) hath the Excel∣lency of Power, as sent by God. But what need I say any more, we all swear that the King is the Only Supreme Gover∣nor in his Dominions. A man would think, that that word Only, might be spared, since nothing can be above a Supreme, but it is put there by way of Eminency. I read in Josephus, That Herod having offended Cleopatra, she besought Antony to call him to account for it: But Antony refu∣sed so to do, for then said he, He will be no King. And after he had enlarged somewhat on these points, he added this: In the word of a King there is power, saith the Preacher: It was wont to be so; and by the word of God it ought to be so. I might en∣large upon this, but some Ears will not endure sound Doctrine. The King, you see, must be acknowledged to be Supreme, and no Superior to the King on Earth: far be it from me to flatter any man, I thank God I fear no flesh, but do deliver the Truth. This day is the Birth-day of our Sovereign Lord. Birth-days of Kings have been usually Celebrated with great Solemnity in for∣mer times; it pleaseth God, that this day begins the 49th. year of his Majesty's life, and let me call it the year of Jubilee to his Majesty. The Jews had a Custom, that in the 49th. year of any mans life, he should be at liberty, whatever his sufferings were before. It must be the desire and prayer of every Loyal heart, that the King may have a Jubilee indeed: This is that which Loy∣alty bids us do. I will not stand too much upon this particular; but this I will say, Oh! that we knew our happiness, to have a King that is the Son of Nobles; a King that is not a Child; a King that is at full Age to Govern by Wisdom, and Prudence: And truly as God gives us this blessing, so he expects we should ac∣knowledge it thankfully, Eccles. 10. 16. Wo be to thee O Land, (saith the Preacher) when the King is a Child! To have him, when his experience hath riveted in him sound judgment, and ability to Govern. The Lord threatned Jerusalem, in Isa. 3. 4. I will give Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. Those that would have their own Wills, could (I warrant you) be content that the youngest should Reign. To have a base man exalted, is one of the things that the Earth cannot bear: but some Body must have the Government, it doth not belong to all, you see here is one that alone hath a right to it. After which, he concluded to this effect, That all true Christians are the First-born of God, Heb. 12. The Congregation of the First-born; they are all Heirs of Heaven; in the same relation that Christ is by Na∣ture, we are by Grace, and Adoption, &c.
This Sermon, together with the Arch-Bishop's steady carriage in the point of Episcopacy, did so much enrage both the Presbyterian, and Independant Factions, that in their News Books, and Pamphlets at London, they reproach'd the Lord Primate for flattering the King, as also for his perswading him not to abolish Bishops; and that he had very much prejudiced the Treaty; and that none a∣mong all the King's Chaplains had been so mischievous (mean∣ing to Them) as He; which reproaches, whether the Lord Pri∣mate did deserve, or not, I leave to the candid Readers, both of the said Sermon, and Reconciliation above mentioned, to judge; I am sure his Majesty's Affairs were in as ill a condition to tempt any man to flatter him, as the temper of his Soul was then to suffer it: But the truth is, the Lord Primate did no more than assert his Majesty's just Rights and Prerogative, then trampled upon; and it was no more than what he had both preached and written be∣fore in that Treatise, since published, Of the Power of the Prince, and Obedience of the Subject. After the Lord Primate had taken his last leave of his Majesty, and done him and the Church all the service he was able at that time (though not with that success he desired) he returned to Southampton, in order to his going towards London, where he was kindly received by the chief of the Town, and withal intreated to preach there the next day, (being Sunday) but when he thought of complying with their desires, the Governor of the Garrison hear∣ing of it, came to my Lord Primate, and told him, he had been informed, he intended to preach on the morrow; to which; when my Lord answered yes, 'twas true; he replyed, that it might be at that time of ill consequence to the Place, and therefore wished him to forbear, for they could not permit it; and so they suffered him not to preach there; for they were afraid of his plain deal∣ing, and that he would have declared against that Villainy, they were then about to execute: For not long after my Lord's re∣turn to London, his Majesty was brought up thither as a Prisonerby the Army, in order to that wicked piece of Pageantry, which they called his Tryal: And now too soon after came that fatal Thirtieth of January, (never to be mentioned, or thought on by all good men, without grief and detestation) on which was perpetrated the most Execrable Villainy (under the pretence of Justice) that ever was acted since the World began, A King Murthered by his own Subjects, before his own Palace, in the face of the Sun: For which the Lord Primate was so deeply sensible, and afflicted, that he kept that day as a private Fast so long as he lived; and would always be wail the scandal and reproach it cast, not only on our own Nation, but Religion it self; saying, That thereby a great advantage was given to Popery, and that from thence forward the
Priests would with greater success advance their designs against the Church of England, and Protestant Religion in general. Nor will it be impertinent here to relate a passage that happened to the Lord Primate, at the time of his Majesty's murther: The La∣dy. Peterborough's House (where my Lord then lived) being just over against Charing-Cross, divers of the Countesse's Gentlemen, and Servants, got upon the Leads of the House, from whence they could see plainly what was acting before White-Hall: as soon as his Majesty came upon the Scaffold, some of the House-hold came, and told my Lord Primate of it, and askt him if he would see the King once more before he was put to death: My Lord was at first unwilling, but was at last perswaded to go up; as well out of his desire to see his Majesty once again; as also curiosity, since he could scarce believe what they told him, unless he saw it: When he came upon the Leads, the King was in his Speech; the Lord Primate stood still, and said nothing, but sighed; and lifting up his Hands and Eyes (full of Tears) towards Heaven, seemed to pray earnestly; but when his Majesty had done spea∣king, and had pulled off his Cloak and Doublet, and stood strip∣ped in his Wastcoat, and that the Villains in Vizards began to put up his hair, the good Bishop no longer able to endure so dismal a sight, and being full of grief, and horror for that most wicked Fact now ready to be Executed, grew pale, and began to faint; so that if he had not been observed by his own Servant, and some others that stood near him (who thereupon supported him) he had swounded away. So they presently carried him down, and laid him on his Bed, where he used those powerful weapons which God has left his People in such Afflictions, viz. Prayers, and Tears; Tears, that so horrid a sin should be committed, and Prayers, that God would give his Prince patience, and constancy to undergo these cruel Sufferings; and that he likewise would not (for the vindication of his own Honour and Providence) per∣mit so great a wickedness to pass unpublished. This I received from my Lord Primate's Mr. James Tyrrel. Grandson, who heard it from the mouth of his Servant, who lived with him till his death. After this sad Tragedy, the Government (if it may be so called) was managed by a corrupt Oligarchy, until Oliver Cromwell turned them out, and set himself up for Protector, by the help of his Army, and Creatures, though with equal Tyranny, and Arbitrariness as the former; during most of which sad Times the Lord Primate kept close to his Study, and Charge at Lincolns-Inn, utterly dis∣owning those Usurpers, and their wicked actions, and still com∣forting the Loyal Party (then sufferers) that this Usurpation would quickly expire, and that the King (whose right it was) would return unto his Throne, though he himself should not
live to see it; and thus much he declared, not long before his death, to his said Grand-son, and my self (among others,) say∣ing, That this usurpation of Cromwell's, was but like that of some of the Grecian Tyrants, which, As it began by an Army, so it common∣ly ended with the death of the Usurper. About the middle of this year he finished the first part of his  great and long expected work of the Annals of the Old Testament, from the beginning of the World to Anno Mundi 3828. as far as to the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, in which he has very exactly fixed the three great Epocha's of the Deluge, the going of the Chil∣dren of Israel out of Egypt, and the return of the Jews from their Captivity in the first year of Cyrus; which is the only certain Epo∣cha, or rule of conjoyning the Sacred with Prophane Chronology. In this Volume he gives a most exact account of the Reigns of the Kings of Israel, and Judah, with their Synchronisms: As also the Succession of the Babylonish, Persian, and Macedonian Monarchs; with the concurrent Olympiads, and Aera of Nabonussar, and the most remarkable Eclypses of the Sun; as they might any way serve to regulate the account of time, which he has collected out of all Authors, both Sacred, and Prophane, with singular Industry, Learning and Judgment. About this time the Lord Primate had finished, and published  the second part of his Annals; beginning with Antiochus Epiphanes, and continued to the destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus Vespasian: In which Volume he has given an exact account of the Macedo∣nian Empire, under the Asiatick, and Egyptian Kings, reducing their Reigns to a more certain Calculation, than ever had been done before, and restoring several of them to their due Places, and Times, which had been omitted by other writers of Chronological History: as also an account of the Affairs of the Roman Empire, especially those relating to the Oriental Parts thereof; together with a History of the New Testament, from the Birth of St. John the Baptist, to Anno Christi 73. out of the Holy Scriptures, as also from the best Greek and Roman Authors that have written of those Times. So that these two Volumes may well be accounted of as the most useful, as well as the Learned'st Works he ever wrote, and are a Repository, or Common-place of all Ancient Histo∣ry. I cannot now omit to take Notice, That Oliver Cromwell, to make the World believe that he did not persecute men for Religi∣on, had for some time before this shewed favour to some of the Orthodox Clergy; as particularly to Dr. Brownrig, Bishop of Exeter, whom he had sent for, and treated with great outward respect; and as for Dr. Bernard, who had been the Lord Primate's Chap∣lain in Ireland, and was after Dean of Kilmore, Cromwell having sa∣ved
his life at the taking of Droghedah, had made him his Almoner here: So that it is the less wonder if he also sent for the Lord Pri∣mate to come to him; who was at first unwilling to go, but upon 2d. thoughts, considering that his refusal would but exasperate him the more, against himself, and the rest of the Clergy of the King's party, and that perhaps he might thereby prevail with him to do some Good, or at least hinder him from acting some greater Evil, he went accordingly, and was received by Cromwell with great outward kindness, and civility; what the conversation was in particular, I cannot tell, but as I have heard, it was chiefly about advancing the Protestant Interest, as well at home as abroad, (to which Cromwell made great pretences,) but be it as it will, you may be sure he was too great an Enthusiast to take my Lord Pri∣mate's advice; and so after a great deal of Canting discourse, he civily dismist him: But whether now, or at any other time, Oliver Cromwell bestowed any Gratuity, or Pension upon him, I know not; nor do at all believe, notwithstanding a late Before the late Edition of the Body of Divinity. Eng∣lish writer of his life, (I know not upon what grounds) has made bold to say so: only this much I remember, my Lord Primate said, that Oliver Cromwell had promised to make him a Lease of some part of the Lands belonging to the Arch-Bishoprick of Armagh for 21 years, which my Lord Primate thought it no harm to ac∣cept, considering it was but his own, and which he had been de∣prived of above half that time, especially in consideration of his Daughter, and many Grand-Children, for whom he had as yet been able to do nothing: And if the Church did happen to be resto∣red before that time, it could lose nothing by this Grant; and if not, he thought his Children might as well deserve to reap the benefit of it, as others; but though Dr. Bernard in his Epistle to the Reader, before the life of the Lord Primate, was made by Cromwell's Secretary, (who then had the Copy in his power) to publish, as if this Grant had been really past; yet the Usurper was craftier then so; and as he delayed the passing of it as long as the Lord Primate lived; so after his death he made a pretence, by imputing malignancy (which was indeed Loyalty) to the Lord Primate's Son-in-law, and Daughter, to free himself from that promise. This year, about the beginning of Winter, the most Learned Mr. Selden happening to dye, the Lord Primate was desired by Mr. Vaughan, and Mr. Hales, and the rest of his Executors, to preach his Funeral Sermon; which (though he had now left off preach∣ing in great Congregations) yet he now granted, as well out of respect to those two above mentioned, as also to the deceased, between whom, and himself there had been so long an acquain∣tance, so he preached at the Temple-Church (where he was buried)
giving him all the Elogies which so great and Learned a man could deserve, though to the lessening of himself, having this pas∣sage (among others) in his Sermon, that he looked upon the per∣son deceased as so great a Scholar, that himself was scarce worthy to carry his Books after him. Cromwell being now highly enraged against the Loyal Party,  for their indefatigable (though unsuccessful endeavours) for his Majesty's Restauration to his Throne, after he had shewed him∣self very implacable and severe to the Cavalier Gentry, (as they then called them) began now to discharge part of his rage upon the Orthodox Clergy, forbidding them, under great penalties, to teach Schools, or to perform any part of their Ministerial Functi∣on: whereupon some of the most considerable Episcopal Clergy, in, and about London, desired my Lord Primate, that he would use his Interest with Cromwell, (since they heard he pretended a great respect for him) that as he granted Liberty of Conscience, to almost all sorts of Religions, so the Episcopal Divines might have the same freedom of serving God in their private Congre∣gations, (since they were not permitted the publick Churches) according to the Liturgy of the Church of England; and that nei∣ther the Ministers, nor those that frequented that Service, might be any more hindered, or disturbed by his Souldiers. So accord∣ing to their desires, he went, and used his utmost endeavours with Cromwell, for the taking off this restraint, which was at last pro∣mised, (though with some difficulty) that they should not be molested, provided they medled not with any matters relating to his Government: But when the Lord Primate went to him a se∣cond time, to get this promise Ratified, and put into Writing, he found him under his Chyrurgeons hands, who was dressing a great Boyl, which he had on his Breast; so Cromwell prayed the Lord Primate to sit down a little, and that when he was dressed he would speak with him; whilst this was a doing, Cromwell said to my Lord Primate, If this Core (pointing to the Boyl) were once out, I should quickly be well; to whom the good Bishop replyed, I doubt the Core lies deeper; there is a Core at the heart that must be taken out, or else it will not be well; Ah! replyed he, (seeming unconcerned) so there is indeed, and sighed. But when the Lord Primate began to speak to him concerning the business he came about, he answered him to this effect, That he had since better considered it, having advised with his Council about it, and that they thought it not safe for him to grant liber∣ty of Conscience to those sort of men, who are restless, and impla∣cable Enemies to him, and his Government; and so he took his leave of him, though with good words, and outward civility: The Lord Primate seeing it was in vain to urge it any farther,
said little more to him, but returned to his Lodgings very much troubled, and concerned that his endeavours had met with no bet∣ter success; when he was in his Chamber, he said to some of his Relations, and my self, that came to see him, This false man hath broken his word with me, and refuses to perform what he promised; well, he will have little cause to glory in his wickedness, for he will not continue long; the King will return; though I shall not live to see it, you may: The Go∣vernment both in Church and State is in confusion, the Papists are advan∣cing their Projects, and making such advantages as will hardly be pre∣vented. Not long after this viz. about the midle of February following, he went from London to Rygate, taking his last leave of his Friends and Relations, who never had the happiness to see him again: As soon as he came thither, he set himself to finish his Chronologia Sacra, which took up most of that little time he after lived; he was now very Aged, and though both his Body and mind were healthy, and vigorous for a man of his years; yet his Eye-sight was extremely decayed by his constant studying, so that he could scarce see to write, but at a Window, and that in the Sun-shine, which he constantly followed in clear days, from one Window to another; so that had he lived, he intended to have made use of an Ammanuensis: He had now frequent thoughts of his dissolu∣tion; and as he was wont every year to Note in his Almanack, over against the day of his Birth, the year of his Age, so I find this year 1655. this Note written with his own hand: Now Aged 75 years, My Days are full; and presently after in Capital Let∣ters, RESIGNATION: From which we may gather, that he now thought the days of his Pilgrimage to be fulfilled, and that he now wholly resigned up himself to God's Will, and Plea∣sure. Not long before his death, going to Rygate, I preached a Ser∣mon there, where this good Bishop was present, after Church, he was pleased to confer with me in private (as 'twas usual with him so to do) and he spake to this effect; I thank you for your Ser∣mon, I am going out of this World, and I now desire, according to you Text, To seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the Col. 3. 12. right hand of God, and to be with him in Heaven; of which (said he) we ought not to doubt, if we can evidence to our selves our Conversion, True Faith, and Charity, and live in the Exercise of those Christian Graces, and Vertues, with perseverance; mortifying daily our inbred Corruptions, renoun∣cing all Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts; and he that is arrived at this ha∣bitual frame, and holy course of life, is the blessed, and happy man, and may rejoyce in hope of a glorious Eternity in the Kingdom of Heaven, to receive that Inheritance given by God, to those that are sanctified. So that all his discourse was of Heavenly things, as if his better part had
been there already, freed from the Body, and all Terrene affecti∣ons; and he seemed as if he were seriously considering his Spiri∣tual State, and making ready for his departure, which he now shortly expected. But since it had been usual with him to insist on things of this Nature, when we were together, and that he was at this time in health, I did not believe that his Change was so near, as he presaged; yet he himself had other thoughts, and it proved he was not mistaken; for on the 20th. of March, (the day he fell sick) after he had been most part of it, as long as he had light at his Study, he went from thence to visit a Gentlewo∣man then sick in the House, giving her most excellent prepara∣tives for death, together with other holy advice, for almost an hour, and that in such a Heavenly manner, as if, like Moses upon Mount Pisgah, he had then a prospect of the Celestial Canaan; that Night, after Supper, he first complained of his hip, judging it to be a touch of the Sciatica, which he had many years agone; next Morning early he complained of a great pain in his side; a Phy∣sician being sent for, prescribed what he thought convenient in that case, but it could not thereby be removed, but rather encreased more and more upon him, which he bore with great patience for 13 or 14 hours, but his strength, and spirits decaying, he wholly applied himself to prayer, and therein had the assistance of the Countesse's Chaplain; upon some abatement of the torture, he advised those about him to provide for death, in the time of health, that then they might have nothing else to do but to dye: Then taking his leave of the Countess of Peterborough, by whom he had been so long, and kindly entertained, and giving her ma∣ny thanks for all her kindness to him, with excellent Spiritual Counsel, as a return for all her favours: Then he desired to be left to his own private Devotions: After which, the last words he was heard to utter, (about One of the Clock in the Afternoon) praying for forgiveness of Sins, were these, viz. O Lord forgive me, especially my sins of Omission: So presently after this, (in sure hopes of a glorious Immortality) he fell asleep, to the great grief, and affliction of the said Countess, who could never sufficiently lament her own, and the Churches great loss, by his too sudden departure out of this life. Thus dyed this humble, and holy man, praying for his sins of Omission, who was never known to omit his duty, or scarce to have let any time slip, wherein he was not imployed in some good action, or other; and if such a man thought he had so much to beg pardon for; what an account must those have to make, who scarce bestow any of their time as they ought to do He had been when he died 55 years a Minister (and almost all that time a constant Preacher,) near 14 years a Professor of Divinity in the Univesity of Dublin, and several years Vice-Chancellor of the same,
he sat Bishop of Meath near 4 years, and one and thirty years Arch-Bishop of Armagh, being from St. Patrick, the 100 Bishop of that See. As soon as his Relations received the sad news of his death, they gave orders for his interment at Rygate, where he dyed, the Honourable Countess, with whom he had lived and dyed, inten∣ding to have him buried in her own Vault, in order to which, his Relations (being then not near) it was thought fit to preserve the Corps by such means as are proper in that case; so a Chyrurgeon being sent for, the Body was opened, and a great deal of Coagu∣lated blood found setled in his left side, which shewed that the Physician had mistook his disease, not expecting a Pleurisie in a man of above 75 years of Age. But now whilst they were pre∣paring speedily to bury him, some or other put it into Oliver Crom∣well's head, how much it would be for the Lord Primate's, as well as his own honour, to have him solemnly buried; which he approving of, and thinking it a good way to make himself Popular, because he well knew what great reputation the decea∣sed had among all Ranks and Degrees of men: Whereupon he presently caused an Order to be drawn, and sent to the Lord Pri∣mate's Son-in-law, and Daughter, straitly forbidding them to bury his Body any where else, than at Westminster Abby, for that his Highness (as he then called himself) intended a Publick Fu∣neral for him: This Command his Relations durst not disobey, (as the Times then were) though it was much against their Wills, perceiving well enough the Usurper's design, that (as it was inten∣ded, so) it would make more for his own honour, than that of the deceased Primate, and withal perceiving (what accordingly happened) that he would never defray half the expence of such a solemn Funeral, which therefore would cause the greatest part of the charge to fall upon them (though they were least able to bear it,) and yet he would reap all the glory of it. I should not have said so much on this subject, had it not been to shew the World the intriguing subtilty of this Usurper, even in this small Affair; and that for the expence of about 200 l. out of the Deo∣dands in his Amoner's hands, (which was nothing at all to him) he was able to put those he accounted his Enemies, to treble that charge: However (since it could not be avoided) the Corps was kept unburied, till the 17th. of April following, when it was re∣moved from Rygate towards London, being met, and attended by the Coaches of most of the Persons of Quality then in Town, the Clergy in, and about London, waiting on the Hearse from Somerset House to the Abby Church, where the Crowd was so great, that there was forced to be a Guard, to prevent the rudeness of the people: The Body being brought into the Quire, Dr. Nicholas
Bernard, (then Preacher of Grays-Inn) preached his Sermon; his discourse was on 1 Sam. 25. 1. And Samuel died, and all Israel were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him: Of which I shall say nothing more, since it is in print, and is but, for the most part, an account of his life, which we now give you more at large. The Sermon ended, the Corps was conveyed to the Grave in St. Erasmus Chappel, and there buried by the said Dr. according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, his Grave being next to Sir James Fullerton's, once his School-Master; there waiting a glorious Re∣surrection, with those that dye in the faith of our Lord Jesus: Many Tears were shed at his Obsequies, the City and Country being full of the singular Piety, Learning, and Worth of the deceased Primate; which, though it fall not to every man's Lot to equal, yet it is his duty to follow so good an example, as far as he is able, Quamvis non passibus aequis. In the next place I shall give you a faithful account (without flattery) of his personal Qualifications, Opinions, and Learning. As for his outward form, he was indifferent tall, and well shaped, and went always upright to the last; his Hair naturally Brown, when young; his Complexion Sanguine; his Countenance ex∣pressed Gravity, and good Nature; his Carriage free; a presence that commanded both Respect, and Reverence; and though ma∣ny Pictures have been made of him, the Air of his face was so hard to hit, that I never saw but Drawn by Mr. Lilly, af∣ter Knighted. one that was like him: He was of a strong and healthy Constitution, so that he said, That for the most part of his life, he very rarely felt any pain in his head, or stomach; in his youth he had been troubled with the Sciatica, and some years after that, with a long Quartan Ague, besides the fit of the Strangury and Bleeding above mentioned, but he never had the Gout, or Stone: A little sleep served his turn; and even in his last years, though he went to Bed pretty late, yet in the Sum∣mer he would rise by five, and in the Winter by six of the Clock in the Morning; his Appetite was always suited to his dyet, he would feed heartily on plain, wholsom Meat, without Sauce, and better pleased with a few Dishes, than with great Varieties; nor did he love to tast of what he was not used to Eat: He liked not tedious Meals, it was a weariness to him, to sit long at Table; but what ever he Eat, or Drank, was never offensive to his Stomach, or Brain, for he never exceeded at the greatest Feast; and I have heard some Physicians impute the easieness of his Digestion to some∣thing very particular, in the frame of his Body, for when the Chy∣rurgeon had opened him, he found a thick Membrane lined with Far, which (as I suppose) was but a continuation of the Omentum, which extended it self quite over his Stomach, and was fastened
above to the Peritonaeum, somewhat below the Diaphragma,; so that I have heard him say, he never felt his heart beat in the most Exercise; and the Chyrurgeon said, That had it not belonged to the Body of a Person of his Eminency, he would have taken it out, and preserved it, as a rarity which he had never found, or heard of in any other Body besides, and therefore the quickness of his Digestion considered, it was no wonder if he bred blood so fast as he did, so that he used to have frequent Evacuations there∣of, from the Veins on one side of his Tongue, but more usually in some lower parts of his Body, to the stopage of which (for some time before his death) may very well be ascribed that Di∣stemper which was the cause of it. As for his natural temper, and disposition, he was of a free, and easie humour, not morose, proud, or imperious, but courte∣ous and affable, and extremely obliging towards all he convers'd with; and though he could be angry, and rebuke sharply when he ought, (that is, when Religion, or Vertue were concerned,) yet he was not easily provoked to passion, rarely for smaller matters, such as the neglects of Servants, or worldly disappointments: He was of so sweet a nature, that I never heard he did an injury, or ill Office to any man, or revenged any of those that had been done to him, but could readily forgive them, as our blessed Lord and Master enjoyns: Nor envyed he any man's happiness, or vilified any man's Person, or Parts; nor was he apt to Censure, or Condemn any man upon bare reports, but observed that rule of the Son of Syrach, Blame not before thou hast examined the Truth; Eccles. 11. 7. understand first, and then rebuke. His natural endowments were so various, and so great, as sel∣dom are to be met with in one man, viz. a Fertile Invention, a Tenacious Memory, with a Solid and Well-weigh'd Judgment; whereby he was always, from a young man, presently furnished for any Exercise he was put upon, which lay within the compass of those studies he had applied himself to; so that in short, that Character given of St. Augustin, might be very well applied to him, viz. Insignis erat sanctissimi praesulis mansuetudo, ac miranda animi lenitas, & quaedam invincibilis clementia: Linguam habebat ab omni petulan∣tia, & convitiis puram, Ingenii felicitas prorsus erat incomparabilis, sive spectes ingenii acumen, vel obscurissima facile penetrans, sive capacis memo∣riae fidem, sive vim quandam Mentis indefatigabilem, &c. But that which is above all, he was endowed with that Wis∣dom from above, Which is Pure, Peaceable, Gentle, easie to be Intrea∣ted; Jam. 3. 17. full of Mercy, and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hy∣pocrisie. No man could charge him of Pride, Injustice, Covetous∣ness, or any other known Vice; he did nothing mis-becoming a prudent, or a good man; and he was so Beneficent to the Poor,
that when he was in prosperity (besides the large Alms with which he daily fed the attendants at his door) he gave a great deal away in money, keeping many of the Irish poor Children at School, and allowing several Stipends to necessitous Scholars at the Uni∣versity, not to mention other Objects which he still found out, on whom to bestow his Charity: And after the Irish Rebellion, when he himself was in a manner bereft of all, it is incredible to think how liberal he was to poor Ministers, or their Widows, and o∣thers that had been undone by that wicked Insurrection; and I scarce ever knew he refused an Alms to any person, whom he be∣lieved to be really in want, insomuch that I have heard this pas∣sage from his Servant, who then waited on him, That once at London, (when he was out of the way) there was brought to my Lord a poor Irish Woman, pretending great necessity, but he be∣ing either somewhat displeased to be called off from his Study, (upon which he was then very intent,) or perhaps he might not have at that time much to spare, told her in short, He was not able to relieve all that came to him upon that account, if he did, he should soon have nothing left for himself; which this poor Woman was so far from taking ill, that she went away praying for him, which he immediately reflecting, was much concerned at, for fear he should have neglected his duty, when a fit Object of Charity was offered him; wherefore he presently commanded some of my Lady's Servants, to run after her, and if possible, over∣take her and bring her back, but they could not light of her: So when his Servant returned home, he told him this accident with great concern, ordering him to go the next day to some places, where such people used to resort, to inquire out such a Woman, (whom he described, as exactly as he could, to him) which orders his man obeyed, though without success: At which his Lord was much troubled; and could she have been found, no question but she would have been very well rewarded for her being sent away empty the day before by him. Yet notwithstanding all these Vertues, none was more humble, and free from vain glory, than this person, who was endowed with them; so that what high esteem soever others might have of him, he never put any value on himself, but was little in his own thoughts, and would often bewail his own infirmities, and the want of those Graces he thought he saw in others, and which he most earnestly de∣sired: He was so great a lover of real Piety, that he thought no other accomplishments worth speaking of, without it; and he heartily loved, and respected all humble, devout Christians, and would always say, they were God's Jewels, highly to be valued, and with these (though of the meanest condition) he would gladly dis∣course, speaking kindly to them, causing them to sit down by
him, and if they were bashful he would encourge them, to speak their minds freely in any words, that might best express their love to God, and the State of their Souls; and he was so skilful a Physician in Spiritual matters, that he could readily perceive eve∣ry man's case, and necessities, and would apply suitable remedies thereunto; if wavering, to settle them; if doubting, to resolve them; if sad, to comfort them; if fallen into a fault, to restore them, administering means to prevent the like Temptations; nor did he neglect any opportunities by good advice, and admo∣nitions, to reclaim those that were corrupted with Errors, or Vi∣ces: So that in all his discourses, as well publick, as private, he still endeavoured to bring Religion into reputation, and to make sin, and a wicked course of life odious, shameful, and destructive to the Souls and Bodies of men: And he would press this point with such a concerned earnestness; that one would have believed those to whom he then applied himself, must needs resolve not to love sin any longer: And on the other side, he would so mag∣nifie the happiness, and excellencies of a Vertuous and Pious Life, that one would have thought that none could withstand such powerful perswasions. And as this holy man was never better pleased than when he saw the grace of God manifested in any, so was he never grieved at any thing more, than at the great decay of sound Religion, and Christian Piety, which too much prevailed in those days, toge∣ther with the mighty encrease of both Spiritual, and Fleshly Wic∣kedness, as Heresies, and Schisms, and unchristian Animosities; with Debauchery, and Prophaneness, (so contrary to the nature of true Christianity,) which had so over-run, and infected this Na∣tion, during those times of Licentiousness, and Confusion: For these things he would frequently express his grief, saying, These were the sad Presages of greater miseries, that will befal this Church and Kingdom, and make way for Popery, to which our own Di∣visions, and wicked Lives, give the greatest advantage; and that these at length would prove a Scourge to the Nation, if not cause the greatest blow that had been ever given to the Reformed Chur∣ches. These things he spake (not as pretending to Prophecy, but) from the then present evil Aspect of those Times. And as this Religious man was always well imployed himself, so he was a constant reprover of Idleness in others; for he would have all men (of what Degree, or Quality soever) still busied in some honest imployment, that thereby Temptations might have the less power over them: And he would often express his Pity, that any who had good Natural Parts, and Abilities, should not imploy their Talents, to better purposes, than he saw too many did; saying, That such were no better than Drones, who did no∣thing
but devour the fruits of other mens Labours, and would not be at any themselves; and thought it a great shame for Per∣sons of Quality to be brought up (for the most part) only in Lear∣ning how to Eat, and Drink, and Dress themselves; and to spend their Time, and Estates in luxurious Treats, unnecessary Visits, or (which is worse) in down-right Debauchery; these he looked on as persons that did not only wrong to their own Souls, but were a dishonour to the Nation, and a scandal to the Truth of Religion; and would frequently affirm, that it was better to be an Idiot, than such a witty (but wicked) man; better to be an honest Clown, than such a fashionable, but vicious Gentleman. Yet was he not so morose, or severe, as to disallow what were harmless diversions, for he knew how useful they were in their respective Seasons, but he could not endure it should become a Trade, and Business, as if men could find nothing else to do, but to run from one vain Recrea∣tion to another, till they had quite wearied themselves with their eager pursuit, and so made themselves unfit for the Service of God, or their own Civil concerns: And as for particular Recreations, he liked those best that exercised the Body without too much force, or violence, as walking, or riding abroad; or such as might relax, and unbend the Mind, and keep it from Melancholy, or too deep a thoughtfulness on Business: But as for Gaming, (especially for Mony,) he by no means could allow of it, for several reasons; but chiefly, for that it too often administred to Passion, as also to Swear∣ing, Cursing, Quarrelling, Cheating, and not unseldom to Duelling; all which arose from coveting that which was anothers; so that nei∣ther Winners nor Losers were satisfied, nor rarely knew when to give over in time. As for his own Recreations, walking was his greatest delight, and at spare times he loved pleasant Conversa∣tion, and innocent Mirth, himself often telling Stories, or relating the wise, or witty sayings of other men, or such things that had occurred to his own observation; so that his company was always agreeable, and for the most part instructive; but still he would conform himself to the Genius, and improvements of those he con∣vers'd with; for as with Scholars he would discourse of matters of Learning, so could he condescend to those of meaner capacities. But when any asked his Opinion, or Advice, in any points of Lear∣ning, he was highly Communicative, and free to impart what he knew, or thought would benefit others; and would first, with great modesty, shew them what others said upon that Subject; and would after, when farther pressed, deliver his own thoughts thereupon: Yet he was prudently cautious in delivering his Opi∣nion, when he was sifted by designing captious men, whom he thought intended only to take advantage of what he should de∣clare to them: But he never declined giving his true thoughts,
when desired by those he thought Honest, Candid, and Pious, and that would not make use of his Opinion to evil purposes. But he could not endure that any should ridicule either Scripture, or Religion, or drole upon any man's private Faults, or Calamities; and above all things he could not suffer filthy, or obscene Communication, or Swearing; He knew it displeased God, and therefore it ex∣tremely offended him; and where he could not make the persons desist from it, he would presently leave the place, and their com∣pany: And when he could not with decency, or good manners go away, and though he was always very uneasie in such Con∣versation, yet did he not always express his abhorrence of it in words, nor reprove their persons, when he considered it might do more hurt, than good, but would then hold his peace, waiting for an ppportunity to do it with gentleness, and by way of Ad∣vice, when the persons concerned might happily be convinced, he did it purely for their good, and not in reproach to them: And I remember once, when there had happened some discourse at Table, from Persons of Quality, that did not please him; he said nothing then, seeming not to hear them; but after Dinner, when I waited on him into his Chamber, he looked very Melan∣choly, which I taking notice of, and asking him if I might know the cause: It is a sad thing (said he) to be forced to put one's foot un∣der another's Table, and not only to have all sorts of Company put upon him, but also to be obliged to hear their follies, and neither to be able to quit their company, nor to reprove their intemperate Speeches. If he perceived any (whom he accounted truly Religious) Sad, and Melancholy, he would often ask them why they were so, and if any thing really troubled them; if not, he would proceed thus, If you have entirely devoted your selves to the Service of God, what reason have you to be Melancholy When, (if you will riously consider) none have more cause to be cheerful, than those who lead a Holy, and a Vertuous Life; by this your dejection, you may bring an Evil Report upon Religion; for people seeing you always sad, will be apt to think 'tis That occasions it; and that you serve a hard Master, whose Yoke is heavy, and Com∣mands grievous; which vvill deter others, and scare them from the vvays of Vertue, and Piety, vvhich you ought by no means to do, for sincere Christians may, and ought to rejoyce, and to shevv themselves cheerful; vvhereas the vicious and vvicked have the greatest reason to be sad: And as he advised others, so he himself vvas alvvays of an even, cheerful temper, seldom trou∣bled, or discomposed, unless he found such occasions as those a∣bove mentioned; and indeed his conversation vvith Heaven gave him all the reason imaginable to be so; for besides his pri∣vate devotions Morning and Evening, he never omitted (vvhen
he kept house) to have prayers there four times a day publick∣ly, viz. in the Morning at six, in the Evening at eight, besides the whole Service before Dinner and Supper in his Chappel, at which he was always present, as he also was, when it was constantly read at the Countess of Peterborough's, or other Families where he lived: From whence you may observe the reverend esteem he had for our Liturgy; so that when some had traduced him, as if he had spoke flightingly of it, he took it very ill, as appears by what I find of his own hand in his private Manual, January 16th. 1655. Not long before his death, which I suppose he wrote on purpose, that those who should peruse his Papers might take no∣tice of it. Of the Book of Common-Prayer I have always had a reverend, and a very high esteem; and therefore that at any time I should say it was an Idol, is a shameless, and a most abominable untruth. J. A. And he did so much approve of set Forms of Prayer in pub∣lick, that he always kept himself to one constant short pathetical Prayer before his Sermons, with little alteration. And though this Apostolical Preacher, and Prelate, was as much able as any to instruct, and direct others in all matters of Religion, yet would he still give a good Example, and offer himself to be a learner, and though he had preached in the Morning, yet would he rarely miss his Attendance at the publick Service in the Afternoon, and was observed to be one of the most devout at Prayers, and the most attentive hearer of any in the Congregation; nor would he admit any drowsiness to seize him, nor suffer any thing to divert him from the present business. And as he used plain preaching himself, so was he much pleased with a pious, practical discourse from others, as if he had been to learn what he never knew be∣fore. He delighted to hear sin rebuked, and laid open in all its colours, and Christ, and his Kingdom exalted; this was always a pleasant Theme to him, and he would afterwards thank, and en∣courage the Preacher, when he had thus performed his duty, to do so still. Having given you some account of his private Conversation, we will now proceed to that of his more Publick. I have al∣ready given you an Idea of his way of Preaching, to which I shall only add, that in his delivery his very Voice, and Gesture were moving and perswasive, yet without any Tone, or Affectation; so that his preaching was with Authority, and not with inticeing words of humane wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power. He had that fluency, and ready command of words, that for many years he never committed more to writing than the Heads of his
Sermons, trusting the rest (after he had well considered what to say,) wholly to his memory, which though it might render his Sermons not so fit to be published, as wanting that polishing, and exactness of Style, which those that write, and supervise their own Sermons are able to give them: Yet on the other side, his discourses had that Pathos, and natural vigor, (the very sinews of perswasion) which must needs be wanting in those that are read; nor yet does abound (being always attended with some concern) in those, who speak their written Sermons without Book: And indeed, considering how constantly he preached, had he tyed himself up to that drudgery, he would scarce have had time for any other business: But this made him not desirous of having any of his Sermons printed, since he was sufficiently sensible of the great disadvantage they must appear abroad withal, as well in respect of those Errors, and Omissions, which those that take Ser∣mons in Characters must needs be liable to; as also because they wanted his own Eye, and Correction to be added to them, both which are requisite to make any discourse so exact, and coherent as it ought to be: But to add something farther of his way, and method in his popular Sermons; as he was an excellent Textuary, so it was his custom to run through all the parallel places, that concerned the subject on which he treated; and paraphrase, and illustrate them as they referred to each other, and their particular Contexts; he himself, as he past on, turning his Bible from place to place, and giving his Auditory time to do the like: Whereby as he render'd his preaching extreme easie to himself, so it be∣came no less beneficial to his Auditors, acquainting them with the Holy Scriptures, and enabling them to recur to the proofs he cited, by which the memory was very much help'd, to recover the Se∣ries of what was discoursed upon from them: He never cared to tire his Auditory with the length of his Sermon, knowing well, that as the satisfaction in hearing decreases, so does the attention also, and people, instead of minding vvhat is said, only listen vvhen there is like to be an end. And to let you see hovv strict∣ly he endeavoured to keep himself to this Rule, (though some∣times to the great regret of his hearers,) I shall give you this one instance; About a year before he died, vvhen he had left off prea∣ching constantly, he vvas importuned (being then in London,) by the Countess of Peterborough, and some other Persons of Quality, to give them a Sermon at St. Martin's Church, as vvell because it vvas the Parish vvhere he then lived, as that it vvas a Church vvhere his voice vvould be best heard of any thereabouts: The Lord Primate complyed vvith their desires, and preached a Ser∣mon highly satisfactory to his Auditory; but after a pretty vvhile the Bishop happening to look upon the Hour-Glass vvhich stood
from the light, and through the weakness, and deficiency of his sight mistaking it to be out, when indeed it was not, he conclu∣ded, telling them, since the time was past, he would leave the rest he had to say on that Subject to another opportunity (if God should please to grant it him) of speaking again to them in that place: But the Congregation finding out my Lord's mistake, and that there was some of the hour yet to come; and not knowing whether they might ever have the like happiness of hearing him again, made signs to the Reader; to let him know that the Glass be∣ing not run out, they earnestly desired he would make an end of all he intended to have spoken; which the Reader performing, the Bishop received it very kindly; and reassuming his discourse where he broke off, he concluded with an Exhortation full of Heavenly matter for almost half an hour; the whole Auditory be∣ing so much moved therewith, that none (unless perhaps some of the meaner sort in the Iles) went out of the Church, until he had done his Sermon. I relate this to let you know what great power this good man had in the Pulpit; and I have heard many say, they were never weary of hearing him, for besides the ex∣cellency of the matter he was upon; he had the faculty still to keep up the warmth, and attention of his hearers, and to dismiss them withal with an Appetite. And that you may see how great a Master he was in this Art of gaining Souls, it will not be amiss to insert here some of those Directions he used to give those who were newly enter'd into Holy Orders, since they may not be unprofitable to such as mean serious∣ly to undertake this Sacred Calling. I. Read, and Study the Scriptures carefully, wherein is the best Learn∣ing, and only infallible Truth; they can furnish you with the best materials, for your Sermons; the only rules of Faith, and Practice; the most powerful motives to perswade, and convince the Conscience; and the strongest ar∣guments to confute all Errors, Heresies, and Schisms: Therefore be sure, let all your Sermons be congruous to them; and to this End, it is expedient that you understand them as well in the Originals, as in the Translations. II. Take not hastily up other mens Opinions without due Tryal, nor vent your own conceits, but compare them first with the Analogy of Faith, and rules of Holiness, recorded in the Scriptures, which are the proper Tests of all Opinions, and Doctrines. III. Meddle with Controversies, and doubtful points as little as may be in your popular preaching, lest you puzzle your hearers, or engage them in wrangling Disputations, and so hinder their Conversion, which is the main design of Preaching.
IV. Insist most on those points that tend to effect sound Belief, sincere love to God, repentance for Sin, and that may perswade to Holiness of Life: Press these things home to the Conscience of your Hearers, as of abso∣lute necessity, leaving no gap for evasions, but bind them as close as may be to their duty; and as you ought to preach Sound and Orthodox Doctrine, so ought you to deliver God's Message as near as may be in God's Words, that is, in such as are plain, and intelligible, that the meanest of your Audi∣tors may understand: To which end 'tis necessary to back all practical Pre∣cepts, and Doctrines, with apt proofs from the holy Scriptures; avoiding all Exotic Phrases, Scholastick Terms, unnecessary Quotations of Au∣thors, and forced Rhetorical Figures, since it is not difficult to make easie things appear hard, but to render hard things easie is the hardest part of a good Orator, as well as Preacher. V. Get your hearts sincerely affected with the things you perswade others to embrace, that so you may preach Experimentally, and your Hearers per∣ceive that you are in good earnest, and press nothing upon them but what may tend to their advantage, and which your self would venture your own Sal∣vation on. VI. Study, and consider well, the Subjects you intend to Preach on, be∣fore you come into the Pulpit, and then words will readily offer themselves, yet think what you are about to say, before you speak, avoiding all uncouth, phantastical words, or phrases, or nauseous, undecent, or ridiculous expres∣sions, which will quickly bring Preaching into contempt, and make your Ser∣mons, and Persons, the subjects of Sport, and Merriment. VII. Dissemble not the Truths of God in any case, nor comply with the lusts of men, or give any countenance to Sin by word, or deed. VIII. But above all, you must never forget to order your own Conver∣sation, as becomes the Gospel, that so you may teach by Example, as well as Precept, and that you may appear a good Divine every where, as well as in the Pulpit▪ for a Minister's Life and Conversation is more heeded than his Doctrine. IX. Yet after all this take heed you be not puffed up with Spiritual Pride of you own Vertues; nor with a vain conceit of your Parts, or Abi∣lities, nor yet be transported with the Applause of men, nor dejected, or discouraged with the Scoffs, or Frowns of the wicked and profane. To which I shall add one advice more, which I received from a person of great worth, and dignity in the Church, who had it from the mouth of this great Master of perswasion; it was concerning Reproof, where men were
to be dealt with that lay under great Prejudices, and Vices, either by Edu∣cation, Interest, Passion, or ill Habits, (cases of much frequency) and there∣fore to render admonitions of greater force upon them, his direction was, To avoid giving the persons intended to be wrought upon, any Alarm before hand, that their Faults, or Errors were designed to be attacked; for then the persons concern'd, look upon the Preacher as an Enemy, and set them∣selves upon their guard: On such occasions he rather recommended the chu∣sing of a Text, that stood only upon the borders of the difficult subject; and if it might be, seem'd more to favour it; that so the obnoxious hearers, may be rather surprized, and undermined, than stormed, and fought with: And so the Preacher, as St. Paul expresses it, being crafty, may take them with guile. He would also exhort those who were already engaged in this Holy Fun∣ction, and advised them, how they might well discharge their duty in the Church of God, answerable to their Calling, to this Effect: You are engaged in an excellent Employment in the Church, and intrusted with weighty matters, as Stewards of our great Master, Christ, the great Bi∣shop: Under him, and by his Commission, you are to endeavour to reconcile men to God; to convert sinners, and to build them up in the holy Faith of the Gospel, that they may he saved, and that Repentance, and Remis∣sion of sins be preached in his name, This is of highest importance, and requires faithfulness, diligence, prudence, and watchfulness. The Souls of men are committed to our care, and guidance; and the Eyes of God, An∣gels, and Men are upon us, and great is the account we must make to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Supreme Head of his Church, and will at length reward, or punish his Servants in this Ministry of his Gospel, as he shall find them faithful, or negligent; therefore it behoves us to exercise our best Talents, labouring in the Lord's Vineyard with all diligence, that we may bring forth fruit, and that the fruit may remain. This is the work we are separated for, and ordained unto; we must not think to be idle, or careless in this Office, but must bend our Minds and Studies, and imploy all our Gifts and Abilities in this Service: We must Preach the word of Faith, that men may believe aright; and the Doctrine, and Laws of Godliness, that men may act as becomes Christians indeed; for without Faith, no man can please God; and without Holiness, no man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And as this good Bishop took delight to advise others in the exercise of this great Duty, so likewise, he said, none of his La∣bours adminstred greater comfort to him in his Old Age, than that he had ever since he vvas called to the Ministry (vvhich vvas ve∣ry early) endeavoured to discharge that great Trust committed unto him, of preaching the Gospel, vvhich he accounted so much his duty, that he made this the Motto of his Episcopal Seal, Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero! I mention not this, as if he thought all
those of his ovvn Order vvere obliged to preach constantly them∣selves, since he was sensible that God hath not bestowed the same Talents on all men alike, but as St. Paul says, Gave some Apostles, and some Pastors, and Teachers, though on some he hath bestowed all these gifts, as on this great Prelate, yet it is not often: And be∣sides, God's Providence so ordained, that as he had qualified him in an extraordinary manner, for the preaching of the Gospel, so likewise towards his latter end he should be reduced to that con∣dition, as in great part to live by it. And here I cannot omit, that amongst many of those Advices, which he gave to those who came to him for Spiritual Counsel; one was concerning Afflictions, as a necessary mark of being a Child of God, which some might have gathered out of certain unwary passages in Books, and which he himself had met with in his Youth, and which wrought upon him so much, that he earnest∣ly prayed God to deal with him that way, and he had his request. And he told me, that from that time, he was not without various Afflictions through the whole course of his life; and therefore he advised, that no Christian should tempt God to shew such a Sign, for a mark of his paternal love, but to wait, and be prepared for them, and patient under them, and to consider the intention of them, so as to be the better for them, when they are inflicted: And by no means to judge of a man's Spiritual State, either by, or without Afflictions, for they are fallible Evidences in Spiritual mat∣ters; but that we should look after a real sincere Conversion, and internal Holiness, which indeed is the only true Character, and Evidence of a state of Salvation. I have already given you some account of his carriage whilst he exercised his Sacred Function in his own Country; to which I shall only add, That as his Discipline was not too severe, so was it not remiss, being chiefly exercised upon such as were remark∣ably Vicious, and Scandalous in their Lives, and Conversations, whether of the Clergy, or Laity; for as he loved, and esteemed the sober, diligent, and pious Clergy-men, and could not endure they should be wronged, or contemned; so as for those who were Vi∣cious, Idle, and cared not for their Flocks, he would call them the worst of men, being a scandal to the Church, and a blemish to their profession; and therefore he was always very careful what per∣sons he Ordained to this high Calling, observing St. Paul's injun∣ction to Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no man: And I never heard he Ordained more than one person, who was not sufficiently qua∣lified in respect of Learning, and this was in so extraordinary a case, that I think it will not be amiss to give you a short account of it, there was a certain English Mechanick, living in the Lord Pri∣mate's Diocess, who constantly frequented the publick Service of
the Church; and attained to a competent knowledge in the Scriptures, and gave himself to read what Books of Practical Divinity he could get, and was reputed among his Neighbours and Protestants thereabouts, a very honest and Pious Man; this Person applyed himself to the Lord Primate, and told him, That he had an earnest desire to be admitted to the Ministry, but the Bishop refused him, advising him to go home, and follow his Calling, and pray to God to remove this Temptation; yet after some time, he returns again, renewing his request, Saying, He could not be at rest in his Mind, but that his desires toward that Calling encreased more and more; whereupon the Lord Primate discoursed him, and found upon Examination, that he gave a very good account of his Faith and knowledge, in all the main points of Religion. Then the Bishop questioned him far∣ther, if he could speak Irish, for if not, his Preaching would be of little use in a Country where the greatest part of the People were Irish, that understood no English. The Man replyed that indeed he could not speak Irish, but if his Lordship thought fit he would endeavour to learn it, which he bid him do, and as soon as he had attained the Language to come again, which he did about a Twelvemonth after, telling my Lord that he could now express himself tolerably well in Irish, and therefore desired Ordination: whereupon the Lord Primate finding upon Exami∣nation that he spake Truth, Ordained him accordingly, being satisfied that such an ordinary Man, was able to do more good than if he had Latin without any Irish at all, nor was the Bishop deceived in his expectation, for this Man as soon as he had a Cure, imployed his Talent diligently and faithfully, and proved very successful in Converting many of the Irish Papists to our Church, and continued labouring in that Work, until the Rebellion and Massacre, wherein he hardly escaped with Life. And as this good Bishop did still protect and encourage those of his own Coat, so did he likewise all poor Men, whom he found oppressed or wronged by those above them. And for an instance of this I will give you part of a Letter, which he Writ to a Person of Quality in Ireland, in behalf of a poor Man, which was his Tenant, whom he found much wronged and oppressed by him. viz.
I Am much ashamed to receive such Petitions against you. Have you never read, that the unrighteous, and he that doth wrong, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God Think there is a God who hear∣eth the Cry of the Poor, and may bring a rot upon your Flocks, and Curse every thing you put your hand to. And if you think not of him, because you see him not (although he sees you through and through) yet believe your own Eyes, and consider that he hath appointed his Deputies upon Earth, the higher Powers, which will not suffer the Poor to be oppressed by you or those that are greater than you; for shame therefore give content to this Petitioner, that you hear not of this in a place, where your Face must blush, and your Ears tingle at the hearing of it. J. A. Now having given as brief a Character as I could, of this excellent Prelate, not only as a private Man, but also a Minister and Bishop of Gods Church, and as a most Loyal Subject to his Lawful Sovereign Prince, expressed upon all occasions, I should proceed in the last place, to give some account of his Judgment and Opinions in points of Religion and Learning, for the first I shall say in general, That he always adhered to, and maintained the fundamental Catho∣lick Truths, observing that Golden Rule, concerning Tra∣ditions.—Quod ubique, quod ab omnibus, quod semper Creditum est, &c. and never approved of any Religion, under what pretence soever obtruded or introduced, contrary to the Scriptures and Primitive Truths, received and professed in the Church of Christ in all Ages; and upon this account could never comply with, nor approve of the new Doctrines and Worship obtruded and practised in the Church of Rome, as now it is, but always protested against their Innovations and humane Inventions, as doth most evidently appear, in his Writings, bearing Testi∣mony against their Corruptions, False and Erroneous prin∣ciples. And as for the great Scholars and Leading Men of the Romish Church, the Lord Primate usually said, That it is no Marvel; if they had a veil cast over their Eyes, as St. Paul said of the Jews, in the reading of the Scriptures; for besides the several judgments of God upon them, that have blinded their own Eyes, their Minds are so prepossessed and Corrupted with false Principles, Prejudices and Worldly interest,
that it is no wonder if they cannot perceive the most manifest and plainest Truths. But as this good Mans judgment was sound and not byassed by prejudice or passion or worldly interest, so did he heartily approve of the Religion professed and established in the Church of England, as most Congruous to the Holy Scriptures and Primitive Christianity; and in which (if a Man keep the Faith and Lives according to its precepts persevering) he need not doubt of his Salvation. And in this Faith and Communion of the Church of England, he lived Holily and died happily. And this Holy Primate being fully perswaded in his own Mind, laboured instantly to reduce Popish Recusants and Sectaries from their Errors, and vain Conceits to inform them aright, and to perswade them for their Souls good to comply with, and embrace the Religion and Communion of the Church of England, and this he aimed to bring about by his Writing, Preaching and Conference upon all occasions and was successful in that en∣terprise. But now for his Opinion in some nice points of Religion, that do not touch the foundation of Faith, he would not be rigorously Dogmatical in his own Opinions, as to impose on others Learned and Pious Men, of a different Apprehension in the more obscure points, with whom nevertheless (thô not alto∣gether of his judgment) he had a friendly Conversation, and mutual Affection and Respect, seeing they agreed in the points necessary.—Would to God, That the Learned and Pious Men in these Days were of the like temper. It will be needless here to mention any more particulars of his judgment in several points seeing there are so many instances of this kind in the Collection, to which I refer the Reader.
Yet before I leave this matter, I think fit to mind you of some Treatises published by Doctor Bernard, after the Pri∣mates Death, Intituled, The judgment of the late Lord Primate, on seve∣ral Subjects. 1. Of Spiritual Babylon, on Rev. 18. 4. 2. Of Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. and the ancient form of Words in Ordination. 3. Of a set form of Prayer in the Church. Each being the judgment of the late Bishop of Armagh, which being not set down in my Lord Primates own Words, nor written by him in the Method and Order they are there put into, cannot be reckoned, being much enlarged by the Dr., as himself confesseth; therefore cannot so well vouch them, as if I had been certain, that all he writes were purely the Lord Primate's, since the Papers, out of which the Doctor says he Collected them, were never restored to my Custody, thô bor∣rowed under that Trust, that they should be so; and therefore I desire that those, into whose hands those Manuscripts are now fallen, since the Drs. decease, would restore them, either to my self, or the Lord Primates Relations. And tho perhaps some of those Letters published by Dr. Ber∣nard, might have been as well omitted, or at least some private reflections of them left out, concerning a Person easily provoked to bitterness and ill words, being provoked by the publishing those Letters, writ an invective Book on purpose to answer to Dr. Heylin's Respondet Petrus. what was contained therein, and not contented with this, has likewise bestowed great part of that Book, to tax my Lord Primates Opinions and Actions, as differing from the Church of England, only to lessen the Esteem and Veneration, which he deservedly had, with all those who loved the King and Church of England, as also to maintain those old Stories broach∣ed before concerning the repeal of the Irish Articles, and the Death of the Earl of Strafford, to which last particulars I
need say no more than what I have already spoken in the Lord Primate's Vindication: and as to the former, relating to my Lord's Opinions and Actions, a near Relation of the Lord Pri∣mate's has, I hope, vindicated him sufficiently, in an Appendix at the end of this Account; so that I shall concern my self no far∣ther therewith. I have now no more to do, than to give you a short account of his Opinions, in some of the most difficult parts of Learning, with some Observations, which either my self, or others that convers'd with him can remember we have received from him by way of discourse, though not the Twentieth part of what might have been retrieved in this kind, had this task been undertaken many years agone, whilst these things were fresh in our memories, and whilst many more of his learned friends were alive, who must needs have received divers learned remarks from his excellent conversation. As for the Lord Primate's Opinions in Critical Learning, it is ve∣ry well known, as well by his Discourse, as Writings, that he still defended the certainty, and purity of the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, before the Translation of the Septuagint, since he doubt∣ed whether this we have, were the true Translation of the LXX. or not; as you may see in his Epistle to Valesius, and his Answer thereunto; which controversie, as it is a subject above my capa∣city to give a Judgment on, having exercised (as it still does) both the Wits, and Pens of the greatest Scholars in this present Age: So I heartily wish, That it may never tend to the disadvantage, not only of our own, but indeed of the whole Christian Religion, with Prophane and Sceptical men; for whilst one Party decry the Hebrew Text as obscure, and corrupted by the Jews, and the other side shew the failings, and mistakes of the Greek Translation, sufficient to prove that it was not performed by men Divinely In∣spired, it gives the Weak, and more Prophane sort of Readers, oc∣casion to doubt of the Divine Authority of these Sacred Records, though (notwithstanding all) the differences that have hitherto been shown between the Hebrew Original, and Greek Translation do not (God be thanked) prove of greater moment, than in the ac∣counts of Time, Names, or Numbers of men, difference of some Words, and Phrases, &c. whilst they still agree in all the main points, both of the History, and Doctrine, which I think ought to satisfie any sincere, considering Person, that God's Providence has taken sufficient care, to convey these Sacred Records, and Founda∣tions of our Faith, clear, and uncorrupted to us, a reasonable al∣lowance being still given to the Mistakes and Errours of the Co∣piers, or Translators, which were not Divinely Inspired, so as to se∣cure us from all mistakes in a Book which has been so often tran∣scribed
in so many hundreds of years, and that out of a Language which is thought by divers of the learned to have been written without any of those Points, which in most of these Eastern Langua∣ges stand for Vowels: But to other of the Learned of the contrary Opinion, and what our Primate thought of this, and some beside him, skill'd in this point, we may understand among the Colle∣ctions hereafter, unto which I refer the Reader, and to return from whence we have digressed. The Lord Primate being once importuned by a Learned man, to give some directions in Writing, for the advancement of solid, and useful learning, as well Sacred, as Prophane, he said it might be thus performed. 1. By learned Notes, and Illustrations on the Bible. 2. By censuring, and inquiring into the Ancient Councils, and Works of the Fathers. 3. By the orderly Writing and Digesting of Ecclesiastical Hi∣story. 4. By gathering together whatsoever may concern the State of the Jews, from the destruction of Jerusalem to this present Age. 5. By Collecting of all the Greek and Roman Histories, and di∣sting them into a Body. And to effect all this, he proposed, That the most ingenious and studious men of both Universities, being preferred to Prebends in Cathedral Churches should be enjoyned, and amply encoura∣ged to prosecute this design, for the advancement of this most profitable Learning. And how much the Lord Primate desired the performance of these so useful works appears by what he had long since recommended to the University of Oxford, touching the revising the Works of the Ancient Fathers of the Church: What his design was in this kind, the Reader may best judge by this passage in a Letter, written 1626. recommending this design to the University of Oxford, which I shall here insert. —The business of Revising the Ancient Fathers works in Latin (so long projected, and so many years followed by Dr. James) I do greatly ap∣prove, and judge it to be (as the times now are, and the Books now printed at Cologne, and else where) most necessary, tending to the great honour of this famous University; the benefit of them that shall be imployed therein, and the great good of the Church: And if the Heads of the University would be pleased, or might be intreated to incourage, and imploy some of their Youn∣ger Divines herein (whereof I see so great store, and some I have found very painful in another kind) I shall think my self greatly honoured by this Uni∣versity (as I confess I have been very much already) if by my means they may be the rather encouraged to the performance of this great work.
And indeed he had so great an esteem of the Ancient Authors, for the acquiring any solid learning, whether Sacred, or Prophane, that his advice to young Students, either in Divinity, or Antiquity, was, not to spend too much time in Epitomes, but to set themselves to read the Ancient Authors themselves, as to begin with the Fathers, and to read them according to the Ages in which they lived, (which was the Method he had taken himself) and together with them carefully to peruse the Church Historians that treated of that Age, in which those Fathers lived, by which means the Student would be better able to perceive the reason and meaning of divers Pas∣sages in their Writings (which otherwise would be obscure) when he knew the Original and Growth of those Heresies, and Heterodox Opinions they wrote against; and may also better judge what Do∣ctrines, Ceremonies, and Opinions prevailed in the Church in every Age, and by what means introduced: So likewise for Prophane Authors, his advice was, to begin with the most Ancient, and so to read them in the order of time, of which they writ, which was the Method he used in the composing of his Annals: Nor did he ad∣vise Students in Divinity to spend more time than was necessary, in the subtilties of the School-men, only so far as might serve for the understanding, and answering the Controversies, between those of the Church of Rome and us; saying, That they were good to puzzle mens heads with unnecessary doubts, but bunglers in resolving them, and that their Writings had done more mischief to the Church, than brought advantage either to Learning, or Religion; That they might serve for Controversial Disputes in the Schools, but were very improper for the Pulpit, and altogether useless for the Functions of a Civil Life: And whom one would think Prudentius had on purpose thus described, Solvunt ligantque quaestionum vincula, per Syllogismos plectiles, fidem minutis diffecant am∣bagibus, &c. As for the Heathen moral Philosophers, he advised young Divines not to spend too much time in them, for they were much mistaken in many great points of Morality, and true hap∣piness, the best rules of life, &c. and the shortest, and plainest for all moral Duties; being delivered by God in the Holy Scriptures. In Theological Treatises, and Discourses, he was displeased with new wording of old Truths, and changing the Terms used by the Ancients, to express the things they meant; he would have the old form of sound words retained, for Qui nova facit verba, nova gignit Dogmata; and ever suspected that those who purposely used new coined words, had no very good meaning, or else affected too great singularity. But I think I need say no more to prove the Lord Primate's great knowledge in all parts of useful Learning, since besides the Suffrages of the most knowing men of this Age, his many and
learned works (of which I have given you a short account in this Treatise) sufficiently declare it to the World, but let us look back a little, and survey at once those various parts of Learning he was skilled in: First, his Sermons, Treatises Theological, and Writings against the Papists, do sufficiently shew how great a Doctor he was in Theology, as well Practical, as Polemical; his Theological Bibliotheke (as imperfect as it is) together with the Epi∣stles of Ignatius, and Polycarp, which he put forth, with learned dissertations concerning their Writings; as also his Treatise of the Ancient Apostolical Symbol of the Roman Church, declare how well he was versed in all the Ancient Monuments of the Church; as his works of the Succession, and state of the Christian Churches, and of the Antiquities of the British Church do his knowledge in Ecclesiastical History, and Antiquity; his Syntagma of the Version of the Septuagint, and his Epistle to Lud. Capellus, concerning the various readings of the Hebrew Text, speak him a great Critick in the Greek, and Hebrew Tongues; and his Annals of the Old, and New Testament, do shew how great a Master he was in all the Ancient Authors both Sacred and Prophane; besides several o∣ther smaller Treatises, as well in Latin, as English, viz. Of the Ma∣cedonian Year, the Geographical Description of the lesser Asia, &c. each of which shew his great skill, either in Astronomy, ancient Geo∣graphy; or the Civil Laws of the Roman Empire, besides divers other smaller Works of his, too many to be here particularly inserted, and therefore I shall refer the Reader to the Catalogue added at the end of this Account: Yet must I not omit particularly to take notice of two excellent Posthumous Treatises of his, which have not been yet mentioned, as being published since his death, the first is that of the Power of the Prince, and Obedience of the Subject, which was written by the King's Command, during the late Wars, but forborn then to be published, because the corruption of those Times still growing worse and worse, would not bear this sound Doctrine; nor did he think it proper to do it in the short time of that Usurper, lest he, or others, might have interpre∣ted it to his advantage; but not long after his late Majesty's hap∣py Restauration it was Published, and Dedicated to him by the Lord Primate's Grandson, James Tyrrel, with an excellent Preface written by that learned, and good Bishop Sanderson, in which he has given as true a Character of the Author, as of the work it self, in which he says, (with a great deal of truth) That there is nothing which can be brought either from the Holy Scriptures, Fathers, Philoso∣phers, common Reason, and the Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, to prove it altogether unlawful for Subjects to take up Arms against their Sove∣reign Prince, but is there made use of with the greatest advantage. The other Treatise is written in Latin, entitled Chronologia Sacra, which
the Lord Primate never lived to finish; but was, as much of it as could be found (though somewhat imperfectly) published by the Learned and Reverend. Dr. Barlow, now Lord Bishop of Lincoln: The occasion, and design of this Treatise, was, to prove the Foun∣dations of the accounts of time in his Annals, and that his Chronologi∣cal Calculations made use of in that work, agreed with the accounts laid down in the Scriptures, and Prophane Authors, which could not be done in the Annals themselves, without interrupting the Series of the Work: In this he hath solved several difficulties relating to the History, and Chronology of the Bible; he began with the Crea∣tion, though the first Chapter is lost (being not to be found among his Papers,) yet in the next he gives an exact account of the dif∣ferences between the Jewish, Samaritan, and Greek Calculations, from the Creation to the Birth of Abraham, which he carried on, as far as the time of the Judges, but was then interrupted by death: Yet he had before happily perfected the account of the Reigns, and Synchronisms of the Kings of Judah, and Israel, from Saul to the Baby∣lonish Captivity, which being more perfect than the other part, was thought fit by the Printer, or Publisher to be set before it, though it be indeed contrary to the order of time: It was great pity that my Lord did not live to finish this work, which would have been of excellent use for the clearing of many difficulties, and recon∣ciling the differences between the Sacred and Prophane Chronology, and History. I may here likewise take notice of those many Vo∣lumes of his Collections, and several of them, all of his own hand, on particular subjects, both Theological, Philological, and Historical, most of them extracted out of several Manuscripts in the Libraries of the Universities, Cathedrals, and private mens Studies, there being scarce a choice Book, or Manuscript in any of them but was known to him, nor was he conversant in the Libraries of our own Nation alone, but also knew most of the choice pieces in the Vati∣can, Escurial, and Imperial Library at Vienna, as likewise in that of the King of France, of Thuanus at Paris, and Erpenius in Holland, as still appears by the Catalogues he had procured of them, divers of which I have now in my Custody; and out of which Libraries he at his great cost procured divers Copies for his own use, which made the most considerable Ornament of his Study. But to re∣turn to his own Collections above mentioned, which were the Store-Houses, and Repositories, from whence he furnished himself with materials for the writing of so many learned Treatises, and out of which might be gathered matter towards the performing much more in the same kind, though divers Volumes of them were borrowed by Dr. Bernard, and never restored by him, as I have already said: Yet those that remain are thought very con∣siderable by the several Learned men, who have perused them,
and in particular, the late judicious Lord Chief Justice Hale having borrowed several of them, did out of them Transcribe those four Volumes, which he bequeaths in his Will to the Library at Lin∣colns-Inn, among divers other Manuscripts of his, by the name of His Extracts out of the Lord Primate's Collections: And for the satis∣faction of the Reader, I shall give you the Heads, and Subjects of some of the most considerable of them, at the end of this account: So that the Lord Primate was like the wise Housholder in the Gospel, who brought out of his Treasure things New and Old: And a Learned man of this Nation compared the Arch-Bishop of Armagh, not only to a careful Surveyor, who collects all sorts of materials for his building, before he begins his work, but also to a skilful Architect, who knew Artificially how to frame and put together the materials before Collected, till they became one strong, entire, and uniform Structure. Nor does any thing more express the great strength of the Lord Primate's memory, than those Collections, which though promiscuously gathered by way of Adversaria, according as those Subjects offered themselves, yet could he as readily call to mind, and find out any particular in them, which he had occasion to make use of, as if they had been digested in the more exact method of a Common-place-Book. So that he certainly deserved a much higher Character than that Dr. Heylin Sarcastically puts upon him, Of a walking Concordance, and living Library, as if he had been only an Index for such wise men as himself to make use of; but greater Scholars than he, had far higher and more Reverend thoughts of him, there being scarce a Learned Writer of this present Age, who does not mention his great Piety, Learning, and Judgment with honour, and venera∣tion: I had once collected a great many Elogies of this kind from the Writings of divers considerable Authors, but since I find that done already by others, and that it would swell this work into too great a bulk, and only serve to prove that which I think no body questions; I shall only refer you to the Learned Works of Mr. Cambden, Mr. Selden, Sir Roger Twisden, Bishop Davenant, Bi∣shop Hall, Bishop Prideaux, and divers others of our own Coun∣try: And of Foreigners, to the Learned Vossius, Spanhemius, Te∣stardus, Morus, Lud. de Dieu, Bochartus, and many more; divers of whose Letters you will find in this ensuing Collection, so that you can scarce read farther, than the Preface, or Epistle Dedica∣tory of several of their Works, without finding his name mentio∣ned with peculiar honour; but I cannot here omit that Elogy gi∣ven him by the Suffrages of the University of Oxford, in a publick Convocation, Anno 1644. since the Authors are not commonly known.
Jacobus Usserius, Archiepiscopus Armachanus, Totius Hiberniae Primas, Antiquitatis primaevae peritissimus, Orthodoxae Religionis vindex , Errorum malleus, In Concionando frequens, facundus, praepotens, Vitae inculpatae Exemplar Spectabile. Rob. Pink Vicecancellarius Oxoniensis posuit. This was then ordered to be placed under his Effigies, cut in Brass at the charges of the University, in order to be prefixed be∣fore his Works. And unto what hath been already said concerning his great Learning, we may add his great activity, as occasion served, to advance the Restauration of our old Northern Antiquities, which lay buried in the Gothick, Anglo-Saxonick, and other the like obso∣late Languages. And for this we have the Testimony of two late learned, and most industrious retrievers of those decayed Dia∣lects; namely, Mr. Abraham Whelock, late Professor of Arabick, and Saxon, in the University of Cambridge, and Mr. Francis Junius. The first of these, in an Epistle before the Saxon Translation of Bede's History, acknowledgeth the solemn direction and encou∣ragement he received in Cambridge from the Lord Primate of Ire∣land, in order to the prosecuting his publick Saxon Lectures in that place: And in his Notes upon the Persian Gospels, the same Au∣thor Not. ad Mat. 6. shews what information he received from that Reverend Person, concerning the Doxology in the Lord's Prayer, which is found in the very Ancient Translation of the Gospels into Gothick. Mr. Junius published a very old Paraphrastical Poem in Saxon, which upon strict enquiry was found to be written by one Caed∣mon, a Monk, of whom Bede makes mention: The Manuscript Copy of which Poem, the said Publisher lets his Reader know more than once, he received from the hands of the Lord Arch-Bishop of Armagh. And when the same Author published the now mentioned Gothick Translation of the four Evangelists, and Observat. in Willeram, pag. 248. & Prae∣fat. in Caed. carefully transcribed out of the most venerable Monument, known by the name of Codex Argenteus, he therewith printed in his Go∣thick Glossary a very learned Epistle upon that Subject, written Pag. 14. to him by the same Lord Primate of Armagh, which you will find in this ensuing Collection.
But whilst we now speak of his Learning, I had almost omit∣ted to give you some account of that, out of which he gained great part of it, his excellent Library, consisting of near 10000 Volumes, Prints, and Manuscripts, all which, he in the time of his prosperity, intended to bestow at his death on the Colledge of Dub∣lin, in gratitude to the place where he received his Education: But when it pleased God to lay that great Affliction upon him, in the loss of all he had, except his Books, it is not to be wondered if he left those as a portion to his only Daughter, who had been the Mother of a numerous Off-spring, and hitherto had nothing from him, and which (besides some parcels of Gold he had by him, that had been before presented to him by Mr. Selden's Exe∣cutors, and other Persons of Quality) was all he had to leave her. This Library which cost the Lord Primate many Thousand pounds, was after his decease much sought for by the King of Den∣mark, and Cardinal Mazarine, and a good price offered for it by their Agents here: But the Lord Primate's Administrators being pro∣hibited by an Order from the Usurper, and his Council, to sell it to any without his consent, it was at last bought by the Souldiers, and Officers of the then Army in Ireland, who out of Emulation to the former Noble Action of Queen Elizabeth's Army, were in∣cited, by some men of Publick Spirits, to the like performance, and they had it for much less than what it was really worth, or what had been offered for it before, by the Agents above mentio∣ned: They had also with it all his Manuscripts, (which were not of his own hand-writing,) as also a choice (though not numer∣ous) Collection of Ancient Coins: But when this Library was brought over into Ireland, the Usurper, and his Son, who then Com∣manded in chief there, would not bestow it upon the Colledge of Dublin, least, perhaps, the gift should not appear so considerable there, as it would do by it self; and therefore they gave out, That they would reserve it for a new Colledge or Hall, which they said they intended to Build, and Endow: But it proved, that as those were not Times, so were they not Persons capable of any such noble, or pious work, so that this Library lay in the Castle of Dub∣lin unbestowed, and unimployed all the remaining time of Crom∣well's Usurpation; but after his death, and during that Anarchy, and confusion that followed it, the rooms where this Treasure was kept, being left open, many of the Books, and most of the best Manuscripts were stolen away, or else imbezeled by those who were intrusted with them; but after his late Majesty's Re∣stauration, when they fell to his disposal, he generously bestowed them on the Colledge, for which they were intended by their owner, where they now remain; and (as they are) make up the greater part of that Library.
Thus having dispatch'd (as well as I am able) this account of the Life, and Writings of this rare, and admirable Prelate, though infinitely short of his incomparable worth, and perfections, being so eminently Pious, so prodigiously Learned, and every way so richly accomplished, I can only conclude, humbly beseeching the God of all Grace, the Father of Light, the Giver of every good and perfect Gift, That he would appoint, and continue in his Church a constant Succession of such Lights; and that particularly within his Majesty's Dominions, these Churches may still flourish under the like Pious, Watchful, Laborious, and Exemplary Mini∣sters, and Bishops, who may adorn the Gospel, and their own pro∣fession; for the Confutation of the Adversaries of our Religion, and the Conviction of all those who clamour against the Doctrine, Government, and Godly Worship now Established in the Church of England. Amen.
M. S. JACOBUS USSERIUS, Archiepiscopus Armachanus Hic situs est; Ob Praeclaram Prosapiam, Raram Eruditionem, Ingenii Acumen, Dicendi & scribendi faeundiam, Morum gravitatem suavitate conditam, Vitae candorem & integritatem, Aequabilem in utrâ{que} fortunâ animi constantiam, Orbi Christiano & Piis omnibus Charus, Omnium{que} judicio praeterquam suo, Praesul verè Magnus. Qui Ecclesiam Veterum institutis, Clerum suo Exemplo, Populum Concionibus Affidue instruxit: Chronologiam sacram pristino nitori restituit; Bonarum artium Professores, Inopia Afflictos, Munificentiâ sublevavit: Deni{que} qui Haereses repullulantes calamo erudito contudit; His ingenii dotibus, his animi virtutibus ornatus, Praesul optimus, piissimus, meritissimus, Cum inter bella Civilia & Ecclesiae & Patriae suae funesta, Sibi{que} Luctuosa, Nec Ecclesiae nec Patriae diutius prodesse poterat, In Christo pacis Authore placide obdormivit, Anno Aerae Christianae, 1655. Aetatis suae, 76. Riegat in Comitatu Surrey, Martii, 21. Obiit, Sepultus apud Westmonast. In Hen. 7mi. Capellâ Apr. 5. 1656.
A Catalogue of the Lord Primate, James Usher's Works, and Writings, already Printed. In Latin. DE Ecclesiarum Christianarum Successione & Statu, cum Explicatione Quaestionis de Statu Ecclesiarum, in partibus praesertim occidentis, à tempore Apostolorum. De primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum. Epistolarum Hibernicarum Sylloge. Historia Gotes-Chalci. Polycarpi & Ignatii Epistolae Graec. Lat. cum desertatione de eorum Scriptis, deque Apostolicis Canonibus & Constitutionibus Clementi tri∣butis. Appendix Ignatiana. De Romanae Ecclesiae Symbolo Apostolico vetere, & aliis fidei formulis. De Anno solari Macedonum. Epistola ad Lodovicum Capellum, de textus Hebr. variantibus Lectionibus. Annales Vet. Test. Annales N. Test. Chronologia Sacra. De Graecâ Septuaginta Interpretum versione Syntagma. Desertatio de Cainane. In English. AN Answer to Malon the Jesuits Challenge. The Religion professed by the Ancient Irish and Britains. A Sermon Preached before the House of Commons; Westminster. A Sermon of the Visibility of the Church, Preached before King James, Jun. 25, 1624. A Speech delivered in the Castle Chamber Dublin, concerning the Lawfulness of taking, and danger of refusing the Oath of Supremacy, Nov. 22. 1622. A Speech in the same Place upon the denial to contribute for the Supply of the Kings Army, for the defence of the Government, April 30, 1627. Immanuel, or the Mistery of the Incarnation of the Son of God. A Geographical Description of the lesser Asia. A Discourse of Bishops and Metropolitans. A small Catechism entitled the Principles of Christian Religion, with a brief Method of the Doctrine thereof. His Annals of the Old and New Testament, Translated into English, with the Synchronisms of the Heathen Story, to the destruction of Jerusalem. The Power of the Prince, and Obedience of the Subject stated, with a Pre∣face by Dr. Robert Sanderson late Bishop of Lincoln. Published from the Original Copy, written with his own hand, by James Tyrrell Esq, Grand∣son to the Lord Primate. A Body of Divinity, or the Summ and Substance of Christian Religion by way of Question and Answer, collected by himself in his younger years for his own private Use, and through the Importunity of some Friends commu∣nicated to them, but not with a Design to be Printed, though afterwards published by others; with good Acceptance. A Volume of Sermons in Folio, Preached at Oxford, before his Majesty, and elsewhere; published since his Death. These that follow were gathered out of the Fragments of the Lord Primate, and Published since his Death, by Dr. Bernard. HIS Judgment and Sense of the State of the present See of Rome from, Apocal. 18. 4. Ordination a Fundamental: His Sense of Hebrews, 6. 2. Of the use of a Set form of Prayer in the Church. The extent of Christs Death and Satisfaction, with an Answer to the Excep∣tions taken against it. Of the Sabbath, and Observation of the Lords Day. His Judgment and Sense of John 20. 22. 23. Receive ye the Holy-Ghost. Whose Sins ye Remit, &c. A Catalogue of the Lord Primate Ushers own Manu∣scripts, of various Subjects, not Printed. Lemmata Manuscriptorum. CEnsura Patrum & aliorum Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, five Bibliotheca Theologica. Historiae dogmaticae Quaestionum inter Orthodoxos & Pontificios Controver∣sarum Specimen, in Quaestione de Communi Sacrarum Scripturarum usu, contra Scripturarum lucifugas. De veterum Pascalibus Scriptis, & de ratione Paschali, quibus computi Eccle∣siastici in Universo orbe Christiano, ante Gregorianam reformationem, apperiuntur, ex vetustissimis Manuscriptis codicibus, notis Illustratum. Veterum de tempore Passionis Dominicae & Phaschalis . Variae Lectiones & Collationes, Vet. & Nov. Instrumenti. 1. Genesis] Longe antiquissimum exemplar Graecum Cottonianum, cum editione Francofurtensi, Collatum. 2. Collatio Psalterii à B. Hieronymo ex Heb. conversi, & à Jacobo Fabro, Parisiis, An. 1513. editi, cum aliis exemplaribus Manuscriptis & Impressis. 3. Annotationes variarum Lectionum in Psalmis juxta Masoreth Judaeorum, five cum notâ aliquâ Masoreticâ. 4. Psalterium cum versione Saxonicâ interlineatâ in Bibliothecâ Salisburiensis Ecclesiae. 5. Psalterium Gallicum cum Romano collatum & Hebraico  opposi∣tum, Manuscripto in Westmonasteriensis Ecclesiae Bibliothecâ. 6. Collatio Canticorum utriusque Testamenti cum editione vulgatâ Latinâ. 7. Variae Lectiones & Collationes N. Test. ex vetustissimis Exemplaribus. 8. Collatio editionis Chronici Eusebii, à Josepho Scaligero edit. cum Manu∣scripto è Regiâ Bibliothecâ. 9. Collatio variorum Pentateuchi Samaritani Exemplarium, cum notis & Observationibus. 10. Chronologia Legum Codicis Theodosiani & Justiniani; collata cum Malmesburiensi Manuscripto. Julianae Periodi ad Juliani anni usum & vulgaris aerae Christianae, ad anni Ju∣liani pariter & Gregoriani Methodum accommodatae, fixa jam Epochâ, cum Tabulâ reductionis dierum Anni Juliani veteris ad dies Anni Gregoriani Novi, hodie usitati in pluribus partibus orbis. Ratio Bissextorum literarum Dominicarum, Equinoctiorum & Festorum Christianorum, tam mobilium quam immobilium. De Institutione Chronologicâ, viz. De Tempore & illius Mensurâ, de Die ejusque partibus, de horis & scrupulis, de Hebdomadibus & Mensibus, de Anno Astronomico, de variâ Annorum Supputatione: Secundum Graeca Exemplaria. De differentiâ circuli & spherae, de cursu septem Planetarum & Signorum Coelestium, & de quinque Parall. in sphera Zonasdistinguent.— Veteres Observationes Coelestes Chaldaicae, Graecae, & Aegyptiacae. Insigniorum Imperiorum & Regnorum, quae ante Christi adventum in orbe floruerunt, successiones et tempora, ad usum veteris Historiae studiosorum; eorum praesertim qui exoticam Chronologiam cum Sacra conferre cupiunt. Series Chronologica Syriaca, Regum & Imperatorum Babylonicorum, Persa∣rum, Graecorum, & Romanorum, à Nebuchadnezzar ad Vespasianum, ab Anno Mundi 4915. ad Annum 5585. De fastis Magistratuum & Coss. & Triumphorum Romanorum, ab Urbe Con∣dita usque ad excessum Caesaris Augusti, ex fragmentis Marmoreis foro Romano effossis, & à doctissimis nostri temporis Chronographis suppletis. Catalogus Consulum, ex variis Authoribus. De Ponderibus & Mensuris. De Primis Haereticis & Haeresibus Judaeorum. Annotationes Rabbinicae, ex Scriptis Rabbinorum & eorum Scarae Scripturae In∣terpretum. Imperatorum Christianorum à Constantino magno usque ad Justinianum, Con∣stitutiones, & Epistolae collectae & recensitae. Veterum Anglo-Saxorum Monumenta & Anglo-Saxonicarum Epistolarum Sylloge, ex variis Manuscriptis. Epistolae Alcuini variae ad diversos Missae ineditae, in Bibliothecâ Cottonianâ Manuscriptis collectae & recensitae. Epistolae venerabilis Archiepiscop. Lanfranci ad diversos Missae, ex antiquissi∣mo exemplari Bibliothecae Cottonianae collectae, & recensitae. Collectiones Genealogicae, Historicae, Mathematicae, Astrologicae, Chronolo∣gicae, & Theologicae variae, de quibus passim judicium fertur. Memorandum, THat out of the forementioned Manuscripts, the Incomparable Sir Math. Hale, late Lord Chief Justice, (having borrowed them) extracted those four Volumes, which he calls, Chronological Remembrances extracted out of thë Notes of Bishop Usher, mentioned in the Catalogue of his Ma∣nuscripts, which he Left to the Honourable Society of Lincolns-Inn. Besides those Manuscripts above cited, the Primate Usher had Written his Polemical Lectures in the University of Dublin, while professor there, touch∣ing the Points in Controversie, between the Protestants and Pontificians, 3 Volumes 4to. (Lost) His Lectures pro formâ when he commenced Dr. of Divinity, touching the 70 Weeks, Dan. 9. 24. and de Mille Annis, mentioned Apocal. 20. 4. (Lost) His Treatise of the Hermage and Corban Lands in England and Ireland, yet to be seen in Bibliothecâ Lambethianâ. His Collections and Observations touching the Advancement and Restaura∣tion of our Northern Antiquities in the Gothick, Anglo-Saxonick, and the like obscure Languages; and also concerning the Doxology, found in the very Ancient Gospels in Gothick. His Numerous Epistles Latin and English, touching matters of Learning, and Religion, many of them now Printed in Collection with others.
An APPENDIX to the Life of the Lord Pri∣mate USHER; containing a vindication of his Opinions and Actions in reference to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and his Conformity thereunto, from the Aspersions of Peter Heylin D. D. in his Pamphlet called Respondet Petrus. FInding that Dr. Heylin hath taken the pains to write this Book on purpose to callumniate and asperse the Lord Primates Memory, and arraign his Opinions and Acti∣ons, as not conformable to the Doctrines of the Church of England, I cannot well omit to consider what that Au∣thor hath there laid to his charge, how justly I shall leave to the impartial Reader to judg; for I hope I shall make it appear that what the Lord Primate hath either publish'd, or written in private Letters on those Subjects, was on very good grounds, and such as may very well be defended, as agreeable to the Sence and Doctrine of our Church, contained in the 39 Articles. Or if after all I can say, the Reader shall happen to think otherwise, I desire him not to censure too hardly, but to pass it by, since such difference (if any be) was not in the fundamental Doctrines of our Religion, but only some Points of lesser moment; or in which the Church it self has not tied men either to this or that sence; and that the Lord Primate held these Opinions, not out of contradiction or singula∣rity, but only because he thought them more agreeable to Scrip∣ture and Reason: tho in most of them I doubt not but to shew, that the Doctor has stretched the Lord Primate's words farther than ever his own sence and meaning was. But to come to the Points in which the Doctor hath made bold to question his Judg∣ment, the first is his Opinion of the Divine Morality of the Sab∣bath, or Seventh days rest, asserted by him in two several Letters, published (tho perhaps not so prudently with those private reflec∣tions) by Dr. Bernard, in which Controversy whether the Autho∣rities made use of by the Lord Primate out of the Fathers and other Writers, do not make out the Assertion by him laid down; or whe∣ther the Doctor has fairly and ingenuously answered those Quota∣tions he cites in those Letters, I shall not here take upon me to ex∣amine, but shall observe thus much, That as it is a Doctrine held by some of the Fathers, as also maintained by divers learned Di∣vines and Bishops of our Church, and therefore could not be so Puritanical as the Doctor would have it; especially since the Lord
Primate thought that he had the Church of England on his side, as she hath declared her sence of this matter in the first part of the Homily of the time and place of Prayer, viz. God hath given express charge to all Men, that upon the Sabbath day (which is now our Sunday) they shall cease from all weekly and work-day labour; to the intent, that like as God himself wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and blessed and con∣secrated it to quietness and rest from labour: even so God's obedient People should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their common and daily business, and also give themselves wholly to the heavenly exercise of God's true Reli∣gion and Service. Which passage being expresly in the point, of my Lord Primat's side, the Sabbath day, mentioned in the fourth Com∣mandment, being there called our Sunday, and the same reason laid down for its observation, viz. because God had rested on the Ib. Sect. 7. seventh day, &c. The Doctor has no way to oppose this so express Authority, but to make (if possible) this Homily to contradict it self; and therefore he produces another passage just preceding in this Homily, as making for his Opinion, which that you may judge whether it does so or no, I shall put down the passage as he him∣self hath cited it, with his Conclusions from it, and shall then fur∣ther examine whether it makes so much of his side as he would have it, viz. As concerning the time in which God hath appointed his People to assemble together solemnly, it doth appear by the fourth Commandment, &c. And albeit this Commandment of God doth not bind Christian People so strictly to observe and keep the utter Ceremonies of the Sabbath day, as it was given unto the Jews, as touching the forbearing of work and labour, and as touching the precise keeping of the seventh day, after the manner of the Jews; (for we keep now the first day, which is our Sunday, and make that our Sabbath, that is, our day of rest, in honour of our Saviour Christ, who upon that day rose from death, conquering the same most triumphantly:) yet notwithstanding whatsoever is found in the Commandment appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most godly, most just and needful for the set∣ting forth of God's Glory, ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian People. So that it being thus resolved, that there is no more of the fourth Commandment to be retained by good Christian People, than what is found appertaining to the Law of Nature; and that the Law of Nature doth not tie us to one day in seven, or more, to one day of the seven, than to any other; let us next see by what Authority the day was changed, and how it came to be translated from the seventh to the first. Concerning which it follows thus in the said Homily, viz. This Example and Commandment of God, the god∣ly Christian People began to follow immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to chuse them a standing Day of the week to come together in; yet not the seventh Day, which the Jews kept, but the Lord's Day, the Day of the Lord's Resurrection, the Day after the seventh Day, which is
the first Day of the week, &c. sithence which time God's People hath always in all Ages, without any gainsaying, used to come together on the Sunday to celebrate and honour God's blessed Name, and carefully to keep that Day in holy rest and quietness. So far the Homily. And by this Homily it appears plainly, that the keeping of the Lord's day is not grounded on any Commandment of Christ, nor any Precept of the Apostles, but that it was chosen as a standing day of the week to come toge∣ther in, by the Godly Christian People immediately after Christ's Ascension, and hath so continued ever since. But the Doctor has been very careful in his Quotations, not only to take whatsoever in this Homily he thinks makes for his purpose, but has also been so wary as to leave out whatsoever he thinks is against him; and therefore the Reader is to take notice, that the place first cited by the Doctor immediately precedes that before quoted by the Lord Primate, being connected to it by this passage (which the Doctor omits), And therefore by this Commandment, we ought to have a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works. So likewise doth he omit that which immediately follows the words quoted by my Lord Primate, viz. So that God doth not only command the observation of this Holy Day, but also by his own example doth stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same. And after the obedience of natural Children, not only to the Commands, but also to the Example of their Parents, is urged, it follows thus, as an Argument for its observation, So if we will be the Children of our heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian Sabbath Day, which is the Sunday, not only for that it is God's express Commandment, but also to declare our selves to be loving Children, in following the Example of our gracious Lord and Father. After which it follows again in the next Paragraph (which is also concealed by the Doctor, tho it connects the words aforegoing, and the passage he next makes use of, together), Thus it may plainly appear that God's Will and Commandment was to have a solemn time, and standing-day in the week, wherein the People should come together, and have in remembrance his wonderful Benefits, and to render him thanks for them, as appertaineth to loving and obedient People. From all which put together, I shall leave it to the ingenuous Rea∣der to judge who hath most perverted the sence of this Homily, the Lord Primate, or the Doctor and whether or no these Con∣clusions following do not clearly follow from the passages above∣cited; first, that by the fourth Commandment it is God's perpetual Will to have one solemn and standing Day in the week for People to meet to∣gether to worship and serve him Secondly, That this day, tho it be not the seventh day from the Creation, yet is still the Christian Sab∣bath, or day of Rest, being still the seventh day, and still observed, (not only because of our Saviour Christ's Resurrection on this day)
but also that we keep the Christian Sabbath, which is the Sunday, as well for that it is God's express Commandment, as also to shew our selves dutiful Children, in following the Example of our gracious Lord and Father, who rested on the seventh day. Thirdly, That on this Christian Sabbath, or Sunday, we ought to rest from our lawful and needful works, and common and daily business; and also give our selves wholly to Heavenly Exercises of God's true Religion and Service. And therefore this being the express words and sence of this Homily, that we may not make it con∣tradict it self, the passages which the Doctor relies so much upon, must have this reasonable construction, viz. That the Maker there∣of, tho he supposed that we Christians were not obliged to the precise keeping of the seventh day after the manner of the Jews, Yet notwithstanding whatsoever is found in this Commandment appertaining to the Law of Nature, &c. as most just and needful for the setting forth of God's Glory, ought to be retained and kept of all Christian People. Which words must be understood in a clean contrary sence to the Doctor's, viz. that the meaning of the Author was, (and which our Church confirms) that by the Law of Nature the seventh day or one day in seven is to be kept holy; or otherwise to what purpose serve these words before recited, viz. thus it may plainly appear that God's Will and Commandment was to have one solemn and standing Day in the week, wherein People should come together &c. (that is, now under the Go∣spel, as before under the Law.) And what follows, which the Doctor thinks makes for him, viz. This Example and Commandment of God the Godly Christian People began to follow immediatly after the As∣cension of our Lord Christ, and began to chuse them a standing day of the week to come together in; yet not the seventh day, which the Jews kept, but the Lord's Day, the Day of the Lord's Resurrection, the day after the seventh day, which is the first day of the week, &c. does rather make against him; that is, by Gods Example as well as Command, they were obliged after Christs Ascension to chuse them one standing day of the week to meet together in: And if so, that must be one day in seven by an immutable moral institution; or else, the Church might, if they had so pleased, have celebrated the Lord's Resur∣rection (not as the Homily says) on one standing day of the week, but only at Easter; and the Law of Nature, according to the Doctor, not tying us to observe one day in seven, if this Com∣mandment of keeping the Sabbath, or seventh day, oblige none but the Jews; then the primitive Church might, if they had pleased, have quite left off setting aside any particular day of the week for God's Service, and have thought it sufficient to have kept one day (suppose) in a month or two, for Men to meet together for the Service and Worship of God: which whether those of the Doctor's Party would be pleased with, I shall not dispute; but sure I am
that the Church of England maintains no such Doctrine. But the Doctor, because he thinks the Homily not enough of his side, un∣dertakes to shew us upon what grounds the Lord's day stood in the Church of England at the time of the making this Homily, and therefore he has put down the Proem of an Act of Parliament of the fifth and sixth years of Edward the 6th concerning Holy-days, by which he would have the Lord's day to stand on no other ground but the Authority of the Church, not as enjoyned by Christ, or ordained by any of his Apostles. Which Statute whosoever shall be pleased to peruse, may easily see that this Proem he mentions, relates only to Holy days, and not to Sundays, as you may observe from this pas∣sage, viz.—which holy Works as they may be called God's Service, so the times especially appointed for the same are called Holy-days, not for the matter or nature either of the time or day, &c. which title of Holy-days was never applied to Sundays, either in a vulgar, or legal accepta∣tion. And tho the Doctor fancied this Act was in force at the time when this Homily was made, and therefore must by no means contradict so sacred an Authority as that of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament: because this Act, tho repealed by Queen Mary, he would have to be revived again the first year of Queen Elizabeth, and so to stand in force at the time of making this Homily; whereas whoever consults our Statute-Book, will find that this Statute of King Edward the 6th was not revived, nor in force till the first of King James, when the Repeal of this Statute was again repealed: tho certainly the reviving of that, or any other Statute, does not make their Proems (which are often ve∣ry carelesly drawn) to be in every clause either good Law, or Go∣spel: But tho the Doctor in other things abhors the Temporal Powers having any thing to do in matters of Religion; yet if it make for his Opinion, then the Authority of a Parliament shall be as good as that of a Convocation. But I have dwelt too long up∣on this Head, which I could not well contract, if I spoke any thing at all to justifie the Lord Primat's Judgment in this so mate∣rial a Doctrine. The next Point that the Doctor lays to the Lord Primat's charge Resp. Pet. Sect. 10. as not according to the Church of England, is a passage in a Let∣ter to Dr. Bernard, and by him published in the Book, intituled, The Judgment of the late Primat of Ireland, &c. viz. That he ever de∣clared his Opinion to be, that Episcopus & Presbyter gradu tantum dif∣ferunt, non ordine, and consequently that in places where Bishops cannot be had, the Ordination by Presbyters standeth valid. And however (saith he) I must needs think that the Churches in France, who living under a Popish Power, and cannot do what they would, are more excusable in that defect than those of the Low-Countries, that live under a Free-State, yet
for the testifying my communion with these Churches (which I do love and honour as true members of the Church Universal) I do profess, that with like affection I should receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of the Dutch Ministers, if I were in Holland, as I should do at the hands of the French Ministers, if I were at Charenton. Which Opinion as I cannot deny to have been my Lord Primat's, since I find the same written almost verbatim with his own hand, (dated Nov. 26. 1655, in a private Note-Book) not many months before his death, with the addition of this clause at the beginning, viz. Yet, on the other side, holding as I do, That a Bishop hath Superiority in degree above Presbyters, you may easily judg that the Ordination made by such Presbyters as have se∣vered themselves from their Bishops, cannot possibly by me be excused from being schismatical. And concluding with another clause, viz. for the agreement or disagreement in radical and fundamental Doctrines; not the consonancy, or dissonancy in the particular points of Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment) is with me (and I hope with every man that mindeth Peace) the rule of adhering to, or receding from the Communion of any Church. And that the Lord Primate was always of this Opinion, I find by another Note of his own hand, written in another Book many years before this, in these words, viz. The intrinsecal power of Ordaining proceedeth not from Jurisdiction, but only from Order. But a Presbyter hath the same Or∣der in specie with a Bishop; Ergo, A Presbyter hath equally an intrinsecal power to give Orders; and is equal to him in the power of Order; the Bi∣shop having no higher degree in respect of intension, or extention of the cha∣racter of Order; tho he hath an higher degree, i. e. a more eminent place in re∣spect of Authority and Jurisdiction in Spiritual Regiment. Again, The Pa∣pists teach that the confirmation of the Baptized is proper to a Bishop, as pro∣ceeding from the Episcopal Character as well as Ordination: and yet in some cases may be communicated to a Presbyter, and much more therefore in regard of the over-ruling Commands of invincible necessity, although the right of Baptising was given by Christ's own Commission to the Apostles, and their Successors: and yet in case of Necessity allowed to Lay-men: even so Ordi∣nation might be devolved to Presbyters in case of Necessity. These passages perhaps may seem to some Men inconsistent with what the Lord Primate hath written in some of his printed Treatises, and parti∣cularly that of the Original of Episcopacy, wherein he proves from Rev. 2. 1. that the Stars there described in our blessed Saviour's right hand, to be the Angels of the seven Churches. 2. That these An∣gels were the several Bishops of those Churches, and not the whole Colledg of Presbyters, as Mr. Brightman would have it. 3. Nor has he proved Archbishops less ancient, each of these seven Chur∣ches being at that time a Metropolis, which had several Bishops under it; and (4) that these Bishops and Archbishops were or∣dained by the Apostles, as constant permanent Officers in the
Church, and so in some sort Jure Divino; that is, in St. Hierom's sence, were ordained by the Apostles for the better conferring of Orders, and for preventing of Schisms, which would otherwise arise among Presbyters, if they had been all left equal, and indepen∣dent to each other. And that this may very well consist with their being in some cases of Necessity, not absolutely necessary in some Churches, is proved by the Learned Mr. Mason, in his defence of the Ordination of Ministers beyond the Seas, where there are no Bishops, in which he proves at large against the Papists, that make this Objection from their own Schoolmen and Canonists; and that tho a Bishop receives a Sacred Office, Eminency in Degree, and a larger Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction than a Presbyter, yet that all these do not confer an absolute distinct Order; and yet that Bishops are still Jure Divino, that is, by the Ordinance of God, since they were ordained by the Apostles, and whereunto they were directed by God's Holy Spirit, and in that sence are the Or∣dinance of God. But if by Jure Divino, you would understand a Law binding all Christian Churches universally, perpetually, un∣changeably, and with such absolute Necessity that no other form of Regiment may in any case be admitted, in this sence we can∣not grant it to be Jure Divino. And much of the same Opinion is the Learned Bishop Davenant in his Treatise. So that you see here that as Learned Men, and as stout Asserters of Episcopacy as any the Church of England hath had, have been of the Lord Primat's Judgment in this matter, tho without any design to lessen the Order of Bishops, or to take away their use in the Church, since Mr. Mason in the said Treatise, tho he grants the French Churches (having a constant President of the Presbytery) to enjoy the substance of the Episcopal Office; Yet whereas their Discipline is still very defective, he wishes them in the bowels of Christ by all means to redress and reform it, and to conform themselves to the ancient Custom of the Church of Christ: So that I hope after all, this Question, Whether Episcopacy be Ordo, or Gradus, will prove only a difference in words rather than sub∣stance, between those of the Lord Primat's Judgment, and those of the contrary, since they are both agreed in the main Points in con∣trove sie between them and the Presbyterians, viz. That Bishops were ordained in the Church by the Apostles themselves, from the direction, or at least approbation of our Saviour himself, being the Stars which St. John saw in his Vision in our Lord Christ's own Hand, and that they are permanent, immutable Officers in the Church, which cannot subsist without it, but in Cases of pure Ne∣cessity. And lastly, that those Presbyters, which in Churches founded and setled with Bishops, do separate from them, are
guilty of Schism. These things being agreed upon on both sides, I think the rest of the Controversie is not worth contending about: But if any Learned Persons of the Church of England, who are well vers'd in the Writings of the Fathers, and other ancient Monuments of the Church, have already proved, or can further make out, that Episcopacy has always been an absolute distinct Order, as well as Office in the Church, I suppose the Lord Primate, were he now alive, would be so far from opposing them, that he would heartily thank them for giving him greater light, provided it could be done without unchurching all those Protestant Churches abroad vvho want Bishops. And I hope however, if the Lord Primat may be thought by the Doctor, or others, not to go high enough in this matter, nor sufficiently to magnifie his own Office, yet that he may well be pardoned, since it proceeded from his excess of Hu∣mility, and Charity towards our neighbouring-Churches, to whom no good Protestants ought to deny the right-hand of fellow∣ship. The third Point which the Doctor will have the Lord Primat to hold contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, which (he says) maintains an Universal Redemption of all Mankind, by the Sufferings and Death of Christ, as is proved by the Prayer of Consecration of the sacred Elements in the Sacrament, which declares, that God hath given to his Son Jesus Christ, by his suffering death upon the Cross, and by the Oblation of himself, a full and sufficient Sacri∣fice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. And also that in the publick Catechism, the party catechised is taught, to believe in God the Son, who hath redeemed him, and all Mankind. But that in this Point the Lord Primat is of a contrary Judgment to the Church of England. For as he seems not to like their opinion, who contradict the riches of Christ's Satisfaction into too narrow a room, as if none had any interest therein but such as were elected before the foundation of the World; so he declareth his dislike of the other Extream (as he is pleased to call it) by which the benefit of this Satisfaction is extended to the Redemption of all Mankind. The one Extremity (saith he) extends the benefit of Christ's Satisfaction so far, ut reconciliationem cum Deo, & Peccatorem Remissionem singulis impetraverit, as to obtain a Reconciliation with God, and a Remission of Sins for all Men at his merciful hands, p. 21. which The Lord Primat's Judgment. tho they are the words of the Remonstrants at the Conference at the Hague, Anno 1611, and are by him reckoned for untrue; yet do they naturally result from the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, which is maintained in the Church of England; not that all Man∣kind is so perfectly reconciled to Almighty God, as to be really and actually discharged from all their Sins, before they actually
believe, (which the Lord Primate makes to be the meaning and effect of that Extremity, as he calls it, p. 2.) but that they are so far reconciled unto Him as to be capable of the remission of their Sins, in case they do not want that Faith in their common Sa∣viour which is required thereunto. And here the Doctor thinks he finds out two notable Contradictions in the Lord Primat's Let∣ter of the Year 1617, since in one part thereof, he seems to dislike of their Opinion, who contract the riches of Christ's Satisfaction into too nar∣row a room; as if none had any kind of interest therein, but such as were elected before the foundation of the World, as before was said. And in the other he declares, that he is well assured that our Saviour hath ob∣tained at the hands of his Father Reconciliation, and Forgiveness of Sins, not for the Reprobate, but Elect only. p. 1. Now the Doctor has done his worst. Yet I hope to prove that tho there may be a diffe∣rence between my Lord Primat's way of explaining this Doctrine, and that of the Doctor's, (which proceeds indeed from the different Notions they had of Election and Reprobation); Yet that there is no such formidable Contradiction in these two Propositions of my Lord Primat's by him laid down, as the Doctor fancies; or that the L. Primat hath maintained any thing in this Doctrine contra∣ry to that of the Church of England: for (1.) the Doctor owns that all Mankind is not so perfectly reconciled to Almighty God, as to be really and actually discharged from all their Sins, before they actually believe; but that they are so far reconciled unto him, as to be capable of the remission of their Sins, in case they do not want that Faith in their common Saviour which is required there∣unto. Now what will the Doctor get by these words, [if they are so far reconciled to him, as to be capable of the remission of their Sins, in case they do not want that Faith which is required thereunto] since the Questi∣on still remains between the Lord Primat, and those of the con∣trary Opinion, Whether all Men can obtain, without the aid of Grace, this saving Faith which is required thereunto Our Saviour says the direct contrary, Joh. 6. 44, 65. No Man can come to me, ex∣cept the Father which hath sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day. And St. Paul tells us, Ephes. 2. 8. For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. So Phil. 1. 29. And that likewise it is the greatness of God's Power that raises Man's heart unto this Faith, Ephes. 1. 19. So then Faith being the work of God in Man's heart, (which he bestows on whom he pleases) all the question now is, Whether Christ has obtained Reconciliation, and Remission of Sins from his Father for those whom God foresaw would, or could not obtain this saving Faith and if not, consequently not for the Reprobate, (as the Lord Primat hath laid down) they being only Reprobate, for want of
this Faith. Nor will this be contradictory to my Lord Prim at's o∣ther Proposition, against such who contract the Riches of Christ's Sa∣tisfaction into too narrow a room, as if none had any kind of interest therein, but such as were elected before the foundation of the World. Since this is to be understood of the Supralapsarian Opinion, which makes Re∣probation to be antecedant to the Fall of Adam, and not only at a Praeterition, but a Predamnation for actual Sins. Whereas the Lord Primat held that Mankind considered in massa corrupta after the Fall of Adam, was the only Object of God's Election or Reprobation; so that it is in this sence that he is to be understood when he says that our Saviour hath obtainedat the hands of his Father forgiveness of Sins, not for the Reprobate, but Elect only. Nor does he say that this pro∣ceeds from any deficiency in our Saviour's Death, and Satisfaction, which is sufficient to save the whole World, if they would lay hold of it, and apply it to themselves; but the reason why all Men were not thereby saved, was, because they do not accept Salvation when offered to them. Which is the Lord Primat's express words, in a Sermon upon John 1. 12. concerning our Redemption by Christ. So that those passages in our Liturgy and Catechism, before cited by the Doctor, of Christ's being a sufficient Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World; and in the Catechism, of his redeeming all Mankind; must certainly be understood in this restrictive sence, viz. to as many of the World of Mankind, as God foresaw would lay hold of this Satisfaction by Faith and good Works; or else all Men must have a like share therein, whether they contribute any thing to it by Faith or Repentance or not. And now I shall leave it to the indifferent Reader to judg whether the Lord Primat or the Doctor are most to be blamed for breaking their Subscription to the 39 Articles (as the Doctor would have him guilty of in this Point) because the Church of England in its second Article says ex∣presly, that Christ suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice not only for Original Guilt, but also for the Actual Sins of Men. In which (says he) as well the Sacrifice, as the effect and fruit thereof, which is the Reconciliation of Mankind to God the Father, is delivered in general terms, without any restriction put upon them; neither the Sacrifice, nor the Reconciliation being restrained to this or that Man, some certain quidams of their own, whom they pass commonly by the name of God's Elect. The Sacrifice being made for the Sins of Men, of Men in∣definitly without limitation, is not to be confined to some few Men only. Yet after the Doctor has said all he can, it seems still to me (and I sup∣pose to any unprejudiced Reader) that these Christ suffered, &c. to re∣concile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, &c. for the actual Sins of Men—to be, not general, but limited Propositions: since by recon∣ciling his Father to us, can be understood no further than to us that
are not Reprobates (every Man supposing himself not to be of that number); and in this sence the Lord Primat himself makes use of the words we and us in his Body of Divinity, when he speaks of Justification and Reconciliation by Faith, tho he there sup∣poses that all Men are not actually justified, nor reconciled to God by Christ's Sufferings. And as for the last clause, it is no more general than the former: for tho the word Men be used in that place indefinitly, yet it is not therefore a general Proposition, it being still to be understood of those Men who truly believe; for otherwise it had been very easie and natural for the Framers of this Article to have added this small word [all] and if they had, the question would have been much as it was before, Christ's Death being a Sacrifice that did not actually take away the Sins of the whole World, (for then none could be damned) tho vertually it hath power to do it, if it were rightly applied, the Sacrifice having such virtue in it self, that if all the World would take it and apply it, it were able to expiate the Sins of the whole World, as the Lord Primat in the above cited Sermon very plainly and truly expresses himself on this Do∣ctrine. The fourth Point which the Doctor accuses the Lord Primat not to hold according to the Church of England, is that of the true and real Presence of Christ's most precious Body and Blood in the Sacrament. Which Doctrine of a real Presence, he first proves from the words of the distribution, retained in the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, and formerly prescribed to be used in the ancient Missals, viz. The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul unto Life everlasting. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. It is proved, secondly, by that passage in the publick Catechism, in which the party catechised is taught to say, that the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and received of the Faithful in the Lord's Supper. Now if a question should be made, what the Church means by verily and indeed in the former passage it must be answered, that she means, that Christ is truly and really present in that blessed Sacrament, as before was said; the words being rendred thus in the Latin Translation, viz. Cor∣pus & Sanguis Domini quae verè & realiter exhibentur, &c. verily and indeed, as the English hath it, the same with verè and realiter, (that is to say, truly and really): as it is in the Latin. He like∣wise cites Bp. Bilson, Bp Morton, and Bp. Andrews, all of them to maintain a true and real Prefence of Christ in the Sacrament; and likewise Mr. Alex. Noel in his Latin Catechism makes the party catechized answer to this effect, That the Body and Blood of Christ given in the Lord's Supper, and eaten and drank by them, tho it be only in an heavenly and spiritual manner, yet are they
both given and taken truly and really, or in very deed, by God's faithful People. By which it seems it is agreed on both sides, (that is to say, the Church of England, and the Church of Rome) that there is a true and real Presence of Christ in the holy Eucha∣rist, the disagreement being only in the modus Praesentiae. But on the contrary, the Ld Primat, in his Answer to the Jesuit's Challenge, hath written one whole Chapter against the real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; In which tho he would seem to aim at the Church of Rome, (tho by that Church not only the real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but the corporal eating of his Body is maintained and taught) yet doth he strike obliquely and on the by on the Church of England. All that he doth allow concern∣ing the real Presence is no more than this, viz. That in the receiving of the blessed Sacrament, we are to distinguish between the outward and the inward action of the Communicant. In the outward, with our bodily mouth we receive really the visible Elements of Bread and Wine; in the inward, we do by Faith really receive the Body and Blood of our Lord; that is to say, we are truly and indeed made partakers of Christ crucified, to the spi∣ritual strengthning of our inward man. Which is no more than any Calvinist will stick to say. But now after all these hard words the Doctor has here bestow∣ed upon my Lord Primat (part of which I omit); I think I can without much difficulty make it appear, that all this grievous Ac∣cusation of the Doctor's is nothing but a meer , a strife about words, and that the Lord Primat held and believed this Doctrine in the same sence with the Church of England; 1. Then the 29th Article of our Church disavows all Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine in the Supper of the Lord. The second asserts that the Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual man∣ner; and that the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith. And now I will leave it to the unprejudiced Reader to judge whether the Lord Primat's way of explaining this Sacrament (according to the passage before cited by the Doctor) does differ in sence from these Articles, (however it may somewhat in words, as coming nearer the Articles in Ireland, which the Bishop when he writ this Book had alone subscribed to, and was bound to maintain): for I think no true Son of the Church of England will deny that in this Sacrament they still real∣ly receive the visible Elements of Bread and Wine. 2. That in the inward and spiritual action we really receive the Body and Blood of our Lord, as the Lord Primat has before laid down. But perhaps it will be said, That the Lord Primat goes further in this Article than the Church of England does, and takes upon him to
explain in what sence we receive the Body and Blood of our Lord, and that otherwise than the Church of England does; he explaining it thus, that is to say, We are truly and indeed made partakers of Christ crucified, to the spiritual strengthning of our inward man; whereas the Church of England declares that the Body of Christ is eaten only after a heavenly and spiritual manner; yet still maintains the Bo∣dy of Christ to be eaten, whereas the Lord Primat only says, that we are truly and indeed made partakers of Christ crucified, but does not say (as the Article of our Church does) that we are therein partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ. But I desire the Objector to consider whether the Explanation of our Church, does not amount to the same thing in effect, that saying that the Bo∣dy of Christ is eaten in the Supper after a heavenly and spiritual manner; and the Lord Primat, that we are truly and indeed made partakers of Christ crucified, viz. after a spiritual, and not a carnal manner. But perhaps the Doctor's Friends may still object, that the Lord Primat does not express this Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, as Bp. Bilson and Bp. Morton assert, the former saying that Christ's Flesh and Blood are truly present, and truly received by the Faithful in the Sacrament, and the latter expresly owning a real Presence therein And Bp. Andrews in his Apology to Cardinal Bellarmine, thus declares himself, viz. Praesentiam credimus non minus quam vos veram, de modo praesentiae nil timerè definimus. Which the Do∣ctor renders thus: We acknowledg (saith he) a presence as true and He adds the word re∣al, which is not in the Latin. real as you do, but we determine nothing rashly of the man∣ner of it. And the Church Catechism above cited, as also the La∣tin Catechism of Mr. Noel, confess the Body and Blood of our Lord are truly and indeed (or as the Latin Translation renders it, verè & realiter) taken and received in the Lord's Supper. Which the Lord Primat does not affirm. I know not what such Men would have. The Lord Primat asserts that we do by Faith really receive the Body and Blood of Christ, and that in the same sence with Mr. Noel's Ca∣techism, and the Article of the Church, viz. that Christ's Body is received after a spiritual and heavenly manner. Which was added to ex∣clude any real presence as taken in a carnal or bodily sence. So that our Church does in this Article explain the manner of the Presence (notwithstanding what Bp. Andrews says to the contrary.) Nor know I what they can here further mean by a real Presence, un∣less a carnal one; which indeed the Church of England at the first Reformation thought to be all one with the real, as appears by these words, in the first Articles of Religion agreed on in the Con∣vocation 1552, (Anno 5. Edw. 6.) It becometh not any of the Faithful to believe or profess, that there is a Real or Corporal Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the holy Eucharist. And that our Church did
likewise at the first passing the 39 Articles in Convocation, Anno 1562, likewise disallow any Real Presence, taken in a carnal sence, Christ's Body being always in Heaven at the right hand of God, and there∣fore cannot be in more places than one: appears by the original of those Articles, to be seen in the Library of Corpus Christi Colledg in Cambridg, where tho this passage against a Real or Corporal Pre∣sence (which they then thought to be all one) are dash'd over with red Ink; yet so, as it is still legible, therefore it may not be vid. Dr Bur∣net's Hist. of the Refor∣mation, Part 2. p. 405. amiss to give you Dr. Burnet's Reasons in his 2d part of the Histo∣ry of the Reformation, p. 406, for the doing of it,—The secret of it was this; The Queen and her Council studied to unite all into the Com∣munion of the Church; and it was alledged, that such an express Definition against a Real Presence, might drive from the Church many who were still of that perswasion; and therefore it was thought to be enough to condemn Transubstantiation, and to say that Christ was present after a spiritual man∣ner, and received by Faith. And to say more; as it was judged superfluous, so it might occasion division. Upon this, these words were by common consent left out; and in the next Convocation the Articles were subscribed without them. This shews that the Doctrine of the Church, then subscribed by the whole Convocation, was at that time contrary to the belief of a Real and Corporal Presence in the Sacrament; only it was not thought necessary, or expedient to publish it. Tho from this silence, which flowed not from their Opinion, but the Wisdom of that Time, in leaving a liberty for different Spe∣culations, as to the manner of the Presence. Some have since inferred, that the chief Pastors of this Church did then disapprove of the Definition made in King Edward's time, and that they were for a Real Presence. And that our Protestant Bishops that were martyr'd in Queen Mary's days were against this expression of a Real Presence of Christ as a Natural Body, appears by those Questions which they disputed on solemnly at Oxford before their Martyrdom: The first Questi∣on, Whether the Natural Body of Christ was Really in the Sacrament The second, Whether no other substance did remain but the Body and Blood of Christ Both which they held in the Negative. So that since this expression of a Real Presence of Christ's Body, was not maintained by our first Protestant Reformers, nor used by the Church of England in her Articles, I do not see of what use it can be now, (tho perhaps only meant in a spiritual sence by most that make use of it; For the real presence of a Body, and yet un∣bodily; I suppose those that speak thus, understand as little as I do) unless that some Men love to come as near the Papists as may be in their expressions, tho without any hopes now of ever making them approach the nearer to us, and in the mean time giving matter of offence and scandal to divers ignorant and weak Christians of our own Religion.
The fifth Point that the Doctor taxes the Lord Primat with as held by him contrary to the Church of England, is, That she teaches that the Priest hath power to forgive Sins, as may be easily proved by three several Arguments, not very easie to be an∣swered. The first is from those solemn words, used in the Ordi∣nation of the Priest, or Presbyter, that is to say, Receive the Holy Ghost. Whose Sins ye forgive, they are forgiven; and whose Sins ye re∣tain, they are retained. Which were a gross prophanation of the words of our Lord and Saviour, and a meer mockery of the Priest, if no such power were given unto him, as is there affirmed. The second Argument is taken from one of the Exhortations be∣fore the Communion, where we find the people are exhorted by the Priest, that if they cannot quiet their Consciences, they should come un∣to him, or some other discreet Minister of God's Word, and open their grief, that they may receive such ghostly advice and comfort, as their Consciences may be relieved, and that by the Ministry of God's Word they may receive Comfort, and the benefit of Absolution, to the quieting of their Consciences, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness. The third and most ma∣terial Proof, is the Form prescribed for the Visitation of the Sick; In which it is required, that after the sick Person hath made a Confes∣sion of his Faith, and professed himself to be in Charity with all Men, he shall then make a special Confession, if he feel his Conscience troubled with any weighty matter. And then it follows, that after such Confession, the Minister shall absolve him in this manner, viz. Our Lord Je∣sus Christ who hath left power to his Church to absolve all Sinners that truly repent, and believe in him, of his great Mercy forgive thee thine Offences: And by his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen. Of the first of these three places, deduced all of them from the best Monuments and Records of the Church of England, the Lord Primat takes notice in his Answer to the Jesuit's Challenge, p. 109. where he treateth purposely of the Priests power to forgive Sins, but gives us such a Gloss upon it, as utterly subverts as well the Doctrine of this Church in that particular, as her purpose in it. And of the second he takes notice, p. 81. where he speaks purposely of Confession, but gives us such a Gloss upon that also, as he did upon the other. But of the third, which is more posi∣tive and material than the other two, he is not pleased to take any notice at all, as if no such Doctrine were either taught by the Church of England, or no such Power had been ever exercised by the Ministers of it: For in the canvassing of this Point, he declares sometimes that the Priest doth forgive Sins only declarative, by the way of declaration only; when on the consideration of the true Faith, and sincere Repentance of the Party penitent, he doth de∣clare
unto him in the Name of God, that his Sins are pardoned, and sometimes that the Priest forgives Sins only optativè, by the way of Prayers and Intercession; when on the like consideration he makes his prayers unto God, that the Sins of the Penitent may be pardoned. Neither of which comes up unto the Doctrine of the Church of England; which holdeth that the Priest forgiveth Sins authoritativè, by virtue of a Power committed to him by our Lord and Saviour. That the Supream power of forgiving Sins is in God alone, against whose Divine Majesty all Sins, of what sort soever, may be truly said to be committed, was never question'd by any who pretended to the Christian Faith. The Power which is given to the Priest is but a delegated power, such as is exer∣cised by Judges under Soveraign Princes (where they are not tied unto the Verdict of Twelve Men, as with us in England) who by the Power committed to them in their several Circuits and Divi∣sions, do actually absolve the party which is brought before them, if on good proof they find him innocent of the Crimes he stands accused for, and so discharge him of his Irons. And such a power as this, I say, is both given to, and exercised by the Priest, or Pres∣byters in the Church of England. For if they did forgive Sins only declarativè; that form of Absolution which follows the general Confession in the beginning of the Common-prayer-Book would have been sufficient, where the Absolution is put in the third per∣son; Or, if he did forgive Sins only optativè, in the way of prayers and intercession, there could not be a better way of Absolution, than that which is prescribed to be used by the Priest or Bishop, af∣ter the general Confession made by such as are to receive the Com∣munion, viz. Almighty God, and heavenly Father, &c. have mercy upon you, pardon you, and deliver you from all your Sins, &c. Or else the first clause in the form of Absolution used at the Visitation of the Sick, would have served the turn; viz. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath left Power to his Church to absolve all Sinners, which truly repent and be∣lieve in him, of his great Mercy forgive thee thine Offences; And there could be no reason at all imaginable why the next clause should be superadded to this prayer, viz. And by his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, &c. if the Priest did not forgive Sins Authoritativè, by such a delegated and commissionated power as before we spake of After all which tedious Charge of the Doctor's against the Lord Primate, which I have been forced to transcribe, to let the impar∣tial Reader see I shall not answer him by halves, I doubt not but to prove that first the Doctor hath dealt very disingenuously with the Lord Primat's Book, by him there cited, out of which he hath culled some passages here and there, on purpose to cavil and find
fault: For I shall shew you (1.) that the Lord Primat doth there assert, that whatsoever the Priest or Minister contributes in this great Work of Cleansing the Souls of Men, they do it as God's Ministers, and receiving a power from God so to do; and that tho perhaps he does not make use of the Doctor's distinction of autho∣ritativè, yet he speaks the same sence. (2.) That admit the Priest does absolve authoritativè, Yet that this Absolution can only operate declarativè, or optativè, and not absolutely. And 3dly, That the Church of England in none of the three forms of Absolution above mentioned (no not in the last which he so much insists upon) does pretend to give any larger power to the Priest or Minister than this amounts to. As for the first Head I have laid down, I shall prove it from the Lord Primat's own words, in the same Treatise before cited by the Doctor; who agrees with the Lord Primat, that the supream power of forgiving Sins is in God alone. Next, that the power given to the Priest, is but a delegated power from God himself. Now that the Lord Primat owns the Priest, or Minister, to be endowed with such a power, I shall put down his own words in the said Book: viz. Having thus reserved unto God his Prerogative Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. Royal in Cleansing the Soul, we give unto his under Officers their due, when we account of them as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Not as Lords, that have power to dispose of Spiritual Graces as they please, but as Ser∣vants that are tied to follow their Master's prescriptions therein; and in following thereof, do but bring their external Ministry, (for which it self also they are beholden to God's Mercy and Goodness) God conferring the inward Blessing of his Spirit thereupon, when and where he will: Who then is Paul, (saith St. Paul himself) and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye be∣lieved, even as the Lord gave to every Man. Therefore, saith Optatus, in all the Servants there is no Dominion, but a Ministery; Cui creditur, ipse dat quod creditur, non per quem creditur; It is he who is believed, that giveth the thing that is believed, not he by whom we do believe. Whereas our Saviour then saith unto his Apo∣stles, Joh. 20. Receive the holy Ghost. Whose Sins ye forgive, shall be forgiven. St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, and St. Cyril, make this Observation thereupon, that this is not their work pro∣perly, but the work of the holy Ghost, who remitteth by them, and therein performeth the works of the true God.To forgive Sins therefore being thus proper to God only, and See the places cited at large in the Book. p. 118. to his Christ: his Ministers must not be held to have this power communicated unto them, but in an improper sence, namely, because God forgiveth by them; and hath appointed them both
to apply those means by which he useth to forgive Sins, and to give notice unto Repentant Sinners of that Forgiveness. For who can forgive Sins but God alone yet doth he forgive by them al∣so, unto whom he hath given power to forgive, saith St. Ambrose. And tho it be the proper work of God to remit Sins, saith Ferus; yet are the Apostles (and their Successors) said to remit also, not simply, but because they apply those means whereby God doth remit Sins. After the Lord Primat had shewed in the pages before-going, that the power of binding and loosing consists in exercising the Disci∣pline P. 127. of the Church, in debarring or admitting Penitents from or to the Communion, he proceeds thus; That this Authority of loos∣ing remaineth still in the Church, we constantly maintain against the Heresie of the Montanists and Novations, &c. And after having confuted the uncharitableness of those Here∣ticks, P. 128. who denied that Penitents who had committed heinous Sins, ought to be received into the Communion of the Church, goes on thus; That speech of his (viz. St. Paul's) is specially noted, and pressed against the Hereticks by St. Ambrose, To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing to whom I forgave it, for your sakes I forgave it, in the Person of Christ. For as in the Name, and by the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, such a one was delivered to Sa∣tan; for God having given unto him Repentance, to recover himself out of the snare of the Devil; in the same Name, and in the same Power was he to be restored again; the Ministers of Reconciliation standing in Christ's stead, and Christ himself being in the midst of them that are thus gathered to∣gether in his Name, will bind or loose in Heaven, whatsoever they accord∣ing to his Commission shall bind or loose on Earth. Then after he has shewn that the power of the Priest, or Ministers of the Gospel, is only ministerial and declarative, like that of the Priests under the Law of Moses, Where the Laws are set down that concern the Le∣prosie, P. 135 (which was a type of the pollution of Sin) we meet of∣ten with these speeches; The Priest shall cleanse him, and, The Priest shall pollute him; and in vers. 44. of the same chapter, The Priest Lev. 13. with pollution shall pollute him, as it is in the Original; Not, saith St. Hierom, that he is the author of the pollution, but that he decla∣reth him to be polluted, who before did seem unto many to have been clean. Whereupon the Master of the Sentences (following herein St. Hierom, and being afterwards therein followed himself by many others) observeth that in remitting, or retaining Sins, the Priests of the Gospel have that Right and Office, which the Legal Priests had of old under the Law, in curing of the Lepers. These therefore (saith he) forgive Sins, or retain them, whiles they shew, and declare that they are forgiven, or retained by God. For the
Priests put the Name of the Lord upon the Children of Israel, but it was he himself that blessed them. Neither do we grant hereby, (as the Adversary falsly chargeth us) that a Lay-man, yea or a Woman, or a Child, or any Infidel, P. 136. Bellarmin. de Poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. ult. or a Parrat likewise, if he be taught the words, may in this sence as well absolve as the Priest as if the speech were all the thing that here were to be considered, and not the power: whereas we are taught that the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Indeed if the Priests by their Office brought nothing with them but the Ministry of the bare Letter, a Parrat peradventure might be taught to found that Letter as well as they; but we believe that God hath made them able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; and that the Gospel ministred by them, cometh unto us not in vvord only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance. For God hath ad∣ded a speical beauty to the feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, that howsoever others may bring glad-tidings of good things to the penitent Sinner, as truly as they do; yet neither can they do it with the same authority, neither is it to be expected that they should do it with such power, such assurance, and such full satisfaction to the afflicted Conscience. The speech of every Christian (we know) should be imployed to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers; and a private Bro∣ther in his place may deliver sound Doctrine, reprehend Vice, exhort to Righteousness very commendably: yet hath the Lord notwithstanding all this, for the necessary use of his Church, ap∣pointed publick Officers to do the same things, and hath given to them a peculiar power for edification, wherein they may boast above others; and in the due execution whereof God is pleased to make them Instruments of ministring a more plentiful measure of Grace unto their Hearers, than may be ordinarily looked for from others.—These are God's Angels, and Ambassadors for Christ, P. 137. and therefore in delivering their Message are to be received as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus. That look how the Prophet Esay was comforted when the Angel said unto him, Thy Iniquity is taken away, and thy Sin purged; and the poor Woman in the Go∣spel, when Jesus said unto her, Thy Sins are forgiven: The like Consolation doth the distressed Sinner receive from the mouth of the Minister; when he hath compared the truth of God's Word faithfully delivered by him, with the work of God's Grace in his own heart. For as it is the Office of this Messenger, to pray us in Christ's stead, that we would be reconciled unto God: so when we have listned unto this motion, and submitted our selves to the Gospel of Peace, it is a part of his Office likewise to declare un∣to
us in Christ's stead, that we are reconciled to God: and in him Christ himself must be acknowledged to speak, who to us-ward by this means is not weak, but mighty in us. Having now shewn what the Lord Primate hath said in that Treatise; That the Absolution of the Priest, or Minister, tho it be declarativè, yet is still authoritativè, by virtue of that power which Christ hath commited unto him. But that this is no absolute pow∣er, but still only declarative, I shall prove in the next place, as well from what the Lord Primat hath here laid down, as from the nature of the Absolution it self, The Lord Primat having before declared, P. 119. that the prayer of the Priest is one great means of obtaining re∣mission of Sins, I shall now shew you that the Doctor did not so well peruse the Lord Primat's Book as he might have done, when he so confidently affirms, That tho the Lord Primat has spoken some∣what of the declarative and optative Forms of Absolution, yet he hath taken no notice of the Indicative, or that which is used in the Absolution of the Sick: of which sort take the Lord Primat's words; In the days of Thomas Aquinas there arose a Learned Man P. 123. among the Papists themselves, who found fault with that Indica∣tive Form of Absolution then used by the Priest, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, and would have it delivered by way of deprecation; alledging that this was not only the Opinion of Guliel. Altisiodo, Guliel. Paris. and Hugo Cardinal; but also that thirty years were scarce passed since all did use this Form only, Absolutionem & Re∣missionem tribuat tibi Omnipotens Deus, Almighty God give unto thee Absolution and Forgiveness. This only will I add, that as well in the ancient Rituals, and in the new Pontificial of the Church of Rome, as in the present practice of the Greek Church, I find the Absolution expressed in the third Person, as attributed wholly to God, and not in the first, as if it came from the Priest himself. And after the Lord Primat hath there shewn, That the most An∣cient That all the antient forms of Absolution in the Greek Church were till of late only declara∣tive, or opta∣tive, and al∣ways in the 3d, not first person. See Dr. Smith's learned Ac∣count of the Gr. Church, p. 180, 181. Forms of Absolution both in the Latin and Greek Church, were in the third and not in the first person, he proceeds thus: Alexander of Hales, and Bonaventure, in the form of Absolution used in their time, to observe that Prayer was premised in the Optative, and Absolution adjoined afterward in the Indicative Mood. Whence they gather that the Priest's Prayer obtaineth Grace, his Absolu∣tion presupposeth it, and that by the former he ascendeth unto God, and procureth pardon for the fault; by the latter he descend∣eth to the Sinner, and reconcileth him to the Church. For although a man be loosed before God, (saith the Master of the Sentences) yet is he not held loosed in the face of the Church but by the Judgment of the Priest. And this loosing of Men by the Judg∣ment of the Priest, is by the Fathers generally accounted nothing
else but a restoring them to the peace of the Church, and admit∣ting of them to the Lord's Table again: which therefore they u∣sually express by the terms of bringing them to the Communion; recon∣ciling them to, or with the Communion; restoring the Communion to them; admitting them to Fellowship; granting them Peace, &c. Neither do I find that they did ever use any such formal Absolution as this, I absolve thee from all thy Sins: wherein our Popish Priests notwith∣standing, do place the very Form of their late-devised Sacrament of Penance, nay hold it to be so absolute a Form, that (according to Thomas Aquinas his new Divinity) it would not be sufficient to say, Almighty God have mercy upon thee, or God grant unto thee Absolution and Forgiveness: because, forsooth, the Priest by these words doth not signifie that the Absolution is done, but entreateth that it may be done. Which how it will accord with the Roman Pontifical, where the Form of Absolution is laid down Prayer-wise, the Jesuits who follow Thomas, may do well to consider. Now how near the Doctor approaches to this Opinion of the Papists when he urges these words, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, as an Argument of the Priests power to forgive Sins authoritative, and as if this Form had something more in it, or could work further towards the remission of the Sins of the Penitent than any of the rest, I shall leave it to the Reader. Whereas whosoever will con∣sider the Office of the Priest, will find that it is not like that of a Judg, or a Vice-Roy (as the Doctor would have it) under a So∣veraign Prince; who has power not only to declare the person ab∣solved from his Crimes, but also may reprieve, or pardon him when guilty, or condemn him tho innocent, neither of which per∣haps the Prince himself, by whose Commission he acts, would do: whereas the Priest, whatever power he has delegated from God, (vvhich I do not deny) yet it is still only declarative, and condi∣tional, according to the sincerity of the Repentance in the person absolved. For as his Absolution signifies nothing, if the Repentance of the Penitent, or dying person, be not real and sincere; so neither can he hinder God from pardoning him, if it be so indeed, tho he should be so wicked, or uncharitable, as to deny him the benefit of this Absolution, if he desire it: so that the Office of the Priest in this matter, rather resembleth that of an Herald, who has a Com∣mission from his Prince to proclaim and declare Pardon to a com∣pany of Rebels who have already submitted themselves, and pro∣mised Obedience to their Prince; which Pardon as it signifies no∣thing, if they still continue in their Rebellion; so tho the Herald alone has the power of declaring this Pardon, yet it is only in the Name, and by the Authority of his Prince, who had passed this Pardon in his own Breast before ever the Herald published it
to the Offenders: so that it is in this sence only that the Priest can say thus,—By his Authority (viz. of our Lord Jesus Christ) commit∣ted to me, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, since he does this not as Christ's Vicar, or Judg under him, but as his Herald or Ambassa∣dor, or, as St. Paul words it, In the Person of Christ forgives our Offences; Yet still conditionally, that we are really penitent, and consequently is not effective, but only declarative of that Forgiveness. I shall now in the last place shew you, that the Church of England understands it in no other sence but this alone: and that if it did, it would make it all one with that of the Papists. First, That the Form of Absolution which follows the general Confession, is only declarative the Doctor himself grants; so likewise that before the Communion is only optative, in the way of prayer and intercessi∣on, and consequently no other than declarative or conditional; and therefore that the Absolution to particular Penitents both in order to receive the Communion, as also in the Visitation of the Sick, are no other likewise than declarative, appears from the great tender∣ness of the Church of England in this matter, not enjoining, but on∣ly advising the Penitent in either case to make any special Con∣fession of his Sins to the Priest, in which case alone (this Abso∣lution is supposed to be necessary) unless he cannot quiet his Con∣science without it, or if he feel his Conscience troubled vvith any weighty matter, after which Confession the Priest shall absolve him. But our Church does not declare that either the Penitent is obliged to make any such special Confession to the Priest either before the Sacrament, or at the point of Death, or that any per∣son cannot obtain remission of their Sins without Absolution, as the Church of Rome asserts; so that it seems our Church's Absolution in all these cases is no other than declarative, and for the quieting of the Conscience of the Penitent, if he find himself so troubled in mind, that he thinks he cannot obtain pardon from God without it: Tho the Priest (as the Herald above-mentioned, whose Office it is to proclaim the King's Pardon) still absolves authoriative, and could not do it unless he were authorized by Jesus Christ for that purpose. And if the Doctor, or any other, will maintain any higher Absolution than this, it must be that of the Church of Rome, where a small Attrition, or sorrow for Sin, by virtue of the Keys, (that is, the Absolution of the Priest) is made Contrition, and the Penitent is immediately absolved from all his Sins; tho perhaps he commit the same again as soon as ever he has done the penance enjoyned. And that the pious and judicious Mr. Hooker (who cer∣tainly understood the Doctrine of the Church of England as well as Dr. H.) agrees fully with the Lord Primat in this matter, appears from his sixth Book of Ecclesiastical Policy, where after his declaring
(with the Lord Primat) that for any thing he could ever observe, those Formalities the Church of Rome do so much esteem of, were not of such estimation, nor thought to be of absolute necessity with the ancient Fathers, and that the Form with them was with Invocation, or praying for the Penitent, that God would be re∣conciled unto him; for which he produces St. Ambrose, St. Hie∣rom, and Leo, &c. p. 96. he thus declares his Judgment, viz. As for the Ministerial Sentence of privat Absolution, it can be no more than a declaration what God hath done; it hath but the force of the Prophet Na∣than's Absolution, [God hath taken away thy Sins;] than which constru∣ction, especially of words judicial, there is nothing more vulgar. For ex∣ample, the Publicans are said in the Gospel to have justified God; the Jews in Malachy to have blessed the proud man, which sin, and prosper; not that the one did make God righteous, or the other the wicked happy; but to bless, to justifie, and to absolve, are as commonly used for words of Judgment, or Declaration, as of true and real efficacy; yea even by the Opinion of the Master of the Sentences, &c. Priests are authorized to loose and bind, that is to say, declare who are bound, and who are loosed. The last Point in which the Doctor taxes the Lord Primat as Respon. Pe∣trus Sect. 10. § 7. differing from the Church of England, is in the Article of Christ's de∣scent into Hell; The Church of England (says he) maintains a Local Descent; that is to say, That the Soul of Christ, at such time as his Body lay in the Grave, did locally descend into the nethermost parts, in which the Devil and his Angels are reserved in everlast∣ing Chains of Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great and ter∣rible Day. This is proved at large by Bishop Bilson in his learn∣ed and laborious Work, entitled, The Survey of Christ's Sufferings. And that this was the meaning of the first Reformers, when this Article amongst others was first agreed upon in the first Convo∣cation of the Year 1552, appears by that passage of St. Peter, which is cited by them touching Christ's preaching to the Spirits which were in prison. And tho that passage be left out of the present Article, according as it passed in the Convocation of the Year 1562, yet cannot it be used as an Argument to prove that the Church hath altered her Judgment in that Point; as some Men would have it; that passage being left out for these Reasons following: For, first, that passage was conceived to make the Article too inclinable to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which makes the chief end of Christ's descent into Hell, to be the fetching thence the Souls of the Fathers, who died before and un∣der the Law. And secondly, because it was conceived by some Learned Men, that the Text was capable of some other constru∣ction than to be used for an Argument of this Descent. The Judg∣ment of the Church continues still the same as before it was, and
is as plain and positive for a Local Descent as ever; she had not else left this Article in the same place in which she found it, or given it the same distinct Title as before it had; viz. De Descensu Christi ad Inferos, in the Latin Copies of King Edward the 6th, that is to say, Of the going down of Christ into Hell, as in the English Co∣pies of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Nor indeed was there any rea∣son why this Article should have any distinct place or title at all, unless the maintenance of a Local Descent were intended by it. For having spoken in the former Article of Christ's Suffering, Crucifying, Death and Burial, it had been a very great Imperti∣nency (not to call it worse) to make a distinct Article of his descending into Hell, if to descend into Hell did signifie the same with this being buried, as some Men then fancied; or that there were not in it some further meaning, which might deserve a place distinct from his Death and Burial. The Article speaking thus, [viz. as Christ died for us, and was buried; so is it to be believed that he went down into Hell] is either to be understood of a Local Descent, or else we are tied to believe nothing by it, but what was explicitly or implicitly comprehended in the former Article. And lastly; That Mr. Alex. Noel, before mentioned, who being Prolocutor of the Convocation in the Year 1562, when this Ar∣ticle was disputed, approved and ratified, cannot in reason be sup∣posed to be ignorant of the true sence and meaning of this Church in that particular. And he in his Catechism (above mentioned) declares, that Christ descended in his Body into the bowels of the Earth, and in his Soul, separated from that Body, he descended also into Hell; by means whereof the power and efficacy of his Death was not made known only to the Dead, but the Devils themselves; insomuch that both the Souls of the Unbelievers did sensibly perceive that Condemnation which was most just∣ly due to them for their Incredulity; and Satan himself the Prince of De∣vils, did as plainly see that his tyranny, and all the Powers of Darkness were opprest, ruined, and destroyed. But on the contrary the L. Primat al∣lows not any such Local Descent, as is maintained by the Church, and defended by the most learned Members of it, who have left us any thing in writing about this Article. And yet he neither fol∣loweth the Opinion of Calvin himself, nor of the generality of those of the Calvinian Party, who herein differ from their Master; but goes a new way of a later discovery, in which although he had few Leaders, he hath found many Followers. By Christ's descending into Hell, he would have nothing else to be understood but his continuing in the state of separation between the Body and the Soul, his remaining under the power of Death during the time he lay buried in the Grave: which is no more in effect, tho it dif∣fer somewhat in the terms, than to say, that he died, and was buried, and rose not till the third day, as the Creed instructs us.
In vindication of the Lord Primat's Judgment in the sence of this Article, I shall lay down some previous Considerations to excuse him, if perhaps he differed from the sence of the Church of England in this Article, if it should appear that it ought to be understood in a strict and literal sence. For, first, you must understand that this Article of Christ's Descent into Hell, is not inserted amongst the Articles of the Church of Ireland, which were the Confession of Faith of that Church when the Lord Primat writ this Answer to the Jesuit; the Articles of the Church of England (amongst which this of Christ's Descent into Hell is one) not being received by the Church of Ireland till the Year 1634, ten years after the publish∣ing of this Book; so that he could not be accused for differing from those Articles, which he was not then obliged to receive, or sub∣scribe to. 2dly. Had this Article been then inserted, and expressed in the very same words, as it is in those of the Church of England, could he be accused of being Heterodox for not understanding it, as the Doctor does, of a Local Descent of Christ's Soul into Hell, or the places of Torment, since the Church of England is so modest as only to assert, that it is to be believed that he went down into Hell, without specifying in what sence she understand it For, as the Lord Primat very learnedly proves in this Treatise, the word Hell in old Saxon, signifies no more than hidden, or covered; so that P. 287, 288. in the original propriety of the word, our Hell doth exactly an∣swer the Greek  which denotes , the place which is unseen, or removed from the sight of man. So that the word Hell, signifies the same with Hades in the Greek, and Inferi in the Latin. Concerning which St. Augustin gives us this Note; The name of Hell (in Latin Inferi) is variously put in Scriptures, and in many meanings, according as the sence of the things which are intreated of do require. And Mr. Casaubon (who understood the property of Greek and Latin words as well as any) this other; They who think that Hades is properly the seat of the Damned, be no less deceived, than they, who when they reade Inferos in Latin Writers, do interpret it of the same place. [Whereupon the Lord Primat proceeds to shew] That by Hell, in divers places of Scripture, is not to be understood the place of the Wicked, or Damned, but of the Dead in general; as in Psal. 89. 48. What Man is he that liveth and shall not see Death shall he de∣liver his Soul from the hand of Hell And Esa. 38. 18, 19. Hell can∣not praise thee; Death cannot celebrate thee; they that go down into the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth. The Living, the Living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day. Where the opposition betwixt Hell, and the state of Life in this World, is to be observed. Therefore since the word Hell does not necessarily imply a place of Torment, ei∣ther in Scriptures, or ancient Authors; and that Christ's descent in∣to
Hell is not to be proved from any express place of Scripture, as the Doctor himself grants, since upon the review of the Articles of our Church, past in Edward the sixth's time, this passage of St. Pe∣ter, of Christ's preaching to the Spirits in Prison, was left out in the pre∣sent Articles of our Church, as not well bearing that interpretation. And that the learned Grotius, and Dr. Hammond have in their Com∣ments on the New Testament explained this place in a quite dif∣ferent sence. So that all the light we can receive as to this Article of our Creed, must be sought for in the ancient Fathers of the Church, whose Opinions in this point are various and uncertain, (as the Lord Primat sufficiently sets forth in this Treatise) some of them understanding by this word Hell, [or Hades] Abraham's Bosom, or place of Happiness, whither the Angels carried Laza∣rus; or that Paradise in which our Saviour promised the good Thief he should be with him. So that this sort of Hell can have no great difference from Heaven it self. Others of them will have our Saviour descend into Hell, or some out-skirts of it, which were no places of Torment, only that he might make the Patri∣archs and Prophets a Visit, whom they supposed to be there de∣tained, tho he did not fetch them from thence. Others, as St. Je∣rom, St. Augustine, and others, suppose Christ to have descended into Hell, or the place of Torment, to bring forth such Souls of his as he found there. Others, that he went thither to preach, and to bring from thence all the Souls of the Heathens, that heard then, and believed his Preaching. Others again, that he emptied Hell of all its Prisoners, and left the Devils there alone; Which Opinion, tho very untrue, was maintained by St. Cyril, and others: into which Error they were led by the superficial consideration of those words of St. Peter, above-mentioned. From which difference, and variety of Opinions we may learn, that as the Fathers were not Infallible; so this Opinion of Christ's Local Descent into Hell, as a place of Torment, was not generally agreed on amongst them, no more than the Reasons for which he should go thither. And there∣fore sure our more Modern Authors, as Bp. Bilson and Mr. Noel, could be no more certain than the Fathers themselves, in what sence our Saviour descended into Hell, or what business he had to do there; Especially since this Article of our Church only says, we must be∣lieve he went down into Hell, without specifying in what sence he went thither; which she might easily have done, if she had not thought it better to leave Men to their liberty to put what reason∣able sence they should think fit, upon so obscure and doubtful an Article; and which has so little influence upon our Faith or Man∣ners, supposed to be taken in one or the other sence. Therefore I cannot see how the Lord Primat deserves to be blamed if in a
matter of so great uncertainty and variety of Opinions, he follow∣ed some of the most sober of the Fathers, who did not understand Christ's descent into Hell, or Hades, to be understood of any local descent into a place of Torment. And that the Lord Primat was not the first Discoverer or Broacher (as the Doctor would have him) of this Interpretation of Hades, or Hell, for the state of Souls as separate from their Bodies, I shall shew you from several Quo∣tations the Lord Primat makes use of, out of the Fathers, and other ancient Authors to this purpose. First, as for the Heathen, or pro∣phane Writers, he shews out of Plato, and other Philosophers and Poets, that the word Hades signifies a general invisible future state of the Soul after it is separated from the Body, consisting of two places, one of Bliss, and the other of Torment, according to the nature and actions of the Soul whilst it was united with the Body, and which places they fancied to be as far beneath the Earth as the Heaven is from it: for they imagined that the Earth was not round but flat, and that the Sea and Skies did meet. So that most of the ancient Fathers having no notion of the roundness of the Earth, and of its being encompassed with Air; and likewise be∣ing most of them Platonic Philosophers, it is no wonder if they had the same notion of this Hades, as those ancient Philosophers and Poets had before. Yet some of them were better instructed, as St. Chrysostom, who says modestly, If thou dost ask me (saith he) of the situation and place of Gehenna I will answer and say, that it is seated somewhere out of this World; and that it is not to be enquired in what place it is situated, but by what means rather it may be avoided. But St. Gregory Nyssen, in his Dialogue between himself and Macrina P. 341. touching the Soul and the Resurrection, makes her to answer the Question proposed by Gregory in this manner: Where is that name of Hades so much spoken of and which is so much treated of in our com∣mon Conversation, so much in the Writings both of the Heathen and our own into which all men think that the Souls are translated from hence as into a certain Receptacle for you will not say that the Elements are this Hades. Whereunto Macrina thus replies: It appeareth that thou didst not give much heed to my speech, for when I spake of the translation of the Soul from that which is seen unto that which is invisible, I thought I had left nothing behind to be enquired of Hades; neither doth that name, wherein Souls are said to be, seem to me to signifie any other thing either in prophane Writers, or in the holy Scripture, save only a removing unto that which is invisible and unseen. So likewise Theophylact, and Hugo Ethe∣rianus P. 342. after him, What is Hades, or Hell Some say that it is a dark place under the Earth; others say that it is the translation of the Soul from that which is visible, unto that which is unseen and invisible. For while the Soul is in the Body, it is seen by the proper operations thereof; but being
translated out of the Body, it is invisible; and this did they say was Hades. Hitherto also may be referred the place cited before out of Origen in his fourth Book, , which by St. Jerom is thus delivered: They who die in this World by the separation of the Flesh P. 343. and the Soul, according to the difference of their works, obtain divers places in Hell. Where, by Hades, Inferi, or Hell, he meaneth indefi∣nitly the other World; in which how the Souls of the Godly were disposed, he thus declares in another place: The Soul leaveth the darkness of this World, and the blindness of this bodily Nature, and is translated into another World, which is either the bosom of Abraham, as it is shewed in Lazarus, or Paradise, as in the Thief that believed upon the Cross; Or yet God knows if that there be any other places, or other Mansions, by which the Soul that believeth in God, passing and coming unto that River which maketh glad the City of God, may receive within it the lot of the In∣heritance promised unto the Fathers. For touching the determinate state of the faithful Souls departed this life, the ancient Doctors (as we have shewed) were not so throughly resolved. The Lord Primat having thus shewn in what sence many of the ancient Fathers did understand this word Hades, which we translate Hell, proceeds to shew that divers of them expound Christ's De∣scent into Hell (or Hades) according to the common Law of Na∣ture, which extends it self indifferently unto all that die: For as Christ's Soul was in all points made like unto ours (Sin only ex∣cepted) P. 345, 346. while it was joined with his Body here in the Land of the Living: so when he had humbled himself unto the Death, it became him in all things to be made like unto his Brethren, even in the state of dissolution. And so indeed the Soul of Jesus had experience of both: for it was in the place of human Souls, and being out of the Flesh, did live and subsist. It was a reasonable Soul therefore, and of the same substance with the flesh of Men, proceeding from Mary. Saith Eustathius the Patriarch of Antioch, in his Exposition of that Text of the Psalm, Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell, , the place of humane Souls, (which in the Hebrew is the world of Spirits) and by the disposing of Christ's Soul there, after the manner of other Souls, concludes it to be of the same nature with other Mens Souls. So St. Hi∣lary in his Exposition of the 138th Psalm, This is the Law of humane Necessity, saith he, that the Bodies being buried, the Souls should go to Hell. Which descent the Lord did not refuse for the accomplishment of a true man. And a little after he repeats it, that desupernis ad inferos mortis lege descendit, He descended from the supernal to the infer∣nal parts by the Law of Death. And upon Psal. 53. more fully; To fulfil the Nature of Man, he subjected himself to Death; that is, to a departure as it were of the Soul and Body; and pierced into the in∣fernal
seats, which was a thing that seemed to be due unto Man. I shall not trouble you with more Quotations of this kind out of several of the ancient Greek and Latin Fathers which he makes use of in this Treatise, most of them agreeing in this, That Christ died; and was buried, and that his Soul went to that place or receptacle, where the Souls of good Men do remain after Death; which whe∣ther it is no more in effect but differing in terms, than to say, he died and was buried, and rose not till the third day: which the Doctor makes to be the absurdity of this Opinion, I leave to the Judgment of the impartial Reader; as I likewise do whether the Lord Primat de∣serves so severe a Censure after his shewing so great Learning as he has done, concerning the various Interpretations of this word Hades, or Hell, both out of sacred and prophane Writers, that it only serves to amaze the Ignorant, and confound the Learned. Or that he meant nothing less in all these Collections than to assert the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England in this particular; Or, whether Christ's Local Descent into Hell can be found in the Book of Ar∣ticles which he had subscribed to, or in the Book of Common-Prayer which he was bound to conform to And if it be not so expressed in any of these, I leave it to you to judge how far Dr. H. is to be believed in his Accusation against the Lord Primat in other matters. But I doubt I have dwelt too long upon this less important Article, which it seems was not thought so funda∣mental a one, but (as the Lord Primat very well observes) Ruf∣finus P. 310. in his Exposition of the Creed takes notice, that in the Creed or Symbol of the Church of Rome there is not added, He descended in∣to Hell; and presently adds, yet the force or meaning of the word seems to be the same, in that he is said to have been buried. So that it seems old Ruffinus is one of those who is guilty of this Impertinency (as the Doctor calls it) of making Christ's descent into Hell to signifie the same with his lying in the Grave, or being buried, tho the same Author takes notice that the Church of Aquileia had this Article in∣serted in her Creed, but the Church of Rome had not, (which sure with Men of the Doctor's way, should be a Rule to other Chur∣ches.) And further, Card. Bellarmin noteth, (as the Lord Primat confesses) that St. Augustin in his Book, De Fide & Symbolo, and in his four Books de Symbolo ad Catechumenos, maketh no mention of this Article, when he doth expound the whole Creed five se∣veral times. Which is very strange, if the Creed received by the African Church had this Article in it. Ruffinus further takes no∣tice, that it is not found in the Symbol of the Churches of the East; by which he means the Nicene and Constantinopolitan Creeds, the latter of which is nothing else but an Explanation, or more ample Enlargement of Creed Apostolical. Tho this indeed be not at
this day read in the Greek, or other Eastern Churches, or so much as known or received in that of the Vid. Jobi Ludolfi, lib. 311. c. 5. 19. Hist. Aethiop. Copties and Abyssines. But the Doctor having shown his Malice against the Lord Pri∣mat's Memory and Opinions in those Points, which I hope I have sufficiently answered, cannot give off so, but in the next Section accuses him for inserting the nine Articles of Lambeth into those of the Church of Ireland, being inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Church of England. But before I answer this Accusation, I shall first premise, that as I do not defend or approve that Bishops, or others, tho never so learned Divines, should take upon them to make new Articles, or define and determine doubtful Questions and Controversies in Religion, without being authorized by the King and Convocation so to do: Yet thus much I may charitably say of those good Bishops, and other Divines of the Church of England, who framed and agreed upon these Articles, that what they did in this matter, was sincerely, and as they then believed, ac∣cording to the Doctrine of the Church of England, as either expresly contained in, or else to be drawn by consequence from that Article of the Church concerning Predestination. And certainly this makes stronger against the Doctor: for if with him the Judgment of Bp. Bilson, Bp. Andrews, and Mr. Noel, in their Writings, be a sufficient Authority to declare the sence of the Church of England in those Questions of Christ's true and real Presence in the Sacrament, and his Local Descent into Hell; why should not the Judgment and Determination of the two Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and York, with divers other Bishops and learned Divines, after a serious debate and mature deliberation, as well declare what was the Doctrine of the Church of England in those Questions of Predestination, Justifying Faith, Saving Grace, and Perseverance But it seems with the Doctor, no Bishops Opinions shall be Orthodox, if they agree not with his own. But to come to the Charge it self: The main Reason why the Doctor will needs have the Lord Primat to be the cause of the inserting these Articles of Lambeth into those of Ireland, agreed on in Convocation 1615, is, because the Lord Primat be∣ing then no Bishop, but only Professor of Divinity in the Univer∣sity there, and a Member of Convocation, was ordered by the Convocation to draw up those Articles, and put them into Latin, as if Dr. Usher could have then such a great influence upon it, as to be able to govern the Church at his pleasure; or that the Scribe of any Synod or Council should make it pass what Acts or Articles he pleases; or that one private Divine should be able to manage the whole Church of Ireland, (as the Doctor would needs have him do in this Affair.) Whereas the Doctor having been an ancient Mem∣ber of Convocation, could not but know that all Articles after
they are debated, are proposed by way of Question by the President and Prolocutor of either House, and are afterwards ordered to be drawn into form, and put in Latin by some Persons whom they appoint for that purpose; and tho perhaps they might not be them∣selves in all points of the same Opinion with those Articles they are so ordered to draw up; and that Dr. Usher did not hold all those Ar∣ticles of Ireland in the same sence as they are there laid down, ap∣pears from what the Doctor himself tells us in this Pamphlet; for p. 116, he saith, That it was his (viz. the Lord Primat's) doing, that a different explication of the Article of Christ's descent into Hell, from that allowed of by this Church; and almost all the other Heterodoxies of the Sect of Calvin were inserted, and incorporated into the Articles of Ireland.And p. 129, he finds fault with the 30th Article of that Church, because it is said of Christ, that for our sakes he endured most grievous Torments, immediatly in his Soul, and most painful Sufferings in his Body. The enduring of which grievous Torments in his Soul, as Calvin not with∣out some touch of Blasphemy, did first devise: so did he lay it down for the true sence and meaning of the Article of Christ's descending into Hell▪ In which expression, as the Articles of Ireland have taken up the words of Calvin, so it may be rationally conceived that they take them with the same meaning and construction also. But the Doctor owns that this was not the Lord Primat's sence of this Article; for p. 113, aforegoing, he says thus, Yet he (viz. the Lord Primat) neither follows the Opinion of Calvin himself, nor of the generality of those of the Calvinian Party, who herein differ from their Master; but goes a new way of a later discovery, in which altho he had few Leaders, he hath found many Followers. But as I shall not take upon me to enter into a dispute with the Doctor, or his Followers, in defence of these Irish Articles, and to prove they are not contradictory to those of England, it not being my business; yet I cannot forbear to observe, that it is highly improbable that all the Bishops and Clergy of Ireland should incorporate the nine Articles of Lambeth, containing all the Calvinian Rigours (as the Doctor calls them) in the points of Predestination, Grace, Free-will, &c. if they had thought they were inconsistent with those of the Church of England, and had not been satisfied that it was the Doctrine then held and maintained in those Points by the major part of the Bi∣shops and Clergy of our Church, as also believed by the King himself, who confirmed them, and certainly would never else have sent one Bishop, and three of the most Learned Divines within his Dominions, to the Synod of Dort, to maintain against the Remon∣strants or Arminians, the very same Opinions contained in these Irish Articles: But if all those must be counted by the Doctor for Ri∣gorous Calvinists that maintain these Articles, and consequently Heterodox to the Church of England, I desire to know how he can
excuse the major part of our Bishops in Queen Elizabeth and King James's Reign, and a considerable part of them during the Reigns of the two last Kings of blessed Memory (some of whom are still living) from this Heterodoxy. And if all Men must be guilty of Calvinism, who hold these Opinions concerning Predestination, Grace, and Free-will; then the most part of the Lutherans (who differ very little from Calvin in these points) must be Calvinists too. Nor are these Points held only by Protestants, but many also of the Church of Rome hold the same, as witness the Jansenists, and also the Order of the Dominicans, who come very near to Calvin in the Doctrines of Predestination, &c. and are as much opposed by the Jesuits, as the Arminians are by the Anti-remonstrants in Holland. But perhaps the Doctor may make St. Augustin a Calvinist too, since he is much of the same Opinion with the Lord Primat in most of these Points against the Pelagians. Having now I hope vindicated the Lord Primat from these unjust Accusations of his differing from the Church of England in matters of Doctrine, I now come to answer his Aspersions upon the Lord Primat in lesser matters; and that you may see how unjustly he seeks out a Quarrel against him, he makes it a crime in him, be∣cause those who were aspersed with the names of Puritans made their Addresses to him by Letters, or Visits, and because he was car∣ress'd and feasted by them where-ever he came, (as the Doctor will have it) as if the Lord Primat had no other Perfections but his assert∣ing those Calvinian Tenents. Then he goes on to tax the Lord Primat with Inconformity to the Rules and Orders of the Church of England in several particu∣lars: but with how great want of Charity, and with how many malicious Inferences and Reflections, without any just grounds, I leave to the impartial Reader who will give himself the trouble to peruse that Pamphlet, many of those passages being cull'd here and there out of Dr. Bernard's Treatise, entitled, The late Lord Primat's Judgment, &c. without ever considering what went before, or what followed after; and without taking notice that several things en∣joined in the Canons of the Church of England, had no force or obligation in that of Ireland, where those Canons were not yet subscribed to, or received: and consequently such Ceremonies as were by them enjoined, being in themselves indifferent, as the Church declares, it had been singularity in him to have observed them there, and much worse to have imposed them upon others: for it is truly said of him by Dr. Bernard, That he did not affect some Arbitrary Innovations, (not within the compass of the Rule and Order of the Book of Common-prayer) and that he did not take upon him to introduce any Rite or Ceremony upon his own Opinion of Decency, till the Church had judged
it so. p. 147. What the Lord Primat's behaviour was in England in relation to some of these Ceremonies of lesser moment, either to the peace or well-being of the Church, the Lord Primat needs no Apology, he having reason enough for what he did, if he con∣formed himself no further than the Doctor would have him. But to give one Instance for all of the Doctor's want of Charity to∣wards the Lord Primat; Dr. Bernard having asserted his Conformi∣ty to the Discipline, Liturgy, and Articles of the Church of Eng∣land,—and that many of those who were called Puritans, received such sa∣tisfaction from him, as to concur with him in the above-said particulars. The Doctor immediatly makes this Remark: For this (says he) might ve∣ry well be done, and yet the Men remain as unconformable to the Rules of the Church (their Kneeling at the Communion only excepted) as they were be∣fore. Now what other Rules of the Church the Doctor means I know not, since I always thought that whoever had brought over a Lay-Nonconformist to conform to the Service and Orders of the Church, had done a very good work; and I know not when that is done, what is required more to make him a true Son of the Church of England. But I shall say no more on this ungrateful Subject, since I doubt not but the Lord Primat's great Esteem and Reputation is too deep rooted in the hearts of all Good Men, to be at all lessened by the Doctor's hard Reflections; tho I thought I could do no less than vindicate the Memory of so pious a Prelate, since many ordinary Readers, who were not acquainted with this good Bishop, or his Writings, may think Dr. H. had cause thus to find fault with him. So avoiding all invidious Reflections upon the Reverend Doctor, long since deceased, I shall now conclude, hear∣tily wishing that whatever he hath written, or published, had never done any more prejudice to that Church which he undertook to serve, than any of those Writings or Opinions of the Lord Pri∣mat's, which he so much finds fault with. FINIS.
A COLLECTION Of Three Hundred LETTERS Written between the Most Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES USHER, Late Lord Arch-Bishop of ARMAGH, and most of the Eminentest Persons for PIETY and LEARNING in his Time, both in ENGLAND and beyond the SEAS. Collected and Published From Original Copies under their own Hands, by RICHARD PARR, D. D. his Lordships Chap∣lain at the Time of his Death, with whom the Care of all his Papers were intrusted by his Lordship. LONDON, Printed for NATHANAEL RANEW, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCLXXXVI.
THE CONTENTS. LETTER I. A Letter from Mr. James Usher to Mr. Richard Stanihurst, at the English Colledge in Lovain. Page 1. II. A Letter from Mr. James Usher to Mr. William Eyres. 2 III. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to Mr. James Usher. 3 IV. A Letter from Mr. Henry Briggs to Mr. James Usher. 11 V. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Lydiat to Mr. James Usher. 13 VI. A Letter from Mr. James Usher to Mr. Thomas Lydiat. 14 VII. A Letter from Mr. James Usher to Mr. Thomas Lydiat. 15 VIII. A Letter from Mr. James Usher to Dr. Challoner. 16 IX. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr. James Usher. 17 X. A Letter from Mr. James Usher to Mr. Samuel Ward. 18 XI. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr James Usher. 22 XII. A Letter from Mr. Alexander Cook to Mr. James Usher. 32 XIII. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr. James Usher. 33 XIV. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr. James Usher. 34 XV. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to Mr. James Usher. 34 XVI. A Letter from Mr. Henry Briggs to Mr. James Usher. 35 XVII. A Letter from the Most Reverend Tobias Matthews, Arch-Bishop of York, to Mr. James Usher. 36 XVIII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Gataker to Mr. James Usher. 37 XIX. A Letter from Mr. Robert Usher to Dr. James Usher. 38 XX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Lydiat to Dr. James Usher. 39 XXI. A Letter from Dr. James Usher to Mr. Thomas Lydiat. 43
XXII. A Letter from Dr. James Usher concerning the Death and Satisfaction of Christ. 46 XXIII. An Answer to some Objections against the said Letter, by Dr. James Usher. 49 XXIV. A Letter from Sr. Henry Bourgchier to Dr. James Usher. 53 XXV. A Letter from Mr. William Crashaw to Dr. James Usher. 55 XXVI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Gataker to Dr. James Usher. 56 XXVII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Lydiat to Dr. James Usher. 57 XXVIII. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to Dr. James Usher. 59 XXIX. A Letter from Mr. James Warren to Dr. James Usher. 60 XXX. A Letter from Dr. James Usher to Mr. Thomas Lydiat. 60 XXXI. A Letter from Sr. Henry Bourgchier to Dr. James Usher. 61 XXXII. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to Dr. James Usher. 62 XXXIII. A Letter from Dr. James Usher to Mr. William Camden. 63 XXXIV. A Letter from Mr. William Camden to Dr. James Usher. 65 XXXV. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Warren to Dr. James Usher. 66 XXXVI. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton, Bishop of Chester, to Dr. James Usher. 67 XXXVII. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Dr. James Usher. 67 XXXVIII. A Letter from Dr. James Usher to Mr. Thomas Lydiat. 68 XXXIX. A Letter from Dr. James Usher. 71 XL. A Letter from Mr. Edward Browncker to Dr. James Usher. 72 XLI. A Letter from Dr. James Usher, Bishop Elect of Meath, to the most Reverend Dr. Hampton Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 73 XLII. A Letter from the most Reverend Dr. Hampton Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 75 XLIII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Gataker to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 76 XLIV. A Letter from Sir William Boswell to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 77 XLV. A Letter from Sir Henry Spelman to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 78
XLVI. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 78 XLVII. A Letter from Sir Robert Cotton to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 79 XLVIII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 80 XLIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath, to Mr. John Selden. 81 L. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. 81 LI. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath, to Oliver Lord Grandison. 83 LII. A Letter from the most Reverend Dr. Hampton, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 84 LIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 85 LIV. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 86 LV. A Letter from Mr. Henry Holcroft to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 87 LVI. A Letter from Dr. Goad and Dr. Feately to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 88 LVII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. 89 LVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 90 LIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath, to the Most Reverend Dr. Hampton, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 90 LX. A Letter from the Most Reverend, the Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 92 LXI. A Letter from Dr. Ryves to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 301 LXII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 302 LXIII. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 303
LXIV. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 304 LXV. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to Mr.—Calandrine. 306 LXVI. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to Mr.—Calandrine. 307 LXVII. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 309 LXVIII. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 310 LXIX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis in Aleppo, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 311 LXX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Pickering to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 312 LXXI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis in Aleppo, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 313 LXXII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 314 LXXIII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 315 LXXIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath, to Dr. Sa∣muel Ward. 315 LXXV. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 316 LXXVI. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 317 LXXVII. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bi∣shop of Meath. 318 LXXVIII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 320 LXXIX. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. 321 LXXX. A Letter from the Right Reverend, the Bishop of Kilmore, to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop Elect of Armagh. 322 LXXXI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis from Aleppo, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 323 LXXXII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 325
LXXXIII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis at Aleppo, to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 326 LXXXIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend John Williams Bishop of Lincoln and Lord Keeper. 327 LXXXV. A Letter from Mr. Abraham Wheelock to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 329 LXXXVI. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 330 LXXXVII. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 331 LXXXVIII. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 332 LXXXIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 333 XC. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 333 XCI. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 334 XCII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Lord Keeper and Lord Treasurerer. 335 XCIII. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. 338 XCIV. A Letter from Mr. John Cotton of New England, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 338 XCV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 340 XCVI. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 340 XCVII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 341 XCVIII. A Letter from Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 342 XCIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 343 C. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 344
CI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Samuel Ward. 345 CII. A Letter from Mr. Ralph Skinner to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 346 CIII. A Letter from Mr. Ralph Skinner to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 356 CIV. A Letter from Mr. Ralph Skinner to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 358 CV. A Letter from Mr. Ralph Skinner. 363 CVI. A Letter from Mr. Ralph Skinner to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 366 CVII. A Letter from Mr. James White to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. 368 CVIII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 368 CIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 369 CX. A Letter from Dr. John Bainbridge to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 370 CXI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis from Aleppo, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 371 CXII. A Letter from Mr. Alexander Cook to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 372 CXIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Lord Faulkland. 373 CXIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Most Reverend Robert Abbot, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. 374 CXV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Honourable Society of Lincolns-Inn. 375 CXVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Most Reverend Robert Abbot, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. 376 CXVII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 377 CXVIII. A Letter from the Lord Deputy Faulkland to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 379 CXIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend Robert Abbot, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 380
CXX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis in Aleppo, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 381 CXXI. A Letter from the Reverend John Hanmer, Bishop of St. Asaph, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 382 CXXII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. John Selden. 383 CXXIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, to Mr.—387 CXXIV. A Letter from Dr. William Bedell, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 387 CXXV. A Letter from Dr. John Bainbridge, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 390 CXXVI. A Letter from Dr. William Bedell, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 391 CXXVII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. 393 CXXVIII. A Letter from Sir Henry Spelman to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 395 CXXIX. A Letter from Mr. John King to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. 396 CXXX. A Letter from Sir Henry Spelman to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 398 CXXXI. A Letter from Dr. George Hakewill to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 398 CXXXII. A Letter from the Reverend John Prideaux, Bishop of Worcester, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 399 CXXXIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, to the Right Honourable—400 CXXXIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 401 CXXXV. A Letter from Dr. William Bedell to the Most Reverend JamesUsher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 402 CXXXVI. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 403 CXXXVII. A Letter from Mr. Archibald Hamilton to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 405 CXXXVIII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 406
CXXXIX. A Letter from the Right Honourable the Lord Deputy Faulkland, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 407 CXL. A Letter from Mr. John Philpot to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 407 CXLI. A Letter from the Lords of the Council in Ireland, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 408 CXLII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 409 CXLIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 410 CXLIV. A Letter from Dr. John Bainbridge, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 411 CXLV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London. 412 CXLVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 413 CXLVII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 414 CXLVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London, to the Most rend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 415 CXLIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 416 CL. A Letter from Mr. Lawr. Robinson, to the Most Reverend James Usher Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 417 CLI. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 418 CLII A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 419 CLIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore. 424 CLIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 426 CLV. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 428 CLVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Lords Justices in Ireland. 429
Instructions to Mr. Dean Lesly for the stoping of Sir John Bathes Patent. 430 CLVII. A Letter from the Right Reverend George Downham, Bishop of London-Derry, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 432 CLVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 432 CLIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 433 CLX. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. 435 CLXI. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, to Dr. Samuel Ward, concerning Baptism. 440 CLXII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, concerning Baptism. 440 CLXIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, to Dr. Samuel Ward, concerning Baptism. 441 CLXIV. A Letter from King Charles the First, to the Lords of the Council in Ire∣land. 446 CLXV. A Letter from the Earl of Cork, and the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 447 CLXVI. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 448 CLXVII. A Letter from the Kings Council in Ireland, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 450 CLXVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 451 CLXIX. A Letter from Dr. John Forbes to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 455 CLXX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. John Forbes. 456 CLXXI. A Letter from the Ministers of the Pallatinate to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 457 CLXXII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London. 459 CLXXIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend William Laud, Bishop of London. 460 CLXXIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 461
CLXXV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 464 CLXXVI. A Letter from Johannes Buxtorfius to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 465 CLXXVII. A Letter from Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 468 CLXXVIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 469 CLXXIX. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 470 CLXXX. A Letter from Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 472 CLXXXI. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 473 CLXXXII. A Letter from Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 474 CLXXXIII. A Letter from Mr. Francis Taylor, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 475 CLXXXIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend William Laud, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 476 CLXXXV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 477 CLXXXVI. A Letter from Ludovicus de Dieu, to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 478 CLXXXVII. A Letter from Ludovicus de Dieu, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 480 CLXXXVIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 481 CLXXXIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend William Laud, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 482 CXC. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Gerardus Vossius. 483 CXCI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Fredericus Spanhemius. 484 CXCII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych. 485
CXCIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 486 CXCIV. A Letter from Ludovicus de Dieu to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 487 CXCV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 487 CXCVI. A Letter from Mr. J. Battiere to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 488 CXCVII. A Letter from Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 490 CXCVIII. A Letter from Arnoldus Bootius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 491 CXCIX. A Letter from Dr. William Gilbert to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 492 CC. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. 494 CCI. A Letter from Sir Simon D'Ewes to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 495 CCII. A Letter from the Right Honourable Dudly Loftus, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 497 CCIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 498 CCIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Lewis de Dieu. 499 CCV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, con∣cerning the Sabbath and Observation of the Lords Day. 500 CCVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Sir Simon D'Ewes. 505 CCVII. A Letter from Johannes Priceus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 506 CCVIII. A Letter from Sybilla Christiana Comitiss. Hanoviae, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 507 CCIX. A Letter from D. Blondellus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 508 CCX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Claudius Salmasius. 508
CCXI. A Letter from Mr. John Greaves, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 509 CCXII. A Letter from Dr. Gerard Langbaine to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 510 CCXIII. A Letter from Christianus Ravius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 511 CCXIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Gerard Langbaine. 512 CCXV. A Leter from Dr. Gerard Langbaine to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 513 CCXVI. A Letter from Dr. Gerard Langbaine to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 514 CCXVII. A Letter from T.—to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 515 CCXVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 516 CCXIX. A Letter from Mr. Patrick Young to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 517 CCXX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Fredericus Spanhemius. 518 CCXXI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Johannes Gerardus Vossius. 518 CCXXII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Barlow, now Bishop of Lincoln, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 519 CCXXIII. A Letter from Claudius Sarravius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 521 CCXXIV. A Letter from Fredericus Spanhemius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 522 CCXXV. A Letter from Dr. Gerard Langbaine to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 523 CCXXVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Christophorus Justellus. 526 CCXXVII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Claudius Sarravius. 527 CCXXVIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Isaacus Vossius. 527
CCXXIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 528 CCXXX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich. 529 CCXXXI. A Letter from Gerardus Johannes Vossius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 529 CCXXXII. A Letter from Dr. Jsaac Basire to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 530 CCXXXIII. A Letter from Sir Thomas Ryves to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 531 CCXXXIV. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 533 CCXXXV. A Letter from Dr. Gerard Langbaine to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 535 CCXXXVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Alexander More. 536 CCXXXVII. A Letter from Sir Thomas Reeves to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 537 CCXXXVIII. A Letter from Isaacus Gruterus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 538 CCXXXIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Johannes Gerardus Vossius. 539 CCXL. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Johannes Hevelius. 540 CCXLI. A Letter from Dr. Henry Hammond to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 541 CCXLII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Henry Hammond. 541 CCXLIII. A Letter from Dr. Henry Hammond to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 542 CCXLIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Henry Hammond. 542 CCXLV. A Letter from Dr. Henry Hammond to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 543 CCXLVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Henry Hammond. 543 CCXLVII. A Letter from Mr. Edward Davenant to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 544
CCXLVIII. A Letter from Mr. Abraham Wheelock to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 545 CCXLIX. A Letter from Isaacus Gruterus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 547 CCL. A Letter from Petrus Scavenius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 547 CCLI. A Letter from Paulus Testardus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-shop of Armagh. 549 CCLII. A Letter from Christianus Ravius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 550 CCLIII. A Letter from Dr. Gerard Langbaine to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 551 CCLIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 553 CCLV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 554 CCLVI. A Letter from Dr. Merick Casaubon to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 555 CCLVII. A Letter from Dr. Isaac Vossius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 556 CCLVIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 557 CCLIX. A Letter from Ludovicus Capellus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 559 CCLX. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 559 CCLXI. A Letter from Mr. Robert Vaughan to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 561 CCLXII. A Letter from Ludovicus Capellus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 562 CCLXIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Franciscus Junius. 563 CCLXIV. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 564 CCLXV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Henry King, Bishop of Chichester, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 567 CCLXVI. A Letter from Ludovicus Capellus to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 568 CCLXVII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus Capellus. 569
CCLXVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Brain Duppo, Bishop of Salisbury, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 579 CCLXIX. A Letter from Gothofredus Hotton to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 580 CCLXX. A Letter from Robert Vaughan to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 581 CCLXXI. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 583 CCLXXII. A Letter from Johannes Buxtorfius to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 584 CCLXXIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Johannes Buxtorfius. 586 CCLXXIV. A Letter from Ludovicus Capellus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 587 CCLXXV. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 588 CCLXXVI. A Letter from the Right Reverend Brian Walton, Bishop of Chester, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 590 CCLXVII. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 591 CCLXXVIII. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. 592 CCLXXIX. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 592 CCLXXX. A Letter from Mr. John Price to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 595 CCLXXXI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Ludovicus de Dieu. 596 CCLXXXII. A Letter from Dr. John Price to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 596 CCLXXXIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton, Bishop of Durham, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 598 CCLXXXIV. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 599 CCLXXXV. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 600 CCLXXXVI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 602 CCLXXXVII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh. 603 CCLXXXVIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh. 605 CCLXXXIX. A Letter from Jacobus Goar to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 606 CCXC. A Letter from Nicolaus Mercator to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh. 607 CCXCI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Henricus Va∣lesius. 609 CCXCII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 610 CCXCIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend John Bramhall, Bishop of London-Derry, to the Most Re∣verend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 611 CCXCIV. A Letter from Henricus Valesius to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh. 613
CCXCV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Henricus Va∣lesius. 614 CCXCVI. A Letter from Dr. Thomas Barlow, now Bishop of Lincoln, to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 615 CCXCVII. A Letter from Mr. Herbert Thorndike to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. 616 CCXCVIII. A Letter from Johannes Dallaeus to the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh. 619 CCXCIX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Arnold Boate. 620 CCC. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Arnold Boate. 620 CCCI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Arnold Boate. 621 CCCII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Arnold Boate. 621 CCCIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Nicolaus Mer∣cator. 622 CCCIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. 623 CCCV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Christianus Ravius. 623 CCCVI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. 624 The Contents of an additional Collection of Letters from several other Eminent Persons. I. A Letter from Mr. William Camden to Sir Edward Stradling. 1 II. A Letter from Mr. William Camden to Sir Edward Stradling. 1 III. A Letter from Padre Paulo, Author of the History of the Council of Trent, to the Abbot of St. Medard. 2 IV. A Letter from Hugo Grotius to Dr. John Overal, Dean of St. Pauls. 4 V. A Letter from Hugo Grotius to Dr. John Overal, Dean of St. Pauls. 4 VI. A Letter from Hugo Grotius to the Right Reverend John Overal, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. 5 VII. A Letter from Hugo Grotius to the Right Reverend John Overal, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. 7 VIII. A Letter from Johannes Henricus Hottinger to Christianus Ravius. 7 IX. A Letter from Jacobus Irmingerus to Christianus Ravius. 9 X. A Letter from Jacobus Syrmondus to Simon de Dewes. 10 XI. A Letter from Jacobus Syrmondus to Simon de Dewes. 12 XII. A Letter from John Deodate to the Assembly of Divines, London, 1647. 14 XIII. A Letter from Sir Thomas Bodleigh to Sir Francis Bacon. 17 XIV. A Letter from Sir Thomas Bodleigh to Sir Francis Bacon. 19 XV. A Letter from Sir Henry Sydney to his Son Sir Phillip Sydney. 23 XVI. A Letter from Sir Henry Sydney to his Son Sir Phillip Sydney. 24 XVII. A Letter from Sir William Boswell to the Most Reverend William Laud, Arch-Bishop of
LETTERS. LETTER I. A Letter from Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Richard Stanihurst at the English Colledge in Lovain. Dear Uncle, HAving the opportunity of this Messenger so fitly offered unto me, I make bold to desire your furtherance in some matters that con∣cern my Studies. The principal part of my study at this time is imployed in perusing the Writings of the Fathers, and observing out of them the Doctrine of the Ancient Church; wherein I find it very ne∣cessary, that the Reader should be thoroughly informed touching his Au∣thors, what Time they lived, and what Works are truly, what falsely attri∣buted to them; either of which being mistaken, must of force bring great confusion in this kind of study. To help Students wherein, Johannes Mola∣nus, sometime Divinity Professor in the University of Lovain, wrote a Book, which he intituled Bibliotheca Theologica; giving charge at his death to his Heirs, That they should see the Work published; (as witnesseth Possevinus in Apparatu Sacro) but they being negligent in discharging that Trust com∣mitted unto them, the Book is at last fallen into the hands of Aubertus Mi∣roeus, a Canon of Antwerp, as himself acknowledgeth in his Edition of Sige∣bert's Chronicle. If you could procure from him the Copy thereof, (which I suppose will be no hard matter for you to effect) and with some conveni∣ent speed impart it unto me, I should take it for a very great argument of your love, and hold my self exceedingly obliged unto you thereby. Besides my main studies, I have always used, as a kind of Recreation, to spend some time in gathering together the scattered Antiquities of our Nation; whereof I doubt not but many Relicks are come into your hands, which I would very willingly hear of. But especially I would intreat you to let me have a Copy of Philip Flatsebury's Chronicle, for hitherto I could never get a sight of it; as neither of Cornelius Hibernicus his History, cited by Hector Boethius: Sentleger's Collections, alledged by Mr. Campian: Richard Creagh of the Saints of Ireland: Christopher Pembridg his Abstract of the Irish Chroni∣cles, &c. There is also among the Manuscript Books of the Jesuites Colledge at Lovain, the Life of St. Patrick, a Manuscript, &c. A Manuscript whereof I have much desired, both because the Author seemeth to be of some Anti∣quity, and likewise alledgeth certain Sentences out of St. Patrick's own Wri∣tings. If any of our Country men, studious of such matters, will be pleased to communicate either that, or any other Antiquities of like nature, I do promise that I will take as much pains for him, and make full recompence of courtesie in the same kind. Your own Treatise of St. Patrick's Life I have; as also your Hebdomada Mariana. Your Margarita Mariana, and other writings
(if there be any) I have much sought for, but could not as yet get: Thus presuming upon that natural bond of love which is knit betwixt us, that I shall receive such satisfaction from you as I expect; with my Mother, your Sister's most kind remembrance, I remain Your most loving Nephew, James Usher. LETTER II. Jac. Usseri ad Guil. Eyrium Epistola. Guilielmo Eyrio, in Collegio Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae, Socio, QUas ad me dedisti literas, Eyri ornatissime, eas reddidit mihi jampri∣dem huc ex Angliâ reversus, Frater: Ad quas quòd seriùs jam respon∣deam, partim illud in causa fuit quòd , partim etiam quòd Livelaeanam de authentica Scripturarum editione commentationem priùs expectaverim, quo amplior mihi tribueretur occasio & gratias agendi, & amplius de quaestione gravissimâ inquirendi (quo unâ fideliâ duos dealbarem parietes) profectò me negligentiam insuper com∣memorare necesse sit, quam diffiteri non possum. Sanè  cum Livelaeo tuo conferre, cum aliis de rebus, tum praecipuè de versione LXX Interpretibus adscriptâ; ubi mihi in multis aquam haerere non diffiteor: Pro∣misit de his nuper rara quaedam & inaudita doctissimus Scaliger, (cujus ego hominis multiplicem eruditionem admirari soleo) ut & de Masoritarum ob∣servationibus, à quibus, post Hieronymi tempora, puncta Hebraeorum & ac∣centus inventos, confirmatur. Sed ludet ibi profectò operam, si quid ego augurari possum. Ludat Scali∣geri Critica in Virgiliano Culice; ludat, (inquam) nam lusisse ostendunt cre∣brae illae trajectiones, quas ille nulli opinor hominum unquam probaverit. Et ludente autore, ludat etiam Interpres. Lusit Virgilius Culice, (Lusimus Octavi) lusit etiam in emendando Culice Scaliger. Et hujusmodi nugis lu∣dat ille quantum volet: Non in eo positae sunt fortunae Graeciae. Sed in se∣riis & maximi momenti rebus pium & modestum pectus desideraverim. Tuum erit (doctiss. Eyri) & tui simillium, quibus ad arcana literaturae He∣braicae datus est aditus, succrescenti huic malo ire obviam, & curare ne quid inde detrimenti Resp. Christiana capiat. Haec in nostros fabricata est machi∣na muros; aut aliquis latet error. Ad nos quod attinet, qui sacris illis vix dum initiati sumus; congessimus et nos ex Hieronymo & Scriptis Hebraeorum observationes; sed Talmudico∣rum librorum ope destituti, quod voluimus perficere, nondum potuimus. Illud certè mihi persuasissimum ipsum Masoreth longè antè Hieronymi tempora extitisse. Illud velim scire quomodo in Baba Bothra, in Historia de Joabo magistrum suum occidente, distinguunt  & , an per puncta vocalia, an aliter. Et in Massecheth  Perek . et quid intelligit Arias Montanus, cum dicit Josephum punctorum meminisse. Lasciviunt critici, quorum petulantia comprimenda; nisi non sit verisimile, non ego credulus illis.
—Cur dextrae jungere dextram Non datur, ac veras audire & reddere voces Aen. 1. Nec vidisse semel satis est: juvatus{que} morari; Et conferre gradum, & veniendi discere causas. Aen. 6. —Nequeunt expleri corda tuendo. Aen. 8. Spondeo digna tuis ingentibus omnia coeptis. —Nec partum gratia talem Parva manet.—Aen. 9. Omnia magna de te spem nobis conciliasti. Jac. Usserius. Dublin. 12 Kal. Januar. 1607. LETTER III. Guiliel. Eyrii ad Usserium Epistola. Spectatissimo Viro ac Amico suo singulari, M. Jacobo Usserio Theo∣logiae Professori apud Dublinienses in Hyberniâ, S. QUOD Hieronymus in Epistolâ quâdam ad Paulinum Presbyterum scripsit, nempè literas ejus à principio probatae jam fidei fidem & vete∣ris Amicitiae nova praetulisse Argumenta, idem de tuis (ornatissime humanis∣siméque Usseri) quas ad me 12 Kalendas Januarii dedisti literis, verè dicere possum. Vera est enim haec necessitudo nostra & satis antiqua, quam (ut sanctissimi Patris verbis utar) non utilitas rei familiaris, non proesentia tan∣tùm corporum, non subdola & palpans adulatio, sed Dei timor & divinarum Scripturarum studia conciliant. Hanc tu praeclarè novis officiis reapse colui∣sti, Guilielmus tuus votis & affectu tantùm. Quod autem tam diu jam conticuêre literae meae, in causâ non fuit veter∣nus aliquis, nec oblivio singularis erga me tuae humanitatis, quam nec loci distantia, aut , &c. obscurare nec temporis diuturnitas è tabulis memoriae meae obliturare potest; sed quotidiana exspe∣ctatio Liveleanae commentationis de authenticâ Scripturarum editione, quam tibi jam anteâ pollicitus eram. Hanc frustrà adhuc expectavimus; licèt jampridem consilio Roffensis Episcopi tradita fuerit cuidam viro docto, unà cum Chronologiâ Latinâ, ut publici juris fiant. Ambas quamprimum lucem aspexerint, volente Deo, ad te mittam. Chronologicus ille tractatus (credo) propediem prodibit: alterum quod attinet, si non editus fuerit (quod non multùm desiderarem, nisi quaedam cautiùs, quaedam verò pleniùs scripta fuissent) non dubito quin post menses aliquot, copiam ejus mihi denuò haeredes Livelaei facient; atque tum postea in tuam gratiam exscribendum curabo. Intereà verò loci, agnosco me valdè obaeratum esse & tibi & doctissimo juveni Fratri tuo Ambrosio, qui peritissimâ manu suâ, quaedam in meum usum ex Alcorano Arabicè exscripsit. Tibi verò (clarissime Jacobe) meipsum debeo, qui non solùm suavissimis tuis literis animum meum erexisti, sed etiam Arabicae Grammaticae mihi copiam fecisti. Nondum potui, Postelli auxilio, Nebien∣sis
Psalterii superare difficultatem, neque sanè operae pretium est. Video enim Arabicam illam Psalmorum versionem non Hebraicam veritatem, sed ubique (ni fallor) vel Graecam vel (quae plerumque eôdem redit) vulgatam Latinam translationem expressisse. Amisimus Judaeum, olim praeceptorem meum, cu∣jus gratiâ in animo mihi fuit hoc studium suscepisse; quia specula aliqua as∣fulserat, qualemcunque hujus linguae scientiam in Academiâ nostrâ hâc ra∣tione, locum aliquem habere potuisse. Non sum  (ut Clenar∣dus olim:) sed Arabicari parumper, & primoribus tantùm labris Arabicis∣mum degustare volui, ut in aliis quibusdam rectiùs judicare possem. Nam in animo mihi fuit jampridem, quorundam hortatu & consilio, quae∣dam de authenticâ scripturarum editione déque punctorum, vocalium & accen∣tuum Hebraicorum antiquitate & ratione penitiùs (quàm hactenùs) rimari; & fontium puritatem integritatémque à Librariorum incuriâ & Critico∣rum quorundam conjecturis vindicare: ob cámque causam limatissimum tuum judicium in nonnullis libentissimè cognoscerem, quorum te (do∣ctissime Usseri) callentissimum esse, omnes qui te nôrunt testari possunt. Verùm ne longiore hujusce rei explicatione, aliud quiddam quod mihi jam in animo occurrit, excidat planè è memoriâ, illud priùs expediam. De∣git hîc apud nos (uti nôsti) Qui mihi ad sedem Armacha∣nam translato, anno 1625. in Midensi Episco∣patu successit, & anno 1650. mortem obiit. Antonius Martinus; quem & tute satis nôsti, ego verò in cute novi. Vestras est natione & affectu suo: & noster foret non tantùm affectu & votis nostris, aequè ac merito suo, sed etiam loco, nem∣pe in albo sociorum, si natione nostras esset. Quorsum haec Dicam paucis∣simis. Quoniam Martinus hic meus (nam sic revera est, curâ, & pro more nostro, tutelâ quâdam) noster esse nequit; gratularer sanè plurimum ipsimet & vobis si vester esse posset, locúmque socii in Collegio patrio capesseret. Certè quorundam sermone nuper accepi, quosdam propediem asciscendos & cooptandos esse in album sociorum Collegii Dubliniensis: scio etiam vos in vo∣tis habere, probos & literatos in seminario vestro collocare, qui strenuam ope∣ram vel in artibus docendis, inque juventute erudiendâ, vel in messe Domini in agris Hybernicis colligendâ, tandem ponant, & vel sint vel fiant idonei ut hoc faciant. Illud consultissimum est. Nam si habeatis in scholâ vestrâ qui cum laude & fructu juventutem vestram in Philosophiâ & politiori lite∣raturâ instituant, (quales & habuisse, ac etiamnum vos habere sat scio) tan∣dem fiet (annuente Deo) ut intra fines Hiberniae generosa juventus conti∣neatur, neque extra Athenas vestras Romae aut alibi instituantur. Talis futu∣rus est (spero) Martinus noster: quippe qui is est, qualis alii plerique videri tantùm volunt, & in humaniori literaturâ, & vitae integritate: germanissi∣mus certè Nathaneel, sine fraude. Haec divinae providentiae & vestrae prudentiae relinquenda censeo, & ad rem propositam accedo. Atque ut intelligat Reverentia tua, me operam daturum, ut tibi gratus sim, spero me brevi confecturum Indicem sive Catalogum variarum lectionum in utroque Instrumento, unâ cum earundem censurâ, quem ad te transmittam; ut tibi saltem occasionem aliquam haec eadem penitiùs rimandi, & lucem veritatis aliis praebendi dare possim. Scio enim te multa in adversariis tuis ad hanc rem pertinentia habere, quae occasione oblatâ, in usum Ecclesiae pro∣feras: mihi satis fuerit ansam doctioribus praebere. Quid enim amplius te∣nuitas mea in hoc genere praestare potest, cui non conceditur per statuta Collegii nostri in gremio indulgentissimae matris Academiae, ul∣tra biennium aut triennium manere, atque intereà loci oportet in aliis potissimum temporis partem consumere Tuum erit potiùs (doctissime Jacobe) qui commodius antiquitates indagare, Spartam hanc exornare. Ve∣rùm ut intelligas, quid à me expectes, & quâ ratione tute postea rem ipsam expe∣dias, en tibi methodum eorum quae parare occoepi! & quidem opus ipsum in privatum usum brevi (juvante Domino) absolvam. Appellari po∣test , seles legis, sive Massoreth, vel (ut alii legunt) Masorah, ad
puritatem fontium sive  S S. contextus scripturarum conservan∣dam, & consequenter ad ejusdem  declarandam adhibita, & 2. libris comprehensa, quorum 1. Prior, Prolegomena generalia continebit. 2. Alter, Indicem variarum lectionum, in totâ Scripturâ. Primi libri praecipuam materiem (post statum controversiae de au∣thenticâ Scripturarum editione & fontium puritate) sex propositioni∣bus, quas firmissimis rationibus confirmare possim, si dextrè intelligantur, complexus sum. Ia Propositio: Illa tantùm Scripturarum editio est authentica quae divini∣tùs inspirata fuit, & à Prophetis atque Apostolis conscripta. IIa Propositio: Illa ipsa scriptura prophetica quae primitùs conscripta fuerit etiamnum pura & integra conservatur in Ecclesiâ. IIIa Propositio: Hebraica veteris Instrumenti scriptura iisdem vocalium & accentuum notis, quibus hodiè utimur, antiquitùs tradita. IVa Propositio: Graeca novi Testamenti scriptura (quae divinitùs inspirata fuerit) adhuc integra & pura manet in Ecclesiâ. Va Propositio: Graeca veteris Instrumenti translatio, nec divinitus inspira∣ta, nec pura & integra. VIa Propositio: Vulgata Latina Bibliorum editio, nec fida nec authentica, nedum divinitùs conscripta. Appendix Lib. I. IN Appendice, Paralipomena sive praetermissa in Prolegomenis quaedam subjicientur, ad praesens negotium facientia, sed in propositionibus com∣modè tractari non possunt. 1. De characterum Hebraicorum qui hodie in usu sunt, origine & anti∣quitate. Haec disquisitio necessaria videtur, ad defensionem integritatis Scripturae, propter novam opinionem illustrissimi viri Josephi Scaligeri: qui in animadvers. in Euseb. Chron. ad locum Eusebiani num. 1617. Literae, (inquit) quibus hodie Judaei sacros libros & omnia acta sua conscribunt, nu∣perae ac novitiae sunt, ex Syriacis depravatae, illae autem ex Samaritanis, &c. Vide locum. Hâc de re variae sunt aliorum opiniones, ut Postelli libello de Phoenicum literis, Waseri lib. de antiquis numis Hebr. &c. & aliorum: quas hic ventilandas suscepi, etsi fateor in quibusdam quae caput rei non at∣tingunt aquam mihi haerere. Verum Scaligeri opinionem aperte falsam esse probari potest ex metis. Nam 1o probatur, modernas literas non esse nuperas, &c. & Samari∣tanas in Biblico usu semper non fuisse antiquitùs, quia non Samaritanae sed Judaicae in usu fuerunt Christi humiliati tempore: ut constare mihi videtur ex Matth. 5. 18. Luc. 16. 17. & locis id genus aliis, ubi Christus docet, Ne minimam quidem particulam legis perituram; nempe ut (omnes fatentur) sal∣tem quoad sensum & doctrinam, allusione facta ad minimam literulam He∣braici contextus, nempe joth, quae facilè omnium literarum minima est in Hebr. Alphabeto, sed in Samaritano potiùs maxima (Heb. י Samar. .) Quod si ante Christi humiliati tempus, nostrae literae fuerint, tum neque nuperae sunt & novitiae, neque ex Syriacis depravatae. Nam Syriacae sive Maroniticae introductae fuerint à Christianis nascentis Ecclesiae, ne quid cum Nazaraeis & Hebionitis (quorum haeresin execrabantur) haberent commune; ut docet doctiss. vir Guido Fabricius Boderianus in Epistola ad Dictionar. Syro-Chald. 2o Idem constat ex omnibus illis scripturae locis (qui benè multi sunt) in quibus veteres Interpretes LXX, & alii antiquissimi hallucinati sunt & decep∣ti literarum similitudine, ut . Job. 21. 3.
, Graecè legitur , , & id genus sexcenta quae ex Indice no∣stro observari possunt. Nulla autem tális est earundem literarum vicinitas jux∣ta Samaritanum alphabetum. Vide Postelli vel Scaligeri ipsius Alphabetum Sa∣maritanum locis citatis. 3o Multa alia id ipsum docent, quae non opus est hîc repetere. Nempe figurae Hebraicae literarum quae hodiè in usu sunt, simplicissimae: ex quibus etiam, (ut Postellus probat, & res ipsa docet) nimirum ex currente earum formâ, Syriacae & Arabicae literae ortum habent. Item  sive notatio∣nes nominum quae Hebraicis potiùs quam Samaritanis characteribus conve∣niunt. Quâ de re consulendi sunt Grammatici. Miror quid Scaligero in mentem veniebat. Sed missa haec facio, & reliqua quae communiter contra hanc Scaligerianam & aliorum opinionem dici possunt. II. De Masoriticis & Rabbinicis notis in Bibliis Hebraicis: de 28 Perig∣moth, déque librorum & capitum variis distinctionibus; & id genus aliis, & quid illis tribuendum sit. Neque hîc multis opus est, quia in confirmatione 2ae propositionis nostrae, in responsione ad objectiones contra Hebraici fontis puritatem, fusiùs diximus, quod satis esse videatur, donec ad particularium locorum censuram in Indice nostro deveniamus. 1. De 18 locis qui vulgò appellantur, , & à quibusdam contra puritatem Hebraicae Scripturae & fidem Judaeorum obji∣ciuntur. 2. De 4. locis qui vulgò appellantur, , objicitur e∣tiam. 3. De 848 locis, , objectis, &c. ubi descripsi ea ex Talmude & Eliae Massoreth hammassoreth: quae tu (doctissime Usseri) à me in tuam gratiam describenda petis. 4. De varietatibus inter Orientales & Occidentales, item inter filios Aser & Nephtali. 5. De locis quibusdam Veteris Instrumenti, in quibus corruptelae objiciun∣tur ex rei grammaticae ratione. 6. De locis (in genere) tam Veteris quàm Novi Testamenti, in qui∣bus,  observantur, atque ex collatione locorum parallelorum corruptionis arguuntur. III. De Chaldaicâ paraphrasi, déque Arabicâ & Syriacâ, necnon de aliis Veterum & Neotericorum versionibus, quarum in propositionibus non fit mentio, & quid illis tribuendum sit. IV. De castigatissimis Bibliorum Hebr. Veteris Instrumenti, & Graec. No∣vi Testamenti exemplaribus, His generalibus propositis ac enucleatis, facilè erit judicium de singulis variarum lectionum locis: neque opus erit in Indice sive Catalogo no∣stro subsequente multa dicere, quae alioquin saepissimè & ferè ubique re∣petere oporteret. Secundi libri Argumentum. Index & collatio Variarum lectionum per singulos Scripturae Libros & Librorum Capita, unâ cum earundem censurâ, juxta ordinem particularium locorum; praesertim ubi fontium puritas quibusdam suspecta videtur vel incu∣riâ librariorum aut Criticorum temeritate periculum sit ne corrumpatur.
Hujus Specimen, ex collectaneis nostris de∣promptum, hic subjiciam. Collatio variarum Lectionum in Psalmis. Significationes notularum quibus saepiusculè in hac parte Indicis nostri usi sumus. Qu. leg. Al. rect. h. e. QUibusdam legitur sicuti primo in loco habetur: alitèr verò rectiùs sicuti postea subjicitur. I. II. III. Indicant , quorum ope Judicandum est, ex positis jam ante propositionum fundamentis, de genuina Lectione in singulis locis: nam ad 3a capita revocari possunt. I. Codices sive Exemplaria primaevi Contextus, tum Manuscripta, tum typis Excusa. II. Interpretum Versiones & Commentationes, tum veterum tum recen∣tiorum. III. Rationes ex verbis ipsis loci{que} circumstantiis, necnon ex aliorum loco∣rum Collatione, fidei{que} Analogia. Quod si lectio aliqua ex his tribus alicujus auctoritate destituatur, tum sic notatur, I—o II—o Om. Cod.—i. Omnes Codices vel omnia Exemplaria nostra, tàm Manu∣scripta, quàm Typographica. Exempl. Mass.—i. Exemplaria juxta Masoreth Judaeorum excusa, praesertim si Voculae aut Verbis, de quibus controvertitur, nota Masoretica apponatur. MS. T.—Manuscriptum Psalmorum Exemplar in Bibliotheca Collegii Trinitatis Cantabrigiae. MS. C.—Manuscriptum Exemplar in Bibl. Coll. Gonevelli & Caii Can∣tabrig. MS. T. &C. notat utrumque. Bom. 1 edit. Bom. 2 edit. Bom. 3 edit. —Codices Bibl. Hebr. à Dan. Bombergo Venetiis editi, tum seorsim variis formis & temporibus, tum etiam cum Rab∣binorum commentariis, necnon cum Masora minori & majori in duabus posterioribus Editionibus emendatissimis, quas ubi{que} ferè comprobavimus in Psalterio. Pl. 16o Pl. 8o Pl. 4o Pl. fol. —Codices Bibl. Hebr. à Ch. Plantino, variis formis & tem∣poribus, Antwerpiae excusi,—praesertim acuratissima Edi∣tio illa ab Aria Montano & aliis doctissimis viris elaborata, quam hac nota [Bibl. Reg.] indicavimus. Comp.—Codices Hebr. juxta Complutensem Editionem. Steph.—Biblia Hebraea in 4o cum com. Rab. In 12 Pro. minor. & in 16o elegantissimis characteribus, Parisiis, per Rob. Stephanum. Int. V. & N. vulg. edit.—Interpretes Veteres & Neoterici, qui vulgatam E∣ditionem Graecam vel Latinam in versionibus aut commentationibus suis sequuti sunt. Huc spe∣ctat Arabica Tralatio Psalmorum in Justiniani Ne∣biensis octaplo Psalterio, quam saepè consuluimus. Int. V. & N. Heb. Ver.—Interpretes Veteres & Recentiores, qui He∣braicam veritatem sequuti sunt. Hoc nomine com∣plector etiam Rabbinicos Scr. Interpretes, item Le∣xicographos, & alios qui vel Concordantiis aut Scho∣liis suis lectionem aliquam in locis controversis comprobarunt.
Variarum Lectionum in Psal. Hebr. Observatio & Censura. Psal. 2. 7. Qu. leg. ] ut vocula,  sit cum Tseri, atque ut clau∣sula haec referatur ad praecedentem versum. I. Legitur.  in margine 1ae Edit. Bom. cum Rab. Com. & 2ae Edit. cum Rab. Scholiis. II. Graec. Schol. . 6a Edit. . Theod. . Vul. lat. proedicans proeceptum ejus.] Narrabo proprie, ut narrem Dei Sta∣tutum & decretum (inquit Genebrardus) Ubi observa  posse esse Nomen Dei, ut à Masoretis notatum sit perverse per Seghol loco Tseri. Vel si sit proe∣positio Latine vacare, narrabo Proeceptum [ejus] h. e. ut narrem Proeceptum ejus, sum constitutus Rex ab ipso. Haec ille. Al. rect. ] ut  sit cum Seghol, atque ut clausula haec non re∣feratur ad praecedentem versum, sed initium sit sequentis. 1. Om. Exempl. nostra, tàm M S. quàm Typograph. Quòd autem in Margine 1ae Edit. Bom. cum  Rab. & 2ae in minori forma absque Scholiis leg.  cum Tseri, nihil valere debet, tum quia verborum ratio, & versuum divisio in omnibus etiam non punctatis exemplaribus re∣pugnant, tum etiam quia (ut Elias Lev. monet in 3a praefat. Mas. Hammas. cautè agendum est in illis Bibliis Venetianis. Non respiciat (inquit) lector Verba quae in margine falso sunt posita de lectionum varietate, &c. Qui enim concordantias illas adjecit indoctus fuit, nec fuit Judaeus, nec quippiam novit in Masoreth, nec habuit delectum in oblatis exemplaribus, &c. Vide Basil. edit. Heb. pag. 54.  &c. II. Int Om. V. & N. quibus propositum fuit Hebraicam veritatem exprime∣re nostram lectionem comprobarunt: nempe Chald. Hieron. Rab. Sunt Jar. Ab. Ez. D. Kimqui, Justinianus, Cajetanus, Montanus, & Lexicographi, etiam om∣nes Rab. Mord. Nathan in Concordantiis. Neque verò Lat. vulg. Interpres (qui Graecum sequutus est) nec Inter∣pretes quibus propositum fuit Latinam aut Graecam vulgatam explicare (He∣braeum autem contextum vel non omnino aut negligentiùs consuluerunt) no∣strae Lectioni refragantur. Graec. vulg. , &c. Sic non alior∣sim legisse videatur quàm in Hebraeis habetur. Nam  recte expli∣cat  & [] propter sensus evidentiam adjicitur. Hinc. vulg. lat. Proedicans proeceptum ejus. Quod librarii non inspectis Hebraeorum pausis praecedenti versui non rectè addiderunt; sensu quidem non incommodo, quem Ambrosius, Augustinus, Theodoretus, Haymo, Euthymius, & alii expresserunt. Scholiastes etiam Theod. & 6. Editio supra citat. sensum potiùs quam verba reddiderunt. Jansenius utramque Lectionem exponit, neu∣tram rejicit. III. Sensus est aptior & verbis convenientior juxta Hebraicam versuum di∣visionem & punctationem  per Segol, ut significet juxta, vel fit idem quod : Quòd fi per Tseri legeretur  nullo modo, hoc in loco [Dei vel ] sonaret, ut patet ex ordine verborum, nam tum legendum es∣set  non : futilis autem videtur conjectura Drusii Quest. lib. 2 q. 32 collat. cum observ. lib. 5. cap. 15. ubi asserit interpretem Chald. LXX. & Hieron. legisse  & transtulisse, Annunciabo Dei proeceptum; postea autem mutatam esse lectionem propter ordinem verborum; praeterea juxta Latini vul∣gati Interpretis distinctionem Accentuum Hebraicorum ratio planè negligitur, nec commodior sensus exprimitur. Quid sit autem tribuendum punctis & accentibus Bibliis nos in prolegomenis ostendimus.
Psal. 2. 9. Qu. leg. ] à , quod significat [pascere] propriè: sumi∣tur autem figuratè pro [regere] sicut & Graecis . I.—0. II. Grae.  Vulg. lat. reges eos. Hanc etiam lect. sequ. Int. V. & N. Vulg. Edit. III. Apoc. 2. 27. & 19. 15. leg. . Al. rect. ] à  quod idem significat cum  h. e. confringere, conterere. I. Om. Cod. MS. T. &C. & Typ. & in Mass. exempl. cum nota Maso∣ritica II. Int. V. & N. Hebr. Ver. Aqu. .Chald. , confringes eos: Et sic Rab. Ab. Ez. R. Da. Kim. Hieron. franges eos. Eandemque lect. comprobarunt Justin. Mon. Vat. & Rab. Mor. Na. in Concord. &c.Arab. ] ambiguum est ex defectu punctorum vocalium in Neb. Edit. III. Hanc lectionem confirmat, posterius membrum versiculi. Nihil enim tritius est in Scripturis, praesertim in libris metricis & poeticis, ejusdem sensus reputatione, juxta Rabbinorum observationem . Apocalypseωs autem 20 cap. ver. 27. non citatur iste locus Psalmis, sed vel recitatur sensus tantum juxta vulgatam & in vulgus notam Graecorum interpretationem, vel potius juxta frequentissimum Spiritûs Sancti in Scriptura loquentis morem, aliqua fit loci hujusce paralleli in verbis, sensu manente, im∣mutatio. Quâ re non animadversa, & observatâ, quidam non dubitarunt (ut opinor) in nascente Ecclesia Christiana, hunc & similes locos Graecae vulgatae versionis Novi Testamenti locis parallelis conformare, in quibus forsan olim aliter legebatur. Sexcenta hujusce rei exemp. suppetunt ex Indice hoc nostro. Vide Psal. 19. 5. ubi ] Linea vel delineatio eorum, leg. Grae. : quia sic leg. Rom. 10. 18. Sed de his fusius in confirmatione 5ae pro∣positionis libri primi. Variationes autem sive discrepantias hujusmodi tritas esse & frequentes in locis parallelis constat éx collatione, non solum Veteris Instr. cum Novo, sed etiam alterutrius cum ejusdem aliis locis, ubi idem sensus habetur. Confer Psal. 18. cum 2 Sam. cap. 22. ubi idem Psalmus verbis pul∣chre immutatis recitatur. e. g. Sam.  Psal.  Sam. &c. lege totum Psal∣mum & confer. Sic 2 Sam. 7. 7. —1 Chron. 17. 6.  1 Reg. 7. 24. —2 Chron. 4. 3. . Et alia id genus sexcenta. Deni{que} etiamsi concederetur  rectè verti hoc in loco [pasces eos] inde tamen non sequitur legendum esse  & non  quia in Poët.  duci potest à  pascere, sicut  à  & similia, quae videre est in Ezraidis & Camii Grammatica. Vide Micoe 7. 14. ubi verbum  in significatione pascendi cum  quemadmodum & defendi potest hoc in loco, potius quam lectio Masoritica sit rejicienda. Psal. 2. 12. Qu. leg. : Al. rect. ] Verum , Exempli ac Speciminis ergo reliqua in Psalterio & caeteris Scripturae libris, hac ratione () conficiam.
Appendix Lib. II. IN Appendice, quaedam Paralipomena, ad Indicem nostrum pertinentia, sunt adjicienda. 1. Tabulae varietatum inter Orientales & Occidentales Judaeos, atque in∣ter , quae in calce 1ae & 2ae editionum Bibliorum Bomber∣gianorum habentur. 2. Tabulae  & . 3. Consectaria nonnulla, unâ cum summâ totius causae quam in manibus habemus. viz. 1. Lectio alicujus loci veteris vel Novi Testamenti quae comprobatur con∣sensu & conspiratione omnium exemplarium quae inveniri poffunt, non est rejicienda propter  quod difficulter conciliari potest, nedum prop∣ter interpretum quorundam auctoritatem qui aliter legisse videantur; donec exemplar aliquod fide dignum aliam lectionem exhibeat: nisi circumstantia loci, aut analogia fidei necessariò postulet. Hoc patet ex iis quae dicenda sunt lib. 1. in Prolegomenis, praesertim in confirmatione 2ae, 4ae, 5ae, & 6ae Propositionum. 2. Lectio alicujus loci veteris Instrumenti quae comprobatur fide Masori∣ticorum & emendatissimorum exemplarium, licèt in aliis aliter habeatur, cae∣teris paribus, est praeferenda. Hujus ratio petenda est ex iis quae in Prolegomenis diximus de Masorae ra∣tione & fide, necnon ex iis, quae docentur in 2a & 4a appendice libri primi. 3. Lectio alicujus loci Veteris vel Novi Testamenti, quae comprobatur au∣ctoritate Interpretum qui de industriâ fontes sequuti sunt, h. e. Hebraicam & Graecam veritatem, versione aut commentatione suâ illustrârunt, caeteris pari∣bus, potior est illâ quae nititur fide, vel potiùs hallucinatione Interpretum qui rivulos consectati, & Graecam sive vulgatam Latinam editionem interpretati sunt. Hujus veritas patet ex 5a & 6a Propositione libri primi, atque ex 3a ejus∣dem appendice. 4. Lectio alicujus loci Novi Testamenti quae comprobari potest auctoritate & fide vetustiorum & correctiorum exemplarium, licèt forsan pauciora sint, caeteris paribus, est praeferenda. Vide 4am appendicem lib. 1. Huic nemo non suffragabitur, qui novit quid tribuendum sit aliquam mul∣tis Codicibus, praesertim noviter editis, qui in vulgus spargunt errores & multiplicant  unius qui primò lapsus est incuriâ vel inscitiâ. Verùm errantium multitudo (ut in re aliâ dixit Hieronymus, ni fallor) non debet patrocinari errori. Lectiones autem omnes quas in Catalogo nostro defendimus, comproban∣tur vel consensu omnium exemplarium & Interpretum qui primaevam Scrip∣turae editionem sequuti sunt, nullâ ratione repugnante, vel saltem fide emen∣datissmorum codicum, ac praeterea, quorundam doctissimorum interpretum calculo, ratione etiam ex verbis ipsis vel ex aliis locis petitâ, exigente. Hoc patet ex singularium locorum inspectione in Indice nostro variarum lectionum. Ergo lectiones quas sequuti sumus, & censurâ nostrâ comprobavimus, sunt verae & germanae. Rursus, Illa tantum Scripturarum editio, & lectio in singulis locis est authentica, quae , primitùs conscripta fuerit, juxta primam Propositionem primi libri.
At Hebraica tantùm Veteris Instrumenti integrè etiamnum cohservata in Ecclesiâ (juxta 2am Propositionem) idque punctata (juxta 3am.) Novi verò Testamenti Graeca editio, integrè etiam adhuc conservata (juxta 4am Pro∣positionem) atque utraque juxta lectiones quae in Indice nostro comproban∣tur, divinâ inspiratione primitus conscripta fuerit, ut ex Prolegomenis & In∣dice patet: non autem Graeca Veteris Instrumenti, nec Latina Vulgata No∣vi, quae nec fidae nec purae sunt, juxta 5am & 6am Propositiones, nee denique cujuscunque limae Versiones nostrae sunt  conscriptae, ut patet ex 3a appendice libri primi. Ergo, Sola Hebraica Veteris Instrumenti editio, sicut Graeca Novi, authen∣tica est & pura. Vides methodum quam mihi proposui. In animo etiam fuit, difficultates quasdam tibi (doctissime vir) proposuisse, in quibus exactissimum tuum ju∣dicium cognoscerem. Sed sentio me jam modum epistolae excessisse, & vere∣or ne interpellem te nimis nugis meis à gravioribus negotiis. Ignoscas quae∣so Guilielmo tuo, qui prolixè & cordatè potiùs quam eleganter & suaviter te compellare maluit. Nactus jam tandem Tabellarii opportunitatem, remisi ad te, manu fidâ ejus∣dem, Postelli Grammaticam, unâ cum libello altero, quem tibi benevolentiae ergô dicavi; majorem daturus, si Anglia nostra aliquid librorum non-vulga∣rium ad antiquitatem eruendam suppeditaret. Nondum aliquid efficere potui in Arabicis, quod dignum sit operâ: forsan si Christmanno muto Magistro, aut Bedwello Londinensi vel potiùs Ambro∣sio tuo Dubliniensi vivâ voce praeceptore uti liceret, aliquid efficerem. Sed non licet. Velit, jubeat clementissimus pater qui in coelis est, ut Ecclesiae suae pomoeria dilatet, nostras Ecclesias in verâ pace conservet, tibíque (frater do∣ctissime) & tuis omnibus in Christo benedicat. Vale: è Musaeo m Collegio Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae, 9o Kalendas Aprilis juxta veteres Fastos, & anno Domini 1607, juxta computum Ecclesiae Anglicanae. Tuus in communi fide, ac Ministerio Evangelii, frater Amantissimus, GUIL. EYRE. LETTER IV. A Letter from Mr. H. Briggs to Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, Salutem in Christo. Good Mr. Usher, PArdon me, I pray you, that I have not written unto you of late, nor got∣ten the Book, you gave me, printed, (for now I cannot think it yours.) I received your Letter the other day, and did the same day twice seek Mr. Rimay, and your Books mentioned in the end of your Letter; of all which Abraham could get none save one Catalogue of the last Mart, which I have sent you within a Book of the Shires of England, Ireland and Scotland, which
at length I send to Mr. D. Chaloner, to whom I pray you commend me very kindly, with many thanks and excuses for my long deferring my promise. Abraham hath taken all the names of your Books, and pro∣miseth to get them for you at the next Mart. I was likewise with Mr. Crawshaw (he hath not gotten, nor cannot find Confes. Ambrosianam) of whom I have now received your Book again, because he saith it is im∣possible to get it printed here without the Author's name, or without their Index Expurgatorius, if any thing in it do sound suspiciously. He hath not read it over himself, and he is had in some Jealousie with some of our Bishops, by reason of some points that have fallen from his Pen, and his Tongue in the Pulpit. I will keep your Book till you please to send me word what I shall do with it. I think Sir J. Fullerton, or Sir J. Hamilton may with one word speaking have it pass without name; but I am now determined not to mention it to them until you give me some better Warrant. Concerning Eclypses, you see by your own experience that good purposes may in two years be honestly crossed, and therefore till you send me your Tractate you promised the last year, do not look for much from me, for if another business may excuse, it will serve me too: Yet am I not idle in that kind, for Kepler hath troubled all, and erected a new frame for the Motions of all the Seven upon a new foundation, making scarce any use of any former Hypotheses; yet dare I not much blame him, save that he is tedious and obscure; and at length coming to the point, he hath left out the principal Verb, I mean his Tables both of Middle-motion, and Prosthaphaereseων; reserving all, as it seemeth, to his Tab. Rudolpheas, setting down only a lame pattern in Mars: But I think I shall scarce with patience expect his next Books, unless he speed himself quickly. I pray you salute from me your Brother Mr. Lydyat, Mr. Kinge, Mr. Martin, Mr. Bourchier, Mr. Lee. Macte Virtute: Do not cease to help the building of Sion, and the ruinating of Babel; yet look to your health, ut diu & valide concutias hostium turres. The Lord ever bless you, and your labours, and all that most worthy Society. Farewel. Tuus in Christo, H. Briggs. Aug. 1610. Concerning Sir R. Cotton's Letter, I must crave pardon at this time, for I am but very lately come home, and full of business, going out of the Town again (I think) to morrow; and now if perhaps I find him I shall hardly get it copied. But I pray you to what question of sound Divinity doth this appertain Yet do not think me so censorious, but I can like you should sometimes descend to Toys for your Recreation. My opinion is, He that doth most good is the honestest man, whosoever have precedence; but if harm, the less the better. Pray for us: The Lord ever bless his Church, and us all in particular. Mr. Bedwell is not well, and keepeth altogether at his t'other Living at Totenham. Farewel. Yours ever in the Lord, Henry Briggs.
LETTER V. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Lydyat to Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Mr. Usher, I Received your Letter this Friday the 13th of March, for which I thank you: It had been broken open by Chester Searchers before it came to him; but I thank God I have not lost any thing of moment for ought I find as yet. The East-Indian Fleet is gone about six weeks since; but I remain at London still, a suiter unto you that the School of Armagh be not disposed of otherwise than I have hitherto requested you, until I speak with you in Ireland, or rather here in London, where I shall be glad to see you. The night before I received your Letter, Mr. Crashaw acquainted me with a Letter from Mr. Cook, wherein he seemed to doubt of divers things in Mr. James his English Book, whereof you write; signifying withal that he purposeth to be at London this Spring, where I hope to see you all three meet, to the better performing of that business. Mr. Provost told me that he had sent you a Mi∣nister for Warberies (Mr. I have forgot his name, Mr. Provost being now out of Town) with my Lord Arch-Bishop his Letters commendatory to my Lord Chancellor; I think he is come to you ere this time. Printing of Books, especially Latin, goeth hard here: mine is not yet printed, never∣theless, I thank God, mine honourable friends, whom I have acquainted with the matter, shew me still a friendly countenance, with which I rest, comfor∣ting my self with that, pro captu lector is habent sua fata libelli. I have sent you the King's Book in Latin against Vorstius, yet scant dry from the Press; which Mr. Norton, who hath the matter wholly in his own hands, swore to me, he would not print, unless he might have money to print it: a sufficient argument to make me content with my Manuscript lying still unprinted, un∣less he Equivocated: but see how the World is changed; time was when the best Book-printers, and sellers would have been glad to be beholding to the meanest Book-makers. Now Mr. Norton, not long since the meanest of ma∣ny Book-Printers and sellers, so talks and deals, as if he would make the No∣ble King James, I may well say the best Book-maker of this his own, or any Kingdom under the Sun, be glad to be beholding to him: any marvel there∣fore, if he think to make such a one as I am his Vassal: but I had rather be∣take my self to another occupation; therefore again I request you that my possibility be not frustrate for the School of Armagh. Thus hoping to see you in London ere long, with my very hearty thanks unto you, and com∣mendations to Mr. D. Chaloner, Mr. Richardson, and all the residue of our good friends with you, I commit you to God's gracious preservation. Yours as his own, Thomas Lydiat. Inner Temple. Aug. 22. 1611.
LETTER VI. A Letter from Mr. James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Thomas Lydyat. Good Mr. Lydyat, HOwsoever I intended not to have written unto you, before I had first heard from you, (which I long since expected) yet having the oppor∣tunity of this Bearer offered, I could not pretermit that occasion of saluting you, and making known that you are not out of remembrance with your friends here, for in truth that was the special cause of my writing at this time: You will not believe how I long to be informed from you of the state of things there, both of our own private, and of our Respublica literaria in general. Now I pray you be not slack in satisfying my desire; and let me hear, among other things, how matters go with Mr. Casaubon, and how he is imployed. If hereafter you shall have occasion to enter into conference with him, learn whether he can bring any light to the clearing of the Albi∣genses, and Waldenses, from those imputations wherewith they are charged by their Adversaries. Ludovicus Camerarius reporteth, That many of their Writings in the Ancient Occitanical Language (Langue d' Oc) were to be seen in Joseph Scaliger's Library. Poplinier in the 28th. Book of his History, to prove that their Religion little differed from ours, alledgeth the Acts of a Disputation between the Bishop of Pammiers, and Arnoltot, Minister of Lom∣bres, written in a Language savouring much of the Catalan Tongue: Yea, sundry persons (saith he) have assured me that they have seen the Articles of their Faith engraved in certain old Tables, which are yet to be seen in Alby, in all things conformable to those of the Protestants. At my last be∣ing in London Mr. Fountayn, the Minister of the French Church, (dwelling in the Black-Fryars) told me, That in his time there was found a Confes∣sion of the Albigenses, which being exhibited to a Synod of the Reformed Churches in France, was by them approved as Orthodox. He promised me to write to the Ministers of Paris for the Copy of the Articles of that Con∣fession. I pray you put him in mind of it: And get from Mr. Casaubon, and him, what information you can in those particulars; for you know how greatly they make for my purpose. You remember that Dr. Chaloner wished you to deal for some Minister to come hither for St. Warburghs: I would willingly understand what you have done therein; if Mr. Ayre be about London, you may do well to acquaint him with it, and try whether he can find in his heart once again to visit poor Ireland. Dr. Chaloner hath written to Mr. Provost to this purpose: You may do us a very great pleasure, if you can help us to a faithful Minister to undertake that Charge; and Letters commendatory from the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. I would willingly hear what is done with Mr. Justice Sibthorp's Book, the Preface whereof I sent over by you. If Mr. Briggs cannot get it printed, I pray you let it be safely sent unto me again, and that with as convenient speed as may be. If it will pass there, intreat Mr. Crashaw for my sake to take some pains in perusing the same, and alter∣ing therein what he thinketh fit, for that hath the Author wholly referred to his discretion. If you can come any where to the sight of Sanders, De Schismate Anglicano, write me out what he noteth concerning Ireland, in the year 1542. Sir Robert Cotton promised me the Copy of certain Letters, which concerned the Consecrating of the Bishops of Dublin, by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, (they are at the end of his great Manuscript Book of the Pope's
Epistles.) I pray you call to him for it, and likewise intreat Mr. Camden to send me the Copy of those Letters which he alledgeth to that purpose in his Hiberniâ, pag. 765. of the last Edition. I will trouble you no more at this time, but expect to hear from you after so long silence; in the mean time, committing you and your labours to God's good Blessing, and Wishing unto you, as unto mine own self. James Usher. Septemb. 9. 1611. LETTER VII. A Letter from Mr. James Usher afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Thomas Lydyat at London. I Received your Letter of the 22 of August, together with the Books speci∣fied therein, for which I give you great thanks. And as you have not been unmindful of my businesses; so have not I been altogether of yours. I have dealt since with my Uncle, the Primate, both for the annual stipend in the Proportion of Land lying about the School; and do find him constant in his Promise: Whereby I resolve you may well make account of your Fifty Pounds per annum, at the least. His Register hath been very forward in fur∣thering the matter, and will take care that the utmost benefit be made of the Land to your behoof. I have caused him to write unto you of the state thereof, for your better information. Make I pray you, as convenient hast unto us as you can; and in the mean time, let us hear (once more at least) of your Affairs, and send unto me in your next Letter, in what forwardness Justice Sibthorp's Book is—(as you have signified, delivered unto a Stationer in the Church-yard) and whether Mr. Crashaw hath taken any pains in running it over. And at your coming, forget not to bring for me a Bible in Octavo of the new Translation well bound, (for my ordinary use) together with Mr. James, and Mr. Cook's Books you wrote me of. I would hear also willingly, whether you have proceeded further with Mr. Web, and what hope we may conceive of his coming. Because you met not with himself, and we had no certainty from you to pitch upon, Dr. Chalo∣ner thought good at Mr. Bernard's departure, to try whether Mr. Storer (a worthy Preacher) might be drawn over to the place. We look for answer very speedily, of which we will not fail to certifie you with the first: for if we speed not this way; the care must lie upon Mr. Provost, or your self, to see us otherwise provided for; wherein you shall not only do us a great pleasure, but also procure a great blessing to this whole City. I pray you remember me in all kindness to Mr. Provost, and the rest of our friends there: but especially remember me to God in your Prayers; to whose good blessing I commend you and your Labours. Jac. Usserius. October the 4th. 1611.
LETTER VIII. Another Letter from Mr. James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Doctor Chaloner. Dear Sir, I Know you greatly wonder at my long silence, and much blame my neg∣ligence in that behalf. But the truth is, your Letters sent so long since by Mr. Cubbiche, came not unto mine hands before the 26th of March; nei∣ther could I have full time to sollicite my Lord of Canterbury in those busi∣nesses, before the 5th of April. What then (after two or three hours serious conference had with me) he resolved upon, you may understand by his Let∣ters written to my Lord Chancellor, and to the Visitors. Divers defects he observed in our Statutes, as in that of the Election of Fellows, though an or∣der be taken therein for others to have a voice in that business, yet it is said Electio sit penes magistrum, which he said was absurd. He observed that there was no order taken that the Scholars should come into the Chappel, Cleri∣caliter vestiti; and took great exception against the Statute for the ordering of Common-placing, which he affirmed to be flat Puritanical. The Statutes had been sufficiently confirmed, if the Visitors there had subscribed unto them, without whose consent they could not afterwards have been altered by the Provost and Fellows; who (as the Arch-bishop, our Chancellor, saith) have by the Charter of Foundation power to make Statutes, but not to alter them after they be made. Your Project for the general was well liked by the Arch-bishop, but he excepted against it in divers particulars. We should not look so much (he said) for a great number, as to give some competency of maintenance unto those whom we did entertain. That Batchelors of Art should have no more allowance, than those that came newly into the House, he misliked: And for Masters of Art, if every year there be a new Commencement of twenty of them, (according to your project) then, said he, the twenty whom you would have to stay in the House (to be rea∣dy to answer the Church Livings, and Schools abroad) must of force be dis∣missed at every years end, to give place unto the new supply: Therefore would he have a competent number of Fellows, who might have a more set∣led abode in the Colledge, and read Lectures by turns; counting it a great inconvenience that there should be but about six Fellows constantly resident in the House, and they so taken up with Lectures, that they can have no time for themselves to grow up in further learning: And you must look, saith he, to have some eminent men among you which may be deeply groun∣ded in all manner of knowledge; and not content your self with sending out a number of such as are but superficial. Likewise for the proportion of Ac∣cates, set down by you, he said it was in vain to look that there should be in times to come the same prices of them, which are at this present, or have been heretofore: And therefore if we would build upon any certainty, we should take care that all our payments should not be brought in money, but a certain reservation should be made for Provisions. When my Lord Chan∣cellor hath imparted unto you, how far my Lord of Canterbury hath pro∣ceeded; what you see remaineth fit to be further sollicited, signifie unto me by the first that cometh from thence, that I may move my Lord of Canter∣bury therein: And I pray you withal send me a note of the most general, and gross Defects, or Abuses in our Church of Ireland, with the means whereby they may be redressed, if easily they may be redressed; for in such matters I have good hope that my Lord of Canterbury may be wrought withal to
do us good. But I pray you be not too forward to have Statutes sent you from hence. Dictum sapienti. According to your direction, I dealt with Mr. Cook to come over unto St. Warburghs, and now that Mr. Hill is placed there, I know not what to do or say. You write unto me of an allowance of 30 l. which he might have from the Colledge; let me know upon what consideration it shall be, for he would understand what his imployment shall be, before he resolve to leave his own Country. The Provost hath sent me a Bill for 20 l. to discharge my Credit with the Stationers, for the Books which Mr. Martin brought over: You may do well to have a care that the English Popish Books be kept in a place by themselves, and not placed among the rest in the Library, for they may prove dangerous. Purchase hath done nothing yet for the Religions of divers Churches; having hitherto written not a word more in that intended work of his, than you see printed. Speed's Chronicle is at 3 l. 10. s. price. Sir Henry Savil's Chrysostom (in eight Volumes) at 9 l. which prices are too great for me to deal withal, unless I might put them upon Sir James Carol his score, (as you would have me put Pradus upon Ezekiel, which is now discharged by Mr. Temple.) About the end of May I purpose (God willing) to see you. I am now earnestly attending the Press, and as much of my Book as is at this present printed, I send unto you; together with two small Treatises lately published here, of some importance, (which also I would have you deliver unto my Lord Chancellor, if he hath not already seen them.) That against Paulus V. is supposed to be written by Marta: and one thing therein I think special worthy of observation, what the intendment may be of those great sums of money, which the Pope is said there daily to lay up. The Parsonage of Trim (for as much as I can learn here by the Common-Lawyers) is like to fall to the King's Presentation: And otherwise (I sup∣pose) Sir James Carol hath lost his turn, if he have not presented within the compass of his six months. Mr. Briggs would willingly hear from you, what Scholars you would entertain of his sending over. Mr. Sherwood hath writ∣ten to the Provost for one Increase Nowel, of the Age of 19 years, of good sufficiency in Learning, and Religious; he looketh to have your furtherance also in his admitting. Mr. Hildersham remembreth himself unto you. To morrow the Prince Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth remove to Greenwich; on Tuesday from thence to Rochester; and the next day take shipping home∣ward. But I have no leisure to write unto you any news; and therefore re∣serving the relation of them unto others, and remembring my heartiest com∣mendations to Mrs. Chaloner, and all the rest of my good friends; I leave you all unto the blessed Protection of our good God, and rest always, Yours in all Christian Affection, James Usher. London April 9. 1613. LETTER IX. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutem. Good Mr. Usher, I Am given to understand by Mr. Bourchier, That the Edition of the Coun∣cils specified in the new Catalogue, as set forth by the Authority of Paulus Quintus, hath the Greek Councils in Greek. I would know whether the Acts of
the IV. V. VI. VII. and VIII. Councils were set forth Graeco-lat. as the first Tome is, which I have seen at Oxford; also what other remarkable Differences you ob∣serve between these and former Editions. If there be any other Books of Note which you meet withal amongst the new, I pray you in the next Letter let me have the Names. Yesterday I went to Benedict Coll. Library; where we found Cladius Seisellius contra Waldenses, not perfect. Thus with my best Wishes I commend you and your Studies to the protection of the highest. Your loving Friend, Samuel Ward. Sydney Coll. May 12. 1613. LETTER. X. A Letter from Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Sam. Ward. YOU will not believe (good Sir) what great Pleasure I took in per∣using those writings which I received from you, especially where I found your learned Parisian so fully to agree with me, in collecting the Or∣der of the ancient Codex Canonum, out of the Council of Chalcedon. For not long before, I had entred my self into the same Consideration, and re∣solved after the same manner, but upon somewhat a more sure Ground. I had found in Baronius (ad an. 341. §. 34.) that both in the 4th. and in the 11th. Action of the Council of Chalcedon, certain Canons of the Council of Antioch were cited, but without any Name, out of some ancient Collections, in which the 95th. and 96th. Canon did contain the same that the 16th. and 17th. of the Antiochen Council. I mused a while what this might mean; and conceiving Baronius his Opinion to be somewhat improbable, that these Canons should be produced from some other Place than the Council of Antioch it self. I bethought my self at last, of that which Dionysius Exiguus hath in his Preface before his Translation of the Greek Canons, ad Stephanum Salonitanum Episcopum. Regulas Nicenae Synodi, & deinceps omnium Concilio∣rum, sive quae anteà, seu quae postmodùm facta sunt usque ad Synodum 150. Pontificum, qui apud Constantinopolim convenerunt, sub ordine numerorum, id est à primo Capitulo usque ad 165um. sicut habentur in Graecâ auctoritate, digessimus. Tum sancti Chalcedonensis Concilii Decreta subdentes in his Graecorum Cano∣num finem esse declaramus. Then set I a numbring of the Canons, and finding some variety in the divers Editions, I resolved to try Constantinus Harmenopulus his reckoning in his Preface before the Abridgment of the Greek Canons: where he numbreth 20 Canons of the Council of Nice, 25. Ancyranae, 15. Neocaesariensis, 19. Gangrensis, 25. Antiochenae, 60. Laodicen. Synodi. . (although I yield rather to give with your Parisian, 14. to the Council of Neocaesaroea, and 20. to that of Gangra.) So applying his Reckoning to the Order of the old Codex Canonum, the 16th. and 17th. Canon of the Council of Antioch, fell out precisely to be 95th. and 96th. in the other Reckoning: and the first Canon of the Council of Constantinople (which immediately followed the five Provincials in Dionysius his Order) to the 165th. Hence I concluded that the first Collection of the Canons consisted only of the first General, and five other Provincial Councils, unto which afterwards were ad∣ded the General Councils that followed. For thus much both Dionysius his Distinction of them from the rest seemeth to insinuate, and the Order of placing those General Councils after the Provincials (which otherwise no doubt if then they had been extant, when this first Collection was compiled, would immediately have been conjoyned with the Council of Nice) doth fur∣ther
confirm: and the Citation of this Collection in the Council of Chalce∣don (afterwards incorporated into the same Book of Greek Canons, as ap∣peareth by Dionysius) manifestly convinceth. Whether the Ephesine were as yet entred into the same body, I make some Question: because I find no Ca∣non thereof cited, neither by Fulgentius Ferrandus, or Cresconius; neither is it well known which were to be accounted the Canons of that Council: the Canons which are in the counterfeit Isidorus his Collection, being quite divers from those which are in Tilius his Greek Edition of the Ca∣nons. Of this ancient Collection of the Greek Canons, there was an ancient Latin Translation extant before the time of Dionysius, as he in his Preface wit∣nesseth. But it being somewhat confused, Dionysius made a new Translation, which also he enlarged with Addition of new Canons: prefixing in the be∣gininng of his Book the 50. Canons of the Apostles, translated by him out of Greek. In principio, (saith he) Canones, qui dicuntur Apostolorum, de Graeco transtulimus: quibus quia Of these Fulgentius Fer∣randus seemeth to be one in Dionysius his Days, for he never citeth those Canons. plurimi consensum non proebuere facilem, hoc ipsum ignorare vestram noluimus sanctitatem. Then having ended the Greek Ca∣nons in the Council of Chalcedon he adjoyned thereunto the Latin Canons of the Sardican and African Councils, which before were never brought into Codex Canonum, as you have well observed. For so much also doth himself testifie in his Preface; Ne quid praeterea notitiae vestrae videamur velle sub∣strahere, Statuta quoque Sardicensis Concilii atque Africani, quae Latine sunt edita, suis à nobis numeris cernuntur esse distincta. And here I take it about the year 530. do we Unless in the 5th. Canon of the fifth Coun∣cil of Carthage, of which we may further inquire. first find mentioned these Canons of Sardica of Dionysius, and Ferrandus: being as yet also unknown unto the Greek Church howsoever afterward we find them added unto their Codex Canonum. For about this same time in the days of Justinian, Constantinus, , (alledged by Turrian lib. 1. contra Magdeburg. pro▪ Canonib. Apost. cap. 21. & 28.) maketh his Collection of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, only out of the Canons of the Apostles, and the ten great Synods (as he calleth them) viz. Ancyrana, Neocaesariensi, Nicenâ, Gangrensi, Antiochenâ, Laodicensi, Constantinopoli∣tanâ, Ephesinâ, Chalcedonensi, Carthaginensi; without mention of that of Sardica, whose Canons seem to have been coyned for the Advancement of the Bishop of Rome's Authority, after that the Forgery of the Canon of the Council of Nice, had no Success, as no small presumptions may induce us to imagine. If we may believe Bellarmine lib. 2. de Romano Pontif. cap. 25. (who herein I think followeth Lindanus.) Dionysius his Translation is extant in Monasterio S. Vedasti Atrebati; where the Canons of the Council of Nice and of Sardica are joyned together, as if they were but one Council. But they may believe him who list. The Words of Dionysius, which I have alrea∣dy alledged, put the Matter out of all question, that in his Edition the Canons of the Council of Nice and Sardica were placed for enough asunder. But where this Edition of Dionysius is to be had, is not so easie to be told. This only I conjecture, That whereas Crab setteth down two old Editions of the Canons, that which is different from Codex Moguntinus is likely for the most part to be that of Dionysius. So Baronius testifieth (ad an. 314. §. 81. 87.) that the first Edition of the Ancyrane Council in Crab, is of Dionysius his Translation: but ad an. 325. §. 156. (he sheweth,) That the first Edition of the Nicene Canons is not of Dionysius, nor the second neither, if we may give credit to his Relation. But this I leave to your own Judgment, who have better means to search out this Matter, than I can possibly have in this Country. After this cometh Codex Romanus to be considered, which had nothing of Dionysius his Translation, but only the Canons of the Apostles, the rest being either of the old Translation which was before Dionysius, or of some other done after his time. For that there were many, appeareth by the
Preface of the counterfeit Isidorus to his Collection: And Hincmarus Rhemen∣sis Archiepisc. in libro de variis capitulis Ecclesiasticis, cap. 27. De Transla∣tione è Graeco Concilior. & Canonum: where among other things he writeth thus of Isidorus his Collection; Et beatus Isidorus in Collectario suo de Ca∣nonibus quatuor editiones Nicaeni Concilii compaginavit. Although in the printed Collection of Isidorus, we have but one Edition left unto us. This Codex Romanus contained no more Councils than that of Dionysius; but had in the end adjoyned the Epistles of some Bishops of Rome: first of six, viz. Siricius, Innocentius, Zosimus, Celestinus, Leo, and Gelasius; as is ma∣nifest by the Collection of Cresconius, (by some thought to be Corippus Grammaticus) who using this Codex about 700 years after Christ, alledgeth the Decrees of no other Bishops of Rome than these. Then in the Roman Book were added the Constitutions of Bishops from Gelasius to Hormisda: And afterwards, to the time of Vigilius, as I gather by Gregory lib. 7. epist. 53. From Gelasius to Gregorius junior, the Decrees of There are more. five Popes you have in Codice Moguntino, (the true copy of Codex Romanus) Quod volumen postea re∣cognitum est Romae cohoerere cum aliis antiquis fideliter, saith Possevinus: And just so many are mentioned by Leo IV. in Gratian, Distinct. 20 C. de libellis, (but that Silvester is by Error added, of whose Decrees none were extant in the Body of the Canons) according to the last Roman Edition; for in the for∣mer Editions of Gratian I find the name of Also of the Councils An∣tioch. Laodi∣cen. Constanti∣nopolit. Ephes. Chalcedon. Symmachus written with great Let∣ters: Iste Codex est scriptus de illo authentico, quem dominus Adrianus Apostolicus dedit gloriosissimo Carolo regi Francorum & Longobardorum, ac Patricio Ro∣manorum, quando fuit Romae. And in this Book, Eckius writeth, were con∣tained the Decrees of XV Bishops of Rome, (lib. 1. de primatu Petri, cap. 20.) But in other Copies which P. Pithoeus had of the same sort, there appear to be no more than the Epistles of XI Popes, In Codice Mo∣guntino are 14. as in Codice Moguntino. I have great want of this Codex Moguntinus, which I am very glad you have lighted upon. I doubt not but it is wholly inserted into Crab his Edition; but I know not how to distinguish it from the other Collections there: I would intreat you therefore to send me a transcript of the Title of the Book (and if any thing be worthy the noting in the Preface of him that set out the Book) as also of the several Councils, and Epistles, with a direction in what page we may read the same in Edit. Colon. An. 1551. Crab, or Edit. Venet. An. 1585. Nicolinus his Edition; that so I might learn which of the two old Editions in Crab, is that which is found in Codice Moguntino: As also whether the subscriptions be the same. And here espe∣cially desire I to be satisfied in the Sardican and African Councils. The like would I now do unto you for Isidorus his Collection, directing you how you might read it entirely in Crab, if I had thought the Book were not to be found with you there. And if you could spare for a time your Book hither (which I would not willingly desire, considering the great distance betwixt our dwel∣lings) I would send it back with all speed, and send together with it Tilius his Edition of the Greek Canons, if I might understand you wanted it at Cam∣bridge. But if by your good direction I may find it fully in Crab, it shall suffice. Now a word of that Collection, which falsly is attributed unto Isidorus, being compiled sometime betwixt the years 683. and 783. as in my Biblio∣theca Theologicâ, God willing, I shall fully declare. The Author of this Col∣lection, taking pattern by the Epistles fathered upon Clement, coyned a num∣ber more of the same stamp, giving them the superscription of The Names of the ancient Popes: And not content by this means to advance only the Pope's Spiritual Jurisdiction, for the enlarging of his Temporalties, he coun∣terfeiteth, in the name of Constantine, that ridiculous Donation, which before this time was never heard of. This forgery being first hammered in Spain, was first of all uttered in France by Riculfus, Bishop of Mentz, viro erga S. se∣dem Romanam valdè devoto, as a certain Author beareth witness of him, (pro∣duced
by P. Pithoeus in his Testimonies prefixed before Ansegisus) where what entertainment it had, shall in his place be declared. This Collection was first published in Print by Jacobus Merlinus, Paris. 1530. 80. and it is to be found in a manner wholly, (but enlarged with some Additions of Popes Epistles at the end) in your Corpus Canonum of Benett Colledge, [§. 361] and in the two great Volumes of the Popes Epistles, in the Publick Library of your University, [§. 235.] in the beginning whereof are to be seen Provinciarum & Regionum nomina, which are wanting in the Printed Books, but not in the Manuscripts, as appeareth by Pithoeus lib. 11. Adversariorum, Cap. 1. I would willingly understand whether it hath more or less than Provinciarum Imperii Romani Libellus, set out by Ant. Sconhovius with Eutropius, and Andr. Schottus with Antoninus his Itinerary (Co∣lon. 1600. 80. In the Printed Copy of Isidorus, there is 1. Origo Conciliorum generalium, as in Crab, taken in a manner verbatim, out of the true Isidorus, lib. 6. Orig. Cap. 16. and by him out of some former Council-Book, as ap∣peareth by those Words, Sed & siqua sunt Concilia quae Sancti Pa∣tres spiritu Dei pleni sanxerunt, post istorum quatuor auctoritatem omni ma∣nent stabilita vigore: quorum gesta in HOC OPERE condita continentur. 2. Annotatio 6. principalium Synodorum: item, Annotatio [19.] Synodorum, quarum gesta in HOC CODICE continentur. This is to be found in Gratian, Distinct. 16. Cap. 10. & 11. with some Additions at the end: Whereof see the Roman Corrections in that place. Now seeing in this Catalogue many Councils are reckoned, which are not to be found in Isidore's Collection, and some also in Isidorus which are not to be found in this Catalogue, (which seemeth to be the cause why this Catalogue was omitted by Crab, as not agreeing to the Collections now extant) it appeareth that Annotatio Synodorum quarum gesta in HOC CODICE continentur, was translated hither out of some other Col∣lection of Councils not now extant. For beside the Book which had the Greek Canons, there is no doubt but there were others which contained also the constitutions of the Western Councils. One of which was used by Fer∣randus, who, beside Concilium Cellense or Zellense (which is the same with Concilium Tilense sub Siricio P. in Isidore and Crab,) citeth 7 other Coun∣cils, not now to be found as I suppose. Marazense (or Marizanense) Ma∣crianense, Suffetulense, Incense, Tusduritanum, Thenitanum, and Septimunicense. But to return to the Printed Isidorus. There follow there, 3. The Epistle of Aurelius to Damasus, and of Damasus to Aurelius, extant also in Crab, and the Copy of your publick Library; which Epistles Baronius sheweth (ad an. 374. §. 11.) to have been counterfeited by this counterfeit Isidorus. 4. Isidorus his Preface, which is extant in Crab, and the MS. of your publick Library. Where he is called Isidorus Mercator, for, peccator. Whereof see the Roman Correct. of Gratian, Distinct. 16. Cap. 4. and Baronius in Martyro∣log. Roman. (April 4.) 5. The 50. Canons of the Apostles, as they are in your Benett Copy. 6. The Decretal Epistles of the Popes from Clemens to Mel∣chiades, (inclusivè) as in order they lie in the former part of the first Tome of the Decretal Epistles, set out by the Authority of Sixtus V. at Rome, An. 1592. fol. as also in your two Manuscripts. 7. The Discourse De Primi∣tivâ Ecclesiâ: and Edictum D. Constantini Imperatoris, (which is the Lewd Donation fathered upon Constantine) extant in Crab, immediately before the Nicene Council. 8. The Nicene Council, with a Preface prefixed, in your Copy of the publick Library, as I remember. The Acts of the Nicene Coun∣cil are more largely set down, than in the Printed Copy of Isidore. I pray you make a Comparison with your Crab, and Write unto me what you find. 9. The Canons of Councils, from Nicen. I. to Hispalense II. as in your Bennet Copy. For in the Copy of the publick Library, all this is wanting. 10. Concilium Romanum sub Silvestro: as in Crab, pag. 271. the Counterfeit Epistles of Athanasius, and the Aegyptian Bishops to Pope Mark, &c. (in Crab, pag. 299) with other Decretal Epistles, from Marcus
to Gregory the first, in whom Isidorus ended his Collection, as himself in his Preface signifieth. Yet in the end are further added the Epistles of Gregorius Minor, Vitalianus, Martinus, Gregorius III, and Zacharias, as they were found in the Ancient Copies of this Collection. But enough, or rather too much now of Isidorus. Beside these Ancient Collections, there were kept in later times, greater Volumes of the Councils; containing both Eastern and Western Councils, Old and New, not much unlike the first Edition of Crab, set out at Colon. An. 1538, fol. Such a one have I seen fairly Written, with Sr. Robert Cotton, and such a one is that which you enquire of in Sr. Thomas Bodley's Library, (Pag. 34. c. 1. n. 7.) Such a one also is that of Lorrain, in bibliothecâ Canoni∣corum Ecclesiae Virdunensis, mentioned by Fronto Ducoeus the Jesuit, (apud Baron. An. 811. §. 19.) And hither do I refer the great Book of the Acts of the Councils, of which Petrus de Aliaco (about the end of his Book de Reformatione Ecclesiae) wisheth care to be had, Ut magnus Codex Conci∣liorum generalium, qui modo rarus est, (saith he) licet sit perutilis & ne∣cessarius, à Metropolitanis in magnis Ecclesiis reponeretur. And sure a Faithful Record of the Acts of General Councils, would be a matter of great moment. We have long expected them from the Roman Press: Where the good Fathers have been mending them a longer time, than Nature requireth for bringing forth an Elephant. Anno 1591. (or about the Year 1593. at the farthest) the Work was under the Press, as appeareth by Baronius, ad An. 360. §. 17. & ad An. 431. §. 112. Jo. Antonius Petramellarius, in his continuation of Onuphrius his Book of Popes and Cardinals, set out Anno 1599. signified unto us that the work was Printed. (pag. 355.) But that it was not yet finished, Baronius after that maketh known unto us. (ad An. 787. §. 9. & 811. §. 19.) And whether this Birth of theirs as yet hath seen the Light, I cannot learn. We read in Socrates (lib. 1. cap. 5. lib. 2. cap. 11. & 13. lib. 3. cap. 21.) that one Sabinus, a Macedonian Heretick, gathered to∣gether the Acts of the Councils. But it seemeth that Work is perished; except that be some abridgement of it, which is extant in the Library of the Patriarch of Constantinople, and intituled, Sabini Monachi Epitome omnium Synodorum, (as it is in the Catalogue of Constantinople, set out by Antonius Verderius, in Supplemento Epitomes Gesnerianae.) But what should we talk of Works, which we have no hope to come by J. U. LETTER XI. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr. James Usher, afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Domino plurimam. Good Mr. Usher, I Received your large Letters, &c. As you were confirmed in your Opi∣nion touching the Ancient Canonical Code, by the Parisian, which I sent you. So I having long since observed the place of Dionysius Exiguus in his Epistle to the Bishop of Saling, (which is extant in Casiodorus) was glad to see you jump with me; which place I much marvel how it escaped our Parisian, being a far better Evidence for the Ancient Code, than is that of the But so in Noti∣tia Episc. Galliae propetim. Council of Chalcedon, considering it setteth down exactly the Number of
165: That this Collection of the Council of Nice, and the 5 Provincial, was before the Council of Constantinople, (besides your conjecture from the placing of the Provincials after that General of Nice, which you make out of Dionysius, and is also in the Titles which are in the Greek Canons, and in Codex Moguntinus,) methinks that may probably be gathered out of the 16th. Action of the Council of Chalcedon. When after that Constantine the Secre∣tary of the Consistory had read the 6th. Can. of the Nicene Council out of the Canonical Code, which was in the Custody of Aetius the Arch-Deacon (which no doubt was the same which is mentioned both in the 4. & 11. Actions) coming afterwards to alledge the Canons of the Council of Constantinople, he beginneth to read thus, Synodicum primi Concilii sub Nectario Episcopo; and which Synodicum, no doubt was the Title of a distinct Codex from the other, though it may be, both in one Volume. It is great pity we have not these Acts of the Council of Chalcedon in Greek, and more pity we have not those of the 1. Constantinop. neither in Greek or Latin. It should seem by Verderius Appendix, that they are to be had in the Libraries in Greece. But by this citation, and Maxinianus his Subscription in that Action, a little after, we may see the Constantinopol. Councils Canons were then incorpo∣rated into the Canonical Code; though according to my former probable con∣jecture, non sub eadem numerorum serie. As for the Ephesine Canons howso∣ever they are neglected, or at least not mentioned by Ferrandus, Dionysius, and Cresconius, (and that in probability especially the first 6, for that they were not touching general Orders in Church Discipline, but in particular for the suppressing of Nestorius, and the Pelagian Heresies, whence Baronius seemeth to acknowledge but 6,) yet I doubt not but they were received in the Ca∣nonical Codes, both of the East and West Churches. And first I doubt not but they are comprehended in that general ratification of the Canons, which is in the 1st. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, as may appear by Balsamon his Schol. upon that Canon. 2dly, No doubt but they are contained in Justinian's Canonical Code, which is confirmed, Novell. 131, where he will have the Canons of the 4 General Councils, and such as are by them approved, to be received as Imperial Laws. Now the 6 first Canons of the Ephesine Coun∣cil are all orderly compiled together Tom. IV. Cap. 9. of Peltarus's Edition, with a Synodal Epistle to the Emperor Theodos. prefixed for the confirmation of them. The other two Canons are before in the Acts of that Council, and also are to be found in Libello Constitutionum Synodicarum, fathered by Crab upon Cyril chiefly, which he (as it seemeth) faithfully set forth, Tom. 1. Pag. 542. &c. which is dismembred in the Venetian and the late Cologne Edition; one Member placed one where and another elsewhere, not much unlike their dealing with the ancient Canonical Code. This Book Crab much commendeth as having not seen the Acts of the Council of Ephesus, since by Peltarus, and Sylburgius set forth, where most of those things are to be found. Whereas you seem to say, That it is not well known which were the Canons of that Council, for that the Counterfeit Isidore hath diverse from those in Tilius's Greek Edition: I doubt not but those and those only which are in Tilius's Greek Copies are the right Canons of the Councils, the other 12 Anathematisms being rather to be reputed Dogmata than Canones, ac∣cording to Justinian's distinction in the aforesaid 131 Novell. and , as Gelasius Cyzi∣coenus lib. 2. distinguisheth. And therefore Joannes Windlestin who set forth Codex Moguntinus out of 3 Manuscripts, writeth thus in proefat. Concil. Ephesin. Hoc Concilium in majoribus duobus quibus utimur codicibus non habetur, ex eâ forsan ratione, quod solum de fide, nihil de statu & regimine Ecclesiastico statuisse videtur.—Integra quidem acta illius non habemus, Synodicam verò Epistolam, una cum XII Capitulis ex 3o Codice huic operi adjungi operae pretium fore duximus. But he was deceived and so were the Compilers of his two
greater Codes, if they thought there were no other Canons of that Council. But I rather think that the Romanists have no great good will to that 8th. Can. concerning much the liberty of the Church Universal. As for the mutations which came after the Council of Chalcedon, and af∣ter Justinian's Edict, I doubt not but the times might by diligence be obser∣ved, whether they were by Substraction or Addition: The leaving out of the Ephesine Canons; the altering of the Constantinopolitan; and the cutting off of the two or three last Canons; also the leaving out of the last Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, no doubt that was by the Romanists means, which hence is apparent, in that all these are as yet entire in the Greek Copies, whereas all these defects are in Codice Moguntino. As for the Canons of the Apostles, they were not only questioned in Dionysius his time, but before his time by Gelasius, dist. 16. cap. Rom. Eccles. and after his time about the year 580. For in a Synod at Paris held Contra praetextatum Rhothomagensem, about that time, King Chilperic sent to the Synod, Librum Canonum in quo erat quaternio novus annexus, habens Canones quasi Apostolicos continentes haec, E∣piscopus in homicidio, adulterio, & perjurio deprehensus, à sacerdotio divellatur: now this is the 25th Canon of the Apostles, and yet saith Gregorius Turo∣nensis, lib. 5. cap. 18. Regi nihilominus neque Bertichranus Burdegal. neque Gregorius Turonensis, neque alii qui aderant Episcopi fidem habere voluerunt, quod falso Canone uteretur, observantissium antiquorum Canonum. Whence it is evident that then in the French Church, no not the first fifty Translated by Dionysius, were received. Some 100 years after all the 85 Canons were con∣firmed in Trullo, but Cresconius after that doth acknowledge no more than are in Codice Moguntino, viz. 50. Whereas you seem to doubt of the Council of Sardica; surely there may be just cause of the suspicion of Forgery. Reasons might be brought on both sides; I wish I had leisure to scan my doubts. Concil. Carthag. 1. Can. 5. & habetur dist. 71. c. primatus, or rather privatus. Mr. B. calleth it San∣ctissimum Concilium, mentioning one of the Canons of that Council. Augu∣stine afterward calleth it in question, cont. Crescon. lib. 3. c. 34. & lib. 4. c. 44. acknowledging no other Sardican, but one, which was heretical. And Patres Aphricani (as you know) writing ad Coelestinum: Ut aliqui tanquam à tuae Sanctitatis latere mittantur, nulla invenimus patrum Synodo constitutum. I know their distinction of the two Sardicans, but much may be said against it. Sure it is, that it was never holden for General which made the Canons. Codex Hadrianaeus, which is inserted into the late Cologne Edition, out of Henricus Canisius his Lib. Antiq. Lection. maketh mention only of 60 Bishops which subscribed to that Council. And Codex Moguntinus in the end, num∣bereth but LX. which subscribed, but after the Catalogue of the names, it addeth, Et subscripserunt omnes Episcopi diversarum Provinciarum vel Civi∣tatum, Numero CXXI. Moreover in the Preface in Codice Hadrianaeo, before the Sardican Canons, there are said to have been XX Regulae XL Episco∣porum: But in Codice Moguntino, in the Hec praesatio extat in Edit. per Crab. p. 328. Preface there, it is said there XL Regulae XX Episcoporum. And here I am to tell you, That Codex Hadria∣noeus, and Moguntinus, though in substance they agree, yet in many circum∣stances they disagree, as for example, in many particulars in the said Prefaces; also in the distinction of Canons, and sometimes in Titles: So it should seem also for number of Decretal Epistles, if that which Eckius saw were the same with that H. Canisius had, for it should seem that Eckius's Book had the De∣crees of 15 Popes, whereas Codex Moguntinus hath but 13, and not 11 only, as you seem to say out of Pithoeus. And now since I mention Pithoeus, if his copy of Ferrandus's Breviary of the Canons were true, there were other Ca∣nons amongst the Sardican Canons than those we have, as may appear in Ferrandus his Breviary, num. 92, 93, and 214; for the 1. and 13. Tit. there alledged, are not to be found in the Canons of Sardica now extant. Ano∣ther
thing also touching Pithoeus: He saith in the Preface of Ferrandus's Bre∣viary, that that Version which is in Codice Moguntino is not that of Diony∣sius Exiguus; but I assure you Baronius, Ant. Augustinus, and the Recognisers of Gratian in their Annotations, and Binius in the late Cologne Edition, take that which is in Codice Moguntino to be that of Dionysius Exiguus. You alledge Hincmarus Rhemens. in lib. de variis capitul. Eccles. I would know whether you have the Book, or you have it From Turrian. vid. Epist. Pon∣tif. Arabic. Nomo-Canonum. from some others who do alledge him. I would desire your help for such Books as were pertinent to this business. Hincmarus was an excellent man, and a stout Champion against Innovations, and all such as prejudged ancient Canonical Liber∣ties. As for the Decretal Epistles, I am of opinion with you, That first they were brewed in Spain, and broached by Another Col∣lector. Canon. Caroli M. Tem∣porib. in 3 Tom. rerum Ala∣mannicarum Goldasti. Riculfus, and afterward by Otgarius, (or Autcarius, as Bened. Levit. proefat. in 5. lib. capitular. termeth him.) And so much doth Hincmarus lib. contra Hincman. Laudunens insinuate; alledged inter testimonia proefixa capitularibus: and in Fr. Pithoeus his Glossary, lit. R. and by Baron. ad an. 865. n. 5. But in one thing I cannot accord to Fr. Pithaeus in the forenamed place, That Isidorus Mercator was the Collector of the Decretal Epistles from Clement to Gregorius Magnus. It seemeth tho that the Decretal Epistles began chiefly to be in request about the time that Isidore lived, according to your account; for in the XIV. Council of Toledo Can. 11. there is somewhat which may argue so much. But I do not think that Cresconius followed Isidore his Collection, considering it may be doubted whether ever he saw it; and therefore though Isidore gathered the Decretals to Gregory the Great, as he intimateth in his Preface; yet Cres∣conius (as it should seem) followed some former. My Error in Concil. Cellensi was, in that I presupposed, that all the Coun∣cils mentioned by Ferrandus, (excepting those which are in Codice Tiliano) were in Africk: whereas Tela is in Spain, as Antoninus's Itinerarium witnes∣seth. I have not that Edition of Isidore printed by Merlinus 1530. but by those your directions I shall acknowledge it when I meet with it. I have included here a note, by which you may know how to find the whole Codex Moguntinus in Crab's Edition. I had verily thought you had had it. As for the Acts of the Councils in Greek, which are promised to be set out at Rome, and have been a long time, I do fear me there will be jugling in that work. It is much to be lamented that Ant. Augustinus, who had gotten Ma∣nuscript Copies out of the chief Libraries of Asia, and Europe, of the IV Ge∣neral Councils, and had them almost in a readiness for the Press, was preven∣ted in this Work by untimely death. I have been at Bennet Colledge, but could not get into the Library, the Master, who had one of the Keys, being from home. I will remember some∣time for to look the places out of Burchardus: As for that other place of your Irish Synod, alledged Dist. 82. Can. 5. But of that Canon thus writeth Ant. August. emendat. Gratian. lib. 1. Dialog. XIV. Post Concilium Carthaginens. III. quaedam fragmenta sunt incerta, quibus proeponitur illud, quod Gangrensi Con∣cilio falsò Gratianus & poenitentiale Romanum tit. 8. c. 6. ascribunt, cujus ini∣tium est, Presbyter si fornicatione: Concilio Hiberniensi vindicatur in lib. Ansel∣mi Lucensis Romano lib. 8. cap. ult. Et ut audio ita inscribitur à Gregorio Pres∣bytero in Polycarpi lib. 4. titulo, De Incontinentia Clericorum. Poenitentiali Theo∣dori in veteri lib. Mich. Thomasii; & certè illud Hiberniense Concilium sub eo∣dem Theodoro Cantuariensi habitum est. Since the time in which I writ the former part of this Letter (which was in the beginning of Lent, upon the receipt of yours) I have been occasioned to be going and coming from and to Cambridge, to have some settled place of abode; being limited in my time for the keeping of my place in our Colledge; which if I could have enjoyed, I
should hardly have removed hither, (where I am now with the Bishop of Bath & Wells) or any where else. But the Bishop sending for me, and offering me a Competency, in that kind I requested of him, then when I was un∣provided, I could not neglect God's Providence, and was advised hereunto by my best Friends: This unsettled Abode of mine was the Cause why I fi∣nished not this Letter so long since begun, and sent it not before this. I have since got Jacob Merlin's Edition of Isidore's Collection, and before that at my being in the North, I borrowed out of Durham Library, the Manuscript of it, which is all one with Corpus Canonum in Bennet Colledge Library; and in Trinity Colledge Library newly erected, there is another Copy of the same. I got also in the North a fair Transcript of the Greek Canons, which, as I understand, Erasmus caused to be copied out of an ancient Copy which was brought to Basil, at what time the Council of Basil was held. This Copy Erasmus sent to Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, where it hath been since. Bishop Barnes who was Bishop there since, gave it to his Son, and his Son to me. It is the same with that which is translated by Gentian Harvett, and which Balsamon commenteth upon. The other day my Lord shewed me a Letter which came from one of his Chaplains at Windsor, who signified unto him that Sir Henry Savil had an intendment to set out the Greek Councils: I fear me, he will hardly get Copies. I will inquire further into it, and will further it what lyeth in me: Antonius Augustinus had gathered all the Acts of the 4 first General Councils, out of all the Libraries of Italy, and had pur∣posed to have set them forth, as Andreas Schottus reporteth in a funeral Ora∣tion upon him: Nay, he saith further, he had writ a Book thus entituled, Con∣cilia Graeca & Latina cum Historia, Scholiis, & Variae Lectiones. But surely they will be suppressed for ever. As for the Title of Volusianus ad Nicholaum in Colleg. Corp. Christi, you are to know that Bennet Colledge by his Foundation is called Collegium Cor∣poris Christi, not Christ's Colledge; and the Book in that Library I have not looked into. But the Printed Book, which ad Verbum is printed out of the Manuscript hath Nicholaus I. but falsly I verily think, for that was Nicho∣laus II. which is Mr. Fox his Opinion, and I think other probable Argu∣ments than he hath might be brought. I have not my Books here, and there∣fore I can say no more of that now. I cannot meet with Turrian de Eucharistia, and therefore cannot relate unto you now, what he thinketh of the Author of the Epistle ad Caesarium Monachum: I remember P. Martyr de Eucharistiâ, saith that Chrysostom was the Author and that it was written in the time of his second Exile, against Appollinarius and others of his Sect, and he addeth, That in the Library of Florence there was a Manuscript Copy of it; and that Arch-Bishop Cranmer had another. And now, good Mr. Usher, to shut up these disorderly and scambling Lines, I do acknowledge Mr. Alvey's great Kindness and kind Offer, and could have wished his Offer had come first, but God had otherwise disposed; for I had disposed of my self before I heard of him; who otherwise would have been glad to have been one of your Confociates. But howsoever I hope by Entercourse of Letters, we shall benefit one another in some sort by Gods Grace. Mr. Eyres is purposed to come to see your Colledge, and to take some Tryal; you'll find him a sound Christian, an ho∣nest and faithful Friend, and (I think) in some sort Eminent in one kind, I mean in the Hebrew Tongue. He is of a good Constitution and able to take Pains, and as he is able so is willing. In a word, such an one as I think you shall have much Comfort, and so you shall have of Mr. Pearson too, if he also come among you. Thus in hast I am glad to omit many things: I must send the Concordance of Codex Moguntinus with Crab's Edi∣tion
of the Councils, from London, for I forgot it at Greenwich. The Lord keep you, prosper your Studies, bless your endeavours, and give his Grace to conduct us in those Ways which lead to Happiness. Your very Loving Friend in the Lord, Samuel Ward. Eman. Coll. July the 6th. 1608. I could not have leisure to revise my Letter. Pardon my loose and negligent Writing. Diligentius mihi consideranti quo Tempore prima Canonum Collectio facta esset, duplex occurrit Ratio quae me in hanc Sententiam traxit, et existimem primum et antiquissimum Homo-canonicum ex Nicaenis, Ancyranis, Neocaesarien∣sibus, Gangrensibus, Antiochenis, Laodicenis Canonibus, compositum, inter An. 364. & 381. (1) post Laodicenum, & ante Constantinopolitanum primum in unum Corpus coactum fuisse. Prior fundata est in Verbis Dionysii in Epistola ad Stephanum Salonitanum, qui cùm secutus sit antiquum Graecum Homo-canonicum, perspicuè docet supradictos Canones numerorum serie continuatos olim fuisse CLXV. Constantinopolitanos verò Canones novâ serie et seorsim numeratos. Quorsum enim summam colligeret Canonum proecedentium, priusquam recitet Constantinopolitanos, eosdemque serie de novo inchoaret, si in vetusto Graeco Codice, quo usus est, hi Canones unâ eâdemque serie continuati fuissent cum pri∣oribus Firmatur adhuc haec Ratio conjecturâ petitâ ex Act. XVI. Concilii Chalced. ubi Constantinus Secretarius relegit Nicaenos Canones ex Codice, [qui proculdubio idem erat cum illo, ex quo leguntur Canones 16. et 17. Synod. An∣tiochen. Actione XI. qui coincidunt cum Can. XCV. & XCVI. Tituli Codi∣cis, planè juxta seriem numerorum in Codice Graeco quo usus est Dionysius] postea cum legit Canones Constantinopolitanos, sic incipit, Synodicum Concilii Constan∣tinopolitani. Altera Ratio petita est è Titulo proefixo Canonibus Ancyranis & Neocaesariensibus in Graecis Exemplaribus & Codice Moguntino, & aliis Latinis Editionibus; ubi cum collectores primi dicant proepositos fuisse in hoc Codice Canones Nicaenos propter authoritatem Oecumenicae Synodi, manifestum est nondum secundam Oecumenicam Synodum habitam fuisse. Si enim Canones Constantinopolitani jam extitissent, cum facta esset haec prima Collectio, unà cum Nicaenis priorem locum obtinuissent, cum illud Concilium pro Oecumenico etiam ha∣bitum. Haec subjeci, ut tibi ansam ministrarem amplius in haec inquirendi; ut haec, quae tamdiu in tenebris delituerunt, tandem in apertam lucem proferantur. Vale (Amicissime Usher) & D. Alveium, virum multis nominibus reverendum, meo nomine saluta. Welliae Calend. Augusti, 1608.
Versio quae habetur in Codice Moguntino, & quae di∣citur fuisse Dionysii Exigui tota inserta est Edit. Co∣loniens. P. Crab, 1551. eámque facilè hoc indi∣culo subjecto ita dignoscas. In Editione Crabbensi, haec sunt Codicis Moguntini. In Canonibus Apostolorum Vetus Editio. In Graecis Conciliis. In Nicaena Ancyrana Neocaesariensi Antiochena Laodicena Chalcedonensi Editio prior in Titulis. Canonibus. In Gangrensi Editio 2a in Titulis. 1a in Canonibus. In Concil. Constantinopol. 1. Editio secunda in Titulis. Canonibus. Concil. Ephesini nulli Canones, sed eorum vice, Epistola Synodalis Concilii Ephesini ad Nestorium, unà cum Symbolo, & 12 Anathematismis Cyrilli, quae omnia unâ habentur in editione P. Crab, à pag. 535. ad lin. 12. col. 1. pag. 539. In Latina Synodo Sardicensi Editio prior in Titulis. Canonibus. Concil. Carthaginens. Canones sunt 33. qui iidem sunt cum 33. primis Cano∣nibus, qui sunt in Graeco Codice Tiliano. Latine non fimul extant in Edit. Crabbens. Concil. Aphricanum integrè extat apud P. Crab, prout est in Codice Mo∣guntino, à pag. 500 ad 522. Proemium Gangrens. Dominis honorabilibus, &c, et praefatio Synod. Antioche∣nae, Sancta & pacata Synodus, &c. extant iisdem Verbis in Cod. Moguntino. Subscriptiones non multum variant in Nicaena. Ancyrana. Neocaesariensi. Gangrensi. Constantinopol. 1.
Magis in Antiochena. Nullae in Codice Mogunt. in Ephesina. Laodicena. Subscriptiones Concil. Chalcedonens. quae tres integras pagin. occupant in Cod. Moguntino, non extant in Editione Crabbens. Subscriptiones Concil. Sardicens. in Cod. Mogunt. & Crabbens. non va∣riant numero, sed Lectiones variae & Ordo varius. Crab enim Alphabeticum se∣quitur ordinem, non sic Cod. Mogunt. Haec de Conciliorum Canonibus. Catalogus Roman. Pontificum, quorum decreta in Codice Mo∣guntin. habentur. 1 Siricius—XV. cap. 2 Innocentius 1.—LVII. cap. 3 Zosimus—IIII. cap. 4 Bonifacius 1.—IIII. cap. 5 Coelestinus 1.—XXII. cap. 6 Leo 1.—XLIX. cap. 7 Hilarius—VI. cap. 8 Simplicius—II. cap. 9 Felix—III. cap. Interseritur in ipso Codice, non tamen in Catalogo praefixo. 10 Gelasius 1.-XXVIII. cap. 11 Anastasius 2.—VIII. cap. 12 Symmachus.—V. item VIII. cap. 13 Hormisda—IIII. cap. 14 Gregorius 2.—XVII. cap. Summa, Decreta CCXXIX. cap. Concordantia horum Decretorum prout extant in Codice Moguntino cum Edition. Concil. Petri Crab, 3bus. Tom. Colon. an. 1551. in gratiam eorum penes quos non sit iste Codex. 1. Decreta Siricii in Cod. Mogunt. XV.—apud Crab. pag. 415. ubi tituli ferè respondent Codici Moguntino. 2. Innocentii—LVII. quae sic concordes cum Edit. Crabbens. Decreta-VIII—apud Crabb.—Epistol. 1. ad Decentium Eugubinum Episco∣pum, à pag. 452. ad 455. XIII — 2 ad Victricium Rothomagens. à pag. 455. ad 457. col. 2. XII. Vid. Sum∣mam, & Gra∣tian, Cod. 37. qu. 1. c. 9. 10. ex Codice Can∣num. VII — 3 ad Exuperium Tholosanum, à pag. 457 ad 459. V — 4 ad Foelicem Nucerianum Episcopum. Horum Summa — XXXII XXXIII 5 XXXIV 6 XXXV 7 XXXVI 8 XXXVII 9 XXXVIII 10 XXXIX 13 XL 11 XLI 14 XLII 15 XLIII 16
XLIV 17 XLV 18 XLVI 18 XLVII 18 XLVIII 19 XLIX 20 L 21 LI LII LIII LIV LV LVI LVII 22. ergo si ita est, &c. Plura Decreta Innocentii I. non extant in Cod. Mogunt. 3. Zosimi Decreta IIII. ad verbum habentur apud Crab, p. 487. & 488. 4. Bonifacii etiam Decreta IIII. ubi rescriptum Honorii habetur pro Decre∣to novo, p. 490. ad 493. 5. Coelestini, à pag. 523. ad 528. Decreta. Epistol. 1a XIII Epistol. 2a VI Epistol. 3a III Sum. XXII. 6. Leonis I. Decreta XLIX. quae cum Edit. Crabbens. sic in concordiam redigas. apud Crab. Decreta V Epist. 1. pag. 632. VI Epist. 2. pag. 632. VII Epist. 4. pag. 632. VIII Epist. 4. pag. 632. IX Epist. 4. pag. 632. X Epist. 4. pag. 632. XI Epist. 4. pag. 632. XII Epist. 4. pag. 632. XIII Epist. 4. pag. 632. XIV Epist. 3. p. 634. XV Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XVI Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XVII Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XVIII Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XIX Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XX Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXI Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXII Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXIII Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXIV Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXV Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXVI Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXVII Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXVIII Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXIX Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712. XXX Epistol. 90 ad Rusticum Episcopum Narbon a pag. 709. ad 712.
XXXI Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXII Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXIII Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXIV Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXV Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXVI Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXVII Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXVIII Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XXXIX Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XL Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XLI Epistol. 82 ad Anastasium Episcopum Thessalonicensem à pag. 697. ad 700. XLII Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLIII Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLIV Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLV Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLVI Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLVII Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLVIII Epistol. 77. ad Nicetam Episcopum Aqui∣leiensem, pag. 691. XLIX. Epistol. 85 ad Episcopos Africanos per Mau∣ritaniam, pag. 702. in Codice Mogunt. non di∣stinguitur in plures Canon sed unious est Can. 7. Hilari Decreta apud Crab. I pag. 951. §. quoniam. II 952. col. 1. §. praeterea. III 952. col. 2. §. Epistol. 1. Tarraconens. IV 953. col. 1. & 2. Epistol. 2a Tarraconens. Videtur mihi Codex Moguntinus hîc parum accuratus. Nam Epistolae Tarraconensium proculdubio non pro decretis habendae, sed Rescripta Hilati. pag. 954. & 955. col. 1. post medium, apud Crab. Non enim plures Episto∣lae habentur in Codice Moguntino. 8. Simplicii Decreta tantum duo; I est Epistol. apud Crab. II pag. 957. II est Epistol. apud Crab. III pag. 957. 9. Foelicis Pap. III. Decreta duo; I apud Crab, p. 959. col. 1. lin. à fine 8. communis dolor, & us{que} ad fin. illius col. 2. Anastasius Diaconus, &c. ad pag. 961. col. us{que} ad lineam 3am. II apud Crab, p. 959. col. 1. lin. à fine 8. communis dolor, & us{que} ad fin. illius col. 2. Anastasius Diaconus, &c. ad pag. 961. col. us{que} ad lineam 3am. 10. Gelasii Decreta XXVIII. apud Crab, à pag. 965. ad 969. col. 2. ad lin. 2. 11. Anastasii Decreta VIII. apud Crab, à pag. 997. ad 999. col. 1. lin. 2. 12. Symmachi Papae Decreta, sub nomine Symmachi Papae extant in Codi∣ce Moguntino, quae in Edit. Crab. dicuntur esse Decreta Romanarum Synodo∣rum I. II. III. IV. hoc est apud Crab, à pag. 1001. col. 2. ad pag. 1009. col. 1. ad ista: Finiunt Decreta Symmachi Papae. 13. Hormisdae Papae Decreta IV. I apud Crab, p. 1042. col. 2. Quo finimus semper, &c. II apud Crab, 1043. col. 1. Deo amabili, ac piissimo Imp. ad finem Epist. III apud Crab, 1034. col. 1. gloriosissimo at{que} elementiss. ad finem Epist. IV apud Crab, 1044. col. 1. Lectis literis, &c. 14. Gregorii Junioris Decreta XVII- extant apud Crab, sub nomine Grego∣rii III. Tom. 20 à pag. 437. col. 1. circa medium, ad pag. 439. & finem col. 1. .
LETTER XII. A Letter from Mr. Alexander Cook to Mr. James Usher, afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Good Sir, I Read in the Mariale, That Deus in curia sua coelesti habet tres Cancella∣rios; Bernardinus de Bisto in Marcul. part. 12. Ser. 2. de Coronatione Mariae Lit. V. primus est, ad quem spectat dare literas simplicis justitiae, et iste est Michael Arch-Angelus, &c. secundus Cancellarius, ad quem spectat dare literas mixtas, scilicet Justitiae & Misericordiae, est B. Petrus Apostolus, qui in palatio Dei est janitor constitutus, ubi sunt duae portae, viz. porta justitiae & misericordiae. Nam per portam justitiae ingrediuntur illi qui salvantur exoperibus justitiae; per portam verò misericordiae ingrediuntur illi qui salvantur ex sola Dei mise∣ricordia & gratia sine operibus. Et istam differentiam tangit Apostolus ad Rom. 4. dicens: Ei autem qui operatur, merces non imputatur secundum gratiam, sed secundum debitum: ei verò qui non operatur, credenti autem in eum qui ju∣stificat impium, reputatur fides ejus ad justitiam, &c. Ideo Petrus pingitur cum duabus clavibus, quia cum una aperit portam justitiae, illis viz. qui dicere possunt cum Psal. 107. Aperite mihi portas justitiae, & ingressus in eas confite∣bor domino, &c. Cum alia verò aperit portam gratiae & miserecordiae viz. illis qui∣bus dicitur, Eph. 2. Gratiâ servati estis per fidem, hoc non ex vobis, Dei enim do∣num est, & non ex operibus, ne quis glorietur. Tertius Cancellarius est ille, ad quem spectat dare literas purae gratiae, & misericordiae, & hoc officium habet B. virgo, &c. I pray, if your leisure serve, and opportunity too, let me know, if you have read of like Divinity to that of the two Gates, and of St. Peter's two Keys, in any other Paper. And besides I would gladly know, whether you have not seen these words in the Title page of Arius Montanus his Interlineal Bible, printed by Plantin, An. 1584. viz. Accesserunt & huic editioni libri Graece scripti, quos Ecclesia Orthodoxa He∣broeorum Canonum sequuta, inter Apocryphos recenset. For if my memory deceive me not, I have seen them there: And yet a friend of mine hath that Bible bearing the same date, wherein they are not; and I have not opportunity to see more Copies. I verily think the Papists have reprinted the first page, whereby it comes to pass that in some they are, and in some they are not. I would be glad to see the other part of the Succes∣sion of the Church, which you promise in that you have set out already. And if I can hear when good occasion brings you to London, I will make hard shift but I will meet you there. The bearer hereof, Mr. Foxcroft, is an honest Gentleman, and one of my Brother's neighbours; by him you may send to us at your pleasure. My Brother commends himself very kindly to you: And so with remembrance of mine own love unto you, I commend you, and your Labours to God's gracious blessing. Your unfeigned Well-willer, Alexander Cook. Leedes in Yorkshire, July 2. 1614. Do not you think that Mr. Casaubon p. 305, 306. mistook Baronius his opi∣nion of Damascen for my part I do not believe his censure touched Da∣mascen de Imaginibus.
LETTER XIII. Another Letter from Mr. Sam. Ward to Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo. Good Mr. Usher, I Understood by a paper inclosed in a Letter to Mr. Winch, that you were desirous of some information hence in sundry particulars therein mentio∣ned. And first for the place alledged out of Joachim Abbas in Mr. Perkins his Problem, there is a little mistake; for it is cited pag. 2. whereas it should have been Part. 2. pag. 119. facie 2. in the Edition which was An. Dom. 1527. There is in the allegation a word or two differing; but in the place mentio∣ned you shall find somewhat more to that purpose. For that which is written touching Rabanus in the Preface of Guilielmus Malmesb. in abbreviatione Amularii, it is verbatim the same with that which you have in your Book alledged out of the MS. in Collegio Omnium Animarum Oxon. As for the words which M. Plesseis alledgeth out of Claudius Seisellius con∣tra Waldenses, in commendation of the said Waldenses, I have not exactly pe∣rused the Book: but thus much I find fol. 9. Nonnihil etiam ad horum Wal∣densium confirmandam toler and amque sectam confert, quod praeter haec (quae con∣tra fidem religionem{que} nostram assumunt) in reliquis fermè puriorem quam coete∣ri Christiani vitam agunt. Non enim nisi coacti, jurant, raroque nomen Dei in vanum proferunt, promissa{que} sua bonâ fide implent, & in paupertate pars maxima de∣gentes Apostolicam vitam doctrinam{que} servare se solos protestantur. Touching the History of the Earls of Tholouse, I have transcribed some part of that which concerneth the Waldenses, and will finish the rest, and send it you ere long. It chiefly consisteth in a narration of Simon Mountiffort his attempt warranted by the great Council of Lateran, for the suppressing of the Hereticks, and their Abbettors, chiefly Raymundus Earl of Tholouse. But I will in some sort satisfie your request shortly, by sending you the Tran∣script. I doubt not but they which set forth the Council of Chalcedon, for  writ . Thus with my best wishes, and kindest salutations, and willingness to help you here in what I can out of our Libraries, I commit you to the Protection of the highest. In hast. Your very loving Friend, Sam. Ward. Sidney Colledge July 28. 1614. We have lost (and so hath the whole Church) a great loss by Mr. Casau∣bon's untimely decease.
LETTER XIV. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Mr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, then in London. Salutem. Good Mr. Usher, I Am sorry I had not opportunity to see you before my departure out of the City. I pray you inform me what the Specialties are which are omit∣ted in Mr. Mason's Book. I would only know the heads. I would know of you, whether you have seen, or heard of the second Tome of Councils, Groe∣co-lat. set out at Rome. I hear it is alledged by Fronto Ducoeus. Or whether you can remember out of the Reading of Catalogues of Manuscripts, whe∣ther the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon be extant in any Library in Europe, Graecè. I have read of the Acts of the 1 Concilium Arelatense, set forth by P. Pithoeus, but could never come by them: I would know whether they be extant in the late Paris Edition of Hilary, or no, 1605. I had no leisure when I was with you, to inquire how Mr. Mason doth warrant the Vocation, and Ordination of the Ministers of the Reformed Churches in Foreign Parts. Thus with my best wishes, and kindest salutations, I commend your self, and all your labours to God's blessing, and the good of his Church, and so rest, Your assured loving Friend, Samuel Ward. Sidney Colledge April 14. 1615. I did hear that the King had given 600 l. per Annum to the Colledge in Ireland, and that now the whole revenue of the same is 1100 l. per An∣num, which I am glad to hear of. LETTER XV. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to Mr. James Usher, after∣ward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, Clarissimo Viro ac amico suo singulari Dom. Jacobo Usher, sacrae Theologiae Professori eximio, Guil. Eyre salutem in Christo. Cùm multis aliis nominibus (clarissime, charissimé{que} Usher) metibi oboera∣tum esse lubens agnoscam, tum postremùm, pro libro quem superiore anno abs te dono accepi; intelligo historicam tuam explicationem gravissimae questionis, cujus tertiam partem multi (sat scio) avide desiderant & ex∣pectant: certe omnes qui Orthodoxam fidem amplexantur, pro utilissimo hoc opere tuo multùm tibi debent. Beasti me hoc munere, ut non dicam quan∣ti aestimo: atque praeterea animum addidisti ad antiquitatis studia intermissa,
in quibus infantiam meam agnosco, & jam hospes plane fui in iisdem praeser∣tim perquinquennium, quo hic Colestriae assiduis ad populum concionibus distentus fuerim. Gratulor tibi purpuram si verus sit rumor: nobis etiam ipsis Vitam & Va∣letudinem tuam gratulari debeo, propter tristem rumorem de morte tua apud nos sparsum: cura (quaeso) Valetudinem; ac si me audies, minùs frequens eris post reditum tuum in Angliam, quem expectamus, quàm olim fueris Londini concionibus, ne ardor tuus citiùs quàm cupimus, languescat. Tu quidem ipsissimos antiquitatis fontes & reconditos thesauros apperuisti, & li∣matissimo judicio Veritatem collegisti; quam scioli nonnulli ex Foxii Mar∣tyrologio aliisque id genus rivulis tantum derivatum à te affirmare non dubi∣târunt. Hoc forsan in proxima operis editione, vel saltem in ejusdem proxi∣ma parte, praeoccupare juvabit: Sed in tanta re minimè opus esse consilio existimo. Atque de his rebus, si nobis tam liceat esse fortunatis, in Angliâ reverentiam vestram alloqui speramus. Aliquoties Domino nostro Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi Academiae vestrae Cancellario, officium meum praesentare soleo: quod si aliquid sit vobis negotii apud illum, quod mea tenuitas expedire possit, nec mihi nec meis parcere decrevi, sed facilè intelligo paratissimos vos habere Londini, quorum opera uti liceat: hoc tantum amoris & Officii mei erga vos & Collegium vestrum Gratiâ, calamo incidebat. Deus opt. max. clementissimus in Christo Pater vos omnes, omni benedictionum genere cumulatissimos reddat, per Dominum nostrum Jesum. Amen. Guil. Eyre. Colcestriae 29. die Aprilis, 1615. LETTER XVI. A Letter from Mr. H. Briggs professor of Astronomy at Gresham College, to Mr. James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo. Good Sir, MR. Carew, shewed me your Letter written to Mr. Smith of Lincolns-Inn, (whose Death, I perceive, even we which did not know him, have much cause to lament) wherein you mention me, and a Letter which formerly you Writ to me, which never came to my hands. But to the point which here you repeat, I cannot tell how to meet with that part of Theon. his Commen∣tary upon Ptolomoeus his magna constructio; I have it in Greek, but there I have no hope to find that thing either explained or recorded. There is in Christman upon Alfraganus which I suppose you have, in his Treatise de connexione anno∣rum, pag. 306. and in other places mention of oera Philippica which Kaba∣silla maketh the same with à morte Alexandri; but the Arabs ignorantly con∣found Philip and Alexander, and Alexander and Nicanor, making oeram Alex∣andrinam Seleucidarum 12 years and 325 days later than oera Philippica. But I am out of mine element, and I do not doubt but you have these things better known than I can: But I shall most gladly do any thing I can according to your direction. Concerning Eclipses which my Coufien Midgeley putteth me in mind of from you (for whom I heartily thank you, and for all your
other kindnesses.) Mullerus in his Phris. Tabulis hath mightily discouraged me, for he hath weakned the Prutenicks, my Foundation, in three places of his Book at least, yet hath not either helped it, or shewed the fault in particular, that others might seek remedy. I have seriously set upon it; but these difficulties, and other straitness of time, and weight of other easier and more proper business, have, sore against my will, forced me to lay it aside as yet, till I can find better leisure and then I hope still to do somewhat. Napper, Lord of Markinston, hath set my Head and Hands a Work, with his new and admirable Logarithms. I hope to see him this Summer if it please God, for I never saw Book which pleased me better, or made me more wonder. I pur∣pose to discourse with him concerning Eclipses, for what is there which we may not hope for at his hands. Paulus Middleb. is at pawn as I hear, and the other Book likewise; but I have, somuch as I can in Mr. Crawshaw's ab∣sence, had care to have them kept. I pray you, if you see Mr. Widdows, commend me heartily to him. We have here long expected him. Thus desiring the Al∣mighty ever to bless and prosper you, referring all news, &c. to Mr. Egerton's report, I take my leave from Gresham House this 10th. of March, 1615. Yours ever to his Power in the Lord H. Briggs. Let me I pray put you in mind de pres. numero & Officio. I set it here that you may the more seriously remember it. LETTER XVII. A Letter from the most Reverend Tobias Mathews, Arch-Bishop of York, to James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo Jesu. HAving oftentimes wished occasion to Write unto you, since the publi∣cation of that your Learned Work, de continuâ Successione, & Statu Christianarum Ecclesiarum, &c. God now at last, though long first, sending so good opportunity, by this honest Religious Gentleman, Mr. Peregrine Towthby, I can do no less than both wish and advise you to Proceed in the full performance of the same, by addition of the third part, according to the pro∣ject of your whole Design: Which last shall, I hope, be no less useful and be∣neficial to all Christian and truly Catholick Professors, than the former have been, and are like to be for ever. And as I doubt not but you may contain the rest within the compass of no more, at the most, than the Volume al∣ready extant doth comprehend; So do I verily perswade my self you shall therein glorifie God, and edifie his People exceedingly. Especially if you will but interlace, or adjoyn, some rather judicious, than large or copious discourse of this punctual question, or objection, Quid de Salute Patrum, & Majorum nostrum, &c. fit statuendum; whereof albeit some other good Authors have well, and worthily delivered their Opinions, yet you shall be sure not to lose your farther labour, endeavour, and determination therein. For assure your self that in the Controversie de Ecclesiâ, our adversaries do not demurre themselves, nor intangle others (though needlesly, yet sophisti∣cally) in any one Quillity, or Cavil, more than in that particular before
expressed. Were I not throughly perswaded both of your sufficiency, and integrity, I would not intimate thus much unto you: All which, notwith∣standing, I refer to your own Pious and Discreet consideration; yet hoping withal to hear from you ere long, by whom you now receive these from me; which I trust you will reserve to your self alone, howsoever you enter∣tain, or dislike, yea or deliberate of the motion. The while here I right hear∣tily commend you, and your godly studies to the special good blessings of the Almighty. Yours very loving in the Lord, Tobias Eboracensis. Bishopthorpe May 12, 1616. LETTER XVIII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Gataker to Mr. James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Health in Christ.Good Sir, PResuming on your kindness shewed me at your being in these parts, to∣gether with your ingenuous disposition otherwise, I am bold to request a further courtesie from you. I have in mine hands a Manuscript, contain∣ing, among others, certain Treatises, which I cannot yet learn to have been printed; to wit, Guilielmi de Sancto Amore; de periculis novissimorum temporum; as also divers things of Robert Grosthed, sometime of Lincoln, viz. An Oration delivered in writing to the Pope at Lions; (whereof I find a peice recorded in Catalogus Testium;) excerpta quaedam ex ejusdem epistolis; tractatus de oculo morali; de modo confitendi; & sermones quidam. Some of these, perad∣venture, if they be not abroad already, might not be unworthy to see the light: nor should I be unwilling, if they should be so esteemed, to bend my poor and weak endeavours that way; but of that Oration to the Pope, cer∣tain lines, not many, are pared away in my Copy, though so as the sense of them may be guessed, and gathered from the context: And in the other Treatises there are many faults, that cannot easily or possibly, some of them, without help of other Copies, be amended. My desire is to understand from you, whether at your being here in England (for I wot well how careful you were to make inquiry after such Monuments) you lighted upon any of these, and where, or in whose hands they were. There are besides in this Manuscript a Commentary on Augustine De Civitate Dei; and a Postil on Ecclesiastes, with a Treatise De modo proedicandi; but these two imperfect, of nameless Authors: Besides Guilielm. Paris. de Prebendis, & Malachiae Mino∣rith de veneno spirituali: which two last I understand to have been publish∣ed. I should be glad to hear, as many others desire, that the second part of your painful and profitable Task, so generally applauded, and no less greedily expected, were preparing, or fully prepared for the Press, and much more to see it abroad. Works of that kind are in these times very seasonable; nor de∣serve any better of God's Church than those that deal soundly, and learnedly in them, among whom your self, as not a few acknowledge, may well claim
a prime place: Your Labours both in that kind, and others, the Lord bless, and continue unto you life and strength, to be long an Instrument to his glo∣ry, and of his Churches good. Yours assured in the Lord, Thomas Gataker. Rederith Martii 18. 1616. LETTER XIX. A Letter from Mr. Robert Usher to Doctor James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Ornatissimo viro, amantissimo{que} suo sobrino Jacobo Usserio, dig∣nissimo in nostra Academia Theologiae Professori, Salutem. DUas fulgentes & insignes stellas (vir ornatissime) firmamento nostrae Ecclesiae nuper decessisse, cimmeriae, & horrendae, quibus miserima haec Insula, & in occasum vergens Academia involvuntur, tenebrae promulgant; ad quas dispellendas te sulgenti scientiarum splendore omnibus praelucentem, ad∣mirabili morum candore corruscantem, summo{que} honore coronatum, Deus ele∣git, ut studiorum tuorum habenas, ad emolumentum nostrae Ecclesiae Babylo∣nica superstitione infestae, ad salutem Patriae mentis caecitate laborantis, & ad dignitatem Academiae in praecipitem ruinam irruentis, expeditè flectas. Mi∣seris fuccurrere te didicisse, ter nobilis illa pugna nunquam fatis laudanda nu∣per cum superba, & septemplici Romanae gentis Hydra, sub Christi vexillo inita, pro maturata aetate, ac illibatâ despectae Ecclesiae castitate, palam testa∣tur; quam pene oblivio, vel potius cruenta tyrannorum rabies etiam spiran∣tem absorbuit, & sepelivit. Perpetuas hujus peregrinationes, dura{que} exilia, ter∣ribilem Draconis faciem fugientis, ab ultima antiquitate, quâ in cunabulis fuerat, ad nostra fere tempora vivis coloribus depinxisti. Nunc igitur faces∣sant nostris finibus mendaces Romanae Synagogae Cretenses, quos olim abyssus turmatim evomuit, facessant, (inquam) non sine hac novitate, quâ perfidam, & obscoenam Babyloniae meretricem salutent: ferreo tui ingenii ariete Anti∣christiani regni fundamenta concussa, vel potius convulsa novâ restauratione indigere; veram Christi sponsam demum tenebrosis umbris extulisse caput; te{que} istius gravissimae controversiae & contentionis palmam reportasse. Hinc omnes, quos liber tuus, variâ sane lectione & doctrina perpolitus, vel saltem ejus fama à limine salutavit, uno ore te solum in hac materia Apollinis lyram attigisse, constanter perhibent: hoc idem insignis tua fama astipulatur, quae nullam Europae partem insalutatam reliquit, idem industriae & ingenii tui foe∣tus, quem omnes avidè arripiunt, summo{que} prosequuntur amore. Filium equi∣dem parentis causâ omnes fovent, parentem filii gratiâ omnes admirantur, sic cunctos te cum admiratione amare, cunctos{que} te cum amore admirari facile percipias. Immortales Deo grates, propterea quod te per devios antiquorum campos vagantem in penetralia suae veritatis deduxit, benignitatis suae The∣sauros tibi apperuit, te{que} patriae incolumem, patriam{que} tibi restituit: tibique (amantissime sobrine) justissimas habeo gratias, quas me tibi diu debuisse immensa tua erga me gratia comprobat; cujus tuum cubiculum mihi cre∣ditum minimam non esse tesseram ingenuè fateor. Sed ne chartacea haec salutatio te gravissimorum negotiorum mole obrutum, molestiâ afficiat, vela
contraham, hoc interim abs te flagitarem, & hoc audaciae meae symbolum, pa∣riter{que} amoris, ferena humanitatis fronte accipias. Tuae salutis, & felicitatis studiosiss. Rob. Usserius. Ad obscoenam meretricem septem insidentem Montibus, de tuo libro, Carmen. Frigore cur pavido trepidas Babylonica Thais Cur trepidae proebes turpia terga fugoe Fluctibus Hesperiis emergit lucida stella, Quâ Veniente fagis, quâ{que} Oriente cadis. Purpuream lucem vitat caligo profunda, Dagon sic Arcam concidit ante Dei. Hac radiante patent cunctis genitura nefanda, Gorgoneus{que} tuus partus, uter{que} parens. Mordaces anni, violata{que} foedera lecti, Et stygio soboles carcere spurca fluens. Fulgenti nuper cecidit tua gloria coelo, Nunc eadem terris in loca nigra cadit. LETTER XX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Lydyat to Dr. James Usher, at Dublin Colledge. Reverend and Dear Dr. Usher, I Received your Letter dated the sixth of October. I am glad you received my Book, and I thank you for yours, which I received from Mr. Harris of Hanwell. The former part of your Letter, being, in regard of the matter, a Tragi-Comedy, drave me almost into an ecstasie; and afterwards brought to my mind that of the Psalmist, Many are the troubles of the righteous: but God delivereth him out of them all. And therefore it is good to hold fast by him continually, and to desire his direction and furtherance in all our Affairs and Businesses: So although the beginning and middle thereof be ne∣ver so troublesome, we shall not need to doubt, but that the end will be hap∣py and prosperous. The Astronomical Calculation of years in Ptolemy's Canons, if it be Ge∣nuine, is doubtless an excellent Monument of Antiquity, which I would glad∣ly see: But yet it is not likely to make me to let go mine account of Darius his years, firmly proved out of Thucydides, and Ctesias, compared with Dio∣dorus. I have endeavoured to satisfie you, touching the objections you make in your Letter: as also to satisfie your desire touching the distances of Taurus, mentioned by Albategnius; and touching the quantity of the Solar and Lunar year, and disposition of the Grecian Calendar, in Ge∣minus. Thus with remembrance of my dutiful commendations to your self, Mr.
Provost Temple, D. Richardson, and the rest of our friends with you, I com∣mit you, your Studies, and Affairs, to the blessing of God, to the behoof of your Country, and the whole Church of Christ. Yours to be commanded in all Christian Duties, Thomas Lydyat. Alkerton, Monday March 18. 1616. Excerpta ex Albatenio. DE Epocharum distantiis, I find no such express mention in Albategnius, as that in the end of the 15 of Alfraganus, of Christman's Edition: nei∣ther are his 32 nor his 421 set down in the same method. The 325 (the Title whereof, in the Indice Capitum before the Book, is, In scientiâ Tarec Arabum & Romanorum ac Persarum atque Alkept alternatim) hath three parts. In the first part are set down their 4 sorts of Months, thus. Mensium qui∣dem Arabum nomina sunt, Almuhartan, Saphar, &c. Romanorum autem men∣sium nomina secundùm Graecorum & Egyptiorum principia sunt, Elul, Tisrin primus, Tisrin Secundus, &c. Nomina verò mensium Persarum, sunt Efroso∣meth, Asdiasdmed, &c. Mensium autem Alkept nomina sunt Tut, Bena, Accur, &c. Whereunto is subjoyned a Clause directly concerning your purpose, and that truly set down, amidst the manifold errors about the Dates of Times, both in the same Chapter, and in the whole Book, as appeareth by comparing the same with other places in these Words. Principium autem à quo Romani inci∣piunt & Alkept, est à morte Alexandri Macedonis secundum Graecos. Aegyptii verò & Romani ab Ehahilcarnain annis numerant, & sunt inter eos 12 anni Aegyptiaci. These are the very Words, and without doubt Albatenius his meaning, confirmed by the Dates of the most principal of his observations, and the plain truth. In the second part, he sheweth how to find the beginnings of all those 4 sorts of Years and Months. Where the Arabian and Alhegira radix, is, 5d. The Roman from Alhilcarnain, Aera Dhilkarnain est 2x apud Albateg∣nium, viz. is 0d. 7d. The Persian from Jesdag, 3d. The Alkept also from Adhilcarnain, 5d. Whereby is signified that the first year of Dhilcarnain began in the 436 year of Nabonazar, and 12 à morte Alexandri, almost ending, to wit, on the 8d. Potiùs 9. Of Tisrin posterioris, or November following. In the 3. he sheweth how to find one sort of year by another, and it hath 8 Sections. 1. Romanorum, i. e. Syre-Graecorum & Constantinopolitana, à die Septembris feria 7a, anni periodi Julianae 4402. [ab initio Octobris alii Arabes exteri Antiochiam deducunt; ut à 1o Tisri Hebraei in suâ aerâ contractuum, & Jason Cyrenaeus in 2o. lib. Maccab.—vel 1o die Octobris (ejusdem anni) feriâ 22, ut apud Alfraganum, & alios Arabas, & Hebraeos in suo—.] 2. Alkept, Alexandrinorum, i. e. à 290 die Augusti feriâ, anni periodi Julianae 4403. ut aera Chaldaeorum apud Ptolęmaeum, & Laodicenorum apud Scalig. p. 405. Nam Thoth Nabonass. 436. incurrit in Novem. 9. seria 5a. Thoth verò 437 (quod hic potius intelligendum, quia à 12 Alexandri dessnente sit supputatio) à Nov. ser. 6a. §. 1. Si autem Romanorum Taric per Taric Alhegira scire volueris, ita ut diem Romani mensis in quo fueris, & quot ad Hilcarnaim anni praeterierint, deprehendas, Arabicam radicem servatam accipe, eique 317 dies superadde (viz. as many as are from the first of Quod caput est arae Dhilk. Elul or September, to the 15 of Quod caput est Hegirae. Themmur or Tamuz, that is, July)—quibus 933 superadde annos, collectumque erunt anni ad Hilcarnaim. This confirms the former account; for being granted that there are 945 years inter Philippum sive mortem Alexandri, & Hegiram, take away 12, there remain 933 between Dhilcarnaim and Hegira.
§. 2. Cum autem Taric Alkept per Romanorum Taric nosse desideras, annos ad Hilcarnaim cum anno in quo fueris (etsi Elul per unum tantùm diem ingressus sit) accipe; post hoc, ex eo 387 diem abjice, &c.—et collecto, tres semper dies adjunge, et hi sunt dies in quibus Alkepin, Elul Graecos ingressu, quae est Tut, proecedunt, &c.—per hoc autem Taric stellarum ex Canonibus Theum abstra∣huntur postquàm his annis 15 anni superadduntur, eo quod sit à morte Alexandri Macedonis. §. 3. Romanorum autem Taric per Taric Alkept si nosse quaeris, annos Alkept (qui sunt anni ad Hilcarnaim Aegyptiaci perfecti i. e. aequabiles.) sume, ex quibus 387 ab∣jice, &c.—Et si perfectis annis Alkept 15 annos, ut ab Alexandri Macedonis morte, sic adhibueris. Dehinc collecto complito. 535 annos Aegyptiacos adjunxeris, inde collectum annos libri Ptolemaei, quibus stellarum motus abstrahuntur, efficies, quod est à principio regni Nabuchodonosor primi usque ad annum in quo fue is, ex annis Alkept. Here the last number 535, being by a manifest error of the first Figure, put for 435, from the beginning of Nabonazar's Reign, to the Alkept year, (in which oera Dhilcarnaim, from the Syro-Graeco-Roman Month, Elul Gor∣pioeus and September began,) doth as manifestly discover the error of 15 twice put for 11, and consequently of 287. Crus. pag. 35. 387 days for 283 1205 anni die 297. in an∣no aequabili, (ineunte verò an. 1206.) qui hic intelligitur, ut ex collatione Eclipsis lumi∣naris liquet. years, from anno Na∣bonazari 436 to 719, as being the remains of 11 taken away from 294. à morte Alexandri in the 425 year, ad regnum Aegyptiacum Augusti in the same 719. And so likewise in the 42. Cap. Quod si conjunctionem vel proeventionem per Taric Alkept scire volueris, annos ad Hilcarnaim cum anno in quo fueris, licet una dies tantum Elul praeterierat, assume; post hoc, ex annis 587 projice, re∣siduique quartam accipe, quodque fuerit, erit dies quartarum.—Et ei quod ex diebus quartarum provenerit, 3 dies, in quibus mensis Tut ab Alkept priusquam à Graecis habetur, superis junge, eique quod ex diebus post hoc exierit, ab Elul initio, &c. For annis 587, read annis 283. Now that oera Dhilcarnaim is placed by Albategnius in the beginning of the Syro-Roman Elul or September, falling into the 436 Aegyptian year from Na∣bonazar's Reign, and the 12 from Alexander's Death ending, is further proved, as I said, by the Dates of the most and principal of his Observations. As, namely in the 27 Cap. where he writeth, he observed the Autumnal Aequinoctium at Arac, anno 119 ex annis Adilcanari, qui sunt post mortem Alexandri 1206 Vagis non fixis. Annorum, ante solis ortum 19 die mensis Elul ex Romanorum mensibus, quod est 8 die mensis pachon ex mensibus For though it did well agree with the observation of the Aequi∣noctial, yet it cannot with the first Lunar Eclipse, which was in the same year 1194. Alkept per quatuor horas et dimidiam et quartam ferè,—post Ptolemaei observationem (before set down, ejusdem Aequinoctii, anno tertio regni Antonini, quod fuit anno 463 à morte Alexandri, nonâ die mensis Athyr, ex mensibus Aegyptiorum, unâ horâ ferè post ortum solis in Alexandriâ) 743 annis Aegyptiacis et 178 diebus, et medietate et quarta unius diei minutis duabus quintis unius horae ferè; vice 185 dierum et unius medietatis, ac quartae diei partis, &c. And in the 30 Cap. Medietas autem Eclypsis primae (Solaris,) secundum quod visu deprehendimus, fuit anno 1202 ad Hilcarnaim, qui est annus 1214 ab Alexandri morte, post dimidium unae octavae Diei mensis Ab, in Arracta civi∣tate, per spatium unius horae temporalis, sole existente inter 19 et 20 gradus Leonis. The second Eclipse noted 23d. mens. Huni (sive—secundi) An. 1205. Dhilc. 1554. ab Alex. morte, hath both numbers corrupted, and, as it ap∣pears, to be corrected 1204 and 1215. Eclypsis Lunaris prima fuit anno 1194 ad Hilcarnaim, quod est anno 1206 à morte Alexandri die 53 mensis Temur (Tamuz). Invenimasque dimidium E∣clypsis in Arracta post hujus diei dimidium, 8 horis, et modicum plus ex horis aequa∣libus:—Sole existente inter 4 et 5 gradus Leonis, &c. Eclypsis secunda anno 1212 ad Hilcarnaim, quod est anno 1224 à morte Alexandri apparuit, fuitque medietas Eclypsis in Antiochia post medium secundae diei mensis Ab—horis et tertiâ parte horae ferè—sole existente inter 14 et 16 gradus Leonis.
Note that in all these Places and Allegations (contrary to my self upon Scaliger's Allegations in the 18—my Tract, before my self had seen Albategni∣us) he understandeth as well the year à morte Alexandri, as Dhilcarnaim, Syro-Graeco-Roman, not i. e. Jul. esse diem 365 (sed Alkept non di∣ffrt à Juliano) quod etiam pro∣vtur ex aerâ Philippicâ in Historiâ mes∣cella. Alkept. Only in the 51 Chap. he connecteth the year 1191 ad Hilcarnaim with the year 1627 regni Nabuchodonosor, without any agreement of Day or Month: the observation of the site of the fixt Stars in the Zodiack, as namely Cor Leonis, not requiring either. And the year 1191 Dhilk. falls into the year 1627 Nabon. ending the 15 of Canna poste∣rioris or January, thereof, to the farther confirmation of the Premises. For thence it follows that the Dhilk. likwise fell into the 436 year Nab. ending in Tisrin posteriore or November: there being one whole Aegyptiae. Alkept year swallow∣ed up in 1200 years i. e. Julian. Dhilk. within little more than two Months. And on the other side, in the 52 Chap. confuting the Author's Motus Coeli ante & retro, he hath these Words, Dixerunt etiam quod perfectio anterioris motus fuit ante regnum Augusti 128 Aegyptiacos, et sunt 666 anni Alexandri Macedonis. Where restoring the true reading 166 anni à morte Alex. Mac. and adding the 128 and 166 together, you have Ptolemy's 294 years à morte Alexandri ad regnum Augusti. And so I hope I have fully satisfied your de∣sire touching the distances of the Taric's in Albategnius, especially annorum Alkept ab Alexandri morte ad regnum Augusti, and of Taric annorum Dhil∣carnaim between and from them both. I have set down the Translator's very Words, together with his own and the Printer's Faults, not doubting but you will easily discern them. Your Objections against mine account. Darius hath  36 years, and Xerxes 21, which makes me somewhat to stagger at your beginning of Artaxerxes Longim. not that I doubt of the flight of Themistocles to Artaxerxes  after the Death of his Father Xerxes, (for of that I am well resolved) but that I would be satisfied  better for the time of that Flight. Which that it fell on the 2 year of the 77 Olympiad can be no more proved out of  Diodorus Siculus, than that he  died the same year, which we know to be untrue. Diodorus doth, as Baronius in his Annals, where he findeth a Note of the Time expressed in his Authors, he followeth that direction,  where he findeth none, he placeth things at adventures. Cimon's Victory at Eurymedon, is by Eusebius set at the 4th.  year of the 79 Olympiad. Diodorus placeth not it only, but also Cimon's Conquest of  Eione, and the taking of Scyrus by the Athenians (even as he found them related together by Thucy∣dides l. 1. pag. 65. edit. Graeco-Lat. without any note of time,) at the 3d. year of the 77 Olympiad. But of this I desire to have further satisfaction from your self. Mine Answer. That is not much material, unless there be recorded some Astronomical Observation, made in any year of his above 31, by some that lived at the same time. If you grant that, you must needs grant, that Artaxerxes began to Reign before the 3 year of the 77 Olympiad, if any credit be to be given, either to Thucydides or Diodorus touching the time of Themistocles's Flight. What better satisfaction can you desire than that Thucydides places it anon after the Execution of Pausanias, indefinitely before Cimon's double Victory, and Diodorus definitely in the 2 year of the 77 Olymp. and next before the same famous Victory: And no other Author that you do name, or I ween can name, places it later. I prove not that point out of Diodorus but out of Thucydides, convincing Diodorus of error, touching the same, by his own confession.
Yet Diodorus might with very good Historical order and reason, to the story of his Why of the Flight, rather than of the Ostracism, which he principally relates in that place. Flight, (as falling out in Greece, being the last memorable matter concerning him) adjoyn the story of his Death, the time whereof was un∣certain, as falling out in the Persians Thucydides ta∣men in Attica clàm humatum dicit: reserente Attico apud Cic. in Brut. Dominions. This general imputation raised, as may seem, upon occasion of Pontacus his Note upon Themistocles's Death, in Euseb. Chron. is of no force to the shaking of this particular Truth, touching Themistocles's Flight, in the 2 year of the 77 Olymp. at the latest, otherwise sufficiently confirmed. Your self alledge no Author that sets it later: and you may see that in Eusebius Chron. it is set 2 years sooner, to wit, in the 4th. year of the 76 Olymp. at what time per∣haps his trouble began, upon the Arraignment and Examination of But that was anno 40. Olymp. 75. according to Diodorus. Pau∣sanias, by a manifest and notorious error of two Olympiads, acknowledged also by Scaliger. It is no more to be doubted that Cimon got that most Fa∣mous Persian Victory in the year that Demotion was Archon at Athens, and that the same was the 39 year of the 77 Olymp. than that Pompey took Jeru∣salem, when Cicero was Consul at Rome. It is true that he there mentioneth them both, in his entrance to the Histo∣ry of that year; but so as he plainly signifieth they were obtained before that year, by what he writeth: Cimon, the Athenians Admiral, But he saith that he was made Admiral Archonte Demo∣tione, though Plutarch doth make him Ad∣miral before that. after he had taken Eione and Scyrus, enterprizing greater matters, returned home; and encrea∣sing his Navy, and making sufficient preparation, he set forwards towards Caria, &c. according to my interpretation of the same years Story, out of Diodorus; which also you saw. Where also it is worth the noting, That he concludes the same Story with these express words: So these things were done this year. And for your further satisfaction, note, That there being two Fountains, as it were, of the History and Chronology of the Persian Monarchy: The one Herodotus, out of the Greek Re∣cords, as I guessed, out of Hecatoeus Milesius his Copy, having by some error of the Writer  for  in Darius Hystaspis years; the o∣ther Ctesias, Artaxerxes Mnemor's Physician, out of the Persians own Re∣cords: Howsoever your Author Ptolemy being an Aegyptian-Greek may fol∣low Herodotus account; yet Ctesias adding to his account of years, a further Advertisement of Darius his dying within a few days, after the Marathonian discomfiture, deserveth more credit. And his meaning is more fully explained by those Words of Scaliger's Georgian Collections, in his 43. pag. : And Darius himself not en∣during the ignominy died for grief. Mark those words well. Note, That the Marginal Notes are the Bishop's, and not Mr. Lydyat's. LETTER. XXI. A Letter from Dr. James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Thomas Lydyat. Salutem à Salutis Fonte D. N. I. C. Dear Sir, I Remember that some three or four years since, having occasion in a pub∣lick Lecture in the Colledge, to speak of the beginning of Daniel's Seven∣ties: I laboured to prove that Artaxerxes Longimanus began his Reign to∣ward the end of the third year of the 77th. Olympiad. First, By the number of years attributed to Darius Hystaspis, by Ctesias, viz. 31. not 36.
Secondly, By the time of the death of the same Darius, noted not only in him, but also in Georgius Syncellus his Collections, (pag. 43. Graec. Euseb. Scaligeri; which place, I then did cite long before you advertised me there∣of:) to be not long after the overthrow received at Marathon, An. 2o Olym∣piadis 72. Thirdly, By the Testimony of Petrus Alexandrinus, (whom Mr. Casau∣bon, in his Exercitations against Baronius, wrongfully maketh the same with Peter the Ancient Martyr of Alexandria,) or whosoever was the Author of those Fasti, which commonly are called Siculi: wherein the beginning of Artaxerxes is expresly placed at the time above assigned. Fourthly, By the Testimony of Thucydides, making Artaxerxes then to Reign, when Themistocles fled into Persia. But here I made a doubt of the time of Themistocles his flight: wherein I desired your further resolution. For though I willingly yield to that which I find recorded in Thucydides, that it fell after the Execution of Pausanias, and before Cimon's double Victory: Yet whether that Victory was gotten in the year that Demotion was Archon at Athens, and whether Themistocles his flight fell out the year before that, is not (I take it) so clear, but that we may call it into question. The former I would willingly believe, for the Authority of Diodorus Siculus; upon whose credit only, the referring of Ci∣mon's Victory unto that year dependeth. Eusebius (who is the only man I know of, that after him setteth down the time of his Victory) placeth it at the fourth year of the 79th. Olympiad: by a manifest and notorious Error of two Olympiads, you say, but prove by no other Authority but the Confession of Scaliger; which with me (and I think with you too) is of very little moment. Diodorus is the only man we can find, that saith, this Victory was gotten in the year that Demotion was Archon at Athens, Publicola and Rufus Consuls at Rome. But doth not he also say , &c. and that he being thus made Admiral took Eïone, and Scyrus The words methinks sound thus plainly, That this year he was made Admiral, and then conquered those places; which being untrue, derogates much from the credit of his report, that saith, Cimon got his famous Victory at Eurymedon the same year. You say, the former is reported by him, by way of recapitu∣lation: but the words  seem to me very clear, that Diodorus meant plainly, That Cimon this year was made Admiral; and the words following as plainly import, that having thus undertaken the Admiralty, he took Eï∣one and Scyrus. I never read that part of your written Chronicle, wherein this matter is handled: if there be any thing in it, that may farther clear the point, I pray you communicate it unto me, for I do desire, as much as you do, to streng∣then the Authority of Diodorus, in placing Cimon's Victory at the Praetorship of Demotion, (or which is all one) at the third year of the 77th. Olympiad. But this being admitted, for Diodorus his sake, how can you prove, either out of him, or any other Author, that Themistocles his flight into Persia fell out just the year before that for this is the main matter that concerneth the cause: You say, That you prove not that point out of Diodorus, but out of Thucydides. For Diodorus, I think you do well, seeing he expresseth not any way, that this flight fell upon that year, more than his Ostracism, or his death, but heapeth promiscuously all that appertained to his fall. Thucydides saith no more than what I have delivered, and do willingly acknowledge: that his flight happened after the Execution of Pausanias, and before Cimon's Victory. Other proof you produce none for the setling thereof at the se∣cond year of the 77th. Olympiad, but what is contained in these words of your Letter [Your self alledgeth no Author that sets it later: and you may see that in Eusebius's Chronicle it is set two years sooner, viz. in the fourth year of the 76th. Olympiad. At what time perhaps his trouble began, upon
the Arraignment and Examination of Pausanias.] Whereunto I thus answer: It was far from my meaning to alledge any Author that setteth the flight of Themistocles later than the second year of the 77th. Olympiad. But I would know of you, what reason might be alledged, why it should not be placed forwarder. The Arraignment and Execution of Pausanias is referred by Dio∣dorus Siculus to the fourth year of the 75th. Olympiad: The flight of Themi∣stocles by Eusebius to the fourth of the 76th. Olympiad. These two being the sole Authors, who express the time of these two accidents; why should we without cause reject the Testimony of either Especially for the streng∣thening of the Assertion of Eusebius; which we may thus farther reason. The Peloponnesian War began in that Spring, which ended the first year of the 87th. Olympiad, as is known. Two years and a half after that, dyed Pericles, (witness Thucydides lib. 2. pag. 141.) He began to rule the Common-wealth after the death of Aristides; and continued the Government fourty years; (witness Plutarch in Pericle, pag. 155. & 161.) Aristides deceased almost four years after Themistocles was expelled from Athens, as Aemilius Probus (or Cornelius Nepos) testified in the life of Aristides. These things being laid together, do shew, That the expulsion of Themistocles from Athens fell no later than the beginning of the fourth year of the 76th. Olympiad; (to which time you doubtfully refer the beginning of his troubles:) how much sooner soever, my opinion is, That at that time Themistocles fled unto Per∣sia, as Eusebius noteth, whose Testimony I have no reason to discredit, unless I have some better Testimony or Reason to oppose against it. The year be∣fore that (which is the third of the 76th. Olympiad) I suppose Artaxerxes Longimanus to have begun his Reign: to whom, as yet , The∣mistocles fled, as Thucydides sufficiently proveth. Thus the 20th. year of his Reign should fall upon the second year of the 81 Olympiad: And the 487th. year from that (which is the middle of Daniel's last week) should fall to∣ward the end of the fourth year of the 202 Olympiad; from which I cannot be drawn as yet, to draw the passion of our Saviour Christ. If you have any further reason to perswade me to hold my first Opinion, which I learned from you, and did once publickly deliver in the Schools, upon the reasons laid down in the beginning of this Letter, I pray you let me understand thereof, for I am most willing to learn any thing, that may further me in the understanding of Daniel. Concerning Aera Dhilkarnain, and Taric Alkept, I cannot, in such man∣ner as I would, deliver my mind unto you, until I see the intire work of Al∣bategnius, which I expect from you by this Bearer, together with Geminus, according to my request in my former Letter: (which by reason of the Bearer's sudden departure from hence, hath lain by me well nigh a year.) In the mean time I commit you, and your Godly Studies, unto the Blessing of the Almighty, resting always Your most Assured Loving Friend, and Brother, James Usher. Dublin Jan. 2. 1617.
LETTER XXII. A Letter from Dr. James Usher afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh, concerning the Death of Christ, and his Satisfaction on the Cross. THE All-sufficient satisfaction of Christ, made for the sins of the whole World. The true Intent and Extent, is Lubricus locus to be handled, and hath, and doth now much trouble the Church: this question hath been moved sub iisdem terminis quibus nunc, and hath received contrary resolutions; the reason is, That in the two extremities of Opinions held in this matter, there is somewhat true, and somewhat false; The one extremity extends the benefit of Christ's satisfaction too far, as if hereby God, for his part, were actually reconciled to all mankind, and did really discharge every man from all his sins, and that the reason why all men do not reap the fruit of this benefit, is the want of that faith, whereby they ought to have belie∣ved, that God in this sort did love them: whence it would follow, that God should forgive a man his sins, and justifie him before he believed, whereas the Elect themselves, before their effectual vocation are said to be without Christ, and without hope, and to be utter strangers from the Covenants of Pro∣mise, Ephes. 2. 2. 2. The other extremity contracts the riches of Christ's satisfaction into too narrow a room; as if none had any kind of interest therein, but such as were elected before the foundation of the World; howsoever by the Gospel, every one be charged to receive the same: whereby it would follow, that a man should be bound in Conscience to believe that which is untrue, and charged to take that wherewith he hath nothing to do. Both extremities then drawing with them unavoidable absurdities; the Word of God (by hearing whereof, faith is begotten, Eph. 1. 13.) must be sought unto by a middle course, to avoid these extremities. For finding out this middle Course, we must, in the matter of our Redemp∣tion, carefully put a distinction betwixt the satisfaction of Christ absolutely considered, and the application thereof to every one in particular: The for∣mer was once done for all; the other is still in doing: The former brings with it sufficiency abundant, to discharge the whole debt; the other adds to it efficacy. The satisfaction of Christ, only makes the sins of mankind fit for pardon, which without it, could not well be; the injury done to God's Majesty being so great, that it could not stand with his honour to put it up without amends made. The particular application makes the sins of those to whom that mercy is vouchsafed to be actually pardoned: for, as all sins are mortal, in regard of the stipend due thereunto by the Law, but all do not actually bring forth death, because the gracious Promises of the Gospel stay∣eth the execution; even so all the sins of mankind are become venial, in re∣spect of the price paid by Christ to his Father, (so far, that in shewing mer∣cy upon all, if so it were his pleasure, his justice should be no loser,) but all do not obtain actual remission, because most offenders do not take out, nor plead their pardon as they ought to do. If Christ had not assumed our Na∣ture, and therein made satisfaction for the injury offered to the Divine Ma∣jesty, God would not have come unto a Treaty of Peace with us, more than with the fallen Angels, whose nature the Son did not assume: But this way being made, God holds out unto us the Golden Scepter of his Word, and thereby, not only signifieth his pleasure of admitting us unto his presence, and accepting of our submission, which is a wonderful Grace, but also sends an Embassage unto us, and entreats us that we would be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Hence, we infer against the first extremity, that by the virtue of this bles∣sed Oblation, God is made placable unto our Nature, (which he never will be unto the Angelical nature offending) but not actually appeased with any, until he hath received his Son, and put on the Lord Jesus. As also against the latter extremity, that all men may be truly said to have interest in the merits of Christ, as in a Common, though all do not enjoy the benefit thereof; because they have no will to take it. The Well-spring of life is set open unto all, Apoc. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, but many have nothing to draw with; and the Well is deep: Faith is the Vessel whereby we draw all vertue from Christ, and the Apostle tells us, That Faith is not of all, 2 Thes. 3. 2. Now the means of getting this Faith is the hearing of the word of truth, the Gospel of our salvation, Eph. 1. 13. which ministreth this general ground for every one to build his Faith upon. Syllogism. What Christ hath prepared for thee, and the Gospel offereth un∣to thee, that oughtest thou with all thankfulness to accept and apply to the comfort of thy own Soul. But Christ by his death and obedience hath provided a sufficient remedy for the taking away of all thy sins, and the Gospel offereth the same unto thee. Therefore thou oughtest to accept, and apply the same to the comfort of thine own Soul. Now this Gospel of Salvation many do not hear at all, being destitute of the Ministry of the Word; and many hearing do not believe, or lightly regard it; and many that do believe the truth thereof, are so wedded to their sins, that they have no desire to be divorced from them; and therefore they refuse to accept the gracious offer that is made unto them. And yet notwithstanding their refusal on their part, we may truly say, That good things were provided for them on Christ's part, and a rich prize was put into the hands of a Fool, howsoever he had no heart to use it, Prov. 17. 16. Our blessed Saviour, by that which he hath performed on his part, hath procured a Jubilee for the Sons of Adam; and his Gospel is his Trumpet, whereby he doth proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and preacheth the accep∣table year of the Lord, Luk. 4. 18, 19. If for all this some are so well pleased with their Captivity, that they desire no deliverance, that derogates nothing from the generality of the freedom annexed to that year. If one say to sin, his old Master, (Levit. 25. 39. Exod. 21. 5. Deut. 15. 66.) I love thee, and will not go out free, he shall be bored for a slave, and serve for ever, But that slavish disposition of his, maketh the extent of the priviledge of that year not a whit the straighter, because he was included within the general Grant, as well as others; howsoever, he was not disposed to take the benefit of it. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a certain King that made a marriage of his Son, and sent his Servants to those that were bidden to the Wedding with this message; Behold, I have prepared my Dinner; my Oxen, and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; Come to the Marriage, (Mat. 24.) If we look to the event, they that were bidden made light of their entertainment, and went their ways; one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise, (verse 5.) but that neglect of theirs doth not falsifie the word of the King (verse 4.) viz. That the Dinner was prepared, and these unworthy Guests were invited thereunto: For what, If some did not believe, shall their unbelief disannul the Faith, and truth of God (Rom. 3. 3, 4.) God forbid; yea, let God be true, and every man a lyar, as it is written, that thou mayest be justified in thy say∣ings, and overcome when thou judgest. Let not the house of Israel say, The way of the Lord is unequal. For when he cometh to judge them, the inequality will be found on their side, and not on his. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal, and your ways unequal saith the Lord, Ezek. 18. 29, 30. The Lord is right in all his ways, and holy in all his works. All the ways of our God are
mercy and truth; when we were in our sins it was of his infinite mercy that any way, or remedy should be prepared for our recovery: And when the remedy is prepared, we are never the nearer, except he be pleased of his free mercy to apply the same to us, that so the whole praise of our Redemp∣tion, from the beginning to the end thereof, may intirely be attributed to the riches of his grace, and nothing left to sinful flesh wherein it may rejoyce. The freeing of the Jews from the Captivity of Babylon, was a Type of that great deliverance, which the Son of God hath wrought for us. Cyrus, King of Persia, who was Christus Domini, (and herein but a shadow of Christus Dominus, the Author of our Redemption) published his Procla∣mation in this manner; Who is amongst you of all his people, the Lord his God be with him, and let him go up, (2 Chron. 36. 23. and Ezra 1. 2.) Now it is true, they alone did follow this Calling, whose spirit God had raised to go up, Ezra 1. 5. But could they that remained still in Babylon, justly plead, That the King's Grant was not large enough, or that they were excluded from going up by any clause contained therein The matter of our Redemp∣tion purchased by our Saviour Christ lieth open to all, all are invited to it, none that hath a mind to accept of it, is excluded from it. The beautiful feet of those that preach the Gospel of peace, do bring glad tidings of good things to every house where they tread: The first part of their Message being this, Peace to this house, (Rom. 10. 15. Luk. 10. 5.) But, unless God be pleased out of his abundant mercy to guide our feet into the way of peace, the Rebellion of our Nature is such, that we run head-long to the ways of destru∣ction and misery, Rom. 3. 16. And the ways of peace do we not know. They have not all obeyed the Gospel, Rom. 10. 16. All are not apt to entertain this Message of peace, and therefore, though God's Ambassadours make a true tender of it to all unto whom they are sent, yet their peace, only resteth on the Sons of peace, but if it meet with such as will not listen to the motion of it, their peace doth again return unto themselves, Luk. 10. 6. The Proclamation of the Gospel runneth thus: Apoc. 22. 17. Let him that is a thirst come, for him this Grace is specially provided, because none but he will take the pains to come; but least we should think this should abridge the largeness of the offer, a Quicunque vult, is immediately ad∣ded, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely: yet withal this must be yielded for a certain truth, That it is God who must work in us to will and to do of his good pleasure; and though the Call be never so loud and large, yet none can come except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. For the Universality of the satisfaction derogates nothing from the necessity of the special Grace in the application: Neither doth the speciality of the one any ways abridge the generality of the other. Indeed Christ our Saviour saith, Joh. 17. 9. I pray not for the world, but for them that thou hast given me: but the consequence hereby inferred may well be excepted against, viz. He pray∣ed not for the World, Therefore, He payed not for the World; Because the latter is an act of his satisfaction, the former of his Intercession: which being divers parts of his Priesthood, are distinguishable one from another by sundry differences. This his satisfaction doth properly give contentment to God's justice, in such sort as formerly hath been declared: His Intercession doth sollicit God's mercy. The first contains the preparation of the remedy neces∣sary for man's salvation; the second brings with it an Application of the same, And consequently the one may well appertain to the common nature which the Son assumed, when the other is a special Priviledge vouchsafed to such particular persons only, as the father hath given him. And therefore we may safely conclude out of all these premises, That the Lamb of God of∣fering himself a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, intended, by giving sufficient satisfaction to God's Justice, to make the nature of man, which he
assumed, a fit subject for mercy, and to prepare a Medicine for the sins of the whole World; which should be denied to none that intended to take the benefit of it: Howsoever he intended not by applying this All-sufficient re∣medy unto every person in particular, tomake it effectual unto the salvation of all, or to procure thereby actual Pardon for the sins of the whole World. So, in one respect he may be said to have died for all, and in another respect not to have died for all; yet so as in respect of his mercy he may be counted a kind of universal cause of the restoring of our Nature, as Adam was of the depraving of it; for as far as I can discern, he rightly hits the nail on the head that determineth the point in this manner. Thom. Contra Gentiles, lib. 4o. 55. Mors Christi est quasi quaedam universalis causa salutis; sicut peccatum pri∣mi hominis fuit quasi universalis causa damnationis. Oportet autem univer∣salem causam applicari ad unumquemque specialiter, ut effectum universalis causae participet. Effectus igitur peccati primi parentis pervenit ad unum∣quemque per carnis originem; effectus autem mortis Christi pertinget ad unumquemque per spiritualem regenerationem per quam Christo homo quodam∣modo conjungitur & incorporatur. James Usher. March 3. 1617. LETTER XXIII. An Answer to some exceptions taken against the former Letter, by the Re∣verend James Usher Arch-Bishop of Armagh. I Cannot sufficiently wonder, why such exceptions should be taken at a Letter of Mine, which without my privity came to so many mens hands, as if thereby I had confirmed Papism, Arminianism, and I know not what error of Mr. Culverwell's which (as you write) is, and hath been, opposed by many; yea, all good men. The Papist (saith one) doth thus distinguish; a Mediator of Redemption and Intercession; and Bellarmine (saith another) divides the satisfaction and application of Christ. To which, what other Answer should I make but this To hold, That Christ is the only Me∣diator of Redemption, but the Saints are also Mediators of Intercession, That Christ by his Merits hath made satisfaction to his Father in gross, and the Pope by his Indulgence, and his Priests by their Oblations in the Mass do make a particular application to particular persons; to joyn thus Partners with Christ in this manner in the Office of Mediation is Popery indeed: but he who attributing the entire work of the Mediation unto Christ alone, doth yet distinguish the Act of Redemption from the Act of Intercession, the Sa∣tisfaction made by him unto God, from the Application thereof communi∣cated unto men, is as far from Popery, as he that thinks otherwise, is from the grounds of the Catechism; for that Christ hath so died for all men (as they lay down in the conference of Hague) Ut reconciliationem cum Deo, & peccatorum remissionem singulis impetraverit, I hold to be untrue, being well assured, That our Saviour hath obtained at the hands of his Father Recon∣ciliation,
and Forgiveness of sins, not for the Reprobate, but Elect only; and not for them neither, before they be truly regenerated, and implanted into himself. For, Election being nothing else but the purpose of God, resting in his own mind, makes no kind of alteration in the party elected, but only the execution of that Decree and purpose, which in such as have the use of reason is done by an effectual Calling, in all by spiritual regeneration, which is the new birth, without which no man can see the Kingdom of God. That Impetration, whereof the Arminians speak, I hold to be a fruit, not of his Satisfaction, but Intercession; and seeing I have learned from Christ's own mouth, Joh. 17. 9. I pray not for the reprobate World: I must needs e∣steem it a great folly to imagine, that he hath impetrated Reconciliation and Remission of sins for that World. I agree therefore thus far with Mr. Ames in his dispute against Grevinchovius, That Application and Impetration, in this matter we have in hand, are of equal extent; and, That forgiveness of sins is not by our Saviour impetrated for any unto whom the merit of his death is not applyed in particular. If in seeking to make straight that which was crooked in the Arminians Opinion, he hath bended it too far the contrary way, and inclined too much upon the other extremity; it is a thing which in the heat of disputation hath befallen many worthy men before him; and if I be not deceived, gave the first occasion to this present controversie. But I see no reason why I should be tied to follow him in every step, wherein he treadeth: And so much for Mr. Ames. The main error of the Arminians (vid. Corvin. in Defen. Armini. cap. 11.) and of the patrons of Universal Grace, is this, That God offereth unto every man those means that are necessary unto salvation, both sufficiently and effe∣ctually; and, that it resteth in the Free-Will of every one to receive, or re∣ject the same; for the proof thereof they alledge, as their Predecessors, the Semipelagians, did before them, that received Axiom of Christ's dying for all men, which being rightly understood, makes nothing for their purpose. Some of their Opposites (subject to oversights as well as others) more for∣ward herein than circumspect, have answered this Objection, not by expoun∣ding, (as was fit) but by flat denying that famous Axiom; affirming pe∣remptorily, That Christ died only for the Elect, and for others nullo modo; whereby they gave the adverse party advantage to drive them unto this ex∣tream absurdity, viz. That seeing Christ in no wise died for any, but for the Elect, and all men were bound to believe that Christ died for themselves, and that upon pain of damnation for the contrary infidelity; therefore all men were bound to believe that they themselves were Elected, although in truth the matter were nothing so: Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis Tempus eget. Neither is there hope, that the Arminians will be drawn to acknowledge the Error of their Position, as long as they are perswaded the contrary Opi∣nion cannot be maintained without admitting that an untruth must be be∣lieved, even by the commandment of him that is God of Truth, and by the direction of that word, which is the Word of Truth. Endeavouring therefore to make one truth stand by another, and to ward off the blow given by the Arminians in such sort that it should neither bring hurt to the Truth, nor give advantage to Error; admit I failed of mine in∣tent, I ought to be accounted rather an Oppugner, than any wise an Abettor of their fancies. That for the Arminians. Now for Mr. Culverwell, That which I have heard him charged withal, is the former extremity, which in my Letter I did condemn, viz. That Christ in such sort did die for all men, That by his death he made an actual reconcilement between God and man; and That the special reason why all men reap not the fruit of this reconcilia∣tion,
is the want of that faith, whereby they ought to have believed, that God in this sort did love them. How justly he hath been charged with this error, himself can best tell; but if ever he held it, I do not doubt but he was driven thereunto by the absurdities, which he discerned in the other extremity; for what would not a man fly unto, rather than yield, that Christ no manner of way died for any Reprobate, and none but the Elect had any kind of Title to him, and yet so many thousand Reprobates should be bound in Conscience to believe that he died for them, and tied to accept him for their Redeemer and Saviour; yea, and should be condemned to everlasting Torments for want of such a faith, (if we may call that faith, which is not grounded upon the word of truth) whereby they should have believed that which in it self was most untrue, and laid hold of that in which they had no kind of interest If they who dealt with Mr. Culverwell, laboured to drive out one absurdity by bringing in another, or went about to stop one hole by making two, I should the less wonder at that you write, that though he hath been dealt withal by many brethren, and for many years, yet he could not be drawn from his errour. But those stumbling blocks being removed, and the plain word of truth laid open, by which faith is to be begotten, I dare boldly say, he doth not hold that extremity wherewith he is charged, but followeth that safe, and middle course, which I laid down; for after he had well weighed what I had written, he heartily thanked the Lord, and me, for so good a re∣solution of this Question, which for his part he wholly approved, not seeing how it could be gainsaid. And so much likewise for Mr. Culverwell. Now for Mr. Stock's publick opposition in the Pulpit, I can hardly be in∣duced to believe that he aimed at me therein; if he did, I must needs say he was deceived, when he reckoned me amongst those good men, who make the Universality of all the Elect, and all men to be one: Indeed I wrote but even now, that God did execute his Decree of Election in All by spiritual ge∣neration: But if any shall say, that by All, thereby I should understand the universality of All, and every one in the World, and not the universality of all the Elect alone, he should greatly wrong my meaning: for I am of no other mind than Prosper was, Lib. 1. De Vocat. Gent. Habet populus Dei plenitudinem suam, & quamvis magna pars hominum salvantis Gratiam aut re∣pellat aut negligat, in elect is tamen & proescitis, atque ab omni generalitate dis∣cretis, specialis quaedam censetur universitas, ut de toto mundo, totus mundus liberatus, & de omnibus hominibus, omnes homines videantur assumpti. That Christ died for his Apostles, Luk. 22. 19. For his Sheep, Joh. 10. 15. For his Friends, Joh. 15. 13. For his Church, Ephes. 5. 25. may make peradventure against those, who make all men to have a share alike in the death of our Sa∣viour: But I profess my self to hold fully with him, who said, Etsi Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, tamen specialiter pro nobis passus est, quia pro Eccle∣sia passus est. Yea, and in my former writing I did directly conclude, That as in one respect Christ might have been said to die for all, so in another re∣spect truly said not to have died for all: and my belief is, That the principal end of the Lord's death, was, That he might gather together in one the Chil∣dren of God scattered abroad, Joh. 11. 52. and, that for their sakes he did spe∣cially sanctifie himself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth, John 17. 19. And therefore it may be well concluded, That Christ in a spe∣cial manner died for these; but to infer from hence; that in no manner of respect he died for any others, is but a very weak collection, specially the re∣spect by me expressed being so reasonable, that no sober mind advisedly con∣sidering thereof, can justly make question of it, viz. That the Lamb of God of∣fering himself a sacrifice for the sins of the World, intended by giving satis∣faction to God's Justice to make the nature of man, which he assumed, a fit Subject for mercy, and to prepare a Sovereign medicine that should not only be a sufficient Cure for the sins of the whole World, but also should be laid
open to all, and denied to none, that indeed do take the benefit thereof: For he is much deceived that thinks a preaching of a bare sufficiency, is able to yield sufficient ground of comfort to a distressed Soul, without giving a fur∣ther way to it, and opening a further passage. To bring news to a Bankrupt, that the King of Spain hath Treasure enough to pay a thousand times more than he owes, may be true, but yields but cold comfort to him the miserable Debtor: Sufficiency indeed is requisite, but it is the word of promise that gives comfort. If here exception be taken, That I make the whole Nature of man fit for Mercy, when it is as unfit a subject for Grace as may be; I Answer, That here two impediments do occurr, which give a stop unto the peace, which is to be made betwixt God and man. The one respects God, the party offended, whose justice hath been in such sort violated by his base Vassals, that it were unfit for his glorious Majesty to put up such an in∣jury without a good satisfaction. The other respects Man, the party offen∣ding, whose blindness, stupidity, and hardness of heart is such, that he is nei∣ther sensible of his own wretchedness, nor God's goodness: that when God offers to be reconciled unto him, there must be much intreaty to perswade him to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. In regard of the latter, I acknow∣ledge with the Apostle, That the natural man receives not the things of the spirit, for they are foolishness to him; neither can he, because spiritually dis∣cerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And this impediment is not taken away by Christ's Satis∣faction (which is a work of his Priestly Function) but by the enlightening of the mind, and softening the heart of the sinner, which are effects issuing from the execution of the Prophetical and Kingly Office of our Redeemer. When therefore, I say, That by Christ's satisfaction to his Father, he made the Nature of Man a fit subject for mercy, I mean thereby, that the former impediment arising on God's part is taken away, that if it were not for the other (for the having whereof we can blame none but our selves; and in the not removing whereof, we cannot say God hath done us any wrong) there were no let, but all Men might be saved: And if it pleased God to extend his mercy unto All, as he keeps his freedom therein, in having compassion on whom he will have mercy, and leaving others in blindness, natural hardness of their own heart, yet the worth of Christ's satisfaction is so great, that his Ju∣stice herein should be no loser. But if this Justice (you will say) be satisfied, how comes it to pass that God exacts payment again from any I Answer, We must take heed we stretch not our similitudes beyond their just extent, lest at last we drive the matter too far, and be forced to say (as some have done) That we cannot see how satisfaction and forgiveness can stand together, and so by denying Christ's Satisfaction be injurious to God's Justice, or by denying remission of sins become injurious to God's mercy. We are therefore to understand, that the end of the satisfaction of God's Justice is to make way for God's free li∣berty in shewing mercy, that so Mercy and Justice meeting, and embracing one another, God may be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Rom. 3. 26. Now the general satisfaction of Christ, which was the first act of his Priestly Office, prepares the way for God's mercy, by making the sins of all mankind pardonable, the interposition of any bar from God's Justice notwithstanding, and so puts the Sons of Men only in a possibility of being justified, a thing denied to the nature of fallen Angels, which the Son was not pleased to assume: But the special Application of this Satisfaction vouch∣safed by Christ unto those persons only whom his Father hath given him out of the World, which is an appendant, or appertaineth to the second Act of his Priest-hood, viz. his Intercession, produceth this potentia in Actum, i. e. procureth an actual discharge from God's anger, and maketh Justification, which before was a part of our possibility, to be a part of our present Possession.
If it be said, It is a great derogation to the dignity of Christ's death, to make the sins of mankind only pardonable, and brings in a bare possibility of Justi∣fication; I Answer, It is a most unchristian imagination to suppose the merit of Christ's death, being particularly applied to the Soul of a sinner, produceth no further effect than this. Saint Paul teacheth us, that we be not only ju∣stifiable, but justified by his blood, Rom. 5. 9. yet not simply as offered on the Cross, but through faith in his blood, Rom. 3. 25. that is, through his blood applyed by faith. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, (saith Saint John, 1 John 1. 17.) cleanseth us from all sins, yet cleanse it doth not by being prepared, but by being applyed; prepared it was when he poured it out once upon the Cross; applyed it is when he washeth us from our sins therein, Rev. 1. 5. It is one thing therefore to speak of Christ's satisfaction, in the general absolute∣ly considered; and another thing, as it is applyed to every one in particular: The consideration of things, as they are in their Causes, is one thing; and as they have an actual Existence, is another thing. Things as they are in their Causes, are no otherwise considerable, but as they have a possibility to be. The application of the Agent to the Patient, with all circumstances ne∣cessarily required, is it that gives to the thing an actual Being. That Dis∣ease is curable for which a Soveraign Medicine may be found, but cured it is not till the Medicine be applyed to the Patient; and if it so fall out, that the Medicine being not applied, the party miscarries, We say, He was lost, not because his sickness was incurable, but because there wanted a care to apply that to him that might have helped him. All Adam's Sons have taken a mortal sickness from their Father, which if it be not remedied, will without fail, bring them to the second death: No Medicine under Heaven can heal this Disease, but only a potion confected of the blood of the Lamb of God, who came to take away the sins of the World; which, as Prosper truly notes, habet quidem in se ut omnibus profit; sed si non bibitur non medetur. The virtue thereof is such, that if all did take it, all without doubt should be recovered, but without taking it there is no reco∣very: In the former respect it may be truly said, That no man's state is so desperate, but by this means it is recoverable, (and this is the first comfor∣table news that the Gospel brings to the distressed Soul) but here it resteth not, nor feedeth a man with such a possibility, that he should say in his heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven to bring Christ from above but it brings the word of comfort nigh unto him, even to his mouth and heart, and presents him with the Medicine at hand, and desireth him to take it; which being done accordingly, the cure is actually performed. LETTER XXIV. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, afterwards Earl of Bath, to Dr. James Usher, afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Worthy Sir, VVERE my Invention able to find Words to express the greatness of my Error, I would fill this Sheet of Paper with Phrases A∣pologetical, and Reasons of Excuse for my long Silence; but when I consi∣der the Goodness of your Disposition and mine own Confidence, of the Inte∣rest I have heretofore had in your Love, they diminish Despair in me, and perswade strongly to conceive Hope of Pardon at your Hands. I should
have been very glad in this time of my Absence from thence, to have heard from you, but your greater Imployments, and the Burthen of a higher Du∣ty that lyeth upon you, do speak sufficiently in your behalf. If you can steal any time from your Pastoral Function to give Perfection and Life, to many of your exquisite Labours, there liveth no man who would more re∣joyce at the News thereof than my self. I hear by common Fame, That there is somewhat published against you this Mart; but the Catalogue is now come o∣ver, and proves Fame a Lyar. The Arch-Bishop of Spal. his great promised Work is in the Press here at London, and will come abroad before the End of the Term. It will be as large as Bellarmin's Work. Laurentius Beyerlinke, who stiles himself Archipresbyter Antuerpiensis, hath begun the Fight against the Arch-Bishop. I know not whether you have seen his Book or no. There came but a few over. I only saw it, but could not buy it for Money. He is much threatned by the Jesuits in all Countries of Christendom. I doubt not but you have heard of the Ambassage of Sir John Bennet to Bruxels to question the Arch-Duke in the Behalf of the King our Master, concerning the late Book of Patianus, who neither apprehended the Author, nor suppressed the Book, until he was sollicited by the Kings Agent, and only interdicted the Book, and suffered the Author to fly his Dominions. On Munday the 13th. of April, in the King's Chamber of Presence at the tower in Paris, the Mar∣quess d' Ancre, a Man of no obscure Fame, was murthered with a Pistol, by the Hands of Mouns. de Vitri his old professed Enemy, whose death will give a great assistance to the much desired Peace in France. A Synod of the Re∣formed Churches began at Rochel the 28th. of the last Month; wherein will be handled the Cause of the Princes in the late Stirres. Sir John Digby makes Preparation for his Journey into Spain, to treat of a Marriage, which (to give you my Opinion) I think is unfeignedly intended on our Part, but whether by them or no, the Doctors doubt, as the Saying is. Sir Walter Raleigh is now at Southampton, and the Ships of his Fleet follow him daily from hence, and other parts. The action is most distastful to the Spaniards beyond any that we have undertaken these many years, and hath receiv∣ed strong Opposition from the Spanish Ambassador, and some of our own, who have sucked in too much Spanish Air. We hear that two Scottish Earls, Angus and Morton, both of the Family of Douglas, have lately withdrawn themselves out of their Country, and are gone into France. This place is now grown somewhat solitary; and therefore if my Advertisements be some∣what trivial, I hope you will afford them a favourable Interpretation. I desire to be esteemed a Servant to your Love, and will ever be ready (I make profession) to declare my self Your true affectionate Friend, while I am Henry Bourgchier. London, the 31th. of May 1617.
LETTER XXV. A Letter from Mr. William Crashaw, Preacher at the Temple, to Dr. James Usher. Salutem in Christo. Sir, THese be some of the Points I would have conferred with you in. 1. Whereas the Oath for the Clergy in the Council of Trent, it runs thus, Credo, &c. Sanctam Cath. Ap. Romanam Ecclesiam, &c. Our Men say Luther and others were not perjured: For that Romana was then put in, and not in afore when they took it: I pray shew me where any such Oath or Creed is extant of theirs that hath it not in 2. What Credit is to be given to the Life of St. George extant in Lipoma∣nus, printed at Rome, 1558. translated, he saith, out of Metaphrastes and what Evidence in Story you find of Alexandra, an Empress, Wife to Dio∣clesian 3. What found Evidence have you of Cyril the Monk his Evangelium Aeter∣num, and whether it is extant more than in Gul. de S. Amore 4. Who was the Author of that Hellish Libel, De tribus Mundi Impo∣storibus, and whether you ever saw it 5. What Author have you more than Scaliger, that Mysterium in Greek was written within on the fore-part of the Pope's Crown And what cer∣tainty of Proof conceive you to be in that Testimony of Scaliger 6. What Evidence have you, that the 4 Book of Esdras, refused both by Us and the Church of Rome, was written before Christ; if it were, Why then is it refused as non-Canonical, seeing such plain and pregnant Pro∣phecies are in it, and such as no Power but Divine could foretel, especially that of the 12 Caesars, cap. 11 Of these things I pray consider, and when you have leisure, write me what you conceive, that so I may not lose it; I lent you Josseline de Vitis. Archiep. Cant. in Fol. which you said you lent Dr. Mocket and I believe it, yet I could never get it; and now I find my Book at Mr. Edwards his Shop, near Duke-Lane, and he saith he bought it with Dr. Moc∣ket's Library, but I cannot have it. Happily you might by your Testimony prevail to get it me, for I charged him not to fell it: I pray think of it, as you go that way. Thus longing to see you, and till you send me Word what day you will be here, I commend us to God, and am Yours in Christ, William Crashaw.
LETTER XXVI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Gataker to Dr. James Usher, afterward Arch Bishop of Armagh. Health in Christ.Worthy Sir, I Esteem my self much beholden unto you, as for your former love, so for this your late kindness, in vouchsafeing me so large a Letter, with so full instructions concerning this business, that I was bold to break unto you, though the same, as by your information appeareth, were wholly su∣perfluous. True it is, that though not fully purposed to do ought therein my self, willing rather to have afforded mine endeavours and furtherance to some o∣thers, I supposed that those two treatises, viz. that Oration of the Bishops, and that of Wilhelm of S. Amore. his might be not unworthy the publishing, had the one been perfect, and the other not yet published, (for as for that of Parisiensis de prebendis, I had heard to be already abroad: and Gesner in his Bibliotheca hath tractatus 2. Argentin. impress. 1507 de collatione & pluralitate Eccles. beneficiorum, which may seem the same, one of them with this. As it is said to be gemma pretiosior in that Manuscript you speak of, so to be auro pret. in mine.) But I perceive now by your instructions, that the one is out already, and the other perfect and fit for the Press, in the hands of one better furnished and fitter for the performance of such a work than my self, whom I would therefore rather incite to send what he hath perfect, a∣broad, than by his perfect Copy, having pieced out mine imperfect one, to take his Labours out of his hand. I have heard since I Wrote to you by Mr. Bill, that Sir Henry Savil is about to publish Bishop Grosthead's Epistles, out of a Manuscript remaining in Merton Colledge Library. That treatise de oculo morali, I lighted lately on, in another Manuscript bound together with Grosthead in Decalog. having this Title before it, Incipit Liber de Oculo morali, quem composuit Magister Petrus de Sapiere Lemovicensis. And I find it cited by Petrus Reginaldeti, a Friar, in his Speculum finalis retributionis, under the name of Johannes de Pechano, as the Author of it. Neither seemeth it, though written honestly, yea wittily and learnedly, as the wit and learn∣ing of those times was, to be of the same frame and strain for gravity, that other the works of that Bishop are; which also maketh me suspect those Sermons, that in my Manuscript go under his name, should not be his, ha∣ving lately at idle times run over some of them. If I meet with your Coun∣try-man Malachy at any time, I will not be unmindful of your request. And if any good Office may be performed by me for you here, either about the Impression of your Learned and Religious Labours, (so esteemed and much de∣sired, not of my self alone, but of many others of greater judgment than my self,) or in any other imployment, that my weak ability may extend it self unto, I shall be ready and glad upon any occasion to do my best therein. I lighted of late upon an obscure fellow, one Hieronymus Dungersheim de Och∣senfart, who in Anno 1514 published a confutation dedicated to George, then Duke of Saxony, of a confession of the Picards, which whether it be the same with that which Gretser saith Luther set out with his Preface, I wot not: The Title of it is, Totius quasi Scripturae Apologia, and the be∣ginning
of it, In summi Dei maximo nomine & terribili, Amen. Nos homines in terrae or be quanquam ad ima subacti, &c. And though it be not entirely, in∣serted by him in his answer, yet so much is picked out of it, and set down in their words, as may shew in divers main points their dissent from them, and consent with us. But it is not likely, that this Author, though obscure and not worthy the Light, hath escaped your curious eye. Gesner seemeth mis∣taken in him, when he saith, Hieronymus Dungersheim scripsit Apologiam sa∣crae Scripturae Boemorum, for he wrote not it, but against it. But I trouble you, it may be unseasonably, with needless trifles, amids your more serious Affairs, which forbearing therefore to do, further at this present, with hearty Salutations, and my best Prayers unto God, I commend you and your god∣ly Labours to his gracious Blessing, and rest Your assured Friend and Unworthy Fellow-Labourer in the Lord, Tho. Gatacre. Rederith June 24. 1617. LETTER XXVII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Lydyat to Dr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutations in Christ. Reverend Mr. Usher, I Received both your Letters; and as touching your discourse in the latter, about the beginning of Artaxerxes's Reign, and Daniel's weeks, and the time of our Lord's Passion, &c. depending thereupon, I framed mine answer to your former discourse therebout, in your Letter bearing date, Octob. 6. 1615. upon the ground of your opinion, which I gathered out of the Words thereof: Darius hath there (in Ptolemy's Canons) 36 years, and Xerxes 21 which maketh me somewhat to stagger at your beginning of Artaxerxes. Which words I could not otherwise understand, than that they had drawn Artaxerxes's Beginning back again, in your conceit, unto the vulgar Station, lower than I had advanced it, upon the grounds mentioned in the beginning of your last Letter, and that place of Fast. Sicul. which either I had not marked, or else had neglected and forgotten. And to the same purpose seems unto me to tend that you inferr in the same Letter, upon Cimon's taking Eione and Scyrus, in the beginning of his Admiralty, first mentioned by Diodorus Siculus in De∣motion's year. Whence it would follow, That the Siege of Naxos, and The∣mistocles's Flight at the same time, was later, and the Victory at Eurymedon yet later than that. My Manuscript Chronicle being the third part of my Trea∣tise de Emendat. Tempor. after my first project, wherein I have wholly transla∣ed those places of Thucydides and Diodorus, concerning Themistocles's Flight, I did communicate unto you; if I have not much forgotten my self, and if I be not much deceived, you shall find that part of my Translation, agreable both to Diodorus his Words, and to the Truth. Wherefore it made me marvel, that in the latter part of the same Letter, you now go about contra∣riwise, to set Themistocles's Flight, according to Eusebius's Chronicle, and con∣sequently the beginning of Artaxerxes, according to Thucydides, two or three years higher, at what time I supposed his troubles began, about the Arraign∣ment
and Examination of Pausanias, and so much the more, that for your purpose you alledge Aurelius Probus or Cornelius Nepos, affirming Themistocles to have been expelled Athens, four years before Aristides's Death, and the beginning of Perieles's Government; which falling out just upon the very same year of my supposal, strongly confirmeth the same; and so much the more strongly, for that his Words seem to have direct reference to those of Thucydides. Erat enim Themistocles patriâ puisus per ostracismum, Argis vitam agens, & per caeteram Peloponnesum commeans. Whereas therefore Cornelius Nepos his account casts Themistocles's expulsion or exostracism from Athens, right upon that same year, after which time, saith Thucydides, he lived at Argis, and was going up and down about Peloponnesus: needs must his Pursuit and Flight be supposed a good space after that, upon the Execution of Pausanias, whose first plotting of Treason and endictment thereupon, whereabout was long and much ado before his Execution, seem to have be fallen the 4th. year of the 75 Olympiad: Where Diodorus relateth his whole History together, according to his manner. But that, that made me most of all to marvel, was, that by your thus urging Artaxerxes's beginning together with Themistocles's Flight, two or three years higher than my Pitch, you not only utterly discredit your Ptolemy's Canons, for giving 36 years to Darius and 21 to Xerxes, together with Diodorus and Eusebius, but also all other Authors of Antiquity that I know, whereof none ascribes less than 31 to Da∣rius, and 20 to Xerxes, which hereby, whether upon oversight or otherwise, you enforce your self to do; namely subtracting two or three years more from Xerxes, leaving him scarce 15. whose Authorities and Testimonies, together with the other reasons, that I have in place alledged, will, I trust, in the end prevail with you, to move and draw you, to assent to the truth which I have delivered, concerning the beginning and ending of Daniel's weeks, and the time of the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord and Saviour Christ, with all the dependences thereupon. For certainly how weak soever I the restorer and publisher thereof am, yet it is strong and will prevail; and notwithstand∣ing mine obscure estate, in due time, the Clouds and Mists of errors being dispersed and vanished, it will shine forth as bright as the clear Sun at Noon∣tyde. As touching the Books you wrote for, I told this Messenger that I meant to send them, and therefore I appointed him to call for them, together with my Letter this Day. But since I have altered my purpose, not envying you the sight of them, but expecting your coming into England ere long as of custom, once within three or four years: at which time I shall be glad to shew you them, and to confer them together with your Ptolemy's Canons. In the mean time if you have any more urgent occasion, of desiring to be re∣solved of any thing in them, do but acquaint me with your purpose, what you would prove out of them, and I will truly give my best diligence to  what may be found in them for the same; and so save you that Labour on seeking, which I suppose you may better bestow otherwise, and so I trust I shall deserve better of you, than if I sent you the Books. Thus desiring your daily Prayers, as you have mine, for Gods blessing, to bend our Studies to the best ends, and make them most profitable to the setting forth of his glory and the good of his Church and of our Countries, I take leave of you for this time, resting Yours to be commanded in all Christian duties. Thomas Lydyan.  July 8, 1617.
LETTER XXVIII. Mr. William Eyres Letter to Dr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Eximio Doctori Domino Jacobo Usserio Guilielmus Eyre S. P. D. Praestantissime Domine; FAteor me tibi plus debere quàm verbis exprimere possim, etiamsi centiès ad te quotannis literas darem, idque non solùm propter privatae be∣nevolentiae erga me tuae fructus uberrimos, sed etiam ob magnitudinem tuo∣rum erga nos omnes qui Theologiae studiosi sumus meritorum. Macte vir∣tute tua, faxitque Christus Opt. Max. (cujus sub vexillo militamus) ut Scripta tua polemica cedant in nominis sui gloriam, & Antichristi interitum, quo de in Sibyllinus memini me legisse, , quod de scrip∣tis doctissimorum Virorum quidam interpretantur. Nos hic plerique omnes (ut opinor) preces fundimus, dum vos, sive gubernatores, sive nautae, vel clavum tenetis, vel per foros cursitatis, &c. & navali praelio dimicatis. preces & lachrymae, arma nunquam magis necessaria fuerunt, quàm in hac in exulceratissima tempestate & omnium pessimâ morum corruptelâ. Serenissimus Rex noster Jacobus jam denuò collegium illud Chelseiense prope Londinum, Theologorum Gratia, qui controversiis dent operam, ador∣nare & locupletare coepit. Matthaeus Sutlivius ea in re nullum lapidem im∣motum relinquit. Quid fiet nescio. Res agitur per Regias literas ad Episco∣pos apud Clerum, & eorum operâ apud subditos ditiores, ut opus tandem perficiatur. Forsan majora adhuc à vobis in Dubliniensi Collegio, quàm ab illis Chelseiensibus expectare possumus, quamdiù vivit acviget amicus ille meus, de quo Draxus quidam nostras, in libello nuper edito, lumen illud Irlandiae, & in Academia Dubliniensi Professor regius, Theologus tam  ut sive scripta sive disputationem requiras, idoneus est, qui cum tota Papistarum natione concertet. Sed quid ego haec autem ne quicquam ingrata revolvo Me quod atinet, ita nuper, praesertim per integrum annum novissime elapsum & eo plus & secularibus negotiis quotidianis, contra genium & volunta∣tem meam & concionibus ad populum nimis (ut videtur) frequentibus, quasi demersus fuerim ut nihil in Hebraicis quaestionibus me posse videar; atque in quibusdam absque te, quem pure indigitare possim , ita haeret aqua, ut ulterius progredi non liceat: fas sit igitur mihi Oraculum tuum consulere, & limatissimum judicium tuum expiscari. Nolo tamen in hoc tem∣pore diutiùs te interpellare. Gratulor tibi ex animo & purpuram tuam & costam illam, quam tibi Deus restituit,  Cura Valetudinem. Gratia Jesu Christi sit cum omnibus vobis. Amen. G. Eyres. Colcestriae 170 die Augusti, 1617.
LETTER XXIX. A Letter from Mr. Edward Warren to Dr. James Usher, afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh, at St. Patricks. Reverend Sir, THat the Beast which was, and is not, and yet is, should be Romanus Pon∣tifex, I like your Conjecture very well, and the Ground seems to me firm, and such as I may tread safely on. And that which you quote out of Dionys. Halicarnas. touching his Immunity, brought me to consider better of his Office and Authority set down by Livy, (lib. 1.)—Caetera quoque omnia publica privataque sacra pontificis scitis subjecit [Numa:] ut esset quò con∣sultum Plebs veniret: ne quid divini juris negligendo patrios ritus peregri∣nósque asciscendo turbaretur. Which in my conceit is some Resemblance of that Head-ship which the latter Pontifex now challengeth to himself. In the other Part I take all to be clear, save only that I stick somewhat at the Accommodation of those Words, (pag. 10.) That when he cometh, he shall continue but a short Space. I heartily thank you, that for my satisfa∣ction you have taken so much Pains. Your poor Friend Edward Warren. Kilkenny. Novemb. 4. 1617. The God of Peace be with you. Usserii notae. Of Pontifex Maximus see Plutarch. in Vitâ Numae, Ciceronem in orat. pro domo, apud Pont. et de aruspic. Resp. Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. 1. Georg. Fabrice observat. lect. Virgil. Aenead. 6. Insolentia & superbia eorum abiit in Proverbium. (Horat. Od. 2. 14.) —Mero Tinget pavimentum superbo Pontificum potiore Coenis. Vid. loc. ubi Interpres not at proelautas coenas Proverbio Pontificales appellari solitas. Exemplum hujus Coenae vide in Macrobio, lib. 2. Saturnal. cap. 9. LETTER XXX. A Letter from Dr. James Usher, afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Thomas Lydyat, Rector of Askerton in Oxford-shire. Salutem in Christo. AS I was now going out of the House, I met with Robert Allen, who told me he was to go presently for England, and required my Letters unto you. I have nothing that upon this sudden I can well write of, but the
renewing of my former Request for those two Books which I wrote for in my two former Letters. And therefore according to the Form which our Ca∣nonists use in their Court Proceedings,—Peto, primò, secundò, & tertio, in∣stantèr, instantiùs, & instantissimè, That you will let me have the use of your Geminus and Albategnius, which shall (God willing) be returned un∣to you as safely and as speedily as you shall desire, which I hope you will the rather condescend unto, because I have no purpose to see England these many Years: the contrary Report whereunto, was the chief Cause wherefore you deferred the sending of those Books by the former Messenger. And so nothing doubting, but you will yield at last to my earnest Request, I bid you hear∣tily farewel, resting ever Your assured loving Friend and Brother, James Usher. Scripsi raptim Dominici Adventûs Anno Domini 1617. LETTER XXXI. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to Dr. James Usher, after∣wards Arch-Bishop of Armagh, at Dublin. Worthy Sir, HAD the Opportunity of convenient Messengers concurr'd with my Desires, my Letters should have come faster to your Hands than they have done; and what hath been wanting of that Respect which absent Friends yield one another, I do assure you hath been supplied by an affe∣ctionate Desire in me to enjoy your Company, together with the Remem∣brance of those many happy Hours, which I have spent with you. I had once hop'd to have seen you this Winter, but my necessary Occasions in Eng∣land, with the Difficulties of a Winter Journey, are like to detain me here until the Spring; where, if my Service may be useful or advantageous to you, it shall be as absolutely at your Command, as any Friend of yours that lives. I doubt not, but you have heard much of the troublesome Estate of the Low-Country Churches, by their Diversity of Opinions, and what Tumults had like to have ensued; or rather are like to ensue, for the Tempest is not yet over-blown; and had not the opposite Faction to the Ar∣minian, by them termed vulgarly Gomarians, shewed a great deal of Tempe∣rance, and Patience, much Effusion of Christian Blood had followed. I suppose you have seen Sir Dud. Carlton's Speech in the last General Assembly at the Hague, which is answered by H. Grotius in Print: He is a Professor in Leyden, very inward with Mouns. Barneveldt, and by name (I think) well known to you: And 14 of the 18 Cities, which send their Deputies to the General Assembly, have publickly protested against any National, or Pro∣vincial Synods, which shall be called. About a Fortnight since, the Heads and others of the University of Cambridge, were summon'd to appear before his Majesty at New-market, where, at their coming, they were required to deliver their Opinions concerning Mouns. Barneveldt's Confession, lately sent over to the King, to which, as I am informed, many of them did subscribe; and principally Dr. Richardson, the Kings Professor, for which he either hath already, or is in some Danger of losing his Place. I know not whether you have
seen the Book called Analecta Sacra, published the last Mart, if you can discover the Author I pray you let me know him. I have written to a Friend of mine at Paris, to enquire at the Printers, where the Book was printed of the Author. With much difficulty I obtained one of them, which you should have received, had I not been constrained to bestow it otherwise. Here in England there is little written or published in any kind of Learning. In eve∣ry Parish-Church there are now Sums of Money collected for Chelsey Col∣ledge, but I see no Addition to the Work. Our kind Friend, Mr. Briggs, hath lately published a Supplement to the most excellent Tables of Logarithms, which I presume he hath sent you. Suarez's Book against the King, is now grown common by the late German Impression; which if you please you may have. The Popish Writers having sharpned their Weapons, being now to strike, with sharp Invectives, our Arch-Bishop of Spalato, after their wonted manners, and now openly charge him with Apostacy, and revolt from their Religion. He hath not obtained any Ecclesiastical Promotion, nor, for ought I hear, desireth any; but rather to end his Days in a retired and solitary Exile. Since the return of Digby into Spain, there is little known of the Progress of our Affairs there; neither of Sir Walter Raleigh, since the Return of Captain Bayly from him, if I may give his unworthy running away so honest a name. Sir, both I and my Messenger stand upon Thorns, as they say, being both presently to begin our Journeys; he for Ireland, I for the West of England, where I mean to spend this Festival time; which I hope shall excuse my Rudeness in Writing, both for Matter and Manner. When I come to a place of more leisure, you shall hear from me. In the mean time, let me live in your good Opinion, as one who truly loves you, and will ever declare himself Your truly affectionate and faithful Friend, Henry Bourgchier. London the 6th. of December 1617. LETTER XXXII. A Letter from Mr. William Eyres to Dr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Eximio Sacr. Theologiae Professori, & amico suo singulari, Domino Jacobo Usserio, S. RAMUS iste tuus & noster, qui brevi (ut opinor) ad nos in Angliam reversurus est, absque grati animi mei significatione aliqua, pro singu∣lari tuâ erga me clementiâ & benignitate, non est dimittendus. Gratulor verò tibi (charissime frater!) felicitatem tuam, qui in regione minùs culta, & variis motibus perturbatâ natus & educatus, nobis hic in florentissimo Regno, totique orbi Christiano facem Divinae intelligentiae in rebus maximè necessariis praebuisti; ac etiamnum porrò (uti speramus, & expectamus) praebiturus es. Intelligo doctissimas tuas lucubrationes, tanquam stellas toti∣dem
lucidissimas. Macte Virtute istâ tuâ, Christo optimo Maximo duce in omnibus. Nos hic Semipagani qui ad stivam religati sumus, Rusticos in Christianae fidei fundamentalibus, & in timore Domini instruimus. Plerique hic ferè omnes Papismum detestantur. Sit nomen Domini benedictum. Contra Papatum quotidie concionamur. Neminem habemus repugnantem: omnes consentientes. Caeterum valde multi sunt, qui odio Papismi plusquam Vatiniano (ut ita dicam) flagrant, ut solenniorem Dei cultum nullo modo ferre possint. Hinc omne genus ne∣quitiae caput sustollere taxim occoepit. Multi qui contra Papisticam superstitio∣nem invehuntur, contra rapinam, sacrilegium, luxuriam, ebrietatem, gulam, arrogantiam, superbiam, avaritiam, usuram, & id genus enormia, ne protestan∣tur quidem. Sed quorsum haec Manum de Tabula. Verbum sapienti sat est, satque habet favitorum semper qui rectè agit. Quid nos in votis habemus, postmodum accipies. Interea verò, in Jesu Christo Domino ac sospitatore nostro benè vale. Fraterculus tibi multis nominibus devinctissimus, Guilielmus Eyres. Colcestriae 21. die Aprilis, 1618. LETTER XXXIII. A Letter from Dr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. William Camden. My dear and worthy Friend, I Have been earnestly intreated by Dr. Rives to send this inclosed▪ Letter unto you. He hath had his Education in New-Colledge in the Univer∣sity of Oxford, where he took his Degree of Doctor in the Civil Law. He is now one of the Masters of the Chancery with us, and Judge of the Faculties and Prerogative Court. Two things, he told me, he was very desirous to be certified of from you; the one, In what sort you would have him answer that Calumniation of our Irish Libeller, where he intimateth, that you dissemble your Religion, and write otherwise than you think, delusus Spe hujus secult, et mundani honor is lenocinio illectus. The other, What you think of our great St. Patrick and of his Miracles. Touching the former, I assured him of my own knowledge, that you were wrong'd most shamefully: what you did you did out of Judgment, and not led by any such base Respect as you were charged withal; and that I knew for certain, that with your heart you embraced the Religion which by Au∣thority is maintained in the Church of England. For the latter, I gave him good leave to discredit as much as he list, that Pack of ridiculous Miracles which latter Writers had fastned upon St. Patrick; but wished him in no wise to touch the Credit of that worthy man himself, nor to question his Succession to Palladius, nor to cast him unto lower Times, contrary to the consent of all Writers that ever make Mention of him. And to this end, I shewed unto him what I had gathered together to this purpose, in a Treatise
which I lately wrote at the Request of Dr. Hampton, Lord Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh, of the first Planters of the Christian Faith in Ireland, and specially, of St. Patrick and his Successors in the See of Armagh: but one word from you will satisfie him more than a hundred from me; and therefore let me in∣treat you, that you would here erranti comiter monstrare viam. You easily may see what little Credit the Testimony (or the Silence rather) of so late an Author as Platina is, may carry to bear down the constant agrement of all our own Writers. The Objection would be far more specious, if it were drawn from the Silence of venerable Bede, who making express Mention both in his History and his Chronicle of Palladius, speaketh nothing at all of Patricius. Yet have I seen in Sir Robert Cotton's Library an ancient Frag∣ment written before the time of Bede, wherein St. Patrick is not only men∣tioned, but also made to be as ancient in time as hitherto we have still be∣lieved him to have been. It was found among Mr. Josseline's Papers: and is now bound up in blew Leather, with other Antiquities. If you can come by the Book, and will be pleased to transcribe that place of it where the Tradition of the Liturgy from Man to Man is described (for there this Mention of St. Patrick is to be found) either that or nothing will give full Satisfaction to our Doctor. The Company of Stationers in London are now erecting a Factory for Books and a Press among us here: Mr. Felix Kingston, and some others are sent over for that Purpose. They begin with the printing of the Statutes of the Realm; afterwards they purpose to fall in Hand with my Collections De Christianarum Ecclesiarum Successione & Statu. I do intreat you of all Love, to look over the first Edition; and what you find I have mistaken, or what you think may be further added out of the Antiquities which you have met withal, signifie unto me. I wrote unto you to this purpose about four years since, by a Kinsman of mine, Mr. John Brereton: at which time also I desi∣red to understand from you, Whether it were possible to get the Copy of the Epistles to the Monks of Glastenbury, attributed to St. Patrick, which I remem∣ber you told me you had sometimes seen. But since that time I have heard nothing from you. If you will be pleased at this time to write unto me, or to Dr. Rives, (who earnestly expecteth your Answer) you may leave your Let∣ters at my Lord Knevet's House in Westminster, there to be delivered unto Sir Henry Docwra, our Treasurer at Wars; who will take Order that they shall be safely conveyed unto me. And thus craving Pardon for my Bold∣ness in troubling you thus far, I take my Leave for this time, resting always. Your most loving and firm Friend, James Usher. Dublin, June 8. 1618.
LETTER XXXIV. A Letter from Mr. William Camden to Dr. James Usher, afterward Arch-Bishop of Armagh. My most esteemed good Mr. Dr. YOur loving Letter of the Eighth of June I received the Fourth of July, being retired into the Country for the recovery of my tender health, where portum anhelans beatadinis, I purposed to sequester my self from Worldly business and cogitations. Yet being somewhat recovered, I could not but answer your love, and Mr. Doctor Rieves Letter for your sake, with the few lines herein enclosed, which I submit to your censure. I thank God my life hath been such among men, as I am neither ashamed to live, nor fear to die, being secure in Christ my Saviour, in whose true Re∣ligion I was born and bred in the time of King Edward VI. and have conti∣nued firm therein. And to make you my Confessor sub sigillo Confessionis, I took my Oath thereunto at my Matriculation in the University of Oxon. (when Popery was predominant) and for defending the Religion established, I lost a fellowship in All-Souls, as Sir Daniel Dun could testifie, and often would relate how I was there opposed by the Popish Faction. At my coming to Westminster I took the like Oath, where (absit jactantia) God so blessed my labours, that the now Bishops of London, Durham, and St. Asaph, to say nothing of persons employed now in eminent place abroad, and many of especial note at home of all degrees; do acknowledge themselves to have been my Scholars. Yea, I brought there to Church divers Gentlemen of Ireland, as Walshes, Nugents, O Raily, Shees, the eldest Son of the Arch-Bishop of Cassiles, Petre Lombard a Merchants Son of Waterford, a youth of admirable docility, and others bred Popishly, and so affected. I know not who may justly say that I was ambitious, who contented my self in Westminster School when I writ my Britannia, and eleven years after∣ward: Who refused a Mastership of Requests offered, and then had the place of a King of Arms, without any suit cast upon me. I did never set sail after present preferments, or desired to soar higher by others. I never made suit to any man, no not to his Majesty, but for a matter of course incident to my place, neither (God be praised) I needed, having gathered a contented suf∣ficiency by my long labours in the School. Why the Annalectist should so censure me I know not, but that men of all humours repair unto me in re∣spect of my place; and rest content to be belied by him, who is not ashamed to belie the Lords Deputies of Ireland and others of honourable rank. Sed haec tibi uni & soli. That I might give you better satisfaction, I sent my Servant with directi∣ons to my Study at Westminster, who found this which I have herein inclosed. Which if they may stead you I shall be right glad. As my health will per∣mit I will look over your learned Treatise De Christianarum Ecclesiarum Suc∣cessione. But such hath been your happy industry therein, that I have little hope to add any thing, and less to observe any mistaking. Thus with my salutations to your good self, and my respectful love remembred to Sir Ar∣thur Savage, I rest Your true and devoted Friend, William Camden. Chesilhurst July 10. 1618.
LETTER. XXXV. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Warren to Dr. James Usher, after- Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Sir, I Have read carefully what Arminius hath written De justitia & efficacia providentiae Dei in malo. Yet in that I read him for especially, he leaves me as doubtful as he found me. For where he saith, Quum soepenumero futu∣rum Pag. 96. sit, ut creatura non omnino in malo obdurata actum quia peccato junctus sit patrare nolit, nisi argumentis quibusdam & occasionibus, quae velut incitamenta sint ad illum patrandum, objectis; istius quo{que} objectionis administratio penes Dei providentiam est, qui irritamenta ista objicit: In these words (if I mi∣stake him not) he will have it, That God casts Stumbling-blocks in the way of them that of themselves would have gone upright, of purpose to provoke them to do evil; which, taken together with his foreknowledge of the event, in my apprehension seems very harsh, and flat contrary to the Scripture, Jam. 1. 13. Indeed if God, foreseeing both what arguments and occasions in∣citing unto sin, would by ordinary course of Nature, or free-will, come in the way of him that for the present meant no such evil; and likewise, that un∣less his Providence hindered, he would be thereby overcome; I say, if God, foreseeing all this, should with-hold his preventing interposition, it were no more than bare permission, the justice whereof cannot be called in question. And if this seem too little, it might haply be farther granted, istius objectio∣nis administrationem penes Dei providentiam esse, (to use his own words) though I cannot think what bounds are thereunto due: but that he should irritamenta ista objicere, cum creatura actum peccato junctum ex se patrare no∣lit, It seems to me very hard to grant, and he as hardly to maintain the justice of it, pag. 102. & 114. But of the extent, and justice of his Admini∣stration in this point, I would your leisure served to send me your opinion; you shall both pleasure me, and do God service in it. So commending you to his Protection and Grace, I rest, and shall be Ever at Your Service, Edward Warren. Kilkenny Sept. 1. 1610. I have sent you Arminius by this Bearer, James Congame.
LETTER XXXVI. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton, Bishop of Che∣ster to Dr. James Usher, late Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo Jesu. Sir, I Do heartily thank you for your double pains in writing, which is your kindness beyond any single desert of my part; and I must twice thank you for the young Batchelor, who hath approved himself, since his coming hither, to be indeed very commendable. Your manifold Imployments spe∣cified in your Letters, will not suffer me to be too large in these of mine, lest I might morari tua tempora. Truly I cannot but admire your exceeding pains, and bless God for his Graces in you. The Synod in the low Countries is held at Dort, the most of their Suffragators are already Assembled, the manner of their proceedings is methodically ordered; the Remonstrants (excepting some few) do ex∣empt themselves. I think to hold universal grace quoad revelationem nega∣tivè, as importing that no Soul can be said particularly to be excluded, may sufficiently qualifie the violence of oppositions. I shall long to see you with me, that I may enjoy the comfort of your presence; I pray you, if it be pos∣sible, satisfie my desire: In the interim, and always, I pray our Lord Jesus to preserve us to the glory of his Saving Grace, and rest Your loving Friend, Tho. Cestrensis. Chester, Decemb. 15. 1618. LETTER XXXVII. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to Dr. James Usher, at Dublin. Good Mr. Dr. Usher, MY kindest salutations premised. These are to signifie unto you, That I received at Dort the Letter you sent me, though a long time after the date. As touching the Additions and Corrections Upon Euse∣bius's Chroni∣cle. which J. Scaliger left with Gomarus; I understand by him, that they shall shortly be published. He hath delivered them to a Printer at Leyden, who is to print them. The Additions are many, as he telleth me, almost as many as are already set forth. Chamierus was not at the Synod, and I cannot learn whether any such ancient Writings of the Albigenses were left with him. As for that which you de∣sired to be transcribed out of Paulus Alexandrinus, concerning the method of the Alexandrian Year, I being at Leyden after the Synod, was desirous to have spoken with Meursius; but enquiring for him of Mr. Joannes Latius, one of our Synod, he told me he would go to Meursius, and transcribe it, and send it me into England; for he thought it not seasonable to go to him that day, being the day of Bernevelt's Execution, whose Sons Meursius had been
Tutor unto. When I receive the Transcript from Latius, I will send it you. It may be you will be desirous to know the remarkable passages of the Sy∣nod, which will be shortly published, both the Acts, and the Canons con∣cluded upon touching the five Articles: We had somewhat to do when we came to frame Canons, with the Provincials, and some of the Exteri, touch∣ing some points, especially touching the second Article. Some of us were held by some half Remonstrants, for extending the Oblation made to the Fa∣ther, to all; and for holding sundry effects thereof offered seriò, and some really communicated to the reprobate. I had somewhat to do with a prin∣cipal man touching this point; somewhat passed in writing between us pri∣vately. We were careful that nothing should be defined which might gain∣say the Confession of the Church of England: which was effected, for that they were desirous to have all things in the Canons defined unanimi consensu. We foreign Divines, after the Subscription of the Canons, and a general ap∣probation of the Belgick Confession, and Catechism (which is the Palatine's) as containing no Dogmata repugnant to the Word of God, and a Decree a∣gainst Vorstius's Doctrine, chiefly that in his Book De Deo, were dismissed. In our approbation of the Belgick Confession, our consent was only asked for Doctrinals, not for matters touching Discipline. We had a solemn parting in the Synod, and all was concluded with a solemn Feast. This was upon Thursday April 29. The Saturday we went to the Hague to take our leaves of the States General, where we resolved, while our Ship was made ready, to see Leyden, Amsterdam and Harlem, which we did the week following. Up∣on the Monday we purposing to go for Leyden, early in the morning were informed, that Bernevelt, was to lose his head that morning, which was executed. Upon the tenth of May we loosed from the Bril, and arrived at Gravesend the thirteenth of May: And visited his Majesty at Greenwich as we came by, who graciously did receive us. And thus, I thank God, we are safely returned to our homes. And here with my hearty salutations, I com∣mend you to the gracious Protection of the highest Majesty. Your assured, ever-loving Friend, Samuel Ward. Sidney Colledge May 26. 1619. LETTER XXXVIII. A Letter from Dr. James Usher to Mr. Thomas Lydyat: Salutem, à Salutis fonte D. N. Jesu Christo. Dear Sir, I Do acknowledge my self much bound unto you for the Loan of your Ge∣minus and Albategnius (the Reading whereof hath given me a great deal of Contentment) but most of all for your kind Letter (delivered unto me by Robert Allen, the 3d. of July last) wherein you so gently pass over my great Error in detaining your Books so long from you. I will not make any long Apology for my self, and excuse my Negligence by want of Op∣portunity of a fit Messenger: your love having covered my Offence already
I may spare my Labour in covering any further. Now at length therefore I return your Books unto you again, with a thousand Thanks; and heartily do wish that I may have some Occasion offered on my part to gratify you in the same kind. In the mean time I send you Ptolomy's Canon Regum, so often cited by Dr. Rainolds in his Lectures: a Copy whereof I received from Bishop Overal (lately deceased) transcribed by Mr. Rich. Mountague out of Sir Henry Savils Manuscript of the . In the same Volume is Theon also upon those Canons, whence Sir Henry Savil himself hath sent me certain Notes de Ratione anni Alexandrini; touching which also within these three daies I received from Meursius a Greek Discourse of the Scholiasts against Paulus Alexandrinus, who wrote in the Year of the World (according the Account of the Grecians) 6659, Dioclesiani 867, (hoc est Aerae nostrae 1151.) This latter doth contain but ordinary Stuff: in Theon the Principal thing that I observe is the time of the Concurrence of the beginning of the Ae∣gyptian and the Alexandrian year, (hoc est anni vagi et fixi) noted by him in these Words. , or (as he otherwise expresseth it) . For, ab initio aerae Philippicae, , he reckoneth with Ptolomy annos 294, but 299 . That from this  we must deduce Caput aerae Alkept apud Albateg∣nium, which by him is placed annis 287. (587, 387. your Book hath the first Figure being set down inconstantly and falsly, the other two constantly and truly) post aeram Dhilcarnain, I make little question: howsoever I be not yet fully resolved whether I should referr the same to the beginning or the ending of the fifth year of Augustus, that is, whether I should begin it à Thoth anni 299. or 300. oerae Philippicoe: for in both of them, the first of Thoth fell upon the same day, tam in anno vago, quam in fixo; in the former upon August 30, feria 5a, (which is the Character oerae Alkept in Albategnius; if the number be not de∣praved) in the latter upon August 29, feria 6a, unto which I rather incline; because by this means we shall keep straight the beginning of Dhilkarnain, which by Albategnius his Account certainly doth incurr in annum periodi Julianoe 4402, twelve years after the Death of Alexander (as himself setteth down fol. 43. lin. 4. and you do acknowledge to be true) whereas by the former Hypothesis it must be referred to the Year 4401, (contrary to the meaning of Albategnius) eleven Years after Alexander's Death. That the Aegyptians received the use of their annus aequabilis from Nabo∣nasar; or that the Babylonians did ever use that Form of Year, I think will hardly be proved. If that be true which Eratosthenes writeth  (apud Geminum pag. 127.) that the Aegyptians sometime celebrated their Isia , using this manner of year, it must needs be that they used this Form of year before the time of Nabo∣nasar. For the 17th. day of Athyr (to which you rightly refer the begin∣ning of that—I could never concurr with the Summer Solstice betwixt the time of Nabonasar and Eratosthenes. The Authority of Geminus also moveth me to yield, that in Metonis Ennea∣decaëteride, the years were not alternatim pleni and cavi (as you imagine) although in Calippus his Period the Disposition seemeth to have been such; to which, (as to that which was received into civil use in his time) I re∣ferr that place of Geminus (pag. 1158) . You have rightly observ'd that in my Discourse de Christianarum Ecclesia∣rum Successione & Statu, there is wanting for the Accomplishment of the second Part, an hundred years Story: which defect in the Continuation of the Work is by me supplied. I purpose to publish the whole Work together
much augmented: but do first expect the Publication of my Uncle Stani∣hurst's Answer to the former, which I hear since his death is sent to Paris to be there Printed. I am advertised also, that even now there is come out at Antwerp, a Treatise of my Country-man Christopher de Sacro-Bosco, De verae Ecclesiae Investigatione, wherein he hath some dealing with me. Both these I would willingly see, before I set out my Book anew: that if they have justly found fault with any thing, I may amend it; if unjustly, I may defend it. I am very glad to hear of your Pains taken in the unfolding of the Revelation: and hope that e'er long, it will come abroad among us. To help you therein touching the Fratricelli, Beguini, &c. my Opinion is this, That as under the name of the Albigenses were comprehended not only the Manichees which swarmed in those parts of France, but also the Waldenses which dwelt among them: so likewise under the Name of the Fratricelli and Beguini (unto whom as monstrous Opinions and Practices are ascribed as unto the other) those also were contained who made Profession of the Truth. For to omit the Testimony of a certain Writing, in quo S. Bernar∣dini Errores recensentur (alledged by Illyricus) affirming, Fratricellos, qui potissimum in Italiâ fuerunt, communiter esse Hussitas: the Witness of Conra∣dus de Monte Puellarum, or of Maydenburg, (a Canon of Ratisbon, who wrote about the year 1340. De Erroribus Begehardorum) is plain to this purpose. Sub illorum habitu (saith he) quarumlibet Hoeresum species, utpote pauperum de Lugduno, & aliarum iniquitatis Sectarum partitiones per Ovile Christi suos Apostolos satagunt seminare. Add hereunto, that the Waldenses Merindoll and Cabriers, are known to have been a Colony deduced from the Alpes, the chief Receptacle of the Fratricelli. This appeareth by the Inquisition returned unto Francis the first, anno 1540. by William Bellay then Governor of those Parts: wherein was certified of them, ducentis abhinc annis ex regione Pedemontanâ profectos, in provinciae partemillam commigrasse, &c. as may be seen in Crispin. lib. 3o Actionum & Moniment. Martyrum. Thuanus hath here 300 Years, but 200 of these times they were persecuted under the Name of the Beghardi. I alledge the Testimony of Matthias Parisiensis, who lived in Bohemia about the year 1390. Qui alienant se strenuè (saith he in lib. de Sacerdotum & Monachorum spiritualium abominatione Cap. 30.) ab exercitio tulium & à contubernio propter Domini Jesu timorem & amorem, mox à vulgo Christiano hujus mundi conviciantur & confunduntur, & nota pessima singularitatum vel Hoeresum criminantur: propter quod tales homines devoti, qui similia vulgo profano non agunt, Bechardi, vel Turspinii (lego Turebipini) aut aliis nominibus blasphemis communiter jam nominantur: quod fi∣guratum est in illis primis in Babylone, quibus alia nomina impofuerunt quàm habuerunt in terra Israel. There cometh also unto my mind, another place (which is not common) touching the Beghardi and Fratricelli, out of the Book de squaloribus Ro∣manae Curiae, written by Matthew de Cracovia, who was Bishop of Worms, ab anno 1405 ad 1410. Thus he there complaineth, Vadunt Beckardi, Fra∣tricelli, Sectuarii suspectissimi de hoerefi, & clero infestissimi, erectis capiti∣bus absque ullo timore in urbe, et seducunt liberè quotquot possunt. And mark that this fell upon the time of Pope Gregory the XII, who usually did send his Letters to the Princes and Bishops of Christendom, per Lollar∣dos seu Beguardos, ad quos semper videbatur ejus affectio specialitèr in∣clinari. As is affirmed by Theodoricus à Niem. lib. 3. de Schism. cap. 6. Whereby we see what Rest and Boldness the same Professors got by the great Schism in the Papacy; agreeable to that which Wickliff writeth, lib. 3. de Sermone Domini in monte.
You see, when I begin, I know not how to make an end, and therefore that I prove not too tedious, I will abruptly break off, desiring you to remem∣ber in prayers. Your most Assured, Loving Friend and Brother, James Usher. Dublin, Aug. 16. 1619. LETTER XXXIX. A Letter of Dr. James Usher's, afterwards Arch-Bishop of Armagh. Sir, YOU hear (I doubt not) ere this, of the lamentable news out of Bohe∣mia; how it pleased God, on the 29th. of October last, to give victory to the Emperor's Army against the King of Bohemia. His whole Army was routed, 3000 flain on the ground, others taken Prisoners, who have yielded 1800 Of the other side. (to save their lives) to serve against him. Himself, and the chief Commanders, fled with 2000 Horse, came to Prague, took away the poor Queen (being with Child) and some of his Councellors, with such things as in that hast could be carried away; and so left that Town (it not being to be held) and withdrew himself into Silesia, where he hath another Army (as also in Mo∣ravia) though not without an Enemy there invading also. How those of the Religion in Bohemia are like to be dealt with, you may imagine; and what other evil effects will follow, God knoweth, if he in mercy stay not the fury of the Enemy, who in all likelihood intendeth to prosecute the Victory to the uttermost. Spinola also prevaileth still in the Palatinate, one Town or two more, with two or three little Castles, he hath gained; and now we hear, that a Cessation of Arms is on either side agreed upon, for the space of five months. The Spaniard hath made himself Master of the Passage be∣twixt Italy and Germany, by getting Voltelina; where he hath put down five Protestant Churches, and Erected Idolatry in their places. He hath so corrupted many among the Switzers, as they cannot resolve on any good course, how to help the mischief, or how to prevent the further increasing of it. The French (that should protect them) are Hispaniolized: The Ger∣mans have their hands full at home: And the Venetians, that would, dare not alone enter into the business. And now newly (while I am writing this addition) we are certified here, that the King of Bohemia hath quit Mora∣via and Silesia, seeing all things there desperate; and hath withdrawn him∣self unto Brandenburgh. God grant we may lay this seriously to heart; otherwise I fear, the judgment that hath begun there, will end heavily upon us; and (if all things deceive me not) it is even now marching toward us with a swift pace. And so much touching the Affairs of Germany, which you de∣sired me to impart unto you, whether they were good or evil. Concerning Mr. Southwick's departure, although not only you, but divers others also have advertised me; yet I cannot, as yet, be perswaded that it is intended by him: for both himself in his last Letter unto me, and his Wife here (no longer than yesterday) hath signified unto me the plain contrary. Your Son Downing wisheth the place unto Mr. Ward, your neighbour Mr.
Johnson unto Mr. Cook of Gawran, and others unto one Mr. Neyle, who hath lately preached there with good liking (as I hear:) The last of these I know not; with the first I have dealt, and am able to draw him over into Ire∣land. Your assured loving Friend James Usher. 1619. LETTER XL. A Letter from Mr. Edward Browncker to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. SIR, I Marvel much at the Deputy's exceptions; he discovers a great deal of unworthy suspicion. What answer I have made unto him you may here see. I doubt not but he will rest satisfied with it, unless he hath re∣solved to do me open wrong. You may seal it up with any, but your own Seal. I pray you lend me your best furtherance, it shall not go unacknow∣ledged, howsoever I speed. As for the Manuscripts you desire to hear of, neither one, nor the other is to be found: It is true, according unto Dr. James his Catalogue, there was one Gildas in Merton Colledge Library, but he was Gildas Sapiens, not Gildas Albanius, whom Pitts says was the Author of the Book entituled, De Victoria Aurelii Ambrosii; neither is that Gildas Sapiens now to be seen in Merton Colledge, he hath been cut out of the Book where∣unto he was annexed: Yet there is one in our Publick Library. He stiles him Gildas Sapiens also, as Bishop Usher noted in the margin M S S. who writes a story De Gestis Britannorum, in whom I find mention of King Lucius his Baptism: His words be these, Post 164 annos post adventum Christi Lucius Britannicus Rex cum Universis Regulis totius Britaniae Baptismum suscepe∣runt, missa legatione ab Imperatore & Papa Romano Evaristo. As for the Ora∣tions of Richard Fleming, there be no such to be heard of in Lincoln Colledge Library: Neither can I find, or learn, that the Junior Proctor's Book relates any passage of the Conversion of the Britains. If you have any thing else to be search'd for, I pray make no scruple of using me further: So wishing you comfort in your labours, I rest Your very loving and thankful Friend, Edward Browncker. From Wadham Colledge Septemb. 11. 1620.
LETTER XLI. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop-elect of Meath, to the most Reverend Dr. Hampton, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. My very good Lord, I Received yesterday your Grace's Letter, whereby I understand, how un∣advisedly the Bishop of Clogher entred into contestation with your Lord∣ship for the exercise of his Jurisdiction; and laboured to turn your particular favour toward me, to his own advantage, whereat I was not a little grieved. It was far from my meaning ever to oppose either your Archiepiscopal right, or the duties of your Register for the time present, much less for the time to come. The difference betwixt the Registers is by their mutual consent referred to the determination of my L. Chancellor, before whom let them plead their own Cause; I mean not to intermeddle with it. The exercising of the Ju∣risdiction hitherto, cannot be justified by taking out a Commission now from your Lordship: But seeing what hath been done herein, cannot now be un∣done, I will thus far shew my respect unto your Metropolitical Authority, that whensoever the matter shall be called in question, I will profess, that what I have done in the exercising of the Jurisdiction, I have done it by your special Licence, without which I would not have meddled with it. And for the time to come, I have given order to my Commissary, that he shall proceed no farther, but presently surcease from dealing any way in the Juris∣diction: that no occasion may be left, whereby it might be thought that I stood upon any right of mine own, to the derogation of any point of your Archi∣episcopal Authority. And thus much for my self. As for my Lord of Clogher, howsoever I be none of his Council, yet the respect and duty which I owe unto you, as un∣to my Father, forceth me to wish, That your Grace would seriously delibe∣rate of this business, before you bring it unto a publick Tryal. For then I fear the matter will be determined, not by Theological Argumentations of the power of the Keys, but by the power of the King's Prerogative in Causes Ecclesiastical, and the Laws of the Land. If my Lord of Clogher's Council told him, that he might challenge the exercising of his Jurisdiction as an in∣cident to that which he had already received from the King: It is certain that in his Letters Patents the Bishoprick is granted unto him, Una cum omni∣bus Juribus, Jurisdictionibus, Prerogativis, Preeminentiis, Allocationibus, Com∣moditatibus & Privilegiis tam spiritualibus quàm temporalibus, with a Man∣damus directed Universis & singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Decanis, Archi∣diaconis, Officialibus, Commissariis, Rectoribus, Vicariis, Presbyteris, & aliis personis Ecclesiasticis quibuscunque; quatenus ipsum Episcopum & ejus Officia∣rios tam spirituales quàm temporales Episcopatum proedictum habere, percipere, gubernare, gaudere & disponere permittant. And howsoever, if the matter were to be disputed in the Schools, he peradventure might obtain the victo∣ry, who did defend, That Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical doth issue from the Keys, not from the Sword: Yet I doubt me, when the case cometh to be argued in the King's Court, he will have the advantage that hath the Sword on his side, and standeth to maintain the King's Prerogative. Again, by the Statute of 2 Eliz. whereby Congedelires are taken away, he that hath the King's Letters Patents for a Bishoprick is put in the same state, as if he were Cano∣nically both Elected and Confirmed. Now, howsoever by the Law, a Bishop barely elected can do little or nothing: yet the Canonists do clearly resolve,
that he who is both Elected and Confirmed, may exercise all things that ap∣pertain to Jurisdiction; although he may not meddle with matters of Ordi∣nation, Vid. Abb. c. Qualiter, tit. de electo & electi potesta∣te. &c. Ava∣ritiae. in 6. Gregor. Tho∣losan. in Syn∣tagm. utrius{que} Juris; & alios passim. until he receive his Consecration. Lastly, I would intreat your Lord∣ship to consider, when the See of Armagh becometh void, (as sometimes it hath been for two or three years together:) in whom doth the exercise of the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction remain Doth it not in the Dean and Chapter of Armagh If a Dean then, who is but simplex Presbyter, without receiving Commission from any other Bishop, is by the custom of the Land, capable in this case of Episcopal Jurisdiction; What should make him that is elected and confirmed a Bishop to be uncapable of the same I speak now only of the Law, and ancient Customs of the Realm; by which (I take it) this matter, if it come to question, must be tryed. All which I humbly submit unto your Graces grave consideration; protesting, notwithstanding, for mine own par∣ticular, that I will not only for the time to come cease to exercise the Juris∣diction (of the proceeding further wherein, I see no great necessity before my Consecration) but also willingly herein submit my self unto any course that your Lordship shall be further pleased to prescribe unto me. There is at this time in Dublin neither Civilian nor Register with whom I might advise touching the matter of the Dilapidation. My Lord Chancel∣lor offered to grant (if I pleased) a Commission out of the Chancery, for the inquiry hereof: But I considered with my self that this business was more proper for the Archiepiscopal Court; whereof I remembred that fa∣mous President of William Wickham Bishop of Winchester; who sued the Executors of his Predecessor in the Court of William Witlesey Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and recovered against him 127 afros, 1556 boves, 3876 mutones, 4717 oves matrices, 3521 agnos, & 1662 libras cum 10 solidis, pro repara∣tione Aedificiorum ad ruinas vergentium: as in the Register of the said Witle∣sey is yet to be seen. I will cause Mr. Ford to draw up my Libel in the best manner he can; and then expect the issuing of the Commission with all con∣venient expedition: For it behoveth me that the inquiry of the Dilapidations be returned, before I go in hand with the reparation: and that I must do ve∣ry shortly, though upon mine own charges, unless I will see the house fall quite down the next Winter. I humbly thank your Grace for your remembrance of me in the matter Armagh. For howsoever I conceive very little hope that I shall ever enjoy that Deanry; yet am I nothing the less beholding unto you for your care of me: for which, and for all the rest of your honourable favours, I must always remain. Your Graces in all Duty to be Commanded, James Usher. Dublin, July 11. 1621.
LETTER XLII. A Letter from the most Reverend Dr. Hampton, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Salutem in Christo. I Thank your Lordship for your care and respect of me, as likewise your counsel, that I should be well advised, ere I brought the matter of Jurisdi∣ction into publick Tryal. I truly have not cause to complain, but if the Bi∣shop of Clogher, or any other, think themselves wronged, that I give not way to the exercise of his Jurisdiction until he be Consecrated, and thereupon de∣sire Justice, I shall be ready to shew reason, and yield account of my Opini∣on as well in the King's Courts, as in Theological Schools. For to pass the general words of his grant cum omnibus Jurisdictionibus, which grant him Jus ad rem, but not in re: The Statute of 2 Eliz. cap. 1. expresly forbiddeth all that shall be preferred, to take upon them, receive, use, exercise any Bi∣shoprick, &c. before he hath taken the corporal Oath of the King's Supremacy before such person as hath Authority to admit him to his Bishoprick. As for the Statute of Conferring and Consecrating Bishops within this Realm, I find not the words you have written, viz. That he which hath the King's Letters Patents for a Bishoprick, is put in the same state as if he were Cano∣nically elected and confirmed. But that his Majesties Collation shall be to the same effect, as if the Conge delire had been given, the election duly made, and the same election confirmed (for the Dean and Chapters election in England is not good, until the King have confirmed by his Royal assent) then it followeth in the Statute, upon that collation the person may be consecra∣ted, &c. Afterward in the same Statute it is further enacted, That every per∣son hereafter conferred, invested, and consecrated, &c. shall be obeyed, &c. and do, and execute in every thing, and things touching the same, as any Bishop of this Realm, without offending of the Prerogatives Royal. Now by an argu∣ment à contrario sensu it appeareth that it is not I which stand against his Majesties Prerogative, but they which exercise Jurisdiction without the form prescribed in these Statutes: Confider again how impertinent the opinion of Canonists is in this case, where the King's collation is aequivalent to a Ca∣nonical Election, and Confirmation: The Confirmation which the Canonists speak of is from the Pope, not from the Prince. Gregoriana constitutione in Lugdunensi Consilio cautum est, Electum infra tres menses post consensum suum electioni proestitum, si nullum justum impedimentum obstat confirmationem à supe∣riore Proelato, petere debere, alioqui trimestri spatio elapso electionem esse peni∣tus irritandam. When the See of Armagh falleth void, the Dean and Chapter have Au∣thority by the Canons to exercise Jurisdiction, which the Bishop elect hath not until he be consecrated, as you may read in Mason's Book, and elsewhere, and so it is practised in England. Behold the cause which maketh the Dean capable, namely the Authority, Canons, and Custom of the Church: So is not the Bishop elect warranted, and standeth still in the quality of a simple Presbyter, until he be further advanced by the Church. When Jo. Forth shall bring his Libel I will do the part which belongeth to me. In the mean time I commend you to God, and rest Your Lordships very loving Friend, Armagh. 13 July 1621.
LETTER XLIII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Gataker to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. Right Reverend, MY duty to your Lordship remembred. This Messenger so fitly of∣fering himself unto me, albeit it were the Sabbath Even, and I cast behind hand in my studies by absence from home, yet I could not but in a line or two salute your Lordship, and thereby signifie my continued and de∣served remembrance of you, and hearty desire of your welfare. By this time I presume your Lordship in setled in your weighty charge of Over-sight, wherein I beseech the Lord in mercy to bless your Labours, and Endeavours, to the glory of his own Name, and the good of his Church, never more in our times oppugned and opposed by mighty and malitious Adversaries both at home and abroad: never in foreign Parts generally more distracted and distressed than at the present. Out of France daily news of Murthers and Massacres, Cities and Towns taken, and all sorts put to the Sword. Nor are those few that stand out yet, likely to hold long against the power of so great a Prince, having no succours from without. In the Palatinate likewise all is reported to go to ruine. Nor do the Hol∣landers sit, for ought I see, any surer, the rather for that the Coals that have here been heretofore kindled against them, about Transportation of Coin, and the Fine imposed for it, the Quarrels of the East-Indies, the Command of the Narrow Seas, the Interrupting of the Trade into Flanders, &c. are daily more and more blown upon, and fire beginneth to break out, which I pray God do not burn up both them and us too. I doubt not, worthy Sir, but you see as well, yea much better, I suppose, than my self, and many others, as be∣ing able further to pierce into the state of the times, and the consequents of these things, what need the forlorn flock of Christ hath of hearts and hands to help to repair her ruines, and to fence that part of the Fold that as yet is not so openly broken in upon, against the Incursions of such ravenous Wolves, as having prevailed so freely against the other parts, will not in likelihood leave it also unassaulted: as also what need she hath, if ever, of Prayers and Tears (her ancient principal Armor) unto him, who hath the hearts and hands of all men in his hand, and whose help (our only hope, as things now stand,) is oft-times then most present, when all humane helps and hopes do fail. But these lamentable occurrents carry me further than I had purposed when I put Pen to Paper. I shall be right glad to hear of your Lordship's health and welfare, which the Lord vouchsafe to continue; gladder to see the remainder of your former learned, and laborious Work abroad. The Lord bless and protect you: And thus ready to do your Lordship any service I may in these parts, I rest Your Lordships to be commanded in the Lord, Thomas Gataker. Rothtrith, Sept. 19. 1621.
LETTER XLIV. A Letter from Sir William Boswel to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. My very good Lord, IF your Lordship hath forgotten my name, I shall account my self very unhappy therein, yet justly rewarded for my long silence; the cause whereof hath especially been my continual absence (almost for these last eight years) from my native Country: where now returning, and disposed to rest I would not omit the performance of this duty unto your Lordship, hoping that the renewing of my ancient respects will be entertained by your Lord∣ship, as I have seen an old Friend or Servant, who arriving suddenly, and unexpected, hath been better welcomed than if he had kept a set and frequent course of visiting and attendance. With this representing of my service, I presume your Lordship will not dis∣like that I recommend my especial kind friend Dr. Price (one of his Maje∣sties Commissioners for that Kingdom,) and for his Learning, Wisdom, and other Merits (which your Lordship will find in him) truly deserving your Lordships good affection. The most current news I can signifie to your Lordship from this place, are, That the Lord Vicomte Doncastré returneth (within three days) into France, (as 'tis thought) invited thereunto by that King, both at his coming from thence, and since by his Ambassadour resident here; which occasioneth some forward natures to presage of Peace very speedily in those Parts, between the King and his Protestant Subjects. Whereof, notwithstanding, (except want of moneys) the importunity of his old Councellors, at length, having been long slighted, the disunion of his Grandees, and desperate resolution of the afflicted Protestants to withstand these Enemies, shall beget an alteration, for my own part, I see little reason: for it is not likely, That either the Prince of Condé, who hateth the Protestants, and loveth to fish in troubled Waters; or the Jesuit party (earnest votaries of the House of Austria) being still powerful in France, will ever suffer that King to be at rest, until their Patrons Affairs shall be settled in Grisons, Germany, &c. From Italy I hear that in Rome there is lately erected a new Congregation De fide propaganda, consisting of 12 Cardinals, (whereof Cardinal Savelli is chief:) A principal Referendary thereof being Gaspar Schioppius: There are to be admitted into this Congre∣gation of all Nations, and their Opus is to provide maintenance from their Friends, &c. for Proselites of all Nations, who shall retire into the Bosom of the Romish Church: But I fear I begin to be tedious to your Lordship, and therefore craving Pardon, as well for my present boldness as former omissions, with my ancient and most unfeigned Respects I take leave of your Lordship, desiring to know if in these parts I may be useful to your Lordship, and re∣maining ever Your Lordships most Affectionate to love and serve you, William Boswel. From Westminster Colledge, March 17. 1621.
LETTER XLV. A Letter from Sir Henry Spelman to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. Right Reverend, and my most worthy Lord, THough I be always tied to reiterate my thankfulness to your Lordship, for your favours here in England, yet is it not fit to trouble you too often with Letters only of complement. And other occasion I have hitherto not had any, save what in Michaelmas Term last I wrote unto you touching the Monument of Bury Abby, which the Cutter going then in hand with came to me about, as directed so by your Lorship. I was bold to stay him for the time, and signified by those Letters that I thought much excep∣tion might be taken to the credit of the Monument, for that both the ends of the upper Label pictured in the Glass, over the head of Antichrist, are stretched out so far, as they rest not in the Glass, but run on either way up∣on the stone Pillars, which, as your Lordship knows, could not possibly be so in the Window it self. How it cometh to pass I do not know, whether by the rashness of the Painter, (not heeding so light a matter as he might take it) or that perphaps those which in the picture seem to be the Pillars of the Window, were but painted Pillars in the Glass it self, and so the whole Win∣dow but one Pannel. I cannot determine this doubt, but out of all doubt such a picture there was, and taken out exactly by a Painter then, as a right honest old Gentleman which saw it standing in the Abby Window, and the Painter that took it out, did often tell me about 40 years since; affirming the picture now at the Cutters to be the true pattern thereof. But at that time my understanding shewed me not to make this doubt; if I had, he perhaps could have resolved it. For my own part, though I think it fitter in this respect not to be published, as doth also Sir H. Bourgchier, yet I leave it to your direction, which the Cutter hitherto expecteth. So remembring my service most humbly to your Lordship, and desiring your blessing, I rest Your Lordships to be commanded, Henry Spelman. Tuttle-street, Westm. Mar. 18. 1621. LETTER XLVI. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. My Lord, I Should before this have returned your Nubiensis Geographia; but Mr. Bed∣well had it of me, and until this time, presuming on your favour, he keeps it; nor can we have of them till the return of the Mart. Then I shall be sure to send your through Mr. Burnet. There is nothing that here is worth memory to you touching the State of Learning; only I received Letters late∣ly
out of France touching this point, Whether we find that any Churches in the elder times of Christianity were with the Doors, or Fronts Eastward or no, because of that in Sidonius—Arce Frontis ortum spectat aequinoctialem, lib. 2. ep. 10. &c. and other like. I beseech your Lordship to let me know from you what you think hereof. I have not yet sent it, but I shall most greedily covet your resolution: And if any thing be here in England that may do your Lordship favour or service, and lye in my power, command it, I beseech you, and believe that no man more admires, truly admires your worth, and professes himself to do so, than Your Lordships humble Servant, J. Selden. March 24. 1621. Styl-Anglic. My Titles of Honour are in the Press, and new written, but I hear it shall be staid; if not, I shall salute you with one as soon as it is done. LETTER XLVII. A Letter from Sir Robert Cotton to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. My honourable Lord, THe opportunity I had by the going over of this honourable Gentleman, Sir Henry Bourgchier, I could not pass over without doing my service to your Lordship in these few lines. We are all glad here you are so well settled to your own content and merit, yet sorry that you must have so important a cause of stay; that all hopes we had to have seen your Lord∣ship in these parts is almost taken away: Yet I doubt not but the worthy work you gave in England the first life to, and have so far happily proceeded in, will be again a just motive to draw you over into England to see it per∣fected, for without your direction in the sequel I am afraid it will be hopeless and impossible. Let me, I pray you, intreat from your Honour, the Copy of as much as you have finished, to show his Majesty, that he may be the more earnest to urge on other Labourers to work up, with your Lordships advice, the rest. I have received Eight of the Manuscripts you had; the rest are not returned: If I might know what my Study would afford to your content, I would always send you; and that you may the better direct me, I will, as soon as it is perfected, send your Honour a Catalogue of my Books. The Occurrents here I forbear to write, because a Gentleman so intelligent cometh to you. What after falleth worthy your Honours knowledge, I will write hereafter upon direction from your Lordship, whither, and by whom I may address my Letters. I cannot forget your Lordships promise to get me a Book of the Irish Saints Lives, and that Poem of Richard the Second your Honour told me of: A love to these things I hope shall make excuse for my bold remembrance. My service to your self, I remain Your Lordships constant and assured to be ever Commanded, Robert Cotton. New Exchange, Mar. 26. 1622.
LETTER XLVIII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. Most Reverend in Christ, I Must excuse my long silence, partly by my long stay by the way, and partly by my expectation of your Lordship here about this time: Now being somewhat doubtful of your repair hither, I have adventur'd these, as an assured Testimony of my respect and observance to your Lordship. Ma∣ny of your good friends here were glad to hear of your health, and hopeful to see you. Sir Robert Cotton hath purchased a House in Westminster, near the Parliament House, which he is now repairing, and there means to settle his Library by Feoffment to continue for the use of Posterity. Mr. Camden is much decayed, Et senio planè confectus, in so much that I doubt his friends shall not enjoy him long. Sir Henry Spelman is busie about the impression of his Glossary, and Mr. Selden of his Eadmerus, which will be finished within three or four days; together with his Notes, and the Laws of the Conqueror; the comparing whereof with the Copy of Crowland, was the cause of this long stay; for they could not get the Book hither, though they had many promises, but were faign to send one to Crowland to compare things. We have not yet the Catalogue of Frankfort; nor any news but what you often hear. The reports of the Princes entertainment in Spain fills the Mouths and Ears of all men; and not so only, but also set the Printers a work. I should be very glad to know your Lordships resolution of coming into England, that I might accordingly send you either Books, or other news which we have here. If your Lordship would be pleased to send me your Copy of Dionysius Exiguus, I would willingly take some pains in the publica∣tion of him; for I doubt your own labours take you up so much, that you cannot attend him. I desire to be most kindly remembred to Mr. Dean of Christ-Church. I hear much murmurings among the Papists here, especially those of our County, against some new persecutions, (you know their Phrase) lately raised in Ireland, and particularly against some courses of your Lord∣ships in the Diocess of Meath; as namely in the case of Clandestine Christ∣nings, &c. beyond all others of your rank. I should be larger, did I not doubt of my Letter's finding your Lordship there; but wheresoever God will dispose of us, let it be; I will ever approve myself Your Lordships true Affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, April 16. 1622. Your Colledge Statute of seven years continuance is much disliked here, with some other things in that Society; and some fault laid upon us, that we did not take a more exact Survey of their Affairs.
LETTER XLIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath, to Mr. John Selden. Worthy Sir, I Received your loving Letter sent unto me by Sir Henry Bourgchier, and do heartily thank you for your kind remembrance of me. Touching that which you move, concerning the situation of Churches in the elder times of Christianity, Walafridus Strabo (De rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. 4.) telleth us, Non magnoperè curabant illius temporis justi, quam in partem orationis loca converterent. Yet his conclusion is, Sed tamen usus frequentior, & rationi vicinior habet, in Orientem orantes converti, & pluralitatem maximam Eccle∣siarum eo tenore constitui. Which doth further also appear by the Testimo∣ny of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, in his Tom. 5. Bi∣blioth. Patr. Part 1. p. 171. (Edit. Colon.) twelfth Epistle to Severus: Prospectus verò basilicae non, ut usitatior mos, Orientem spectat. And particularly with us here in Ireland, Joceline in the Life of St. Patrick, observeth, That a Church was built by him in Sabul, hard by Downe (in Ulster) Ab aquilonali parte versus meridianam plagam. Add hereunto that place of Socrates, lib. 5. hist. Eccles. cap. 22. : And compare it with that other place of Walafridus Strabo, where he sheweth both in the Church that Constantine and Helena builded at Jerusalem; and at Rome also in the Church of All-Saints, (which before was the Pantheon) and St. Peters; Altaria non tan∣tum ad Orientem, sed etiam in alias partes esse distributa. I desire to have some news out of France concerning the Samaritan Pen∣tateuch; and how the numbers of the years of the Fathers, noted therein, do agree with those which the  hath in Graecis Eusebianis Scaligeri; al∣so whether Fronto Ducoeus his Edition of the Septuagint be yet published. I would intreat you likewise (if it be not too great a trouble) to transcribe for me out of the Annals of Mailrose in Sir Robert Cotton's Library, the Succes∣sion and Times of the Kings of Scotland. So ceasing to be further troublesome unto you at this time, I rest Your most assured, loving Friend, Ja. Mid. Dublin, April 16. 1622. LETTER L. A Letter from Dr. Ward, Margaret Professor at Cambridge, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. My good Lord, THe remembrance of our former love, doth embolden me to present these lines to your Lordship, which otherwise I would not presume to do. I wish your Lordship, in your great Place and Dignity, all happiness and con∣tentment;
still perswading my self, That your Place and Dignity doth not so alter you, but that you still do continue to be , no less than that Bishop of Durham, R. Angervile, was. I hope therefore it will not be altoge∣ther ungrateful to write of things touching that argument. I am right sorry to hear of that heavy news which was reported unto me upon Monday last, of the taking of Heydelberg by Tilly, the Commander of the Duke of Bavaria. It is a great grief that the place where the purity of the Reformed Religion hath so long been maintained, should now come into the hands of the Enemy. I take it (I have heard) that, out of fear it should be Besieged, care was taken that the Manuscripts were conveyed into the Duke of Wirtemburg's Coun∣try. I wish it were so, if it be not. It should grieve me, if that famous Libra∣ry too should come into their hands, who are so faithless in setting them out. Your Lordship was partly acquainted with a business which I had underta∣ken, to answer one Chapter of Perron's latest work, set out after his decease. Since that time Petrus Bertius, the Remonstrant, is turned Roman Catholick, and hath undertaken the Translation of that whole Book into Latin, and hath in Specimen set forth the Translation of that Chapter which I had under∣taken to answer, as a principal motive of his Conversion to them, which he hath added to the Oration of the motives to his Conversion; I suppose you have seen the Book. Now having been lately chosen, upon my Lord of Sa∣rum his promotion, to be Reader of the Margaret Lecture in our University, Lam advised by my good friends, and namely the Lords Bishops of Wells, and Sarum, to read those Controversies mentioned in that Chapter. And upon more mature advice have resolved to set down positively the Fathers Doctrine, not barely by Thesis, but with their several proofs, and the Vindi∣cation of them from the Adversaries cavils. I will be bold to communicate with you, the special difficulties which I shall observe, if it be not trouble∣some unto your Lordship. In the first Controversie touching the Real Pre∣sence, they except against the testimony produced by P. Martyr of Chrysostom ad Caesarium Monachum. I have heard your Lordship say, it is alledged by Leontius, but by what Leontius, and where, I remember not. I cannot find it in such Tractates of Leontius, as I find in Bibliotheca Patrum; I desire your Lordship in a word to certifie me. It seemeth P. Martyr read it in Latin, for otherwise it is probable he would have alledged the Greek Text, if originally he had it out of the Greek. I suppose your Lordship hath seen the third Tome of Spalatensis, contain∣ing his VII. and IX. Book. I fear me he may do some harm with the Trea∣tise which he hath, lib. 7. c. 11. touching the matter of Predestination, wherein he goeth about to shew, That both Opinions may be Tolerated, both that of St. Austin's, which makes Predestination to be gratuita; and that other, which maketh Predestination to be, Ex proevisis fide & operibus. But chiefly he goeth about to invalidate St. Austin's Opinion. It will confirm the Remon∣strants in their Error; for he hath said more than any of them, but all in vain, for doubtless St. Austin's Opinion is the truth: and no doubt but it is special Grace which doth distinguish Peter from Judas, and not solum liberum arbi∣trium. It is great pity the man was so carried away with Ambition and Avarice; otherwise I think he is not inferior to Bellarmine, for the Contro∣versies. I write this Letter upon my way, being at Sarum, where my Lord Bishop of Sarum doth salute you. I cannot now dilate further, but with my best service and wishes, commend your Lordship to the Highest Majesty, and so rest Your Lordships in all service, Samuel Ward. Sarum, Sept. 25. 1622. I intreat your Lordship that I may know where Leontius doth alledge that Tractate of Chrysostom.
LETTER LI. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath, to the Right Honourable Oliver Lord Grandison. My very good Lord, I Had purposed with my self long ere now to have seen your Honour in England; which was one reason, among others, why I did forbear to trou∣ble you hitherto with any Letters. But seeing I think now it will fall out, that I shall remain here this Winter, I thought it my duty, both to tender my thankfulness unto your Lordship for all the honourable favours which I have received at your hands, and withal to acquaint you with a certain par∣ticular which partly doth concern my self, and in some sort also the state of the Church in this poor Nation. The day that my Lord of Falkland recei∣ved the Sword, I preached at Christ-Church: and fitting my self to the pre∣sent occasion, took for my Text those words in the 13th. to the Romans; He beareth not the Sword in vain. There I shewed, 1. What was meant by this Sword. 2. The Subject wherein that power rested. 3. The matters where∣in it was exercised. 4. Thereupon what it was to bear the Sword in vain. Whereupon falling upon the Duty of the Magistrate in seeing those Laws executed that were made for the furtherance of God's Service, I first de∣clared, That no more was to be expected herein from the subordinate Magi∣strate than he had received in Commission from the Supreme; in whose power it lay to limit the other at his pleasure. Secondly, I wished, That if his Majesty (who is, under God, our Supreme Governour) were pleased to extend his clemency toward his Subjects that were Recusants, some order notwithstanding might be taken with them, that they should not give us publick affronts, and take possession of our Churches before our Faces. And that it might appear, that it was not without cause that I made this motion, I instanced in two particulars that had lately fallen out in mine own Dio∣cess: The one certified unto me by Mr. John Ankers, Preacher of Athloane, (a man well known unto your Lordship) who wrote unto me, That going to read Prayers at Kilkenny in West-Meath, he found an old Priest (and about 40 with him) in the Church; who was so bold as to require him (the said An∣kers) to depart, until he had done his business. The other concerning the Friars, who not content to possess the House of Multifernan alone (whence your Lordship had dislodged them) went about to make Collections for the re-edifying of another Abby near Molengarre, for the entertaining of another swarm of Locusts. These things I touched only in general, not mentioning any circumstances of Persons or Places. Thirdly, I did intreat, That what∣soever connivance were used unto others, the Laws might be strictly execu∣ted against such as revolted from us, that we might at least-wise keep our own, and not suffer them without all fear to fall away from us. Lastly, I made a publick Protestation, That it was far from my mind to excite the Magistrate unto any violent courses against them, as one that naturally did abhor all cruel dealings, and wished that effusion of blood might be held ra∣ther the Badge of the Whore of Babylon, than of the Church of God. These points, howsoever they were delivered by me with such limitations, as in moderate mens judgments might seem rather to intimate an allowance of a Toleration in respect of the general, than to exasperate the State unto any extraordinary severity: yet did the Popish Priests perswade their followers, that I had said, The Sword had rusted too long in the Sheath, whereas in my
whole Sermon I never made mention either of Rust or Sheath: yea some al∣so did not stick to give out, That I did thereby closely tax your self for be∣ing too remiss in prosecuting of the Papists in the time of your Government. I have not such diffidence in your Lordships good opinion of me, neither will I wrong my self so much, as to spend time in refelling so lewd a calumniati∣on. Only I thought good to mention these things unto your Lordship, that if any occasion should be offered hereafter to speak of them, you might be informed in the truth of matters: Wherein, if I have been too troublesome unto you, I humbly crave pardon, and rest Your Honours in all Duty, ever ready to be commanded, Jac. Midensis. Dublin, Oct. 16. 1622. LETTER LII. A Letter from the Most Reverend Dr. Hampton, Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Salutem in Christo. My Lord, IN the exceptions taken by Recusants against your Sermon, I cannot be af∣fected as Gallio was at the beating of Sosthenes, to care nothing for them. I am sensible of that which my Brethren suffer: And if my advice had been required, I should have counselled your Lordship to give lenitives of your own accord, for all which was conceived over harsh, or sharp; the inqui∣sition, whether an offence were given or taken, may add to the flame already kindled, and provoke further displeasure, it is not like to pacifie anger. But let your case be as good as Peter's was, when the Brethren charged him in∣juriously for preaching to the uncircumcised, the great Apostle was content to give them a fair publick satisfaction, Act. 11. and it wrought good effects; for the Text saith, His auditis quieverunt & glorificaverunt Deum: it brought peace to the Congregation, and glory to God. My Noble Lord Deputy hath propounded a way of pacification, that your Lordship should here satisfie such of the Lords as would be present; wherein my poor endeavours shall not be wanting: howbeit (to say ingenuously as I think) that is not like to have success; for the Lord of Kilkenny, and your other friends trying their strengths in that kind at Trim, prevailed not; but can tell your Lordship what is expected. And if my wishes may take place, seeing so many men of Quality have something against you, tary not till they complain, but prevent it by a voluntary retractation, and milder inter∣pretation of the points offensive, and especially of drawing the Sword, of which spirit we are not, nor ought to be; for our Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual. Withal it will not be amiss in mine opinion for you Lordship to withdraw your self from those Parts, and to spend more time in your own Diocess; that such as will not hear your Doctrine, may be drawn to love and reverence your Lordship for your hospitality, and conversation. Bear
with the Plaines of an Old mans Pen, and leave nothing undone to recover the Intercourse of Amitie between you and the People of your Charge. Were it but one that is alienated you would put on the Bowels of the Evan∣gelical Shepherd, you would seek him and support his Infirmities with your own Shoulders, how much more is it to be done, when so many are in dan∣ger to be lost But they are generous and noble and many of them near unto you in Blood or Alliance, which will plead effectually, and conclude the matter fully whensoever you shew your self ready to give them Satisfaction. In the mean time, I will not fail to pray God for his Blessings unto the Busi∣ness, and so do rest Your Lordships very loving Brother, Armagh. Tredagh, October 17. 1622. LETTER LIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath, to Dr. Samuel Ward, Master of Sidney Sussex Colledge, Cam∣bridge. Worthy Sir, I Was heartily glad when I heard, that upon my Lord of Sarum's Promo∣tion you were chosen to succeed him in Reading the Lady Margaret's Lecture; and do very well approve the Judgment of them, who advised you to handle the Controversies mentioned in that Chapter of Cardinal Perron's Book, which Bertius pretendeth to have been the principal Motive of veri∣fying in himself the Title of his old Book, Hymenoeus Desertor. His Ora∣tion of the Motives to his Perversion I saw before I left England, than which I never yet did see a more silly and miserable Discourse proceed from the Hands of a learned Man. The Epistle that Chrysostom wrote unto Caesarius against the Heresie of Apollinarius and others, that confounded the Deity and Humanity in Chirist, is not cited by Leontius, but by the Author of the Collections against the Severians, who is thought to have lived about the time of Damascen. In the 8th. Tome Bibliothecae patrum, Edit. Colon. An. 1618. pag. 336. you shall find these words alledged by him, ex Chryso∣stomo ad Caesarium Monachum: Hoc est absurdum dogma Apollinarii amentis; haec est hoeresis impiissima introducentium mixtionem et compositionem. Sir Henry Savil was of your mind, that Pet. Martyr met with this Treatise only in Latine; but I shewed him the contrary, by the Controversie that was betwixt Gar∣diner and Him, (Respons. ad Object. 201) concerning the Interpretation of the Word . Martyr mistaking it, as if it had been derived from , and so translating it in that Sentence [Sic et divinâ mundante corporis naturâ,] and Gardiner on the other side contending it should be rendred [Firmante corporis naturâ,] and the righter of the three peradventure being that which I follow [divinâ naturâ in corpore insidente.] I am at this present in hand with such a Work as you are imployed in, being drawn thereunto by a Challenge made by a Jesuit in this Country, concerning the Fathers Doctrine in the Point of Traditions, Real Presence, Auricular Confession,
Priest's Power to forgive Sins, Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, Limbus Pa∣trum, Prayer to Saints, Images, Free-will, and Merits. I handle therein only the positive Doctrine of the Fathers, and the Original of the contrary Error, leaving the Vindication of the Places of Antiquity abused by the Adversary, until I be urged thereunto hereafter by my Challenger. The better part of the Work I have gone through already: As soon as the whole is finished I will not forget to send it unto you, or else deliver it with mine own hands. In the mean time I send you a Treatise, written by one of our Judges here, touching these Controversies; with a Discourse of mine own added thereunto, concerning the Religion professed by the Ancient Irish: And so leaving you, and all your painful Endeavours unto the Blessing of our good God, I rest Your own in all Christian Love and Affection, Jac. Midensis. Tinglass, March 18, 1622. LETTER LIV. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. Salutem à fonte Salutis. Most Reverend in Christ; I Cannot hope to send you any Portion of our London News, which common Fame will not bring sooner to you; I notwithstanding fail in my Duty, if I adventure not. The same day of your departure hence, the Houses of Parliament presented their Petition concerning Recusants to the King; to which they received a large and very satisfactory Answer; and a Proclamation to that purpose is expected within a few days. On Saturday, the day following, the Spanish Ambassador (I mean the Marquess) desiring Audience, acquainted the King with a Practice of Treason; namely, That the Prince and my Lord of Buckingham had conspired, That if they could not draw the King to their Desires this Parliament, by the Authority thereof they would confine him to some place of Pleasure, and transfer the Government to the Princes About this there is now much consultation, in what manner to proceed; (Salvo legatino jure) and Sir Robert Cotton, (as you know his manner is) hath been very busie in ransacking his Papers for Presidents: Of this more hereafter. This day my Lord Treasurer makes his Answer; about the be∣ginning of the next Week we shall know his Doom. Our good Friend D. Lyndsel was cut on Munday; and is yet (God be praised) well after it; there was a Stone taken out of his Bladder about the bigness of a Shilling, and rough on the one side. I am now collating of Bede's Ecclestastical Hi∣story with Sir Robert Cotton's Copy; wherein I find many Variations; I com∣pare it with Commelyn's Edition in Folio, which is that I have. All that I expect from your Lordship, is, to understand of the Receipt of my Letters, which if I know, I shall write the more confidently. I should also willingly
know how you like your Dwelling. My Lord of Bristol is come. I pray you present my Love and Service to Mrs. Usher: And so with many thanks for all your kind Respects, I will ever remain. Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, April 28. 1623. Sir Robert Cotton is like to get a very good Copy of Malmsbury de An∣tiquit. Glaston. It is a Book I much desire to see. I pray you remember the Irish Annal which you promised me before your going out of Town. LETTER LV. A Letter from Mr. H. Holcroft to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. My Lord, IT hath pleased his Majesty now to direct this Letter to the Lord Deputy to admit you a Privy Counsellor of that Kingdom. I am ashamed it hath staid so long in my hands before it could be dispatch'd: But if it had come at the first to me, during the Duke of Buckingham's being here, it had not staid three days; but gone on in the plain High-way, which is ever via sana. After the Lord Deputy was pleased to put it into my Hands, at my first Access I moved his Majesty and shewed his Lordships Hand: But the King willed it should stay; and it became not me to press it further at that time: I know the Cause of the Stay was not any dislike of your Person, or Purpose not to grant it. But if the Duke had come home in any time, you should have been beholding to him for it. I pray your Lordship not to think it strange, that about the same time, his Majesty dispatch'd the Letter for Sir Edward Trevour to be a Counsellor: The Grant was gotten by my Lord of Buckingham before his going, and by his Commandment I drew it. I do strive to give your Lordship a particular Accompt of this Business, and do pray your Lordship to endeavour to satisfie the Lord De∣puty, of whose Commands herein I was not negligent. So soon as I acquaint∣ed his Majesty with his Lordships second Letter, I had his Royal Signa∣ture of which I wish you much Joy. My Lord Grandison is in reasonable good Health. So I remain Your Lordships most assured Friend, Henry Holcroft. Westminster, June 13. 1623.
LETTER LVI. A Letter from Dr. Goad, and Dr. Featly, Chaplains to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Admodum Reverende Domine, HAving so convenient a means, we send to your Lordship, which perhaps you have not yet seen translated and thus Armed with a Preface, by a worthy and learned Gentleman, Sir Humphrey Lynd, our Neighbour. To whose Observations concerning the Censures upon this Tractate de Corpore & Sang. Christi, if you will add any thing which he hath not espyed, we will impart the same from you to him, whereby your Lordship shall more encourage this well deserving Defender of the Cause of Religion, to whom in other Respects the Church and common Cause oweth much. For at this instant upon our Motion he hath undertaken the Charge of printing the particular passages of many late Writers castrated by the Romish Knife. The Collections are made by Dr. James, and are now to be sent unto us for preparation to the Press. We shall begin with Polydore Virg. Stella, Mariana, and Ferus. Proeterea in eodem genere alia texitur tela. The Story of the Waldenses written in French, and comprising Relations and Records for 400 years, is now in translating into English to be published. Before which it is much desired that your Lordship will be pleased to prefix a Preface for the better pass; which we think will be very acceptable, and the rather because we hope your Lordship will therein intimate, that in the same Subject jamdudum aliquid parturis, whereto this may serve for a Midwife, unless the Masculine birth deliver it self before this foreign Midwife come. Thus desiring to hear from your Lordship; but more to see you here up∣on a good occasion, we take our Leave, and rest, Thomas Goad. Your Lordships to be commanded, Daniel Featly. Lambeth, June 14. 1623.
LETTER LVII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. Salutem à Salutis fonte D. N. Jesu Christo. Most Reverend in Christ, THough I have little to say more than the remembrance of my love and best respects, I could not forbear to lay hold on the opportunity of this Bearer, our common friend, thereby to present them, as many ways most due from me to your Lordship. You have been so long expected here, that your Friends Letters have by that means, come more rarely to your hands. We have little News either of the great business, or any other, though Messen∣gers come Weekly out of Spain: And I conceive that Matters are yet very Doubtful. The new Chapel for the Infanta goes on in Building, and our London-Papists report, That the Angels descend every Night, and Build part of it. Here hath been lately a Conference between one Fisher a Jesuit, and one Sweete on the one side; and Dr. Whyte and Dr. Feately on the other: The Question was of the Antiquity and Succession of the Church: It is said that we shall have it Printed. All our Friends are in good Health, name∣ly Sr. Robert Cotton, Sr. Henry Spelman, Mr. Camden, Mr. Selden and the rest, and Remember themselves most Affectionately to you. Mr. Selden will send you a Copy of his Eadmerus with the first opportunity; which should have been done before this time, had not his expectation of you here, stayed his hand. Philip Cluverius is lately Dead at Leyden of a Consumption: Before his Death he was so happy as to finish his Italia, which they say is done with great diligence, and the Impression so forward that we shall have it this Autumnal Marte. My Lord Chichester is to go within a Fortnight to Colen, to the Treaty and Meeting there, appointed for the Restitution of the Palatinate. But some think that the Armies now a-foot in Germany will much hinder it. Bethlem Gabor troubles the Emperor again in Austria. The Duke of Brunswick in Bohemia, Lusatia, and Silesia; and Manfeyld in other places. I believe I shall see your Lordship in Ireland, before I see you here. If your Answer to the Challenge be Printed, I hope I shall be beholding to you for a Copy. And thus wishing your Lordship as much happiness as to my self, I will ever remain Your Lordships most Affectionate Friend, and Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London. July, 14. 1623. Divers of my fellow-Commissioners remember their best Affections to your Lordship; especially Sr. Nath. Rich, and Mr. Crew. My Lord Marshal speaks of you often with much Affection; you will find him a noble Friend, if occasion be to use him; which if it be in your absence, and my self present, I shall be most glad to be your Sollicitor.
LETTER LVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton, Bishop of Co∣ventry and Litchfield, to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Salutem in Christo Jesu. Right Reverend, and Dear Brother: : I Do much joy to hear of your health, wherein consisteth the comfort of ma∣ny: I have been much beholding unto Mr. Dr. Barlow for his pains, both in commending your Lordships health unto me, and in inviting me by his presence to write unto you; yet more especially for the view that he gave me of your Treatise, which is now lately published: At the sight of the In∣scription, viz. [The Religion professed by the Ancient Irish] I was compelled to usurp that saying, Num boni quid ex Galiloea Yet when I came and saw, it is that good which beyond expectation doth much affect me: This is Ex tenebris lucem: Macte industriâ & sanctitate, and bless the World with your labours. When I shall have any thing that may seem acceptable, I shall be ready to impart it unto your Lordship. My request is, That when you shall have occasion for London, I may be your Host, for I lie directly in the Road: In the interim let us, I pray you, enjoy the Rite of Christian Absents, to pray one for another. And thus desiring our Lord Jesus to preserve us to the glory of his Saving Grace, I rest Your Lordship's loving Brother and Friend, Tho. Coven. & Litch. Eccleshall, July, 19; 1623. LETTER LIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath, to the Most Reverend Dr. Hampton, Arch-Bishop of Armagh. My very good Lord, IT is now above a fortnight since I received your Graces direction for pro∣secuting the Order, for settlement of the payment of Tithes in the Es∣cheated Counties: whereof some question was made at the Council Ta∣ble. My Lord Docwra, and my self, the next day after we received your Let∣ters, addressed our selves unto the Lord Deputy; and possessed him fully with the substance of the business: Within two hours after your Graces Letter was openly read at the Table: together with which I exhibited the Orders set down in your Triennial Visitation, Anno 1620. Whereupon my Lord Deputy very honourably moved, that the former Act of State might be renewed, and enlarged with the addition of such particulars as were in your Orders ex∣pressed, and there omitted. It was replyed, That the matter was of great importance, and much concerned the Country, and therefore it was not
suddenly to be resolved upon, until the advice of the Judges, and some other of the Bishops were had therein. In the mean time, for the preparing of matters, Mr. Vice-Treasurer, my Lord Chief Justice, Sir Roger Jones, Sir Adam Loftus, and my self, were appointed to meet in private, and to con∣sider of those particulars in your Graces Order, which were not formerly contained in the Act of State. The things questioned at that meeting, were, 1. For the Titles of Warrens, and Fish, of which they made doubt, whe∣ther they ought to be paid or no. 2. Of Tradesmen, Merchants, and Sellers of small Wares, under which Title, they said, all sellers of Ale, all manual Occupation, and day Labourers might be comprehended: yea, and the Servants of all the Trades also, as well as the Masters. 3. To the Title of Milk and Calves; they would have the words of Cheese and Butter added, to take a way all questions about them. 4. That no Seed of Hemp and Flax should be paid, but such as are in the Bundle with the stalks of the Hemp and Flax, (as it was no otherwise, I told them, in the Order intended.) 5. Of Mortuaries was the last and greatest Controversie; which being gi∣ven heretofore (as was alledged) for praying for dead mens Souls, it was by some said, That it was against Law and Conscience to demand them now, when such praying is held to be unlawful. But generally the exception ta∣ken against the Order was, That the poor only did suffer therein; and there∣fore it was wished, that a certainty might be laid down for all Mortuaries. This is the substance of all that passed at that meeting: since which, I have attended divers times, to see unto what issue these things might be brought at the Table. And to be sure that nothing should be done therein in my absence, I took with me your Graces Orders, and the Commissioners Animadversions upon them, and still detain them in mine own custody. At last, considering that it was your Graces pleasure, that my Lord Chancellor should be made acquainted with this business, before it came to the Table, seeing, by reason of his absence, that could not then be done, I thought it not amiss yesterday to move my Lord Deputy, that things might be deferred until my Lord Chancellor's coming hither: for now that my Lord Docwra is in England, I think we shall not find any like affected unto us in this busi∣ness, as my Lord Deputy and Lord Chancellor have always shewed them∣selves to be. My continual expectation of the ending of this matter, hath occasioned the delay of my writing unto your Grace therein: now, as you shall be pleased to give me further direction, I will either proceed in the same, or forbear until we may have the benefit of my Lord Chancellor's presence. While I was writing of this, I received your Graces Letter brought by this Bearer: together with his complaint made against Heglye, and others, in the prosecution of that suit. I will, according to your direction, give order to my Official that these violent courses may be stayed, until the truth of things upon further examination may appear. I find more trouble with Mr. Heg∣lye and Mr. Shepherd in causes of this nature, than with all the Ministers in Meath beside: and in truth (my Lord) unless some course be taken for re∣straining such unquiet spirits as these, our whole Clergy will pessime audire for their sakes. Yesterday I was fain my self to prefer a Petition to my Lord Deputy in the behalf of my Clergy, that no Indictments might be permitted to proceed against them at the Assizes for matters of this kind, but they might be referred to the Ecclesiastical Court, unto which the cognisance of the right of Tithes doth properly appertain. And I do discern at this time a kind of a general combination to be made for the disgrace and keeping down of our Ministers. What that particular is which your Grace doth mention in the beginning of your Letter, I do not yet understand, John Forth having
not as yet sent any Letter unto me. But whatsoever it is, I will not fail (God willing) to be present at the Assizes in Trim; and both in that par∣ticular, and in all other things, wherein your Grace shall be pleased to em∣ploy me, to follow your directions, as one who desireth always to be ac∣counted Your Graces, ready to do you all service, Ja. Midensis. Pinglass, August, 6. 1623. LETTER LX. A Letter from the Most Reverend the Arch-Bishop of Armagh to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Salutem in Christo. UPon Sunday last, as I was going to Bed, a Pacquet was brought unto me from my Lord Deputy, with the Advertisements of all that passed at White-Hall the 20th of July. But by good hap I received advice from my Lord Grandison five days before of the King's noble profession in a Speech used to his Judges, That as he had, so he would still maintain the Religion Established in the Church of England, and would never give way to the contra∣ry. Only he wished the Judges to proceed in the execution of Laws with temperance, and fitting moderation. Seeing it hath pleased God (whose Councils may be secret, but not unjust) to exercise us with this mixture, let us remember how dangerous it is to provoke Princes with too much animosity, and what hazard Chrysostom brought to Religion that way. The Gospel is not supported with wilfulness, but by patience and obedience. And if your Lordship light upon petulant, and seditious Libels, too frequent now-a-days, as report goeth, I beseech you to repress them, and advise our Brethren to the like care. So I commend you to God, resting Your Lordships very loving Brother, Armagh. August 12. 1623.
LETTER LXI. A Letter from Dr. Ryves to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. Right Reverend, and my very good Lord; I Have now too long time forborn to write unto your Lordship, the cause whereof hath been, for that we have here lived in suspense our selves, of what would ensue of our Noble Prince his Journey into Spain; nei∣ther durst I write you any thing for certain, because I was ever in fear of a contrary report before my Letter could come unto you; and as for Un∣certainties they were not worth the writing. But now at the last, thanks be to our good God, we have our Prince again; he came to London on Monday Morning last, being the 6th of this present, at Eight of the Clock in the Morning; it was my hap to be at Lambeth at that time with my Lord of Canterbury; and whilst I was there, the Prince came to Lambeth Stairs, where his Grace received him and kissed his Hand; and from thence in his Graces Barge went to York-House, where he brake his Fast, and presently went away to Royston, where the King then was and is. News of his lodg∣ing that Night at Guilford came to his Grace of Canterbury that Morning at Three of the Clock, and presently all London rang with Bells, and flamed with Bonfires, and resounded all over with such Shouts, as is not well possi∣ble to express. The day, without bidding, was kept festival by every Man; whereof, because I took such pleasure in seeing it, I conceive your Lordship will also take some pleasure in hearing the Relation. As for the Match, Rumor in ambiguo est, pars invenit utra{que} causas; some say it will be a Match, others that it will not; and each part thinks he hath reason for what he says; but nothing is yet known that may be reported for a certain∣ty. As for my self, hanging otherwise in equal Ballance between the two Opinions, your divining Spirit is always obversant before mine eyes; and sways me to believe as I hope, that it will please God to dispose of our Prin∣ce's Affections for the greater benefit of his Church, and our State. It hath happly ere this came to your Lordship's Ears, that I was not long since commanded to attend my Lord Chichester into Germany: after a while, that Negotiation was hung up upon the Nail, in expectance of the Princes return: and now we look to hear of a new Summons, but nothing is done as yet therein. And even so, my good Lord, humbly desiring your good Prayers to God for me in all my honest Endeavours, I take leave, and rest, Your Lordship's in all Service to be commanded, F. Ryves. From my House near the Doctors-Commons, this 8th of October, 1623.
POSTSCRIPT. MY good Lord, no Man doubts but that the Prince went a good Pro∣testant out of England; but it's as certain, thanks be given to God for it, that he is returned out of Spain tenfold more confirm'd in ours, more obdurate against their Religion than ever he was before. So is the Duke of Buckingham, in so much that upon his Letters to his Dutchess out of Spain, she went also publickly to her Parish-Church at St. Martins the Sunday before Michaelmas-day, and on Michaelmas-day it self, and so conti∣nueth. Moreover, what is befallen to the Prince himself and to the Duke, the same is befallen to all the rest of his Company, they all return more re∣solv'd Protestants than ever; being thorowly perswaded ex evidentia facti, that Popery is Idolatry, if ever any were. F. R. LETTER LXII. A Letter from Sir H. Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Salutem à D. N. Iesu Christo. Most Reverend in Christ, I Hope you will impute my long silence to your long expected and much wished repair hither, which you seemed in your last kind Letter to in∣tend before this time: I trust that your Stay proceeds not from want of Health, but some other occasion, which I shall most gladly understand. We are here full of business, but all in Treaty, and so little concluded, that I know not what to deliver for Truth to my Friends. Here hath been a great Conventicle of Embassadors, which is now dissolved: Dieguo de Mendoza, who accompanied the Prince, is gone yesterday: Dieguo de Meshia, who came from Bruxells with a fair train of Nobles, Gentlemen, and Military Men, goes away on Tuesday next. Our late prodigious Events, as that of the fall of the House in Black-friers, being related in three several Pamphelts, the late dangerous Fire in London, with some others of that kind, cannot now be new to your Lordship. The latest which I must send you, is very sad and dolorous, being of the death of our late worthy Friend Mr. Camden, whose Funeral we solemnized at Westminster on Wednesday last in the After∣noon with all due Solemnity: At which was present a great Assembly of all Conditions and Degrees; the Sermon was preached by Dr. Sutton, who made a true, grave, and modest Commemoration of his Life: As he was not factious in Religion, so neither was he wavering or inconstant, of which he gave good Testimony at his end; professing in the Exordium of his last Will and Testament, that he died, as he had lived, in the Faith, Communion, and Fellowship of the Church of England. His Library (I hope) will fall to my share, by an Agreement between his Executors and Me, which I much desire, partly to keep it entire, out of my Love to the Defunct. The original Copy of the second part of his Elizabeth, is in my hands,
which is intended to be shortly printed. Within a day or two Sir Robert Cotton and my self intend to go into his Study, which is yet shut up, and there to take a view of his Papers, especially of such things as are left of his own writing. I desire to be remembred by your Lordship in your holy Prayers to God, to whose gracious Protection I commend you, and ever remain, Your Lordships most affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, Novemb. 22, 1623. LETTER LXIII. A Letter from Dr. James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. MY Duty in most humble manner remembred unto your Lordship. I am informed that your Lordship passed this way, not far from us to London, where you have remained for some few weeks: I should have been glad to have known of it sooner, or rather to have waited upon your Lord∣ship here in Oxford. I have traced the Steps a far off about the Succession and Visibility of the Church, wherein your Lordship hath gone a far Journey: I do but glean where you have reaped a plentiful Harvest. Nevertheless if my poor and weak Labours may any ways stead your Lordship, I would be glad to contribute my Pains. You ascend (as I perceive) as far as our St. Aug. of England, and not unworthily: for if our Records be true, not only the Irish, (as you shew) but also our Britains and Scots continued averse and heretical (as they are called) to the whole World, almost till the time of S. Bernard. Many Scots and French were orthodox in the substantial Points of Religion long before Waldus (I mean P. Waldus, for there was another Waldus Ortho∣dox some hundreds of years before P. Waldus in Berengarius's time.) I have collected as much as I can find in all likely Authors to this purpose, as in the Catalogue of Writers and Witnesses of the truth of the last Age of Goulartius, Wolfius, Rhoanus, Balaeus de scriptoribus, out of the History of the Waldenses, both by Lydius and Camerarius out of Lombard, Dr. Powel and others, printed; out of sundry Manuscripts, as Gascoigne, Canter, Mapes, P. de Vine∣is, Becket, Sarisburiensis, which have been diligently read over by a learned Kinsman of mine, who is at this present, by my direction, writing Becket's Life: wherein it shall be plainly shewed, both out of his own Writings and those of his time, that he was not (as he is esteemed) an Arch-Saint, but an Arch-Rebel; and that the Papists have been not a little deceiv'd in him. This Kinsman of mine, as well as my self, shall be right glad to do any Ser∣vice to your Lordship in this kind. He is of strength, and well both able and learn'd to effectuate somewhat in this kind; critically seen both in He∣brew, Greek, and Latin, knowing well the Languages both French, Spanish, and Italian, immense and beyond all other Men, especially in reading of the Ma∣nuscripts of an extraordinary style in penning, such a one as I dare ballance with any Priest or Jesuit in the World of his Age, and such a one as I could wish your Lordship had about you: but paupertas inimica bona est moribus, and both fatherless and motherless, and almost (but for my self) I may say (the more is the pity) friendless. For my self, I am not so far gone in Years as in Sicknesses; yet my Body is not so weak, but my Mind is as strong,
and my Zeal great to see somewhat acted against the Papists in matters of Forgery and Corruption, which are matters of Fact, whereto my Studies have always aim'd, and shall during Life (if God will.) I find infinite Corrup∣tions in the Fathers Works, especially of the Roman Print: in the Canon Law and Decretals I can convince them of shameless Forgeries by the Parch∣ments. But that which hath amazed or amused the World, and made it turn, or continue Popish, hath been the want of Censurers of the Fathers Works, which made our Magdeburgians and some of our best learn'd, to lance the Fathers, and not to spare them, whereas they are but Pseudo-Fathers indeed. But the notedst cozenage which is rife, and most beguiling in these days, is a secret Index Expurgatorius, and therefore the more dangerous; that is, the reprinting of Books, not making mention of any Castigation or Purgation of them, and yet both leaving and adding, and otherwise infinite∣ly depraving them (as is to be seen in hundreds of Books of the middle-Age and later Writers) I instance in Sixtus Senensis, and Alphonsus de Castro, and Antoninus Summes. There are about five hundred bastard Treatises, and about a thousand places in the true Authors which are corrupted, that I have diligently noted, and will shortly vindicate them out of the Manu∣scripts, (for hitherto they be but the Conjectures of the Learned.) For this purpose I have gotten together the Flower of our young Divines, who volun∣tarily will joyn with me in the search: some fruits of their labours (if your Lordship desires) I will send up. And might I be but so happy as to have other twelve thus bestowed; four in transcribing Orthodox Writers (whereof we have plenty) that for the substantial Points have maintain'd our Religion, (40 or 50 l. would serve): four to compare old Prints with the new: four other to compare the Greek Translations by the Papists (as Vedelius hath done with Ignatius, wherein he hath been somewhat help'd by my Pains) I would not doubt but to drive the Papists out of all their starting-holes: But alas, my Lord, I have not Encouragement from our Bishops! Preferment I seek none at their hands, only 40 or 60 l. per Annum for others, and their Lordships Letters to incourage others is that I seek, which being gained, the Cause is gained, notwithstanding their brags in their late Books. And thus, craving pardon, I rest in humble Service, Your Lordship's in all Duty, Tho. James. Oxford, 28 Jan. 1623. LETTER LXIV. A Letter from Mr. William Eyre to the Right Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Meath. Reverende in Christo Pater, Domine mihi mult is nominibus colendissime: NUperrime de adventu tuo in Angliam, de{que} morâ per aliquot menses, audivi à Ramo nostro, quem tamen nondum mihi contigit videre, ex quo tecum fuit Londini: Solummodo per internuntium me de quibusdam certiorem fecit.
Gratulor verò tibi & tuis, nobis etiam omnibus vitam & valetudinem tuam, qui tam auspicatò. & foeliciter his funestissimis temporibus, illa arma sumsisti, quae non carnalia, sed divinitùs valida sunt ad subversionem muni∣tionum Antichristi, & Davidis exemplo in nomine Domini exercituum ad∣debellandum incircumcisum illum accessisti. Certe hic in Anglia ad arma Ecclesiae communia capessenda, quae preces sunt & lachrymae, heu! nimis segnes sumus omnes: & alibi forsan ad arma carnalia minimè necessaria nimis proclives fuerunt valdè multi, oraculi Apo∣stolici non satis (ut videtur) memores de interitu Antichristi ; quod non solum de praedicatione veritatis vivâ voce, sed etiam, ac praecipuè de Polemicis Theologorum nostrorum scriptis interpretari licet: quò Sibyllinum etiam illud a quibusdam transfertur,—; quoniam scilicet ex linteis contritis fit papyrus, quae scriptioni inservit. Sed quorsum haec apud Dominationem tuam Accedo ad illa quorum tu nupèr mentionem fecisti. Fateor me ante annos aliquot quaedam meditatum fuisse quae verè  vel etiam antidoti vice esse possent, non solùm contrà venenata aliquam multorum scripta, qui sacro∣sanctos fontes corruptelae passim insimulant; sed etiam adversus nonnullorum & Pontificiorum & nostrorum de origine Biblicae punctationis scriptionisque, admodùm periculosas vel certè nimis temerarias conjecturas; & quorundam etiam aliorum ex adversa parte, judaizantium superstitiosas vel minùs proba∣biles opiniones. Nam inter Biblicam & masoreticam punctationem diligenter distinguendum esse censeo, ut Veritatem tàm ab excessu quàm à defectu in∣ter utrumque vindicemus & sartam tectam defendamus. Caeterùm haec etiam omnia & id genus alia à nobis semipaganis qui nec otio nec literis abundamus, & qui literis quam libris sumus abundantiores, ad te releganda sunt; lima∣tissimum tuum & judicium & stylum desiderant. In his & aliis ejusdem farinae spinosis & perplexis nobis eris  vel in Apologia quam in promptu habes pro sacrorum fontium puritate & authentica utrius{que} instru∣menti editione, vel in Bibliotheca tua Theologica, quam post lucubrationes tuas de Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione, Expectemus. Fieri quidem potest ut rectè quis sentiat forsan etiam & firmissimis argumentis ostendat & confirmet; sed illud ipsum nec commodè, nec expeditè, nedum politè & latinè proferre possit: quod tamen in hoc de punctatione Hebraicâ argumento mihi videtur necessarium. Quod  adtinet: lectum reperies in Manuscri∣pto exemplari (inter alia) Symboli Apostolici Romanis characteribus expresso, Cantabrigiae in Archivis Bibliothecae Benedictinae, , iisdem ferè verbis cum lxx (ut opinor)  63, & cum Apostolo Ephes. 4. Mi∣rum in modum debacchantur hic adversarii nostri quod non satis Theologi & Catechistae nostri consentiunt in hoc articulo explicando. Et certè populus pleris{que} in locis apud nos articulum hunc tantum non planè negare & re∣jicere jamdudum occoepit. Quod Concionatorum & Catechistarum quo∣rundam vel imperitia, vel (ut levissimè dicam) incogitantiâ, factum esse vi∣detur. Mihi semper maximè consentaneum visum est & ad obstruendum os Pontificiis & ad piorum consolationem, si unà cum confutatione errorum de Limbo Patrum, &c. unum idem{que} doceamus & profiteamur, nempe juxta tum articulos Doctrinae Catholicae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, tum utrum{que} Catechis∣mum nostrum, minorem & majorem, Christum scilicet Dominum nostrum, verè & reapse ad locum damnatorum descendisse, & quoad efficaciam infer∣num, &c. debellasse, &c. ut in Noellano Catechismo (si dextrè intelli∣gatur) exprimitur. Sed manum de tabula, ne Epistolae modum exceden∣do gravissimum occupationum tuarum cursum impediam. Temporis totius∣que villicationis nostrae reddenda est ratio in die illo, coram supremo judice. Quoties mihi in mentem venit (venit autem saepiuscule) tua in me singu∣laris Clementia toties me ipsum vel ingratitudinis vel socordiae accusare me
posse videar quòd non faepius per literas officii & grati animi significationem dederim. Ignoscas igitur quaeso huic temeritati meae. Christus opt. max. Te incolumem servet precor omni{que} benedictionum genere cumulatiffi∣mum reddat. Vale, Dominationi tuae devotissimus in Domino, Guilielmus Eyre. Colcestriae Martii vii, 1623/4. LETTER LXV. A Letter from Dr. James to Mr. Calandrine. Good Mr. Calandrine, I Am glad my Lord hath a mind this way; I am told that he may perhaps have those fair Houses furnished for the speaking. Godstow of Sir Tho. Walters, which is not far from Oxford, by Land or by Water at pleasure; Water-Eaton of Sir Richard Lovelace, four miles distant, Waterstock of Sir Geo. Crooks six miles. I move not because I hear not from his Lordship, but if I may, both Dr. Bambridge and my self will do our best for the best in our Intentions, both for my Lord's Health, and the facilitating of his Lordship's Studies. Sir John Walter and Sir Geo. Crook may be spoken withal in Lon∣don. Concerning our beginning, and that with the Councels, taking Dama∣sus de Pontificibus, and the Epistles, Decretals together, I wish it here pre∣sently, if we had my Lord of Canterbury's Letters and Copies. Normannus certainly is no Anabaptist. Alph. de Castro is in the Index Expurgatorius as well as Cajetan, contrary to both our Expectations. Not only the peices, but the whole Tracts are at my Lord's command. That of Anselm, Plessis had not from me: Of that my Cousin is transcribing, I know that Asinus Burnelli of Nigellus Wiraker is long ago printed, now out of print; but he hath compared his Manuscript with two more and enlarged it, the print is not to be come by. Stampensis and Serlo, I think are no where extant. In my note D. I am not as yet assured to be that in Lambeth; the sight will shew that it is a MS. so ancient, that it was Theodorus's, written almost in Gregory's Time: The Copy of the Concordance I send you, you need not keep a Copy of it, for I have the Original by me. Anentine of Ingolst. I have not seen, he is much corrupted, as all our Historians, two quire taken out of him, two out of Cuspinian, more than a quire out of Krantzius: If my Cousin come, I will perhaps send, I dare not venture them otherwise: Remember my Duty to my Lord, & sic te Deo. Your assured Friend, Tho. James. April 11, 1624.
LETTER LXVI. A Letter from Dr. Tho. James to Mr. Calandrine. Good Mr. Calandrine, I Receiv'd your last weeks Letter: The Collection out of Stella I have, but no Stella it self, and that I will not trust an ordinary Carrier with, the Lyon's Addition and the Index Expurgatorius of Spain will satisfy your longing therein: some of the first places are amended according to the Prescript of that unholy Inquisition, but farther they proceed not: all the rest (and in one place a whole leaf or two) are to be expunged, but untouched in that of Lyons. We have fully finished the Collation of the Opus imperfectum, hereafter more of that matter, mean time I have taken pains for trial sake, to compare both our Basil and it with the Manuscript, for one Homily; I find wonderful need of a second review. I have sent you a Proof of some few Differences from both the printed Copies, whereby you may perceive, how this Book and sundry others have been tossed and tumbled by ignorant Men, what, and how great mistakes, and need of a diligent review, for this is but lapping. I do send you up also in thankfulness for Dr. Goad's Project, a Fancy of mine, which I pray you to impart to the good Bishop; if he give any liking to it, let it go forward, if otherwise, let it be remanded, it is both fesible and possible in my judgment. If Cambridge will set up, or set forward the like, I dare undertake more good to be done for the profit of Learning and true Religion, than by building ten Colleges. I have of late given my self to the reading only of Manuscripts, and in them I find so ma∣ny, and so pregnant Testimonies either fully for our Religion, or against the Papists, that it is to be wondred at; Religion of Papists then, and now, do not agree. How many private Men out of their Devotion would singly be able to found such a College; much more jointly considered, but I leave all to God's Providence, it shall suffice, and be a great comfort to me if this cannot be effected, that by my Lord of Canterbury's Letters, (which I have long'd for) we may have a quasi College, and the whole benefit of that which is expected in Dr. Goad's refin'd Project. I my self, by my intreaty, have set twenty or thirty a-work; how may the Lord Archbishop command our Heads of Houses, and they their Company, or at least, one out of a College or Hall. I have or shall receive this week three quire of Paper of my Workmen, for which as they finish the quire, I lay out the Mony, 20 s. for each quire: of Gu. de S. Amore I have received one quire; and so of Wickleph , which is harder to read, and the other in English of Wicklephs, I look for this day. Platina is almost done, Alphonsus à Castro respited a while, and Cajetan likewise, till I hear from the Learned Bishop. Touching Wicelius, I thank you for your Advertisment, I now perceive my Conjecture fails me not, that Cassander was much holpen by him, and his Judgment confirm'd by reading his; but if I read his Epistles, I will tell you my mind; howsoever in the interim, Wicelius is of more authority than Cassander, and his Books concealed purposely, or made away quantum in illis by the Inquisitors. I have ever been of Dr. Ward's mind, touching the publishing those Books which they make away so fast, ut jugulent homines fur∣gunt, &c. Fisher de natura Dei, is in one of their Indices impudently denied to be his; tho some one in the Council of Trent say nay. Upon the fifth of Matthew, is but a scantling to those great Volumes which I have ready: if any Man please to come hither, he may see the whole,
My Lord of Meath's return and earnestness for the Plot, both before and since, as also Dr. Goad's forwardness to print ought hereabout (I pray God the News be not too good to be true) glads me much; as the Sickness of my Lord of Ely doth some no less. It were not from the purpose, if Dr. Sutcliff do see this whole Project of our College and Purpose; and if he did turn away his mind wholly from Chelsey, I durst presume of more fasibility and possibility here of doing good. Lastly, for the Catalogue, it is a great and painful Work, but hath well requited my Pains, in that I find some Books that I have long sought after, and could not find, as Stella of the Popes, and such like. If any thing be printed, I would print only those that are not mentioned in our present Catalogue. But where is the Encouragement for the printing or doing any thing If our Genevians had sent us over that of Gregory at this Mart, how sea∣sonable had it been to have put an egde to our great Business: I am sorry it came not, but see no remedy. What of the Enchiridion! nothing; my Judgment you have, and it is free to alter, that do nothing at pleasure, but sure I am some things are past question: lay aside and expunge all doubtful Treatises, till our College take them in hand, which shall rivet them in after another fashion, if God give Life. I have now at length recovered the Spanish Book of Mr. Boswell: the Book is a Commentary upon our English Laws and Proclamations against Priests and Jesuits, spightful and foolish enough, but especially about the Powder-Treason, laying it to Puritans, as Cobham, Gray, and Rawley; or to the whole State, or a Policy to intrap Them and their Estates. I would my Lord of Meath did understand the Tongue, that from him the King might under∣stand the Mystery of Iniquity contained in the Book: No Place, or Time when, or where it was printed. Was he asham'd of that he did and it seemeth it, or the like like hath been divulged in many Languages. But I end, and pray God, That the Clergy give us not a fair denial, that is, a de∣lay to our Businesses at this Session. Let my Lord prevent as wisely and timely as he can. God have you and all yours in his safe keeping, and re∣member my Service in dutiful manner to my Lord, and Commendations to my Cousin, with whom (if I had had the Spirit of Prophecy) Dr. Featly should not have coaped withal, but God send the Truth to take place; if the President be faulty, to be punished; if innocent, to be delivered: And so once again I bid you heartily farewel. Your most assured Friend, Tho. James. Oxon the 23d of May, 1624. If my Lord of Meath, nor any other there hath Wicelius, it shall be written out, unless my Lord please to speak with Sir William Paddy, who was the Donor of the Book, and may command it to London, where it may be reprinted.
LETTER LXVII. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. My very good Lord; YEsterday, being the 27th of September, I received this inclosed Letter: In reading whereof, it presently came into my mind, that this was the Man at whose Sermon his Majesty was so much offended, when I was last at Court. Whereupon I sent for the party, and upon Conference had with him, found indeed that I was not deceived in mine Opinion. I put him in mind, that his Conceits were contrary to the Judgment of the Church of Christ from the beginning of the Gospel unto this day: and that of old they were condemned for heretical in the Nazarites. But finding that for the present he was not to be wrought upon by any reasoning, and that long a dies was the only means to cure him of this Sickness; I remembred what course I had heretofore held with another in this Country, who was so far ingaged in this Opinion of the calling of the Jews (tho not of the revoking of Judaism) that he was strongly perswaded, he himself should be the Man that should effect this great Work, and to this purpose wrote an Hebrew Epistle (which I have still in my hands) directed to the dispersed Jews. To reason the matter with him I found it bootless; I advised him therefore, that until the Jews did gather themselves together, and make choice of him for their Captain, he should labour to benefit his Country-men at home with that Skill he had attained unto in the Hebrew Tongue. I wished him therefore to give us an exact Translation of the Old Testament out of the Hebrew Verity, which he accordingly undertook and performed. (The Translation I have still by me): but before he had finished that Task, his Conceit of the calling of the Jews, and his Captainship over them, vanished clean away, and was ne∣ver heard of after. In like manner I dealt with Mr. Whitehall; that foras∣much as he himself acknowledged that the Mosaical Rites were not to be practised unto the general calling of the Jews, he might do well, I said, to let that matter rest till then; and in the mean time keep his Opinion to him∣self, and not bring needless Trouble upon himself and others by divulging it out of season. And whereas he had intended to write an historical Dis∣course of the retaining of Judaism under Christianity: I counselled him ra∣ther to spend his pains in setting down the History of Purgatory, or Invocati∣on of Saints, or some of the other Points in controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and Us. So far I prevailed with him herein, that he intreated me to become a Suitor unto your Lordship in his behalf, that the loss of his Living, and those other Troubles which he hath already sustained, might be accepted for a sufficient Punishment of his former Offence; and that he might have the Favour to be restored only unto his Fellowship in Oxford, where he would bind himself to forbare intermedling any way with his former Opini∣ons, either in publick or in private, and spend his time in any other Employ∣ment that should be imposed upon him. How far it will be fitting to give way unto this motion, I wholly leave unto your own grave Consideration. Thus much only I have presumed to propound unto your Lordship, in discharge of my Promise made unto Mr. Whitehall, with whom I could have no long Communication, by reason
I way presently to begin my Journey for the visitation of the Diocess of Meath. Until my return from thence, I have stayed the printing of the rest of mine Answer unto the Jesuits Challenge; the former part whereof I humbly make bold to present unto your Lordship's view, as unto whom, a∣bove all others, I most desire my simple Labours in this kind may be approved. And so craving pardon for my boldness in troubling you thus far, I rest, Your Lordship's, in all Christian Duty, ready to be commanded, Ja. Midensis. Dublin Sept. 28. 1621. LETTER LXVIII. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. MY Duty remembred unto your Lordship. I am much beholden to your Lordship for your last Book, which I received before the Act by my good Friend Mr. Calendrine; I have punctually perused it, and do render un∣to your Lordship both common and private thanks for the same, and expect your Lordship's of the Britains ancient Religion: wherein as I see no difficul∣ty, so I would be glad to assist with my Pains if any thing were worthy: yet of my Cousin Mr. Rich. Jame's (who remembreth himself most dutifully to your Lordship) I send a Taste, or Essay; of what may be done by him. I will say no more of him or it, but this; That I know no Man living more fit to be imployed by your Lordship in this kind than himself; his Pains incredible, and his Zeal as great, and his Judgment in Manuscripts such, as I doubt not but your Lordship may use to the great benefit of the Church, and ease of your Lordship; may there be but some course taken that he may have victum & vestitum independant from any one. This if he may have from your Lord∣ship, or by your Lordships means, I know his Deserts and Willingness to de∣serve well of the Church. For my own Business, I know not what to say, whether to go onward, or to stay. Guil. de s. Amore is transcribed, and wants but the three Books from your Lordship, whereof Mr. Calendrine hath given me good hopes. Wickleph de Veritate is the better part done; I have hitherto laid out the Money, but my Purse will hold out no longer to defray the Charges: If it would be so, that I may receive the Money to recompence their pains, I would not doubt before the next Session, but to have most of Wickleph's Works transcribed; but I fail in the burden, and refer all to God's Providence and your Lord∣ship's Direction, being not idle in these Businesses. And so in haste, with my own and my Cousin's Duty to you, I end, and rest, Your Lordship's in all Duty, Tho. James. Oxon the 27 Ju∣ly, 1624.
LETTER LXIX. A Letter from Thomas Davies to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. Right Reverend, MAY it please your Lordship to take notice, that your Letter of the 24th of January in London, came to my hands the 14th of July, unto which I have given due perusal; and perceiving your Lordship's pleasure thereby, omitted no opportunity, neither any time, but the very day that I received it, began to lay out for those Books you writ for. The five Books of Moses in the Samaritan Character, I have found by a meer accident, with the rest of the Old Testament joyned with them; but the mischief is, there wants two or three leaves of the beginning of Genesis, and as many in the Psalms, which notwithstanding I purpose to send by this Ship, lest I meet not with another; yet I have sent to Damascus, and if not there to be had, to Mount Gerazim, so that in time I hope to procure another, which shall contain the five Books of Moses perfectly. I sent a Messenger on purpose to Mount Libanus and Tripoly, for the Old Testament in the Syriack Tongue, but he returned without it, and brought word that there I might have one after two months, but could not have it time enough to send by this Ship. The reason why they sent it not, was, that they wanted Parchment to copy one of the Books, and so not being perfect, did not send it; which by the next Ship, if your Lordship please, God willing, I will send you. But I pray understand, that by the Syriack Tongue they mean here the Caldean; And every Man tells me it is all one, the Syrians and Caldeans being one and the same People, but questionless the same Language; Therefore if your Lordship mean, and de∣sire to have the Old Testament in Caldean, I beseech you to write me by the first over Land, that I may provide it by the next Ship. Also I beseech you to take knowledge that I dare not promise you to send it according to the Hebrew; for neither my self, nor any other Man here, can determine it; only I must be forc'd to take his word that sells it me, who is a Minister of the Sect of the Marranites, and by birth a Caldean, but no Scholar, neither is there any to be found in these parts; but if your Lordship will have me send it at adventures, though it cost dear (as it will cost 10 l.) I will do my best en∣deavour to send it by the first Conveyance, but shall do nothing herein, until such time I have further order from your Lordship; to effect business of this nature in these parts requires time, Travel being very tedious in these Coun∣tries. I have inquired of divers, both Christians and Jews, of the overflow∣ing of Jordan, but can learn no certainty. Some say it never rises but after great Rain; but I met with a learned Jew, (at least so reputed) who told me that Jordan begins to flow the 13th of July, and continues flowing 29 days, and is some 18 or 20 days increasing: but I dare not believe him, his Relation not agreeing with the Text; for Harvest is near ended with them by that time; and unless you will understand by Harvest, the time of gather∣ing Grapes, it cannot agree. I have also sent to Damascus concerning this, and trust ere long to satisfy your Lordship in this Particular, and in the Ca∣lendar of the Samaritans. A French Frier, who lived at Jerusalem, told me that it never overflowed except occasiond by Rain: whereupon I shewed him the words in Joshua 3. 15. that Jordan overfloweth his Banks at the time of Harvest: which words are written with a Parenthesis, and therefore said he, are no part of the Text, which I know is his ignorance; I could
have shewed him, the thing plainly proved by that which he holds Canoni∣cal Scripture, Ecclus. 24. 26. If I have done your Lordship any Service herein, I shall greatly rejoyce, and shall ever be ready and willing to do the best Service I can to further the Manifestation of God's Truth; yea I should think my self happy that I were able to bring a little Goats Hair, or a few Badgers Skins, to the building of God's Tabernacle. I acknowledg your Lordship's Favour towards me, who have not, neither could deserve at your hands the least Kindness conceivable; yet the Graciousness of your sweet Disposition, emboldens me to entreat the continuance of the same, and also the benefit of your faithful Prayers; so shall I pass the better amongst these Infidel Enemies to God and his Christ. And so I pray God to encrease and multiply his Favours and Graces both upon your Soul and Body, making you happy in what ever you possess here, and hereafter to grant you Glory with Christ; into whose hands I recommend your Lordship, and humbly take leave, ever resting, Your Lordship's in all bounden duty to command, Thomas Davies. Aleppo, Aug. 29. 1624. LETTER LXX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Pickering to the R. R. James Usher Bishop of Meath, at Wicken-Hall. Right Reverend, and my very good Lord; I Was not unmindful, according to my Promise, to send to Dr. Crakenthorp for Polybius and Diodorus Siculus immediatly after I was with your Lord∣ship: But he attending the Visitations at Colchester and Maldon, came not home till yesterday. At which time, sending my Man for the Books, the Doctor returned Answer, That your Lordship shall command any Books he hath whensoever you please. That he had not Diodorus Siculus; but he sent me Polybius, and Marianus Scotus, which he says Dr. Barkham told him you desired to borrow. These two Books your Lordship shall now receive; and if it fall out that you be already provided of Marianus Scotus, then it may please you to let that come back again, because the Doctor tells me that after a while he shall have occasion to see some things for his use in Sigebert and other Writers, which are bound in this Volume with Marianus; but by all means he desires your turn should be served however. I shall be most ready to afford your Lordship any Service that lieth in my power, during your a∣boad in these parts, holding my self in common with the Church of God, much bound to you for your great and weighty Labours, both formerly and presently undertaken in the Cause of our Religion. The God of all Wisdom direct your Meditations and Studies, and grant you Health, and all Conve∣niences, for the Accomplishment of your intended Task. And so with remem∣brance of Dr. Crakenthorp's, and my own Love and Service, I humbly take leave, and shall ever rest, Your Lordship's in my best Devotions and Services to be commanded, Tho. Pickering. Finchingfield, Sept. 9. 1624.
LETTER LXXI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davies in Aleppo, to the Right Reverend James Usher Lord Bishop of Meath. Right Reverend Sir, MY bounden Duty remembred, &c. News here is not any worthy your knowledg; the great Rebel Abassa still troubles the State, and hinders the going forward of the Army against the Persian. Some few days time News came that the Vizier had given Battel to the Re∣bel, and that the Rebel had cut off 12000 Janisaries; yet they report the Vizier to have the best of the day, which most Men judg to be but report: certainly it is that Abassa will give them great trouble, pretending only Re∣venge upon the Janisaries for the Blood of his Master Sultan Osman. The greatest Villanies that ever were practised or intended, never wanted their Pretences. Yet it is thought by many that this Man hath done nothing without leave from the Port, otherways it is strange they had not cut him off long since; for what can be his Forces against the Grand Signior's Powers The Janisaries refuse to go to War before the Rebel be cut off, or Peace made with him: whereby you may observe what Power the King hath over his Souldiers; the truth is, they command and rule all, oppressing and eating up the Poor. When I consider the Estate of the Christians in these Parts, yea the Mahumetans themselves that are not Souldiers, then must I say, happy, yea thrice happy are the Subjects of the King of England, who live in peace, and enjoy the Fruits of their own Labours, and yet have another and a great∣er Blessing, the free passage of the Gospel. I pray God we may see and be thankful for so great Favours, expressing it by Obedience to God, and Honour to our King. Thus fearing that I have troubled your Lordship with a slender Discourse, humbly take my leave, beseeching the Lord of Lords, to multiply his Graces upon you, recommending you, with all yours, to God's Grace and Mercy, rest, Your Lordship's in all Duty to command, Thomas Davies. Aleppo, 29th Sep∣tember, 1624.
LETTER LXXII. A Letter from Sir H. Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher Lord Bishop of Meath. My very good Lord, I Received your Lordship's Letter, for which I return many thanks. My Journy into Ireland is of such necessity, that I cannot defer it long; though I have many motives, besides those mentioned by your Lordship, to urge my stay. As for the Books which you mention, I find Jordanus in vitas Fra∣trum in the Catalogue of the Publick Library at Oxford; Mr. Selden told me he never heard of the Author; if any Library about London have it, or that other Work of his, I will endeavour to discover them. As for the new Edi∣tion of Sealiger de Emendat. Temporum; as many as I speak withal are of opi∣nion that it is so far from coming out, that it is not yet come in to the Press. Here are already come two Dry-fats of Mart Books, and they expect but one more; you may perceive by the Catalogue what they are. Here will be very shortly some good Libraries to be had; as Dr. Dee's, which hath been long litigious, and by that means unsold. One Oliver, a Physician of St. Ed∣mundsbury, of whose writing I have seen some Mathematical Tracts printed; and Dr. Crakanthorp are lately dead. If there be any extraordinary Books which your Lordship affects, if you will be pleased to send a note of them, they shall be bought. Such News as we have, you receive so frequently, as coming from me they would be stale, which you know destroys their very Essence. We have had Bonfires, Ringing, Shouting, and also Ballads, and base Epithalamiums for the conclusion of the French Marriage, and yet I am but modicae fidei. Our Country-man Florence, Mr. Carthye was committed to the Tower some five days since. And thus remembring my best Affection to your Lordship and Mrs. Usher, I will remain, Your Lordship's very affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, (in haste) Novemb. 24. 1624.
LETTER LXXIII. A Letter from Dr. Ward to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath, at Much-Haddam in Essex. My very good Lord, IT was my purpose to have come to visit your Lordship at Haddam to morrow: but the truth is, upon Thusday last, before I came out of Cam∣bridg, I was made acquainted with a business which will occasion my return to Cambridg to morrow. I notwithstanding brought with me the Manu∣scripts of Bedes Ecclesiastical Story which I have of Sir R. Cotton's, and have sent it unto you by this Bearer Walter Mark: I will expect the Book from you, when you have done with it, for that I would keep it till Sir Robert restore a Book of mine, which he had of Mr. Patrick Young. I had purposed to have borrowed also out of our University Library, Simeon Dunelmensis, but I find that I am deceived, in that I thought it had been his History or Chro∣nicle, but it is only the History of the Church of Durham, and of the Endow∣ments of that Church, and not his History of England. And thus sorry that my occasions will not suffer me to see your Lordship this time; and with my kind Salutations to Sir Gerard Harvy and his Lady, with Thanks for my kind Entertainment when I was there; I commend you to the gracious Pro∣tection of the highest Majesty. Your Lordship's in all observance, Samuel Ward. Much-Mondon, Jan. 2. 1624. LETTER LXXIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath, to Dr. Samuel Ward. Good Mr. Doctor; I Received by W. Marks your Ancient Bede, which I suppose did some∣time belong to the Church of Durham: As soon as I have compared it with the printed Book, I will not fail (God willing) to send it you safe back again. As for Simeon Dunelmensis his History of the Church of Dur∣ham (which is in the publick Library of your University) I would intreat you to borrow it for me; however it hath not proved to be the Chronicle which I at first desired; for I have a great mind to see and transcribe all that hath been written by Simeon and Turgotus. Dunelmensis. Turgotus (I hear) is with Mr. Tho. Allen of Oxford, and (if my memory do not much deceive me) at my being in England the last time before this, you told me that you had begun to transcribe the Annals of Simeon Dunelmensis, which continue the History of Bede. I pray you, if you know where those An∣nals may be had, do your best to help me unto them. I could wish that Mr. Lisle would take some pains in translating the Saxon Annals into our
English Tongue; for I do not know how he can more profitably imploy that Skill which God hath given to him in that Language. If I had any op∣portunity to speak with him my self, I would direct him to five or six. Annals of this kind, (three of which belonging to Sir Rober Cotton, I have in my hands at this present) our of which there might be one perfect Annal made up in the English Tongue, which might unfold unto us the full State of the Saxon Times. But how that Gentleman's Mind stands affected that way I know not the feeling of his Mind therein I leave to you. And so com∣mending all your good Endeavours to the Blessing of our good God, I rest, Your most assured Friend, Ja. Mid. Much-Haddam, Jan. 4. 1624. LETTER LXXV. A Letter from Sir H. Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. My very good Lord; I Received your Lordship's Letter, which was must wellcome to me, and much more the News of your Recovery, which was deliver'd to me by Mr. Burnet, and by me to some others of your Friends, who were no less glad than my self. I am afraid that you converse too much with your Books; I need not tell you the danger of a Relapse. This News which I sent your Lordship deserved not Thanks, because vulgar and trivial: that of the Death of Erpenius is but too true, and is much lamented by learned Men in all places, for the cause by your Lordship truly expressed; he died of the Plague. Mr. Briggs was gone from London some three days before the Re∣ceipt of your Lordship's Letter. But I will write to him, that which I should have delivered by word of Mouth, if he had tarried here. In the collating of Books your Lordship hath made a good choice, that being a fit study in time of Sickness, as not so much imploying the Mind as other Studies. As for Bede I doubt the Collation of him will be scarce worth your labour: For as far as I went, they seemed rather to be variantes lectiones, than material Differences, a very few excepted. To make use of my Collations, your Lordship shall not want the Heydelburg Edition, which I will take care to have sent unto you. I have been this Morning with Mr. Patrick Young, who cannot give me satisfaction concerning those Books till he have been in the Princes Library. For the nameless Annal, I conceive that your Amanuensis mistook your meaning; for where you say that it begins at the year of our Lord 744, and ends in the year 1100, I cannot see how Asserius Menevensis could be the Author of most of it: Mr. Young will make search for it, and return an Answer as soon as conveniently he may. As for Asserius de rebus gestis Alfredi, he tells me that they have only a Transcript of it; but Sir Robert Cotton hath an ancient Copy; the same he tells me of Florentius Wigorniensis, and Simeon Dunelmensis. Of Eusebius Chronicle they have three or four Copies; and if you please shall have all of them, or which you please. Sir Rob. Cotton doth daily augment his store; he hath gotten lately a Book of St. Edm. Bury.
By the next return I hope to send the Books which you desire, and perhaps to play the Carrier my self. There is a rumor of the Adjournment of the Parliament till April, but no Proclamation yet come forth. There is a new Secretary, Sir Albertus Morton, to be sworn in the place of Sir Geo. Calvert. I have not heard any thing out of Ireland since my last to your Lordship. Mr. Young tells me that he received lately a Letter from Paris from one Lucas Holstenius, a young Man whom I mention'd sometime to your Lordship, being acquainted with him here in London the last year: he writes to him that a Jesuit there doth publish a new Edition of Eusebius in Greek and Latin; for the furtherance of which Work, Mr. Mountague, and Mr. Young sends thither their Notes and Observations upon him. Petavius is busy about his work de Emendat. Temp. which will shortly come abroad. Holstenius is print∣ing Scylax, Artemidorus Ephesius; with divers other old Geographers, some of which were heretofore publish'd by D. Haeschelius; and some till now never publish'd. I doubt not but D. Ryves hath sent your Lordship his Answer to the Analecta. I have read him over, and approve the Work, but not in eve∣ry particular; as where he makes Sedulius among others, (pag. 46. lib. 2.) to be one of St. Patrick's forerunners in the plantation of Christian Religion in Ireland. I do not see how that can be; The best Authors making him contemporary, if not later than St. Patrick. Some other passages I could cen∣sure, both of ancient and modern times; but I will spare that labour till our meeting. In the mean time with the remembrance of my Love and Service to your Lordship and Mrs. Usher, and my heartiest Wishes and Prayers for your Health, I will remain Your Lordship's most affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Bourgchier. Lond. Jan. 17. 1624. LETTER LXXVI. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher, Lord Bishop of Meath. AFter my Duty in humble manner premised; I hope, and am right glad to hear of your Lordship's Recovery. I have received from your Lord∣ship two Books, whereby I have not been a little benefited; yet of Boston I hear there is a greater Catalogue extant. I forbore to write all this while, for fear of trouble. I have laboured ever since in the common business, as your Lordship shall perceive by an humble Supplication printed, which your Lordship shall receive by Mr. Calandrine, which could I have had the happi∣ness that it might have passed your learned Censure, would have been much more perfect, but, ut quimus aut quando, non ut volumus. I have done it as advisedly as I could, and doubt not to give every Man good satisfaction in good time. If our Friends of Cambridge will joyn with us, the Work may be well atchieved within half the time, they taking half the Points menti∣oned, and they both sending to us their Observations to be revised by us; we ours to them to be revised by them, that it may be the work jointly of both Universities. My Zeal and Knowledg cannot match Dr. Ward's, yet I will endeavour to do my best. I deire to have my Service remembred to my Lord of Ely. I have upon a Letter of your Lordship's, imployed some in
transcribing Guil. de S. Amore, not that which your Lorship sent, but another greater and fuller Work, that is done, and a great deal besides: More had been, if we had not been compell'd, for want of Mony to have surceased; and my poor Means would not serve to supply Wants, and I am indebted for that which is done. Your Lordship by Letter (if I mistake not) under∣took for my Lord of Ely's 20 l. per Annum; had all promised been paid, I had had 20 or 30 quire in readiness; that which I have shall be fitted against the Parliament, in the exactest manner that it can be done for the Press. I have in the Press at the present these things, A Confutation of Papists out of Papists, in the most material Articles of our Religion; whose Te∣stimonies are taken either out of the Indices Expurgatorii, or out of the ancient Books, especially the Manuscripts. An Index librorum prohibitorum 1ae, 2ae, vel 3ae Classis, vel expurgatorum quovismodo; chiefly for the use of our publick Library, that we may know what Books, and what Editions to buy; their prohibition being a good direction to guide us therein; I have cast them in∣to an exact Alphabet. My Cousin Rich. James desireth to have his Duty remembred to your Lordship, he hath reviewed and inlarged his Book of Bochel's Decanonization, a Book so nearly concerning Kingly Dignity, and so fully opening the History of those Times, that I know not where a Man shall read the like: I would he might have the happiness that your Lordship might see it, being now fair transcribed, that it might pass your Lordship's Censure before it pass any further. And I am perswaded (over-weaning perhaps in love to my Cousin) that if his Majesty saw it, it would please him, having so many good pieces of Antiquity in it: it is his, and shall be my chiefest Study. I have here found upon search thereof, Petrus Minorita's Homil. upon Matthew, and two Books of St. Augustins coming here into England, which are of good note: but I make no doubt your Lordship hath seen them already; I leave therefore to trouble your Lordship any further, being right glad to hear of your Lordship's Preferment (as I am informed) for the good of the Church; and so I rest, Your Lordship's in all Duty, Thomas James. Oxon Febr. 8. LETTER LXXVII. A Letter from Dr. Thomas James to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath. My humble Duty remembred to your Lordship: I Am incouraged by your Lordship's Letters to go on chearfully in my in∣tended course and discovery, solus aut quomodo what is one Man able to resist, when so many oppose so falsly and so impudently I have written to his Grace by his Chaplains for helps necessary for the forwarding so great a Work, as the Visibility and perpetual Succession of the Church. There shall come nothing forth till I have viewed by my self, or others, under a publick No∣taries hands, all the Testimonies that do result out of the Manuscripts and printed Books of Papists: But what can I poor weak Man do, unless my Lord of Canterbury command Help, and command Books and all things
necessary to so great and requisite a Work which being well done, will∣serve to close up the Mouths of our deceived Papists. This Question (if I conceive aright) is set afoot politickly by our Adversaries the Papists, by especial Advice from Rome: for it is plausible amongst the People and vul∣gar sort, and impossible to be answered by every one; but be it as it may, I have willingly offered to answer one Smith, a Lincolnshire-Man, who insults upon us in the close of his Book in these words; And if now they endeavour to answer them, [his Reasons] it will yet more appear that they can no way answer them, and that this kind of dealing with Protestants [in matters of Fact] out of their own Confessions is the fittest to stop all Mouths. Upon occasion of these words, I will make bold to write somewhat concerning this matter, both to divert our Papists to other matters of Fact, wherein they have hitherto de∣clined the Question about the Controversie of their Bibles (I mean of Sixtus and Clemens) impossible to be answered. I have heard their best Reasons about the number of the bastard Treatises, which, as false Writers, have put them into Possession of their false Religion, which amount unto five hun∣dred, reckoning none but such as are both condemned by some, and urged by others as learned Papists; touching the corrupting of all Authors, and Re∣cords in all Ages, both in their several Indices Expurgatorii, and without, e∣specially of their Decretals and Gratian, wherein the Soul and Life of Po∣pery consists. For the Decretals, I have lighted upon a Manuscript, that, I trust, to a clear eye, will make the matter indubious, and by the sight of this Manuscript (which contains them not at large) there are such Absurdities contain'd in them, as I shame either in modesty (as of Mice Turds in the Eucharist) or in Grammar (Epscopi si in fide erraverit) are to be quitted; but for all other matters whatsoever they are, portandi, a good Resolution set down in a good Phrase. For the Canon Law, I mean Gratian, I have com∣pared it from top to tae, not without special Contentment to all Lovers of the Truth. For by the Edition of the Canon Law, so carefully set out by Greg. 13. Faber and Contius, and I know not who must be imployed to that great business, more care had of the printing of that than of the Bible; it must be testified that the Edition doth agree exactly with the Roman Copy, or else it of no worth; they had the use of many Vatican Copies. Now either this is untrue, or their Copies are of no Credit: For none of our Copies, of as great Antiquity as theirs, either have Constantine's Donation, or the proof of it out of Gelasius Dist. If Gesta SS. Martyrum S. Sylvestri, this is proving of a thing that is ignotum by ignolius; for both are wanting in all our Co∣pies, that are of as great Antiquity as theirs, as long since Antoninus and o∣ther good Lawyers have observed. Generally in the Edition of the Canon Law they have deceived us thus. 1. Those which are Palea, noted by them, are indeed Palea, that is Chaff, in our old Copies. But besides, 2. There are a number of good Consequences that are Paleae, which they have passed over in silence, whereof our Manuscripts give good witness. There are also a third sort which they have made Paleae, to discredit them which are no Paleae, as in the 8th Distinction touching Obedience to Princes Commandments for Religion, this is in all our Manuscripts but censured and sentenced by them Lord! What a world of Corruptions is contained in that Volume, I mean not only of Gratians, that is bad enough, but of their Additions to, and Perversions of Gratian's. I mean to spend this next week wholly upon this Argument of Popish Frads, and to send up my abortive Labours to be sub∣mitted to your Lordship's grave Judgment. I deal in matters of Fact, and have little help God knoweth: I will empty my self to your Lordship. For Marianus Scotus, God knows, if I had compared it, one of the first Books, and both that and Matthew of Paris, yea and Bedes History must be compared, or vain will be our Labour in writing of the Visibility of the Church, when we shall rely upon such sandy Proofs. It is too true that Possevin
observeth, that there are whole Pages thrust into Marianus's Works; he saith by Hereticks: he lieth like a Varlet; the cui bono will shew us that. The Manuscript in our publick Library (I have compared the Capita through∣out) doth hugely differ from the Printed, and so doth another Copy of alike Goodness and Antiquity in C. C. C. To compare him exactly, is to write him out anew: Hoc opus, hic labor est. I doubt your Lordship's Leisure will not serve; after this Fortnight mine shall; and it will need the help both of Dr. Banbridge and Mr. Briggs. To have the Copy out of the Library it is impossible; for if the King should write for it, it is Perjury for any Man to propose a Dispensation for the lending it forth: but the Copy at C. C. C. upon a sufficient caution for the redelivery, shall and may be sent up to your Lordship; and I suppose Mr. Patrick Young hath one or two Copies in the Princes Library at St. James's. Not only the Rabbins, but the Thalmud in six Volumes at Rome hath felt the smart of the Popish Indices, would God we were but half as diligent to restore, as they abolish and put out the Truth. I have restored 300 Citations, and rescued them from Corruption in thirty quire of Paper: Mr. Briggs will satisfie you in this Point, and sundry other Pro∣jects of mine, if they miscarry not for want of maintenance; it would de∣serve a Prince's Purse. If I was in Germany, the Estates would defray all Charges; cannot our Estates supply what is wanting If every Church-man that hath an 100 l. per Annum and upward, will lay down but a Shilling for every hundred towards these publick Works, I will undertake the reprinting of the Fathers, and setting forth of five or six Volumes of Orthodox Writers, comparing of Books printed with printed, or written; collating of Popish Translations in Greek, and generally whosoever shall concern Books, or the Purity of them, I will take upon me to be a Magister S. Palatii in England, if I shall be thereunto lawfully required. I thank your Lordship for my poor Kinsman, whom I leave to express his own Wants and Desires himself. I have trespassed too much on your Lordship, whom God long preserve. Your Lordship's in all Duty, Tho. James. Oxon Feb. 15th, 1624. LETTER LXXVIII. A Letter from Dr. Ward to the Right Reverend James Usher Bishop of Meath, at Much-Haddam in Essex. Right Reverend, I Received your Lordship's Letter, which I should have answered ere now. But the truth is I had a purpose to have seen your Lordship at my return from London at the end of the Term, but I was hindred in that intention: And since my return home, I heard your Lordship was fallen into a burning Fever, whereupon I purposed to have made a Journey to visit your Lord∣ship, and to that purpose went to Mr. Crane to have his Company: But being born in hand by one of Jesus Colledg, that he should shortly hear from Had∣dam how your Lordship did, the Party went out of Town, and so I heard nothing till Mr. Crane came home. I did hear at London of the de∣cease of the late Primate of Armagh, and of your Lordship's Designment
by his Majesty to succeed in that place, which I pray God may turn to his Glory, the Good of the Nation, and your own Comfort and Contentment. I have borrowed of Mr. Vice-Chancellor, the Book wherein is the History of the Church of Lindifern, after of Durham; it is in four Books; the Book is none of those which Bale mentioneth; I borrowed it of him for two Months. It is one of them which Matthew Parker gave to the University-Library: I spake with Mr. Lisle, as touching the setting of some of the Saxon Chronicles: He saith he hath seen some, but few of them have any thing which are not in other Chronicles now extant. If you have any which you think were worth his pains, I would incite him thereunto. I suppose your Lordship hath seen the Process against the Corps, Picture, and Books of the Arch-bishop of Spalato. Unwise Man that could not easily have presa∣ged these things. By halting between two, he hath much obscured his worth with all Parties. I have perused some of Dr. Crakenthorp's Book, which is well done. I purpose to see your Lordship at Easter, if God will, and you continue with Sir Gerard Harvy. This Messenger bringeth the Book, and things from Mr. Crane, with two Letters from him. Thus with my Prayers to God for the Recovery of your Health, and to bless you in all your Affairs, with my best Wishes I commend your Lordship to the gra∣cious Protection of the highest Majesty. Your Lordship's in all Practice, Samuel Ward. Cambridg this 21st of March, 1624. LETTER LXXIX. A Letter from Sir H. Bourgchier to the Right Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Much-Haddam. Salutem in Christo. Most Reverend in Christ; IN discharge of my Promise, and that great Obligation of Thankfulness due from me, I thought good to present these Lines to your Lordship: Your Friends here were glad to conceive so good hope of your perfect Recovery, which I doubt not will be daily greater. I have herewithal sent your Lordship Eusebius's Chronicle, and Asserins de vita Alfredi from Mr. Pa∣trick Young, together with the remembrance of his Love and Service. It was neither his fault nor mine that you had them not sooner. He desires that your Lordship will be pleased to return the Transcript of Epistles which you borrowed of me, if you have not present occasion to use them; for among them are some Epistles of Grossetede, which my Lord Keeper desires to have: having contracted with the Printer for the Impression of his Works, with which he goes in hand presently, as I told your Lordship. Sir Rob. Cotton hath not yet gotten Malmesbury de Antiquit. Glaston. but expects it daily. I have been with my Lord of Winehester, and presented your Lordship's Love and best Respects to him: I also told him of your Samaritan Pentateuch, of which he was very glad, and desires to see it with your Lordship's best Conveni∣ence:
He keeps his Chamber for a Cold, being otherwise very well. Since my being with your Lordship, I understand that Mr. Mountagues Appeal to Caesar (for so he stiles it) is in the Press. I am promised Sirmundus upon Sidonius Apollinaris, and Anastasius Bibliothecarius History, which are not common: the former with Savarons Notes I have; but Mr. Selden will fur∣nish your Lordship in the mean time with both. Vettius Valens in Greek is Mr. Selden's now, but was sometimes Dr. Dees: But the rest of his Books will be had very shortly, as many as are worth the having; and so much de re literaria. Now your Lordship will expect something of the publick Occurrents of the World, which may be to you some Recreation. The Siege of Breda holds still; the Prince of Orange will be in the Field by the 20th of April, Stylo novo, with 50000 Foot, 9000 Horse, and 150 pieces of Ordnance, and as they say, is resolved to fight rather then Breda shall be lost. Here is now great talk of the French Match, and of the Duke's present Journey thither, but I confess I believe little: For I hear others speak of the Popes Nephew, Cardinal Barberino coming with great Pomp into France, and, as some say, rather to hinder thn further the Match. Here is great prepa∣ration for a Fleet to go to Sea: They speak of a Press of 10000 Land Soul∣dier, and 7000 Mariners to furnish that Fleet; and that it shall be victual'd for eight Months. Here is News come out of Spain of a great loss lately sustained by the Spaniards in the South Sea, and that by the Holland Fleet that went for Lima. And thus wishing your Lordship perfect Health, and as much Happiness as to my self, I will ever remaim, Your Lordship's very affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London March 23d, 1624. LETTER LXXX. A Letter from the Bishop of Kilmore to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop Elect of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my honourable good Lord, I Do congratulate with unspeakable Joy and Comfort your Preferment, and that both out of the true and unfeigned Love I have ever born you, (for many years continued); as also out of an assured and most firm Per∣swasion, that God hath ordained you a special Instrument for the good of the Irish Church, the growth whereof (notwithstanding all his Majesty's Endow∣ments and Directions) receives every day more Impediments and Oppositions than ever: And that not only in Ulster, but begins to spread it self into other places: so that the Inheritance of the Church is made Arbitrary at the Coun∣cil-Table; Impropriators in all places may hold all ancient Customs, only they upon whom the Cure of Souls is laid, are debarr'd: St. Patrick's Ridges, which you know belonged to the Fabrick of that Church, are taken away: Within the Diocess of Ardagh, the whole Clergy being all poor Vicars and Curats, by a Declaration of one of the Judges this last Circuit, (by what direction I know not) without speedy remedy, will be brought to much de∣cay; the which I rather mention, because it is within your Province: The
more is taken away from the King's Clergy, the more accrews to the Pope's: and the Servitors and Undertakers, who should be Instruments for settling a Church, do hereby advance their Rents, and make the Church poor. In a word, in all Consultations which concern the Church, not the Advice of sages but of young Counsellors is followed. With all particulars the Agents whom we have sent over will fully acquaint you, to whom I rest assured your Lordship will afford your Countenance, and best Assistance. And my good Lord, now remember that you sit at the Stern, not only to guide us in a right Course, but to be continually in action, and standing in the Watch-Tower to see that the Church receive no hurt. I know my Lord's Grace of Canterbury will give his best furtherance to the Cause, to whom I do not doubt, but after you have fully possessed your self thereof, you will address your self. And so with the remembrance of my Love and Duty unto you, praying for the perfect recovery of your Health, I rest, Your Lordship's most true and faithful Servant to command, Tho. Kilmore, &c. March 26. 1624. LETTER LXXXI. A Letter from Mr. Tho. Davis to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, MAY it please your Grace; upo the 8th of July past I received your Letter, baring date the 12th of March from Much-Haddam, and the 5th of the last Month the Copy thereof by way of Legorn, whereby I per∣ceive that my Letter of the 29th of Spetember, 1624 together with the five Books of Moses in the Samaritan Character came in safety to your hands, be∣ing very glad it proves so acceptable to your Lordship; however find my¦self to have been abused by a Jew, who pretends to have knowledg in that Tongue, affirming to me that it contained all the Old Testament. How they read those Books I have enquired (having no better means) of him, who I perceive knows no more (if so much) than their Alphabet, and to hear him read the first two Verses of Genesis I could not, because another of those Books is not here to be had. The Name of God Jehovah, is pronoun∣ced by them, as saith he, Yehueh. and the fist, eight, and sixth of these Let∣ters of their Alphabet are pronounced hef, chef, ef, the ch of the eight Let∣ters must be pronounced deep in the throat, Chef. I sent to Damascus to see if I could procure the Grammer, Chronicles and Calendar which your Lordship desires, but could not obtain any of them, there being but one poor Man of the Samaritan race left in Damascus, who is not able to satisfy me in any thing you desire; only he said there were cer∣tain Books in their Language pawned to a great Spahee of that City, but what they contained the poor Fellow knew not. The Spahee would not part with them under 200 Dollers, which is 60 l. Sterling: so I durst not venture upon them, being ignorant of their worth; yet I will not cease labouring as occasion shall serve to give satisfaction to your Grace in what you require
touching the Samaritans, and I hope to prevail in some things, unless the Troubles in and about Jerusalem do hinder the free passage of Caravans this ensuing Spring. A former Letter, which it seems your Lordship writ and sentaway by Marcel∣les, I never received; but as for the Old Testament in the Chaldean Tongue, my diligence hath not wanted to procure; and to this end, sent divers times to Tripoly and Mount Libanus, but could not prevail. I have seen here the two first Books of Moses, but examining them according to your Direction, I found them to be out of the Greek; whereupon I resolved to send to Emmit and Carommitt a City in Mesopotamia, where divers of the Sect of the Jacobites do remain; and after a long time there was sent me (which I re∣ceived eight days past) the five Books of Moses only, in an old Manuscript, and according to the Hebrews, with a promise ere long to send the rest of the Old Testament: the Party that sent me this, is the Patriarch of the Jacobites in those Parts who writ also that I should have Eusebius his Chroni∣cle, with some of the Works of Ephraem; which if he do, shall be sent by the first good Conveyance. Those parcels of the New Testament, viz. the History of the Adulterous Woman; the second Epistle of St. Peter, the se∣cond and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, with the Book of the Revela∣tions, I have procured, and sent them together with the five Books of Moses, and a small Tract of Eprhaem by the Ship Patience of London. With the said Books I have sent another in the same Tongue, which I humbly present your Grace; if it shall yeild any matter worthy your reading, I have ob∣tained my desire; however it may prove, I presume it will be accepted as a Token of his Love, who will ever be ready, in what he can, to observe and effect what your Lordship shall command him. I have sought the Old Testament in that Tongue, which is out of the Greek, and distinguished by certain Marks and Stars: but I cannot hear of any such. From Emmit I hope to have some good News to write your Lordship, and to send you a Catalogue of such Books as be here to be had. When this Book which I now send shall be received, I beseech your Grace to give your Secretary order to advise me thereof: in the mean time, if any of the Books you desire shall be brought or sent unto me, I will not let them go for a small matter more or less; such Books are very rare, and esteemed as Jewels by the Owners, tho they know not how to use them, neither will they part with them but at dear rates, especially to Strangers, who they presume would not seek after them, except they were of good worth: and indeed they give a kind of superstitious Reverence to all Antiquity. Thus have I related my proceedings, and what intend to do, in what your Lordship writes for, and I should be very glad to accomplish your desire, but I presume my willing and ready mind shall be accepted. Here is News from Bagdat, that the Vizier with the Army have been thereabouts now three Months past, but have done little worthy so great a force; and now for 70 or 80 days have besieged Bagdat, but can do no good upon it. The Persians have made divers Sallies out of the City, and after a small Skirmish returned, giving the Turks the worst; the King of Per∣sia, if report be true, draws all his Forces that way, but rather to fear the Turk than encounter him, unless by some Stratagem, wherein he hath the advantage of the Turks: the sequel and issue of this War we expect, and greatly desire in this place, the rather because our Trade depends much thereupon. There hath of late happened some Troubles about Jerusalem, by the Insolence of an Arab called Emeere Farrach; there is a force of Men gone against him; he being of no great power, will be soon quiet. The Estate of his Empire decays, and will be utterly ruined by the Tyranny and Oppression of the Spahees and Janisaries, who are Lords and Governors of the Country; what Man is he that dare oppose a Souldier The Mahometans are Slaves to
the Souldiers, the Christian and Jew under both; it would grieve a Man's Heart to see the poor Estate and Condition of the Christians in these Parts; nor so much for their outward Estate, tho that be marvelous grievous, but they are to be pitied for their Estate of Christianity; for I know that in a manner all true knowledg is departed both from Minister and People, the Lord in Mercy visit them. Pardon my Tediousness and Presumption, and excuse my weakness, who shall daily pray unto the Lord of Lords to pro∣sper all your ways, and bless all your Endeavours, and grant you a long Life here, with Happiness, and everlasting Glory in the Life to come, and will ever rest, Your Graces in all humble observance to be commanded, Thomas Davis. Aleppo the 16th of January, 1625. LETTER LXXXII. A Letter from Sir H. Bourgchier to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Much-Haddam. Most Reverend in Christ, and my very good Lord; I Received your Lordship's Letter of the 26th of March, for which I return many humble Thanks. I have written to Mr. Pat. Young, both concern∣ing his Transcript of Epistles, and the nameless Annal; but I could yet re∣ceive no Answer from him, and I have not yet had time to go to him my¦self. I have spoken with Sir Rob. Cotton concerning Malmesbury, and the two Books of Saints Lives in Sarisbury Library, all which he hath undertaken your Lordship shall have with all convenient speed. As for the other two Books, he tells me that you have one of them, if not both already, but if you want either of them you shall have it sent to you. Giraldus Cambrensis of the Lives of David and Patrick was in my hands, which I send your Lord∣ship herewithal. I have transcrib'd him for the Press, only I will desire that when the Printer is ready for that part, I may have it to compare with my Transcript; for I purpose to go in hand with the Impression of his Works, tho I make some adventure of my own Purss. If my Memory fail me not, that Arabick Book is in my Lord Marshall's Library, but I have not had oppor∣tunity to go in since the receipt of your Lordship's Letter, by the next I will give your Lordship an account of it. I received some Letters out of Ireland of the 25th of March, but containing little memorable; only which is very lamentable, of five hundred Souldiers lately transported from the River of Chester, three hundred at least are lost by Shipwrack upon the Coast of Wales. Sir Ed. Chichester is created Baron of Belfast, and Viscount of Carikfergus. Here is much preparation for the Solemnities of the Fune∣ral, Parliament, and Coronation. The new Writs are gone out, returnable the 17th of May. The Funeral-day is appointed the 10th of May, which doubtless will be very great and sumptuous. It is said that the King of Bohe∣mia his eldest Son comes over to be chief Mourner. There is no day certain for the Coronation, because it depends upon the Marriage, that both may be done together. Italy which hath been quiet sixty Years, some few, Brables of the D. of Savoy excepted, is now grown the Stage of War: The French,
the Duke of Savoy, and the Venetian Forces are 50000, and are come within twelve Miles of Genoa, having already taken divers of their Towns. But now my Paper bids me end; wherefore with the remembrance of my Love and Service to your Lordship and Mrs. Usher, as also to Sir Garret Harvy and my Lady, I will ever remain, Your Graces most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, April 7. 1625. LETTER LXXXIII, A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davies to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Father, and my no less honoured Lord; IT is a good while since I writ your to Grace, for want of a good occasion, not presuming to trouble you with unnecessary Lines, so trust my long silence will be excused. The five Books of Moses, with those parcels of the New Testament (which your Lordship writ for) in the Caldean Tongue, sent you ten Months ago, I trust in safety are come to your hands, whereof I should be glad to hear. I have used my best Industry to procure those other Books that you would have bought, but hitherto have not been so happy as to light upon any of them, such Books being very rare and valued as Jewels, tho the Possessors are able to make little use of them. Amongst all the Caldeans that lay in Mount Libanus, Tripoly, Sidon, and Jerusalem, there is but only one old Copy of the Old Testament in their Language extant, and that in the custody of the Patriarch of the Sect of the Maronites, who hath his residence in Mount Libanus, which he may not part with upon any terms; only there is liberty given to take Copies thereof, which of a long time hath been promised me, and indeed I made full account to have been possessed of one ere this time, having agreed for it; but I was deluded, which troubled me not a little, so in fine, resolved to send a Man on purpose to Libanus to take a Copy thereof, who is gone, and I hope in four or five Months will finish it; and by the assistance of the Almighty, I trust to be able to send it by our next Ships. By our Ships lately departed I have sent your Lordship some of the Works of Ephrem, which if they prove useful, I have my desire, however I trust will be acceptable. The last Letter I received from your Lordship bears date the 21st of Fe∣bruary, and came to my hands the 18th of July, where I perceive you would have the New Testament in the Aethiopian Language and Character, wherein my best Endeavours have not wanted, for which purpose I have sent to Damascus, where a few of the Abissines do inhabit, yet have had no answer thence; and in case do not prevail here, I purpose to send to Jerusa∣lem, where divers of them do attend upon the Sepulcher of our Lord, whence I hope to be furnished, and in due time to send it with the Old Te∣stament in the Syriack Tongue, by the next Ships. Thus much I beseech your Lordship to be assured of, that I will omit no time, nor neglect any means for effecting what you have or shall command me.
Touching such Occurrences which are worthy your Lordship's knowledg, this unsettled tottering Estate affords little. The Turks Forces were before Bagdat, and during the Siege, the Persians sallied out of the City divers times and had many Skirmishes with the Turks, but ever came off with Honour, and slew the Turks in great numbers, who after eight Months were forced to raise their Seige and be gone; who whilst they sought to starve their Enemies, were themselves almost famish'd, the Persians having stopped all Passages whereby Provision should have been brought to the Camp. The Vizier having raised the Siege, and marching toward Mossell, a City formerly called Ninive, was pursued by their subtil Adversaries, demanding their Am∣bassador, who the Turks, contrary to the Laws of Arms, did detain: in this their Fight the Persians had the slaughter of the Turks, and after three days the Ambassador was delivered them, who with great Honour and Joy re∣turned to Bagdat; and the Turks with great loss, and greater dishonour marched weakly towards Mossell, who before they could arrive thither, what with want of Victuals, and a Sickness that raigned amongst them, as also an extream hot Wind that sometimes happens in those Parts, there died in one day twelve thousand Persons; in fine, they lost in these Wars the greater part of the Army, which consisted of 150 thousand Men; and now the Vi∣zier with a great part of the Army are here in Aleppo, where they purpose to winter, and in the Spring to make a second on-set and try their Fortunes (as they term it) with their Enemies. But a good success such unruly and rebellious Souldiers can scarce expect; their long Ease and unjust gotten Wealth hath caused them to forget Obedience either to their King, or his Lieutenant: But whether of these two Mahumetans prevail I think makes not much; my Prayers shall be, that God his Enemies may be scattered, and his Truth take place. Your Graces in all bounden Duty, Thomas Davis. Aleppo, July, 1625. LETTER LXXXIV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Right Reverend John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. My very good Lord, IT pleased your Lordship and my Lord Treasurer, upon the reference made unto you by his Majesty, to order that Dr. Rives should forgo the Claim which he made by his Patent to the exercise of the Office of the Prero∣gative and Faculties, and to execute the same only as Substitute under me. But the Doctor having taken upon him to set down in Writing your Lord∣ship's Mind; hath done it with such advantage to himself, that I am forced to become an humble suitor unto your Lordship to commit the drawing up of that order to some Person that shall be more indifferent. For there he hath inserted a Clause, that he may enjoy the place which he desireth during his Life: (which is not fit to be granted unto any Substitute, but during his good Behaviour) and generally he setteth down all things therein as may most make for his own behoof, without reserving any Power unto me, to limit him any way
in the exercise of those Offices; when it was no part of my meaning to give him any such unlimited and absolute Power; but such only as other Bishops ordinarily do give unto those which they place under them. And whereas in Ireland the power of granting Dispensations is not by Law re∣strained to any competent distance of place, to any certain number of Bene∣fices, or to any Qualification of Persons: I more particularly declared my Mind therein unto my Lord Treasurer in the Doctor's own presence: that I held it no ways fit that my Substitute should have Authority to grant Fa∣culties as he listed, but only to such Persons, and in such manner as I my self should appoint: yet so as the whole profit of such Grants should wholly be re∣served unto him, and the care of ordering them left only unto me. Here∣upon a motion was made by my Lord Treasurer, that as we had referred the main business unto your Lordship, so we should also refer the condition Your Lordship may by private Instructions, and his discretion, free your self of this fear. and limitation of that Deputation, which was to be granted unto him by me; unto which Motion both of us then yeilded. After this he brought unto me the Copy of an Instrument drawn by himself; wherein there was no manner of mention at all made of any limitation of his Power, either in the granting of Dispensations, or in any thing else: So that by virtue hereof he might also likely do what he pleased, without controul or restraint from me. I leave unto your Lordship's Wisdom to consider, whether it would be convenient, that the Doctor should take upon him to visit the whole Clergy of the Kingdom, to convent Arch-bishops and Bishops before him, and to grant all manner of Dispensations whether I will or no; and whe∣ther I should not wrong both my self and the whole Clergy of Ireland (who have groaned long under this heavy burden, as your Lordship discerns by the Copy of their Petitions here inclosed) if I did commit any such trans∣cendent and unlimited Power unto him. My humble suit therefore unto your Lordship is, that you would be pleased to get the Order drawn by Dr. Rives, into your hands again, and to commit the laying down both of it and of the Authority which he is to receive from me, unto some other which shall not respect his own Ends, but simply express what shall be your Lordship's pleasure therein; whereunto I will most willingly submit my self, and ever rest, Your Lordship's in all Duty ready to be commanded, Ja. Armachanus. Much-Haddam, 6 July, 1625. The Answer of the Bishop of Lincoln. My Lord, I do not conceive this Patent to be so unreasonable; so a Clause be added therein, of a Power reserved to you and your Successors Person, to take unto your own Cognizance, any Exercise of any one private Act of Jurisdiction, or issuing forth of any one particular Di∣spensation, that may be of consequence to the State, or the Church: which Clause Sir Henry Martyn will (at my desire and request) clear up for your Lordship. Jo. Lincoln, C. S.
LETTER LXXXV. A Letter from Mr. Abraham Wheelock to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend, MY most humble Duty remembred to your Lordship, being not a little affected with your Recovery. My Lord, you may peradventure blame me of Neglect or Forgetfulness, or both, concerning some business I was entrusted with, when last I was with your Lordship. I had wrote a Letter fully to excuse my self. The Fellows of Emanuel were confident they had not that Thalmud your Lordship desired: Mr. Dr. Ward undertook the delivery of that Bennet-Colledg Book, when I intended to have by a Letter excused my self, but a long fit of Sickness prevented me. I could draw little or nothing from Mr. Downs, whose Memory fails him; by much a-do I desired him to shew me that place which Mr. Broughton so much talked of concerning , it is in Plato his Cratylus, pag. 54. at the bottom of the Leaf of the Basil Edition, apud Henricum Petri; where he brings Socrates shewing why Pluto was so called; your Lordship will better gather the Ar∣gument that I can fitly set it down. Socrates, , where he addeth much more concerning ; if I were able to give the sum of it, it needeth not if your Lordship have Plato, if not, (except London Stationers now furnish) I can with much conveniency send down to Tottenham any Book. I was lately with one Mr. Boyse, whose Notes are on Chrysostom, with Mr. Downes's; he is now comparing of Nicene Syn. in Greek with an old Manuscript which was by great chance offered to him: he is very learned in the Greek Authors, and most willing to communicate, tho your Lordship needs not those Excellencies; he is but four Miles dwelling out of Cambridg. I intend to go over of purpose to him concerning the same Queries which your Lordship propounded, because he was Mr. Downes his Scholar; I shall intreat him to furnish me with all the Notes (if he may conveniently) that he gathered from Mr. Downes. My Lord (if I be not over-bold to desire such a Favour) I wish I had that Table wherein your Lordship hath compared the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Alphabet, which sheweth plainly the right Pronunciation of the , and the whole consent of the rest. When I have done with Mr. Boyse, and have obtained any thing worth your view, I will by that Messenger desire your Servant to copy out that Table for me, which would give great content to my Scholars, which study the Languages. And thus craving pardon of your Lordship, I humbly take my leave, and rest Your Lordship's humble Servant to his Power, Abraham Wheelock. Clare-Hall, Ju∣ly 12. 1625.
LETTER LXXXVI. A Letter from Dr. Sam. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Much-Haddam. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord, I Received a Note from Dr. Lindsell, written by your Lordship; wherein you desire to have a Book out of Trinity-Colledg Library, which you in∣title, Psalterium Gallicum, Romanum, Hebraicum MS. in magno Folio. There is no such Book there, as the Master telleth me; but he shewed me the Psal∣ter in Hebrew MS. interlinear with a Latin Translation; and two other Col∣lateral Translations in Latin, but there is no French, and it is but in a little Folio. The Catena in Psalmos 50 priores, Daniele Barbaro interprete, I cannot learn where it is. Whereas you desire some old Impression of the Greek Psalms, in Trinity-Colledg Library, there is Augustini Justiniani, Episcopi Nebiensis Psalterium Octaplum; in which there is the Greek Translation, also the Arabick and Chalde Paraphrase; but I suppose you have that Book already. Also they have a Manuscript Psalter in Greek, a very good Hand, which it seemeth was Liber Theodori Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis. If you would have any of those, I will procure them from Dr. Maw. I had purposed to have seen you e're now; and now this Week I had purposed to have brought my whole Family to Mundon, but this day I received a Letter, that one of my Work∣men at my Parsonage, had a Sister who is suspected the last Saturday to die of the Plague at Standon. I thank God we are yet well at Cambridg. If you please to write unto me your mind, touching the Books aforesaid, I will do what you would have me. Thus desiring the Lord to mitigate this grievous Judgment which hath seized upon our Mother-City, and from thence is diffused to many other Towns in the Land, and to stay it in his good time; and in the mean time to sanctify this Correction unto the whole Land, that it may have that powerful working for which God sends it, to make us sen∣sible of our Sins, and of his Wrath for our Sins, and of the Miseries of our Brethren under the Cross; and so to move us to true Repentance, and new Obedience; which He effect in us for his Mercy's sake. Thus with my best Service to your self, and Mrs. Usher, and my kind Love to Sir Gerard and his Lady, I commend you to the safe protection of the highest Majesty. Your Lordships in all observance, Samuel Ward. Sidney-Coll. Aug. 3. 1625. I am careful that the Letter be conveyed by Persons safe from all Infection.
LETTER LXXXVII. A Letter from Dr. James, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. After the remembrance of my humble Duty: MAY it please your Grace to pardon my long silence and neglect of writing, according to my Duty, occasioned partly by Sickness, part∣ly by Discontent and Discouragement from our great Ones: But being now freed from both, (God be thanked) I address my self wholly to the care of the Publick, long since by me intended. Wherein now, more than ever, I must be bold to crave your Lordships furtherance, that as it had its first be∣ginnings from your Grace, so it may its final end, and a fulfilling by your Lordships good means. It is true, my Lord of Litchfield is intrusted with the whole direction and managing of this Business: but had your Grace been near, there would have been none more able nor willing than your Grace. I do therefore most humbly intreat your Lordship, that sometime before your Grace's departure into Ireland, you would be pleased, upon con∣ference with my Lord of Litchfield, to settle the whole Business, what Au∣thors we shall begin with, in what order, and after what manner. As for the Canon-Law, which I have looked unto, not without the vocation and approbation of Mr. Vice-chancellor; I must confess my forwardness therein, upon a supposal of sundry Additions unto Gratian; and my Fellow-labou∣rers are as earnest as my self upon that little which we have hitherto found. Doubtless Gratian was one of the first Compilers of the Popish Religion, in his hotch-potch of the Canon-Law: but yet he is not so bad as he is made, the Corruptions are of a later hue, and came in long since his time. I have given a taste as of all that I have hitherto done, in certain rude Papers, overhastily perhaps sent up to pass your Lordships Censure and Judgment; and from thence to the Press, that I may have a taste to present unto my Lord the Bishops, and others, that have already promised their helps. If this, of almost an hundred places corrupted in point of Religion, (not taking all up∣on an exact survey, but a few to give proof of the faisibility of the Work to the common profit of the Church) shall be thought fit to be printed, and an hundred places of flat contradiction, Men, if ever, will be stirred up to ad∣vance this Work; for the doing whereof, with some jeopardy of my Health, and loss of all worldly Preferment, I am most willing to be imployed to the uttermost of my simple Endeavours, having nothing to promise but Fidelity and Industry. Good, my Lord, what can be done by your Grace, let it be done to the uttermost; the Work is in a manner yours; to God be the Glo∣ry; and if the Church of England receive not as much profit by this one Work being well done, as by any thing since Erasmus's Time, I will never look hereafter to be credited of your Grace, or any Man clse. But to the well∣doing and perfecting of this Work, two things are requisite; First, That the Fathers Works, in Latin, be reprinted, (the Vindiciae will not serve) wherein I desire to have three or four able Doctors, or Batche∣lors of Divinity, to be my Assistants in framing the Annotations. Secondly, That there be provision, either in Parliament, or out, that the Copies may be sent from any Cathedral Church or Colledg, upon a sufficient Caution, non obstante statuto: both these being granted, as at your Lord∣ships instance they may be, I doubt not of a most happy success of the whole Business. Which, that I may not be too troublesome to your Grace, I
commend unto the protection of the Almighty, praying for your Lord∣ships health and happiness, and resting, as I am, in all Bands of Duty and Service. Your Grace's in all Duty, Tho. James. Oxon 27 Feb. 1625. I have a Pseudo-Cyprian, Arnaldus Bonavilla∣censis, Work collated and restored by the MS. and printed here under your Graces Name: of Authors falsified, it is the greatest instance that can be given, the whole Treatise fairly written forth, is at your Grace's dispose, your mind being signified. It hath sundry foul Additions, and Diminutions in many Points of Controversy. LETTER LXXXVIII. A Letter from Mr. John Selden, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord, I Was glad to have occasion to send to your Lordship, that I might so hear of the good Estate of your Self, and your Family, to which certainly all good Men wish happiness. I was the last week with Sir Robert Cotton at Connington; at my parting from him, (when he was with his Son to go to Oxford to the Parliament) he gave me leave to send to your Lordship to spare me the two Saxon Chronicles you have of his; which I beseech you to do, and to send them me by this Bearer; together with my Matthew Pa∣ris, Baronius his Martyrologie, and Balaeus. I exceedingly want these five Books here, and (if you command it) they shall be sent you again in reasona∣ble time. I presume too, my Lord, that by this time you have noted the Differences between the Texts of the received Original, and that of the Sa∣maritan. I beseech you to be pleased to permit me the sight of those Diffe∣rences, if they may with manners be desired, especially those of Times. I shall desire nothing more, than upon all opportunity to be most ready to appear, and that with all forwardness of performance in whatsoever I were able, Your Lordships most Affectionate Servant, J. Selden. Wrest in Bedfordshire, August 4. 1625.
LETTER LXXXIX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. Salutem in Christo Jesu; SIR Robert Cotton did assure me, that the Psalterium Gallicum Romanum, Hebraicum, was in Trinity-Colledg, in an extraordinary large Folio; but hereby you must not understand any Text written, either in the French or in the Hebrew Language, but by Hebraicum, the Latin Psalter translated by St. Hie∣rom out of the Hebrew; and by Gallicum, the Latin Psalter, translated by him out of the Greek, (which is the very same with our Vulgar Latin Edition) so cal∣led, because it was first received in the French Church; as the other Roma∣num, because it was used in the Church of Rome: which if our last Tran∣slators had considered, they would not have alleaged, (as they do in their Epistle to the Reader) for confirmation of the translating of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, the Testimony of Trithemius, that Efnarde (Einar∣dus they mean) about the Year 800, did abridg the French Psalter, as Be∣da had done the Hebrew. If this Book cannot be had, (as I much desire it may) I pray fail not to send me the other two Manuscript Psalters which (you write unto me) are in the same Library, viz. the Greek (thought to be Theodori Cantuar.) and the Hebrew that is interlin'd with a Latin Translation; for Aug. Justiniani Psalterium Octaplum I have of mine own. When you remove to Munden, (if it be not troublesome unto you) I wish you did bring with you your Greek Ganons Manuscript. I understand that Mr. Boyse hath gotten lately into his hands, a Greek Manuscript of the Acts of the first Council of Nice: I should be glad to hear how it differeth from that of Gelasius Cyzicenus which we have; and whether he can help me with any old Greek Copy of the Psalms, or any Commentary upon them. So ceasing to trouble you any further at this time, I commend you, and all yours, to God's blessed direction and protection, ever resting Your own in Christ Jesus, Ja. Armachanus. Much-Haddam, Aug. 9. 1625. LETTER XC. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend and my very good Lord; IReceived your Lordship's Letter, and according as you will me, have borrowed the two Books you mention. Dr. Maw would intreat you to set down some limited time for which you would borrow them;
and to signify the receipt of them, in some Note under your hand. There is, as I remember, a part of the Psalter in King's-Colledg Library, Manuscript, in a great Folio, which was brought from Cales, I will look into it. When I come to Munden, I will bring the Books you mention. Mr. Boyse his Manuscript of the Acts of the Nicene Council, is surely the Collection made by Gelasius. He came to me to borrow the printed Copies, I lent him two of them; and withal told him, there is another Manuscript of Gelasius in Trinity-Colledg Library. The next time I speak with Mr. Boyse, I will know whether he have any Greek Copy or Commentary upon the Psalms. Thus hoping to see you e're long, (if God will) with my best Service remembred; I commend you, and all yours, to the gracious protection of the highest Majesty in these dangerous Times, resting Your Lordships in what he may, Samuel Ward. Sidn. Coll. Aug. 11. 1625. LETTER XCI. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend my very good Lord, I Received your Letter, and the enclosed, which I will deliver to Dr. Maw. This day I met with one of King's-Colledg, and he tells me, the great Volume they have in Manuscript of the Psalms in Latin, which was brought from Cales, is but half of the Psalter. I willed him to compare it with the Vulgar Edition, and to tell me whether they differ. He promised me he would. I received not the Letter ill six a Clock this Night, and this Bearer is to be gone early in the Morning, so that I cannot compare it with the Vulgar now; but I verily think it is no other but the Vulgar Edition; it is the greatest Folio that ever I saw. Yesterday, after I sent you the two Books, I hit upon the Book you desired, Psalterium Gallic. Roman. Hebraicum, at one of our Stationers, set out by Jacobus Stapulensis, with his Commenta∣ry, which I here send you. I will also write to Mr. Bedell for the Manuscript Psalter he hath. Thus, in some haste, I commend your Lordship to the safe protection of the highect Majesty. Your Lordships in what he may, Samuel Ward. Cambridg, Aug. 12. 1625. I send you also one Edition of the Psalms, Graeco Lat. but I think it will do you no great pleasure.
LETTER XCII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. To the Right Honourable and my special good Lords, the Lord-Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord High-Treasurer of England. My most honoured Lords; YOUR Lordships Letters, bearing date the 9th of this Present, were delivered unto me by a Servant of Dr. Rives the 18th of the same. In reading whereof, I found my self much grieved, that the Doctor, by his sinister Suggestions, should so far prevail with your Wisdoms, as to make you conceive that I refused to perform the Agreement which your Lordships made betwixt us. True it is indeed, that I complained unto your Lord∣ships, that the drawing up that Agreement was committed to the Party him∣self, who was careful enough to lay down all things therein to his own best advantage; without reservation of any Power unto me, to limit him any way in the exercise of that Authority which he was to hold under me. But as soon as I had received satisfaction from your Honour (my Lord Keeper) under your hand writing, that I might limit him by private Instructions, though not by Patent; and that the clause of good-behaviour was ever included in these Offices, howsoever they were granted during Life: I presently did agree to sign his Patent. And this is that second Agreement he talketh so much of; which I never took to be any other, than that which was at first intended. Concerning this, he affirmeth in his Petition, that having shewed unto me my Lord Keeper's Opinion, signified in writing, concerning the Exceptions taken by me against his Draught of the Patent; I agreed to seal him the said Patent, provided that two Clauses only might be added; but most guilefully suppresseth that which was not to be inserted in the Patent, but to pass in private betwixt us two; namely, that I might limit him by private Instructions, according to my Lord Keeper's direction, which at that very time he delivered unto me in writing. My Lords, if you think that I have any Faith or Honesty in me, believe me herein, that I propounded this unto him as the main foundation of our Agreement; and that he gave his assent unto it before ever I would promise to seal his Patent: He only adding this, That he did not doubt, when he could shew cause unto me why I should vary from my Instructions in any Particular, I would be ruled by better Reason. Herewith for the present did I rest satisfied: but the day following I considered better with my self, what a slender Tie I had upon him, if I only should rest contented with his bare Word only; which at his pleasure he might deny, where-ever he saw cause. And therefore to prevent all matter of future Discord, I intreated him, by Letter, that as I had shewed my self ready to gratify him, by binding my self publickly under my Hand and Seal unto him, so he would privately tie himself in like manner, for giving more full satisfaction unto me in two Particulars. For the former of these, which doth concern the Registership; I signi∣fied unto him, at the time of our Agreement, that I had made promise of it already to one Mr. Hilton: Which being a Matter of less importance, the Doctor doth now so little stand upon it, that in a Letter lately written unto me, he hath utterly disclaimed all Power of conferring the said Office upon the next avoidance. But for the latter, which concerneth the limiting of him by private Instructions, (according to my Lord-Keeper's express dire∣ction)
he hath now at full discovered that whereof I conceiv'd at first but a jealousie; namely, that he did but dare verba, and intended nothing less than performance, when to get my consent unto the signing of the Patent of his own drawing, he submitted himself to be ordered by the Instructions which I should give him. For as if res were adhuc integra, and no such A∣greement at all had passed betwixt us; he now maketh your Lordships to write, that you do not think it reasonable that this should be imposed upon him. I am bold to say, that he maketh your Lordships to write thus; be∣cause, I am verily perswaded, that if the Matter be examined, it will be found, that this Letter was of his own drawing. Wherein, what infinite wrong he hath done unto your Honour, (my Lord-Keeper) I humbly be∣seech you to consider. First, He bringeth your Lordship's Writing unto me, signifying that I might limit him by private Instructions, though not by Patent: and hereunto he shewed himself then content to yield. And now he hath stolen another Letter from your Honour, wherein he would have you sig∣nify again, that you do not think it reasonable that he should be tied to fol∣low the Instructions that I shall give him. Behold! Jordanes conversus est retrorsum: and now, not Littora littoribus contraria, but litterae litteris. Your Lordships had need to watch this Man's Fingers, when-ever you trust him with drawing up of any Orders or Letters that do concern his own Particu∣lar: for otherwise you may chance to find him as nimble in putting Tricks upon your selves, for his own advantage, as now he is in putting them upon me. Which that your Lordships may yet be more sensible of, I intreat you to weigh well the Reason which he maketh you here to render, of the unrea∣sonableness of the Condition that I require of him. For did ever any rea∣sonable Man hold it to be a thing unreasonable, that a Substitute should be ordered by him that hath appointed him to be his Substitute This may be true, will he say, in thesi, but not in hypothesi, in other Substitutions, but not in this; because, upon your Lordships motion he hath submitted himself to take that under me, which he hath a fair pretence to challenge in his own Right: So that, were it not for the respect which he did bear unto your Lordships mo∣tion, his stout heart belike would not stoop to such terms of submission; but hazard the whole rather, by putting his own Right in trial. Yea, but what if this prove to be another piece of the Doctor's Legerdemain; and that it do appear evidently, under his own hand, that this desire of submis∣sion did primarily and originally proceed out of his own breast, ex motu mero & proprio, long before your Lordships had any thing to do in the bu∣siness If you will be pleased to take so much pains as to peruse the inclo∣sed copy of a Letter which he wrote unto me, not long before the decease of his late Majesty, (of blessed memory) you shall find a Motion tendred therein unto me, for the intreating of Sir Henry Holcraft to move his Maje∣sty, that he (the said Doctor) might be spoken to for the surrendering of his Patent; together with the renewing of a former Suit, of making him my Servant in that place; sealed up with a promise, of rendring his due obedience and thankfulness unto me for my favour. So far was he then from those high terms whereon he now standeth. But the case is now so far altered, that this obedient Servant of mine, af∣fecteth not an Equality only with me, (by exempting himself wholly from my controul) but also, for ought I see, a Superiority over me. For if it shall please him to visit my Diocess, or my Province, as he did in the time of my Predecessor; what is there in that Patent, as he hath drawn it, whereby I may hinder him from so doing Your Honour may, by private In∣structions, and his Discretion, free your self of this fear; faith my Lord-Keeper in his Marginal Annotations upon my former Letter. But, good my Lord, give me leave to think, that the hope of such a Prize as he got by
his other Visitation of all the Arch-bishops and Bishops in our Kingdom, will very easily blind this Man's Discretion; and for my private Instructions, what weight will they be of, if it be now thought a matter not reasonable, that my Substitute should be tied by them As for the Report which your Lordships are to make unto his Majesty, upon the reference of this Business unto you: I humbly crave, that for so much as doth concern me, it may be made to this effect. First, That I never did, nor do, refuse to submit my self to that Agree∣ment which you have put under your hands to be signified to his Majesty, but am ready to perform it in every particular. Secondly, That for the limiting of my Substitute, and the terms where∣upon he must hold his Place under me, (of which there is nothing laid down in that Agreement which you have signed, that which concerneth Fees and Profits only excepted) I do desire that his Patent only be drawn according to the Pattern of Sir Henry Martin's; and that the same Power may be reserved to me and my Successors, that my Lord of Canterbury's Grace doth retain unto himself, in the exercise of the Office of Prerogative and Faculties. Which if it may here stand well with Sir Henry Martin's Re∣putation; I see not but it may stand as well likewise in Ireland, without any such great disparagement to Mr. Doctor's Dignity. And lastly, If the Doctor herein shall not hold himself to be fairly and exceeding favourably dealt withal; my desire is, that both of us may be left to the Law, to try our Rights together. For thereby it shall be made as clear as the Light, that the Doctor's Patent was absolutely void, or voi∣dable, ab initio; that whatsoever validity it had at the beginning, yet it was afterwards forfeited by his notorious Misdemeanour; and, in fine, that it was actually surrendred into the Hands of His Majesty, and by him cassated and annulled, howsoever the Ceremony of cancelling it hath been neglected. Which kind of Trial, by course of Law, I do now the rather desire, (yet strill submitting my self to the former Agreement, if it shall so seem fit unto your Lordships); 1. Because the Doctor wished mine Agent to certify me, in plain terms, that he would not be under me; and hereby, for his part, hath disclaimed the benefit of your Lordships Order. 2. Because, by his incensing of my Lord of Canterbury against me, (of whose Grace I never yet deserved evil) by his abusing of me in his Reports unto your Lordships, and by his disgraceful traducing of me in all Companies; he hath made him∣self utterly unworthy of the Favour which I intended to shew unto him. 3. Because, as long as my Life shall be conceived to remain in that pretended Patent; the validity of the Acts that have passed in the Prerogative Court, during the time of my Predecessor, (some whereof have been of very great moment) may be held in suspence; it being still questionable, whether they were done coram non-Judice, or no. All which I leave unto your honoura∣ble consideration: and humbly craving pardon, if I have any way over∣shot my self in defending mine Innocency and Reputation against the unwor∣thy Proceedings of my ungrateful Accuser; I rest, Your Lordships, ready to do you Service, J. A. Much Haddam, Aug. 20. 1625.
LETTER XCIII. A Letter from Mr. John Selden to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord, IT was most glad News to me to hear of your so forward Recovery, and I shall pray for the addition of Strength to it, that so you may the ea∣sier go on still in the advancement of that Common-wealth of Learning, wherein you can so guide us. I humbly thank your Lordship for your In∣structions touching the Samaritan Bible, and the Books. I have returned the Saxon Annals again, as you desired, with this suit, that if you have more of them (for these are very slight ones) and the old Book of Ely, Historia Jornallensis, the Saxon Evangelist, the Book of Worcester, the Book of Mailros, or any of them, you will be pleased to send me them all, or as many as you have of them by you, and what else you have of the History of Scotland and Ireland, and they shall be returned at your pleasure: if you have a Saxon Bede, I beseech you let that be one also. If I have any thing here of the rest, or ought else that your Lordship requires for any present use, I shall most readily send them to you, and shall ever be Your Lordship's most affectionate Servant, J. Selden. Sept. 14. 1625. Wrest. Sept. 19. Sent him upon this; An∣nales Latino-Saxonici, the Book of Mailros, Fordoni Scotichronic. Fragment. Scotic. Annal. ad finem Ivonis Carnot. Fragment. Annali∣um Abb. B. Mariae Virginis Dublin. Annales Hiberniae Thomae Case. The Book of Hoath. Pembrig's Annals Ms. There is hope (as Sir Robert Cotton tells me) that a very ancient Greek MS. Copy of the Council of Nice, the first of them of that name, is to be had some where in Huntingdonshire, I thought it was a piece of News that would be ac∣ceptable to your Lordship; he is in chase for it. LETTER XCIV. A Letter from Mr. John Cotton of Boston in New-England, to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend, MY beloved Neighbour-Minister Mr. Wood, acquainted me with your de∣sire to hear from me, how I conceived of the way of God's eternal Predestination, and the Execution of it: I should not have hearkned to him herein (tho I love him well) were it not for the deep Affection and
Reverence I bear to your Person and Gifts, which hath constrained me (to∣gether with his importunacy) to yield to the sending of this Discourse to you, which I was occasioned to write a year ago for the satisfaction of a Neigh∣bour-Minister in Points of this nature. The Questions and Answers in the beginning of the Book, I delivered and opened by way of Catechism long ago; which a Neighbour-Minister having afterwards gotten from some of my Hearers, he wrote those Doubts, which follow in the Book, the better to inform either himself or me: Whereupon as I could get any time in the midst of other continual Employments (too heavy for me) I wrote to him the Discourse following, the more fully to acquaint him with the grounds of my Judgment, as knowing well his sufficiency to object fully, if he found himself unsatisfied in any Passage thereof. The Style (I confess) is unmeet for you to read, as being plain and popular, and therefore too large, and withal empty of variety of reading, which store of other Occurrences in my Calling here, inforceth me too often to intermit. Thus much let me humbly intreat at your Lordship's hands, by the honour which you owe to Christ, and by the Love you bare to his poorest Servants, stick not (I beseech you) to advertise me freely of any such tenent herein, as you shall think less safe. I trust you shall find me conscious of mine own Slenderness, and glad to rive such Light, as God shall be pleased to impart to me by you. Yet this one thing more let me also add. Tho I yield some degree of Effi∣cacy in Christ's Death unto all; yet I conceive it far short, both of Impetra∣tion and Application of that gracious Atonement, which is thereby wrought to the Elect of God; whence also it is that I dare not preach the Gospel indifferently unto all, before the Law; nor the worth of Christ, before the need of Christ. Childrens Bread is not meet for Whelps; and full Souls will despise Hony-Combes. I see John Baptist was sent to humble, before Christ to heal: and Christ himself preached Repentance, before Faith in the Promises, Mark 1. 15. Neither do I remember in the Gospel any Promise of Grace, pardoning Sin, nor any Commandment to believe Sin pardoned, but to the broken, the bruised, the poor, the weary, the thirsty, or the like. Faith in the Promises, before the Heart be changed from Stoniness to Broken∣ness, I fear is no better than the Temporary Faith, which is found in the stony Soil; Luke 8. 13. But I cease your Lordship's further Trouble. Now the Lord Jesus, who hath delighted in you to fill your Heart with the Riches of his manifold pre∣cious Graces, be pleased to enlarge you to the Employment of them to his best advantage, guide all your Ways in his Faithfulness, and Wisdom, and sustain you with his Mercy and Power unto the end. So I humbly take leave, and rest; Earnestly desirous to be directed by your Lordship, or confirmed in the Truth, John Cotton. Boston, May 31. 1626.
LETTER XCV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. Salutem in Christo Jesu. SIR, I Am very sorry to hear of your Distractions there; but, , to whose Guidance we must refer both this and ipsam rerum summam quae in summo jam (si quid videmus) versatur discrimine. When the Collaters have finished the Acts, I could wish they collated the Epistles with the Text which is inserted into the Commentaries of Photius and Oecu∣menius, Manuscripts in the University Library, where there are some varie∣ties of readings also; (as I remember) noted in the Margent in the brief Scholies that are written in red Letters. Remember me to Mr. Chancy, and learn of him what he hath done for Mr. Broughton's Books; intreat him also to look into the Manuscript Psalter in Hebrew and Latin in Trinity Colledg-Library, and thence transcribe for me the last Verse save one of the 52 Psalm, which is wanting in our printed Hebrew Bibles; the Latin of that Verse (if I forget not) beginneth, Consilium Mosis, &c. I would willingly also hear how far he hath proceeded in the Samaritan Bible, and what Mr. Boys hath done in the transcribing of the Greek Manuscript which I left with him: Wish Mr. Green to send me Lucian in Greek and Latin. Your assured Friend, J. Ar. LETTER XCVI. A Letter from Dr. Ward to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord, I Received your Lordship's Letter; and that which I signified to your Lordship in my last Letter, was almost really effected. The night before the choice of our new Chancellor, I was very ill, so as without hazard of my Health, I could not be at the choice, and so was absent: The Duke carried it not above three or four Voices from the Earl of Berkshire; and had not neither carried it, but that the King's Pleasure was signified for the Duke, both by Message and Letter. Quod vis summam rerum in summo versari discrimine, & timeo, & doleo. I acquainted Mr. White with your Pleasure, and wished him to impart it to the rest of the Collators, as touching the Collation of the Text in the Com∣ments of Photius and Oecumenius. I send you inclosed the Hebrew Verse you writ for. They are in Denteronomy in the Samaritan Pentateuch. I have
not as yet spoken with Mr. Boyse. I received the Books you mention, and sent two of them to Mr. Austine. Mr. Green will send you the two Books, Lucian Graeco. Lat. and N. Testam. Syrlacum-Latin, to Mr. Burnets. Mr. White sendeth up unto you the Variae Lectiónes upon the Psalms. The divers Read∣ings of Prosper shall be sent you. Dr. Goad sent me two sheets of my Latin Sermon printed. But I hear not whether our Suffrage be reprinted. I would know whether Nicetus his Orthodoxus Thesaurus be extant in Greek. I suppose it is in Latin, at least in the New Bibliotheca. He is said to interpret Greg. Nyssen his Opinion of the Conversion which is made in the Eucharist menti∣oned c. 37 Catechet. I cannot tell what to pronounce touching that discourse. His discourse is somewhat plausible till he come to the conversion made in the Eucharist by Christ's words, and then he doth faulter. I pray you let me know where the Manuscript Copies of the Saxon Annals are to be had. Mr. Mede and Mr. Whalley are both in good health. I am right sorry that your Lordship should so soon go from us. I am now in busi∣ness, in Disputations in our Schools. I shall forget many things which I should have enquired of. And so with my best Service remembred to your Lordship and Mrs. Usher, I commend you. to the gracious Protection of the highest Majesty, and so rest, Your Lordship's in all Observance, Samuel Ward. Sidney-College, June 6. 1626. There is good Agreement (God be thanked) in King's College. LETTER XCVII. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord; I Have sent you here enclosed the diverse Readings of the Continuation of Eusebius's Chronicle by Hierom, and both the Prospers. Mr. Elmar will bring your Lordship the Concio ad Clerum, which, against my mind, is set forth, without those other things which I told your Lordship of, whereof I would have had this but an Appendix. We have had this Week a gracious Letter from his Majesty, much approving the Choice of our Chancellor. And another from our Chancellor. To both which Answers are returned by our University. God dispose of all to good. Our Chancellor seemeth to be forward for the erecting a Library here. I have not spoken with Mr. Boyse as yet; nor do I hear that Mr. Chaunty is come home. I would be sorry your Lordship should so soon leave us. I will still hope of your longer continuance. Howsoever when you leave us, I will accompany you, and all yours, with my best Devotions, for your safe Journey and Arrival at your home. And so commend you, and Mrs. Usher, to the gracious Protection of the highest Majesty. Your Lordship's in all observance, Samuel Ward. Sidney-Coll. June 10th. 1626.
LETTER XCVIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. SIR, I Have received from you the divers readings of the continuation of Eu∣sebius's Chronicle, and your Concio ad Clerum, for which I heartily thank you. Your Gratia Discriminans (I doubt not) will settle many Mens minds in those dubious Times, to which I wish that the other things which you in∣tended, had been added, especially those places which you observed out of St. Augustin, against falling from Grace. But of this Argument I earnestly beseech you to take special care, as soon as your Commencement Businesses are past over, and when you have put your Notes together, I pray you make me so happy as to have a Copy of them. Ne{que} enim mihi gratior ulla est Quam sibi quae Wardi praefixit pagina nomen. The suddain Dissolution of the Parliament hath amazed us, all Mens hearts failing them for fear, and for looking on those things which are coming on the Land. The Lord prepare us for the Day of our Visitation, and then let his blessed Will be done. There is a Proclamation to be presently set out for the stopping of those Contentions in Points of Religion. I have dealt with your Chancellor very effectually for the erecting of your Library, to which he is of himself exceeding forward: I have pro∣cured him to send unto Leyden for all the printed Hebrew Books of Erpenius his Library; which together with his Manuscripts which he hath already, he purposeth to bestow upon your University. I have also perswaded him to send thither for the Matrices of the Syriack, Arabick, Aethiopick, and Sa∣maritan Letters, and to bestow them like wise upon you. Mr. White hath sent up unto me the Variae Lectiones of the Psalms, ac∣companied with a very kind Letter. I pray you tell him, from me, that I will keep them by me as a perpetual testimony of his love and respect to me; whereof he shall find that I will not be unmindful, whensoever either himself, or any of his, shall have occasion to use me. Nicetus his Orthodaxus Thesaurus I have not seen in Greek, the Latin I have in Ireland; but whether it be inserted into Bibliotheca Patrum I cannot tell, the Book being not now by me. That Gregory Nyssen's Catechetical Oration hath been evil handled and in∣terpolated by Hereticks, I think is somewhere observed by Nicephorus him∣self, (see his Ecel. Elist. lib. 11. cap. 19.); yet that Discourse of the Eucha∣rist (if my Memory fail me not) is inserted by Cuthimius in his Panoplia: And I have seen it my self in two ancient Greek Manuscripts of Gregory Nyssen with Mr. Patrick Toung, (the one whereof was Mr. Casabon's, the other of Metrophanes the Grecian) which you may do well to see collated with the printed. Spalatensis also, I think, suspecteth this place of For∣gery. In Sir Rob. Cotton's Library there be four several Saxon Annals; and one written both in the Saxon and in the Latin Tongue. In Benet-Colledg Li∣brary likewise, Vol. 269. there is another ancient Saxon Annal.
I should have gone from hence at the time I wrote unto you of; but since that time I received a Letter from the Lord Chamberlain, signifying the King's Pleasure, that I should preach at Court the 25th of this Month, which hath caused me to put off my Journey until the end of the Term. So with the remembrance of my best wishes to you, I rest, Your most assured, Ja. Armachanus. Lond. Jun. 16. 1626. LETTER XCIX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Samuel Ward. Salutem in Christo Jesu. SIR, SInce I wrote unto you last, I have received intelligence from Leyden, that all Erpenius's printed Books are already sold; and his Matrices of the Ori∣ental Tongues are bought by Elzevir the Printer there; so that now you must content your selves with his Manuscripts only, which are a very rare Treasure indeed, and for which your University shall rest much beholden unto your Chancellor. I my self have now received out of Mesopotamia, an old Manuscript of that Syrian Translation, of the Pentateuch out of the He∣brew, (the same which St. Basil citeth in his Hexameron) which I make ve∣ry great account of. The Patriarch of the Jacobites in those parts, who sent this, promiseth also to send the rest of the Old Testament e're long; in the mean time I have received the Parcels of the New Testament, which hi∣therto we have wanted in that Language, (viz. the History of the Adulte∣rous Woman, the 2d Epistle of Peter, the 2d and 3d Epistles of St. John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Revelation); as also a small Tractate of Ephram Syrus, in his own Language. Elmenhorst is dead, but I will do my best to hearken after his Copy of the Acts of the Council of Calcedon at Hamburg. I will also speak with Mr. Pa∣trick Young, for the  of the 37th Chapter of Greg. Nyssen's Cate∣chet. as soon as I can meet with him. The place of Nyssen doth not trouble you more, than a like one of Chrysostom hath done me, viz. Sermone quinto de Poenitentiâ, Tom. 6. edit. Savil. pag. 791. (which in the Latin Tomes, is Homil. de Eucharistiâ in Eucaeniis) where I would willingly understand what the meaning of his Similitude is, and of that Mysteria consumi Corporis substantiâ. There is another place likewise of Chrysostom, cited by Bellarmin in his Apo∣logy, Ex Hom. 3. in 2 Thess. Jubebit seipsum pro Deo coli, at in Templo Colloca∣ri, non Hierosolymitano solum sed etiam Ecclesiis; where my Lord of Winche∣ster telleth the. Cardinal, that the word tantum is not in the Greek. I pray you see in Commelinus's, Edition, or that of Verona, for Sir H. Savil's is other∣wise, Tom. 4. pag. 232. Your Assured Friend, J. Arm. London, June 23. 1626.
LETTER C. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord; I Received your Lordships last Letter, of the 23d of this month, and do perceive thereby, that Erpenius's printed Books, and his Matrices of the Oriental Tongue, are already sold. I am glad your Lordship hath got the old Manuscript of the Syriack Translation of the Pentateuch, and for your hopes of the rest. You say, you have received the parcels of the New Testament in that Language, which hitherto we have wanted. But it seemeth those Parcels are writttn out of some Copies: But I doubt whe∣ther anciently they were in the old Manuscript. I am much afraid the Je∣suits have laid hold of Elmenhorst's Copy. As for the places of Chrysostom, I will at my better leisure, by God's Grace, examine it. Mr. Boyse hath written out the Fragment of P. Alexandrinus; but in∣treateth me to let him have the Book till the next week, for he would gladly peruse the Notes of Casaubon upon Nicander. And, God-willing, the next week, I will send it to Mr. Francis Burnett. I am right sorry to see matters of that importance carried ex consilio perpaucorum. I had a Let∣ter from my Lord of Sarum, by which I understand as much. There was the last week a Cod-fish brought from Colchester to our Market to be sold; in the cutting up which, there was found in the Maw of the Fish, a thing which was hard; which proved to be a Book of a large 16o, which had been bound in Parchment, the Leaves were glewed together with a Gelly. And being taken out, did smell much at the first; but after wash∣ing of it, Mr. Mead did look into it. It was printed; and he found a Ta∣ble of the Contents. The Book was intituled, A preparation to the Cross, (it may be a special admonition to us at Cambridg). Mr. Mead, upon Sa∣turday, read to me the Heads of the Chapters, which I very well liked of. Now it is found to have been made by Rich. Tracy, of whom Bale maketh mention, Cent. 9. p. 719. He is said to flourish then 1550. But, I think, the Book was made in King Henry the Eighth's Time, when the six Articles were a-foot. The Book will be printed here shortly. I know not how long your Lordship will stay in England; I wish you might stay longer. We are to come to present our new Chancellor, with his Patent, upon the 13th of July; all our Heads will be there, I would be glad to meet your Lordship then. And thus wishing your Lordship all good success in your Affairs, a for∣tunate Journey, and speedy Passage when you go, with our best Devoti∣ons, my Wife and I wish you and yours all health and happiness, commend∣ing you to the safest protection of the highest Majesty. Your Lorships in all observance, Samuel Ward. Sidn. Coll. June 27. 1626.
LETTER CI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. To Dr. Samuel Ward. SIR; I Received your Letter, wherein you signify unto me the News of the Book taken in the Fishes Belly: and another Letter from Mr. Mead touching the same Argument. The Accident is not lightly to be passed over, which (I fear me) bringeth with it too true a Prophesy of the State to come; And to you of Cambridg (as you write) it may well be a special Admonition, which should not be neglected. It behoveth you who are Heads of Colledges, and , to stick close to one another, and (quite obliterating all secret Distasts, or privy Discontentments which possibly may fall betwixt your selves) with joint consent to pro∣mote the Cause of God. Mr. Provost, I doubt not, will, with great ala∣crity, in hoc incumbere. So, with the remembrance of my Affections to all my Friends there, I commit you to the protection and direction of our Good God; In whom I rest, Your own most assured, Ja. Armachanus. Lond. June 30. 1626.
LETTER CII. A Letter from Mr. Ralph Skinner, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend in God, and cordially Religious; YOUR Lordship knows right-well that trivial Adage, That there is no fishing to the Sea, nor Mines of Silver and Gold like to the Indies: Yet no Fisher, when he fished, did ever draw up all Fish in his Net, and no Mud, Gravel, or Stones; nor no Pioneer did ever dig up all pure Trench, or without some Oar intermixed therewith. The same befalls me in the Works of Maymon, the Ocean of all Jewish Learning, the Quarries of Silver and Gold, whose () Fame surpasseth the Indies; for his Wine is mixed now and then with Water, and his Silver with some dross. All is not Fish that comes to the Net, nor all is not Gold that glisters. What must I do then Shall I reject Maymon, full of good Mammon, for some few Errors Or, shall I not rather separate the Errors from Maymon, and present you with his golden Mammon for so the  Mat. 4. 19. i. e. He that winneth Souls, is wise: the true Fisher of Men, the Prov. 11. 30. wise Catcher of Souls, my Lord and Master, hath taught me to do, imitat∣ing the Fishers, whose custom is to gather the good into Vessels, and to cast Mat. 13. 48. away the bad and putrid; and to play the skilful Goldsmith in the purging the Tradition from the Precept, as he hath taught me, Mat. 15. 5. discern∣ing . Mark 7. 11. inter  mandatum, which was this, (honour thy Father and thy Mother); and inter  traditionem; which was this, When any one saith to his Father or his Mother, Korbon est quo jurari debebas à me. That the Reader then may make a profitable use of Maymon, he must observe his Errors, and his good Things. His Errors be these Six; I. M. Tract. Fund. 1. c. 3. §. 9 That the Stars and Celestial Spheres have Life and Knowledg. This Error is gross, it needs no confutation. II. That God did never repent him of a good Thing, or retreat his words, but only once, viz. When he destroyed the Just with the Unjust, in the destruction of the first Temple. He forgot himself, of that he said in the first Chapter, viz. M. Tr. Fund. 2. c. 10. §. 4. That no Accidents are incident unto God, that he cannot change; that he is not as Man that lies, or the Son of Man to repent; but one that keepeth his fidelity for ever. III. M. Tr. Fund. c. 9. §. 1. That all Moses Law is perpetual. He understood not that the Ce∣remonies was buried in Christ's Grave, Dan. 9. That the Substance come, the Shadow must vanish. IV. M. Tr. Repent. c. 5. §. 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. That Man hath free-will to do Good or Evil. But we know that the preparations of Man's Heart are of God; that we are not able, as of our selves, to think a good thought; and that , and  comes from him: If the preparation then to a good Thought, if the good Thought it self; if the willing and doing of good be of God, wherein have we Free∣will V. M. Tr. Repent. c. 8. §. 7. &c. 9. §. 2. That the Promises of God mentioned in the Prophets, are for things Temporal, to be fulfilled in this Life in the Days of the Messiah. But we know that the Son of God is already come, and hath given us an understanding that we might know him that is true. The word , or Tradition, is 1 John 5. 20. thirteen times found in our Testament; but , or Cabala, his Correla∣tive, comes but twice, 1 Tim. 4. 9. & 1. 15. This is, , a faith∣ful
and firm saying, , & omni Cabala seu acceptatione dignus. As if he should say, If there be any Cabalistical Doctrine worthy undoub∣tedly to be received, it is this, That Christ Jesus came into the World, &c. This is our Christian Gabala then, that the Messias is already come, and that he is a Spiritual King; not such a Temporal one as they would have him, for he re∣fused to be made such a King: And that the Temporal Blessings and Pro∣mises were made to allure, and lead them as Children unto the Spiritual. VI. M. Tr. Repent. cap. 7. §. 6. Luke 3. 27. That the Kingdom descended to Salathiel, of Jeconias's Posterity, upon Jeconias's Repentance. But St. Luke hath taught us, that Salathiel was the natural Son of Neri, not of Jeconias, but yet said to be his Son, in that he was his Successor in the Kingdom. And Jeremy tells us, that Solo∣mon's Heir failed in Jeconias's dying without Children, by which means the Kingdom was devolved on Nathan, Solomon's Brother. These six Errors avoided as Rocks of Shipwrack to the Reader, and his Traditions distinguished from the Commandments, the Reader may make with me this sixfold good use of Maymon. 1. His Hebraisms, which I have noted in the Margent. 2. The Pirke Aboth,  The Capital Apothegms, and the Wise Sentences of the Rabbies of Israel, which are marked out in the Mar∣gent with an Hand, thus ☞. 3. Talmudical Sentences and Pharases, expounding the New Testament in some places. 4. Places of Scripture otherwise expounded than by Munster, Tremellius, Junius. 5. The Judicial Laws and Punishments inflicted by the Sanhedrin, or Con∣sistory, for every particular Sin. 6. Rabbinical common Places. Now of these six in order. The two first whereof being either written or pointed out by the Finger in the Margent, I shall not need particularly to rank them together in order, because of prolixity; it is enough for them digito monstrari & dicier haec sunt ☞. In the third place we are to speak of Talmudical Sentences: It is observed of the Learned, that there be five seve∣ral Dialects or Proprieties of Speech in the New Testament. 1. The Com∣mon or Attick Greek. 2. The Septuagint Greek. 3. The Apostolick Greek. 4. The Hebraisms noted by Beza first, then by Drusius in his Lib. Praeter. And yet as many more may be noted. 5. The Talmudical Phrases, of which I am now to shew those that I have noted out of Maymon's first Book. First, Of fealing to Life or to Death. As Christ himself was sealed, Him John 6. 27. . 2. Cor. 1. 22. hath God the Father sealed,  So must Christians be; Who also hath sealed us, internally; for it follows, and given us the earnest of his Spi∣rit in our hearts. And eternally, Rev. 7. 4. The number of them that were sealed, 144000 of all the Tribes of the Children of Israel, of each Tribe twelve thousand. So v. 3. Hurt not the Earth, till we have sealed the Servants of our God in their Foreheads. To these and such-like places, Maymon gives light thus: M. Tr. Repent. cap. 3. §. 3. Even as they do examine and poise the Righteousness of Man, and his Iniquities, in the day of his Death; so yearly do they counterpoise the Ini∣quities of every particular Man that comes into the World with his Righ∣teousness, on the Holy Day, which is New-years day. He that is found I would then wast hot or cold but seeing thou art lukewarm, I will spu thee out of my mouth. righteous, is fealed unto Life; and whosoever is found wicked, is sealed unto Death: but those that he Neuters, between both, them they su∣spend until the day of Expiation; if they repent, they are sealed up to Life; but if not, they are sealed up to Death. Out of which words, and laudable custom of the Jews, note with me a double sealing to Life, or to Death, proportionable to the double Person, viz. the Righteous, or the Wicked. 2. Observe the two times of this sealing, in the day of a Man's death,
and on New-Years Day; i. e. on the first day September during one's Life. Kimchy, on the 9th of Ezek. v. 4. on these words, (Mark, a Mark on the Foreheads of those Men that sigh) comments thus; Make a Sign or Wri∣ting; he commands that they mark with Ink on their Foreheads, the Men that sigh and cry, for a Sign, that the Destroyer shall not come near unto them. And this Sentence, is like the Sentence of the Blood of the Pass∣over in Egypt, which was for a Sign or Mark; only this of Ezekiel was in vi∣sion of Prophesy. And our Rabbies, of blessed memory, have expound∣ed the word (Tau), which signifies a Mark, to be the letter called (Tau). The holy blessed One commanded Gabriel, to write upon the Forehead of the Righteous, a Mark or Letter (Tau) made with Ink; but on the Fore∣head of the Wicked, a Mark (or Tau) of Blood. Now, why did he make a diverse Mark Rab. maketh answer, (Tau tichieh, and Tau ta∣muth) i. e. the one Mark, or Tau, stands for (Tichieh), thou shalt live; and the other Mark, or Tau, stands for (Tamuth), thou shalt die. But Rabby Samuel saith, Tau stands for (Tamath), perfect is the Righteous∣ness of the Fathers; for those Men were the Righteous of Jerusalem, which sighed and cried for the Abominations thereof. Tuus far Kimchy. Now that the full lustre of the place may be had, we will parallel these four pla∣ces together, St. John, Ezekiel, Kimchy, and Maymon. St. John, Rev. 7. 3. . Ezek. 9. 4. Kimchy, on Ezek. cap. 9. v. 4. this Mark or Tau was 1 2 the Mark 1 of Ink. 2 of Blood. 1 2 the Tau or Mark 1 of Life. 2 of Death. Maymon: Whosoever was found 1  Righteous 2  Wicked was 1 sealed to Life. 2 sealed to death. The marking then that Ezekiel and Kimchy speak of, is the sealing that St. John and Maymon speak of; and those that sigh and cry for the Abomi∣nations of Jerusalem, are those whom St. John calls the Servants of our God, and Maymon names them the Righteous; and both Maymon and St. John tells us, that the true Marks, Signs, and Seals of a Christian, be Repentance and Righteousness: which Marks, they that have them, are sealed and appointed unto Life; And that Impenitency, and want of Righteousness, be the Marks of the Wicked, designing them to Death. Kimchy, on the 133 Psalm, saith, That on the Forehead of the Priest, Aaron and his Successors, between, the Eye-brows, was made a Mark when he was anointed High Priest () like the Greek κ or χ, which Let∣ter, or Mark, χ, stood, no doubt, for , whereof the High Priest was a Type. And Rabbi Shelemo Jarki saith, on these words, [Thou shalt Jarki in cap. 29 Exodi, vers. 7. pour the Oil of Unction on his Head, and shalt anoint him in this manner]. Also this Anointing was made after the manner or fashion of χ: for Moses put the Oil upon his Head, and between his Eye-brows, and made the Let∣ter χ with his Finger. So on the 7th verse, on these words, (and unleavened Cakes anointed with Oil) he comments thus, After the frying of those Cakes, he anointed them after the manner of χ, the Greek Cappa, or χ. This χ on the Cake of Bread, was, no doubt, to teach us that Christ was
the true Manna that came down from Heaven, the Bread of Life. 2. Of the Typical Sense of the blowing of the Trumpet on New-years Day. 1 Cor. 15. 34. Awake to Righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledg of God. Ephes. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. Some think this place is taken out of Esay 60. 1. and some out of Esay 26. 19. as Beza doth. Drusius approves Georgius Syncellus's Opinion, that it is taken out of the Apo∣cryphas of Jeremy. But Maymon enlightens this place fully in his 3d Chap. of Repent. Sect. 4. thus; That it was the custom of the Jews to blow the Trumpet on every New-years Day, and the Cryer to cry; Awake thou that sleepest; like John the Crier, Repent, and amend; for the Kingdom of Hea∣ven is at hand. His words be these; Although that the blowing of the Trumpet in the beginning of the Year, is the Ordinance of the Scrip∣ture, Lev. 23. 24. yet there is a thing or matter signified, or intimated thereby; as if one should say, Awake you sleepers from your sleep, and ye soporiferous sluggards, arise from your drowsiness, search into your Works, and return by Repentance, remembring your Creator. These that forgot the Truth, by reason of the Vanities of the Time, wandring all their Years in Vanity and Toys, which neither profit nor deliver. Look into your Souls, and make good your Ways and your Actions; and let each of you forsake his evil Ways, and his Thought that is not good. Thus far Maymon. The blowing of the Trumpet then, is a lively Type of Repentance, and newness of Life, to begin on New-Years Day; and of awaking and rising from the sleep of Sin, whereof St. Paul speaks. Kimchy, on Psal. 81. 1, 4. Blow the Trumpet in the New Moon, in the time appointed in our so∣lemn Feast-day, comments thus; This Psalm was sung every New-years day in the Temple, and the blowing of the Trumpet is mentioned in it; the meaning whereof is, That our Fathers rested from their Service, and ceased from their Labours in that day: For this Psalm spoke of the going of our Fathers out of Egypt, which was on the Eve of the 14 day of Nisan, or March. Out of which words of Kimchy's, and Maymon's compared together, note with me, that the Jews had two New-Years Days; one on the First of September, of which Maymon speaks, in which the blowing of the Trumpet signified waking to Re∣pentance; the other on March 14 at Even, of which Kimchy speaks, in which the blowing of the Trumpet proclaimed the memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt; for the Jews had two Years, Annus Civilis, & Naturalis, which began the first of September. And the first word of the Bible, per Metathesin literarum, seems to prove it, God created in the beginning,  that is,  in the first of September. And Annus Sacer, which began on the 14th of Nisan at Even; This month shall be unto you, the first among the months of the Year. I thought good to note this, that the Reader might not think that the Rabbies do jar amongst themselves. 3. Of this Phrase, why Abraham is called God's Friend. James 2. 23. And [He] i. e. Abraham was called the Friend of God: It seems St. James alluded to that of Esay 41. 8. The Seed of Abraham my Friend. Now why Abraham was called God's Friend St. James particularly opens not unto us. Rabbi Shelemo Jarki saith, God saith, Abraham my Friend, for that he did acknowledg me out of Love, and not for the Rebukes and Disciplines of his Fathers. Kimchy saith, for that he loved me, and did adhere unto me, and went forth from among the Worshippers of Graven Images and Idols, which Exposition suits well to the Prophets precedent words. And Rabbi Abben Ezra saith, Remember Abraham that came away from the Idolaters. Neither is he called [Ahub] a Friend, passively, but [Oheb] a Friend, active∣ly; not beloved, but a loving Friend, or Lover; for it is an Action which passeth or goeth out of the Lover or Agent cleaving unto the Beloved, which is the Patient. Maymon in his Tractate of Repentance, cap. 10. §. 2. 3. makes plain this matter unto us. Men serve God three manner of ways, and
have a threefold intent in serving him. 1. Some fear God for fear of Punishment, that he should not bring upon them in this. Life the Curses written in the Law, nor cut them off from the Life to come; this is a good Service, but yet none of the best: for Women and Children for the most part serve God thus. 2. Some serve God for hope of Reward, that all the Blessings promised in the Law may come upon them in this Life, and that afterwards they may have ever∣lasting Life. This is also a good kind of Service, but none of the best; for that M. Tr. Rep. cap. 10. throughout. it is mercenary, and Servants serve their Masters for Hire. 3. Some serve God for meer Love, non formidine poenae, nec spe praemii, sed veritatis amore; and this is the excellent kind of serving of God, which every wise Man cannot attain unto; for it was the Dignity of Abraham our Father, whom the holy blessed James 2. 23. God called his Friend or Lover: for that he did not serve him for Fear or Reward, but out of his Love. Now what is this excellent Love But when we are even sick of the Love of our God, always musing on his Love, as a Lover that is sick of the Disease of Love, in all his Actions doth nothing but muse on his Beloved. And as the Spouse in the Canticles was sick with the divine Love; the whole Book being nothing but a lively Parable of this excellent kind of serving God in Love. 4. Of a periphrastical Speech, or describing of God, out of Gen. 1. And he said, let there be Light, and there was Light; and out of Ps. 33. 9. the Rabbins describe  May. Tract. Fund. cap. 2. Sec. 2. God thus, He that did but say, and the World was: So the Centurian, Mat. 8. 8. stiles Christ, , do but say the word only, thou that art the word, and my Servant shall be healed: by which Epithet he proves Christ to be God and Cre∣ator. So 2 Cor. 4. 6. . So Luke 5. 5. So Mat. 4. 3. 5. Of the Parable of the strange Sheep found, or the Joy for the repenting Sinner: Mat. 18. 12. and Luke 15. 7. If a Man hath an hundred Sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and go into the Moun∣tains and seek that which is gone astray; and when he hath found it, he rejoyceth more over that Sheep than over the 99 which went not astray. And St. Luke addeth, That Joy shall likewise be in Heaven over one Sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety nine just Persons, which need no Repentance. This stray Sheep is the unrepenting Sinner, the finding of him is his returning by Repentance; the Joy is in Heaven before God and his Angels for his Repentance. All this, Luke 15. 10. expounds thus: Likewise, I say unto you, that there is Joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner that repenteth: and lastly, Vers. 1, 2. he shews the occasion of the Parable, viz. The murmuring of the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ; This Man receiveth Sinners, and eateth with them; which thing they despised: And therefore Matthew saith, 18. 10. Take heed ye despise not one of these little ones, the repenting Sinner, viz. and then tells the Parable that their Conversion is to be joyed at and not to be despised. Maymon in his Tractate of Repentance, Cap. 7. §. 4. openeth all this excellent∣ly: Let not a Man that is a true Repentant think that he is far from the Dig∣nity of the Righteous, because of the Iniquities and Sins that he hath committed. The matter is not so, but he is beloved, and one that the Creator takes Joy in as if he had never sinned; and not that only, but his Reward is great, for he hath tasted the taste of Sin, but now he hath left it and subdued his ill Affection. The wise have said, the place in which true repentant Sinners stand, the most perfect righteous Men are not able to stand therein, that is to say, That their Dignity is greater than the Dignity of these righteous Ones who have never sinned, because that they have subdued their Affections or Concupiscenses more than these. And in the same Chap. §. 8. he saith that it was accounted an absolute Sin for any one to say unto a true penitent Sinner, Remember thy first Works, &c. Kimchy on the 57th of Esay, vers. 19. on these words [Peace, Peace to him that is a far off, and to him that is near] comments thus: By him that it far off, is meant the Sinner that repents, and by him that is near, the Righteous. And from this place they have taught and said, The Sinners that repent are greater than the
Righteous, as is said to him that is far off, and to him that is nigh; first to him that is far off, then to him that is nigh. By far off is meant, that was far off, but now is become nigh; and by nigh, is meant he that was nigh already. Kimchy, that is, as St. Paul expounds Esay's words, both to Jew and Gentile, Ephes. 2. 17. He preached Peace to you which were far off, and to them that were nigh; and vers. 13. the Gentiles viz. which were sometimes far off, are now nigh; as Christ saith, Publicans and Sinners shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before the Scribes and Pharisees. And Maymon opens his meaning more fully: Repent. Cap. 7. §. 6. Sin is of a separating nature; your Sins have made a partition between you and me; but Repentance is of a con∣joyning and uniting nature, making the Sinner to day nigh unto God, who yesterday was far off. 6. Mat. 22. 30. Luke 20. 35. Mark 12. 25. In the Resurrectin they nei∣ther marry, nor are given in Marriage, but are like unto the Angels of God in Hea∣ven. Maymon in his 8 Chap. of the Tract of Repentance, Sect. 2. saith, That the first wise Men have said, there is not in the World to come, neither eating nor drinking, nor use of Marriage-bed; but the Righteous sit with their Crowns on their Heads, enjoying the glorious splendor of the Divine Majesty, and are like unto the Ministring Angels. It is worth observing how that Christ confutes the Errors of the Sadduces, (who thought there was no Re∣surrection) out of the ancient sayings of their own Talmudical Doctors. And Maymon gives the reason of this Apothegm; There is no eating nor drinking in the World to come: Ergo they neither marry, nor are given in Marriage. Thus it is observable how Christ disputing against the Jews about the Resurrection, doth prove the Resurrection out of the sayings of their own Talmudicks, and in proving it, he doth approve those sayings; and in approving them, doth reprove the Sadduces for denying it. 7. Of eating, drinking, and feasting in Heaven, and such-like speeches: Mat. 26. 29. Mar. 14. 25. & Luke 22. 18. Christ saith, Now I tell you, from henceforth I will not drink of this fruit of the Vine, until that day when I shall drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father. And Mat. 18. 11. And I say un∣to you, that many shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Maymon in his Tractate of Repentance, cap. 8. sect. 2 & 4. opens this and the like speeches unto us, saying, In the World to come there is neither eating nor drinking, nor any one thing of the things which happen unto Bodies in this World. Again; Ever∣lasting Life is called by eleven names in the Old Testament parabolically, which he there reckons up. And the Wise-Men have called it metaphorical∣ly by two; that is, 1. The World to come. 2. That good Feast, or Ban∣quet, that is prepared for the Righteous. These two last we find in the New Testament, Mark. 10. 30. , and in the places afore alledged: whereas they have said (saith Maymon) that the Righteous do sit by way of Aenigma, or Riddle, they have said it, meaning that the Souls of the Righteous are found there without Labour, Molestation, or Weariness. 8. Of Forgiveness of Sins neither in this World nor the World to come. Mat. 12. 32. Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven in this World, nor in the World to come, i. e. shall never have forgiveness , but is guilty of eternal Damnation, as St. Mark ex∣pounds the Hebraism, cap. 3. 29. Mat. 18. 18. Whatsoever ye bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Hea∣ven. Maymon in his Tractate of Repent. cap. 6. §. 1. hath the like Speech; There is a Sin which is punished in this World, and not in the World to come; there is a Sin which is punished in the World to come, and not in this World; and there is a Sin which is punished both in this World, and in the World to come. 9. Acts 1. 6. Wilt thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel This phrase is frequent with Maymon in his Tract of Repentance, cap. 8. sect. 7.
where he saith, that the World passeth away, only the Kingdom must first be re∣stored unto Israel. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 31. For the Fashion of this World passeth away. So 1 John 2. 17. The World passeth away. So Maymon in his Tract of Repent. cap. 9. sect. 2. saith, That this World after his fashion passeth away. And there he makes as it were a threefold World: 1. This present World. 2. The day of the Messiah. And 3. the World to come, or Everlasting Life. And he ex∣plaineth himself, That by this present World, he means the Kingdoms and Monarchies which do captivate and afflict Israel, the last of which being taken away, then shall begin the World of the Messias; he means, as Rabby Abra∣ham, Tzebang a Spanish Jew, hath expounded in his bundle of Myrth, on the first of Gen. that after 5600 Years of the World expired, and before the end of the 6000 Year (in which they say the World shall end): In this in∣terim, I say, of 400 Years (in which time we now live) shall be the fall of Rome, which they call Edom typically, and that then Redemption shall come in to Israel. And this is Maymon's meaning here when he saith, That the first wise Men have said that between this World (of the Monarchies, viz.) and the days or times of the Messiah, there is not any space or let, but only this, that God causes first the Kingdoms to pass away, that is, the last of these Mo∣narchies that afflicts Israel, must pass away; which is the Idolatry of Rome that hinders the Jews from believing in Christ. 11. 2 Cor. 11. 31. The God which is blessed for ever: So Rom. 1. 25. The Creator blessed for ever: So Rom. 9. 5. God over all blessed for ever. This Epistle which St. Paul useth so frequently in his Epistles, is infinitely used of Maymon and all the Rabbins, and therefore is become one of their Rabbinical Abbre∣viatures  God holy and blessed for ever. 12. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be God the Father of Mercies. So Maymon ends his Book of Knowledg: Blessed be the God of Mercy; it were more signifi∣cantly translated, the God of Commiserations, as Drusius hath well observed; for , is the Father of Mercies; , is the Father of Commiserations, answerable to Maymon's Syriac word () whose fatherly Bowels yearn with a natural  of Pity and Compassion to∣wards his. 13. Rev. 1. 20. & 2. 1, 8, 12. He whom St. John calls so often in the Re∣velations , The Angel of the Church; is called by Maymon in his first Chap. of the Fundamentals of Moses's Law, Sect. 9.  the Messenger, Legate, Legate, Apostle, Minister of the Church or Congrega∣tion. There he saith that God appeared in Mount Sinai, (when he gave the Law) like to the Angel, or Minister of the Church or Congregation, wrap∣ped in Garments. 14. Luke 3. Christ saith twice, It is written, and once, It is said. And so St. Paul often useth this Phrase, The Scripture saith; but they seldom or never tell you in what Book it is written or said, or in what Chapter, or in what Verse. The same Phrase is as frequent with Maymon: he saith, It is said, It is written, or, The Scripture saith, whensoever he bringeth any place of Scrip∣ture for to prove his Assertion. Now the reason why he never cites the Section, Chapter, or Book, is for that the Jews have always been so ready and pregnant in the Scriptures, as that they need not cite the Book, Chapter, or Verse: For this their expertness in the Scriptures they were called Sopherim, Seribes or Numberers of the Law. They have told us that there be 54 Pa∣rashioths or Sections in Moses's Law, of which they do here joyn together the two shortest, and so in every year they read over Moses's Law, ending on the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles; every Sabbath-day reading in the Synagogue a whole Section. They set down the number of the Verses of every Book, as namely Genesis hath in it 1534 Verses. The midst of the Book is at these words, [And by thy Sword thou shalt live.] The Sections
thereof be 12. The Sydrim, or lesser Sections, be 43. The number of the Let∣ters of Genesis be 4395. And Hakmi tells us on the first of Genesis, how many Alphabets there be in the Law, viz. 1800. And so I could run through all the other Books. But I must not be tedious. Now methinks I hear some ignorant Scholar object, such an one as Jude speaks of, who condemns and speaks ill of those things which he knows not, and corrupts those things he also knows; To what end and purpose serves this great and needless labour of the Rabbies, in numbring up of the Books, Verses, Sections, Words, and Letters I answer. They serve us for exceed∣ing great use, especially in these our days, in which God did foresee Pope∣lings would go about to prove that the Scriptures were corrupted, and that then we must of necessity have another Judg, viz. the Pope. If I should grant this Argument, made by the Pope's Champion, Pistorius, That the Scriptures were corrupted, and that therefore we must have another Judge: Yet doth it not follow that the Pope must be he; but contrary-wise, that of all other the Pope must be excluded from being Judg, for that he is a Party. But we constantly deny the Corruption of the Scriptures, which they affirm, and endeavour to prove by the 848 variae Lectiones, and by the Keries and the Cethists. And we answer, that variety of reading argues not any Corruption, but Ingenuity and plentiful Fruit of the Spirit of God, done only in obscure places for Illumination: for we can prove out of the Nazarites and Sopherisms, every word and letter to have been through God's singular Providence, num∣bred up, and so kept by them thereby from Corruption: Upon which Point Pistorius the Pope's Champion durst not dispute with a Learned Man of our Land. For howsoever the Jews were male Legis observatores, yet were they boni servatores & custodes, true keepers of the Oracles of God committed unto them: And how did they keep them but by numbring up every Word, Letter, and Verse, that so it being left unto Posterity on Record, we might prove the Purity of the Scriptures by their Nazaretical Books against the foisting Papists, who do nothing but foist in and corrupt all things, not only the Greek Fathers, but even the Targums and Comments of the Rabbins in all those places and expressions that make against Rome in Buxtorffs Bible lately set forth. As for Example, Esay 34. 9. And [her] i. e. Edom's Ri∣vers, shall be turned into Pitch. Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast, that wrote long before Christ, comments thus: And the Rivers of Rome shall be turned into Pitch. Rabbi David Kimchy cites this Chaldaical Exposition, and con∣firms it, saying, That all the Section is spoken against Edom, that is, Rome. And Elias Levita in his Methurgaman in the word [Roma] cites the Chaldee Paraphrast so against Rome, and so doth Munster. All these follow the true and best Bumberges Bibles. But in Buxtorffs Bibles lately set forth (which follows the third Edition of Bumberg's Bibles that be purged) there the word Rome is left forth in the Targum, and in Kimchy's Comment; and four times in Rabby Shelemaes and Kimchies Comments instead of the word [Edom] by which they mean Rome, they have put the word [Javan] that is Greece, and once the word (Cuthith) that is, Samaria. And in the 35th Chapter four times the word [Cuthith] Samaria. So Rome is both Samaria and Greece, and in other places Persia, and a mess of Wax. And on the 16th Verse of the 34th of Esay, Kimchy comments thus: Whosoever will see into the Destructi∣on of Rome, let him search over the Book of Jehova, and wade in, &c. in Bumbergs Bibles. But in Buxtorffs Bible you have no more but these words [whosoever will see into] leaving out the words of Kimchy, the De∣struction of Rome; and doth not tell one that he must see, for that they would have the Reader blind, and not to see Rome's Fall, which for all this their Legerdemain with Scholars, must yet in the end be sacked with Sword, and burnt with Fire, for her Idolatry and Filthiness. Rev. 17. Now for that the Romans came of the Edomites, as himself saith on Obadiah. And the
Edomites came of Esun, Gen. 36. 9. otherwise called Edom, of his red Pottage. Therefore they by Edom mean Rome and the Roman Antichrist, whereof Esan was the type of his Brother Jacob, the type to the Elect; which agrees with that of the Apostles, Rom. 9. Heb. 11. And again, what can be plainer in Mysteries, then to wrap up the thing typified in the name of the Type it self, as is done in this word  that is  Edom, that is, Rome; the two Letters D and R, which is very frequent in the Scripture, being changed. 15. Mat. 12. 36. But I say unto you, That of every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an account in the day of Judgment. Maymon saith, The Wise have said, even the light, and idle, or wanton Speech that is in secret or private between the Husband and his Wife, the Lord will give even Judg∣ment upon that. And Maymon saith, that this was a Cabbala grounded on the 4th of Amos, ver. 13. Who declareth unto Man what is his secret Thought or Speech. Mameshico, the 70, have on purpose by a Metathesis or Transpo∣sition of Letters made thereof one word (Hammeshico) and translated it , shewing unto Man that his Messiah or Christ. For that the Agadah Annunciation Evangelization of the Messiah to the Gentiles, was one of the greatest Secrets of God, reckoned up there by Annas. It is one of the 13 places of Scripture which the 70 did of purpose change, for the reason alledged, as I conjecture. It is not therefore a Corruption of the place, as some do unjustly accuse them, but a witty mutation and signification, done by them of purpose to teach us Gentiles to know the Messiah, who then when they translated this, was unknown to us. Mark how Christ still confutes the Rabbies of the Jews by the saying still of their own Talmudicks; and here by an Argument taken à minore ad majus thus; If a Man by the saying of your Doctors, must give an account of every idle word, much more for a Blasphe∣my; but the first is true out of your Doctors, ergo the second. For Mat. 12. 24. they had spoken Blasphemy against Christ, that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub, which was the occasion Christ alledged this Talmudical Sentence against them. 16. Mat. 5. 37. Christ having condemned the Jewish Rabbins for swear∣ing, teacheth them out of their own Books of Ethicks, that swearing was forbidden in a Rabbi, saying, But let yoar Communication be, yea, yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then these, cometh of evil. So James 5. 12. But above all things, my Brethren, swear not; but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest you fall into Condemnation. Maymon in his Tractate of the Manners of the Rabbies, Cap. 5. §. 13. saith, The Contracts or Commerce of the Scholar of a wise Man, are in Truth and Fidelity: he saith of that which is not so, that it is not so; and of that which is so, that it is so: he saith, I, I, or, No, No; Yea, Yea, or, Nay, Nay; or of a negative No, and of an affirmitive 1. 17. Acts 22. 3. I was brought up in this City (saith Paul) at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught, &c. The latter expounds the former; for Scholars were wont to sit on lower Seats at the Feet of their Masters. Maymon in his Tractate of the Manners, &c. Cap. 6. Sect. 2. saith, The Wise have charged saying, Dust thy self in the dust of their Feet, and drink with thirst their Words. The Hebrew Verb , or  signifies in pulvere seu arenam descendere, as Virgil saith, Fulva luctatur arena. It is a Metaphor borrowed from Antagonists of the Olympian Games, wrestling and striving together for Victory till they lay in the dust; as Jacob did wrestle with God, Gen. 32. 25. where this word is used, he wrestled and strove with God till he lay in the dust again; which also is interpreted of Prayer, Hosea 12. 5. which over∣comes God invincible. Be ye holy, as I am holy; be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. Maymon in his Tract Ethics, Cap. 1. §. 6. saith, The wise Men have taught us thus, what is meant by this that is called holy even this, that
thou shouldst be holy. What is meant by this, that God is called merciful even this, that thou shouldst be also merciful. Acts 2. 10. Mat. 23. 15. Wo unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye compass Sea and Land to make one Proselite, and when he is made, ye make him twofold, more the Child of Hell then your selves. Maymon in his Tractate of Idolatry, cap. 10. sect. 4, & 6. tells us of the difference between, 1.  an Israelite. 2.  a Stran∣ger, and 3.  a Proselite; who is also of two sorts,  Prose∣lite of Righteousness, a true Israelite indeed, one of the Covenant, who re∣ceiveth the 613 Precepts of Moses's Law, and was received at all times after, and was circumcised, such were Shemagjah and Abtalian, saith Maymon in his Preface. , that is, Proselites of Righteousness; and Rabby Maiir, , that is, the Son of a righteous and true Proselite: Such were the Sichemites, Urias Hettaeus, Achor, of whom Judith 14. Herod the Idu∣maean, Onkelos, Titus Vespasian's Sisters Son, Nicolaus, Act. 6. Naaman the Syrian, the Eunuch, Cornelius, Acts 2. 5. are called . The Aegyptians for the most part became Pro∣selites, Deut. 23. 7. Thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian, for that ye were in the Land of Aegypt  Strangers Advenae; nor an Edomite, for he is thy Brother. Such an Edomitish Israelite was the Prophet Obadiah, of whom the Rabbies use this Proverb. Kimchi, R. Salomon Jarchy, Aben Ezra in Ionam. Obad. The mustard pot bies the mustard-pot-maker: for that of an Edomite Obadiah be∣came a Proselite, and then was sent to prophesy against Edom. And so we know that many Romish Edomites being become true Proselites, have prophesied against Rome, which is Edom there, as all the Rabbies say spiritu∣ally; for, saith Kimchy there, whatever our Rabbies have spoken against Edom, in the last days, is to be understood against Rome. And God grant us more such Romish Edomites as Luther was But of these Proselites Mat. 23. 15. is not to be understood. 2.  A Proselite of the Gate, or an Inhabitant amongst the Jews who received not the  613 Precepts but only the seven Precepts of the Sons of Nae, Qui habitabat in Israel & in se recipiebat quod noluit colere Idola, quia Idolatrae inter Judaeos habit are non licebat. These Proselites were not circumcised, neither received the whole Law, but only the seven Pre∣cepts, which were these. 1.  Judicia, that they should observe publick Justice. 2.  Benedictio Dei, that they should worship God. 3.  that they should not worship Idols. 4.  that they should fly Incest and Lust. 5.  that they should fly Blood-shed. 6.— and avoid Violence and Rapin. 7.— and not to cut off a Member from any Creature whilst it was yet living. This Proselite, saith Maymon, was never to be received but only in the time the Jubile was in use. Of this second kind of Proselite Christ's saying is to be understood; for that the Jews permitted these to break or omit all the other Laws of Moses impunè, so they kept these seven; by which unlaw∣ful Permission they became the Children of Hell and worthy of Destruction more then themselves; living both like Jews in regard of the seven Precepts and like Gentiles in respect of the other 606 Precepts which  the Jews themselves were bound to keep. Of these Mungrels, Heathenish Jews or Jewish Gentiles, that like  live of both fashions I take it (under Correction) that Christ speaketh, and justly reproveth such Pro∣selites, like our Papists Converts, that will both become conformable out∣wardly
in our Church, and yet also go to Mass. If any can open the place better, I shall be ready to learn. Jam nè istae Gemmae quas Galli gallinacei instar, ego in Rabinorum sterquilinio offendi, ullo modo Dominationem vestram offendant, iterum at{que} iterum supplex oro; nam si meliores invenissem etiam ob∣tulissem. Nihilominus tamen Davidica illa faba in caput meum (si quo forte peccem) merito cudatur. Ps. 141. 5. Now remains these three to be spoken of in the next place; 1. . 2. Judicials of the Sanhedrim. 3. Rabinical Common-places. But both my Nephews sudden Journey, and an unexpected Accident, have enforced me to defer these till the next time. Your Lordships to command, Ralph Skynner. This Epistle is before his Transla∣tion of Rambanus Maddae into English, and Dedicated to Bi∣shop Usher. LETTER CIII. Right Reverend in Christ; I Have sent your Lordship Drusiius his Alphabetum Hebraicum vetus; and Veterum Sapientum , out of which I conjecture the reason why the Jews at this day do pronounce the Hebrew words with the defect of the Gutturals, is, for that the Septuagint Jews have used so to write them in Greek, as, , &c. , the 2, 3, 9.  the 12, &c. Three Jews I have talked with personally,  and asked them the reason why they omitted these Gutturals,  in words, by reason of which their pronunciation was difficult to be understood by us which pro∣nounced them: I told them, that Moses wrote them to this end, that they should be read and pronounced: And they confessed it should be so, only custom and use had otherwise prevailed. Now this custom arose (as I sup∣pose) from this ancient manner of writing and speaking without the Gut∣tural. Now what was the original cause of this custom, I cannot yet find, unless it be that which Elias Levita alleageth, in his Titsby voce,  for  cum defectu , because, saith he, the pronounciation of  is difficult to the Gentiles; as Abben Ezra saith, That whosoever hath not learned to pro∣nounce  and  in his Youth, (though he be an Hebrew) shall never be able to pronounce them genuinely while he lives; Therefore (saith he) the  i. e. Gentiles pronounce not  but  without . It may be therefore, that Antiquity, and the Seventy, respected the Gentiles in the difficulty of these Gutturals, as in other things, and to make the pronunciation of this Tongue more eile, did leave them out; for surely these Seventy did, in their Translation, much respect the Gentiles, that they might not only not offend them, or make their Holy Tongue unamiable to the Gentiles,
through the difficulty of the hard Gutturals; but also that they might al∣lure us Gentiles to become ( that is) Proselites of Righteousness, to receive their 613 Precepts,  and to believe in the Messias, as one, for many places, shall shew; Amos 4. 13. Aununcians hominem, () quae sit cogitatio ipsius. Maymon, secreta verba & mussitationes. Septuaginta, ; acceperunt pro unâ dictione ( i. e. his Messia) &  praeposita  quod  indicat. Unus ex 13 loci, quos de industriâ corri∣puere 70, ut Gentibus Messiam indicarent. Hoc etenim est unum ex magnis illis secretis ibidem enumeratis, quae Deus facit, Messiae nempe  annunciatio, Evangelizatio ac ejus praedicatio Gentibus. I have sent your Lordship also Mr. Claudius Duret's History of the Lan∣guages of the Universe; which Book, long e're now, I had translated for the good of the Gentry, in that it fitteth a Gentleman with Discourse of every Nation and Language; but that I understood the several Characters in this Book would not be had for 1000 l. and to set it forth without Cha∣racters, would be a Catarract in the Reader's Eye. He setteth down thir∣teen several Characters of the Hebrew Tongue, pag. 117. & deinceps. In the division of the Books of the Talmud, he follows Riccius and Galatinus, which are not so exact as Buxtorf. In his 76 Page, he affirmeth that Moses, foreseeing his death, wrote the Law in thirteen Copies, from the first Ele∣ment to the last, giving each of the twelve Tribes of Israel, a Copy written in publick Characters, (namely, saith he) Characters Samaritan; and that he left the 13th Copy to the Levites and Priests in secret and divine Writing standing on triangular Rods; the use of which remained only to the Priests and Levites, who were expert and of understanding in the reading and understanding thereof, having the knowledg of the Points and Accents of Letters and Vowels, &c. Out of which I note these two things: First, That Moses left unvowelled Copies to the Tribes, save one which had both Accents and Vowels to the custody of the Priests, to which they might have recourse in doubtful Lections. Secondly, The Antiquity of the Samaritan Characters, for the commendation of your Lordships Sa∣maritain Bible. I beseech your Lordship, any time at your fit leisure, to send to Mr. Burnett's, that little Tract of mine of , and your Lord∣ships approbation, or reprobation of it, wherein I fail; for I have not yet done it so exactly as (if God permit) I intend. I would gladly be con∣firmed in the Truth, or have the falshood infirmed, if there be any in that Tract; for the Lord he knows, I have always sought the Truth with inte∣grity of Heart, weeping often with St. John, where I find the sealed Book, submitting always my Spirit to the Spirit of the Prophets, in propriis stare; but crying out always  let the Righteous smite me, & vincet ve∣ritas. Surely the Prophesy and Sign of Jonas, is expounded to be fulfilled in that Article of our Creed, () for as Jonas's , was three days, and three nights, from the time that  the Fish swal∣lowed him, till the time  cast him up: So Christ's  must an∣swerably be part of three days, from the time he did , and that he was laid in the Sepulchre, till the time that he arose out of the Se∣pulcre, the precise time of 34 hours; at which instant neither the great Stone, or the Sepulchre, nor the Seal of Pontius Pilate, nor the Guard, could hold him any longer under the power of  and Death; for so long he must be held under; Destroy this Temple, within three days I will build it up again. Now the Jews laboured all they could to disannul this Pro∣phesy, and to keep him longer, yea, for ever in , and under the Power of Death. To this end, rolling on his Sepulchre a Stone, sealing it, and setting a Guard, saying, This Deceiver said, while he was living, that within three days he would rise again. Now this is more than to be buried, for he might have risen in so few hours again; but till the 34 hours expired, he
could not, without the disannulling of Jonas's Prophecy. And now from Christ's , I pass unto mine own, (for I am to speak with dead Phrase) in a kind of living  obscuratus ab amicis meis, living in tene∣bris, dark , cum blattis ac tineis quotidie rixans. Out of this place of ob∣scurity I would gladly enter into  pro  the Guttural o∣mitted.  that House, that Temple of God called  Mercy, Chaldaice &  Hebraice, as the word is taken Jonah 2. 8. They that observe vain Vani∣ties, forsake ( their Mercies) the God of Mercies, as the Apostle calls him: the Syriac ( merciful) now as the , there, and  said, so say I, , your Lordship must be this , or else I shall still remain telluris inutile pondus, unprofitable to the Church, burying invitus my Talent in the Ground. Whereas David tells me, Psal. 92. 12. , i. e. The Righteous shall flourish as a Palm-tree; the reason he renders in the words following: They shall bring, &c.  &c.  And as the Apostle saith to the same effect, The Grace of God was not in vain in me, therefore (saith he) I laboured more abundantly then they all. The Grace of God is operative in whomsoever it is, which not suffering me to be idle, makes me seek late full Employment. Now as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for your Lordship's Health, that you may still fight Jehovah's Battels for , and all other points, which these devilish Spirits of the Jesuits, the Locusts of , and the bottomless pit, by their smoaky Doctrine do resist. I humbly be∣seech your Lordship to have a care of your Health, and a while to spare your self (from being tantus helluo librorum) till you have perfectly recove∣red your former Health; for much reading is a weariness to the Flesh. There is a company of Mistresses of Witchcraft, Nahum 3. 4.  lately discovered; your Lordship will by others understand the Particulars; I on∣ly touch the General. And thus with my humble Duty and Observance to your Lordship, ever remembring you in my poor Prayers, I rest now and ever, your Lordship's ever obliged, Ralph Skynner. From Waltham-stow, January 26. 1624. LETTER CIV. Right Reverend in God; I Have sent your Grace Cunradus Graserus on the ten last Verses of the 11th Chapter of Daniel; whose tenet is contrary to Junius and Broughton. Now to satisfy your Lordship's next Request: That the Hebrew Article , of that memorial () is frequently put for the Preposition  or  by an  articulo loco Prepositionis, these places sufficiently prove. 1. Rabbi David Kimchy in his Preface on the Psalms saith thus,  There be some Psalms also that have this Title or Epigraph,  [to] David, instead of  [for] David. As Psal. 20. To the Master Quirester () a Psalm [to] David, that is, for David: which the kind of the Psalm argueth; for it is a supplication of the Church in the behalf of their King,  v. 1. in initio Psalmi, & in fine; he closeth it up simili sono:
2. Rabbi Elias Levita Germanus, in his  Chapter of the  cap. 4. office of the Article  saith, that  hath three offices. (1.)  est  est  donativum, Dativi Casus signum [to] ut Gen. 32. 18.  [to] my Lord, to Esau. (2.)  est vel () est Genitivum, Genitivi Casus signum,  [of]  est Possessivum, ut Psal. 24.  terra est Do∣mino, id est Domini. So  a Psalm [to] David, that is of David,  being understood. (3.)  est loco  (propter) est accusativi casus signum (for) ut Exodus 14. 3. And Pharaoh said  propter filios Israel: So Gen. 20. 5.  say for me, he is my Brother; hitherto Elias. I will add other places of mine own observation, Psal. 119. vers. 122.  be thy Servant's Surety [for] good, not [to] good. So Micah 1. 12. The Inhabitant of Maroth was sick [for] good  that it had lost. So Psal. 3. 3.  There is no help [for him] in God. So Psal. 7. 13.  He hath prepared [for him] the Instruments of Death; and Kimchy notes there, that some expound () for , that is,  . Dan. 9. 24. Dan. 9. 24. [Seventy Weeks are determined each one of them touching Rabbi Sagna∣dias the eminent Doctor, his Ex∣position on Dan. 9. 24. or concerning thy People.] R. Sagnadias: Let us number and we shall know how many Years ten times seven do amount unto, namely seventy: Behold 70 Weeks are 490 Years; abstract from them the 70 Years of the Captivity of Babel, from the time that Nebuchadnezzar laid waste the Sanctuary, unto the second Year of Darius, and there remain 420 Years: For so long the second House or Temple remained standing; as if he should say, seventy Years  is  Sagnadias. That is, 70 years of Babel's Captivity, and 420 Zorubba∣bel's Temple stood, make to∣gether 490 Years, or 70 Weeks. he hath decreed concerning thy People, and concerning thy City Jerusa∣lem, the City of thy Holiness, which shall hereafter be built up. So thou hast learned, that jointly with the Babylonish Captivity, together with the standing of the second House, are seventy Weeks, which are 490 Years: 70 of the Destruction, and 420 of the Building. Dan. 9. 24. (, &c.) to restrain, or prohibite Defection, or Rebellion, which they had already made or committed. And to seal up, that is, read , and to finish Sins of Error, that is the blessed and holy One will finish erroneous Sin. [And to expiate] to make Reconciliation, I Our English Cover comes of his Hebrew Mother  literis  organi permutatis. expound it to cover the Iniquity of Israel: that is, of Solomon's Temple. and to bring in Righteousness of [Eter∣nities]. R. Sagnadias by  means Solomon's Temple, so called (the House of Perpetuity) for that the Ark rested there longer then in any other place, as I shewed in unvailng Moses's Tabernacle. This is the house of the Sanctuary, as it is written, 1 Kings 8. 13. a settled place for these to dwell [in for ever]. Now the House of the Sanctuary is called () or Worlds. In the World or Age of the first building, and in the World or Age of the second building, and in the World or Age of the third building, which shall remain from Age to Age for ever. Dan. 9. 24. [And to seal up the Vision and prophecy]: for from the time that the second House was built, there did not arise up any more a Prophet in Israel, only they used  the Echo or Voice from Heaven. Dan. 9. 24. [And to anoint the most holy.] For greater shall be the Glory of the Dignity of the second House, than of the first; as it's written, Great shall be Pag. 2. the Glory of the latter House above the first. And this that he saith () it is, of the signification of the Chaldee word () to anoint, as that place () to anoint them, is interpreted in the Chaldee () to anoint. And some Expositors say () to anoint, is to measure out the measure ()
which they interpret in the Chaldee , a measuring, according to the Sentence, where it's said, A Like shall be stretched out over Jerusalem. Dan. 9. 25. () From the going forth of the Commandment. From Yet forgetting himself, he be∣gins the 77 of Daniel from the first of Cyrus. the time that the word Went forth from the Presence of the Creator, when the Decree was decreed to bring back the Captives from Babel, and to build Jerusalem by the means of Cyrus. Dan. 9. 25. [To Christ the Prince] until that King shall be anointed, which is the Prince that must build up Jerusalem, hi∣therto are seven Weeks: seven Weeks I say are 49 Years, From the first year of Cyrus till the second of Darius the Persian, are 7 weeks, or 49 years, of those 490 years; the first division of the Weeks the City Bither, whereof Ben. Coz∣ba was King, Adrianus Caesar took 73 years after the destruction of the second Temple after other 52 years. He misreckons himself 11 years here: for 49, and 420, and 10 make but 479, to which add 11 years, and there is 490. from the time that the Creator preached the glad-ti∣dings that Jerusalem should be built, until the second year of Darius King of Persia. After that shall Jeru∣salem be built, and shall stand built 420 years. Be∣hold 70 weeks wants 10 years, and those 10 years Bi∣ther stood. Now when they shall ascend up to Jeru∣salem, the Street shall be built; that is, Jerusalem, and the Streets thereof. Dan. 9. 25.  And the Wail, it's properly the Ditch cut out about the Wall; the Ditches are the Villages of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, which are now cut off, so that Men cannot pass over. Dan. 9. 25.  And in the strait of Times; They be the Courts of the Sanctuary, the watches and the stations of the Priests and Levites; as if he should say, Jerusalem should be waste all these years. Abben Ezra on Dan. 9. 24. 70 Weeks, &c. That eminent Doctor Sagnadiah saith, that these weeks are years; witness that which he saith afterwards, cap. 10. 3. till three weeks of days (that is, years) were fulfilled; but he mentioneth not with the weeks 70 days. For Behold they are like 7 Sabbaths of Years: and right is the In∣terpretation; for that half of the Week that he mentioneth, is 1290 days, as I will declare by perfect Demonstration, only the Exposition of these 70 weeks are exceeding hard. Moreover, for that we know not whether these words [to restrain Rebellion, and to finish erroneous Sins] be in laudem, or vitu∣perium: For lo, it's semblable, that from the word [to cover Iniquity, and to . anoint the most holy] that all this is in laudem, in Commendation; but these words [to seal Vision and Prophecy] cannot be in Commendation. Now seeing it's so, how can we order aright these words [to restrain Rebellion, and to end erroneous Sin] that Abben Ezra knows not that Moses's Cer∣monial Law, had its Funerals and Death in Christ's Death, Col. 2. 14. agreeing with this of Dan. 9. 24. when Christ was crucified and nailed to the Cross, then was the Ceremonial Law crucified and nailed to his Cross. they should be in Commendation. And so the like of those words, [to seal Vision and Prophecy.] But behold we find it written [that the Iniquity of the Amo∣rite was not perfectly filled up] and those words are spoken in vituperium, in the ill sense: for the meaning is, that hitherto the day of his Calamity, and the final punishment of his Iniquity is not yet come; as that place, Greater is my Punishment than can be born; and so that, if () Punishment shall happen unto thee. And so thy Iniquity is perfected and finished, thy Punishment is ended; and it is in the ill sense. But the Replyer may answer, that these words [erroneous Sin, and Trespass] as also that word [I beseech thee take away now, &c.] are contrary to those words [and her Iniquity is taken away.] But lo the whole shall be expounded ac∣cording to the meaning of the place; but these words, to bring in eternal Righteousness, do shew that they are in Commendation. And the sense of [to seal Vision] is, the understanding of the Prophets, which have prophesied of the Subject of the second Temple. And now I will tell the meaning of, that eminent Gaon, he saith, That the exposition of [the word went forth] is, That God had decreed that Jerusalem, with the second Temple, should he waste 490 Years, which are the 70 Weeks.
Only thou hast erred in thine Account, when the 70 Years were compleat and ended, and they are but only seven Weeks, which make 49 Years; and thou needest not be curious to mention the Years, for they were 51. And the meaning [to Messias the Prince] is, Cyrus the King. And he hath brought a Reason from the words of the Prophet; Thus saith the Lord to Cyrus his Messias, or anointed One, whose right hand I have strengthned. And the 62 Weeks are the Days, i. e. Years, of the second House. But lae there is a difficulty, for the Angel saith, In the beginning of thy Supplications, Abben Ezra confutes Rabby Sagnadiah, as before. the Word went forth. Again, how can the Years of the Captivity be ming∣led with the Years of the second Temple Or, how should we expound, to restrain Rebellion, and to finish Error Again, what shall become of the Week that remains Of which he saith, [he will confirm the Covenant for many in one Week] after the 62 Weeks; and it were meet to mention, that yet three Weeks do remain. Moreover, his proof that Cyrus is the Messias, is not right; for that [to his Messias] is as much as to his Prophet; for so it is written for that, that the Lord hath anointed me. But before I speak my Opinion, I will expound these words, (He will confirm the Covenant for many). It is a thing manifest∣ly known, that Titus made a Covenant with Israel for seven years; and that three years and an half, the daily Sacrifice ceased, before the destruction I, but not by Titus, but by Antiochus. of the second Temple, as its written in the Book of Josephus Son of Goryon. Dan. 9. 27. And he saith, [with the Wing of Ro∣man Souldiers. Wing of Abomination he shall make it desolate] because the Abominations shall spoil the Sanctum Sancto∣rum, or the Oracle, after the number of years mentioned before, when Je∣rusalem was taken. And it is written, in the 4th Prophecy, [And they pol∣luted the Sanctuary of my Strength] that was the day Jerusalem was taken, in the time of Titus, who had taken away the continual Sacrifice before, and the abomination of Desolation was set up. For so it is written, [And from the time that the daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the desolating Abomination set up, shall be 1290 days]: And they must needs expound Daniel, how ma∣ny compleat days are half a week, because of the Leap Years; so also by reason of the word [] or half a week: For it is not meet that  or February, makes the mensis Em∣bolismicus, or intercallaris be∣ing doubled. [half] should be the [whole], neither more nor less, as the [] half-Tribe of Manasses, and many such like. Now know thou that [] days, are always so taken for days, and not for years. Only it is meet, that if it be said [] days, that it should be a compleat year, in the revo∣lution of the days of the year, as they were at first. As that [from days to days] which are the days of a compleat year; so that [days shall be his Redemption] that is, in a year shall he be redeemed. But when the number of two or three days shall be used within this word [] days, it can∣not fitly be taken for years, but for days as they are, after the exposition of that place [two days] which were two compleat ones, when the days re∣turned as they were. And so that [until a month of dayes] when the Moon shall be seen according to the form in which she was seen in the first day of Man's being. Therefore have I said, that 1290 days, are that half of the week that he mentioneth. And so that [blessed is he that waiteth for that he may attain to those days] as I will expound. For in case they were years, how could a Man wait or expect a 1000 years to come unto them And it is written, the days of our years, The 70 Years of the Captivity, was a Type, the time of Man's Life, a Captivity of 70 Years. In the Psalms, Teach us so to number our dayes () is in num∣ber 70, and hath reference to the 70 Years named immediatly be∣fore, the allusion is sweet. in them are 70 years. And behold we find that Nehe∣miah saith, That the City of the Sepulchres of my Fathers lieth wasted, and the Gates thereof are burnt with Fire. And it's written, Also me hath he commanded to be a Prince in the Land of Judah. And it's written of him, He shall build up the Temple of the Lord, and shall bear the Honour; shall sit and reign upon his Throne. So
Jeremy prophesyeth of him, A King shall reign, and be wise. And in Ezra it's written, concerning Nehemiah, And thou shalt be to them for a King. And now I will expound the 70 weeks. The 70 weeks, are from the going forth of the Word in the beginning of Daniel's Supplications. [To restrain Rebellion], is like that [The Iniquity of the Amorite is not yet perfect:] [And to seal up Error], is as that, [thy Iniquity is perfect and fi∣nished]. And [to cover Iniquity], to bear the Yoke of the Captivity, to make reconciliation [with our Fathers]. And to bring in] till God shall judg them with Righteousness. Or his Exposition is in dispraise: For the coming of Righteousness, is the setting of Righteousness; as the going down of the Sun is the setting thereof. Therefore it's in dispraise; For commen∣dation is the contrary, as that, [their Righteousness shall go forth like the Light]. And he shall bring forth thy Righteousness like light. And this is that, Arise, O my Light, for thy Light cometh. For thy Light was set until now. Dan. 9. 24. [And to seal up the Vision and Prophecy] because the Pro∣phets shall cease; [And to seal the Messias the most Holy]. And behold, this is the beginning of the Captivity. So that the matter of the Account can∣not come into thy mind. For lae, in the Account of the Kings of Persia, there is a New Moon added, according to the word of the Angel, as I will Or because  declare. Now whether there be in the Computation, an Addition or Substraction, it hurteth not. Perad∣venture, If I could tell but what Verse and Chapter he writes of this New Moon, I had translated it: I will seek more at leisure. I understand not by these two Eclipses, what time is gain∣ed: I would be glad to learn of your Grace. the matter of the New Moon will come into thy mind, when he knoweth the moment of the Eclipse of the Moon in this Year. Besides, we have found another Eclipse before this, an hundred Years, by which I may know the place of the Moon according to Truth. And according to his Account, he will wil∣lingly reduce backward the Years that come. Now lo, the meaming of Vers. 25. Know therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the Gommandment, to restore and to build Jerusalem, un∣to To build a∣gain. the Prince Messias, are 70 Weeks. And behold, 19 Years were of the Kingdom of Cyrus and Ahashuerosh. Abben Ezra his account of the 70 weeks. So the whole is seven until Vid. E. in Dan. 11. 2. 62 Weeks are 434 Years, so long Zeroba∣bel's Temple stood, viz. to be 1290 days.  And two Years of Darius, and he reigned 12 Years; and its so writ∣ten in a Book of the Kings of Persia. And twenty Years of Artaxshashta the King. Lo, all amounts but to seven Weeks, till Nehemiah came, as its written in the Book of Ezra. Now the 62 Weeks, are the time that the second Temple stood; and the half of the Week I have expounded. And thus, my Lord, I have shewed your Grace the Exposition of R. Sagnadiah to be false, by Abben Ezra his Opinion. And, 2dly, I have set down Abben Ezra's Supputation of the 70 Weeks: Which is thus, 51 Years of Cyrus and Ahashuerosh, Darius and Artaxerxes; or 7 Weeks, 434 Years: or the 62 Weeks, the time the second Temple stood; and he makes the Temple to stand longer by 14 Years than any other. Seven Years, the last Week, in all 491 Years. You see he is a Year too much: besides, he makes the last Weeks half, to be after the destruction of Zorobabel's Temple, which was 40 Years before the destruction thereof. My Lord, I must now impart a Matter unto you. My Wife received a Letter of late, since I was with your Lordship, from her Sister, my Lady Temple, wherein she writeth that my Lord of Meath hearing of my entring into the Ministry, did promise to confer upon me a Living worth 60 l. per Annum presently; and that within a Year, he would make it worth an 100 l. per Annum, if I would come over. I wonder that my Lord of Meath, Dr. Martin (as I suppose) should, of his own accord, make such an offer
unto me that am a meer Stranger to him, and never had conference with him. But, my Lord, if your Lordship would vouchsafe me, to be a poor Levite and Chaplain in your Service, I would say with Mollerus, in Psal. 123. v. 2.  Cum omne servire durum sit, faelicissimus, cui contigerit, bono ac pio servire Domino. If your Grace shall in your Letter signify . Then behold I will say with Ruth, Where thou goest, I will go; and where thou diest, I will Ruth. 1. 16, 17. die, &c. And thus, with thanks for your Lordships last bounty in bearing my Charges, which I understood not till I took Horse, and therefore could not return thanks till now, I rest now and ever, Ralph Skynner. Sutton, Octob. 31. 1625. My Lord, I would gladly be your Scholar, to learn your Method and  Est communis generis, therefore may agree with  facile way in preaching. O that I might be beholden unto you for some of your directions in that kind. And that I might see but a Sermon or two of your Graces in writing, according to those directions: For therefore did I enter in the last hour of the day of my Life into God's House, that I might say with David, Ps. 92. 13.  The Reason is rendred . And Abben Ezra calleth the Rabbies, LETTER CV. Worthy Sir, YOUR last kindness is not forgotten, though unrequited, for I can∣not  Pecuniam qui habet, non refert, & qui refert, non habet. At gratiam qui refert, habet, & qui habet refert. Accept therefore this my Literarum Manus, by which now I prove that plainly unto you, which long ago I affirmed in conference, viz. That Israel passed not over the Red Sea transversum, as you with others have supposed. If Israel coming out of the Sea, arrived and landed at the self-same side Major. of the Wilderness, from which he departed when he entred the Sea: Then did he not go over the Red Sea transversum. But Israel coming out of the Sea, arrived and landed at the self-same side Minor. of the Wilderness, from which he departed when he entred the Sea. Ergo, Israel did not go over the Sea transversum. Concl. The Major Proposition cannot be denied. For if he went into and out of the Sea, keeping still the same side, he did not pass over-thwart the Sea, which is the breadth thereof, from one side to another. The Minor is thus proved out of the Text, in express words. They came from Succoth to Etham, in the edg of the Wilderness, Exod. 13. 20. Num. 33. 6. And returned from Etham to Pihahiroth, encamping by the Sea, Num. 33. 7. Exod. 14. 1. & 9. and passing  in or by the midst
of the Sea, Num. 33. 8. they came into the same Wilderness again, Num. 33. 8. which is called also  Exod. 15. 22. From which collation of places it appears, that Abben Ezra his Opinion is true, We know (saith he) that there is no Red Sea between Egypt and the Land of Israel, neither was there any need that they should go into the Red Sea, for that it was their way to Canaan, only God commanded them so to do, to the end that the Egyptians might go in after them and be drowned. Now from the Wilderness of Etham, Israel entred the Sea, and into the Wilderness of Etham they went out again. Seeing from the Collation of these two places, the Truth will better appear, I will set them down. Exodus 12. 37. 1. On the 15th of Nisan, six hun∣dred thousand Footmen journied from Rangmeses to Succoth, Exod. 12. 37. Numbers 33. 3, 5. They departed from Rameses on the 15th day of the first month, and pitched in Succoth, Numb. 33. 3, 5. Exod. 13. 20. 2. They departed from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edg of the Wilderness of Etham, viz. Exod. 13. 20. Numb. 33. 6. And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in the end of that Wilderness, Numb. 33. 6.
Exod. 14. 2. 3. Then from Etham they returned, and encamped before Pi-hahiroth, be∣tween Migdol and the Sea, before Bagnal-zephon, before it they pitched by the Sea, Exod. 14. 2. And 600 Cha∣riots of the Egyptians following after Israel, overtook them pitching by the Sea,  Exod. 14. 7, & 9. There the Children of Israel,  Exod. 14. 22. went into the midst of the Sea, (not through the midst of the Sea) the reason is rendred, For the Wa∣ters were to them a Wall on each Hand; and the Egyptians went in af∣ter them  vers. 23. and the Waters returned on them, ver. 26, 27, 28. So Moses brought forth Is∣rael out of the Red Sea, and they went out into the Wilderness of Shur, Exod. 15. 22. And for three days, finding no Water in the Wilderness, they came to Marah, Exod. 15. 23. 2. The same phrase is in the next verse said of the Egyptians, Exod. 14. 27.  If we should expound these words as the former, that God shook the Egypti∣ans through the Red Sea, quam absur∣de esset. 3. Its said, that Israel saw the Egyp∣tians dead,  Exod. 14. 30. which is not likely they would have so easily done, if they had pas∣sed over the breadth of the Sea. 4. It appears, Exod. 14. 20. that it was night when Moses stretched out his hand on the Sea, and when Jehovah dried the Waters, and when Israel entred the Sea. And it appears also, that  Exod. 14. 24. which is called  ver. 27. that the Waters returned,  and the Egyptians were drowned. Now is it likely that six hundred thousand Men, besides Women and Children, could pass over the breadth of the Red Sea in so short a time as 9 hours at the most For on the 15th of March they went from Rameses to Succoth; on the 16th day from Succoth to Etham; on the 17th day from Etham they returned to Pi∣hahiroth, and entred the Sea at night, suppose at 6 a Clock at night at the soonest, at 3 in the Morning-Watch they arrived at Etham, or Shur in Etham, and saw the Egyptians drown∣ed on the shore. Numb. 33. 7, 8. And they departed from Etham, and turned unto Pi-hahiroth which is before Bagnal-zephon, and pitched be∣fore Migdol, Numb. 33. 7. And they departed from before Pi-hahiroth, and passed [through] for, by, or in the midst of the Sea, into the Wilderness,  and they went three days journey into the Wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah, Numb. 33. 8. By the Collation of these two pla∣ces, it appears, that Israel returning from Etham, came to Pi-hahiroth; there entring the Sea, came out of the Sea to the same Wilderness of Etham again. Numb. 33. 8. Which Moses (Exod. 15. 22.) calleth Shur: A place in the Wilderness of Etham, and the same that Etham is, saith Ab∣ben Ezra. It's not for the wisest Man (saith he) to judg of God's Works, Why dost thou thus For God com∣mands Israel here, when he had made his Journey to Etham, and was so much forward on his way to Canaan, to return then backward again to Pihahiroth  their three days journey, and that  to the end that Pharaoh might follow after them, and be drowned in the Sea. For when Pha∣raoh had heard that Israel had made two days journey to Etham in the Wilderness, and that then they (af∣ter they had gone so far on their way as Moses had foretold them [We must go three days journey in the Wilderness to sacrifice]) returned back to go a∣nother way, then Pharaoh thought that Moses's intent was to fly, (for it was told Pharaoh, that the People fled) Exod. 14. 5. and not to go to sacrifice. Then he said  For he that flies away, his way is per∣plexed, and he knows not whither he goes. Then being at Pi-hahiroth, the Lord commanded Moses to bid the People go into the Sea, Exod. 14. 15. which they did, vers. 22.  Think not, saith Abben Ezra, because the Scripture saith there,  that they came into the half, or midst of the Sea; for in case they had but entred, or set but half a foot, or hoof,  into the Sea,  it may be called, or said, within the Sea, as  in the midst of the—and yet they were not in the midst of the Camp. But  is that place where the Sea was in the beginning of the Night. Now, the Use and benefit of this place thus truly explained, is three∣fold. 1. It discovers the Error of all the Maps of our Geographers, who make the Israelites to pass over the breadth of the Red Sea towards Canaan. 2. It shews the infirmity of our last Translation, and the Liturgy, in this Particular. 3. It will free you, my worthy respected Friend, from your mistaking of this History, and will serve to direct you into the right way of Truth, which we all seek after. I hope therefore it will not displease you to be drawn with Israel out of the Red Sea, seeing Moses was content to be drawn out of the Egyptian Waters: He by a Woman, an Egyptian; you by a Man, a Christian. He crying and begging it, you without Petition or Re∣quest. And thus, with my Love and Service to you and the Truth, I rest now, and ever, Yours to command in all good Offices, Ralph Skynner.
LETTER CVI. Right Reverend in God; YOur Grace's Letters of the 18th of November, came not to my hands: till the 3d of December: To the Contents whereof I have sent this Answer. To the first Demand; Rabby Levi ben Gershom I have not, but R. Sag∣nadia his Exposition on () Dan. 9. 25. is this. In verba quae Dominatio vestra quaerit: aedificabitur & (in aedificio ejus) id est aedificata manebit. To the second Demand, as touching () Dan. 9. 24. I find the first part of Mr. Br's words out of Abben Ezra, viz. . That the 70 Weeks are from the going forth of the Word at Daniel's Prayer; as also the latter  but not in a conti∣nued coherence; for after the word () three Lines, at least of the exposition of other words of the Text are inserted, without dependance; for he saith not  but  without : So that he shews terminum à quo, by the Preposition  in voce  but, terminum ad quem, he hath not precisely expressed, for that  wanteth. To the third; These be Abben Ezra's words touching the New Moon, and the Eclipses. To the fourth; Abben Ezra's Calculation of the 77 of Daniel. Having written thus far, I presently came to London, and went to Mr. Wal∣ker to borrow those Books I had not, because I am desirous to give your Grace all the satisfaction I can. Mr. Walker hath not Gersham, nor any Com∣ment on Daniel, but the same that I have; only he lent me () and so I have read over the whole Tractate (), but there is not any word touching the duration of the Babylonian Kingdom, or any other Kingdom. It only handleth on what days the  is to be read, and their Rites and Ceremonies; I confess, I read only the Text of Megillah, I read not Ram∣banus,
nor Bartinorah's Comment, for that would require many days, and I found no one word in the Text tending any thing at all towards any such Matter; and therefore, my Lord, I would be glad to know what Author referred you to that Tractate of Megillah, or whether your Grace hath mis∣taken the : I humbly thank your Grace for your Lordship's last kindness unto me, when I was at Much-Haddam, for defraying my Charges at mine Inn. And now, my Lord, vetus conferendo beneficium invitas novum. It hath pleased my Lord Carew, who lieth at Nonesuch, some mile and an half from Sutton, before whose Honour I have often preached, to be plea∣sed to write his Letter to the Right Honourable my Lord Keeper, Sir Tho∣mas Coventry, that he would be pleased, at his Request, to bestow a Bene∣fice on me, when any shall fall in his Gift. And he was pleased moreover to send the Letter by Sir Thomas Stafford to my Lord Keeper, to sollicit the Matter also by word of mouth. And so I was there at Hampton-Court, and presented my self to my Lord Keeper; who gave me his hand, and pro∣mised, that within three months, or sooner, he assured himself he should provide for me. And now, my Lord, my request is, that your Grace would be pleased to write your Letter also unto my Lord Keeper, in my behalf, to this effect, having relation to my Lord Carew's Precedent; That whereas your Lordship is informed, that my Lord Carew hath sollicited my Lord Keeper to bestow a Benefice on one Ralph Skynner, Minister and Preacher of the Word at Sutton, (under Mr. Glover) a Man of honest Life and Conversation, and conformable to the Orders of our Church, and so forth, as it shall please your Lordship to write of me, that you would be pleased to second my Lord Carew's Request effectually, for that I am but mediocris fortunae Vir, and have not means and maintenance to buy me Books, and other Necessaries. This your Grace's Letter, in my behalf to my Lord Keeper, if your Lordship would be pleased to send it before Christide, inclosed in a Letter to Mr. Burnet's, and to give me leave to seal it, after I have read it, it's likely my Lord Keeper would remember me the sooner. I have given my Lord Carew satisfaction in many Questions, at sundry times of conference; and especially in these three, 1. That the Pope and Conclave be . 2. That the Points and Vowels were given by God from Sinai, and not the invention of the Masorits. 3. That the He∣brew Tongue is the most ancient Tongue, and that Moses wrote in it, and not in the Caldee and Egyptian; and all this proved expresly out of the Text of the Scripture: For which my Lord hath given me a greater com∣mendation in the ancient Tongues, to my Lord Keeper, than I either have deserved, or can answer unto. And thus, with my humble Service to your Grace, I end, Per Metathesin RADULPH SKYNNER. London Decemb. 8. 1625.
LETTER CVII. A Letter from Mr. James White to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Illustrissime & Reverendissime Antistes, QUòd venerandae Antiquitatis Monumenta, quae meae curae non ita pridem conferenda credidit Dominatio vestra, tardiùs multò, quàm vellem, ad umbilicum perduxerim, est quod sperem apud tantum Candorem veniae locum me inventurum. Quòd autem eo auspicio (dicam, an infortunio) transacta sint, ut neutiquam industriae meae specimen exhibendi, nedum judicio vestro sublimi satisfaciendi copia fiat; quicquid veniae audacia arrogaverit, nullam fidenter sperari posse exploratum habeo. Siquidem (quod minimè dissimu∣landum existimavi) vel ipsae liturae, quibus inter scribendum imprudens in∣dulsi, incuriae me vel invitum coarguunt. Quin & inter sacras illas paginas conferendas semel at{que} iterum in ea loca incidi, unde me facilè expedire non potui. Intelligat, obsecro, Dominatio vestra Psalmos 117, & 147. Quo utro{que} in loco idem scrupulus, eadem occurrit difficultas. Utrobi{que} enim Psalmi duo fronte satis distincti, materiâ varii, titulis etiam à se invicem diver∣si Identitatem numericam (si ipsum Catalogum spectemus) mirum in modum prae se ferunt. Porrò, naevo haud minore laborant Psalmi 145, & 146. ad quos liber ille typis excusus, quem praeire voluisse expectavi, claudus adeò inventus est, ut id spatii meâ solius conjecturâ in versibus ànnotandis emetiri coactus fuerim. Has & istiusmodi densiores ingenii mei nebulas vestro benignè affulgente candore opportunè dispersum iri nullus dubito. Colo∣phonem imposuimus quatuor S. S. Evangeliis ante-Pentecosten, coronidem pariter Actis Apostolorum (si Deus dederit) breve addituri. Interim, quàm sim obstrictus Dominationi vestrae, quòd me indignum, ullis negotiis hisce sacris dignatus fueris, Praesul amplissime, preces meae testatum faciant Deo Opt. Max. apud quem ardentissimis, uti par est, votis contendo, ut Reveren∣tiam vestram Ecclesiae suae columen diutissimè conservet. Reverendissimae vestrae Dominationis Observantissimus, Jacobus White. Cantabrigiae ex Col. Sid. Nonas Junii, 1626. LETTER CVIII. A Letter from Mr. Samuel Ward to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord, I Received your Lordship's; I understood by others, this Commencement of your  in the Sermon before his Majesty, as touching the repres∣sing of the Arminian Faction. God's Blessing be upon you for this good Ser∣vice to opportunely performed. I pray God his Majesty may have a true
apprehension of the ensuing Danger. I was told by some, that notwith∣standing the Proclamation, Mr. Mountague was to set out a Book; but I can∣not say it for certain. Mr. Whalley spoke to me above a month ago to write to your Lordship to leave Mr. Lively his Chronology with him and me, and we would take care for the publishing thereof. If your Lordship have not sent it away, we desire it may be sent hither: I had quite forgot in my last Letters to men∣tion it. I did your Lordship's Message to Mr. Chancy. I have sent your Lordship the Book which Mr. Boys had, as also his Tran∣script which he doth expect hereafter again. Those Commencement-Affairs here so distracted me, that I cannot recollect my self, to bethink of some things which I would have demanded of your Lordship. I am right sorry of your departure from us so soon. I will in∣treat you to remember Chrysostom ad Caesarium Monachum. I pray God to be with you in initio, progressu, & exitu itineris. My best Wishes and Devotions shall accompany you to Tredaw, and there also. And so with my Prayers for your Lordship's Health and Happiness, I take my leave, resting Your Lordships for ever, Samuel Ward. Sidney-Colledg, July 5. 1626. Amicitia quae desinere potest nunquam vera fuit. Hieron. I shall be bold to transmit my Letters as occasion shall serve. LETTER CIX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Ward. Salutem in Christo Jesu. AMong the Manuscripts of the Library of Magdalen Colledg in Oxford, (in Dr. James's Catalogue, numb. 211.) I found Lib. Jo. Chrysostomi con∣tra illos qui negant veritatem carnis humane assumptae à Deo: Which I verily did suppose to be the Book ad Caesarium Monichum, which he wrote against the History of Sidonius Apollinarius. But coming unto the Library and making search for the Book, I found it was conveyed away, and not to be heard of, which did not a little offend me. I spake with Mr. Young for the Colla∣tion of the place in Gregory Nyssen's Catechetical Oration touching the matter of the Eucharist, who told me that Mr. Cafahon and himself had here∣tofore collated that place, but could find nothing that could bring help to the interpretation of the place, or make much any way to or fro. You have in Trinity-College a Greek Manuscript of Euthymius's Panoplia Dogmatica, wherein this is cited. If you find any difference bet wixt it and the printed, I pray you acquaint me therewith, as also with your Judgment concerning the place of Chrysostom which I proposed unto you, and the similitude of Wax which he there useth. I had many things to write, but am now intercepted by the time, being ready to take Barque presently; yet in all my haste I can∣not forget Sir Ger and Harvy's business unto Trinity College, in giving furthe∣rance
whereunto, as I have already found your exceeding great forwardness, so I earnestly intreat you in my absence to supply what I my self would most willingly have done, if I were there present; for which Favour to a noble Friend (unto whom I have so extraordinarily been beholden) as well as for the many other Fruits of your Love shewed to me, I shall ever rest, Your assured Friend and Brother, Ja. Armachanus. Leverpool Aug. 17. 1626. LETTER CX. A Letter from Dr. Bambridge, Professor of Astronomy in Ox∣ford, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. Right Reverend, and my singular good Lord; BEsides my many obligations of Service to your Grace, I am in particu∣lar engaged in an expedite and resolute method of calculating Eclipses, which I hope to accomplish to your Grace's Content, and would now have presented the same, but that many other pursuits in my Astronomical Hi∣story have taken up my time. Presently after my return from your Grace, I made haste to London, but could find nothing of Dee's Books, but bare Titles, whereof some did very much please me, and encourage me to make a diligent enquiry after them. I reforted to Sir Rob. Cotton (with very kind welcome) but his Books being not yet ordered in a Catalogue, I deferred my search there till another opportunity, and now am bold to enter your Grace's Bibliotheca, with humble request that I may have the names of such Mathematical Books as were Dee's. It may be I shall find those Books, whose Titles did promise so much. If I had the Books at Oxford, I would make an abstract of all things making to Astronomical History and Chronography, the two chief Objects of my Enquiry, and safely return the Books and Ab∣stract to your Grace. Being at London, I procured an Arabick Book of Astronomy, the Tables whereof I do perfectly understand, but the Canons annexed are more diffi∣cult, and yet do so much the more incite me to find out that particular mean∣ing, which is not possible without knowledg in the Arabick; wherefore I have made entrance into the Rudiments thereof, and hope (labore & Con∣stantiâ) at length to be able to translate any Arabick Book of Mathematicks. It is a difficult thing which I undertake, but the great hopes I have in that happy Arabia to find most precious Stones, for the adorning and enriching my , do overcome all difficulties, besides the great Satis∣faction to see with mine own Eyes, (videre est octava scientia) and not to be led hoodwinkt by others, who tho they may be expert in that Tongue, yet without special skill in these particular Sciences, cannot truly translate the Arabick; besides that every one hath a special purpose in his study of that Language, taking no delight to follow anothers course, (flultum est ducere invitos caes ad venandum). I relate this to your Grace in assurance of your Favour herein, if you please in your enquiry at Aleppo, and other Eastern Places for Syriack Books, to take in all Arabick Books of the Mathematicks
and Chronology, and amongst the rest a good Arabick Copy of the Alko∣ran, the only Book whereby that Language is attained. If your Grace have one already, I humbly request the use thereof for some time; for ours are bound Prisoners in the Library, wherein are many Arabick Books, but aut ho∣re nescio-quo, de re nescio qua. I hope to bring them in lucem meliorem, and with them many others, if I may have the gracious Rays of your favour∣able assistance. I am not yet come to the closure of my Apology, I beseech your Grace's patience a while. Besides my Enquiries, I am very busy in the Fabrick of a large Instrument for Observations, that I may, mea fide, both teach and write; and here again I humbly entreat you to take in your Consideration my Petition at Oxford, that you would as occasion shall be offered commend to the Munificence of some noble Benefactors this excellent and rare part of Astronomy () which would certainly commend them to Posterity; in the mean time, I would not fail to publish their Fame unto the Learned World. I may not forget, in my return from your Grace, I called on Mr. Burton, to see his Leland, and there in the Catalogue of Books in Worcester Church I found, Commentarii 'Dunchagt praesulis Hybernensis in Mart. Capel. opus erudi∣tum, if I do well remember, for I cannot now find my written note. I spake to the Dean of Worcester (who was with me at Oxford) about it, but he made no esteem thereof. Yet if it please your Grace, I will cause it to be perused. I shall account my self very happy, if I may here do any thing worthy your Grace's Acceptation. In the mean time I much desire to hear of your Grace's safe return into Ireland, with your worthy Confort, and with many hearty Prayers to God, that you may live many heathful and happy Years, I rest Your Grace's most humbly devoted Servant, John Bainbridg. Oxon. Octob. 3. 1626. LETTER CXI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Sir; AFter I had writ the former Lines, came to my hands your Lordship's Letter of the 31th of July, from Oxford; whereto I have given due perusal, and thereby take notice, that your Grace hath received mine of the 16th of January, with the Books sent you by the Ship Patience of London; being very glad thereof, but more joy ful that your Lordship finds such con∣tent in them, being sorry that I am not able to perform to the full what you desire. The Patriarch's Name that sold me the Books of Moses, is, Jesu Jáb; which in the Chaldee Tongue, is as much as to say, Jesus give me And
whereas I writ he was a Jacobite, I pray take notice that he is a Nestorian, and hath his residence in Emite and Zert, and continually comes to this Town to visit them that are of that Heresy. His promise to me he hath not kept, neither could I ever hear from him since he sent me that Book, now in your Lordships possession; yet I caused divers Letters to be writ to him, and at this present have given order to write to him again: But as I often writ to your Grace, those Books are rare, especially in the Chaldean Tongue and Character; the greatest part of the Chaldee Books, are written in the Arab Character, which I think you would not have, nor esteem. As for the remainder of the Old Testament in the Chaldee, I have sent a Man to Mount Libanus to take a Copy thereof, intending to send you the whole Old Testa∣ment in one Volume; notwithstanding I know you have the Books of Moses and the Psalms; those you have, are old Copies, and this will be a new Transcript, presuming your Lordship will not think much of the Charge, which if I had excepted, would have been very little less than now it will be. And as for the Samaritan Books, in the hands of the Damasceen Spahee, I will use my best diligence to find him out again, and redeem them at as easy a rate as I can. And so continue my care in accomplishing your Lordship's Will in every thing, desiring the benefit of your particular Prayers. And so fearing to be further troublesom to your Grace, humbly take my leave, and remain, Your Graces, most humbly to command, Thomas Davis. Aleppo, Novemb. 14. 1626. English Ac∣count. The 14th day of the 3d Month, of the Turkish Account, and the 1036 of Mahomet. The Turks and Moors begin their Month, when they first see the Moon af∣ter the Change. LETTER CXII. A Letter from Mr. Alexander Cook, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My good Lord, IAcknowledg my self much bounden unto you, for your Letter sent me from Liverpool, in your return to Ireland. Yet I confess I had not from this place, where now I am, returned you thanks, but that I was desirous to acquaint you with an Accident lately fallen out; some Circumstances where∣of, I had better occasion to know, than many my betters. It concerneth my Lady Faukland. She, within this fortnight, hath declared her self to be a Papist. One of the Priests who perverted her, goeth under the Name of Fitz Gerard, though his true Name is George Pettinger, a York-shire Man, an idle pating Companion, and a Serving-man not many years ago: a fre∣quenter of Baudy-Houses, and a Cozener of Trades-men in London, as I my self in part know; and as I am credily informed by Sir Tho. Savile, to whom he was well known; and by some Gentlemen of his own Kindred. Mr. Mountague, Mr. Coses, and the Colledg (as it is called) at Durham∣house,
are sensible of the disgrace which they sustain by reason of her fall. Mr. Mountague told her, That dying an English Papist, she died in the state of Damnation. Mr. Coosens told her, That she had sinned damnably in de∣parting from that Church wherein she was born and baptized, before she had consulted with the Governors thereof. Besides, Mr. Coosens gave her a few Notes, which she sent unto her Priest to answer: whose Answer came to my hands; and in my poor Opinion, was a very silly one. Yet Mr. Coosens would not reply, but took his farewel of the Lady, without purpose of ever visiting her again. She protested, that if ever she turned again, she will turn Puritan, not Moderate Protestant, as she phraseth it; for Mode∣rate Protestants, viz. Mr. Coosens, &c. are farther from Catholicks than Puri∣tans. And thus much concerning her, who, for any thing I know, is nei∣ther fallen from Grace, nor to Grace. Here is 15000 l. offered (as it's said) for the Bishoprick of Winchester, by the Dean of Winchester: And some say it is worth it, for he may make of the Leases, at his first entrance, 10000 l. The other Bishopricks are rated proportiona∣bly; and destinated to Men of corrupt Minds. Dr. Laud is Dean of the Chappel; and Dr. White Bishop of Carlisle. Chamierus is lately come forth against Bellarmine; they are sold as fast as they come over: But Mr. Fether∣ston looks daily for 40 more, of which I hope to have one. The Papists brag, that God hath not shewed himself a Hugonite for these three years last past. They have great hopes, but I trust their hopes shall perish. Yet wise Men are afraid of what may follow; and are more inquisitive than heretofore to know, Whether Dotage may not be wrought by Sorcery. I shall be glad to see your second part of the Succession of Christian Churches; or any thing else of yours against the common Adversary. Your Lordship had need now to do something, for few go with a right foot, and the Ene∣mies are many. I thought, all this while, I had been writing to Mr. Usher, which made me write so carelesly; but ere-now my Memory serves to tell me, that it is my Lord Primat of Armagh, to whom I ought to have written more respe∣ctively: yet I cannot find in my heart to burn what I have written, but to pass it a way as it is, not doubting of a pardon from your Lordship, if for no other respect, yet for this, that I live in the North, where we know not well what Manners mean. And so with remembrance of my humble Duty and Service, I rest, Your Lordship's poor welwiller, A. Cook. Lond. Nov. 30. 1626. LETTER CXII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to the Right Honourable the Lord Deputy Falkland. May it please your Lordship; MY diligence hath not been wanting, either in treating with my Lords the Bishops when they were present, or in writing unto them when they were absent, touching the Augmentation, and the present paiment of
the Loan-monies, demanded of the Clergy in the Province of Armagh. The Augmentation with one Voice, they did deny; alledging, that your Lord∣ship, in your Letters directed unto them, did not propound any indefinite Sum to be levied according to their Discretions; but a precise one, of 395 l. and 4 s. for one months pay of the new Supplies in Ulster. And as for the present paiment of that Sum, order hath been already taken, that (according to your Lordships special Directions) 70 l. should be delivered unto Sir William Calfield. One hundred twenty one Pounds, and a Noble, I have since received; which is ready to be delivered unto any one who shall be authorized to receive the same under your Lordship's Hand. The Bishop of Clogher, who hath already paid half of that Sum which was assigned unto Sir William Calfield, is there at Dublin, ready to give an account of that which remaineth due upon his Clergy. The Bi∣shop of Derry hath left with me his Ticket, wherein he undertakes to pay 50 l. unto any one of the Captains to whom your Lordship shall appoint. Upon the Diocess of Meath, there was 85 l. 1 s. 4 d. taxed in this Levy; which is the double twentieth part of the Clergy there; the twentieth part of the Bishoprick it self being abated, because the Bishop is yet in First-Fruits. For this I have used my utmost endeavour, both with the Bishop and with his Clergy; but could not prevail, to get from them more than 50 l. And therefore of them I must rid my self, and wholly leave them unto your Lordship. As for the Remain of the Total Sum, betwixt this and the beginning of the Term, I will use my best endeavour to get in what may be had, and give a particular Certificate of the Names of those who will not pay; to the end your Lordship may deal with them, as in your Wisdom you shall think fit. And so expecting your Lordship's further Commands in this, or any other Service, I humbly take leave for the present, and ever-more rest, Your Honour's faithful Servant, J. A. Droghedah, Jan. 7. 1626. LETTER CXIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the most Reverend George Abbot Arch-bishop of Canterbury. My most gracious Lord; WHen I took my last leave of you at Lambheth, I made bold to move your Grace, for the settlement of the Provostship of our Colledg here, upon some worthy Man, whensoever the place should next become void. I then recommended unto you Mr. Sibbes, the Preacher of Grays-Inn; with whose Learning, soundness of Judgment, and upghtness of Life, I was very well acquainted: And it pleased your Grace to listen unto my Motion, and give way to the coming over of the Person named, when time required. The time (my Lord) is now come, wherein we have t last wrought Sir William Temple to give up his place, if the other may be drawn over. And therefore I most humbly intreat your Grace, to give un∣to
Mr. Sibbes that Encouragement he deserveth; in whose behalf I dare un∣dertake, that he shall be as observant of you, and as careful to put in Execu∣tion all your Directions, as any Man whosoever. The matter is of so great importance for the good of this poor Church, and your Fatherly Care as well of the Church in general, as our Colledg in particular so well known, that to shall not need to press you herein with many words. And therefore leaving it wholly to your Grace's grave Consideration, and beseeching Al∣mighty God to bless you in the managing of your weighty Imployments: I humbly take leave, and rest Your Grace's in all Duty ready to be commanded, J. A. Droghedah, Janua∣ry 10th, 1626. LETTER CXV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Honourable Society of Lincolns-Inn. My most worthy Friends; I Cannot sufficiently express my Thankfulness unto you for the Honour which you have done unto me, in vouchsafing to admit me into your So∣ciety, and to make me a Member of your own Body. Yet so is it fallen out for the present, that I am enforced to discharge one piece of debt with en∣tring into another. For thus doth the case stand with us. Sir William Tem∣ple, who hath governed our Colledg at Dublin these seventeen Years, finding Age and Weakness now to encrease upon him, hath resolved to ease himself of that Burthen, and resign the same to some other. Now of all others whom we could think of, your worthy Preacher Mr. Sibbs is the Man upon whom all our Voyces have here settled; as one that hath been well acquain∣ted with an Academical Life, and singularly well qualified for the under∣taking of such a place of Government. I am not ignorant, what damage you are to sustain by the loss of such an able Man, with whose Ministry you have been so long acquainted: but I consider withal, that you are at the Well∣head, where the defect may quickly be supplied; and that it somewhat also tendeth to the honour of your Society, that out of all the King's Dominions your House should be singled out, for the place unto which the Seminary of the whole Church in this Kingdom should have recourse for help and succor in this case. And therefore my most earnest suit unto you is, that you would give leave unto Mr. Sibbes to repair hither, at leastwise for a time, that he may see how the place will like him. For which great Favour our whole Church shall be obliged unto you: and I, for my part, shall evermore pro∣fess my self to rest Your own in all Christian Service, ready to be commanded, J. A. Droghedah, Jan. 10th, 1626.
LETTER CXVI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the most Reverend George Abbot Arch-bishop of Canterbury. My very good Lord; I Wrote unto your Grace heretofore concerning the Substitution of Mr. Sibbes into the place of Sir William Temple. But having since considered with my self, how some occasions may fall out that may hinder him from coming hither; and how many most unfit Persons are now putting in for that place: I have further emboldened my self to signify thus much more of my Mind unto you, That in case Mr. Sibbes do not come unto us, I cannot think of a more worthy Man, and more fit for the Government of that Col∣ledg, than Mr. Bedel, who hath heretofore remained with Sir Henry Wotton at Venice, and is now beneficed about Berry. If either he, or Dr. Featly, or any other worthy Man whom you shall think fit, can be induced to accept of the place; and your Grace will be pleased to advise the Fellows of the Colledg to elect him thereunto: That poor house shall ever have cause to bless your Memory for the Settlement of it at such a time as this, where so many labour to make a Prey of it. In ordering the Affairs that do belong unto the Primacy, the greatest trouble that I yet meet withal, is the Persidiousness of the Register, whom my Predecessor hath fastened upon me. He hath combined with one Chase (a base Fellow that is now acting this business at Court) to overthrow the Ministry which King James (by your Grace's special Incitation) hath so happily planted in the Diocess of Armagh, by making the Rectories that did belong to the Vicars Chorals of Armagh to be Lay-fee; unto which In∣cumbents have been hitherto (by his Majesties own Direction) still presen∣ted; and the Livings also taxed with payment of First-fruits, as all other presentative Livings are. Dawson is a Man so notoriously branded for his lewd Carriage, that I dare not trust him with the keeping of the Records, or suffer him any ways to intermeddle with the businesses of the Church. To see therefore whether I can fairly rid my hands of him; I have made a grant of his places unto others, and so left them to the trial of their Titles by course of Law: Which hath so incensed Dawson, that he laboureth now by his Emissary Chase to disgrace me in Court with all the Calumnies that his wicked Heart can devise. Wherein I doubt not but your Grace, (as occa∣sion shall require) will be ready to stand for me in my just defence. As for the general state of things here, they are so desperate, that I am afraid to write any thing thereof. Some of the adverse part have asked me the question, Where I have heard or read before, that Religion and Mens Souls should be set to sale after this manner unto whom I could reply nothing, but that I had read in Mantuan, that there was another place in the World, where Coelum est venale, Deus{que} I procured a meeting of all the Prelates at my House; who with one voice protested against these Courses, and subscribed this Protestation of theirs with their hands. But forasmuch as we knew that the Project was wonderful distastful unto the Papists themselves; we contained our selves in publick, and suffered the Breach to come from their side. I know their Agents are not asleep at Court; but our hope is, that your Grace is as vigi∣lant there to make opposition unto their Practices; and to advise of some
other course to give the King content, which may be more for his honour, and the good of the Church. All which I humbly leave unto your Grace's sage Consideration, and evermore rest, Your Graces, ready to do you all Service, Ja. Armachanus. Drogheda Febru∣ary 9. 1626. LETTER CXVII. A Letter from Dr. Ward to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord, MY best Service premised, &c. I received your Lordship's last Letters to me dated from Leverpool; and have heard by others since of your Lord∣ship's safe arrival in Ireland. As touching Sir Gerard Harvy, I have been with him at Hadham since, and have had Letters once or twice about his business from him. I consulted with Mr. Whalley, and wrote to Sir Gerard what Fine will be expected besides his coming in Rent-corn, which he is willing to pay. The Fine will be about 200 l. for renewing his Lease, and adding of ten Years to the time he hath; about Easter he will be with us a∣bout it. I am sorry your Lordship missed of that Epistle of Chrysostom ad Caesarium Monachum, at Oxford. I was in good hope your Lordship would have hit upon it. It is to be feared it is purloin'd away. I received Mr. Boys his variae lectiones in Liturgiam Basilii, which your Lordship left to be sent him. I spake with Mr. Patrick Young, who telleth me, that Sirmondus hath all Fronto's Papers, and that he is in hand with Theodoret, and that after he is set out, I shall have my Transcript upon the Psalms. He saith your Lordship hath the Greek Transcript of Euthymius. I have seen Athanasius Graecol. newly set forth at Paris; it hath some Homilies added by one Holstein, but it wanteth the varia lectiones which are in Com∣lin's Edition. Eusebius in three Volumes Graecol. is daily expected, but not yet come. Dr. White, now Bishop of Carlisle, hath sold all his Books to Hills the Broker. His Pretence is the charge of Carriage so far by Land, and the dan∣ger by Water. Some think he paid for his Place. I did hear of his Censure of your Lordship, which I would not have believed, but that I heard it cre∣dibly reported about the time of your Lordship's departure hence. Sundry Bishopricks are still remaining unbestowed. The Precedent is not good. Concerning Court and Commonwealth-affairs here, I suppose you have better Information than my Pen can afford. I would I could be a Messenger by my Letter of better news than any I hear here. The 25th of January deceased your good Friend and mine Mr. Henry Al∣vey at Cambridge. I was with him twice when he was sick: the first time I found him sick, but very patient, and comfortable. He earnestly prayed that God would give him Patience and Perseverance. The later time I came he was
in a slumber, and did speak nothing: I prayed for him, and then departed. Shortly after he departed this Life: He desired to be buried privatly, and in the Church-yard, and in a Sheet only without a Coffin, for so, said he, was our Saviour. But it was thought fitting he should be put in a Coffin, and so he was: I was at his interring the next day at night. Thus God is daily collecting his Saints to himself. The Lord prepare us all for the Dies accen∣sionis, as St. Cyprian stileth it. Since the decease of Dr. Walsall, Dr. Goslin our Vice-Chancellor, and Dr. Hill, Master of Katherine-Hall, are both dead. In their places succeed, in Bennet-Colledg, Dr. Butts; in Caius-Col∣ledg, Mr. Bachcroft, one of the Fellows; in Katherine-Hall, Mr. Sibbs of Grays-Inn. Concerning the place of Chrysostom, Homilia de Encaeniis, which you men∣tion in your last Letters, I cannot write now as I would, I having not my Book by me. My last Lecture was touching it. I see a great difference in the Reading, between the reading in the Manuscript of New-Colledg in Oxon, which Sir H. Savill printed, and the reading in M. Baraciro, which is in the Notes of Sir H. Savill. The Latin Translation is answerable to that of New-Colledg. That speech, , gave occasion (I think) to Damascene to say the like. Though I do somewhat suspect some corruption by later Grecians in that Point; especially Origen writing to the contrary, as you know, in Matth. 15. In the similitude following from Wax, the words , is translated in the Latin Translation, nihil remanet substantiae; contrary as I conceive to the Greek, for it should be, ni∣hil substantiae perdit. For , est, aliquid substantiae perdo. It is not easy to conceive the sense of that Similitude, both for the Protasis, and Apodosis. But of this when I come home at better leasure. I do purpose (God willing) in my Determinations, when I shall di∣spute upon any, to go in the Point of Free-will, for that (as I conceive) it is the chief ground of the rest of the Errors maintained by the Remon∣strants, or at least, of most of them. I have been here above a fortnight, for to get a License of Mortmain for the holding of 240 Acres of Capite Land, which a Gentleman would give to our Colledg; but I find great difficulty in effecting it, so as I fear me I must return, re infectâ. If you would be pleased to send Mr. Lively's Chronology, I think Mr. Whalley would see to the publishing of it. And thus with tender of my best Service, and my best Wishes and Prayers, for the happy success of your good Designs, and prospering of all your Endeavours; and for the publick Peace and Safety of both the Nations, Yours and Ours, in these tottering and troublesome Times, I commend your Lordship, and all yours, to the gracious protection of the highest Majesty. Your Lordship's in all Service, Samuel Ward. London, Feb. 13. 1626.
LETTER CXVIII. A Letter from the Right Honorable the Lord Deputy Falkland, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord, YOur judicious apprehension of the Perils which threaten the Peace of this Kingdom, which your dutiful consideration of the King's Wants, through his other manifold Occasions of Expence, together with your Zeal to his Service, is clearly manifested, by conforming your Tenants to the good Example of others, to join with the rest of the Inhabitants, in contri∣buting to the relief of the new Supplies, and other Souldiers sent hither for the publick Defence, notwithstanding your Privileges of Exemption, by Patent, from such Taxes; which I will take a fitting occasion to make known to his Majesty, for your Honour. And where your Lordship doth complain, that other Country Charges are imposed upon your Tenants, whereof you conceive they ought to be free, by virtue of your Patent: I can give no direct answer thereunto, un∣til I be informed from your Lordship of what Nature they be; but do faithfully assure your Lordship, that neither my Lord Chichester, nor my Lord Grandison, did ever shew more respect to your Predecessors, than I will be ready to perform towards your Lordship, as well in this your De∣mand, as in all other things which lie in my Power, (not being prejudicial to the King's Service, which I know is as much as your Lordship will ever desire); and do pray your Lordship to send me a Copy of their Warrants for my information, what hath been done in that behalf before my Time. I have kept Sir Charles Cootes Company from that County as long as I could, and will remove them thence as soon as I can conveniently: But your Lordship may please to understand, that by the earnest intercession of some well-willers to that County, it hath been less burthened with Souldiers, than any other within that Province; saving only Fermannagh, which is much smaller in scope than it. And for the Distinction you desire to be made between your Town-Lands, which you alleadg are generally less by one half, than those that are held by others; that Error cannot be reformed without a general admea∣surement, and valluation of the different Fertilities; for we all know that a hundred Acres in a good Soil, may be worth a thousand Acres of Lands that are mountainous and barren, and therefore it will surely prove a Work of great difficulty, and will require a long time to reduce it to any perfecti∣on; so as it is best to observe the custom in usage, until such a reformation shall be seriously debated and agreed upon. For the Bridg to be built at Charlemount, it was propounded to the Board by the Lord Caulfield; he informing, that the old one was so decayed, that it could hardly last out another Year. The usesul Consequence of that Bridg, in time of War, guarded by a strong Fort, (which Defence others want) being well known to the Table, did make it a short Debate, every Man concurring in Opinion, with an unanimous consent, that it was most necessary for the King's Service, that a substantial Bridg should be erected there with expedition. Then the Question grew, At whose Charge, whe∣ther at the King's or Countries Which, upon mature debate was ordered, that the Country should bear, as well for that it is a place of equal conve∣niency
with any other that is or can be made elsewhere, for passage of the Inhabitants over that deep River in times of Peace, as because they shall en∣joy great security by their Neighbourhoods to that strong Fort of Charle∣mount (in times of Combustion) built and maintained without their Charge. These Considerations did move us to give direction to certain of the Justi∣ces of Peace, of each of these Counties of Tyrone and Armagh, to view the place, and treat with Workmen; which they accordingly did. Upon whose Certificate, we gave Warrant to applot the same, according to their Agreement with Workmen; which I wish may be levied without opposi∣tion or interruption; and do make it my request unto your Lordship, to give way and furtherance thereunto, for this Work, tending so much to the Service of the King and Country, which I shall take in very good part from your Lordship; and you cannot want your Reward in Heaven for it, it be∣ing a Work of that kind which is accounted pious. And so I commit your Lorship to God's protection, and rest, Your Lordships very affectionate Friend, Falkland. Dublin-Castle, March 15. 1626. I have given order for the prepa∣ring a Fyant for the passing of those Particulars your Lordship desired, by Mr. Singe. Falkland. LETTER CXIX. A Letter from the most Reverend George Abbot Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My very good Lord; I Send unto you Mr. Sibbes, who can best report what I have said unto him. I hope that Colledg shall in him have a very good Master, which hither∣to it hath not had. You shall make my excuse to the Fellows, that I write not unto them. You shall do well to pray to God that he will bless his Church; but be not too sollicitous in that Matter which will fall of it self, God Almighty being able and ready to support his own Cause. But of all things, take heed that you project no new ways; for if they fail, you shall bear a grievous Burthen: If they prosper, there shall be no Thanks to you. Be patient, and tarry the Lord's leasure. And so commending me unto you, and to the rest of your Brethren, I leave you to the Almighty, and remain, Your Lordship's loving Brother, G. Cant. Lambeth, March 19. 1626.
LETTER CXX. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Davis, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Sir; MAY it please your Lordship to take a view of my Proceedings, for the procuring of such Books you gave me order for; such as I could get, and have in readiness to be sent by our next Ships, (which may depart this Port about four months hence) are certain Books, and loose Papers in the Samaritan Tongue, of what use or value I cannot learn. The Old Testament in the Chaldean, which after seventeen months time, is writ∣ten in a fair Character, wanting only the Book of the Psalms, and the se∣cond of Esdras. I have also a small Tract of Ephraems in the Syriack. I have used the best means I could to procure the New Testament in the A∣byssins Language and Character, but to this day have not been able. Four∣teen days past I sent again to Jerusalem, to try if it, or any other of the Books your Lordship would have in the Samaritan Tongue may be had. For obtaining whereof, I have made use of the favour of a Gentleman of Veniee, that is Consul for that Nation in this Place, who I presume will en∣deavour to satisfy my great desire in this Particular; and if he fail me, I have no farther hopes of prevailing. I am sorry that I can do no better service in a business that may be so beneficial (as your Grace hath intimated) to the Church of God, and so acceptable to your self. Such Papers as I have, or can procure, shall (God willing) with a Note of their Cost and Charges, be sent by our Ships aforesaid. News this place affords not worth your knowledg. By our last Letters from Constantinople, they write of great preparation for the Wars, and that they will this Spring go against the Rebel Abbassa, that holds the City of Assaraune. In their last Years Siege of that place, they lost many Men, and much Honour. The Common Adversary (the Persian) in the mean while hath time to provide himself to welcome the Turks, when they shall think good to visit him. They write also from Constantinople, that a Greek Patri∣arch, or Bishop, (that spent three Years in England) was resolved to print (being furnished out of Christondom with all things necessary, having leave of the Caymo-cham) some of the Greek Fathers, whose Writings it should seem the Papists have abused. Which when the Jesuits that live in Constan∣tinople understood, they went to the Bashaw, and told him. That the Greek, under pretence of Printing, would coin and stamp false Mony: Whereupon, without examination of the Business, order was given to apprehend and instantly to hang the old Man; his House and Goods to be seised upon for the King's use: The latter was effected, but God so provided, that the Man was at that instant of time in our Ambassador's House: where the Officers came to take him, and execute that tyrannical Sentence. But the Ambassa∣dor examining the Business, undertook his Protection, and the   of his Person; yea, so far prseuted the Business against the Jesits, that they were cast into Prison, their House, Library, and all their Goods, taken for the King's use; and liberty given to the old Greek to go on with his intended Work. And for the Jesuits, the best they could expect, was to be
banished Constantinople, and never to come into any part of the Grand Sig∣nior's Dominions. But I fear their Mony will produce too good an issue of so foul a Business. Their Malice is inveterate; God deliver all good Men out of their Power. Thus I humbly take leave, and ever rest, Your Grace's in all Duty to be commanded, Thomas Davis. Aleppo, the 14th of March, 1627. Of the Turks Account, the 18th day of the 7th Month called Raged, and the 1037 Year of Mahomet. LETTER CXXI. A Letter from the Right Reverend Dr. John Hanmer Bishop of St. Asaph, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; I Have received the Chronicle of Ireland, penn'd by my Uncle, and per∣fected by Mr. Molineux; together with the History of Ireland, compiled by Edmund Campian. I have cursorily ran them both over, and do find some defects in both, not only in Orthography, by reason of the unskilful∣ness of the Transcriber, but also in the Sense, by reason of dissonancy in the coherence, and the very Context it self. But as it is, I do purpose (God willing) to send it this week to London unto some Friends of mine, to give the Printers there a view of the Volume; as also to deal with them touching the Profit that may be raised to the advancement of the Widow, my Aunt. I will not fail to prefix in the Epigraphe and Title to Mr. Campian's History, that direction which your Lordship very kindly affordeth in your loving Letter. And I am sensible enough, that Campian's Name, honoured with your Grace's Publication to the Work, will be a Countenance unto it, and much further the sale. And for Mr. Daniel Molineux, not only my self, but the whole Realm of Ireland, together with this of great Britain, shall owe a large beholdenness unto him. If it please God that the Work take success for the Press, I will take care that his Name, for his care and pains∣taking therein, shall live and have a being in the memory of Posterity, so long as the Books shall live. When the Copies shall be returned from London, and the Printer agreed withal, I and my Friends here will review them again, and again, and to our Capacities make them fit for the Press; for I find, by perusing, that such a Work must be framed by such Men as be skilful, both in the Irish and Welsh Tongues, and reasonably versed in their Stories. Between this and Michaelmass I hope to bring all Passages to perfection, and agreement with the Printer, and then I will not fail to certify your Grace of the Pro∣ceedings: Till when, and ever, I commit you and yours to the Grace of the Almighty. Resting, Your Lordships most assured loving Brother, and Servant in Christ Jesus, Joh. Asaph. Pere Pat, May 28. 1627.
LETTER CXXII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Mr. John Selden. Worthy Sir; YOur Letter of the 9th of September, came not unto my hands before the 13th of November. And to give you full satisfaction in that which you desired out of my Samaritan Text; I caused the whole fifth Chapter of Genesis to be taken out of it, as you see, and so much of the 11th as concerneth the Chronology you have to deal with. The Letters in the second and third Leaf, are more perfectly expressed than those in the first; and therefore you were best take them for the Pattern of those which you intend to follow in your Print, there being but 22 of them in number, without any difference of Initials and Finals, and without any distinction of Points and Accents. Matrices may be easily cast for them all, without any great Charge; which if you can perswade your Printer to undertake, I will freely communicate to him the Collection of all the Differences be∣twixt the Text of the Jews, and the Samaritans, throughout the whole Pentateuch; a Work which would very greedily be sought for by the Learned Abroad; howsoever such things are not much regarded by ours at Home. The Original it self, after the Collation is perfected, I have dedicated to the Library of our Noble Friend Sir Robert Cotton. In the Samaritan Chronology, published by Scaliger, Lib. 7. de Emend. temp. pag. 618. there are reckoned 130 Years from Adam  to his Death, where it should be  to his Son Seth: and to Noah are attributed 600 Years, for which Scaliger setteth down 700, thinking that to be signified by  (which rather should have been noted by ) whereas there is meant thereby  that is, 600. Likewise to Mahalaleel, there are attributed there 75 Years, and to Methusalach 77; for which Eu∣sebius in his Greek Chronicle (pag. 4.) hath 65, 67. Which Scaliger, in his Notes upon the place, (pag. 243. a) would have reformed according to his Samaritan Chronography. But that Eusebius was in the right, and his Chronography wrong, appeareth now plainly by the Samaritan's own Text of the Bible: Only one fault there is in Eusebius, (or in the corrupt Copy of Georgius Syncellus rather, which Scaliger used) in annis , patrum ante Diluvium: Namely, in the 60 Years attributed to Exoch. Which to have been miswritten for 65 appeareth, not only by the consent of the Sa∣maritan, both Chronicle and Text, but also by the total sum of the Years from Adam to the Flood; which as well in Ensebius (pag. 9. Graeci Chronici, lin. 10. & pag. 19. lin. 36.) as in Georgius Syncellus, is noted to be anno∣rum. 1307; which Scaliger in his Notes (pag. 248 b. and 249 b) doth wrongfully mend 1327. and, (pag. 243 a) with a greater Error, termi∣nate with the time of Noah's Birth, blaming George the Monk for extending them (as the truth was) to the Year of the Flood. From the Creation to the Flood, according to the Hebrew Verity, are 1656 Years; according to the Samaritan Text 1307; according to Eusebius his reckoning out of the Septuagint, 2242; and according to Africanus, 2262. George followeth Eusebius his Account, which he noteth to be 20 Years less than that of Afri∣canus; 186 greater than the Hebrew, and 935 greater than the Samaritan; for that he meant so, and not as it is written (pag. 243 a. Scaligeri) 930, is evident even to this, that in the self-same place he maketh the diffe∣rence
betwixt the Hebrew Account (which every one knoweth to be 1656) and the Samaritan to be annorum 349. Now for the Years that these Fa∣thers lived, post , there is an exact agreement between the Samari∣tan Text, and the Chronicle of Eusebius; save that herein the application of them to the Years of Noah, there is a manifest Error of the Scribe, Pag. 4. lin. 1, and 2; putting  and , for  and . Adhuc tamen restat te vindice dignus nodus. St. Hierom, in his Hebrew Questions upon Genesis, affirmeth, that he found the Year of Mathusalah and Lamech to be alike; in Hebraeis Samaritanorum Libris. And indeed the Hebrew hath, as he setteth it down, that Mathusalah lived 187 Years before he begat Noah. But in the Samaritan Text it is far otherwise; that Mathusalah lived 67 Years be∣fore he begat Lamech, 653 after, 720 in all; and Lamech 53 Years before the birth of Noah. And these numbers are in the self-same sort related by Eusebius, who lived before St. Hierom; lest any Man should imagine that since his Time the Samaritan Text which we have, might be altered. Now it is to be noted, that by both these Accounts it falleth out, that the Death of Mathusalah doth concur with the Year of the Flood: And it is the principal intent of St. Hierom in this place, to solve the Difficulty moved out of the Greek Edition, that Mathusalah lived 14 Years after the Flood; by appeal∣ing unto the Books of the Hebrews, and the Samaritans, wherein Mathusa∣lah is made to die, Eo Anno (as he speaketh) quo caepit esse diluvium. This general peradventure might run in St. Hierom's memory, when he wrote this, which well might make him think that the particular Numbers of both Texts, did not differ; especially if (as it is likely) he had not the Sama∣ritan Text then lying by him to consult withal. But howsoever his slip of memory derogateth nothing from the Credit of that which we are sure was in the Samaritan Text before he committed this to writing. I come now to the Years of the Fathers which lived after the Flood. Wherein for the Time ante  (whereupon the course of the Chro∣nology doth depend) there is an exact agreement betwixt the Samaritan Text and Chronicle. From whom also Eusebius doth not dissent; if the Error be amended which hath crept into pag. 10. lin. 12. (Graeci Chronici) where 130 Years are assigned to Arphaxad, instead of 135. For that this was the Error, not of Eusebius, but of the Transcriber, appeareth evident∣ly, both by the Line next going before, where Sem, after the begetting of Arphacsad, is said to have lived 500 Years,  (whereas there would be but 495 Years to the 111th of Phaleg, if 130 Years only had been assigned to Arphacsad, and not 135); and by the total Sum thus laid down, in the 20th line of the same page. . And indeed, in the Years ante , post diluvium, there is a full agreement, both in the total Sum, and in all the Particulars, betwixt the Samaritan Account, and that of the LXX, as it is related by Eusebius, (Gainan in both being o∣mitted) which sum of 942 being added to the former of 1307, maketh up the full number of 2249, from the first of Adam, to the 70th Year of Te∣rah, the very same Sum which is laid down by Eusebius, (pag. 19. lin. 37. Graeci Chronici) and answereth precisely to the Collection of the Particulars that are found in my Samaritan Bible. In Scaliger's Samaritan Chronicle, (pag. 618. Emend.) the particulars being summed up, amount to 2267, (2365 it is in Scaliger, pag. 625.); which number so laid down in the Chronicle, (and partly misreckoned; partly miswritten in the Commentary) is by the same Scaliger, in his Notes upon Eusebius (pag. 249. b.) amended 2269 nimirum  neque dubium est ita esse, saith he; of which yet I do very much doubt: or rather do not doubt at all, because I know the Error was not in the Transcriber, but in the Chronologer himself, who accounteth from the Birth of Noah, to the Birth of Arphacsad, (as did also
Africanus and others before him) 600 only; and not (as Eusebius and others more rightly) 602; from whence, unto the 70th of Terah, by the joint consent, as well of Eusebius, as of the Samaritan Text and Chronicle, there are 940 Years. For Scaliger's 937, (pag. 249. b. Eusebian.) is but an Error of that noble Wit, who intending higher Matters, did not heed so much his ordinary Arithmetick. In the numbering of the Years of these Fathers, post , there is not the like consent betwixt the LXX, and the Sa∣maritan, as was before. Our Greek Copies differing very much herein, not only from the Samaritan, but also betwixt themselves. Eusebius, pag. 10. Graeci Chronici, differeth from my Samaritan Text only in the Years of Ra∣gau. Yet there, lin. 15. in Phalec. instead of , would be read more fully, ; and lin. 17. in Seruch. instead of ; (quod res ipsa indicat) lin. 16. it is said of Ragau; ; whereas the Samaritan Text hath a whole hundred Years less. And that we may not suspect there was here any Error Librarii, by putting  for  wheraas Rehu, or Ragau, is said to have lived 132 Years before he begat Serug, 107 after; the whole sum of the Years of his Life is added to be 239. For so the Samaritan, in the 11th of Genesis, as allothers in the 5th, useth to sum up the whole Time of the Lives of the Fathers. It is true indeed, that attributing unto Ragau 207 years after he begat Serug, he should have con∣tinued his Life, by this Account, until the 77th of Nachor. But the Text it self, of the Samaritan Bible, beareth such sway with me, that I should rather think Eusebius did, out of it (as elsewhere always) set down 107 as he found it there. And Georgius the Monk, in his miswritten Copy, finding 207, laboured thus to fit the whole unto the 77th of Nachor. Which I am so much the more easily induced to believe, because in the Chronology of the LXX, related by Eusebius, (pag. 9. lin. 37.) Non dissimile quid ani∣madvertisse mihi videor; for there the same Ragau is said to have begotten Seruch at 135 years. Scaliger giveth there a mark, that it should be 132, as Nicephors Chronologiam excipio ubi tam in Graeco li∣bro edito quam in MS. Anastasii Bibolothecarii translatione ha∣bentur 135, licet ibi quo{que} Conti∣us substiturit 132. every where else it is read; and that so it should be here, appeareth plainly by the Total (in lin. 44, and 45) of 942 from the Flood, and 3184 from Adam unto Abraham: Which to be the genuine calculation of Eusebius, Nemo harum rerum paulo peritior ignorat. Yet George not heeding this, but finding 35 written in that Copy which came to his hands of Eusebius, turneth the Stream that way, and maketh the 406 years which Omnes nostri libri cum Anti∣quiss. Cottoniano MS. habent 330. Eusebius giveth to Salah, after he begat Eber, to end in the 7th of Seruch; which would not so fall out, unless Ragau did hold his 135 years. In like manner he maketh the 207 years of Ragau himself, after he begat Serug, (in the printed Books, And again, p. 231. in Chroni∣co Casauboniano verum in Raderi editione restitu∣tum est, 63. pag. 10. lin. 37. there is ) to end in the 77th of Nachor. And the 209 of Peleg, after he begat Ragau, to end in the 75th of Serug, (though in these there be one years odds); For of the 135 years that Eber is said to have lived, until the 38th of Nachor, (p. l. 33.) we can make here mense, because both the Numbers are vitiated. Thus much I thought good to write unto you, concerning the State of the Samaritan Account, because no Man hath dealt herewith since Scaliger. I have likewise the old Syriack Translation of the Pentateuch, which was received from the beginning of Christianity, in the Church of Antioch; but neither have I transcribed any thing unto you out of that, nor out of my Arabick Manuscript of Moses; because the former hath but a meer Translation of the Years of the Fathers, as they are found in our common Hebrew Text, and the other is wholly taken out of the LXX.
I have had also another Book lately sent unto me from the East, intituled, Otzar Raza (or rather Razaja) a Treasury of Secrets, containing a brief Com∣mentary in the Syriack Language, upon the whole Old Testament (except∣ing the Book of the Lamentations, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther) and likewise the New, those parts only excepted which are wanting in our prin∣ted Syriack Testaments, (the Text whereof I have procured likewise from the Patriarch of the Nestorians in Syria) viz. The 2d Epistle of St. Peter, the 2d and 3d of St. John, that of St. Jude, and the The Syriack lately set out at Leyden, may be much amended by my Manu∣script Copy. Revelation. In this Treasure, among other things worth the observation, are found; 1. A Genealogical Table from Adam to Moses. 2. A Table of the Judges to Samuel. 3. A Table of the Kings of Judah, from Saul to Sedechias. 4. A Chronological Table of the Kings that successively reigned in Babylon, Persia, and Egypt, from thence unto Vespasian. Where to Nebuchadnezzar, after the time of Sedechias, are assigned 24 years; To Evilmerodach, 1. To Belshatzar, 2. To Da∣rius the Mede, 3. To Cyrus, 30. To Cambyses 8; and all this to make 70 years to the second of Darius Hystaspis, from the desolation of Jerusalem, ac∣cording to Zachar. 1. 12. In these Tables, some Heathenish Antiquities also are inserted; as of the building of Tarsus, &c. But these are nothing in comparison of the Treasure which you have found of the Kings and Archons of Athens: than which (as you have rightly judged) nothing can please me more. You have made my Teeth water at the mention thereof; and therefore, I pray you, satisfy my longing with what convenient speed you may. I can give you no occasion of Inscriptions, because I am fixed here in a Country where the old Roma∣nists never had any footing. All that I have in this kind, I did but borrow from the Monuments of my Lord of Arundel, my Lord William Howard of Naworth, and Sir Robert Cotton; which to send back unto you who are there at the Well-head, were inanis opera. Those Hebrew Fragments of Aldersgate, had your own explication in Latin adjoined unto them (as I re∣member) which made me seek no further; especially, because those Inscrip∣tions were made by later Jews, and so were of the same stamp with that of R. Moses filii R. Isaac found in Ludgate (whereof Stow maketh mention in his Survey). I think you may do well to put together all the Inscriptions, printed and imprinted, which are not to be found in the great Volume of Goltzius; and amongst the rest, the Latin one, v. Scipionis Barbati F. (with Sirmondus his Explanation) and the Greek of Herod expounded by Casaubon, for Salmasius his Exposition is a little too long: And whatsoever Punick Let∣ters can be had in any Coin, (as one or two Sir Robert Cotton hath of them) would be added also, because these are scarce known to any. There was a Chronology some years since, published by one of Ausborough, and dedicated to the Pope, the Emperor, and King James, which was pre∣scribed by the Church of Rome. I pray you, if you can, help me to a sight of it; and let me understand whether your second Edition of Titles of Ho∣nour be yet come abroad, for as yet I have heard nothing of it. By this time, I suppose, I have tired you with a tedious Letter, and therefore now I dismiss you, and rest always, Your most assured loving Friend, Ja. Armachanus. Drogheda, Nov. 30. 1627.
LETTER CXXIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Dean— Mr. Dean; I Do acknowledg no Promise made unto you on my part, but upon a Condition to be performed on your part, of desisting to prosecute any further your Sacrilegious Intention, either by your self, or by any of yours; the jealousy whereof you have been so far from taking away out of my mind, by your two last Letters, that you have increased it much more. To bear me in hand, that you will not follow the Business your self, but leave it only to the prosecution of your Friends; and that, if they obtain your de∣sire, yet you will submit all afterward to mine own disposition; I esteem no better than a meer delusion of me. And therefore if you intend to say no more than this, when you come up, you may save your Journey, for I will accept no other Satisfaction, but an absolute disclaiming of the prosecution of this Business, either by your self, or by others. And this I look you should certify unto me, before Sir Archibald Atcheson's arrival, for afterward I care not a rush for it. And when you both have tried the uttermost of your Wits, to subvert the good Foundation laid by King James, of happy Memory, you shall but struggle in vain, with shame enough. And so be∣seeching Almighty God to give you the Spirit of a right Mind, and to par∣don the Thoughts of your Heart, I rest, Your Loving Friend, Ja. Armachanus. Drogheda, Febr. 1. 1627. LETTER CXXIV. A Letter from Dr. W. Bedell Provost of the Colledg at Dublin, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend Father, my honourable good Lord; YOur Letters of the 20th of September, came not to my hands till the be∣ginning of November. Upon the receipt whereof, I wrote to the Vice-Provost, to forbear to proceed to the election of Fellows, if it were not past before. Not but that the Course was such, as stood by the Statutes in being e're I came to the place; but because, by your Grace's earnestness therein, I conceived, your Wisdom saw more to lie in it than I could per∣ceive. Since that, I am sorry to understand the success of that Election was not such as gave satisfaction to your Grace, and hath bred a new Broil in the Colledg. For the restriction of the Statute for Batchelors, that they should be at least of seven Terms standing; if there be any blame, it must lie upon me; who would have had it according to that in Emanuel Colledg, that they should be of the third Year; but that by some of the Company this temper
was found. Wherein the Lord is witness, I respected meerly the good of the Colledg, and had not so much as in my thoughts, the Case of any that was to pretend the next Election, but resolved, as every Statute came to be considered, to reduce it to such perfection, as there should be as little need as was possible to touch them afterward. I have seen, by experience, that the timely preferring of young Men, makes them insolent and idle; and the holding them a little longer in expectation of Preferment, doth them more good in one year, than two years before, or perhaps after. Wherefore I cannot herein repent me of that which was done. If Mr. Vice-Provost, and the Seniors, have in any other Point failed of their Duty, I desire your Grace, not only to excuse me in participation in it, but them also thus far, that as I hope, it proceedeth of Error, and not Malice. And of one thing I do assure my self, and have been bold to undertake so much to the Fellows, that your Grace, though it be in a sort necessary for you, and all Men of place, to give satisfaction in words to importune Suitors, will not take it ill that we discharge our Consciences, coming to do acts upon Oath, such as this is; otherwise, miserable were the condition of such places, and happy are they that are farthest from them. I understood further, by your Grace's said Letters, That you dislike not that the time of the Fellows should be ex∣tended to twelve years, though you would not have it mentioned upon this suddain, &c. Which made me send for the University-Statutes of Cambridg, to my Friend Mr. Ward, (having leisure this Winter to that purpose) to think of some Project, according to my last Letters to your Grace. And shortly it seems to me, that with one labour, the University might be brought into a more perfect Form, and yet without touching our Charter. At my being in Dublin, there came to me one Dr. de Lanne a Physician, bred in Immanuel Colledg: Who in speech with me, discovered their purpose to procure a Patent, like to that which the Colledg of Physicians hath in London. I noted the thing, and partly by that occasion, and partly also the desire of the Fellows, to extent their time of stay in the Colledg; I have drawn a Plot of my Thoughts in that behalf, which I send your Grace herewith. I have imparted the same generally to my Lord of Canterbury; who desireth that your Grace would seriously consider of it, and, to use his own words, That it may be weighed with Gold Weights; and if it be found fit, will concur thereto when time shall be. I could have wished to have been present with you at the survey of it, to have rendred the reason of some things, which will now perhaps be ; but your Wis∣dom, Experience, and Knowledg of the Place, will easily pierce through, and disperse all those Mists which perhaps overcloud my understanding; and howsoever I shall hereby, dare sapienti occasionem. For my speedy return, which your Grace presseth; I confess to them, that I am ready to forethink that ever I came there, so conscious to my self of mine own weakness and unfitness for the place, as I fear rather to be burthen∣som than profitable to the Colledg: Which also made me desirous to retain (if I might lawfully) the Title to my Benefice, resigning the whole Profits and care to some able Man, to be nominated by the Patron, and approved by the Bishop of the Diocess; that I might have, upon just cause, whi∣ther to retire my self. I have not yet received your Grace's decision of this Case. I wrot also to the Society hereabout, who being conditores juris perpetui, are also interpretes: Neither have I understood what they conceive. Since my coming away, by occasion of my Lord Deputy his voluntary Offer, to confer upon me the Treasurership of St. Patricks; I entreated them to present a Petition to his Lordship, for the enjoying the 40 l. anci∣ently granted to the Colledg, for the enlarging the Provost's Maintenance, and upholding the Lecture at Christ's Church, whereof I was put in hope be∣fore my coming. They have not so much as vouchsafed me an Answer.
When I took my Oath to the Statutes, I made protestation, that I intended not to renounce my Benefice, that place being litigious, and my Affairs not yet accommodated here. Since my coming home hither, my Corn, Cattel, and some Goods, and a Lease of some Pasture Grounds which I held, I have forgone; but the main Matter of my Estate lying in Mony, I cannot yet recover. At my coming up hither, I left one of my Children sick of an Ague, which he hath had these three Weeks; and if he should be reco∣vered, he cannot be presently fit to travel; neither are the Ways and Weather indeed seasonable thereto. But that which (to deal plainly) doth most of all trouble me, is, the report of the new Broils in the Colledg; which I see, partly in other Mens Letters: for to my self (as if I were but a Cypher in Algorism) they vouchsafe not a word. That some Fellows are displaced by the Visitors, others placed by Mandate of my Lord Deputy; old Grudges and Factions revived, & malè sarta gratia necquicquam coit & rescinditur. I never delighted, nor am made for it, ignum gladio fodere. Some of my Friends represented to me the Examples of Mr. Travers, and Mr. Alvey; and that comes to my mind, Better sit still, than Rise and Fall. I have now an honest Retreat, with that form, Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites. It is written hither, and I have seen it with mine Eyes, That I am said to be a weak Man, and so thought to be by wise Men. This Witness is most true. In all these regards, I humbly beseech your Grace, by your undeserved love to me (which God knows how much I value, and that it was no small en∣couragement to me to enter into this Business) by your love to the Colledg, which I know is great; by your love to our Lord Jesus Christ, whereof he takes that proof, your love to his Lambs. Since you know now my weakness a little better than when you first nominated me to that place, and the want of the Colledg of an able Head, dispose of my place as you shall think most fit for that Colledg, University, Church, and Kingdom. For my part, I do here absolutely resign all my Interest unto it, into your Grace's hands, or the hands of those whom it may concern. Assuring your Grace that I shall account your freeing me from this burden, the greatest favour that you can do me: under the which, if it had not been for the fear of offending God, I think I had never put my shoulder so far as I have done. But if you shall esteem in Conscience I cannot go back, I beseech you be pleased freely to set down your Opinion touching my Case propounded in my last. I desire of God, that neither my Living, nor my Life, may be so dear unto me, as to finish my Course with joy, and the Ministry that I have received of the Lord Jesus. Upon the receipt of your Graces Letters, I shall resolve presently (if God let not) to come, or stay. Touching the Parliament-Affairs, I know your Grace hath better adver∣tisement than I can give you. The beginnings yet go marvellously well; the Lower House excellently tempered. Nothing hath as yet been so much as put to question. The Upper House joined with them; insomuch as when they had received the Motion for a publick Fast, they added a Motion, to petition to his Majesty for the putting in execution all Laws and Acts of State against Recusants. This Petition was penned by the Bishops of Norwich and Litchfield, and presented to his Majesty by both Houses. The former is appointed by Proclamation, to be April 21. The latter the King hath taken into consideration, with good signs of approbation. The Lower House is now employed about the Liberties of the Subjects; which they deduce even from the Conquest, and so down. They purpose (it seems) to proceed to the examination of the infringing of them, and of their Causes and Reme∣dies. It is resolved among them, that the Grievances of the Subjects shall go
hand in hand with the Supply of the King's Wants, which are so great, as his Majesty, when he received the latter Petition, told them, (March 3.) That without present Supply he could not set forth one Ship, &c. God of his Mercy grant, that the Progress and End may be correspondent. In which hearty Prayer I end, recommending your Grace to the Lord's Protection, and my self to your Prayers, and rest, Your Grace's in all Duty, W. Bedell. London, April 1. 1628. LETTER CXXV. A Letter from Dr. Bainbridge, Professor of Astronomy in Ox∣ford, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. Right Reverend, and my very good Lord; HAving so fit opportunity, I am bold to remember my Service to your Grace; and withal, my former suit concerning Hipparchus, , which being both in the Vatican, and Escurial, I marvel that Patavius did not procure a Transcript thereof; certainly it would have hel∣ped much in his Doctrina Temporum contra Scaligerum: Whereas now the ne∣glect of that, and other ancient Monuments, hath left that Work imperfect, and given just cause to others, of a more curious search; wherein I purpose to bestow my best Endeavours, not doubting of your Grace's Favour. Mr. Selden hath written some Notes upon certain ancient Greek Inscriptions, which were brought out of Turky for my Lord of Arundel; amongst which, one doth promise some light in the Persian Chronology, (I mean, of the Persian Monarchy) which of all others I most desire to be illustrated, being so ne∣cessary to the connexion of Sacred and Prophane History; concerning which I will yet forbear to signify my Opinion, daily expecting a view of Mr. Selden's Book. Your Grace's most obliged Servant, John Bainbridg. Oxon, April 7. 1628.
LETTER CXXVI. A Letter from Dr. Bedell, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend Father, my honourable good Lord; HAving the opportunity of this Bearer's return from his Friends, my Neighbours, to Kelles, I thought fit to send by him, if it were but the Duplicate of my last to your Grace, from London, the first of this Month, sent, as Mr. Burnet told me, by one Mr. Goodwyn of London-Derry, who had special occasion to repair to your presence. Wherein I satisfied you (I hope) of the rightness of my Intention, in the restriction of the Statute for Batchelors Probationers to seven Terms standing, and re∣presented to your Grace the chief exercise of my Thoughts since my leaving Ireland, I mean, the Draught of a new Patent, and new Statutes to be pro∣cured for the University; which, I hope, you have safely received. You may perhaps esteem it a pragmatical unquietness of Spirit in me, that would busy my self with things beyond mine own line. But since it hath pleased God to embarque me, by their means, in the Affairs of that Country, I take my self bound to further the Voyage what I may; not only for mine own safety, and the rest of the Passengers, but for the honour of your self, that are the Pilot, and the Glory of God especially, unto which Port I am well assured all your Course is directed. I suppose it hath been an Error all this while, to neglect the Faculties of Law and Physick, and attend only to the ordering of one poor Colledg of Divines; whereas, with a little more la∣bour, and a few Priviledges attained, a great many more good Wits might have been allured to study, and seasoned with Piety, and made Instruments for the bringing in Learning, Civility, and Religion, into that Country. I did communicate the Plat to my Lord of Canterbury, at my first being with him, especially in that Point of admitting all Students that should be matri∣culated, though they lodg in Dublin in private Houses; and of the four Fa∣culties, with their several Promoters, &c. who seemed not to dislike it; but required it should be maturely thought of, by your Grace and the Universi∣ty, and promised his assistance if it were found fit. At that time I left with him the Statutes of our Colledg, which I had this Winter written out with mine own hand, and caused to be fair bound. He retained them with him till the very morning of my departing from London. At which time he sig∣nified his good approbation of the whole; only accounted that too strait, for the Provost's absence but six weeks, whereas many Causes there would be, which would require longer discontinuance. I shewed his Grace, that Col∣ledg-Business was excepted, and that we had not innovated any thing in that Statute, it being so before my Election. Another Point he disliked, was, touching Students wearing Gowns always in the Colledg, and if it might be when they went into the Town. Whereas that of all other, (said he) would have been provided for. I answereth, The Streets in Dublin were ve∣ry foul, and that by the Statutes, Scholars were not permitted to go ordina∣rily into the Town, without their Tutors consent. He said, they might, if the Streets were never so foul, take their Gowns under their Arms. I told him, that this was also an old Statute, e're I came there. With the occasi∣on I told his Grace of the new Stirs I heard of in the Colledg; (for even but the day before, I had understood by other Mens Letters, more perfectly, of my Lord Deputy's putting in certain Fellows, and of their displacing of
Mr. Lloyd by your Grace, and the Visitors, whereof I had no intelligence till then, save by Rumors only). I added, of mine own fears, that I should make a very ill Pilot in so rough Seas. He perswaded me to go on, using that Verse, Tu ne cede malis, &c. I told him of my deafness, and that the Law not allowing surdum procuratorem, how could it be but ab∣surd in the Provost of such a Society. He told me, that was not so great a matter, for a great many did male andire. He bad me not be dismayed, re∣presenting to me the future Reward. I told him, indeed if that were not, I had little eneouragement, sith neither I should, for ought I saw, have the Main∣tenance for the Lecture, which I was put in hope of, nor retain the Title of my Benefice only, renouncing the Profits. To that he said, there was no question I might: that I had not beneficium; and he would maintain it to any Man, &c. With these Discourses, having brought his Grace from his Chamber to his Barge, I recommended my self to his Prayers. The same morning, e're my departure, I wrote to Dublin, amongst others, to Mr. Lloyd, endeavouring to let him see his Fault, and to keep him from being hardned in it. At my return home, I found one of my Sons yet afflicted with an Ague, which hath held him these six weeks; and the Ways being not yet fit for travel, (the Spring having been very late and winterly) I have resolved to attend your Grace's. Letters, both in answer to my Case propounded, in my Letters of Sep∣tember, and of my last from London, wherein I did put my place there wholly in your disposition; and if you think it may be more to the good of the Col∣ledg and Church there, that I forgo it, did (and do again by these Presents) absolutely resign it into your hands, or the hands of them whom it may con∣cern. Your Grace may be pleased to consider seriously my insufficiency, which by my last being there, partly by your own experience, and the report of o∣thers, you may have understood to be more than perhaps you imagined before. And by these new Accidents, you may perceive the need the Colledg hath of a more able Head. I have ever liked and loved to proceed by that good old Form, Ut inter bonos bene ageir, &c. I have seen it written from thence, that you and other wise Men, account me a weak Man; and in truth I do know my self so to be. Do not the Colledg that wrong to clog it with me; hitherto i hath received no great damage, and these new Broils may serve fitly as a good occasion to cover my defectiveness. I may, without any disgrace, and with much content, fit still. That which Annibal, when in the Common-Council at Car∣thage he plcked down a turbulent Orator that stood up to disswade a neces∣sary Peace, said, to excuse his uncivility. That the Feats of War he had meetly learned, but the Fashions of the City he was to be taught by them. I would crave leave to invert; the Ar of dutiful Obedience, and just ruling also in part, I did for 17 years endeavour to learn, under that good Father Dr. Chaderton, in a well temper'd Society; the cnning tricks of paching, siding, bandying and , with and between great Men, I confess my self ignorant in, and am now, I fear, too old to be taught. And me thinks the Society it self, (like to the Frogs in the Tale, weary of the Block set over them) esteem the neither worthy to be acquainted with the Colledg-Affairs, nor so much as an∣swered in mine own; and (wherein they do extreamly wrong not me only but your Grace also, as I verily believe) do keep your Letters from me. I wish them a more active Governor. Concluding, I be send your Grace vouchsafe me your last resolution for my coming, or stay▪ and esteem , as you shall ever truly, Your Grace's humble Servant in Christ Jesus, W. Bedell. Horningerth, April the 15th, 1628.
LETTER CXXVII. A Letter from Dr. Samuel Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Tredagh. Most Reverend and my very good Lord; THough I must needs acknowledg my neglect in writing, or forgetfulness, or both, since your last going into Ireland; yet now I could have no further pretext for the omission of that Duty, by which I am obliged by no few Bonds, especially having such conveniency of sending, by my most worthy Friend, with whom I am most loth to part, but that upon higher considerations, I conceive God may use him as an Instrument of much good in that place, if God send him health and life. I assure your Lordship, I know not where you could have pitched upon a Man, every way so qualifi∣ed for such a place. He is a sincere honest Man, not tainted with avarsee of ambition; pious, discreet, wise, and stout enough, si res exigat; he will be frugi, and provident for the Colledg: and for converse of a sweet and amiable disposition, and well experienced. In a word, he is homo perpaucorum homi∣num, si quid judico. I pray the God of Heaven to bless his coming to you, to the good of your Colledg, and the Church of Ireland. I suppose your Lordship will desire to hear somewhat of our Cambridg-Affairs; though I doubt not but you hear, by some Cambridg Men which come over to you. I suppose you have heard of a Lecture for reading of History, intended to be given us by the Lord Brook. Who, as you know, first intended to have had Mr. Vossius of Leyden; afterward his Stipend be∣ing augmented by the States, he resolved of Dr. Dorislaw of Leyden also. He, before his coming hither, took his Degree of Doctor of the Civil Law at Leyden: was sent down to Cambridg by my Lord Brook, with his Majesty's Letters to the Vice-Chancellor, and the Head, signifying my Lord Brook's intent: and also willing us to appoint him a place and time for his Reading; which accordingly was done. He read some two or three Le∣ctures, beginning with Cornehs Tacitus; where his Author mentioning the conversion of the State of Rome from Government by Kings to the Go∣vernment by Consuls, by the suggestion of Junius Bruus; he took occasi∣on to discourse of the Power of the People under the Kings, and afterward. When he touched upon the Excesses of Tarquintus Superus his infringing of the Liberties of the People, which they enjoyed under former Kings, and so among many other things, descended to the vindicating of the Nether∣landers, for retaining their Liberties against the violences of Spain. In conclusion, he was conceived of by some, to speak too much for the defence of the Liberties of the People; though he spake with great moderation, and with an exception of such Monarchies as ours, where the People had surrendered their Right to the King, as that in truth there could be no just exception taken against him: yet the Master of Peter-house complained to the Vice-Chancellor; Master of Christ's-Colledg: and complaint also was made above, and it came to is Majesty's ear; which we having intelligence of Dr. Dorislaw denied to come and clear himself before the Heads, and carried himself so ingeously, that he gave satisfaction to an; whereupon  were  to his Patron, to the Bishop of Durham, and others, to signify  much. But he going to his Patron first, he suppressed the Letters, , he would , before any excuse should be made. Af∣ter word came from the Bishop of Winchester, then Durham, in the Majesty's
Name, to prohibit the History-Reader to read. But after that, both his Majesty, and the Bishop, and all others above, and here, were satisfied; but then his Patron kept off, and doth to this day, and will allow his Rea∣der the Stipend for his time; but we fear we shall lose the Lecture. I see a Letter which his Patron writ to him, to Malden, to will him to be gone into his Country; but he would assure him of his Stipend. The Do∣ctor kept with me, while he was in Town. He married an English Woman about Malden in Essex, where now he is. He is a fair-conditioned Man, and a good Scholar. I had a Letter from Mr. Vossius before Christmass, with a Book of the La∣tin Historians, which he lately set forth, and dedicated to my Lord the Duke of Buckingham. He sent also a Book to his Majesty, and the Court-Bishops. I writ back unto him, and sent him my Lord of Sarum his Com∣mentary on the Colossians, willing him to revise his Pelagian History, especi∣ally about the Points of Original Sin, and the Efficacy of Grace. As touching my self, in my Readings, I have suspended my Reading upon the Real Pretence, though I had almost finished it. And have read this Year and half, at least, upon that Point which I chiefly insist upon in my Sermon in Latin, to shew, that the Grace of Conversion giveth not only posse convertere, but also  velle. I have been long in vindicating the third Argument, used by the Contra-Remonstrants in Colloq. Hagiensi, ta∣ken from the places, where we are said to be mortui in peccatis; wherein the Remonstrants do discover the grounds of their Assertions, more than else∣where. Dr. Jackson hath lately set forth a Book of the Attributes of God; wherein, in the Preface to the Earl of Pembroke, he doth profess himself an Arminian, ascribing to the opposites of Arminius, as I conceive, that God's Decrees, before the Creation, take away all possibilities of contrary Events after the Creation. True it is, that God's eternal Decree of any Event, as that I should write at this moment; cannot consist, with my actual not writing at this time: But none say it taketh from me all possibility of writing at this time, unless it be sensu composito. This conceit (as I conceive) maketh him elsewhere to impugn all. Divine Predefinitions as prejudicious to Man's Liberty and Freedom; which is a most silly conceit. I do con∣ceive, all that which he disputeth in his Book, against Negative Reproba∣tion, as not sorting with the antecedent Will of God, for the Salvation of all, to be against the seventeenth Article of Religion, which plainly avereth a gratuitous predestination of some, and not of all. Therefore from thence is inferred, a not-election of others to that Grace, which is that which pro∣perly is stiled, Reprobation. As for our University, none do patronage these Points; either in  or Pulpit; though because Preferments at Court are conferred upon such as incline that way, causeth some to look that way. I suppose your Lordship hath seen my Lord of  Reading  the Colossions, which should have been exhibited,  his Majesty, when he was here about the beginning of Lent. But my Lord of Winchester hindred that intention, though herein he  the Univer∣sity. For we having received a Favour from his Majesty, to enjoy the pri∣viledg of our Charter for printing all kind of Books against the London Printers, thought to shew to his Majesty a Specimen of our Printing both for good Letter, and good Paper, of both which his Majesty had  in printing the Bibles at London.
Thus with remembrance of my best Service to your good Lordship; with my best Wishes and Prayers for the continuance of your Lordship's Health and Prosperity here, for the good of God's Church, and your hap∣piness hereafter I commend you to the gracious protection of the highest Majesty; resting, Your Graces, in all Service, Samuel Ward. Cambridg, May 16. 1628. Mr. Whalley and Mr. Mead are both in good health, for which Friends I am be∣holden to your Lordship, tho you take Mr. Bedell from me. Dr. Chaderton also is in health. LETTER CXXVIII. A Letter from Sir Henry Spelman, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Pleaseth it your Grace; I Cannot express with what humble gladness I received your Letters: First, For that they gave me assurance of your Recovery; then, that among your weighty Affairs of Church and Common-wealth, you should descend to think on me, so remote in Application to your Lordship, though no Man nearer in Affection and Devotion. I register it in my Memorials of your Goodness; as also your sending to me the Copy of the Synod of St. Patrick, which I much desired; and many thanks to your Lordship for it. Touching the Books it pleased you to require my help in procuring them, by some of my Friends and Kindred in France; your Grace knoweth, that all intercourse between us and them is now stopped up: Yet have I taken order with Mr. Boswell, who is gone over with my Lord of Carlisle, and to pass near Province, that if any opportunity may serve, he will endeavour to procure them; and my Son, who is gone after them, shall put him in mind of it. It is said, that my Lord of Carlisle, having treated beyond the Sea with the States of the Low-Countries, and not satisfied in their Answer, hath left some Protestation against them, as he passed from them; and that the States have done the like against us. I hope it is not true, we have Enemies enow. I suppose your Lordship would gladly hear how the great Orb of State moveth here in Parliament, (your own and many others depending on it): And I would very willingly have been the first that should have done you that Service, if the Messenger had staid a day or two longer, that we might have seen the Event. For all hangeth yet in suspence; but the Points touch∣ing the Right of the Subject in the Property of their Goods, and to be free from imprisonment at the King's Pleasure, or without lawful cause ex∣pressed upon the Commitment, hath been so seriously and unanswerably proved and concluded by the Lower House, that they have cast their Sheat Anchor on it, and will not recede from any tittle of the Formality proposed in their Petition of Right touching the same. The Upper House hath, in some things, dissented from them, proposing a Caution to be added to the
Petition for preservation of the King's Soveraign Prerogative; which the Lower House affirms they have not rub'd upon in ought that of right be∣longeth to it. Yet will they not admit that Addition, lest it impeach the whole intent of their Petition. Wherein they are so resolute, that having upon Thursday last, admirably evinced the Right of the Subjects in every part thereof, at a Conference with the Upper House, they refused to meet the Lords the day following in a Committee required by them, for qualifi∣cation as was conceived. Thereupon the Lords spent Saturday in debate a∣mong themselves, but concluded nothing that we hear of. It is reported, the Lord Say did then speak very freely and resolutely on behalf of the Sub∣ject, with some unpleasing rubs upon the Duke there present; but by others interposition, all was well expounded. What this Day will produce, Night must relate. And of what I have written, I have nothing but by hear-say, for I am no Parliament-man. My Lord of Denbigh, with the Navy that went for the rescue of Rochel, is returned, without blow or blood-draught. It is said, their Commission gave them not sufficient Warrant to fight; and one Captain Clark (suspected in Religion) is committed to the Gatehouse for disswading them. Thus pray∣ing for your Health and Happiness, I rest, Your Grace's most humbly devoted, in all Service, Henry Spelman. Barbacan, May 26. 1628. LETTER CXXIX. A Letter from—J. King, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my especial good Lord; TWo things do occasion me to write to your Lordship; the one, to show the continuance of my dutiful and best respect to your Lordship, which I have born to your Lordship ever since your Childhood; which in∣deed descended first from your Father, who loved me always in his life-time, as I did him truly and faithfully. The other is, upon some mislike I under∣stand your Lordship hath conceived of the Lord Camfield, my Son-in-Law; which indeed I am sorry for, for I never found him but honest and religious. I know he may have ill Instruments about him, and the World is full of Pick-thanks, and such as usually do lewd Offices amongst Men of Place and Quality. But if your Lordship would please to take him into your favour, and upon any occasion (if any happen) to make known to him what is or may be reported to your Lordship, of any of his miscarriages, or unfriend∣ly dealings towards your Lordship, I would not doubt of his conformity, and giving of your Lordship meet satisfaction: and this is my Suit and Pe∣tition to your Lorship; for of all Men in that Kingdom, I do wish him, and all others that are my Friends, to be serviceable and respective to your Lordship: and for my self, so long as it shall please God to give me Life, I will pray for your Lordship, which is all the Service I can do you. Our worthy Bishop here, who I have found here, ever since I came hither, a
worthy Friend, and a godly Pastor and Pillar of the Church, hath many times, and often, most kindly remembred your Lordship; and surely he is as good a Man as may be, yet in this Parliament, which is yet scarcely ended, some have conceited not so well of him as before; but who can or doth escape the malice of wicked Men this being the last and worst Age of the World, and surely for all crying and notorious Sins, as Whoredom, Lying, Swearing, and Drunkenness, I am perswaded that now our own Nation is become the very worst of any in the Christian World, which makes me much afraid that God Almighty hath some heavy Judgment a preparing for us. It is certain, that in Spain are wondrous great preparations for War, especially for Sea-Service; which some think is rather for Denmark, and those Eastern parts, than for us; and the rather it is conjectured of, because Monsieur Oillur lies yet with a great Army of above 60000 Men about Stoade, Hambourgh, and other parts. If his Fleet come on this Summer, as it is thought it will, and pass the Narrow Seas unfought withal, and unbea∣ten by us, it is to be feared, that Spain, and France, or one of them, will next land upon our Continent, and sit down and fortify; being hopeful, as it may be well imagined, of aid from English Papists, whereof the King∣dom is too well stored. Rochel is much doubted cannot long hold out, and then there is little hope of any Mercy from the King of France; which would be a woful case to have so many poor Souls put to the Sword. It is thought his Majesty would relieve them, if these Subsidies could come in time: And it is to be wished now, that his Majesty had never medled with them; for in the beginning they were well provided to have made their own Peace. It is strange to be believed how this Kingdom is weakned by the loss of Shipping; for within this three years, it is said, England hath lost of Vessels, great and small, 400. All things concur very untowardly against us; but God Almighty hath reserved Victory to himself only. We had great rejoicing every where for his Majesty's gracious and good agreement with the Parliament; but some ten days ago, the House of Commons ha∣ving exhibited certain Remonstrances to his Highness, which, as it seemed, touched the Duke: after reading thereof, his Majesty rose up, and said, They should be answered; and instantly gave the Duke his Hand to kiss: which the Parliament-men, and others, were much amazed at. God Al∣mighty amend what is amiss, if it be his blessed Will and send Unity at Home, that we may the better keep off and withstand our Enemies Abroad, and continue Peace in these Kingdoms; and more pertinently I pray to keep the Spaniards out of Ireland, for we shall far better hold tack, with them here, if they should land, than you can do there, where too many are ready to join with them. I know I can write nothing to your Lordship which is News to you, yet express my Love, and hearty and humble Affe∣ction to your Lordship, I make bold to trouble you with a long Letter: And so, with my Service to Mrs Usher, I take leave, and rest, Your Lordship's ever truly assured, to honour and serve you, J. King. Layfield, June 30. 1628.
LETTER CXXX. A Letter from Sir Henry Spelman, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; I Have nothing since my Letter by your Servant Mr. Sturges to trouble you with; but this Bearer, my Kinsman, coming to see your noble Country, I have requested him, and therewith enjoined him, to present my humble and most devoted Service to your Lordship; and to bring me certain word how it standeth with you for your Health: which to the good of the Com∣mon-Wealth, as well as my own particular respect, no Man more desireth and prayeth for. For the Passages here of note, I know you receive them by many Pens, and therefore I will not enter into any relation of them; only I wish they were better. Yet amongst them, I desire to present your Grace with the first printed Copy of the Petition of Parliament to his Majesty, for their ancient Rights and Liberties, with his gracious Answer thereto. And by much instance I (even in this hour) obtained it from Mr. John Bill the Printer, before they yet are become publick, and to the laming of the Book from whence they are taken. I send you also Mr. Glanvill's and Sir Henry Martyn's Speeches to the Upper House about this Matter; and the Procla∣mation agaisnt Mr. Doctor Manwaring's Sermons. But the King, notwith∣standing, hath (as it is credibly reported) released him of all the censure imposed upon him by the Upper House of Parliament, and this next month he is to serve in Court. The Deputys Lieutenants also of the West Country, are released; and some of them repaired with the dignity of Baronet, others of Knighthood, all with Grace. Mr. Bill desired me to remember him most humbly to your Lordship, and to advertise you, that he willingly will print your noble Work in one Volume, as well in Latin as in English; which with multitude of others, I shall much rejoice to see. Thus with all humble re∣membrance to your Grace, I rest, A Servant thereof, most bound and devoted, Henry Spelman. Barbacan, July 1. 1628. LETTER CXXXI. A Letter from Dr. George Hakewill, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My very good Lord; YOur Lordship's favourable interpretation and acceptance of my poor Endeavours, beyond their desert, hath obliged me to improve them to the utmost in your good Lordship's Service; and more especially in the
good education of that going Gentleman (Ja Dill) whom you we pleased to commend as a Jewel of price to my care and trust; praising God that your Lordship hath been made his Instrument to reclaim him from the Superstitions of the Romish Church, and wishing we had some more fre∣quent Examples in that kind, in these cold and dangerous Time. For his tuition, I have placed him in Exeter Colledg, with Mr. Bodley, a Batchelor of Divinity, and Nephew to the great Sir Thomas Bodley of whose sob∣ty, gravity, piety, and every way sufficiency, I have had a long trial; and (were he not so near me in Blood) I could easily afford him a larger Testi∣mony. He assures me, that he finds his Scholar tractable and studious; In that such a Disposition, having met with such a Tutor to direct and instruct it, I make no doubt but it will produce an effect answerable to our expecta∣tion and desire: And during mine abode in the University, my self shall not be wanting to help it forward the best I may. Your Lordship shall do well to take order with his Friends, that he may have credit for the taking up of Monies in London, for the defraying his Expences; for that to expect it from Ireland, will be troublesome and te∣dious. I wish I could write your Lordship any good News touching the present state of Affairs in this Kingdom; but in truth, except it please God to put to his extraordinary helping hand, we have more reason to fear an utter downfal, than to hope for a rising. Thus heartily praying for your Lordship's Health and Happiness, I rest, Your Lordship's unfeignedly to command, Geo. Hakewill. Exeter Colledg in Oxford, July 16. 1628. LETTER CXXXII. A Letter from Dr. Prideaux Rector of Exeter Colledg or Oxon, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Father in God; YOur letters  the more welcome unto me, in that  brought news of the publishing of your Ecclesiastical , so much desi∣red. In which the  of  and  thing fully and in  see will put a period (I trust) to the  is a high favour, that i pleased you to make use of my  for the placing of your Kinsman. I shall strain  best endeavours to make
good your Undertakings to his Friends. Young Tutors oftentimes fail their Pupils, for want of Experience and Authority, (to say nothing of Negli∣gence and Ignorance) I have resolved therefore to make your Kinsman one of my peculiar, and tutor him wholly my self; which I have ever con∣tinued to some especial Friends, ever since I have been Rector and Doctor. He billets in my Lodgings; hath (three) fellow Pupils, which are Sons to Earls, together with his Country man, the Son of my Lord Caulfield; all very civil, studious, and sit to go together. I trust, that God will so bless our joint Endeavours, that his worthy Friends shall receive content, and have cause to thank your Grace. Whose Faithful Servant I remain, Jo. Prideaux. Oxon, Aug. 27. 1628. LETTER CXXXIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Right Honourable— My most honourable Lord; THE noble respect, which in a singular manner you have still born to the preservation of all Monuments of Antiquity, hath emboldned me at this time, to put your Lordship in mind of a present occasion, which may much conduce to the general good of all of us, that employ our Studies in this kind of Learning. That famous Library of Gicono Barocci, a Gentleman of Venice, con∣sisting of 242 Greek Manuscript Volumes, is now brought into England by Mr. Fetherstone the Stationer. Great pity it were, that such a Treasure should be dissipated, and the Books dispersed into private hands. If by your Lordship's mediation, the King's Majesty might be induced to take them into his own hand; and add there unto▪ that rare Collection, of Ara∣bick Manuscripts, which my Lord Duke of Buckingham purchased from the Hens of Erpenius, it would make that of his Majestys a Royal Library indeed, and make some recompence of that incomparable loss which we have lately sustain'd in the Library of Heidelberg. We have  a poor return unto, your Lordship of our Com∣mission, in the business of Pbeli M Fgh Birr and his Sons. And be∣cause the directions which we received  the Lords, required the dispatch thereof with all convenient expedition  we have made more haste (I fear) than good speed, fully purposing in our selves, that the examination which  taken should have come unto your  your Lordships Resolutions  have been notified be∣fore the beginning of Hily Tem. That things have fallen out otherwise i that (I confess) wherein we shall be hardly   selves  that this important Business might in such  be  that the Honour and Dignity of his Majesty  might withal be very tenderly respected for the least shew of  that may  he given from thence  Authority, will add encouragement to such  are too apt to  his Maje∣sty's
Ministers here, from being so forward as otherwise they would be, in prosecution of such publick Services of the State. Which I humbly leave unto your Lordship's deeper consideration; and evermore rest, Your Honour's in all dutiful Service, ready to be commanded, Ja. Armachanst. Dublin, Jan. 22. 1628. LETTER CXXXIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud Bishop of Lon∣don, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. My very good Lord; I Have received your Grace's second Letters, and with the Letters from Dr. Barlow, a Man known to me only by Name, and good Report. I have, upon receipt of these, a second time, humbly presented Dr. Barlow's Suit to his Majesty; with all fair representation to his Majesty of the ne∣cessity of a good Commendam to the Arch-bishop of Tuam. And tho, in my judgment, I hold it very unfit, and of ill, both Example and Conse∣quence in the Church, to have a Bishop, much more an Arch-bishop, retain a Deanery in Commendam: Yet because there is (as I am informed) much service to be done for that Arch-bishop, and because I have conceived this Man will do that Service, (for so he hath assumed); and because much of that Service must be done at Dublin, where that Deaury will the better fit him, as well for House as Charge; and because it is no new thing in that Country to hold a Deanry with a Bishoprick; I made bold to move his Ma∣jesty for it, and his Majesty is graciously pleased to grant it; and I have al∣ready, by his Majesty's special Command, given order to Sir Hen. Holcross to send Letters to my Lord Deputy to this purpose. But there two things his Majesty commanded me to write to your Lordship; The one, that young Men be not commended to him for Bishops; The other, that he shall  be drawn again to grant a Deanry in Commendam. Any other Preferment, though of more value, he shall be content to yield. I am glad I have been able to serve your Grace's desires in this Business. And for Dr. Barlow, I with him joy; but must desire your Lordship to excuse my not writing to him; for between Parliament and Term I have not lenure. So I leave you to the Grace of God, and shall ever rest, Your Graces loving Friend, and Brother. Guil. London. Jan. 29. 1628. My Lord Arch-bishop of Tak. Dr. Barlow's  that was, is of my , for holding a
LETTER CXXXV. A Letter from Dr. William Bedell, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Drogheda. Right Reverend Father, my honourable good Lord; SInce your Graces departure from Dublin, I began to peruse the Papers you left me of Dr. Ghaloner's hand, about the first foundation of the Colledg; which although in some places I cannot read word for word, yet I perceive the sense, and have transcribed so far as they go without inter∣ruption: But they refer to some Copies of Letters which I have not, nor yet are in our Chest, as namely, the City's Letter to Queen Elizabeth, and the Lord Deputy and Comisales; and hers to the Lord Deputy here, for the founding of the Colledg: All which if they might be had, would be in∣serted into the History of the Colledg, ad Verbum. And which is worse, the third Duernion is wholly missing, noted, it seems, in the Front with the Figure 3. This makes me bold to write to your Grace to search if you can find any thing more of this Argument, that there may be somewhat left to Posterity concerning, the beginnings of so good a Work. I have also, since your Grace's departure, drawn a Form of the Confirmation of our Rectories, from the Bishop of Clougher, in conformity, to two Instruments, viz. the Resignation of George Montgomery, sometime Bishop thereof, and Derry, and Rapho; and our Colledg Patent. I have used all the means I can, to know whether any Predecessor of your Grace, did in like manner resign into the King's Hands any Patronages within your Diocess, and what their Names be; which if I could understand, I would entreat your Grace to go before in your Diocess, and to be our Patron in the soliciting the other Bishops to follow in theirs. I send your Grace the form of the Con∣firmation, and the Names of the Rectories in our Patent, referring the rest to your wisdom and love to the Colledg. This is a Business of great im∣portance to this Society, and hath already been deferred so long, and Mr. Usher's sudden taking away, (to omit my Lord of Kilmore) admonishes me to work while the day lasts. Another Business there is, which enforceth me to have recourse to your Grace; which is this, Yesterday, as I was fol∣lowing Mr. Usher's Funeral, there was delivered me a Letter from my Lord Chancellor, containing another to his Lordship from Mr. Lloyd, together  a Note which I send herewith. He demandeth of the Colledg, not only his Dit in his absence, which the Statute expresly denies to a Fellow, (and which a your Grace and the Visitors intended to grant him, you did him a Favour instead of a Punishment) but Wages for being a Prime-Lecturer; whereas his Year came out at Midsummer, and he had till then his Allowance, although he performed not the Duty. But here is not all, for it seems he hopes, by the words of your Decree, to hold all this till he be possessed of some Ecclesiastical Benefice, notwithstanding his Term by the Charter expires at Midsommer. We have answered my Lord Chan∣cellor, as your Grace shall find by these inclosed; and do humbly desire your Grace, to certify either him or us of your intention; and to draw a Line or two to be sent to the rest of the  for this Allowance (if you  it for mine own and the Fellows Discharge in the paying it. These Letters your Grace will be also pleased to send us back, as having, by reason of the shortness of time, no time to copy them. We have obtained this night, a Warrant from my Lord Chancellor to the Serjeant at Arms, to
arrest Sir James Caroll; who in all this time of your Grace's being in Dub∣lin, would never be seen, and is now, as we hear, in Town. We have not yet delivered your Grace's return of the Reference made to you at the Coun∣cil Table, touching the Inclosure at the Colledg-Gate, as having but lately received it. In the mean while the Scholars, upon St. Matthew's Day at night, between Supper and Prayer-time, have pulled it all down, every Stick, and brought it away into the Colledg to several Chambers. Yet up∣on warning that night given at Prayers, that every Man should bring into the Quadrangle what he had taken away; there was a great pile reared up in the Night, which we sent Mr. Arthur word he might fetch away if he would; and he did accordingly. This Insolency, though it much grieved me, I could not prevent; I did publickly upon the Reference, pray them to be quiet, signifying our hope that we had of a friendly composition; but when they heard that Mr. Ar∣thur fell off, they would no longer forbear. Concerning the Affairs in England, I know your Grace hath better intel∣ligence than I. Our Translation goeth on in the Psalms, and we are now in the 88th. Mr. Neile King is in Chester. Your Grace will pardon this scribling. And so I commit you to God, desiring to be remembered in your Prayers; and resting, Your Grace's in all Duty, W. Bedell. Trinity Coll. March 5. 1628. LETTER CXXXVI. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend in Christ, my very good Lord; I Must first desire your Grace's pardon for my long silence, and that you will be pleased to believe, that it proceeded not from any neglect of him whom I have so long and so much honour'd. I presume your Grace conti∣nually receiveth advertisement of what passeth here from abler Pens than mine, and therefore my pains in that may well be spared. Among the rest, you cannot be ignorant of the close imprisonment of your Grace's Friend and Servant, Mr. Selden, for some offence given, or rather taken, at his carriage and deportment in Parliament. Here is lately deceased, the Earl of Marleburgh; I was often with him about his Irish Collections, and was so happy in the pursuit of them, that I received from him the greatest part of them, not many days before his death. Also the Earl of Westmoreland is lately dead; and my ancient Friend and Kinsman, the Earl of Totnes, de∣prived of his sight, and not like to live many days: If his Library will be sold, I will strain my self to buy it wholly, for it is a very select one. But howsoever, I will not miss (God willing) his Irish Books and Papers. Mr. Selden's Titles of Honour, is ready to come forth here, and his De Diis Syris at Leyden, both well enlarged; I wish he were so too, that his Friends who much love him, might enjoy him. Sir Robert Cotton doth add to his inestimable Library. Mr. Thomas Allen hath been lately bountiful to it;
He is now in London, and also Mr. Brigges. If I should only enumerate those who make enquiry of your Grace's Health, their Names would fill a Letter. Mr. Brigges's Book of Logarithms is finished by a Dutch-man, and printed again in Holland. Mr. Brigges tells me that Kepler is living, and confesses his mistake in the advertisement of his Death, by being deceived in the similitude of his name, with one D. Kapper, who died in that manner as he related. But it appears sufficiently, by his long-promised Tabulae Rodolphiae, which now at last are come forth; but they answer not the expectation which he had raised of them. Dr. Bainbridge is well at Oxford; Dr. Sutcleffe is lately deceased. Yesterday at Newgate Sessions, Fa. Muskett, your Grace's old Acquain∣tance was arraigned, and two other Priests; and one of them an Irish-man: they were all found guilty of Treason, and had judgment accordingly. There were an hundred Recusants presented at the same time. It is said, that a Declaration shall come forth concerning the Arminian Doctrine, done by those Divines who were at the Synod of Dort. L. Wadding, our Country-man, hath published a second Tome of his An∣nales Fratrum Minorum. The Jesuit's Reply to your Grace, is not to be gotten here; those that came into England were seized, and for ought I can hear, they lie still in the Custom-house: that which I used, was borrowed for me by a Friend of the Author himself, half a year since, he being then here in London, and going by the Name of Morgan. Since the Dissolution of the Parliament, there is a strange suddain decay of Trade, and consequently of the Customs; God grant there follow no inconvenience in the Common-Wealth. The French and Dunkerkers are very bold upon the Coast of England, and I hear of no means used to repress them. It is said, that our Deputy shall be presently removed; his designed Suc∣cessor, my Lord of Danby, is expected from Garnsey: He was imployed thither, to furnish that Island with Munition, and other Necessaries, when there was some jealousy of the French, while that Army lay hovering about the parts of Picardy and Normandy; but it is now gone for Italy, and is passed the Mountains; they have taken some Town in Piedmont; the King is there in Person. It is now said, that Matters are accommodated by Composition; if not, it will prove a bloody War between those two great Kings, and the French will put hard for the Dutchy of Millain. I humbly desire to be held in your Grace's Opinion, as one who will ever most willingly approve himself, Your Grace's very affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, March 26. 1629. Sir Robert Cotton desires to have his humble respects presented to your Grace.
LETTER CXXXVII. A Letter from Mr. Archibald Hamilton, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend; ON Thursday last, I understood by certain intelligence, that my Lord of London (whether by the perswasion of Sir Henry Wotton, or others, I know not) earnestly moved his Majesty in Dr. Bedell's behalf, Provost of Dublin-Colledg, that he might be preferred to the Bishoprick of Kilmore, which his Majesty hath granted; and the Letter for his Consecration is like to be there as soon as this. I am heartily glad of his good Preferment, but am somewhat grieved withal that the Colledg hath enjoyed him for so small a time, who was like to make it much happy by his careful Government. Some fear there is conceived, that one or other from hence may be put upon the House, who will not (it may be) so truly aim at the religious Education of the Students; for some one (deeply tainted with the Arminian Tenets) putteth in close to be recommended thither by his Majesty; and thinks to pre∣vail by that means. This I thought good to certify, that your Grace may give timely warning thereof to the Fellows, that they may make a wary and a safe Election, of some sound Scholar, and Orthodox Divine. I will not presume to name any, but I think Mr. Mead might be well thought of, the place being formerly intended for him, and he generally reputed a very able Man for such a Charge. The Earl of Totnes departed this Life some ten days since, his Corps is not yet buried: Soon after his decease, I went and made enquiry after that Press of Books and Manuscripts which only concern Ireland, and asked whether he had left them as a Legacy to our Colledg, as your Lordship heretofore moved him, and as he himself lately promised (to Sir Fran Annesly and my self) that he would: whatsoever the good Man intended, or what∣soever direction he gave, I cannot learn, but the Colledg is not like to get them; for one Sir Thomas Stafford (the reputed Son of the said Earl) hath got them, and many other Things of my Lord's into his hands, out of which there will be hard wringing of them. Sir Fran. Annesly, and I have ear∣nestly dealt with him, that he would give them to the Colledg, as the Earl intended to leave them; and if not that he would let your Lordship have the refusal of them before any other if they be to be made away; he ab∣solutely refuseth to part with them upon any terms, alleadging, that he pur∣poseth to erect a Library, wherein they, and all other the Earl's Books, are to be preserved for his everlasting memory. He promiseth withal that if your Grace, or any that your Lordship will appoint hath a mind to exem∣plify, write out, or collect any thing out of any of the said Books and Ma∣nuscripts, he will most willingly affoyd your Lordship, or them, a fire and leasurely use of the same, as to you shall seem sitting; and this was all that we could get from him. If your Lordship's Letter can be so powerful, it were not amiss to write to himself; for it may be conjectured (for all his fair pre∣tences) that a ready sum of Mony may make an easy purchase of them. In my last Letter I advertised your Lordship how far I had proceeded in the business of Armagh; since which time I have driven it to no further perfection, partly, because I expect to hear your Lordship's express plea∣sure therein; and partly, by reason of the Lord Keeper, and Lord Grandison's late Sickness, which hath kept them and the rest of the Com∣mittees
from meeting, to make a final determination of their Report, that his Majesty's Letter may be procured accordingly, for the setting off all things to your Lordship's desire. If the Report were once made, the Letter shall come speedily over, and in a sufficient time, to settle all before the Par∣liament sit, or can conclude any Acts for restraining of Bishops, to set any Leases for any longer term than one and twenty Years. Thus recom∣mending your Lordship to the blessed protection of the Almighty, and hum∣bly intreating your Lordship to have a vigilant care for the providing of an able Head to the Colledg; I humbly take leave, and remain, Your Grace's Servant, Archibald Hamilton. White-hall, April 8. 1629. LETTER CXXXVIII. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend in Christ, my very good Lord; I Received your Lordship's Letter, of the 22d of March, by Sir Jo. Neu∣tervill. I doubt not but your Grace hath heard of the Greek Library brought from Venice by Mr. Fetherston, which the Earl of Pembroke hath bought for the University-Library of Oxford; it cost him 700 l. there are of them 250 Volumes. Dr. Lindsell, now Dean of Litchfield, tells me, that it is a great Treasure, far exceeding the Catalogue. He likewise tells me, that there are a great number of excellent Tracts of the Greek Fathers, ne∣ver yet published; besides divers ancient Historians and Geographers; and particularly, that there is as much of Chrysostom, as will make a Volume equal to any of those published by Sir H. Savil: I do not hear of any Books brought home by Sir Thomas Rae, besides the ancient Greek Bible which was sent to his Majesty by him, from Cyrill the old Patriarch sometime of Alexandria, but now of Constantinople. It is that which went among them by Tradition, to be written by St. Tecla the Martyr and Scholar of the Apostles; but it is most apparent not to be so ancient by some hundreds of years; and that, as for divers reasons, so especially because there is before the Psalms, a Pre∣face of Athanasius. I hear he hath brought home a rare Collection of Coyns and Medals. I now spend my spare time, in gathering Matter for the Story of Hen. 8. which in time (if God spare me Life and Health) I intend to publish. And thus with the tender of my Love and Service to your Grace, I will remain, Your Grace's very affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, Henry Bourgchier. Lond. April 13. 1629.
LETTER CXXXIX. A Letter from the Right Honourable the Lord Falkland Lord Deputy of Ireland, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; I Have received information, both of the unreverend manner of publishing the late Proclamation at Drogedah, and the ill observance of the same since it was published. For the first, That it was done in scornful and con∣temptuous sort, a drunken Souldier being first set up to read it, and then a drunken Serjeant of the Town, both being made, by too much Drink, un∣capable of that task (and perhaps purposely put to it) made the same seem like a May-game. And for the latter, That there is yet very little obedience shewed thereto by the Friers and Priests; only that they have shut up the Fore-doors of some of their Mass-houses; but have as ordinary recourse thither by their private Passages, and do as frequently use their superstitious Service there, as if there were no command to the contrary; those Mass-houses being continued in their former use (though perhaps a little more pri∣vately) without any demolishing of their Altars, &c. I expected to have been informed as well of the publishing thereof there, as of the Effects it had wrought, from no Man before your Lordship, both in respect of your Profession, and the eminent place you hold in the Church, and of your being a Privy Counsellor, who was present and assistant in all the Consultations about setting it forth, and privy to the Resolutions of the Board thereupon. But since this is come to my hands from another, I do hereby pray and authorize your Lordship, calling to your assistance Mr. Ju∣stice Philpot, who is now resident there, to enter into a serious examination of the Premises, and to give me a full information of what you find thereof, by the first opportunity. So desiring to be remembred in your daily Prayers, I am, Your Lordship's very affectionate Friend, Falkland. Dublin-Castle, Apr. 14. 1629. LETTER CXL. A Letter from Mr. Philpot, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My good Lord; I Have had some Conference with my Lord Deputy about those Matters, wherein your Grace and I were lately imployed; he telleth me, that this day he will advise with the Counsel upon the Informations sent by us, and afterwards will take such course therein as shall be thought fit. His Lordship insisteth much upon that part of Mr. Sing's Information, where he saith, That the Titulary Bishop of Rapho, did make a Priest at a publick Mass in an
Orchard. He saith, That the said Bishop is as dangerous a Fellow here in Ireland, as Smith is in England; and that he hath good Bonds upon him, and would be glad to this occasion to call him in; and therefore I pray your Grace to wish Mr. Sing to be ready to make good his Accusation, for the said Bishop is bound not to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. I told my Lord Deputy how careful you were to see him before his going from hence; and that your Grace intended to make a journey of purpose hither, having now no other business here. He told me, that if your Grace had any such pur∣pose, that you need not make any great haste, for he hoped to have time enough before his going, to make some good progress in the Business begun, concerning the Jesuits and their Houses, &c. and that he had not his Sum∣mons yet to go away, which could not come till the Wind turned; and if it came then, he said, he would stay ten days after at the least; in which your Grace may have notice time enough to perform your desire. I told my Lord, that your Grace was somewhat troubled at his Letter; for which he was sorry, and blamed his Secretary, protesting he did not intend to give your Grace any cause of discontent. His Lordship told me, that the News of Mantua is true, which is relieved, and the French King returned: but there is no certainty, but a common report, of any Peace concluded with France. I shall be ready, upon all occasions, to do your Lordship any ac∣ceptable Service; and will for ever remain, Your Grace's faithful Servant, Jo. Philpot. Dublin, April 27. 1629. LETTER CXLI. A Letter from the Lord Deputy, &c. to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. After our right hearty Commendations to your Lordship; BY your Letters of the 6th of this Instant, which we the Lord Deputy thought fit to communicate to the Council, we perceive, and do well approve the care and pains you have taken, as well in searching out the truth of the Matter, concerning the Titulary Bishop of Raphae, as in endea∣vouring to inform your self of the Proprietors and Possessors of the Po∣pish Conventual-Houses in that Town. Touching the Titulary Bishop, we rest satisfied by your Lordship's said Letters, that at that time he did no publick Act, nor gave Orders to any: But as yet remain unsatisfied whether there were any great Assembly of People at that Meeting; and what Persons of Note were among them, wherein we desire to receive further satisfaction from your Lord∣ship. As to their Conventual-Houses, we have given his Majesty's Attorney-General, a Copy of the Paper enclosed in your Letters to us, and gave him direction to put up Informations in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, against the Proprietors and Possessors of those Houses, that thereby way may be
made to such further course of proceeding as the several Cases shall require. And this being all for the present, we bid your Lorship very heartily farewel From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, May 15. 1629. Your Lordship's very loving Friends, H. Falkland. A. Loftus Canc. Anth. Midensis. Hen. Docwra. W. Parsons. Tyringham. LETTER CXLII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud Bishop of Lon∣don, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. My very good Lord; I Am glad Mr. Bedell's Preferment gives your Grace such contentment. Your former Letter came safe to my hands, so did your second. I see nothing is so well done, but Exceptions can fret it; for I hear that which I looked not for concerning Mr. Bedell's Preferment, whole Name was never put to the King, till both the other Competitors were refused by his Majesty as too young. Ardagh is not forgotten in the Letter; for since upon receipt of your Lordship's last Letters, I spake with Sir Hen. Holcroft about it. Beside those of your Lordship's, I have received Letters from Mr. Bedell, and from the Fellows, about their freedom of election of a Provost. My Lord, his Majesty would fain have a Man to go on where Mr. Bedell leaves. I am engaged for none. I heartily love Freedoms granted by Charter, and would have them maintained. If they will return which are come hither; and all agree, or a major part, upon a worthy Man that will serve God and the King, I will give them all the assistance I can to keep their Priviledg whole. The King likes wondrons well of the Irish Lecture begun by Mr. Bedell, and the course of sending such young Men as your Grace mentions. I hope, before our Committee for the establishment of Ireland end, I shall find a time to think of the Remedy your Lordship proposes about scandalous Mi∣nisters; in which, or any other Service, I shall not be wanting. For the particulars concerning Clark, I have your inclosed; and if he stir any thing while I am present, you shall be sure I will do you right. Now, my Lord, I have answered all your Letter, save about the Arch-bishop of Cassa's for the old Dean. I have done all I am able for that reve∣rend and well-deserving Gentleman; but the King's Majesty hath been pos∣sessed another way; and it seems upon like removes, hereafter will move more than one. And at this time he will give Cassils to my Lord of Clougher, if he will take it, and so go on with another to succeed him, of whom he is likewise resolved: And who shall be Cassils if my Lord of Clougher refuse.
There is nothing which the Dean of Cassils can have at this time, unless he will with a good commendam, be content to take Kilfanora. To which, tho I do not perswade, yet I would receive his Answer: And I add, it will be a step for him to a better. As for Betts, the Lord-Elect that was, he hath lapsed it by not proceeding to Consecration. I must now humbly intreat your Grace to send me the Names and Values of all the Bishopricks and Deaneries in Ireland. And what Bishopricks are joyned to others, that I may be the better able to serve that Church, being as yet one of the Committee. And I pray excuse my not writing to Mr. Bedle, for in truth I have not leisure. So I leave you to the Grace of God, and rest, Your Grace's very loving Brother, Guil. London. June 16, 1629. LETTER CXLIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend W. Laud Bishop of London, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Armagh. My very good Lord; THE two Fellows of the Colledg of Dublin which are attendant here about the freedom of their Election, were commanded by his Majesty to send to the Colledg there, and to know whom they would pitch upon for their Governour. And his Majesty was content, upon the Reasons given by me, and the Petition of the Fellows, to leave them to freedom, so they did chuse such a Man as would be serviceable to the Church and Him. Upon this after some time, they delivered to the King, that they would choose, or had chosen Dr. Usher, a Man of your Grace's Name and Kindred: His Ma∣jesty thereupon referred them to the Secretary, the Lord Vicount Dorchester, and my self, to inform our selves of his Worth and Fitness. My Lord pro∣posed that they should think of another Man that was known unto us, that we might the better deliver our Judgments to the King. I was very sensi∣ble of your Lordship's Name in him, and remembred what you had written to me in a former Letter concerning him, and thereupon prevailed with his Majesty that I might write these Letters to you, which are to let your Grace understand that his Majesty puts so great Confidence in your Integrity and readiness to do him Service, that he hath referred this business to the Up∣rightness of your Judgment, and will exercise his Power accordingly. For thus he hath commanded me to write; That your Grace should presently upon receipt of these Letters write back to me what your Knowledg and Judgment is of the worth and fitness of Dr. Usher for this place, setting all Kindred and Affection aside: And upon that Certificate of yours the King
will leave them to all freedom of their choice, or confirm it if it be made. So wishing your Lordship all Health and Happiness, I leave you to the Grace of God, and shall ever rest, Your Grace's very loving Friend, and Brother, Guil. London. London—House, June 25. 1629. LETTER CXLIV. A Letter from Dr. Bainbridg to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My very good Lord; THis Bearer's unexpected departure hath prevented my desire to dis∣charge some part of those many Obligations, wherein I am bound un∣to your Grace; but assuring my self that your Grace will a little longer suspend your Censure, I am bold to mediate for another. Whereas our Turky Merchants, trading at Aleppo, being now destitute of a Minister, have referr'd the choice of one unto your self; may it please you to under∣stand, that there is one Mr. Johnson, a Fellow of Magdalen-Colledg, who hath spent some Years in the Oriental Languages, and being desirous to improve his Knowledg therein is content to adventure himself in the voy∣age; he would take the pains to preach once a week, but not oftner; being desirous to spend the rest of his time in perfecting his Languages, and making such other Observations as may tend to the advancement of Learning. If your Grace upon these terms please to recommend him to the Merchants, I dare engage my Credit for his civil and sober Behaviour, and his best En∣deavours to do your Grace all respective Service. I do not commend an in∣digent Fellow enforced to run a desperate hazard of his Fortunes, but a learned Gentleman of fair hopes, and presently well furnished with all things needful to a Scholar. I suppose that Fetherstone did send you a Catalogue of Barroccins his Greek Manuscripts, they be now Prisoners in our publick Library, by the gift of one Chancellor, and with them some few more given by Sir Tho. Rae, amongst which there is (as I take it) a fair Copy in Arabick of the Apostles Canons. If there be any thing in these Manuscripts which may give you content, I shall (with my hearty Prayers for your good Health) endeavour to ap∣prove my self Your Graces most affectionate Servant, John Bainbridge. Oxon, July 20, 1629.
LETTER CXLV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to the Right Reverend W. Laud Bishop of London. My very good Lord; YOur Letters of the 25th of June I received the 8th day of August, wherein I found contained a large Testimony, as well of your special care of the welfare of our poor Colledg, as of your tender respect unto my Name and Credit; for which I must acknowledg my self to stand ever bound to perform all faithful Service unto your Lordship. I have hereupon written unto the Fellows of the House, that in making their Election they should follow their Consciences according to their Oaths, without any by-respects whatsoever. Dr. Usher is indeed my Cousin german; but withal the Son of that Father, at whose instance, charge and travel, the Charter of the Foundation of the Colledg was first obtained from Queen Elizabeth, which peradventure may make him somewhat the more to be re∣spected by that Society. To his Learning, Honesty, and Conformity unto the Discipline of our Church, no Man, I suppose, will take exception. And of his Ability in Government he hath given some proof already, while he was Vice-Provost in that House; where his care in preventing the re∣newing of the Leases at that time was such, that thereby we have been now enabled so to order the matter, that within these six Years the Colledg-Rents shall be advanced well-nigh to the double value of that they have been. Whereunto I will add thus much more, that I know he sincerely in∣tendeth the good of his Country, meaneth to go on where Dr. Bedell hath left, and in his proceedings will order himself wholly according as your Lordship shall be pleased to direct him. Which if it may prove an induce∣ment to move his Majesty to confirm his Election; I shall hold my self strongly engaged thereby to have a special eye to the Government of that Colledg: seeing the miscarriage of any thing therein cannot but in some sort reflect upon my self; who would rather lose my Life, than not answer the Trust reposed in me by my Soveraign. In obedience unto whose sacred Directions, and discharge of the Care committed unto me by his Letters of the 7th of November last (the Copy whereof I send herewith) I humbly make bold to represent this also unto your Lordship's Consideration; whe∣ther if the Lord Bishop of Glogher shall be removed unto the Arch-bishoprick of Cashell, the Dean of Raphoe may not be thought upon to succeed him in Glogher, as being a very well deserying Man, and one toward whom his Majesty hath very gracious Intentions. But of him I shall need deliver no more, than what is contained in the enclosed Testimonial, sent by my Pre∣decessor unto King James of blessed Memory. And so with remembrance of my Service unto your Lordship, I rest, Your Lordship's in all Christian Duty ready to be commanded, J. Armac. Armagh, August. 10th, 1629.
LETTER CXLVI. Reverendo Viro D. Ludovico de Dieu Orientalium Lin∣guarum in Academiâ Leydensi Professori eximio. Siab Academiâ is abfuerit, tradantur Literae istae vel Danieli Heinsio, vel Gerardo Joh. Vossio resignandae. QUod ita compellem te familiaritèr, homo quem tu ne de facie quidem nosti, non est quòd adeo mireris, Vir eruditissime. Ex Apocalypsi enim tuâ Syro-Latinâ (quam cum MSo meo codice diligenter contuli) & Hebraeo-Chaldaicis Institutionibus, ita mihi visus sum habere te cognitum: ut participare me tecum, & thesauros ex Oriente advectos primo quo{que} tem∣pore communicare penè gestiam: Interim, ecce tibi Samaritanorum illud Pentateuchum, in quo comparando Christianae pietatis homines paulo negli∣gentiores hactenus fuisse, conquestus est olim magnus vester Scaliger. Cujus voto aliquâ certe ex parte fuerit satisfactum, si ex Academiâ cujus ille, dum Scal. de Emend. lib. 7. pag. 627. vixit, ingens fuit ornamentum, primùm in lucem prodeat tamdiu desidera∣tum venerandae antiquitatis monumentum. Verum properato hîc opus; ne hanc vobis desponsam jam & destinatam laudem, alius praereptum eat. Ne{que} est quod deterreat libri moles: merum enim Pentateuchum est; id{que} à punctis vocalibus & accentibus omnibus planè liberum. Ut cùm in promp∣tu vobis sint Samaritani typi à Clarissimo Erpenio relicti; nihil obstare vide∣am, quo minus proximis Vernalibus Nundinis opus absolutum publice edi possit, ac passim divendi. Tu modo operi manum admovere velis; &  in te suscipere officium. Ad exemplar ipsum quod attinet; recen∣tius quidem illud est, verum ex antiquioribus satis fideliter expressum. Le∣viticum à se descriptum annotavit librarius  mense Giumadi altero, anni nongentesimi filio∣rum Ismaelis. Mensis vero ille anni aerae Ismaeliticae sive Mahummedicae 900, mensi respondet Martio anni Christianae nostrae epochae 1495. Geneseos vero librum, qui casu aliquo exciderat, ab alio suppletum fuisse res ipsa lo∣quitur: & quidem  hoc est,  si ego decurtatas illas voces recte interpretor, qui annus Hegirae 986. in aere nostrae 1578. incurrit. Ut autem Judei in describendo Libro Legis, quo in Synagogis suis utuntur, minores suas  ita Samaritani sectiones (illis ut plurimum responden∣tes) quos  appellant, curiose observant; propriâ notâ apposita unam∣quam{que} terminantes, & interjecto insuper spatio à proxime insequente dis∣cludentes. Quin & numerum earum ad uniuscujus{que} libri calcem recensent: 250 Geneseos, Exodi 200. levitici 134, vel 135. Numerorum 118. & 160 Deuteronomii. Harum igitur distinctionem uti in editione negligi nollem: ita quo commodius textus Samaritani cum Judaico collatio possit institui, tùm capitum (quibus vulgò utimur) ad marginem, tum verficulorum intra contextum, numerum adjiciendum existimarem: eo modo, quo in primis partibus libri Geneseos à nobis factum vides & quidem versiculorum nostrorum numerum constanter retinendum judicarem, etiam iis in locis (nam & ejusmodi aliquando occurrunt) in quibus à Samaritis ordo est im∣mutatus. Ubi vero integrae periodi ab iisdem ad sacrum contextum sunt ad∣jectae (ut in XI Capite Geneseos, verbi gratiâ, & post xxx Capitis 36 ver∣siculum, & in libro Exodi frequentissimè) Ziphram o praeigimus.
Habeo & Praefationem paratam, in quâ (inter alia) quî factum ut solos Mosis libros Samaritani receperint, rationem explico; quo tempore, & quo Authore facta sit haec primigenii contextus interpolatio, ostendo, authores{que} veteres, Eusebium, Diodorum Tarsensem, Hieronymum, Cyrillum, Anespe∣rum, Georgium Syncellum, & alios qui illius Testimoniis sunt usi, comme∣moro. Eam si editione dignam censebis accipies: quam primùm quid illic acturi sitis resciero. Est apud nos Dublinii Petrus quidam Wiboraeus, cujus in Mercaturis faciendis operâ utuntur Middleburgensium vestrorum negotia∣torum nonnulli: Est & Londini Franciscus Burnetus, qui in vico, quem Lom∣bardicum vocant, habet domicilium, ad insigne Aurei Velleris, Horum uter literas tuas recte ad me curabit deferendas. Vale, vir doctissime; V. V. Cl. Danieli Heinsio ac Gerardo Joh. Vossio (quos ego ambos, ob interiores illas & reconditas in quibus praeter caeteras excellunt literas, unicè diligo) salutem meis verbis dicito. Tuus ex animo JACOBUS USSERIUS, Armachanus. Pontanae in Hiberniâ Kalendis Octobris An. MDCXXIX. LETTER CXLVII. A Letter from Sir H. Bourgchier to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend in Christ, my very good Lord; MY last Letter sent by Mr. Ja. Ware, I presume is come to your Grace's hands long before this time. I have the happiness to hear of your Grace sometimes by Mr. Burnet, which is a great Comfort unto me; especi∣ally when I heard of your Health and Ability to perform so great a Journey, in your late Visitation of your Province, of which I shall ever wish the continuance. I am very sorry that it is my ill fortune, so often to advertise your Grace of the misfortune of your Friends here. Sir Robert Cotton hath been lately committed to the Custody of the Bishop of Ely, and often strictly examined concerning the publication of a Project, tending to the oppression of the Common-wealth, and with him were restrained in several places the Earls of Bedford, Somerset, and Clare, and some others: after ten or twelve days close Imprisonment, and several Examinations, they were all enlarged; and an Information exhibited against them in the Star-Chamber, to which they are now to answer. Mr. Solden is also made a party to this In∣formation; he is still a Prisoner in the Tower, but enjoyeth now the liberty of the Prison: At my last being with him, he desired me to present his Ser∣vice to your Grace; he would have done it himself, if he might with safety. Here hath been a good while with us Ger. Jo. Vossius of Leyden, a Man well known to your Grace by his Books; and now to me de facie; and which is more, with whom I have contracted Familiarity and Friendship: He told me that your Grace was well known to him both by your Latin Book, which he had diligently read, and by the Report of divers learned Men. and when he understood by me, how much you esteemed and loved him, he desired me to return his humble Thanks, with desire that you would imploy his Service in whatsoever he is able to perform. His Majesty has conserr'd on him the Prebend in Canterbury, which lately was Dr. Chapman's. He is now
settling himself in it; he saith, he hath received a late Advertisement of the Death of Bertius, who over-lived his own Credit and Reputation. Mr. Sel∣den's Titles of Honour hath long slept under the Press, by reason of his long close Imprisonment; but now he tells me it shall go forward; and he thinks within two Months it will come abroad. The War in Italy is like to proceed; the French King raiseth a great Army for that Expedition. Here was a report that the States had taken Gulick, but it holds not for a certain Truth. One thing I must not over-pass, and that a strange and monstrous Accident lately happened here in England. One Dorington (a younger Son of Sir William Dorington of Hamp-shire, and Grand-Child to that Dorington who brake his Neck from St. Sepulchres Steeple in London) being reprehen∣ded for some disorderly Courses by his Mother, drew his Sword and ran her twice through, and afterwards she being dead, gave her many Wounds, and had slain his Sister at the same time, had he not been prevented. I presume your Grace hath heard of the Death of Dr. Tho. James: his Ne∣phew Mr. Rich. James is fallen into some Trouble, by reason of his Famili∣arity and Inwardness with Sir Robert Cotton. I suppose you have the last Catalogue of Francfort, which hath nothing of note. But I fear I have been over troublesome to your Grace's more serious and weighty Imploy∣ments; wherefore with the remembrance of my Love and Service, I will ever remain Your Grace's most affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, December the 4th, 1629. LETTER CXLVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud Bishop of Lon∣don, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. My very good Lord; I Have received two or three Letters from you since I writ you any An∣swer. I hope your Grace is not of opinion that it is either idlenesi or neglect which have made me silent; for the plain truth is, I fell into a fierce burning Fever August the 14th, which held me above three Weeks. It was so fierce, that my Physicians, as well as my Friends, gave me for dead, and it is a piece of a Miracle that I live. I have not yet recovered my wonted Strength, and God knows when I shall; yet since I was able to go to the Court, tho not to wait there. I have done as much business as I could, and I think as your Grace hath desired of me, for the Church of Ireland, as your Lordship will see by this brief Account following. And first, my Lord, I have obtain'd of his Majesty, the new incorporating of the Dean and Chapter of Derry, and I think the Dean is returned. At the same time the King was pleased to give order for confirming the Election of Dr. Usher to be Governour of the Colledg in Dublin. Thirdly, upon the refusal of my Lord of Clougher, his Majesty gave, in the time of my Sick∣ness,
the Arch-bishoprick of Cassills to the Bishop of Killally, and the Bi∣shoprick of Killally to the Dean of Rapho. And whereas your Grace, in the close of one of your Letters, did acquaint me, that there was a fear, lest some cunning would be used to beg or buy some Patronages out of the King's Hands; I moved his Majesty about that likewise, and he made me a gracious promise, that he would part with none of them. And now, my Lord, I give your Lordship thanks for the Catalogue of the Bishopricks of Ireland, which I heartily desire your Grace to perfect, as occasion may be offered you. And for the last business (as I remember) concerning the Table of Tything in Ulster, I have carefully look'd it over; but by reason I have no experience of those parts, I cannot judg clearly of the Business; but I am taking the best care I can about it, and when I have done, I will do my best with his Majesty for Confirmation, and leave, Mr. Hyegate to report the Particulars to your Grace. I have observed that Kilphanora is no fertile Ground, it is let lie so long Fallow. Hereupon I have adventured to move his Majesty, that some one or two good Benefices, lying not too far off, or any other Church-Prefer∣ment without Cure, so it be not a Deanery, may be not for this time only, but for ever annex'd to that Bishoprick. The care of managing that Busi∣ness he refers to your Grace, and such good Counsel in the Law as you shall call to your assistance. And I pray your Grace think of it seriously and speedily; and though I doubt you will find nothing actually void to annex unto it, yet if that Act be but once past, the hope of that which is annex'd, will make some worthy Man venture upon that Pastoral Charge; and so soon as you are resolv'd what to do, I pray send me word, that so I may acquaint his Majesty with it, and get pow'r for you to do the Work. These are all the Particulars that for the present I can recall out of your Let∣ters, sent unto me in the time of my Sickness. So with my hearty Prayers for your Health and Happiness, and that you may never be parch'd in such a Fire as I have been, I leave you to the Grace of God, and rest, Your Grace's loving poor Friend, and Brother, Guil. London. London-house, Decemb. 7. 1629. LETTER CXLIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend Father, my Honourable good Lord; I Have received your Grace's Letters concerning Mr. Cook. I do acknow∣ledg all that which your Grace writes to be true, concerning his sufficien∣cy and experience to the execution of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; neither did I forber to do him right in giving him that Testimony, when before the Chapter I did declare and shew the nullity of his Parent. I have heard of my Lord of Meathe's attempt; and I do believe, that if this Patent had due Form, I could not overthrow it how unequal soever it be. But falling in the essential parts, besides sundry other defects, I do not think any rea∣sonable
Creature can adjudg it to be good. I shall more at large certify your Grace of the whole Matter, and the reasons of my Counsel herein. I shall desire herein to be tried by your Grace's own Judgment, and not by your Chancellor's; or, as I think in such a case I ought to be, by the Synod of the Province. I have resolved to see the end of this matter; and do desire your Grace's savour herein, no farther than the equity of the Cause, and the Good, as far as I can judg, of the Church in a high degree do require. So with my humble service to your Grace, I rest, Your Grace's in all duty, W. Kilmore. Kilmore, Decemb. 28. 1629. LETTER CL. A Letter from L. Robinson, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My honourable and most dear Lord; MY poor Prayers to God shall never be wanting for the continuance and increase of your Lordship's Health, and all true Happiness, nor my serviceable and thankful Affections for all your noble Favours done to me and mine. I forbear to treat with my Lord of Kilmore altogether about any of those things which are divulged under his hand, being perswaded his Desires were only to do good, and assured himself sees his expectation fail in them; partly, by the Apology he made for himself amongst his Ministers, gathered together in the Church of Kilmore, at the inhibiting of Mr. Cook; where he shewed much grief, that there were divers scandalous Reports rais'd of him: As that he was a Papist, an Arminian, an Equivocator, Politician, and traveller into Italy; that he bow'd his Knee at the Name of Jesus, pull'd down the late Bishop's Seat, because it was too near the Altar, preached in his Surplice, &c. There generally he affirmed his education in Christian Re∣ligion, and his love to the Truth; shewing the Reasons of his Travels, and the Use of the Ceremonies, not to hinder any Man's liberty of Conscience, nor urge Conscience, but as he had voluntarily practis'd them in England for the good of some others, so here. Some things he denied, and others he shew'd Reasons for, so that he gave us all good satisfaction, and we hope we shall have much comfort in him. Yet, 'tis true, he sent a strange Abso∣lution to an Irish Recusant, in a Letter (using many good Instructions, for the Man was sick) in this form; If you be content to receive Christ, and believe in him, by the Authority which is given to me, I absolve you from all your Sins you have confessed to Almighty God, and are truly contrite for, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. Thus craving pardon for being troublesome to your Grace, I take leave, and will ever rejoice to remain, Your Lordship's poor Servant to be commanded, Lau. Robinson. Farnh. Jan. 18. 1629.
LETTER CLI. A Letter from Sir Henry Bourgchier, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend in Christ, and my very good Lord; I Did very lately presume to present my Service to your Grace by my Ser∣vant, whom I sent into Ireland; whose return from thence I expect very shortly, and by him to hear, at least of your Grace's Health and wel∣fare, than which no news can be more welcome to me. Your Friends here, as many as I know, are all well. Sir Rob. Cotton is not altogether free of his Trouble; but he and his Friends hope he shall shortly. Mr. Selden is al∣so a Prisoner in the King's-Bench, but goes abroad when he pleaseth, so that his Friends enjoy him often; I hope we shall have his Titles of Honour very shortly. At Paris there is ready to come forth the King of Spain's Bi∣ble that was: It will be now in ten Volumes, whereas the other was but in eight, and much fairer than the other, as they say that have seen it, which I think can hardly be. Here is little News at this pre∣sent. The French Army is gone into Italy, commanded by the Cardi∣nal Richleau: The Imperialists are so terrified with their coming, that they have raised the Siege of Mantua, and drawn themselves into the Dutchy of Milan, for the defence thereof. There is a Treaty of Peace there, and in the Low-Countries, of a Truce between the King of Spain and the States; and the Spanish Ambassador is here about the same Business, and ours in Spain: And these several Treaties depend so one upon another, that it is thought it will either prove a general Peace, or a general War. I wrote to your Grace in my former Letter, of Mr. Vossius being here in England. Within these two days I heard from him by Mr. Junius his Brother-in-law, who went over with him. He liked his entertainment so well in England, that he hath now a good mind to settle himself here. Concerning our own poor Country, I can say nothing, only that the Business of Philim Mac Teagh is in question; which I mention the rather, because your Grace had your part in it as a Commissioner. The King hath sat two days already with the Lords, and heard it with great patience and attention. My Lord of Falk∣land, as I hear, hath ended his part; which was, to answer the Certificate and Report of the Commissioners in Ireland, as far as it touched himself. Sir Henry Beatinges part is next; when those have done, the other side shall have liberty to reply. I cannot hear any speech of a new Deputy; I believe the Government will continue as it is, and the rather, because it is a saving way, which these Times do easily hearken unto. I have sent your Grace, here inclosed, something that hath been lately done concerning the Church of England: I doubt not but your Grace hath received it from other hands, but I thought good to adventure it howsoever. I intend (with God's Assistance) to be in Ireland about the midst of March at the farthest. If your Grace desire any thing from hence, I shall willingly con∣veigh it to you; and if they be Books, I can do it conveniently, because I carry many of my own. I will desire your Grace to esteem me in the number of those who most reverence and honour you, and will ever approve himself, Your Grace's most affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, Henry Bourgchier. London, Jan. 21. 1629.
LETTER CLII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Father, my honourable good Lord; THE report of your Grace's indisposition, how sorrowful it was to me the Lord knows; albeit the same was somewhat mitigated by other News of your better Estate. In that fluctuation of my mind (perhaps like that of your Health) the saying of the Apostle served me for an Anchor; That none of us liveth to himself, neither doth any die to himself. For whether we live, we live to the Lord; or whether we die, we die to the Lord: Whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's: Thereupon, from the bottom of my heart commending your Estate, and that of his Church here (which how much it needs you he knows best) to our common Master, though I had written large Letters to you, which have lien by me sundry Weeks, fearing in your sickness to be troublesom, I thought not to send them, but to attend some other opportunity after your perfect recovery, to send, or perhaps bring them. When I understood by Mr. Dean of his Journey, or at least sending an express Messenger to you with other Letters; putting me also in mind that perhaps it would not be unwelcome to you to hear from me, though you forbore to answer: I yielded to the Example and Condi∣tion; so much the rather, because I remembred my self a Debtor to your Grace, by my promise of writing to you more fully touching the Reasons of my difference with Mr. Cook, and now a Suitor in your Court at his instance. And first, I beseech your Grace, let it be a Matter meerly of merriment, that I skirmish a little with your Court, touching the Inhibition and Cita∣tion which thence proceeded against me, as you shall perceive by the inclo∣sed Recusation. For the thing it self, as I have written, I do submit it wholly to your Grace's decision. And to enlarge my self a little, not as to a Judg, but a Father; to whom, beside the bond of your undeserved Love, I am bound also, by an Oath of God; I will pour out my Heart unto you, even without craving pardon of my boldness. It will be perhaps some lit∣tle diversion of your Thoughts, from your own infirmity, to understand that you suffer not alone, but you in Body, others otherwise, each must bear his Cross, and follow the steps of our high Master. My Lord, since it pleased God to call me to this place in this Church, what my Intentions have been to the discharge of my Duty, he best knows. But I have met with many Impediments and Discouragements, and chiefly from them of mine own Profession in Religion. Concerning Mr. Hoil, I acquainted your Grace. Sir Ed. Bagshaw, Sir Francis Hamilton, Mr. Wil∣liam Flemming, and divers more, have been, and yet are, pulling from the Rights of my Church. But all these have been light in respect of the dealing of some others professing me kindness, by whom I have been blazed a Papist; an Arminian, a Neuter, a Politician, an Equivocator, a nigardly House-keeper, an Usurer; that I ow at the Name of Jesus, pray towards the East; would pull down the Seat of my Predecessor to set up an Altar; de∣nied burial in the Chaneel to one of his Daughters; and to make up all, that I compared your Grace's preaching to one Mr. Whiskins, Mr. Creighton, and Mr. Baxter's, and preferred them. That you found your self deceived in
me, &c. These things have been reported at Dublin, and some of the best affected of mine own Diocess (as hath been told me) induced hereby to bewail with Tears the Misery of the Church; some of the Clergy also, as it was said, looking about how they might remove themselves out of this Country. Of all this I heard but little, till Mr. Price coming from Dub∣lin before Christmass to be ordered Deacon, having for his memory set down twelve Articles, among a number of Points more, required satisfacti∣on of me concerning them. Which I endeavoured to give, both to him, and to them of the Ministry, that met at our Chapter for the examination of Mr. Cook's Patent. Omitting all the rest, yet because this Venim hath spread it self so far, I cannot but touch the last, touching the preferring others to your Grace's preaching. To which Mr. Price's answer was, as he told me, I will be quarter'd if this be true. Thus it was, Mr. Dunsterveil ac∣quainted me with his purpose to preach out of Prov. 20. 6. But a faithful Man who can find Where he said, the Doctrine he meant to raise was this, That Faith is a rare Gift of God. I told him, I thought he mistook the meaning of the Text, and wished him to chuse longer Texts, and not to bring his Discourses to a word or two of Scripture, but rather to declare those of the Holy Ghost. He said, your Grace did so. Some∣times, I answered, there might be just cause; but I thought you did not so ordinarily. As for those Men, Mr. Whiskins and the rest, I ne∣ver heard any of them preach to this day. Peradventure their manner is to take larger Texts; whereupon the Comparison is made, as if I prefer∣red them before you. This Slander did not much trouble me; I know your Grace will not think me such a Fool (if I had no fear of God) to pre∣fer before your excellent Gifts, Men that I never heard. But look as the French Proverb is, He that is disposed to kill his Dog, tells Men he is mad: And whom Men have once wronged, unless the Grace of God be the more, they ever hate. Concerning the wrongs which these People have offered me, I shall take another fit time to inform your Grace. Where they say your Grace doth find your self deceived in me, I think it may be the truest word they have said yet; for indeed, I do think both you and many more are de∣ceived in me, accounting me to have some Honesty, Discretion, and Grace, more than you will by proof find. But if, as it seems to me, that Form hath this meaning, that they pretend to have undeceived you, I hope they are deceived. Yea, I hope they shall be deceived, if by such Courses as these they think to unsettle me, and the Devil himself also, if he think to dismay me. I will go on in the strength of the Lord God, and remember his Righteousness, even his alone; as by that Reverend and good Father my-Lord of Canterbury, when I first came over I was exhorted, and have obtained help of God to do unto this day. But had I not work enough before, but I must bring Mr. Cook upon my top one that, for his Experience, Purse, Friends, in a case already ad∣judged, wherein he is ingaged, not only for his profit, but reputation also, will easily no doubt overturn me. How much better to study to be quiet, and to do mine own Business or, as I think, Stampitius was wont to bid Lu∣ther, go into my Study and Pray. My Lord, all these things came to my mind, and at the first I came with a resolution to take heed to my self; and if I could, to teach others moderation and forbearance by mine own Exam∣ple. But I could not be quiet; nor without pity hear the Complaints of those that resorted to me, some of them of mine own Neighbours and Te∣nants, called into the Court, commonly by information of Apparators, hol∣den there without just Cause, and not dismissed without excessive Fees, a they exclaimed. Lastly, One Mr. Mayot a Minister of the Diocess of Ar∣dagh, made a Complaint to me, that he was Excommunicated by Mr. Cook; notwithstanding, as I heard also by others, the Correction of Ministers was
excepted out of his Patent. Whereupon I desired to see the Patent, and to have a Copy of it, that I might know how to govern my self. He said, Mr. Ash being then from home, should bring it me at his return: Himself went to Dublin to the Term. At the first view I saw it was a formless Chaös of Authority, conferred upon him against all reason and equity. I had not long after occasion to call the Chapter together, at the time of Ordination: I shewed the Original, being brought forth by Mr. Ash, desired to know if that were the Chapter-Seal, and these their hands; they acknowledged their Hands and Seal, and said, they were the less careful in passing it, because they accounted it did rather concern my Predecessor than them. I shewed the false Latin, Non-sence, injustice of it, prejudice to them, contrariety to it self, and to the King's Grant to me. I shewed there were in one Pe∣riod above 500 words, and which passed the rest, hanging in the Air, with∣out any principal Verb. I desired them to consider, if the Seal hanging to it were the Bishop's Seal. They acknowledged it was not. Therefore with protestation that I meant no way to call in question the sufficiency of Mr. Cook or his former Acts, I did judg the Patent to be void, and so declared it, inhibiting Mr. Cook to do any thing by virtue thereof, and them to assist him therein. This is the true History of this Business, howsoever Mr. Cook disguises it. I suspended him not absent, & indicta causâ: It was his Com∣mission which was present, that I viewed, with the Chapter, and censured; which if he can make good, he shall have leave, and time, and place e∣nough. And now to accomplish my promise, to relate to your Grace my purpose herein; My Lord, I do thus account, that to any Work or Enterprize, to remove Impediments is a great part of the performance: And amongst all the Impediments to the Work of God amongst us, there is not any one greater, than the abuse of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. This is not only the Opinion of the most Godly, Judicious, and Learned Men that I have known, but the cause of it is plain: The People pierce not into the inward and true Reasons of things, they are sensible in the Purse. And that Religion that makes Men that profess it, and shews them to be despisers of the World, and so far from encroaching upon others in Matter of base Gain, as rather to part with their own, they magnify. This bred the admiration of the Primitive Christians, and after of the Monks. Contrary Causes must needs produce contrary Effects. Wherefore let us preach never so painfully, and piously; I say more, let us live never so blamelesly our selves, so long as the Officers in our Courts prey upon them, they esteem us no better than Publicans and Worldlings: and so much the more deservedly, because we are called Spiritual Men, and call our selves Reformed Christians. And if the honestest and best of our own Protestants be thus scandalized, what may we think of Papists, such as are all in a man∣ner that we live among The time was, when I hoped the Church of Ire∣land was free from this Abuse, at least freer than her Sister of England; but I find I am deceived. Whether it be that distance of place, and being fur∣ther out of the reach of the Scepter of Justice, breeds more boldness to of∣fend, or necessarily brings more delay of redress. I have been wont also in Ireland, to except one Court, (as he doth Plato): But trust me, my Lord, I have heard, that it is said among great Personages here, that, My Lord Primate is a good Man, but his Court is as corrupt as others; some say, worse. And which I confess to your Grace, did not a little terrify me from visiting, till I might see how to do it with Fruit; in that of your late Visi∣tation they see no profit, but the taking of Mony. But to come to Mr. Cook; of all that have exercised Jurisdiction in this Land these late Years, he is the most noted Man, and most cried out upon. Insomuch as he hath found from the Irish the Nick-name of Pouc. And al∣beit
he came off with credit when he was questioned, and justified himself by the Table of Fees, (as by a leaden Rule any Stone may be approved as well-hewed); by that little I have met with sitice I came hither, I am induced to believe it was not for lack of Matter, but there was some other cause of his escaping in that Trial. By his pretended Commission, and that Table of Fees, he hath taken in my Predecessor's Time, and seeks to take in mine for Exhibits at Visitations, and his Charges there above the Bishop's Procura∣tions; for Unions, Sequestrations, Relaxations, Certificates, Licences, Per∣mutations of Penance, Sentences (as our Court calls them) Interlocutory in Causes of Correction, &c. Such Fees as I cannot in my Conscience think to be just: and yet he doth it in my Name, and tells me, I cannot call him in∣to question for it. Alas, my Lord! if this be the condition of a Bishop, that he stands for a Cipher, and only to uphold the Wrongs of other Men, What do I in this Place Am I not bound, by my Profession, made to God in your presence, and following your words, To be gentle and merciful, for Christ's sake, to poor and needy People, and such as be destitute of help Can I be excused another day with this, That thus it was e're I came to this place, and that it is not good to be over just Or sith I am perswaded Mr. Cook's Patent is unjust and void, am I not bound to make it so And to regulate, If I may, this matter of Fees, and the rest of the Disorders of the Jurisdi∣ction, which his Majesty hath betrusted me withal Your Grace saith truly, It is a difficult thing, if not impossible, to overthrow a Patent so confirmed; and I know in Deliberations, it is one of the most important Considerations what we may hope to effect. But how can I tell, till I have tried To be discouraged e're I begin, is it not to consult with Flesh and Blood Verily I think so, and therefore must put it to the trial, and leave the success to God. If I obtain the Cause, the Profit shall be to this poor Nation; if not, I shall shew my Consent to those my Reverend Brethren that have endeavoured to redress this Enormity before me. I shall have the Testimony of mine own Conscience, to have sought to discharge my Duty to God and his People. Yea, which is the main, the Work of my Ministry, and my Service to this Nation, shall receive furtherance howsoever, rather than any hinderance thereby. And if by the continuance of such Oppressions, any thing fall out otherwise than well, I shall have acquitted my self towards his Majesty, and those that have engaged themselves for me. At last I shall have the bet∣ter Reason and juster Cause, to resign to his Majesty the Jurisdiction which I am not permitted to manage. And here I beseech your Grace to consider seriously, whether it were not happy for us to be rid of this Charge, which not being proper to our Calling, nor possibly to be executed without De∣puties, as subjects us to the ill conceit of their unjust or indiscreet carriage, and no way furthers our own Work Or if it shall be thought fit to carry this Load still, whether we ought not to procure some way to be discharged of the envy of it, and redress the abuse, with the greatest strictness we can devise For my part, I cannot bethink me of any course fitter for the pre∣sent, than to keep the Courts my self, and set some good Order in them. And to this purpose I have been at Cavan, Granard, and Longford, &c. and do intend to go to the rest, leaving with some of the Ministry there a few Rules, touching those things that are to be redressed; that if my Health do not permit me to be always present, they may know how to proceed in mine absence. I find it to be true, that Tully faith, Justitia mirifica quaedam res multitudini videtur; and certainly to our proper Work a great advantage it is, to obtain a good opinion of those we are to deal with. But besides this, there fall out occasions to speak of God and his Presence, of the Re∣ligion of a Witness, the Danger of an Oath, the Purity of Marriage, the preciousness of a good Name, repairing of Churches, and the like. Pe∣nance it self may enjoined, and Penitents reconciled, with some profit
to others besides themselves. Wherefore albeit Mr. Cook were the justest Chancellor in this Kingdom, I would think it fit for me, as things now stand, to sit in these Courts; and sith I cannot be heard in the Pulpits to preach as I may in them (albeit Innocency and Justice is also a real kind of preach∣ing) I have shewed your Grace my Intentions in this Matter. Now should I require your direction in many things, if I were present with you. But for the present it may please you to understand, that at Granard, one Mr. Neu∣gent, a Nephew as I take it to my Lord of Westmeath, delivered his Letter to Mr. Astre, which he delivered me in open Court, requiring that his Te∣nants might not be troubled for Christnings, Marriages, or Funerals, so they pay the Minister his due. This referred to a Letter of my Lord Chancel∣lor's to the like purpose, which yet was not delivered till the Court was risen. I answered generally, that none of my Lord's Tenants, or others, should be wronged. The like Motion was made at Longford by two or three of the Farralls, and one Mr. Faganah in Rosse; to whom I gave the like answer; and added, that I would be strict in requiring them to bring their Children to be baptized, and Marriages to be solemnized likewise with us, sith they ac∣knowleg these to be lawful and true; so as it was but wilfulness if any for∣bear. Here I desire your Grace to direct me; for to give way that they should not be so much as called in question, seems to further the Schism they labour to make. To lay any pecuniary Mulct upon them, as the value of a License for Marriage, 3 or 4 s. for a Christening, I know not by what Law it can be done. To excommunicate them for not appearing or obeying, they being already none of our Body, and a multitude, it is to no profit, nay rather makes the Exacerbation worse. Many things more I have to confer with your Grace about, which I hope to do coràm; as about the reedifying of Churches, or employing the Mass-houses (which now the State enquires of) about Books, Testaments, and the Common-Prayer Book; which being to be reprinted, would perhaps be in some things bettered: But specially about Men to use them, and means to maintain them, now that our English have engrossed their Livings: About the printing the Psalter, which I have caused to be diligently surveyed by Mr. James Nangle, who adviseth not to meddle with the Verse, but set forth only the Prose, which he hath begun to write out fair to the Press. Mr. Mor∣tugh King I have not heard of a long time, I hope he goeth on in the Histo∣rical Books of the Old Testament. Mr. Crian was with me about a Fortnight after I came to Kilmore, since I heard not of him. Of all these things, if by the will of God I may make a journey over to you, we shall speak at fall. As I was closing up these, this Morning, there is a Complaint brought me from Ardagh, that where in a Cause Matrimonial in the Court at Longford, a Woman had proceeded thus far, as after Contestation, the Husband was en∣joined to appear the next Court to receive a Libel; One Shane age in In∣gerney, the Popish Vicar-General of Ardagh had excommunicated her; and she was by one Hubart in Cutril, a Popish Priest, upon Sunday lass, put out of the Church, and denounced excommunicate. Herein, whether it were more sit to proceed against the Vicar and Priest, by virtue of the last Letters from the Council; or complain to them, I shall attend your Grace's advices And now for very shame, ceasing to be troublesome, I do recommend your Grace to the protection of our merciful Father, and rest, Your Graces in all Duty, Will. Kilmore and Ardaghen. Kilmore, Feb. 15. 1629.
LETTER CLIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kil∣more. Salutem in Christo Jesu. I Thank your Lordship for the great pains you have taken in writing so large a Letter unto me; and especially for putting me in mind of that comfortable place of the Apostle, which you mention in the beginning there∣of. But as for the matter of Merriment (as you call it) contained in your inclosed Recusation, I confess my Ignorance to have been such, that I un∣derstood not where the Jest lay: Yet when I shewed it to those that had better skill in the Law than my self, I saw that they did heartily laugh at it: whose Reasons I had no list to examine, but referred the scanning thereof to the Judex ad quem, to whom the cognisance of this Matter now proper∣ly belongeth. Most of the Slanders wherewith you were so much troubled, I never heard of till you now mentioned them your self; only the course which you took with the Papists, was generally cried out against: neither do I re∣member, in all my life, that any thing was done here by any of ours, at which the Professors of the Gospel did take more offence, or by which the Adversaries were more confirmed in their Superstitions and Idolatry. Whereas I could wish, that you had advised with your Brethren, before you would adventure to pull down that which they have been so long a build∣ing; so I may boldly aver, that they have abused grosly both of us, who reported unto you, that I should give out, that I found my self de∣ceived in you. What you did, I know was done out of a good intention, but I was assured that your Project would be so quickly refuted with the present Success and Egent, that there would be no need that your Friends should advise you to desist from building such Castles in the Air. Of Mr. Whiskins, Mr. Creighton, and Mr. Bexter's preaching, I heard not a word till now. Would God that all the Lord's People might prophesy, and there might be thousands of his faithful Servants that might go beyond me in doing our Master's Work: the Spirit that it in me (I trust) shall never last after such enuy. For your judging of Mr. Cook's Patent to be void, and so judicially de∣cling it, I wish you would not be too forward in standing upon that Point. To  in a judicial manner of the validity or invalidity of a Patent, in no office of the Ecclesiastical, but of the Civil Magistrate; and for the one to  the Judiciture of that which apper∣taineth to another, you know draweth near to a . Complaints I know will be made against my Court, and your Court, and every Court wherein Vice shall be punished, and that not by Delin∣quents alone, but also by their Landlords, (be they Protestants or others) who in this Country  not how their Tenants live, so they pay them their Rents. I learned of old in Aeschylus, , and if they  the like Authority, will be ready to receive such Accusations against their Brethren, every one will judg that there is less cause why they should be pitied, when they are served so themselves. The
way to help this is, not to take away the Jurisdiction from the Chancellors, and to put it into the Bishops hands alone. All Bishops are not like my Lord of Kilmore. I know a Bishop in this Land, who exerciseth the Jurisdiction himself; and I dare boldly say, that there is more Unjustice and Oppression to be found in him alone, than in all the Chancellors in the whole Kingdom put together; and though I do not justify the taking of Fees without good ground, yet I may truly say, of a great part of mine own, and of many other Bishops Diocesses, that if Men stood not more in fear of the Fees of the Court, than of standing in a white Sheet, we should have here among us another Sodom and Gomorrah. Your course of taking pains in keeping Courts your self, I will commend, so that you condemn not them that think they have reason why they should do otherwise. As for my self, mecum habito, and am not ignorant, quam sit mihi curta supellex. My Chancellor is better skilled in the Law than I am, and far better able to manage Matters of that kind; Suam quis{que} norit ar∣tem, runneth still in my mind; and how easy a matter it is for a Bishop that is ignorant in the Law, to do wrong unto others, and run himself into a Premunire; and where Wrong is done, I know Right may more easily be had against a Chancellor, than against a Bishop. If my Chancellor doth Wrong, the Star-Chamber lieth open, where I will be the Man that will cast the first Stone at him my self, as I did for the removing and cen∣suring of him whom I found at my first coming into the Diocess of Meath. And as for my late visiting of your Diocesses, your Lordship need not a whit be terrified therewith. It is not to be expected that an Arch-bishop passing through a whole Province upon a suddain, should be able to perform that which a Bishop may do by leasure, in his every years Visitation: Neither may the Arch-bishop meddle with the Reformation of any thing but what is presented; If any such Presentation were made, and reformation of the Abuse neglected, there is cause to complain of the Visitation. But as for the taking of Mony, your Lordship will find, that when you come next to visit your self, there will be great odds betwixt the Sum that ought to be paid unto you, and that which was delivered unto me; and yet if your Clergy can get but half so much for their Mony from you, as they did from me, they may say, you were the best Bishop that ever came among them. When the Clergy of the Diocess of Ardagh was betrayed into the hands of their Adversaries, (à quibius minime omnium oportuorat) and like to be so overborn, that many of them could scarce have a bit of Bread lest them to put in their Mouths; I stood then in the Gap, and opposed my self for them against the whole Country, and stayed that Plague. In the other Diocess of Kilmore, when complaint was made against the Clergy by that Knave, (whom they say your Lordship did absolve) I took him in hand, and if the Clergy had not failed in the prosecution, would have bound him fast enough, without asking any question for Conscience-ake, whether he were of our Communion or no. And whereas they held their Means, as it were, by courtesy from the State, I took the pains my self to make up the Table of all their Tithes and Duties, and at this very instant am working in England to have it firmly established unto them by his Maje∣sty's Authority. And yet the Sums of Mey which they paid me, were not so great, but that I could make a shift to spend it in defraying the Charges of the very Journey. I am a Fool, I know, in this commending (or de∣fending rather) my self, but consider who constrained me. The Writings which you sent me, I had long before from the same hand which sent them unto you; I should be glad to hear your judgment of them,
and would be glad also to go on in further answering of the remain of your Letter, but that I am quite tired; and what I have written, I fear will not be so pleasing unto you. What resteth, I partly refer to Mr. Dean's Relation, and partly to our Conference when we shall next meet, where many things may be more fitly delivered by word of mouth, than commit∣ted to a Letter. In the mean time I commend you to the Blessing of our good God, and ever rest, Your most assured loving Friend, and Brother, (notwithstanding any unkind Passages which may have slip'd from me in this Letter) Ja. Armachanus. Drogheda, Feb. 23. 1629. LETTER CXLIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud Bishop of Lon∣don, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. My very good Lord; I Thank your Grace heartily for your Letters, especially for the Preface of this your last. It is true, my Lord, God hath restor'd me, even from Death it self, for I think no Man was farther gone, and scap'd. And your Grace doth very Christian-like put me in mind, that God having renewed my Lease, I should pay him an Income of some Service to his Church; which I hope, in the strength of his Grace, I shall ever be willing, and sometime able to perform. I have not yet recovered the great Weakness into which my Sickness cast me, but, I hope, when the Spring is come for∣ward, my strength will encrease, and enable me to Service. In the mean time, my Lord, as weak as I have been, I have begun to pay my Fine; but what the Sum comes to, God knows, is very little. Your Table of the Tithes of Ulster, and the Business concerning the Impropriations, are both past; and concerning both, I leave my self to Mr. Hygat's Report. As touching the Deanery of Armagh, I am glad to hear that any place of Preferment in that Kingdom, hath so good means of subsistence without Tithes. But I must needs acquaint your Grace, that neither my Lord of Wichester that now is, nor Dr. Lindsell, did ever acquaint me with your Grace's purpose, of drawing Johannes Gerardus Vossius into those parts; had I known it in time, the Business might have been easier than now it will be. For, First, Upon an attempt made by the Lord Brook to bring Vossius into England to be a Reader in Cambridg, the States allowed him better Maintenance, and were unwilling to have him come; and himself was not very willing, in regard of his Wife, and many Children, being loth to bring them from all their Kindred and Friends into a strange place. And if he were unwilling upon these Grounds to come into England, I doubt whe∣ther he will venture to Ireland or no.
But, secondly, my Lord; since this, my Lord Duke in his life-time pro∣cured him of his Majesty, the Reversion of a Prebend in Canterbury, which is since fallen; and Vosss came over into England in the time of my Infir∣mity, and was installed, and I was glad I had the happiness to see him. After he had seen both the Universities, he return'd home again, and within these two days I received a Letter from him of the safety of his return thi∣ther. The Church of Canterbury, notwithstanding his absence, ow him an hundred pounds a Year, as they formerly did to Mr. Casauba▪ Now, I think, the Prebend of Canterbury (would he have been Priest, and re∣sided upon it) would have been as much to him as the Deanery of Armagh. But howsoever, (my Lord) the King having given him that Preferment al∣ready, will hardly be brought to give him another, especially considering what I could write unto you, were it fit. Nevertheless, out of my lov to the Work you mention, if you can prevail with Vossius to be willing, and that it may appear the Deanery of Armagh will be of sufficient Means for him and his numerous Family, if your Grace then certify me of it, I will venture to speak, and do such Offices as shall be fit. And now, my Lord, for your own Business, Mr. Archibald Hamilton, who it seems, by your Grace's Letters, is your Agent here, hath not as yet been with me; but whensoever he shall come, he shall be very welcome; and I hope your Grace knows, I will be very ready to do that Church and you the best Service I can. As I had written thus far, Mr. Hamilton came to me; so that now I shall inform my self, as well as I can, of your Lord∣ship's Business, which he tells me is perpled by some to whom it was for∣merly refer'd. His Majesty is now going to New-Market, so that t his re∣turn, little or nothing can be done; but so soon as he comes back, I will not be wanting to that part which shall be laid upon me. I formerly writ to your Grace about divers Businesses, and I have re∣ceived your Answer to the most of them, only to one particular you have answered nothing, which makes me think that Letter scarce came safe to your hands: It is about the Bishoprick of Kilfanora, which is so poor in it self, that no Man asks it of the King; and his Majesty is graciously pleased that your Lordship would think of some good Parsonage, or Vicarig, or Donative, that might for ever be annex'd unto it. And though nothing be now perchance actually void to fit this Purpose, yet I conceive the An∣nexation may be presently made, though the Profit arising from the thing, come not to the Bishop till it become void. I pray your Grace take as much care of this as possibly you can, and let me hear from you what may be done. This Letter, my Lord, is a great deal too long; but so many Occasions would not suffer it to be shorter. I wish you all Health, and so leave you to the Grace of God, ever resting, Your Grace's loving poor Friend, and Brother, Guil. London. Lod. House, Feb. 23. 1629.
LETTER CLV. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kil∣more, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. Most Reverend Father, my Honourable good Lord; THe Superscription of your Grace's Letters was most welcome unto me, as bringing under your own Hand, the best evidence of the recovery of your Health; for which I did, and do give hearty thanks unto God. For the Contents of them, as your Grace conceived, they were not so plea∣sant; but the Wounds of a Friend are faithful, saith the Wise Man: Sure, they are no less painful than any other. Unkindness cuts nearer to the Heart than Malice can do. I have some experience by your Grace's said Letters: Concerning which I have been at some debate with my self, whether I should answer them with David's Demand; What have I now done Or as the Wrongs of Parents, with Patience and Silence. But Mr. Dean telling me, that this day he is going towards you, I will speak once, come of it what will. You writ, That the course I took with the Papists was generally cried out against; neither do you remember, in all your Life, that any thing was done here by any of us, at which the Professors of the Gospel did take more offence, or by which the Adversaries were more confirmed in their Superstitions and Idolatry. Wherein you could wish, that I had ad∣vised with my Brethren, before I would adventure to pull down that which they have been so long a building. Again, what I did, you know was done out of a good intention; but you were assured that my Project would be so quickly refuted, with the present Success and Event, that there would be no need my Friends should advise me from building such Castles in the Air, &c. My Lord, all this is a Riddle to me. What course I have taken with the Papists; What I have done, at which the Professors of the Gospel did take such offence, or the Adversaries were so confirmed: What it is that I have adventured to do, or what Piece so long a building, I have pulled down: what those Projects were, and those Castles in the Air so quickly refuted with present success, as the Lord knows I know not. For truly, since I came to this place, I have not changed one jot of my Purpose, or Practice, or Course with Papists, from that which I held in England, or in Trinity-Colledg, or found (I thank God) any ill Success, but the Slanders only of some Persons discontented against me for other Occasions: Against which I cannot hope to justify my self, if your Grace will give ear to private Infor∣mations. But let me know, I will not say my Accuser, (let him continue mask'd till God discover him) but my Transgression, and have place of De∣fence; and if mine Adversary write a Book against me, I will hope to bear it on my Shoulder, and bind it to me as a Crown. For my recusation of your Court, and advertisement what I heard there∣of; I see they have stirred, not only Laughter, but some Coals too. Your Chancellor desires me to acquit him to you, that he is none of those Officers I meant: I do it very willingly; for I never meant him, nor any Man else; but thought it concerned your Grace to know what I credibly heard to be spoken concerning your Court. Neither, as God knows, did I ever think it was fit to take away the Jurisdiction from Chancellors, and put it into
the Bishops Hands alone; or so much as in a Dream condemn those that think they have reason to do otherwise nor tax your Grace's Visitation; nor imagine you would account that to pertain to your Reproof, and take it as a Wrong from me, which out of my Duty to God and you, I thought was not to be concealed from you. I beseech you pardon me this one Er∣ror, Si unquam posthac. For that Knave whom (as your Grace writes) they say I did absolve; I took him for one of my Flock, or rather Christ's, for whom he shed his Blood. And I would have absolved Julian the Aposta∣ta under the same form. Some other Passages there be in your Grace's Letters, which I—But I will lay mine Hand upon mine Mouth. And craving the blessing of your Prayers, ever remain, Your Grace's poor Brother, and humble Servant, Will. Kilmore and Ardaghen. Kilmore, March 29. 1630. LETTER CLVI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Lords Justices. My most Honoured Lords; I Received a Letter from your Lordships, (without any Date) wherein I am required to declare what Motives I can alleadg for the stopping of Sir John Bathe's Patent. Whereunto I answer.; That I cannot, nor need not, produce any other reason, than that which I have done; and for the maintenance of the suffi∣ciency whereof, I will adventure all I am worth, namely, that for the Particular now in question, Sir John Bathe's Letter hath been gotten from his Majesty by meer surreption, and therefore no Patent ought to be passed thereupon. For although I easily grant, that my Lord Treasurer, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, might certify unto his Majesty, that there was no other thing left to be passed here but Impropriations, (though Sir John Bathe, I think, hath found already somewhat else to be passed in his Book, and may do more if he will not be so hasty, but take time to enquire): Yet how doth it appear that either of these two noble Gentlemen did as much as know that his Majesty had taken a former Order for the settlement of these things upon the Church To which Resolution had they been pri∣vy, I do so presume of their Nobleness and care of the Publick Good, that the remittal of a Matter of two thousand pounds, would not induce them to divert his Majesty from making good that precious Donation, which (by the Example of his Father of never-dying memory) he had solemnly de∣voted to God and his Church: such an eximious Act of Piety, as is not to be countervalued with two, or twenty thousand pounds of any earthly Treasure. But whatsoever they knew, or knew not of his Majesty's own pious Resolution, and constant Purpose, never to revoke that which he hath once given unto God; I rest so confident, as I dare pawn my Life upon it, that when he did sign those Letters of Sir John Bathe's, he had not the least
intimation given unto him, that this did any way cross that former Gift which he made unto the Church, upon so great and mature deliberation, as being grounded upon the Advice, first, of the Commissioners sent into Ire∣land; then, of the Lords of the Council upon their report in England; thirdly, of King James, that ever blessed Father of the Church; and lastly, of the Commissioners for Irish Affairs, unto whom for the last debating and conclusion of this business, I was by his now Majesty, referr'd my self at my being in England. I know Sir John and his Counsel do take notice of all those Reasons that may seem to make any way for themselves. But your Lordships may do well to consider, that such Letters as these have come before now, wherein Recto∣ries have been expresly named, and those general Non obstantes also put, which are usual in this kind: and yet notwithstanding all this, his Majesty intimateth unto you in his last Letters, that he will take a time to examine those Proceedings, and punish those that then had so little regard to the par∣ticular and direct expression of his Royal Pleasure for the disposing of the Impropriations to the general benefit of the Church: Which whether it carrieth not with it a powerful Non obstante to that surreptious Grant now in question: I hold it more safe for your Lordships to take Advice a∣mong your selves, than from any other bodies Counsel, who think it their Duty to speak any thing for their Clients Fee. As for the want of Attestation, wherewith the credit of the Copy of a Letter transmitted unto you is laboured to be impaired: If the Testimony of my Lord of London, who procured it, and the Bishop Elect of Kil∣fennora, who is the bringer of it, and of a Dean and an Arch-Deacon now in Ireland, who themselves saw it, will not suffice; it will not be many days (in all likelihood) before the Original it self shall be presented to your Lordships. In the mean time, I desire (and more than desire, if I may presume to go so far) that your Lordships will stay your hands from passing Sir John Bathe's Patent, until my Lord of London himself shall signifie his Majesties further Pleasure unto you in this Particular. And it my Zeal hath carried me any way further than Duty would require, I beseech your Lordships to consider, that I deal in a Cause that highly concerneth the good of the Church, unto which I profess I owe my whole self; and there∣fore craving Pardon for this my Boldness, I humbly take leave, and rest, still to continue Your Lordships in all dutiful Observance, J. A. Droghedah, April the 3d, 1630. Instructions given to Mr. Dean Lesly, April 5. 1630. for the stopping of Sir John Bathe's Patent. 1. YOU are to inform your self whether Sir John Bathe's Patent be already sealed; and if it be, whether it were done before Satur∣day (which was the day wherein I received and answered the Lords Justices Letters touching this business; and at which time they signified the Patent was as yet unpast) and use all speedy means, that the Patent may not be
delivered into Sir John Bathes hands before you be heard to speak what you can against it, and if that also be done, I authorize you to signifie unto the Lords Justices, that I must and will complain against them to his Sacred Majesty. 2. You are to go unto Sir James Ware the younger from me, and enquire Sir James Ware the youn∣ger made no Cer∣tificate, but up∣on conference with Sir Fran∣cis Cotting∣ham, Sir James told him that there was but little left in lease to the value, but Impropriations. of him whether he gave any Certificate unto my Lord Treasurer, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that the King had not of Temporal Lands the annual Rent of 300 l. to grant in reversion; but that of necessity must be supplied with the Grant of the reversion of Tithes impropriate. And withal, learn of him, to what value the Temporal Rents, not yet passed in reversion, do arise; and what proportion thereof Sir John Bathe is now a passing in his Book. 3. Whereas the Lords Justices in their Letter do signifie unto  that such a Certificate had been made unto his Majesty by the Lord Trea∣surer, and Chancellor of the Exchequer; you may certifie them that Sir John Bathe sent unto me a Certificate under their hands, to view; wherein they do inform his Majesty, that in their Judgments the granting of  l. Rent in Reversion, will countervail the Sum which Sir John was to remit; but that there was no other thing let to be passed but Impropriations, (which is the main thing that concerns this business); that, to my remembrance, they meddle not with at all; and Sir John Bathe by the Temporal Lands that now he is passing in his Book, doth prove it to be otherwise. 4. Take a view of Sir John Bathe's Letter, and consider (with your Counsel) first, whether there be any general Non obstante in it against all precedent Instructions and Directions (of which I much doubt.) And, se∣condly, Whether any such general Non obstante have power to cross the par∣ticular As is alledged in the Lords Justices Letter. Letter (which in y apprehension is more then an Instruction at large) which I brought over from his Majesty, that now is, for the disposing of the Impropriations otherwise. 5. Let Sir John Bathe be demanded upon his Conscience, whether he did so much as know that I had obtained any such Letter from his Majesty when he procured his If he did; why did he not (to take away all suspi∣cion of surreption) cause a special Non obstante to be inserted against it as well as he hath done against another particular Instruction, mentioned in the end of his Letter If he did not (as his Kinsman, who brought me the Lords Justices Letters assured me he did not,) how in any common intend∣ment can it be presumed that the Particularities of my former Letter were  into due consideration, and revoked by his Majesty If it be alledged, that his Letter coming after mine, is of it self a sufficient Revocation thereof: I alledg in like manner, that this last Letter of mine coming after his, is of it self a sufficient Revocation of his; and so much the more by far, because his was obtained upon my direct Complaint against Sir John Bathe's Letter, as surreptitiously procured (which I take to be a Non-obstante sufficient enough against him, whatsoever it be against any other:) whereas in the pro∣curing of Sir John Bathe's, there was no notice at all taken of my parti∣cular Letter. 6. You are to  the In∣structions which they received with the Sword they are  make stay of the passing of any Grant, for which the King's Letters are brought unto them, where they have cause to doubt, whether his Majesty were fully informed or no concerning the  or inconveniency of that Parti∣cular. Wherein, if my Lord of London's Letter be not of authority suffici∣ent otherwise to make a legal Attestation of his Majesties Royal Intendent: ye I suppo,  will  so much weight with it, as to  the  little which longer (as they have done , when they had nothing so strong a ) until his Majesty being fully informed upon both
sides, shall signifie his express Pleasure unto them in this particular. And in doing otherwise, they may justly conceive, that it will be charged upon them for a neglect in performance of his Majesties Pleasure. LETTER CLVII. A Letter from the Right Reverend George Downham Bishop of London-Derry, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, MY very good Lord. The Book and Papers which you were pleased to send to me, I have now returned with Thanks. Of which I made this use so soon as I had received them, that I gave Directions to Mr. Price to insert those Additions unto the 13th Chapter of Perseverance, and § 3. both in the beginning, whereof I spake of Adulti, (of whom properly this Con∣troversy is understood.) And in the end thereof, where I speak of In∣fants, touching whom, I say first, That this Controversy is not understood of those, who neither are endued with Habit of Grace, nor are able to produce the Acts thereof, as not having the use of Reason. And therefore being neither justified by Faith, nor sanctified by the Habits of Grace, cannot be said to fall from them. Thus I thought good to rid my self of that Question, rather then to pro∣fess a difference from them, who, notwithstanding that Objection taken from Baptism, agree with me in the Doctrine of Perseverance; yet I must profess to your Grace, that I do not subscribe to their Opinion, who ex∣tend the benefit of Baptism beyond either the Purpose, or Covenant of Grace. But hereof more when it shall please God to give us a meeting. In the mean time, and always, I commend your Grace to the gracious Pro∣tection of the Almighty; In whom I ever rest Your Grace's in all Duty, Georg. Derens. Fawne, April 24. 1630. LETTER CLVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo Jesu. Most Reverend, I Was right glad to receive, by your Graces own Letters, the report of your late, almost desperate Sickness; they being therein the Messengers of your present Health. Wherein I and others are to acknowledg the Merc
of God unto us, who hath preserved you to be still a most emnen nstru∣ment of his Glory, and Comfort of his Church. I do also condole with your Lordship the loss of those rare Lights of Learning mentioned in your Letter; but yet enjoying also with you the hopes of their Blessedness Your Grace inquires after Christ his Mass, a Fruit which will not be in sea∣son before Michaelmas. I have an eager longing to be made partaker Histo∣icae Controversiae Predestinatianae, together with your new Edition of alter∣ing the Jesuits Challenge. I had the sight of your Adversaries Book, but obiter; at what time I alight on a palpable Falsification of his; but ea est in∣felicitas Memoriae, that I have forgot it; else, according to my Duty, I should have acquainted your Grace with it. Good, my Lord, that which our outward Man denieth, let our inward continually seek to embrace and enjoy, our mutual presence by brotherly Affection, and holy Prayer unto God, that we may be that which we profess, Filii Gratiae, & Charitate Fratres. Our Lord Jesus preserve us to the Glory of his saving Grace. Your Grace's in respectful Acknowledgment, Tho. Covent. & Litchfield. Eccleshall-Castle, May 21, 1630. LETTER CLIX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to Dr. Ward. Salutem à salutis fonte D. N. Jesu Christo. YOur Letter of the 24th of November, lay by the way almost a quarter of a Year before it came into my hands, but was the most welcome when it came of any that I did receive from you, as bringing with it the joyful news of your Life, together with your godly Caveat of putting us in mind of our subjection to the Law of Mortality, which Instructin God did shortly after really seal unto me by his Fatherly Chastisement, whereby he brought me even to the Pits brink, and when I had received in my self the Sentence of Death, was graciously pleased to renew the Lease of my Life again; that I might learn not to trust in my self, but in him which raised the Dead; our Comfort is, that Life as well as Death, and Death as well as Life are equally ours; For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whe∣ther 2 Cor. 1. 9. 1 Cor. 3. 22. Rom. 14. 8. we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords. I heartily thank you for your large Relation of the state of your Diffe∣rences there: Let me intreat you to take present care that a fair Copy be taken as well of your Lectures touching Grace and Free-will, as of your others touching the Eucharit, which I much desire you should finish; that it may not be said of you, as it hath been noted of Dr. Whitaer, , and Chamier, That God took them all away in the midst of their handling of that Argument, making an end of them before they made in end of that Controversie: It is great pity your Lectures should be hazarded i  exemplari; two at least I would have, and preserved in two divers places,
lest that befal to them which happened to Dr. Raynold's Answer to Sanders touching the King's Supremacy, (a Copy whereof I have by God's good Providence recovered) and his writing of Christ's Descent into Hell (which I fear is utterly abolished). Mr. Vssius having some notice that I intended to publish Marianus Scotus, (the printed Fragment of his Chronicle being scarce worthy to be accoun∣ted his) sent me word that he likewise had a like intention to print the same out of a Manuscript Copy, which he received from Andr. Scotus; and de∣sired that either I would receive his Notes for the setting forward of that Edition, or else send unto him what I had in that kind. I purpose to send unto him my Transcript, both of Marianus himself, and of his Abbridger, Robertus Lotharingus Bishop of Hereford; as also the History of Gotteschal∣cus, and the Predestination-Controversy moved by him, which I am now a making up; whereunto I insert two Confessions of Gotteschalcus himself, never yet printed, which I had from Jacobus Sirmondus. I touch there also that Commentitious Heresy of the Predestinatians, which was but a Nick∣name that the Semi-Pelagians put upon the Followers of St. Augustine, who is made the Author thereof, in the Chronicle of Tiro Prosper; whose words in the Manuscript are, Praedestinatorum Haeresis, quae ab Augustino accepisse di∣citur initium; not as in the printed Books, Ab Augustini libris male intellectis; for which I desire you should look your Manuscript Prosper, which is joined with Eusebius his Chronicle in Bennet-Colledg Library. I could wish also that when you came thither, you would transcribe for me Gulielmus Mal∣mesburiensis his short Preface before his Abbreviation of Amalarius (which is there in Vol. 167.); and Scotus de Perfectione Statuum (which is there in Vol. 391.) cum Tragedi Seneca, if it be but a short Discourse. I have written a large Censure of the Epistle of Ignatius, which I forbear to publish, before I have received a Transcript of the Latin Ignatius, which you have in Caius Colledg, (Vol. 152. of Dr. James Catalogue); if I could certainly have learned that Mr. Th. Whaley had been in Cambridg, I should have written to him for procuring it unto me; but if he fail, I must make you my last refuge; whatever Charges be requisite for the transcription, Mr. Burnet will see defayed. You have done me a great pleasure, in communicating unto me, my Lord of Salisbury's and your own Determination, touching the Efficacy of Bap∣tism in Infants; for it is an obscure point, and such as I desire to be taught in by such as you are, rather than deliver mine own Opinion thereof. My Lord of Derry hath a Book ready for the Press, wherein, he handleth at full the Controversy of Perseverance, and the Certainty of Salvation: He there determineth that Point of the Efficacy of Baptism, far otherwise than you do, accommodating himself to the Opinion more vulgarly received a∣mong us; to which he applieth sundry Sentences out of St. Augustine; and among others, that, De Baptism; Sacramenta in solis electi hoc verè effici∣nt, qud figurant. I have finished the History of Gotteschalcus, and the Predestination Con∣troversy, stirred up in his Time; whereunto you have given a good fur∣therance in your learned Observations sent unto me, touching the original of the Nick-name of the Predestinatiani, imposed by the Semi-Pelgians upon the Followers of St. Augustine. I have had out of Corbey Abbey in France, two Consessions written by Gotteschalcus himself, which as yet have not been printed. If we could but obtain Rthrans his Treatise of the some Argument, written unto the Eperor Charles the same time. I doubt not but it would give us as great contentment as his other Work doth, De    , for he held constantly St. Augustine's Doctrine a∣gainst the Semi-Pelagians.
I have now in hand, Institutionum Chronologicarum, Lib. 3. wherein I labour, by clearness of method, and the easy manner of handling, to make that perplexed Study familia to the Capacity of the meanest Understand∣ing. Therein I handle only , making up, as it were, the Body of an Act. After which I intend (if God spare my Life and Health) to fall up∣on the  in the Sacred Chronology, and there to handle all the Contro∣versies of that kind; which may bring Light to the Sacred History, and the Connexion of it with the Exotical. I have review'd also my Answer to the Jesuit's Challenge, and enlarged it with many Additions, which by this time I suppose are newly printed n London. Forget not in your Prayers, Ja. Armachant. Your most assured Friend and Brother, Drogheda, Dec. 10. 1630. LETTER CLX. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord; I Received your Lordship's Letter, sent by Mr. Stubbin; by which I un∣derstood of your Lordship's late Recovery, even from the Jaws of Death; but more fully by Mr. Stubbin himself, who related unto me the great hazard you Lordship was in, by so excessive bleeding so many days together, as is almost ineredible. So that as it is said of Abraham, that he received his Son Heb. 11. 9. from the Dead, ; so we all, even God's Church, have received your Lordship in like manner, à aucibus Oxci: Praise be to the Lord of Life, who killeth and reviveth again; who bringeth down to Hell, and bringeth back again: To him be given all Glory for ever. Amen. Amen. Since the receipt of your Lordship's Letters, there hath hapned the most doleful dissolving of our University, and the most suddain dispersion of our Students that ever I knew, occasioned by the Infection brought hither by a Souldier or two, dismissed not long since from the King of Sweden's Army, in February last. So as, whereas this time was our chief time of the Year for Acts and Disputations, now our School-gates are shut up, and our Colledges left desolate and empty almost. There have died of this Infection, from the last of February, till the 24th of April, 24 Persons; and since then till May 15, 30 more, and 7 more. The Magistrates are careful. But the Charge groweth great, both in maintaining the Infected, and the Poor a∣mongst 61 in all▪ us, which want both Means and Work. I pray God we may be sensible of our Sins, and his heavy Hand, and may by serious Repentance meet him, that so he may forgive our Sins, and heal our Town and Land. I received in your Lordship's Letter, the Copy of Sir John Breerton's Will inclosed, signed with your Grace's Hand: For which, in the Name of our whole Society, I humbly thank your Lordship. It seemeth the Inven∣tory
is not yet put in. I received also by Mr. Stubbin, a Letter from Mr. Ran∣dal-Breerton, sole Executor to Sir John his Brother; who at his coming into England from you, promiseth me to acquaint the Colledg with the particula∣rity of his Brothers Bequest. I have heard Mr. Randal very well reported of; and I hope verily he will faithfully discharge the Trust reposed in him by his deceased Brother. I will still intreat your Lordship, when the Inven∣tory is exhibited, for a Copy to be sent us. If my leasure permit, I will hearken (God willing) to your Lordship's Motion, of revising my Lectures of Grace and Free-will. In my proceed∣ings in my Readings, I acquainted your Lordship formerly, with some op∣position I had from some in our University, under pretence of violating his Majesty's Declaration; which, I say, I do not. And so as yet I have con∣tinued in reading on that Argument, though not in naming the Authors [Remonstrants] whom I impugn. If God give opportunity, and health, I will do the like in my Readings upon the Eucharist. My Lord of Sarum hath transcribed his Readings, de Praedest. & Repro∣batione, & morte Christi. I am instant with him to transcribe other Read∣ings of his. I suppose your Lordship hath heard of my Lord of Sarum, how he was questioned for his Sermon before his Majesty, in the beginning of Lent last; the Particulars whereof you shall more fully understand by the enclosed parcel of a Letter he wrote to me. I am right sorry, the delivery of the established Doctrine of our Church should thus be questioned. I have vindicated my Reasons. I sent one in our University touching the 17th Article, from such Answers as he had returned me; As also sundry Te∣stimonies of St. Augustine, from the like opposition; which I sent the same Party, tending to shew, that according to St. Augustine, the Non-Elect ne∣ver come to be justified by a true and lively Faith, nor ever are by that Bond mystically united to Christ as their Head, nor ever attain unto true Repentance, &c. It is worthily done of your Lordship, to set forth Marianus Scotus emen∣datê, and his Abridger; who as it seemeth, abridged his Work in Marianus's life-time; for Marianus died but a little before Rob. Lotharingus. As touching the History of Gotteschalcus, I wish it may be cleared out of the Ancient Monuments. It seemeth your Lordship hath taken pains there∣in. It may occasion Mr. Vossius to revise his Story touching him. I make no doubt but that the Semi-Pelagians & Massilienses, were the first insertors of the Pradestinatiani into the Catalogue of Hereticks: And it may seem that Arno∣bius jun who writ upon the Psalms, was one of the first, that imposed the Name of Heresy upon the Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation, as it was deli∣vered by St. Augustine, vid. in Psal. 108. And was the first that stiled the Biblioth. Sanct. lib. 4. in Arnob. holding of St. Austin's Doctrine, Praedestinatus, in Psal. 146. For I conceive he was in time before Tyro Prosper, Faustus, or Gennadius. For the conjecture of S. Senenses seemeth to me probable, that this Arnobius lived in St. Austin's Time, for that his Commentary upon the Psalms, is ascribed to two African Bishops, Laurentio & Rustico Episcopis. Now S. Senensis saith, he findeth in a Council of Carthage, in which St. Austin was present, there were also pre∣sent Laurentius Icositanus, and Rusticus. Though I find not this in any one Council of Carthage, yet I easily believe it was so, for I find that Rusticus an African Bishop, was one of them Bishops, which in a Synodical Epistle to Innocentius 1. condemned Pelagins and Caelestius; the Epistle is the 90th Epistle amongst St. Austin's Epistles; where two of that Name [Rusticus] are mentioned; this Epistle was written Anno 416. Now shortly after, viz. Anno 419, in that Council of Carthage, wherein the Book of Canons, which is Codex Africanus, was confirmed, there were present 217 Bishops, as the Code saith, of which only 24 are named; in which number are St. Austin
and Laurentius Jositanus: And it is very credible, that Rusticus living a lit∣tle before, was among the 193 the rest which were not named. Again it is observed, both by Erasmus in his Preface prefixed before Arnobius, and by S. Senensis also, That in these Commentaries are found, sundry unusual Latin words, which in St. Austin's Time were very usual amongst the Africans; which though Laurentius de la Barre doth hold to be no sufficient Reason, yet it carrieth with it no little probability. Tyro Prosp. may seem to be the next, who (as it seemeth) was not that Prosp. Aquitanus, who was Episcopus Rhegiensis in Italy, though they both continued St. Hierome, ad eadem usque tempora. According to your Lord∣ship's Directions, I looked into the Prosper which is in Bennet-Colledg Libra∣ry, and I find, Ad Arcadii & Honorii, An. xxiv. thus, Praedestinatorum hae∣resis quae ab Augustino accepisse initium dicitur, hiis temporibus serpere exorsa; just as it is in the Manuscript which is in his Majesty's Library at St. James's (as I remember your Lordship told me). The four Divines of Leyden, in the Censure of the Remonstrants Confession, relate the words of Tyro Prosp. thus; Praedestinatorum Haeresis, quae ex Augustini libris malè intellectis accepisse dicitur initium, hiis temporibus serpere exorsa, sine specie tamen erroris, pag. 97. The last words are not in my Tyro Prosp. which is amongst the Works of P. Pithaeus, nor in the Manuscript of Bennet-Colledg. After these Faustus and Gennadius continued this Nick-name; the latter expresly, in the continuation of the Index Haeresium Hieronymi, where he perstringeth a Sentence of Augustine contra Julianum, lib. 5. c. 3. as I con∣ceive. Now howsoever Sigebert relateth the Opinion of the Predestinati, as having grown out of the misunderstanding of St. Augustine, and not as any just sequel of St. Austin's Doctrine. Yet it may seem that both the Mas∣silienses, and some Africans in St. Augustine's Time, did conceive the Opini∣on, as is related by Sigebert, to be a just Sequel of St. Austin's Doctrine, as it may appear by Prosp. in Epistola ad Augustinum. Haec sententia & lapsis cu∣ram resurgendi adimit, es sanctis occasionem teporis, eo quo in utram{que} partem superfluus labor sit, si neque rejectus illa industria possit intrare, ne{que} electus ulla negligentia possit excidere, &c. Et Hilarius in Epistola ad Augustin. Nam si sic praedestinati sunt (inquiunt) in utram{que} partem & de aliis ad alios nullus possit accedere, quo pertinet tanta extrinsecus correctionis instantia And the like Inferences doth Faustus make in his two Books, even as do the Remon∣strants, their Successors, at this day, though most falsly, these Predesinitions not prejudging Liberty. I send you here inclosed also Gulielmus Malmesburiensis his short Preface before his Abbreviation of Amularius. As for Scotus de perfectione Statuum, it is 16 Folio and 1 Page. The Argument, or Conclusion, which he goeth Rather Fol. 6. pag. 1. about to demonstrate, is this, Quod status Praelatorum & Pastorum Ecclesiae praesupponit statum alium perfectiorem quam sit omnis status Praelationis Pa∣storalis. If your Lordship desire a Copy, I will see, when God shall bring together our dispersed Students, if I can get a sit Amanuensis. As for Dr. Walsall's Manuscript of Rathrammus, I know where it is. I think it were not amiss to print both those Treatises of Rathram's, with that De Corpore & Sanguine Domini, which is already extant. If I do not print them, your Lordship shall have a Copy. As for the Latin Copy of Ignatius's Epistles, in Caius-Colledg Library, I was in good hope it had been the same with an old printed Translation which I have; but comparing them together, I find them differ much. I acquainted Mr. Thomas Whalley, now Dr. Whalley, with that you wrote in your Letter. He seemed to me not unwilling to undertake; but now in this contagious time he is gone into the Country. I spoke also with Mr. Foster of Emanuel Colledg, who it seemeth hath taken some pains already in it, but then he was to go into the Country. I am informed by some Fellows in
that Colledg, that being shortly to depart from the Colledg, by his time there allotted, finding in himself some impediment in his utterance, he could wish to be imployed by your Lordship in such-like Business. He is a good Scholar, and an honest Man. The worst is, the Book cannot be lent out of the Colledg. I will see (by God's Grace) at the return of our Students, what can be done if God send life. As touching those Papers which I sent, touching the Efficacy of Baptism in Infants; I do acknowledg it a Point in which the Scriptures are sparing. The occasion of my Determination, was (as I think I signified in my for∣mer Letters) for that the Question was given with a purpose to impugn the Doctrine of Perseverance, as they conceived, by an undeniable Argument. I was very loth the Question should be brought upon the Commencement-Stage, and therefore signified to the then Vice-Chancellor, that it would intrench upon the Question of Perseverance, which is one of those Questions (I said) his Majesty would not have discussed, which he signifieth by his Declaration. Yet he replied, the Affirmative Part of the Question was the authorized Doctrine of our Church, as appeared in the Rubrick, of defer∣ring Confirmation: And the Answerer was importunate to have that Que∣stion; and so accordingly it was over-ruled by the major part of the Do∣ctors. I had heretofore thought upon the Point somewhat. And my Lord of Sarum, and my self, at Dort, had speech of it, when we signified in our Judgment, That the Case of Infants was not appertaining to the Question of Perseverance. I considered also, that howsoever the Scripture sparingly speak of the Effect of Baptism in Infants, yet there are general Grounds, from the Nature of Sacraments, which may serve to inform and direct our Judgments herein. Again, I considered the perpetual Tradition of the Church is no way to be slighted, where it doth not cross the Scripture, but is consonant to general Grounds contained in them. My Lord of Derry is a worthy Man, and whom I do much reverence; yet I would wish his Lordship to be well advised. I doubt not but the Doctrine of Perseverance may sufficiently be cleared, though we grant that all Infants baptized, be free from Original Guilt. The Speech in Lombard alleadged, as out of St. Augustine, Sacramenta in solis electis effi∣ciunt quod figurant, is no where to be found in St. Augustine. And if it were, yet it is to be understood as Lombard doth gloss it, otherwise Augu∣stine should contradict himself, as is evident by the Testimonies he there pro∣duceth out of Austin; and many more which might be brought for Remis∣sion of Original Sin in all baptized Infants, out of him. I know most of our Divines do make the principal End and Effect of all Sacraments to be Obsignation, and all Sacraments to be meerly Obsignatory Signs; and con∣sequently that Ablution of Infants from Original Sin, is only conditional and expectative, of which they have no benefit, till they believe and re∣pent; I cannot easily assent hereunto. For so, 1. Infants Baptized, dying in infancy, have no benefit by Bap∣tism. And all Non-Elect Infants have no benefit at all, so that to both of these they are nuda & inefficacia signa. And, 2. what necessity of baptizing of Infants, if it produce no effect till Years of Discretion 3. Though our Divines do most-what run upon Obsignation, yet often they do expresly hold, that Sacraments do offer and exhibit that Grace which they signify, and as I conceive must needs offer and exhibit the Grace which they signify, before they Assure and Confirm. For God doth offer and exhibit Grace promised in the Sacrament, then we exercise our Faith in relying upon God, promising, offering, and exhibiting on his part; and so according to the Tenure of the Covenant, receive the Grace
promised, and then Sacraments in the second place do assure us of the Grace received. And thus much is signified in the definition of a Sacra∣ment in our short Catechism, as I conceive, when it is said, It is an outward visible Sign, of an inward Spiritual Grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a Means whereby we receive the same, and a Pledg to assure us thereof. So that first it is a Means whereby God doth offer and exhibit on his part the Grace it signifieth; which we receiving by Faith, it then also be∣cometh a Pledg, to assure us of the receipt thereof. So the Eucharist doth first offer and exhibit, Augmentum gratiae & auctiorem, auctiorem & perfe∣ctiorem communionem cum Christi corpore & sanguine, & participationem in beneficiis inde fluentibus; and then it is a Pledg to assure us thereof. And so Ursinus truly saith, Baptismus & coena Domini sunt Sacramenta,—quia sunt opus Dei, qui aliquid in iis, nobis dat, & se dare testatur; and he hath many Speeches to this purpose. So Calvin, Institut. Lib. 4. c. 17. §. 10, 11. and in 1 Cor. 11. 24.. So that instrumen∣tal conveyance of the Grace signified, to the due Receiver, is as true an Effect or End of a Sacrament, when it is duly administred, as Obsignation, and is praeexisting in order of Nature to Obsignation: for Obsignation must be of that, quod prius datur & exhibetur, as Mr. Beza often saith. Mr. Hooker in mine Opinion, doth truly explicate the Nature of Sacraments, Lib. 5. Sect. 57, 59, 60, 64, & 67. Nay, it may seem, that Obsignation is not so essential as exhibitio rei signatae, for the latter may be without the former, as in the Baptism of Infants, where no preparation, ex parte suscipientis, but only Capacity and Not-resistance is sufficient, ad rem signatam recipiendam. All these I submit to your Lordship's Judgment, and will not be contenti∣ous, if any can bring that which is more demonstrative out of Scriptures, Mr. Hooker saith as we say, touching the efficacy of Baptism in Infants, and yet holdeth the Doctrine de perseverantia fidelium, as well as we do. Thus fearing too much Prolixity may argue me to be unmannerly, I hold my hand— I know not how my Lord of Kilmore doth sort with the Irish. I per∣swade my self he hath godly and pious Intentions: He is discreet and wise, industrious and diligent, and of great sufficiency many ways. I do per∣swade my self, the more your Lordship doth know him, the more your Lordship will love him: And this I dare say, he truly honoureth and sincerely loveth your Lordship. And thus with my affectionate and earnest Prayers to the God of Heaven, for the continuance of your Lordship, and him, and my Reverend good Lord of Derry, for the good of his Church; and to multiply his Graces upon you, and to give you all, Health here, and Happiness hereafter: With tender of my best Service to your Lordship, I commend you to the most gracious protection of the highest Majesty. Your Grace's in all observance for ever, Samuel Ward. Sidn. Coll. May 25. 1630. The Arminians (as Dr. Meddus writeth to Dr. Chadderton) are very factions in Am∣sterdam, and demand justice for Barnevelt's death. I fear me they will much disturb that State. God keep us also.
LETTER CLXI. Part of a Letter of the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore, to Dr. Ward Master of Sidney-Colledg, Cambridg, Anno 1630, out of Bishop Bedell's Papers. A Passage in my former Letters to Mr. Doctor Ward. I Thank you for the two Treatises, that of my Lord of Salisbury, and your own, which you were pleased to communicate to me. Concerning which, to give you mine opinion shortly, for the present. This I do yield to my Lord of Sarum most willingly, that the Justification, Sanctification, and A∣doption which Children have in Baptism, is not univocè, the same with that which adulti have. And this I likewise do yeild to you, that it is vera solutio reatus, & veracitèr, & in rei veritate performed, and all the like emphatical forms, &c. But all these sacramentalitèr, and that is obsiguativè ex formulâ & conditione foederis. Where you make Circumcision and Baptism to be the remedy of Original Sin. I think it be too specially said, which is true of all Sin. And so much the Text Acts 2. 38. with the rest do shew. I do think also that Reprobates coming to Years of Discretion, after Baptism, shall be condemned for Original Sin. For their Absolution and washing in Baptism was but conditional and expectative, which doth truly interest them in all the Promises of God, but under the condition of repenting, believing, and obey∣ing, which they never perform, and therefore never attain the Promise. Consider well what you will say of Women before Christ, which had no Cir∣cumcision, and of all Mankind before Circumcision was instituted; and you will perceive, I think, the nature of Sacraments to be not as Medicines, but as Seals, to confirm the Covenant, not to confer the Promise immediately. These things I write now in exceeding post-haste, in respect that this Bearer goes away so presently. I only give sapienti occasionem. I think the empha∣tical Speeches of Augustin against the Pelagians, and of Prosper are not so much to be regarded, (who say the like of the Eucharist also) touching the ne∣cessity and efficacy in the case of Infants, and they are very like the Speeches of Lanfranck and Guitmund of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, opposing er acitèr & verè to sacramentalitèr; which is a false and absurd Contraposi∣tion. Sed man de Tabulâ. The right Definition of a Sacrament in general will decide this Question. LETTER CLXII. Part of Letter from Dr. Ward, to the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore. A Passage out of his last Letters to me, May 28. AS touching the Papers which I sent you, and had before sent to my Lord Primate, touching the Efficacy of Baptism in Infants; I would desire your Censure at your best leisure. You seem in your Letter to make the principal End and Effect of all Sacraments to be Obsignation, and all Sacra∣ments
to be meerly obsignatory Signs, and that all ablution of Sin in In∣fants is only conditional and expectative, of which they have no benefit till they believe and repent. I cannot easily assent hereunto. For so, 1. In∣fants baptized dying in Infancy, have no benefit by Baptism. 2. Non-elect Infants living, have no benefit at all: so that to both these they are made  & prorsus inefficacia signa. And, 3. What necessity can there be of baptizing Infants, if it produce no Effect till they come to years of Discretion 4. Our Divines do generally hold, that the Sacraments do offer and exhibit that Grace which they signify; and in order of Nature, do first offer and exhibit, before they assure and confirm. For God doth offer and exhibit Grace promised in the Sacrament. Then we exercise our Faith in relying upon God promising, offering, and exhibiting, on his part, and so receive the Grace promised; and then the Sacrament assureth us of the Grace received. So it is in the definition of a Sacrament in our short Catechism; when it is said: It is an outward visible Sign of an inward spiritual Grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledg to assure us thereof. So that, first, it is a means whereby God doth offer and exhibit the Grace it signifieth, which we receiving by Faith, it then also becometh a pledg to assure us of the receipt thereof. So the Eucharist doth first offer and exhibit growth and increase of Grace, and a nearer and faster Communion with Christ's Body and Blood, and all the benefits flowing thence; and then it i a Pledg to assure us hereof. For as Mr. Beza saith in Col. Mompel, Obsignari non potest quod non habetur, pag. 66, 76, & 131. Ursin. Cat. Edit. Cant. p. 584. Sacramentum & opus Dei erga nos, in quo dat aliquid scilicet signa & res signalas, & in quo testatur & se nobis offerre ac dare sua beneficio—& mox Baptismus ac Coena Domini sunt Sacramenta, quia sunt opus Dei qui aliquid in its nobis dat & se dare testatur. Vid. etiam Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. c. 17. §. 10, 11. and in 1 Cor. 24. So that instrumental conveyance of the Grace signified to the due Receiver, is as true an effect of a Sacrament when it is administred, as obsignation, and is pre-existing in order of Nature to Obsignation. See more at large Mr. Hooker, l. 5. §. 57, 59, 60, 64, & 67. who, in my opinion, doth truly explicate the Efficacy of Sacraments. The opinion of the Franciscans out of Soctus, Bonaeventure, and St. Bernard, mentioned in the History of the Council of Trent, pag. 237, is a true opinion, tho they leave out the other use of the Sacraments, which is Obsignation. Tho Catherinus and Eisingrenus hold that also. Since then Infants are capable of Baptism, why not of spiri∣tual Ablution of Original Guilt, which is the thing signified, tho not of actual Obsignation of this, since they cannot interpose any impediment to hinder the operation of the Sacrament. It seemeth you conceive that I make Circumsion and Baptism to be the remedy of original Sin only: I neither so say, nor think. It is true, your Lordship saith, the true definition of a Sacrament in general will decide this Question, and so say I; and think the definition in our ordinary Catechism formerly mentioned, is a good and sound definition. LETTER CLXIII. Part of a Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore, to Dr. Samuel Ward. FIrst, you say, If Sacraments be meerly obsignatory, and the ablution of Sons in Baptism only conditional and expectative, of which the Baptized have no benefit till they believe and repent. Then Infants baptized, dying in Infancy,
have no benefit by Baptism. This Consequence me-thinks is not good: For they are by Baptism received into the visible Church, which is a noble Privi∣ledg of Comfort to Parents, and Honour and Profit to themselves. Again, there is presently granted them an entrance into Covenant with God, as was anciently by Circumcision with the God of Abraham, wherein God promises Pardon of Sin, and Life eternal, upon their Faith and Repentance; and in this they have a present right, tho the accomplishment be deferred. Yet if God take them out of this World while the Condition is in expectation, most pious it is to believe that he takes the Condition for performed: Like to him that solemnizeth a Marriage with her to whom he was betrothed sub conditione. And here, if the Souls of Christians be indued with any actual Knowledg at all, so soon as they leave the Body; it seems the mystery of Re∣demption by Christ is revealed unto them, and Faith is given them, whereby they cleave to God by him, the Author of their Blessedness, although they have no need now of the Obsignation of the Promise whereof they are in present possession. The second Reason. Non-elect Infants living, shall thus have no benefit at all by Baptism. I answer. Where there be divers ends of one and the same thing, the denial of one is not the denial of the rest. These Non-elect In∣fants have offered by God the same with the other, viz. the obsignation of the Covenant, and aggregation to the Church. The same that he hath also, quifictus accedit ut ponit obicem, gratiae, as to the present possession of it. All that come to the Sacrament, Elect, or Non-elect, receive the Pardon of Sin Original and Actual sacramentally; and whosoever performs the Condition of the Co∣venant, hath the fruition of that, whereof before he had the Grant under Seal. So as the Sacraments are not nuda & inefficacia signa on God's part, to the one or other. Thirdly, (you say) What necessity of baptizing Infants, if their Baptism pro∣duce no effect till they come to years of discretion Though the most principal Effect be not attained presently, the less principal are not to be refused. So Children were circumcised, which could not understand the reason of it; and the same also did eat the Passover. And so did also Children baptized in the Primitive Church communicate in the Lord's Supper. Which I know not why it should not be so still, de quo alias. Fourthly, Our Divines, you say, generally hold that the Sacraments do offer and exhibit the Grace which they signify, and in order of Nature, do first offer and exhibit before they assure and confirm. For God doth, 1. Offer and exhibit Grace promised in the Sacraments. 2. We exercise our Faith, resting upon God promising and ex∣hibiting. 3. So we receive the Grace promised. 4. Then the Sacraments assure us of the Grace received. And this order you endeavour to confirm out of the Definition of a Sa∣ment in our Catechism: you declare it in the Eucharist, and bring divers Testimonies of our Writers to prove it. I answer. The Grace which the Sacraments confer, is of three sorts. The first is, The spiritual things which are proportionable to the outward. The second, The Effects of these. The third, The Certification of the Party in the lawful use of the outward, of the enjoying the two former. As in Baptism, 1. The Blood and Spirit of Christ. 2. The washing of Sin, and new Birth. 3. The Obsignation to the Party baptized, that by Christ's Blood his Sins are cleansed. The first of these is signified in that common Sentence, That Sacraments consist of two parts, An outward visible Sign, and an inward invisible Grace.
The second is the most usual and common notion of the word Grace; meaning some Spiritual Favour, in order to Salvation promised in the New Covenant. The last is most properly the Grace of the Sacrament it self. For the two former (which our Catechism seems to reduce to one) are properly the Grace of the Covenant, which God doth confirm and seal by the Sacraments. As when the King's Majesty grants Lands and Tenements with certain Immunities and Priviledges thereunto appertaining, as in his Letters Patents at large appeareth, and sets to the Great Seal; all the Grants and Articles in the Patent are confirmed thereby materialiter & subjective, but the Ratification of the Patent is properly and formally that which the Seal works: Which also according to the form of the Patent may be simple or conditio∣nal, present, or ad diem, according as his Majesty is pleased. As touching the terms also of offering and exhibiting, they may be taken two ways: Either of the offering and propounding; so doth Calvin take the Iastitut. l. 4. c. 17. §. 10. word [exhibet] in the Covenant, and Institution of the Sacraments; Or, 2. confirming in the use of them. These things thus premised, it seems to me that the Order is this: God doth, 1. Offer his Covenant (under the condition of Faith and Repen∣tance) and therein Christ and his Benefits. 2. We accept of the Covenant according to the tenor of it. 3. God offers to confirm it with Sacraments proportional. 4. We receive them, and so are certified of the performance of the Covenant, and have the Promises thereof conveyed by Covenant, and by Seal also unto us. Where you say, In the Eucharist God doth first offer and exhibit growth, and increase of Grdce, and a nearer and faster Communion of Christ's Body and Blood, and all the Benefits flowing from thence; and then it is a Pledg to assure us thereof. It seems to me that God having in the New Testament (confirmed with Christ's Blood) offered unto us Life under the condition of our re∣ceiving him; would confirm to as many as receive him that they have Life. Therefore he hath instituted Bread and Wine, the means of Natural Life, in a certain use, to be Seals of Spiritual Life. We now receiving them, they are Pledges unto us, and do certifie us of that Spiritual Life which we have by receiving Christ. Where then you say, That the instrumental conveyance of the Grace signified, is as true an effect of a Sacrament as Obsignation; and is then existent in order of Nature unto it. I do conceive that the setting of Christ and his Benefits be∣fore us in the Gospel, (as the Bread that came down from Heaven) and in the institution of the holy Supper, in the proportional creatures of Bread and Wine, with condition that these, worthily received, shall confer those, must needs go before any Obsignation. But then our partaking of these Crea∣tures duly, giveth unto us the Possession of the former by way of Obsigna∣tion; which in our purpose is the sole and only instrumental conveyance which the Sacraments have. You will ask, what is the due participation That which God requires. There can be required no more of Infants but the receiving of the outward washing in Baptism; they cannot prove themselves, nor repent and believe. Very true. Have they then that Obsignation Yes doubtless, according to the form of the Covenant. How is that That repenting and believing, their Sins are washed away. Then, because they do not yet repent and believe, nothing passes: Yes, this passes, The Confirmation that this Sacrament gives upon Repentance and belief of all God's Promises of the New Testament. The same thing which passes to him qui fictus accedit; who when afterward he doth
indeed repent of his Fiction, and receives Christ by Faith, hath also the actual enjoying of the thing so confirmed to him. The Opinion of the Franciscans out of Scotus and Bernard, mentioned in the Council of Trent, seems to be the true Opinion; for they make the Sa∣craments to be effectual, because God gives them, Effectus regulariter concomitan∣tes; and to contain Grace no otherwise then as an effectual Sign; and that Grace is received by them as an Investiture by a Ring or Staff, which is obsig∣nando. Which agrees also with Catharines Opinion, de intenione Ministri: And Eisingrens saith, that God only can give to sensible Signs Vertue to Pag. 192. confer Grace. Confess. c. 1. Yet I believe they understand the matter other∣wise then I have before expressed. Their Authority is of little moment either way. Beza, Ursine and Calvin have no other meaning then I have expressed. Mr. Hooker I have not. Since Infants (say you) are capable of Baptism, why not of spiritual Ab∣lution of Original Guilt which is the thing signified, tho not of actual Obsignation of this, since they cannot interpose any impediment to hinder the operation of the Sacraments. Questionless they are partakers of the actual Obsignation of Ablution from original and actual Guilt (say I.) Suppose they understand not this Ob∣signation, nor receive this Ablution otherwise then Sacramentally As I said before the counterfeit Convert also doth; tho he put a bar to his present Ab∣lution of his Sins, and consequently his own Certification thereof. Where I said, The true definition of a Sacrament in general will decide this Question, which you grant, and commend that of our Catechism. I do not disallow it, being well interpreted; but do think incomparably better that of the Apostle; That they be Seals of the Righteousness of Faith. Or if we will include the Sacraments of the state of Grace before the Fall: They be Seals of God's Covenant concerning everlasting Happiness. If yet more gene∣rally we will include the Rain-bow, Gen. 9. They be Seals of God's Covenants. The Definition of Scotus, Signum sensibile gratiam Dei ejus effectum gratuitum Scot. in 4 dist. 1. 9. 2. ex institutione divinâ efficacitèr signanus, ordinatum ad salutem hominis viatoris, methinks is a good Definition, especially declaring efficaciter as he doth, & in hoc efficacitèr (saith he) includitur tam certitudinalitèr, quam prognosticè. I know that he acknowledges no Sacrament pro statu innocentiae, but with∣out all reason, and the Definition will serve well enough for both States; where he and the other Schoolmen require since the Fall some remedy for Original Sin; and I perceived the same form in your Determination, Certum esse Christum Sacramentum Baptismi instituisse in remedium originalis peccati & ad reatus ejusdem veram solutionem. I conceived you meant to make that the proper effect of Baptism: which seemed also to be implied in the explicati∣on of the Question in the first Sentence, and after, Cum{que} Baptismus potissi∣mum institutus sit ad solutionem originalis peccati, &c. You know what it is to demonstrate specially of one sort of Triangles that which is true in all; which made me a little touch upon that point. But verily, I think this conceit of Sacraments to make them Medicines, is the root of all Error in this matter; and that it is good to take Light from the Tree of Life, and that of the knowledg of Good and Evil, that they are Seals only to God's Promi∣ses. In my last to you, as I remember, I gave you occasion a little to consi∣der the case of Women under the Law, and of all Mankind before Circum∣cision. Methinks it is very inconvenient to say, that the Males should have a remedy against Sin, and the Females none. And the Schoolmen when they will first lay down their own conceit, that such a remedy there must be, and then divine what it must be; they make Bellarmine ridiculous, who from the silence of holy Scripture herein, labours to shew the Scriptures are De verbo non Scrip. c. 4. insufficient, and yet he cannot help us here by any Traditions. This Incon∣venience is well avoided by making the Sacraments to confer Grace only
by Obsignation of God's Promises, and the end of them to be Certioration. For so long as God would have Men rest upon his meer Word and Promise without a Seal, his Word alone was to suffice: When he gave a Seal, that was to have validity as far as he extended it. Now he extended Circumcision to all Abraham's Seed, Males and Females, yea to the Males and Females of all that were adjoyned to Abraham, tho but bought with his Mony: And the Cir∣cumcision Gen. 17. 10, 11, 12. of the Males was an Obsignation of God's Covenant to the Fe∣males also. Lastly; in the New Testament, willing to make more ample De∣monstration of his Love, and more abundantly to confirm the Truth of his Promises, he hath appointed the Obsignation of them even to both Sexes, and to every several Person: Whereby he hath not made their Condition worse, who without contempt do want it, but their's better which are Par∣takers of it. Which I speak in regard of the imagined necessity of Baptism to Infants to Salvation, as if it were indeed a Medicine to save Life, where∣as it is only an assuring that Christ gives Life. Consider how Baptism was given to them who had remission of Sins and the gifts of the Holy Ghost also before, who therefore could have no other Intention therein but Certification only, and adjoyning to the Church, Acts 10. 44. Consider how it hath force about Sin, not only going before it, but fol∣lowing also; yea even to them that at the time of the outward receiving it do ponere obicem, else such ought to be re-baptized. Consider that if the Faith of the Parents, or the Church, were effectual before Circumcision was instituted for the taking away of Original Sin from Infants, or under the Law from Female Children; it is no less effectual at the present under the Gospel. And this presupposing that some mean must come between to make them partakers of Christ. Wherefore the same mean yet standing, the effect of Baptism needs not to be assigned Justification, or Ablution from Sin, but Testification to the Receiver, when he repents and believes that he is washed from Sin. Consider that if you will aver that Baptism washes away otherwise then sa∣cramentally, that is, obsignatorily original Sin; yet you must allow that manner of washing for future actual Sins. And you must make two sons of Justification, one for Children, another for Adulti And (which passes all the rest) you must find some Promise in God's Covenant, wherein he binds himself to wash away Sin without Faith or Repentance (for that Children have these I think you will not say). You seem also to break the Chain of the Apostle, Rom. 8. 30. Whom he hath justified, he hath glorified, Lastly; by this Doctrine you must also maintain that Children do spiritu∣ally eat the Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood, if they receive the En∣charist (as for divers Ages they did, and by the Analogy of the Passover they may, (perhaps ought): since they do not ponere obicem contraria cogitati∣onis aut pravae operationis. And sith the use of his Sacrament topics quoties must needs confer Grace; it seems it were necessary to let them communicate, and the oftner the better, to the intent they might be stronger in Grace. Which Opinion, tho St. Austine and many more of the Ancients do maintain, I be∣lieve you will not easily condescend unto, or that Children dying without Baptism are damn'd: Which if Baptism be the Remedy that takes away Ori∣ginal Sin, I see not how you can avoid. Touching the Propositions of Molina opposed by the Dominicans, and the Letters of Hippolytus de Alonte-Peloso, I am glad you have met with them: For I sent you the Originals which P. Paulo gave me upon occasion of speech with him touching that Controversy, reserving no Copy to my self. The occasion was the contention of the Jesuits and Dominicans before Pope Clement the 8th. And those Letters were week by sent from Rome
to Padre Paule, of the carriage of the Business. When you find a trusty Messenger, I desire you to send me them. For the Quodlibetical Question, there is no haste. I would join with it another Tractate about the Valtelin, set forth by Sir Rob. Cotton in English, (as it is said at least) but I cannot get the Italian Copy. I am sorry that Arminianism finds such favour in the Low-Countries, and amongst our selves; and glad that my Lord of Sarum, whom I truly love and honour, came off so well in the Business touching his Sermon. LETTER CLXIV. A Letter from his Majesty, K. Charles the First, to the King's Council in Ireland. Cha. REX. Right trusty, and right well-beloved Cousins and Counsellors, we greet you well. Whereas it hath pleased God, of his infinite Grace and Goodness, to vouchsafe unto us a Son, born at our Palace of St. James's, the 9th day of this present Month of May; to the great comfort, not on∣ly of our Selves in particular, but to the general Joy and Contentment of all our Good and Loving Subjects, as being a principal Mean for the esta∣blishment of the prosperous Estate and Peace of all our Kingdoms; whose Welfare We do and will ever prefer before any other earthly Blessing that can befal Us in this Life. We therefore, according to the laudable Custom of our Royal Progenitors, in like case heretofort used, have thought fit to make known unto you the joyful Tidings, as well in regard of the High Place ye hold under Us in the Government of that our Kingdom, as also that by timely Order from you, the same may be communicated unto the No∣bility, and principal Cities and Towns thereof; as to those (who we know) with all dutiful and loving Affections, will embrace whatsoever may ma for the prosperous advancement of the Publick Good, in which both you and they have so great Interest (And to this purpose We have sent these out Letters unto you, by Our trusty and well beloved Servant, Thomas Prist, , one of our Officers of Arms, being an Officer of Honour speci∣ally by Us honour to appointed, for the more honourable expression of our good affection to that our Kingdom. Given under our Signet, at Our Palace of Westminister, the fifth day of June, in the sixth Year of Our Reign. To Our right , and right well-beloved  and Counsellors, Adam, Viscount Loftus of Ely  Chancellor of Our Kingdom of Ireland and Richard Earl of Cork, Our Justices of that our Realm.
LETTER CLXV. A Letter from the Right Honourable the Earl of Cork, &c. to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. After our hearty Commendations to your Lordship; WE have lately (to our exceeding great comfort) received the glad Adver∣tisement of the Queen's safe Delivery, in the Birth of a young Prince; which did surprize us with such extraordinary Joy, as is justly due from us upon so happy an occasion. And because it is our Duties to join in sit Expressions of thankfulness to God for so great a Blessing, we have resolved to set a Day apart for performance of those Duties, so soon as one of his Majesty's Servants shall arrive here, who is an Officer of Honour, especially appointed by his Majesty to convey unto us those glad Tidings, for the more honourable expression of his Highness's good Affection to this his King∣dom. The particular respect we bear to your Person, and to the eminence of your place in the Church, have moved us to make choice of your Lordship to preach here before this State, on the Day whereon we purpose to per∣form those Ceremonies of Thankfulness due from us; which we have thought fit to make known unto you, purposing shortly to let you know the day when we desire your presence: Yet if you shall find, by your late Sickness, any indisposition in your Body, or danger to your Health to perform this Charge, (which we know would otherwise be very acceptable to you) we do not in such case so strictly require your presence with us, but that we do freely leave it to your own choice to come or stay, as you shall find the dis∣position of your Body to enable you. Only we desire to understand from you, whether we shall then expect you, or not, to the end we may make choice of another if you may not come. And so we bid your Lordship very heartily farewel. From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, Junii 18. 1630. Your Lordship's very loving Friends, R. Cork. Ad. Loftus, Canc. In imitation of the like sent us out of England, we have caused the inclosed to be imprinted here.
LETTER CLXVI. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Laud Bishop of Lon∣don, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. Salutem in Christo. My very good Lord; I Hope your Grace will pardon me, that in all this time I have not written unto you: For though I thank God I have recovered my Health in a measure, beyond expectation, yet I have been so overlaid with Business, that I have not been able to give you any account, or at least not such as I desired. Your Lordship's first Letters (for I owe you an answer to two) bear date April the 5th, and your later June the 4th, 1630. The Main of both Letters is concerning Sir John Bathe. And though in your last Letters you be confident that Sir John's Grant is not past the Seals, as he hath avouched it is: yet I must acquaint your Grace that you are mistaken therein; for it appeared, at the last sitting of the Committee, that the Seal was put to his Grant at the beginning of April last. Of which Doctrine you may make this Use; what close conveyance and carriage there may be, when the Church is to be spoiled. I understand by Mr. Hamilton, that the Lord Chancellor of Ireland is in Holy Orders; and that being Deacon, he holds an Arch-Deaconry yet of good value. Surely, my Lord, if this be so, there is somewhat in it that I will not express by Letter; but were I his Su∣perior in Ordinary, I know what I would do, and that I have plainly ex∣pressed, both to his Majesty, and the Lords Committees. But, my Lord, for the Business; I have stuck so close unto it, both with his Majesty, and with the Lords, especially the Lord Treasurer, who hath been, and is very noble to the Church, that I hope Sir John Bathe will see his Error, and pitch upon some other Reward for his Services, and surren∣der this Patent, though seal'd, that we may go on with the King's Royal and Pious Grant to the Church. Things being thus far onward once more; there are two things which stick with the Lords. 1. One is, They like not the placing of these Impropriations upon any In∣corporations, Dublin, or other. To this I answered, That neither did I like it; and that it must be alter'd, because it is against Law. So it is re∣solved, that we shall hereafter take, not only that, but all other material Passages of the Grant into consideration; and therefore, I think, neither your old, nor your new Letter will stand. Some thought it fittest, that these Impropriations should be left to the King to give. To this I replied, That that course would, by the Suit of the Clergy, and their Journeys over, take off a great part of the Benefit intended them. And to leave them in the Power of the Lord Deputy, that might be but to enrich his Secretaries, and expose the Church to that which I will not speak. 2. The other Difficulty is, That this Grant to the Church, is too much against the King's Profit in these difficult Times, because in the Lay-way, the King's Rent may be improved; which according to this Grant cannot be. This Blow I looked not for; but answered upon the sudden, That I thought the Church of Ireland would be glad to take the King's Grant, though it were with some improvement upon such Impropriations as might well bear it. This I did, partly to bear off the shock for the time, and
partly to gain opportunity to write to you, who understand that Business better. And I pray you, by your next Letters, give me all the help you can towards this Business. One thing more, and then I have done with Sir John Bathe. Upon oc∣casion of his Speech, That the Clergy had a third part of that Kingdom; I represented to the Lords the Paper which you sent me concerning the State of the County of Louth. It was a miserable spectacle to them all: yet at the last, some Doubt arose whether those Values there expressed, were the Rate in the King's Books, or the uttermost value to the Incumbent. To this I was not able to make a resolute Answer, yet I feared they were Rates to the utmost value. Hereupon the Lords required of me to write unto you, to desire you to send me word with all the speed you can, what value that Note of yours contain'd, of which I pray fail not. Your Grace is pleased, in another Passage, to desire me not to be too strict to my Rule, in chusing Deans only to be Bishops. My Lord, it is true, Deans are, or should be the likeliest Men to be fitted for Bishopricks; but they, and no other, was never any Rule of mine to my remembrance. My Rule was, and is, and to that I shall ever be strict, not to suffer any Bishop to hold any Deanery in Commendam, if it lie in my power to hin∣der it. For that which concerns the Bishop of Clonfert, and Killmacduagh, I have read the inclosed Papers you sent, and see cause more than enough to pity; but the way for remedy will be full of difficulty. And for Killanora, there will be time enough to think upon Annexation. For the Colledg and their Chauntry-Lands, &c. when they come for their Patent, they shall not need to doubt all the lawful assistance that I can give them. And now, my Lord, (for as my Business stands, 'tis time to make an end) I must needs thank you that you make it a matter of Joy to hear of my late Honour, in being chosen Chancellor of Oxford. My Lord, I speak really, it was beyond my deserts, and contrary to my desires; but since it hath pleased God, by their Love, to lay it upon me, I must undergo the Burden as I may. My honourable Predecessor enriched his Name by the Greek Ma∣nuscripts he gave; and it gives me much content that I was the means of it. And now for the Bargain which you mention of Ancient Coins, to the num∣ber of 5500, I cannot upon the sudden say any things, for my own Purse is too shallow, and my Lords, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Pembrook, are dead. You say, they are a great Bargain at 600 l. I pray therefore, if you have so much Interest in the Seller, send me word, as soon as you can, how many Ounces the Gold Coin comes unto, and how many the Silver, and then I shall be able to judg of the Copper; and then, upon my return to those your Letters, I will give you answer, where I can find any noble Spirit that will deal for them or no. You may judg by these Letters, I am not in haste, but indeed I am; and yet in the fulness of my Business, more troubled a great deal, that I cannot remedy what I see amiss, than at any disproportion between the weakness of my Shoulder, and the weight of my Load. Let me have your Prayers, and in them, and God's Grace, I shall rest, Your Grace's very loving Friend, and Brother, Guil. London. Fulham-house, July 5. 1630.
LETTER CLXVII. A Letter from the King's Council in Ireland, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. After our very hearty Commendations to your Lordship; HIS Majesty, by his Letters of the 5th of June last, hath been graciou∣sly pleased to signify unto us, that it hath pleased God, of his infinite Grace and Goodness, to vouchsafe his Majesty a Son, and us a Prince, born at the Palace of St. James's, the 29th day of May last: A Copy of which Letters, together with some of the Prayers framed in England upon this oc∣casion, and lately imprinted here, we have thought fit to send you here in∣closed; that by timely order from you, the same may be communicated unto your Clergy, as to those, who with all Duty and loving Affection, will em∣brace whatsoever may make for the prosperous advancement of the Publick Good, wherein all of us have Interest. The Joy and Gladness we apprehend in this great Blessing, hath justly moved as to set apart one Day, to be jointly and unanimously celebra∣ted as a Festival throughout the whole Kingdom, in expression of the thankfulness due from us all upon this happy occasion; which Day we have resolved shall be the 15th Day of this Instant: whereof we give your Lord∣ship notice, to the end you may cause the same to be notified to your Clergy; and that on that day there be publick Prayers, Thanksgivings, and Sermons in the several Churches of your Diocess; and that the said Prayers be then publickly read in the time of Divine Service; and that afterwards ringing of Bells, making of Bone-fires, and all other expressions of Joy may be made, to testify the general Joy and Gladness of that Day. And we pray and require you, to be with us here at that time, to the end all of us, who are partakers of this Benefit, may join in the Solemnities of this in∣tended Festival. And so we bid your Lordship very heartily farewel. From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, July 5. 1630. Your Lordship's very loving Friends, A. Loftus Canc. R. Corke. Grandison. Hen. Valentia. W. Caulfeild. Hen. Docwra. Fra. Mountnorris. W. Shurley. W. Parsons. J. Erskyne. Cha. Coote. Thory Duttoy. Ad. Loftus.
LETTER CLXVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend William Bedell Bishop of Kil∣more, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, at his House at Termonfeckin. Most Reverend Father, my Honourable good Lord; I Cannot easily express what contentment I received at my late being with your Grace at Termonfeckin. There had nothing hapned to me, I will not say, since I came into Ireland, but as far as I can call to remembrance in my whole Life, which did so much affect me in this kind, as the hazard of your good Opinion. For loving and honouring you in Truth, (for the Truth's sake, which is in us, and shall abide with us for ever) without any private Interest; and receiving so unlooked for a blow from your own hand, (which I expected should have tenderly applied some Remedy to me, being smitten by others) I had not present the defences of Reason and Grace. And although I knew it to be a fault in my self, since in the perfor∣mance of our Duties, the judgment of our Master even alone ought to suf∣fice us; yet I could not be so much Master of mine Affections, as to cast out this weakness. But, blessed be God, which (as I began to say) at my being with you, refreshed my Spirit, by your kind renewing and confirming your love to me. And all humble thanks to you, that gave me place to make my defence, and took upon you the cognizance of mine Innocency. And as for mine Accuser (whose hatred I have incurred) only by not giving way to his covetous desire, of heaping Living upon Living, to the evident da∣mage, not only of other Souls committed to me, but of his own: Truly I am glad, and do give God thanks that his Malignicy, which a while masked it self in the pretence of Friendship, hath at last discovered it self by pub∣lick opposition. It hath not, and I hope it shall not be in his power to hurt me at all, he hath rather shamed himself; and although his high Heart can∣not give his Tongue leave to acknowledg his Folly, his Understanding is not so weak and blind as not to see it: Whom I could be very well content to leave to taste the Fruit of it also, without being further trouble some to your Grace; save that I do not despair, but your Grace's Authority will pull him out of the Snare of Satan, whose Instrument he hath been to cross the Work of God, and give me more occasion of joy by his amendment, than I had grief by his perversion and opposition. Your Grace's Letters of August 23. were not delivered to me till the 9th. In the mean space, what effect those that accompanied them had with Mr. Dean, you shall perceive by the inclosed, which were sent me the 28th, the Evening before our Communion I answered them the next Morning, as is here annexed. As I was at the Lord's Table, beginning the Service of the Communion before the Sermon, he came in; and after the Sermon was done, those that communicated not being departed, he stood forth and spoke to his purpose. That where as the Book of Common Prayer requires, that before the Lord's Supper if there be any  there should be to conciliation; this was  because they all knew, that there was been  he did profess that he  no  and  me in any thing, he was orry.
I answered, That he had good reason to be sorry, considering how he had behaved himself: For my part, I bare him no malice; and if it were in my power, would not make so much as his finger ake. Grieved I had been, that he in whom I knew there were many good parts, would become an Instru∣ment to oppose the Work of God, which I was assured he had called me to, &c. This was all that passed. He offered himself to the Lord's Board, and I gave him the Communion. After Dinner, he preached out of 1 Joh. 4. ult. And this Commandment have we from him, that he that loveth God, &c. When we came out of the Church, Dr. Shiriden delivered me your Grace's Letters. And thus Mr. Dean thinks he hath healed all; as you may perceive by his next Letters of August 30. Only he labours about Kildromfarten: Whereabouts I purposed to have spoken with your Grace at my being with you, but I know not how it came not to my mind. Whether it be, that the Soul as well as the Body, after-some travel, easily falleth to rest; or else God would have it reserved perhaps to a more seasonable time. It is now above a Twelve-month (the Day, in many respects, I may well wish that it may not be reckoned with the days of the Year) that your Grace, as it were, delivered to me with your own hands, Mr. Crian a con∣verted Friar. To whom I offered my self as largely as my ability would extend unto; though I had already, at your Grace's commendation, re∣ceived Mr. Dunsterville to be in my house, with the allowance of 20 l. per Annum. The next day before my departing, Mr. Hilton made a motion to me, that where he had in his hands sufficient to make the Benefice of Kildrom∣farten void, if I would bestow it upon Mr. Dean, he would do so, other∣wise it should remain in Statu. I answered, With profession of my love and good opinion of Mr. Dean, whereof I shewed the Reasons, I added, I did not know the Place, nor the People; but if they were meer Irish, I did not see how Mr. Dean should discharge the Duty of a Minister to them: This Motion was seconded by your Grace: But so, as I easily conceived, that being solicited by your old Servant, could do no less than you did, and notwithstanding In his first Letter about Mr. N. King. the Lecture he promised your Grace should read to me in the matter of Collations, would not be displeased if I did as became me, accord∣ing to my Conscience, and in conformity to your former motion for Mr. Crian. Dr. Dean after pressed me, that if without my concurrence your Grace would confer that living upon him, I would not be against it. Which I promised, but heard no more of it till about April last. In the mean while, the Benefice next unto that which Mr. Dunsterville was already possessed of falling void, Mr. Crian not coming to me, nor purposing to do so till after Christmass; and whensoever he should come, my House, as I found, not affording room for him and Mr. Dunsterville both; whose former Benefice was unable (he said) to maintain him; chiefly he promising Residence, and taking of me for that purpose an Oath absolutely, without any excep∣tion of Dispensation; I united it to his former, and dismissed him to go to his Cure. Wherein how carelesly he hath behaved himself, I forbear to re∣late. To return to Mr. Dean; About mid-April he brought me a Presentation to Kildromfarten, under the Broad Seal. I could do no less but signify to the Incumbent, who came to me, and maintained his Title, requiring me not to admi. Whereupon I returned the Presentation, indorsing the Rea∣son of my refusal. And being then occasioned to write to the Lords Justi∣ces, I signified what I thought of these Pluralities, in a Time when we are so far overmatched in number by the Adverse Party. This passed on till the Visitation, wherein Mr. Dean shewed himself in his Colours. When the Vi∣car of Kildromfarten was called, he said, He was Vicar, but would exhibit
no Title. After the Curat, Mr. Smith signified to me, that his Stipend was unpaid, and he feared it would still be in the contention of two Incum∣bents. Upon these and other Reasons, I sequestred the Profits; which I have heard by a Simoniacal Compact betwixt them should be for this Year the former Incumbents. Neither did Mr. Dean write or speak a word to me hereabout till the day before the Communion in the Inclosed. That very Morning I was certified, that he purposed to appeal to your Grace; which made me, in answer to his next, to add, Quod facis fac citius. Here I beseech your Grace give me leave to speak freely touching this matter; so much the rather, because it is the only Root of all Mr. Dean's despite against me. Plainly I do thus think, that of all the Diseases of the Church in these times, next to that of the Corruption of our Courts, this of Pluralities is the most deadly and pestilent, especially when those are institu∣ted into Charges Ecclesiastical, who were they never so willing, yet for want of the Language of the People, are unable to discharge them. Con∣cerning which very Point, I know your Grace remembers the Propositions of the Learned and Zealous Bishop of Lincoln before Pope Innocent. I will not add the Confession of our Adversaries themselves, in the Council of Trent; nor the Judgment of that good Father, the Author of the History thereof, touching Non-residence. Let the thing it self speak, whence flow the Ignorance of the People, the Neglect of God's Worship, the Defraud∣ing of the Poor of the remains of dedicate Things, the Ruin of the Mansi∣on-houses of the Ministers, the desolation of Churches, the swallowing up of Parishes by the Farmers of them, but from this fountain There may be cause, no doubt, why sometimes in some Place, and to some Man, many Churches may be committed. But now, that, as appears by the late Certifi∣cates, there are besides the Titulary Primat and Bishop, of Priests, in the Diocesses of Kilmore and Ardagh, 66; of Ministers and Curats but 32; of which also three whose Wives come not to Church: In this so great odds, as the Adversaries have of us in number, (to omit the advantage of the Lan∣guage, the possession of the Peoples Hearts, the countenancing of the No∣bility and Gentry) is it a Time to commit many Churches to one Man whom I will not disable; and he saith he hath a very able Interpreter: and I think no less, which made me once to say, that I would sooner confer the Benefice of Kildromfarten upon him, than upon himself; which Resolution I do still hold, in how ill part soever he takes it. But what hath he done in the Parishes already committed to him, for the instruction of the Irish that we should commit another unto him He that cannot perform his Duty to one, without a helper; or to that little part of it whose Tongue he hath, is he sufficient to do it to three No, it is the Wages is sought, not the Work. And yet with the Means he hath already, the good Man his Predecessor maintained a Wife and a Family; and cannot he in his Solitary (he had once written Monkish) Life defray himself Well, if there can be none found fit to discharge the Duty, let him have the Wages to better his Maintenance: But when your Grace assureth us, we shall lack no Men, when there is be∣sides Mr. Crien, (whom D. Sheriden hath heard preach as a Frier in that very place; which I account would be the more to God's Glory, if there now he should plant the Truth, which before he endeavoured to root out); be∣sides him we have Mr. Nugent, who offereth himself in an honest and dis∣creet Letter lately written to me. We have sundry in the Colledg, and namely two trained up at the Irish Lecture; one whereof hath translated your Grace's Catechism into Irish; besides Mr. Duncan and others: With what colour can we pass by these, and suffer him to fat himself with the Blood of God's People Pardon me, I beseech your Grace, when I say We, I mean not to prescribe any thing to you: My self I hope shall never do it,
or consent to it. And so long as this is the cause of Mr. D's Wrath against me, whether I suffer by his Pen or his Tongue, I shall rejoice, as suffering for Righteousness sake. And sith himself in his last Letter excuses my Intent, I do submit my Actions after God to your Grace's Censure, ready to make him Satisfaction, if in any thing in Word or Deed I have wronged him. For conclusion of this business (wherein I am sorry to be so troublesome to your Grace) let him surcease this his greedy and impudent pretence to this Benefice, let Mr. Nugent be admitted to it, or Mr. Crien if he be not yet provided for; to whom I will hope ere long to add Mr. Nugent for a Neigh∣bour, . If these second (questionless better) Thoughts, have any place in him, as in his last Letters he gives some hope, let my Com∣plaints against him be cast into the Fire. God make him an humble and modest Man. But if Mr. Dean will needs persist, I beseech your Grace to view my Reply, to the which I will add no more. As touching his tradu∣cing me in the Pulpit at Cavan, I have sent your Grace the Testimonies of Mr. Robins and Mr. Teate, altho he had been with them before and denied what they formerly conceived. And if your Grace will be pleased to en∣quire of Mr. Cape by a Line or two (with whom I never spake word about the matter) or compare the heads of his Sermon (which he saith were gene∣ral) with his former Reports made of me, I doubt not but you will soon find the Truth. I have sent also his Protestation against my Visitations: wherein I desire your Grace to observe the blindness of Malice. He pretends that I may not visit but at or after Michaelmas every Year. As if the Month of July wherein I visited were not after Michaelmas; for before the last Micha∣elmas I visited not. I omit that he calls himself the Head of the Chapter. The Canon Law calls the Bishop so: he will have the Bishop visit the whole Diocess together, directly contrary to that form which the Ca∣nons prescribe. But this Protestation having neither Latin, nor Law, nor common Sence, doth declare the Skill of him that drew it, and the Wit of him that uses it. Which if your Grace enjoyn him not to revoke, I shall be enforced to put a remedy to it otherwise, in respect of the evil Example and Prejudice it might bring to Posterity. And now to leave this unplea∣sing Subject: Since my being with you, here was with me Mr. Brady, bring∣ing with him the Resignation of the Benefice of Mullagh which I had con∣ferred upon Mr. Dunsterville, and united to his former of Moybolk; he brought with him Letters from my L. of Corke, and Sir W. Parsons, to whom he is allied. But examining him, I found him (besides a very raw Divine) unable to read the Irish, and therefore excused my self to the Lords for admitting him. A few days after, viz. the 10th of this Month, here was with me Mr. Dunsterville himself, and signified unto me that he had revoked his for∣mer Resignation. Thus he plays fast and loose, and most unconscionably neglects his Duty. Omnes quae sua sunt quaerunt. Indeed I doubted his Re∣signation was not good, in as much as he retained still the former Benefice, whereto this was united. Now I see clearly there was a compact between him and Mr. Brady, that if he could not be admitted, he should resume his Be∣nefice again. I have received Letters from Mr. Dr. Ward of the Date of May 28, in which he mentions again the point of the Justification of Infants by Baptism. To whom I have written an Answer, but not yet sent it. I send herewith a Copy thereof to your Grace, humbly requiring your Advice and Censure (if it be not too much to your Graces trouble) before I send it. I have also written an Answer to Dr. Richardson in the question touching the Root of Ef∣ficacy, or Efficiency of Grace, but it is long, and consists of five or six sheets of Paper, so as I cannot now send it. I shall hereafter submit it as all other
my Endeavours to your Grace's Censure and Correction. I have received also a large Answer from my Lord of Derry, touching Justifying Faith, whereto I have not yet had time to reply. Nor do I know if it be worth the labour, the difference being but in the manner of teaching: As whether justifying Faith be an Assent working Assiance; or else an Assiance following Assent. I wrote presently upon my return from your Grace to my Lords Justices, desiring to be excused from going in person to take Possession of the Mass-houses, and a certificate that my Suit with Mr. Cook is depending be∣fore them. I have not as yet received Answer, by reason (as Sir Will. Usher signified to my Son) the Lord Chancellor's Indisposition did not permit his hand to be gotten. I do scarce hope to receive any Certificate from them, for the respect they will have not to seem to infringe your Grace's Ju∣risdiction. Whereupon I shall be inforced to entertain a Proctor for me at your Graces Court when I am next to appear, it being the very time when my Courts in the County of Leatrym were set, before I was with you. Asham'd I am to be thus tedious; but I hope you will pardon me, sith you required and I promised to write often: And having had opportunity to convey my Letters, this must serve instead of many. Concluding with my humble Service to your Grace, and Thanks for my kind Entertainment, I desire the Blessing of your Prayers, and remain always, Your Graces humble Servant, Will. Kilmore and Ardaghen. Kilmore, Sept. 18. 1630. LETTER CLXIX. A Letter sent from Dr. Forbes, Professor of Divinity at Aberdeen, with his Irenicum, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Jacobo Usserio Dei miseratio∣ne Archiepiscopo Armacano totius Hiberniae Primati meri∣tissimo, Domino suo colendissimo. Salutem in Domino. Reverendissime & Sanctissime Pater, TAnta mihi ex doctissimis & tam longè latèque laudatissimis pater∣nitatis tuae lucubrationibus, famosissimaque in omnes, praesertim piae eruditionis appetentes humanitate, incessit venerandi tui nominis reve∣rentia, isque ardor me tenet limatissimum tuum judicium de rebus nostris consulendi, ut hoc qualecunque, licet tumultuarium, procurandae pacis co∣namen ad tuam sanctitatem destinare non dubitaverim, animos collegi ex reverendi decani tui hortamento, pollicentis rem me haud ingratam pie∣tati tuae hoc officio praestiturum. Praepropera, fateor, scriptio: id quod adjectus omissorum index non inficiatur. Sed quid facias inopinata mala saepe non morantur ex praeparato suppetias. Hoc saltem submissae erga
tuam eminentiam observantiae meae sit testimonium. Vale, Pater in Christo colendissime, & diu foelix Deo ejus{que} Ecclesiae vive, nostri in sanctissimis tuis precibus memor. Beatitudini tuae submissè addictissimus JOANNES FORBESIUS S. S. Theol. D. & Professor in Academia Aberdoniensi in Scotia. Aberdoni die 7 Aug. Anno Dom. 1631. LETTER CLXX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Forbes. D. Johanni Forbesio SS. Theologiae D. & Professori in Aca∣demiâ Aberdoniensi in Scotiâ. Vir Eximie! SUmmâ in voluptate  tuum perlegi: eam{que} Patriae tuae felicitatem sum gratulatus, quòd novum tandem produxit , qui eam ipsi praestitit diligentiam & virtutem, quam olim exteris Ecclesiis (quum non admodum dissimiles de Adiaphoris obortae lites earum pacem perturbarent) Euseb. l. 5. Hist. Eccles. . exhibuit ille Vetus; qui . Nulla salus bello; ipsi{que} bello salus si qualis sit, non alio quàm pacis no∣mine ea continetur. Nam & de  pace bello Uriam, opi∣nor, 2 Sam. 11. 7. à Davide aliquando interrogatum meministi. Jam vero pro , scriptum remitto tibi ego  sed quod ju∣cundum praebeat spectaculum Midianiticorum satellitum inter se manu conse∣rentium, & mutuo isto bello Ecclesiolae nostrae pacem promoventium. Tu quicquid hoc est munusculi, ut ab homine optimè erga te affecto transmissum, suscipe & me (ut facis) ama. Pontanae in Hiberniâ III Eid. Decembr. anno reparatae salutis, 1631. Tuus in Christi Ministerio confertus, Ja. Ar.
LETTER CLXXI. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino JACO∣BO, Archiepiscopo Armacensi, & totius Hibernia Primati Domino nostro benignissimo.Gratia & Pax à Deo Patre, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen. REverendissime in Christo Pater, Domine & Benefactor, verâ animi ob∣servantiâ nobis colende, Quod Propheta Regius Psalmo 136 inter alia multa Dei beneficia, tum in Universum genus humanum, tum specialiter in Ecclesiam suam collata, versu 23 commemorat: Dominus in humiliatione nostrâ memor fuit nostri: quia in seculum est benignitas ejus, &c. Id nos in Exilio nostro septennali saepius efficaciter experti sumus, & adhuc experimur: ac proinde etiam merito commemorare & celebrare debemus. Dum enim propter Evangelium Christi functionibus nostris dejecti, patriâ expulsi, in terrâ alienâ inter hospites parum propitios, miseri vitam extrema per omnia ducimus: benignissimus Pater Coelestis subinde nostri memorem sese prae∣stat: pios nobis nutricios etiam è longinquo excitat: qui visoera misera∣tionum suarum nobis aperiant: afflictiones nostras, per sanctorum communi∣onem suas esse ducant: & liberalitate suâ inopiam nostram solentur ac sub∣levent. Quorum in numero Tu, Reverendissime Domine, tanquam novus quidam Sol ex ultimo Occidente nobis exortus es: qui lucem Fidei, quam habes in DOMINUM JESUM, & Charitatis in omnes sanctos, quâ totam Hi∣berniam collustras, per tanta locorum intervalla, per tot interjecta Maria, us{que} ad nidulos & latibula exilii nostri, in ipso Germaniae meditullio clarissimè effulgere fecisti. Dum simulat{que} literae nostrae supplices, miseriae{que} nostrae indices, anno praeterito ad Reverendiss. Dom. Tuam perlatae sunt, summâ cum Prothymiâ & prolubio totus in eam cogitationem at{que} curam incubuisti: ut Fidelium animi per Universum Hiberniae Regnum quà Religionis purioris exercitium viget, sanctis cohortationibus ad hilarem & liberalem Eleemosyna∣rum pro nobis collationem permoverentur. Nimirum hoc est verè Primatem Hiberniae esse; non titulo tantùm & dignitate, verùm etiam pietate, humani∣tate, sympathiâ, charitate, atque omni genere virtutis. Nec fuisse inanem la∣borem tuum in DOMINO, eventus oftendit. Etenim tam luculentum subsidium à Fidelibus in Irlandiâ vestrâ pro nobis collatum, at{que} ad nos tri∣bus vicibus transmissum est: videlieet, quadringentarum octoginta octo li∣brarum Sterlingar. unius solidi, & decem nummor. quale nos ne optare quidem, nedum sperare unquam ex illis locis, ausi fuissemus. Quippe qui non ignoraremus, vix tertiam Regni partem Religioni nostrae orthodoxae, reli∣quam antem multitudmem omnem Pontificiae addictam esse. Quamobrem Reverendissimae Dominationi tuae pro tanto favore studio{que} opere ipso plus satis comprobato, gratias quàm maximas agimus, tum nostro tum omnium fratrum coexulum nomine. Habemus etiam majores, nam rela∣turos nos esse, affirmare non possumus; praesertim hoc afflictissimo rerum no∣strarum statu. Sed DEUM oramus, ut quae in nos contulisti, ille qui po∣test solus, multo cum foenore in te refundat. Sicut viduae Sareptanae, Domui{que} ejus largissimè refudit: quicquid alimoniae in Eliam Prophetam tempore persecutionis & famis impenderat. 2 Reg. 17. Sicut etiam optimo & benefico
Episcopo Spiridioni, de quo fit mentio in Historiâ Ecclesiasticâ, cumulatim reposuit: quicquid ille in pauperes famelicos erogârat. Cum enim horreum suum omnibus egenis aperuisset: ut inde quis{que} prout indigeret, frumentum acciperet: cumulus non decrevit, sed tantus perduravit ad finem us{que} carita∣tis, quantus fuerat initio. Sicut deni{que} Tiberio Secundo Imperatori, erga pauperes liberalissimo & opes mirabiliter auxit, & victorias egregias do∣navit. Nec dubitare debet Reverendiss. Dom, Tua, ad Te quo{que} pertinere: quod Angelus ad Cornelium Centurionem dicit, Actor. 10. Preces & Eleemo∣synae tuae ascenderunt in memoriam in Dei conspectu. Et quod ipse Filius Dei ad Antistitem Thyatirensis Ecclesiae dicit, Apoc. 3. 19. Novi opera tua & charitatem, & subministrationem & fidem, &c. Quod{que} haec suo tempore Tibi latura sint fructus suos. Porrò sicut confidimus, Catalogum seu Tabulas Rationum, quas pro primis duabus Quotis ad R. D. Tuam, unà cum Eucha∣risticis missimus rectè redditas esse: Ita nunc etiam pro novissimis duabus Quotis, quae 185 libras Sterl. 8 Solidos continuerunt, & hic no∣strae Monetae florenos 1231 confecerunt, Catalogum hisce adjunctum mitti∣mus: Ut hanc distributionem non minùs, quàm priores duas, fideliter à no∣bis factas esse, inde constare possit. In quem finem etiam Apocham pro ac∣ceptis pecuniis non tantùm à nobis collectae Administratoribus, sed etiam ab aliis Primariis Viris subscriptam, ad opt. & humaniss. Virum, Dom. Christia∣num Bor. Mercatorem Dublinensem, missimus. Habemus praeterea hîc ad manus, & diligenter asservamus singulorum Participantium Chirographa; quibus, se portiones in Catalogo assignatas accepisse, attestantur. Si fortè ad probandam Accepticum Expenso congruentiam, iis aliquando opus sit. Quod restat, quod unum gratitudinis argumentum edere nunc possumus; nos non tantùm pro salute & incolumitate tuâ seduli ad DEUM precatores verùm etiam tuorum in nos meritorum laudum{que} tuarum grati buccinatores apud homines futuri sumus: ita, ut quocun{que} terrarum nostra nos fata de∣ferent, fidelem tui memoriam nobiscum simus ablaturi. Bene vale, Pater eximie & venerande. DOMINUS JESUS opus manuum tuarum con∣firmet, ad nominis sui gloriam, & Ecclesiae suae incrementum. Amen. No∣rinburgae die xiii Septembris, Anno Dei Hominis facti M. DC. XXXI. Reve∣rendiss. Dom. Tuam Subjectissimo Studio colentes Sacrae Collectae pro Exulib. Archipalatinatus Supe∣rioris Administratores, Fratrum omnium nomine, Ambrosius Tolner quondam Pastor Ecclesiae Tursehennentensis, & Dioceseos Waldsassensis Inspector, unde nunc exul in agro Norico, suo & Ln. Georgii Summeri nomine jam absentis Gebhardus Agricola Ecclesiae Aurbacensis quon∣dam Pastor & Inspector, nunc in Marchiona∣tum exulans, &c. Jonas Libingus Judex quondam Archipalatinus Caenobii Weisseno, nunc in Exilio ad facrae Collectae negotia Deputatus Norimbergae.
LETTER CLXXII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the most Reverend William Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury. My most gracious Lord; WHen I took Pen to write, the first thing that presented it self to my thoughts, was that saying in the Scripture; Why are you the last to bring the King back to his House For methought I could not but be much blamed for coming thus late to congratulate both his Majesty's safe return, and your own advancement (joined therewith) unto the highest place of Church-Preferment, that is within his Highnesses Dominions. Wherein I may truly say thus much for my self, (to begin withal); that since the time I received the Letter you wrote unto me the day before you began your Journey for Scotland, no day hath passed hitherto, wherein I have not made particular mention of you in my Prayers unto Almighty God; who hath graciously heard my Request, and granted [therein] as much as my Heart could desire. But thus in the mean time did the Case stand with me: Upon the arrival of the Lord Deputy, I found him very honourably affected to∣ward me, and very ready to further me, as in other things that concerned the Church, so particularly in that which did concern the settlement of the Lands belonging to the Arch-bishoprick of Armagh. Wherefore not being willing to let slip so fair an opportunity, I presently obtained a Commission for making an inquiry of all the Lands that remained in my quiet possession: and took my Journey (though in an unseasonable time of the Year) into the Northern Parts of the Kingdom. Where beside the speeding of the Of∣fices that were taken in the three several Counties of Armagh, Tirone, and London-Derry; there was offered the opportunity of solemnizing the tran∣slation of the Bishop of Raphae, and a Consecration of the Bishop of Ar∣dagh, in the Cathedral Church of Armagh; where no such Act had been be∣fore performed within the memory of any Man living. And much about this time had we the News of your Grace's Election into that high Dignity which his Majesty hath called you unto: for which, as this poor Church in general, so none more than my self in particular, have great cause to rejoice. God having (no doubt) given you such high favour in our Master's Eyes, that you might be enabled thereby to do the more good unto his Church; and especially to put a happy end to that great Work (which hitherto hath received so many Impediments) of setling the Reversion of the Impropria∣tions of this Kingdom upon the several Incumbents. Whereunto I assure my self your Grace will easily work my Lord Deputy; who every day sheweth himself so zealous for the recovering of the dissipated Patrimony of the Church, that mine Eyes never yet beheld his match in that kind. By the death of your Predecessor, our University of Dublin was left to seek a new Chancellor; whom I advised to pitch upon no other but your self: which they did with all readiness and alacrity. If your Grace will design to receive that poor Society under the shadow of your Wings, you shall put a further tie of observance, not upon that only, but upon me also, who had my whole breeding there, and obtained the honour of being the first Proctor that ever was there.
I am further intreated by our Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Corke, to cer∣tify my knowledg touching the placing of his Monument in the Cathedral Church of St. Patrick's, in the Suburbs of Dublin. The place wherein it is erected, was an ancient Passage into a Chappel within that Church; which hath, time out of mind, been stopped up with a Partition made of Boards and Lime. I remember I was present when the Earl concluded with the Dean to allow thirty Pounds for the raising of another Partition, betwixt this new Monument and the Quire, wherein the Ten Commandments might be fairly written: Which if it were put up, I see not what offence could be taken at the Monument; which otherwise cannot be denied to be a very great Ornament to the Church. I have nothing at hand to present your Grace withal, but this small Trea∣tise written unto Pope Calixtus the 2d, by one of your Predecessors, touch∣ing the ancient Dignity of the See of Canterbury: Which I beseech you to accept at the hands of Your Grace's most devoted Servant, J. A. 1632. LETTER CLXXIII. Another Letter to the same. May it please your Grace; UPon my return from my Northern Journey, I wrote unto you by Sir Francis Cook; declaring the cause of my long silence, together with the extraordinary Zeal of our noble Lord Deputy; I may justly term him a new Zerubbabel raised by God, for the making up of the Ruins of this decayed Church; who upon an occasion, openly declared himself an oppo∣site to the greatest of those that have devoured our holy Things, and made the Patrimony of the Church the Inheritance of their Sons and Daugh∣ers. I likewise made bold to intreat your Lordship (in the same Letter) to accept our poor University of Dublin into your gracious Protection. I cau∣sed the Draught of two other Letters to be made, in the Name of the So∣ciety, unto your Grace; the one penned by the Provost, the other by Dr. Hoyle the Divinity-Professor there. But the Fellows of the House were so factious, that nothing could please them which came from their Superiors; and so idle, that they would not take pains to do the like themselves. So that now I have the more cause to implore your Grace's Aid afresh, and to present you with a new Supplication of Miserere domus labentis. Wherein that I may conceal nothing from your Grace, the very Truth is this; The Provost, albeit he be a very honest Man, and one that mindeth the Good of the House, yet is of too soft and gentle a disposition to rule so heady a Com∣pany. The Lord Bishop of Kilmore, while he was Provost there, compo∣sed Statutes for the good of the House, conformable to those of Emmanuel-Colledg in Cambridg, where he himself in former time lived. But there is so little Power given to the Provost for redressing of things that are amiss, without the consent of the greater part of the Senior Fellows, that they,
finding thereby their own strength, perpetually join together in crossing what∣soever the Provost attempteth for reformation, either of themselves, or of the Scholars; being sure never to give their consent, that any punishment shall be inflicted upon themselves, either for absenting themselves from the Church, or lying out of the House, or frequenting of Taverns, or other such Enor∣mities. So that the Provost, by their perverse dealing, being now made weary of his place, it were to be wished, that some other Preferment might be found for him; and one of a more rigid Temper, and stouter Disposi∣tion placed in his room; for such a Wedg, for the breaking of so evil a Knot, must necessarily be used. The Earl fearing that my former Letter might not have come unto your hands, hath earnestly entreated me to write thus much again; which as I could not well deny unto him, being but the bearing of a Testimo∣ny to the very Truth, so do I wholly submit the same unto your graver Judgment. Your Grace's most devoted Servant, J. A. 1632. LETTER CLXXIV. Doctissimo & Ornatissimo viro D. Ludovico de Dieu, Ec∣clesiae Lugduno-Batavae Pastori, Fratri plurimùm hono∣rando. Leydam. Salutem, à salutis fonte D. N. Iesu Christo. LIbros, quos ad te & Clariss. Vossium miseram acceptos fuisse, laetus ab utro{que} vestrûm audio: sed literas, alteri cuidam è Belgio vestro (in Hispaniam, ut audivi, postea profecto) commissas, interiisse video. Quae jactura effecit, ut nulli facile nuncio fidem deferendarum literarum adhibue∣rim hactenus. Discedente vero hinc ad vos nobilissimo Juvene Dunharvai∣nae Vicecomite; oblatam tam opportunè occasionem praetermittere nolens, perspectae nobis fidei , ipsius Vicecomitis Ephoro, tradendas curo quas jam scribo literas. At{que} ut , quod aiunt, ab eo in quo postremas tuas termina∣veras, ego nunc incipiam: monachum illum, de quo ad D. Rivetum scripsit Marinus Marsenius, non alium quàm Johannem Morinum fuisse suspicor, qui tum in prolixâ illâ praefatione editioni  (quae Lutetiae An. 1628. Graeco-latina prodiit) praefixa, tum in Exercitationibus Ecclesiasticis (quas in Samaritanum Pentateuchum ibidem Anno 1631. evulgavit) ex Graeco∣rum & Samariticorum codicum fide, Hebraeum nostrum textum corruptum & depravatum esse, stultissimâ operâ astruere conatus est. Stultissimam enim quid ni dixerim cum eâdem ipse operâ sua sibi caedat vineta, & (quod probè est à te annimadversum) Vulgatae editionis Latinae authoritatem pari∣ter enervet: Tridentinorum suorum Decreti parùm memor, qui ut haec ipsa editio pro authenticâ habeatur statuerunt, & ut eam nemo rejicere quovis praetextu audeat vel praesumat; at{que} adeò eodem cum illo afflatus spiritu, cui immanis iste versus olim excidit.
Pereant amici, dum unà inimici intercidant. Tui & eruditissimi Constantini tui erit, hominis nimio sibi placentis au∣daciam Cic. Orat. pro Dejotaro. at{que}  comprimere, & sacrorum fontium integritatem sartam tectam ab omni detrimento conservare. Quâ in re praestandâ, maximo vo∣bis erit subsidjo Veteris Testamenti Editio Syriaca, quam ab Apostolorum temporibus hucus{que} magno omnium Orientis populorum, qui Chaldaicâ sive Syriacâ utuntur linguâ, consensu retentam, & semper summâ in venera∣tione & auctoritate esse habitam; & demum publice in omnibus eorum Ec∣clesijs antiquissimis constitutis in Syriâ, Mesopotamiâ, Chaldaeâ, Aegypto, & deni{que} in universi Orientis partibus dispersis ac disseminatis, lectam esse ac legi, in Diatribâ de Chaldaicae lingua Utilitate confirmat Georgius Amira Syrus. Cum enim haec in Ecclesiâ Antiochenâ (à quà Christianum nobis processit nomen) à primis us{que} temporibus recepta, & a veteribus Patribus (Melitone Sardens. Basilio Caesareens. Apollinario Laodiceno, Eusebio Eme∣seno, Diodoro Tarsensi, Theodoreto Cyrensi, Procopio Gazaeo, Hesychio, Polychronio, & authore Questionum & Respons. ad Orthodoxos quae Justi∣no Martyri tribuuntur) subinde citata fuerit: argumentum nobis praebet , loca textus Hebraici cum ea consentientia à posterioribus, Maso∣rethis & Judaeorum Rabbinis (quod isti nugatores clamitant) haudqua∣quam interpolari potuisse. Quare, sicut anteà Samaritanum, ita nunc Syri∣acum Pentateuchum per D. Freyum nostrum tibi mittendum duxi: ut ad Mosaicos quamprimùm libros ab ardelionis istius nefariâ Criticâ vindicandos aggredereris. Habeo & totius Veteris instrumenti librorum (quam mihi emptam in Sy∣riâ vidit D. Jacobus Golius) versionem similem, nec Canonicorum tantum sed Apocryphorum quo{que} adjuncto etiam Fl. Josephi de Macchabaeis. Hanc, & quicquid penès me est Samariticorum fragmentorum, tecum communica∣turus sum libens: si quando animum induxeris Parisiensem (quam expecta∣mus) Samaritani & Syriaci contextus editionem cum MSS. nostris exempla∣ribus comparare. Id enim tantum relinquitur peragendum; primae editio∣nis gloriâ, quam Academiae vestrae optabam, aliorum festinatione jam prae∣reptâ. Ne{que} alium in finem quaternio ille Arabico-Samaritanus, elegantis∣simo Charactere exaratus, à me missus fuerat, quam ut formulae archetypae, quas matrices vocant, inde exprimerentur si, quod sperabam, Editio ista a∣pud vos procederet. Integrum verò Samaritanum Pentateuchum in Arabi∣cam & Cuthaeis vernaculum linguam translatum extat: licet ea solum pars, quae Genesin & Deuteronomion complectitur, ad meas manus pervenerit. Sunt etiam apud me nummi fex aenei vetustissimi, partim Phoeniciis partim Arabicis literarum notis (longe ante tempora Mahummedica) insigniti: quorum usus fortasse aliquis in dissertatione de Samaritanorum Characterum origine esse poterit. Arabici Psalterii tria habui exemplaria, satis antiqua: quorum unum D. Londinensi Episcopo, Academiae Oxoniensis dignissimo Cancellario, cum aliquam multis aliis codicibus MSS. nuper à me donatum est: alterum quod D. Gulielmo Bedwello commodaveram, eo jam vitâ functo, vix est ut recu∣perari a me posse sperem: Bibliotheca mea tertium adhuc conservat. Habeo & Genefim Arabicè ex Graeco versam, & amplo commentario explicatam: Arabicas quo{que} Homilias in Sacrae Historiae partem, à Josepho incipientes. Eâdem linguâ Chrysostomi Conciones Quadragesimales habeo, quae in no∣stris desiderantur libris, & Graecis & Latinis. Arabicum quo{que} Nomocano∣men possideo; in quo veterum Synodorum Canones ad certos titulos redu∣cti continentur.
E. Syriacis Ephraemi, praeter tractatum quem habes de amore Sapientiae, Hymni apud me sunt de Humilitate, Rescipiscentiâ, Fine seculi, Gog & Ma∣gog, Monachis & Eremitis; Nocturnae meditatio contra ebrietatem & cra∣pulam: & Praecationum liber. Item Hymni varii Alphabetici. Habeo & Syriacum in quatuor Evangelia Commentarium: & in universa ferè Biblia alterum Thesauri Secretorum titulo praenotatum: cui & quatuor Tabulae Chronologieae sunt insertae. 1. Patriarcharum, ab Adamo ad Mosem. 2. Judicum, à Josuâ ad Samuelem. 3. Regum à Saule ad Sedechiam. 4. Imperatorum exterorum à Nebuchadnetsare ad Vespatianum us{que} Librum Sermonum in dies festos his addas licet: & Syriacam Grammaticam absolutissimam. Samaritica verò scripta, praeter Pentateuchum, quae nactus sum omnia ad communem amicum nostrum D. Johannem Seldenum trans∣misi: à quo, quod contineant poteris rescisere: & de nostris quidem ha∣ctenùs. Accepi, simul cum Canonicarum Epistolarum Editione Syrà, eruditissimas tuas in quatuor Evangelia Animadversiones: in quibus quod culpem nihil est, si prosusam mei (nihil tale promeriti) laudationem exceperis. Omni∣no luculentum opus est, & reconditâ multiplici{que} doctrinâ refertum: nec, si me audias, prius conquiesces quam pari diligentiâ & simili Commentationis genere quod Novi Testamenti est reliquum illustraveris. Nihil enim certe in morte olarissimi Amanae amisisse nos video, quod non Academia vestra Lugdunensis in Te, in Imperatore, in Golio, abunde compenset. Reliquit vero filium post se doctissimus Buxtorffius, qui Parentis vestigiis & loco insi∣stens, magnam de se apud omnes spem eoncitat, inprimis sacrarum literarum studiosos: dum, quod audio, Rabbinicum studium sacris aliquando medita∣tionibus concionando temperat. Vidi & ego specimen Concordantiarum Patris, quas pro merito magni facio; majori tamen desiderio expecto Lexi∣con, de quo filius ad Clariss. Heinssum: quandoquidem (quod à Bux∣torssio P. verissime est notatum) id quod dederunt nobis Parisienses, bono publico parum consulat. Loco tuorum remitto munera  plane : Praedestinatianae (quae Ecclesias vestras tantopere perturbat) Controversiae Historiam, & Veterum Epistolarum Hibernicarum sarraginem: utram{que} manu meâ correctam, ut si deinceps fortè edantur, ex isto  paulo prodire possint emendatio∣res. Tu donum ipsum non spectabis, quod est profecto leviculum, sed ani∣mum summè erga te affectum donantis, qui est Totus tuus, Jacobus Usserus Armacanus. Dublinii, V. Idus Junias, 1632. S D. Casauboni apud vos edendae sint Epistolae; habeo illius aliquot, quas Typographo im∣pertiam.
LETTER CLXXV. Admodum Reverendo in Christo fratri. D. Ludovico de Dieu, Ecclesiae Lugduno-Batavae Pastori dignissimo. Leydam. Salutem in Christo Jesu. COnsilium tuum de Syriacis Ephraemi in lucem proferendis valdè mihi probatur. Ad editionem illam adornandam tres codices per Hubnerum nostrum ad te deferendas curo, manu satis eleganti descriptos. In ipso primi vestibulo occurrunt, qui in publicâ vestrâ Bibliothecâ asservantur, de Humilitate & de Resipiscentiâ Tractatus: in ejusdem quo{que} libri fine repetiti: adjecto initio sermonis in festum Palmarum quem vos habetis integrum. In eodem volumine Hymnus de Monachis & Eremitis extat, qui in publica; nec non de Gog & Magog, at{que} alter de Amore doctrinae tractatus, qui in privata D. Golii habetur Bibliothecâ. Illa verò de amore doctrinae Paraenesis ordine conscripta est Alphabetico: (quod in Goliano apographo non vide∣tur à librario fuisse animadversum, qui à voce  eam est exorsus) ac jam pridem habetur edita, non Latinè solùm, in Ephraemò Gerardi Vossii; sed Syriacè etiam, in Isaaci Sciadrenfis Rudimento Syriaco, quod Romae An∣no 1618. ex Maronitarum Collegio prodiit, in quo & hoc, & aliud Ephrae∣mi Canticum legitur, cujus initium; Lux quae orta est justis. Tabulae Chronologicae Thesauro secretorum inserta Graecorum supputa∣tionem & ipsae sequuntur: sed annotata simul Hebraeorum diversa numerandi ratione. Aliae autem sunt à Canone illo Chronographico, qui Syriaco Pen∣tateucho subnexus est: in quo notatio illa, quae authoritatem  Hebraicae praefert veritati, à Graecae potius quàm Latinae Ecclesiae addicto Monacho profecta fuisse videatur. Verùm de hâc annorum  Pa∣triarcharum , in Chronologicis nostris (Deo favente) plenius diffe∣rendi aliquando dabitur occasio. Ad Gotteschalchum verò nostrum quod attinet: novam illius editionem tantisper differendam censeo, dum subsidia ad eam locupletandam ex Gallia mihi promissa accepero. Doctissimum Salmasium sedem inter vos fixisse gaudeo. Scripsisse eum ad∣versus Joh. Morini exercitationes, literis superiore Februario Lutetia ad me datis significatum est. Sed neque illius (si qua edita) ne{que} ipsius Simeonis de Muys Responsionum adhuc videre contigit: quanquam desiderii nostri impatientiam aliquantum hîc linierint eruditissimae tuae in aliquot Samaritani Pentateuchi loca Observationes; at{que} illa in Genes. x. 19. inprimis. Ubi Do∣sitheum haeresiarcham (Hebraicae lectionis apud Samaritas corruptorem) non id solùm fefellit, quòd angustam Cananaeorum acceptionem à latiore, sed etiam quòd Terrae Israëliticae (à Cananaeis olim insessae) terminos ab Imperii [Confir. distinct. Deut. 20. 10, 11, 16, 17.] Israëlitici finibus nesciverit distinguere. Propria enim Israëlitarum patria erat Canaaena illa [Angustior di∣stinguitur à Gi∣liade. i. Paraeà, Josu. 22. 9, 32.] latior, in qua tribus quae{que} sedem suam sortitò obtinuit, pulsis inde septem Cananaeorum nationibus (Act. 13. 19.) universi verò po∣puli Israëlitici Imperium, suorum armis Deinceps propagandum, hinc us{que} ad ingressum Aegypti, inde us{que} ad Euphratem protendebatur, quos am∣plissimos [Jos. 24. 11, 12 cum Exit. 23. 31. & Deut. 7. 1, 20.] imperii hujus limites. 1 Reg. 4. 21. invenimus designatos: ubi in omnia regna, à fluvio us{que} ad limitem Aegypti, imperium Salomon habuisse dicitur, fluvio nimirùm Euphrate, Syriae Zobaeae limite, quem pater illius David subjugaverat (2 Sam. 8. 3. x. 19.)
Admodum placuit quo{que} tua vocabuli  ex Ephraemo interpretatio; non minus placitura &  illa altera, si firma aliqua ratione ostendi posset, ante Syro-macedonum tempora Hebraeos vel interluniorum, vel novilunio∣rum, vel pleniluniorum ullam omninò in mensibus suis rationem habuisse. Gratissima mihi suit à te missa de Janne & Jambre dissertatio; ut & praeclari illius Lexici, unde ea excerpta est, specimen apud vos impressum, charactere & ordine tali operi convenientissimo. Deus Opt. Max. egregiis tuis conatibus adsit, & laboribus benedicat, Ja. U. Ar. Dublinii, Idibus Juniis, Ann. MDCXXXIII. LETTER CLXXVI. A Letter from the Learned John Buxtorff, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Viro Reverendissimo & Amplissimo D. Jacobo Usserio Archie∣piscopo Armachano dignissimo, &c. Domino meo pluri∣mùm colendo & observando.Vir Reverendissime; QUòd ego tenuissimae, & infimae conditionis homuncio, ex ultimis Germaniae oris. Te in florentissimo Hiberniae Regno, Virum primarium, in summa Ecclesiasticae dignitatis sede constitutum, literis meis compellare; ac in tan∣ta tali{que} negotiorum mole interturbare audeo, id ne meae vel temeritati vel ambitioni à Rev. T. D. attribuatur, ut decet, observanter peto; quamvis enim jam ante aliquos annos insignis Tuae pietatis & eruditionis, maximae eti∣am in linguis Orientalibus peritiae fama apud nos percrebuerit, & ad aures meas pervenerit, ita ut vel hinc stimulus mihi ad ambitiunculam aliquam Fa∣voris Tui quaerendi, dari potuerit: tamen, quia meo me novi metiri modu∣lo, facilè agnovi, longè & aetate, & eruditione & conditione inferiorem me esse, quàm ut tantorum Heroum limina salutare, vel amicitiam sollicitare Debeam. Quadriennium est, ex quo D. Matthias Pasor, Oxoniae tùm literas Syriacas & Arabicas docens, in suis ad me literis T. D. amplissimam men∣tionem fecit & de loco quodam in Bibliis Hebraicis à Patre meo editis, à R. T. in libro quodam Anglicano censoria virgula notato monuit, petens ut ad id responsi aliquid sibi subministrem operam se daturum, ut D. T. id in∣notescat. Respondi equidem D. Pasori sed nescio an aliquid de eo ad T. D. perlatum fuerit. Bibliothecae Tuae instructissimae, & libris Orientalibus quo∣que refertissimae publicum encomium legi in Commentario IV Evangg. Ludovici de Dieu, Amici mei singularis, quod & ipsum in admirationem & amorem Tui me abripuit. Nihil tamen horum eò me impellere potuisset, quò nunc progressus sum, nisi à Doctissimo & Praestantissimo populari meo D. Jacobo Frey, Proregis vestri Filii Illustrissimi, Ephoro & Moderatore cùm per literas tum ore tenùs nunc ad id faciendum instigatus fuissem. Is enim de T. D. erga Parentem meum defunctum, & erga me superstitem amico affectu, candidoque de laboribus nostris publicis judicio, tàm prolixè retulit, ut firmiter tandem mihi persuaserim, non ingratum Tibi fore, si
ipsemet per Literas studiorum partim praeteritorum partim praesentium rationem reddam, & de quibus R. T. certior nostro nomine fieri cup it ex me ipso intelligat. Intellexi ex D. Passore & D. Frey R. T. in Bibliis Parentis p. m. id desi∣derare quod castrata & à censoribus Romanis expurgata exemplaria, poste∣riores sc. editiones venetas, sit secutus, at{que} id monere in libro suo Anglica∣no, ex occasione loci ex Aben Esra, Gen. 37. 35. Hoc quod attinet, sciat velim T. R. exemplar illud, ex quo in nostris Bibliis Basileensibus expressa sunt Commentaria Rabbinorum, fuisse tertiam editionem venetam, non quòd illud prae caeteris eligeretur, sed quia ita se fortè obtulit & prioribus editionibus emendatius esse credebatur. Deinde quòd illa quae contra Christi∣anos faciunt non fuerint, restituta, factum esse, partim mandato & voluntate Magistratus nostri qui eâ lege permisit editionem illam, ut ne quid vel in Christum blasphemi, vel in Christianos & Christianam Religionem male∣dici & contumeliosi in iis relinqueretur. Et qui novit persecutiones & odia gravissima quae occasione Bibliorum istorum in hac ipsa Urbe, contra se excitavit Pater meus non mirabitur, ipsum sibi ab istius modi Judaeorum cavillis exprimendis cavisse. Ad haec, collegerat illa loca omnia Pater me∣us, & in praefatione, quam illis praefigere volebat proponere voluit. Quia autem post absolutam editionem aliud Consilium ceperat, de triplici Commentario addendo, Masorethico sc. Chaldaico, & Hebraeo, in Com∣mentarium Hebraicum ista reservabat, vel in peculiarem Tractatum quam parabat de Blasphemiis Judaeorum contra Christianos. Masorethicum Com∣mentarium edidit. Commentarium Chaldaicum, qui notas continet Criticas in universum Targum, confectum penes me habeo edendum, quam primùm meliora his studiis affulserint tempora. Commentarium Hebraicum, in quo de lingua Hebraica, & Hebraeorum codicum puritate agere volebat in∣choavit, & jam aliquo us{que} perduxit, sed non absolvit. In hoc quo{que} co∣gitabat prolixe & speciatim agere, de Keri uketif, Tikkun Sopherim, de Punctorum vocatium origine, aliisque rebus, ad hanc materiam spectantibus. Cogitabat etiam his subnectere Tractarum de Lectione Rabbinorum. Sed partim alii labores, partim parcae iniquae ea nobis inviderunt. Locum autem Aben Ezra Gen. 37. 35.  ita quo{que} expressum invenio in nostra editione. Sed in tertia editione ve∣neta vox  est omissa. Similis locus est Gen. 18. ab initio in eo∣dem,  Errantes spiritu dicunt, h. e. Christiani. Pro quo in Bib. Bas. ex tertia editione veneta substitutum.  Numb. 24. 19. R. Sal. ad  in veneta secunda editione est,  Zach. 13. 7. ad verba  percute Pasto∣rem, R. Sal. glossa,  videri potest etiam in Kimchio Obad. 1. ab initio. Jes. 34. 1. & Jes. 31. 1. R. Sal. Jer. 31. 40.  invitis haereticis. Jes. 9. 6.  in edit. veneta, pro quo in Bas.  Talia loca & alibi reperiuntur, quae majore ex parte in Lexico Rabbinico sparsim reperies. Talia etiam sunt in Paraphrase Chaldaica. Thren. 5. 11. priores editiones Venetae  poste∣riores & Bas.  Numb. 24. 19. in libris antiquis legitur, ut & Elias addcit,  jesa. 54.  Bas.  Videri potest etiam Mich. 7. 8. & ibid. R. Solomon. sic & v. 10. Psal. 108. 11. Thren. 4. 22. 1 Sam. 2. 5. Jesa. 34, &c. Haec & alia loca in Commentario Chaldaico Parentis diligenter sunt annotata, & ex antiquis exemplaribus restituta. De punctorum apud Hebraeos origine Pater meus constanter in ea sen∣tentia permansit, antiquius inventum esse Masorethis, & eo semper colli∣mavit,
ut illorum antiquitatem ad Esram referret, sic{que} tanto certius divi∣nam quo{que} authoritatem illis assereret. Nam si ita est, ut Lutherus ali∣cubi Grammaticos monet, ut Lectionem, ubi Grammatica id patitur, auda∣citer contra Judaeos corrigamus & emendemus, & quod Mercerus Vir doctiss. vult, non adstricti esse debeamus ad Lectionem vocalium audactos judices & emendatores passim reperiemus. Ad librum illum qui sub Erpenii nomine prodiit consultò noluit respondere Pater meus. Existimabat adhuc ad plena∣riam quaestionis illius Tractationem Authores quosdam esse—à Judaeis ex quibus uti ipse ad Capellum scripsit, antiquiora quaedam speravit. In Tibe∣riade non ex professo illam quaestionem tractavit tantùm Masorethas illos Ti∣berienses Elianos indagare voluit, & num qui tum super vocales scripserint iidem fuerint & vocalium inventores. Quod non obscurè se demonstrasse autumavit. Sane à nonnullis Pontificiis ipsis id eo us{que} obtinuit, ut in ejus concesserint sententiam, prout literae ex ipsa urbe Româ ad eum scriptae (quas abservo) id testantur. Plurima habuit, quae ad—illam tractan∣dam summo studio à longis Annis collegerat quae, si per vitam longiorem saepius optavit, licuisset ei digerere & publice proponere, Capello & aliis viris doctis novos scrupulos injecissent & forte eos in aliam sententiam per traxissent. Author ipse erat Capello, ut diutius suum tractatum premeret, ne{que} adhuc juris publici faceret. Nam habuimus & legimus eum antequam imprimeretur. Sed aliter visum est ei & D. Erpenio p. m. sine tamen ulla ejus offensione. Magis enim sollicitus erat pater meus ingravescente praesertim aetate de Lexico suo absolvendo, in quo tot Annos tam improbos labores jam exantlarat. Et Divinâ assistente gratiâ om∣nes literas absolvit, sed confusè admodum ita ut necesse fuerit omnia de novo digerere, & describere, qui meus fuit labor hoc biennio, à quo Con∣cordantias Hebraeas absolutas dedi, ut nunc nihil aliud restat, nisi Typo∣graphus promptus & Mecaenates, quorum favore & auxilio in lucem eda∣tur. Viginti quatuor nunc sunt anni ex quo prima fundamenta jecit, sed spero in plures annos victurum & duraturum. Editionem jam remorantur calamitosa haec tempora, quibus & Typographi ne gratis quidem libros imprimendos suscipiant, tantum abest ut aequo pro laboribus pretio illos velint redimere, & Patroni viris doctis desunt, qui alacritatem ipsorum ex∣citent & foveant. Providebit autem Deus. Ego sanè nihil non agam ut quamprimum fieri potest, lucem aspiciat. Volebam ad has nundinas Ti∣tulum ejus imprimi curare, sed certo Consilio id distuli. Ut interim R. T. D. gustum aliquem totius operis accipiat, delineationem quandam Tituli hic adjungo. Quantitate, ni fallor, superabit Lexicon Schindleri: sed longè alià ratione est conscriptum. Porrò monuit me etiam D. Freyus in suis ad me literis D. T. judicare me operam non perditurum, si pari ratione, quâ in transferendo More Nevochim incepi, authores etiam nonnullos Historicos transferendos susce∣perem, ut  &  quod ab eo tempore nil simile tentari causa fuit quòd hactenus in Parentis laboribus edendis & absolvendis de∣tentus fuerim, & adhuc detinear. Videbo autem, ut inposterum osten∣dam me T. R. judicium magni-fecisse. Haud difficile illud erit, si otium ad ea suppet &  habeo; sed alterum non. Invenio in adversariis meis, me anteà in Academiâ Archipalatinâ eum vidisse, sed ubi nunc sit, novit Deus, ubi impressus sit, ignoro. Inquiram autem, saepè citatur in Juchasin. Quod si tranquilliora essent tempora varia haberem, quae juris publici facerem. Communicavi nuper cum D. Constant. l'Empereur Sepher Hizzachon Manuscriptum, quem in fallor tranferendum & refutan∣dum suscipiet. Sed excedo modum Epistolae. Haec visum est ad ea quae R. T. D. nomine mihi proposita fuerunt respondere. Ea ut aequi boni{que}
consulat, me{que} illustri suo favore & Patrocinio dignetur, humillime rogo, Deum Opt. Max. animitùs orans ut R. T. D. quam diutissimè Ecclesiae suae bono sospitare velit. Dab. Basil. Anno 1633. d. 26. Aug. Reverendiss. Dignit T. addictissimus Johannes Buxtorfius, Linguae Sanctae in Academiâ Basileensi Professor. LETTER CLXXVII. A Letter from Constantinus l'Empereur ab Oppych, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Illustrissimo Praesuli D Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Armachano, Hyberniae Primati.Su. S. V. S. P. à D. Jesu. Illustrissime Praesul! NON sum is qui rem nihili censeat, viros magnos morari in seriis ne∣gotiis quibus assidue distinentur: novi quanti sit Ecclesiae vel uni praeesse, nedum tot ac tantis, quae tempus vacuum praeterfluere non sinunt ut alias lucubrationes praeteream quibus & absentes ac posteritatem doces. Nihilo secius, opportunitatem commodissimam ab iis nactus, qui singularem illustris dignitatis tuae benignitatem & comitatem mihi depraedicarunt, in ipsa fiduciam concepi, non ingratum fore, si cujus compellandi causa vel longum iter susciperem, eundem epistolari alloquio in tanta literas deferen∣tium commoditate affarer. Adjungerem etiam quaedam opuscula mea, nisi jam satis diu edita essent, adeo{que} nullus dubitarem quin in instructissimum penu illata sint. Sed olim (de quo mihi admodum gratulor) manuscrip∣tum codicem accepi satis carie attritum, quò à Judaeo quodam congestum est, quicquid adversus religionem Christianam afferre at{que} objicere Judaei possunt, quod quidem alicujus sit momenti. Hunc Rabbinicum codicem ubi in latinum Sermonem convertero (id enim ago) & objectionibus respon∣dero: faciam Deo dante ut Illustrissima tua dignitas exemplar quampri∣mum habeat. Et quandoquidem intellexi, ex antiquis & raris Manuscrip∣tis illustrissimam tuam dignitatem percipere magnam venustatem, reticere nequeo, quin & de alio Manuscripto (cujus me compotem fecit D. Bux∣torfius) mentionem injiciam: nomen est Nizahon. virulentum scriptum contra Christianos. Vertere etiam coepi, ut eodem modo edam, at{que} trans∣mittam. Porrò cum in D. tuâ instructissimá Bibliothecâ Syriacum in Bi∣blia Commentarium esse intellexerim sive Thesaurum secretarium; at{que} ab iis qui vetus Testamentum transferunt in linguam Belgicam rogatus sim, ut observationes ad loca difficiliora porrò suppeditem: si optare liceret, istius Syriaci in Hagiographa & Prophetas posteriores Commentarii usum ad tempus concedi exoptarem. Nam Pentateuchum & reliquos Historicos quod concernit, istos jam examinarunt revisores (ut vocant) at{que} ad Ha∣giographa pergunt. In locis dubiis Abrabanielem meum (omnium Com∣mentatorum coryphaeum) consulere soleo: sed ne is quidem per omnia satisfacit. Attamen ne vel minimum quidem hac mea petitione D. tuae commodis obesse velim: ne{que} committendum censeo ut liber adeo rarus cum discrimine & amittendi periculo in incertum mittatur; verum suo
loco relinquendum, si tuta mittendi ratio desit, existimo. De Chronico Sama∣ritanorum Arabico, cum collega D. Golio egi: quod D. tuae votum esse cognoscerem ut ex Arabico in Latinum verteretur. Sed tot jam negotiis se implicitum quaeritur, ut hoc tempore id praestare nequeat: ita enim praeter stata negotia undique sollicitari, ut suus non sit. Cyclium deni{que} Paschalem V. M. (de quo D. t. ad Dominum Frey perscripserat) in nostra Bibliotheca nondum invenire potui. Hactenus curas tuas interpellari; boni quaeso consulas: tua facilitate fretus, id feci, qui mea officia offero. Illustrissimae dignitati tuae, cujus cliens audire gestio Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych. Ludg-Bat. 16 Kal. Dec. An. 1633. Partae salutis. LETTER CLXXVIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to Dr. Ward. Good Doctor; I Received with your last Letter, the Penitential Canons of Maimonides, for which I heartily thank you: In lieu whereof, I hereby send you the History of Gottheschalcus, (the first Latin Book, I suppose, that ever was printed in Ireland); I have directed it (as you see) to Mr. Vossius; but upon your advertisement, forbore to commit the publication of it unto him. For the Arminian Questions, I desire never to read any more than my Lord of Salisbury's Lectures touching Predestination and Christ's Death; and yours concerning Grace and Free-will; together with the determina∣tion of the Question of Perseverance, which you shewed unto me, The Book of Scotus in Benet-Colledg, I guess to be the same with a Manuscript which I have my self, without the Author's Name, beginning thus; Quod status Praelatorum, viz. pastorum Ecclesiae presupponit statum alium, probatur sic. I had thought the other had been written by Johannes Erigena, or else I had not much desired it: but now I discern it came from Johannes Duns, I do not much esteem it. If I be not deceived, being once in talk of Scaliger at your Table, Mr. Mead made mention of some Mistake of his, in the Fragments of Aby∣denus, or Berosus, which he hath published at the end of his Book De Emen∣datione Temporum, but what it was, I cannot call to remembrance: If you have a better memory, I pray you help mine; or else enquire of Mr. Mead himself when you shall next see him. I received a very kind Letter from Mr. Vossius, for my History of Gottheschalcus. A Copy of your Writings, touching the Efficacy of Baptism, and the Questions, with the Remon∣strants, I much desire. Dr. Twisse I see (as you feared) hath followed the rigid part. I have gotten a good large Fragment of the beginning of Clement's genu∣ine Epistle to the Corinthians. Your own most assured, Ja. Armachanus. Dublin, April 30. 1634.
LETTER CLXXIX. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord; I Received your Grace's Letter of the 30th of April, for which I humbly thank your Lordship, and crave pardon withal of my long silence. I am right sorry to hear of the late decease of the worthy Bishop of Derry; Boni deficiunt, mali proficiunt. I heard, before the receipt of your Lord∣ship's Letter, of it at London. I heard also there, that Dr. Bramhall of our Colledg was likely to succeed him: I pray God he may succed him, as in place, so in all his Vertues and vertuous Actions. I pray God to be assistant to the Parliament of State with you, and to bless all the Proceedings there∣in, and to give an happy success to that Honourable Meeting, in all their Important Affairs. For my Lectures of the Eucharist, I have as yet no lei∣sure to transcribe them, nor others touching the Remonstrants. As for my Lord of Sarum his Readings, I will see if I can get Mr. Burnet to procure them to be transcribed. As for an Answer to the Animadversions you men∣tion, I will (God willing) e're long send your Lordship a Copy of them. The Author of the Animadversions is now with us. We have had some do∣ings here of late about one of Pembrook-Hall, who preaching in St. Mary's, about the beginning of Lent, upon that Text, James 2. 22. seemed to avouch the insufficiency of Faith to Justification, and to impugn the Doctrine of our 11th Article of Justification by Faith only; for which he was convented by the Vice-Chancellor, who was willing to accept of an easy acknowledg∣ment: but the same Party preaching his Latin Sermon, pro gradu, the last week, upon Rom. 3. 28. he said, he came not, palinodiam canere, sed eandem cantilenam canere; which moved our Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Love, to call for his Sermon; which he refused to deliver. Whereupon, upon Wednesday last, being Barnaby day, the day appointed for the admission of the Batche∣lors of Divinity, and the choice of the Batchelors of Divinity, which must answer Die comitiorum; he was stayed by the major part of the Suffrages of the Doctors of the Faculty. And though sundry Doctors did favour him, and would have had him to be the Man that should answer Die comitiorum, yet he is put by, and one Mr. Flatkers of our Colledg chosen to answer. Whose first Question is, Sola sides justificat. 2. Realis praesentia Christi in Eucharistia non ponit Transubstantiationem. The truth is, there are some Heads among us, that are great Abettors of Mr. Tourney, the Party above mentioned, who no doubt are backed by others. I pray God we may persist in the Doctrine of our Church, con∣tained in our Articles and Homilies. Innovators are too much favoured now a-days. Our Vice-Chancellor hath carried Business for Matter of Religion, both stoutly and discreetly. Dr. Lane died on Sunday last, and was buried in the night upon Tuesday, in St. John's Colledg. It may be you are willing to hear of our University Affairs. I may truly say, I never knew them in worse condition since I was a Member thereof, which is almost 46 years. Not but that I hope the greater part is Ortho∣dox; but that new Heads are brought in, and they are backed in maintain∣ing Novelties, and them which broach new Opinions, (as I doubt not but
you hear) others are disgraced and checked when they come above, as my self was by my Lord of York the last Lent, for favouring Puritans in Consi∣story; and all from false Informations from hence, which are believed with∣out any examination. At that time also I intreated my Lord of Canterbury to speak to the Dean of Wells that now is (who had sundry times excepted against me for not residing three months per Annum, as I should by Char∣ter) which I nothing doubt but it was by his instigation, he promised me then he would; but not having done it yet, I repaired again to my Lord's Grace about it in November. But now he cannot, for that his Majesty hath given him in charge to take account of the Bishops in his Province, how Re∣sidence is kept. I told him my Case was not every Man's Case; and that I had a Benefice, at which I desired to be in the Vacation-Time; but no∣thing would prevail. And yet, as I told him, I am every Year at Wells, sometimes a month or six weeks. I think they would have me out of my Professor's place, and I could wish the same, if I could have one to suc∣ceed according to my mind, for then I should have leasure to transcribe things. Well, howsoever, God's Will be done, and he teach us Humility and Patience. I heard also of some doings with you. The Lord of Hea∣ven direct you and us, and teach us to submit to him in all things. I have not yet sent my Answer to Mr. Ch. but intend e're long. I have not fi∣nished yet one Point, to shew the Arminian Opinions were condemned in the Synods which condemned the Pelagian Heresy. At Mr. Burnet's impor∣tunity, who could not get a good Scrivener to transcribe my Lord of Sa∣rum's Readings, de Praedestinatione, & morte Christi; I gave way that he should send it to you; which I intreat your Lordship, if you have received it, to return it me, as soon and as safely as you conveniently can. The Tractate de Praedestinatianis, in defence of your Lordship (I know not your Adversary, nor his Name) is Dr. Twisses; it may be he hath sent your Lordship a Copy of it. He is a deserving Man. We have a Vice-Chancel∣lor that favoureth Novelties, both in Rites and Doctrines. I could write more, sed manum de Tabula: The greatest part of this was inclosed in the Letter your Lordship had sent Jan. 14. I made now a few additions. And so I rest, Your Grace's in all observance, Samuel Ward. Sidn. Coll. Jun. 14. 1634. Dr. Baden, a Dean with you in Ireland, answereth the Act, In Vesperiis Comitiórum. His Questions are 1. Justificatio non suscipit magis & minus. 2. Non dantur Consilia perfectionis supra legem.
LETTER CLXXX. A Letter from Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Illustrissimo Primati D. Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Ar∣machano, Hyberniae Primati.I. V. S. P. Vir Reverende; EST quod mihi admodum gratuler, qui, cum antea viro illustri non∣nisi de nomine innotuissem, & tamen quod in votis habebam audacter petiissem, tantam evestigio nactus sim benevolentiam, ut illustris tua dignitas expetitum commentariorum in sacras literas volumen Syriacum transmittere gravata non fuerit. Dabitur, Deo favente, opera ut fideliter in Hyberniam transmittatur, ubi usus fuero. In veteri Testamento spei meae non respondet: licet subinde notatur digna animad vertam. Ad textum Syriacum commentaria accommodata sunt; non verò (quod  suadebat) consultus fuit Ebraicus. Imo quantum adhuc videre possum, Syriacus, quo usus fuit, con∣textus è Graeco expressus fuit: ideo{que} saepe aliter legit author quam in Ebraeo extat. Aliquando etiam verba de industria secus collocat, quam invenit. Graecae Linguae peritiam prae se fert: & in Syriaca nimis anxiè, quae ad vo∣cales spectant, persequitur. Occidentalem Syrum fuisse, id est, viciniorem Mari Mediterraneo, ostendit quod sect. 28. Usa. annotat. Tandem hoc ob∣servo, (ut omnia conglomerem, quae è lectione in mentem veniunt) non satis ad messam applicare, quae ad ipsum passim directa fuere. Nihilominus pro usu istius libri gratias habeo maximas: inprimis cum praeclara annotentur in Testamentum Novum. Quae in c. 1. Matt. observata sunt evolvi; placent admodum. Caeterum, est in illustris D. T. Bibliotheca, uti intelligo, versio Syriaca duplex V. T. patruus autem meus D. Antonius Thysius paratum habet commentarium in duo priora cap. Genes. ubi Historiam creationis il∣lustrat. cui praemittere statuit versiones primarias: Ideoque summa diligen∣tia è variis autoribus, Symmachi, Theodotionis, Aquilae, &c. interpreta∣menta ita collegit, ut continuum contextum reddant. Ita{que} valdè sibi gra∣tum fore dicit, si versionem Syriacam ab Amanuensi aliquo descriptam obti∣nere in 2. cap. Gen. posset. Hoc vix à me impetro, ut subjungam: verum fortassis post libri editionem, istius consilii se non factum certiorem, D. tua aegre ferret: ut cui hoc unum cordi sit, prodesse publico. Hic subsisto, & Patri D. nostri I. Christi commendo, Illustrem tuam dignitatem, cujus permanere gestio cliens humil∣limus Constantinus L'Empe∣reur ab Oppych. Lug. Bat. 3. Kal. Jul. ā partae salutis, 1634.
LETTER CLXXXI. A Letter from Dr. Ward, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord; OUR Commencement is now over, where Dean Baden, now Dr. Ba∣den, did well perform his part, who answered the Act Vesperiis Comi∣tiorum. And so did the Batchelor of Divinity, Die Comitiorum, being one of the Fellows of our Colledg. The Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Love, did well perform his part, especially in encountring with one Franciscus de S. Chara, [but his true name is Davenport] who in a Book set forth at Doway, would re∣concile (si diis placet) our Articles of Religion, with the Definitions of the Council of Trent. But we have dismissed the Auditors this Year, with much more content than they were the Year before. Our Stirs we had a little before the Commencement, are prettily well over. There is a little Book intituled Brevis Disquisitio, which I suppose your Lordship hath seen: It containeth in it sundry, both Socinian and Pelagian Points; as also that the Body which shall be raised in the Resurrection, is not idem numero; also Souls do not live till the Resurrection; besides sundry other Points: It is printed Eleutheropoli: it is said it cometh out of Eaton-Colledg, and that Alesius should be the Author, who was at Dort with us. I am sorry such a Book should come thence. In my last Letters from my Lord of Kilmore, he was inquisitive of the Ancient Codes of Canons, as being desirous to in∣quire into the ancient Discipline of the Church. Your Lordship could di∣rect him for Books. If he would undertake it, he would do it to some purpose. And there are not many Books necessary to know the substance of it; as Codex Canonum Universalis Ecclesiae, & Codex Aphricanus; with Zonarus and Balsamon upon them, and the Trullan Canons, and Codex Romanus reprinted, which obtained in the Western Church. At better leisure I will write to him more at large. In the mean time, I told him your Lordship could show them all the fore-named. Thus in some haste. I beseech God to bless you, and your Parliament in all their weighty Affairs; and so intreat your Prayers for us. And so with my Salutations to you, my much honoured Lord, I com∣mend you to the gracious protection of the highest Majesty, resting, Your Lordship's in all affectionate observance, Samuel Ward. Cambridg, July 7. 1634.
LETTER CLXXXII. A Letter from Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. D. I. V. S. P. Praesul Venerande; TU denuò eum qui humanitatem tuam, ipsa fretus, literis fagitare non erubescit: quas fideliter datas sperare non desino, donec secus intelli∣gam. Postremis meis scripta quaedam à me publici juris facta transmisi: ubi inter caetera, quae de septuaginta septimanis Prophetae Danielis mea sit sen∣tentia vel conjectura plenè exposui: quemadmodum in transmissis ad Da∣nielem notis videre licet. Memini etiam quum de Gregorio Syro, cujus sunt istae Syriacae notae manuscriptae in V. & N. T. quum inquam de ipso agerem, me in hac fuisse sententia, eum usum fuisse Syra Versione è 70 concinnata: quod in Isaia eam alicubi cum Ebraeo, quam cum Graeco contextu magis con∣venire deprehendissem. Verum postea in isto scriptore amplius evolvendo sententiam mutavi: Commentatur enim ad versionem ex Ebraeo confectam; licet non usquequaque cum eo concordantem, sed aliquando ad Graecos inter∣pretes deflectentem. Ipse tamen initio commentariorum in Genesin, ubi se usum illa versione profitetur, cum originali Textum (quem tamen non intel∣lexit) exactissimè facere arbitratur. Caeterum, reverendissime Domine, est apud nos vir nobilis & doctissimus, qui omnium reformatarum Ecclesiarum confessiones editurus, aliquoties me sollicitavit, ne dignitatem tuam percun∣ctari gravarer, num extet propria Hybernicarum Ecclesiarum confessio. Existimat vir doctus & pius, non exiguam se reportaturum gratiam, si con∣sensu communissimo orthodoxiam confirmatum iret. Denique hic unà mitto Clavem Talmudicam nuper à me editam: quorsum & cui bono, docebit dissertatio ad lectorem. Hoc levidense munusculum aequi boni{que} facias quaeso: utpote ab eo profectum, qui tua merita deosculans, animum gratum si posset, aliquo signo ostendere anniteretur. Vale Antistes venerande, Deum veneror ut tuos conatus & labores prosperet. Dignitatis tuae cultor humillimus Constantinus L'Empereur ab Oppych. Dabam Lugd. Bat. 21 Dec. an. partae salutis, 1634.
LETTER CLXXXIII. A Letter from Mr. Francis Taylor, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri & Domino Jacobo Providen∣tia Divina Armachano apud Hibernos Archiepiscopo, totius Hiberniae Primati, & Metropolitano longè dignissimo. DOminationi tuae (Reverendissime in Christo Pater) in veteribus ab ipsis cunabulis exercitatissimae, Bibliorum Hebraicorum adversus Mo∣rini Samaritanismum defensionem hanc pro mea parte inscribere visum est. Cui enim potiùs quam tibi Episcopo Catholico & Orthodoxo Morini Pseudo∣catholici, qui nos oves Christi è pascuis virentibus arcere conatus est, technas retectas dedicarem Gratulor sane & ex animo gratulor Hiberniae tuae, cui tantum Praesulem tam insigniter eruditum, pium{que} Deus & Rex concessere: & gratulationis testimonium solenne inscriptionem hanc extare volui. Pecu∣liarem insuper Dominationi vestrae gratiam debet hoc opus, cujus sumptibus & cura exemplar Samaritanum nobis in Anglia primo communicatum suit; & in Bibliotheca Cottoniana, in doctorum seculis etiam futuris commodum, reconditum. Ex illo enim codice habuimus discrepantes Samaritani textus ab Hebraica veritate lectiones, quarum quanta fuerit utilitas, ac propemo∣dum necessitas ad rabiem Morini plene retundendam; non opus est hic dicere, siquidem suis id locis manifesto apparebit. Ad Cardinalem Gallum aspirat Morinus: cur non ego ad Archiepiscopum Hibernum Dedicationem hanc praeterea à me flagitat foelix ille calamus tuus, quo Pontificiae superstitionis fibras faeliciore quàm multi alii successu in utroque idiomate dissecuisti. Quoties Polemica tua vere aurea revolvo, nescio quo modo in ima cordis penetralia ingens autoris admiratio, ingens erga autorem affectus, nunquam nisi me moriente, moriturus irrepit. Urgent praeterea sacrae manus illae mihi sacrum munus adeunti inter alias impositae. Cogit denique quae mihi tecum intercessit, si de tanto viro tali verbo tam pusillo uti licuerit, per multos an∣nos continuata necessitudo. De operis necessitate non opus est longa praefa∣tione. Biblia Hebraica recepit Synagoga Judaica oraculorum divinorum custos, Rom. 3. 2. Ad nos eadem ista transmisit. Patres ad unum omnes pro authenticis habuere, in linguas alias transtulere, translationem discrepan∣tiam ex his correxere. In Ecclesia Romana viri doctissimi plurimi sacram eorum autoritatem scriptis suis communivere. Ecclesiae Orientales omnes approbavere. Protestantes pleno ore pro fonte sacro illa venerantur. Mo∣rinus Samaritanorum aduocatus interim in hoc Judaeis, quos oppug∣nat tamen, similis, nec Deo placet, & hominibus omnibus contrarius est. 1 Thess. 2. 15. Cum inprimis observatum esset dogmatibus Pontifici∣is parum propitios esse codices Hebraeos, reperti sunt, qui corruptos esse clamarent rivulos iis anteferrent. Sed fontem novum qui aperiret, ante Morinum inventus est nemo. Gratuletur patrono suo Ecclesia Pontificia. Nos interim libros sacros antiquos colimus, quibus usus est Christus ipse, & Apostoli, cum tamen characterum mutationem longe antea factam somniet Morinus. Cloaca quo magis agitatur, eo Mephitin exhalat magis. Morinus Samaritanis antiquis Samaritanior etiam evasit. Illi enim, teste Eulogio, Jesum filium Nave Prophetam praedictum, Mosi similem futurum, profite∣bantur. Librum ejus pro Canonico certò habuere, qui hanc illi gloriam tri∣buebant. At hunc librum nobis eripuit cùm aliis prophetiis Dositheus Mo∣rini antecessor. Det nobis Morinus charactere Samaritano scriptos Prophe∣tarum
libros, aut fateatur se plures scripturae sacrae codices quam dederit ab∣stulisse. Sed nec ferendum est hominem Christianum Samaritanos Dei hostes Judaeis Dei populo in libris sacris tuendis anteferre. Praecipuè cum constet Prophetas fuisse post commentitiam characterum mutationem in populo Ju∣daico; in Samaritano nullos. Cur non ergo Samaritana Biblia nobis reli∣quere Prophetae Cur de tanta mutatione silent Cur apud Haereticos se∣pulta Biblia in lucem Spiritu Divino eos illustrante non producunt Ut tace∣am Morini in Sacris Literis tractandis magistralitatem, qui eodem jure in his quo Sorbona in aliis censurâ afficiendis utitur. Hoc placet, illud displicet, quando{que} Samaritanus codex, quando{que} Latinus, Graecus semper, nunquam illi Hebraicus approbatur. Si prout meritus est, verbis asperioribus non∣nunquam castigetur Morinus, nemo nobis vitio vertat ne{que} enim cum Haere∣tico aliquo res est, qui articulum fidei unum aut alterum negat, aut textum peculiarem aliter quàm veritas posuit interpretatur, sed cum eo qui fontes sacros in universum abripit, & pro Deo Israelis falsi Messiae adulteria nobis obtrudit. Nec ignorantiam nobis objiciat quis, quòd Jesuitam eum appelle∣mus. Indignaretur, sat scio, Morinus, si Congregationis Oratoriae Iesu Christi Presbyterum titulo isto non dignaremur. Liber certè totus Jesuiticum spiritum, frontem perfrictam Societati illi familiarem nimis, prodit. Si quid sit, quod ulteriorem disquisitionem requirat, totum illud, si respondere Mo∣rino visum fuerit, in replicatione fusiùs tractabitur. Prelo aliàs impraesentiarum vacante oblata vulgandi opportunitas festinationem operis urgebat. Haec in∣terim habui, quae tibi, dummodo id placeat (quod pro singulari tua tum pietate tum candore nullus ambigo) in perpetuum erga Dominationem tuam studii & observantiae meae monumentum dedicarem. Deus verbi sui majesta∣tem contra omnes impiorum latratus potenter ipse tueatur, & per totum or∣bem indiès ampliùs diffundat; Te verò Hibernae gentis ornamentum in Chri∣stianae Religionis emolumentum diutissimè in terris florentem conservare, tandem{que} (sero tamen) in gloriam sempiternam recipere dignetur. Cla∣phamae. Calend. April. 1635. Reverendissimae Dominationi tuae addictissimus Franciscus Tailerus. LETTER CLXXXIV. A Letter from the most Reverend William Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo. My very good Lord; I Thank you heartily for your Letters, and am as heartily glad that your Parliament and Convocation are so happily ended, especially for the Church; and that both for the particular of your letting Leases, which is for Maintenance, and for the quiet, and well-ordering and ending of your Book of Canons. I hope now the Church of Ireland will begin to flourish again, and that both with inward Sufficiency, and outward Means to support it. And for your Canons, to speak Truth, and with wonted li∣berty and freedom; though I cannot but think the English Canons entire,
(especially with some few amendments) would have done betterly yet since you, and that Church, have thought otherwise, I do very easily submit to it, and you shall have my Prayers that God would bless it. As for the Particular about Subscription, I think you have couched that well, since as it seems, there was some necessity to carry that Article closely. And God forbid you should, upon any occasion, have rouled back upon your former Controversy about the Articles. For if you should have risen from this Convocation in heat, God knows when or how that Church would have cooled again, had the cause of Difference been never so slight. By which means the Romanist, which is too strong a Party already, would both have strengthned, and made a scorn of you. And therefore ye are much bound to God, that in this nice and picked Age, you have ended all things cano∣nically, and yet in peace. And I hope you will be all careful to continue and maintain that which God hath thus mercifully bestowed upon you. Your Grace's very loving Friend, and Brother, W. Cant. Lambeth, May 10. 1635. LETTER CLXXXV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Ward. Good Doctor; I Have been almost tired with continual attendance on out long continued Parliament and Convocation; which being done, they would needs im∣pose upon me also the moderating of the Divinity Act; and the creating of the Doctors at our last Commencement. I am now at last retired from Dub∣lin to my old: Place, where I begin at length, Redire in gratiam cum veteribus Amicis. I send you herewith Harrys his Book against the Friars, and our New Canons. The Articles of Religion agreed upon in our former Synod, Anno 1615, we let stand as they did before. But for the manifesting of our Agreement with the Church of England, we have received and approved your Articles also, concluded in the Year 1562, as you may see in the first of our Canons. But while we strive here to maintain the Purity of our ancient Truth, how cometh it to pass that you in Cambridg do cast such stumbling∣blocks in our way by publishing unto the World such rotten Stuff as Shel∣ford hath vented in his five Discourses; wherein he hath so carried himself, ut Famosi Perni amanuensem possis agnoscere. The Jesuits of England sent over the Book hither to confirm our Papists in their obstinacy, and to assure them that we are now coming home unto them as fast as we can; I pray God this Sin be not deeply laid to their charge, who give an occasion to our blind thus to stumble. I thank you most heartily for communicating my Lord of Salisbury's Le∣ctures unto me, they are excellent, learnedly, foundly, and perspicuously performed, and I hope will do much good here for the establishing of our
young Divines in the present Truth; Will you not make us as much be∣holden unto you for your own Lectures upon the other Questions You may not think that the same accurateness is expected in the Writings which you privately communicate unto your Friends, as in that which you are to commit unto the Press, after you have added supremam manum thereunto. Neither were it amiss that you should make a Collection of all your Determi∣nations, as you see the Bishop of Salisbury hath done; and cause your Lectures of the Eucharist to be transcribed, and left in a safe hand, that it may not (as I have heretofore warned you) periclitari in unico exemplari. Of these particulars I desire to hear your Resolutions in your next Letters; and in the mean time recommend you and your godly Labours unto God's good Blessing; evermore resting, Your most assured loving Brother, Ja. Armachanus. Drogheda, Sept. 15. 1635. LETTER CLXXXVI. A Letter from the Learned Ludovicus de Dieu, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Amplissime, Celsissim, Doctrina juxta ac Pietate excultissime Vir; PAulo minus est Biennio, quod literis meis amplissimam tuam Digni∣tatem salutavi, additis etiam meis in Acta Apostolorum observatiun∣culis, quas amplissimo tuo nomini, etsi tanto honore non dignas, inscripse∣ram. Nihil exinde literarum ab amplissima tua dignitate videre contigit. Interceptas ita{que} in itinere, aut meas, aut tuas, aut utras{que} fortasse, suspi cor. Interim saeva nos hic exercuit pestis, quae una semel hebdomade, ad mille quingentos, anno integro ad viginti hominum millia prostravit. Deserta erat Academia, abrupta commercia, urbs horrori omnibus, tan∣quam , fulgiebant, quibus fugere dabatur: nos quibus non tantum fugere per munus licebat, sed & trepidantibus animum addere, & cum morte luctantes solari ac corroborare oportebat, & sanis & aegris operam navavimus, , nec defuit nobis benigna eius clementia, qui nos in mediis quotidie ver santes ignibus, ita est tutatus, ut cum universa familia incolumis hactenus evaserim. Et ut ut nondum penitus extinctum sit contagium, ita tamen deferbuit, ut jam per septimanas aliquot defunctorum unius septimanae numerus tricenarium vix excedat. Viget rursus Academia, vigent com∣mercia, refulgescit pristinus Urbis splendor, nec quicquam restat, nisi ut revirescat quo{que} vera pietas, & conemur omnes  Quod ut largiatur nobis qui vitam hactenus produxit,  votis con∣tendimus. Ne autem, Vir maxime, labores nostros literarios apud Dig∣nitatem tuam dissimulemus, inciderat, quum jam pestis grassari coepisset, in manus nostras Historia quaedam Evangelica, ex quatour Evangelistis Persico idiomate ab Hieronvmo Xaverio Jesnita, ad Mogolense Regnum, propagandae Rel. Christ gratia Anno 1595, ablegato, isthis contexta, & Regi Acabaro, Anno hujus seculi secundo dicata at{que} oblata. In qua quum mala fide actum suspicarer (quid enim ab istiusmodi Antichristi
mancipiis exspectari possit ) opera, dedi, ut lecta, pri∣mum ex Pentateucho Persico Constantinopoli olim impresso, Genesi, Xa∣verii librum aggrederer. Nec efficere potuit saeva lues, quin & legerim & in Latinum Sermonem converterim, confectò{que} Dictionariolo, bis jam ver∣siones meas reviderim & emendaverim, prolixa{que} praefatione peregrinas Historias, fabulas, ineptias, audacias, quibus scatet, excerpserim & per∣strinxerim. Librum Arabico titulo inscripsit  id est, Speculum Sanctitatis. Ac in Praefatione ad Regem alium etiam librum promittit, jam tum fere ad umbilicum perductum, cui nomen sit  id est, speculum monstrans veritatem, in quo quae in Christ. Rel. difficilia sunt & credenda nos videntur, sit enodaturus, & propagatione Evangelii per Apostolos fusè enarraturus. Quem librum jam innotuisse, di∣dicimus ex Gallo quodam Pierre Bergeron dicto, qui libri sui Relacion des Voyages en Tartarie indigetati, Lutetiae ante Biennium editum tractatu de Sa∣racenis, pag. 63. narrat, Persam quendam Ahmed ben Sin dictum adversus librum cujusdam Jesuitae, cui titulus est speculum veritatem monstrans, scrip∣sisse librum, cui titulus sit Politor speculi, in quo Mahometismum adversus Christianam Religionem tuetur. hunc autem refutasse Franciscanum, Pa∣trem Gadagnol libro Romae impresso An. 1631. Quos omnes ut nobis com∣paremus, operam damus. Incitavit ad haec, quem ab aliquot annis familia∣rem habui, Joh. Eligmannus Silesius, Chymicus incomparabilis, medicus eximius, & de nostra Urbe durante hac lue optimè meritus, plurimarum Linguarum, & inter eas Arabicae ac Persicae bene peritus, quem magno mihi in hoc opere adjumento fuisse fateor. Et vide hîc singularem quan∣dam Dei Providentiam. Dum enim haec scribo, idem ille Amstelodamo, quò ante quatriduum concesserat, jam jam redux, novum Xaverii librum Persicum se mihi adferre ait, à se jam dum Amstelodami fuit lectum, quo vita Apostoli Petri, tum ex sacris tum aliunude desumta comprehendatur. Prurit jam mihi animus, ut & hunc priori addam, & utrum{que} simul Persicè ac Latinè edam, additurus etiam suo tempore speculum veritatem mom∣strans, & speculi Politorem, si haberi unquam à nobis possint, Deus{que} vi∣tam & otium largiatur. Ut autem ad praefatum amicum meum D. Elig∣mannum redeam, nos minus sibi quàm mihi opportune nunc advênit, qui enim laetum, quod dixi, nuncius mihi attulit, idem laetus accepit, esse me in exarandis ad amplissimam tuam Dignitatem literis. Postquam enim & singulari tua pietate & universali eruditione inaudivit (& quomodo non inaudiisset, qui familiarissimus nobis est & vere intimus) non potuit, utpote doctorum omnium amantissimus, & Antiquitatum praesertim curio∣sissimus, humillima sua officia Dignitatis tuae per me nos offerre, simùl{que} inquirere, deturne ulla Lexici Irlandico-Latini, aut Latino-Irlandici ha∣bendi copia. Quum enim praeter Cebetis Tabulam, quam ex Arabico longè locupletiore nobis brevi est daturus at{que} habuimus hactenus, praeter etiam Persicam Chronologiam, quam ex praeclaro Authore Persa, cum Annotationibus suis paret, coeperit paulatim Linguam Germanicam per omnes ejus Dialectos, Latinam item & Graecam cum Persica conferre, quippe quae cum istis, praesertim cum Germanica nostrâ{que} Belgica ingentem (quod experti loquimur) affinitatem habeat, Irlandicae quo{que} Genium explorare cupit, si haec fortassis propius caeteris ad eam accedat. Non gravabitur, spero, Dignitatem tuam verbulo monere, num quid Irlandicè exstet, quod in usum ejus facere possit, & qua via comparari queat. Im∣pensae ut per Amplissimum Dominum Boswellium restituantur, curabi∣mus. Perlegit jamdudum Epistolas tuas Hybernicas, quae{que} ibi recurrunt nomina propria spem faciunt, deprehensum & istic iri, quod in Germanica
deprehendit. Juvat certe experiri, quid nobis Europaeis cum remotis illis Asiaticis affine sit. Publica jam hîc gaudia faciunt campanarum tinnitus, facturi & sub vesperam laeti ignes, per omnes Provincias unitas, post actas Deo solennes gratias, accendendi, ob recuperatum singulari Dei beneficio Schenkianum munimentum, praecedenti anno turpissima nostrorum incuria deperditum. Nunquam magis quam tum triumphavit hostis, nunquam nos luximus magis, tanto magis triumphamus nunc, quod dissipatis mag∣nis quae agitabat Consiliis ipsi ignominia, nobis securitas data sit. Faxit Deus, ut tantum grata mente beneficium semper recolentes, datori ejus dignas gratias rependamus, ab eo uno pendeamus, eum revereamur & colamus. Ejusdem favori ac clementiae Amplissimam tuam Dignitatem commendat, ut{que} ea sospes diù sit at{que} incolumis maximopere optat, qui est & erit Amplissimae tuae Dign. devotissimus Servus, Ludovicus de Dieu. Datum Lugd. Bat. 4 Maii, 1636. LETTER CLXXXVII. A Letter from the Learned Lodovicus de Dieu, to the most Re∣verend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissime Praesul! QUas per Cl. ac Nobilissimum D. Boswellum 4o Maii ad Ampl. tuam dedi literas, quin acceperis nullus dubito. Monitus iterum per eun∣dem D. Boswellum, qui est ejus singularis in me favor, de nave Dublinium cogitante, non potuit non Rever. tuam submissè vel verbulo salutare. Scripseram de Historia Christi à Jesuita Hieronymo Xaverio Persicè con∣texta, à me vero translata, & brevi censura notata. Addideram, tradi mihi, dum scriberem, Apostoli Petri Historiam, eodem Autore. Transtuli exinde & hanc, at{que} utrius{que} textum Persicum descripsi, ingenti sane & taedioso cum labore, necessario tamen, quia Orientalium scriptura legi à Typothetis non poterat. Omnia jam sunt prelo adaptata, ei{que} proxima, volente Deo, septimana subjicientur. Imprimitur jam tractatus Talmudicus  cum translatione Cl. Lempereur, ejus{que} notis sequentur &  &  Specimen quo{que} nuper vidimus sacraram Observationum Cl. Heynsii in universum N. Testamentum: in procinctu est ut editio ejus pro∣cedat. Opus certe luculentum, & multifaria eruditione refertum. Haec sunt Vir amplissime, quae hîc nunc potissimum in re literaria aguntur. Quae nos tam tua scire interest, quam hîc omnes docti valetudinem tuam resciscere avent, anni enim sunt, ex quo nihil de rerum tuarum statu cog∣novimus. Incolumen tamen & salvum speramus, ut{que} idem diu sis, arden∣tissimis votis precamur. Plurimum se favori tuo Cl. Lempereur commen∣dat, ut{que} nos deinceps amore tuo digneris, obnixè ambo rogamus. Datum Lugd. Batav. 22. Augusti, 1636. Reverendae Amplit. tuae Devotissimus, Ludovicus de Dieu.
LETTER CLXXXVIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Lodovicus de Dieu. Admodùm Reverendo in Christo fratri D. Ludovico de Dieu, Ecclesiae Lugduno-Batavae Pastori vigilantissimo. Leydam.Reverende Vir, ac Charissime in Christo Frater; ELiteris tuis 22o Augusti Gregoriani datis (quae ante paucos dies ad me fuerant perlatae) intelligo te & alteras non ita pridem ad me dedisse, quae nondum mihi visae sunt; & intercidisse illas, quas ipse ad te scripseram Eucharisticas, post allatas mihi eruditissimas tuas in Acta Apostolorum a∣nimadversiones: in cujus luculenti operis Praefatione quòd quaedam haud admodùm magna beneficia tibi à me exhibita depraedicas, in eo majorem pro∣priae tuae humanitatis quàm rei ipsius rationem habuisti. Ad duos verò illos Tractatus Persicos, à te in Latinum sermonem conversos, quod attinet: dif∣fiteri nemo potest, quin omnes Persicae Linguae studiosi magnam inde hau∣rire queant utilitatem. Sed ut ingenuè animi mei sensum tibi aperiam, in∣dignos puto Jesuitas qui afficiantur illo honore, ut hujusmodi ipsorum scriptis ullus transferendi labor impendatur, praesertim à viris ad majora natis. Ita{que} posthac (si me uti monitore volueris) potius aut in Syriacis Ephraemi illu∣strandis, aut in pertexendis tuis in Novum Testamentum observationibus, perges: quâ ratione multo majus addes gloriae tuae incrementum, quàm col∣locando operam tuam ibi, unde ne{que} ad nos insignis utilitas, nepe ad te quicquam nisi cognitionis peregrini idiomatis fama redire queat. Ephraemi Opusculorum si quid adhuc in Syriâ lateat, eruendum curabimus: quâ in re ne operam ludamus ac impensam—emendo illa quae jam possidemus; omnium ejus tractatuum, quos istic Leidae habetis titulos at{que} exordia proprio sermone ac charactere descripta, ad me transmittas velim. Et quia scire valdè aveo, quos secum ex Oriente libros attulerit Cl. Golius; si catalogum ipso∣rum impressum addideris, quem hactenus nancisci non potui, rem mihi fa∣cturus es gratissimam. Eruditissimi Heinsii praeclaras illas in Novum Testa∣mentum Observationes avidissime expectamus: cujus generis & alias Claris∣simum Grotium moliri jampridem intelleximus. Doctissimum verò Salmasium tamdiu cessare miramur, neque tot jam annis quicquam novi procudere: quum praesertim tot circum urgeatur exemplis, quae vel ignarum quenquam excitare queant ad praeclaros conatus, nedum tantum ac talem virum. Bre∣viarium quoddam, linguâ (ut putabatur) Aegyptiacā conscriptum, illi transmittendum, Arnoldo Bootio nostro tradidi, sed & illud intercidisse au∣dio. Plurimum velim meo nomine & illi, & Heinsio, & si quos alios illic amicos habemus, salutem dicas. Vale Clarissime Vir, ac me porrò amare perge. Ja. U. Arm. Ex aedibus nostris Termino-fechinia∣nis: Septembris Juliani die 14. An∣no Salutis MDCXXXVI.
LETTER CLXXXIX. A Letter from the most Reverend William Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo. My very good Lord; I Have been put to no small pains, considering my other Occasions, to read over, and in a manner to study the several Letters and other Papers, which have been sent and come to my hands, some from your Grace, some from the Provost and Fellows that join with him; some from Pheasant and the other Party; and some from the Lords Justices, and Council there to the Lord Deputy, and from his Lordship to me; and all of them about the late unhappy difference fallen between the Visitors of the Colledg near Dub∣lin, and the Provost. The more carefully I have read over these Papers, the more (I clearly confess to your Grace) I am troubled at the Business, and could heartily wish some friendly way were thought on there, to prevent a formal and legal Decision by me. Of which yet seeing so little hope as I do, I have taken all the pains which I can, preparatory to a final Sentence: For I have very carefully, and with all indifferency, drawn a brief History of the Fact, and the whole Proceedings, with relation in the Margent to every several Paper that hath come to my hands. A Copy of this Brief, together with all the several Papers to which it relates, I have sent to my Lord Depu∣ty, and desired him to shew it to your Grace, and all the other Parties whom it concerns: to this end, that if your Lordship and they agree upon the Fact, I may have it returned unto me, and go on to my Decision. But if you agree not upon the Fact, as I have set it down, that then you may there set∣tle any Difference, and agree upon it, that no one whom it concerns, may say I had not a right state of the Question before me. When this is done, I shall go on to do my Duty with Justice to all Parties, as far as I can appre∣hend the Cause, and as far as my learned Counsel here shall be able to advise me. But I cannot but still wish, and that very heartily, that my Decision may be prevented by the care and wisdom of my Lord Deputy, and the moderate and prudent respects of the Parties interessed, which I presume your Grace will further: For it appears very ill to his Majesty, (who was of necessity to be made acquainted with the Business, because the Censure of the Provost, if he deserve it, is referr'd to himself) and must needs appear so to all wise Men, both here and there, that such a Difference concerning young Men newly started up from Boys, should cause so great a disturbance among grave and wise Men, as this hath done. And 'tis somewhat too that the Romanists which swarm in those Parts, have such an occasion as this Difference, to please themselves withal. My Hopes are great in your Grace's Moderation; but if all fail, I shall make a binding Decision so soon as ever the state of the Business is sent me back. So wishing your Grace all Health and Happiness, I leave you to God's blessed Protection, and rest, Your Grace's very loving Friend, and Brother, W. Cant. Croidon, Oct. 18. 1636.
LETTER CXC. Ornatissimo Clarissimo{que} Viro D. Gerardo Vossio, Historiae & civilis Doctrinae apud Amstelodamenses Professori. ACcepi, Vir eximie, Literas tuas quibus dum amorem quo te prose∣quor ex breviore saltem muneris indicio rectè quidem colligis, no∣bilissimum tuum pectus instar fertilioris alicujus agri aperis qui plus mul∣to adferat quàm acceperit. Adeo munusculum nuper tibi à me oblatum extollis, ut quo te merito me absolvere studebas, eo me tuo totum implices, & beneficium longè majus reddere videaris, cùm te debere aliquid mihi profiteris. Utcun{que} vero aliqua inter nos in Gotteschalci Historiâ oboria∣tur differentia; gaudeo tamen, & tibi ex animo gratulor, nos (quod ait) in eo, quod rei caput est, consentire, uter{que} dum B. Augustini sententi∣am amplectimur. Quam sive Gotteschalcus per omnia fuerit secutus, sive aliquando excesserit, nolim ego multùm contendere: modo (quod liben∣ter audio) nobis ipsis cum Augustino conveniat, cujus sententiam in cau∣sâ Gotteschalci tuendam susceperat Remigius. Qui verò duriores sunt, vel fuerunt, Augustini interpretes nunquam mihi placuerunt, minime{que} omnium inertes illi , qui faciunt agendo ut nihil aga∣mus, & homines sponte suâ ignaros ipsis quo{que} truncis reddunt stupidiores, quum divinus ille gratiae praeco, ex eo ipso quòd Deus is sit qui efficiat in nobis , contrarium plane deducat : Studendum idcirco ut cum timore & tremore salutem nostram operemur. Quippe quod verendum sit, si ab Religione Officii hîc decli∣naverimus & vel nihil agendo vel male agendo, eum a cuius  illa quam habemus volendi & faciendi potestas tota pendet irritaverimus; ne Deus ita a nobis lacessitus iure suo nobiscum agat at{que} nos desertos de∣serat, & novas ad volendum & agendum vires (abs{que} quibus ipsi nos lassos erigere nequeamus) ultra non impertiat. De Mariano nostro, quî factum ut mutus omnino ad vos venerit, aman∣tissimo utrius{que} nostrum D. Ludovico de Dieu rationem reddidi. Mens verò quae nunc est mihi, tum erat eadem: nempe ut, sicut tuâ operâ, ita etiam sub tuo nomine, integer prodiret Marianus. Integrum vero in unico Cottonianae Bibliothecae exemplari reperi: si tamen integrum. Postrema enim pars Chronic à Dionysianae aerae anno 900 us{que} ad finem (quam inde descriptam totam seorsim ad te miseram) integrior in Sichar∣di editione legitur; cui siquid desit ex tuo supplendum erit exemplari; quod illud Gemblacense esse suspicor, ex quo novam Mariani editionem promisit nobis Miraeus quam non praestitit. Nactus sum & alia tria exem∣plaria, in quibus Anglicanum Florentii Chronicon cum universali Mariani hoc Wigorniensis quidam Monachus. Regis Stephani temporibus commis∣cuerat. Ex eorum uno Florentium (vel potius Marianum) suum edi∣dit nobilissimus D. Guielmus Howardus de Naworth, Thomae Norfolci∣ensis Dueis Filius. Duo alia apud Oxonienfes vidi  unum, in Collegii Corporis Christi Bibliotheca alterum: quorum utrum{que} praeter Proaemia integrum Librum secundum habuit, qui à primo aberat. Initio Cottoniani codicis verba ista praefixa inveni. Meum Nomen ut dignum, Chronica Chronicarum; cum prae illis servo verba Evangelista∣rum; nulla enim Cronica conservat diem mensis solaris Resurrectionis Christi iuxta Historiam Evangelii nisi ista sola. Sequebantur deinde, tanquam ipsius Mariani, Tabellae illae Chronologicae quas in Apographi
mei principio descriptas vides: quae commodius, ni fallor, ad calcem ope∣ris essent rejiciendae. Earum aliquot in Bodleiano quo{que} habentur codice (qui à Consulum Indiculo incipit) & in altero Collegii Corporis Christi plures; Romanorum Episcoporum Catalogo us{que} ad Eugenium III per∣ducto, cui aliâ adscripti erant manu ann. 8, mens. 4, di. 20, quod argumen∣to est Eugenii tempore exemplar illud fuisse exaratum. Ut autem intelli∣gas quibus in locis Cottonianum libri primi & tertii Chronicon à vulgato differat: Florentium Wigorniensem nunc ad te mitto, quem Francisci Quarlesii operâ, qui mihi tum erat ab Epistolis (Vir ob sacratiorem Poësin apud Anglos suos non incelebris) cum illo conferendum curavi ad Annum us{que} Dom. DCCCC. Dionysianum, à quo quaternio prius missus initium duxit. Ubi quae lineis subtùs ductis sunt notata, à Cottoniano exemplari absunt, & ex Florentii Annalibus à Wigorniensi de quo dixi Monacho sunt hîc intexta. Mitto simul & Epitomen à Roberto Lotharingo, Herefordensi Episco∣po, eodem quo Marianus mortem obiit anno concinnatam; cujus in quar∣to de Pontificibus Libro Gulielmus Malmesburiensis ita meminit. Erat tunc temporis Monachus Marianus apud Magontiam inclusus, qui longo solitudinis otio Chronographos scrutatus, dissonantiam cyclorum Dionysii Exigui contra Evangelicam veritatem vel primus vel solus animadvertit. Ita{que} ab initio saeculi annos singulos recensens, 22 annos, qui circulo de∣erant, superaddit, magnam & diffusissimam Chronicam facere adorsus. Eum Librum Robertus miratus unicè, aemulatus mirifice, Angliae inve∣hendum curavit. Deni{que} captus Mariani ingenio, quicquid ille largius dixerat, in arctum contrahens defloravit; adeo splendidè, ut magis valere defloratio videatur, quàm ingentis illius voluminis diffusio. Ad calcem hujus Epitomes in Cottoniano codice Appendix adjecta, ab altero Bodleianae Bibliothecae aberat: quam vel eo nomine negligendam non putabam, quod magnae illius Periodi Julianae, cujus usum magno Scali∣gero acceptum referrimus, prima vestigia in ea deprehenderim. De mag∣nis Cyclis Appendicem non dissimilem ad finem libri primi ipsius Mariani in Collegii Corporis Christi MS. appositam inveni: quam hic inclusam mitto; alia quo{que} de Mariani patriâ & variis editionibus Collectanea mis∣surus similiter si ad editionis tuae ornatum aliquid inde accessurum à te in∣tellexero. Deus laboribus tuis benedicat: & omnia tua studia in honorem gratiae suae, Ecclesiae bonum at{que} Reipublicae Christianae vertat emolumen∣tum. Vale, Vir Clarissime, & siquae sunt alia, ex latore harum litera∣rum D. Freyo fusiùs intellige. Dublini Anno. MDCXXXII. quarto Idus Junias. Tui Studiosissimus, Ja. Armath. LETTER CXCI. Admodùm Reverendo in Christo Fratri D. Friderico Spanhe∣mio Pastori & Professori Theologo, at{que} Academiae Ge∣nevensis Rectori Digniffimo. Genevam. Reverende Vir, ac Charissime in Christo Frater; DUbiorum Evangelicorum Librum, ante biennium a te editum, mag∣nâ cum voluptate perlegi: at{que} accuratam tuam in Controversiis illis pertractandis diligentiam admiratus sum, & singulare in definlendis judi∣cium. Ita{que} nihil potuit accidere optabilius quam amantissimae illae tuae
Literae, quibus ad contrahendam ac deinceps colendam inter nos amicitiam ultrò me provocas. Qualis sit tuus erga me animus abundè ipsae mihi in∣dicârunt: quin verò par sit meus in te affectus, nolim te dubitare. Mu∣nus Literis tuis adjunctum mirificè me tenuit, quod totam Reformatio∣nis in illustrissimâ vestrâ Urbe olim institutae Historiam à primis ipsius initiis (quae antea penitus ignoraveram) accuratissime deductam, spe∣ctandam mihi exhibuit. Nam de stilo ac orationis nitore & elegantiâ su∣perfluum est dicere; quum haec, licet per se magna, aliis majoribus in te dotibus obumbrentur. Pro Dono igitur tum quod jam misisti, tum quod brevi missurum te polliceris (quod sanè non possum non avidè expectare) magnas tibi merito gratias ago; & siqua in posterum mihi se offerat occa∣sio, in quâ vicissim tibi gratificari possim, lubentissimo animo id sum facturus. Deum oro ut quàm diutissimè te servet incolumem, ac tua optima coepta ad summum Ecclesiae bonum spectantia, propitius secundet. Tuus in Christi Ministerio conservus. Ja. Armachanus. Ex aedibus nostris Termino∣fechinianis xi Kalend. Sep∣temb. Anno MDCXXXVI. LETTER CXCII. Doctissimo & Ornatissimo Viro D. Constantino L'Empereur Hebraicarum Literarum apud Lugduno-Batavos celeberrimo Professori, amico plurimùm colendo. Leydam. Clarissime Vir; ET Literas unas at{que} alteras à te accepi, & duos quo{que} libros à te editos: pro quibus, & egregiâ tuâ in me humanitate, (cujus haec non levia fue∣runt indicia) gratias tibi ago singulares. Id verò de scriptis tuis universè non possum non profiteri, me semper ab iis multo discedere doctiorem, & non rerum tantùm absconditarum varietatem, sed & exactum at{que} lima∣tum judicium in iis deprehendere. Nam quod ad felicitatem Hebraica vertendi attinet; nondum novi quem tecum conferre possim, non modo eorum qui nunc sunt, sed & qui prius fuerunt. At{que} hujus rei insigne prae caeteris specimen dedisti in Clave Talmudicâ, cujus Auctor, cùm tam distorto, conciso, ac intricato sermonis genere utatur, ut deditâ operâ affectasse obscuritatem videatur: adeo tamen in omnes ejus sensus pene∣trâsti, & nitido ac plano Sermone explicâsti, ut qui liber multis in locis ipso Talmudae (cui facem se velle accendere profitetur) difficilior judicari mereatur, adhibitâ tuâ interpretatione cunctis Hebraici Sermonis vel me∣diocriter gnaris factus sit facillimus. Sed & librum quem ad te miseram Syriacum (Thesauri Secretorum inani titulo venditatum) ita fecisti tu∣um, ut ex eo me docueris, quae ego priùs nullus observaveram. Quod si ille vobis non amplius sit futurus necessarius, velim primâ eum opportu∣nitate mihi remittas. Nôram enim vestram Bibliorum Versionein (cui illam inservire voluisti) jamdudum absolutam, & typis excusam esse au∣dio: quod haud dubiè in maximam populi vestri cedet utilitatem, quum à talibus viris, qui isti operi & primitùs invigilârunt & secundas curas ad∣hibuerunt (inter quos te facilè principem locum tenere censemus) nihil nisi egregium queat proficisci. Ex nuperis Domini de Dieu literis intelli∣gimus te tractatum Talmudicum  recenter dedisse, ac duas quo{que} alias Babas breviter secuturas: quorum operum non mediocris expectatio me tenet; quum certissimò mihi persuadeam, ut excaeteris tuis, ita ex his
quo{que} maximos me fructus percepturum. Deum oro ut diu te nobis inco∣lumem conservet, ac studiis tuis benedicat. Tui studiosissimus. Ja. Armachanus. Ex aedibus nostris Termino-fechini∣anis Sept. xv. Ann. MDCXXXVI. LETTER CXCIII. Admodum Reverendo in Christo fratri. D. Ludovico de Dieu, Ecclesiae Lugduno-Batavae Pastori dignissimo. Leydam. Salutem à Salutis fonte D. N. Jesu Christo. LIterae III. Maii datae, quas intercidisse existimaveram tandem ad manus meas pervenerunt: quum alteras tuas XXII Augusti scriptas diu ante accepissem; ad quas & responsum dedi tunc, quod tibi perlatum esse confido. Labor iste, in quo nunc versaris, libros Persicè à Xaverio scriptos in Latinum Sermonem convertendi, at{que} simul cum Persico Arche∣typo divulgandi, quin hujus Linguae studiosis perutilis futurus sit, nemini potest esse dubium. Quod si tantundem quo{que} solidae gloriae inde tibi ac∣cessurum est, minùs dolebimus intermissum à te egregium opus Animad∣versionum in Novum Testamentum, quarum ea pars, quam jam nunc dedisti, quum summopere nobis placuerit, permagnum ejus quod restabat desiderium nobis commoverat, cujus frustratio sicut dolori nobis est, ita vehementer optamus ut quàm velocissimè absoluto hoc penso quod nunc subiisti, eo reverti velis, tuas{que} illas notas eo quo caepisti modo praetexere; unde & ad te plus veri decoris, & ad sacrarum literarum studiosos plus verae utilitatis redundabit. Chronologiam illam Persicam (modo alicujus sit antiquitatis & fidei) omnino dignam putamus quae Latino Sermone donetur: at{que} D. Eligman∣no quem ejus versionem suscipisse scribis, auctores sumus, ut in instituto pergat, id{que} ad finem perducere contendat. Porro ipsi indices velim, quod & multas ipsi pro officiosâ salutatione gratias agimus & optime ipsi cupi∣mus; cùm ob id, quod tibi viro optimo tantopere carus est, tum ob insig∣nes illas virtutes quibus illum ornatum esse attestaris. Quo minùs autem ipsius desiderio de Dictionario Hibernico satisfacere possim hoc in causâ est, quod nullum adhuc habeamus hujus Linguae Lexicon sive per se factum, sive cum aliâ Linguâ comparatum, saltem non typis editum. Alphabetum tamen Hibernicum at{que} integrum Novum Testamentum unà cum hisce transmitto: siquid inde adjumenti capere possit amicus ille tuus, aut veriùs noster. Est quidem Lingua haec & elegans cum primis, & opulenta: sed ad eam isto modo excolendam (sicuti reliquas ferè Europae Linguas verna∣culas intra hoc seculum excultas videmus) nondum extitit hactenùs qui animum adjiceret. Pestem denuo apud vos grassatam esse, cum non parvâ animi aegritudine intelleximus; Deum Optimum Maximum, qui prius te tuos{que} tam cle∣menter tutatus est oramus ut nunc itidem ex mediis istius luis flammis vos eripiat, fidelem{que} pro temporaneâ at{que} aeternâ salute vestrâ curam gerat. Id ex imo vovet pectore. Amicus tibi addictus, deditus, obstrictus JA. USSERIUS Armachanus. Dat. Dublinii IIII. Januarii Juliani Natali die meo. Rem mihi facturus est gratissimam D. Eligmannus, si nuda Persioorum Dynastarum nomina cum Imperii annis (interea dum opus integram apparatur) communicare dignatus fuerit.
LETTER CXCIV. Amplissimo pietate juxta ac eruditione conspicuo Praesuli D. Ja∣cobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Armachano & Hiberniae Prima∣ti; Domino suo plurimum suspiciendo. Dublinium. Amplissime Vir, Venerande in Christo Pater; SUspicor amico meo Johanni Eligmanno quem in peregrinarum linguarum collatione versari ex literis meis accepisti, juvandorum studiorum ejus gratia missum. Dignus vir est, cujus studiis omnes docti faveant. Sub prelo habet aurea carmina Pythagorae Arabica una cum sua versione, additis variis ejusdem Philosophi fragmentis ex Arabibus excerptis, quae libri Graeci, qui exstant ignorant. Sequetur deinde Tabula Cebetis Arabica, amplior & ac∣curatior, quam libri Graeci quos Europa habuit eam exhibent. Habet quo∣que fere paratum, ex authore Persico Compendium Chronologicum ab orbe condito, quod ab ipso versum & notis ejus illustratum, seculo Mythologico magnam lucem addet, & multas fabulas Graecorum in Orientis Historias ver∣tet. Ille mecum una ingentes Amplit. tuae ob missum librum Irlandicum gra∣tias agit, ambo{que} mentem tuam ex proximis literis plenius expectamus. Vive diu vir Amplissime, & vale Ecclesiae Reipublicae{que} literariae sospes at{que} inco∣lumis, nos{que} ut deinceps a more tuo ac favore digneris, obnixe rogamus. Da∣tum Lugd. Batav. 14 Aprilis 1637. Amplitudini tuae devotissimus, Ludovicus de Dieu. LETTER CXCV. Admodum Reverendo in Christo fratri, D. Ludovico de Dieu Ecclesiae Lugduno-Batavae Pastori fidelissimo. LIteras tuas cum adjuncto librorum Academiae Vestrae Catalogo diu est quod accepi, uti & alteras posteà quibus argumenta Ephraemi opuscu∣lorum incluseras; pro quibus maximas tibi gratias & ago & habeo. Admo∣dum vero indolui casum tuum qui filium primogenitum, & quidem talem a∣miseris: cui tamen levando solatia praebere non est visum, non modo quod propriâ sapientiâ abunde instructus sis ad haec & similia, quibus omnes ob∣noxii sumus, fortiter toleranda; sed etiam quòd tantum temporis intercesse∣rit, ut sit intempestivum nunc adhibendo remedia obductam jam vulneris ci∣catricem refricare possem videri. Hoc tantam dicam, non tuam tantùm vi∣cem, sed & publicam me doluisse in hâc calamitate: quum Ecclesia simul & res literaria non potuerint à tanto ingenio & taliter exculto non maximos suo tempore fructus percipere; ac proinde in hâc jacturâ non parum & ipsae amis∣serint, ac tecum in partem detrimenti, & eam quidem permagnam, vene∣rint.
Sed quum Deus hoc ità esse voluerit ac ipsius decreta impatienter ferre non minùs irreligiosum sit quàm irritum, omnino in ipsius voluntate est acquiescendum. Latorem istorum istuc transmisimus ad coemendos illic Characteres vel Syriacos vel Hebraicos, quibus hîc imprimamus Vetus Testamentum Syriacum; quod facere statuimus simul at{que} ipse ad nos reversus fuerit, ac proinde rogatum te velim ut per ipsum nobis remittas Pentateuchum Syriacum & Psalterium, quae olim tibi commodavimus. Quippe iis notis opus fuerit ad tollenda errata alterius nostri exemplaris, in quibus, etiam ubi sunt admodum manifesta, nihil mutare vo∣lumus, nisi aliorum codicum auctoritate. Quod si & vobis vel in publica Bibliothecâ, vel in privatis, quippiam hujusmodi librorum est, ulla videlicet pars Veteris Testamenti Syriaci, quaeso ut collatis operis cum D. L'Empereur (ad quem itidem super hâc re scripsi) id nobis procuretis: pro quo officio permagnas vobis gratias habebimus, ac codices vestros simul ac opus nostrum fuerit absolutum (quod parvo temporis spatio speramus fore) fideliter resti∣tuemus. Pluribus non agam tecum, ut hanc rem tibi commendatam faciam, quum non dubitem quin per se tibi magnopere cordi futura sit, utpote cum bono publico Ecclesiae ac literarum conjuncta, ac proinde omnibus istarum studiosis pro virili promovenda. Deus te, Charissime Frater, quàm diutis∣simè incolumem nobis conservet, tuis{que} optimis studiis benedicat. Vale. Tuus in Christi Ministerio conservus, Ja. Usserius Armachanus. Dublinii, Julii vii. Anno 1637. LETTER CXCVI. A Letter from Mr. Battiere, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Father in God, my most honoured Lord; I Have received a Letter from your Grace by Mr. Cullen, with much joy, as well to hear of your Grace's good Health (which I pray to God may continue long so for the Good of Christendom) as to see me favoured with some Employment again for your Grace, than whom I know no body living I desire to serve with more affection: I will with one word, set down here what hath been done in your Lordship's Business since Mr. Cullen's ar∣rival. I brought him first to my Lord the Earl of Leicester, who for your Grace's sake, and his own worth, shewed him all kindness, and to Mr. Joanes. I carried him to Mr. Duluy, where he made acquaintance, bestowing a Com∣plement upon them from your Grace. Pere Sirmond and Mr. Rigault, we could not find at home yet, nor Gabriel the Sionita, whose great Bible I shewed him also, and conferred the Syrian Characters together, of which
there be three or four here; but of this Mr. Cullen will give a better account a while hence; for I have written also to Geneva, where such a Character is to be sold, to have the sight of it in print, and at what rate they mean to sell it, to compare the Prices and Characters together with these here. In the mean while Mr. Cullen is advised to sequester himself from English and Irish, to profit the more in the French Tongue, for conversing afterwards with those that he hath business withal, and to that end I hope he will not be de∣nied a prorogation of his licence of travelling and absenting himself from the Colledg for some few months longer, with the continuation of his Sti∣pend (he being imployed in Work so good for the Common Wealth) especially upon your Grace's Commendation. I have set one to work for the transcribing of Concil. Lemovicense, and Theodori Poenitentiale, and will go on with the rest one by one, as I can get them; for to demand so much at once, would seem strange to them, although they be very courteous and of∣ficious. Of printed Books, I bought Vita Leonis & Caroli of Sirmondus; but the rest marked to me, are not his. Hincmari Opusc. are of Cordesius, and I think you Grace hath them. Ivo Carnotensis of Juret. Damianus of Cae∣tan a Benedictine. Bellarm. de Script. Eccl. of Sirmond, but scarce any thing altered in it. Browerus de Treverensis Ecclesiae Antiquit, I cannot get yet. There is nothing added to the Councils of Binius, nor any thing printed of St. Chrysostom but what your Grace hath. Du Chesnes's third and fourth Volume are a printing, but not yet finished. This Kingdom being now in Wars on all sides, doth not afford any great Design for the advancement of Learning. Of late, one Mr. Gallant a Counsellor of State, and a Protestant, set forth a Book de Franco allodio in French, in which he gives a touch unto the Waldenses History, and Simon de Montfort: I wrote of this Man heretofore to your Grace, as one best versed in that History, and best stored with their Writings; this Book I will send with the rest. I wonder your Grace hath not received my former, with one from Mr. Buxtorf; if I am not deceived, I sent them away with those of the City and University of Basil to my Lord Deputy; to whom I made bold to add one of mine, to thank his Greatness for the Favour of my Naturaliza∣tion in Ireland, and for his nobleness to my Kinsman Frey. I am not so out with Ireland, (where I have heretofore received so good entertainment) but I hope to see it again; which I desire the more for your Grace's sake, to tender my best Respects in Person to so much worth; and should think me happy if I could deserve a mean Prebend in your Cathedral, to wait more close upon your Grace. I humbly crave your Grace's Blessing, and remain with my hearty Prayers for your Health and Prosperity, Your Grace's most humbly obedient and devoted Servant, J. Battiere. Paris 2/1 August 1637. My Lord the Earl of Leicester remembers his Love and Service to your Grace.
LETTER CXCVII. Illustrissimo viro Domino Jacobo Usserio Armachano totius Hyberniae Archiepiscopo. Dublin. D. I. V. S. P. Antistes reverende; QUas ad me 15 Septembris dedisti literas ubi perlegissem, non mediocri∣ter incensus fui, ut in eruenda antiquitate Judaica, & iis quae ad gentem illam ex propriis ipsorum scriptis convincendam faciunt, evulgandis, majori quam antea animi alacritate progredi animo meo constituerem. Benignum enim istud de scriptis meis judicium non potui non facere maximi: ut pote ab eo profectum quem Belgium hoc confoederatum (ut alias linquam natio∣nes) ob acerrimum judicium & latissimam eruditionem suspicit ac miratur summè. Hoc tempore si quis abstrusiora tractet, vel invidia, vel pravo im∣peritorum judicio saepe laborat: utriusque securum jure optimo reddunt tanti viri (qui mihi & Belgio nostro est instar omnium) favor ac Judicium. Hoc nomine ingentes ago gratias uti etiam pro Thesauro secretorum, quem uti singulari promovendae cognitionis studio miseras, ita etiam diuturniorem in reddendo à me necti moram passus. Sed jam per D. legatum Boswellum remitto navi, quae Rotterodamo rectà in Hiberniam solvit. Animum etiam in omnes literatos pronum in eo agnosco, quod articulos fidei in Hiberniae Synodo stabilitos ad primas literas obtinuerim. Quos viris doctis & ortho∣doxiae amantibus communico; postea isti missurus qui (ut antea scripsi) confessionum orthodoxarum editionem molitur. Vicissim vobis Catalogum librorum, quos D. Golius ex Oriente attulit, quem{que} D. Botius petierat, transmitterem: verum D. de Dieu, utsibi id officii relinquerem voluit; ut qui ea de re literas à D. tua accepisset. Accepi hisce diebus à D. Gomaro T. D. & Professore in Academia Groeningana poesin Abraam, sive veteram illam carminum rationem ac formam, qua poemata sacri contextus in Jobo, Psal∣mis, Proverbiis, diversisque Canticis, concinnata & confecta fuere. Eam{que} poesin cum illa Pindari & Sophoclis perpetuò confert. Hujus editionem mi∣hi mandavit: atque alia mea opera nonnihil remoratus est. Etenim cum li∣ber perpetuis exemplis refertus sit eq{que} sine versione latina apposuerit, super eo monitus non responsurum fructum nisi ea vetantur; hanc operam mihi offerenti imposuit, ne forte liber si remitteretur in itinere periret. De ista veteri poesi scripsere etiam antehac docti libri Cosroes author, Abrabaniel, & Rabbi Azarias: quem postremum vertere incaepi. Sed isti aliam sequun∣tur rationem, ut qui magis in membrorum inter se convenientia, quam in syllabarum quantitate & numero, metrum investigent. At{que} haec hactenus. Caeterum D. O. M. veneror ut curis ac laboribus D. tuae benedicat, eamque Ecclesiae suae quam diutissimè superesse concedat. Interim permanere gestio, Amplitudinis tuae cliens humillimus, Constantinus l'Empereur. Lug. Bat. 8 Kal. Jan. An. 1637.
LETTER CXCVIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnoldus Botius, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissime Domine; DUM tuam in Evangelia catenam Syriacam percurro obiter, deprehen∣di, quod praeter ineptas illas allegorias, de quibus jam tum ex prima inspectione R. D. T. locutus fueram, multa etiam seria, ac lectu omnino dig∣na, contineat, ac plerorum{que} locorum difficiliorum interpretationes afferat mi∣nime poenitendas. Sed & non pauca ibi reperi, ad controversias hodie inter nos ac Pontificios agitari solitas spectantia, & quidem ejusmodi partim, ut ipsis potius quam nobis favere videantur. Sane de sacra communione ita loqui∣tur, acsi panis & vini transubstantiationem (ut nunc loquimur) planissime agnosceret; adeo quidem, ut siquis Papistarum velit Veterum quempiam pro sua causa loquentem introducere, ac pro arbitrio suo ipsius verba effor∣mare, non videam quid ultra desiderare possit. Sed fortasse me judicium fallit. Tu, Domine, judicabis; in quem finem totum locum non quidem hic inserendum duxi (quum prolixior esset) sed per se descriptum, huic epi∣stolae inclusi. Rursus sunt ibi, quae pro nobis potius facere videantur, cujus∣modi est enarratio Matt. 3. 6. ad verba illa, Confitentes peccata sua, ubi quum movisset quaestionem, Quomodo veriti non fuerint Judaei, peccata sua palam profiteri, quum ex lege Mosis (quae minuta duntaxat peccata, tam{que} quae per ignorantiam commissa essent, expiabat) confitentes reos certe mors, & qui∣dem lapidationis, maneret [ego adhuc quaero, unde hoc hauserit] ac re∣spondisset, his verbis,  Johannes major ipsis habetur, dederat{que} ipsi Deus baptisare in poenitentiam, ut ostenderet, abolitam esse Legem, & sacrificiorum tempus praeteriisse, ac advenisse foedus novum, quod peccatores poenitentes suscipit: Deinde hanc apponit observationem,  Hinc animo collige tres ordines sacerdotum; unus est eorum sub lege, qui offerebant sacrificia pro peccatis per ignorantiam commissis: iis vero peccatis, quae scienter patrata erant, mortem la∣pidationis infligebant. 2. Johannis, qui baptisando, peccata scienter commissa, palam faciebat. 3. Sacerdotes novi foederis, dum baptisant, non faciunt pecca∣ta palam, sed expiant peccata tam scienter quam ignoranter commissa, & remissio∣nem eorum exhibeat. Hic quum novi foederis sacerdotibus non aliam remissio∣nis peccatorum administrationem attribuat quam baptismum, omnino mihi inde sequi videtur, confessionem auricularem, & quae ipsi annectitur remissio∣nem peccatorum, ipsi ignotam fuisse, quum alioquin ejus mentionem hic fa∣cere debuerit, loco ipso id prorsus efflagitante. Pluribus R. D. T. nunc non distinebo; quare hic finiens, Divinae protectioni ipsam supplianter commendo. R. D. Tuae Devotissimus cliens, Arnoldus Botius. Dublin, 30 Octob. 1638.
LETTER CXCIX. A Letter from Dr. William Gilbert, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My very good Lord; ALL my expectancies for observation of this Lunar Eclipse last Tuesday morning, were lost in the cloudy disposition of the Heavens for that time; which offered matter of more consequence to my meditation, in that idle interim of expecting a fairer Season: That Hysteron Proteron of Opini∣ons in translating the Sun into the Center, and making it Stationary; In advancing the Earth up into an Orb, and making it Ambulatory: Howsoever it hath suffered by popular prejudice in some, and the resty disposition of others in their own Errors, yet doth it excellently accommodate many irregular Motions to Account, and open a large Field for the search and invention of high things: for thus, By the apparent Semidiameter of the Sun in his Apoge, and the Angle of half the Conick shadow of the Earth, is most artificially and easily determined the true Parallax of the Sun; And by the Parallax his distance from the Earth; And by these, the semidiamiter of the fixt Stars and Planets, together with the several parallaxes they make upon the Orb of the Earth, and their distances. Upon this Account the Semidiameter of the Orb of the Earrh in his middle-distance from the Sun, is 1498 semidiameters of the Earth, the Cube of 1498 is 3, 361, 517, 992: And so many times is the Orb of the Earth or Sun, bigger than the Earth it self; yet all this whole Orb, in respect of the Orb of Saturn, (which makes not one minute of parallax upon it) is but a Point: And the Orb of Saturn again, in respect of the Firmament, is but a Point; for the fix'd Stars make but a Parallax of five minutes at the Orb of Saturn, (as by the Difference of the Semidia∣meters of their Orbs may appear); so that I wonder at many of the Anci∣ents, that have shrunk and shrivelled up these two Heavens of the Planets, and of the fix'd Stars into one, whereas they are not only almost infinitely and disproportionably distant, but are also distinguish'd by their different Heat and Light; this Planetary Heaven having its Heat and Light from its Heart and Centre, the Sun, which from thence communicates his Heat and Light to all the Planets, more or less, as they are nearer or farther from him: And therefore we see how languishing a Light he lends to Saturn, as being twice farther from him than some of the rest, and the last of those Bodies receive Light from him. What the World (now come to Specta∣cles) hath by her Optick Eyes of Glass lately discovered, is obvious to eve∣ry Man; namely, that Saturn (a Body 46 times bigger than this Earth that bears us) hath, besides the same Sun common to us with it, to serve it by day, a certain number of Moons also appropriate to it to serve it by night: And that Jupiter (a Body 25 times bigger than this Earth) hath, besides the same Sun common to us with it, to serve it by day, three Moons also appro∣priate to it to serve it by night: and whereof (if need were) we could give the Places, and the several Vicissitudes of their Changes, Wains, and Fulls. Our Earth also (proportionable to her bigness) hath one Moon assigned her for her service by Night; which, howsoever great by its very nearness it appears to us on Earth, yet undoubtedly is as undiscoverable from the Orb of Jupiter, as are his Moons from hence, which are not seen without
Spectacles: What all these things may import, I spare to speak, that this Earth may enjoy her own Opinion, to have been the only work of God in his Creation in this kind; yet of Saturn, Jupiter, and others of that kind, with that rich and fair Furniture about them, I only say, as upon the disco∣very of some sumptuous richly hung House, and all shining with Lights and Torches, surely that House was not so made and furnish'd for Rats and Mice to dwell in. Upon the Suburbs of Saturn, begin the Confines of the se∣cond and starry Heaven, whose almost infinite extension, is such, as that the whole Planetary Heaven (whose Bounds is the Orb of Saturn) bears but the proportion of a Point unto it, and gives but a Parallax of five minutes at the fix'd Stars; the Light of this starry Heaven, as far transcending the Light of the Sun, as doth the Sun that of a Candle. And here to measure out these starry Bodies, we take not the short scantling of the Earth, or Sun's Semidiameter, but the whole Orb of the Earth, or Sun it self; and they come out so vast, that had I not the warrant of a Demonstration to do it, I should think they did exceed all belief, though not the truth. A Star of the first Magnitude, comes out twenty thousand and three and fifty times bigger than the whole Orb of the Earth or Sun. A Star of the second Magnitude, 5935 times bigger than the Orb of the Earth; and so propor∣tionably the rest. And therefore is the extent of this starry Heaven such, and so vast, that the Light and Heat of these huge and many Suns, might not confound the Light, and fire the Frame of this lower Heaven. If then the Light of one petty Sun here below be such as no Eye can endure it, what inaccessible Light must that of this second and starry Heaven be, where are such inexhaustible Suns, and so many of them, that though Ptolomy from Alexandria could count but 1202; and Tycho from his Uraniburgh but 1000, yet appear they by the Perspective, as infinite for number, as they are almost incomprehensible for their vastness. All these vast Lights, and that vaster Heaven that holds them, are but the Portal to that third and Su∣pream Heaven which he inhabits, whom St. James calls Pater Luminum, the Father of these vast Lights, which yet are but Torches to him that made them. This is a Building well befitting him that framed it, as near Infinity as may be, yet not Infinite; yet compared to Him that made it, it is all as a Point, as Nothing. From this Height have we a full survey of the true poorness of Man; for from this starry Height, look but down towards the Earth, and how many thousand degrees beneath, (nothing to be seen) is it vanish'd away Where then are the pompous Parts of it, Asia, Africa, and the new-found America What is become of Europe, the least and last part of it What of Ireland, and the several subdivisions into which it is shted; and those petty parcels of it to which we so ambitiously intitle our Names and Vanities What great share enjoy we of those fathomless Fountains of Heat and Light, those many glorious Suns send out yet we must be (by our own account) the only Creatures of Excellency, for whom all these things were made So might the Spider, nested in the Roof of the Grand Seignior's Seraglio, say of her self, All that magnificent and stately Structure, set out with Gold and Silver, and embellish'd with all Antiquity and Mosaick Work, was only built for her to hang up her Webs and Toyls to take Flies. We the glorious Ants of this Earth, magnify our selves upon this Mole-hill here, to be the great and sole End of the World's Workmanship; whilst we con∣sider not how little and nothing we are of it. From hence I sometimes take down mine own towring thoughts, when they prompt me forward to the pursuit of these petty Preferments here below; for but looking up to this starry Heaven, they are lost, and come out, upon account from thence, no more considerable than the cast Dust under my Feet. From hence also I learn Temper, and am put into a large possession of my self; for take but
the opinion of Man's own Excellency from him, he will then be becalm'd into temper, and receive his Sufferings without risings and rebellion of Heart, and as no indignities done him; whilst comparing himself with himself, and things below him, he dwarfs his Understanding, and swells into a Conceit of being Some-body; whom when his turn of Trouble and Afflictions overtake him, he knows not what he hath done may deserve them, or why he alone, amongst all Men, should be singled out for such a Suffering, and hath secret risings of Heart against God, that sends it sometimes belch'd out in Blasphemies, or other symptoms of a proud and ignorant Spirit, who with his low-built Knowledg, never soaring higher than the pitch of him∣self, and Men about him, takes himself to be the Complement of the whole Creation, and all things tied to his Service; and therefore takes all Afflicti∣ons as Affronts and Indignities done him; whereas he that from this height beholds himself in the infinite lustre of all these Lights and Suns that never set about him, shall see himself comparatively such a thing as comes out many degrees beneath Nothing; and is taken up in admiration, how a God served by Hosts of Creatures of such excellent Glory, should vouchsafe such honour to his despicable Dust and Ashes, as to seek his own glory in his Sufferings, which makes him strangely ambitious of offering up his Body to the Rack, the Flame, and other Instruments of Torture, and that with such a setledness of suffering in them, as if he suffered in a borrowed Body, or one of Air. I have chawed many times upon those Husks and Chaffy Terms of Infinitum, Aeternum, and the like, which the Schools give us to apprehend God in; but I confess I could never get them down, or swallow them any way, to enlarge my Conceit of God by them; whereas he that orderly ascends the Rounds of these two visible Heavens; First, By the chaste observations of his own, and undeceived sense; Secondly, By Indu∣ctions, fresh and unadulteratly drawn from those Observations; And lastly, by undeniable Demonstrations built upon those Inductions; shall find his Understanding so exalted, and his Heart enlarged in the apprehension of God's Omneity, and his own Nothing (and that not petitory, but com∣manding his Assent) that I dare say, No means (not Divine) can make a Man walk more humbly with his God, more honestly with his Neighbour, or more soberly with himself, than the almost Infinity of these Creatures so made sensible. If by your Grace's leave I may but borrow these Hypotheses for such Purposes as these, you shall not further need to fear that I will find out new Worlds where God hath made none. Your Grace his most obedient Servant, Will. Gilberte. Dublin, Decemb. 11. CIC: IC: C: xxxviii. LETTER CC. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to the Reverend Dr. Ward. Reverend Sir; THE Manuscript Latin Copy of Ignatius in Caius Colledg Library, hath this singular in it, That in the genuine Epistles, (for the other I heed not) those Passages are wanting, which are excepted against as insititious
and supposititious by our Writers; and that the place touching the Eucha∣rist cited by Theodoret, out of the Epistle to the Smyrnians, which is wanting in all other Books, is to be found in this. But I intend, e're long, to pub∣lish Ignatius my self, as considering it to be a Matter of very great Conse∣quence, to have a Writer of his standing to be freed (as much as may be) from these interpolations of later Times. Your Observation, that the Canons of the Apostles are of a later Date, is very right; as also of the Time of the Laodicen Councils, wherein Baro∣nius is undoubtedly deceived. Sir Henry Spelman sent me a part of his Col∣lections of our British Councils, printed in a large Folio, as much as reacheth from pag. 31, to 375, which I am now a revising, and supplying with some , which may be added by way of Appendix. Both that Work of his, and mine also of the Antiquities of the British Churches (with the Pelagian History inserted thereunto) will come abroad, I hope, this next Term. I sent to Paris to get a new Transcript of Rathramus de Corpore & San∣guine Domini, out of Thuanus his Library; but instead of the Text which I desired, they sent me only an Appendix subjoined thereunto out of Am∣brose Augustine, &c. touching the same Argument. I had a Copy also from thence of Rathramus his Collections against the Grecians, which is a large Tractate. Those other two Treatises of his, I suppose you have compared with the Manuscript belonging to the late Master of Benet-Colledg; and a∣nother Manuscript of the same, you may find in the Library of the Cathe∣dral Church of Salisbury. The Infirmities of old Age (which I am sorry do come so fast upon you) being so many Messengers to give us warning of our dissolution, should put you in mind of putting your Writings in good Order, that in them you may live and speak unto the Church when you are dead. So with the re∣membrance of my best Wishes, I recommend you, and all your godly En∣deavours, to the Blessing of Almighty God; evermore resting, Your very loving Brother, and fellow Labourer, Ja. Armachanus. Dublin, Sept. 10. 1639. LETTER CCI. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Antistiti erudissimo Jacobo Usserio Armachano Dubliniae vel alibi in Hiberniae. CUM pridiano P. R. lectissima Tua filia masculinam illam multis mihi charam nominibus heroinam Baringtonam Stowhallae praedio in agro Suffolciensi nostro comitata sit pomeridiano; quinàm fieri potuit, quin cog∣nitâ natâ, in vera Parentis optimi praeconia me totum effunderem. Nisi Te verecundari cogerem aliquam duntaxat eorum, quae tum mihi animitùs exci∣derunt partem sub incude revocarem. Ego enim pietati primas, eruditioni secundas vices tribuo; literatos valdè veneror, sanctitate morum insignes pluris sacio: ubi autem summam eruditionem (ut proh dolor in Te pene
unico) cum intimâ pietate conjunctam reperio vix fando, exprimi possit, quanta mihi exinde admiratio, delectatio, dilectio exorta sint. Novum de Antiquitatibus à P. V. Ecclesiasticis excusum esse opus, eadem mihi Domina retulit Baringtona, quo cùm laeticiam, tum maerorem mihi excussit. Laetici∣am ob tantum à summo indultum Ecclesiae suae Numine beneficium: maero∣rem, quod paucula illa quae fortassis solus Tibi adjutoria ministrare potis eram, propter ignotam mihi hanc festinationem ad Te mittere omiserim. Annos enim totos tredecim Magnae Britanniae veram molitus sim Historiam, ex ipsis majorem partem Arduuis vindicandam. Ex vetustissimis schedis & exaesis non rarò membranis propriâ nostrâ integros manu Tomos excerpsimus. Bibliothecam post Cottonis in fallor (quem vixisse doleo) inter privatas An∣glicanas locupletissimam numismatis aureis, argenteis, aeneis, Autographis & MSS. codicibus exornatam instauravimus. Cum enim tot in vetustis nugas, tot in neotericis ex plebis faece magnam partem ortis commenta videram, opus hoc ingens & cui me omnino imparem non diffiteor aggressus sim. Quid enim de caeteris sperandum, cum vix aut ne vix una in ipsius Camdeni de∣cantatâ toties Britanniâ suis caret erroribus pagina. Dum Regum molimina, res bello ac pace gestas, foedera, jura, praelia & id genus alia Britannicam spectantia politeiam regero; non me effugiunt Ecclesiae sub Britannis puritas, Morgani eorum gentilis ambitio, apostasia, haeresis, nominis à Graeco idio∣mate in Pelagium detorsio (Mor enim Britannieè Mare Gan. cum sonat) ipsius in vendis heiè turbis symmistarum doli; Vortigerni Gennisiorum id est, occiduorum Saxonum Ducis proditiones; regni Pelagianis quibus mu∣nia irrogaverat Ecclesiastica innixus invasio, stupra, incestus & alia scelera: quae ipsius tandem in Synodo clericorum & laicorum (ut inquit Nennius MSS. suis Chronicis Sect. 20. fol. 8. a. Britannicâ) excommunicatio & Vi∣vicomburium exceperunt. Integram istius Haereseωs etsi brevissimè contexui historiam: eam{que} redivivam inter pontificios (uti incomparabilis, fatetur Jacobus Thuanus in Claromontani sodalitii sociis) in execrandis Evangelicos penes Anabaptistis (novante & larvato vanissimi Arminii insig∣nitis nomine) & Pseudo-Lutheranis reperio. Cum se isti igitur seductores pestilentissimi, à Bernardi Rotmanni, Thomae Munceri, Michaelis Serveti Tarraconensis, Bernardini Ochini Senensis, Laelii Socini Itali, Sebastiani Ca∣stellionis Allobrogis (qui sua etiam; sub ementito Martini Bellii nomine ve∣nena Christianis digerenda propinavit) temporibus se totos pene octoginta annos elapsos Anabaptistas indigetarunt (unde verè fatetur Johannes Barne∣feldius se istis dogmatis nomen dedisse priusquam Arminium noverat) malè sibi sanè consuluerunt Orthodoxi, qui oscitantia sive incuriâ, novae isti post∣liminio irrepenti appellationi non temporiùs se opposuerunt. Hinc enim in tantam provecti sunt isti veteratorii audaciam; ut se Lutheri vestigiis impu∣denter insistere mentiuntur; cum tamen ipse Augustinus contra servum ar∣bitrium pro Dei gratiâ vix Luthero fortiùs calamum suum strinxit. Imò mo∣destiores Ethnici, teste Xenophonte, Daemonibus suis praescientiam rerum om∣nium attribuerunt; quo impietatum affatim imbibisse Christiani illi revin∣cuntur, qui nihilo amplius vero Deo adscribi patiantur.  (mquit ille in Libro de Convivio excuso Parisiis 1625. pag. 887.) . Spem mihi de P. V. in Angliam vere ineunti non minimam adventu oculis∣sima Tua secit filia: faxit Deus ut tanto Veritatis & Evangelii sui assertori itum reditumque indulgeat tutum. Liberali tum moliminum nostrorum com∣municatione Te inter manuum Tuarum deosculationes defatigamus. Magnam Spelmannus noster suâ dedicatione & ante Concilia nuper excusa praesatione piis omnibus offensam cievit. Ego amicè quid in illis desiderarem, quid in∣ducerem liberè exposui; quibus enumerandis impraesentiarum supersedeo: Ingenuè aliqua fassus se volente nolente expuncta, addita, interpolata; alia
reprehendi aegerrimè tulit, nec postremò illud in me, Te omnia adprobasse, vibravit jaculum. De his aliisque nonnullis si copiam Tui nobis indulgeat Deus Opt. Max. mutuo transigamus alloquio. Interim P. V. sit exorata, ut mihi hanc libertatem, quod incognitus Te impolitis hisce compellare sim ausus codicillis, ignoscat. P. V. deditissimus, Simonds D'Ewes. Stowhallae in agro Suffolciensi Septem. 28. 1639. calculo Juliano. LETTER CCII. A Letter from—Dudley Loftus, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissime Pater; TAM memor sum tuorum erga me benesiciorum, ut pro illis gratias non magnas; sed ut dicunt ingentes, hoc tibi egissem tempore, nisi satis mihi compertum comprehensumque fuisset, quam vehementer à tritâ illa & populari gratiarum actione animus tuus abhorreat, verum si quanta mihi ad∣referendas gratias est voluntas, tanta ad easdem aliquando praestandas suppe∣teret facultas, animum certe meum non beneficii immemorem aut ingratum argueres, sed singulari erga te studio affectum persentisceres. Tibi comparavi Librorum Graecorum M. S. Catalogum; quem una cum his literis accipies, & si aliquid restat quod mearum virium erit perficere, rem mihi gratissimam fa∣cies, si in illo perficiendo me uti servo velis, quod per totum hoc tempus non Catalogum ne{que} literas accepisti, obsecro ne mei erga te officii debiti, vel tuorum erga me beneficiorum oblivione factum esse existimes, nam ni∣hil à vero dicere, hic tantum est secundus dies post quem mihi vi∣dere Catalogum licebat cujus ad exemplar his conscriptus fuit, in Biblio∣theca Bodl. librum quendam Aethiopicum M. S. inveni, cui titulus  quem in linguam latinam transferre incepi ulterius{que} progredi mihimet proposui, si non tibi displicuisse intellexero: & tu ulterius progrediendi ap∣probator esse velis, sin minus facile manum referam; hic liber etiam si quam∣plurimis ad Mariam virginem preculis abundans, haud omnino esse indignum interpretis labore ex his verbis, quae tibi transcripsi patet : ho∣rum verborum interpretatio est ut sequitur [beatus ego propter fiduciam me∣am: & non propter justitiam meam, beatus ego propter fidem meam, & non propter puritatem meam]. Vale totius Europae splendor, totius terra∣rum orbis eximium decus, & te persuasum habeas, quod ego ad omnia officia vestrae gratiae praestanda, quavis oportunitate oblatâ memet paratissimum ostendam, Tuorum servorum humillimus in perpetuum erit, Dudleius Loftus. Oxon, Novemb. 14. An. D. 1639.
LETTER CCIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissime Domine; ARtabani illud testimonium, à Brissonio citatum est ex Plutarcho, uti videre poteris ex inclusa charta, in qua totam illam Brissonii periocham descripsi, utpote continentem varia aliorum autorum dicta eodem spectantia, quae proposito tuo utilia (ut credo) nesciebam an tibi in promptu essent, aut nunc succurrerent. Proxime post illa, à me exscripta, subjungit Briss. de cultu venerationis seu adorationis, Regibus suis exhiberià Persis solito, varia è diversis autoribus documenta: qui cultus, divinus potius quam hu∣manus, à sacrilega vel regum arrogantia vel subditorum adulatione profectus, jure Graecis summopere semper displicuit, foedus{que} ac detestabilis visus est, impium nimis credentibus, honorem Deo debitum mortali exhibere: qua de re prolixe ibidem agit Brissonius, inde{que} mihi in mentem venit, honorifica illa Persarum de regibus suis praeconia parum aut nihil ponderis habere, quum palam sit, eos omnem hac in parte modum excessisse, ac Reges suos non tan∣quam Dei ministros & vicarios coluisse, sed tanquam ipsos Deos, eodem sa∣crilegio, quo postea Romani Caesaribus templa aras{que} ponebant, & sacrificia adolebant, non modò defunctis, at{que} in Divorum numerum relatis, sed ad∣huc in terra degentibus: & qua hodie{que} nonnullas nationes, infra omnem servilitatem abjectae, Principi suo omnipotentiam quandam & omniscientiam attribuunt. Locus in Platonis Politico, de quo quaeris, hic est,  [Democratia scilicet]  [Monarchia seu Regia] . Quae verba ut recte intelligantur, nonnulla altius repe∣tenda sunt. Quippe Plato in isto tractatu  (quae duo toto passim libro iudifferenter usurpat) in duo summa genera dividit: quo∣rum unum in tria genera secetur, prout imperium ac rerum summa vel penes unum est, vel apud plures vel in toto populo: quae genera usitatis nomini∣bus Monarchia, Oligarchia, & Democratia dicta, rursus bifariam singula se∣centur, prout vel , vel , verbi gra∣tia Monarchia in Regiam ac Tyrannicam, & sic de caeteris: ut in universum sex  species hoc genus sub se comprehendat: has autem omnes, ac tam  quam , excludit ab appellatione verae , cujus duntaxat  sint, meliora vel deteriora, prout ex legum praescripto gubernantur, vel secus. Alterum autem genus, quum in verbis supra allegatis  vocat, statuit : hoc inter utrum{que} genus ponens discrimen, quod in secundaria, seu imitatrice, legum ac consuetudinum praescripto obstricti teneantur, qui imperant, qui{que} promde ; in altera ve∣rò, proprio arbitrio ac liberrimo judicio omnia disponant, nullis legum vin∣culis obligati, utpote artem, bene ac conducibiliter gubernandi homines, exactissime callentes: propterea{que} non magis ullis scriptis regulis, vel propriis vel alienis, adstringendi, quàm vel medicus vel gubernator in exercenda sua arte ex scripto agere solent. Verborum igitur supra allegatorum hic est sen∣sus, quod de sex illis civilis regiminis speciebus praestantissima sit justum ac legitimum regnum, & reliquis quin{que} longe antecellat; & ipsum tamen
(imaginariae scilicet, & qualis nulla unquam fuit, nisi in primo seu aureo seculo, quando hominibus praeerant Dii, sicuti mutis animalibus homines; quam fabulam prolixe tractat in eodem libro Plato) non magis conferendum sit, quam homines Diis. Quanquam enim utrique, , unum idemque  nomen sit commune, ac ambo Reges appellentur; latissimum tamen inter ip∣sos esse intervallum. Ex illo igitur loco non potest Platoni attribui, acsi dixisset, Regem esse velut Deum inter homines; quum illud dixerit non de Regibus, quales sunt fuerunt{que} in mundo, sed qualem inter reliquas Ideas si∣bimet ipse consinxit: quod quia videre non poteras, si nuda tantum verba illa, de quibus R. D. T. quaerebat, ascripsissem; ideo me in tantam prolixi∣tatem necessario diffudi. I do not in any part of my Studies take so much delight, as I do in what may be serviceable to your Grace: Whom praying to rest fully assured of that, and accordingly to employ me, as often as occasion shall be offered, I humbly take leave, ever remaining, Your Grace's most affectionate Servant, Arnold Boate. Dublin, Nov. 15. 1639. LETTER CCIV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Lewis de Dieu. Reverendissimo in Christo fratri D. Lodovico de Dieu, Eccle∣siae Lugduno-Batavae Pastori fidelissimo. Leydam. POstremae tuae Literae (dilectissime frater) Londini mihi sunt redditae unà cum Catalogo, & librorum quos mihi comparaveras Pretio, quod ut il∣lic persolveretur, probi cujusdam Bibliopolae Londinensis fidei commendavi. Interim gratissima mihi fuit tua cura de locupletandâ Bibliothecâ meâ novo hoc auctario, cui & xx. illa volumina Graecorum Aristotelis interpretum ac∣cessisse, mihi jam gratulor; ea cum reliquis libris Londinum ad Bibliopolam illum de quo dixi (post pretium enumeratum) transmitti velim. Quas Bri∣tannicarum turbarum futurus sit exitus, . Hiberniae enim nostrae status adhuc est pacatissimus, de cujus motibus inanes apud vos sparsi fuerant rumores sed de nostris rebus omnibus certiores vos reddet D. Boswel∣lus noster, qui confestim ad vos iter ingressurus est. Deus te Custodiat, & piis tuis laboribus benedicat. Scripsit haec raptim, , Ja. Usserius Armacanus. Londini, Jun. 28. M. DC. XL.
LETTER CCV. A Learned Letter of the late Arch-bishop of Armagh, concerning the Sabbath, and observation of the Lord's Day. Worthy Sir; YOur Letter of the first of February came unto my hands the seventh of April; but my journy to Dublin following thereupon, and my long stay in the City, (where the multiplicity of my publick and private Employ∣ments would scarce afford me a breathing time) was such, that I was for∣ced to defer my Answer thereunto, untill this short time of my retiring into the Country: Where, being now absent also from my Library, I can rather signify unto you, how fully I concur in judgment with those grounds, which you have so judiciously laid in that question of the Sabbath, than afford any great help unto you in the building, which you intend to raise thereupon (For when I gave my self unto the reading of the Fathers, I took no heed unto any thing that concerned this Argument, as little dreaming that any such controversy would have arisen among us); Yet generally I do remember that the word Sabbatum in their writngs doth denote our Saturday: although by Analogy from the manner of speech used by the Jews, the term be sometimes transferred to denote our Christian Festivities also, as Sirmondus the Jesuite observeth, out of Sidonius Apollinaris, (lib. 1. Epist. 2.) where, describing the moderation of the Table of Theodorick, King of the Goths, upon the Eves, and the excesse on the Holy-day following; he writeth of the one, that his convivium diebus profestis simile privato est; but of the other, De luxu autem illo Sabbatario narrationi meae super sedendum est, qui nec latentes potest latere personas. And because the  of the fourth Commandment point∣eth at the Sabbath, as it was in the first institution, the seventh day from the Creation: therefore they held that Christians were not tied to the observance thereof. Whereupon you may observe, that S. Augustine in his speculum (in operum tomo 3o.) purposely selecting those things which apper∣tained unto us Christians; doth wholly pretermit that Precept, in the reci∣tal of the Commandments of the Decalogue; Not because the substance of the Precept was absolutely abolished: but because it was in some parts held to be Vid. Augustin. Praefat. in spe∣culum. ceremonial, and the time afterwards was changed in the state of the New Testament, from the 7th to the first day of the week: as appeareth by the Author of the 25 Sermon, de tempore (in 10o tomo Operum Augustini:) and that place of Athanasius in homil. de semente, where he most plainly saith touching the Sabbath, . Whereupon Caesarius Arelatensis in his twelfth homily, doubted not to preach unto the people; Verè dico, Fratres, satis durum & prope nimis impium est, ut Christiani non habeant reverentiam diei Dominico, quam Judaei observare videntur in Sabbato, &c. Charles the Great in his Laws, taketh it for granted, that our observation of the Lord's Day is founded upon the  of the fourth Commandment. Statuimus (saith he, Edit. Linde∣brog. p. 842. libro 1o. Capitularium, cap. 81.) secundum quod & in lege Dominus praecepit, ut opera servilia diebus Domi∣nicis non agantur; sicut & bonae memoriae genitor meus in suis Synodalibus edictis mandavit. And Lotharius likewise, in legibus Alemannorum, titulo 30. Ibid. p. 373. Die Dominico nemo opera servilia praesumat sacere: quia hoc lex prohibuit, & sacra scriptura in omnibus contradicit. Accommodating the Law of God touching the Sabbath unto our observation of the Lord's Day, by the self-same Analo∣gy;
that the Church of England now doth in her publick Prayer: Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. The Jewes commonly hold two things touching their Sabbath; as Manasses Ben-Israel sheweth in his eighth Probleme, de creatione; which he published at Amsterdam the last Year. First, that the observation thereof was commanded only unto the Whether the Proselyte, or  were tied there∣unto, is handled in the Talmud of Jerusalem, Se∣der,  fol. 8. d. of my Edition. Israelites, (where he speaketh also of the seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah; which have need to be taken in a large extent, if we will have all the duties that the Heathen were tyed unto to be comprised therein.) Secondly, that it was observed by the Patriarchs, before the coming out of Egypt. For that then the observation began; or that the Israelites were brought out of Egypt, or the Egyptians drowned upon the Sabbath; I suppose our good Friend Mr. Mead will not be able to evince, either out of Compare with Deut. 16. 12. 7. Deut. 5. 15. or out of any other Scripture whatsoever. And the Text, Gen. 2. 3. (as you well note) is so clear for the ancient institution of the Sabbath, and so fully vindicated by Dr. Rivet, from the Exceptions of Go∣marus, that I see no reason in the Earth why any Man should make doubt thereof; especially considering withal, that the very Gentiles, both civil and barbarous, both ancient and of later days, as it were by an universal kind of Tradition, retained the distinction of the seven days of the Week; which if Dr. Heylin had read, so well proved as it is by Rivetus and Salmasius, he would not have made such a conclusion as he doth: That because the Hea∣then Part. 1. cap. 4. Pag. 83, 84. Pag. 90. (of the four great Monarchies at least) had no distinction of Weeks, there∣fore they could observe no Sabbath; whereas he might have found, that the di∣stinction of the days of the week did reach etiam ad ipsos us{que} Sauromatas; for even of the Slavonians themselves (while they yet continued in their an∣cient Paganism) thus writeth Helmoldus, Chronic. Slavor. lib. 1. cap. 84. Illic secundâ feriâ papulus terrae, cum flamine & regulo, convenire solebant propter judicia: The same order of the days of the Week being retained by them, which Theophilus the old Bishop of Antioch noteth to have been ob∣served by all Mankind.  (saith he, lib. 2. ad Antolycum) ) confounding as it seemeth , with , as also doth Lactantius, lib. 7. cap. 14.) . Where∣with we may joyn that other place of Johannes Philoponus, , Lib. 7. Cap. ult. , who, with shewing the cause thereof, thus shuts up the whole work; . We see it The variation of some rude A∣merican breaketh here no square, no more than it doth in the unskilful reckoning of their Times. [They be∣ing meer Sava∣ges. almost generally observed in all Nations, though never so far distant, and strangers one to another, that in their reckoning of Numbers, when they come to 10, they return to their addition of 1, 2, and 3, again. If it should be demanded, how they did all come to agree upon this kind of Arithmetick, and not some place their Period at 8, some at 12, some at 15 I suppose this could not be better resolved, than by saying, They had this by tradition from the first Fathers that lived before the Dispersion; and that this is not an improbable Evidence of that Truth propounded by the Apostle un∣to the Philosophers of Athens, Acts 17. 26. That God made of one Blood all Nations of Men to dwell on all the Face of the Earth. How much more when we find a far greater Agreement among the Nations, in the computation of the seven days of the Week (the self-same day, which is accounted the first by one, being in like manner reckoned so by all, notwithstanding that great variety of differences which is betwixt them in the ordering of their Years
and Months): How much more strongly, I say, may we conclude from hence, that the tradition of the seventh-Day was not of Moses, but of the Fathers, and did not begin with the Common-Wealth of Israel, but was de∣rived unto all Nations by lineal descent from the Sons of Noah Add hereunto that those Heathens, who were strangers from the Common∣wealth of Israel, though they made not the seventh day a Festival as the Jews did; yet did they attribute some holiness to it, and gave it a peculiar honour above the other days of the week; wherein they retained some Relicks, and preserved still some clear foot-steps of the first institution. Quinetiam populi jam This word was not well left out by Go∣marus, in Inve∣stigat. p. 123. The Greek, S. . olim, saith Josephus, (sub fin. lib. 2. contra Apion.) multùm nostram pietatem aemulantur: neque est civitas Graecorum ulla usquàm aut Barbarorum, nec ulla gens, ad quam septimanae, in qua vacamus, consuetudo minimè pervenerit; Jejuniaque & candelabra accensa, &c. Of which Rite of lighting of Candles, or Lamps rather, mention also is made by Seneca, in his 95th Epistle; Accendere aliquam lucernam Sabbathis prohibeamus; quoni∣am nec lumine Dii egent, & ne homines quidem delectantur fuligine. And by Tertullian, lib. 1. ad Nation. cap. 13. where he noteth also those to be the Sabbaths observed by the Nations, saying thus unto them; Qui solem & di∣em ejus nobis exprobratis, agnoscite vicinitatem: Non longè à Saturno & Sabba∣tis VESTRIS sumus; wherein though their Devotion were somewhat like unto that of the Jews, (which is all that those words of Josephus do im∣port, Multum nostram pietatem aemulantur); yet that it was not done by any late imitation of them, or with any relation at all to their observance, that other place of Tertullian doth seem to evince, in the 16th Chapter of his Apologeticum; Aequè si diem solis laetitiae indulgemus aliâ longè ratione quàm religione solis; secundo loco ab eis sumus qui diem Saturni otio & victui decer∣nunt, exorbitantes & ipsi à Judaico more, Upon these two words I ground the strength of the Argument, which will hold, not∣withstanding the correction of Gottefredus, out of that in libro 1. ad Na∣tiones, cap. 13. Quod quidem facitis, exorbi∣tantes & ipsi à vestris ad alte∣nas religiones. quem ignorant. And that they did not celebrate their Saturdays, with that solemnity wherewith themselves did their Annual Festivities, or the Jews their Weekly Sabbaths, may appear by the words of this same Author, in the 14th Chapter of his Book de Idololatriâ, thus speaking unto-the Christians, (who observed 52 Lord's Days every Year, whereas all the Annual Festivities of the Pagans put together, did come short of fifty); Ethnicis semel annuus dies quisque festus est; tibi octavo quo∣que die. Excerpe singulas solemnitates nationum, & in ordinem texe; Pente∣costen implere non potuerunt. And yet, as I said, that they accounted Satur∣day more holy, and requiring more respect from them than the other ordina∣ray days of the Week, may be seen by that of Tibullus, Eleg. 3. lib. 1. Aut ego sum causatus aves, aut omnia dira. Saturni SACRA me tenuisse die. And that of Lucian, Oper. Lucian. Graeco-lat. pag. 893. edit. Paris. Anno 1615. in his , of Boys getting leave to play, ; and that of Aelius Lampridius, touching Alexander Severus, using to go unto the Capitols and other Temples, upon the seventh Day. Whereunto we may add those Verse of the Ancient Greek Poets, alleadged by Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 5. Stromat. and Eusebius, lib. 13. Praeparat. Evangelic. which plainly shew that they were not ignorant, that the Works of Creation were finished on the Seventh Day; for so much doth that Verse of Linus intimate; —. And that of Homer; .
And that of Callimachus; . The Israelites, by the Law of Moses, were not only to observe their weekly Sabbath every seventh Day, but also their Feast of Weeks once in the Year: Which although by the vulgar use of the Jewish Nation, it may now fall upon any day of the Week, yet do the Samaritans until this day constantly observe it on the first Day of the Week, which is our Sunday: For which they produce the Letter of the Law, Levit. 23. 15, 16. where the Feast of the first Fruits (otherwise called Pentecost, or the Feast of Weeks) is prescribed to be kept the morrow after the seventh Sabbath: which not they only, but also amongst our Christian Interpreters, Isychins and Ru∣pertus do interpret to be the first Day of the Week. Planius, saith Isychius, Isych. lib. 6. in Levit. cap 23. Vid. Lidyat De variis annorum formis, cap. 5. Legislator intentionem suam demonstrare volens, ab altero die Sabbati memorari praecepit quinquaginta dies: Dominicum diem proculdubiò volens intelligi. Hic enim est altera dies Sabbati, (in hâc enim resurrectio facta est) qua hebdomadae numerantur septem, usque ad alterum diem expletionis hebdomadae. Dominicâ rursus die Pentecostes celebramus festivitatem, in quâ Sancti Spiritus adventum mernimus. i. Consecuti sumus, (juxta usum loquendi veterum.) Where you may observe by the way, that although this Au∣thor made a little bold to strain the signification of altera dies Sabbati, (which in Moses denoteth no more than the Morrow after the Sabbath) yet he maketh no scruple to call the Day of Christ's Resurrection another Sabbath Day; as in the Council of Friuli also (if I greatly mistake not the Matter) you Concil. Foro-Julien s. c. 13. shall find Saturday called by the name of Sabbatum ultimum, and the Lord's Day of Sabbatum primum; (with some allusion perhaps to that of St. Am∣brose, in Psal. 47. Ubi Dominica dies caepit praecellere, quâ Dominus resurrexit; Sabbatum, quod primum erat secundum haberi caepit à primo); not much un∣like unto that which Dr. Part. 2. cap. 2. pag. 19. 1. Heylin himself noteth out of Scaliger of the Ethio∣pian Christians, that they call both of them by the name of Sabbaths; the one the first, the other the latter Sabbath; or in their own Language, the one Sanbath Sachristos, i. e. Christ's Sabbath; the other Sanbath Judi, or the Jews Sabbath. But touching the old Pentecost, it is very considerable, that it is no where in Moses affixed unto any one certain day of the Month, as all the rest of the Feasts are: which is a very great presumption that it was a moveable Feast, and so Against Do∣ctor Heylin, part 2. cap. 1. pag. 14. varied, that it might always fall upon the day immediately following the ordinary Sabbath. And if God so order the matter, that in the cele∣bration of the Feast of Weeks, the Seventh should purposely be passed over, and that Solemnity should be kept upon the First: what other thing may we imagine could be presignified thereby, but that under the State of the Gospel, the solemnity of the weekly Service should be celebrated upon that day That on that day the famous Pentecost in the 2d of the Acts was observed, is in a manner generally acknowledged by all: wherein the Truth of all those that went before being accomplished, we may observe the Type and the Verity, concurring together in a wonderful manner. At the time of the Passeover, Christ our Passeover was slain for us; the whole Sabbath fol∣lowing 1 Cor. 5. 7. Levit. 23. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 15. 20. Math. 27. 52, 53. Levit. 23. 15, 16, 17. Numb. 28 26. Exod. 34. 22. he rested in the Grave. The next day after that Sabbath, the , or sheaf of the first Fruits of the first (or Barly) Harvest, was offered unto God; and Christ rose from the Dead, and became the first Fruits of them that slept; many Bodies of the Saints that slept, arising likewise after him. From thence was the Account taken of the seven Sabbaths; and upon the morrow after the seventh Sabbath (which was our Lord's Day) was celebrated the Feast of Weeks, the day of the first Fruits of the second (or Wheat)
Harvest; upon which day the Apostles having themselves received the first Fruits of the Spirit, begat three thousand Souls with the Word of Truth, and presented them as the first Fruits of the Christian Church unto God, and unto Acts 2. 1, 4, 5, 41. Jam 1. 18. Revel. 14. 4. Thom. Wal∣dens. Doctri∣nal. Tom. 3. Tit. 16. c. 140 the Lamb. And from that time forward doth Waldensis note that the Lord's Day was observed in the Christian Church in the place of the Sabbath; Quia inter legalia (saith he) tunc sublata Sabbati custodia fuit unum, planum est tunc intrâsse Dominicam loco ejus: sicut Baptisma statim loco Circumcisionis. Adhuc enim superstes erat sanctus Johannes, qui diceret: Et fui in spiritu die Dominicâ, Apoc. 1. cùm de Dominicâ die ante Christi Resurrectionem nulla prorsùs mentio haberetur. Sed statim post missionem Spiritus sancti, lege novâ fulgente, in humano cultu sublatum est Sabbatum; & dies Dominicae Resurrecti∣onis clarescebat Dominicâ. The Revelation exhibited unto St. John upon the Lord's Day, is, by Ire∣naeus (in his fifth Book) referred unto the Empire of Domitian; or, as Revel. 7. 10. S. Hierome in his Catalogue more particularly doth express it, to the fourth Year of his Reign: Which answereth partly to the forty-ninth, and partly to the ninty-fifth Year of our Lord, according to our vulgar computation; and was but eleven or twelve Years before the Time, when Ignatius did write his Epistles. Of whom then should we more certainly learn, what the Apostle meant by the Lord's Day, than from Ignatius who was by the Apostles themselves ordained Bishop of that Church, wherein the Disciples Acts 11. 26. were first called Christians: And in his Epistle to the Magnesians, clearly maketh the Lord's Day to be a weekly Holy-Day observed by Christians, in the room of the abrogated Sabbath of the Jews; than which can we desire more But here you are to know, beside the common Edition, wherein the genuine Epistles of Ignatius are fouly depraved, by a number of beg∣garly Patches added unto his Purple by later hands: There is an ancient Latin Translation to be found in the Library of Caius Colledg in Cam∣bridg; which, although it be very rude, and corrupt, both in many other, and in this very same place also of the Epistle to the Magnesians, yet is it free from these Additaments, and in many respects to be preferred before the common Greek Copy, as well because it agreeth with the Citations of Eusebius, Athanasius, and Theodoret; and hath the Sentences vouched by them out of Ignatius, (and particularly that of the Eucharist, in the Epistle to the Smyrnians) which are not at all to be found in our Greek; and hath in a manner none of all those places in the true Epistles of Ignatius, against which exception hath been taken by our Divines; which addeth great strength to those Exceptions of theirs, and sheweth that they were not made without good cause. Now in this Translation, there is nothing to be found touching the Sabbath, and the Lord's Day, in the Epistle to the Mag∣nesians, but these words only; Non ampliûs sabbitazantes, sed secundùm Dominicam viventes, in quâ, & vita nostra orta est: Whereunto these of our common Greek may be made answerable; . It may be the three first syllables of this word were wanting in the Greek Co∣py which the Translator u∣sed; & thence eame his vi∣ventes. All those other words alleadged by Dr. Heylin, (Part. 2. pag. 43.) to prove that Ignatius would have both the Sabbath and the Lord's Day observed, being afterwards ad∣ded by some later Grecian, who was afraid that the custom of keeping both days observed in his time, should appear otherwise to be directly opposite to the sentence of Ignatius, whereas his main intention was to oppose the Ebio∣nites of his own time: who, as Eusebius witnesseth in the third Book of his Ecclesiastical History, did both keep the Sabbath with the Jews, and also . By whose imitation of the Church herein, the antiquity of the observation of the Lord's Day may be further confirmed: Ebion being known to have been St. Paul's Antagonist, and to have given out of himself, that he was
one of those that brought the prices of their Goods, and laid them down at the Apostles feet; as the universality of the observance may be gathered, by the Argument drawn from thence by Eusebius, towards the end of his Ora∣tion of the Praises of Constantine, to prove the Preeminency of our Saviour Christ, above all the Gods of the Heathen; because this Prescript of his, touching the Celebration of this Day, was admitted and submitted unto; not within the Dominions of Constantine only, but also throughout the compass of the whole World: . Quis enim (saith he) cunctis totins orbis ter∣rarum incolis, seu terra seu mari illi sint, praescripserit ut singulis septimanis in unum convenientes diem Dominicum festum celebrarent; instituent{que} ut sicut cor∣pora pascerent cibariis, sic animos Divinis Disciplinis reficerent We see then that the Doctrine, which the true Ignatius received imme∣diately from the hands of the Apostles, was the very same with that was de∣livered by the Father of the Council of Laodicea, about 250 Years after, (for the Proofs produced by the Authors, to whom my D. White. Lord of Ely, pag. 73. referreth us, for having it to be held before the first Nicene, are no∣thing worth); Non oportet Christianos Judaizare & in Sabbatho otiari; sed ipsos eo die operari, diem autem dominicum praeferentes otiari (si modo possint) ut Christianos. The contrary whereunto, Pope Gregory the First, in Registr. lib. 11. Epist. 3. esteemeth to be the Doctrine of the Preachers of Anti∣christ: Qui veniens, diem Dominicum & Sabbatum ab omni opere faciet custo∣diri: Which my Lord of Ely (pag. 219) rendreth, Upon the old Sabbath∣day, or upon the Sunday; by a strange kind of mistake turning the Copula∣tive into a Disjunctive. Ja. Armachanus. LETTER CCVI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Worshipful Sir Simon Dewes. D. Simonidi Dewesio, Equiti Aurato & Suffolciensi Vice-Comiti.Vir Eximie; SEcundae tuae literae ix Kalend. datae, hic Londini mihi demum sunt redditae; sicut & tertiae prid. Non. Junii insequentis perscriptae, ex quibus postre∣mis tristem de unici tui filii immaturâ morte nuncium dolens accepi, sed cum Deus hoc ità voluerit, ac ipsius decreta impatientèr ferre non minus irreligio∣sum sit quàm irritum, omninò in ipsius voluntate est acquiescendum. Et quanquam propriâ sapientiâ ad haec & similia, quibus omnes obnoxii sumus, fortitèr toleranda abundè instructus sis; Optâssem tamen ut parti alicui tanti doloris leniendae, aliquod solatium praesens adhibere possem: Illo Enniano subinde mihi in mentem recurrente;—fi quid ego adjuto, curamve levasso quae nunc te coquit, & versat sub pectore fixa. Verùm quo minùs voto hìc meo satisfacere valeam, Comitiorum utrius{que} Academiae facit vicinitas, quae Cantabrigiae haerere me nòn patitur, sed ad Oxoniensium  porrò visendam confestìm inde me avocat, spes tamèn adhuc superest post finitam agri Suthfolciensis tibi commissam custodiam, simul nos conventuros; & cùm de aliis ad Remp. literariam pertinentibus tùm de Spelmanni nostri in∣stituto,
tuisque  (quas avidissime percurri) ali∣quanto liberius, quàm ista scribendi ratiò permittit, collocuturos. Quo tempore & Ninium, (ità enim appello, & vetustissimi codicis authoritatem, & nominis ejusdem in Ninia, & Niniano expressa vestigia, secutus) cum variis MSS. à me nòn indiligentèr comparatum, tecum sum communicaturus; ut Exemplaria Cottoniana (quibus in hac ipsâ collatione ego sum usus) denuò consulete necesse nòn habeas. Nàm ad diplomata Anglo-Saxonica quod at∣tinet: non in uno aliquo volumine simul collecta, sed per varios illius Bib∣liothecae libros dispersa ea fuisse animadverti, de quibus in unum corpus compingendis, dabitur (ut spero) opportunus tecum coram consultandi lo∣cus; Interim ut egregiis tuis conatibus Deus adsit & benedicat, summis votis exoptat qui Ex animo tuus est, Ja. Armachanus. Londini, xii Kal. Jul. An. M. DC. XL. LETTER CCVII. A Letter from the Learned Johannes Priceus, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Joannes Priceus Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino D. Jacobo, Archiepiscopo Armachano S. D. COllectanea (Antistes eruditissime) de Britannicarum Ecclesiarum pri∣mordiis accepi dudum,  ac humanitatis pariter insigne spe∣cimen. At dum indies (quem cassus rumor vulgaverat) praestolor adven∣tui tuo, alieno jam satis tempore adimplevi officium meum. Nae tu nimis (doctissime Praesul) facilis es & communis, qui in tantâ illustrium literis aut honoribus abundantiâ, homunculum nullius ordinis cohonestare sustines. Contrectabitur sanè eximium manus istud assiduis ac religiosis manibus, li∣brorumque atque adeò cogitationum mearum locum principem occupabit. Joannes Priceus. Dabam ex rure suburbano Hono∣ratissimi Domini Georgii Rad∣cliffe. iiii Kalend. Sept. 1640.
LETTER CCVIII. Reverendo & Illustri Praesuli Domino Jacobo Usserio Archie∣piscopo Armachano, totius Hyberniae Primati, &c. Ami∣co nostro honorando. Reverende & Illustris Domine Praesul, Amice honorande; EA, quae Scholarchae de Illustris nostri Gymnasii Hanovici restauratione, ex mandato nostro non ità pridem ad Tepleniùs perscripsêre at{que} effla∣gitâre, multis verbis repetere supersedemus, non dubitantes, quin animo tuo adhuc infixa haereant. Notum est, ità res esse humanas, ut alias copiâ abun∣dent, aliàs penuriâ laborent, & subindè aliter at{que} aliter sese habeant, notum & illud, quando res humanae semel loco moveri inclinarivè sede sua, captae, quò majores sunt, eò aegriùs serius{que} vestigio sisti at{que} reponi. Quid mirum igitur, quod Scholarchae nostri aliena quaerant subsidia, utpotè propriis de∣stituti. Eo, enim res rediit, ut propter penuriam redituum totum fere Gym∣nasium suo quo{que} splendore inclinari coeperit, nec multùm abfuit, quin vix ac ne vix quidem restitueretur, nisi rebus nostris ex bona parte restitutis, ni∣hil antiquiùs duxissemus, quàm ut animum quo{que} ad restaurationem dicti Gymnasii converteremus, & quod ab initio tanta Authoris pietate fundatum, tantis quo{que} successoris sumptibus & laboribus reparatum in pristinam for∣mam restitueremus. Quapropter desiderium Scholarcharum, uti pium, honestum & utile Reipublicae & Ecclesiae Tibi Reverende Pater majorem in modum recommendatum volumus, obnixè rogantes, ut ea qua polles autho∣ritate, totum negotium pro impetrando aliquo liberali subsidio promovere nos non dedigneris offerimus è contrà & nostro & omnium Reipublicae par∣tium nomine gratam animi recognitionem & officia paratissima. Vale. Dabamus Hanoviae 14 Octobris, Ann. 1641. Sibylla Christina, nata ex Illustrissima Domo Anhaltina, &c. Comitista ac Domina in Hanau & Rhinec Domina in Muntzenberg, &c. Vidua & Tutrix. Sibylla Christina Comitissa in Hanau.
LETTER CCIX. A Letter from the learned D. Blondell, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Domino Honoratissimo, Do∣mino Jacobo Armachano Ecclesiae Archiepiscopo, Hiberno∣rum Primati. Londinum.Reverendissime in Christô Pater, Domine honoratissime; QUandoquidem te intolerandô  cruciatu propè enectum, ex ipsis quodammodò sepulchri faucibus, potenti dextrâ, Ecclesiae suae misertus, Dominus eripuit, qui in communi piorum luctu privato dolori indulsissem, coeleste beneficium totô mentis affectu praedicare necesse habeo, teque velut redivivum novis obsequii mei officiis prosequi. Benedictus miserationum pa∣ter, totius consolationis Deus, qui te propitius ex altô respexit, adjectis su∣per sanctae vitae tuae dies diebus, in bonis desiderium tuum repleat, ut aquilae juventam tuam renovet, tibi ex Sion benedicere pergat, ut deinceps bonum Jerusalem, pacemque super Israël & videas, nè quid inauspicatum Ignatii ve∣ris suis natalibus restituendi editioni obsistat, votisque Honoratissime Pater Paternae tuae Reverentiae observantissimi D. Blondelli. Udanci Carnutum. Idis Octob. An. 1642. LETTER CCX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Claudius Salmasius. Nobillissimo & Doctissimo viro D. Claudio Salmasio. Vir Clarissime; NOstram de ignatii Epistolis dissertationem censendam tibi mitto; Ipsum quo{que} Ignatium simul missurus, si bellicae turbae, quibus Musarum an∣tiquum hoc domicilium jam premitur, non obstitissent. Sicubi à te dissentio, id eâ temperatum videbis modestiâ, quam tibi spero nòn displicituram. Quicquid sit: id tibi persuadeas velim; eorum qui adhuc tibi ignoti sunt re∣perturum te neminem, qui & te & tua in Rempub. literariam merita pluris aestimet, quàm Tuum (si eo dignari velis me honore) Jacobum Usserium Armachanum. Oxonii Prid. Kalend. Jun. (Julianas) An. 1644.
LETTER CCXI. A Letter from Mr. John Greaves to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. I Should be glad to hear that your Grace had received, either from the Vaticane Library, or that of the Escurial in Spain, a Transcript of Ptole∣my, or rather Hipparchus,  So much the rather be∣cause in perusing of some of my Arabian and Persian MSS. I have found some Observations, which may much conduce to the clearing of that Argu∣ment. I have not now leisure to send your Grace those which were made by the Indians at Kôbah, and Kandahar, or those others, which were made by the Persians before Yezdegerd's time, and by Yezdegerd, and long after him in Almamon's time, as I find them mentioned by Alhashamy an Arabian Author. Those of the Chatéans, and of Nassir Eddin, and of Aly Kôsgy, as later than the former, so exacter, I could not but send them to your Grace. The true Solary Year, According to the Chateans in 365 days 2436/10000 parts of a day. According to Nassir Eddin 365 days 14′ 32″ 30▪. According to Aly Kôsgy, who observed in the 841 Year of the Hegira, almost 200 Years after Nassir Eddin, 365 days 14′ 33″ 32▪, whereas Ptolemy is much more, 365 days 14′ 48″. I have finished those Lemmata of Archimedes, which the Arabians call , and if I be not deceived, such as wish well to the Mathema∣ticks will think my Pains well bestowed: As indeed it was no small labour to correct the Diagrammes, and the Letters (which were too often perver∣ted in the MS.) and sometimes to supply what was defective in the Demon∣stration it self. According to your Grace's advice, I have made a Persian Lexicon out of such words as I met with in the Evangelists, and in the Psalms, and in two or three Arabian and Persian Nomenclators. So that I have now a stock of above 6000 words in that Language, I think as many as Raphelengius hath in his Arabick Dictionary. Wherefore I have a greater mind than ever to go to Leyden, and peruse their Oriental Manuscripts, which were procured by the expence of the States, a thing which long since your Grace would have had me to have done. But yet considering my Lecture in Oxford (though as yet it cannot be read) it will not be fit for me to go without special leave from our Honourable Chancellor, and two or three more of the Lords of his Majesties Privy Council. I shall therefore desire your Grace to procure this Favour for me in writing, with this Caution, that my absence for a while may be no prejudice to me at home; especially since my Journey is for the improvement of Learning, and for the publishing of some of those Books, which I long since have finished. There I shall have an opportunity of printing your Grace's Map, and of perfecting and publishing that Dis∣course of Dr. Bainbrigg concerning the periodus Sothiaca: and I hope your
Grace will think of something else, in which I may be serviceable to you, and useful to the Commonwealth of Letters. Your Grace cannot sufficiently com∣mand him, whom by your many Favours you have ever made, Your Grace's most obliged Servant, John Greaves. Septemb. 19. 1644. If I may serve Dr. Harvy, I shall be most ready either here, or at Leyden, to do it. LETTER CCXII. A Letter from Dr. Langbaine to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord, IN August last I did cursorily survey that Edition of Ignatius out of the Florentine Copy by Isaac Vossius, and found with content, what I look'd after with greediness, your Lordship's Judgment in discerning and distin∣guishing the Genuine from the Spurious, confirmed by a new Testimony of that Antiquity and Authority, as few will hereafter dare to question, tho your Lordship's Reasons before were to me (and I doubt not to many others) of that moment, and the Conjecture built upon so good grounds, that (as Pliny says of Eratosthenes) puduit non credere. That your Lordship goes on in the same course, notwithstanding all the Opposition and Discouragements of the Times, as we cannot doubt but there remains a Blessing for your self, so it may (I am sure it ought) have an in∣fluence upon us here below. The publication of the Martyrdoms of Igna∣tius and Polycarpus, sure cannot be unseasonable; we are born to those times, quibus sirmare animum expedit constantibus exemplis. For my self, I cannot tell what account to make of my present Employment, I have many Irons in the Fire, but of no great consequence: I do not know how soon I shall be called to give up, and am therefore putting my House in order; digesting the confused Notes and Papers left me by several Predecessors, both in the Uni∣versity and Colledg; which I purpose to leave in a better method than I found them. At Mr. Patr. Young's request I have undertaken the Collation of Constantines Geoponicks, with two MSS. in our publick Library, upon which I am forced to bestow some vacnt hours. In our Colledg I am ex officio, to moderate Divinity-Disputations once a week. My honoured Friend Dr. Duck, has given me occasion to make some enquiry after the Law. And the op∣portunity of an ingenious young Man (come lately from Paris) who has put up a private course of Anatomy, has prevailed with me to engage my self for his Auditor and Spectator upon three days a week, four hours each time. But this I do, ut explorator non ut transfuga. For tho I am not sollici∣tous to engage my self in that great and weighty Calling of the Ministery after this new way, yet I would be loth to be , as to Divinity: Tho I am very insufficient to make a Master-buider, yet I could help to bring in Materials from that publick store in our Library, to which I could willingly consecrate the remainder of my days, and count it no loss to be deprived of all other Accommodations, so I might be permitted to enjoy the liberty of my Conscience and Study in that place. But if there be such a price set upon the latter, as I cannot reach without pawning the former,
I am resolved, the Lord's Will be done. I shall in all conditions, be most desirous of the continuance of your Grace's Affection, and at this time more especially of your Prayers for him, who is Your Lordship's most engaged Servant, Ger. Langbaine. Queens Coll. Feb. 9. 1646/7. LETTER CCXIII. Viro Reverendissimo, Honoratissimo, Jacobo Usserio, Patrono meo summo, Venerande, Christianus Ravius S. P. D. NON possum omittere, Patrone, Pater, Domine, quin subinde ad Te scribam, ut solâ meâ voluntate animo{que} interim gratitudinem me∣ritorum ergà me ingentium tuorum ostendam quando reapse nihil dum pos∣sum. Rogo saltem hoc, ut cùm nuper intellexerim, Rev. Dominum Rutilium habuisse Commissum à Tuâ Honoratissimâ Reverendissima{que} Dign. ut aliquos pro te libros inquireret, & procuraret, meâ potiùs eâ te operâ uti velis, tanquam clientis tui obsequentissimi. Iste enim meus amicus eam fortè nequeat praestare operam ita laboriosam, quam tali in re requiri scio. Jam fere an∣nus est elapsus, elabetur{que} ad Calendas Majas, à quibus Lectiones meas Am∣stelodamenses tractavi; absolvi{que} interim praeter Grammaticam Mehlfureri Ebraicam & A. Buxtorfii Chaldeam, Joelem prophetam, item{que} tria priora Capita Danielis, privatis{que} Collegiis, & binis de septimanâ publicis lectioni∣bus, diebus Martis & Veneris, hora tertiâ pomeridianâ, frequentiori certè auditorio, quàm Leidae L'Empereurius, Franekerae Coccejus, & Groningae Altingius, Altingii Theologi Germani Filius. Cl. Pasor, qui olim Arabica Oxoniae docuit publicè, jam ab aliquot benè multis annis, quibus Groningae Professor vivit, nihil omnino praestat in Orientalibus, & eorum amorem peni∣tus rejecit. P. L' Empereurius est Professor Theologiae, isque locus vacat, & si Cl. Buxtorfium Basileâ nancisci potuissent, vocatum magno gaudio susce∣pissent, cum desistat, locum illum pariter supplere perget L' Empereurius. Ego Amstelodamensem Conditionem multo praeferam Leidensi, & proximo Maio res experientur, an Magistratus noster Amplissimus Orientalium Professi∣onem constituerere Ordinariam possit, velit{que}. Hoc interim fatentur Cu∣ratores ipsi, rem ultrà suam & omnium spem felicius procedere. Aliquot MSS. misi Tigurum, à quo loco & omnium Tigurinarum Ecclesiarum Anti∣stitis & Professoris literas T. D. Committo, ut videas, me non— Amstel. 8 Aprilis, 1647.
LETTER CCXIV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Langbaine. Salutem in Christo Jesu. YEsterday I received your Letter, sent by Mr. Patrick Young; and thank you very much for your readiness in contributing your pains to the furtherance of my little Treatise, de Fidei Symbolis, which is now in the Press: I hold therein against Vossius, and the vulgar Opinion, that the Ni∣cene Creed, in our Common-Prayer Book, is indeed the Nicene, and not the Constantinopolitan: I mean the Nicene, as it is recited by Epiphanius in his Anchoratus, (p. 518. Edit. Graec. Basiliens.) a Book written seven Years before the Council of Constantinople was held, and yet therein both the Article of the Holy Ghost, and the others following, are recited , which have been hitherto thought to have been added to the Symbol first by that Coun∣cil. If the Synodicon, which you think to have been written Anno Christi 583, have any thing touching the distinction of Nicene and Constantinopo∣litan Creed; I would willingly understand, and with what number your Synodicon is noted in the former disposition of the Baroccian Library, ac∣cording to which my Catalogue is framed. In the first Tome of the Graeco-Latin. Edition of Gregory Nazianzen, a∣bout the 728 Page, there is a kind of Symbol: the first part whereof I find at the end of the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, in Crabbes Edition, in∣tituled, Fides Romanorum, that is, as I conceive it, Constantinopolitanorum. It is to be found also (if I remember aright) among the Manuscript Tra∣ctates of Nazianzen, translated by Ruffinus, in Magdalen Colledg Library, in the first Edition of S. Ambrose his Works, and in Georgius Wicelius his Eu∣chologium. By comparing of all which together, if I might get a right Co∣py thereof, it would do me some pleasure. It is also by some attributed to Athanasius; and happily may be that Symbol of his, differing from ours, which Cazanorius (or Czecanorius) in his Epistle to Calvin, saith to be so common in the Moscovitical and Russian Churches, of whose Ecclesiastical Offices you have in the publick Library some Copies; by which we might understand the truth hereof. I will trouble you no further at this time, but rest, Your most assured loving Friend, Ja. Armachanus. London, April 22. 1647. I send you back, with much thanks, your Catalogue of the Arch-bishops of Constantinople. In Epistolis Photii Epistola prima MS. quae ad Michaelem Bulgariae Re∣gem est (cujus partem aliquiam interprete Turriano, Latine dedit Hen. Canisius Antiquarum lectionum Tom. 5. pag. 183.) post septem Synodos plus satis laudatas; subjungit Symbolum fidei, , &c. ut in versione Turriani, nisi (quod recte conjectavit Canisius) quod Spiritum Sanctumrà patre procedere dicit. Nulla uti Turrianus adjecerat, filii men∣tone factà.
Inde Narrationem de septem Synodis instituit; quam Turrianus misit. Sed latine dedit Binius Concil. Tom. 3. p. 400. Demum monita plura politica subjicit. Quae in latinis Turriani enim comparent. Vid. Cod. African. ad finem. Crabbe F. 155, & 308. LETTER CCXV. A Letter from Dr. Langbaine, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; I Received yours of the 22d, upon the 25th of April, and have bestowed the most part of the last Week in the search of those Particulars there mention'd. I am sorry the Event has not answered my Desires and Endea∣vours. I do not doubt but your Lordship will make good that Assertion of the Nicene Creed, though I profess I yet look upon it with some prejudice, as being prepossessed with an anticipated Notion to the contrary. Some∣thing in these Papers which I have collected in haste, do in the general look that way; upon perusal (if it be not too much trouble to your Lordship, and the time not overpast already) your Lordship will make the Consequence. In that Synodicon of Basilius Jalimbanensis, I met with nothing directly to the purpose; only in the beginning of the Book, this enclosed of Germanus de sex Synodis. What he says of the two first, as only to the purpose, I have transcribed. In each of them is mention of a Symbol, but not of the difference. I have in the same Argument sent to—and confronted two pieces of Photius, the one out of his Epistles, the other I met with in a Copy of his Nomocanon, with Balsamon's Scholia, much larger than the printed. I have looked upon that in Gregory Nazianzen, and compared it with that in Crab, which he calls Fi∣des Romanorum, and do readily subscribe, that by Romanorum must be meant the Eastern Church; but then he that made that Title, must be supposed to have writ since the division of the Empire. In Magd. Coll. Library, I spent two days in search after Nazianzen's Translation by Ruffin, but in vain, I do not find they have any such Book: What seem'd next like it, was some pieces of Basil of Ruffin's Translation; at the end whereof there is indeed a part of his Exposition on the Creed. While I was there tumbling amongst their Books, I light upon an old English Comment upon the Psalms, the Hymns of the Church, and Athanasius's Creed, which I presently conje∣ctured (though there be no Name to it) to be Wickliffs; and comparing the beginning with Bale, found that I had not erred in the Conjecture, and therefore writ this piece out, in which he calls the Nicene Creed, the Creed of the Church. I remember, two Years ago, when I had an opportunity to read some Saxon Books that had formerly (as I suppose) belonged to the Church of Worcester; I met twice with the Nicene Creed in Saxon; but I do not re∣member any difference from that we use. I have sought in the ancientest Editions of Ambrose, but return with a non est inventus. Wicelius we have not; and for the Russian Offices, if I can find any thing, you shall have it by the next.
I presume you have already a Copy of that old Latin Creed, at the end of the ancient Copy of the Acts, given by my Lord of Canterbury, and therefore I forbore to send it. Gulasius, in the Acts of the Nicene Council, brings in the Philosopher disputing against the Holy Ghost, as well as against the Son; and that may be (as far as the authority of the Author will bear) somewhat to the purpose. I received my Copy of the Arch-bishops of Constantinople, and do return unto your Grace with thanks, that Oration of Himerius which I had from your Lordship. The Papers which I send, are somewhat confused, and some not right writ I fear; some my Boy has left in the Publick Library, and the Carrier will be gone before the Library be open. I have in the Margent thus * marked what I conceive your Grace may possibly make use of. I am very much straitned in time, and therefore desire your Lordship's favour for thus scribling. I am, Your Lordship's to command, Gerard Langbaine. Q. C. Oxon. May 4. 1647. LETTER CCXVI. A Letter from Dr. Langbaine, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; SInce my last (this day seven-night) I have enquired (and I do here send you what I met with) concerning the use of the Nicene Creed a∣mong the Russians, which I conceive full to your purpose. I perceive my haste made me then omit at sealing, that Oration of Himerius, which I now return with thanks to your Lordship; and perhaps, by mistake, I might send some other Papers no way pertinent. I have thought sometimes, and have not yet found any sufficient reason to remove me from that Opinion, That notwithstanding what Vossius hath said, the Church was never without some Form of Confession, which they requi∣red before they admitted any to Baptism. I know not otherwise how to ex∣pound that of Heb. 6. 2. , &c. For though Vossius affirm no more to have been required, but barely, In nomina Patris, Filii, & Spiri∣tus sancti; yet methinks that of Repentance from dead Works, of the Re∣surrection of the Dead, and everlasting Judgment, are made parts of those Fundamental Doctrines; and Faith in God seems to comprehend the rest. To this purpose I conceive Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2. pag. 93. speaks for the Requisites to Baptism, in the Practice of the Church in his Time; . Then follows the mention of the Three Persons of the Trinity, not simply, but with equipollent Attributes to those in the Creed; of the Father, as .—The Son, .—The Holy Ghost, . Which what is it else, but what we read both in Cyrill of Jerusalem, and Epiphanius, and the latter part of the Nicene Creed In like manner Clemens Alex. Paeda∣gog.
lib. 1. cap. 6. p. 92, 93, 94. gives this Attribute to Christ; , (all one with ) and speaking then of Baptism, under the various names of , quotes, Joh. 5. for everlasting Life, mentions —and the Re∣surrection of the Dead; . Where he produceth again a Testimony out of John 3. That every one that believes, hath Life everlasting; and I will raise him up again at the last Day. Where con∣sidering the proper importance of the word , and the Mat∣ter there treated of, Baptism; and the Points there spoken of, Resurrection, Life Eternal.—I suppose it may not absurdly be collected, that he implies these Doctrines were, , confessed before Baptism. I forbear to say any thing of that Regula Fidei in Irenaeus; and the like in Tertullian, for substance the same, and containing expresly those Points which make up the close in the Nicene Creed; and which Vossius supposeth to have been added by the Constantinopolitan Fathers. What varieties are for matter of expression in the Citations observed out of Ruffin, &c. I think does not conclude without hard measure against the Antiquity of some publick form. Wherein (if it were not written, we may suppose it capable of more) we may be content to bear with some in words, so long as they bear up to the same sense, considering that the Quotations of those most ancient Writers out of Scripture it self, are made with so much liberty; and yet no Man doubts but they had a much more certain Rule to go by. I am again overtaken by the Time, and with the desire of your Lordship's Prayers, and the continuance of your Love and Encouragement, take leave, and rest, Your Lordship's in all Duty, Gerard Langbaine. Queens Coll. May 11. 1647. LETTER CCXVII. A Letter from—to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; UNderstanding that Dr. Price is going for London, I could not omit to re∣commend him to your Grace; if you should meet with any means to encourage his Studies, (that I can scarce expect) or at least to keep him from those Precipices, which the straitness of his Fortune, and manifold oc∣casions of Discontents may drive him unto. I know that it is needless for me to write thus much, knowing your good Inclinations to him, if things were as in Times past, when there were Means and Opportunities to help one another. But when I think of the loss of Hugh Cressey, and some others, whose melancholy Thoughts have blinded their Judgments, and dis∣posed them to be easily wrought upon by the other Party, to the dishonour of our (sometimes) most glorious Church; when I see how they brag of these Conquests, methinks we should leave nothing unattempted, that may by any possibility prevent Mens stumblings at those Rocks of Offence, which these sad Times cast them upon.
I find here our Lawyers differ much from the Ecclesiasticks about the Councels of Constance and Basil: These go far higher for the Popes Au∣thority than those will give way to. The King of France hath as much Au∣thority in Church-Businesses, as the King of England claims, so far as I can perceive. Among the Doctors of the faculty of Divinity of Paris (where∣of the Sorbon is but a little part) here be divers that are not for the Infalli∣bility of the Church; but such a certainty of an inferior degree, as yet for the Authority of the Church and her Pastors, we are all bound to submit un∣to; a Point I think very well gained, and of good consequence. David Blundell's last Book about Episcopacy, is much cried up by those of the Refor∣med Religion: who are generally very sharp against our English Hierarchy, upon the Credit of Mr. Pryn and Bastwick's Papers and such like Testimonies. I hope your Grace will vindicate your Order in general, and in particular the Credit of Ignatius his Epistles, against his Exceptions; as I hear young Vossius in part hath done; but I have not yet seen the Book. That which is my great Comfort, my young Master is his Fathers Son, and peremptorily constant to the Principles wherein he was bred, which makes me hope that our Posterity may yet see the Sun shine again. I humbly beg your Prayers, for, My Lord, your Grace's most humble Servant, T. Rouen, May 18, 1647. LETTER CCXVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Joseph Hall Bp of Norwich to the most Reverend James Usher, Arch-bishop of Armagh. GRatulor vero ex animo, te, Antistitum decus, Sancto Ignatio tuo: Gratulor tibi imò, universo orbi Christiano, Ignatium, meritissimò tuum; sed quidem & tuo benificio nostrum Gratiorem profecto operam navare Dei Ecclesiae nullus unquam potuisset quam tantum, tam antiquum sanctum{que} Apostolicae  patronum, ac tam egregium primaevae pietatis exemplar ab injuria temporis vindicando. Inciderat nempe bonus iste viator Hierosolymitanus in Latrones quosdam Hierochuntinos, qui illum non spoliârant modò, sed misere etiam penè{que} ad mortem vulnerâ∣rant; praeterierant saucium ac fere moribundum, nescio quot Parkeri, Coci, Salmasii, alii{que} nuperae sectae coryphaei; vestra vero (molliora uti sunt) viscera tam durâ hominis  sorte miserecorditer commota sunt; vestra unius pietatis (optimi instar Samaritae) vinum oleum{que} infudit tam patentibus vulneribus, abstersit saniem, foedè{que} hiulca plaga∣rum ora, manu tenerâ fasciavit; ferè{que} exanimem vestro typorum jumen∣to imposuit; ac communi deni{que} Ecclesiae hospitio, non sine maximis im∣pensis, commendavit. Profecto hoc uno nomine assurgent Amplitudini tuae boni (quotquot sunt) omnes; manus{que} tam salutares piis labiis ex∣osculabuntur. Intelligent jam novitiae paritatis assertores quid illud sit quod tanto molimine us{que} machinantur, sentient{que} quam probe illis cum sanctissimo Martyre, ac celeberrimo Apostolorum Discipulo conveniat.
Illud vero, inter doctissimas Annotationes vestras saliente & corde & oculo legisse me fateor, quo egregium illud  Salmasianum de tempore sup∣positicii Ignatii, leni illa quidem, sed castigatrice manu corripueris: Fie∣ri ne potuit ut tantus author in re tanti momenti Chronologicâ, tam foede laberetur, aut num forte, hoc pacto, (quandoquidem haec causae discipli∣nariae Arx merito habeatur) Dominis suis palpum obtrudere maluit Quicquid sit, bis Martyrium passus Ignatius noster; tuâ demum operâ, Praesul honoratissime, reviviscit; causamque iniquissime jam abdicatae  in Ecclesiae totius foro tam cate agit, ut non pudere non possit hesternae Disciplinae astipulatores, tam malè-suscepti, litis injustae patroci∣nii. Quod si nullum aliud foret nostrae sententiae propugnaculum, nobis quidem abundè sufficeret habuisse () nostrae veritatis patronos te, & Ignatium. Vale Primatum , & Ecclesiae laboranti, & preci∣bus, & operis (quod facis) subvenire perge, & fave. Cultori tuo, ac maloru tuorum Socio, & praeconi meritorum, Jos. Norvicensi. E Tuguriolo nostro Highamensi, Maii 25o 1647. LETTER CCXIX. A Letter from Mr. Patrick Young, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend, and my very good Lord; HItherto, being disappointed by the Carrier who brought my Trunck hither so late, I have been hindred to satisfie your Lordship touching the Passage Psal. 142. 9. which I find in my Roman Edition, , without any variety in the Margin, and consequently so in the anci∣ent Manuscript Copy. I long to see your Treatise de tribus Symbolis, as any thing else which cometh from your learned Pen: be pleased I pray you, so soon as it is printed, to send it unto my Son-in-law Mr. John Attwood, Counsellor at Law in Grays-Inn, who will speedily hasten it unto me; unto whom likewise I intreat your Lordship to deliver the Key of my Study, lest when I come to Town I should miss of it, if your Lordship go into the Country. Thus with remembrance of my ever bounden Respects, I take my leave, remaining, as ever Your Lordships truly devoted Friend and Servant. Pat. Young. Broomefield the 25th of June, 1647.
LETTER CCXX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to D. Fredericus Spanhemius. Admodum Reverendo in Christo Fratri D. Frederico Span∣hemio Academiae Lugduno-Batavae, pro tempore, Rectori dignissimo. Leydam. ET tuam de gratiâ disputationem uberrimam, & funebrem Aransicani Principis laudationem accepi, Spanhemi Charissime! at{que} in utra{que} tum ingenii acumen, tum facundiam singularem, & perspexi & admira∣tus sum: Quas tamen dotes in priore argumento adversus communes Gratiae adversarios, intendendas multò magis optavissem, quàm adversus amicos, idem bellum adversus Pelagianos & Semipelagianos nobiscum pro∣fessos; licet in  & circumstantiis quibusdam nonnihil dissidentes; de quâ controversiâ quaenam moderatiorum apud nos Theologorum fuerat sententia, ex inclusâ doctissimi Davenantii () schedulâ po∣teris cognoscere. Pro amplioribus vero donariis illis tuis de Symbolis dissertatiunculam meam tibi remitto, munus sanè levidense, sed quod tu ex mittentis affectu aestimabis, & (si tanti videbitur) D. Salmasio, D. Heinsio, Jo. Latio, (ac D. Riveto quo{que} si commode poteris) commu∣nicabis, & plurimam illis salutem verbis meis nunciabis. Tuus in Christo Frater & , J. U. A. Scripsi Lundini xiv. Kal. Sextilis Juliani, Anno M. DC. XLVII. LETTER CCXXI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Johannes Gerardus Vossius. Viro Clarissimo Johanni Gerardo Vossio, Historiarum apud Amstelodamenses Professori celeberrimo. Vir Eximie; QUod post acceptos eruditissimos tuos de Diis Gentium Commenta∣rios (qui in Mythici Temporis Chronico, quod ante multos Annos congesseram, recognoscendo mihi magno fuerant usui) nihil hactenus ad te rescripserim; etsi culpâ liberare me nequeam, excusationem tamen asserere possum aliquam; non justam illam quidem sed quam humanitati tuae aliquantulùm probari posse non diffidam. Subitò incendio tempore il∣lo correpta est nostra Hibernia, quod nedum deflagravit, sed serpit quotidiè
& potiùs adaugescit. In eo praeter calamitatem publicam & Religionis Reformatae Professorum lanienam post homines natos immanissimam & crudelissimam; externis istis bonis (quae appellantur) exutus sum om∣nibus: solâ Bibliothecâ è flammis illis ereptâ, à quâ ipsâ tamen ad hunc us{que} diem etiam exulo: Exceperunt enim me deinde novi in Angliâ furores, qui me Oxonio in Cambriam depulerunt: ubi per integrum XVIII Septima∣narum spatium gravissimo afflictus morbo, aegerrimè tandem ex ipsis quo∣dammodo sepulchri faucibus summâ Dei Misericordiâ sum revocatus. Quomodò Londini posteà acceptus fuerim, commemorare non libet: Ne{que} priorum illorum malorum omnino meminissem, nisi ut inde intelli∣geretur, quae animum meum necessitas à literarum & literatorum omni∣um consortio hucus{que} penè alienaverit. Ubi vero primum colligere me caepi, ut illam neglecti in te colendo officii culpam aliquo pacto expiarem, brevem hanc de Symbolis (notissimâ tibi materiâ) dissertationem tuo nomini inscribere visum fuit: in quâ quia deinceps te alloquor, hic finio, & totus tuus maneo. De Mariano Scoto edendo nùm omnem cogitationem abjeceris, admodum scire aveo. J. U. A. Londini xiii Kalend. Augusti, Anno M. DC. XLVII. LETTER CCXXII. A Letter from the Reverend Dr. Barlow (now Bishop of Lin∣coln) to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. My Lord, I Did receive (by the hands of Mr. Tozer) your Grace's Tract de Sym∣bolis; for which great Honour done unto me, this piece of Paper comes to return my most humble and hearty Thanks. I confess I have ever been inquisitive after your Grace's Writings, and thought my self happy when I had found them; for I was never deceived in my Expectation, but ever found old Orthodox Truth maintained upon just and carrying Grounds, which elsewhere I have often sought, but seldom found. I wish Vossius in putting out and composing his Tract de tribus Symbolis, had used the same Judgment and Diligence your Grace hath done in this: For tho your Grace be pleased to give that Tract of his a civil Commendation, yet 'tis undenia∣bly the most indigested thing that ever Vossius put out. And here (well knowing your Lordship's unparallell'd Skill in Antiquity, and your Can∣dor and Willingness to communicate your Knowledg to the Benfit of others) I shall take the boldness humbly to desire your Grace's Opinion concerning the 13 Can. of the Council of Ancyra, the words are these—. I find no various reading in any Greek Copies, Balsamon, Zonaras, Tilius, Justellus, &c. all agreeing; only Salmasius, (Apparatu ad lib. de Primatu, pag. 78.) for [] will have it [] And (it seems) Dionysius Exiguus reads it so too. The Latin Translations make it quite another thing than the Greek imports, as your
Lordship may see by those two Translations in Grabb (followed by the rest) and that of Justellus, in his Codex Can. Ecclesiae Universae, pag. 2. which runs thus—Chorepiscopis non licere Presbyteros, vel Diaconos ordinare: Sed nec Presbyteris Civitatis, sine literis Episcopi, in alienâ Parochià aliquid agere: Where Justellus adds these two last words [Aliquid agere] as if , or some such thing were in the Greek, which I find not. I confess Fulg. Ferrandus in Breviat. Cano. Can. 92. reads it as Justellus—Ut Presbyteri Givitatis sine jussu Episcopi nihil jubeant, nec in unaqua{que} Parochiâ aliquid agant; tho the Greek is otherwise, and the old Latin Translation (vid. Cod. Can. veterem Ecclesiae Romanae Mogunt. 1525. & postea Par. 1609.) agrees exactly with the Greek. So then the sense of the Can. seems to be this—That the Chorepiscopi, and Presbyteri civitatis, may not ordain Priests or Deacons without Commission from the Bishop, but with it they may. Here first, I shall make no question but the Chorepiscopi might ordain with Licence first had from the Bishop; for tho it hath been the general opinion of the World that the Chorepiscopi were only Simplices Presbyteri (as the counterfeit Damasus Apud Blondel Pseudo-Isido∣ri, pag. 530, &c. tells us, Epist. 5. and the rest have followed him, as Distinct. 68. Can. 4, 5. Gratian, In Epit. Jur. Pon∣tificii, lib. 6. Tit. 2. cap. 1, 2, 3. Ant. Augustinus, Wal. Messal. cap. 5. pag. 315. Salmasius, Apologiae, Sect. 3. p. 93, &c. Blondellus, Of the Church, l. 5. c. 29. Donfield, De Republ. Eccl. part. 1. l. 2. c. 9. §. 17, 18, 19. Spalaten∣sis, Irenico. l. 2. cap. 11. Prop. 14. p. 249, &c. Forbes, the Capit. of Apud Fred. Lindenbrog. l. 7. c. 318, 328, 329. lib. 5. c. 168. l. 6. cap. 19, 284. lib. 1. cap. 9. lib. 7. cap. 310. Charles the Great, &c.) Yet I conceive that 'tis demonstrable undeniably from the carrying Principles in Antiquity that they were Bi∣shops. And therefore my Question is, how the Presby∣teri Civitatis might ordain (if that be the meaning of the Canon) with Licence from the Bishop, it never appearing in Antiquity that any Presbyters Ordination of a Presbyter was Canonical, either by himself; for we find Ischyras censured, and deposed, because or∣dained by Coluthus, who was but a Presbyter. Second∣ly, Nor do we find that ever any Bishop gave Com∣mission to a Presbyter to ordain; it being expresly against the Canons of the Apostles, Can. 2. I know that Claud. Salmasius (Wal. Messalin. cap. 5. pag. 315. & fusè à pag. 308, ad pag. 317. & in Apparat. ad lib. de Pri∣mat. pag. 78. & lib. de Primat. cap. 1. pag. 10, 11.) and Dav. Blondellus (Apolog. pro sententiâ Hieron. Sect. 3. pag. 93. & sequentibus) from this Canon infers that Ordination anciently was not peculiar to the Bishop, but any Presbyter had commune jus, and might (as well as the Bishop) ordain. If your Grace would be pleased to honour me so far, and help me in this doubt, you should do a great favour to Truth, and to My Lord, Your Grace's most humble, and very much obliged Servant. Thomas Barlow. Q. Coll. Oxon. Sept. CIC. ICC. XLVII.
LETTER CCXXIII. A Letter from the Learned Claudius Sarravius, to the most Re∣verend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Illustrissime ac Reverendissime Antistes. DUdum tibi obstrictum, pro honorifica in Ignatio nominis mei mentione, novo rursum beneficio devincire voluisti. Dono enim tuo accepi exi∣miam tuam Diatribam de Symbolis Veteris Ecclesiae. Pro tuis iftis erga me meritis, debitam rependo gratiarum actionem. Magna cum voluptate nec sine fructu legi postrema haec tua opuscula; in quibus igneum ingenii vigo∣rem, & eruditionem reconditam abstrusissima quaeque rimantem & bono publico eruentem, ex animi sententia dico, sum admiratus. Omnino, cum optimum sit quod antiquissimum, in originibus indagandis merito opera col∣locatur. Te vero ista praesertim aetate & tot inter turbas, haec tuae curae du∣cere, summam laudem meretur. Aderit Deus, se suaque quaerentibus. Ita precor & voveo; eumque veneror ut Regi Regnoque vestro, ea suggerat consilia, quae suae gloriae, Vestrisque commodis, Tibi vero imprimis Vir Bo∣ne & Magne conveniant. Interea perge nos hujusmodi muneribus beare-Sed ante omnia, qua istic polles auctoritate, effice, ut Biblia illa Theoclae ty∣pis vestris cum orbe Christiano communicentur. Nullo illustriori monumen∣to, aeternitati, fama tua post tot exantlatos labores, conservabitur. Hoc te rogant omnes qui sacra amant, ego vero . Si quid hic vicissim ego tua caussa potuero, beatum me existimavero. Virum amicissimum & eruditissimum Jo. Pricaeum, cujus familiaritate & Consiliis plurimum profecisse me profiteor, ne grave est meo nomine saluta: & urge ut suas chartulas com∣ponat & sacras literas ornare non desinat. Vale Vir summe, meque tui obser∣vantissimum ut tuorum in numero habere velis etiam atque etiam rogo. Illustrissimae ac Reverendissimae tuae dignitati addictissimus, Claudius Sarravius. Lutetiae Parisiorum, Octob. 28. 1647.
LETTER CCXXIV. A  Letter from the learned Fr. Spanhemius, to the most Re∣verend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. S. Reverendissime Praesul, Domine honoratissime. ET amicas literas Tuas, & eximium de Symbolis adjectum munus probè accepi, & utro{que} nomino prolixas tibi gratias habeo. Distribui quin etiam exemplaria adjecta eruditis viris, quibus ea destinasti, quibus omnius gratissima fuere. Gaudeo ex animo non tantam firmam tibi valetudinem constare, verùm etiam animum in mediis turbis vestris à turbis liberum, & totum utilissimis studiis desixum: Addo & quietis. Id mihi non licere im∣pensè doleo, qui non genio meo, nec instituto, sed alienâ intemperie in theatrum litigiosum pertractus fui. Juxta tecum optarem toto animo, ut cum apertis adversariis ista mihi pugna depugnata foret. Nec tamen desunt gra∣vissimi viri complures, & ex mediâ quidem Galliâ, qui Theologiam Salmuri∣ensem periculosisfimam judicant, & illi omnibus modis obviam eundum cen∣sent. Et sanè pro certo mihi persuadeo, non visa tibi esse praecipua  istorum scripta, nec à me impetrare possum, ut credam sub∣actissimo judicio tuo, & orthodoxiae tenacissimo probari posse vel Synop∣sin Testardi de naturâ & gratiâ, vel Amyraldi librum de Praedestinatione Ver∣naculâ linguâ scriptum, nec alia id genus quibus pleras{que} Remonstrantium no∣strorum hypotheses ingerunt, & probant, & ipsis cum illis argumentis. Ad∣de, imputationem peccati Adae ab ipsis negari, & novum communionis no∣stri cum Christo modum doceri praeter  & innumera alia. Parisienses Theologi in cum ipsis eunt, sed cum paucis aliis, & quidem ob easdem hypotheses antehâc à se defensis. Pleri{que} hodiè alieni sunt ab Au∣gustini ingenio, & Retractationum opere. Rev. Davenantii judicium & eruditionem maximi semper feci, fateor tamen me in quibusdam illi subscribe∣re non posse hoc argumento, nec videre quî cohaereant vel inter se, vel cum aliis quibusdam doctissimis commentationibus Academicis, quas mihi videre contigit. Id unum etiam video nostros quosdam compendifacere, hypothe∣seωn quarundam, quae Lutheranis & Remonstrantibus sunt Familiares, con∣cessione, ut magis ferociant & glorientur, nos in his cogi ad Sententiam tuam accidere, item sequuturum in aliis, modò pergant strenuè nobis con∣tradicere. Da veniam, Reverendissime Praesul, si liberiùs ista apud te effun∣do, cujus pietatem, eruditionem, addo & affectum erga me ex animo vene∣ror. Si tantae essent meae exercitationes, ut bonas aliquot horas tuas iis le∣gendis impendere dignaveris, non dubito quin Theologia ista, quae Ecclesiis nostris obtruditur, tibi displicitura esset. Ecclesiae sanè & Academiae nostrae, & Gallicae omnes, Una Salmuriensi exceptâ, ut & Helveticae ab eâ quàm longissimè recedunt. Amplissima ejus rei testimonia penes me habeo. Vale, Praesul Venerande, & me tuae pietatis, & eruditionis, utriusque summae, cul∣torem amare perge. Deus te melioribus servet temporibus! Scripsi prid. Kal. Dec. Anni 1647. Lugd. Batav. Rev. T. Dign. observantissimus, Fridericus Spanhemius.
LETTER CCXXV. A Letter from D. Langbaine, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; TWO Particulars I remember, whereof your Lordship required an ac∣count from me; one concerning Marianus Scotus, whether William of Malmsbury (as I then affirmed) made any mention of him and if so, in what manner. First, Lib. 3. de Regib. in Willielmo primo, pag. 116. Sub isto Imperatore [Henrico] regnante floruit Al. Marianus. Maurinianus Scotus, qui primò Fuldensis Monachus, mox apud Mogontiacum inclusus, contemptu praesentis vitae, gratiam futurae demerebatur: Is longo vitae otio Chrono∣graphos scrutatus, dissonantiam cyclorum Dionysii Exigui ab Evangelica veritate deprehendit. Ita{que} ab initio seculi annos singulos recensens, vigin∣ti duos qui circulis praedictis deerant superaddidit, sed paucos aut nullos suae sententiae sectatores habuit. Quare saepe mirari soleo cur nostri temporis doctos hoc respergat infortunium, ut in tanto numero discentium, in tam tristi pallore lucabrantium, vix aliquis plenam scientiae laudem referat. Adeo inveteratus usus placet. Adeo ferè nullus novis licèt probabiliter in∣ventis, serenitatem assensus pro merito indulget. Totis conatibus in sen∣tentiam veterum reptatur: Omne recens sordet. Ita quia solus favor alit ingenia, cessante favore obtorpuerunt omnia. Again, lib. 4. de pontificib. (pag. 286.) cap. de Episcopis Herefordensibus. Non multò post accepit sedem illam Robertus Lotharingus—omnium li∣beralium artium peritissimus; abacum praecipuè & lunarem computum, & coelestium astrorum cursum rimatus. Erat tunc temporis monachus Al. Mariman∣nus. Ma∣rianus apud Mogontiam inclusus, qui longo Solitudinis otio Chronographos scrutatus dissonantiam cyclorum Dionysii Exigui contra Evangelicam verita∣tem, vel primus vel solus animadvertit. Ita{que} ab initio seculi annos singu∣los recensens viginti duos qui circulo deerant superaddidit; magnam & dif∣fusissimam Chronicam facere adorsus. Eum librum miratus unicè, aemulatus mirificè, Angliae invehendum curavit. Deni{que} captus Mariani ingenio quic∣quid ille largius dixerat, in arctum conferens defloravit. Adeo splendidè ut magis valere videatur defloratio, quàm ingentis illius voluminis dif∣fusio. I am partly of opinion, that this defloration of Marianus, was the plain Song; and what was added by Florence of Worcester, and other Monks in their several Cloysters, (in relation most an end to their particular Founda∣tions, and the memorable Passages of their several Monasteries) were but so many several descants upon that Ground. We have in our Bodlean, as the printed Catalogue more than once in∣forms, a Manuscript with this Title; Excerpta ex Chronico Mariani; the Author (in Litera H.) Rog. Herefordensis. And again (in K.) Rodgerius Hereford. Episc. Excerpt. de Chronico Mariani. But in the Manuscript it self, both the Name of the Author, and Title of the Book, runs otherwise, viz. Exceptio Rodberti Herefordensis Episcopi de Chronicis Mariniani. The Tract is but short, consisting of 24 Chapters, and the Argument of them answera∣ble to the ten first Chapters in Marianus's Manuscript, de computo Ecclesiastico. Where in the 7th Chapter he gives us this Chronological Character of the Time and Place he writ in. In Anno praesenti, qui secundum Dionysium
pronunciatur Millesimus octogesimus quintus Incarnationis, contra Evange∣listas caeteros{que} Doctores. Hic est Annus Vigesimus Willielmi Regis An∣glorum; quo judente hoc anno totius Angliae facta est descriptio, in agris singularum provinciarum, possessionibus singulorum procerum, in agris eorum, in mansonibus, in hominibus tam sevis quàm liberis, tam in tugu∣rio tantum habentibus quàm domos & agros possidentibus, in carrucis, in equis & caeteris animalibus, in servitio & censu totius terrae F. Homiuum. omnium. Alii inquisitores post alios, & ignoti ad ignotos mittebantur provincias, ut alii aliorum F. descriptionem discretionem reprehenderent, & rego eos [reos] constituerent. Et vexata est terra multis cladibus ex congregatione regalis pecuniae proce dentibus. Upon which I should not doubt to build, that this is the same Robert, the deflorator of Marianus mentioned by Malmesbury (though the historical part be here wanting) the Name, the Time, the Place, the Subject, all concur∣ring to strengthen this Conjecture. This, and somewhat more concerning Marianus, either in my Letters, or Papers, I have formerly transmitted to my good Friend Dr. Duck; from whom, if your Lordship think it may be tanti, you may at any time recieve those indigested Notes, which being bur ordinary, will add nothing to your Lordship, in a Point which you have already so thoroughly canvassed. The second enquiry which your Lordship was pleased to employ me in, was (as I remember) about a Greek Piece concerning Lacedemonian Months, in the Catalogue of the King of France his Library; but upon search not found by the Puteani Fratres. I conceived then, the best direction for the search, would be to note what other Tract were next Neighbours, in the Catalogue, which might be a means to help me with that Volumn, in which surely this concerning the Months makes the least part: Which I have ac∣cordingly done hereunder. And becuase, upon perusal of the Catalogue, I found it very corrupt, and that the Writer is guilty of many obvious Mi∣stakes, I conceived this of ours to be only a Transcript of some other, which possibly may be there in the Library; and therefore I took the pains to page our Catalogue, as hoping that might expedite the search, if the Enquirer make use of any other Catalogue of the same kind with this, by consider∣ing the proportion of Pages, whereof this contains in all 280, and is regu∣larly writ. I find several Pieces of that Subject, how diverse in themselves I know not; but I chose rather to set down all, than to run the hazard of omitting what possibly you might most desire. In Catalogo Manuscriptorum in Bibliotheca Regis Galliae repertorum, Anno 1636. Pag. 127. Nili Gnomae. De Synodis us{que} ad VII Oecumenicam. De aedificii Constantinop. De Epiphania Domini, ex Constitutionibus Apostolicis. De nominibus Mensium secundum Judaeos, Macedones. Graecos, aegyptios. De Sacris bibliis, Prophetis & Prophetissis. Jo. Damascen de Lumine, Igne, Sole, & Stellis. Pag. 184 Pythagorae paraeneses. Septem Sapientum dicta. De Mensibus Atheniensium & Lacedaemoniorum. .
De Musis. De Mensib. Athen. Roman. Maced. Hebr. Aegypt. & Graec. De Vita Aristotelis. Proverbia. Numerorum Notae. Pag. 210. De Figura & situ Italiae ex Polybio. De Mensib. Graecorum & Alexandrinorum. Nomina Urbium mutata. De Inventoribus Artium. De Scriptis Rhetorum. Musarum nomina & inventa. Nomina Mensium. Excerpta ex Rhet. Zenophontis. Pag. 221. Propositiones Arithmeticae. De Syllogismis. De Mensibus. De Septem Sacramentis. Pag. 221. Nili Praecepta. De Mensibus. Meletii versus in Crucem Domini. Pag. 230. Astrologia. . . De Mensib. Romanis, Atticis, Alexandrinis. De Agricultura. Apotelesmata Lunaria. Pag. 238. De XII Prophetis. Jo. Damascen. de Mensib. Macedonum. . Pag. 243. Dialecti specierum & herbarum. De Mensibus Eclipse. Pag. 252. Posidippus & Metrodorus de eligendo vitae genere. De Mensibus Atheniensium, Romanorum, Alexandrinorum. De aetatibus hominis ex Hippocrate. Pag. 264. De Climatibus. De Ventis. De Mensibus. De Mansionibus Signorum solaribus. Pag. 269. Ex Menandro in Mulieres. Ignatii versus Iambici de Adamo. Hippocratis Epistola ad Ptolomaeum. This last I add for the Names sake of Ignatius, though it be nothing to the purpose, de Mensib. Some other Particular I think there was, which I might have dispatched eadem operâ, but I could not call to mind the Name of the Authors. So soon as your Lordship shall give me any further Directions, I shall most readily
apply my self to the execution; in the mean time, and ever, desiring the continuance of your Love to, and Prayers for this Place, and therein for Your Lordship's most obliged Servant, Gerard Langbaine. Queens Colledg, Jan. 4. 1647/8. LETTER CCXXVI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to Christoph. Justellus. Insignis Eruditionis Viro, Christophoro Justello. Lutesiam Parisiorum.Vir Clarissime; QUod Carthaginensem Synodum Nomocanoni Johannis Epiphaniensis Scholastici intextum fuisse affirmavi; in eo Francisci Turriani fidem sim∣pliciter sum secutus: Sed quum in opus ipsum (à Barocianâ in Italiâ ad Bod∣leianam in Angliâ Bibliothecam translatum) postea incidissem: Ut in au∣thore (à Turriano pro Canonib. Apost. Cap. 21, & 28.) Constantini pro Jo∣anne (quod & aliunde intellexi) ità in Synodorum recensione Carthaginensis nomen, pro Sardicensis à Jesuitâ positum fuisse comperi. Quae verò in usum meum indè describenda curaveram, quia ità te velle ex D. Basirii nostri literis cognovi, simùl cum hisce ad te transmisi: id{que} eo libentiùs quòd Photii quo{que} simul adjuncta habebat hactenùs inedita in suum Nomocanonem Prolegomena, Anno Mundi, 6391. conscripta. Qui idem numerus cùm ad (pag. 62.) calcem notitiae Ecclesiasticae, ex Regiâ Bibliothecâ à Carolo Sanctopaulino Editae, itidem appositus cernatur; eadem{que} ipsa Notitia in∣ter Prolegomena ista & Nomocanonii Corpus in Oxoniensi Manuscripto col∣locetur: Quin ea Photio tribuenda sit, mihi vix relinquitur dubium. Ad exscriptorem enim antiquiorem refero, quod ad Lapithum Cypri urbem po∣steriorem, ibidem invenio annotatum. . Sicut ad posteriorem quod ad Clima Sohenes in quarta Armeniâ subjicitur. . Ignatiana mea, cum aliis aliquot opusculis, simul etiam mitto; De va∣riis Asiae acceptionibus libellum, ante aliquot annos linguâ vernaculâ semel at{que} iterùm publicatum, deinde missurus, quamprimum Latinâ veste donatus prodieret, qui de Proconsulari Asià, & Asianâ Diocesi quaedam continet, ad institutum tuum non nihil facientia. Tui Studiosissimus & Studiorum tuorum fautor maximus, J. U. A. Scripsi Londini Februarii die 12/22 Anno 1647/8.
LETTER CCXXVII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to D. Claudius Sarravius. Amplissimo Clarissimo{que} viro D. Claudio Sarravio Supernae Parisiensis Curiae Senatori dignissimo. Lutetiam Parisiorum.Vir Eximie; AD humanissimas tuas literas responsum hucus{que} distuli: Ut Ignatianam appendicem at{que} Macedonici & Asiani anni explicationem, nùnc pri∣mum à praelo prodeuntes, comites illi liceret adjungere. Earum utram{que} li∣matissimo tuo submitto judicio. Sed ab illo animi affectu erga me libero, quem largè effuse{que} in literis illis tuis ostendere tibi libuit. Vanissimum enim omnium mortalium me esse oporteret, si praeconia illa, quibus me ornasti ne dicam onerasti, ullâ ex parte vellem agnoscere. Alexandrini verò—ex∣emplaris (quod post Basilii M. tempora descriptum fuisse, praefatio illius quae tibi habetur in Psalmos satis indicat) Editionem (quae à te tantopere postu∣latur vel flagitatur potius) urgere non cesso. Id oneris in se suscepit vir do∣ctissimus Patricius Junius, cujus primum specimen simul cum hisce mitto. Mihi enim praeter  officium, aliud nihil hic incumbit; nisi ut de ipsa LXX Interpretibus adscriptâ versione quid sit sentiendum, quaedam ad∣nectam Prolegomena. Interim à vobis nòn minùs  nostri expetunt Graecam ex codice Cardinalis Rupefocaldii prophetarum editionem: Cujus Esaias à Curterio, & Hoseae pars à Phillippeio in apertum prolata, ut inte∣gro frueremur opere, salivam jamdudum nobis movit. Quous{que} etiàm in Graecâ, quam promiserat, Bibliorum  adornandâ, Fronto Ducaeus fue∣rit progressus, scire avemus: Et si quid aliud sit, quod ad Junii nostri Co∣natus aliquid afferre possit adjumenti. Quod tuae curae commendat, apud quem (tuo merito) summo in honore es & praetio. Jacobus Usserius Armachanus. Londini Februarii die 13/23, Anno 1647/. LETTER CCXXVIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to D. Isaac Vossius. Viro amicissimo Isaaco Vossio. Amstelodamum. MItto ad te Ignatianam meam Appendicem, ex penu tuâ (ut vides) insigni accessione locupletatam. Cui adjungere visum est de Mace∣donum & Asianorum anno Solari, dissertationem alteram: Cum utrius{que} ex∣emplari, meo nomine, Clarissimo parenti tuo tradendo. Miseram ad eum septem abhinc mensibus literas, unà cum meâ de Fidei Symbolis Diatribâ:
quae, an ad manus ejus pervenerint Nescio. Si interpolatae Epistolae Bar∣nabae apographum Romano illo codice (cujus sub finem Notarum in eam Epistolam meministi) descriptum; Et rariorum quae ex Galliâ & Italiâ tecum detulisti monumentorum Indiculum, mecum communicarem nòn gra∣veris, rem mihi progratam feceris. Vale, Tui studiosissimus J. V. A. Londini, Februarii die 18/28, Anno 1647/8. LETTER CCXXIX. A Letter from the Right Reverend Joseph Hall Bishop of Nor∣wich, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. Salutem in Christo. GRatâ admodum & manu & mente accepi heri, Primatum Reverendissi∣me, a manibus Honorandi plurimùm Episcopi Dunelmenis, literas tuas, sed & donaria longè pretiosissima, libros tuos: Deus bone! quam elaboratos quàm reconditiore literaturâ refertos quos stupebunt exteri, gratulabuntur{que} authori faelicitatem hanc & otii & eruditionis: Nostri vero quô tandem non possunt non erubescere, tantum virum neglectui habuisse At, ô te omni & invidiâ & tyrannide superiorem: quem divinior mens supra terrena quae{que} ita longè extulit, ut ingratissimi aevi sive incuriam sive contemptum nihil quicquam ad te pertinere sentias: Illud tibi unum curae est ut bene merearis: Ilicet hoc animo resides in obscuro Lincolniensis Hospitii angulo, qui to∣tius Occidentis Patriarchatu dignissimum te praestitisti. Mihi vero homini pauperculo quid tandem suppetit quod munificentiae tuae retribuam Exciderat mihi pridem opella quaedam, ita quidem minutula, ut me plane puduerit eiusmodi strenulam tanto praesuli obtulisse; Tandem ta∣men eo prorupi audaciae, ut id facerem; Tu pro singulari candore tuo ig∣nosces erroribus quibus{que} sive scriptiunculae, sive authoris; qui se Reverendissimae Paternitatis vestrae clientem profitetur devotissimum Jos. Norvic. E tugurio meo Highamensi, Febr. 26. 164 7/8.
LETTER CCXXX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh, to the Right Reverend Joseph Hall Bishop of Norwich. Admodum Reverendo in Christo Patri, Fratri{que} charissi∣mo D. Josepho Hallo Norwicensi Episcopo. QUem tui in me amoris & judicii (Antistes optime) fructum ce∣perim; Ignatiana Appendix ista declarabit: ad quam perficiendam, & in lucem proferendam majorem mihi animum quàm unquam habuissem, elegantissimas & suavissimas tuas ad me literas dedisse, non possum non agnoscere. Cum eâ mitto & de Fidei Symbolis Diatribam, & de Mace∣donum at{que} Asianorum anno dissertatiunculam; non alio à te aestimandas pretio, quàm quod profectae sunt à Fratre tuo amantissimo & cultore summo Jacobo Usserio Armachano. Lond. viio Kalend. Mar∣tias, An. M. DC. XLVII. LETTER CCXXXI. A Letter from the Learned Ger. Jo. Vossius, to the most Reve∣rend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissimo in Christi Patri, JACOBO USSERIO, Ar∣chiepiscopo Armachano, Hiberniae Primati, degenti hoc tempore. Cum opere de re poeticâ Londini. Reverendissime, & illustrissime Praesul; ACcepi dissertationem tuam de vetere Romanae Ecclesiae Symbolo, sanè eruditam; quam cum iis, quae summo bono publico adtexuisti, vocare possumus . Quod verò illa nomini meo inscripseris, nimium quantum obstrinxisti. Nam quantillus ego sum, qui tanto à vi∣ro eximium hoc beneficium accipio Equidem gaudeo, gratias{que} ago im∣mortales, & opera dabitur, ne videaris unquam in segete ingrata hoc be∣nefieium obsevisse. Haec rescripsisse oportuit, simulac aureolos labores tu∣os conspexi. Sed initio moram injecit adversa mihi, & uxori valetudo. Postea contigit, ut me compellaret vir nobilis, & eruditissimus Petrus Grotius, qui à Consiliis est serenissimos Principi Bohemico Philippo. Rogabat autem me, ut siquid nunc literarum in Britanniam mittere lu∣beret ad summos viros, suâ operâ uti vellem: Jucundissimum sibi fore, si occasione istâ frueretur conspectu, & alloquio magnorum virorum, quos habet Britannia. Nec mirabitur quisquam sic esse animatum, qui
sciat hoc paternum habere. Est enim Filius ingentis Hugonis Grotii, Serenissimae Reginae Suecicae ad Regem Christianissimum, dum vita erat, legati. Equidem occasionem illam me amplexurum ajebam, eo luben∣tiùs, ut fidei illius eâdem committerem codices paucos operis nostri de re Poetica. Fortasse enim alioqui futurum, ut quod semel iterum{que} mihi evênit, Harpyiae in illos involarent, praetextu illo, quòd vetitum sit legi∣bus Anglicanis, ne libri compacti in insulam deportentur: quasi hoc etiam pertineat ad libros non venales, sed eruditis hominibus dono transmissos. Sed dum is, nunc his, nunc illis intervenientibus negotiis, iter sum differ∣re cogitur, ecce toti menses abierunt. Ita factum, ut tardè adeo respon∣derem: quod, pro humanitate tua, facilè condonabis, praesertim meliora posthac promittenti. Verum nimis de isto multa. Alia sunt, de quibus magis averet animus per literas colloqui: sed ulterius procudere sermo∣nem non licet. Us{que} adeo exhorruit animus tristi nuncio, qui nunc mihi apportatur, dum totus sum in literis ad varios conscribendis: Est is de subito excessu Clarissimi viri Casparis Barlaei, Philosophi, & Poetae egre∣gii, meique, per nunc quasi duos & viginti, conjunctissimi collegae. A∣vocor igitur ad solatia, prout potero, praestanda numerosis liberis defuncti. Propediem, ut confido, exsequar, quae nunc scribere in animo habebam. Amstelodami. Postr. Januarias Styl. Jul. anni CLCLCCXLVIII. Qui annus ut vegetae adeò senectae tuae felix sit ac prosper, Deum rogo immor∣talem. Rev. & Illust. Nomini tuo aeternum obstrictus, Ger. Jo. Vossius. LETTER CCXXXII. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac D. D. Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Armachano, at{que} totius Hiberniae Primati, Isaacus Basirius S. D. DA veniam interpellanti, Reverendissime in Christo Pater; Siquidem id ago impulsu Cl. Christoph. Justelli. Is inpraesentiarum apparat Codicem preciosum, qui inscribetur Geographia, Sacro-politica, &c. in quo Suburbicariae priscae, adeò{que} Dioeceseon veterum singularum Origines de∣lineantur, at{que} justi Termini figuntur. In eo opere stipulatus ego sum ab eo unum integrum Caput in honorem Dioeceseos Britannicae, & liber∣tatis ibidem Ecclesiasticae vindicias; captâ scilicet ab viiio Canone Con∣cilii Oecumenici Ephesini 1. occasione splendidâ. Annuit huic meae Sti∣pulationi vir doctissimus, & Antiquitatis (praecipuè Ecclesiasticae) secun∣dum tuam Paternitatem callentissimus. Quinetiam, meo rogatu, Epis∣copatum ipsum asserere spospondit, & ni mutet sententiam, re ipsa im∣plevit: nam Episcopatus Natales arcessit ab ipsâ Apostolicâ Aetate. (Ae∣tate, inquam; nam de Authoritate inter nos nondum convenit.) Ad haec, (sub spe Restitutionis in integrum, quam tandem implere digne∣tur D. O. M.) eum exoravi, suum uti opus praeclarum inscribat Regi nostro Sereniss. Magnae Brit. Monarchae. Quid multa Ipsa est in parato Epistola Dedicatoria: Cui succedit Praefatio in qua tuae Reverendissimae Paternitatis mentionem inseruit planè honorificam, uti par est. Istud to∣tum
tantum non sub Praelo. Interea temporis rogavit me vir Cl. te uti suo nomine at{que} cum debitâ veneratione salutarem, simùl{que} unicum scru∣pulum à te eximi sibi efflagitarem: Scilicet, dum versabat ille tuum de Antiqu. Eccl. Britannic. datum tractatum, (quem à temet sibi trans∣missum gratus recordatur) Incidit inibi in mentionem Johan. Scholasticl Epiphaniensis cognominati; cui tu videris attribuere quandam Cano∣num Collectionem MS. in qua asseris fuisse insertos Canones Concilii Carthaginensis contra Pelagium. Ait vir doctus visos equidem à se duas Canonum  Johan. Presbytero Antiocheno Scholastico attribu∣tas; in quibus isti Canones Carthag. neutiquam comparent. Huic suae dubitationi tuum Responsum humillimè postulat Cl. Justellus; ac insu∣per tui istius Codicis MS. (Si is fortè tibi praesto est & eundem commu∣nicare non gravaberis.) Usuram petit tantisper, at{que} eundem ad te remit∣tere incolumen in sese recipit. Ego autem, si apud te forem tanti, memet tibi supplicem adjungerem, illum uti tu digneris tuo velut Celeusmate accendere ad bonum opus, tuis{que} eundem hypomnematibus in rem prae∣sertim Britannicam, ditare. Vale, Reverendissime in C. P. ac D. & ig∣nosce , sed & Ecclesiae vestratis Filio observantissimo, at{que} propter eandem exulanti hîc etiamnum in Patriâ. Datum Raptissime Lutetiae Parisiorum vio Eid. Feb. Anno ultimi temporis CLCLCCXLVIII. LETTER CCXXXIII. A Letter from—to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverendissime; PAternitatis vestrae Literas 20o Januarii ad me datas in tempore acce∣pi, quibus si expectato serius respondeo, attribuito id quaeso ancipiti rerum & temporum conditioni, non enim omni nunc Tabellario, aequè fido. Jam vero qualem vellem latorem nactus, gratias quas multiplices tibi ex illis deberi sentio, non ultra differendas censui: Illas praesertim quas ob doctissimum illum de Anno Macedonico & Afratico à te compo∣situm & ad me dono missum libellum accepi, cui utinam legendo par essem, sed ut ingenuè fatear, ingenioli mei captum superat, Discipulum enim Magistro, & Lectorem scriptori parem requirit: Deus enim bone quam tu longè temporum & locorum inter se comparationem repetis & ex intimis varii plane & Daedalaei operis ambagibus Lectorem, me paulo in hoc doctrinae genere eruditiorem, tanquam Ariadnaeo aliquo filo se sibi reducem ostendis. Sed humc tamen apicem non tam Scaligerum & Peta∣vium, quam Tho. Lydiatum concollegiatum olim meum (qui{que} de variis annorum formis, librum elegantissimum, uti scis, scripsit) effugisse mi∣ror; praesertim quum aera Macedonica à pugna ad Sinum Issicum in Cili∣cia, vel paulo post ad Arbelam qua cecidit Darius, inchoata, ut est in ipsa Machbaeorum fronte, eum latere non potuit; inde enim aeram illam non in Asia modo, verum etiam in Phoenicia, toto{que} oriente, & Aegypto, quarum terrarum res gestae in illis libris perscribuntur, observatam fulsse, ut ego quidem opinor patet. Quanquam vide quaeso ne quum caetera omnia praeclare ipso tamen librum hunc edendi tempore peccâris. De Paschate enim & Theophaniis, & Timothei & Polycarpi, aliorumque
sanctorum exitibus & memoriis in eo agis; tempore scilicet, quo uti scis, id maxime apud nos agitur, ne qua harum & his similium ineptiarum memoria aut sensus in mundo amplius conservetur. Sed bene est quod exquisitissimus hic tuus labor latinè scriptus, omnes Europae populos pervagabitur, & apud illos famam inveniet, ad quos mali hujus nostri contagio non pertinget. Ad quaesitum vero meum ita, Reverendissime Pater, respondisti; ut non solum dubitationi meae satisfeceris, verum etiam multa insuper eru∣ditione de ipsa Codicis Justinianaei editione, animum cumulaveris. Ita{que} non solum quod antea de legibus illis  in Codice positis conjecta∣bar, id ex Antonii Augustini & Contii authoritate planè ut scire mihi videar, effecisti, verum etiam quantum lumen ex tua illa ejus emendatio∣ne, universae Jurisperitorum Scholae si quando in lucem prodierit allaturus sis, penitus declarasti. Quod vero de Ribera mones, ut quin{que} ejus de Templo & iis, quae ad Templum pertinent libros cum meis de Tabernaculo & cultu ejus ante compararem, quam meos in lucem ederem, gratias qui∣dem plurimas ob tam prudens & paternum consilium ago. Sed nec ego meos unquam in lucem edere, ut res sunt forsitan, institui, nec ruri positus unde doctissimi illius Jesuitae librorum copiam nanciscar, existimare pos∣sum: si qua tamen fortuna me in eos aliquando conjecerit legam, à te praesertim monitus, & quidem cupidissimè, & inde pannum unum aut alte∣rum purpura conspicuum, gossapinae meae assuendum, quam possim tectè suffurabor. Sed redeo in Macedoniam. Equidem libri tui frontem subtristis & paene flens aspexi. Jacobi Usserii Armachani vidi, & quid, inquam ego apud me, de Archiepiscopo & totius Hiberniae Primate fit Hui: Tantane tam patientèr nullo certamine tolli dona sines tanta{que} Doctrinae Virtutis & Honoris insignia, humeris illis pendentia detrahi vel diripi potius patieris sed video quid sit; libris enim tuis tot tantis{que} plurimis & optimis Anglicè Latinè{que} olim conscriptis effectum esse putas, ut nulla regio tam remota sit, quae non intelligat, nulla aetas tam sera, quae non recognoscat Armachani titulum huic operi praefixum non inqui∣linatus sed Honoris & Dignitatis tuae esse & rectè quidem putas ita{que}— —Parere necesse est. Nam quid agas quum te furiosus, & idem Fortior— Ne multa ideo detractus tibi titulus tolerabilior ut opinor, est, & esse certè debet quod qui se major est, suum sibi non nisi per ludibrium re∣lictum esse sentiat. Vale Reverendissime, & benedictionem tuam mihi impertias quaeso. Paternitatis tuae omni amore Filius, obsequio verò Servus, T. R. April 3. An∣no 1648.
LETTER CCXXXIV. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; I Have not yet received your last Packet, because that the Messenger by whom such things use to be sent, was gone a few hours before it came to my Brother's hands, as he writes to me, so as he was fain to keep it lying by him until his return: When it cometh, I shall not fail to distribute your Treatises according to your Order, and to give you an account of it. I have recovered, out of the King's Library, by the humanity of the Fratres Puteani, all the Pieces desired by you; but the Title of the first is mistaken in the Oxford Catalogue, not being De Mensibus Atheniensium & Lacedamo∣niorum, but Athen. & Romanorum. Whereof your Grace may not doubt, because those same Treatises, which in that Catalogue do immediately pre∣cede and follow, do also precede and follow that de Mensibus Ath. & Rom. all being bound up in one and the same Volume; as likewise the second Indiculus Mensium desired by you, and a great many other Treatises to boot. And to make this appear the more clearly to you, I will set you down se∣veral of those Treatises preceding that first Indiculus Mensium, . Then follow the two named by you, , and ; And immediately after, . Januarius. . . These Latin words, Sunt à recentiori manu, uti vel primo sta∣tim aspect li∣quet. Februarius. . . Martius. . . Aprilis. . . Maius. . . Junius. . . b. Augustus. . . a. Julius. . . e. November. . . c. September. . . d. October. . . f. December. . . Next unto this follow the two Treatises mentioned by you; , and . And after them, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . I know not what to make of the last Figure, and therefore I have expressed the shape of it as near as I could. . . . . . . . . . , sed planissime scriptum est . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . After this Indiculus, followeth , and the other two Treatises mentioned by you. As for the next three Treatises desired by you, I have written them apart, being too big to be inserted in a Letter. Nihil unquam in vita foedius scriptum vidi, ne{que} pluribus aut majoribus er∣roribus scatens, praesertim in vocalibus ac diphthongis, quare vix ullae sunt, quas non inter se permutet, non modo , & , sed & , eaque—omnia non semel aut iterum, sed innumeris in locis, ac quidem persaepe bis ter-ve in unica voce. Praeterea abbreviaturis quam∣plurimis ac difficillimis adeo iste scriptor refertus est, ut non nisi post multam ac diutinam considerationem quicquam in iis dispicere potuerim. Tandem ta∣men sic satis foeliciter me extricavi, ac sublatis erroribus, qui per se evidentes erant, eos tantum reliqui, de quibus aliqua poterat esse dubitatio, ibi quo{que} appositis semper verioris scripturae conjecturis: quod ipsum in abbreviaturis quo{que} (exceptis nonnullis facilioribus, quas compendii gratia retinui) à Praeter innumera ista Exscriptoris errata, permulti praeterta occur∣runt crassi soloe∣cismi & barba∣rismi, ab ipso, ut videtur, autore: is quibus nihil mutavi, virgu∣lam tantum iis subduxisse con∣tentus. me praestitum est; quarum quotcun{que} assequi non potui, ita prorsus eas adumbravi, quomodo se habeat in principali scripto, servatis omnibus iisdem ductibus & lineamentis, quo res divinatu facilior tibi esset. Quantum ad Igna∣tii Jambos, charactere scripti sunt adeo minuto ac deformi, ac tot praeterea cum abbreviaturis, ut postquam eos multum ac diu acerrima cum attentione ver∣saveram, plurimae adhuc voces superessent, de quarum lectione penitus de∣sperabam. Dns autem Blondellus, à quo hic auxilium speraveram, pauciora me∣ipso in istis se discernere fatebatur; ne{que} quenquam mihi indicare poterat, à quo adjuvari possem. In hisce difficultatibus versanti commodè supervenit D. Justellus, qui re intellecta, duxit me ad quendam Coquaeum, Graecae lin∣guae magistrum, transcribendis Regiae Bibliothecae Manuscriptis saepius ab ipso Justello aliis{que} adhibitum, qui negotium id in se suscepit, ac feliciter perfecit; pro qua opera coronatum ipsi dependi. Praeivit autem mihi suo isto labore ad extricandam Pseudo-Hippocratis Epistolam, eodem prorsus characteris ge∣nere eadem{que} manu descriptam, in cujus vera lectione assequenda sic quo{que} non parum desudandum fuit. Georgius is not so much as begun to be printed, nor they will not begin to print him this half Year yet, because that the Latin Translation, which is to be printed with him, per columnas, will be ready no sooner. And Mr. Gramoi∣sii the Printer, being intreated by me to let me see the Copy, for to com∣pare that Catalogue of the High Priests, refused it: But Mr. du Puis hath promised me to get it done by the means of Fabrottes. He hath also bor∣rowed for me, out of the Library of Monsieur de Thou his Nephew, the Ma∣nuscript of Bertramus, which I have given yesterday to one to transcribe (I for to compare the Manuscript with it) after I had employed two or three days in vain, for to get a printed Copy, to buy or to borrow. I never saw Sirmond yet (having caused your Treatise de Symbolis to be given him by a third Person) and therefore I thought it best, for the borrowing of the Fa∣sti
Idatiani, to imploy some body that hath some interest in him; and having found that Monsieur Heraldes hath so, I have prayed him to do the Busi∣ness, which he hath undertaken, and to give me an account within a few days.—Monsieur Justel having understood of me, that you have some of Ephrems Works in Syriack, hath given me the inclosed Note, praying you to let him know, which of them they be you have. He is going to reprint his Codex Canonum, with many other Collections of the same nature; several whereof were never printed before. Thus humbly kissing your Grace's hands, I rest, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, Arnold Boate. Paris 15/25 Aprilis 1648. D. S. Ephraem Syro Ex Hebed Iesu Sobensi Episcopo de Catalogo Syrorum Scriptorum. EPhraem magnus, qui Syrorum Propheta cognominatus est, commentaria confecit in Libros Geneseos, Exodi, & Sacerdotum; item in librum Josue Filii Nun, Judicum, Samuelis, & Regum, Davidis, Isaiae ac duodecim Prophetarum minorum, Ieremiae, Ezechielis, at{que} beati Danielis. Extant praeterea ejusdem opera de Ecclesiae fide, nec non Sermones, Carmina, Elegia, Hymni; ac totum defunctorum officium, theses de literis Alphabeti, Dispu∣tationes contra Judaeos, Manichaeum, Bardesanem, Marcionem, & Philetum, & Hypetum, Demum{que} dissolutio impietatis Juliani. LETTER CCXXXV. A Letter from Dr. Langbaine, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; I Have lately read Mr. Cressy, the late Dean of Laghlin, his Exomologesis, who in his 27th Chapter, pag. 178. informs, That in his hearing one of the most learned Protestant Prelats in the King of England's Dominions (quo∣ting your Grace in the Margent) professed, That whereas he had had, of many Years before, a design to publish the New Testament in Greek, with various Se∣ctions and Annotations; and for that purpose had used great diligence, and spent much Mony to furnish himself with Manuscripts and Memoires, &c. I humbly desire to be informed from your Lordship how much of Truth there is in that Report; and whether you collated the Manuscripts in our Pub∣lick Library I have in some part made enquiries upon some suspected or doubtful places, and it was in my thoughts to have gone through the whole; which if by your Lordship's pains, or means, it hath been done already, I should be loth, actum agere. Together with the Greek, I would have compa∣red
that venerable Latin Manuscript of the four Gospels in the Bodlean, which is writ in fair large Letters, (partly Saxon) in a continued order, without distinction of words; which seems to promise some considerable variety: for I find in Matth. 20. after the words, Sicut filius hominis non venit ministrari sed ministrate, & dare animam suam redemptionem pro multis; these added, (I know not whether, according to any other Greek or Latin Copy) Vos autem quaetitis de modico crescere, & de minimo minui. I would likewise willingly know whether your Lordship be not of opinion (as I profess I am) that the additional Passage (which Robert Stephens says he found in two of the most ancient Manuscripts, and Beza in one of those which he used) con∣cerning the Man whom our Saviour is said to have seen working upon the Sabbath, & c. Luke 6. have not been infarsed (dolo malo); Whether by the Marcionites, as Grotius, or some others; and in general, what we may think of those many various Lections, of which we know the Books of the New Testament afford more store than most other Writings. I do not expect your Lordship should undergo so much trouble, as to give me any account in writing; but I have taken this occasion, to mention so much of my own desires, hoping when I shall wait upon your Lordship in Person, to receive that satisfaction in these, as I have done in others of this kind. For whose Health and Happiness I shall, according to my bounden Duty, ever pray; and humbly beg the like from your Lordship in behalf of Your Grace's most humble Servant, to be commanded, Gerard Langbaine. Queens Coll. Apr. 24. 1648. LETTER CCXXXVI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to D. Alexander More. Admodum Reverendo in Christo fratri, D. Alexandro Moro Genevensis Ecclesiae Pastori dignissimo. REctè omninò judicâsti (Vir Eximie) à doctissimo simul & prudentissi∣mo Exoniensi Episcopo primum scriptae fuerint istae literae, quibus deinde, multum rogatus, nomen quo{que} meum non illibentèr apposui; Etsi enim per leges regni nostri matrimonium ità illegitimè initum & consummatum (quic∣quid de eo apud vos demum statueretur) rescindi non potuisse minimè igno∣rarem: Exempli tamen interfuturum existimabam, ut ab Ecclesiâ & Repu∣blicâ vestra severioris disciplinae observantissimâ legi Dei tam adversum cri∣men non planè dimitteretur impunitum. Quod quidem tam candidè à Re∣verendo caetu vestro fulsse acceptum, magnoperè sum gavisus. Summum il∣lum amorem literis etiám contestantibus, quem inter eos esse decebat, qui sunt &  at{que} earundem pretiosissimarum promissio∣num  ne{que} in nullâ felicitatis meae parte ponendum duco, quòd hac occasione ad amicitiam tuam mihi factus sit aditus, cui aliquantum firmandae Ignatiana à me edita hoc tempore misissem, nisi libri moles obstitisset, ne
tamen prorsus  ad te accederem, leviculam hanc de Symbolis Diatribam literis hisce comitem visum fuit adjungere. Quam tu ex mit∣tentis affectu aestimabis qui est ex animo Frater tui amantissimus, & in Christi Ministerio conservus devinctissimus, Ja. Usserius Armachanus. Scripsi raptim Londini xvi Kalend. Julii, An∣no M. DG. XLVIII. LETTER CCXXXVII. A Letter from—to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Vir Illustrissime ac Reverendissime; NON indignaberis, quod hac Epistola tuas interrumpam curas qui∣bus immortalitatem emis. Me ad scribendum inducit summa tua humanitas, quae inter caeteras tuas virtutes & egregias dotes familiam du∣cit. Tanto enim favore non dedignatus es, me, dum degerem in An∣gliâ, isto bonarum artium emporio celebetrimo, & ingeniorum felicissima altrice, complecti, ut in aeternum non desint hujus rei monumenta; me non solum in tui consortium & colloquium, (quo nihil gratius) benigne admisisti, sed etiam de variis rebus movisti sermones, mea studia compro∣basti, & quod nimium est, consiliis & reipsa meos conatus promovere. Hac fretus fiduciâ, non erubesco tuum de itinere meo Constantinopolita∣no exposcere consilium, quod mihi instar oraculi erit, & norma mearum rerum gerendarum. Non me latet, quantâ peritiâ rerum Orientalium & cognitione librorum MSS. praesertim Graecorum (quorum praecipuos & summa cura inquirendos nominasti, mihi{que} sponte obtulisti eorundem ca∣talogum) fretus, melius tum publicae, tum privatae utilitati visâ occa∣sione prospiciam; fateor ingenue me nullum alium ob finem iter susci∣pere, quam ob bonum Reip. literariae, quantum in me est, cujus haud mini∣mam partem promittit notitia harum linguarum, ignorantia nos in multis titubare facit. Nec deerit veritatis aliquod lumen in vetustioribus hujus∣modi MS. si nostram sententiam contra adversantium imposturas illustra∣re possumus; & tanti majori studio nobis erit incumbendum hisce labo∣ribus, quanto majus & firmius praesidium inde pro fulciendis suis opini∣onibus quaerunt adversarii; quod jam Romae manifestarunt, publicando illud MS. Arabicum, vetustissimum, ut ferunt, ex quo sua dogmata infalli∣biter stabiliri & demonstrari, nostra{que} perspicue & solide confutari stolide credunt. Operam perdo haec exaggerando, cum dudum tibi satis super{que} cognitae fuerint hae linguae ut & commoda inde promanantia; quocirca nul∣lus dubito quin me pro more tuo Tibi devincias, tuum{que} consilium mihi be∣nigne communices, praesertim cum hac occasione me aliquando idoneum reddas inserviendo Reip. literariae, & haec alia{que} tua mihi collata benefacta publicis & privatis tabulis consecrando. Catalogum Librorum Celeberri∣mi D. Scioppii Praestantiss. D. Hachio misi, qui tibi, si ita placuerit, eun∣dem conspiciendum praebebit. Doleo ipsius sortem, qui jam in extrema senectute squalide degit, aliorum addictus gratiae. Graviter laborat febri
continuâ & fere nulla spes recuperandae pristinae saluti relicta est. Opera ipsius non parum noxae adferent parti adversae, ita ut divina fere providen∣tiâ id fieri cernamus, quomodo tanti viri nolentes volentes coguntur assentiri sanae doctrinae, suam{que} ac falsam respuere. Latitant hinc & inde in Italiâ summi viri, quorum opera posthuma aliquando monstrabunt, quantum potior pars Catholicae Ecclesiae abhorreat à suo capite, & à plu∣rimis canonibus sibi pro Articulis Fidei obtrudi solitis. Summâ cum ad∣miratione audiri R. P. Fulgentium Venetiis degentem, olim socium R. P. Pauli, qui historiam Concilii Tridentini sub nomine Petri Soavez Poloni conscripsit; Mirum dico, quam apertè & solidè loquutus est de vi∣tiis & falsis opinionibus in Romanam Ecclesiam introductis. Nec minus ab eâ dissentit Jul. Clem. Scotus ex illustri comitum Scotorum familiâ oriundus dudum Jesuita, jam vero infensissimus istius ordinis inimicus, quorum scripta maximum ponderis habebunt in adversariis. Nimium hac Epistolâ excurro, Vir magne, veniam audaciae in scribendo, &, quod superest, Deum immortalem precor, velit T. Rev. dign. diu incolumen in sui nominis gloriam totius{que} Reip. literariae emolumentum conservare; mihi meis{que} rebus fave. Patavii Antenoris 19 Octob. st. n. 1649. LETTER CCXXXVIII. Reverendissimo Doctissimo{que} Viro Jacobo Usserio Archie∣piscopo Armachano S. P. D. Isaacus Gruterus. VIx egressus eram adolescentiae spatia quae sub ferula eruditur, cum inter ea te nomina excepi, ad quorum venerationem se compone∣bat jam tum aetatis impetus, solâ virorum ingentium veneratione com∣mendari solitus, Juventâ maturior, etsi turbatô saepius ob domestica ex fortunae variantis arbitrio impedimenta profectu, tenui tamen & velut caliganti in graviores literas prospectu accessi ad tui admirationem pro∣pius; in magnam felicitatis partem deputaturus occasionem, quae epistoli∣cae compellationi viam panderet. Et videtur ex inopino oblatum, in quo fatigata vane exquirentis anxie consilia. Invado igitur quà desideriis meis operam spondet Nobilissimi Boswelli expeditum literas amantibus obsequium. Ne{que} praemunio ulterius hanc scriptionis licentiam, ne aut modestiae tuae inimica, aut fronti meae insueta meditari iis dicar, quibus aliunde haud innotui, longe dissidens à molestâ ambitionis pompâ, sim∣plicitatis perditurâ pretium apud virtutis istius aequos aestimatores. Praeter illud, quo apud Eruditos hujus seculi clarus jamdiu emeruisti tacitam & nunc calamo mandatam ex me reverentiam, Savilii impulit recorda∣tio, ex paucis in lucem editis, quae videre & legere mihi contigit, hausta. Putabam enim animadvertisse familiariter te cum Nobilissimo Viro & nunc ad beatos translato consuevisse. Ejus in Tacitum notas, nunquam latine lectas, nupere vertere Romano sermone caepi. Praelo destinatis sua designavi prolegomena cum eo, quod tantas virtutes decet, Elogio. Sed
quia homini lectionis angustae quaedam ex libris innotuerunt, pauca ex Amicorum sermonibus, multa fugiunt, cum{que} nancisci haud licuerit, unde plenioris adjumenti spes erat facta, optem tuâ opera scire quid scripserit, otii, in fallor, religiosus dispensator, editum ineditumve. An spes sit vindicandi a Bibliothecae situ, quae plurima in omni scientiarum genere elucubrata vidisse testatur quisquis autor est praefationis in Germania prae∣fixae An. 1601. Libello de Militia Romana, latinitate donato; sed cujus diu est cum nulla prostant exemplaria. Audio vivere filiam ejus, unicam amplissima∣rum fortunarum haeredem in provinciâ Cantium dictâ. Vereor an falso rumor id auribus meis insinuaverit, aditusne ad eam per consimiles lite∣ras (latine enim scire narrant) detur, quaeso effice ne me lateat, si opis fuerit tuae, meditantem ea, quibus Vir apud Belgarum & alibi eruditos plerum{que} ignotus celebretur; si modo praestare id queat praeconii nostri exilitas. Depuduisse fors videbor multis alios ex se aestimantibus, non tibi, qui literarum nomine & defuncti illud quicquid est molestiae exhaurire non defugies & perscribere ex vero cognita. Diriges autem quae mihi destinaveris ad Nobiliss. Boswellum, cujus beneficio hae Londinum transmittuntur. Vale Vir Reverendissime & aequus esto negotium facessenti; qui quodvis obsequium libentissime tibi debiturus sum ea—facili∣tate tanti{que} officii nomine. Hagae-Consitis in Batavia. Postridie Idus Julias. M. D. C. XLIX. Parats hasce & jamjam per Nobiliss. Boswellum Curandas Amicus me∣us Ecclesiae Anglicanae apud Batavos minister in Britanniam transfre∣taturus secum sumpsit. Cum eo brevi edituro tulissime habere po∣tero responsum, si meruisse illud licuerit. LETTER CCXXXIX. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned John Gerard Vossius. Viro Clarissimo mihi{que} amicissimo Johanni Gerardo Vossio. Amstelodamum. VIvo adhuc, Mi Vossi! Si vivere dicendus est qui ad calamitosissima & flagitiosissima reservatus tempora, ea quotidie spectare cogitur, quo∣rum animus meminisse horret, luctu{que} refugit. Inter quas continuas aerum∣nas & illo animi angore me subinde confici dissimulare non possum; quod ità ego te neglexerim, ut pro eximio illo artis tuae Poëticae thesauro nulla à me relata, ac ne habita quidèm aut acta fuerit gratia. Ante annum, & quod excurrit Appendicem meam Ignatianam ac de Macedonum ac Asianorum anno solari dissertationem mittere ad te memini; sed quid tantilla illa ad justos hosce poëticae tuae, tanta diligentia & industriâ elucubratos, commentarios Majoris fortasse operis, & pretii, usus certè aliquandò uberioris, futuri sunt Annales nostri sacri: Cum Asiatico, & Aegyptiaco, & Olympiadum exor∣dio us{que} ad Vespasiani imperium, ex scriptoribus exteris, deducto chronico. Quamprimum opus absolutum fuerit (quod ante finem proximae aestatis fu∣turum
spero) consendum ad te sum missurus: Si lucis hujus usuram saevitia temporum tantisper mihi permiserit. Intereò literarum harum latorem D. Johannem Priceum, insignis eruditionis, & probitatis virum (quem ex scriptis notum tibi esse non dubito) & sui praecipuè, & mei etiàm (cui a∣micissimus est) causâ, finu complexu{que} tuo recipe; & me, licet id parum commerentem, amare non cessa. Tui Cupidissimus Ja. Usserius Armachanus. Londini, xvii Kalend. April. anno 1648/9. LETTER CCXL. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Johan. Hevelius. Viro Clarissimo D. Johanni Hevelio Dantiscano. Gedanum. Vir Praestantissime; SElenographiam tuam admirandam ostendit mihi Hartlibius noster, Splen∣didissimum munus, Dubliniensi nostrae Bibliothecae benignissime à te donatum. Cui inter tumultus bellicos jam animam penè agenti Academiae, inter primos in illam admissos ego jam unicus superstes relictus filius, officii mei esse duxi, gratias quantum possum maximas, dulcissimae matris nomine, tibi persolvere: at{que} privati mei insuper in te affectus , Asiaticum & Aegyptiacum nostrum chronicon à mundi primâ origine ad Antiochi Epi∣phanis & Maccabaica tempora deductum,  qualiscun{que} vicem supple∣turum, ad te transmittere: Quod ut boni consulas oro, ut profectum ab ho∣mine, Tui amantissimo J. U. Armachanus. Londini pridie Kalend. Novemb. Julian. anno aerae Christianae MDCL.
LETTER CCXLI. A Letter from the Reverend Dr. Hammond, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; SOme few Dissertations I have put together, with some purpose to adven∣ture them to the Press; But first desire to offer them to your Grace's view, to receive your judgment of the fitness of so doing. If the whole do bring too great a trouble to your Grace, you may then read over the Lemmata, and thereby be directed to read where you think there will be most hazard of my running any Error. And if upon survey your Grace shall find cause to send back the Book again for my further thoughts, it will be welcome, if accompanied with your Directions. But if there be no more dangerous  than what your Pen may without much trouble correct, I desire it may then be returned to Mr. Royston this Bearer, with a word of notice to him that he may proceed. But I must desire from your Grace the favour of perfect secrecy till the Book be printed, and then it shall visit your Grace again. From Your Graces most humble Servant, H. Hammond. Dec. 6. LETTER CCXLII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Reverend Dr. Hammond. Good Doctor; I Received heretofore, by your direction, from Mr. Allestree, the Greek Passage of Irenaeus, and yesterday your most accurate descanting upon the same, for which I return unto you very hearty thanks, being very glad also to understand by your Letter of the 20th of August, therewith received, that you have a thought of making an entire dissertation for the vindicating of Ignatius his Epistles: Which together with your Treatise of Episcopacy in Latin, enlarged with such additions as you mention of Act. 20. and the Ancyran Canon, I hold would be to exceeding good purpose. The new Ti∣tle wherewith you were dubbed, of Sir Knave, is in the railing Book writ expresly against Desiderius Heraldus; which having but look'd on, I sent to young Heraldus, the other's Son, who hath not hitherto restor'd the same to me. I pray God to bless you in all your Godly Endeavours; in whom I ever more rest, Your very loving Brother, Ja. Armachanus. Rigate in Surry, Apr. 30. 1649.
LETTER CCXLIII. A Letter from the Reverend Dr. Hammond, to the most Re∣verend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; I Must not omit to render my most humble Acknowledgments for the fa∣vour of your last Book of Chronology, added to the many former Obli∣gations laid on me by your Grace. I could not but smile when I was of late required by the London-Minsters to answer the Objections which you had made to the Epistles of Ignatius. The Printer will shortly give you an account of the Return I have made to it. I find now in another Caviller against those Epistles, a Testimony out of St. Jerom, Dial. 3. cont. Pelag. [Jgnatius vir Apostolicus & Martyr Scribit audacter, Elegit Dominus Apostolos qui super omnes homines peccatores erant] which I find not in his Epistles. Doth your Grace remember any thing of it If it be not troublesome, I beseech you impart one word concerning it to Your most humble Servant H. Hammond. May 16. LETTER CCXLIV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Reverend Dr. Hammond. Good Doctor; I Have read, with great delight and content, your accurate Answer to the Objections made against the Credit of Ignatius his Epistles; for which, as I do most heartily thank you, so am I moved thereby further to entreat you to publish to the World, in Latin, what you have already written in Eng∣lish, against this Objector, and that other, who for your pains hath rudely requited you with the bare appellation of Nebulo for the assertion of Epis∣copacy, to the end it may no longer be credited abroad, that these two have so beaten down this Calling, that the defence thereof is now deserted by all Men, as by Lud. Capellus is intimated in his Theses of Church-Go∣vernment at Sedan lately published. Which I leave to your serious conside∣ration; and all your Godly Labours to the blessing of our God, in whom I evermore rest, Your very loving Friend and Brother, Ja. Armachanus. July 21.
LETTER CCXLV. A Letter from the Reverend Dr. Hammond, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; TO the trouble that I lately offered your Grace, I beseech your par∣don if I present this Addition, in desiring a view of your Variae Le∣ctiones of the New Testament, which I conceive fit to be look'd on, to pre∣pare those Notes for the Press which I have now in good part done. If this Favour be uncivil for me to ask, or inconvenient for your Grace to grant, I shall by your least word be kept from farther importuning it; but if you see fit to communicate them, this Bearer, Mr. Royston, will safely convey them to me; and at what time your Grace shall appoint, return them to you; from Your Grace's most obliged Servant, H. Hammond. Decemb. 10. 1650. LETTER CCXLVI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Reverend Dr. Hammond. Reverend Sir; I Read over your Book with no small admiration, both of the infiniteness of the pains which you have taken, and the exactness of the judgment which you have shewed therein. The only thing I could wish is, that the accurate Tractate of the Gnostic Heresy, should come out apart in a Disserta∣tion by its self, without any reference to the Argument of your other main Discourse; for howsoever the occasion of bringing it in be not unapt, yet the application of St. Paul's Prophecy thereunto, is not like to find such ac∣ceptance in the reformed Churches beyond the Sea, that I should desire the principal Argument in hand might be adventured in the same Bottom with the other. The varieties of the Readings of the New Testament, out of the Cam∣bridg Copies, I have sent unto you; but those out of the Oxford ones (wherein your self had a chief hand) I can by no means find, and do much fear that they were plundred, among my other Books and Papers, by the rude Welch in Glamorganshire. Yet instead thereof I have sent unto you, the  excerpted out of the Volumns wherein the ancient Edition of the Septuagint is contain'd, in the Library of St. James's: Which if it may stand you in any stead, I shall be very glad. Your own, J. A. Lond. Jan. 14. 1650.
LETTER CCXLVII. A Letter from Dr. Edward Davenant, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend; IT is an extraordinary comfort to me, in the midst of my Troubles, to hear, not only of your Grace's Health, which I am bound daily to pray for, but that you should be so affected with the hearing of mine. I never shall forget the Favours which you were pleased to shew me in Bristol; and though these silly Things of mine are far unworthy of your judicious perusal, yet I choose rather to lay open mine own weakness, than disobey the least of your desires. For the Resolution of Spherical Triangles, I take the Sextant of any Circle; this I divide into 90 equal Parts, and suppose each Part a Degree; by this means I keep always (in Circulis Maximis) the same Radius that I be∣gan with; and the length of that Radius is always the measure of a Right An∣gle. This course I find to be the most speedy for practice, though for the measuring of other Arches and Angles, the Scale is not to be trusted, but use is to be made of the common Rules of Trigonometrical Calculation. Touching my Treatise of Eclipses, I know how far it is from perfection; for want of better Authors, my Grounds are for the most part taken out of Calvisius, whose Rules (of any that I have seen) I find to be the most compendious: but the exemplification of his Rules is extreamly misprinted in many places. In his first Table, upon which many of the following de∣pend, there is an overfight committed by himself; Calvis. Edit. 3. 1629. Franco∣furt. p. 7. col. 1. For whereas dividing a Circle, or i. d. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. 06. 00. 00. 00. 00. 00. 00. 00. 00. By   d. i. ii. iii. iv. v. vi. vii. 12. 11. 26. 41. 32. 00. 27. 13.   He makes the Quotient to be d. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi.     29. 31. 50. 07. 51. 20. 27.     Or, d. h. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi.   (29. 12. 44. 03. 08. 32. 10. 46.)   It should be d. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. *   29. 31. 50. 07. 51. 38. 20.   Or, d. h. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. *   (29. 12. 44. 03. 08. 39. 20.)   So that comparing the first Column of his 7th Page, with the first Column of the 9th Page, you may see 38.v. omitted, and 20.vi. put into the place thereof. Which oversight, though small, yet being in fundamento, it has an influence throughout his first five Tables, and causeth mine to differ from them. I doubt not but your Grace is furnished with far more ready and exact Tables, and therefore easily may spare these; which I desire, after you have perused them, that they may be safely returned; for whatsoever they are,
they have cost me no little labour, and I have never another Copy of them if these should happen to miscarry. If I forget not, you made mention of one Mullerus, (whose Works I never had a sight of); I would fain know whether it be not the same Mollerus, whose Tabulae Phrisicae I find thrice re∣prehended (how justly I cannot say) in Calvisius, A Mundi, 3178, 3963, and 4283. There is nothing in Mathematicks which I more long to hear of, than the new Edition of Vieta's Works, if it be yet come forth. But I trespass too far upon your patience, to trouble you so long about these Trifles. To make some Recompence, I have sent up with them that elabo∣rate Work of the Bishop of Salisbury; which being committed to my charge, your Grace has done me unspeakable favour to undertake the publishing of it. I send the Book it self, which my Lord left with me to be printed, ra∣ther than that I shewed you at Bristol, which was but a Transcript out of this. The weakness of my Body, and other Troubles which now lie heavy on me, will not permit me to attend upon the printing; my hope is, you will find some Divine there at hand, that will look to preserve it from the Errors of the Press. The short answer of his unto the French Divines, (which I found scattered amongst his Papers) is sent up in the Book; I re∣fer to your Grace's Judgment, whether it be fit to be added or omitted in the Impression. If Dr. Ward's Works, touching the same Subject, may come forth together in one Volume, I believe it will be no less agreeable to the mind of the deceased Authors, than grateful to the sight of surviving Posterity. I cease to be more troublesome, and with my heartiest Prayers for your long Health here, and eternal Happiness hereafter, remain, Your Grace's in all humble Service, to be commanded, Edward Davenant. Gillingham, Jan. 29. 1646. LETTER CCXLVIII. A Letter from Mr. Wheelocke Professor of Arabick in Cambridg, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Lincolns-Inn. MAY it please your Grace to give me leave, since in these Times I come not to London, to tender my most humble Duty to you in this Paper-fashion. I most humbly thank your Grace for mentioning me to Mr. Cudworth: who, as his Name also promiseth, is a young Man of good worth; and so, had he liv'd (when the Church of Ireland lately flourished under your Grace's Primacy) furnished with such Abilities, no wonder if you had called him into that then flourishing Kingdom, as were many more of his Parts and Merits. Your Grace was pleased to ask him what I was do∣ing. My Lord, I cannot spend my time better, than after the Holy Scrip∣tures, in gathering your Lordship's Observations upon many obscure Texts of the Bible; but by my constant attending on my Lectures, I am prevented of doing what I otherwise might. Sir Henry Spelman's Saxon Lecture, ho∣noured by your Lordship's first motion to the Heads of Houses, (and have I not cause to admire God's Providence, as my Lord of Exeter told me, that the Work should be countenanced by so transcendent Patronage) hath
made me your Grace's Scholar; as in truth the Ecclesiae ipsae Britannicae Uni∣versae at this time are. But, my Lord, pardon my boldness, and give me leave to chalenge the Stile, if not of Scholar, or , or , since I never counted my self worthy to wait on your Person, yet a true admirer of all your Lordship's most rich Treasures, now, in your most learned Writings bequeathed to the Church; but my Saxon Imploiment will bind me much to be acquainted with your Primordia Eccles. Britannicarum; tho your Grace will pity my Condition, as being not able to compass the use of those rare Manuscripts cited in that most rich Magazine; yet I am glad that we have many excellent and rare Antiquities there at large cited to us. I pre∣sumed, two Years since, to send Mr. Hartlib a Specimen of my Intentions, and beginnings of a Confutation of the Alcoran: It was according to my poor skill, a discovery of Mahomet's, and his Chaplains devilish Policy, to raze out of the Faith of the Eastern People, the memory of the Three Persons,  by substituing in the stead thereof three words,  and so in the same manner, as by fair and goodly Language, he blotted out of the Christian Church, the —so doth he the —Gloria Patri—by his  Glory be to God, the Lord of the World, &c. for this intent, to square out a Platform of Faith easy for all the World to believe, that so he and his suc∣ceeding Chalifs, may gain such a false believing and seduced World to the infernal See of Meccha; and that was his meaning in binding all to pray to∣wards Meccha. Had I Skill, and Means, and Encouragement from your Grace, I would endeavour to make some progress in the same Work: not but that I know many in this Kingdom far more able than my self, but that I fear none of them will attempt it, but rather smile at the Design. The Language of the Alchoran, to write in that stile, may be attained; the matter of Confu∣tation may be easy to any that will attend to the wicked Plots of Apostates, then, and ever, practised in the World. But Mr. Hartlib returned my Papers, and told me they were not, or else my Intention, was not approved. I pur∣posedly was desirous to be ignorant who should give this severe Censure, lest they should think I should grieve thereat. Mr. Hartlib, I thank him, did me the pleasure as to conceal it from me. I could scarce keep my self from some such Imployment about the Alchoran; but these Times call us now to other Thoughts: The fear of losing the Univers. as well as Regnum, & Sacerdo∣tium, doth not a little amaze us. When a Messenger comes hither from your Grace, I shall be glad to be informed by him, wherein I may best, in this Lambeth Library, be serviceable, and express my bounden Duty to your Lordship. The Lord still add to the number of your Days, to the comfort of the afflicted Britain Churches, which, next to God, cast their Eyes upon you in these sad Extremities which they have already suffered. Your Grace's most humble Servant, Abraham Wheelocke. We expect every day, the setting up of the Lambeth Books in the Schools; where your Grace, above 30 Years since, heard Mr. Andrew Downs read the Greek Lecture; as yet they remain in Fats, or great Chests, and cannot be of any use.
LETTER CCXLIX. A Letter from the Learned Isaacus Gruterus, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Viro Maximo Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Armachano, Hiberniae Primati S. P. D. Isaacus Gruterus. NON passus sum me abripi affectu, virtutes tuas si non aestimare saltem venerari nescio, cum mihi nuper apud te calamum feci pararium. Ne∣que ex alto nunc causas arcesso, quae necdum consumptae, fiduciam sustinent fore ut & secundae allocutioni sua venia sit, interiorem tantae Eruditionis, in perspectâ multis humanitate, cultum meditanti. Eorum quae tunc scripsi, alia tempus mutavit intermedium, alia integram officii gratiam habent, si vel partem desiderii nostri expletam imputare liceat tuae benevolentiae. Savilii enim filiam, Sidleijo cuidam olim nuptam, obiisse narravit mihi Nobiliss. Boswellus; vir non aliis magis virtutibus, quas plures benignior indulsit na∣tura, quam literarum patrocinio illustris. Quid vero Savilianae industriae ineditum servent alicubi scrinia chartacea, non alîunde quam ex te melius con∣stare mihi posse videtur, cum doceant scripta tua propriori vos familiaritate coaluisse. Illud ergo repetere ausus sum hoc Epistolae compendio, explica∣tum forte olim uberius, ut in concilianda istius rei notitia gratificari velis ho∣mini extero, in magna felicitatis parte habituro per istud obsequium posse tibi commendare quamcun{que} affectus sui operam, testem positi non apud ingra∣tum beneficii. Vale. Isaacus Gruterus. Hagae-Comitis. 26. Febr. iv. Calendas Martii. CICICCL. LETTER CCL. A Letter from P. Scavenius, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Vir Illustrissime & Reverendissime. NIhil gratius mihi accidere potuit, quàm tuas literas, iis{que} inclusa man∣data accipere. Totus fui in ea exequendo, ut tuae petitioni, & meo voto rectè satissecisse viderer, sed nescio quo fato res hic aguntur, ut semper obji∣ciantur tantae remorae, & praetextus, quibus suas res ornare allaborant, qui∣bus alienae parum curae sunt, & qui potius nomine, quam reipsa, aliis inser∣vire cupiunt; divites, ut aiunt, promissis, & tardi vel seri in fide datâ ser∣vandâ
Clariss. Dominus Holsteinius infinitis destrictus negotiis, (nam Cen∣sor est librorum qui hic typis mandantur) merito fugit hunc laborem, quip∣pe immensum, quem requirit vel descriptio vel collatio hujus MS. cum ex∣cusis codicibus. Codex enim est antiquissimus, hinc & inde mutilus, ut in∣terdum Oedippo opus sit sensum indagare. Promisit tamen se missurum parvulas aliquot varias lectiones, quas successive sparsim in unum vel alterum Prophetam notavit, & excusavit se non posse ipsum Codicem mittere, eum{que} periculis tanti itineris exponere, cum hoc modo sibi odium Eminentissimi Do∣mini Cardinalis facillime conciliaret. Magna pars vitae Christianae Fastidii Episcopi Britanni excusa est, & spes est eum tractatum adhuc lucem visurum, cum inter D. Augustini opera non integre reperiatur, sed ejusdem saltem sparsim fiat mentio. Sub praelo sunt edente Hostenio Fragmenta quaedam Conciliorum, & fasciculus quarundam Epistolarum Antiquarum, in quarum numero legi responsum Imperatoris ad Leonem Magnum, quod nullibi, im∣pressum reperitur. In Biblioth. Vaticana maximus certè est thesaurus li∣brorum MS. nec ubivis obviorum, quos saltem per transennam inspicere no∣bis licet. Pessime nostris rebus consuluere ii, qui antehac quaedam descri∣psere, ac postea Romanis invitis & innominatis publicarunt. Nec desunt, qui inde tela quaesivere, quibus ipsos confodere, ac ita proprio ense ipsos necare studuerunt. Hoc modo Itali malè remunerati, cautiores ac difficiliores in communicando exteris sua mysteria evasere. Doleo mihi vix tantum tem∣poris superesse, quo obiter possum lustrare omnes Bibliothecas hujus Urbis. Chronicon Georgii Hamartholi nondum lucem vidit, typis tamen paratum servatur à Domino Leone Allatio. An exstant plura in MSSo codice de Sibyllimis oraculis, quam in excusis, ob angustiam temporis jam non licet in∣quirere. Sequenti septimanâ cum Domino Leone Allatio diligentissimè per∣scrutabor, & primâ occasione de singulis perscribam. Nova quae in re li∣teraria hic occurrunt à Praestantiss. Domino Hachio intelliges. Quod super∣est Deum supplex rogo, velit tuam Reverendissimam dignitatem diu incolu∣men servare in emolumentum totius Reip. literariae. Tu Vir magne, vale, meis{que} rebus fave. Tuus humillimus, Petrus Scavenius. Romae 26. Mart. st. vet. 1650.
LETTER CCLI. Venerando Praesuli, Domino Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Armachano, totius Hiberniae Primati Illustrissimo.Paulus Testardus Ecclesiae Reformatae Blaesensis Pastor. S. P. D.Venerande Praesul; NOmen tuum suavissimae in Ecclesiâ Christi fragrantiae, integerrimam tuam virtutem, quam nulli iniquissimo etsi saeculo non revereatur, at{que} exi∣mia scripta, quibus orbem ditasti, quorum quâ potui diligentiâ quaesitorum partem magno cum gaudio obtinui, jampridem impensissimo studio, sum∣ma{que} veneratione colo: Dignitatis Tuae sententiam, quae possit esse, de opus∣culo quod, sollicitante etiàm ante Annos septemdecim Domino Johanne Brookes, qui tibi, video, non est ignotus, ex Disciplinâ  Ca∣meronis edidi, turbarum ob Arminii Remonstrantiam excitatarum occasione, ut quâ ratione virus quantum in eâ est vir iste Celebris ab Ecclesiis Nostrati∣bus propulerat, omnibus communicarem, eadem{que} operâ aliquam Evangeli∣cos omnes conciliandi rationem saltèm pro modulo insinuarem, cui opusculo & lis mihi mota à Reverendis viris D. D. Molinaeo, Riveto & Spanhemio, sed jàm, Deo gratias, uti spero pacata coegit addere Elucidarium  apo∣logeticum, adeo{que} S. de hoc Additamento, noscendi flagranti desiderio tene∣or, Amicos rogavi eam ut exquirere velent, ipse & Dignitatis tuae sores pul∣sassem exquirendae gratiâ, nisi manum injecisset tenuitatis meae conscientia. At jam, Venerande Praesul, accipio ab eximio viro Domino Colladonio & exhibitas tibi scriptiunculas meas, quas ad Dominum Leche eâ mente misi, & sperandam à te earum Censuram, et me etsi valdè ignobilem tuae Digni∣tati non prorsùs ignotum, imo nec prorsùs benevolentiae tuae expertem. Non haerebo sanè diutius sic monitus, quin ipse venerationem meam Dignitati tuae exhibeam, vota pro ipsius in praesentibus procellis solatio significem & arden∣tissima & constantissima, sententiam tuam de meâ, quae de Gratiae Dei in Christo cum particularitate, tum universalitate distinctius ex utro{que} jàm me∣morato scripto agnoscenda est, de animo, de{que} facto pro occasione rogem, quià fortè ea res in Synodo nostrâ Nationali poterit novae considerationi subjici, importunae rogationis poenam deprecor, gratias quantas possum hu∣manitati tuae & caritati agam, me{que} totum Tuae Dignitati devinctum & ad∣dictum summa cum humilitate profiteor. Vale, venerande Praesul, te{que} per multos annos Ecclesiae suae, quantum restaurandae! incolumem praestet Deus optimus Maximus. Dat. Blaesis iv. Non. April. An. MDCL. Venit in mentem & addere consulturam & Ecclesiae Anglicanae & Nostra∣tibus Tuam Dignitatem, si quid probaret scribere, quod nonnullos Anglis multis apud nos agentibus circà Vocationem nostram, & celebrandam nobis∣cum sacram Eucharistiam scrupulos eximeret, imò & quo sunt statu utendam totam Ecclesiae apud nos consuetudinem, à quo pietatem tuam non abhorrere sum persuasus, qui & Anglicanae parte magna vidisti consuetudine uti in An∣gliâ non trepidavissem.
LETTER CCLII. Viro Reverendissimo Celeberrimo, Illustrissimo{que} JACOBO USSERIO Armachano, &c.Patrono suo aetatèm Colendo Christianus Ravius Berlinas, S. P. D. QUamdiu incertum iter meum erat, tacere, quàm Epistolio meo molestus esse volo Praesul Eminentissime. Statim at{que} Amstelodamum veni, se∣cundo Februarii stylo veteri Serenissimae Reginae indicabam adventum: Illa statim jubet mihi numerari M. Joachimicos, & plus etiam, si opus habeam. Secundo Martii Cambium Holmiae signatur. Tricesimo Martii mercator ac∣ceptat hic collybum, & obstringit se ad praescriptum solutionis terminum qua∣tuordecim dierum. Sic decimo tertio Aprilis Stylo novo accepi mille Joachimi∣cos; & paulo post ducentos amplius: summam trecentarum librarum Ster∣ling. Redemi totam R. Man—typographiam unà cum Matricibus & quos vocant ponzonis omnibus. Habeo jam duodecim genera typorum Ebraicorum: habeo & Graecos & Latinos ferè totidem. Curo fieri & alia: sed caetera re∣jicio in id tempus, quo me sistere Gratiosissimae meae Dominae possim. Res meas jam omnes deposui in navem, quae cras, bono cum Deo, solvet, nauta & ego secuturi ad diem-Martis proximum, ita enim Nauta promittit. Rediit Heinsius junior à REGINA. Cl. Salmasius incertum an hâc aestate abeat. Reginam incipere convalescere, scripsit Cl. Vossius, expectabatur idem hac aestate redux, sed morbo REGINAE praepeditus non veniet. Interim  Vossii de Scientiis Opus apud Blauium prodire potest. Amicus &—Civis meus Georgius Gentzius ex Oriente tandem redux multa affert spolia, & evasit Doctissimus. Abscondit se & sua, ait{que} sibi velle & suis Musis patriae praedia repetere—plus requiei verae, quàm ex ullo splendore officii, & plus reditus, quàm ex luculenta p—Blondellus huc vocatus in locum Vossii nondum venit, proximè tamen expectatur. Schurman & ipsa dicitur â Regi∣nâ vocata, renuere tamen. Multae fuere in Suecia turbae. Cartesii Sepulturam, quae cum non esset pro voluntate Reginae splendida, non secuta est.—quod alias cohonestatura fuerat praesens. Hâc aestate nondum Coronabitur Regi∣na. Meum desiderare adventum affert Jansonius Jansonii Bibliopolae nostri filius, ibi uti Reginae Typographus Regius. Opus tuum, Eminentissime Prae∣sul, quaeso & oro, dedices Reginae Nostrae & nihil timere habes ob eam dedica∣tionem; Non mirabuntur vestri Senatores, Eruditissimum Praesulem Eruditissi∣mae REGINAE & alteri Elizabethae Anglicae aut Angelicae dedicare opus sum∣mae eruditionis, qua illa delectetur, cum vestri Martis alumni sint.—& si Deus me salvum in Sueclam deduxerit, inde laetiora quae{que} expectando me, quod facis, amare perge. . Amstelodami 3/13 Maii, 1650. Communes nostros Amicos, Patrone Venerande, cum Te salutatum, ut so∣lent, venerint, Seldenum, Patr. Junium, Des Euwes, Leigh, studio∣rum meorum fautores, meo quaeso nomine & devotissimè salvere jube & ipse, ut valescas, cura diligenter. Mitto Serenissimae Reginae Effigiem.
LETTER CCLIII. A Letter from Dr. Langbaine, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. To the most Reverend, and his much honoured Lord and Patron, James Lord Arch-bishop of Armagh, at the Countess of Peterborough's House by Charing-Cross.My most honoured Lord; I Have at last return'd, what I intended to have brought to your Lordship, those two pieces of British Antiquities which your Lordship was pleased to impart to me, and whereof I have taken Copies, and may possibly here∣after give some better account than as yet I can; I mean, as to that of Vale Crucis. As for the other, unless the Characters can be more exactly taken from the Original, I give for desperate. What Character the ancient Bri∣tains used, whether that which the Saxons after, as your Lordship (if I re∣member well) is of Opinion, or the same with your ancient Irish (which I conceive to be not much different from the Saxon, and to which this Mo∣nument of , &c. both as to the form of some Letters, and the Ligatures of them, seem to come nearer than to the Saxon). I dare not take upon me to determine, but shall here subjoin what I met with in a very old Manuscript, sometimes St. Dunstan's; in which, besides Ars Euticis Gramma∣tici, de discernendis Conjugationibus in the beginning, and Ovid de Arte Amandi at the end, are contain'd several other Pieces, some in Saxon, some in Greek, but in Saxon Characters. Some in Latin—& inter alia, after this Rubrick. Nemnius. Nemninus istas reperit literas uituperante f. quodam. quidam scolastico saxonici generis quia brittones non haberent rudimentum. at ipse subito ex machinatione, mentis suae formavit eas ut vituperationem et hebitudi∣nem dejiceret. deiceret gentis suae: de figuris et de nominib; ductis. Follows an Alphabet, (as in the next Page, saving that I add (de proprio) the words, Nomen, Figura, Potestas.)
Nomen. alar. braut. curi. dexu. egui. fich. guidir. huil. iechuit. kam. louber. Figura. Potestas. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. Nomen. muin nihn. or. parth. quith. rat. sung. traus. uir. eil. ofr. Figura. Potestas. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. u. x. . Nomen. zeirc. aiun. estiaul egun. aur. emc. hinc. henc. elau. utl. orn. Figura. Potestas. z. ae. et. eu. au. el. hinc. ego. ecce. vult. ae. But the Characters are in the Manuscript much more elegant and neat than I could express. What I said of an Irish Saxon Character, I am bold to call it so, because I find it used in our old Irish Chronicle, and some other Latin pieces of good Note and Antiquity, writ, if not in Ireland, yet by an Irish hand: In which kind I have met with Chalcidius his Translation of Plato's Timaeus; and, I think, a Dialogue of his own about the State of the Soul after Death, both for the Matter and Stile somewhat remarkable, but imperfect. We have two Copies of the Acts of Sylvester in Manuscript Latin, in our Publick Li∣brary; one in a good old Book, which was sometime the Passional of the Monastery of Ramesey; in which those Acts are divided into two Books. The other Copy is one continued Story; the Book in which it is found, is of a good fair Hand, well bound, gilt Leaves, and has been perused by John Leland, whose notes occur sparsim in the Margin, besides his Tetrastich at the beginning of the Book, which containing the Lives of divers Saints, and in the first of St. Martin, by Sulpitius Severus, occasioned these Verses from him. Plutarchus vitas scripsit, vitas{que} Severus, Et pulchre officio functus uter{que} suo est. Quanto Plutarchus linguâ praestantior, alter Materia tanto clarior at{que} fide. Amongst other Lives, there is that of Sylvester, translated (as the Preface pretends) out of Eusebius; the words to that purpose are—Historiographus Noster Eusebius Caesariensis—Cum Historiam Ecclesia∣sticam scriberet pretermisit ea quae sunt in aliis opusculis vel quae se me∣minit retulisse. Nam viginti libros omnium penè provinciarum passiones Martyrum-continere fecit. Deinde secutus ab Apostolo Petro omnium Apo∣stolorum nomina & gesta conscripsit, & earum urbium quae auctoritatem pon∣tificatus per Apostolicas sedes tenere noscuntur; urbes Roma, Antiochia, Jerosolyma, Ephesus, Alexandria: Harum igitur urbium Episcoporum om∣nium
preteritorum us{que} ad tempus suum Graeco Sermone conscripsit. Ex quorum numero Unius. unus Episcoporum Urbis Romae S. Sylvestri me de Graeco in Latino transferre praecepisti. The beginning in both Copies is the same, viz. Sylvester igitur urbis Romae Episcopus, cum esset infantulus. But in the process of the Story they some∣what differ, both one from the other, and from the printed Acts by Surius. In both I meet with the Story of the Bull, &c. If your Lordship think it worth the while, I shall willingly bestow some further pains in collating both these, and another Copy which (I think) I saw some Years since in Baliol-Colledg Library. If the Time and this Paper would admit, I should give you an account of my self and this place: But at present I must respit that trouble. I am, Your Lordship's in all observance, Gerard Langbaine. Q. Coll. June 21. 1650. LETTER CCXLIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Godfrey Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at the Countess of Peterborough's at Lovewick in Northamptonshire. Most Reverend; I Have here made bold to send you my Sufferings on the back-side of the Prayer; and I desire that your return to London may be hastned, if it may stand with your own conveniency; for if you had not been so wholly taken up with Printing and Preaching, truly, my Lord, I would have been bold to have taken your advice in some Points of Learning. And now you are in the Country, I suppose you are at best leasure, but you want your Library; yet I doubt not the good Lady with whom you are (God reward and bless her for being such a Nursing-Mother) hath many good English Books; and I suppose, amongst others, you may find Bishop An∣drews's Sermons; I pray peruse that Sermon at Easter, upon this Text, If any one will be contentious, we have no such custom; and then let me know whether any Man did ever speak more for Traditions, than he doth there for Customs, both which words are the same in effect. Then how many things there are in the old Law, whereof we have no Scripture but only Traditi∣on. Then, I pray, let me have your Opinion of Torniellus, I have read him over; though I have forgotten much, yet I remember he shows some defects. And, I pray, let me know when the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel were divided, upon the death of Solomon, whether the Power of the High Priest were acknowledged in both Kingdoms alike, until Israel fell to Idolatry. I will trouble your Grace no further at this time; if you please to re∣turn any answer, I pray let it be left at the House where you were, and once within a fortnight my Servant shall call there. So desiring that we
may remember each other in our Prayers, I commit you to God's pro∣tection, and rest, Your most humble Servant, Godfrey Goodman. Chelsy, July 8. 1650. LETTER CCLV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Jos. Hall Bishop of Norwich, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. ACcepi à te pridem, Honorandissime Praesul, munus egregium, teque uno dignum, Annales Sacros Veteris Testamenti accuratissimè digestos. Non enim mihi traditum est volumen, quàm oculi mei in tam gratum, diu{que} expetitum opus irruerint illico, ne{que} se exinde avelli patiuntur. Obstupui sanè indefessos Labores, industriam incredibilem, reconditissimae eruditionis monumenta, quae se istic passim vel supino lectori ultrò objiciunt; Praecipuè vero subit animum mirari faelicitatem otii tui, quò inter tam con∣tinuam concionum doctissimarum seriem studiis hisce paulò asperioribus, & abstrusissimarum quarumcun{que} (utpote ex imae antiquitatis caligine eruta∣rum) historiarum indagini vacare potueris: Hoc fieri non potuisset ilicet sine numine mirum in modum & tibi propitio, & Ecclesiae; in cujus unius gratiam haec tibi singularia & artium & linguarum charismata tam ubertim collata fuisse, facilè persentisces. Perge porro, Decus praesulum, ita & nos beare, & adornare tibi coronam gloriae sempiternae: & faxis mirentur posteri tale lumen tam infaelici seculo indultum. Expectare nos jubes Chro∣nologicum opus toti Christiano orbi exoptatissimum, sed & Annales, insuper alios: Quid non à tanto authore speremus Deus modo protrahat tibi dies, ut aevi maturus hinc tandem demigres, sero{que} in coelum redeas. Misit mihi Librum nuper à se editum Christophorus Elderfeldius noster, non, uti fatetur, injussu tuo; sanè doctum, ae probè elaboratum, & nisi in deplora∣tum incidissimus aevum, non inutilem: Quantum debeo & Authori & Pa∣trono Habeat suas à me uter{que} gratias. Ego quod superest Paternitatae vestrae Reverendissimae preces meas animitus voveo quin & meipsum. Jos. Norvicens. E. tuguriolo nostro Highamensi. In festo Sancti Jacobi, Anno MDCL.
LETTER CCLVI. A Letter from Dr. Meric Casaubon, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Lincolns-Inn. May it please your Grace; I Was with Mr. Selden, after I had been with your Grace; whom upon some intimation of my present Condition and Necessities, I found so no∣ble, as that he did not only presently furnish me with a very considerable Sum, but was so free and forward in his Expressions, as that I could not find in my heart to tell him much (somewhat I did) of my purpose of selling, lest it might sound as a further pressing upon him, of whom I had already received so much. Neither indeed will I now sell so much as I intended; for I did not think (besides what I have in the Country) to keep any at all that would yield any Mony. Now I shall, and among them, those Manuscripts I spoke of to your Grace, and Jerom's Epistles particularly; the rather, be∣cause I make use of it in my de Cultu Dei, (the first part whereof your Grace hath seen) which I think will shortly be printed. As for my Father's Papers, I do seriously desire to dispose of them some way, if I can, to my best advantage, but with a respect to their preservation and safety. Which I think would be, if some Library, either here, or beyond the Seas, had them. I pray, good my Lord, help me in it if you can: and when you have an opportunity, conser with Mr. Selden about it. I will shortly (within these few weeks, God willing) send a Note to your Grace of what I have that is considerable, and will part with. Not but that I had much rather keep them, had I any hopes at all, ever to be accommodated with Books, and Leasure to fit them for publick use my self. But that I have no hopes of; and certainly so disposed of as I would have them in my life time, they will be safer than in my keeping, in that condition I am. It would be a great ease to my mind, to see that well done, for I have always reckoned of them as of my Life; and if any mischance should come to them whilst they are in my keeping, (and indeed they have been in danger more than once, since this my tumbling condition) I should never have any comfort of my Life. I have sent your Grace the Jerome, that you may see it; and if you desire to keep it by you, I shall humbly crave a Note of it under your Grace's hand. So I humbly take my leave, Your Grace's in all humble Duty, Mer. Casaubon. Lond. Oct. 21. 1650.
LETTER CCLVII. A Letter from Dr. Isaac Vossius, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Illustrissimo & Reverendissimo viro Ja. Usserio Armachano, S. P. SI non plane ignores eruditionem et magnitudiem CHRISTINAE, dubitare non possis, vir Reverendissime, opus tuum Chronologicum longe ei fuisse gratissimum. Bidui tantum effluxit spatium quod id ad manus ejus pervenerit, plurimum vero praeteriit temporis, ut existimo, ex quo nul∣lum ei tam carum contigit munus. Placuit ei supramodum, cum ipsius ope∣ris ordo & oeconomia, tum etiam illud quod res Aegyptiacas & Asiaticas à nemine hactenus in unum redactas, diligenter adeò & copiose tradideris. Vidit & ex parte jam pervolvit alia nonnulla scripta quae jam olim in lucem protrusisti; vel ex iis solis ingenium & doctrinam tuam satis perspicere po∣tuisset, etiamsi nemo alius nominis tui praedicator accessisset: nunc vero cum & literis et munere tuum erga se animum fueris testatus, mirum quoque in modum auctus est ejus erga te affectus & benevolentia. Voluit itaque ut tibi suo nomine gratias agerem quam maximas, hortarerque praeterea hoc te argumentum persequi & ad nostra usque tempora, si otium & occasio per∣mitteret, perducere. Sed tamen cum norit esse hoc opus maximi & temporis & laboris, non minus forsan gratum feceris, si ea antiquorum scripta, quae ad illustrationem historiae Ecclesiasticae pertinent, & qualia te multa habere intellexît Serenissima Regina prius in lucem emiseris. Legit illa non sine max∣ima voluptate Acta illa de Polycarpo quae Ignatianis tuis adfixisti: Nunc vero quod alia ejus generis plura à te exspectet, facit Bibliotheca tua recepta, quam flammis esse absumtam constans jam olim ad nos detulerat rumor. Multum itaque & tibi & literis gratulatur, quod tam insignis thesaurus salvus ad te sit reversus, postulatque, ut si quae in ea rarioris generis scripta exstent, id efficias, perire posthac ne possint; id quod nonerit metuendum, si ea publici feceris juris. Jussit me praeterea petere à te Catalogum meliorum codicum manu exaratorum, qui in tua adservantur Bibliotheca, praesertim si Graeci sint aut Latini: quem ego perlibenter te missurum esse existimo. Gratissimum quoque erit Serenissimae Reginae si una transmiseris indicem manuscriptorum qui in Cotoniana & Regia exstant Bibliothecis. Diu est quod de Seldeno & Patricio Junio nulli omnino huc perlati sunt nuntii: Eorum virorum studi▪ ex animo favet Regina. In Patricium vero si quid Reginae nostrae esset juris, non tamdiu textus ille Bibliorum Graecus in tenebris delitesceret. Sed non cuique contingit doctis parere dominis. Peto autem ut si fieri possit quam∣primum transmittas indices eos quos te postulari. Amabit te Regina plurimum ubi cognoverit te non minus promtum esse in praestandis quam offerendis officiis. De me vero ita habeas velim ita me erga te ani∣matum, uti debet esse is, quem tu tot tantisque obstrinxeris beneficiis. Vale vir Reverendissime et salve à tuo toto & ex animo, v. Oct. MDCL. Holmiae. Isaaco Vossio. Gratias tibi ago maximas pro libro mihi misso; sequenti hebdomade ube∣riores
tibi referam, simulque transmittam nonnulla quae Ignatium nostrum ad∣tinent, de quibus judicium tuum scire aveo. Serenissima Regina valde capitur operibus veterum Platonicorum, Procli, Olympiodori, Hermiae, &c. Vellem scire quaenam ejus generis scripta in Anglia reperiantur, Valde enim talium lectione adficitur Domina mea. Ite∣rum vale. LETTER CCLVIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, at Lincolns-Inn. May it please your Lordship; BY Mr: Hartlib's Letter of Novemb. 21. I understand, that he had recei∣ved the Copy of my Treatise against Capellus; which by the opportu∣nity of a Friend I had sent him for your Lordship; and that you had been pleased to take the pains, to send him an Extract of that part of my Letter which concerned him; for which I heartily thank your Grace. By his last Letter before, he sent me a Note from you, whereby you desired me to consult the Original of Georgius Syncellus his Chronicle, for to know whether to Simon the Son of Onias, nine Years are given, or nineteen. I have done so, and to my great wonderment find, neither the one nor the other, but twenty Years assigned to that High Priest; the Author's own words being such as follow. . And pre∣sently after he speaks thus of his Successor, . Decimiquarti & 15 Pontificis nulla sit in Syncello mentio, quanquam nulla in manuscripto appareat lacuna, ita ut iste defectus videatur profectus ab ipso autore, qui ibi sic meminit: . sicuti de Simonis decessore ita scribit: . I have in∣deed not seen the original Manuscript; but I dare assure your Lordship, that the Copy out of which I have transcribed these Parcels, is as authentical as it self; as having been transcribed by Peter Goartus, a Dominican Friar, fa∣mously known by his Edition of Codinus Curopalata, and his most learned Notes upon him. This Man, at the request of some eminent Persons there, (wearied with the endless delays of Altinus, and despairing of ever getting this Copy for the Press, but upon such terms as they liked not of) hath with his own hands transcribed the whole Work of Syncellus and Theophanes, and added thereunto, interpretationem latinam per columnas, cum annotationi∣bus fusissimis ac pereruditis in omnes locos difficiliores. And he assureth me upon his Honour, that as all along he hath had a singular care not to com∣mit any the least Error in transcribing, so in the passage in question he hath used an extraordinary attention, because of several remarkable defects in it. For besides the omission of the two High Priests, and the giving of Jesus filius Sirach for a High Priest, (who never was so, as is well enough known) there is a Fault in the Anni Mundi of the said Jesus Sirach, where 5408 are
given in lieu of 5402: For to 5382, the Year of the World wherein Simon begun his Priesthood, being added, the 20 Years that Simon served his place, it cometh to 5402, and not to 5408. How these Faults may have been occasioned, and how in probability they are to be corrected, Goartus sheweth at large in his Annotations: of which part of them, and of any other, as of any thing in the Text of Syncellus and Theophanes, he is very willing to let your Grace have a Copy if you shall desire it; he being indeed one of the most kind affable and serviceable Men that ever I have had to do withal in that kind. So as it is a thousand pities that here is not a Copy of your Annales, for to bestow it upon him: of which I judg him so worthy, that rather than he should go without it, I would bestow mine own Copy upon him, if I had it still. But a few days be∣fore I went to Goartus about your Commission (that being the first time that ever I saw him) Friar Cressy got that from me; who having seen it with me, and borrowed it of me, was so exceedingly in love with it, as I could not be quiet till I bestowed it upon him. I have sent your Syriack Treatise of Ephrem, as likewise your Kimchii Radices Hebraicae; of which Book, although I have as much use as ever, and shall have as long as God giveth me life and opportunity in my Studies (in which the illustrating the Hebrew Text holdeth the chief place with me) yet I thought it unreasonable to detain it any longer from you, having had it so many Years already. That breach in Popery about Grace, groweth wider and wider every day; and whereas hitherto Jansenism hath contained it self within France (where most part of the Prelats and Sorbonists are addicted to it) and the Low-Countries; now it hath found entrance into Spain, and among the very Jesuits, those eager opposers of it; one of whom having written a Book in defence of it, the University of Salamanca gave their approbation to it, af∣ter the amplest and most solemn manner; and at the same time caused pub∣lickly to be burnt a Treatise written by the Jesuits, against a little Jansenical Book, published here at Paris, with the Title of Catechisme de la Grace: And having sent the Jesuit to Rome, with their Letters to the Pope, in recom∣mendation of his Person and his Book, he hath there very boldly asserted his Writing before the Pope and the Cardinals; and in the manner, as they (although hitherto professed and bitter Enemies of that Doctrine) could find no Exceptions against him. Which hath made those of his Order such bitter Enemies to him, as they have secretly made him away; out of which Fact great Troubles are like to follow: for the Pope and the King of Spain both, upon complaint made to them, have injoined the Jesuits to produce that Colleague of theirs, alive or dead, upon pain of their highest Displea∣sure: Which News having been first told me by others, was confirmed to me by Mr. Cressey for a certain Truth. Thus humbly taking leave of your Grace, and praying God to add many and happy Years to your Life, in the preser∣vation whereof the Church of God hath so great an interest, I rest, Your Grace's most humble and most affectionate Servant, Arnold Boate. Paris, Nov. 17. 1650. stilo novo.
LETTER CCLIX. A Letter from the Learned Ludovicus Capellus, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. MIraberis fortè, nec sine causâ, Virlonge clarissime, me primo quasi impetu publico Scripto dignitatem tuam compellare, nulla prius ad te data pri∣vatâ Epistolâ. Id sane longè praeoptassem, ac pridem certe in votis habui ali∣quod literarum cum dignitate tua commercium habere; quod multa audiveram de singulari tuâ humanitate cum summâ doctrinâ & eruditione conjunctâ; quod{que} ab amicis per Epistolas cognoveram & Arcanum meum punctationis, & si forte etiam Spicilegium meum non esse tibi ignota aut improbata, unde mihi nascebatur desiderium resciscendi à te quid de hisce Lucubrationibus meis sen∣tires, sed inhibuit me hactenùs tum subrusticus quidam mihi à naturâ insitus pudor, tum tui reverentia, ne importunis meis literis dignitatem tuam in∣terpellarem, te{que} a melioribus occupationibus avocarem, molestiamve tibi li∣terarum mearum lectione facesserem. Vicit tamen me adversus Bootium defen∣dendi necessitas quae quia urgebat, & eam amici flagitabant, spatium mihi non concessit te priùs per literas compellandi; quod pro tua humanitate mihi con∣donabis, è grato, uti spero, animo accipies hanc ad te mei adversus illum hominem justam defensionem, quâ & meam quam ille impetit, existimationem, & veritatem quam impugnat, adversus illius offutias tueor. Dabis hoc hominis illius importunitati & iniquitati, ac de me, uti confido, aliter, senties quam ille suis accusationibus conatus est Dignitati tuae persuadere. Hoc à candore & aequitate tua exspecto atque ut dignitatem tuam in longos annos Ecclesiae, suae bono servet incolumem, Deum ardentissimis Votis comprecor. Tui cum omni obsequio diligentissimus Cultor, Lud. Capellus. Salmurii, 28 Jan. 1651. LETTER CCLX. A Letter from the Learned Arnold Boate, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; I Have received your Letters of 14/4 January, and of 23 Jan. stilo vet. In the first whereof came inclosed, your Answer upon a Question concern∣ing the late King; and the second was accompanied with a Gift (for which I humbly thank your Grace) of a Copy of your Annales for me, and of Ga∣takerus de Stilo N. Testamenti. As for the other Copy of your Annales, that for Friar Goart; I delivered it him within two days after, and he expressed a great deal of sence of the savour which you have done him in it. He gave me also an Extract about the Priesthood of Simon Onia, and told me, that Syncellus with his Notes is begun now to be printed, and will be done by the
end of this year. He told me also of the Latin Translation of an Arabian Chronologer (who lived above 400 years ago, and hath writ the Chrono∣logy ab initio Mundi ad suam aetatem, with an extraordinary exactness of supputation) newly printed here; of which I intend, God willing, to send you a Copy, together with those Books formerly desired by you, at Ellis his next return thither, which he maketh me believe will be within these two or three weeks. The Disputes and Animosities between the Jansenists and the Molinists, do grow hotter and hotter every day; and lately some Irish-men here having been busy to get Subscriptions of their Country-men, in prejudice of Janseniana Dogmata; they have been sharply censured for it by a Decree of the Uni∣versity, a printed Copy whereof you will receive by Ellis. Capell hath written an Apologetical Epistle to you, in answer to mine Epistle against him, and somewhat about the same bulk; the which being not only fraught with most injurious Language against me, but taxing your Grace of rashness and injustice, for having condemned his Opinion upon my Relation: I have writ an additional Sheet to my former Treatise, in vindication of your Grace, and of my self; the writing and printing there∣of having been dispatched in the space of three days, ne impune velitaret ca∣ninum illud scriptum: I am now going to write, Justum volumen, sub titulo Vindiciarum sacri Textus Hebraici, contra Morinum & Capellum junctim, in quo scripto omnes Criticae Errores, ut & scriptorum Morini, ad vivum persequar. For these here, who vaunted of their intention of writing against Capel, have all given over; and Buxtorf too will make no full answer to his Critica; as you may see by the following Extract of his Letter to me, dated 3 Januarii. Vindiciae meae directe opponentur ejus Defensioni, sed methodicae erunt & planae, atque in capita distinctae. Sub finem specimina aliquot ex critica exerpam, & ostendam quam necessaria, quam utilis, quam solida ista sit crisis, & quam faeliciter cedat. Nolo enim totam ejus criticam examinare & refutare: neque è republica id esset, quia in immensam molem liber ex∣cresceret. I have printed just as many Copies of the said Sheet, as of the Epistola it self, for to send an equal number of it, as of the Epistle, to all the Places where I have sent the other; so as a great many of them shall go into Eng∣land by Ellis. In the mean while, that you may not stay too long for it, I send you a Copy of it here inclosed, and shall be very glad to have your Grace's Judgment about it. Thus with my humble respects, I rest, Your Grace's most humble Servant, Arnold Boate. Paris 15/25 March, 1651. Extract out of Goart's Syncellus. . Syncellus his Copy, as appeareth by this Extract, is defective, (quanquam nulla in mem∣branis lacuna apparet) clrca annos Simonis, non exprimendo annos ipsius proprios, uti in aliis Summis Pontificibus facere solet, sed tantum annos Mundi; è quibus tamen clarum est, non annos novem cum Scaligero, sed annos novendecim Simoni isti à Syn∣cello tributos.
LETTER CCLXI. A Letter from Mr. Robert Vaughan, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverend Father, &c. IN performance of your Request, and my Promise, I have at last sent you the Annales of Wales, as out of the ancient Copy which you saw with me; I did faithfully translate them into the English Tongue, as near as I could, word by word; wherein (knowing my weakness) I laboured not so much to render a sweet harmony of Speech, as the plain and simple Phrase of that Age wherein it was written; which I thought would best please you, tho happily with others it will not so well relish; be pleased to receive it as a Token from him that honours your Worth: as you read it, I pray you correct it, for I know it hath need. There was a Leaf wanting in my Book, which defect (viz. from An. 900, to An. 950.) and some Passages besides, I was fain to make up out of other ancient Copies; whereof though we have many in Wales, yet but few that agree verbatim one with another. And I believe some Mistakings will be found in the Times of some Transactions in this Book, if they be narrowly examined, as in the very Frontispiece of this Author we find, in most Copies, that Cadwalader went to Rome An. 680, or the Year after, as it is in my Copy. Nevertheless it is confessed and gran∣ted by all of them, that the great Mortality hapned in that Year that he went to Rome; but I find no mention of any extraordinary mortality of Peo∣ple that happened about Anno 680, and therefore I think it is not very likely that Cadwalader's going to Rome was deferred to that Year. More∣ver, venerable Bede, and other ancient Writers, do affirm, that the great Mortality fell Anno 664, about the 22d Year of King Oswis Reign over Northumberland, in whose Time Cadwalader lived and reigned; as is manifest in the Tract which is added to some Copies of Nennius (if I may give cre∣dit to that corrupt Copy of it which I have) in the words following: Os∣guid filius Edelfrid regnavit 28. An. & sex mensibus, dum ipse regnabat, venit mortalitas hominum, Catqualater regnante apud Brittones post patrem suum, & in ea periit. This Evidence doth perswade with me, that Cadwalader went to Rome far before Anno 680. But if in ea periit be meant of Cadwalader, for King Oswi ruled five or six Years after, unless we grant that the Plague endured twelve Years, as our Welch Historians do aver, it maketh such a breach in the History, that I (for my own part) know not how to repair it: for if it be true that Cadwalader died of that Plague, then went he not to Rome; and to deny his going to Rome, is no less than to deny the Autho∣rity of all our British and Welch Antiquities in general: Therefore I desire you will vouchsafe, not only to give me your sense of Cadwalader's going to Rome, and the Time, (whereby I may rest better satisfied then at present) but also the loan of your best Copy of Nennius, with that Tract before ci∣ted, which is added to some Copies thereof. And if I be not overtrouble∣some to your patience already, I have another Request unto you, which is, that you will select all the Notes and Histories you have, that treat of the Affairs of Wales, and Princes thereof; and that you will candidly impart them unto me by degrees; as I shall have done with one piece, so be pleased to lend another, and you may command any thing that I have, or can come by; for it is not Labour, Pains, or expence of Mony (to my power) shall
retard me in your Service. My Love and Zeal to my poor Country, and desire to know the truth and certainty of things past, moves me sometimes to a passion, when I call to mind the idle and slothful Life of my Country∣men, who in the revolution of 1000 Years almost, afford but only Caradoc Llancarvan, and the continuance thereof, to register any thing to the pur∣pose of the Acts of the Princes of Wales, that I could come by, or hear of, (some few piecemeals excepted). Dr. Powel in his Latin History of the Princes of Wales, citeth Tho. Maclorius, de Regibus Gwynethiae; but I could not hitherto meet with that Book, and I am perswaded he lived not much before Henry the 6th's Time, peradventure you have seen it: and I do not remember that he citeth any other Author of our Country-men; it may be there are some extant yet, though I had not the felicity hitherto to see them. I hope, by your good means hereafter, I shall attain to some hidden know∣ledg of Antiquity: but I am too tedious, pardon me I pray you. Reve∣rend Father, think of my Request, and put me not off with Excuses any longer, and my Prayer shall be for your Health, Peace, and Prosperity in this World, and everlasting Felicity in the World to come. Your Friend and Servant, Robert Vaughan. Henewrt near Dolgelly, in the County of Merionith, April 14. 1651. LETTER CCLXII. A Letter from the Learned Ludovicus Capellus, to the most Reve∣rend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. SCripfi, Vir Reverendissime, ad Amplissimam tuam Dignitatem, ante men∣ses quinque, at{que} unà misi Epistolam meam adversus Bootium Apologeti∣cam, quam Nomini tuo Clarissimo inscripseram, sperans aliquod ab Ampli∣tudine tua ad me responsum, quo significares quid de lite hac tota sentires. Nihil dum tamen quidquam à te accepi. Ac quia Amicus cui negotium li∣teras ad te meas mittendi commiseram paulo post ad plures obiit, scire non possum an literae meae tibi redditae sint, aut verò an ad eas responderis necne, ita ut fato aliquo vel tuae, vel meae perierint. Itaque dabis, quaeso, veniam si hac iterata compellatione mea gravis & molestus tibi sum; expetendo à te tuam de controversia illa, de qua tota Critica sententiam. Quae etsi fortè (quod certè nolim) adversa mihi sit, gratum tamen erit (si scriptum non est) dissensus tui rationes audire, utsi erro in viam à te admonitus redeam, quod erit mihi longè acceptissimum. Hac spe subnixus, & humanitate tua fretus, pluribus non ero tibi molestus, sed omnia tibi fausta, pristinam{que} Dig∣nitatem, & annos Nestorees à Deo O. M. opto & voveo. Amplitudini tuae omni officiorum genere devinctissimus, Lud. Cappellus. Salmurii & Idus Sextileis. A. D. MDCLI.
LETTER CCLXIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Franciscus Junius. Viro Cl. Francisco Junio, Francisci Filio, Jacobus Armachanus Salutem. A Bonaventurâ Vulcanio editi habentur viri cujusdam docti Anonymi commentarioli duo, in literas Gothicas ex vetustissimo quodam codice argenteo, (ut eum vocat) sumptas, unus; in Alphabetum Gothicum, (quod tamen Gothicum omnino non est) & notas Lombardicas, in alio quodam vetustissimo codice repertas, alter. Argenteus ille codex membranaceus, qui quatuor Evangelia aureis & argenteis literis Gothicè descripta continebat, ad Werdeni sive Werdinensis Monasterii Bibliothecam pertinuit, in regione Bergensi quatuor fere à Coloniâ Germanicis miliaribus distantis. Inde ex vio Matthaei, & io Marci capitulo ab Arnoldo Mercatore nonnulla descripta, Inscriptionum suarum Corpori (pag. 147 & 158.) inseruit Gruterus. Indi∣demque Orationem Dominicam cum aliis quibusdam particulis, ab Antonio Morillono transcriptam, in Gotodonica sua Joh. Goropius Becanus (Ori∣ginum Antuerpian. lib. 7. pag. 739, 740, & 750) retulit: quorum cum iis, quae à Vulcanio sunt edita, collatione factâ, oborta mihi aliquando est suspi∣cio, non alium eruditi illius in literas Gothicas commentarioli authorem fuisse, quàm Antonium ipsum Morillonum, qui Antonio Perrenoto Cardinali Granvellano à Bibliothecâ fuit & Latinis Epistolis. Neque vero ad alium quam ad Cardinalem illum ea verba spectasse sum opinatus, quae in secundi commentarioli principio leguntur: Quamadmodum Dominatio vestra movet, ita est. Omnino enim praesens opusculum interpres est alterius operis, nempe Vo∣cabularii, &c. Quanquam authorem simul cum Domino suo plurimum à vero hic aberravisse, nullum sit dubium: quum codicem illum à Notarum sive Romanae Scripturae compendiorum collectaneis, quae Tironis ac Senecae no∣minibus insignita Gruterus postea in lucem edidit, nihil differre deprehende∣rimus. Ut frustra author hic sibi persuaserit, ad aliud aliquod opus referenda ista fuisse; Cujus usus fuerit, aulicus legatus, qui Gothi erant, docere Lombar∣dicè, ut intra Italiam cum Principibus Italicis possent perorare. Codicem alium Gothicum aureis argenteisque characteribus, papyro exa∣ratum, & non Evangelia tantum sed universum etiam Novum Testamentum, complectentem, in Bibliothecâ Hermanni Comitis Nervenarii extitisse, Phi∣lippus Marnixius Dominus Sanct-Aldeguntius (apud Sibrandum Lubberti de Princip. Christianorum dogmatum, lib. 3. cap. 7.) confirmat. In quo Ora∣tionis Dominicae idem quod in libro Werdinensi habebatur initium; Atta unsur thu in himina de. Cujusmodi Novum Testamentum ad suas etiam ma∣nus pervenisse Matulius Metellus Sequanus (apud Suffridum Petrum, Prae∣fat. in Scriptor. Frisiae Decad.) est testatus. Ubi & illud notandum, Ora∣tionem Dominicam Gothicam doxologiâ illa concludi, quae in vetere Lati∣nâ Bibliorum editione desideratur: Ut ex Graeco fonte Gothicam istam No∣vi Testamenti versionem derivatam esse appareat, & ex ipsius Wulfilae primae∣vâ traductione descriptam. Hunc enim primum literas apud Gothos invenis∣se, & scripturas Sacras in eorum linguam convertisse, Socrates, Sozomenus, Isidorus Hispalensis (in Gothorum Chronico) & Martyrii Nicaetae Scriptor (apud Simeonem Metaphrastem die 15o Septembris) vos docent, quorum
possumus (cum Sixto Senense libro ivo Bibliothecae Sanctae) ex Graeco tran∣slationem illam fuisse factam, expresse indicare. Quo referendus est & ille Walafridi Strabilocus, de rebus Ecclesiasticis, cap. 7. Et, ut Historiae testantur, postmodum studiosi illius [Gothorum] gen∣tis divinos libros in suae locutionis proprietatem transtulerunt: quorum adhuc monumenta apud nonnullus habentur. Et sidelium fratrum relatione didicimus, apud quasdam Scytharum gentes, maximè Tomitanos, eadem locutione divina hactenus celebrari officia. Et quod à Josepho Scaligero est additum (Canon Isagog. libro 3. pag. 138.) Gothos etiamnum in iisdem regionibus degere sub Praecopensi Tartarorum dynastiâ, & utrumque Testamentum, iisdem lite∣ris, quas excogitavit Wulfila, conscriptum, & eadem linguâ, quâ tempore Ovidii utebantur interpretatum legere. Quae eò à me adducta sunt omnia, ut quâ ratione Gothicam ex Graeca scriptionem Wulfilas efformaverit, iu priore illo Commentariolo declarari subindicarem. De quo integrum tamen tibi judicium relinquo. VALE. Jacobus Armachanus. Londini v. Nonas Julias, Anno Aerae Christianae MDCLI. LETTER CCLXIV. A Letter from Arnold Boate, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; ON Saturday last there went away from hence, for Galais and London, the Lady Bannatire, in whose House I live here; by whom I sent you a Pugio Fidei, and a Chronicon Orientale (the first whereof costeth ten Franks, and the other six); as likewise an Extract of the Obelisci and Asterisci Membranarum Sardoianarum; the which being a Work of much more Time and Pains, than I was able in my present condition to bestow upon it; I was fain to hire Mr. Coque, your Professor of the Greek Tongue, for to do it; who would have done it for five Franks (and not under) If I would have been content with the bare transcription of the Obelisks and Asterisks out of the Membranes. But to compare them all along with the Roman Edition, and out of the same to add every where the Chapters and the Verses, quorum nec vola nec vestigium in Membranis exstat (ubi omnia uno teno∣re scripta extant, nullo ne inter voces quidem spatio aut discrimine relicto, quod immensum auget transcribendi molestiam); and without the marking whereof, I could not see how the Transcript would have been of any use to Mr. Ju∣nius; that he would not do for a penny less than twenty Franks, protesting, when he had done, that if it were to do again, he would not do it for dou∣ble the Monies, as having been a whole sevennight busied with it, and found it incomparably more toilsome than he had imagined it. And although he be a very able Grecian, and wonderful diligent and faithful in what-ever he undertakes, yet I would not rely solely upon him, but compared every Obe∣lisk and Asterisk of his transcription, (in which he hath made use of notae Paratheseon for the Obelisks, and of Sublineation in lieu of Asterisks) with the Membranae, for to be sure that all was right, and that he had no where exchanged one for the other. And I can give your Lordship an entire assu∣rance,
that his Transcript agreeth most exactly with the Original, not only in marking the Obel and Aster; but in every word and syllable, ne vitiis quidem orthographicis, quae hic illic occurrunt, exceptis. The only Error committed by him, is, that he hath misplaced some Chapters of Deuter. the which nevertheless cannot be of any other prejudice to Mr. Young, than that of the transposing of a quaternio by a Bookbinder useth to be. He hath also in most places added, as I have desired him, quomodo Editio Romana se haberet quantum ad verba obelis & asteriscis conclusa, & utrum ea ibi adsint vel absint: About the verifying whereof, I have not taken the same pains, as about that of the main Matter; because that the Errors here, if any be, are not of any dangerous consequence, and may easily be mended by Mr. Junius himself; who, if he have not some skill in the Hebrew, will have much ado to com∣prehend the sense and the reason of some of the Asterisks, there being divers of them very perverse or frivolous. I had lately a Letter from Mr. Croy, dated 7. Idus Augusti, 1651. who writes to me, that being at a Synod at Mompelier, when he received the Co∣py of the Anticritica which I had sent him; and having made report to the Synod of the Contents of the same, Ea omnium animos ita perculerunt, ut si eam rem urgere voluissem, decreto publico Criticam illam damnaturi fuerint. He tells me further, to have also read afterwards, Ipsam Gapelli Criticam à capite ad Calcem; adding. Tecum jam sentio, vir nobilissime, & profiteor, Cri∣ticam illam non esse sacram appellandam, sed potius , profanam, & impiam. Interpretum Graecorum & Latinorum , halluci∣nationes, inscitiam, & errores nobis pro totidem variis lectionibus obtrudit. Puerilibus, levibus, ridiculis, & falsis scatet observationibus. Tot asserit esse varia Scripturae exemplaria, quot fuerunt illius Interpretes. Textus Sacri incorruptam veritatem, authentiam, atque autoritatem audaci conatu labefactat. Impurissimi atque impudentissimi Morini, aliorum{que} Sacrae Scripturae hostium, quos Roma peperit & alit, partes agit; & in Acade∣mia Salmuriensi Verbi Divini Minister, & Theologiae Professor (quod hactenus inauditum suit, nec unquam visum) monstra & prodigia adversus Dei Verbum, & contra firmissima verae Theologiae fundamenta, & piam Fidem, gignit at{que} educat. Multa jam annotavi, quae illius inscitiam, au∣daciam, fraudes, & errores demonstrent, & in oculis conspectu{que} omnium exponant, &c. Laetor & glorior, quod doctissimo & piissimo Praesuli Armachano nomen meum notum sit. Si ad eum scribas, ipsum quaeso meo nomine saluta, & certiorem fac, se in inferiori Occitania sui nominis admi∣ratorem, & laudum praeconem habere. Me beatum praedicari, si mihi cum illo literarum commercium esse posset. Hectenus Croiius. Habeo etiam lite∣ras à Voetio, in eandem plane sententiam de Capelli Critica scriptas. As for Buxtorf, he in his last Letter to me, dated the second of June, hath these words: Quum occasionem habebis, Reverendissimo D. Armachano mea studia, officia, obsequia, cum humili salute, deferes, & nuntiabis meo nomine; De ejus constantia in bonae causae semel suscepto patrocinio si du∣bitarem, flagitium summum in tanti viri judicium committerem. And there besides he maketh, in the same Letter, this following Propo∣sition. Quum Capellus Armachanum, quem indigne & procaciter excipit, judi∣cem tamen & arbitrum hujus causae constituat, quid si ille breviter, & pro tanti judicis gravitate & authoritate nervose, sub Epistola ad utrun{que} ve∣strum data suum, post auditam utram{que} partem, judicium, suam{que} senten∣tiam, ferat ac pronuntiet: cum uter{que} ad ejus tribunal provocaveritis nisi itineris & viarum longinquitas obstarent, ipsemet fortassis ad eum hoc no∣mine scriberem.
This Proposition is so fully agreeable to mine own Thoughts; and, if I be not much deceived, to Truth and Equity, as I do most humbly beseech your Lordship to accomplish it; which as you are able to do now to the full, after the perusal of all Capellus his own Writings, so methinks it may be done in few words; viz. first, to state the Question about Capellus his Inno∣vation, as it appeareth to you by the perusal of his Works; and then to give your own Judgment on the same. Subject, with a brief touch of the principal Arguments which move you, either to concur with, or dissent from him or me in any of the most material Particulars. I am told, by them that had it from your Grace's own Mouth, that Capel, for fear of some such thing, and for to pre∣vent it, hath written fawning Letters to your Grace. But that, I am confi∣dent, will not hinder you from appearing freely and fully in a Cause, where∣in God's Truth and Sacred Word is so deeply concerned; and as I have great cause to think, that a full and free declaring of your mind, will be a condemning of Capellus in all the main Points in controversy between me and him; so if it be otherwise, and that in any of them you find him in the right, and me in the wrong Either in questione facti, aut juris., I seek no favour, but an absolute impartia∣lity. And as I dare prescribe your Grace nothing concerning the form of your delivering of your self, so I hope that you will approve of that poin∣ted at by Buxtorfius, of setting down your Mind in the form of an Epistle, to be writ, iisdem verbis, unto Capellus, and unto me, mutatis tantum mutandis. But however, and whether you be resolved to fulfil this Request of Buxtorf, and of mine; or whether that you have no mind to meddle in it, (the which nevertheless is no way credible to me) I do pray your Grace most earnestly, to let me hear from you about it at your first commodity: And if it were not too troublesome to you, I should be glad at the same time to hear, in a few words, your Opinion about the Septimanae Danielis, and where you fix the beginning of them; as likewise your judgment upon Marshami Diatriba, and his great Innovation touching that weighty Subject; and what distance of time you find, upon your most exact enquiries, à primo anno Cyri ad tem∣pus Nativitatis Christi; & quantum ex illo tempore sibi vindicet duratio monar∣chiae Persicae. I humbly thank your Grace for the offer of Mr. Eyre his Notes on the Psalms; but if he be so wholly of Capellus his Mind in the Controversy I have with him, as his Epistles to Capellus do seem to speak him, I would not at all be beholden to him for any of his Labours. If it be known to your Grace, whether Dean Bernard be alive yet, and where he is, and how he doth, you will oblige me greatly to impart the same unto me. Thus with my humblest and most affectionate Respects to your Grace, I rest, Your Grace's most obedient Servant, A. Boate. Paris, Sept. 6. 1651.
LETTER CCLXV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Henry King Bishop of Chichester, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend Father; THough of late I wanted direction to find your Grace's Aboad (not being at Rigate this last Summer) my devotion of Service which needs no guide but your own transcendent Worth, most habitually falls towards you wheresoever you are. As a testimony of this Service, I did in August last, present by one, who undertook the delivery at Harrow-Hill, a small Book (and least that should fail, my Brother sent another by your Chaplain:) which may render your Grace some account of my Exercise & Employment in this retirement. The truth is, one Sunday at Church, hearing a Psalm sung, whose wretched expression quite marred the Pen-man's Matter, & my Devotion, I did at my return that Evening, try, whether from the Version of our Bi∣ble I could not easily, and with plainness, suiting the lowest Understand∣ings, deliver it from that garb, which indeed made it ridiculous. From one to another I passed on until the whole Book was ran through. Which done, I could not resist the advice & importunity of better Judgments than mine own to put it to the Press. I was (I confess) discouraged, knowing that Mr. George Sandys: and lately one of our praetended Reformers, had failed in Two different Extreams: The First too elegant for the vulgar use, changing both the Meter and Tunes wherewith they had been long ac∣quainted: The Other as flat and poor, as lamely worded, and unhandsomly rhimed as the Old; which with much confidence he undertook to amend. My Lord, I now come forth an Adventurer in a Middle-way, whose aim was without affectation of Words, to leave them not disfigured in the Sense. That this was needful, your Grace well knowes; but whether my self fit for the attempt, my modesty suspects. Thus whilst your Grace, and other Champions of the Church (the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel) engage against the Publick Adversaries of Truth, I come behind with the Carriages, and humbly in the Temples Porch fit the Songs of Sion to celebrate the Triumph of your Pens. Though it be too sad a Truth, Cythara nostra con∣versa in luctum, yet some of these Psalms may serve as Threnes and Dirges to lament the Present Miseries; whose Change, as I find not much Reason to hope, so I have more Religion than to despair. That God may long preserve your Grace amongst us, to see a revolution of better Times; or if not so, to comfort by your Presence many who languish under These, is the daily and most earnest prayer of, My Lord, Your Grace's most faithfully devoted Servant, Hen. Chichester. Langley-place, near Colbrook, Oct. 30. 1651.
LETTER CCLXVI. Admodum Reverendo & longè Clarissimo Viro D. Jacobo Usse∣rio Armachano in Hibernia Archiepiscopo. Londinum.Vir admodum Reverende & Clarissime. IMportunus fortè, si non etiam inverecundus, parumque pudens ac mode∣stus videbor tibi Responsi ad literas meas paulo frequentiores efflagitator. Sed dabis, spero, veniam huic meae sive sollicitudini, sive, si sic eam vocare li∣bet, importunitati, quae non aliunde est quàm ab honesto communicandi per literas, cum Dignitate tua Clarissima, de argumento quodam literario (quod semper inter bonos licuit) dequo tu sententiam ferre potes simul & pro tua singulari doctrina, & eximia eruditione, accuratissimam, & pro tua pietate & Christiana charitate, aequissimam. Visum est Bootio, Viro olim (quantum per ejus ad me literas, videbatur) mihi aequissimo, sed mox aver∣so sine ulla justa causa in me animo, pro suo genio & ingenio, & me imme∣rentem, & Criticam meam innoxiam, stylo invadere atroci & cruento, quasi sacra omnia ego irem funditus perditum, id{que} dicatâ Dignitati tuae publicâ Epi∣stolâ. Coegit me hac sua importunitate & inhumanitate, par pari referre, & calamum in eum, hortantibus Amicis, aculeatum stringere ad mei tum de∣fensionem, tum veritatis, quam in hoc argumente à me stare arbitror, pro∣pugnationem, cujus rei aequum existimavi te sacere judicem atque Arbitrum, dicatâ pariter tibi Epistolâ Apologeticâ. Eam ante menses octo curavi per Amicos ad te mitti, bisque ab eo tempore ad Reverentiam tuam dignissimam ea de re scripsi, atque ad meas hasce literas Responsum à Dignitate tua adhuc expecto, necdum habeo, incertus an fato & easu aliquo literae meae perierint, nec sint tibi redditae, aut tuae ad me in via pariter interciderint, an verò cer∣tum & decretum tibi sit omnino nihil respondere, quod postremum vix mihi possum persuadere de tanta tua erga omnes humanitate, & animi verè Chri∣stiani generositate. Itaque datâ & oblatâ mihi per Virum istum Juvenem Do∣ctissimum, qui ad vos commigrat, percommoda opportunitate, volui ite∣rum experiri quid tandem mihi vel sperandum & expectandum, vel etiam desperandum deinceps sit de Dignitatis tuae erga me vel favore & benevolen∣tia, vel rigore & severitate. Age ergo, Vir longè Clarissime, Noli quaeso, silentio tuo animum diutius tenere suspensum, sed quid de me & Critica mea sentias candidus imperti, vel, si illa displicet, ede; quicquid rescripse∣ris gratum erit, sed gratius multò si te non longè à sententia mea abire vide∣ro. Interim velim te de me sentire omnia aequa & justa, utpote qui Digni∣tati tuae omnia à Deo O. M. ex animo precor fausta & felicia. Dignitati tuae Clarissimae, in omnibus obsequentissimus, Lud. Capellus. Dabam Salmurii ipsis Nonis Novembribus, 1651.
LETTER CCLXVII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Ludovicus Capellus. Eruditissimo Viro. D. Ludovico Capello, Jacobus Usserius Armachanus S.Vir Clarissime; CUMtuam detextus Hebraici Veteris Testamenti variantibus Lectionibus ad me datam Epistolam cum alterâ D. Bootii ad me itidem scriptâ con∣ferrem; in ipso statim limine deprehendi, de eo quod inprimis constituendum inter vos fuerat, id est de cardine & statu principalis controversiae, immane inter vos esse dissidium. Affirmas tu, Apologet. epist. pag. 10. Necesse esse ut Bootius & ipsi similes vel renuncient effato suo, scilicet non licere nobis vel in minimo apiculo discedere ab hodierni codicis Hebraici lectione; vel dicant, Scribas omnes quorum operâ ho∣diernus codex ad nos pervenit, per plus quàm duo annorum millia, à reditu ex cap∣tivitate Babylonicâ (quum Edsras dicitur totum Vetus Testamentum ipse descrip∣sisse) ad hunc usque diem fuisse . At effatum illud Bootius ut suum & sui similium esse planè pernegat: & in hisce studiis exercitatissimi De Punctor. antiquit. part. 1. cap. 16. Buxtorfii de Hebraicis codicibus assertionem hanc, suis rationibus munitam, contrà opponit: Neque enim existimo tales esse, ut in nullo planè punctulo, apiculo, aut literulâ, à primis Mosis & Prophetarum autographis apographa unquam discesserint, aut nullum omnino vitium vel levissimum in eos irrepserit. Nam ne ipsi quidem Judaei hoc asserunt: qui & antiquitus jam exemplaria corrupta, sed ab Esrâ iterùm correcta & restituta fuisse; & posterioribus temporibus, cùm inter celebres Authores, tum inter Exemplaria varia, dissensiones & discrepantes quasdam lectiones notant. Tales sunt praeter Notas  Dissensiones de quarundam Vocum lectione inter Judaeos Orientales, & Occidentales, & inter Ben Ascher & Ben Naphtali. Sic memorant aliquando, nec dissimu∣lant, Varietates nonnullas ex libris quibusdam Manuscriptis celeberrimis & magnae authoritatis; ut, exempli gratiâ librorum Hierosolymitanorum, Ba∣bylonicorum, Hispaniensium, Exemplaris Hilleliani, Pentateuchi cujusdam Hierichuntini, Sinaitici, &c. Meminerunt etiam librorum correctorum, & per consequens tacitè etiam minùs correctorum. Redarguunt etiam saepè ex∣emplaria quaedam disertè erroris. Indèque paulo commotior hîc D. Bootius, ita de te conqueritur. Epist. §. 2. Quae est haec dictatoria potestas, imò quae inaudita tyrannis, praescribere nobis quid sentire debeamus ac necessitatem nobis imponere, ut eam tueamur sen∣tentiam quam pro absurdissimâ damnamus; & quae sententiae verè nostrae adeò non cohaeret, aut ex eâ sequitur, ut hâc positâ illam inevitabiliter con∣cidere necesse sit Quasi verò non liceat nobis rem istam, prout melius nobis videtur, concipere atque explicare; & inter duo extrema tum innumerae ac commentitiae Variarum Lectionum multitudinis, tum omnimodae illarum absentiae media (via in qua ut plurimum Veritas inveniri solet) incedere: & quasi nobis id necessariò faciendum esset, quod non nisi stulti facere solent, ut dum vitium aliquod devitant, in contrarium vitium currant. Quid hîc tu verò Ais te Apolog. p. 11, 12. Dictatorem non agere nec tyrannidem exer∣cere, nec illis quidquam praescribere; sed quid ex eorum sententia & positione atque effato sequatur ostendere: nullam vero Bootium invenisse viam qua se
explicet & extricet isto nexu quo eum & sui similes constrinxeras. Si nobis non licet vel in minimo apiculo ab hodierni codicis lectione deflectere; sequi hodiernum codicem ad minimum usque apiculum nobis repraesentare ipsissima Mosis & Prophetarum : hoc autem si verum est, sequi Scribas omnes inter describendum fuisse . Et hîc Bootio Rho∣dum esse asseris hic illi esse saltandum. Atqui ostendendum tibi priùs fuerat, hanc fuisse Bootii sententiam; non licere nobis vel in minimo apiculo ab hodierni Hebraici codicis lectione deflectere: à qua tam procul illum abfuisse videmus, ut Append. Epist. p. 104. duos casus ipse expresserit, in quibus nobis liceat à vulgata lectione recedere. I. Ubi discrepant inter se codices Hebraici; (non quidem quivis promiscuè, sed lectiores ac melioris notae:) tunc enim de variantibus lectionibus artificiosè dijudicandum esse, quaenam alteri praeferenda sit; eàmque eligendam, quae loco aptiùs quadret. II. Quando invictis argumentis probari potest; aliquod textui vitium subesse. Negat quidem ille, & jure negat, veteres Scripturae Translationes quas∣cumquae pro totidem Hebraicae veritatis exemplaribus esse habendas; ita ut ex iis Hebraici textus variationes non minùs certò colligi possint, quàm ex ipsis codicibus Hebraicis. Nam, ut rectissimè à te est observatum, Apolog. p. 101 Non omnis variatio Interpretis à textu originario nititur aut fundata est in diversitate codicum originariorum: multa potest esse ab Interpretis ipsius hallucinatione & deli∣beratò factâ mutatione, additione, & detractione. Ex incuria quoque &  Interpretis praeteriri non rarò in versione videmus, quod in eo quem transferen∣dum sibi proposuit codice legebatur, atque aliud etiam pro eo quod ibi habe∣batur in Translatione substitui. Quemadmodum (verbi gratia) ex II Mac∣cab. XIII. 15. tum in Francisci Junii versione, tum in doctissimi fratris tui Jacob. Cappel. ad ann. Mundi 3837. Historia, bis mille viri à Juda Maccabaeo intersecti feruntur: non quòd id ita in textu originario utervis invenerit, sed quòd frater Latinum hîc inter∣pretem simpliciter secutus fuerit; Interpres verò Graecum quem vertebat tex∣tum minùs diligenter attendens,  pro  perperam accepe∣rit. Cujusmodi , ob characterum aut sonorum in vocabulis prae∣cipuè Hebraicis similitudinem vel levem aliquam à minùs attento inspecto∣re conceptam literarum transpositionem, multo etiam faciliùs possunt obre∣pere. Et ut in multis hujus generis locis, Hebraicum quo Interpres usus est exemplar eandem quam ille reddidit lectionem exhibuerit: de eorum tamen plurimis nullo nobis constare potest modo, utrum ipsi Interpreti an codici quem prae manibus ille habuit Hebraico ista accepta referenda fuerit differen∣tia; praesertim si Interpres ille ex Judaizantium furit numero. Ex libris enim Talmudicis & Commentariis quae Medrashim vocant, mani∣festum est, Judaeis hanc esse consuetudinem, non ex negligentia aliqua, sed ex nimia potius diligentia, & certo consilio profectam; ut paronomasticis hujusmodi vocum immutationibus in sacrarum literarum explicatione saepiùs utantur: non quod in exemplari ullo ita scriptas voces illas deprehenderint, sed quod ad varios exponendae Scripturae modos amplificandos pertinere il∣lud existimaverint. Unde & tu, Critic. p. 178. quum Talmudici dicunt, Psalm. LXVIII. 14. non esse legendum (uti nos legimus)  sed , in Exod XXXII. 1. non  sed , in Isai. XXVI. 2. non  sed , & in Cantic. VII. 11. non  sed  esse legen∣dum; non id eos voluisse (cum Commentar. Masorethic. l. 1. c. 9. Buxtorfio patre, ) agnos∣cis, ut quod ipsi legendum dixerunt pro vera textus lectione esset recipien∣dum, sed ut acumen ingenii in his ostentarent, & haberentur pro iis qui Legem variis modis explicare possent. Neque tamen ex ullis omnino Interpretum locis variantes Hebraicorum codicum lectiones peti posse inficiatur Bootius, Epist. §. 14. ex eâ tantùm versione quae LXX nomen praefert colligendas eas esse negat; ex reliquis omnibus
Interpretibus desumi eas posse, libenter concedit. Nullo enim modo ad∣mitti posse judicat, quae de  ō editione contra Buxtorfium à te prolata sunt. Critic. Defens. §. 14. Manifestum esse ex collatione  LXX cum textu hodernio Hebraeo, codicem eorum ab isto enormiter variâsse. Reddi enim in infi∣nitis locis discrepantiae rationem certam & indubitatam, variam lcincèt lectionem, quod aliter legerunt in suo codice, quàm hodie legitur in Ju∣daico. Codicem Hebraeum quo usi sunt LXX in Versione suâ concin∣nandâ, immensum quantum ab hodierno Judaico diversum abire. Ex Translationis ipsius cum hodierno Judaico contextu contentione, Sole ip∣so clariùs liquere, LXX Interpretes longè aliter in codice suo Hebraico legisse, quam nos hodiè legimus in hodierno Judaico. Nec ita solus sensit Bootius: hoc ipsum jamdudum illum docuerat B. Hie∣ronymus. Qui passim notat & monet quàm diversè LXX Interpretes ab hodiernâ lectione discesserint; neque tamen diversitatem seu variatio∣nem illam rejicit in codicis ipsorum discrepantiam ab eo quo utebatur: sed totam diversitatis causam & culpam ipsis Interpretibus adscribit; qui aliter legerunt decepti literarum similitudine & affinitate, vel omittendo & subtrahendo, vel addendo etiam aliquid de suo, prout illis videbatur consultius. Quod multis ex Hieronymi scriptis & Commentariis pro∣ductis locis & exemptis probat Epist. §. 55, 57, 58. Bootius; & esse verum, Apol. pag. 93. tu ipse ag∣noscis. Et rectè quidem hîc tu putas, Ibid. pag. 94. Ipsum Bootium non existimare neces∣sariò sibi credendum, sequendum & amplectendum esse, quicquid uspiam ab Hieronymo dictum aut scriptum est. At nihil hoc impedit, quo mi∣nùs ille inquirat, quî fieri potuerit, ut homo in aliis minime hebes, & in Hebraicâ literaturâ satis perspicax, id videre non potuerit, quod tu non modo certum esse atque indubitatum, sed etiam Sole ipso clariùs liquere as∣seris. Causa, verò, Ibid. pag. 96. inquis, Cur res illa Hieronymo in mentem non ve∣nerit, non fuit defectus aliquis ingenii aut judicii, vel doctrinae in ipso, sed praejudicata opinio quam à praeceptoribus suis Hebraicis hauserat; codicem Hebraicum repraesentare ad amussim ipsa Prophetarum autogra∣pha, proindeque non esse ab illo vel latum pilum discedendum. Ita∣que quicquid videbat ab illo codice vel tantillum discrepare, statim illud rejiciebat tanquam spurium, corruptum & adulterinum; ejusque causam in Interpretum hallucinationes, vel Scribarum, qui Translationes ipso∣rum descripserunt, audaciam, temeritatem, vel inscitram rejiciebat. Quod fortasse non dixisses, si ex Commentariis ipsius in 3. caput Epistolae ad Galatas Critic. p. 478, 479, 480. in memoriam revocavisses, quam facile suspicionem hanc ille admiserit; à Judaeis detracta textui Hebraico fuisse vocabula  in Deuteron. XXVII. 26. &  adjectum in Deuteron. XXI. 23. at∣que ex Ibid. p. 292. Commentariis in Micheae cap. V. 2. in Josuae XV capite, post versum 59. duos versiculos potuisse de veteribus libris radi malitiâ Judaeo∣rum, ne Jesus Christus de tribu Judâ ortus videretur. LXX illorum tuorum animadvertisse te agnoscis Apolog. p. 21. frequentes pueriles & pudendos saepe lapsus atque aberrationes a genuinâ vocum & phraseon significa∣tione, & sacrorum scriptorum mente atque scopo, etiam in iis locis, in quibus illi, non secus quàm nos hodie, legerunt. An vero ex ignorantiâ aut  in tam frequentes, tam pueriles & pudendos lapsos homines Hebrai∣cae linguae satis peritos incidere potuisse putabimus: an accuratiorem po∣tius eos omnem transferendi rationem consulto hîc neglexisse Quod certè alibi passim ab eis fuisse factum videmus, ubi nulla literarum similitudo vel vocum affinitas variantis lectionis aut erroris à librariis commissi aliquod exhibet vestigium. Quo referenda celeberrima illa de annis primorum Patrum, in cap. V. & XI. Geneseos, differentia: de quâ, in lib. 15. de ci∣vitate
Dei cap. 13. B. Augustinus: In his in quibus continuatur ipsius mendositatis similitudo, ita ut ante genitum filrum qui ordini inseritur alibi (in Graeco sc.) supersint centum anni, alibi (in Hebraeo) desint; post genitum autem ubi deerant supersint, ubi supererant desint: videtur habere quandam, si dici potest, error ipse constantiam; nec casum re∣dolet, sed industriam. Hac addita conclusione, ipso digna. Recte fieri nullo modo dubitaverim, ut cùm diversum aliquid in utrifque codicibus invenitur, quandoquidem ad fidem rerum gestarum utrumque esse non potest verum, ei linguae potiùs credatur, unde est in aliam per intepre∣tes facta translatio. Agnoscis deinde ipse; Critic. p. 214. Si conferatur Graeca ista Versio cum Hebraeo textu, inveniri infinita loca in quibus aliquid deficit eorum quae in He∣braeo habentur. Et quaeris, Ibid. p. 300. Quî potuerit tanta esse in Interpretibus  & praecipitatio, ut periodos etiam integras omiserint, easque mul∣tas & frequentes: quin & capita integra, & capitum partes longè maxi∣mas omiserint penitus Quum ab Interpretibus illud simul quaerere de∣buisses; qui etiam potuerit tanta esse in librariis  & praecipitatio, ut toties & tam foedè hic erraverint tecumque considerare, creditu longe fuisse facilius, Interpretes ista in suo codice inventa pro libitu in Versione suâ praeteriisse; quam à Masorethis vel primis Hebraicorum nostrorum codicum descriptoribus conficta magnâ ex parte & textui sacro addita fuisse. Id enim dicere oportet, si in hodiernae lectionis correctione tot editionis Graecae defectuum aliqua habenda fuerit ratio. Et hi quidem defectus in libro Job maxime sunt conspicui: in quo à Graecis codicibus abfuisse notavit Epist. ad Jul. Africanum. Origines, , saepe quidem quatuor aut tres sententias, nonnunquam autem quatuor decim, sexdecim & novemdecim. Quos omnes defectus ex Graeca Origenis editione supplens Hieronymus, in La∣tinam suam Versionem (quam obelis & asteriscis distinctam in lucem ali∣quando proferre nobis est animus) ita ad Paulam & Eustochium est prae∣fatus. Beatum Job, qui adhuc apud Latinos jacebat in stercore, & vermibus scatebat errorum, integrum immaculatumque gaudete. Quomodo enim post probationem atque victoriam ipsius Job 42. 10. dupliciter universa reddita sunt: ita ego in linguâ nostrâ (audacter loquor) feci eum habere, quae amiserat. Indeque Prae∣fatione in eundem librum ex Hebraico postea à se conversum, eos qui prio∣rem illam suam Translationem probaverant (in quorum número & Augu∣stinus fuit; qui ad eam suas in Jobum Annotationes adaptandas censuit) simul etiam à LXX. erratum fuisse fateri oportere colligit. Neque enim fieri potest, inquit ille, ut quos plura intermisisse susceperint, non eosdem etiam in quibusdam errâsse fateantur, praecipue in Job; cui si ea quae sub aste∣riscis addita sunt subtraxeris, pars maxima detruncabitur. Et hoc duntaxat apud Graecos. Caeterum apud Latinos, ante eam translationem quam sub aste∣riscis & obelis nuper edidimus, septingenti ferme aut octingenti versus desunt: ut decurtatus & laceratus corrosusque liber foeditatem sui publice legentibus praebeat. Tibi verò (qui LXX tuis tantopere detrahi illibenter audis) hoc Critic. p. 295. vi∣detur ab eo dictum esse hyperbolice: quod in eo libro hodie versus sint duntaxat 1070, sic enim in veteribus illis editionibus Latinis fuissent tantum 270, versus in eo libro, (vel 370, ut debebas etiam adjicere). Ubi nostros versus sive  Hebraeorum, qui 1070 in libro Jobi numerantur, minùs ac∣curate distinguere videris à Veterum : cujusmodi in libris 20 ; suae 60000 extitisse, ad eorum finem annotat Josephus; & 1800, in libro Jobi fuisse, ad calcem Chronographiae suae refert Nicephorus Con∣stantinopolitanus Patriarcha. Hesychius, vel quicunque ineditatarum in libros sacros Graecarum Hypothesium author fuit, dictione hîc adhibitâ,
librum Job sine asteriscis quidem 1600  habuisse notat; cum asteriscis verò 2200. Varia enim  apud varios erat longitudo: & ab He∣sychio magis praecisè asterisco notatorum quantitas ad 600 , quam ab Hieronymo (dimidiatam libri partem propius assequi affectante) ad 700 vel 800 versuum numerum reducitur; quae ipsa minor tamen ratio satis evincit, tot in uno libro defectuum Graecam vulgatam editionem ream esse repertam, ut quid in reliquis ab illâ omissum sit, operae pretium non fuerit attendere. Sed nihil editionis illius authoritatem magis minuit, quàm multiplex illa tot assumentorum ad sacram Hebraicae veritatis purpuram audacissi∣mè facta additio: quae aliquando non versiculorum tantum aliquot, sed in∣tegrorum etiam est capitum. Harum additionum, ab Origene in Epistolâ ad Julium Africanum, ex Jobi & Estherae libris producta habentur exem∣pla. Et de libro Estherae agnoscis ipse, Critic. p. 293. Multa fuisse addita & omissa ad libitum Interpretis; qui non fuit accuratus in vertendo, sed studuit tantum ut∣cumque sensum reddere. Sed ut sensum utcumque ille redderet; tam multa à textu demere, tam multa aliena in eum intrudere, quid attinebat Et quî minùs accuratus ille fuit in hoc quàm in Propheticis libris in qui∣bus vel ille vel illi Interpretes, ut tu quoque fateris, Ibid. p. 132. Passim vocum genus, numerum, statum, tèmpus, modum, conjugationem, & personam immutärunt, pene pro arbitrio; ut sensum aliquem, uti ipsis videbatur, commodum exculpe∣rent iis in licis in quibus alioqui sensus non videbatur ipsis elici posse aptus & accommodatus. Qui vero in uno libro ad libitum multa addunt & omittunt, in aliis ita commutant omnia pene pro arbitrio, non aequi sane habendi sunt Hebrai∣cae lectionis arbitri. Praesertim quum in Daniele complura illi capitula Hebraeo textui addiderint, quae ob hanc ipsam causam Eusebius & Apolli∣narius, Porphyrii calumniis respondentes, ut legitimam Scripturae partem defendere recusabant; sed etiam reliquae prophetiae faciem universam ita immutaverunt, ut Christianae Ecclesiae, in aliis libris eorum Versionem secutae, hîc eam repudiare atque in ejus locum Theodotionis editionem coactae fuerint substituere. De quibus, in suorum ad Danielem Com∣mentariorum Prooemio sic scripsit Hieronymus. Ante annos plurimos quum verteremus Danielem, has visiones (à LXX superadditas) obelo praenotavimus, significantes eas in Hebraico non haberi. Et miror quosdam  indignari mihi, quasi ego decurtaverim librum: quum & Origenes, & Eusebius, & Apollinarius, aliique Ecclesiastici viri & doctores Graeciae, has visiones non haberi apud Hebraeos fatean∣tur; nec se debere respondere Porphyrio pro his, quae nullam Scripturae sanctae authoritatem praebeant. Illud quoque lectorem admoneo, Danie∣lem non juxta Septuaginta Interpretes, sed iuxta Theodotionem Eccle∣sias legere, qui utique post adventum Christi incredulus fuit; licèt eum quidam dicant Ebionitam, qui altero genere Judaeus est. Et initio Pro∣logi in Danielem, ex Hebraico à se conversum Danielem Prophetam juxta Septuaginta interpretes Domini Salvatoris Ecclesiae non legunt, utentes Theodotionis editione: & hoc cur acciderit, nescio. Sive enim quia sermo Chaldaicus est, & quibusdam proprietatibus à nostro eloquio dis∣crepat, noluerunt Septuaginta interpretes easdem linguae in lineas in tran∣slatione servare; sive sub nomine eorum ab alio nescio quo, non satis Chaldaeam linguam sciente, editus est liber; sive aliud quid causae extite∣rit ignorans: hoc unum affirmate possum, quod multum à veritate di∣screpet, & recto judicio repudiatus sit. Quod igitur à Bootio quaeris; Apolog. p. 35. Cur de LXX Interpretibus non idem dicere liceat, quod de aliis ipse concedit ubi nimirum constat eorum in∣terpretationem fundatam esse in variâ lectione quae fuit in eorum codice,
quaeque demonstrari potest ex ipsâ translatione. Responderem ego quidem, idem ipsum de omnibus dicendum fuisse, fi de fundamento illo constaret: sed illud adhuc nobis dubium manere; an ex ipsa translatione  ō demonstrari possit, aliter eos in suo Hebraeo codice Iegisse, quam nos in nostro. Nam etsi in aliis interpretibus, vel paraphrastis etiam, qui sententiam textus originarii exprimendam sibi proposuerunt, ubi eo∣rum codex à nostro variaverit, dignosci aliquando possit: in iis tamen idem praestari posse non est expectandum, quibus tam multa Scripturae, quam transferendi susceperant, ad libitum & addere & subducere ludus est. Et eos quibus vocum genus, numerum, statum, tempus, modum, conju∣gationem & personam immutare, pene pro arbitrio, mos est; à literula∣rum vel permutatione vel transpositione vel additione etiam atque detra∣ctione (quae tibi variantium lectionum ex translatione sumptarum De∣monstrationes sunt) adeò religiose se continuisse, non facilè quis credi∣derit. Tu verò longè alium rerum speciem animo depinxisti tuo. Critic. p. 570. Ipsum codicem Hebraeum, quo usi sunt LXX in Versione suâ concinnandâ, im∣mensum quantum ab hodierno Judaico diversum abiisse. Ibid p. 572. Christi & Jonathanis Chaldaei Paraphrastae tempore, & seculis sequentibus, obtinuisse solum hodiernum Hebraeum codicem, ab illo  LXX multum discrepan∣tem. Et si quae fuerunt ante tempus Antiochi Epiphanis paria & ge∣mina illi  LXX exemplaria vetusta, videri vel persecutione immanis illius Tyranni abolita, vel Pharisaeorum & Scribarum, Versioni  LXX infensorum hostium, post illam persecutionem zelo, invidiâ, & laevâ mente in contemptum adducta, neglecta, ac tandem penitus exoleta, ut eorum factam non esse mentionem ab ullo Judaicorum scriptorum post Christi & Jonathanis tempus, causa non sit cur quis miretur. Denique, Apolog. p. 105. Codices omnes hodiernos Judaicos pro unico duntaxat exemplari tex∣tus Hebraici habendos & censendos esse; codicem  LXX, pro uno altero. Judaicos enim omnes posteriores esse recensione illa librorum sacrorum quae censetur facta à Masorethis post 500, à Christo nato annum; omnesque exscriptos aut correctos videri ex uno exemplari de quo Maimoni. in  tract. 5. c. 8. § 4. Maimonides ait, Ben Aschar per plures annos in ea laborâsse, & fuisse Ierofolymis constitutum ut ex eo codices corrigerentur & emendarentur. Ubi primum tu quidem, cum aliis plurimis, accuratam illam Penta∣teuchi versionem, à LXX Interpretibus Ptolemaeo Philadelpho procurante perfectam, cum laxiore totius Veteris Testamenti translatione alterâ con∣fundis; quae, utut eorundem LXX titulo venditetur, post Esth. c. 10. sin. in edit. Graec. Vatican. quartum ta∣men annum Regni Ptolemaei Philometoris & Cleopatrae est confecta Joseph. lib. 2. contr. Apion. sub quibus Dosithei Judaei celebre in Aegypto nomen fuit. Quem Philometo∣rem cùm tempore graviffimae illius persecutionis regnavisse in Aegypto, ip∣sique tyranno Antiocho superstitem fuisse constet: cui erit credibile, In∣terpretem illum, quicumque demum fuerit, in suâ Versione concinnandâ ejusmodi Hebraico codice uti potuisse, cujusmodi omnes Epiphanis perse∣cutione aboliti fuerint aut alio ullo uti voluisse, quam à Judaeis Assamo∣naeorum saeculo viventibus communiter recepto, id est, nostro quando∣quidem, te ipso fatente, Critic. p. 513.  & zelus Pharisaeorum Judaeorumque posteriorum erga Legis corticem, & Masoretharum diligentia effecit, ut non ita multùm variaverint codices Hebraici ad Assamonaeorum saeculo ad haec usque nostra tempora. Deinde, ubi recensionem librorum sacrorum, quae à junioribus Maso∣rethis post 500 à Christo nato annum & perfectam Gemaram Babylonicam facta censetur, commemoras (nam Critic. p. 510. ut minimum sexcentis, atque adeo am∣plius, post Christum natum annis vixisse illos statuis): de priscorum quoque consimili studio, luculentum illum locum ex eâdem Babylonicâ Gemarâ in
memoriam tibi revocandum judicavi. Tract.  cap. 1. Primi vel antiqui illi () ideò appellati sunt , quòd literas Legis omnes numeraverint; dicentes. Litera Vau vocis  (Levit. xi. 42.) est media litera libri Legis:  (Levit. x. 16.) medietas vocum;  (Levit. xiii. 33.) versuum. In  (Psalm. lxxx. 14.) litera  vocis  est media litera Psalmorum:  (Psalm. lxxviii. 38.) medius versus. Primorum verò vel antiquorum horum nomine intelliguntur  Viri Synagogae magnae ob hoc ita dicti, quòd  Coronam (ut Trac.  cap. 7. alibi in hac ipsa Gemarâ legitur) vel  magnificentiam (ut in Tra.  cap. 3. Gemarâ Hierosolymitanâ, alterâ longè antiquiore, habetur) in pristi∣num statum restituerint. Eos postremis Prophetis proximè successisse, & ut sepimentum Legi fieret monuisse, in ipso initio  (quae pars Mischnae est, circa annum Christi 188 èditae) traditum invenimus, unde & celebre illud Elias, Praefat. 3. Masoreth hammasoreth. Rabbinorum effatum est petitum:  Masorah est sepimentum Legis. Cumque à primis hisce Masorae authoribus, qui cum postremis Prophetis sunt versati, observatum fuerit, literam Vau in voce  mediam esse literam Legis: (quod etiam apud R. Jehudam Le∣vitam, in parte 3. libri Cozri, legitur:) notandum est, ad hujus rei con∣servandam memoriam, in hodiernis etiam Bibliis Vau illud majusculo sig∣natum esse charactere, Levit. xi. 42. apponique ad illud notulam istam Masorethicam.  Vau vocis  est medietas Legis in literis. Unde non solùm primorum & postremorum Masoretha∣rum hac in re consensio, sed etiam hodiernorum Hebraicorum codicum cum primorum illis, qui tempore Philadelphi & LXX Interpretum anti∣quiores fuerunt, conformitas adstruitur. Masorae hujus antiquitatem Josephi quoque adversus Apionem gramma∣ticum auctoritate comprobari, Comment. de varia Hebrai∣cor. libror. scri∣ptions & lectio∣ne; cum Bibliis interlineatis edit. Antuerp. ann. 1584. Arias Montanus asserit. Non quòd ex∣pressam ejus mentionem ille fecerit; sed quòd absque Masorae subsidio non tam confidenter scribi ab eo potuisse is existimaverit, quod in priore con∣tra Apionem libro apud ipsum legitur. . Palam est ipsis operibus, quantam nos scripturis no∣stris habeamus fidem. Tanto enim saeculi spatio jam praeterito, neque adjice∣re quicquam aliquis, neque auferre, neque mutare est ausus. Omnibus enim in∣sertum est mox ex prima generatione Judaeis, haec divina dogmata nominare, & in his utique permanere; & propter ea, si oporteat, libenter mortem oppetere. Cui geminum est & illud, quod à Apud Euseb. lib. 8. Praeparat. Evangelic. Philone est traditum; Judaeos, per spatium amplius quàm bis mille annorum, : ne verbum quidem eorum quae à Mose scripta sunt movisse, sed millies potius morituros, quam quicquam legibus & in∣stitutis ejus contrarium suscepturos. Nam quòd Philonem & Josephum Critic. p. 571. asseris in lingua Hebraicâ infantes planè fuisse, si modò quid omnino Hebraicè scivisse dicendi sunt: ut de Philone Hellenista Alexandrino libenter id dem, de Josepho Sacerdote Hierosoly∣mitano concedere non possum; qui Joseph. in lib. Belli Judaici Prooemio. suis lingua patria Judaici belli scripsit historiam, & in Originum libris Antiquit. lib. 1. cap. 1. & lib. 10. cap. 11. Hebraicas scripturas in linguam Graecam transtulit. Quum Hebraicam igitur ille veritatem per tot secula intergram & illibatam fuisse conservatam profiteatur: quaenam de vulgata Grecâ Testamenti Ve∣teris editione (à LXX quidem seniorum sub secundo Ptolemaeo facta, quam
non totius Scripturae sed librorum tantùm Mosaicorum fuisse Ibid. lib. 1. ca. 1 ipse agnoscit, diversa; licèt à Philone, Hebraicae linguae imperito, sola adhibita & ex∣plicata) à codice Hebraeo qui eo tempore obtinebat tam longè latèque di∣scedente, ipsius fuerit sententia, non difficile fuerit cuivis colligere. Qui enim codex Hebraeus eo tempore obtinebat, non alius ab eo profectò fuit, quem in Chaldaica sua Paraphrasi Ionathan & Onkelosius expresserunt: quos usos esse codice Hebraeo longè à Codice  LXX diverso, & eodem penè cum ho∣derno quem à Masorethis habemus, Critic. pa. 324. tute concedis. De ipso quoque Josepho non est illud praetereundum, quod ex sacris He∣braeorum literis Origines suas translaturum se est Antiqu. lib. 1. cap. 1. & lib. 10. cap. 11. cum lib. 20. cap. ult. & contr. Apion. li. 1. pollicitus, neque sub∣trahendo quicquam neque addendo, id eum pari fide non praestitisse. Eodem enim consilio quo Persis nuper Hieronymus Xaverius Jesuita interpolatam à se Evangelicam dedit Historiam, etiam Graecis ille rerum in Vetere Testamento gestarum transmisit memoriam: nonnulla quae erant in Canone supprimens, alia (ut quum Salomoni, verbi gratia, pro 40 regni annis 80 tribuit; & in numero talentorum argenti ad Templi usum à Davide relicto I Chronic. XXII. 14 centum millia pro mille millibus substituit) immutans, atque ex scriptis apocryphis non pauca adjiciens; uti in ejus de Mose trienni, de eodem juvene cum Aethiopibus bellum gerente, de Tharbi regis Aethiopum filia con∣nubium ejus expetente, & aliis ejusdem farinae narrationibus licet perspicere. Eodem quoque consilio, sed majore licentiâ, editionis Graecae LXX se∣niorum titulo evulgatae author, quum totius Veteris instrumenti arcana (id flagitante fortasse aliquo, cui hoc denegare ille non poterat) hominibus alienis à Republica Israëlis essent communicanda, & margaritae ea ratione coram porcis (ita enim à Judaeis habebantur Gentes) projiciendae; quod proximum erat, quanta potuit negligentia opus perfecit: & in Vulgata ejus editio non multum distat ab Hebraico. Unde non satis miror quid causae fuerit, ut si eosdem in universis libris habemus in∣terpretes, in aliis eadem, in aliis diversa transtulerint. Hieronym. Pro∣log. in Ezechiel. Ezechiele ostendens quid in vertendo posset, in reliquis libris quid vellet facere; detractionibus, mutationibus, & additionibus suis ita eos invertit, ut cum A. Gel. lib. 20. cap. 5. Aristotele dicere potuerit, fuisse eos . Sed quocun{que} animo id ille fecerit: ab Hebraicis qui manibus omnium tum ferebantur codicibus certo consilio & destinata opera recessisse eum constat. In qua tamen tam longa & lata à textu orginario discessione, divinam Critic. pag. 513 tecum providentiam & agnoscimus & suspicimus: quod nulla extiterit tam damnosa inter utrosque textus differentia, ut rectam fidem, quae ad salutem est necessaria, labefactaret aut laederet. Qua ratione saluti prospectum est, tum Hellenistarum, sive Graeciensium Judaeorum, qui quum Hebraicos libros nullo modo intelligerent, & praeter hanc nulla jam alia totius Veteris Scri∣pturae extaret Interpretatio, Mosis & Prophetarum lectionem inde petitam in Synagogas suas introduxerunt: tum Christianorum è Gentibus, qui eos secuti eandem, quoque Versionem in usum Ecclesiasticum receperunt. Atque de hac editione ista dicta sufficiant. Ad Samaritanam Pentateuchi editionem jam accedo: quam vel primus, vel certè inter primos, nostris temporibus in Occidentem ipse intuli. Cùm enim Christianae pietatis homines paulò hâc in re negligentiores hactenus fuisse, ex Emendat. tem∣por. lib. 7. Scaligero didicissem: non priùs destiti, quàm ex Syria & Palaestina quin{que} vel sex illius exemplaria (una cum Arabicae versionis textus illius parte magna, & Arabici in eundem Commentarii fragmento) mihi comparavissem Cùm{que} ab Eu∣sebio Caesariensi, Diodoro Tarsensi, Hieronymo Stridonensi, Cyrillo Alexan∣drino, Procopio Gazaeo & aliis, citatum invenissem: apud Photium, in Bibli∣otheca [cod. 230.] Decreti Synodici Eulogii Patriarchae Alexandrini in Sama∣ritanos editi argumentum exponentem, tandem reperi, librorum Mosaicorum à Samaritis receptorum depravatorem fuisse Dositheum illum, cujus in libro 1. contra Celsum Origenes ita meminit. Post Jesu tempora Dositheus Samarita per∣suadere Samaritis voluit se esse Christum illum à Mose praenunciatum: & visus est nonnullos doctrinâ suâ cepisse. & in Matthaeum, tractat. 27. Sicut manifestat
historia lectionum, non multi fuerunt homines in tempore Apostolorum, qui Christos se esse dixerunt: nisi fortè Dositheus Samareus, unde & Dositheani di∣cuntur, & Simon de quo referunt Actus Apostolorum. Synodum verò illam ab Eulogio coactam docet Photius, occasione con∣troversiae inter Samaritas Alexandrinos de loco illo Mosis ortae, Deuteronom. XVIII. 15. Prophetam tibi suscitabit Dominus Deus tuus ex fratribus tuis, sicut me, quem eorum alii Jesum Nave, sive Josuam filium Nunis, proximum Mosis successorem, fuisse contendebant; alii Dosthen sive Dositheum, genere Sa∣maritanum & Simoni Mago aequalem, () â cujus nomine Dostheni cognominati sunt. De quo & postea hoc habetur additum.  (ea enim vox, pro , in Photio est reponenda) . Infinitis diversique generis corruptelis Mosaciam Pentateuchum adulteravit: aliosque libros stultitiâ & portentis plenos, divinisque legibus contrarios consarcinavit, suisque asseelis reliquit: Quibus illi fascinati, perinde quasi ille non perierit sed alieubi in hâc vitâ degeret, eum suspiciebant: ut in Euangel. Johannis tomo 14. habet Origenes. Ex Hebraica igitur à Palaestinis & Babyloniis, atque Graeca ab Hellenistis Judaeis recepta, Hebraeam novam impostor iste conflavit editionem; novis quoque detractionibus, mutationibus & adjectionibus, prout libitum erat, à se contaminatam. Hinc in annis Patrum post Diluvium, Geneseos XI. prae∣termisso cum Hebraeis Cainane, ante  quidem, eosdem, illis tribuit quos Graeca habet editio; post  verò (solo Ebero excepto, cui 270 cum Graecis tribuit, non 430 cum Hebraeis) planè diversos. Et annos Patrum ante Diluvium, Geneseos V. ita digerit; ut quum ab Adamo ad Diluvium, He∣braei 1656 annos dinumerent, Greci 2242 vel 2262. ille 1307 tantùm constitu∣at: in eundem{que} Diluvii annum non solùm Mathusalae (cum Hebraeis) sed eti∣am Jaredi & Lamechi mortem conjiciat; ne{que} Mathusalam (ut alii omnes) sed Noachum omnium Patrum longissimè vitam produxisse adstruat. Quae non ex negligentiâ, aut Hebraici quo ille usus fuerat codicis à nostro variatione, sed  & merâ libidine à nefando impostore admissa fuisse, res ipsa clamitat. Quod neque teipsum inficiaturum confido: qui à Christi saltem tempore (post quem in coelos receptum sacrilegas manus libris Mosaicis illud hominis monstrum intulit) Critic. p. 572. obtinuisse solum hodiernum Hebraeorum codicem; in eòque conservando Ibid. p. 41. Judaeorum scribas diligentissimos atque accuratissimos, imô scrupulosissimos & morosissimos in minutiis omnibus minutissimis consectandis, fuisse confiteris. Post Decalogum, Exodi XX. 17. & Deuteronom. V. 21. in Samariticâ hâc editione adjecti cernuntur versus isti. Cum autem introduxerit te Do∣minus Deus tuus in terram Chananaeorum ad quam vadis possidendam, eriges tibi duos lapides magnos, & oblines eos calce; scribèsque super lapides istos omnia verba Legis hujus. Postquam etiam transieris Jordanem, statues etiam lapides istos quos ego praecipio vobis hodie in monte Garizim. Et aedi∣ficabis ibi altare Domino Deo tuo, altare lapidum: non elevabis super eos ferrum. Ex lapidibus informibus aedificabis altare istud Deo tuo: & offeres super illud holocausta Domino Deo tuo. Et sacrificabis pacifica, & comedes ibi, & laetaberis coram Domino Deo tuo; in monte isto ultra Jor∣danem post viam occasus Solis in terrâ Chananaei habitantis in planitie è re∣gione Galgal, juxta quercum Moreh versus Sichem. Desumpta sunt autem ista ex Deuteronomii cap. XI. 29, 30. & initio capitis XXVII. in cujus 4o versiculo, impius Dositheus, verbis Mosis im∣mutatis, pro monte Ebal montem Garizim substituere est ausus. Quae omnia quorsum tendant ignorare nemo potest, qui locum Evangelii Johann. IV. 20.
legerit; ab In Johann. tom. 13. Origene ita explicatum. Agnoscenda est Samaritanorum cum Judaeis differentia de loco, quem illi rebantur sanctum. Nam Samaritani montem sanctum existimantes eum qui vocatur Garizim, Deum ibi adora∣bant: cujus meminit Moses in Deuteronomio. Judaei autem Sion montem divinum esse rati, propriumque Dei illum rentur esse locum, electum à patre universorum: & hanc ob causam dicunt in ipso aedificatum fuisse Templum à Salomone, omnem{que} Leviticum sacerodotalem{que} cultum illic perfici. Quas suspiciones utraque gens sequens, existimavit patres in hoc vel illo monte ad∣orâsse Deum. De utrâque verò hâc tantùm, Graecâ & Samaritanâ, editione in epistolio meo ad D. Bootium mentem meam egò significaveram: quod facere mihi li∣berum erat, etiamsi Criticam tuam nunquam vidissem. Sed si in eâ tu do∣cuisses (quod scripserat ad me D. Bootius, & in totâ Apologiâ tua negare te nusquam ego invenio) ex Samariticis & Graecis  LXX codicibus varias Hebraiei textus lectiones non minùs veras & certas posse colligi, quam quae hodie in nostris Hebraicis legantur Bibliis: non potui non dicere, ad per∣vertendum Spiritus sancti in mille Scripturae locis germanum sensum (de regula enim Fidei hîc non loquor; secundùm cujus analogiam Christi Ecclesia, quantumvis alias corruptissima Bibliorum translatione usa, salutarem Dei cog∣nitionem & conservavit integram, & in aeternum est conservatura) viam ea ratione aperiri longè periculosissimam; quam qui primus obstruere conaretur, à non ingrata posteritate magnam initurus fuisset gratiam. Quid ego olim de sacra Critica scribere proposuerim, communi nostro amico Guilielmo Eyrio vel perspectum satis non fuit, vel minùs apertè explicatum: quid verò ipse hac de re tota commentari instituerit, ex Epistola ipsius ante annos XLV. ad me data, quam ob argumenti cognationem subjiciendam hîc putavi, In hoc volumi∣ne insertam. vid. p. 3. poteris intelligere. Qua perlecta, quam longè alius Eyrius ille fuerit qui ad te ab eo qui ad me scripsit, facilè animadvertes. Ad me quod atti∣net: sententia mea haec perpetua fuit. Hebraeum Veteris Testamenti codicem Scribarum erroribus non minus esse obnoxium, quàm Novi codicem & libros omnes alios: sed ad errores illos dignoscendos & corrigendos peculiare hîc nobis suppeditavisse subsidium tantopere ab omnibus praedicatam Masoretha∣rum industriam. Ex quibusdam Veterum interpretationibus excerpi aliquas posse variantes textus Hebraici lectiones: ex vulgata Graeca versione, & edi∣tione Samaritana, nullas. In variantibus lectionibus magnam antiquitatis ex∣emplarium unde eae sunt desumptae rationem esse habendam: & ubi ea quibus antiquiores Interpretes sunt usi cum hodie recepta Hebraici textus lectione consentiunt, non esse eam eo nomine sollicitandam, quòd posteriorum vel Interpretum vel aliorum etiam, Hebraicorum exemplarium lectio ab ea discrepet. Denique ubi caetera omnia reperiuntur paria, ad illum tuum re∣currendum esse Canonem: ut ex variantibus lectionibus ea praeferatur, quae sensum parit commodiorem, atque cònsequentibus & antecedentibus magis cohaerentem. Ita in Genes. XI. 26. ubi Syra paraphrasis Tharae ante  annos 75 tribuit: quum ea antiquiores editiones, Graeca & Samaritana, cum hodierna Hebraicâ 70 tantum habeant; recentiore exemplari Syrum interpretem usum fuisse colligo, ex quo antiquiori textus nostri Hebraici lectioni nullum fieri possit praejudicium. Etsi enim codices illi Graeci & Samaritani ab Hebraicis nostris dissentientes, dubiam lectionem non reddant; quia Graeco illi Judaeo ex Gentium contemptu (ut dictum est) Samaritano alteri ex Judaeorum odio, quod Hebraici habebant codices repraesentare non libuit: ubi consentiunt tamen, & eodem quo nos modo etiam ipsos legisse constat, de receptae lectionis antiquitate non contemnendum ferunt illi testi∣monium. Et ubi in ipsis Hebraicis exemplaribus diversae occurrunt lectiones; ad earum antiquitatem discernendam plurimùm conducit & cum hisce editi∣onibus
& cum aliis Veterum sive translationibus sive paraphrasibus consimilis facta collatio. Sed de Criteriis illis jam non agitur, quibus Vatiantium textus Hebraici lectionum discriminari possit vel praestantia vel antiquitas: unde petendae illae sint, quantùmque vel augendae vel minuendae, tota inter nos vertitur quaestio. In qua tractanda, si occurrent aliqua quae minus tibi arrideant; da (quaeso) libertati huic meae veniam, & ab homine nominis & honoris tui (ut ex animo anteà ad te scripsi) studiosissimo profecta ea omnia esse cogita. Vale. Ja. Usserius Armachanus. LETTER CCLXVIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Brain Duppa Bishop of Salis∣bury, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Ar∣magh. My Lord; I Humbly thank you for that excellent Piece of Origen against Celsus; which though in my younger days I had met withall in Latin, yet I ne∣ver saw it in his own Language till now. And indeed the Book hath been a double Feast to me; for besides my first course, which is Origen himself, I find in the same Volume that piece of Gregory his Scholar, which was wrote by way of Panegyrick of him, and hath served me instead of a Banquet. But besides that which the Ancients have done, (of whom many have been liberal in this Argument, either by way of Praise, or of Apology) I find in some Notes that I have taken, the mention of two more modern Apolo∣gists for him; the one Jo. Picus of Mirandula, the other more obscure to me (for I have not otherwise met him cited) Jacobus Merlinus. If the latter of these be in your Lordship's Judgment worth the reading, and in your power to communicate and impart to me, I beseech you to afford it me for a time; for Origen hath had so many Enemies, that I cannot in charity pass by his Friends, without seeing what they can say in his defence. I have something else to be a Suitor for, and that is, your Lordship's own Book; I dare not beg it of you, (for this is no time for you to be a giver) I shall only desire the loan of it, that I may have a fuller view than I had from that which I borrowed from Sir Edward Leech. I beseech you, my Lord, pardon this boldness of mine, which your own Goodness hath made me guilty of. I have no more to trouble your Lord∣ship withal, but only to remain, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Br. Sarum. Richm. Octob. 20.
LETTER CCLXIX. Viro Admodum Venerando, Doctrina & Pietate insigniter Eminenti, Domino Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Armachano meritissimo, &c. Plurimam in Christo salutem precat Gothofredus Hotton. QUòd ego homo peregrinus id fiduciae sumo, ut hoc quicquid sit lite∣rarum, ad Tuam venerandam Dignitatem exarare mittere{que} ausim, illud ipsum est, Praesul Excellentissime, quod principio humillimè depre∣cor. Nec certè eò prorupissem, ni Nobilissimus juxta at{que} longè Erudi∣tissimus Vir, Dominus Junius, Tuarum Virtutum cultor, animum addi∣disset mihi dubitanti, promissâ nimirum à bonitate Tuâ, culpae meae, si qua subsit, pronâ & promptâ veniâ. At quâ de re, Te, Vir Reverendis∣sime, primum epistolâ hac meâ appellem, utique Evangelicus Praeco, Dei Gratiâ, cum sim, de rebus, quae studia Theologiae mea concernunt si Tecum paucis agam, id forsan Tuâ mea{que} cura non videbitur indignum. Vidit, nec prorsus, ut spero, improbavit Tua Excellentia, ea quae ante paucisimos annos de Tolerantia inter Europaeos Evangelicos in Charitate stabilienda libello consignavi evulgavique. In iis pacis cogitationibus me adhuc totum esse & in ardes scere, sciant volo quotquot sunt Pacis Filii ubi ubi reperiantur. Qua ratione vero illuc consilii venerim, non in con∣sultum fortassis erit, si Reverendae Tuae Dignitati brevibus aperiam. Monasterii Westphalorum, ubi eo tempore congregabant Europae plurimi Proceres de pace consulturi at{que} acturi, consilia agitari inter malè affectos mihi secreto tunc temporis relatum est, de Reformatis à pace Im∣perii excludendis, èo quòd, ut illi opinabantur, non essent Augustanae Con∣fessionis socii. Nec relatum est duntaxat à nostratium qui ibidem erant primariis, sed significatum insuper summè necessarium esse, ut quam ejus fieri posset citissimè aliquid remedii huic malo adhiberetur. Qua monitio∣ne ego animosior mea sorte factus, haec qualia-qualia mea in chartam festi∣nanter conjeci, et ter Descripsi festinantiùs: Et descripta illa tria exem∣plaria misi, unum ad ipsam Sueciae Reginam, Alterum ad Plenipoten∣tiarios quos jam vocant Principum Lutheranorum dicto loco coactos, ad Reformatorum Tertium, suppresso obscuri & ignoti Authoris nomine. Quid factum & eam his conatibus dedit Deus pacis benedictionem, ut me∣lioribus mollioribus{que} consiliis à Primatibus Monasterii operantibus locus datus sit, Articulus{que} Instrumento Pacis insertus fuerit, quo cautum est ex aequo libertati & securitati Reformatorum in Imperio at{que} Lutheranorum, quod nunquam antea ita solemniter fuerat factum. Factum praeterea, ut aliquis, qui solus Authorem norat inter Primores, Authoris nomen contra ejus mèntem revelaverit, unde ipsi aliqua necessitas imposita fuit Tracta∣tum suum typis edendi: Editus ergo est, sed prima vice sine nomine, postea cum nomine, mandante id nostrarum Gallobelgicarum Ecclesiarum in his Provinciis Synodo Dordrechti eo temporis articulo coacta, ut appa∣ret ex approbatione Synodali, quae libello Gallica lingua concepta praefigi∣tur. Ex illo tempore, quamplurimae in nostra Reformatione Societates, & in iis societatibus magni Viri calculo suo ista mea Moderationis cona∣mina approbare voluerunt, & reipsa, missis ad eam rem suis literis concor∣diter approbavêre. Ea porro publica approbatoria & hortatoria Testimo∣nia sequenti anno cum bono Deo juris publici facere mihi decretum est,
id{que} de communi consilio facturus sum, nempe, ut ex una parte malè feria∣tis quibusdam os obthuretur, & ansa praeripiatur cavillandi & calumni∣andi; ex altera verò, ut via apud bonos & per bonos muniatur strictioris in∣ter partes vinculi, de quo successu spes mihi non mediocris surgit, ut ex praesentium exhibitore amicissimo, tua excellentia intelligere poterit. Me beares, Virorum Optime, & rem faceres fortassis te dignam, & Rei∣publicae Christianae non inutilem, si his Ecclesiarum nostrarum suffragiis, Tuum maximi in iis ponderis testimonium addere dignaveris, quod à Tua bonitate etiam atque etiam efflagitare audeo. Deus Ter Optimus Maximus, Venerandae & Dignissimae Amplitudini Tuae, tuis{que} in Ecclesiâ suâ magnis laboribus abunde benedicere pergat. Vale. Tuae Excellentiae Observantissimus cultor! Gothofredus Hotton. Propria manu. Dabam xxviii Januarii, 1652. Amstelodami. LETTER CCLXX. A Letter from—R. Vaughan, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Reverend Father; MY Duty most humbly remembred unto you, with thanks for your Opinion of King Cadwalader; which hereafter shall be unto me a Tract to follow, as best agreeing with Reason and Truth. I hope you have received your Books in November last; and if they are any way impaired in the car∣riage, if you please to send them me, I will have them fairly written again for you. What I omitted in my last Letter, by reason of the Bearers haste, is, that in your Giraldus his first Book Laudabilium, and 8. Cap. I observe that my Countrymen in his time used to yoke their Oxen for the Plow and Cart, four in a breast, in these words; Boves ad aratra vel plaustra non binos jungunt sed quaternos, &c. (which I find not in the printed Book). This may happily give some light and help to understand a clause in our ancient British Laws, treating of Measures, made, as is there alleged, by Dyfrewal Moel-mud King of Britain, where it is said that the Britains in his time used four kinds of Yokes for Oxen; the first was four foot long, the second eight foot, the third twelve, and the fourth was sixteen foot long. The first was such as we use now a-days for a couple of Oxen: the second was that men∣tioned by Giraldus, serving for four Oxen; the third (as I suppose) suita∣ble with those two, for six Oxen: and the fourth consequently for eight Oxen. The two last are clean forgotten with us, and not as much as a word heard of them, saving what is in that old Law: but of the second, men∣tioned by Giraldus, we have a Tradition that such was in use with us about sixscore Years ago; and I heard (how true I know not) that in Ireland the People in some places do yet, or very lately did use the same: I pray you call to your mind whether that be true, or whether you have heard or
read any thing of the use of the other two in any Country, and be pleased to let me know thereof. The Copy of Ninnius (you sent me) hath holpen me well to correct mine; but finding such difference between the three Manuscript Books, which the Scribe confesseth to have made use of, I presume your Transcript comprehends much more, in regard you have had the benefit of eleven Co∣pies (as you confess) to help you; which Differences are very requisite to be known of such as love Antiquity. And also where those several Copies (that you have seen) are extant, and to be found at present; and how ma∣ny of those Copies bear the name of Gildas before them, and how many the name of Ninnius: And what those of Gildas do comprehend more or less in them, than those of Ninnius; And whether the Notes of Samuel Beulan, are found in any of those of Gildas, or yet in every one of the Copies of Ni∣nnius; and whether the name of Samuel be added to those Notes in any of those Copies, and to which of them: All which (with the antiquity of the Character of those several Copies) are very necessary to be known, and may easily be discovered by you, and very hardly by any other ever after you. Moreover, about three Years ago, I sent a Copy of the Tract concerning the Saxon Genealogies (extant, if I mistake not, in Gildas and Ninnius) unto you to be corrected by your Book; and Sir Simon D'Ewes undertaking that charge for you (as Mr. Dr. Ellis told me) returned me only this An∣swer upon the back of my own Papers, viz. The eldest Copy of this Ano∣nymon Chron. doth in some places agree with the Notes sent up, but in others differs so much, as there can be no collation made of it, &c. But those my Notes do agree very well with the Book you sent me, and differs not in twen∣ty words in all the Tract; whereof either many are only Letters wanting or abounding; and therefore I marvel what he meant in saying so, unless he had seen a larger Copy of the same than that I had; but your last Letter un∣to me tells, that it is only extant in Sir Thomas Cotton's two Books, and want∣ing in all the other Books that bear the name, either of Gildas or Ninnius; and that Book you sent me, was copied out of one of Sir Thomas Cotton's Books, and examined by the other. He further addeth, that the Author of that Tract (being, as he saith, an English-Saxon.) lived in the Year of our Lord 620: upon what ground I know not. Yet I cannot think other∣wise, but that Sir Simon D'Ewes had some grounds for the same; and it may be the very same that Leland the famous Antiquary had to say, that Ninnius lived, tempore inclinationis Britannici imperii; and Jo. Bale, who more plain∣ly saith, that he lived in the Year 620, just as Sir Simon D'Ewes hath. And (for that Sir Simon is dead) I desire to know of you whether the said Tract be not more copious in one of Sir Thomas Cottom's Books, than it is in the other: Or whether Sir Simon D'Ewes might not find a larger Copy of the same elsewhere; for if it be not the work of Ninnius, nor Samuel Beulan, it may as well be in other Books as in those, especially if an English-Saxon was Author of it: But if it be not found elsewhere, I pray you tell me up∣on what grounds is the Author of it said by Sir Simon to live Anno 620, and Ninnius by Leland, and Bale likewise, said to live in the same Time; when by the first Chapter of some Copies of Ninnius his Book, it seemeth he wrote not two hundred Years after Moreover, in regard you prefer that small Tract (so much spoken of by me) before all the rest of the Book, it were a deed of Charity for you to paraphrase a little upon it; whereby such as are but meanly skilled in Antiquity, may reap some profit by it: Truly some remarhable Passages from the Reign of Ida to the Death of Oswi, Kings of Northumberland, are contained in it; which being well understood, would add a greater luster to the British History.
Lastly, Most Reverend Father, I pray you be pleased to lend me your Copy of that Fragment of the Welch Annals sent by the Bishop of St. Da∣vid's Rich. Davies, to Matthew Parker Arch-bishop of Canterbury; who be∣stowed a Copy thereof upon the Library in Bennet-Colledg in Cambridg; or your Copy of the Book of Landaff, and I shall rest most heartily thankful unto you; and I do hereby faithfully promise to return whatsoever you shall send me, as soon as I shall have done writing of it. I have already taken order to provide a little Trunk or Box for the safe carrying of it to and fro: And my loving Friend Doctor Ellis (who in these dangerous Times hath suffered many Assaults and Storms at the hands of his Adversaries, with pa∣tience and constancy) will, I know be very careful of the safety of your things. I have troubled your patience too long, therefore (craving pardon for my boldness) I rest, and commit you to the protection of God Almighty. Your humble Servant, Robert Vaughan. Hengwrt near Dolgelly, in Merionith-shire, May 1. 1652. LETTER CCLXXI. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; BY your Letter of June 30, I do find, that my last to you having staid so long by the way, hath made me lose the benefit promised by you of print∣ing an Apologetical Epistle jointly with yours to Capellus; whereat, as I have cause to be not a little grieved, so I am glad to find on the other side, by that part of your Epistle already printed, which you have sent me, that you do overthrow the principal Grounds of Gritica Capelli, and so confirm the main part of mine Assertions against the same. But whereas you say, pag. 5. Va∣riantes Hebraicorum codicum Lectiones Bootius ex reliquis omnibus Interpre∣tibus, praeter 70. desumi posse libenter concedit. You will be pleased to give me leave to tell you, that that neither is, nor ever was my meaning; that I say no such thing in the place quoted by you, [Epist. §. 14.] (ubi ser∣mo non est de colligendis Variis Lectionibus ex Veteribus Interpretibus, sed de authoritate codicum Hebraeorum, quibus usi sunt, supponendo cum Ca∣pello, sed nequaquam concedendo, eos Versionibus inde factis fuisse per om∣nia conformes); and that my whole Epistle, from the beginning to the end, is full of Passages, wherein I most plainly say the contrary. Tis true, that I confess, Probabiliter posse defendi, in aliquibus aut compluribus eo∣rum locorum, ubi Interpretes illi à textu nostro Haebraico discrepant, eos ita in codicibus suis scriptum invenisse, quomodo Versio eorum prae se fert. Sed istud idem de ipsis quo{que} 70. fateor, uti liquet ex §. 53. ubi ex professo de hac re ago, ac monstro, quare hoc non obstante nulla tamen Veteris Inter∣pretis cujuscun{que} variatio à codicibus Hebraicis possit pro eorum Varia Lectio∣ne haberi cum ulla certitudine. Quod enim  70. saepissime accidisse affir∣mat Hieron uti bene scripta male legerint; hoc quia aliis quo{que} Interpre∣tibus
interdum contigerit, causa nulla dici potest; vel hallucinando interle∣gendum, vel aliter legendum putando, prout à te ipso indicatur, pag. 12. §. 6, & 7. & pag. 4. in imo. Et concedendo reliquos Interpretes interdum, ut 70. passim, alterutro istorum modorum perperam Haebraica legisse; nullo modo constare nobis potest in locis illis, ubi Interpretes à Textu nostro Hebrai∣co discrepant, utrum ipsi Interpreti, an codici quem prae manibus habuit Hebraico ista accepta referenda fuerit differentia, uti ipsemet ais dictâ, pag. 4. ubi exa∣ctissime idem mecum sentis ac dicis, nisi quod pro tuo de eorum plurimis, mihi dicendum videtur de ullis omnino. Nam{que} illud de plurimis tacite supponere videtur, de aliquibus saltem constare posse. Ast ego non video, quomodo de ullis, imò vel de unica tantum constare possit; aut quomodo quiscun{que} mortalium illo humano ingenio dignoscere aut decidere possit, prolatâ qua∣cunque Veteris Interpretis cujuscun{que} à Textu Hebraico discrepantiâ, an illo in loco revera ita scriptum fuerit in codice Interpretis Hebraico, quomodo Versio prae se fert, an verò locum ibi bene scriptum sequius legerit alterutro modorum istorum jam nunc dictorum. Ego quidem ne animo quidem fingere possum , quo verum à falso hic internoscatur. Quod si toi de eo constat, omnino te obsecro, ut illud mihi impertiri ne graveris: quod donec fiat, non possum vel lato pilo à pristina sententia decedere—. Quod ne∣que ex Septuagint. ne{que} ex ullo alio Veterum Interpretum quocun{que}, possunt ullae Hebraici textus Variae Lectiones colligi, nisi conjecturales ad summum, omni prorsus certitudine destitutae. Thus having nothing else wherewith to trouble your Grace at this time, I humbly take leave, and ever rest, Your Grace's most devoted, and most obedient Servant, Arnold Boate. Paris 11/21 July 1652. LETTER CCLXXII. A Letter from the Learned Johannes Buxtorfius, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Viro Reverendissimo, D. Jacobo Usserio Archiepiscopo Arma∣chano, Theologo summo, &c. Domino observando.Londini apud Comitissam de Peterboro, in Long-Acre. SP. veniam me à te impetraturum, Vir Reverendissime, si in gravissimis tuis occupationibus, quibus ad publicum bonum & Ecclesiae aedificationem omni tempore distraheris, importunius Te interpello. Fiduciam capio ex Tua humanitate & benevolentia, quam ante plures annos Tuis ad me literis es testatus, cui hactenus per silentium, temporum injuriâ nobis indictum, nihil decessisse persuasissimum habeo. Causam scribendi praebet, quod causae
seu controversiae illi, quae mihi cum Capello intercedit, Te quo{que} immix∣tum, atque praeter meritum iniquissime ab illo exceptum, viderim ex Epistola ejus Apologetica, quam impudenter Tuo Nomini maximo in∣scribere non est veritus. Post quam publicatam ab aliis amicis intellexi, illum etiam privatis literis Tecompellare; et in partes suas trahere cona∣ri non erubuisse. Adeo illi omnis pudoris sensus periit. Sed relatum mi∣hi quo{que} est, Tuam Reveren. jam ante plures menses eidem epistolâ publicâ & typis editâ respondisse, suam{que} hac in re sententiam exposuisse, quam tamen mihi hactenus videre non contigit, videre autem mea & causae mag∣ni interest. A sesquianno nullas accepi literas à D. Bootiò, ut planè nes∣ciam, num ille adhuc Parisiis degat necne: scribo tamen nunc ad eum Epistolam, quam unà cum hac per Amicum quendam, illuc euntem, Lu∣tetias mitto, si forte illic reperiri possit. Sin minus, Tuam Reverentiam obnixe rogo, ut quâ brevissimâ potest viâ & certissimâ, exemplar illius ad me deferri curet. Quod puto compendiosissime fieri posse, si Parisios mittat ad D. Bootium, si illic sit, vel ad D. Flavignium Doctorem SS. Th. Sorbo∣nicum, & SS. literarum Professorem, qui & viam novit, si quid ad me spectat, mittendi, & certo id faciet. Favet enim ille causae nostrae im∣pensissime. Mea Anticritica, quam Criticae illi vere Sacrae oppono, est sub praelo, & Deo vitam ac valetudinem largiente, ad proximas nundinas Francofortenses lucem videbit. In duas illa dividitur partes. In prima defendo meas rationes, quas ille in Defensione Criticae non minus impu∣denter, quam inepte, suis cavillis et calumniis suggillavit, ita ut totam illam Defensionem  examinem & refutem. Hanc proponere vi∣sum est, quia illis Fundamenta generalia, huic criticae substrata, discuti∣untur & refelluntur. In secunda, ad Criticae ipsius examen progredior; sed quia illa prolixior, & ineptiae ejus infinitae, nec mei otii, nec e re Lectoris fuisset, si omnia & singula ad censuram vocare voluissem. In im∣mensam enim molem liber excruvisset, & quis tum putidam sentinam mi∣nutissime exhaurire sustineret Hanc itaque observavi methodum, uti∣stincte omnes Variarum Lectionum Classes & species, quas illic propo∣nit, perstringam, tum in genere, si quae illis fundamenta substernat, tum in specie, quaedam ex singulis exempla excerpendo, & tum variae le∣ctionis vanitatem, tum nostrae lectionis bonitatem & veritatem, osten∣dendo, non, ut ille, nudis censuris, & dictatoria quadam virgula, sed ra∣tionibus, Fontes etîam & causas Vaniantium Interpretationum aperiendo. Opus totum centum triginta circiter chartis, seu foliis, in q—ut vocant, complicatis constabit. Loca vindicata aliquot centena. Et sic ordine sex∣—a libri perstringuntur. Ubi prodierit, curabo ut ad Tuam Rever. quamprimum exemplar deferatur. Si tuam Epistolam videre liceret, multum authoritatis à Tuo magno nomine, & accuratissimo judicio, meae causae accederet, si illud adjungere possem; quia non dubito, quin in ea, quam semel concepisti & approbasti sententia, constanter perseveres. Video pleros{que} nostros Theologos, & doctiones atque cordatiores ex Pontificiis etiam, ab ejus sententiâ abhorrere, & ad nostram inclinare. Unum su∣perest, in bonam causam malè agendo perdam. Quod ne faciam, Deus spero sua gratia impediet. Tantum praestiti, quantum ei suffultus licuit: magnam certe partem perfeci valetudine nutante & imbecilla, at{que} adeo corpoe & animo saepe languido & prostrato. Praeteritis nundinis vernali∣bus dedi Dissertationem de Sponsalibus & Divortiis, ex Hebraeorum potissi∣mum scriptis collectam. Eius exemplar lubens mitterem, si de viâ ac ra∣tione constaret. Tuum nomen hîc apud nostros Theologos est venerabile, eruditio Tua admirationi. Habemus Pastorem Gallicum, sed Basileensem nativitate, qui & Anglicae Linguae peritus est. Is aliquot tua scripta ex Anglica in Latinam Linguam convertit, suo tempore edenda. Ex eorum
uno, de Reali Praesentia Christi in S. Caena, & aliis quibusdam Controver∣sis, integram Dissertationem excerptam inseruit noster D. Theodorus Zwinge∣rus, Theatro suo sapientiae coelestis, nuper edito, (quod continet Analysin Institutionum Calvini, cum Vindiciis ejusdem adversus varios Censores, & Ca∣lumniatores) non sine praefatione debitae laudis & honoris. Haec hac occa∣sione ad Tuam Rever. perscribere visum est, quae ut ab Ea in bonam accipi∣antur partem, humiliter rogo. Deum simul rogans, ut Eam, quam diutis∣simo ad suam Gloriam, & Ecclesiae utilitatem, valentem, florentem conserva∣re velit. Reverendiss. T. Dignit. Omni observantiae cultu addictiss. Johannes Buxtorfius. Dab. Basil. Nov. 6. 1652. LETTER CCLXXIII. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned John Buxtorf. Clarissimo Viro D. Johanni Buxtorfio, S. Theologiae Doctori, & Linguae Hebraeae Professori.Basileae. ACcepi (Vir Clarissime) Literas tuas datas 6o Novemb. Gratissima sanè omnis à Te ad nos venit Epistola; haec verò eo nomine gratior, quia rationem aliquam scriptorum tuorum, & nuper editorum, & mox brevi edendorum communicat. Dissertationem tuam de Sponsalibus & Divortiis, superioribus Nundinis Vernalibus publicatam, nondum mihi videre contigit; cupio autem, quamprimùm id commodè fieri possit, oculis usurpare; Nam cum abundè nobis in caeteris tuis operibus & Diatribis satisfeceris, non du∣bito, quin eandem, quam ex aliis voluptatem cepimus, ex isthoc quo{que} scripto capiamus. Et voti me mox fore compotem Bibliopolae pollicentur, quod significo Tibi, nè molestiâ mihi transmittendi, quod intendis, exemplar, onerares. Miratus sum ubi tam diù haeserit exemplar Epistolae nostrae de Textûs Hebraici Veteris Testamenti variantibus lectionibus ad Capellum scriptae; Curavi enim inter alia exemplaria ad Bootium nostrum missa (qui etiamnum Parisiis degit) ut unum ad Te, quâ fieri posset festinatione, mit∣teretur. Sed, ex quo tuas accepimus, aliae nobis à D. Bootio literae missae sunt, quibus promittit Te non diù (quantum per ipsum steterit) Epistolâ illâ no∣strâ cariturum. Theatrum sapientiae caelestis nuper à D. Theodoro Zuingero publicatum spero eadem nave unà cum Dissertatione tua intrà hos paucos dies ad nos iri delatum. Peramicè facit, quod unum ex scriptis nostris Anglica∣nis, opera Pastoris Gallici jam Latinè loquentibus, lucubrationibus suis in∣seruerit. Salutem, quaeso Te, meis verbis illi impertias, ut pote homini non solum hac gratia primum mihi noto, sed olim per commercium literarum, dum Freius noster in vivis versaretur, familiari. Anticriticam tuam secundo Numine ad coronidem tandem perducas. Quicquid ex ingenio tuo prodierit, non dubito quin fuerit . Methodum operis quam indigitasti, probo; Etiamsi solus, aut in paucis es, qui argumentum hoc fae∣liciter
tractare noverint, vereor ut Capellum ab admitatione  ō dimovens; quorum tamen (quae dicitur) translationem tam ab eo abesse in Epistola mea scribo, ut cum Hebraei Codicis autoritate certet, ut asseram potius nulli∣us esse Interpretum eorum, quicun{que} illi fuerint, autoritatem, qui pro libitu suo, addere, detrahere, mutare, quod volupe est facere, insuper habent. Vale, Vir Doctissime; & tam corporis validi, quàm ingenli vegeti (quo∣rum infirmitate, praesertim inter scribendum, Te nuper laborasse doleo) be∣neficio fruere, ad illius gloriam, qui utrumque nobis solus indulget, & pub∣licum Ecclesiae Emolumentum. Ja. Armachamis. Londini 1653. LETTER CCLXXIV. A Letter from the Learned Ludovicus Capellus, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. SPero, Vir Reverende, fore ut perlecta hac mea ad Epistolam tuam Respon∣sione, intelligas mihi necesse non esse demutare sententiam, cum te videam ad meam potius quam me ad tuam inclinare & propendere opinionem. Nam quod de LXX Int. & Samaritico codice adhuc disputas, tanti non est ut propterea invicem multum contendere debeamus (si non & haec Responsio mea posthac non te adducit ut idem mecum sentias) quin magis auguror te in po∣sterum, ne hac quidem in parte diu & longè à me discessurum. Quare age; Vir Praestantisin eo saltem ad quod jam pervenimus pergamus idem sentire, me∣am{que} a qua parum aut nihil distare videris, sententiam fovere ac tueri ne detracta, cum ea non ad sacri textus eversionem, uti malè & imperitè mihi impingunt Bootius & Buxt. sed ad quamplurimorum S. Scripturae locorum illustratio∣nem, adeoque ad non paucorum correctionem atque emendationem facere illa videatur; id quod tu pro tua prudentia & ingenio poteris facile depre∣hendere si libeat tibi loca illa Scriptorum illustrata & emendata accuratè ex∣pendere quorum Index ad Criticae meae calcem additus est. Quin & ex alte∣tero Indice, qui illi subjectus est, locorum Scripturae in quibus occurrit varia aliqua lectio, facile etiam perspicere poteris quam proclive suerit ex una le∣ctione in aliam Scribis ex ignorantia vel incogitantia prolabi; ut planum in∣de sit, quam non temere sed justa de causa à me urgeatur dari tem multas ac multiplices in V. Test. textu originario varias Lectiones, neque adeo ab earum numero excipiendas esse illas quae ex Graeca  LXX. Translatione & Samari∣tico codice colligi possunt. De quibus non secus ac de aliis quibuscunque di∣spicere & licet, & oportet, utrum melior & convenientior sit, ex canone an∣tecedentium, consequentium, &c. qua perspecta & deprehensa, eam amplecti & sequi aequum & justum esse omnes & pios & cordatos hornines una mecum sensuros esse & arbitror & spero, quid enim hîne aut iniqui aut impli esse de∣monstrari potest Noli itaque, Vir Spectatiss. pati te à tam aequa & justa, adeo{que} & utili fententia, hominum indoctorum vel malignorum stisurris, su∣spicionibus & calumniis refugere aut divelli, sed eam pro tua & pietate & doctrina, proque tuo erga Veritatem, & ipsum  Textum amore, for∣titer una mecum & constanter amplectere, uere & propugna. Utpote qae plurimum faciat ad majorem S. Textus illustrationem & confirmationem, Dei∣que inde emergentem, ex veritatis ipsius clariore & certiore agnitione, Glo∣riam
Magnam. Proculdubio hinc inibis apud omnes bonos, pios, doctos & eru∣ditos gratiam & favorem; aliorum tuto & secure sunt, in tam bona causa, con∣temnendae calumina & suspiciones, quae apud imperitos & vitiligatores dun∣taxat valent. Hoc a te Vir Eruditiss. spero ac expecto, si me mens mea non fallit. Caeterum quod tu obiter in privata tua ad me Epistola notas meum quoddam  in eo quod dixi Evangelistam legisse in Psal∣mo 22. , pace tua, Vir Reverende, puto te in eo ipso hallucinatum esse, quum illud mihi imputas, satis enim plana est eo loci mea sententia, ni∣mirum, Evangelistam eo loco vel legisse  non verò  quomodo hodie legitur, vel eum secutum esse LXX Int. quos sic legisse planum est, quan∣do rediderunt , non vero , quod ab illis redditum fuisset, si le∣gissent  non enim ignorabant voeem istam id significare. Quare & hic agnoscere te aequum est tuum illud, In ejùsmodi humanae infirmitatis lapsi∣bus, nos veniam petimus damusque vicissim. Vale, Vir Rev. nosque pro tuo Christiano pectore ama, qui te pro tuo merito colimus. Dignitatis tuae, & eximiae Doctrinae at{que} Eruditionis observantissimus cultor & Fautor. Lud. Capellus. Salmurii xiii Janua∣rii, 1653. LETTER CCLXXV. An Extract of Dr. Boates Letter, Paris 10 of May, Anno 1653, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. BEsides the forementioned Letter, he gave me also one from you, where∣in was inclosed a Specimen of the Biblia Polyglotta. I am of opinion that that Design is not of so high a Concernment for the advancement of true Religion, as the Authors thereof do perswade themselves: and yet I think very well of it, and hold it to be of great use, pro omnibus Literarum studiosis, if it be done as it should be; which I fear it will not be, and that many ways. For whereas the main care of the Undertkers should be to give us a most correct Edition, as that of the Biblia Regia, I find abundance of Faults in all the Text of this first sheet, quod si caetera siut ad eundem modum, the whole Book will be good for nothing else, but to be thrown into the fire and burnt. Secondly, I think it very superfluous, to give us the Persian Pentateuch, as being translated not out of the Original, but out of the Chalde and the Hebrew Samaritan; Whereof it were sufficient to give the discrepancies from our Hebrew Pentateuch, which are not the hundreth part of it, all the rest being word for word the same.
Thirdly, The Syriack and Arabick being that which chiefly must make that Edition to be considerable, (for every body hath the Hebrew, and the Vulgar Latin, and most Men the Greek, and the Chaldee) they ought to give us those two Texts as authentical as may be: Whereas if they take them only out of the Paris-Bible, they will not be worth a Rush, Gabriel Sionita having interpolated them in innumerable places, and so utterly spoyled the authenticalness of them; There besides, the Hebrew Character is a very scurvy one, and such as will greatly disgrace the Work: I would that these things were represented to the Contrivers of that, in it self, most laudable Work, before it be too late; for pitty it were but they should be put in the right way. In Summa they must very much out-do the Paris Edition, or else they were as good, and much better to do nothing at all; and in my opi∣nion they would do infinitely better, both for the Publick, and for them∣selves, too (in regard of the readier Venting of the Impression) if letting alone all the rest, they gave us only the Syriack and the Arabick (not taken ex Bibliis Iuiianis, where they are worth nothing, ob rationes modo dictas sed ex bonis MSS.) cum Sionitae translatione Latina; and the Chaldee, taken, ex Bibliis Regiis (sed cum omnibus variis Lectionibus, deprehendendis ex collatione cum editionibus Venetis) cum sua itidem translatione Latina. Another, Paris 7/17 May, 1653. IN the same Letter I gave you likewise my Judgment about the Biblia Polyglotta, that they are going to print at London; having nothing to add unto what I told you then, but that I am amazed at several Expressions in the printed Papers, concerning that Design, which you sent me by these last Packets, viz. at that honourable and most notoriously false Character they give to that Adulterine Samaritan Pentateuch, the Morinian and Ca∣pellian, calling of the true Hebrew Text by the name of Modern; and at their making so great an account of Critica Capelli; and of the Variae Lectio∣nes to be collected out of the same; whereas of Verae Variae Lectiones, there is not one to be found there but what he hath borrowed from others, being vulgarly known. And as for those Chimerical ones, wherewith the Critica is stuffed, from one end to the other, if they pretend to take them into the number of the true Ones, they are altogether inexcusable, after that the folly of the same hath so evidently been laid open, not only by me and Bux∣torfius, but by my Lord Primat too.—
LETTER CCLXXVI. A Letter from Dr. Brian Walton (afterward Bishop of Chester) to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; I Made account to have waited upon your Grace before you went out of Town, but was prevented by your early departure from Lincolns-Inn, where I was about an hour after you were gone. I have been with my Lord of Ardah, and have left with him the Copy of the LXX, which he is to follow. I perceive he will be engaged in Work of his own for this half Year; yet I hope he will not neglect this, but take some care of it himself, because we cannot rely upon Mr. Huish. I would gladly know whether Mr. Young's Executor will let us have his Notes, or upon what Terms; they will be of very great use, if they may be had: if your Grace please to give me order to write, or call to Mr. Atwood about them, and to make use of your Name, I will see what may be done. If your Syriack Copy be come out of France, Mr. Thornedike would gladly have it to collate, both with the Paris, and your other Manuscript, for all may be done with the same labour. If yours cannot be had as yet, I will borrow some part of Mr. Pocock's till the other come over. Mr. Whelock hath sent me a Specimen of what he hath done about the Samaritane Version; where it differs from the Heb. Samari∣tane, I have sent your Grace a Copy of it. Dr. Lightfoot, as I hear from a Friend, is willing, if it be desired, to undertake the same Task, or part of it: and because of Mr. Wheelock's infirm Body, I would gladly have some sub∣sidiary help. He accounts it a thing easy, (the Samar. being a Dialect of the Chaldee) and I would gladly have something done in it, both to satisfy the Desires and Expectations of many that write about it; as also that we may have something more than is in the Paris Bibles, if your Grace thinks fit. Mr. Whelock propounds another thing concerning the whole Work, which I look upon as a thing hardly practicable, or which will at least require a great deal of time, viz. to have all the Homogeneal Languages together, and one Latin Translation of them all, as the Heb. Chald. Samar. and our Latin Translation for all. So the Roman. LXX, with the Complutense, and that of Tecla's, and our Latin Translation, &c. This I look upon as a Fancy, yet I promised to acquaint your Grace, and others, with it, and to desire your Opinions. I hope we shall shortly begin the Work, yet I doubt the Founders will make us stay a week longer than we expected: as soon as the first Sheet is printed, I shall make bold to send one to your Grace. In the mean time, with my Prayers for your Grace's Health and Happiness, I take leave, and rest, Your Grace's most humble Servant, Brian Walton. From Dr. Fuller's, in St. Giles-Cripplegate Church-Yard, July 18. 1653. We have resolved to have better Paper than that of 11 s. a Ream, viz. of 15 s. a Ream.
LETTER CCLXXVII. A Letter from the Learned Mr. Selden, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; IT is true, that Lipsius, in Annal. Taciti. lib. 1. num. 18. (as it is in my Edition, Paris 1606.) upon that of Principes Juventutis in Suetonius and Tacitus, cites the Ancyran Stone, thus; Verba sunt, ut ad me missa bene∣ficio viri illustris Augerii Busbequii, EQUITES AUTEM ROMANI UNIVERSI PRINCIPEM—HASTIS ARGENTEIIS DONA∣TUM APPELLAVERUNT. Quam Lacunam ritè expleveris, Princi∣pem Juvent. Caium. So he there, and in his Auctarium, pag. 20. the In∣scription is so cited, his words upon it being, Explerem IVV. C. id est, Principem Juventutis Caium. So Is. Casaubon, on Suetonius, lib. 2. cites the whole Stone, and so this Piece, but without the Supplement; of which he makes no doubt, adding, Mirum ita Augustum loqui, quasi alter tantùm filio∣rum eo honore fuerit affectus. Nam certum est ambos Principes Juventutis esse appellatos. Etiam de hastis Argenteis dissentit Dio qui aureas vult fuisse lib. LV. The Periocha wherein this is, in Lipsius, Casaubon, Gruter, (fol. 231.) is thus, Line for Line. Vide partem post. Annal. Us∣serii, pag. 527. Per. Jul. 4079. HONORIS. MEI. CAUSA. SENATUS. POPULUSQUE. RO∣MANUS. ANNUM. QUINTUM. ET. DECIMUM. AGENTIS. For Agentes, Lips. & Grut. Salurt. L. &C. And Casaubon, Scribe Agencies filios. CONSULIS. DESIGNAVIT. UT. CUM. Lips. & Grut. Cùm. MAGISTRATVM. INIRENT. POST. QUIN QUENNIUM. EX. EO. DIE. DUO. Lips. & Grut. Quo. sed apud Casaubonum legitur EX EO DIE DEDVCTI. INTERESSENT. entiâ longe aliâ. DEDUCTI. IN. EORUMVE. Cas. & Grut. Facio Cum. & Divido, INTERESSENT. CONSILIIS. PUBLICIS. DECREVI. SENATVS. EQVITES. AVTEM. ROMANI. UNIVERSI. PRINCIPEM.—HASTIS. ARGENTEIS. DONATVM. APPELLAVERVNT. If Ph. L'Abbe had let me know of his Edition of the Assises of Jerusalem, I could have furnished him from another and far ampler Copy than that of the Vatican, out of my own Store. Your Lordships moct humble and devoted Servant, J. Selden. White-friers, Aug. 8. 1653. My Lord; IN answer to your further Instruction concerning Gruteri Inscription. of Caius Caesar, Mr. Selden hath wrote this Letter. Mr. Pearson hath received the Copy of Hosea and Joel from Rome, and expects the rest shortly. Your humble Servant, Jo. Crooke. Lond. Aug. 8. 53.
LETTER CCLXXVIII. A Letter from the Learned Mr. Selden, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; IT is true, that Vide partem post. Annalium Usserianorum, p. 527. Jul. Per. 4709. Quem Populus Cos. &c. Ex Marmore Romae, is cited there by Lipsius, & notâ 23. in the later Editions. To the same purpose Casaubon in Moniment. Ancyran. Caium XIV. natum annos creatum fuisse consulem ex hi∣storia Dionis & vetere Lapide qui hoc disertè continet, notum est. But where that Inscription is to be found described, non liquet, I have searched as dili∣gently as I can, but in vain. Neither in Smetius, Lipsius his Auctarium, or Gruter, can I find it, no nor in Boissardus, who puts together all at Rome by their places, not in method of their quality, as the rest do. Sigonius A. ab V. C. DCCLIII, hath Caius and Paulus for Coss. on his Fasti; and Onuphrius, lib. 2. Com. in Fast. the same DCCLIV, neither of them mention this Stone. But Onuphrius cites indeed another, C. Caesar Augusti F. Cos. vias omnes Arimi∣ni Sterni—as divers other Stones remember him by that dignity. But for that mentioned by Lipsius and Casaubon, I see no sign of it, after a careful search again through the places also which your Lordship mentions, or the Auctarium of Gruter, of Magistrates. Your Lorship's most humble Servant, J. Selden. White-friers, Aug. 13. 1653. LETTER CCLXXIX. A Letter from the Learned Mr. John Selden, to the most Re∣verend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; STephan. Pighius in U. C. DCCLIII, hath no other Inscription than that in Gruter, pag. 1075. 2. C. CAESARE. AUG. FIL. & L. PAULLO. COS. LARES. AUGUSTOS, &c. Nor any thing that further concerns the Matter more than every Body there have. Touching his mention of Junius Gallio, I neither find him, or that Province, in the time of Nero, which he runs through. Vid. Annal. Usser. part poster. pag. 670. Per Jul. 4768. Who that Gallio in the Acts was, indeed appears not clearly, whether the adopting Father, or adopted Son. Gallio the Father, you know, was banished by Tiberius.
That M. Seneca had three Sons, whereof L. was the second, appears in Epist. 8. Sic mihi sic Frater Majorque Minorque superstes. As likewise in the Titles of the Controversies and Declamations. Novatus; Seneca, Mela, so reckoned; whence Novatus is taken for the Eldest. That L. Seneca had a Brother called Gallio, appears by himself in his Inscription of his de Vita Beata; and also in that of Statius, in Genethliaco Lucani, Hoc plus quàm Senecam dedisse mundo, Aut dulcem generasse Gallionem. And in that of Tacitus, Annal. 15. under Nero; Junium Gallionem Senecae Fratris morte pavidum & pro incolumitate supplicem increpnit Salienus Cle∣mens; besides the mention of him by the Name of Junius Gallio Frater Se∣necae in Eusebius, num. MMLXXX, (where that ridiculous Mistake is of propria se manu interfecit, mortem ejus Nerone in suam praesentiam differente, in Editione Scaligerana aliisque, for Olymp. 211. non est acta, Nerone in suam praesentiam differente). And afterward MMLXXXIV. L. Anneus Melas Se∣necae Frater & Gallionis bona Lucani poetae filii sui à Nerone promeretur. And Tacitus also, lib. 16. Mela quibus Gallio & Seneca parentibus natus, &c. Which of these three were Eldest, is not altogether clear. But it is a good Argument taken from the enumeration by their Father, that their Births were agreeable to that Order: And then Novatus or Gallio must be eldest. And Tacitus proves Gallio's priority in the place now cited. Hence Lipsius in de Vita Seneca, cap. 2. and divers times, on his Works, makes Novatus the Eldest. But in his Elect. 1. cap. 1. he makes him the second, and L. the first. So doth Pontacus on Eusebius, pag. 573. And Grotius, ad Act. 18. 12. Erat hic Frater Magni Senecae dictus cum junior esset Novatus, sed adoptatus postea à Junio Gallione. But, I confess the Father's Enumeration sways most with me. Touching the Adoption, I can find no unlikelyhood that M. Seneca should give away any of his Sons by adoption, which was usually made for advantage. And Junius Gallio the Father might well deserve it. And that of Seneca ad Mareium, rather confirms the reasonableness of it, and the like use. Now for that Gallio in the Acts, (whom the Arab calls ; as Dio, Galonus, the Father Gallio) it sorts very well with all Circumstances, that he should have been Seneca's Brother, as Baronius, Anno 53. §. 33. Pontacus in Eusebium, Grotius, &c. doubt not. Seneca's Power in Court will warrant it, and his Comfort to his Mother of her two Sons, (cap. 16.) Alter honores industriâ consecutus est, alter contemsit; plainly meaning Novatus or Gallio, and Mela. And of Gallio's greatness, (in Prae∣fat. ad Nat. Quaest. 4.) Solebam tibi dicere Gallionem fratrem meum (quem nemo non parum amat, Etiam qui amare plus non potest) alia vi∣tia non nosce, hoc etiam (adulationem) odisse. And it doth not well ap∣pear what became of Gallio the Father; likely enough, before, lost upon his Banishment. But neither doth it clearly appear that either Father or Son was Proconsul in Achaia, there being no necessity that the mention of Gallio and Achaia together only, with relation to his Sickness contracted there, (Epist. 104.) should prove him Proconsul of it. And it may be as much wondred at, and more, that Seneca, after his way, had not mentioned or touched his dignity, when there was an unavoidable mention to be had of Achaia (whence he speaks of his coming as of an ordinary Traveller) more, I say, than that he calls him Dominus meus Gallio. Whether he were his
elder Brother, or not, he might, by reason of his Dignities, which he so had and affected (as Seneca expresly takes notice of in that to his Mother) complementally call him Dominus meus, though Lipsius refers it every where, after he grew of the mind that Novatus was eldest, to the Eldership. Pardon my thus troubling your Lordship, and especially my ill writing and blotting, which I could not mend by transcribing, because I was to dispatch it away as soon as I had done. Your Lordship's most humble and most affectionate Friend and Servant, J. Selden. Whitefreirs, Octob. 13. 1653. Golius his Lexion is come. My second de Synedriis is done, only it wants the dressings previous to it: And the third is begun in several Sheets, and will, I hope, be soon dis∣patched. That Salmasius is dead, is by every Body undoubtedly believed, and I am afraid it is too true. Vid. Annalium part. post. loco supra citato. For the Name of Dominus, you best know the frequent use of it in Com∣pellations and Appellations out of Martial, lib. 2. Epig. 68. ad Olum, and enough of Seneca's Time, Quod te nomine jam non saluto, Quem Regem & Dominum priùs vocabam Ne me dixeras esse contumacem, &c. And Lib. 1. Ep. 113. In Priscum.Cum te non nossem Dominum Regem{que} vocabam, Cum bene te novi, jam mihi Priscus eris. And Lib. 4. Epig. 84. In Naevolum,Sollicitus donas, Dominum Regem{que} salutas. This was frequent in Salutations and mutual Expressions, though the Em∣perors sometimes avoided it as too much earnest, or seeming so; to the rest, it being in jest or complement. Truly Seneca used not a less expression of that kind to him, when he began his Books de Ira, with Exegisti à me Novati, ut scriberem quemadmodum ira possit leniri, &c. Exigere is actus Dominii, as exigere Tributum, Vectigal, &c. in most familiar Language. I have thus poured out my Fancies to you, which I know you will in your ex∣cellent Goodness and Judgment look upon with gentle pardon. So that if Gallio in the Acts, were either of Them that had such relation to the Sene∣ca's, I suppose it to be most probable it was this Novatus.
LETTER CCLXXX. A Letter from Dr. Price, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, my good Lord; THE last week, and no sooner, fix of your Books were delivered to me; one of them I presented, in your Name, to the Prince Elector; three others I am sending into France, two of them, in your Name, to Big∣nonius and Sarravius; and a third, as from my self, to Monsieur Militerius; the fifth I will give, as from you, to the Fr. and the sixth I will keep by me, to be disposed of as shall be ordered. I lately received Letters from Bignonius and Sarravius: in the former o which there is (my Lord) this passage concerning you; Particuliement j vous ay grande obligation de m' avoir concilié la bienuiellance d'un Prelat tres eminenten doctrine, dont je cognois des long temps le merites par la reputation Pub∣lique, qui le publie non seulement pour son rare scauoir mais aussy pour sa grande sagesse & singuliere moderation. In the other there is this passage, Et particu∣lierement je vous prie d' asseuner Monsieur l' Archeves{que} d' Armach des mes tres∣humbles respects. Lors que i'auray receu son liure que vous me promettez, je prendray la liberté de l'en remercier moy mesme par vostre entremise; which I suppose I shall not need to English. I likewise received Letters from Sir G. Radcliffe, which do thus conclude; I long to hear what my Lord Primate does with his Chronological Observations. It were pitty that a Work about which he hath bestowed so much time, should perish, or prove imperfect, for want of his last hand. And so much for these Matters. We are here still, as far as I see, in a doubtful and dangerous estate. In the Houses there are great Divisions, and since the return of those Members which the General himself guarded and conducted, the Presbyterians (a pretty ridiculous Business) out-vote the Independents. The Scots likewise, by a constant Report, are coming in again. In this condition we are, , nothing can comfort us, but the coming again of our Titus. A few days, 'tis thought, will produce somewhat very extraor∣dinary. The rest of this Letter is nothing else, but what is verbatim to be found in Pricaeus's Notes upon 1 Tim. 4. 12, 15, 16. As is also what is in∣serted in Letter 283, upon 2 Tim. 2. 9. Your Grace's most humble and faithful Servant, John Price. London, Aug. 19. The sixth Copy, I have thought upon it, would not be unfitly sent to Monsieur Naudeus. There will want one likewise for the Puteani Fratres, whom, I presume, my Lord, it is your mind should have one, I will there∣fore send them mine, but as from you, my Lord.
LETTER CCLXXXI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Ludovicus Capellus. Viro Clarissimo Ludovico Capello. S. T. & Literarum He∣braicarum in Academiâ Salmuriensi Professore eximio.Vir Clarissime; LIteras tuas Salmurii die Septembris XXVI datas, Octobris nostri (Ju∣liani) die XXIIIo Londini accepi, quibus tamèn respondere (ut vel∣lem) Caligantes oculi non sinunt, qui me à toto hoc scribendi studio jam∣pridem avocant. Conabor tamen (Deo volente) post absolutam Annalium partem, alteram, quae jam effecta proditur in lucem, quae de LXX Interpretum versione animo concepi, in brevem diatribam conficere; & licet ut hic ver∣sione Graecâ ità in historiae Apostolicae dispositione in Annalibus non semel à te dissentiam; semper tamen apud me valiturum illud dubitare noli. Non eadem sentire bonis de rebus iisdem, incolumi licet semper amicitia. Codicem  Alexandria à Cyrillo Patriarchâ in Angliam transmissum (quem The∣clae vocant) edere caepit eruditissimus Patricius Junius. Sed eo ad meliorem vitam translato, nulla illius editionis spes nobis est relicta. Cuduntur tamèn apud nos Biblia Polyglotta, in quibus veteres sacri contentus Editionis uno conspectu representatae exhibentur. In his Alexandrini illius codicis cum editione Graecâ Vaticana collatio instituitur, & textus quem desideras Sama∣riticus simùl adjungitur: quemadmodum inprimis hisce magni operis pagi∣nis (quas ad te mittere libuit) videre licet. Tu ista quaeso boni consule & me amare pergas. Tuus in Christo frater amantissimus Ja. Usserius Armachanus. Londini Octobris 27. Anni MDCLIII. LETTER CCLXXXII. A Letter from Dr. Price, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, my good Lord; I Have been somewhat the longer in answering your Letter, conveyed to me by Mr. Thorndike, as desiring to satisfy you about the Tractate of Chrysostom against Apollinarius. Much search hath been made in this Libra∣ry, but as yet it appears not; and no great wonder, here being almost thirty Volumes of that Father, some of them without beginning, others without end; and some, like Eternity, without beginning and end: if the Pluteus and Number had been specified by your Lordship, it would have facilitated
the Enterprize. And perhaps there is no such thing here, for neither hath your Lordship specified from whom you learned it: Canisius (whom to that end I looked into) citing only in Latin two Passages out of it, but not tel∣ling us in the Margin where the Greek Manuscript is. Of Gregory Nyssen, contra Apollinarium, we have the Greek here, but that we know is printed. I will not yet count your Business desperate, perhaps that piece of Chrysostom may be lighted upon in some other Volume of promiscuous Tractates; and what we could not by Industry, we may obtain by good Fortune. I understand, with much both satisfaction and consolation, of the per∣fecting of your Lordship's Chronology, but despair (for the present at least) in this interruption of Traffique, by the War between England and Holland, to get sight of it: as likewise of Mr. Young's Septuagint, and Dr. Hammond's Version and Notes on the New Testament. Some Notes of mine, upon a part of Paul's Epistles (which I would not have mentioned, but that your Lordship is pleased to enquire of my low Studies) lie ready by me, and had been printed above a Year since, if in Venice at least (for here in Florence is not so much as a Greek Stamp) there could have been found (ô tempore, ô moribus! as says Sir Philip Sidney's Rhombus) a fit Corrector. In those Notes, on the passage of 2 Tim. 2. 9. there is somewhat concerning Ignatius, which coming yesterday under mine eye, while I was thinking of writing to your Lordship occasionally, (and, I hope, without your dislike) I will insert verbatim, desiring your Lord∣ship to confirm me, or (which perhaps there will be more cause for) to reform me. Imo 1 Thess. 3. 1. , per me nempe indignum mini∣strum ejus, cui Deus non spiritum timoris, sed virtutis dedit, 2 Tim. 1. 7. Chrysostomus Homil. 16. ad Antiochenos. Doctor vinctus erat & verbum volabat: ille in carcere latitabat, & doctrina alata passim currebat. Tertullia∣nus ad Martyres. Habet (carcer) vincula, sed vos soluti Deo estis. Ignatius causam afferens cur Trallensibus  non scriberet  (inquit) . Addit deinde, , &c. ubi legitur in omnibus editis, , Sententiâ implicatâ, vel potius nulla. Nos , exigua mutatione, pro  substituendo, eruimus sensum similem Paulino. Scribere (inquit) potuimus vobis altiora, at nos retuimus respectus imbecillitatis ve∣strae; neque enim, quia in carcere detinemur, eo minus caelestia, Angelo∣rum ordines, &c, cognoscere potis sum & contemplari. Seneca 3. 20. de Beneficiis. Corpora obnoxia sunt, &c. mens quidem sui juris. Quae adeo libera & vaga est ut ne ab hoc quidem carcere cui inclusa est, teneri queat, quo minus impetu suo utatur, & ingentia agat, & in infinitum comes coelestibus exeat. Cicero de vere invicto, Lib. 3. de Finibus. Cujus etiamsi corpus constringatur, animo tamen vincula nulla injici possunt. I have had Letters from Sir G. R. at Paris, which call upon me for A. Gellius, upon whom I have more Matter congested, than I have published upon Apuleius; but the digesting (which is the more troublesome) part, remains. Which when I shall have leisure or appetite for, I yet see not. I heard long since (and I doubt by too true a Reporter) of the death of my intimate Friend Sarravius, in that City. Mr. Selden, I hear, as he flou∣rishes in Estate, so declines in strength; it will be your Lordship's favour, when you see him, to mention my humble Service to him. I live here, God be praised, in no want, but in little health, and much solitude, which hath cast me into the passio Hypocondriaca, that afflicts me sore, and (which is worse) into some fits of Acedia, 'gainst which I arm
my self, as I can, by Prayer and otherwise. The Air of this place in the Winter is (as to many others) most pernicious to me; the Conversation of this place, both in Winter and Summer, is most contrary to me, but the Great Duke's Civilities, rather than ought else, have made me thus long abide here. Much Comfort and Favour I should esteem it, sometimes to hear from your Lordship, there being no Man in the World, near whose Person (and indeed at whose feet) I would die so willingly, as at your Lordship's, and at those of Bignonius, whose infinite Learning, and transcendent Christian Humility, have made me a perpetual Servant and Slave to him. Mr. Jeremy Bonnel Merchant, in the Old Jewry, (who perhaps will pre∣sent this Letter) hath the ready and weekly means of conveyance hither. Your Graces most humble and faithful Servant, John Price. Florence, Decemb. 1/11. 1653. LETTER CCLXXXIV. A Letter from the Right Reverend Thomas Morton Bishop of Duresm, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo Jesu.Most Reverend Father in God; TOO long silence among Friends useth to be the Moth and Canker of Friendship, and therefore I must write unto your Grace, although I have nothing to write but this Nothing: And yet I have as much as Tully had to his Friends, Si vales bene est, &c. Notwithstanding, in earnest, I grieve at the Heart to hear of your Grace's declination of Sight, though it be my own Disease, yet so (I thank God) that it is not more, considering mine Age. Something I should add of O Tempora, O Mores, albeit an Ex∣clamation, which I reprove in the Authors, because of Hysteron proteron, for that it ought to be rather, O Mores, O Tempora, but it is God that moves the Wheels, and blessed be his holy Name; and let it be our comfort, my Lord, that in his good Time, he would remove us from those vexatious Mu∣tabilities. If there were any thing in my Power which I might contribute as grateful unto your Grace, I would not be wanting. However (according to the mutual Obligation between us) I shall still commend your Grace to the Protection of the Almighty, to the glory of saving Grace in Christ Jesus. I am Your Grace's in all dutiful acknowledgment, Th. Duresm. Jan. 20. 58. My Lord, Since the conclusion of this Letter, I have been moved, by this Bearer, that your Grace would be pleased to favour him in his reasonable Request unto you. Th. D.
LETTER CCLXXXIV. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley, to the most Reverend James Usher late Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend; YOur last Letter to me, dated April 7. I received not till Easter-even, April 15. your Messenger bringing it too late to my Nephew, (as he saith). The Holy-days being past, I have since wholly attended to satisfy your demands touching the Autumn. Aequin. and Mr. Lin. computation ▪ is Ecl. ad am. Im. Olymp. 293ae. which I have here sent you inclosed, with my whole Proceedings therein, that you may the better judg thereof; where if you espy any Error, (as well may be among such variety, and wanting the help of any other Man, albeit, I have been very careful to examine my whole working over and over again) let me intreat so much, that you would be pleased to certify me thereof. Indeed at last I found out Garsilias (whom you call Garsills) his other Copy, which also transcribed by my Scholar (for lack of leasure in my self) because I have not my own Copy at home to compare the difference only, I have sent you examined, though by my self and him together. D. Ward saith, he remembreth your Business, and will be with you (as he sent me word) within this week. Though I have calculated the Autum. Aequ. as precisely as I could by the Prutenicks, yet you know, by Tycho's Observations, the Prut. fail of the true Ingress into the Aequinoctial, 12 hours sometimes, and sometimes more, which 4000 Years backward, will perhaps make a greater difference than in 400 of Tycho's. You may read in Peucer whereabout the Aequin. Vernal was at the first Olymp. &c. Amandus Polanus, in Syntagm. Theolog. and Origan in his Ephem. have ar∣gued contrarily touching the World's Original Time; which, methinks, in regard of correspondence of the Second Adam with the first Adam, as in other things, so in this, should be in the Spring (as Polanus holdeth) when our Saviour suffered for the Recreation (as I may so speak) of the World. Notwithstanding I am of opinion, the stay of Adam in Paradise was much longer than most Men hold, and Reasons I could yield for it, perhaps so long as Christ lived upon Earth after his Baptism; but in such a nice Point I list not to be curious. Mr. Lively seems to render a Reason why Whitsunday was deferred from May 21 d. to 28 d. because the Easter before fell upon the Jewish Pascha; which Reason I leave to your better Judgment than mine, if it be not good; but by mistaking the Eclipse, that Year of Christ current 394, I think this Calculation I have sent will sufficiently demonstrate. Hoping you will accept these endeavours for this time, I cease to trouble you further, commending your Welfare to the Grace of God. Yours in the Lord, Tho. Whalley.
LETTER CCLXXXV. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley, to the most Reverend James Usher late Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend; SInce the late receipt of your Letter, I have had very little time and lea∣sure to make answer thereto, and am inforced at this present to abbrevi∣ate the same. Your acceptance of my small pains, I am rather to thank you for, than you to account them any trouble to me, who would be right glad if in any Matter my Service may stand you in stead. If I thought you had not taken a Copy of my Garsilias whilst you had it, I would send you the difference so soon as I can. The precise time of the Autum. Aequin. complet. retrò, I remember was set down; and if porrho and current not also expressed, was through my haste; but it may be gathered to be upon the 21st current of Octob. 5 h. 10 m. post med. noct. I wrought (as you see) according to the Alphonsine way, because those Tables, of equal Motions, are more truly printed than those which are secundùm vulgarem rationem So Mr. Livly and I observed.. Mulerius have I read cursorily, but never practised by his Tables; yet methinks it strange there should be such difference, that by your Calculation the middle Motion of Sol should fall upon the 24th or 25th day, without there be some Error in our Opera∣tions. It's no wonder if Firmicus strayed, guessing by Supposition rather what might be, than out of Judgment examining the truth, himself, as an Heathen, holding the World's Eternity. Capell, no question (as you write) was deceived. About Adam's continuance in Paradise, as I affirm nothing, so think it cannot be evicted, his stay might not be many Days, or some Years. 1. To dress and keep the Garden, (a compendium of all kinds of Plants and Animals). 2. To take notice of, and contemplate their several Natures. 3. To have Beasts of all kinds presented in order before him. 4. And then to give names to such a multitude of Species. 5. To visit and search the Properties also of so many sorts of Herbs and Plants, in likelihood, that he might see and know what great things God had done for him, and whereof he was made Sovereign, (that so after his fall he might have the greater compunction and remorse for his trespass, re∣membring the Glory he lost). 6. In probability also to keep a Sabbath. 7. Lie in an heavy sleep till the Woman was built; 8. And then to take knowledg thereof, and give her a Name: 9. And for her to enter a long Conference (by conjecture) with the Serpent, then eat, and give of the forbidden Fruit to the Man; 10. And both of them to sew for themselves Garments of Leaves. All these (with other Circumstances that might be added) seem to imply a re∣spit of more than one or two days. And if there was no necessity of knowing his Wife in three or four days, why in three or four years, considering it is not unlike but that God would first limit some time for him to behold and contemplate the Creatures, and acknowledg his bounty therein.
Considering also Man was made; 1. Animal. Perfectissimum, and so (as the more noble among Beasts and Fowls do also) not exercise Generation but at set times. 2. At{que} immortale, (quatenus potuit non mori) and therefore need not be too sollicitous to preserve the Species of humane Nature, without delay, by Generation, when the Individuals might remain incorruptible. 3. Et originaliter Justum, and therefore freed from inordinate concupis∣cense, rather delighting himself in the fellowship, than knowledg of Wo∣men; and in divine Speculation, and worship of his Creator, and inquisi∣tion of the Creatures Conditions, than in sensual (though lawful) Appe∣tites. 4. And being a Type of Christ, the second Adam, perhaps as the one, some three or four, Interpreters, you know, vary about the num∣ber of Paschas after his Bap∣tism till his Death. or more Years upon Earth, preached Righteousness at his inauguration in Baptism, so the other might remain as long time in injoy∣ing the benefit of his Innocence in his first estate. 5. Lastly, The blessing of Fruitfulness he might well expect in due time to come, sufficient to replenish the World; whenas even in those 930 Years of his Life, after the Fall, if but every 30 Years his Seed were doubled, (an easy supposition) the Total would a∣mount to many hundred millions of Persons. Years. Persons. 30 2 60 4 90 8 100 16 150 32 Sic deinceps. Your correspondence of the Feast of Expiations on the 10th of Tisri, in memory of the first Sin, I hold very ingenious, howsoever other Expositors deem that Time appointed as fit for Humiliation at the end of the Ecclesiastical Year, when all their Fruits were reaped. But granting that good, the consequence of his Creation in Autumn is not necessary, unless we suppose he fell within few days. The forbidden Fruit, 1. in the midst of the Garden; and, 2. but some individual; and, 3. pleasing to the Eye, seemeth to be different from the Pomegranat; and so I suppose you will not deny. For Mr. Livlys mistaking of Whitsunday, I have not to say, till leasure suffer me to examine whether fourteen Years after the Vernal Aequinox fell that Year upon the Lord's Day. But I thank you heartily for imparting so much as you have to me, whereby to make further search hereafter. And so having been both tedious and troublesome to you, I cannot but crave pardon, in regard of your important Occasions, and commit your wel∣fare to the Grace of God; resting ever, Yours, to use, in the Lord, Tho. Whalley. May 30. I would fain know where it is that Eras. Rheinholt failed in his Tables, that Mulerius noteth them of Error in computing the Eclipses in Gordianus the Emperor's time, and the birth of Romulus mentioned by Tarrutius, &c.
LETTER CCLXXXVI. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley, to the most Reverend James Usher late Arch-bishop of Armagh. Salutem in Christo.Right Reverend; IF in omitting a day of the Bissextile Year, I committed , I hope you will bear with elder Years, and long discontinuance from these kind of Supputations; I suppose the Default may easily be amended in the Total, without any great change in the Particulars. Dr. Bainbridg in his Hypotheses, what certainty they are of, may be doub∣ted. Erasmus his Tables have obtained authority (sufficient for Chronology) hitherto by the consent with the Heavenly Motions. Which Mulerius taxing in Romulus and Gordianus Eclipses, might have done well to have noted also the place in which the Errata (and those but typographica perhaps) were committed. Your noting their defects, in Tab. Med. Syz. ab aera Christianâ, fol. 86. b. edit. Witenberg. 1585. (which Edition, with the other also of Tubinge I have) more studied me. Who having examined the whole numbers of fol. 56. b. sub columna Temporis, found no such Errors as you mention; but in fol. 87. a. I found as you said Under anom. lun.; but the best is, I have not used to Calculate heretofore by that Table. Yesterday was a Sevenight, I lent Dr. Ward (out of our Library) an imperfect Manuscript, fair written, concerning the Endowments, &c. of Glassenbury-Abby; I suppose he acquainted you therewith, if happily it may serve your turn; for I should be right glad if in ought I were able any ways to further your Godly Proceedings, wherein you shall always com∣mand me. I acknowledg your kindness, in acquainting me with these Discourses; of which, 1. The Tree of Life (by consent of many good Divines and Schoolmen) was not only a Sacrament, but as a Medicine to defend Man's Nature in his Integrity, from injury of Age and Mortality. 2. I never imagined Adam once to eat thereof; your Text, Gen. 3. 22. evinceth. 3. But I doubt whether it therefore follows, he fell the next Sabbath af∣ter his Creation, or next Year either. There might be just cause of for∣bearance to eat of that Fruit (notwithstanding his continuance in Paradise) known to him, unknown to us. 4. Cedrenus in Compend. Histor. pag. 4, & 5. relates how some held his aboad there 100 Years, others 7. Mercator in Prolegom. Atlantis Geogr. seems to approve thereof. My self only think it not improbable, but that he might live there some Years; the rather, for that at the birth of his third Son Seth, he was 130 Years old; whereby it seemeth that either other Descents are omit∣ted in Holy Writ, besides those three of Cain, Abel, and Seth, or else the distance of Time betwixt them very long, or his abode in Paradise not so short as is imagined. 5. In Levit. 16. 4. I read of Linnen Garments which the Priest put on, but nothing of the Sacred Robes on which the Pomegranats were wrought:
and Tostatus is of my Opinion, that he wore not then these Robes, upon that place of Levit. who seemeth also to approve Mr. Livly his Opinions touching the difference betwixt the Jewish and Christian Easter-day, in Lev. 16. 9, 10. and Chap. 23. 9, 19. though, methinks, Mr. Lively himself hand∣leth that Point in Olymp. 202. 8. best: yet can I not but highly esteem your judicious Censures therein. 6. Pomegranats might be fair, yet are nothing so pleasing to the Eye as other Fruits; they remain to this day, the forbidden Fruit, being extinct; my meaning heretofore was not the mere Fruit in it self considered, to be one individual, but the Tree with all the Fruit thereon. It was but my haste that bred the ambiguity of Phrase. Though unreasonable Beasts ingender once in a Year, (whereof some Authors doubt in the Lion and Elephant) yet reasonable Man (for the causes often alleadged) might abstain in his innocence a longer season. Thus thanking you for all your kindness, and craving pardon of my te∣diousness, I commend you to the Grace of God. Yours to command in what I may, Thom. Whalley. June 21. LETTER CCLXXXVII. A Letter from Mr. Thomas Whalley, to the most Reverend James Usher late Arch-bishop of Armagh. Right Reverend; I Know not how to requite your kindness for the Treatise of Suchten, but remain your Debtor most thankfully for the same; would God there were any thing wherein my Service might stand you in stead, you shall com∣mand me ever. As touching your demand about the disagreement of Rheinold, with himself and Copernicus: I find, upon due examination, that a Mean Synodick Month is, (as you affitm) in exact measure by division of 360 g. into the just Di∣urnal Videlicet, Supputation, or Longitude of the Moon from the Sun, mentioned in Tab. fol. 46. a. precisely d. i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix 29. 31. 50. 07. 56. 35. 23. 20. 12. 43. and 12.g 11.i 26.ii. that is, in Scrup. Hor. p. h. i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix 29. 12. 44. 03. 10. 38. 09. 20. 05. 05. 12. &c. And that in Praecepto 37, it should be only 29.d. 31.i 50.ii 08.iii feré, and not fully 08iii. according to the Diurn. supputation there largely taken, viz. 12.g. 11.i 26.ii 41.iii 30.iv ferè, and consequently in Scru. hor. 29.d. 12.h. 44.i 03.ii 11.iii ferè, not 12iii. ferè, for those 08. fully make up in hourly Scruples, 12iii fully, not 12iii ferè. But it seems that Rheinold, in delivering his Precept, held it not mate∣rial
to be curious in the precise Number of his Example, but contented him∣self with one more gross, though sufficient to illustrate his Precept. But in his Tables, as was requisite, he was more exact; albeit there, in fol. 84. b. the—or straitness of the Columes, may seem to enforce him to set down 29.d. 31.i 50.ii 07.iii 57.iv h. e. 29.d. 12.h. 44.i 03.ii 10.iii 48.iv (as nighest to the truth) instead of 07.iii 56.iv 35.v and so correspondently in hor. scrup. 10.iii 38.iv 09.v Therefore I think Rheinold thus may well be freed from crossing himself, howsoever I find among some Notes of Mr. Lively, upon that 37th Precept, that he also had observed the like Error in him (as you do) of 12.iii for 11.iii ferè. For Copernicus, I dare not undertake to clear him altogether of differing from himself, considering his Numbers are so often false printed, and his Cal∣culations also not so accurate, and so I can easily yield to you therein; but that Rheinold should differ 9.iii from him, it is no marvel: for where you write he professeth to follow Copernicus; therein, Sir, you may please to conceive it is but in part, or secundum quid, namely, in his Copern. Observa∣tions and Demonstrations, not in his Calculations, wherein he professeth to dissent quite from him, as indeed he doth usually almost every where: Read, if you please, his Epistle, ad Albertum Marchionem, Dedicatory, straight after the midst; and his Preface also to the Prutenick Canons, in the very Front or beginning thereof. I might, I confess, have been more copious in this Answer, and with bet∣ter order, but I hope you will pardon, both slackness heretofore, and haste at this present, in regard of my urgent Occasions: But if this do not satisfy, or be not to your contentment, I shall indeavour to amend the same upon your advertisement sent at any time. And for your other Conjectures of Adam's continuance in Paradise, shall be thankful if you will vouchsafe to impart your learned Meditations, either therein, or in ought else, unto me: whom I beseech the Lord to bless with his Spirit, to his Glory, your Comfort, and the Churches Good; desiring always to be accounted, Yours to command, Thomas Whalley. Aug. 15.
LETTER CCXXXVIII. A Letter from Mr. Arnold Boate to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. May it please your Grace; HAving written to you, this day fortnight, a fourth Letter, since I had the honour to hear last from you; I got three or four days after an Answer upon the three first, dated the 14/24th of April, and give you hum∣ble thanks, for having been pleased to satisfy therein those several Questions, which I had made bold to propound unto you. The second part of your Annales is here extreamly longed for by all of them that have seen the first; but I find, by what you tell me of at this time, that it goeth therewith, as it hath done with my Work against Morinus and Capellus, quòd crescat sub manu: whereby it hath come to pass, that instead of a Prodromus of fourteen or fifteen Sheets, which at first I thought to have had, it is now come to be a compleat Vindiciae Veritatis Hebraicae, of full thirty Sheets. I have made an end a sennight since, and the Printer promiseth me to do as much for his part before the end of the next week; and I hope I shall suddenly find an occa∣sion of sending to London the 250 Copies for Mr. Pullen; wherewith I in∣tend to send likewise the Chronological Work of Labbaeus, the which I bought the next day after I had received your Letter. In my last I told you how I had enquired of Friar Goare about the Addenda ad Eusebii Chronicon Grae∣cum, and what answer I had of him: And by this Letter of his which he hath brought me since, you will find a much more ample account concerning the same. Monsieur Sionita being gone out of Paris into Burgundy, a few months before his decease, and having carried all his Papers and Books with him thither, they are fallen into the hands of some Persons, who will never let them appear: insomuch as Monsieur Auvergne Flavignii his Colleague, in Professione Linguae Hebraicae, who died the matter of half a Year ago, could never hear any news of them, although he used all possible diligence for that end. But as for his Syriack and Arabick Bible, by which those in Le-jayes Edition have been printed, they were two excellent Copies, and of a venera∣ble Antiquity, as he assured me, and I partly discovered my self when I saw them with him, at my first coming to this Town. But I believe it is not un∣known to you, how that in printing the Syrrack, he hath interpolated it in very many places, and so utterly spoiled the Authenticalness of it, according to what I have informed you very amply some Years since; so as the Editores of the Biblia Polyglotta there, must in no wise take his Syriack Edition for their Pattern, or else they will spoil all. I am no ways taken with their de∣signs of putting in so much. For besides that, it is a very superfluous thing to add the Samaritan Pentateuch (of which nothing should be printed but the Discrepancies from ours, which is not an hundredth part, all the rest being, word for word, the same); I cannot see to what purpose it is to—the like Editions with the Hebrew and Greek Texts, with their Latin Tran∣slations, and with the Vulgar Latin, these being so easy to be had apart, and no Body being without them: And I would think it much more commenda∣ble, and of much more utility for the Publick, and for themselves too, (in regard of the ready venting of the Impression) to print nothing else but the Syriack, Chaldee, Arabick, Ethiopick, and the Pentateuch in the Sama∣ritan Language, with the Latin Translations. And that Edition too will
not be worth a Rush, if it be not done with the self-same exactness as the Biblia Regia were; whereas those of Le jay are basely defaced with innume∣rable Faults, and therefore fit for nothing but to be burnt. When I shall send you any Books hereafter, I will observe your directions, of addressing them to Mr. Booth at Calais; being most heartily sorry that Theophanes has been so unreasonably long before he came to your hands. Thus humbly kissing your Hands, and praying God to bless his Church, and us your Ser∣vants, with the prolonging of your days in perfect health and strength, I remain ever, Your Grace's most humble and most devoted Servant, Arnold Boate. If it be not too troublesome for your Grace, I would very gladly know, in your next Letter, what Edition or Manuscript-Copy hath been followed in the  Bible lately printed at London, whether it hath  done, and what the Bulk and Price of it is. I delivered unto Mr. Balthazar your Letter to him, and to Mr. Buxtorf, and a Copy of your Epistle. LETTER CCLXXXIX. Illustrissimo & Amplissimo Domino, D. Jacobo Usserio, Episcopo Armacano.Jacobus Goar Ordinis Praedicatorum. S. P. SEgnius est, fateor, in acceptum beneficium, acceptum olim, dico, Tuâ eruditione plenum codicem animi non ingrati testimonium, & mutuâ aestimatione nondum merita rependendâ ad Tuas, vir Illustrissime, proficisci tardiores. Proficiscuntur inquam, à beneficio extortae, verum ex officio spon∣taneo qua excidere dignae fuerant, obsequio levissimo tentant mercari bene∣volentiam tuam. Clar. Bootio, quid de Collectaneis cunctis Eusebianis dicam, an Scaligerianis, cujus Authoris, & ex quibus Codicibus prodierint, quaesi∣visti. Is ad me, qui Codicem Regium Syncelli, in quo laboravit Scaliger, contrectaverim, quique ad Syncelli laborem, passus{que} pedemque ex parte fuerim insequutus, quaesitum retulit, & me resolvere impulit. Ut comperi enuncio. Apud Batavos Collectanea sua congessit Scaliger, neque ex Regiis Parisiensibus in unum cuncta comportavit, addidit quandoque propria, Regia etiamnum collegit, & ex singulis . Chronici pars prior ex Regio eodem, quo usus sum, & Syncelli  simis, quae ad pag. 521, 522. annotavi, demptis, tota prodiit  nomine & quasi Eusebii. Stylo exaratam cum Syncelli textu comparavi &  pag. 504. & seqq. Quae sequitur, Eusebii rursus nomen, & ejus  fert, quae non nisi ex methodo & ordine Eusebii est. Audens dico & since∣rus; ad Eusebii Chronici & Latina Hieronymi verba ex Syncelli verbis & propria Minervâ  plasmavit Scaliger. Quo motus Eusebium repa∣rare voluit. Quo ordine Latinae interpretationis; cui tamen nonnulla ve∣lut è cerebro Palladem novam, Coss. nimirum numerum & alia adjungere,
quia sic scripsisse somniavit Eusebium, non est ver . Subduntur ad Eusebium, ut putat, Addenda, quae Thesauri illius pag. 213. quae ex Regiis, ut mihi suadetur, suppeditavit, & quae eadem in notis ad eadem Addenda à Casaubono accepisse testatur Thesauri Temporum pag. 264. Quo numero no∣tentur illa in Regiis, mihi nondum compertum.  hinc in—Nice∣phori Breviarium ex Regio. Aegyptiacae Africani Dynastiae ex Syncello—prout mihi observatur pag. 520. pars alia non minima ex Fastis Siculis sive Chroni∣co Alexandrino (quod foede, Madero teste, mutilavit) transcripta, quae ad notarum pag. notandus ipse reus fatetur ante prolata de Eusebio veterum testimonia. Haec de Scalligeri Eusebio & Collectaneis. Regius porrò Codex unde Syncellus meus & Scaligeri Eusebius Graecus, continet Nicephori : Syncelli : Theophanis, publici juris propediem faciendi, post Diocletiani, in quo Syncellus desiit, tempora, parem  Historiam: Leonis Armenii vitam imperfectam brevemque, authore Anonymo: Leonis Grammatici ca  edendi, non illepidam ad Leone praefato ad Leonem Philosophum narrationem ab eodem scripta: ac denique incerti Authoris & mutili, alio charactere   de Scaligeri Eusebio haec visa. His utinam accepto beneficio & humanitate  vel quem colo virum illu∣strissimum in aliquo mihi devineiam. Vale. LETTER CCXC. A Letter from the Learned Nicolaus Mercator to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Viro Reverendissimo Domino Jacobo Usserio Armachano; Domino suo quâ par est observantiâ colendo.Londinum.Reverendissime at{que} Illustrissime Domine; DUO sunt spectanda in Cycli cujus{que} inventione, primum congruentia cum motibus coelestibus, & alterum commoditas; quae quidem ambo eâ industriâ temperanda venrunt, ut neutrum alteri deroget; sed periodus euadat utro{que} commendabilis. Secundum haec facilè pronunciatur de prae∣stantia cujus{que} periodi. Nam Julianus quidem annus Gregoriano multō com∣modior, sed minus accuratus est; unde certamen etiamnum hodie viget, uter utri praeferendus sit, cum uter{que} suum commodum habeat adverso incommodo junctum. Apparet autem,  habitâ ratione potius quàm facilitatis, Gregorianam periodum Tetraeteridi Julianae a multis praelatam fuisse quam∣vis centuplo majorem. Quod si igitur Hebdomecontaeteris inveniatur Tria∣contatrieteride non paulò accuratior; propter hoc ipsum praeferetur, quam∣vis duplo & octavâ propemodum parte major: praesertim cùm longè infra Tetracosieterida subsistat, cujus partem sextam non multum excedit, tatis humanae modulo contenta, quam Solon apud Herodotum 70 annis circum∣scribit. Sed accuratiorem esse Hebdomecontaeterida, probo ex Tabulis, quot∣quot post exquisitas Tychonis observationes prodierunt in lucem. Nam Sol∣stitium Hybernum verum currente Periodi Julianae anno 714 incidit secundum Parisinas, Lansbergianas, Philolaicas die 10 Januarii: Deinde anno post Christum currente 5000 bruma secundum easdem, nec non Rudolphinas at{que}
Danicas, congruit 17 Novembris. Anni Tropici interjecti sunt novies mille, dies autem 3287186. Atqui totidem dies colligunt aetates 128 & anni 40, hoc est anni IXM civiles nostro modo in Hebdomecontaëteridas tributi. Verùm Triacontatrieterides 272 & anni 24, constituentes & ipsae annos IXM, continent dies solum 3287182. Ergo IXM annorum spatio Triacontatrieteris quatriduo solido deficit a coelestis anni quantitate exactâ. Tetracosieterides autem 22½ numerant dies 3287182½. Unde patet meum Cyclum & Grego∣riano & isto 33 annorum perfectiorem esse. Nam & aequinoctium vernum verum anno post Christum 2001 contingit juxta Rudolphinas, Parisinas, Philolaicas die 7 Martii; & rursus anno post Christum 9001 juxta easdem die 16 Januarii. Anni intercedunt 7000 tropici, dies autem 2556700: To∣tidem verò dies constituunt nobis centum aetates praecisè. Sola igitur perio∣dus LXX annorum inventa est, quae inde à condito mundo, & ab hoc tem∣pore porrò referret Solem quotannis eodem die ad initium Capricorni; sola, quae aequinoctium vernum verum diei stato affixum retineret in posterum per tot annorum millia. Nam Gregorianae rationes, quemadmodum & Tria∣contatrieteridis, VIIM annorum decursu à coelo aberrant integro ferè triduo; quod in Gregoriana periodo eò minus ferendum videtur, quo ipsa est pro∣lixior, quippe quae vix ter vel quater replicari possit, quin errorem continuò sensibilem incurrat. Ut taceam, quod ipsâ intercalandi tarditate minus prom∣tè subveniat necessitati restitutionis. Causa verò istius aberrationis manifesta est motus apogaei Solaris; nam vestrae rationes quantitatem anni mediam ex∣primunt, meae veram. Illa semper manet eadem, undecun{que} annum ordia∣mur: haec alia est, si initium repetamus à bruma; alia, si ab autumno. Nos Romanorum consuetudinem probantes auspicamur annum Civilem à bruma; quam Calendis Januarii, & aequinoctium vernum, tanquam anni Lunaris & Ecclesiastici metam, Calendis Aprilis affigimus. His igitur duobus cardinibus rationes anni adstringendae fuerunt, ut congruerent ipsi brumae quidem inde à primordio rerum, propter insignem utilitatem, quam haec anni forma Chro∣nologiae praessae; aequinoctio vero non nisi in futurum, ut celebritati Paschali consuleretur. Quid enim annon Concilii Nicaeni temporibus aequinoctium à Patribus in XXI Martii die defixum fuit, ita ut propter Juhaei quadrantis  XX & XXI diem occuparet quemadmodum loquitur Petavius libr. V de doctr. temp. cap. 3. Deinde cum ad Nicaenam stationem aequi∣noctium medium (cur medium dicat potius qùam verum, nihil video) re∣vocari placuisset, decem dies praetereundi ac dissimusandi fuerunt. Verine aequi∣noctii est Nicaena illa statio an medii Vel potius, quaenam est Nicaena statio annon XX ac XXI dies Martii atqui huic stationi non medium aequinoctium congruebat Nicaeni Concilii tempore; sed verum. Cum{que} emendatio Gre∣goriana ad XX ac XXI diem Martii revocârit aequinoctium verum, non me∣dium; cur obsecro adscitâ quantitate anni mediâ potius quàm verâ, dilabi rursus patitur aequinoctium verum ab illa statione, quam affectârat tan∣toperè nam ad retinendum in statione aequinoctium verum, opus est quantitate anni verâ quae à mediâ si fixus esset apogaeus, nullâ re dif∣ferret; at nunc VIIM annorum spatio divertit propemodum triduo: Quan∣doquidem apogaeum moveri evincunt inter alia antiquissimae tres eclipses Ba∣bylone observatae, Archonte Athenis Phanostrato, & anno proximo post eum Evandro, quarum intervalla nisi quatuor vel quin{que} horis abludunt à vero, quod non puto quenquam existimare velle, necesse est, ut apogaeus moveatur: sin rectè assignata fuerunt, ut haeserit istis temporibus circa priores partes Geminorum Perspicuum est jgitur, quâ ratione quaestio de Solaris apogaei motu huc pertineat & quòd Cydo meo LXX annorum nullus detr : Superest ut coodior quo{que} ostendatur isto 33 annorum. Nam per  tempora per quam oportunum est, nec infrequens Divinis Oraculi quae non solum exitum Israëlitarum aetatibus; sed aetatem
hominis LXX annis; & LXX annis sabbathum terrae sanctae: & totidem an∣norum hebdomadibus Unctionem Messiae praesiniuint. Proinde quemad∣modum Hebraeorum Jubilaei septies septenis annis distinguebantur: ita nostra aetas spetuagenis, & Cyclus seriarum septies septuagenis annis absolvitur. Imò si Matthaeus Evangelista praecipuas mundi aetates generationibus distin∣guit, at{que} in eo septenarium numerum affectat; licebit & nobis mundana tempora aetatibus metiri, & septenarium sacrum sponte oblatum amplecti, qui Naturae humanae familiaris est adeò, ut non solùm integram nostram aetatem coronet; sed in partes digestam insuper Climactericis insigniat. Deinde prom∣tum & facile est cuilibet in Arithmeticis leviter versato progressionem septua∣genarii numeri memoriter continuare, quo in 33 annorum periodo vix pro∣cedat: quemadmodum & distributio cujus bet annorum summae multò faci∣lior est in Hebdomecontaëteridas, quàm in Triacontatrieteridas: nam aequè facile est multiplicare vel dividere per 70, at{que} per 7, nec minus facile per 7 at{que} per 4; quare operandi facilitate Cyelus 7 orius vix cedit ipsi quatuor an∣norum periodo. Ac licet ex 33 & 37 annorum Cyclis componatur meus LXX annorum; hujus tamen, utpote rotundi observatio commodior accidit imaginationi, quae naturaliter non acquiescit prius, quàm imparem numerum multiplicando ad rotunditatem perduxerit. Postremò quanquam periodus feriarum  sequitur ultrò Cyclum LXX annorum, etiamsi nemo illud curet, adeò{que} nullam prolixitudine suâ difficultatem parit; tamen abs{que} hoc foret, periodus septem aetatum non tantùm aequè facilè, sed commodius etiam sive per literas conservatur, sive traditione propogatur, at{que} ista 231 annorum, quâ videlicet , at{que} ideo corruptioni vel abolitioni minus oportuna est. Hisee, o decus ingens Anglae, velificari in praesens de∣bui sublimi tuo favori, quo ut porro adspirare meis studiis digneris supplex oro. Reverendissimi at{que} Illustrissimi Domini mei devotus cultor, Nicolaus Mercater. Hasniae, Martii 4/14. 1653/4. LETTER CCXCI. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Henricus Valesius. Viro Doctissimo D. Henrico Valesio. Lutetiam Parisiorum.Vir Clarissimo; MItto ad te non Eufebium solum sed caeteros quo{que} Ecclesiastieae Histo∣riae Scriptores à D. Henrico Savilio cum Manuscripto suo codice (quem in bombycinâ papyro descriptum publicae Oxoniensis Academiae Bib∣liothecae donavit) diligenter collatos: Ubi & lacunas in libris de vita Con∣stanti suppletas invenies. Plura ad te scribere volentem caligantes oculi prohibent: Hoc tamen supprimere non valentem, Seldenum nostrum, jam septuagenarium, Pridie Kalendas Decembris (Julianas) magno nostro cum
luctu ex hac vitâ decessisse. Te vero ad Reipublicae literariae bonum, diu velit Deus esse superstitem quod ex animo exoptat Studiorum tuorum Fautor Summus Ja. Usserius Armachanus. Lond. xiii Kalend. Januar. Anno Christi 1654. (Stylo vetere.) LETTER CCXCII. A Letter from the Right Reverend Jos. Hall Bishop of Norwich, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend, and Honourable; WIth never enow thanks for this precious Gift which I receive from your Grace's Hand. I have, with no small eagerness and delight, turned over these your learned and accurate Annals, wondring not a little at that your indefatigable Labour, which you have bestowed upon a Work fetch'd together out of such a World of Monuments of Antiquity; whereby your Grace hath better merited the title of , than those on whom it was formerly imposed; But in looking over this admirable Pile of History, my curiosity cast me upon the search of two over-famous Per∣sons, Simon Magus, and Apòllonius Tyanaeus; the particularities of whose Sto∣ry seems so much to be concerned, in the disquisition of that Antichrist, lately set on foot by Grotius, and Dr. Hammond. I had hoped to have found a just account, both of their Times, and their Actions, and Events, in this your compleat Collection: Which missing of, I have taken the boldness to give this touch of it to your Grace, as being desirous to know, Whether you thought good to omit it, upon the opinion of the invalidity of those Records, which mention the Acts and Issue of those two great Juglers; or whether you have pleased to reserve them for some further opportunity of Relation. Howsoever, certainly (my Lord) it would give great satisfa∣ction to many, and amongst them, to my self, if by your accurate search, I might understand whether the Chronology of Simon Magus his Prodigies and affectation of Deity, may well stand with St. Paul's Prediction of an , as following it in time, after the writing of that second Epi∣stle to the Thessalonians. I must confess, if the Times may accord, there may seem to be some probability in casting Antichrist upon an Age not so far remote from the Apostolick. as hath been commonly reputed; since the Apostle speaks of it as a thing so near hand, that the ordinary Christians of Thessalonica were well acquainted with the bar of his Revelation. I beseech your Grace to pardon this bold importunity of him, who, out of the consciousness of his deep devotion to you, and his dependence upon your oracular Sentence in doubts of this Nature, have presumed thus to in∣terrupt your higher Thoughts: In the desire and hope whereof, I humbly take leave, and profess my self, Your Grace's in all Christian Observance, and fervent Devotion, Jos. Norvic. Higham, May 1 1654.
LETTER CCXCIII. A Letter from the Right Reverend J. Bramhall Bishop of Derry, (afterward Primate of Ireland) to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. Most Reverend; I Thank God I do take my Pilgrimage patiently, yet I cannot but condole the Change of the Church and state of England. And more in my Pilgrimage than ever, because I dare not witness and declare to that stray∣ing Flock of our Brethren in England, who have misled them, and who they are that feed them. But that your Lordship may be more sensible of the Churches Calamities, and of the Dangers she is in of being ruin'd, if God be not mercifull unto Her, I have sent you a part of my Discoveries, and it from credible hands, at this present having so sure a Messenger, and so fit an Opportunity. It plainly appears, that in the Year 1646, by order from Rome, above, 100 of the Romish Clergy were sent into England, consisting of English, Scotch, and Irish, who had been educated in France, Italy, Germany, and Spain; part of these within the several Schools there appointed for their Instructions. In each of these Romish Nurseries, these Scholars were taught several handicraft Trades and Callings, as their ingenuities were most bend∣ing, besides their Orders, or Functions of that Church. They have many yet at Paris a fitting up to be sent over, who twice in the week oppose one the other; one pretending Presbytery, the other Independency; some Anabaptism, and other contrary Tenents, dangerous and prejudicial to the Church of England, and to all the Reformed Churches here abroad. But they are wisely preparing to prevent these Designs, which I heartily wish were considered in England among the Wise there. When the Romish Orders do thus argue Pro and Con, there is appointed one of the Learned of those Convents to take Notes and to judg: And as he finds their fancies, whether for Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, Atheism, or for any new Tenents, so accordingly they be to act, and to exercise their Wits. Upon their Permission when they be sent abroad, they enter their Names in the Convent Registry, also their Licences: If a Franciscan, if a Dominican, or Jesuit, or any other Order, having several Names there entered in their Licence; in case of a discovery in one place, then to fly to another, and there to change their Names or Habit. For an assurance of their constancy to their several Orders, they are to give monthly Intelligence to their Fraternities, of all Affairs where-ever they be dispers'd: so that the English abroad, know News better than ye at home. When they return into England, they are taught their Lesson, to say (if any enquire from whence they come) that they were poor Christians for∣merly that fled beyond-Sea for their Religion-sake, and are now returned, with glad News, to enjoy their Liberty of Conscience. The 100 Men that went over 1646, were most of them Soldiers in the Parliament's Army, and were daily to correspond with those Romanists in our late King's Army, that were lately at Oxford, and pretended to fight for his sacred Majesty: For at that time, there were some Roman-Catholicks who did not know the Design a contriving against our Church and State of England.
But the Year following, 1647, many of those Romish Orders, who came over the Year before, were in consultation together, knowing each other. And those of the King's Party asking some why they took with the Parlia∣ment's side, and asking others whether they were bewitched to turn Puritans, not knowing the Design: But at last, secret Bulls, and Licences being pro∣duced by those of the Parliament's side, it was declared between them, there was no better Design to confound the Church of England, than by pretending Liberty of Conscience. It was argued then, that England would be a second Holland, a Common-Wealth; and if so, what would be∣come of the King It was answered, Would to God it were come to that point. It was again reply'd, your selves have preached so much against Rome, and his Holiness, that Rome and her Romanists will be little the bet∣ter for that Change: But it was answered, You shall have Mass sufficient for 100000 in a short space, and the Governors never the wiser. Then some of the mercifullest of the Romanists said, This cannot be done unless the King die: upon which Argument, the Romish Orders thus licensed, and in the Parliament Army, wrote unto their several Convents, but especially to the Sorbonists whether it may be scrupled to make away our late Godly King, and his Majesty his Son, our King and Master; who, blessed be God, hath escaped their Romish Snares laid for him It was returned from the Sorbonists, That it was lawful for Roman Catholicks to work Changes in Governments for the Mother-Churches Advancement, and chiefly in an He∣retical Kingdom; and so lawfully make away the King. Thus much, to my knowledg, have I seen and heard since my leaving your Lordship, which I thought very requisite to inform your Grace; for my self would hardly have credited these things, had not mine Eyes seen sure Evidence of the same. Let these things sleep within your gracious Lord∣ship's Brest, and not awake but upon sure grounds, for this Age can trust no Man, there being so great Fallacy amongst Men. So the Lord preserve your Lordship in Health for the Nations Good, and the Benefit of your Friends; which shall be the Prayers of Your humble Servant, J. Derensis. July 20. 1654.
LETTER CCXCIV. Viro Clarissimo & Doctissimo Jacobo Usserio Armachano Henricus Valesius S. IN aere Tuo me esse semper existimavi, Vir clarissime, ex quo Annales Ve∣teris Testam. abs te editos ad me misisti. Qui liber si mihi coràm traditus fuisset ab eo cui id Officium mandaveras, jamdudùm Tibi gratias egissem per literas. Sed quoniam eum Virum postea convenire non potui, Officium quod tamdiu à me dilatum est, nunc tandem oblatâ scribendi opportunitate, Tibi persolvo. Ac primùm ago gratias, quantas possum maximas, ob illud literarium munus, quo me honorandum esse censuisti. Sunt quidem omnes libri tui eruditissimi & accuratissimi: sed hic prae caeteris abundè testatur, quantus sis in omni genere doctrinae. At{que} ut ejus lectione multùm me profecisse ingenue fateor, ita etiam ex secundâ parte ejusdem operis quam à te editam esse nuper accepi, spero non mediocrem fructum me esse coepturum. Alterum deinde beneficium abs te peto, quod pro Tuâ singulari humanitate praestitu∣rum te esse non diffido. Eusebii historiam Ecclesiasticam, & Libros de Vita Imperatoris Constantini cum novâ interpretatione mea, & Annotationibus propediem Typographis commissurus sum; Ad hanc novam editionem, trium duntaxat Scriptorum codicum auxilio sum usus. Nam Itali, quorum subsi∣dium postulaveram, nihil mihi praeter verba inania contulerunt. Cum igitur ex notis Tuis in Polycarpi martyrium compererim, esse apud vos Savili∣anum exemplar, quod quidem optimum esse conjicio, abs te etiam at{que} etiam peto, ut de eo exemplari certiorem me facias, primùm sitnè in membranis: deindè an quatuor libri de vita Constantini in eo legantur integri. Postremo, utrum varias lectiones ex eo codice per te nancisci possim, saltem librorum devita Constantini. Hi enim inquinatissimi ad nos pervenerunt, & multis in locis mutili. Multùm Tibi debebit Eusebius noster, si id mihi praestare volueris, nec Italicorum codicum auxilium posthac magnoperè desiderabo, si Anglicani hujus praesidium nactus fuero. Equidem nolim te Vir Clarissime laborem conferendi codicis sustinere. Absit à me, ut te, tantum Virum, & gravissimis studiis occupatum, tam molesto labore mei causâ defungi velim. Sed si quis fortè apud vos studiosus eum librum tuâ causâ conferre voluerit, cum vulgatis editionibus, aut si quis fortasse jam contulit, rogo ut varias lectiones mecum communices. Ego vicissim tibi spondeo, honorificam men∣tionem, et Tui, & ejus qui hanc operam subierit, in meis annotationibus me esse facturum. Vale Vir Clarissime, & omnium Anglorum doctissime. Tibi addictissimus, Henr. Valesius. Lutetiae Parisiorum, iii Nonas Decemb. An. Christi 1654.
LETTER CCXCV. A Letter from the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh, to the Learned Henricus Valesius. Viro doctissimo D. Henrico Valesio.Vir Clarissime; EUsebium nostrum tandèm salvum ad te pervenisse gaudeo.  illas, longè antequàm Genevensis editio lucem aspexit, à D. Henrico Savilio in eo fuisse annotatas, tibi confirmare possum. Quem & ex proprio Manuscripto suo eas se desumpsisse nòn semel dixisse mihi memini. Et alio hic quàm Christophorsoni codice eum fuisse usum; Tam ex lacunis in libris de vitâ Constantini suppletis, quam ex appendice ad finem Theodoreti histo∣riae adjectâ, tutè poteris cognoscere. Pervolutaverat diligenter, per aliquot annos magnus ille vir, tùm Pontificiam Vaticanam, tùm Viennensem Impe∣ratoriam, tùm Vincentii Pinelli, & aliorum tunc temporis clarorum Italorum privatas Bibliothecas, ex quibus rariora quae{que} suâ manu descripta, in patriam secum detulit; Quorum nonnulla ipse quo{que} in libello, de anno solari ve∣terum Macedonum commemoro. Quanto verò studio omnia omnium loco∣rum scrinia libraria, ad perficiendum suum Chrysostomum, rimatus ille fuerit, quis ignorat Cujus editionem ad Rempub. Augustanam missam, quùm Marcus Velserus primum usurpasset oculis sublatis exclamâsse fertur; Nil ri∣turum alias, nil ortum tale fatemur. Ne quis ad humile quid & vulgare de∣mittere illum se potuisse existimet; sed qualiscum{que} demum codex noster fue∣rit, arbitratu tuo uti eo tibi licebit, donèc Eusebii tui tantopere desideratam editionem absolveris. Interea nostrum ad te mitto, de LXX Interpretum Versione Syntagma: Ex quo Patricium Junium jamdudum vitâ esse functum, intelliges. Te autèm diu adhuc superstitem conservet summus ille Deus, in quo vivius & movemur & sumus: quod secundis votis ab eo expetit Tui amantissimus. J. U. A. Junii die 15/25, Anno 1655.
LETTER CCXCVI. A Letter from Dr. Barlow (now Bishop of Lincoln) to the most Reverend James Usher late Arch-bishop of Armagh. My good Lord; IN obedience to your Grace's Command, I have made search for those Books (in the Passages in them) which you enquired after: and in an∣swer to your Queries, I do hereby make this return. Q. 1. For the first Query, Whether in 1 Chron. 1. Cainan be in both places in the Moscovitical Translation Sol. Be pleased to know, that 1 Chron. 1. 18. the Biblia Moscovitica, have not Kainan between Arphaxad and Sala, as the Septuagint have. For where∣as in the LXX 'tis, . The Moscovitical Translation hath only thus (leaving Kainan out) . Arphaxad begot Sala, and Sala begot Eber. But, ver. 24. of the same Chapter, the LXX Translators and the Moscovite agree, and both have Kainan. For as it is in the Septuagint . So in the other, , &c. the Sons of Sem, Arphaxad, Kainan, Sala. Q. 2. For the second Query, concerning the Passage in Genebrard; be pleased to know, that Genebrard, in Epistolâ ad Lectorem Psalmis praefixâ, ju∣stifying the Septuagint against the Hebrew, (as the Masorites have made it, with Points and Distinctions) he hath these words; Masoretas versus confu∣disse, ac misuisse, ut proinde metrica veterum Carminum ratio periret, quae tem∣pore Septuaginta integra erat. Quod sane extra Poëtas aliquando accidit. Ut. 2. Paral. 30. versu 18. qui clauditur per , Pro. ut proinde Kimchi eum in sequentem extendat, Pro omni qui cor suum praeparat, &c. Q. 3. For the third Query, Whether in Ptolomy's , it be , in the Manuscript Copies Be pleased to know that I have consulted two excellent Manuscripts, and 'tis in both, . Q. 4. For the fourth Query, Whether it be , or . I have consulted two Manuscripts now in my custody, and they very fair ones; in the first, and more ancient Manuscript, in the , under the Title of , we read thus: 1. . 2. . 3. . So it is writ in the Manuscript, where  is manifestly . For, 1. So he writes  [, in the Manuscript] pag. 42. and  [ in the Manuscript] pag. 271. 2. And in the same , pag. 55. of the Kings of Egypt, hav∣ing named one Ptolomy Evergetes, then Ptolomi's more ,
) do immediatly follow, and next after them another Ptolomy Evergetes, thus— (i. e.) . So. pag. 231.  is writ thus, . 3. And in the other Manuscripts, which is later, tis distinctly writ, , and . So that I conceive that 'tis beyond all question, that it must be read , not . Q. 5. For the last Question, Whether the Doxology be in the Lord's Prayer in the Moscovitical Translation, I can return no answer satisfactory: for though I know the Character, and can read the Language, and so may know the proper Names which are contained in all Languages; yet not un∣derstanding the Language, I cannot assure you that the Doxology is there. In our ancient Saxon Manuscript of Gospels, the Doxology is wanting, both in Matth. 6. 9. and Luke 11. 1. In Matthew the Lord's Prayer ends thus—7 ne gelaede þu us on costnunge, ac alys us of yfle soðlice, (i. e.) And lead thou us not into temptation, but free us truly from evil. 'Tis the same in Luke, only the word soðlice is not there. So it is also in Fox's printed Copy of the Saxon. The Doxology is wanting also in an old Latin Manuscript of the Gospels in Saxon Letters, both in Matthew and Luke. My Duty, and humble Service remembred; I beg your Grace's Bene∣nediction, and Pardon, for the rude scrible, of (My Lord) Your Grace's most humble Servant, Thomas Barlow. Q. Coll. Oxon. Sept. 28. 1655. LETTER CCXCVII. A Letter from Mr. Herbert Thorndike, to the most Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. My Lord; I Have perused Bar Nachman upon Gen. 12. 40. but do not find that he begins the 430 Years from the Birth of Isaac. He recites the Exposition of Jarchi, that the 400 Years begin from the Birth of Isaac, because it is said, Thy Seed shall be a Pilgrim, but the 30 from the Decree between the cloven Creatures. Which, though he confesses to be the Opinion of their Doctors, he easily refutes, because Abraham was 75 Years old when he came out of Haran, much more then. This, he says, Seder Olam salves, by saying, that Abraham was but 70 Years old when God made that Covenant with him, and that he returned afterwards into Mesopotamia, and left it finally when he was but 75 Years old. But this being in his Eye but a Midrash, he says, according to the Letter, that when it is said, Thy Seed shall be a Pilgrim 400 Years, the intent is, only to express the time in gross, not to de∣termine
precisely the time of it, which he reserves a latitude for, by men∣tioning the fourth Generation, and the wickedness of the Amorite to be compleated, which occasioned also 40 Years stay in the Wilderness. And so the construction of the words he makes to be this, and the Pilgrimage of the Children of Israel in Egypt, was till 430 Years that they dwelt there, until that were fulfilled to them which was said, In a Land not their own. Which is the same phrase, saith he, with that of Deut. 11. 14. And the days that we travelled from Kadesh Barnea, till we passed the Brook Zered, were 38 Years. For this time was not spent in travelling from Kadesh Barnea, for there they staid many Years, and passed the Brook Zered, where 38 Years were accomplished. And so Dan. 12. 12. Happy is he that expects and attains to 1335 days. Which is not, to those days, but to the end of them. Here, I confess, having Jarchi his reason to begin the 400 Years at Isaac, and this to add 30, I thought he might have taken that course. But then the Chil∣dren of Israel must have dwelt 240 Years in Egypt, which is with him an in∣convenience, because the Text  by Gemara, signifies, that they were to stay in Egypt but 210. But another consideration he hath, of good account to my thinking; That the Revelation of 400 Years, tending to li∣mit the time when God would give his Seed the Land which presently he pro∣mised him, it is to be understood from the time of the Promise. And be∣cause then they must have dwelt in Egypt 220 Years, or thereabouts, he says, if the 210 Years be a Tradition in Israel, it may be salved, by imputing it to the Sons of Jacob only, not reckoning the 17 Years that he lived in it to be of the number. For thus, 227 in Egypt, 190 from the birth of Isaac unto Jacob's going down, and 13 from the Promise to the birth of Isaac, make 430, so I understand him. He saith further, That the 30 Years must be un∣derstood to be added for the sins of the Israelites in Egypt, Idolatry, neglect of Circumcision, and the like, upon this rule, that all Promises that are not with Oath, imply a tacit Condition: And that, upon the same account, their Pilgrimage is prolonged 40 Years in the Wilderness, a Land not theirs, but belonging to the Serpents and Scorpions. This is the effect of his Commen∣tary upon that place, which being close couched, I would not undertake to abridg further, if perhaps any thing in it may prove Novelty to your Grace. As for Abarbniel, I can easily assure, that he understands the calling of Abra∣ham, Gen. 12. 1. to have been out of Charan, for he calls the Opinion of Abenezra expounding that Text of his calling out of Ur, which we follow, as agreeing with S. Stephen, , a plain Lye: for, he doth not believe at all that Terah or Abraham came out of Ur of the Chaldees upon any call of God, but observes all the Text of Gen. 11. 25—to intimate the misfor∣tunes of Terah in Ur; that whereas the Posterity of Sem had Children at 30 Years, he had none till 70. That, whereas they begat Sons and Daugh∣ters, he had but three Sons; that of these three, one died young, another having married, had no Children, and the like: and infers, that these were the occasion to resolve him to leave Ur, and to come into Canaan, whether as more healthy, or whether as more fortunate, according to his Astrology. Something nevertheless he delivers, which seems to justify S. Stephen's words, in that he holds both Ur and Charan to have been in Mesopotamia beyond Eu∣phrates, according to the words of Joshua 24. 2. For, though Chaldea he supposes to be on this side the River, yet he supposes that a place beyond the River may well be called Ur of the Chaldees. As, for the purpose, if we suppose that the Chaldees under Nimrod should conquer beyond the Ri∣ver, this place, as well as those we read of Gen. 10. 10, 11. which he thus understandeth, that Nimrod went forth from those parts, when he said afore,
that the beginning of his Kingdom was, to inlarge it in those parts which he mentions afterwards. In this then he seems to comply with S. Stephen's words. But for the coming of Abraham out of Ur, he acknowledges no Call of God, though he maintains the Truth of the Tradition, that Abraham was to have been cast into the Furnace of Fire, because he disputed against Nimrod's Gods; and that being cast into Prison in the mean time, he was let go, to avoid further inconvenience; which concurring with Terah in his former de∣liberations, resolved them to go from thence into Charan, a place of the Country of Syria, out of the Dominion of the Chaldeans. And this is that which I find Abarbniel acknowledg that they have by Tradition. Now I cannot say that I have found any thing in Bereshith Rabba, that he came out of Charan after the death of Terah; but I conceive I have found something that might move a Man to think so. For there it is said, that one R. Isaac, observing that there wants 60 Years to the death of Terah, by the time of Abraham's travelling, excuses it by the mystical sense, that the Wicked are said to be dead when they are alive. Abraham, he says, was afraid that they would blaspheme God's Name, if his Servant should forsake his Father in his old Age. Whereupon God said, I will dispense with the honour of Father and Mother in thee, though in no body else: And besides, he shall die be∣fore thou shalt go forth. Which, in regard of the Promises, I should take to signify, that it shall be said in the Scripture, Terah died, &c. to wit, in the mystical sense. It followeth there immediatly, that R. Judah, and R. Nehemiah both said, that there was a twofold . R. Judah said, one out of Aram Naharaim, and another out of Aram Nachor. R. Nehemiah said, one out of Aram Naharaim, and Aram Nachor, and another when he blew him from between the cloven Sacrifices to Haran back again: To wit, according to Seder Olam, as I conceive it. Which I would not omit to put down, because it evidences a calling out of Ur, according to the old Rab∣bies, a M as Abenezra. To which purpose there is another Midrash afore upon Jerem. L I. 9. in the Name of Rabbi Azariah. We have cured Babylon; to wit, in the days of Enoch; Prusthel was not healed, in the days of the Flood: Let her alone at the division of Languages: And let us go every Man to his own Land, in the days of Abraham. For here Abraham's going forth is from Babel, that is, from among the Chaldeans. This is all that I have found, for Zoar is not to be found in our Colledg Library, and therefore I purpose to write to Mr. Pocock to look into it at Oxford to the same purpose. My Lord, I have dealt with Dr. Walton, as in a Business that I am affected with. He shewed the difficulty to be doubled by the Arabick, following the Roman Copy. I proposed to change the order of the Roman Copy, re∣taining the Text. To which he answered, upon consideration, that the in∣convenience was incurred already, because many transpositions are passed in the Kings and Proverbs, so that it is too late to avoid it in Jeremy. I propo∣sed to print a twofold Greek, one to answer the Hebrew out of the Antwerp Copy, another to answer the Arabick in a space below. But he stood so hard upon the foresaid Reasons, that I am afraid I shall not prevail. As for Manasse Ben Israel, I had agreed with Dr. Walton, upon a day and hour to go to him. But meeting him occasionally the day before, he pro∣posed to him, but could not learn from any thing that he knew, concerning any received number of Marginal Readings. And for the saying of Elias, he utterly slighted it, not acknowledging, or not discovering any thing he knew of it. Hereupon I thought it not fit for me, equally a stranger to him, to meet him in the same thing, till I have got some introduction to him, (for I hear he is like to stay here a time) and then I shall remember your Question of R. Judah, which I count desperate, unless Broughton had told
us what he hath written, or that he is one of them that are recorded in the Talmud. This is that which I have at present for answer to your Grace's Letter. And if there be any thing which you please to command me further, I shall be very glad to be imploy'd in it. In the mean time, with my humble Service, com∣mending my self to your Grace's Prayers, I pray God to keep your Grace in good health, and take leave to rest, My Lord, Your Graces humble Servant in Christ, H. Thorndike. Novemb. 10. 1655. LETTER CCXCVIII. A Letter from the Learned J. Dallaeus, to the most Reverend James Usher late Arch-bishop of Armagh. A Monsieur Monsieur USSERIUS Archevesqued' Armach. QUam ante aliquot menses accepi eruditissimam de Septuaginta Interpreti∣bus disputationem tuam, Reverendissime Usseri, postquam ex Calandrino nostro intellexi eam à te mihi destinatam ac dono missam fuisse; primum fa∣teor, vehementer in Domino sum laetatus me apud eum virum, quem ob sum∣mam doctrinam & in omni literarum genere eruditionem cum eximia pietate atque probitate, & singulari candore conjunctam plurimum semper suspexi, in aliquo esse numero ac pretio. Nunc vero quod superest, quantas possum gratias pro tua illa bonitate ago, qui hominem peregrinum & ignotum tuo munere dignum esse existimaveris. Ac libellum aureum ego quidem & avidissime legi, & legam ut spero postea non semel, & servabo quo ad vivam, habeboque inter literaria mea  carissimum. Sed & gaudeo mihi hanc occasionem fuisse datam tui per epistolam affandi atque salutandi; à quo me hactenus pudor ut opinor justus ex mea tenuitatis conscientia scilicet ortus, deterruerat. Ac nisi hic me a limine tuo submovisset, erat profecto causa our te adirem & grati animi sensum apud te profiteret. Noli enim putare, Vir maxime, me nunc primum bonitati tuae novissimo hoc dono fuisse obligatum. Jampridem sum in aere tuo sed alia ob nomina. Nam jam inde a primis ado∣lescentiae meae annis fateor me plurimum in iis libris profecisse, quos tu velet ex inexhausto quodam eruditionis ac , omnigenae fonte multos & immortali quidem laude dignos in publicum bonum effudisti; ac etiamnum in hac senecta effundis. Tua quaecumque nancisci potui, studiosissime collegi, eaque in manu & oculis fero. Ac id quidem ipsum jam neque uno loco loquuntur illae nostrae qualescumque de—lucubratiunculae, quas amicorum favore provocati edere ausi sumus: Sed, & testabuntur in posterum, siqua ejusdem generis à nobis prodierint. Habeo enim quaedam parata: quae amici quidem protrudunt, sed nasutiores typographi fastidiunt. Ea si quando eru∣perint, nomen tuum & venerationem in te meam pluribus pagitis praeferent. Nunc hoc unum te rogo, SENEX Reverendissime, ut tibi persuadeas nemi∣nem vivere, qui eximias tuas virtutes vel admiretur sanctius vel veneretur & diligat impensius; qui ve Dominum Iesum ardentius precetur, ut tibi facilem & longam senectam largiatur, omnemque Consolatoris Spiritus copiam affatim affundat. Vale. Tuus ex animo, J. DILLAEUS. Dab. Lutetiae Paris. A. D. 1656. d. Jan. 12.
LETTER CCXCIX. A Letter from the most R. Ja. Usher Archb. of Armagh to Dr. Arn. Boate. Good Doctor, SInce I sent unto you the approbation of Monsieur De Muys his Works, which were to be printed by Mr. Vlack (which I do not know whether they be yet published) I received but one from you. In that which is miscarried, I suppose you wrote unto me therein, what is like to become of Justellus his Geographia Ecclesiastica so long ex∣pected, and such other of his Works as he left behind him. The Papers which I lent him, and his own Collection of the Greek Canons, I received at several times. But the Collection of the Canons I am forc'd to send back unto you again, because I can by no means procure any of our Printers here to intermeddle with it. And in∣deed the Work is as yet imperfect: The Latin Interpretation, as well of the first Collection of Johannes Antiochenus, as of that other Simeonis Magistri ac Logothetae (whom I make to be the very same with Simeon Metaphrastes) being altogether wanting. I send you also herewith six of my Annales newly come forth, one for your self, the other for Monsieur Sarrarius, Puteani fratres, Sirmondus, Petavius and Bignonius (the King's Advocate) into whose Acquaintance I had the honour to be brought by Dr. Price his means. I would not have forgotten Dr. Blondel, but that I perswade my self he is gone from you to Amsterdam, there to succeed Vossius in his Historical Profession. I desire to know what is done for the publishing of Georgius Syncellus. Ja. Armachanus. Lond. July 5/15, 1650. LETTER CCC. A Letter from the most R. Ja. Usher Archb. of Armagh, to Dr. Arn. Boate. I Am sorry Sirmondus is proved so unkind. The best is, we have no need at all of any of Fronto's Variae Lectiones; we have as good Books here, as any he did use. Only we desired that out of our own Book (the very Original whereof Sir Rob. Cotton so lovingly sent unto him) we might have those , transcribed for us, that are betwixt the 27th and 29th Chapt. of the Book of Gen. which was so equal and easy a Request, that we thought none could be so envious as to deny unto us. But the main thing we want, is a Transcript of Cardinal Rupitfucaldius his Copy of the Prophets, which I see they labour by all means to hide from us. But if Sir K. Digby be in Paris, and you go to him in my Name, and tell him how much it will make for the honour of his Country, that we may have the benefit of it; I assure my self, his Credit will reach to the borrowing of it for himself, and then it may be easily transcribed and collated (Esay the longest Book being omitted, as already printed.) I have oft made use in mine Annales of the excerpta ex Polybio, Di∣odoro, Appiano, &c. set out by Henr. Valesius, a very Learned Man, who hath also written upon Ammianus Marcellinus. If you can learn from the Puteani Fratres where he resideth, I should be glad that the Copy of the Annales remaining should be sent Septemb. 27. 1650. unto him. To the same. The Catalogue of the High-Priests which Altinus sent unto me out of his Syncellus, was this, Onias Filius Jaddi, Annis 21. Anno M. 5170. Simon, annis 19. Eleazar, annis 32. Manasses, annis 26. Onias F. Simonis, annis 14. Simon, annis 2. Jesus Filius Sirach. annis 6. Onias, annis 5. Jason, annis 3. Simon, annis 19. Mattathias, anno m. 5328. The 2 Years of Simon, which you sent unto me out of Goartus his Copy, belong to the second Simon. But the Years which I desired to know, were of the first Simon, whether they were 9 or 19; whereof I would willingly hear again from you, and re∣ceive any thing out of Goartus his Notes, which may make for the clearing of the dimness of this dark Succession. I thank you very much for your large Narrative of the proceedings in the Controversy touching Grace and Free-will: by occasion where∣of, if any ancient Treatise or Epistles shall be hereafter published by Sirmondus, or any Lond. Jan. 14/24, 1650. other of his Society, I should be glad to have it sent unto me by the first opportunity. Ja. Armachanus.
LETTER. CCCI. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Arnold Boate. MR. Young having now done with those Variantes Lectiones, I send them back again unto you, with much thanks. He was wonderfully ta∣ken with the perusing of them, as finding them very exactly to agree with the Alexandrian Copy (in the Library of St. James) which he intendeth shortly to make publick; Mr. Selden and my self every Day pressing him to the Work: Neither will he be unmindful to make honourable mention of Mons. Sarau, as he well deserveth, unto whom he acknowledgeth himself much bound for vouchsafeing to communicate unto him so great a rarity. And I for my self must entreat herein a further favour at your hands; That you will be pleased to spend one Day in the transcribing of the places noted with Obelisks in the fragments of Gen. LV. and Numb. I thank you for the great pains you have taken in writing out the passages of Georgius Syncellus, concerning the Succession of the High Priests after the times of Jaddus. Wherein find∣ing my self deceived by the trust I gave to Scaliger, I shall be forced in the next Edition of mine Annals, to alter the whole course of the times of that Suc∣cession. I should be much also to blame, if I did forget to return you thanks, for your defending of me against Capellus. I did not condemn his Book before I saw it, (as he chargeth me) but declared hypothetically, That if there were such a Proposition therein as you told me there was, and he himself de∣nieth not, it was both very unreasonable and very dangerous. I see by your Reply, that you intend to set out a full Refutation both of his, and of Morinus his particular Objections against the integrity of the Hebrew Text: But how you can spare so much time from your practices, I know not. Yet if you shall continue still in that Mind, the Psalter being the only Book, wherein the Papists generally stand for the Greek reading (out of which their vulgar Latin is rendred) against the verity of the Hebrew Text, I will send you Mr. William Eyre his censure upon all the particular places excepted a∣gainst therein, which forasmuch as concerneth that Book will ease you of much Labour. I pray send me Raimundi Pugio, and the Latin Translation of the Arabick Chronology, assoon as it shall be suffered to be Publick. Ja. Armachanus. June, 1651. LETTER CCCII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Dr. Arnold Boate. Good Doctor, I Received both your last Letter, and your entire dispute against Capellus; in the publication whereof I see you do still bewray your old error of load∣ing me with those Encomiums, the least measure whereof I dare not own, but pray only unto God, that by his Grace, I may hereafter endeavour to be that, which the abundance of your affection maketh me to be already. The Books are much desired here. I am sorry I have put you to so much pains, in seeking out for your Va∣lesius, and am not altogether out of hope of obtaining Rochefoculd's Copy, by your industrious Negotiation with the Puteani Fratres and S. K. Digby.
But I was out of measure pleased with your good News you brought me of Mons. Sarau's pieces of the Septuagint, and his willingness to impart the Transcript of the Variae Lectiones thereof unto Mr. Patrick Young. He most earnestly desireth you to see those Variations transcribed for his use: Where∣in he entreateth you to have a special care of the places noted with Obelisks, and Asterisks, and carefully to set down the Marks of the ending of every one of them. I pray send me the Volume of Anastasius Bibliothecarius his Works, and the other of Fulgentius. As likewise Amolonis Lugdunensis Epistolae, lately set out by Syrmondus, and Raimundus his Pugio contra Judaeos, when it shall come out. I send you Mr. Taylor's Pirke Aboth, the Author whereof he maketh to be R. Nathan Babylonius. But I am much mistaken if be not two different Works. If Aboth R. Nathan be to be had at Paris, I pray send it unto me. I have made known to the Queen of France, that there can be no possible expectation of my removing to those Quarters. For which and for all your other manifold, Courtesies I shall evermore rest Your most faithful Friend, Ja. Armachanus. Linc.-Inn, Nov. 29. 1651. LETTER CCCIII. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Nicolaus Mercator. Viro Eruditissimo D. Nicolao Mercatori.Vir Eruditissime, ETsi de solaris Apogaei motu nihil causae esse videam, cur quisquam dubitet; tamen si fixum illud statueretur, quid inde incommodi ad novi tui Anni rationes accederet perspicere me nondum posse profiteor. De ipsa tuâ LXX Annorum Periodo movenda potius fuerit quaestio. Annon ille 33. Annor. Cyclus sit praeferendus, in quo à penultimo Anno diei bissextilis intercalatio transferenda sit in Ultimum. Nam quo brevior & simplicior est Pe∣riodus, & ad justam Anni Tropici Magnitudinem accedit propiùs, eo procul∣dubio est praestantior. Haec vero tua plusquam dimidia parte brevior est, & unico lustro extraordinario contenta, quum duo tua habeat, atque exactius coelestis Anni quantitatem exprimit quam tua, quae ipso Gregoriano majo∣rem nobis Annum exhibet. Ut de Periodo Feriarum Hebdomadicarum  nihil dicam, quae hîc, 231. tantum est Annor. non 490. ut est tua, totis 90. Annis Gregorianâ productior. De quo monendum te censuit Mathema∣ticorum tuorum studiorum summus fautor. Jacobus Usserius Armachanus. Londini, Febr. 4/14. 1653/4.
LETTER CCCIV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. Salutem, à salutis fonte, D. N. Jesu Christo. I Received your Packet, containing your second edition of some Comenian Treatises (which I wish may perform as much as in shew they pro∣mise) and Mr. Dury's Letters unto my Lord Mandevill, for which I most heartily thank you; and do wish withal, that my ordinary application of that Scripture to the Lutherans prove not in the end to be too true: The way of Peace they have not known. I received also your last Letter of the 24th. of Sep∣tember, accompanied with an other from Mr. Ravius; unto which I send an Answer, here enclosed. Withal, I pray you in my name to go unto Mr. Downs, and desire him to deliver unto you twelve Pounds, to be transmitted by Bill of exchange unto Mr. Ravius in Constantinople. For I have promised him four and twenty Pounds yearly, during his Travels in the East: and do intend to make over that summ unto him, by two equal Portions, twice every year. I recommend this business to your care, assuring my self, that you will not lose the first opportunity both of returning those Monies unto him to Constantinople, and of sending my Letter unto him. So beseeching God to bless all your Godly endeavours, to his direction and benediction I leave you, and evermore rest Your assured loving Friend, Ja. Armachanus. Drogheda, Novemb. 12. 1639. LETTER CCCV. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Christianus Ravius. Ornato ac Erudito Juveni, Domino Christiano Ravio Constantinopoli.Erudite Vir, LIteras tuas, mense Julio, Constantinopoli datas, accepi; atque pro∣positum tuum in suscipiendâ tam longinquâ peregrinatione collaudans, ad aliquam sumptuum partem sublevandam, viginti quatu or libras Angli∣canas annuas, quamdiu in Oriente versaberis, tibi subministrare statui: qua∣rum dimidium nunc, reliquum post sex menses accipies, atque tunc porrò ordinem observabo, ut singulis semestribus dimidium istius summae, aequalibus portionibus, tibi numerandum curem, dummodo operam des ut de tempore in tempus meliteris, in quo versaris, certiorem reddas, neque enim to Constan∣tinopoli haesurum, sed ad ulteriora velle penetrare existimo. Libri quos pro me requiri velim, hi sunt: Vetus Testamentum Syriacum, non ex Hebraeo factum (illud enim jam habeo) sed ex Graeco versum, atque obelis et asteriscis distinctum. Polycarpi & Ignatii Epistolae Syriace conversae. Eusebii (non Historia Ecclesiastica quae passim prostat) Chronicum Graecum, vel etiam Syriace versum. Si quid etiam versionum Symmachi, Aquilae & Theo∣dotionis
reperiri possit. Julii Africani Chronicon. Hegesippi Historia Eccle∣siastica. Clementis Alexandrini Hypotyposeôn libri, & de Paschate libellus A∣natolii. Aniani & Panodori computi Paschales. Georgii Syncelli Graecum Chro∣nicon. Apollodori Graecum Chronicon. Phlegon de Olympiadibus. Diodori Siculi, Polybii, Dionysii Halicarnassei, Dionis Cocceiani libri illi, qui apud nos desiderantur. Hipparchi Astronomica, Graecè. Hos libros omnes sollicitè vestiges velim quaquâ transibis, & si quos re∣perias, diligenter in adversariis notes locos ubi extant, & nomina eorum in quorum manibus sunt, itidemque pretium quo eos divendere velint, ut & nomina nostratium mercatorum inn iisdem locis commorantium, ut sic postea, quando ad nos reversus fueris, accersere eos, si pretium placuerit, possimus. Quod si & alii probi authores Graeci aut Syriaci, praeter supradictos, in manus tuas inciderint, qui apud nos desiderantur, poteris & circa illos eâdem uti dili∣gentiâ. Deum oro, ut ab omnibus te periculis custodiens, incolumem tandem ad nos reducat; qui libentissime te, peractà istâ peregrinatione, hic visuri sumus. Amicus tibi faventissimus, Jacobus Usserius Armachanus. Pontana, in Hiberniâ Novemb. 12. 1639. In Literis ad me deinceps scribendis una cum nostris Dieb. & Mensib. etiam Turcicos Mahummedanorum ibi usurpatos, conjungas velim. LETTER LX. A Letter from the Most Reverend James Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. Salutem in Christo Jesu. THE Printer followeth me here so hard, in my publishing the Epistles and Martyrdoms of Polycarpus and Ignatius: that I have no manner of leasure to make answer either to your Letters, or those which I received from Mr. Gentius. You rightly observed in one of yours, that the relation you had from Mr. Ravius might a little retardate the eagerness of his desire to adventure so suddenly upon an Eastern journey. If he could have but the patience to stay until the return of the other, I should willingly continue that allowance unto him, which I have now assigned unto the other. But the troubles of these times are such, that my Rents cannot be received in Ireland; and the event so uncertain, that I know not whether so much will be left me, as may in any competent sort maintain my self and my Family. Yet if things do prove otherwise: I shall be content to allow him ten Pounds per annum; the first payment beginning, from the first notice you shall receive of his ar∣riving at Constantinople. I gave order unto Mr. Ravius, to procure me a Copy of Ignatius his Epistles in the Syriack Language, to which he hath returned me no full answer. I am sure there is a Syriack Copy of them in Rome; and therefore not improbable it is, that a like to that may be found among the Maronites in the East. If I might get either a Syriack, or an Arabick, or an Armenian, or a Persian Translation of them, it would serve me to exceeding good purpose. But I must here break off. Your assured loving Friend, Ja. Armachanus. Oxford, Septem. ult. an. 1640.
LETTER I. A Letter from Mr. William Camden to Sir Edward Stradling. QUOD rebus omnibus praeoptavi, ut Britannia mea, qualiscun{que} illa sit, bonis & doctis non displiceret, id mihi jampridem à plurimis accidisse non mediocriter laetabar; majorem{que} in modum nunc lae∣tor, & mihi ipsi quasi congratulor, quod te etiam (ornatissime Stradlinge) & fautorem, & defensorem invenerit. Ut enim ex nomine te illustri, & vetusta familia prognatum cognosco; Ita etiam ex Epistola, te cum animo candido, tum judicio pererudito planissime perspicio. Singulis etenim lineis imò verbis gravitas tanta Familia digna, doctrina liberalis, judicum li∣matulum, animus{que} officii plenissimus elucet; Utinam illum diem mihi opta∣tissimum videam cum tibi parem gratiam pro his maximis tuis officiis referre possim: verum quia hoc facultatis non est meae, gratias habeo immortales, & debedo, ut magnus ille jubet Philosophus, semper, palam, & libenter. Quod me errati in pag. 365. admones, amicissime facis: Admonere enim & admoneri verae est amicitiae, facile adducor tua fide & authoritate, ut amplissimum illum Equitem Dominum Edwardum Stradlingum libelli authorem fuisse eredam. Exemplar tamen illud in quod ante annos plures incidi, Edwardi Manuselli nomen in titulo prae se tulit, & mihi credulo eò faciliùs imposuit, quod No∣bilem illum virum in genealogiis contexendis & re Antiquaria plurimum de∣sudasse acceperim: Plagiarium autem illum quicunque fuit, qui gloriam alie∣no labore partam in se transmovit, & librarium qui mihi fucum fecit, tacito cogitationis convitio subinde verbero. De asterisco quod scribis, mihi planè novum est, nec à me est, nec à Typographo; Quum liber iterum aedetur Dom. Edw. Stradlingi suo loco, ut sua cui{que} constet gloria, Deo favente reponetur. Interim ut optimis ille Eques mihi ignoscat, tua quaeso intercedat humanitas; si prius hoc erratum rescissem, jam emendassem, nam superiori mense alteram Britanniae meae editionem plurimis locis sparsim adauctam Typographi prae∣cipitarunt. Vale (ornatissime Stradlinge) & à Camdeno tuo salve, qui te ex animo amat & aestimat. Tuus tuo merito Gulielmus Camdenus. Westmonasterii xvi. Februarii, 1586. LETTER II. Another Letter of Mr. Camden's to Sir Edward Stradling. IGnosce (clarissime Stradlinge) si longis & amantissimis tuis literis paucu∣lis respondero; ut plura scribam, tua humanitas, tua benevolentia & mu∣neris magnitudo suo quasi jure exigunt: sed Tribunitia authoritate interce∣dunt jam negotia: Amorem tuum amo, etsi in judicio de me plane caeoutiat. Benevolentiam exosculor, & antiqua illa Romanorum numismata beneficium tuum gratissimo animo prosequor, plurimi enim suo pretio, sed longe pluris tuo munere & voluntate aestimo, utinam aliquando remunerandi facultas conceda∣tur: Te in rebus tam obscuris tam Lynceum, & perspicacem esse non possum
non admirari, praesertim cum optimorum Historicorum libris destitutus, & in his studiis jam primum versatus videaris, foelicissime sane veritatem in pleris{que} omnibus eruisti, Conjecturis{que} tuis ipsa veritas ubi{que} fere ancillatur; liceat ta∣men pro nostro inter nos amore haec liberius admonere, In Valeriani nummo legendum est Imperator Casar Publius Licinius Valerianus Pius Foelix Au∣gustus; C. post Imp. denotat Imperator Caesar, P. F. ante Aug. Pius Foelix Augustus. Qui titulus honorarius coepit sub Gordianis. M. Aur. est M. Au∣relius. Publ. Pinesus Tetricus fuit Pater. Caius Pinesus Tetricus, Filius. Ma∣rii jam primum numisma vidi. Hunc ex fabro ferrario ad imperium evectum, statim{que} à milite quondam operario suo interfectum, triduo tantum regnasse scribit Trebellius Pollio in Triginta Tyrannis. Miror nummos signasse cum triduum tantum imperaret, cum nulla ejus numismata in Gallia & Italia eru∣untur. Imperium in hac insula usurpasse conjectarim, & eundem ipsum esse in cujus memoriam lapis olim visebatur Carleoli in Cumberlandia Marii Victo∣riae inscriptus. De quo in mea Britannia, quod in aversa ejus nummi legi∣tur, Militum substituenda est Concordia; ejusmodi enim inscriptionem vidi cum dextris conjunctis in nummo Severi. Sevelina Augusta quaenam fuit, plane me latet, Severinam Aureliani conjugem fuisse alicubi legi. De inscripti∣onibus illis quas à Bathonia accepisti, gratias habeo, sed in postrema editione Britanniae meae ante tres annos fuerunt insertae, & jam quarta apparatur editio. Vale (Vir optime) & mihi tumultuariae hujus Epistolae veniam deprecetur tua humanitas. Clariss. & Eruditissimum virum D. Johannem David mihi officiosissime saluta, Qui vere tuus, & totus tuus, Guilielmus Camdenus. Westmonasterii 13. Februarii 1593. LETTER III. A Letter from Padre Paulo, (Author of the History of the Council of Trent) to the Abbot of St. Medard. THE Advertisements, which yours of the 18th of June doth give me, concerning the means whereby the most Christian King doth recover his Demains, were most acceptable to me. I have also a great desire to un∣derstand when there happeneth any singular and remarkable Sentence in the Court of Parliament, in Ecclesiastical Matters. It seemeth to me an Endea∣vour worthy of your self, to imploy your leisure in the study of Divinity, and of the Ecclesiastical History: For which I do hold you so well prepared, that you have no need to be directed by any whoever, much less by me; yet I will not omit to obey you in writing my opinion, what is the course that a Man of sincere Affections should hold therein. And to begin with the School∣men, wherein you do particularly require me; I will tell you, that one had need to beware of those Writers that do give their Resolutions too like Magi∣strates, with a Respondeo dicendum, as if they were Arbitrators; and rather to read them, which deliver their Opinion with reservation, and in Matters not decided, do not play the Pedants over others. The University of Paris hath much used to apply themselves to the best Judgments that did spring up amongst them; and the last that offered himself was William Occam, whom, if you lay his Barbarism aside, you shall find a Judicious Writer. I have
still esteemed him above all the School-men. His Work upon the Sentences doth render the Conceit of him that reads him quick and fit to judg. His Dialogues, which pass from the speculative matters to the more practical and in use, are much esteemed where they are permitted to be read. Gerson teacheth well of that which he toucheth; but he did not propound to him∣self to treat of the whole Subject: St. Thomas is currant among the Jesuits and Prelates as a Writer very easy, and who doth not intangle the mind of the Reader with doubts, but resolves him indeed too much. If you resolve to read him, it will be good very punctually to examine his Sorites, for so are almost all his Proofs; and he is in the number of those that I named first. If you will read the Controversies that do at this present exercise the World, you shall do well to bear in mind that the Writers do all of them exceed in Affection to their own side, and do accommodate matters to their own Taste, and in the ancient Writers do see not that which is there, but that which they desire. And therefore it is necessary to use with them the caution that a good Judg should use; not to pronounce till both the Parties be heard. As for the means to get the understanding of the Ecclesiastical History, it will be necessary to put in your Head a Chronology of all the Princes and famous Men that have been in the World; all of them distinguished in their Times and Countries. In the reading of the Historiographers to be very wary, be∣cause for the most part, they are interested on the one side or the other, when they treat of any Controversies. The most sincere Authors are the English, Paris, Hoveden, Walsingham. The most sincere and faithful History is to be drawn out of the Epistles of the Fathers and other Writers of every time. Above all, it is necessary in reading to bear a neutral Affection, and not to suffer that which you find in one Author, to take so deep root in you, that it may not give place to the Truth or greater Probability which you may find after∣wards. But according to my Judgment, to give a general and infallible Rule for all the Difficulties that may occur in the process of your Studies; I take it to be, to consult with the Jesuits, and to resolve the clean contrary to that which they say. There remaineth (you say) the Parliament for a Bank to keep them from overflowing, but still I see the Water to encrease, and the Earth of the Bank to diminish, which puts me in great doubt: We indeed are free from their Persons, but not from their Vexations and Ambushes. I know not whether mischief to be the greater; that which they do being ab∣sent, or that which they do being present. I begin to believe, for that which now I see, that they have been re-accepted in France to free that Kingdom from greater Mischief, which they did in their absence, and peradventure I am not deceived. Your Worship doth esteem me more than is fitting, in thinking that the Jesuits have any thought of me. Assure your self that I am not high enough to be stricken with such a Lightning; (unless they were (whereof I doubt) in the number of those curious Men that do not overslip, no not the least matters): However it be, every one is subject unto danger, only it rests to rely our selves on God in those things whereunto no humane caution can arrive. I beseech your Lordship to make me partaker sometimes of your Letters, whom you shall oblige thereby. You shall not be obliged to write Italian, because however I answer you in this my Language, yet it is to me indifferent to read yours in this, or in French. Our Lord God give your Lordship all Happiness, whose Hands I do reve∣rently kiss. From Venice this 22d of July, 1608.
LETTER IV. A Letter from H. Grotius to Dr. Overal, Dean of St. Pauls. Admodum Reverendo, Eruditissimo{que} D. Doctori Johanni [Overal] Decano Sancti Pauli Londini.Reverende D. CRimen mihi ingratitudinis mea febricula & secutus statim abitus impo∣suit; sed quas agere coràm gratias non potui, eas habeo tibi maximas, tum pro perscripta tua de Praedestinatione sententia, tum pro doctissimo Thomsonis libello. Non possim verbis explicare quam mihi utrum{que} placue∣rit, quam{que} me confirmaverit in sobria veterum, & vere  faci∣ente sententia. Miserum me quod pro istis muneribus reponere nihil possum. Ostendi utrum{que} scriptum viris hic piis at{que} eruditis qui delectati iis maxime fuerunt: quibus{que} in primis voluptas fuit intelligere non esse eam totius An∣glicanae Ecclesiae sententiam, quam confidenter admodum jactant illi, qui praeter Calvinum & Ursinum vix quicquam legerunt. Non cesso urgere lati∣nam interpretationem Colloquii Hagiensis istis de controversiis; item libelli quem vir praestantissimus Johannes Utenbogardus scripsit de Jure Magistra∣tuum in regenda Ecclesia, & legum Ecclesiasticarum, quae Trajecti nuper pro∣mulgatae fuerunt. Apparebit ex eorum librorum lectione quam non ex fide quidam statum nostrarum controversiarum descripserint. Nunc in Hollan∣dia laboratur de statuendis legibus quibusdam super Ecclesiastico regimine. Ubi constitutum quid fuerit, faciam te certiorem: Si qui sunt auctores qui tibi commode videantur istud argumentum tractasse, eos mihi judices velim, ut eorum lectione instructior ad istam deliberationem accedam. Utinam mihi occasio esset ea sermones tecum serendi quae nuper in Britannia fuit: nullius consiliis libentius uterer; nunc rogo per literas id me facere patiaris, quod praesens ipse facturus essem, me{que} in gravissimis rebus dubitantem praeceptis tuis rege, imo potius dubitationes meas ipse praeveni. Non debet tantum li∣cere locorum spatiis, ut coeptae tam foeliciter amicitiae usum interrumpant. Unum opto ut tibi tam sit jucundum me docere, quam mihi doceri erit utile. Vale, mi Domine ac Pater, & in precibus tuis Grotii memento. Tui observantissimus H. Grotius. LETTER V. A Letter from H. Grotius to Dr. Overal Dean of St. Pauls. Admodum Reverendo, Eruditissimo{que} D. Doctori Johanni Decano S. Pauli Londini.Reverendissime D. ac Pater, JAmdudum est quod ad R. D. T. nullas dedi literas, veritus ne molesta esset mea interpellatio, his praesertim temporibus tam iniquis at{que} infestis ut ipsa haec amicitiae commercia in calumniam pateant. Dubito quo{que} an quas po∣stremas per Legatum Caronium dedi, in manus venerint: tunc enim annunti∣abaris ab urbe abesse; ne{que} ex eo quid factum sit literis rescivi. Nunc tamen
cum ad vos iret, studiosus multarum literarum, praesertim Orientalium, juvenis fidus Drusii nuper cum magno bonorum luctu mortui discipulus, non potui non obsequi honesto ejus desiderio. Non quod eum meo nomine cuiquam commendari posse arbitrarer, (ne{que} enim ea est mea auctoritas) sed ut occa∣sionem ipsi additus hac Epistola largirer. Apud nos Ecclesiae status paulatim ad quietem redit, perveniente ad paucos turbatores poena, exemplo ad caete∣ros. Molliores sententiae de Praedestinatione divina plures indies in assensum trahunt: certe non esse ob tales controversias scindendam Ecclesiam ferme in∣ter omnes convenit. Datur nunc typis, brevi{que} adeo proditurus est Thom∣soni libellus. Spero visis ejus argumentis aliquos absteritum iri ab eo dogmate quod eosdem homines eodem tempore constituit , & clavium Ecclesiae vim omnem enervat. De tuendo summarum potesta∣tum jure eo magis solliciti sumus, quod ni id obtineat, videmus latam Schis∣maticis secessionibus a periri viam, praesertim in Ecclesia non optime consti∣tuta. Et videmus Catholica nos judicia Ecclesiae nunc nulla habere nisi in antiquitate quae mire contemnitur. Judicia autem  ita saepe abripiun∣tur affectibus, praeconceptis opinionibus, & Zelo quodam , ut non tuto illis affigi possit conscientia potestatum pro bono Ecclesiae vigi∣lantium. Vincit enim nimium saepe pars major meliorem. Sed nolo diutius insidiari tuis temporibus quae Ecclesiae & usibus melioribus consecrasti. Deus det vobis nobisque suam pacem cum salutaris veri cognitione: idem{que} D. T. Reverendissime D. ac Pater diu bono publico praestet incolumem. xxvi Junii & Cal. non Anni ciiccxvi. Rotterdami. Tuae pietatis observantissimus cultor H. Grotius. A Letter from H. Grotius to Dr. Overal, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. Reverendissimo Domino D. Joanni Episcopo Coventrensi & Litchfeldensi.Reverendissime Domine, EX literis quas xxvii Septembris ad me dare R. T. D. placuit, video non∣dum in manus tuas id temporis venisse quae contra Socinum disputavi∣mus, quare proximis literis judicium super iis tuum expectabimus, emenda∣turi editione quae nunc paratur quicquid ex te non satis recte positum didi∣cero. Ad Rev. Episcopum Eliensem scribo; rogo ut librum de Jure Impe∣rii legat & emendet conscio Rege. Sane multae sunt causae cur id argumen∣tum tractari debeat, tum ne sententia mea sequius quam te habet accipiatur, tum ut seditiosis hominibus occurratur, quorum magna apud nos est seges, qui tumultui ac violentiae Religionis nomen imponunt. Commendavi & Spala∣tensi & Eliensi statum Ecclesiae ac Reipublicae nostrae, cui ad caetera mala ac∣cessit quod oratione nuper habita à Regio Legato, at{que} ita ipsius etiam Regis auctoritate premitur hic melior de Gratia ac libero arbitrio sententia, simul∣que promovetur schisma exempli pessimi. Obsecro vos omnes quantum fie∣ri potest, veritati tuendae & unitati sarciendae detis operam; quam ad rem usui vobis esse poterit qui has fert literas vir clarissimus Petrus Hoofdius, op∣timo natus genere, literis supra modum excultus, testis oculatus eorum quae apud nos sub pietatis titulo prave at{que} pernitiose geruntur. Quod de U∣tenbogardo
quaeris, nihil ille latine unquam edidit: Belgice nonnulla in qui∣bus esset liber haud magnus ejusdem quod à me tractatum est Argumenti. Ejus libri interpretationem Latinam Rev. Episcopo Eliensi transmissam memini. Caeterum Remonstrantium sententiae siquis Argumenta ac rationes propius nosse desideret & legenda sunt examen Perkinsianum Arminii, ejusdem colla∣tio cum Francisco Junio; Johannis Arnoldi Corvini responsio ad libellum Ti∣leni: item adnotata Bogermanni; deinde Nicolai Grevinchonii dissertatio adversus Amesium. Si qua horum ad manus tuas non pervenerint, ut habeas curabo. Ad eas partes libri nostri de summarum potestatum jure quod attinet in quibus haesitaturum existimas Rev. Eliensem alios{que} in Anglia viros eruditos, paratus sum audire eorum sententias & meliora docentibus cedere. Caeterum judicia Synodica, aut etiam quae extra Synodos à viris piis atque eruditis pe∣tuntur in libro nostro ostenduntur maximi facienda. Neque certiorem esse viam ullam discendi dogmatum veritatem. Sed sicut post judicium Ecclesiae singuli de fide sua judicant (ut enim Rex ait, unusquis{que} super propria scientia fidei fundamentum debet collocare) ita & Reges ad ea agenda quae non pos∣sunt agere nisi Reges. Hoc judicium  non incommode in scripto quodam vocavit  Casaubonus. Optime Episcopus Eliensis non debere Regem ita ab alieno ore pendere ut ipse à se nihil dijudicet: Et Bilso∣nus non minus recte requirit ut judicium praecedat usum gladii. Similia apud Paraeum alios{que} leguntur plurima. At apud nos qui maxime jactant, nomen Ecclesiae hi sunt qui veteris Ecclesiae consensum ferocissime repudiant. Pres∣byteros remittere peccata, id est remissa declarare cum Magistro sententiarum exposui, cum quo consentire video Protestantium plerosque. Neque tamen negem alio etiam modo ministerialiter remittere, quatenus actione sacerdotali ac pastorali aut Deum movent ad remittendum, aut hominem ad accipien∣dam remissionem disponunt. Recte etiam à Lombardo adjectum remitti insuper à pastore peccata quoad poenas satisfactorias & quoad excommunica∣tionem. Siquid his superadditum sit in honorem Presbyteralis muneris, de eo monitus libenter supplebo quod deerit: ita tamen ut si fieri potest libenter mansurus sim intra ea de quibus Protestantes consentiunt. Jurisdictionis vo∣cem usurpavi ex Juris Civilis consuetudine ita ut includat , quam ob rationem etiam eam notionem quae Episcopis jure positivo attributa est maluerunt Imperatores audientiam quam jurisdictionem appellare. Ne{que} ta∣men inficias eo in potestate excommunicandi esse aliquid jurisdictioni analo∣gum quod eadem etiam voce latius paulo & extra usum Veteris Romani Ser∣monis sumpta recte judicetur: Episcopatus vocem sumpsi eo significatu ut  indicet non temporariam sed perpetuam: hanc defendo juris esse divini approbantis & suadentis; non tamen universaliter imperantis. Cae∣terum  sumptam abstracte citra considerationem durationis esse Juris Divini etiam Imperantis ostendi ab ipso Beza agnosci. Haec si recte expen∣dantur, spero haud multum fore controversiae: & siquid est tale, parebo meli∣ora monstrantibus. Domino Jesu summo Pastori R. T. D. unice commendo; idem nostras tempestates serenet. T. R. D. addictissimus H. Grotius. M D CXVII.
LETTER VII. A Letter from Hugo Grotius to Dr. Overal Bishop of Co∣ventry and Litchfield. Reverendissimo Domino D. Johanni Episcopo Coventrensi & Litchfeldensi. Reverendissime Domine, IN tantis procellis Ecclesiae simul & Reipublicae versanti nullum obtingere potest solatium tuis literis dulcius. Quare pro iis quas per Hoofdium misisti summas habeo gratias. Multumque gaudeo te Episcopali libertate anniti ne per injuriam damnentur sententiae quas vetus Ecclefia damnare non sustinuit; plurimi in illa etiam probarunt. Quam modestiam si inci∣tarentur Theologi nostri, minus sudaremus in tuendis dogmatibus quae nobis tum à Pontificiis tum à Lutheranis acerrimè objectantur: Synodus Nationa∣lis adhuc urgetur ab iis qui certam sibi ex suffragiorum numero spondent Victoriam: Nos praetentari provincialem tutius magis{que} ex ordine arbitra∣mur; ea si non successerit, de majoribus remediis consultaturi. Sunt qui à Generali Synodo plusquam à nationali sperant aequitatis. Oro Rev. tuam Dom. ut D. Eliensem quantum honeste fieri potest urgeat ad legendum li∣brum de Imperio summarum potestatum; Puto, si diligenter legerit, reper∣turum à me occursum praecipuis difficultatibus. Utut est judicium ejus avide expecto, cui quantum ex animi sententia potero, me aptabo. Germa∣ni Theologi scriptum, scripti{que} sententiam laudant. Insurrexit nuper in me Ravenspergerus Groningensis Theologus ferox juventa, vitio mihi vortens & quasi haeresin impingens quod Christi defendens satisfactionem non asse∣ruerim nullo modo potuisse Deum aliter peccata condonare; item passum esse Christum poenas gehennales, at{que} id genus alia. Quid dicam Miseret me saeculi. Vir quidam pius & doctus Ravenspergero respondet. Idem doctissi∣me tractat Pelagianorum, semi-Pelagianorum & Praedestinatorum historiam. Utrum{que} librum simulat{que} prodierint, ad R. T. D. transmittam. Deus te in∣terim, Reverendissime Pater, diu Ecclesiae Catholicae servet incolumem. T. R. D. Studiosissimus H. Grotius. XVI April. M D CIXVIII. ex Cal. Nano. LETTER VIII. Reverendo admodum & clarissimo viro, D. Christiano Raevio, Berlinati, Linguarum Orientalium apud Amstelodamenses cultori & Professori celeberrimo, amico honorando. Salutem à Domino. Vir Clarissime, QUod tamdiu ab officio scribendi abstinuerim, nullâ meâ factum est culpâ. Dubius haerebam ubi degeres, aliis aliud referentibus. Jam vero ultimis tuis ante paucos dies mihi redditis edoctus, tuo te merito Amste∣lodamensi Gymnasio operam tuam navare praeclaram, non potui non, quamvis
ob Corporis imbecillitatem à biduo ad scribendum ineptus, pauca ad melli∣tissimas tuas literas reponere. Manuscripta igitur orientalia cum caeteris speciminibus Arabicis tandem hic post longam moram appulisse scito. Ani∣mi certè in Tigurinos nostros benevolentissimi  luculentum. Vix credas quàm utriusque ordinis Bibliothecarii hanc tuam in se liberalitatem exosculentur. Cognosces, spero, propediem ex publicis literis, quas hacte∣nus negotia urgentia, turbae, vicinique tumultus sufflaminarunt. Sed & CL. D. Antistiti nostro gratum tuum fuisse alloquium Epistolicum ex adjecto colliges responso. Me cum primis in aere tuo esse lubens fateor, fateborque , quod ignotum me tam impensè ames, mea{que} causa nihil non cupias. Quàm solicitè ubi{que} & instantèr Helvetias cum Belgis in Typogra∣phia orientali adornanda certare cupis vota certè heroica; sed, hoc quidem tempore . Quid serus vehat Vesper expectabimus. Spero ex hac Literarum Orientalium  multa apud nos coctum iri, Concilia, quae adhuc diu alta mente sunt repôsta. Interim in sparta mihi commissa, quan∣tum serent humeri, officium facere pergam. Specimina Arabica in publico & solenni, magno tuo cum honore, actu stu∣diosis post Pascha distributum iri puto. Fac modo, ut quae tua est humani∣tas, compendium tuum Grammaticum, ubi ad umbilicum fuerit deductum, habeam. Quid nos ab aliquo tempore simus imaginati, per Mercatores Francosor∣denses cognosces, quibus fasciculum tibi tradendum committam. Dissertatio tua amica, prolixa & docta de Lexicis & Concordantiis à de∣fectibus desaecandis placet, & jam nunc exactiùs quàm ante tuam assequor mentem. Anxius & summo cum desiderio specimen vel unius radicis abs te expectabo, video enim aliquid praeclari te parturire. Neque dubito, quin, quod incredibilia tua , eruditio , docendi fervor meretur, Amstelodamenses Deus excitaturus sit Patronos, vestrarum regionum Mecaena∣tes. Vix locus fortè ullus commodior obtingere potuisset. Sed quid de pro∣fessione Hebraicâ Leidense si commode illuc commigrares, majori fortè illud cum publico emolumento esset conjunctum. D. Buxtorfius omnem spem Ba∣silea discedendi abjecit. Nova enim ei demandata functio professio Theolo∣gica, novam etiam accessit stipendium. Tibi igitur succedendi locus oppor∣tunus pateret, modo Amstelodamenses, sua si bona in te nôrint, à se te demit∣tant. Miror Belgium professores accersere aliundè, viris incomparabilibus abundans. Si mihi tam foelicem esse contigisset, ut vel aliquot menses tuum exami∣nare licuisset penu literarum, albae Gallinae filium me aestimâssem. Verum avellit nos locorum distantia, quae ex literis tuis me jubet esse contentum. Plura ad vos valetudinis status scribere nunc non sinet, quamvis summatim ad geminam tuam me respondisse Epistolam. Vale igitur Vir Clarissime, me{que} tui amantissimum amare perge. Avide Lexici & Concordiantiarum tuarum expectabo primitias, ad quas Lexicon meum adornare constitui. Raptim Tiguri D. 14. Martii 1647. A. T. Addictissimus. Joh. Henricus Hottingerus.
LETTER IX. A Letter from Jac. Irmingerus, Superintendent at Zurich, to Christ. Ravius. S. P. VIR excellentissime at{que} clarissime, literae tuae aliquot abhinc menses ad me exaratae, maximo sanè me affecerunt gaudio, tum quia singularem tuum erga me spirant favorem; tum quia insignem tuum erga praestantissi∣mum at{que} clarissimum nostrum Hottingerum redolent amorem. Quod vero ad suavissimas tuas literas aequo seriùs respondeo, id non tam meae negligen∣tiae, quàm variis iis{que} gravissimis velim tribuas occupationibus, ex quibus etiam∣num vix tantillum suffurari licet otii, quo scribendis literis vacare possim. Hottingerus ille noster, quem graphicè tuo descripsisti calamo, Vir profectò est omni liberali eruditione non leviter tinctus, sed penitus imbutus, adaman∣tions at{que} concatenatos, nisu Herculeo, exantlat labores; unde ad studiosam juventutem fructus redundant longè uberrimi. Tametsi igitur Clarissimus ille noster Hottingerus seipsum excellentissimorum suorum donorum & splen∣dore, & utilitate satis super{que} commendet: postquam tamen gravissimae tuae commendationis pondus at{que} auctoritas accessit, vel hoc ipso nomine, nobis est erit{que} deinceps, vir ille quàm acceptissimus at{que} commendatissimus. Am∣plissimus noster Magistratus Tigurinus rarissimas Viri illius dotes exosculatur, summo eum amore prosequitur, at{que} animi sui in hunc Virum propensissimi, honorario non ita pridem, ob libri cujusdam Theologici cedro sane digni dedicationem, oblato, signum edidit luculentissimum. Tibi verò Vir excel∣lentissime gratias ago immortales cum pro egregio Alcoranicae versionis speci∣mine, quod mihi dono misisti; tum pro eleganti in Manuale Concordantia∣rum Ebraeo-Chaldaearum praefatione, ut & pro doctissimis tuis Manuscriptis, Ecclesiae Scholae{que} Tigurinae communicatis. Quae ut certissima benevoli tui in Ecclesiam Scholam{que} Tigurinam affectus sunt : ita vicissim omnia, quae à nobis proficisci possunt humanitatis officia, Tibi sanctè pollicemur. Gaudemus sanè, effoeta hac mundi aetate, ea excitari ingenia, quae accenso lin∣guarum Orientalium lumine, Judaicarum juxta at{que} Muhamedicarum super∣stitionum tenebras discutere satagunt. Hujusmodi studium, praeludium sive parasceve conversionis Judaeorum esse videtur, de qua illustria Pandectarum Sacrarum extant oracula Hoseae cap. 3. v. 4 & 5. Rom. 11. v. 25 & 26. Apoc. 7. v. 4, 5, &c. Pergas macte animo, Clarissime Ravi, eo quo coepisti pede, per angusta ad augusta. Dominus Jesus sanctissimos tuos labores coelesti benedictione affa∣tim mactare dignetur. Amen. T. Cl. addictissimus, Joh. Jacobus Irmingerus, Ecclesiae Tigurinae p. t. Pastor. Dabam Tiguri, 8 Martii, Anno 1647.
LETTER X. Nobili & praestanti viro Simoni de Dewes Jacobus Sirmondus S. GRatias imprimis debeo humanitati tuae, vir amplissime! quod me igno∣tum nihilque apud te promeritum, non modo litteris tuis ornaris, sed bonorum quoque tuorum participem esse volueris. In partem enim quodam∣modo venire mihi visus sum numismatum tuorum cum horum notitiam accepi, & cum egregii operis quod prae manibus habes, consilium, ordinem, partesque singulas descripsisti, hoc sum consecutus, ut fructus illos jam animo delibem, quos ex eo maximos Philologis omnibus exituros confido. Ut autem ad singula Epistolae tuae capita, quoniam id te velle intelligo, breviter responde∣am, at{que} ab illâ observatione tuâ exordiar, quam primo loco posuisti: Occonem meritò notari haud dubium est, si Victorini Aug. nummos in quibus Pi. Piav. aut Piavonii nomen integrum adscriptum est, ad Patrem nullus per∣tinere sentiat, cum ad Patrem prorsus spectent tres ii, quos in Epistolâ tuâ delineasti; duo{que} item alii quos Johannes Tristanus Sanctamantius Tomo iii. commentariorum suorum exhibuit pag. 51. in quibus Pater idem M. PIAVONIUS VICTORINUS inscribit{que} adderem, & de nobis, si opus esset, quatuor aut quin{que} patris ejusdem, in quibus PIAV. VICTO∣RINUS appellatur; sed in re satis comprobatâ nihil opus est. Quaeren∣dum fortasse potius fuerit, quod quidem doceri abs te velim, An de VIC∣TORINO quo{que} filio constet PIAVONIUM fuisse nuncupatum video & Occonem & Tristanum hoc insinuasse, sed certiora numismatum do∣cumenta desidero. Duorum enim junioris hujus nummorum qui apud me sunt, simplicior unius tantum nominis est inscriptio IMP. C. VICTO∣RINUS P. F. AUG. in parte autem aversâ utrius{que} si hoc quo{que} adden∣dum est SALUS, AUG. cum solitâ salutis effigie. II. De Fastis Idatianis eam partem edendam curavi quam unam judicabam prodire in lucem tutò posse, lectoribusque probari ob rerum historicarum va∣rietatem & copiam, caetera ut ederem adduci hactenus nòn potui, tùm quod historicis observationibus illis careant, aut si quas interdum habeant, levioris sunt momenti ac vulgò notae, tùm quod in Consulum dinumeratione plurimis in locis adeò corrupta & depravata sunt omnia, ut sine alterius codicis ope re∣stitui aegrè possunt, sed quoniam perspicaci qui sunt ingenio gemmas saepe ag∣noscunt, quas alii non vident: Fuerant qui horumcè fastorum particulas nùnc has nùnc illas à me nòn invito expresserint, suos{que} in usus converterint. Quocirca tibi nùnc etiàm eorundem fragmentum hoc mitto, quod ab exordio principatus Neronis ad Aurelianum usque, unde nostra coepit editio, porrigi∣tur. In eo animadvertes quod dixi, rarissimas interseri observationes; sed Consulum tamen hic minùs confusa sunt nomina quàm in antecedentibus; Hoc sitim tuam si nòn explebit, & plura requires, nòn deero, ut spero, desi∣derio tuo. III. Hanniballiani regis aereum nummum nostrum, quem VALESIUS ad MARCELLINUM edidit, certae atque indubiae antiquitatis esse mihi planè compertum est. Effossus enim est Romae, cum ibi essem, ad meque allatus cum aliis quamplurimis recens erutis, inter quos repertus & alter, est Delmatii fratris ejus, hac Epigraphe FL. JUL. DELMATIUS NOB. C. uter{que} perexiguâ mole, quantà scilicet Quinarii est argentei; Valesius ita{que} num∣mi nostri mensuram excessit, at Tristanus Valesiano rursus majorem affinxit, pag. 501. Tomo iiio. Quo loco nostrum cum suo comparans primas literas
duas quae in nostro extritae fuerunt, supplevit hoc modo, FL. CL. HAN∣NIBALLIANO REG. sed & alia quaedam in ejus ectypo cernuntur, quae nostro non conveniunt. Ubi Parisios redierit, nunc enim abest, dis∣crimen, si per ipsum licebit, attentius considerabimus, ut exactam si discre∣pent utrius{que} accipias imaginem. In Orthographiâ certi nominis non variant, HANNIBALLIANUM enim ambo vocant. IV. Quod vero hunc ipsum Hanniballianum, una cum Delmatio fratre, simul{que} etiam patruum utrius{que} Constantium, Caesares à Constantino magno creatos fuisse contendis, variis{que} consecturis astruere conaris, ignosce si assen∣tiri me posse negem; nam arduum est profectò & supra fidem ut tot saeculis ignorata dignitas, nunc demùm illis nullo reclamante vindicetur. Nec vero assertorem habes sententiae hujus Zosimum, quem laudas, sed apertè repug∣nantem, quippe qui libro 11. pag. 591, & 592. cum unà cum tribus Con∣stantini filiis, regnasse quodammodo tres alios diceret, Delmatium videlicet Caesarem, Constantium ejus patruum, qui frater fuit. Constantini, & Anni∣ballianum, trium horum dignitates apertè distinxit, docens Delmatium qui∣dem à Constantino Caesarem fuisse constitutum, reliquos vero duos non Cae∣sares sed Nobilissimos, quae dignitas inferior erat Caesareâ & ad illum gra∣dus, unde liquet Ausonium, cum de Delmatio & Anniballiano loquens, Caesareum illos nomen indeptos dixit quasi Caesares ambo fuissent, impropriè & poeticè locutum esse. Nihil enim ad asserendum Constantio Patruo hunc titulum facere nummos arbitror, quas profers, in quibus caput reflexâ in verti∣cem caesarie oblonga visitur hac inscriptione DN. Constantius Nob. Caes. & parte in alterâ Pedes Equitem jaculo confodiens, cum epigraphe FEL. TE∣NE. REIARATIO. Quatuor enim hujus generis nummos habemus, to∣tâ parte aversâ planè consimiles, atque in adversam item totâ capitum coma∣rum{que} formam conspirantes, hoc uno dispares, quod in duobus DN. CON∣STANTIUS NOB. CAES. legitur sicut in tuis, in reliquis verò duobus, DN. FL. CL. CONSTANTIUS NOB. CAES. quam posteriorem epigraphem, eam ad Gallum Caesarem pertinere dubium non sit, ad eundem referendam quo{que} priorem esse manifestum est, Galli porrò nomen suo mu∣tasse Constantium, quando Caesarem illum instituit, ita ut pro Gallo Constan∣tius vocaretur, auctor est Aurelius Victor & sciunt omnes; At Occonem tri∣um Constantiorum, id est, Chlori, Augusti, & Galli Nummos confudisse, videor dudum observasse, id{que} ipsum tibi etiam, si animum adjecisti, visum esse, mihi persuadeo. V. De excerptis temporum Constantinianorum à Valesio editis recte mones, mendosè, ubi de Hanniballiani conjuge sermo est, Constantini sororem dictam esse, cum fuerit filia, verùm in hoc errore Valesius esse nòn potuit, qui con∣jugem eandem in Notis suis Constantini, nòn sororem appellavit sed filiam. Fuit igitur  Librariorum seu Typographorum, cum & in archetypo excerptorum eorundem, quod penes nos est, & ni à Typographo quo usus est Valesius, Filia disertè scriptum sit non Sorore: Valesium hic ergo facile absolvi∣mus. Sed apertus error est, quod Bassianum, quem Constantinus in animo habue∣rat Caesarem creare, Caesarem reverâ fuisse affirmat, quod falsum est, & tamen erroris aemulum habuit Tristanum, qui de Bassiano Caesare peculiarem obser∣vationem condidit, pag. 470. Tom. iii. sed vereor ne jam taedio sim, abuti{que} videar his imprimis literis patientiâ tuâ. Vale. Parisiis Kalendis Octobribus, M. DC. XLVIII.
LETTER XI. Nobili praestanti{que} Doctrinâ Viro D. Simoni de Dewes, &c. Jacobus Sirmondus S. P. D. HAbes tandem vir ornatissime, integros Fastos Idatii, quâ parte typis vulgati non sunt, holographa manu nostra exaratos, hoc est minus culto, minus{que} eleganti charactere quàm aut merita tua aut vota mea postu∣lant. In caeteris enim voluntati tuae obsequi conatus sum, nam vetus exem∣plar in quo praepostera & depravata sunt plurima, sic expressi, ut vitiosas quo{que} lectiones (paucis exceptis) retinuerim, & singulos versus singulis ver∣sibus representarim, & quoniam in codice illo nostro singulae paginae binas in columnas distinguebantur, quod imitari nobis non licuit, dedimus operam ut quibus in verbis columellae singulae inciperent in apographo nostro adno∣taremus, ut ad has, si qua erit occasio, facilis sit recursus; expectabo ita{que} deinceps ecquid in his etiam, quae nunc mittuntur, observaturus sis, quod cum autographo conferri & corrigi jubeas quemadmodum in fragmento Necomiano foelicitèr tibi sentias evertisse VICTORINORUM numismata, etsi non adeo inter se discrepant ac quod alter fit imberbis & facie puerili, VICTORINUS uter{que} barbatus: Habent tamen & illa suum quo{que} nec obscurum discrimen, quod filii non tantum hilarior & blandior sit vultus quàm patris, sed barba etiam parcior & tenerior, juvenilem & nondum ple∣nam aetatem ostendens, qualem videre est in aureo nummo apud Sanctamanti∣um Tom. iii. pag. cujus pars anterior VICTORINUM patrem refert, altera filium, & qualem prorsus, exhibet aereus noster, cujus ectypum cum literis nostris accipies, nec vero in Victorinorum mentione quaerendum gen∣tisnè an familiae vocabulum fuerit PIAVONIUS, quod illorum utri{que} vel alteri adjungi solet, cum exploratum sit Romae post eversam rempublicam exolevisse penitus veterem illam propriorum nominum disciplinam, quod vel ex ipsis Imperatorum nomenclaturis quae obviae sunt, intelligi licet, te{que} om∣nium minime latet ac nos ipsos, si hac addi fas est, in notis ad Sidonium mul∣tis confirmasse meminimus. De CONSTANTIO Fratre Constantini magni quando haec iterum reciprocanda serra est, utar potestate quam facis, ut maneam in sententia, illum nec Caesarem esse vel Augustum, nec referri ad eum nummos posse, in quibus Eques à Pedite prostratus effingitur, sed quotquot hujus generis ad∣scriptum habent nomen Constantii, eos vel ad Constantium ipsum Augustum pertinere, vel ad Gallum Caesarem qui Constantius itidem, patruelis Au∣gusti beneficio, vocabatur; ad Constantium nempe si Augusti appositus est titulus; ad Gallum, si Caesaris. Cum{que} prostrati equitis hoc Lemma quod in Constantii Augusti & in Galli Juliani{que} Caesarum numismatis passim cernitur in anteriorum Principum Constantii Magnentii aliorum{que} nummis nusquam appareat, argumento videri, posterioribus demúm Constantii annis (ob bellicum aliquod facinus contra Persas quod inflexus Equitis pileus designet) usurpari coepisse, Constantio proinde patruo, si qui ejus nummi fuerint, tribui non posse, qui ab ipso Constantini Principatus exordio vivere de∣sierat. Mirum tibi non abs re visum censeo, adduci potuisse Baronium ut Con∣stantio magni Constantini filio nummum adscriberet quem ex Laelii Musaeo profert in iiio sub finem anni 337. cujus in adversâ parte inscriptio est DN. CONSTANTIUS JUN. NOB. C. in alterâ, Princeps idem pa∣ludatus
stans inter duo signa militaria cum his verbis CONCORDIA MI∣LITUM & nota loci ASIS; nàm ad Gallum Caesarem haud dubie refe∣rendus est, qui cum itidem Constantius vocaretur, junior hic dicitur ad dis∣crimen Constantii Augusti senioris. Extat quippe inter nostras alter sane per∣elegans, eodem opinor tempore cujus Constantii Aug. nomine ut docet in∣scriptio, DN. CONSTANTIUS. PF. Aug. cujus pars altera eadem prorsus cum superiore, nisi quod pro ASIS Sculptum habet ASIRM. ut Sir∣mii nòn Frisciae cusum significet, De illo item qui Val. Constantius NOB. C. inscribitur ubi laevam in partem se facies explicat, & in parte alterâ aedificium cum epigraphe cui subditae literae R. Q. cum serto intermedio, rectè in eâ senten∣tiâ judicasti, ad Constantium Caesarem Constantini magni Filium, qui Au∣gustus postea fuit, pertinere; perinde at{que} alterum cujus inscriptio est FL. JUL. CONSTANTIUS, NOB. C. cum eadem aedificii structura, tituli utrius{que} habeo singulos nisi quod in posteriore pro literis illis duabus hae in∣sunt idem quippe Constantius nunc Julii nomen adscribit, nunc Vale∣rii, quemadmodum Crispus quo{que} Caesar, qui Julius Crispus in nummis ple∣rum{que} nuncupatur, in antiquis inscriptionibus VALERIUS CRISPUS appellatur, & Commodum Imperatorem constat primum Lucii, postea Marci praenomen fraequentasse. Caeterum horum omnium, & aliorum quae insinuas, particeps fiet Sanctamantius cum ad nos redibit, nondum enim prolixae rusti∣cationis suae finem fecit. Magna interim cum voluptate vidi cerae impressa numismata duo quae Feltonus ad se missa, nobiscum, te volente, communicavit, Honoriani utrum∣que saeculi, unum scilicet Constantini Tyranni, alterum Constantii Augusti, ejus qui pater fuit Placidi Valentiniani, ad hunc (quandoquidem Julii quo{que} nomen gessit) transferri forsan poterunt nonnulla eorum, quae antehac de Julio Constantio Patruo suspicabatur, Constantini vero Tyranni est apud nos argenteus nummus, cujus Ectypon ad te mitto ut conferas cum tuo. Restat ad extremum, ut gratias agam, quas maximas debeo, humanitati & munificientiae tuae quod inopiam, tuâ ex abundantiâ, nostram sublevare me∣diteris. Equidem deesse mihi ex rarioribus nummis, quoniam hoc scire aves, plusculos non ignoro. Sed ex iis qui apud te singulares at{que} unici non sint, duos observavi, quibus careo Pertinacem & Carausium, de Carausio quin aliunde consequi possim non diffido, Aereum Pertinacem ex sex illis quem possides unum largiri si licebit qui certae sit antiquitatis, singulari bene∣ficio me devinctum habebis. Cave tamen pro eximiâ tuâ prudentiâ nè me hoc nomine officiosiorem erga te futurum arbitreris, sic enim animo & voluntate mihi videor affectus ut difficile sit quicquam addi. Vale. Lutetiae Parisiorum xv Kalendas Januarias, CI ICXL VIII.
LETTER XII. Johannis Deodati, S. S. Theologiae apud Geneven∣ses Professoris & Pastoris ibidem, Responsum Ad Conventum Ecclesiasticum Londini congre∣gatum, 1647. Plurimum Reverendi, potentissimi, & praestantissimi Viri, Domini, & Fratres in opere Christi conjunctissimi. SIquantum moeroris cepimus ex literis vestris, quibus tristissimum rerum ve∣strarum faciem expressistis, tantundem nobis suppeteret copia, ad leniendos dolores vestros, solatiis, vel ad labores sublevandos, consiliis, vel ad necessi∣tatibus vestris qualicun{que} opella nostra opitulandum, praeclare nobis videre∣mur honorificae vestrae, & amantissimae appellationi respondere, & paria no∣biscum facere officio non penitus inani, ne{que} poenitendo. Verum (proh do∣lor!) & mensurae nostrae brevitas, & causarum penitiorum unde tot clades fluxere ignoratio, & imprimis perplexa, & lubrica rerum quae inter vos agitantur indoles nos infra officia illa jubent consistere in muto quodam stupente ex horrente silentio, ad digitum Dei inter vos exertum, suspiciendum & adorandum. Quod si rumpendum tandem est silentium nobis adeo bene∣volè à vobis provocatis, quid prius, quid posterius, quidve nobis omnino dicendum superfit, animis suspensis, & calamo titubante ambigimus. Ac tandem post longam deliberationem, ne quà ad exemplum Jobi amicorum praecipiti & importuno sermone peccemus, in merae commiserationis sensum, & verba resolvimur, & vestros luctus, nostris lachrymis, alte{que} ductis suspi∣riis, prosequimur. Testis nobis est Deus, vos precum nostrarum privatarum, & supplicationum at{que} jejuniorum publicorum maximam partem occupare, stat{que} sententia patri miserationum, ne{que} requiem, ne{que} ceffationem dare, donec pace vestra in coelis apud se constituta, tandem nobis in terris restituat, cum plentitudine benedictionis, qua fluat illa perennis, tanquam fluvius. Res nostrae imo adeo omnium Ecclesiarum reformatarum, cum vestris tam arctè sunt connexae, & in vestris vertuntur, ut salute vestra adeo impetrata nostrae omnium tutelae cavisse habeamus persuasissimum; hac poistimum gravi tem∣pestate, quae magnae tribulationis tempus referre videtur, cogit{que} trepidos in aures benignissimi patris coelestis non amplius sese ad agendum per ignem accingentis, ut Amoso Prophetae in visionibus ostendit, sed jamdudum agentis inclamare, parce Domine, Desine Domine; qualis tandem resurget Jacobo jam nunc adeo & undi{que} judiciorum tuorum, domum tuam ob∣euntium favilla amburis. Ex hac nostra hactenus divino miraculo intacta specula conflagrationem illam grassantem vidimus: Ecclesias Rheticas, Ita∣licas deletas, Evangelium in Bohemia antiqua ejus sede extirpatum, devora∣tum Palatinatum, Ecclesias Gallicanas omni praesidio humano denudatas, tan∣quam implumes aviculas vitam precariam trakentes, Germanicas ferè undique quassatus, & semirutas, Hiberniam vestram latronum Eluvione improvisa ab∣sorptam. Hoc unum nempe ad cumulum tantarum calamitatum deerat ut flo∣rentissima Anglia occellus ille Ecclesiarum, peculium Christi singulare, perfu∣gium afflictorum, imbellium armamentarium, inopum promptuarium, spei me∣lioris
vexillum, tam inopinato casu, nullo hoste, nec ab exteris impressione suis ipsius manibus conficeretur, & pedibus protereretur, & illae splendidae domini Caulae, non à feris discerperentur, neque à praedonibus diriperentur, sed ipsis ovibus invicem asperatis & efferatis devastarentur; exemplo planè dico, & inter Ecclesias reformatas inaudito: Nempe Dei timore, & fide compari mansuefactae & hostium communium metu constrictae Charitatem mutuam san∣ctè & coluerant, & exercuerant, & inter se quietae & concordes à Luporum ra∣bie sese morum simplicitate, vitae innocentia, religionis sanctimonia, & fidei robore tuebantur. Horrore toti concutimur adversam hanc pulcherrimam inter vos Ecclesiae faciem, dum concursus bellicos & ferales populi cum Rege suo, fratrum cum fratribus, parentum cum filiis, ovium Christi cum aliis ovibus, imo & cum pastoribus audimus referri; cum in eodem praelii Campo, eundem patrem in nomine unius Mediatoris Christi invocari in auxilium ad funden∣dum eorum sanguinem, qui majori ex parte veros & fidos fratres pari in Deum pietate, & in patriam fide & charitate, se plurimis argumentis, & aequabili vitae tenore hactenus probavere; vi omni bellicâ in propria viscera conversa, quam in vicinorum perduellium poenam destinare vel fratrum conjunctissimo∣rum jamdudum sub servitutis pondere fatiscentium, & ad opem anhelantium liberationi impendere satius omnino fuisset. Acres istas animorum inter vos distractiones nihil mirum est varia judicia & affectus in orbe Christiano exci∣tasse. Ne{que} nos ipsi diffitemur agitatos aliquantulum eadem fluctuatione: non equidem praejudiciis occupatos, ne{que} à quoquam in partes vel publicè vel privatim vocatos, quam nobis sub natam curam nequaquam in postrema parte honoris nobis à vobis delati ponimus quasi sententiae nostrae tantum esset pondus, ut momentum alteri ex tantis partibus vel addere vel detrahere valeret. Continuimus nos in judicando religiosè inter aequales, & incorruptae inter fra∣tres charitatis cancellos, & mediocritatis nostrae modulum; de illis gaudentes quae bonorum omnium plausu excepta undi{que} audivimus, de illis dolentes quae sequiorem speciem prae se ferebant. Exultavimus negotio Scotico, quod vi∣debatur non dispar vestro incendium portendere, Dei opere, mirabili Regis vestri serenissimi nunquam satis praedicanda aequitate, & gentis cordatissimae concordia, antequam sumo jam elato flamma materiem corriperet. Ad pri∣mum nuncium motuum vestrorum erecti fuerant animi nostri in spem certam, eadem promptitudine, & facilitate, omnes offensiones praeteritas sedatum & sequius facta, & consulta, Regis optimi benignitate emendatum, & rempubli∣cam & Ecclesiam ordinatum iri sine strepitu & sanguine; admirati pariter foelicissima & splendida Parliamenti initia, & serenissimi Regis plusquam paternum animum, quo eas leges rogatas sancivit, quibus aequissimum & ab omni labe immune in posterum regimen sperare licebat; exemplo hac no∣stra violentorum dominiorum feracissima aetate non tam raro quam singu∣lari. Corrupit spes nostras turbo ille coitionum apud vos popularium, quae Re∣gis serenissimi descessioni à suo Parliamento & magnae Parliamenti partis se∣cessioni causam praebuere. Exinde multos conatus, & molimina, multa consilia instituta, nihil tamen perfectum, & rite constitutum audivimus. Negotium Ecclesiastici ordinis potissimum nos anxios habuit. Tractatum temporibus, at{que} animis tranquillis, & collatis pacatè sententiis potuerat & Regno pacem perpetuam praestare, & Ecclesiae vestrae omni reddere exoptatissimam illam, & primigeniam temporum Apostolorum faciem; contra vero animis aversis, & invicem obnitentibus, fixit lapidem offendiculi, & exacerbavit vulnus & ani∣mos jam partium studiis aegros, in diversa longissimè deduxit, & si vera no∣bis referuntur, aperuit latè patens ostium spiritibus privatis, & turbidis, quos audimus nomen teterrimum assumpsisse Independentium; qua calamitate nulla infestior Ecclesiae fundum potuit concutere. Aegerrime etiam tulimus sevisse spiritum divisionis, suspicionis, & diffidentiae, pessima Zizania, quae adeo fructificarunt, & proserpserunt ut sponsionum Regiarum dejerationibus
gravissimis firmatarum, fidem elevaverint & omnem exinde spem reconcilati∣onis extinxerint. Doloris vero nostri fastigium hoc fuit, quod aggesta ista materies tandem exasit in bellum atrox, jamdudum odiis internecinis exer∣citum, quo flagrante utut verba, & frequentes protestationes sonent, non po∣test non evilescere regia dignitas, & potestas, convalescere audaciam, & male∣feriatorum licentia, pietas obsolescere, charitas mutua aboleri, & ferina quae∣dam rabies animos invadere, non amplius primas causas belli spectantes, sed injurias in ipso belli progressu illatas vel acceptas, discrimine potius nominum infamium tanquam Stigmatum quorundam quam causae invicem divisos. Facilius omnino nobis & omnibus bonis esset judicia nostra expedire, si major numerus adversae utrius{que} partis ab altera in religionis capitibus essentialibus, vel in reipublicae juribus dissentiret, vel si aperta persequutione altera premeretur, vel si Tyrannis publica adversus leges, alterius partis vecordia, & ignavia inveheretur; Verùm prolixè habetis, quo vos solemini dum ea quae in aliis regnis inevitabilia videntur, vestris legibus justissimis, & potentissimis, & magno omnium indiscriminatim consensu levi negotio propulsare in manu habetis. Haec omnia diu nos adegerunt ad animo agitandum, quis tandem pacis sanctissimae ineundae modus superesset. Grave nobis fuit, tentatus in∣terpellationes Regnorum & Provinciarum amicissimarum frustra fuisse; In mentem venit num tandem hoc à serenissimo Rege & à Parliamento impe∣trari possit, ut delectis ab utra{que} parte Viris Ecclesiasticis fidei integrae, & famae citra omnem suspicionem, negotium daretur, ut collatis capitibus pri∣mam veluti delineationem sanctae pacis instituerent, & spiritu Dei ab omni factione expurgati, utrin{que} agerent sequestres, publicae gratiae & salutis inter∣nuncios animos{que} ferro & marte induratos, alloquiis, hortatibus, & obtestatio∣nibus delinirent, & sacrum Thuribilum inter medias flammas inferrent. Quis scit num Dei Gloria ad preces & suspiria, procumbentum sacrorum ministro∣rum sese manifestatura sit in cordibus utrius{que} partis, ad cedendum odiis, & utrum{que} ad saniora consilia & pacem communem promerendum, praesidiis omnibus terrestribus cessantibus, divina sunt aggredienda, quae nunquam in cassum cessere. Haec ratio efficere posset quod à bello civili utcun{que} res ca∣dat, neutiquam sperari possit, ut voluntaria animorum flexione plene sarcia∣tur vulnus, & redintegretur amor. Haec vobis viris sapientissimis suggerere permittit egregia quam de nobis fovetis opinio. Modestiae equidem nostrae non est, vel praescribere vel monere; at vero movere, rogare, Deum ipsum appellare, nulla verecundiae lex unquam interdixit. Satagite ut quantocius pax restituatur bene sarta & fida, qualiscun{que} tandem illa sit, omni bello ci∣vili praeferenda videtur, cavete ne arridente aliqua belli alea res vestras com∣mittatis ancipiti victoriae sorti qua nihil funestius & reipublicae exitialius acci∣dere potest. Tollite hoc ingens scandalum toti orbi Christiano objectum. Eluite illam maculam professioni purioris Evangelii aspersam, adversari illam arcano quodam odio regnis & potestatibus. Demite exulceratum Regis vestri animum, ne{que} ad praecipitia & abrupta compellite; veniam date pluri∣mis naevis & corruptelis quibus nullum imperium statu etiam florentissimo nunquam caruit, emendationes illas utiliores judicate quae non agglomerantur, sed per partes & momenta digeruntur, & paulatim sanciuntur. Et deni{que} per viscera miserationum Christi permittite vos exorari, ut quas opes, quam potentiam, & quas vires vobis Deus cumulatè largitus est, eas non videamus amplius in perniciem vestram consumi, verum in tot afflictissimorum fratrum vestrorum, pacem vestram suspirantium, liberationem & levamentum, explicari. Haec purissima nostra vota exaudiat, rata{que} esse jubeat Deus pacis; Ille Diabo∣li & Antichristi machinamenta omnia demoliatur, regnum{que} at{que} Ecclesias vestras in alto illo sanctae gloriae reponat, quae hactenus in terris, & Ecclesiae Theatro emicuere. Nostra vero sensa fraterna fiducia exprompta, aequi boni{que} consulite, at{que} cunctationem in respondendo nostram causis quas ha∣buimus graves condonate. Rumor percrebuerat pacis tractationem apud nos
fervere: quare expectandum nobis judicavimus, quid dies pareret ut omnia verba nostra, omnes{que} animorum motus, in meram gratulationem, & effusam laetitiae testificationem liquescerent. Dolemus nos inani ope luctatos; sed prope diem fore illius compotes, & optamus & vovemus, eo affectu quo vos fratres conjunctissimos nobis esse & à vobis haberi gloriamur vobis{que} amplissi∣mam Dei benedictionem, & ipsius sapientiae & roboris copiam exoptamus. Valete in Domino foelicissime, Johannis Deodati S. S. Theologiae apud Genevenses Pro∣fessoris & Pastoris ibidem, Responsum Ad Conventum Ecclesiasticum Londini Congregatum. 1647. LETTER XIII. A Letter from Sir Thomas Bodleigh, to Sir Francis Bacon. My good Cousin, ACcording to your Request in your Letter (dated the 19th of October at Orleans, I received here the 18th of December) I have sent you by your Merchant 30 l. Sterling for your present supply, and had sent you a greater Sum, but that my extraordinary Charge this Year hath utterly unfur∣nished me. And now, Cousin, though I will be no fevere exacter of Account, either of your Mony or Time, yet for the love I bear you, I am very desi∣rous, both to satisfy my self, and your Friends, how you prosper in your Travels, and how you find your self bettered thereby, either in knowledg of God, or of the World; the rather, because the Days you have already spent abroad, are now both sufficient to give you Light, how to fix your self and end with counsel, and accordingly to shape your Course constantly unto it. Besides, it is a vulgar scandal to Travellers, that few return more religious than they went forth; wherein both my Hope and Request is to you, that your principal care be to hold your Foundation, and to make no other use of informing your self in the Corruptions and Superstitions of other Nations, than only thereby to engage your own Heart more firmly to the Truth. You live indeed in a Country of two several Professions, and you shall return a Novice, if you be not able to give an account of the Ordi∣nances, Strength, and Progress of each, in Reputation, and Party, and how both are supported, ballanced, and managed by the State, as being the con∣trary Humours, in the temper of Predominancy, whereof the Health or Dis∣ease of that Body doth consist. These things you will observe, not only as an English-man, whom it may concern, to what Interest his Country may expect in the Consciences of their Neighbours, but also, as a Christian, to consider both the Beauties and Blemishes, the Hopes and Dangers of the Church in all places. Now for the World, I know it too well, to perswade you to dive into the practices thereof; rather stand upon your own guard, against all that attempt you thereunto, or may practise upon you in your Conscience, Reputation, or your Purse. Resolve, no Man is wise or safe, but he that is honest: and let this Perswasion turn your Studies and Obser∣vations from the Complement and Impostures of the debased Age, to more
real grounds of Wisdom, gathered out of the Story of Times past; and out of the Government of the present State. Your guide to this, is the knowledg of the Country and the People among whom you live: for the Country, though you cannot see all places, yet if, as you pass along, you en∣quire carefully, and further help your self with Books that are written of the Cosmography of those Parts, you shall sufficiently gather the Strength, Riches, Traffick, Havens, Shipping, Commodities, Vent, and the Wants and Disadvantages of all places. Wherein also, for your own good here∣after, and for your Friends, it will be fit to note their Buildings, Furni∣tures, their Entertainments; all their Husbandry, and ingenious Inventions, in whatsoever concerneth either Pleasure or Profit. For the People, your Traffick among them, while you learn their Language, will sufficiently instruct you in their Habilities, Dispositions, and Humours, if you a little enlarge the privacy of your own Nature, to seek acquaintance with the best sort of Strangers, and restrain your Af∣fections and Participation for your own Country-men of whatsoever con∣dition. In the Story of France, you have a large and pleasant Field in three Lines of their Kings, to observe their Alliances and Successions, their Con∣quests, their Wars, especially with us; their Councils, their Treaties; and all Rules and Examples of Experiences and Wisdom, which may be Lights and Remembrances to you hereafter, to judg of all Occurrents both at Home and Abroad. Lastly, For the Government, your end must not be like an Intelligencer, to spend all your time in fishing after the present News, Humours, Graces, or Disgraces of Court, which happily may change before you come Home; but your better and more constant ground will be, to know the Consanguini∣ties, Alliances, and Estates of their Princes; the proportion between the Nobility and Magistracy; the Constitutions of their Courts of Justice; the state of their Laws, as well for the making, as the execution thereof: How the Soveraignty of the King infuseth it self into all Acts and Ordinan∣ces; how many ways they lay Impositions, and Taxations, and gather Re∣venues to the Crown. What be the Liberties and Servitudes of all De∣grees; what Discipline and Preparations for Wars; what Inventions for in∣crease of Traffick at Home, for multiplying their Commodities, encouraging Arts and Manufactures, or of Worth in any kind. Also what good establish∣ment, to prevent the Necessities and Discontentment of People, to cut off Suits at Law, and Duels; to suppress Thieves, and all Disorders. To be short, because my purpose is not to bring all your Observations to Heads, but only by these few to let you know what manner of Return your Friends expect from you; let me, for all these and all the rest, give you this one Note, which I desire you to observe as the Counsel of a Friend, not to spend your Spirits, and the precious time of your Travel, in a captious pre∣judice and censuring of all Things, nor in an infectious collection of base Vices and Fashions of Men and Women, or general corruption of these Times, which will be of use only among Humorists, for Jests and Table∣talk; but rather strain your Wits and Industry soundly to instruct your self in all things between Heaven and Earth, which may tend to Vertue, Wis∣dom, and Honour, and which may make your Life more profitable to your Country, and you self more comfortable to your Friends, and acceptable to God. And to conclude, let all these Riches be treasured up, not only in your Memory, where Time may lessen your Stock; but rather in good Writings, and Books of Account, which will keep them safe for your use hereafter.
And if in this time of your liberal Traffick, you will give me any adver∣tisement of your Commodities in these kinds, I will make you as liberal a Return from my Self and your Friends here, as I shall be able. And so commending all your good Endeavours to him that must either wi∣ther or prosper them, I very kindly bid you farewel. Your's to be commanded, Thomas Bodleigh. LETTER XIV. A Letter from Sir Thomas Bodleigh, to Sir Francis Bacon. SIR; AS soon as Term was ended, supposing your leisure to be more than be∣fore, I was coming to thank you two or three times, rather chusing to do it by Word than Letter, but was still disappointed of my Purpose, as I am this present upon an urgent occasion, which doth tie me fast to Fulham, and hath made me now determine to impart my Mind by Writing. I think you know I have read your Cogitata & Visa; which I have done with great desire, reputing it to be a Token of your singular Love, that you joined me with those of your chiefest Friends, to whom you would commend the first perusal of your Draught: For which I pray you give me leave to say this, first, That if the depth of my Affection to your Person and Spirit, and to your Work and Words, and to all your Abilities, were as highly to be va∣lued, as your Affection is to me, it might walk with yours Arm in Arm, and claim your love by just desert: but there can be no comparison, where our states are so uneven, and our means to demonstrate our Affections so diffe∣rent; in so much as for my own, I must leave it to be prised in the na∣ture that it is, and you shall ever-more find it most addicted to your worth. As touching the Subject of your Book, you have set on foot so many rare and noble Speculations, as I cannot chuse but wonder (and shall wonder at it ever) that your expence of Time, considered in your publick Profession, which hath in a manner no acquaintance with any Scholarship or Learning, you should have culled out the Quintessence, and sucked up the Sap of the chiefest kinds of Learning: for howsoever in some Points you vary altoge∣ther from that which is, and hath been ever the received Doctrine of our Schools; and was always by the wisest (as still they are deemed) of all Nations and Ages adjudged the truest; yet it is apparent, that in those ve∣ry Points, and in all your Proposals and Plots in that Book, you show your self a Master-Workman. For my self, I must confess, and do speak it In∣genuè, that for matter of Learning, I am not worthy to be reckoned among Smatterers. Howbeit, sith it may seem, that being willing to communicate this Treatise to your Friends, you are likewise willing to listen to whatsoever they can except against it. I must deliver unto you that for my private Opinion, I am one of that Crew that say there is, and we possess a far greater hold-fast of certainty in the Sciences, than you by your Discourse
will seem to acknowledg: for, where at first you do object the ill Success and Errors of Practitioners of Physick; you know as well they proceed of the Patient's unruliness, (for not one in an hundred do obey his Physician, in observing his Counsels) or by misinformation of their own indisposition, (for few are able in that kind to explicate themselves;) or by reason their Diseases are by Nature incurable, which is incident, you know, to ma∣ny Maladies; or for some other hidden Cause, cannot be discovered by course of Conjecture. Howbeit, I am full of this belief, That as Physick is ministred now-a-days by Physicians, it is much to be ascribed to their Neg∣ligence or Ignorance, or other touch of Imperfection, that they speed not better in their Practice; for few are found of that Profession so well in∣structed in their Art, as they might be by the Precepts which their Art af∣fordeth; which if it be defective in regard of full Perfection, yet certainly it doth flourish with admirable Remedies, such as Tract of Time hath taught by experimental Events, and are the open High-way to that principal Know∣ledg which you recommend. As for Alchimy and Magick, some Conclusi∣ons they have worth the preserving, but all their Skill is so accompanied with Subtilties and Guiles, as both the Crafts and Crafts-masters are not only despised, but named with derision: Whereupon to make good your princi∣pal Assertion, methinks you should have drawn the most of your Examples from that which is taught in the Liberal Sciences, not by picking out Cases that happen very seldom, and may by all confession be subject to reproof; but by controuling the Generals and Grounds, and invent Positions and Aphorisms, which the greatest Artists and Philosophers have from time to time defended: for it goeth currant amongst all Men of Learning, that those kinds of Arts which Clarks, in time past, termed the Quadruvialls, confirm their Propositions by infallible Demonstrations; and likewise in the Trivials, such Lessons and Directions are delivered unto us, as will effect very near, or as much altogether as every Faculty doth promise. Now in case we should concur to do as you advise, which is, to renounce our com∣mon Notions, and cancel all our Theorems, Axioms, Rules, and Tenents, and to come as Babes, ad Regnum Naturae, as we are willed by Scripture to come ad Regnum Goelorum; there is nothing more certain to my under∣standing, than that it would instantly bring us to Barbarism, and after many thousand Years, leave us more unprovided of Theorical Furniture than we are at this present, for it were indeed to become very Babes, Tabula Rasa, when we shall keep no impression of any former Principles, but be driven to begin the World again, and to travel by trial of Actions and Sense (which are your Proofs by Particulars) what to place in intellectu, for our general Conceptions, it being a Maxim of all Mens approving in intellectu, Nihil enim quod non prius fuit in sensu: and so in appearance it would befal us that till Plato's Years become about, our insight in Learning would be in less esteem than now it is accounted. As for that which you inculcate of a Knowledg more excellent than now it is among us, which Experience might produce, if we would assay to retract it out of Nature by particular Proba∣tions, it is no more upon the matter, but to cite us to that which, without instigation by natural instinct, Men would practise of themselves; for it can∣not in reason be otherwise thought, but that there are infinite numbers in all parts of the World (for we may not in this case confine our Cogitations within the Bounds of Europe) which imbrace the course you propose with all diligence and care that any ability can perform; for every Man is born with an appetite of Knowledg, wherewith he cannot be so glutted, but still as in Dropsies, they will thirst after more: but yet why they should hearken to any such Perswasion, as wholly to abolish those setled Opinions, and ge∣neral Theories to which they have attained, and by their own and their
Ancestors former experience, I see nothing yet alleadged to induce me to think it. Moreover, I may speak with good probability, that if we shall make a mental survey, what is like to be effected all the World over, those five or six Inventions which you have selected, and imagine to be but of mo∣dern standing, will make but a slender show, among more than many hun∣dreds of all kinds of Notions, which are daily brought to light by the in∣forcement of Wit or casual Event, and may be compared, and partly prefer∣red above those that you have named: but were it so here, that all were ad∣mitted that you can require, the augmentation of our Knowledg, and that all our Theorems, and general Positions were utterly extinguished with a new substitution of others in their places, what hope may we have of any benefit to Learning by this alteration: assuredly as soon as the new are brought ad , by the Inventors and their Followers, by an interchangable course of natural Things, they will fall by degrees to be buried in oblivion, and so in continuance perish out-right, and that perchance upon the like to your present Pretences, by proposal of some means to advance our Knowledg to a higher pitch of perfection; for still the same Defects Antiquity found, will reside in Mankind, and therefore other uses of their Actions, Devices, and Studies, are not to be expected than is apparently by Record in former Time observ'd. I remember here a Note which Paterculus made of the in∣comparable Wits of the Grecians and Romans, in their flourishing States, that there might be this reason of the notable downfal in their Issue which came after, because by Nature, quod summo studio petitum est, ascendit in sum∣mum, difficilis{que} in perfecto mora est; insomuch that Men perceiving that they could not go further, being come to the top, they turned back on their own accord, forsaking those Studies that were most in request, and betaking themselves to new Endeavours, as if the thing that they fought had been by prevention fore-priz'd by others: so it fared in particular with the Eloquence of that Age, that when their Successors found they could hardly equal, but by no means excel their Predecessors, they began to neglect the study there∣of, and both to write and speak, for many hundred Years, in a rustical man∣ner, till this latter Revolution brought the Wheel about again, by inflaming gallant Spirits to give a fresh onset, with straining and striving to clime unto the height and top of Perfection, not in that Gift alone, but in every other Skill in any part of Learning: for I hold it not an erroneous Conceit to think of every Science, that as now they are professed, so they have been before in all precedent Ages, though not the like in all Places, nor at all Times alike in ours, and the same, but according to the Changes and Turn∣ings of Times, with a more exact or plain, or with a more rude and obscure kind of teaching. If the question should be asked, What proof I have of it I can produce the Doctrine of Aristotle, and the deepest learned Clarks of whom we have any means to take notice of, that, as there is of other things, so there is of Sciences; Ortus & interitus, which is also the mean∣ing, if I should expound it, of Nihil novum sub sole, and is as well to be ap∣plied, ad facta, as dicta, ut nihil neque factum neque dictum quod non dictum & factum prius. I have further for my Warrant, that famous Complaint of Solomon to his Son, against the infinite making of Books in his Time: of which in all congruity it must be understood, that a very great part were Ob∣servations and Instructions in all kinds of Literature, of which there is not now so much as one petty Pamphlet (only some parcel of the Bible excepted) re∣maining to Posterity, as there was not then any bound of millions of Au∣thors that were long before Solomon; yet we must give credit to what he affirmed, that whatsoever was then, or had been before, it could never be averred, Behold, this is new. Whereupon I must for final conclusion infer, seeing all Indeavours, Studies, and Knowledg of Mankind in whatsoever
Arts or Science have ever been the same as at this present, though full of Mutabilities, according to the Changes and accidental Occasions of Ages, and Countrys, and Clarks dispositions, which can never be but Subject to Intention and Remission, both in their desires, and in the practices of their Knowledg; if now we should accord in opinion with you, first to condemn our present knowledg of Doubts and Incertitude; but you confirm, but by a∣verment, without other force of Argument, than to disclaim all our Axioms, Maxims, and general Assertions that are left by Tradition from our Elders unto us, which have passed (as it is to be intended) all probations of the sharpest Wits that ever were. And, Lastly; to devise (being now become A, B, C, Darii) by the frequent spelling of Particulars, to come to the notice of new Generals, and so afresh to create new Principles of Sciences; the end of all would be, that when we shall be dispossessed of the Learning we have, all our con∣sequent travail, will but help in a Circle to conduct us to the place from whence we set forward, and bring us to the happiness to be restored in integrum, which will require as many Ages as have marched before us to be perfectly atchieved. All which I write with no dislike of increasing our knowldg with new Devices, which is undoubtedly a practice of high com∣mendation, in regard of the benefit they will yeild for the present. And the World hath ever been, and will assuredly continue full of such Devisers, whose industry, that way, hath been eminent, and produced strange Effects, above the reach and hope of Mens common capacities; yet our Notions and Theorems have always kept in Grace, both with them, and with the rarest that ever were nominated among the Learned. By this you see to what boldness I am brought by your kindness, that if I seem too sawcy in this Contradiction, it is the opinion I hold of your noble disposition, and of the freedom in these Cases that you will afford your special Friends, which hath induced me to do it. Now, though I my self, like a Carriers Horse, cannot blauch the beaten way in which I was trained, yet such is my censure of your Cogitata, that I must tell you (to be plain) you have much wronged your self and the World, to smother such a Treasure so long in your Coffer; for though I stand well assured (touching the tenour and subject of your main discourse) you are not able to impannel a substantiall Jury in any Univer∣sity that will give up a Verdict to acquit you of error; yet it cannot be gain-said, that all your Treatise over doth abound which choice Conceits of the present state of Learning, and with so worthy Contemplations of the Means to procure it, as may perswade, with any Student, to look more narrowly to his business, not only by aspiring to the greatest persection of that which is now-adays divulged in the Sciences, but by diving yet deeper, as it were, into the Bowels and Secrets of Nature, and by Inforcing the power of his Judgment and Wit, to learn of St. Paul, consectari meliora dona: which course would to God (to whisper so much in your ears) you had followed at first, when you fell to the study of such a Study as was not worthy such a Student: nevertheless, being as it is, that your were therein setled, and your Country soundly served, I can but wish, with al my Heart, as I do very often, that you may gain a fit reward to the full of your de∣serts, which I hope will come with heaps of Happiness and Honour. Yours to be used and commanded, Thomas Bodleigh. Fullham, Feb. 19. 1607.
POST-SCRIPT. SIR, One kind of boldness doth draw on another, insomuch, that me-thinks I should offend, not to signify, that before the Transcript of your Book be fitted for the Press, it will be requisite for you to cast a Censors Eye upon the Stile and Elocution, which in the frame of your Periods, and in divers Words and Phrases, will hardly go for currant, if the Copy brought to me be just the same that you would publish. Novum Organum. LETTER XV. A Letter from Sir Henry Sydney to his Son Sir Philip Sydney. Son Philip; I Have received two Letters from you, the one written in Latin, the other in French, which I take in good part; and will you to exercise that Practise of learning often, for it will stand you in stead in that profession of Life, which you are born to live in. And now, since that this is my first Letter that ever I did write to you, I will not that it be all empty of some Advices, which my natural care of you provoketh me to wish you to follow, as Documents to you in this your tender Age. 1. Let your first Action be, the lifting up of your Hands and Mind to Almighty God by hearty Prayer; and feelingly digest the words you speak in Prayer, with continual meditation and thinking of him to whom you pray, and use this at an ordinary hour; whereby the time it self will put you in remembrance, to do that thing which you are accustomed in that time. 2. Apply your study such hours as your discreet Master doth assign you earnestly; and the time I know, he will so limit, as shall be both sufficient for your Learning, and safe for your Health: And mark the sence and matter of that you read, as well as the words; so shall you both enrich your Tongue with Words, and your Wit with Matter: and Judgment will grow as Years grow on you. 3. Be humble and obedient to your Master: For unless you frame your self to obey; yea, and to feel in your self what Obedience is, you shall ne∣ver be able to teach others how to obey you hereafter. 4. Be courteous of gesture, and affable to all Men with universality of Reverence, according to the dignity of the Person; there is nothing that winneth so much with so little cost. 5. Use moderate Diet; so as after your meat you may find your Wit fresher, and not duller, and your Body more lively, and not more heavy. 6. Seldom drink Wine, and yet sometime do, lest being enforced to drink upon the sudden, you should find your self enflamed. 7. Use exercise of Body, but such as is without peril of your Bones or Joints; it will much encrease your Force, and inlarge your Breath. 8. Delight to be cleanly, as well in all parts of your Body, as in your Garments; it shall make you grateful in each Company, and otherwise loathsom. 9. Give your self to be merry: for you degenerate from your Father, if you find not your self most able in Wit and Body to do any thing when you be most merry: But let your Mirth be ever void of all scurrility and biting
words to any Man; for a Wound given by a Word is harder to be cured, than that which is given by a Sword. 10. Be you rather a hearer, and bearer away of other Mens Talk, than a beginner or procurer of Speech; otherwise you shall be accounted to de∣light to hear your self speak. 11. Be modest in each Assembly; and rather be rebuked of light Fellows for a maiden-like Shame-facedness, than of your sober Friends for pert Boldness. 12. Think upon every word you will speak before you utter it, and re∣member how Nature hath (as it were) rampir'd up the Tongue with Teeth, Lips, yea and Hair without the Lips, and all betoken Reins and Bri∣dles to the restraining the use of that Member. 13. Above all things tell no Untruth, no not in Trifles; the custom of it is naught: And let it not satisfy you, that the hearers for a time take it for a Truth; for afterwards it will be known as it is, to your Shame: And there cannot be a greater Reproach to a Gentleman, than to be accounted a Liar. 14. Study and endeavour your self to be vertuously occupied; so shall you make such a habit of well-doing, as you shall not know how to do evil tho you would. 15. Remember (my Son) the Noble Blood you are descended of by your Mothers side; and think that only by a vertuous Life and good Actions, you may be an Ornament to your Illustrious Family; and otherwise through Vice and Sloth you may be esteemed, labes generis, one of the greatest Curses that can happen to a Man. Well (my little Philip) this is enough for me, and I fear too much for you at this time: but yet if I find that this light meat of digestion do nourish any thing the weak stomach of your young Capacity; I will, as I find the same grow stronger, feed it with tougher Food: Farewel. Your Mother and I send you our Blessing; and Almighty God grant you his, nourish you with his Fear, guide you with his Grace, and make you a good Servant to your Prince and Country. Your Loving Father, Henry Sydney. LETTER XVI. A Letter from Sir Henry Sydney to his Son Sir Philip Sydney. MY Son, the vertuous Inclination of thy matchless Mother, by whose tender and godly Care thy Infancy was governed, together with Education under so zealous a Tutor, puts me rather in assurance than hope, that thou art not ignorant of that summary Bond, which only is able to make thee happy, (as well in thy Death as Life) I mean the Knowledg and Worship of thy Creator and Redeemer, without which all other things are vain and miserable; so that thy Youth being guided by so sufficient a Teacher, I make no doubt but he will furnish thy Life with Divine and Moral Documents. Yet that I may not cast off the Care that beseemeth a Parent towards his Child; or that thou shouldest have cause to derive thy whole
Felicity and Welfare rather from whom thou receivest thy Birth and Being, than from those unto whom the Charge of well-living is allotted; I think it fit and agreeable to help thee with such Advertisments for the squaring of thy Life, as are rather gained by long Experience than much Reading, to the end that thou entring into this exorbitant Age, mayest be the better prepared to shun those Courses, whereunto this World, and the want of Experience, may easily draw thee: And because I would not confound thy Memory, I have reduced them into ten Precepts; and next unto Moses's Tables (if thou imprint them in thy Memory) thou shalt reapt the Benefit, and I the Contentment; and here they follow. 1. When it pleases God to bring thee to Man's Estate, use great provi∣dence and circumspection in the choice of thy Wife, for from thence will spring all future Good or Evil; and it is an Action, like a Stratagem of War, wherein a Man can err but once: If thy Estate be good, match near home, and at leasure; if weak, far off, and quickly: enquire diligently of her Education, and how her Parents have been inclined in their Youth: let her not be poor, how generous soever, for a Man can buy nothing in the Market for Gentility: nor chuse a base or uncomely Creature, although Wealthy, for it will cause contempt in others, and loathing in thy self: Neither make choice of a Dwarf, or a Fool, for by the one thou shalt be∣get a race of Pigmies, and the other will be thy daily disgrace, and it will irk thee to hear her talk; for thou shalt find to thy great Grief, that there is nothing more irksom than a She-Fool. And touching the Government of thy House, let thy Hospitality be moderate, and according to the measure of thy Estate, rather plentiful than sparing, but not costly; for I never knew any grow poor by keeping of an ordinary Table: But some consume themselves through secret Vices, and then Hospitality beareth the blame. But banish Swinish Drunkards out of thy House; that is a Vice that impaireth Health, consumes much, and makes no shew: And I never heard Praise ascribed to a Drunkard, but the well-bearing of Drink, which is a Commendation fitter for a Brewer's Horse or Dray-man, than for a Gentleman or a Serving-man. See that thou spend not above three of the four parts of thy Revenues, nor above a third part of that in thy House, for the other two parts will do no more than defray thy Extraordinarie, which will always surmount the Ordinary by so much, otherwise thou shalt live like a rich Beggar in continual want; and the needy Man can never live happily, nor content: for every one left in an unfortunate estate, makes him ready to sell Lands; and that Gentleman that sells one Acre of Lands, sells one ounce of Credit; for Gentility is nothing but Ancient Riches: So that if the Foundation shrinks, the Building must needs follow after. 2. Bring thy Children up in Learning and Obedience, yet without auste∣rity; praise them openly, reprehend them secretly, give them good Counte∣nance, and convenient Maintenance, according to thine Ability; otherwise thy Life will seem their Bondage: And what Portion thou shalt leave them at thy Death, they will thank Death for it, and not thee. I am perswaded that the foolish cockering of some, and the over-stern carriage of others, causeth more Men and Women to take ill courses, than their own vicious in∣clinations. Marry thy Daughters, lest they marry themselves: and suffer not thy Sons to pass the Alps, for they shall bring home nothing but Pride, Blas∣phemy, and Atheism: And if by Travel they get few broken Languages, it will profit them no more, than to have one sort of Meat serv'd in divers dishes. Neither by my Advice trained up to Wars; for that he that sets his rest to live in that, can hardly be an honest or good Christian; for that every War is of it self unjust, except the Cause make it just. Besides it is a Science no longer in request than use; for Souldiers at Peace are like Chimnies in Summer.
3. Live not in the Country without Corn and Cattel about thee; for he that presents his hands to his Purse for every expence, is like him that think∣eth to keep Water in Fire; and what Provision thou shalt want, prepare to buy it at the first hand; for there is a penny in four saved, between buying at they need, and when the Season and Market serveth fittest for it. 4. Be not served with Kinsmen, Friends, or Men intreated to serve (for they will expect much, and do little); nor with such as are amorous (for their Brains are ever intosticated); and rather be served by two too few, than one too many: Feed them well, and pay them with the most, and thou mayst boldly require Duty and Service at their hands. 5. Let thy Kindred and Alliance be welcome to thy Table; grace them with thy Countenance, and further them in all honest Actions, for by these Means thou shalt find Advocates to plead an Apology for thee behind thy back; but shake off those Glow-worms, (I mean, Parasites and Hypocrites) who will feed and fawn upon thee in Prosperity, but in Adversity will shelter thee no more than an Harbour in Winter. 6. Beware of Suretyship for thy best Friends; he that payeth another Man's Debt, seeketh his own overthrow; but if thou canst not chuse, rather lend thy Mony thy self upon good Bonds though thou borrow, for so shalt thou both please thy Friend, and secure thy self. Neither borrow Mony of a Neighbour, or Friend, but of a Stranger, where paying for it, thou shalt hear no more of it, otherwise thou shalt eclipse thy Credit, lose thy Free∣dom, and yet pay as dear as to another: But in borrowing, be precious of thy Word, for he that hath a care to keep his Days of Payment, is a Lord over another Man's Goods. 7. Undertake no Suit against any poor Man, without much wrong, for thou makest him thy Competitor; and it is a base request to triumph where there is small resistance; neither attempt Law with any Man, before thou be throughly resolved that thou have right on thy side; then neither spare for Mony, nor Pains; for a Cause or two so followed, will free thee from Suits a great part of thy Life after. 8. Be sure to keep some Gentleman thy Friend, but trouble him not with every trifling Complaint; often present him with many, yet small Gifts: And if thou have cause to bestow any great Gratuity, let it be such as may be daily in his sight; otherwise, in this ambitious Age, thou shalt remain like a Hop without a Pole, live in obscurity, and be made a Footstool for every insulting Companion to spur at. 9. Towards thy Superiors, be humbly generous; with thy Equals, fami∣liar; yet respective towards thy Inferiors; shew much humility, and some familiarity, as to bow thy Body, stretch forth thy Hand, and to uncover thy Head, with such be popular Complements; the first prepares the way to Advancement; the second makes thee known for a Man as well bred; the third gains a Man good report, which once being gotten, is easily kept; for high. Humilitudes take such deep root in the minds of the Multitude (who are more easily won by unprofitable Courtesies, than curious Benefits) that I advise thee not to affect nor neglect Popularities. Trust not any Man with thy Estate, for it is a meer folly for a Man to enthral himself to his Friends, as though, if occasion be offered, he should not dare become his Enemy. 10. Be not scurrilous in thy Conversation, nor Stoical in thy Jests; the one will make thee unwelcome to all Companies, the other will breed Quarrels, and get thee hatred of thy best Friends; for Jests, when they sa∣vour too much of Truth, leave bitterness in the minds of those that are touched. Although I have pointed at all these inclusive, yet I think it fit and necessary to leave it thee as a special Caution, because I have seen many
so prone to quip and gird, that they will rather lose their Friend than their Scoff, then they will travel to be delivered of it as a Woman with Child: these nimble Apprehensions are but the Froth of Wit. Your loving Father, Henry Sydney. LETTER XVII.A Letter from Sir William Boswell, to the most Reverend William Laud late Arch-bishop of Canterbury, remaining with Sir Robert Cotton's choice Papers. Most Reverend; AS I am here employ'd by our Soveraign Lord the King, your Grace can testify that I have left no Stone unturn'd for his Majesty's Advance∣ment; neither can I omit (whenever I meet with Treacheries or Conspira∣cies against the Church and State of England) the sending your Grace an Accompt in General. I fear Matters will not answer your expectations, if your Grace do but seriously weigh them with deliberation. For be you assur'd, the Romish Clergy have gull'd the misled Party of our English Na∣tion, and that under a Puritanical Dress; for which the several Fraternities of that Church, have lately received Indulgences from the See of Rome, and Council of Cardinals, for to educate several of the young Fry of the Church of Rome, who be Natives of his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and in∣struct them in all manner of Principles and Tenents contrary to the Episco∣pacy of the Church of England. There be in the Town of Hague, to my certain Knowledg, two dangerous Impostors, of whom I have given notice to the Prince of Orange, who have large Indulgences granted them, and known to be of the Church of Rome, altho they seem Puritans, and do converse with several of our English Factors. The one, James Murray, a Scotchman, and the other John Napper, a York∣shire Blade. The main drift of these Intentions is, to pull down the English Episcopacy, as being the chief Support of the Imperial Crown of our Nation: For which purpose above sixty Romish Clergy-men are gone with∣in these two Years out of the Monasteries of the French King's Dominions, to preach up the Scotch Covenant, and Mr. Knox his Descriptions and Rules within that Kirk, and to spread the same about the Northern Coasts of England. Let therefore his Majesty have an inkling of these Crotchets, that he might be persuaded, whenever Matters of the Church come before you, to refer them to your Grace, and the Episcopal Party of the Realm: For there be great Preparations making ready against the Liturgy and Ceremo∣nies of the Church of England: And all evil Contrivances here and in France, and in other Protestant Holdings to make your Grace and the Episcopacy odious to all Reformed Protestants abroad. It has wrought so much on divers of the Forreign Ministers of the Protestants, that they esteem our Clergy little better than Papists. The main things that they hit in our teeth are, our Bishops to be called Lords; The Service of the Church; The Cross in Baptism; Confirmation; Bowing at the Name of
Jesus; The Communion Tables placed Altar-ways; Our manner of Conse∣crations: And several other Matters which be of late buzz'd into the Heads of the Forreign Clergy, to make your Grievances the less regarded in case of a Change, which is aimed at, if not speedily prevented. Your Grace's Letter is carefully delivered by my Gentleman's own hands unto the Prince. Thus craving your Graces hearty Prayers for my Undertakings abroad, as also for my safe arrival, that I may have the freedom to kiss your Grace's hands, and to tell you more at large of these things; I rest, Your Grace's most humble Servant, W. B. Hague, June 12. 1640. FINIS.
ERRATA. IN the Preface, Line 35, after the word be, add thought. In the Life, Page 1. l. 10. after since, read been. P. 1. l. 16. for Mastres, r. Masters. P. 25. l. 23. f. two, r. ten. P. 36. l. 5. f. Erigene, r. Erigena. l. 6. et per tot. P. 47. l. 19. f. Tenements, r. Te∣nants. P. 93. l. penult. dele most. In the Appendix: Page 7. l. 22. after the word his, read Lat. Determinations. Quaest. xlii. p. 187, 191. P. 9. l. antepenult. f. would, r. would not. P. 10. l. 10. after sence add alone. l. 18. over against these words, Sermon upon John, add in the Margin. vid. Col∣lection of Sermons printed at the end of the last Edition of the Lord Primates Body of Divinity, p. 83. P. 12. , pro . P. 29. l. 35. f. to, r. do. The Author since he wrote this, has thought fit to add the Passages following to∣ward the illustration of the Life. Page 5. l. 1. after the word Doctrine, add, Nay it is evident that our Church maintains the contrary Doctrine; that the Fourth Com∣mandment (as to the substance of it) is moral, and binds Christians to observe it, as well since Christ, as it did the Jews before. For in our Liturgy (which is confirmed by Supream Authority, Sacred and Civil, by Convocation and Parliament) in the Communion-Offices, after the repeating of the Fourth Commandment, concerning the Observation of the Sabbath, it follows; Lord have Mercy upon us, and incline our Hearts to KEEP THIS LAW: Whence it is evident, that in the Judgment of our Church, not only the Jews, but we Christians, are under the Obligation of that Law. Page 11. l. 6. After the word Sufferings, add; But when that Doctor argues thus: This Proposition, Christ is a Sacrifice for Men, is indefinitely set down without limitation, therefore it must mean for all Men; he forgets his Logick, for all know, that Proposi∣tio indefinita in materia contingenti aequevalet particulari. Hómines sunt Docti, signifies not that all Men are learned, but that some are, because it is in materia contingenti: So this, Christ died for Men, can signify no more than this, he died for some Men; seeing it is in inateria contingenti. For it was not of necessity, but of his own Goodness and Free∣will that he died for any. Page 2. Letter 2. line 32. read occident. Page 3. Leter 3. line. 13. read obliterare. P. 4. l. ult. r. Seles. P. 5. App. l. 14. metis pro meis. l. ult. Job 21. 3. P. 9. l. 1. pro , lege , & sic deinceps. P. 12. l. 26. after Brother place (,) P. 19. Marg. l. 11. f. fifth, r. first. P. 22. l. ult. r. prope finem. P. 24. l. 21. observantissimum. l. 29. Mr. B. P. 32. l. 22. r. Arias. P. 47. l. 41. r. for his. P. 62. l. 12. r. begin. l. ult. after es place (,) P. 306. Let. 65. l. 22. Aventine. P. 310. l. 1. r. was. P. 318. l. 18. r. Bochels. P. 319. l. 37. r., if gesta. P. 346. l. 13. f.  r. . l. 20. r. juvari. l. 26. r. retract. P. 348. l. 22, & 23. f.  r. . l. 22, 24, 27. f. , r. . P. 350. marg. l. 5. f. , r. . l. 6. dele . P. 351. n. 7. l. 14. r. . P. 352. n. 11. l. 2. r. Epithete. l. 5. r. . P. 354. l. 3. f. Type of, r. Type, as. n. 15. l. 11. r. Amos. n. 17. l. 6. f. , r. . P. 355. l. 6. r. . l. 12. r. . l. antep. r. . l. 36. f. , r. . l. 39. f. , r. . P. 356. l. 7. f. , r. . Let. 103. l. 20. f. , r. . P. 357. l. 2. r. . l. 9. . P. 358. Let. 104. l. 7. r.  l. 4. r.  P. 359. l. 3. f. . r. . l. 6. f.  r. . f.  r. . l. 18. r.  l. 16. r.  l. 19. r.  Marg. l. 23. is transposed. P. 362. Marg. l. 26. r.  l. 28. f.  r.  P. 363. Let. 105. l. 4. r. munus. P. 366. l. 7. f.  r. . l. 8. f.  r. . l. 9. f.  r. . l. 13. f.  r. . l. 25. f.  r.  f.  r. . P. 385. l. 45. r. mense. P. 386. l. 41. r. proscribed. P. 413. l. 29. before it a place (:) P. 422. l. ult. r. may be. P. 431. l. 4. r. Scotus. P. 435. Let. 160. l. 6. r. . l. 7. r. orci. P. 436. l. 24. del. [.] P. 437. l. 30. r. Sanctis praebet. P. 454. l. 10. r. . P. 456. Let. 170. l. 5. r. - l. ult. conservus. P. 462. l. penult. r. nem. P. 463. l. 3. r. nocturna. P. 464. l. 16. r. insertae. l. 22. r. disserendi. l. 29. responsionem. l. 30. r. lenierint. Marg. l. 6. Peraea. l. 9. f. exit. r. Exod. P. 465. Let. 176. l. 2. del. [.] P. 466. l. 6. r. Ven. &c. l 30. r. vocalium. l. 37. f.  r. . l. 42. f.  med. r. . l. 45. f.  r. . P. 467. l. 15. r. adservo. l. antepen. r. Niz. & ni fallor. P. 469. l. 5. r. Cyclum. P. 472. l. 16. f. messam, r. Messiam. l. 19. r. illustrs. P. 474. l. 1. a word omitted. id. r. fatigare. P. 478. Let. 186. l. 9. r. fugiebant. l. 12. r. . P. 480. Let. 187. l. 4. r. potui. P. 487. l. 1. imperfect. P. 491. l. 35. r. exhibeant. P. 495. Let. 201. l. 2. r. Hiberniâ. P. 496. l. 11. r. ni faller. l. 22. vendis. P. 497. Let. 202. l. 10. after velis place [.] Quod. l. 14. r. hic. ibid. after fuit [.] In. P. 498. l. 30. r. . P. 499. l. 1. r. . P. 501. l. 32. r. . P. 504. l. 17. r. 59. P. 505. Marg. l. 2. r. . l. 5. . l. 17. . l. 22. . Let. 206. l. 12. r. . P. 506. l. 1. r. . Let. 207. l. 2. r. . l. 7. r. munus. P. 514. l. 4. Gulasius. Let. 216. l. 12. r. nomine. P. 515. l. 3. . P. 518. l. 1. Arausicani. P. 519. Let. 222. l. 16. r. . P. 522. l. 2. r. nomine. l 29. r. suam. P. 523. l. 13. lucubrantium. P. 526. Let. 226. r. intextam. P. 528. l. 4. r. communicare. P. 529. Let. 231. l. 10. r. Serenissimo. P. 538. l. 8. r. audivi. P. 539. l. 24. r. redituro tutissimè. P. 540. l. 1. r. censendum. P. 549. l. penuit. r. Anglicanâ. P. 563. l. ult. r. nos. P. 564. l. 3. Strabi locus. l. 6. r. nonnullos. Let. 264. l. 7. r. our. P. 569. l. 37. via (P. 580. l. 14. r. inardescere. P. 585. l. 29. r. excrevisset. P. 586. l. 8. r. diutissime. P. 88. l. 3. r. calumniae. Appendix at the end of the Letters. P. 1. l. 8. r. judicium l. 22. wants nomen after Stradlingi. l. 24. optimus. P. 8. l. 27. r. incredibilis. l. 33. novum. P. 10. l. 2. ornâris. P. 11. l. 15. after fuit del. [.] l. 22. quos. l. 27. forma. P. 14. l. 1. r. tristissimam. l. 20. f. ex r. &. l. 35. r. quassatas. l. 37. ocellus. P. 16. l. 5. r. audacia. l. 18. r. tentatas.
ADVERTISEMENT. LEtter 3. was from an imperfect Copy of the Bishops. The Marginal Note p. 4, and 417. and so often after, is Bishop Ushers. The Letters mentioned p. 511. l. ult. are in the Appendix, p. 7, and 9. Letter 229. should be placed after Letter 230. and Letter 232. should be before Letter 226. Letter 247. should be placed at p. 510. and the Letters p. 599, &c. should be placed about An. 1615. when U. A. B. was Bishop of Meath. The skilful Reader will perceive that often  &  &  are confounded, as p. 359, &c. and we must be forced to remit the Hebrew Letters to his Correction; the faults being too many to be here inserted. The Book being printed at different Presses, there is a mis-paging page 92. to which suc∣ceeds pag. 301. but without any defect in the Book.
