E186_4 53404043 97700
Numb. 99. An Exact Accompt, COMMUNICATING The chief Transactions of the Three Kingdomes, England, Scotland, and Ireland. With the daily Votes and Resolves in both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Also Particular ADVICE from the OFFICE of INTELLIGENCE. Published by AUTHORITY. From Friday June 8. to Friday June 15. Friday, 8 Iune. At the House of Commons. THe Committee appointed to consider of his Majesties Revenue, ac∣quaints the House that they were ready to report the matter of Fact touching the same; whereupon the House ordered them to bring in the said Report on Tuesday morning next. The House resumed the debate upon the Bill for Pardon and Inde∣mnity. Resolved, That twenty more besides those who sate as Judges in the pretended High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty, be excepted out of the Bill for free Pardon and Indempnity, upon such penalties and forfeitures (not Capital) as shall be declared by ah Act of Parliament for that purpose. Ordered, That a Committee do bring in the names of such persons under the aforesaid qualifications according to the said Resolves, and present them to the House for their consideration. Ordered, That a Committee do present the names of such persons
who sate in Judgement in the pretended High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty, yet did not sit and give sentence the last day; after which the House adjourned till three a clock in the afternoon. Afternoon. The House mt and Ordered to go with the Speaker to Whitehall, there to attend his Majestie: Accordingly the Speaker (the Mace be∣ing carried before him) accompanied with all the Members of the House went on foot to Whitehall, and being conducted to his Majestie, the Speaker made a spech, relating to his Majesties Letter and Declarati∣on, taking notice of his Majesties gracious offer of a free Pardon, and thereupon read the Vots of the House; wherein they did in the name of themselves and of all the Commons of England accept of his Maje∣sties gracious Padon and Indemnity: After which the Speaker, in the name of the House, humbly desired his Majesty to issu forth his Royall Pclamation to all his Subjects of England,  to quiet their minds, in letting them know his gacious pleasure to grant such Inde∣mnity, saving onely to those who shall be excepted out of the Act for free Pardons and did withall in the name of the House, ender all hum∣ble and hearty thanks to his Majesty, for his seasonable and gracious Proclamation against prophanenesse. Unto which his Majesty replyed, That as he had promised, so he was ready and willing to perform, and that he should according to their desires, issue forth a Proclamation to make the sam known for the qeting and contentment of all his loving subjects, or words to that effect. The Subcommittee appointed to consider of and state the Debts of the Nation, as to whom, how, and by whom contracted, and to whom due, and what Debts are due to the publick, and by whom, and what Salaties have been paid by the publick, and to whom. And also what persons have received publick moneys, the which they are to be accom∣ptable for, doe sit in the Queens Court de de in diem, at two of the clock in the afternoon. His Majesty this morning rode to Hampton Court, and took a view thereof, after which he returned and touched several persons afflicted with the Kings Evil. Saturday, 9 Iune. This day according to the desire of both Houses of Parliament his Majesty publisht a Proclamation, appointing the 28 of June to be set a part for a day of Thanksgiving throughout England, Wales, and the Town of Barwick, for His Majesties safe Return to his Government over these Kingdomes and Peoples and that the said Poclamation be read in all Churches some Sabbath-daies before the said 28 of June. At the House of Commons. Mr. Speaker informes the House that Mr. Hevingham one of those who sate and gave Sentence in the pretended High-Court of Justice a∣gainst
his late Majesty, had rendred himself unto him according to the Proclamation. Ordered, That William Hevingham be committed into custody un∣to the Serjeant of Arms attending this House, and that the Ser∣jeant do take him into custody accordingly. The House passed the Elections touching Plymouth. They likewise renewed the Report from the Committee appointed to consider who sate as Iudges in the pretended High Court of Iustice, and were absent when the Sentence of Dath upon his late Majesty was pronounced, viz. that the Lord Mounson sate five times, Thomas Chal∣lone five times, Iams Challoner five times, John Lase five times, Iohn Frey six times, Sir Gilbert Pickering three times, Sir Iames Har∣rington two times, Sir Henry Mldmay four times. Resolved, that Thomas Challoner be excepted out of the Act of General Pardon and Indemnity (not extending to Life) but to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed. The like Resolve passed touching the forenamed persons. Ordered, That Sir Henry Mildmay now a Prisoner at Dover be brought up in safe custody to this House. Upon the Petition of Col. Hutchinson, and in consi∣deration of his Penitence, and testimony of his vigorous Actings against those that did abjure KINGLY govern∣ment, it was Resolved, That Iohn Hutchinson Esq in regard of his signal repentance, shall not be within the clause of exce∣ption in the Act of General Pardon and Oblivion, as to a∣ny fines or forfitures of any part of his Estate not purcha∣sed of or belonging to the Publick. Ordered, That Robert Wallop Esq, do appear on munday morning next before this House, to answer such things as shall be objected against him. Resolved, That John Phelpes one of the Clerks to the pretended igh Court of Iustice be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon (not extending to life) but to suf∣fer such pains, penalties and forfeitures as shall be speci∣fied in an Act for that purpose to be passed.
Resolved, That Colonel Adrian Scroop pay one yeares fine so the mercy shewn him in his being Par∣doned. Resolved, That the Lord Gray be left out of the List. The House adjourned the further Debate touching this affair untill munday morning eight of the Clock. Munday, 11 Iune, at the House of Commons A Report was made from the Commissioners appointed to admini∣ster the Oaths of Allegiance and Supreamacie, that four hundred and fifty being all who sate at present in the House had taken the said Oathes. Resolved, That all Officers and Souldiers of the Army doe take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and that it be administred unto them accordingly. The like Rsolve passed touching the Officers of the Navy. Resolved, That all those who by law ought to take Oaths of Alle∣giance and Supreamacie, be enjoined by His Majesties Proclamation to take the same. Resolved, That Robert VVallop Esq be for ever discharged from be∣ing a Member of this House, and from bearing any Office in this King∣dome. Resolved, That the said Robert VVallop Esq be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon, not exending to Life but to suffer such pains, penalties, and forfeiture as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed, and that he be committed into safe custody to the Serjeant at Armes attending this House, and that the Serjeant take him into cu∣stody accordingly. The Reader is to take notice of a mistake in a former Print concer∣ning Mr. Luke Robinson, who was not, as there incerted, one of those Iudges of that pretended High Court of Iustice who condemned his late Majesty. The House read the humble Petition of Luke Robinson who being called to the Bar, with many tears and much sorrow acknowledged the hainousnesse of those his actions. Resolved that the said Luke Robinson Esq one of the Members of this House, be discharged from his present attendance as a Member hereof. The House received the Report from the Committee appointed to con∣sider of the twenty persons besides those who sate as Judges upon his late Majestie, which are to be excepted out of the Act for a General Par∣don: and Resolved, That Sir Henry Vane be excepted out of the Act for a Ge∣neral Pardon, not extending to Life, but to suffer such pains, penalties,
and forfeitures, as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed. Resolved, That William Lenthall Esq Speaker to the last Parlia∣ment, be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon, not extending to Life, but to suffer such pains, penalties, and forfeitures, as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed. Touching Advice from the Office of Intelligence. ☞For the present all Buyers and Sellers are desired to repair thither, where they shall have due notice, and particulars, of such Purchases and Purchasers as may best fit their occasions. At the said Office is to be sold the right sort of that famous Powder known by the name of the Countess of Ken's Powder. Tuesday, 12 Iune, at the House of Commons. The House Ordered Writs to be issued out for new Elections to be made to serve in the places of Iohn Hutchinson and Robert Wallop. The House received the Report from the Committee of Priviledges concerning several Elections, which wre passed accordingly. They likewise read the Bll for Pole-money the fist time, and Ordered it to be read the second time on Thursday morning next. The House read the humble Petition of several Persons who had suf∣fered Bondage and slavery under the Turk, in relation to themselves and others now in bondage. Ordered, That this Petition be referred to the Committee for disco∣veries, to examine what monies have been collectd for the relief of Captives, and how and by what orde it hath been disposed of, and report their opinion to the House. Ordered, That the Members of the House who are of his Majesties Honourable privy Council do acquaint his Majesty with the sufferings of the Lord Inchequeen and his son, who were taken by the Pyrates of Argler, and now in bondage there, and recommend their Cases as the humble desires of this House unto his Majesty for his serious consi∣deration. Ordered, That the Bill for confirmation of Sales be read on Fri∣day morning next, nothing to intervene, and the Bill for settling of Religion on Saturday morning. The House assumed the Debate touching the persons to be excepted out of the Act of General Pardon. Resolved, Tha William Burton Baily of Yarmouth be excepted out of the Act for a General Pardon not extending to life, but to suffer such paines, penalties and forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed. The House adjourned the further Debate touching the persons to be
A Letter from Newark, May 29. THough it cannot be denyed out that the promulgating of a Duty takes away almost the honour concomitant; yet since the late small Actions of every ptty Borrough that hath but the least tincture of a new acquired Loyalty, are still with singular care and indury dayly commended to the Press; why should then these considerable demonstrations of Loyalty be wapt up in Oblivion, that were laid forth in the proclaiming of his Sacred Majesty in the famous County and Town of Nottingham and the loyal Corporation of Newark. Assoon as the joyfull newes came of the proclaiming of his Majesty at London, the Mayor of Nottingham who for his early Loyalty had suffered imprisonment and banishment by the barbarous fury of the Tyrannical Governour) without staying for Order, by beating of Drums did convene all the Townsmen together in Armes, who were nigh 1000. shot, besides a Militia Troop; and then in all the usual places dd solemnly himself proclaim it, at every time with vollies of shot, and such shouting of people as was to the wonderment of all, and astonishment of those few Phanaticks in town. The like in every respect was at Newark, save that the Deputy Mayor who proclaim∣ed it was a Commissioner for Lambert, and a King-hater as long as it was in fashion: but one solemnity was not sufficiet for Newark (a Town as early as any in Loyalty, and beyond all in perseverance; a Town that proposed no other end but his Majesties service, which was seen by enduring all extremeties for his sake, and yielding (in order to his command) upon bald terms for their own Town, where onely for Original Sinne, people were punisht in this world by one of the late Kings murderers who by a rumpng Order rob'd some Ophans of 2500. l. for their Loyalty, the pretended sinne of the parents.) [Tis hop't the Right honourable, the Lords will take this into their consideration, and relieve them who by their means are reduc't to pressing penury; before they passe an Act of Oblivion, the Lord Lexinton is able to in∣form further.] They thought it as fit likewise to keep a memorial of the Kings comming into the World, in order to which May 29. i'th morning one of the Militia Companies drew into the field, where no sooner drawn up, but the Mayor, Aldermen, and Vicar with the in∣habitants came by in solemn procession with singing of Psalmes, and at the Towns end made a halt, that the foot might march before them all the streets along were strew'd with green Bouchs and Flowers, to the Church, where was an excellent Sermon preach't by one Mr. Brawell, who took for his Text Eccles. 10. v. 17. the very choice of which is sufficient to set forth the ingenuity of the Gentleman, there was one thing observable during the sermon, that chose pathetick ex∣pressions concning the murder of the late King, (which fetch't tears from most of the Auditors eyes, yet could not fetch off the has of three or four fear'd Aldermen) after Sermon an Anthem 1'th Organ-lo,
with loud Musick; at 3. of the clock they drew into the field again, both the Horse and Foot of the Mlitia, and a Company of Towns∣men; where after some pleasant skirmishing, which took up 2. or 3. hours they march't in again, where being drawn round the Market-place in a single File, they gave 3. handsome vollies of shot: after this bon fie and much so well compos'd, that I defie malice (nay the aforesaid Aldermen themselves) to say that there was either Souldier or Officer seen drunk that night. The Horse was commanded by Captain Eyre; the Foot by Captain Whaley the loyal Chief of a loyal Fami∣ly; the other one who never receded from Loyalty by bowing a knee to Baal; there were present at the solemnity Squire, Leek and others, besides divers Gentlemen of quality, who riding as Volunteers, gave singular demonstration of their good Affections that day. Wednesday, 13 Iune. At the House of Lords. This day their Lordships agreed on a Petition to be presented unto his Majy, wherein they blesse God for the seasonable Proclamation against Debauchery and Prophanenesse, &c. humbly desiring that his Majesty would be pleased by his Proclamation to enjoyn all Ministers &c. in their several parish-Churches to read it once a moneth, with order to dehort them from the vices, and exhort them to the virtues there∣in mentioned, and this to continue for six moneths, and sent it to the House of Commons for their concurrence. At the House of Commons. The House proceeded in the debate upon the twenty persons to be excepted out of the Act for a General Par∣don. and Resolved, that Oliver St. Iohn Esq be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon, not extending to Life, but to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures as shll be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed. The lke Resolve passed concerning Sir Arthur Hesiltig, Col. Sydenhm, col. Desbrow, and Alderman Iretont The House received a message from the Lords wth a Petition to be presented unto his Majesty concerning his Proclamation ageinst Debauchery, &c. for their concur∣rence, which they assented unto. They also received the report from the Committee ap∣pointed to examine Ellis and the other person who were secured upon suspition of being concerned in the escape of Miles Corbet, it being found that they did not know there∣of, nor had any hand therein, they were discharged from their imprisonment.
Mr. Speaker acquaints the House that Col. Tho. Wayte, — Peter Temple and Simon Maye, who sate in the pre∣tended high Court of Iustice upon his late Majesty had ren∣dered themselves into his hands according to his Majesties Proclamation in that behalf, whereupon the House Or∣dered that the Serjeant at Armes at ending this House doe take them into safe custody, the which he performed ac∣cordingly. Thursday, 14 Iune. At the House of Lords. This day their Lordships had undr consideration severall things re∣lating unto his Majesties Revennue, and also agreed some Orders touching good, belonging unto his late Majesty in the hands of private persons, and likewise read divers private Petitions, which were referred unto the Committee of Lords o Petitions, sitting in the Painted Chamber, Sir Orland Bridgeman officiating as Speaker pro tempore. At the House of Commons. The House passed some Elections, and proceeded in debate of the re∣sidue of the twenty persons to be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon. Resolved, That Col. Axtel be excepted out of the Act of General Pardon, not extended to life, but to suffer such pains, penalties and for∣feitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed, they also had under consideration several others, and adjourned the further debate untill to morrow morning eight of the clock. This day there was brought unto Whitehall from Sheyne one of his late Majesties Pallaces, several Boats laden with many rich and curi∣ous Effigies, formerly belonging unto his Majesty, but since alienated, and now restored to the right Owner. This afternoon there was exposed to publick view out of one of the Windowes in Whitehall formerly the lodgings of Sir Henry Mild∣may, and now the Jewel Office, the Effigies (which was made and shewn with so much pomp at Sommerset House) in Wax of Oliver Cromwell lately so well known by the name of Protector, with a Cord about his Neck, which was tyed unto one of the Barrs of the Win∣dow. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Redmayne in Lovells Court in Pater-noster-Row. And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence. 1660.
