E186_8 53403934 97700
Numb. 6 THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Forraign Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order of the late Council of State. From Monday June 18. to Monday June 25. 1660. THere was lately an Adverrisement in some Books, published by the Office of Intelligence, of a misreport scandalous and false (as he calls it) concerning the death of Major Aberin, who as he saith, died a natural death, and lived a pious life, which was well known to all that lived about him, and confirmed by many persons of Quality that were present with him when he died. My Correspondent in Scot∣land writing none of the best hand, and it being a Scotch name (a thing I am not very well acquainted with) in haste I mistook Aberin for Abernethy; I have inquired of several Scotch Gentlemen in Town, whether there were any Major Aberin in Scotland, whom my mistake might have injured, but I cannot hear of any of that name, and shall willingly
confess it an Error, if the Newsmonger can in his next acquaint me of any one that know such a man in Scotland, though he pretends he was well known by all about him, to be a man of a pious Life, and that it was confirmed by many persons of quality who were present, that he died a natural death. When a Friend shewed me in his Book this Advertise∣ment, I read some few lines further of the Votes of the House of Saturday last, in his Book called the Publick In∣telligencer, wherein he tells you first, that Col. Fleetwood, late Lieutenant General, had rendered himself to the Speak∣er, whereas it was Col. George Fleetwood, one of the Kings Triers, never known by that Title of Lieutenant General. In the second Vote he makes that the House ordered the Books of Mr. John Goodwin and Mr. John Milton to be burnt whenas they only resolved that his Majesty should be desired to order it. In the third Vote, That all the woods of the Kings and Queens Lands that were not really sold, should be seised upon; whereas all Wood and Timber felled off the said Lands, are to remain and continue upon the said Lands, without farther disposal, till the Parliament shall give a farther order therein. In his fourth Vote he puts Cheney for Chancery. I have no time to amend all his faults, it would swell my Book too much, but by this you may judge the rest. I shall only give a further account of some faults which I am desired by some Members of the House to take notice of. That at a Committee of the E∣lections on Saturday June 16. he seems to insinuate some unhandsome carriage of Mr. Richard Ballice, and that they resolved the Petition concerning the choice at Evesham to be vexatious, whenas his demeanors there was observed to be no other then civil, and no such resolve made concerning the Petition▪ I am likewise to take notice of an antient List of the Privy Council, taken out of an old Book of ours, which he in his last Publick Intelligencer, put out as  ist now, excluding out of it, the Right Honorable
Howard, to the no small injuy of that Noble Person, whom the King hath been plesed so highly to honor. Munday, June 25. This day was published a Proclamation of his Majesties gracious pardon in pursance of his Majesties former Declaration, declaring that his Majesty doth graciously accept of the Addrss of the House of Commons, wherein they did in behalf of themselves, and every of them, and all the Commons of England, lay hold upon his Majesties free and general pardon, as it was grant∣ed in his Majsties Letters and Declaration, (excepting onely such as should be excepted by Parliament) and will willingly and freely give his Royal Assent to the Act of general pardon when presented to his Majesty by the two Houses, leaving it to his Subjects to sue out particular pardons in such manner as they shall think fit; and to that purpose, appointing the Secretaries of State to present Warrants for his Majesties Signature directing the Attorney General to prepare Bills for passing pardons to such as desire the same: In the issuing out of which, care shall be taken that no pardon pass to any of the notoious Offnders excepted by Parliament. Sir Henry Mildmay petitioned the House, that they would be pleased to dispence with his commitment to the Towr: whereupon it was ordered; that he be committed to the Serjeant at Arms. A Committee was appointed to consider of the Impropriations late in the hands of the Trustes for maintenance of Ministers, and what is fit to be done in that affair. Mr. Speaker acquainted the House, that Sir John Bourchier, Col. Owen Re, and Col. Robert Lilburn, three of the Judges of his late Majesty, had rendred themselves to him, and that he had put them into the custody of the Serjeant at Arms: which the House approved of. His Majesty sent a Message in writing to the House, to desire them to hasten the Bill of Indempnity: whereupon they resumed the debate, and resolved. That Charles Fleetwood, John Pyne, Maj. Creed, John Goodwin, Ri Dean, Philip Nye, Col. Cobbet, be of the twenty to be excepted out of the general Act of Pardon and In∣dempnity, to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures, not extending to life, as should be inflicted on them, by an Act hereafter to be made for that purpose. Resolved, That William Hulet and Hugh Peters be excepted out of the general Act of Pardon and Oblivion. Tuesday, June 9. The Speaker made a report to the House, That Adrian Scroop, Augustine Garland, Colonel Harvy and Mr. Smith, who sate as Judges upon the late King's Majesty, had according to the Proclamation rendred themselves to him, and that he had committed them to the Sergeant at Armes: Of which the House approved▪ The House ordered, that thanks be given to the Lord Montague, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, for the Eminent services which he  performed to his Majesty and the Kingdome.
Ordered, that Colonel John Downs, one of the King's Judges, seised upon by Order from the General, be committed to the Sergeant at Arms. The House resumed the debate of the Bill of Pardon and Oblivion, and ordered it to be recommitted, and brought in againe to morrow morning. A Bill for a longer continuation of Customs and Excise, was read this day the second time; and upon the debate was recommitted. Ordered, That Tonnage and Poundage be granted to his Majesty during his life, and it is referred to a Committee to prepare a Bill accordingly, and, to consider how it may be dispoed at present till the Bill be dspatched, and the Book of Rates agreed. A Petition of the Marchants Trading to Spaine, was referred to a Com∣mittee. Mr. Robert Relles who served in Parliament for the Borough of Kellyton in Cornwall, being deceaed, the House ordered writs to be issued for a new Ele∣ction of a member to serve in Parliament for that Borough. Wednesday, June 10. A Report being made from the Committee for Priviledges and Elections, con∣crning Turo in Oornwal, it was resolved that Mr. Boscowen is duly elected to serve in Parliament for that place. The Bill for continuance of the Custom and Excise was read this day, and referred to a Committee who are to consider the qualifications of Officers to be imployed in the Excise. Resolved, That the payment of Publique Debts contracted from the 5 of December 1648, till the 22. of February 1659. other then those of the Army and Navy, be stopp'd till further Order. Resolved, That 10000 l. be charged upon the Assessment of 70000l. per mens. to be paid to such person or persons as the Queens Majesty shall appoint for her present supply. The Bill for Tunnage and Poundage was this day reported, twice read, and referred to a grand Commitee. The Speaker acquainted the House, that Sir Hardress Waller had rendred himelf to him; whereupon it was ordered that the Sergeant at Arms take him into custody. The Speaker informed the House, that he was petitioned by a relation of Col. Dixwells, that he being sick, and therefore not able to render himself by the time limited in the Proclamation, that he ight not lose the benefit thereof; whereupon it was ordered, that upon the surrendring of himself he should not lose the benefit of the Proclamation. The Speaker acquainted the House, that upon the surrender of Henry Martin one of the Judges of the late King, he had committed him to the Serjeant at Arms, which the House approved of. Resolved, That Adrian Scroop be discharged from his Commitment, upon his engagement to appear when required thereunto. From his Excellenies Quarters at the Cockpit. A Commission under the Great Seal of England impowered Dr. Mills Judge Advocate to see that the oath of Allegiance and Supremacy be taken by all the Officers and Soldiers about London before him, as also to impower Ralph King to see the same done by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army a∣bout Dublin. On Monday a Letter from Lievt. Colonel Richard Yardley to an Officer of the Army was Communicated to his Excellency, conteining the solemnity of Proclaiming his Majesty in the Isle of Jersey.
His Excellency being informed that his favors jstly bestowed upon Dougall Mac Pherson a Scotch Gentleman, was by some that envied the merit of that person endeavoured to be represented as the reward of some Intelligence that should be given to his Excellency by him, or his means, did for the just vin∣dication of the said Dougall Mac Pherson and to stop the mouthes of such slan∣derous people, give a Certificate under his hand and Sal. Sir George Monck, Capt. General, and Commander in Chief, of all his Majesties Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland; Master of his Majesties Horse, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of his Majesties most honourable privy Councel. WHereas several persons do asperse Dougal Mac Pher∣son of Powrie, a Scotish Gentleman, as if he had been imployed by me, when I was Commander in chief in Scotland, as an Intelligencer, and received mony for that ser∣vice, and was befriended by me upon that account. I do hereby Certifie and Declare, That the said Dougal Mac Pherson, nei∣ther gave Intelligence himself, nor was imployed by me, or any in my name, for the procuring or sending Intelligence; neither did he receive any gratuity or reward for service of that kind; And what friendship I shewed to him, was only in rela∣tion to his civil carriage, which friendship I shall yet continue to him. Given under my Hand and Seal, at the Cockpit June 14. 1660. George Monck. On Tuesday, Col. Faggs Regiment, by his Excellencies orders, drew out in S. Georges fields, and there took the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy. His Excellency is by the Corporation of Trinity House chosen Master, and hath appointed Sir William Batten to be Deputy. His Excellency hath lately disposed several Commands in the Army, and given these Commissions following, viz. To the Earl of Northampton to be Colonel of the Regiment late Col. Lenthals, and to Sir Tho. Sands to be his Lieutenant col. To the Lord Falkland to be Colonel of the Regiment late Col. Sanders▪ and to Bledered Morgan to be Major. To Major Jeremiah Harrison to be Major in the place of Major Scot.
To Major Harley to be Major instead of Major Izod of Sir Anthony Ashley▪ Coopers Regiment. Sir Francis Vincent Kngt  no of Dver-castle. Sir Richard Basse Governr Col rman Col Wai Slingsy  Castle. Major Robrt Hlme  Castle. Col  Persmouth under Col Norton. Saragate Castle. Whitehal 20. , and the Common-Council of the City of  last to Whitehal, and being conducted up to the  Majesty came to them, where the common Sereant  ajesty  representing the affection of the City to him, and  re that his Majesty would be pleased to honor them wh  Dinner, which his Majesty was graciously pleased to ac¦cep o,  of them the honor of kissing his Majesties hand. The  that entertainment, is Thursday the Fifth of July next▪ The same day, Sir James Barry accompanied by the Commissioners from Ireland, del  himself in a Spech to his Majesty, wherein he expressed the great sorow and y of that Nation: Their sorrow for the Sufferings and Murder of his ate ajesty of Blessed Memory, and their joy for his Majesties happy restauration, assuring his Majesty of the constant Loyalty of his Sub∣jects in Ireland, of which he acquainted his Majesty, that the Lord Broghil, Sir Charls Cooe, and Sir Theophius Jons had given such large Testimonies by their eminent Services for his Majesty. At the clause of the Speech he present∣ed his Majesty with a Bill of 20000 l. accepted by Alderman Thomas Viner, formerly ordered to be presented to his Majesty by the said Convention. His Majesty accepted of it, gave them thanks for their Loyalty, and an assurance of his Majesties favor to that Nation; after which, they all kissed his Majesties hand. The same day, the Ministers and Elders of the French, Dutch and Italian Churches, waited upon his Majesty at Whitehall. Mr. Stoupe, the Minister of the French Church, made a Speech, to which his Majesty made a gracious answer, and gave them assurance of his Royal protection. The next day, the said Churches waited upon the Dukes of York and Glocester, who received them with many expressions of their affection. Tuesday last, the Earl of Pembroke gave a noble Entertainment to his Majesty, the Dukes of York and Glocester, at Bainards-castle. On Tuesday last, being the 19. of this moneth, Major Hagedot who brought up Mr. John Carew, one of those that sate in Judgment upon King Charls the First, deliver'd him by order of the Speaker to the Serjeant at Arms. From St. John De Luz, 13 June. The Oath taken by the two Kings was drawn according to that of the Treaty of Vervins, whereof the Acts being exchanged by the two cheief Ministers, they withdrew, their Majesties having desired to be alone at their taking leave. the two Kings and the two Queens could not forbear tears, and it was observed that the King of Spain having bid fare∣well
unto all, out of his passion to kiss again his daughter, did run unawares upon the French Territories. The new Queen was conducted to the rich Coach the King gave her by the Duke of Bournonville her Knight of Honor and the Count de Hautefort her first Gentleman Usher. Their Ma∣jesties were at one end of the Coach, the Queen-Mother at the other, and the Kings Brother at the boot: the new Queen cryed all the while, and being asked by the Queen Mother, whether she would return into Spain, she answe∣red she owed that to her Fathers tenderness, and that she was not sorry to leave Spain upon so good a Subject as the making of Peace. They arived late here, and the King taking the new Queen by the hand conducted her to the Queen-Mothers Lodgings, being attended by 25 Spanish Ladies, that came along with her. The King, the two Queens, the Kings brother and the 3 Princesses supped to∣gether. The King kept company with the new Queen until she was a bed, and came to see her in the morning at her Rise∣ing, and saw her dressing herself still in the Spanish Fashion, with a Waiscoat of White Sattin, a very short Petycoat, a black Lace tyed about her neck, no haires upon her Forehead, and those behind tyed. In the afternoon she passed her time in looking upon the Cloths and Jewels the King gave her, which she liked very well. The Queen Mother gave to the King of Spain a rich Watch, and the King a Diamond worth Twenty Thousand Crowns, to Don Lewis D' Hro a Sword worth 40000 Livers, and a rich Sword to a Spanish Grandee who presently threw his own into the River, and said he would never draw this, but for the service of the two Kings. The new Queens gave to the King a Cbine uli of rich perfumes; The King of Spain hath given to  Daughter eight Truncks of perfu∣med ski,  Pstlles, Spanish red and other  King a rich Hatband, and  eight o the Kings  King hath  ¦manship.
The 8 instant the Queen wrote to the King her Father and would not seale her Letter untill the King had  it, to shew she would do nothing without his privity,  the King refused to see it, leaving her to the French Freedom; at the first enterview none was suffered to come into the roome. There have been several debates for their charges between the Captains of the Guards, and even between the Bishops of Bayonne and Perigueux for the pre∣senting of the Gospel to the King when he took the oath, but Cardinal Mazarin did it himself. For avoiding the like upon the day of the Marriage, and to prevent the contending for ranks and places, none was assigned, but all sate promiscu∣ously, leaving all to every ones civility. The Bishop of Pe∣riguex, de Langres, and Valence officiated there as Almo∣ners for the King, the Queen Mother and the Kings Bro∣ther; some difference was between the two first, about hold∣ing of the Canopy over the Kings head. The Kings Bro∣ther led the Queen, whose train of six Ells long, was car∣ried by Madamoiselle D' Alericon, and D' Valois with the Princess of Carignan. and their own train was carried by the Counts de la Fejullade, and St. Mesme, and by the Marqus de Cire. One of the Tapers was presented by the Kings Brother and the other by Madamoiselle, whose Train was carried by Mr. de Mancini. The Cardinal Mazarin carryed the Gos∣pel to be kissed by their Majesties. That day, the Queen dined alone, and the King with the Queen Mother, after dinner abundance of Gold and Silver Medalls were thrown among the people out of the windows. At night their Ma∣jesties supped together at the Queen-Mothers Lodgings, whol eft them not till they were abed. They rose the next day about eleven a clock. Yesterday there was a conference about the business of Savoy, Mantua and Portugal, the King being unwilling to leave any thing undecided. Yet som∣thing will be referred till the Court is at Paris to be treated there with the Count de Fuensaldagne. The Prince of Conti and many Grandees are gone before.
St. John de Luz, June 12. 1660. Besides the particulars of late here, which have bin so various and many, that it hath bin impossible either to re∣member them, or to send them all at once, take these follow∣ing: At the first interview of the two Kings, which was the 6 instant, the French Horse and Foot were disposed all a∣long the Rivers side, the French and Switzer Guards, be∣ing at the head of them, at the foot of the Mountain▪ all of them in blew Cassocks, with Gold and Silver Gallume and a white Cross before and behind; next to them were the Kings Gensdarms, the Lifeguard, the Kings Muske∣teers on horseback, and the light horsemen. The Pages both of the great and lesser Stables, were likewise along the Rivers side with a Led-horse every one of them in their hands, all in rich imbroidered footcloath. The King of Spain's Guards on foot stood all along the other side of the River (over against the French Guards) in their yel∣low Cassocks, with the Kings Arms imbroidered in Silk. The King being come to the Bridge of the Isle, made a halt, tarrying until the King of Spain was landed. Then the two Kings advanced on towards the other with the like gravity, until they came to the Line that divides their Do∣minions, and there both falling upon their knees, im∣braced each other with a reciprocal joy. After their Com∣plements, the King saluted the new Queen his Spouse, whilst the King of Spain saluted the Queen Mother his Sister, who having told her Brother, that the King her Son, and her self, were much ingaged to him, for travelling so far in the heat of weather to meet them; he answered, that had he not bin able to come in a Coach or on Horseback, he would have come a foot to satisfie his desire of seeing the King, and once more before his death to embrace her. Then were Madamoisele, the two Princesses her Sisters▪ and the Prince of Conti, presented to him by the said Queen Mother; and afterwards the Count of Charrst, Captain
of the Guards, brought in all the Grandees of the French Court, according to the List drawn by his Majesty, with the Cardinal and Monsieur de Villeroy to sa∣lute his Spanish Majesty. When Marshal de Turenne was presented to him, the King of Spain said to his sister, I know him well, he hath caused me often to have little rest in the night. At the same time the Spanish Grandees were presented to the King by Don Lewis d'Aro. After these mutual Complements, a Table was brought in, and both Kings kneeling down before it, swore the observation of the Peace, each of them in his own language, with the Ce∣remonies mentioned in my last: Besides, the eternal and inviolable Peace, they swore each to other a very strict a∣mity. Then all their Guards and Forces gave out many shoots and volleys, the Trumpets blowing mainly in the interim. At their going out of the Hall, the two Kings to avoid turning their backs one to another, went backward, still making courtesies one to another until they were out of the Room. The like was observed in the conference of the next day, at which time the two Courts took leave one of the other. The French Court being upon their vvay hither, not far from the Isle, vvhilst the New Queens Ba∣gage vvent by, being carryed by 24 Mules, vvith fine co∣verings with the Kings Arms, all of Crimson Velvet, and her four Coaches vvherein vvere her Ladies and Maids of Honour; the Queen Mother gave her a Collation. Being arrived here, the King and the said Queen Mother, did what they could to make the new Queen forget her ovvn Country, and the absence of her Father, to vvhom she vvrote, as I have told you before, and her Letter was car∣ried by the Marquis of Villequier. The 9th, the last Ce∣remony of the Marriage vvas performed. About noon, the King being in black clothes, and the new Queen being dressed after the French way, and led by Monsieur the Kings brother, vvent by a Gallery through the Files of the Guards, and of abundance of Gentlemen that vvere upon
Duty. The said Queen had on her head a Crovvn of Dia∣monds & about her the Royal Mantle imbroidered and full of Gold Flovverdluces, the tran vvhereof above six Ells long vvas carryed, as I told you formerly. The Duke d'Uzez led the Queen Mother. The Cardinal Mazarin, and the Abbot of Coastin, officiated as the Kings Almoners, and the Bishop of Bayonne in his Pontificalibus, married their Majesties, and consecrated the Wedding Ring. The King received the Ring from the Bishop, and put it upon the Queens Finger, to whom he gave the pieces of Gold consecrated with the Ring by the Bishop: As they went to the Offering, Monsieur presented the Taper to the King, and Madamoiselle to the Queen: The Abbot of Coastin, and the Bishop of Langres, carryed the Canopy over their heads. The officiating Bishop, after the Mass, made them a short exhortation about the Marriage; the Medals thrown out of the windows, after the Dinner, mentioned in my last, had the Pictures of the King and Queen looking one upon the other, of one side with their Names, and on the other side, Clouds dropping abundance of Rain, with that Motto, Non laetor alier, 1660. others had the Kings Head alone of one side, and a Sun with Clouds on the other side, with this Motto, Faecundus ignibus ardet; and some had the Cardinals Head, with his name on one side, and an Ancher on the other, with this Motto, Firmando fir∣mior haeret. About 8 a clock at night, the Queen Mother brought the Queen to the Kings quarters, where they sup∣ped together, with the Kings brother, who gave the Shirt to the King when he went to bed. The Abbot of Orval, one of the Kings Almoners, blessed the Nuptial Bed, and the Queen being a bed, the Queen Mother and all the compa∣ny wit drew, and the King from eleven a clock at night, was a bed till elven the next day. The same day, the 12. of June, the Court came from St John de Luz for Burdeaux, and is to cme to Fontain∣blew, and from thence go to Compeigne, to be nearer the Frontiers upon the disbanding of the Army.
Thursday June 21. Upon a report from the Committee of Priviledges and Elections concerning the Return of the Election for Scar∣borough. Resolved, That M. Tompson is duly Elected to serve as a Member in Parliament for that place. M. Luke Robinson being chosen for that place, and by former order discharged from sitting in the House, it was ordered that a new Writ issue for the electing of a new Burgress to serve in his stead. Upon report concerning the Election of the Borough of Northampton. Resolved, That Sir John Norris and M. Rainsford, are duly elected for that place. M. Carew, one of the Tryers of the late King, being brought up, and delivered to the Speaker, and by him committed to the Serjeant at Arms, the House approved of his commitment. M. Speaker acquainted the House, that the Lord Monson came with his Keeper from the Fleet, and surrendred him∣self to him according to his Majesties Proclamation; whom the Speaker finding to to be a Prisoner upon Execution, remanded back to the Fleet, which the House approved of. M. Speaker acquainted the House, that Major General Ludlow had rendered himself: whereupon it was ordered, that he be committed to the Serjeant at Arms. The House referred it to a Committee, to state the Ac∣compts of all such who have provided Necessaries in order to his Majesties Reception; and to give Warrants for their satisfaction out of the 20000 l. charged upon the Bill of Assessement for that purpose. Upon Report of amendments to the Bill for confirm∣ing of Priviledges of Parliament and the fundamental Laws, they were agreed unto, and the Bill ordered to be engrossed. The Bill for Pole-money was read the second time, and ordered to be committed to a grand Committee of
the Hou, and that the House be in a grand Committee to morrow morning for that purpose. London. This day the several Aldermen and other Citizens of London, waited upon their Highnesses, the Duke of York and Duke of Glocester, to desire them to honour the Ci∣ty with their company at Dinner at Guild-hall, on the day his Majesty had appointed to dine with them; going to the House of Lords, thence to the House of Commons, whom they also invited the same day: who were pleased to ac∣cept of the Invitation, and return their thanks for the Ci∣ties respect to them. ADVERTISEMENTS. Fryday, June 22. LOst out of a Gartnear S. Dunstaus Church in Fleet-street a Portmantle, with an old pair of Boots, and a pair of Drawers under the Cape of it, and Linnen, with a Book of Accompts in the inside of it. Whosoever can bring but the Book of Accompts to one M. Stallard, at the Kings Head in the Old-Change, or Ranolph Stockdunn, Tapster to the said M. Stallard, shall have twenty shillings for their pains. From Mrs Frances Jacobson of Bradon, in the County of Wilts, June 17. 1660. was stolen a Bay Nag about thirteen hands and an half high, having a black Mayn, and a black bob Tail, shorn somewhat deep on the Mayn, Tros all, the far-leg before being formerly broken hath white spots on every joynt of it; The same night her House was broken up, and several Goods of value stolen: If any can bring tydings hereof to M. Thomas Hook at the Sign of the Cradle in Holborn, shall have twenty shillings for their pains. On Wednesday the 19. June 1660. Strayed from Much-VValtham in Essex a White Grey Glding about 14 handfuls high, with a Snip on his right Ear, and a mark like a Heart on his left buttock; if any can bring tydings of him to M. Thomas Langham at Much-VValtham, or to Robert Clavel at the Stags Head in S. Pauls Church∣yard, he shall be well rewarded. Advertisements of Books newly Printed. A Cluster of Grapes, taken out of the Basket of the Woman of Canaan; or, Coun∣sell and Comfort for believing Souls coming to Christ, and meeting with Dis∣couragements, being the sum of certain Sermons preached upon Matthew the 15th, from verse 22. to v. 29. By Iohn Durant, Preacher of the Gospel in Canterbury. Samuel in Sockeloth: or, a Sern on a slaying to restrain our bitter Animosities, and commending a Spirit of Moderation, and a right constitution of Soul and beha∣viour towards our Brethren. Both sold by Henry Mortlock, at the sign of the Phae∣nix in S. Pauls Church-yard, near the little North door. ☞ There is now Published that long expected and much admired Piece, Intituled, The World Surveyed: or, The Famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blane, or, White of Marscilies; who from the age of 14 years, to 78. travelled through most parts of the World; Containing a more exect description
thereof then hath hitherto been done by any other Atho. The whole Work  authentick Histories. Originally written in French, and faith∣fully rendered into English. By F. B. Gent Amita, The famous Pastoral. Written in Italian by the Exquisite Pen of the ad∣mired Poet Signor' Torquato Tasso; and Translated into English Vese, by Iohn Dancer, with divers other Poems. Both Printed for Iohn Starkey at the Miter in Fleet-street, betwixt the Middle Temple Gate, and Temple Barre. That so much desired Book in Octavo, Intituled, The Idea of the Law, wherein is Charactered the form of Justice in all Courts, whereunto is added the Idea of Government, Monarchical and Episcopal: And the Idea of Tyranny explain∣ed and amplyfied by O. Cromwel, is now published for the satisfaction of all Gentle∣men of the Universities, Inns of Court and Chancery. By the Author Iohn Hey∣don Gent. and useful for all: It hath been of late privately preserved in the hands of the loyally Noble for fear of Tyrants, but now is to be Sold in St. Dunstans Church-yard, and in Fleet-street. Westminster, Thursday June 21. 1660. Ordered by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parli∣ament, That one Subsidie called Tonnage, and one other Subsidie called Poundage, and those other Duties called or known by the name of New-Impost, shall continue to be paid after the Rates, Rules tnd Proportions by which they are now due and payable, and upon the same Goods and Merchandizes whereupon the same are now levied and col∣lected, until the 24th of Iuly, which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1660; before which time, one Act is intended to be passed for the Settlement and Regulation thereof. Ordered by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parli∣ament, That the Imposition of Excise shall continue to be paid after the Rates, Rules, and Proportions by which the same is now due and payable, and upon the same Goods and Merchandizes, whereupon the same are now levied and collected, until the twenty fourth of Iuly, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, before which time, one Act is intended to be passed for the Settlement and Regulation thereof. Friday, Iune 22. At the House of Lords. The House of Lords hving received a Message from the House of Commons to desire their concurrence in or∣dering 10000 l. part of the 20000 l. formerly conferred by the Parliament on the Lord General Monck to be paid out of the Ordinance of Assessment for 70000 l. per mensem, their Lordships agreed thereunto.
At the House of Commons. Upon Report made of Amendments to the Bill of Ge∣neral Pardon and Oblivion, the Amendments were agreed unto and the Bill Ordered to be engross'd. The Bill is to extend to the 24th. of Iune, 1660. Resolved, That Mr. Burton be one of the twenty excep∣ted out of the General Act of Indempnity and Oblivion to suffer such pains, penalties, &c. and now in the Custody of the Serjeant, have liberty to attend his occasions, upon security given to the Serjeant at Armes to be forth coming when he shall require him thereunto. The Bill for setling Judicial Proceedings was ordered to be read to morrow morning. The House Resolved to be in a Grand Committee at three of the clock in the afternoon, which was done accor∣dingly. Saturday, Iune 23. A Petition of Lancelot Emmet and others was read and referred to a Committee. Ordered, That the House be in a Grand Committee on Monday next at three of the clock in the afternoon to consi∣der of a Bill touching the Court of Wardes. Ordered, That the Committee who are to consider of Ministers Livings do meet this afternoon, and so de die in diem, and that they speedily report the same. Resolved, That the House be in a Grand Committee on Munday next to consider of Poll-money. Upon Report made upon examination of the Accompt of Richard Blackwell, John Sparrow, and Humphry Blake, that there was due to the State from them for Arrears of Prize-Goods, from the year 1649. to the year 1652. 41495.5 s. 3 d. ¼ It was Ordered, That it be referred to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, to take speedy course for the calling of the said Richard Blackwel, Iohn Sparrow, and Humphry Blake, to an accompt in the Exchequer, and that they be proceeded a∣gainst. The Bill for satisfaction of Purchases was read, and or∣dered to be read again.
The House resolved, That the Queens Majesty shall be restored to the Possession of these Houses, Mannors and Lands following, being part of her Majesties Joynture, and purchased by such Persons whose Estates are lyable to forfeiture, viz. Mannor of Old-Court, purchased by M. Edwards. Mannor of Richmond, with House and Materials, puchased by Sir Gregory Norton. Eggham purchased by Captain John Blackwel. Mannor of Ampthil, and Mannor of Milbrooke, purchased by Col. Okey. Mannor of Somrsham, with the Chase and Park, Mannor of Crowland, Part Man∣nor of Spalding, purchased by Col. Wanton, and Adrian Scroop. Part of the Mannor of Eastham purchased by M. Blackwel. Mannor of West-Walton, and Mannor of Trington, purchased by Ed. Whaley. Honour and Mannor of Eye, purchased by M. Dendy. Non-such great Park and Materials, purchased by Col. Pride. None-such House and Park, purchased b Col. Lambert. Resolved That Sommerset House and Greenwich, be likewise forthwith restored to the possession of her Majesty, and that all Arrears of rent be paid unto her Majesty, unto such persons as her Majesty shall be pleased to appoint to receive the same. Ordered, That the House be in a Grand Committee on Munday next to consider of Poll-money. Whitehall On Fryday, the Right Honourable the Earl of Winchelsea, with some other Gen∣tlemen, presented an Address to his Sacred Majesty, subscribed by several of the Nobi∣lity and Gentry of Kent, wherein they express their great joy for his Majesties restau∣ration to his people; as also their constant loyalty and hearty affection to his Majesty. His Majesty was pleased to tell them, that in his late Journey through that County, he had sufficient evidence of the hearts of the People; and withal, assured them of his Gracious favour to them upon any occasion that shall offer it self. The same night his Majesty, with his two Royal Brothers, and several of the No∣bility, were highly entertained at Supper by the Lord Lmley. Saturday being appointed by his Majesty to touch such as were troubled with the Evil, a great company of poor afflicted Creatures were met together, many brought in Chairs and askets, and being appointed by his Majesty to repair to the Banquering∣house, his Majesty sat in a Chair of State, where he strok'd all that were brought to him, and then put about each of their Ncks a white Ribban with an Angel of Gold on it. In this mnner his Majesty stroak'd above 600. and such was his Princely pati∣ence and tenderness to the poor afflicted Creatures that thought it took up a very long time, His Majesty being never weary of wel-doing, was pleased to make enquity, whe∣ther there were any moe that had not yet been touch'd. Ae Payers were ended, the Duke of Buckingham brought a Towel, and the Earl of Pembrook a Bason and Ewer, who after they had made their obeysance to his Majesty, kneeled down till his Majesty had washed. Westminster. On Satarday, several Gentlemen of the Long Robe were made Serjeants of the Goise. They came out of the Common Peas Treasury, into Westminster Hall, and stood over against the Common Pleas Court, Sarjeant Glanvil, and Serjeant Lit∣tleton, brought them to the Bar according to the usual form, the Wdon of the ect, and Uher of the Exchequer walking before them. The names of these made Sejeants ate, Sir Tho. Widderington, Serj. Brown, Serj. Glyn, Serj. Earle, Serj. enrs, Serj. Hales. Serj. Twisden, Serj. Maynard, Serj. Newigate, Serj. Windham, Serj. Fountain, Serj. Syse, Serj. Archer, Serj. Waller. The same day Cap. Francis Rolls of Excester, formerly Receiver of the Dcations was seised by Sir Ja. Smith in Westminster Hall, for speaking traiterous words. London, Printed by John Macock, and Thomas Newcomb, 1660.
