A3116B R213022 99825550 154295
MOST WELCOME NEWES FROM YORK BEING A true and perfect Relation of what hath happened in York, since his Majesties last DECLARATION. The Parliaments Resolution, concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons which have absented themselves from the said Houses, and are now at York attending on his Majesty. Likewise the Grounds and Reasons why they are enforced to take Arms, With the severall Reasons to prove that every man is bound to uphold the Parliament against all Opposers whatsoever. Ordered by the Lords and Commons that this be printed and pub∣lished. Iohn Brown Cler. parl. H. Elsing Cler. parl. June 23, Printed for William Arding, 1642.
The Reason why the Subiect is bound to o∣bey the Command of the Parliament, Voted, That if in case of necessity, if his Majesty shall deny his assent, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, doth obliege the People, and ought to bee obeyed, being warranted by the Fundamentall Laws of the Kingdome. Both Houses of Parliament hath took into their se∣rious consideratio the Occasion and Reason why the Members of the said Houses should absent themselves upon their summoning in, Wherupon they hath drawn up a harge against them, and are resolv'd that they shall pay 100. l. a man, and to be examined by the Com∣mittee before the next sitting. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be printed and publi∣shed, John Brown Cler Parl. Hen, Elsing Cler. Parl D. Com.
WELCOME NEWES FROM YORK: Worthy Sir, I Cannot without the fearfull and terrible stain of ingratitude forget your abundance of love, expressed un¦to me when you were resident with us here in the North. It was your desire, and your courtesie to me, and my great necessity have enga∣ged me to certifie you of all Passages which have bin worth any observation since your departure from us. The common fear is of wars, nd that fear is so farre publisht throughout the
whole County, that we must hope little lesse can ens. His Majesty will not give leave to any conditions, but what he hath him∣self first proposed. Some Lords do encourage his Reso∣lutions, but the others stand as Neutrals rather endeavouring to perswade him, then to encourage his Resolution in the violent way of war. We hear that my Lord Pagets ab∣sence from the House, which was be∣yond expectation, hath much disconten∣ted the House, but here his intentions are found to be so faithfull, that wee hope they will have no ground to que∣stion his fidelity and trust. There came lately to York many Ca∣valeers from London, who offered to maintain His Majssties Resolution of setting up His Standard, from which some well disposed Lords of His Maje∣sties Counsell, did of late did of late dis∣sure him. These Cavaleers at a place cal∣led Grimston within 12. miles of Yorke,
upon the 16. of June did gather a head, being in number above threescore, and in the space of three hours by their fain insinuation had gathered unto them a great multitude more, in this Confusion they passed towards Yorke City, and at their first comming they did present their service unto His Maje∣sty, as men willing to continue this mi∣serable distraction, their whole intents complying with his Majesties Resolu∣tion of setting up his Standard. Upon their first proffer, his Majesty was much moved and heavie, desired to have some time for respite for their Entertainment, but did the next mor∣ning being the 17. of JUNE enter∣tain most of them, which hath given them most strange and mighty Encou∣ragement. I will give you for your better satis∣faction some of their Names, which have bin the main Agents in this cause, but ere long I hope they will be appre∣hended.
Collonel Williams Capt, Draper. Capt. Early. Capt. Stichborn, Lievtenant Gil∣bert, Sergeant Major Smith, and some o∣thers, Thus I rest, York Iune 18. 1642. Your most obliged Friend, EDWARD ANDREWS. SInce the peace of this Kingdome hath bin disturbed, those dangerous Agents of Rome hath practised many desperate At∣tempts against this Nation; Whereby they have indeavoured the subversion of our Li∣berties and persons, And since all these now within these few dayes there arose a strange and most wicked danger in Darby Towne, where by the motion and instigation of one Master John Hamson a Catholique, strange things have happened, for after that he and his adherents had indeavoured to spoyle one Mr. James his house, when their intentions
did not take such successe as they expected, they entred the same James his house, and not finding him at home, seized upon his wife; whom after they had ravished, they gagged in a most terrible manner: and after this mischief they plundered the house, and told her that this was but the beginning of what they did intend to act. This slept for a season, and within a small space they intended to fire the Towne, but by the information of Mistris James his wife, their fartqer mischief was preven∣ted, and all their Designs countermanded. Thus the Actors were discovered, and all things now brought to light, which they in∣tended should have bin brought to a greater light. By vertue of an Order this day made in the House of Commons Iune 17. the Officers and Keformadoes li∣sted by the Adventurers for Ireland, are hereby requi∣red to take notice, that they are on tuesday next (at 9. a clock in the morning) to hear a Sermon, and take the Protestation at St. Laurence Church neer Guild-Hall London, and then to enter into pay at Guild-Hall afore∣said. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl.
A Command from the High Court of Parliament, to the Justices of Peace neer adjoyning to the Northern Roads. IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Par∣liament assembled, That a strict search and Examination be made by the Justices of peace Maior, Bayliffs, Constables, and other his Ma∣jesties Officers, inhabiting, or neer adjoyning to all the Northerne Roads, for the stopping and staying of all Armes, Ammunition, Pow∣der, Light-horses, or horses for service in the Warres, and great Saddles that are, or shal be carryed towards the North parts of England, but by the privity and direction of one, or both Houses of Parliament; And that the said Of∣ficers shall stay them accordingly, and speedily give information thereof unto one of the Hou∣ses of Parliament. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament. That this shall be printed and published. Io. Browne, Cler. Parl.
