A3263 E456_5 99860132 112240
Another great and bloudy FIGHT IN THE NORTH, BETWEEN The Forces under the command of James Duke of Hamble∣ton, Lord Generall of the Scottish Army, and the Par∣liaments Forces under the immediate conduct of Major Gen. Lambert, upon Wednesday last neer the Borders of Yorkshire. WITH The particulars of the said Fight, and the number that were killed, and Cullers taken, and the Scots resolution con∣cerning Lieut. Gen. Cromwell. Also, the E of Calender marched into Northumberland, with Deer Saundy Hambleton the Scots famous Engineer; and their Resolution touching Colchester. LIKEWISE, Sad and dangerous Tydings from Colchester, and the sallying out of Sir Charles Lucas upon the Parliaments Forces, his digging of great Trenches to swallow them up, and their resolution to maintain their Works to an inch of ground. London Printed for generall satisfaction, 1648.
swer them again, with the same which they meat to us; and I believe they have paid for their sallying at a high rate: for we have killed about twenty of the troop called the shavers, Sir Charles Lucas his Major, and divers others of eminency, the losse of whom they much lament, VVe have also killed their chief Gunner, and our great Guns playes hard upon them, doing great execution. The last night they made another sally, and thought to have surprised some of our Guards, but by timely discovery were prevented, and made good their retreat without losse. Those who come out of the town say, they begin to eate horse flesh, whether for need, or as a dainty, we know not: they are afraid of a storm, and in that respect have provi∣ded whatever may defend themselves or offend us. They dig deep holes in almost all the streets of this town, that so if we storm, our horse should be uselesse; the high street is not pittied, for there they feed their horses, giving them grasse and nay upon stalls belonging to the shops. It is further reported, that they have made two inner VVorkes within the walls, and have dug a deep trench under them, at least four yards deep, that in ease our men should storm, their trenches should be the Gulfe to swallow them: in consideration whereof, it is conceived it will be very dif∣ficult work to accomplish, and prejudiciall for our Army to storm; but we doubt not but to force them to conditions for surrender in a short time, or else become Master, there∣of by a famine in the town. The enemy maintains their quar∣ters well, they dispute every inch of ground, but in open places they are not so valiant. VVee are put to exceeding hard duty for want of our own Soldiers. When Caesar fought against Pompey in Greece, whose Army was not come to him, onely a numerous company unexperienc'd Roman gallants, Caesar got the better, and gave
this accyunt, he found the Generail with an Army, many of the prisoners and dying Enemies, say that their plot was to bring in the King upon the Parliament, not bp treaty but force, the means to effect it was by making the Parliament odious, and chus to asperse them with reproaches from all sorts of Pamphlets, whereby the people should be incensed against them, 2. To stir up the people to ptition acd muti∣ny. 3 Togather into arms, that then Cavaliers who were to be confided in, carry on the work and not raw discontented countrey men, who onely long for peace. To weaken the Army by making them odious, putting them upon action in all parts, that they appear formidable no where, nor able to resist numerous risings. 5 To make most noise there where there was least design to fright the Parliament with the Scots comming, when the intention was to be strongest in the South. 6 To raise, if not destroy the Parl. or force them to yield to the King. Colchester July 29. 1648. There is a great Rumour amongst the Royalists in Lon∣don, that Major Gen. Lambert is totally routed, and that He hath lost 17. Foot Cullers, and 9 of Horse; which Report is false, some skirmishing hath been between them, and the Major General (as we hear) is retreated towards Cleveland: for your further satisfaction, I refer you to the inclosed Letter.
Terrible News from the North, being a true Relation of another great Fight between the English and the Scots neer Yorkshire. SIR, DUke Hamilton is upon his march towards Bowes and Stainmore, and thought to have forced his way at Stainmore passage, but was presented; for Major Generall Lambert having placed a very considerable party to secure the said Bridge and passage, and a Briggade of the Scots comming up, thinking to passe the River, found oppo∣sition, and the quarrell disputed for the space of two hours and had not another Briggade of the Scots come up, we had been Masters of the day; but seeing our selvs over-pow∣red, made an honourable retreat towards Barnard Castle, which was six or seven miles distant from us, the enemy pursued about three miles, but at a distant, they over-powr us exceedingly in Foot, and have great numbers of horse. In this conflict we lost about 30. men, and brought off about 20 which were wounded; the losse of the enemy is thought to be far more. We are daily in action, and have hard duty, our numbers being not potent enough. We expect Lieutenant Gen. Crom∣wel and his Forces dayly, whom the Scots say they will soundly cudgell, and are resolved to fight him, though he be never so strong. ndeed, they have a very potent Army, be∣sides, they expect 3000. from Major Generall Monro, and another Army from Scotland, to march by the way of Ber∣wick.
Thorney house is surrendred to Col. Charles Fairfax, by the Bees of Pentefract. A Narrative of their proceedings, I have here inserted, viz. Col. Fairfax his Letter to Col. Pauldin Governour of Thorney house for the King. Sir, I am ingaged to make good my proffer. The Renditi∣on of Thornhil house wil forfeit no Loyalty; though blood be precious, yet we cannot condescend to so long a cessation as to expect any answer from Pontefract, but a speedy sur∣render to. C. Fairfax. Thornhill 16 of July, 1648. To the Governour of Thornhill Hall. Sir, You may not expect any thing here but what you can win with your Sword, untill I receive further commands from my Superiours. Yours, Thomas Paulden. Sir, If God shall give you so compassionate a heart to pity the lives of so many of your Souldiers, with divers others that be now in your Garrison, we shall become humble suiters unto the Parliament (whose former mer∣cies some of you have liberally tasted) that you may have the latitude of favour, whereof your several conditions wil admit you capable. But if our offer be now rejected, you must expect a pursuance of our advantages with all extre∣mity. And be assured the blood of those that dy in the slaughter, (a work we abhor, if you did not inforce it) wil be required at your hands, and of them that advise you. C. Fairfax. Thornhill 18. July, 1648. Sir, To infer your conclusion, that the bloud spilt shall be re∣quired at our hands, before you have proued that we ought not to defend, our right and the Kings, with our blood, is very
bad logick; your Rhetorick not so pregnant, as may perswade us to assent to so dishonourable conditions, upon so small reason; but in order to the tendernesse we have of Christian blood, if you please to appoint two of like condition with ours mentioned in my Letters to Sir Henry Cholmley, and send us Hostages, we shall imbrace a Parley. This is all can be returned from, Your servant, Thomas Palden. July 18. 1648. To Collonel Fairfax these present. The Earl of Kalender Lieut. Gen. to Duke Hambleton is marched over Berwick bridge into England, with a second Army consisting of about 8000. with whom comes Deere Saundy Hambleton the famous Engineer the L. Lanerick is Governour of the town of Berwick. We hear that they have fallen upon Col. Lilburns quarters in Northumberland, took about 27. prisoners, 50. horse, and two Cullers. It is said, that they intend to march directly for Colcheter, &c. Barnard Castle July 27. 1648. FINIS.
