A3807 E473_14 R205252 99864669 162435
THE ARTICLES AND CHARGE OF THE ARMY, EXHIBITED In Parliament against the Kings Majesty, the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York; Read in both Houses yesterday, Novemb. 21. 1648. AND Their Declaration and Resolution (sent to the Citizens of London) shewing the manner how they will dispose of the Crown of England. WITH Their Proposals touching the declaring of their Highnesses incapable of any government or trust whatsoever, and to stand exild, and be banisht for ever as Enemies and Traytors. And to dye without mercy, if ever after taken, in case they come not in at the hour set down and prefixed. And the Generals Declaration touching the King. AGreed upon by the Generall Councell of the Army; and commanded to be printed and published. 22 nouemb. Signed T. FAIRFAX. London, Printed for C.W. neer the Royall Exchange, 1648.
A DECLARATION FROM THE ARMY Agreed upon by his Excellency, and the Generall Councell of the Army. WHereas through the blessing of God upon the endeavours and actions of the Army they are become Conquerours and Sub∣duers of the Enemies of peace and free∣dome, and therefore conceive themselvs bound in conscience and judgment to preserue this Na∣tion from future slavery, and to bring all Offenders to condigne punishment.
The Charge and Proposals of the Army. 1 That the capitall and grand Authors of our trou∣bles, the person of the King may be speedily brought to Justice, for the Treason, bloud, and mischief he is al∣ready guilty of. 2 That a timely and peremptory day may be set for the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York to come in, and render themselves, by which time if they do not, that then they may be immediatly de∣clared incapable of any government or trust whatsōe∣ver, and to stand exild for ever, as enemies and tray∣tors, to dye without mercy, if ever after taken. And if they or either of them, renders themselves within the said time, that then the Prince for his capitall delin∣quency (being in appearance next to his Fathers) and himselfe and the Duke to be proceeded against in Ju∣stice, or remitted according as they shall give satisfa∣ction. But however that the Estate and Revenue of the Crown may be sequestred, and all the matter of cost∣ly pomp suspended for a good number of yeers, while the desolations and spoyles of the poor people may be repaired for ease of the peoples contributions, 3 That Justice bee executed on a competent number of his chiefe Instruments that are in the power of the Parl. so that their exemption from pardon may not bee a mockery of Justice in the face of God & Man. 4. That the rest of the Delinquents (English) may upon ren∣dition of themselves to Justice, have mercy extended to them for their lives, and fines set upon them with moderation, and those that have compounded, to bee freed from Suits, Arrests, &c. Now after Justice thus done upon the forementioned particulars, we propound
further for setling of the peace of the Kingdoms, viz. 1 That a speedy period may be put to this Parl. and teat the power thereof may again return to the peo∣ple, by, and whom it was first constituted, and provisi∣on for future, Annuall or Biennial, upon grounds of common right freedom, and safety. 2 That no Delinquents may elect or be elected, at least for some time, and that there may be a certainty of their sitting, meeting, and ending. 3 That it be declared, that as to the whole interest of the Commons of England; they are the supream po∣wer, for the making, cleering, or repealing Lawes; for making War or Peace, and for finall judgment in civil things without further appeale; and that all the Com∣mons of England, and all Officers of Justice, and Mini∣sters of State, shall for the outward man, and outward things be concluded thereby; provided, these things be reserved from, and not intrusted in the said Represen∣tatives. 1 The questioning or censuring of any man, for any thing said or done, in relation to the late wars, but such cases as before mentioned. 2 The rendring up, or giving, or taking away of any of the Foundations of Right, Liberty, and safety to the People, contained in a settlement and agreement; which to be above Law, and to bee signed unto by the Peo∣ple. That no King; or other publike Officer be hereafter admitted, without subscribing to this settlement.
SIR, HIs Majesty (on Friday last) at a Conference with his Councell, declared his great avers∣nesse, for the abolishing of Episcopacy, and declaring against the negotiation of Ireland. It is supposed, that His Majesty hath many scruples against the Army as appeares by his Declaration on Satturday last, (occasioned by a Rumour of the Ar∣mies seizing on his Royall person, and taking him in∣to custody, till assurance be given for their future provisions, and safety, intimating that his heart was possest with many fears and instancing his dream of divers passages appearing visible, touching the pro∣ceedings of the Army, and that he had a great suspi∣cion of their proceedings and actions, desiring the Lords to protect his sacred Person and to direct and gutde them in the wayes of faith and righteousnesse. And in the close of their disputation, his Majesty further declared he would endeavour to give all pos∣sible satisfaction to the Army in all things by them de∣sired (as far as he could dispense withal in honour and conscience) and therefore desired that his condegressi∣ons, and overturnes in the Treaty, should be forth∣with expedited, to the Commanders in chief of each Regiments, to be published at the head thereof, and dispersed throughout the severall Counties. Newport Novemb. 19. 1648. A Message from his Maj. loyall subjects, in the King∣dome of Scotland to his liege people in the Kingdome of England. Right Honourable, As we are very sensible of the benefit and advan∣tage afforded to this Kingdome, against the enemies
to the peace and happinesse of both Nations, by the comming hither of the Force under the command of Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, and Maj. Generall Lambart, so we hold it fitting when the condition of our affairs and posture of our Forces have now per∣mitted their return, to render them them this deser∣ved testimony, and to acknowledge that the deport∣ment of the Generall Officers, under Officers and souldiers in their comming into this Kingdome, during their abode amodgst us, and in their return to England hath been so fair and civill and with so much tender∣nesse to avoid all causes of offence, and to preserve a right understanding, betwixt the Kingdomes, that we trust by their carriage the Malignant and disaffected shall be much convinced and disappointed, and the amity of both Kingdomes strengthned and confirmed which we shall likewise on our part inviolably study to preferve, and to witnesse ihat we are: Your very affectionate friends and humble servants, London Canc. Edenburgh, 7. Novem. 1648. Signed in the name, and by command of the Com∣mittee of Estates. A Message from the army, Right Honorable, THe Agents of the Army are drawing up the Representation of the respective Regiments to present to his Excellency, wherein they De∣clare their unanimous Resolutions for the putting of a finall end and period to all differences whatsoever
now in dispute betweene his Majesty and the parlia∣ment, and that a peace be suddenly concluded of, and his Majesty re-invested, provided that assurance may be given for future safety and liberties, both to the Army and Kingdom. The Generals Declaration. Mr. Speaker, The Generall Councell of Officers at their late meeting here have unanimously a∣agreed upon a Remonstrance, to be presented to you and in regard it concernes matters of highest and pre∣sent importance to your selfe, to Us and the whole Kingdom; I do, at the desire of the Officers, and in the behalf of them, and my self most earnestly intreat that it may have a present reading, and the things propoun∣ded therein may be timely considered. Your most humble servant, T. FAIRFAX. St. Albans 21. Novemb. 1648. FINIS.
