A3956 E149_26 R3991 99872560 156733
GOOD COVRAGE DISCOVERED, AND ENCOVRAGED: IN A SERMON preached before the Commanders of the Military Forces, of the Renowned Citie of London. In the Parish Church of Great St. Helens. May the 17. 1642. By SIMEON ASH, Preacher in London. DEVT. 20. 2, 3, 4. And it shall be, when yee are come nigh unto the Battell that the Priest shall approach, and speake unto the people. And shall say unto them, Heare O Israel, you approach this day unto Battel against your Enemies: Let not your hearts faint, feare not, and doe not tremble, neither be yee terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies to save you. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Dawson for Iohn Barroughes, and are to be sold at his shop at the golden Dragon neare the Inner Temple-gate in Fleet-street. 1642.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, the Aldermen, and Commoners, unto whom the Militia of the Citie of London is committed, the Serjeant Major Generall, the Colonels, the Lieu∣tenant Colonels, Sereant Majors, Captaines, and other officers of the trained Bands of the said Citie. Right Worshipfull, COrnelius, Centurion of the Ita∣lian Band is thus commended by the Holy Ghost, that hee was a devout man, and one that fea∣red God. And I may report thus much to your hnour and to move others to make imitation; that you have begun, and hitherto carred on your Martiall affairs religously. For having put the City into a posture of defence; before the execution of the Mi∣litia; you joyntly sought God by Prayer for good successe.
The Lord heard your Prayers, for you went forth, and retur∣ned home, without the least touch of danger to your selves, or your Companies. This remarkeable Providence called you againe together, to praise the God of salvations, the God of your mercies. Hereupon you were pleased to appoint me (very unworthy) to assist you in the service of Thankesgiving: A service not unseemly for the Hoast of Heaven. This Sermon, which upon that occasion I preached, through the Constructions of your Love found such acceptance, that you commanded it to come abroad to doe you further service. And seeing you gave it good entertainment, as it was first presented, it makes bold to wate upon you without change of habit, expecting your Protection. Although I somewhat suspect that sundry amplifications in the Sermon which affected the Auditors, may not be so pleasing to the Iudicious Reader, yet your desires to have it prined, as it was preached, makes me to run that adventure. The Lord of Hosts guide, guard, and encourage you in all your good undertakings for peace and truth, and make you carefull to put Christian references upon all your ser∣vices, for the honour and safety of our King, the welfare of his Kingdomes, and the continued Prosperity of this famous Ci∣tie. This your prudent and pious perseverance in the worke so well begun, will draw forth many prayses to God, many prayers for you, and much rejoycing in the hearts of all them, who sin∣cerely affect you; of which number, I beseech you account him one who is Your Servant, in, and for Christ, SIMEON ASH.
GOOD COURAGE DISCOVERED, AND INCOVRAGED. PSAL. 31. 24. Be of good Courage. RIght worshipfull, and worthy Gentle∣men, (whose desires, and whose service of thanksgiving, I am now attending,) I hope you are come hither with an in∣tention; First, to honour God for preser∣vation enjoyed, through his providence, to whom you prayed. My Text lookes back unto such a businesse; The Lord preserveth the faithfull; therefore letVerse 23.
the faithfull upon such experiences in way of prayse, in way of requitall learne to bee of good courage. Secondly, I beleeve you are come together in expecta∣tion for the future, to receive further favours from the God of your present prayses; and my Text lookes forward to that, Bee of good courage, and hee shall strengthen thine heart, and wait I say on the Lord. My Text is short, the words in our translation are not many, in the originall, there is but one word, , The Septuagint renders the Hebrew word, , Quit your selves like men; Viriliter agite, play the men, Rob∣ramini, bee yee strong. The Counsell here given is for all Christians, at all times needfull, but for you, and at this time, most seasonable. Bee yee couragious. First, The Counsellour was, a Wor∣thy, a Souldier, a Warriour, a Commander, a King: David, as the title tels you, Hee cals for courage. Secondly, The Persons counselled, they are Saints, faith∣full ones: O yee Saints love him, his manner is by his spe∣ciall providence to preserve you; Therefore bee yee of good courage. The point lies faire, which I conceive pertinent, and now purpose to prosecute. Gods people must bee of good courage. Dctr. I shall briefly suggest the Scriptures proofe, in a threefold gradation, wherein good courage is called for: First, Saint Paul an Apostle with Apostolicall autho∣rity, perswades to it; 2 Cor. 16. 13. Quit yee like men. Secondly, Iehosaphat a King, with regall authority commands it, 2 Chron. 19. ult. Deale couragiously. Thirdly, The great God of Heaven and Earth, putting himselfe under a warlike notion, as the Lord Generall of all the forces in the World, the Lord of Hosts. He peremp∣torily presseth it; Haggie. 2. 4. Now bee strong ô Zoroba∣bel saith the Lord and bee strong ô Ioshua, the Sonne of Ioze∣dek the High Priest, and bee strong the people of the Land saith
the Lord, and worke, for I am with you saith the Lord of Hosts. Three things there be, that I shall speake to, in the pro∣secution of this point. First, The explication of the vertue, the grace called for, wherein I will endeavour to discover what this courage is. Secondly, The confirmation of this truth by reasons, from which this Doctrine may undeniably bee concluded, and by which you may all bee fully convinced, that there is aboundant cause, why all Gods people should bee cou∣ragious. Thirdly, The application of all, by way of use, that my Sermon may be the more serviceable. Christian courage may thus bee described, It is the un∣dauntedA Descrip∣tion of good Courage. audacity of a sanctified heart in adventuring upon difficulties, and undergoing hardships for a good cause upon the call of God. There are six things considerable in the description that I have given, which I will particularly point at, and prove. First, the Genus, the common nature of it: it is an un∣daunted audacity. This Animosity (as some phrase it,) it is common both unto men, and to some bruits. The Lion, Prov. 30. 30. is said, to bee the strongest among beasts, that turneth not away from any. And there is an elegant description of the warre horse, in regard of boldnesse, Job 39. 19. &c. Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou cloathed his neck with thunder▪ Canst thou make him afraid as a gras-hopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible, hee paweth in the valley, and rejoyeth in his strength, hee goeth out to meete the armed men. Hee mocketh at feare, and is not affrighted, neither turneth hee back from the sword. The Quiver ratleth against him, the glittering speare and the sheild, hee swallowes the ground with fiercenesse and rage, neither beleeveth hee, that it is the sound of the Trumpet.
And this boldnesse that is in bruits, it is spoken of, as a piece of this same courage that God is pleased to give to men; Ezek. 3. 9. this is the Lords promise. As an Ada∣mant, harder then the flint, have I made thy forehead. The word Harder, is the same in the Hebrew, that is here in my Text, Fortiorem petra; The Rock, that is not afraid of any weather, Summer, or Winter, Sunne, and Showres, Heat, and Cold, Frost, and Snow, it blusheth not, shrinketh not, it changeth not it's complexion, it is still the same; Such alike thing is courage, in the common nature of it. Secondly, Consider the subject, it is the Heart, the Castle where Courage commands, and exerciseth Military Disci∣pline; (shall I so say) its within the bosome, it is the Soule of a valiant Souldier. Some conceive, our English word Courage, to bee de∣rived from Cordis actio, the very acting of the heart. A valiant man is described, 2 Sam 17. 10. for to bee a man; whose heart, is as the heart of a Lyon. And sometime, the originall translated, Couragious, as Amos 2. 16. may most properly bee rendred, a Man of heart. Beloved, valour doth not consist in a piercing eye, in a terrible looke, in bigge words, but it consists in the mettall, the vigour that is within the bosome. Some∣times, a Coward may dwell at the signe of a roaring voyce, and of a sterne countenance: whereas true fortitude may bee found within his breast, whose outward deportment promiseth little, or nothing in that kind. Thirdly, Note the qualfication of this same subject; I said a sanctified heart: for I am not now speaking of forti∣tude, as a morall vertue, whereof Heathens, that have not God, are capable; and for which many among them, that are not Christians, have beene worthily commended. But I am now discoursing of Courage, as a vertue Theo∣logicall, as a gracious qualification, put upon the people
of God by speciall covenant. And there are three things that doe characterize it, and which doe distinguish it from the morall vertue of fortitude. The Roote, whence it ariseth; The Rule, whereby it is directed; The End, to which it is referred, The Roote, whence it riseth, is love to God; All the Saints of God that love the Lord, bee of good Courage. The love of Christ constraineth mee to make these bold, and brave adventures, saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The Rule whereby it is directed, is the word of God: what the Lord hath pleased to leave on record for a Chri∣stians guidance in holy pages, 1 Chron. 22. 12. 13. The Lord give thee wisedome and understanding, that thou maist keepe the law. If thou take heed to the statutes, and judgements, which the Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel: be strong and of good courage, dread not, nor be dismai'd. Bee a man of mettall, but let thy mettall bee according to my mind, according to this rule. And the End, to which it referres, is God. For every sanctified man, being a selfe-denying, and a God-advan∣cing man; his God is his Center, wherein his actings, his undertakings rest, and his Soule is not, yea it cannot bee satisfied but in God. The fourth thing considerable in the Description is, the naturall, the formall, the immediate operations, that doe flow from this gracious, audacious frame of heart, they are two: There is an adventuring upon difficulties, And there is an undergoing of hardships. First, There is an adventuring upon hard services, It is said, 1 Sam. 31. 12. The valiant men rose and went all night, and tooke the body of Saul, and the bodies of his Sonnes from the wale of Bethshan, and came to Gabesh, and burnt them there. When the Philistins had taken their bodies and were gone away Conquerours, and fastened them there,
as Ensignes of victory, brave blades, well mettalled men, went by night, and fetched them back againe: an hard, and a brave service. And by reason hereof there is an enduring of hardships: Those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy, who are said to be men valiant in fight, Heb. 11. 34. This, testimony is given of them, that They endured tortu∣rings, the tryall of mockings▪ or cruell mockings, of scourgings, of bonds, and imprisonment, of stoning, of being sawne asun∣der, of being slaine with the sword, of wandring up and downe in sheeps skins, and goats skins, being men destitute, afflicted, and tormented. Fiftly, in my description, I cast in the cause, which true courage undertakes to doe, and suffer for, the object it workes upon, the prize it adventures for, it is a good cause, Matters of faith, stand ye fast in the faith, quit ye like men. It is1 Cor. 16. 13 a Gospel peice for which I am to jeopard a joynt, to hazard alimbe, to adventure life, 1 Cor. 6. 13. or matters of fact: I must be of good courage for my conscience, that I may main∣taine an evennesse of spirit in reference to my rule, in rela∣tion to my God, 1 Pet. 3. 14. If yee suffer for righteous∣nesse sake happy are yee, be not afraid of their terrour, neither be troubled. It is a noble, a Christian resolution in any man, if hee thus determine, rather then I will make a wound upon my conscience, a breach betweene God and my soul; rather then I will violate asacred vow, and transgresse the command of my God, I will run the greatest hazards in outward regards that can be imagined. The goodnesse of the cause (Divines say) for which a man suffers, makes the Martyr: In like manner, it is the warrantablenesse of the worke, wherein the souldier, the man of mettall appeares, that gives him the credit, the ho∣nour of this title, to be accounted a valiant man. Sixtly and lastly, I added that good courage makes theIos. 1. 9. foresaid adventures upon the call of God. Have not I com∣manded thee, be strong and of a good courage: If the Lord
please to beat up the Drum; If the Lord please to bid them arme, and come abroad, his call is sufficient, Now God cals either by his precept, or by his providence. Either God cals his Champions for to undertake dangers, or hee com∣mands dangers to over-take them; and hereupon being led forth by the Lord of hoasts, they expresse their valour: For this they know, that whether it be estate, or peace, or life, or liberty, or Religion, or whatsoever else they hope to defend, they are all tallants that God hath entrusted them with, and that therefore only upon his Commission signed, and sealed by his own hand they may come forth, and must come forth bravely, and shew themselves couragious in reference thereto. Now for a man in an impetuous, giddy, neady way, to breake himselfe unwisely in his reputation, liberty, estate, and himselfe knowes no other reason: but because his spi∣rit moves him, and his humours stirre in him, or some pas∣sionat inconsiderate persons provoke him, this (my beloved) is not to be couragious. Wee reade in the Gospel, of a man possessed with an evil spirit, that did often cast himself into the water, and into the fire to destroy himself. And truly it nearely concernes many men of daring spirits, to considerMark 9. 22▪ seriously what spirit it is that acts in them: These things we must marke, that the true nature of courage may bee understood. This description of good courage I judged meet to pre∣mise and to explain briefly, that we may understand the duty in the text, the duty, the seasonable duty, which God calls for, and I plead for. Bee of good Courage. The second thing I propounded in the prosecution of this point, is the reasons wherefore a Christian should bee couragious: And my doctrine is built upon a fourefold ground. First, Gods people should be of good courage, in refe∣rence
unto the condition, unto which God hath called them. God hath appoynted all Christians to be souldiers. A Sacrament is a souldiers oath, when we were baptized we tooke presse money, and vowed to serve under the co∣lours of Christ, and as manfull souldiers to fight against the world, the flesh, and the Devill: and as oft as wee have beene at the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, wee have renewed our solemne, and sacred obligation in that kind, in reference to Christ, who is called The Captaine of the Lords host, Jos. 5. 16. and the Captaine of our salva∣tion Heb. 2. 10. Inàure hardnesse (saith the Apostle) as a good culder of Christ, 2 Tim. 2. 4, Epaphroditus my fellow souldier, Phil. 2. 25. Beloved, wisdome is not more ne∣cessary for a Counsellor, nor eloquence for an Orator, then courage for a souldier. Souldiers we are, wee must there∣fore, Be of good courage. Secondly, the weighty services wherein the Lord of Hosts is pleased to imploy us. Men imployed in peculiar services are commanded to put on fortitude: As Ioshua who was a Commander to guide, and governe the host, the armies of the Israelites in their passage to Canaan, Bee thou strong and very couragious, that thou maist observe toIosh. 1. 7. doe according to all the Law, which Moses my servant com∣manded thee, turne not from it, to the right hand or to the left. And Ezra, in regard of his office, is thus spoken un∣to: Arise, for the matter belongeth unto thee, bee of good courage, and doe it: and common Christians, in respect of services required of them, are to be couragious in their pla∣ces, Ios. 23. 6. Be yee therefore very couragious to keepe, and to doe all that is written in the booke of the law of Moses, that you turne not aside therefrom, to the right hand or to the left. Shall I hint some services that are charged upon all our consciences The worke of mortification, to pick out our eyes, to chop off our hands, to cut off our feet; doe you thinke that a milke sop, a man that is not a man of a stout spirit
will doe this. Novv to massacre fleshly lusts, is (as it vvere) for a man to mangle, and dismember his owne body, it is a worke painefull and grievous, as for a man to cut off his owne feet, to chop off his ownehands, and to pick out his owne eyes, as Christ and the Apostle Paul doe expresse it. Besides this, there are in Christians bosomes, strong holds to be battered, fortifications to be demolished: there are high hils and mountaines, that must be levelled with the ground ther are trenches to be made, vallies to be filled. O beloved, I may not mention the hils that lye before us in heaven way, which we must climbe up; and craggy rocks that we must get over: and without courage certainly the service put upon our hands will not be discharged. Ther are also the wals of Irusalem to be repaired, and the Temple to be reedefied: If Nehemiah had not beene a a man of a brave spirit, hee would never have gone through stitch with that Church worke, those weighty services which hee did undertake. How this is appliable to us for the present time, the time of our begun refor∣mation, I speake not; but rather doe referre it to your considerations; I beseech you to reade Neh. 4 17, 18. They which builded on the wall, and they that did beare bur∣thens, with those that laded: Every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon. For the Builders every one had a sword girded by his side, and so builded, and he that sounded the Trum∣pet was by us. While they were at worke they were all ready for warre. Thirdly, Christians must bee couragious, in reference to the 3. huge Armies, with which they are assaulted. There are armies Of Devils. Of Lusts. Of men and women in the world, that doe wage warre with every Christian, that in good earnest makes out after his God in heaven way.
For the Devils, it is the argument of the Apostle, and from thence I tooke it, Ephes. 6. 10. Brethren, be strong (saith hee,) for we wrestle not against flesh, and bloud, but a∣gainst principalities, and powers, against the Rulers of the darknesse of this World, against Spirituall wickednesses in the heights. Marke for the number they are many, Our name is legion, for wee are many: How many thousands, neither you nor I know. There is strength in them, they are Powers, Principalities, and they are Rulers, they have very great authority in the Darknesse of the World; in Midnight men, Darke men, Men who love not Sunne-shine light, but ra∣ther delight to lye in holes and caves. I meane, in regard of the Darknesse of their minds, and their wilfull ignorance of the things of God. And they are in the height; they fight with much advantage (as some observe,) being over our heads. And they are Spirits, they worke invisibly, and they fight against our Soules, they la∣bour to keepe our hearts in thraldome, they seeke to beggar and to undoe us in regard of our grace, and Spirituall joyes. The Holy Apostle Peter sayeth, The Divell your adver∣sary, goeth about like a roaring Lyon, seeking whom hee may devoure. An Adversary, and a Devill, and a strong one, as a Lyon roaring, and then hee is active, hee walkes about, and hee is full of malice, ready to devoure: These things touched upon, doe tell us, that wee, who are al∣wayes surrounded, besieged by such enemies, have need of courage. There are armies of lusts, I know not how many. The1 Pet. 2. 11. Apostle saith, Fleshly lusts that fight against the Soule. These soes lye within us, and they strike at the head, and the heart, endeavouring to let out the precious life of our im∣mortall soules. As the Captaines of the King of Syria, had a command1 King 22. 31. to fight against, neither small nor great, but the King of Israel. And the Apostle saith, that lusts in his bosome were
such enemies, as still carried him captive, and haled him as a prisoner. (You know the expression, Rom. 7. 2.) Be∣loved, doth not experience oftentimes prove thus much, that pride, passions, unbeliefe, hypocrisie, earthly minded∣nesse, creature confidence, sensuality, doe take up armes against our precious Soules. Alas! alas! lusts, deceitfull lusts, many deceitfull lusts, are still, still tyrannizing in our bo∣somes, which of us hath not cause to complaine with the Apostle, when I would doe good, they are at hand present with mee: strong in mee, ever stabbing, and striking, and poysoning, and wounding; if I would but pray, or weepe, or amend. These Rebels raise their strengths, and com∣bine their forces to hinder mee: and no sooner can Sathan hold up finger, and temptation shew it selfe; But they are ready furiously to march out against Christ, his govern∣ment, graces, glory. Beloved, I appeale to your con∣sciences, whether in regard of this black guard, maintai∣ned within us, wee have not need to bee of good cou∣rage. Thirdly, the armies of people: The Apostle Paul saith, hee fought with men who were as beasts, Beasts after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15. 32. David tels you they were Dogges, and they were Tygers, and Wolves, and Beares, and Buls, and Lyons, so in the Psalmes hee phraseth them. I promise you, a man that is so beset, thus assaulted, if hee bee not a man of courage what will become of him? There are Sanballets and Tobiah's, men of malignant, mischievous Spirits, to doe us mischiefe in Heaven way. had wee not need in that regard to bee couragious? And truly, women if they cannot use weapons, they will cast, and fling stones, shoote their arrowes even bitter words. David met with opposition in that kind, from one that was neare, and should have beene better. Michol shee jeared him in his righteous, and holy zeale, in refe∣rence to God; you know the story, and therefore I report it not. And doubtlesse, had not hee beene a man of an
Heroick Spirit, hee might have beene dasht out of counte∣nance and baffled and cooled in his zeale, because of her reproachfull language. There are those that are ready to performe ill offices, Sheba▪ like, to blow a Trumpet of sedition, of contention, to cast coales, and kindle strife betweene the head and the members, the King, and his Subjects; to set all on a ime in the Kingdome. In this regard, wee had need to bee steele to the back, that wee bee not disheartned. From all these three particuiars, I might apply that passage, 2 Sam. 10. 9. 12. When Ioah saw the front of the battaile against him be∣fore and behind; hee sayed hee of good courage, and let us play the men: His speeches did sparkle Spirits, he herein proved himselfe a man meete to bee a warlike Commander, for danger and difficulties did adde heart and heate. My Masters, you see our case, let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our God. Beloved, you per∣ceive by that which I have pointed at, that our enemies are more and worse, we are beset before, and behind, above, and below, without and within; not onely our Cities, but our Soules are opposed, endangered. Hell and Earth, Men and Devils, yea and our selves are Adversaries to our selves. Therefore there is good reason, why wee should put on Courage. Fourthly and lastly, Wee have need of Courage, because of the various afflictions to bee expected. For ought wee know, heavy things may befall us, and must bee borne by head, and shoulders by us, before wee get to our Castle, our place of refuge, our rest in Heaven; how stony, how thorny, how deepe, and how dangerous our wayes may prove, before wee get to our journeyes end, wee cannot tell. It may bee, wee must travaile through bloud, through our owne bloud, and therefore wee need Courage. After our Saviour had suggested to his Disciples, Mat. 10. 21. Brother shall deliver brother to death; the Father the Child, and the Child shall raise against the Parents, and
cause them to be pat to death, and you shall be hated of all men for my names sake; Hereupon hee adds, verse 26. Feare not, 32. Feare not. Beloved, we know not what may be our portion here on earth, before we come perfectly to enjoy God our portion, and be happy in enjoying of him for ever. Wee may live to see the Citie fired, our estates wasted, our wives abused, our children torne in peices lin be-meale, peice-meale before our eyes: beleeve mee without cou∣rage, these sights will be hard and heavy to be beheld, such like sights will cause us to fownd away, to sinck into the dust, if wee provide not courage. Thus have I run over my reasons, and now I request you all, seriously to consider, whether in all the fore-mentioned regards, we have not abundant cause to endeavour, to get the grace the text com∣mends, and to doe the duty that in the text God cals for, Be of good courage. I come now to the application of all that hath beene de∣livered by way of use. The uses of this poynt that I shall speake to, they are but two. The first Reproofe, The second Exhortation. For Reproofe, hence I have occasion for to blame both unworthy cowardlinesse in some, and wicked audacious∣nesse in others: both vices contrary to this vertue, both extreames, opposed by this practize of Christian fortitude, which my text perswades. First I must check an unworthy dastardlinesse, which discovers it selfe three wayes in the bosomes of men. First, when men by reason of pusianimity, & lownesse of spirit, dare not appeare in the cause that they are convin∣ced, to be the cause of God. There were some, Ioh. 12. 43. who, though they beleeved on Christ, yet they durst not professe him for feare of the Pharisees, lest they should bee excommunicated. The consciences of many tell them,
that such a way is the way of God, doubtlesse this is hea∣ven road; surely these are the courses to be taken to enjoy God, and communion with him, and yet for feare of I know not what, scornes, mocks, losse of friends, or the like; they dare not be seene. It may be they will goe to Christ with Nichodemus in the night, for feare too many eyes observe them, and take notice of them in such un∣wounted paths, exercises which seeme to proclaime strictnesse and precisenesse. You see I am in haste, and ther∣fore cannot instance in particulars. Secondly, others by reason of cowardlinesse soone grow discouraged in sad and weighty undertakings, be∣cause they find the way to heaven craggy, the duties diffi∣cult, the services something hard; and because they have not expected successe on a suddaine; here upon their spi∣rits shrinke up; I have reference in this expression to the original word used to this very purpose, in Num. 21. 4. And the soul of the people was much discouraged, because of the way. Their spirits were shortned (as it is in the Hebrew) they run up by reason of distress, and al vigour gave in. As a Cra∣vant begins to looke pale through feare; his spirits fly to the heart, you shall see no blood in his face: O did he think to be mocked, and to be pursevanted? and did he expect to be imprisoned? and did he conceive to bee put on such a dead taske, and to worke himselfe downe in his strength, respects amongst men, and other outward comforts, and reape nothing but the wind. Much hath beene done, and much hath beene endured, many weeks, moneths, yeares, are run up, since hee expected a good crop, of increase and comfort: but hopes being frustrated, and expectations disappoynted; hee sits downe dejected: Because Refor∣mation is driven on heavily, things stick in the birth, therefore many are disheartned. Thirdly, those that under darke clouds and showres of sufferings lye grovelling on the ground, through disconso∣latenesse: He that faints in the evill day, his strength is smal,
Prov. 24. 10. There is mention of some, Ios. 2. 11. when the wind and tyde went against them; when the victory was carried on the other side, it is said, their hearts melted, there was no more courage in them: The melting of the wax is the severing of part from part: The confirming of the parts together, is the strength of it, the loosening of the parts weakens it: a mans soule runs out through fain∣ting feares, as water; whereas it should be confirmed, as a peice of steele. Christians should be magnanimous, and Fortitude will fortifie, and corroborate the soule. As the originall word suggests thus much, so the conjunction of strength, and valour in the holy Scriptures doth import it: Be strong and of good courage. Thinke of this, and take heed I pray you of dastardly dejectednesse, and dismaying feares, in sad, suffering times, because thereby both soule and body are much feebled, and much prejudiced. The second thing reproved, is wicked audaciousnesse: This branch of the reprehension is needfull, for certainely, there is in some men a kind of fire, that riseth out of hell, or rather some mettall, which is digged out of the bot∣tomlesse pit, which is called Courage, and so accouted in the world. My meaning is, that there is a devillish, wret∣ched resolutenesse in the bosomes of some to hold on in sinne; notwithstanding divine reprehensions, convictions, threatnings, and executions; which is as much opposite to true courage, as the greatest cowardliness in the world. I told you before, that true courage is for good, upon a Command from God. The Apostle checks the Corinthi∣ans, because they had so much boldness, as that they did dare to doe that which was offensive, viz. to goe to law one with another, and that before Infidels, you dare doe it saith he, you have so much boldness, 1 Cor. 6. & the Apostle Peter checks men, They are not afraid to speak evil of Digni∣ties.Psal. 12. 4. The Psalmist brings in bad men thus resolving, Our tongues are our own, and we wil speak, and who is Lord over us. Some there be, who though the Minister flash the very
fire of hell in their faces, discovering the danger of their evill courses; yet like unto the warre-horse, they will ad∣venture further, let the consequence prove what it may: yea, although God be on them in wayes of heavy afflicti∣on, with one rod after another, and one blow bigger then another, though his providence pinch them in their per∣sons, impoverish them in their estates, crush them in their credit; and it may be they suffer much in their yoak-fel∣lowes, Children and neere allies; yea, though the often recoyling of their consciences, cause earth-quakes in their owne bosomes, yet on they will still to doe wickedly. These are the men of whom the Prophet complaines, Who make their faces harder then the Rock, and refuse to re∣turne.Ier. 5. 3. Men of this make are common in every place, and their way of living is much to be bewayled: and now I am necessitated to speake unto them▪ because their stur∣dinesse in refusing to stoope unto God in reformation, is reputed courage. To crush these wretched conceits, I heartily wish that the Scriptures may be perused; where you shall find, that those who are commended for the most valiant Champions, and the stoutest souldiers in the Campe of Christ, that they were the most tiorous in matter of sinne, and most cau∣tious in references to God, that they might not in any kind offend His Majesty. David, that durst take a Lyon by the beard, and durst adventure upon a Duell, a single combat with Goliah, yet thus hee expresseth himselfe to God, My flesh trembleth for feare of thee, and I am afraid of thyPsal. 119. 120. judgements. And Nehomiah, who had many wayes wor∣thily expressed his magnanimity for God and his cause, yet no man was ever more awed with the feare of God. Hee perswaded himselfe, and others thereunto. Ought not wee to walke in the feare of God? And againe complayning ofNeh. 5 9. 15. the governours, who were his Predecestors, that they were usurious, and very injurious in their places; hee addeth but so, Did not I (I durst not) because of the feare
of the Lord my God. I am confident, that this position is full of truth, you may trust to it, as sound and orthodox: That there is no more Christian courage, then there is Chri∣stian feare in our hearts. There is no more true valour in Gods account, in conflicting with difficulties, and stout standing under heavy pressures, then there is a cautious, and timorous circumspection, lest sinne of any kind should be committed to the dishonour, and provocation of God. Shall I thinke that a man that will sweare, and roare, and curse, and pox, and plague (I should not have defiled my mouth with these words) shall I thinke that this man of Beliall hath Christian courage? Hee may have morall magnanimity, as an heathen, as a Romane, but he wants the courage of a Saint, that courage which my Text cals for. Beloved, I pray you beleeve it, (I speake as a Scrip∣ture man; and I speake to men that must labour to be men valiant, as becommeth Saints) hee tat rules his owne spirit,Prov. 16. 32. doth more then hee that overcomes a Citie. That man who takes downe his untamed lusts; and that man who bri∣dles the unruly member the tongue Hee who conquers the rebellious mutinies in his owne bosome, and who notwithstanding all avocasions, is carefull still to keepe close to God, this is the valiant man indeed, God him∣selfe, by Solomons pen, gives such a one his Letters testi∣moniall to be magnanimous. And for my part I will ad∣venter that which is dearest unto my selfe in this world, in the hands of this man, if in the hand of any, in regard of valour, and holy, hearty, heroick resolution. But I put off from this reproofe, wherein my zeale hath made mee bold, to speake my mind: For I had rather counsell then reprehend: and before I goe forward, I wish that my checks lighting on ungracious hearts may make kindly and deepe impressions on them, for their amendment. And God grant that you that come to prayse God, as becom∣meth Saints this day, may learne also hereafter to be valiant as it becommeth Saints, according to the directions of sa∣ced Scripture.
The last use, is an use of exhortation; (I feare, I have more to say then my time, and your occasions will suffer mee to deliver.) It is only this, to perswade you all (my beloved,) I say all, without exception, Colonels, Captaines, other Officers, Souldiers, yea all the Servants of the Lord, to yeild to the word of exhortation, and in your places to endeavour Christian courage; This use most usefull my heart desires to enlarge, wherein I faine would, 1. By Arguments perswade it, 2. By Directions helpe you in it. I have Arguments of two kinds, God grant they may come with some strength upon your hearts, to move you to endeavour to bee truly valorous. First, From the consideration of the rich commodities, that are the undoubted consequences of Religious forti∣tude. O the booties, ô the boones, ô the benefits, that Christians may enjoy in the way of Christian valour. I will point at 6. and I shall doe little more then point at them. First, It will wind, and worke you into the bosome, and favour of God; Be of good Courage, and hee shall strengthen thy heart. Put thou thy selfe forth in a way of bold adventure for him, and his providence shall bee sweetly exercised for thy good. A worthy Comman∣der how carefull is hee of a brave blade, a man that will fight at a Cannons mouth. Doth hee heare from him, that a bone is broken? Send for the Bone-setter. Is hee like to bleed to death? call for the Surgeon, let him post away to prevent that perill; Doth hee grow weaker and weaker? Is there any thing in the Campe, that may restore his Spi∣rits, withhold nothing; nothing is too good, too costly, would hee eate gold, hee should have it. Thus it is with God, O what letters of commendation doth hee give in manifestation of his owne love to them
in Pergamus, upon this very ground: Thou, saith the Lord,Rev. 2. 13. thou hast held forth my name, and not denyed it even in those daies, when Antipas my faithfull Martyr was slaine, even where Sathan dwelleth. Thou didst fight for CHRIST in the Cave, where the Devill commanded, thou didst stand and appeare for him, when other men did lose life, and bloud. Here is a man that God will owne, such a one, shall have Gods heart and hand to doe him honour, to yeild him comfort. And therefore I appeale to your con∣sciences, is not this Courage worth the having? worth the seeking? Secondly, Your Courage will hearten you in the weigh∣tiest and difficultest adventures, which the cause and glory of God, the welfaire of his Church, the honour of the King, the peace and prosperity of the Kingdome may put you upon. Hester was a woman, yet valiant. Must I to the King for my people; If I perish, I perish. I will take my life in my hand and adventure: Nehemih had a hard taske to undertake, truly a dead peice of service to set upon, yet notwithstanding being a couragious man, hee will hazard his All, to obey the command of his God, and to serve the necessities of his brethren. This is recorded for the ever∣lasting credit of some of the Servants of God, the Priests, 2 hron. 26. 17. 18. And Azariah the Priest went in after him and with him 4. score Priests of the Lord that were va∣liant men; and they withstood Vzziah the King, and said unto him, it pertaineth not unto thee Vzziah to burne incense to the Lord. Men of brave Noble Spirits will speake, whatsoever it cost them, upon a call from God, men of valour will ap∣peare according to Gods command in services sad, and heavy. Wee say, that a well metled horse, will take for∣ward, and draw at a standing tree, but that I shall speake of in the next. Thirdly, It will make us unwearied in our workes, though desired, and expected successe bee denied. You see
it some time; (My similitude is a plaine one, but beloved, it fully evidenceth the thing I speake to,) A Carre-horse of good mettall, will plucke, and fall on his knees, and up, and take forty pluckes at a sticking load, where∣as a Jade, if it come not at the first twitch, goes back, back, and you cannot get him forward. Iust thus is it with a Coward, if hee have not victory at the first skirmish, hee will hardly make a second assault; if hee bee knocked downe, once, twice, or thrice, hee gives up all as lost, and is ready to runne away; but a man of a stout Spirit in such a case, will pluckt up heart, fight againe, so long as hee can either stand or stirre. Thus Moses hee goes, the first, and second, and third, and tenth time to Pharoah, notwith∣standing brow-beatings, repulses, threatnings. Thus sath the Lord, let my people goe. That was his message, either it must bee granted, or hee will not cease his importunity. Israel hee comes for, and Israel hee will have with him, or else, hee will not leave Egypt. My beloved, let us bring this downe to our selves: Ma∣ny prayers wee have made, and many fasts wee have kept for Sion: and before our deliverance bee compleat, wee know not, how many plucks wee must yet have, and how many shall wee take to repaire the walles, and to reedifie the House of God, in case, God give us this mettall, which I am commending. Fourthly, Courage will bee a meanes to keepe us from conscience-wasting, and scandalous miscarriages. What had become (thinke you) of Shidrack Mesheck, and A∣bdnego? or what had become of Daniel, if they had not beene men of undaunted hearts? The one had given off doing his duty, presenting his indebted homage to his God, hee must not pray for the space of thirty dayes to his God. The other three must bow downe in way of Ido∣latry to an Idoll. But marke the Sparkling of their Spi∣rits; Bee it knowne unto thee ô King, wee know God can deliver us, but if hee will not, wee will not fall downe, nor worship that
Image which thou hast set up. They were by Courage kept out of the briers, and off the Rock, which might other∣wise have torne and broken them wofully. And Daniel was preserved from the neglect of his devotion to his God, by the same meanes. Fiftly, Believe it, that our Courage will daunt our Ad∣versaries, and drive them away; The Captaine of that black guard, (the Devill I meane) will give back, if stoutly with∣stood: Resist him, and hee will flee▪ stand to it and hee will runneIam. 4. 7. away. In like manner, will those, who march under his colours against Gods people. It is said expresly 1 Sam. 4. 5. 7. when the Philistines heard the Israelites shout, O say they their God is among them, wo unto us. Without doubt, the very valour of Protestants will bee the daun∣ting of the Papists. Let those who appeare for Reforma∣tion, maintaine their ground, and the enemies thereof, will bee discouraged, vanquished. Lastly, I might adde, that our Courage will incourage, I know not how many, One bold leader, will hearten hun∣dreds. O saith Paul, my bonds, and sufferings are famous, they are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places; and many of the Brethren by reason of my bonds Wax bold, and speake the word without feare, Phil. 1. 12. 13. 14. If you would know what word? It was the word of CHRIST, who was denyed, derided. Now to speake for a Christ when Paul is in prison, and in bolts, and fetters for the word of CHRIST, was an act of Man∣hood. And Pauls valour made them thus bold. The Cities Courage will make the Countrey couragious. This true valour that I speake for, may have influence I know not how farre, through the Kingdome in way of benefit, and advantage. Therefore looke you to it, Quit your selves like men, Be of good Courage. The second motive, is taken from the consideration of the sad consequences of cowardlinesse. First, A mans personall discredit, call a Souldier a cra∣vant,
and how doe you disgrace him? They would faine, (saith Nehemiah,) Put mee in feare, that they might have had somewhat to reproach mee; Nehem. 6. 13. A Captaine, and a Coward, what a shame is it? If you desire to maintaine your honour and reputation, in City and Countrey, hold up your hearts, Be men of valour. Secondly, This is another a sad consequence of coward∣linesse, it may tend to make us unprofitable, and unservicea∣ble in our places; I was afraid, and hid my talant, for IMatth. 25. 25 thought, thou wast a hard master. You know whose speech it was. When a man hath both oportunities and ailities to doe, God and the King, the Parliament and Kingdome, good service. God hath bestowed a good head-piece, much wisedome, an able body and healthfull, a strong arme, a vast estate, a great command; and yet notwithstanding, when the welfare of Church and Common-wealth, call him to make appearance, hee drawes back, dares not bee seene, all his talents are tied in a napkin, there is nothing traded for God, because hee is a Coward, and dares not looke out of dores. There will bee a heavy reckoning for that man, Take him, bind him hand and foote. Cowardlinesse makes men, though able, yet unprofitable, therefore take heed of it. Thirdly, The good causes, which men owne and fa∣vour, may receive a great deale of dammage, and prejudice by the pusillanimity, the poorenesse of the Spirits of them, that appeare therein. There was a notable piece of policy, in the endeavour of the rayling wretch Rabshecah, to af∣fright the ouldiers of Hezekih, 2 Chr. 32. 18. This they did, that they might make us afraid and take our City. Coward∣linesse ties a mans hands behind him, that hee can doe no∣thing in the World, hee cannot keepe his ranck, and place, hee neither knowes when to charge, or discharge; his hands quake, his eyes cannot see, hee cries where am I? and what must I doe? Thus all is lost, because of cowardli∣nesse, it is a mighty disadvantage to bee a dastard. Cer∣tainely,
a man under the power of dismaying, in feares is arse a man in the use of his intellectuals. Fourthly, What sad breaches cowardlinesse, may make upon us, both in regard of sinne, and judgements. I know not. The sad example of Saint Peter is here considerable, O what a wound did hee receive, by reason of his unwor∣thy fearefulnesse; It cost him deare before the cut was cu∣red. You know his threefold deniall of his Master, with the black aggravations thereof; O I know him not, I am not any of them, you are mistaken in mee, &c. But before that breach was, made up, it cost him hot water, He wept bitterly. Beloved, beloved, consider what I say, many a man doth that under the command of cowardlinesse, which is paine and anguish in his heart to his dying day. God is won∣derfully incensed, when men shrinke from him, because of difficulties and dangers, Feare not least I slay thee. Bee not dismayed at their faces (saith God to Jeremiah,) lest I con∣found thee before them, Ier. 1. 17. When God cals often, and cals loude upon men to take part with him, and yet they shrinke and draw back, believe it, the danger is not little. You know whose speech it is; If you will deny meeMarke 8. 38. before men, I will deny you before my Father, which is in hea∣ven. A valiant Captaine, when the field is fought, and the victory is got, bids, bring in that cravant, that milke-sop, who did runne away: Hisse him, turne him out of doores, as the shame of his Countrey; when Christ shall come and call, and say to some White-livered men, you were ashamed to appeare for the strict observation of the Lords∣day, and you would not bee seene to favour the Reforma∣tion, which by Englands Parliament, at such a time was endeavoured, and you would not labour to have the san∣ctuary swept from all pollutions, and you would bee at no cost, to have Christs-coine, bear his stamp alone, to have his ordinances pure without mixtures, but you would ra∣ther
Issachar-like, lye under burthens, then struggle for de∣liverance. You were afraid what might bee the issue of your boldnesse in such businesses, if the times should turn, and the tyde run another way, and matters change in such and such a manner. And hereupon you sneakingly left me, and my cause and glory in the open fields. Beloved, this will be an heavy hearing to the cowardly Apostate at the last day, when the fearefull, and the unbeleeving must be sent into the lake which burneth with fire & brim∣stone. Therefore I intreat you againe, and againe, to con∣siderRevel. 2. 8. well of this matter. Lastly, how farre cowardlinesse may tend to discourage others: I wish you to consider: I here remember, that when Israel of old, was to goe forth unto battaile, God commanded the officers to speake thus unto th people, What man is thre, that is fearefull, and faint hearted, lt him goe and returne unto his house, lest his brethrens hearts faint (or melt) as well as his heart. Gentlemen, God forbid that you who are come hither to day, to acknowledge your selves bound to God for your estates, lives, and liberties, & to have the word of truth, preached and pressed upon you for your soules good. God forbid (I say) that you who give good examples in many other kinds, should doe any thing which may tend to wea∣ken the spirits, and to dampe the courage of any, who shall enquire, what doe they in London? Having thus farre perswaded you, to pluck up your hearts, as it becommeth Saints: I now intreat you, to give me leave to counsell you, what course to take, that you may be couragious, and I promise to doe it, as with sincere reference to God, whose servant I am, so with unfained faithfulnesse to you whom I now serve. What shall wee doe, that wee may bee couragious? My directions are in number ten, I will not be long in any one of them, because I would not be tedious, I hum∣bly beg your best attention, desiring to speake to your
soules, and I beseech the Lord to speake to my heart, and yours. The first helpe to Christian courage (which makes way for all the rest) is this: Labour clearly from Scripture grounds to evidence your propriety in God. When David was utterly undone in outward appearance at Ziklag, being stript of all outward comforts, and expe∣cted that his brains should be beaten out with stones, (They talked of stoning him) David incouraged himselfe (hee con∣firmed1 Sam. 30. 6. and strengthened his heart) as the originall expres∣seth it, in the Lord his God: Is there not more in God, My beloved, I pray you put this question upon serious de∣bate in your owne bosomes, my God to hearten mee, then in mine enemies my greatest, my worst enemies to dismay mee? Take the improvement of this point in two parti∣culars. 1 Gods omnipotency? 2 Gods Omnipresence. Is there not more ability in God, then power in all the world, if combined together. Bee strong, and couragious,2 Chro. 32. 8▪ (saith Hezekiah) Be not afraid, nor dismayed, for the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude, that is with him, for there be more with us, then with him: with him is an arme of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to helpe us, and to fight our battailes, And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah, King of Iudah. At this time Senacherib had ray∣sed a very great Army, as holy History reports: And ray∣ling Rabshekah was confident, that Israels God could not deliver; yet you see, that this thought. The Lord our God to helpe us, did steele and strengthen their hearts. The knowledge of Dietie, and Proprietie, will increase magnanimity in a fearefull heart, what are huge armies, strong fortifications weapons of war, the strength, stout∣nesse, skill, or experience of common souldiers, or warlike Commanders against the Lord Almighty? look back to the history last mentioned, where we read, that one angel in one
night killed five thousand men in the host of the King of Assyri. By this example, guesse at the ability of yourIsa. 37. 36. God, having made sure your interest in him; and from thence gather courage. 2 As the ability, so the presence of God by the efficacyIosh 1. 9. of his all-ordering providence, may hearten all them, whose God hee is by speciall Covenant; Have not I com∣manded thee, be strong, and of a good courage, be not afrayd, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee whither soever thou goest. The Lord is with us, by the pre∣sence of his speciall favour, in all our good undertakings whethersoever wee goe. The Christian carries his com∣mander, his refuge, his Castle, his God along with him, whether hee keepe in the Citie, or goe forth into the coun∣trey; whether hee serve by land, or by sea, his God is still at hand. Assurance therefore, that the al-sufficient, al-pre∣present God is ours, will lay a good foundation for good courage: Those who adventure upon any service without God going along with them, may expect defeats; not∣withstanding all meanes of defence: and therefore no mrvell, if they tremble: But God taking part with his people, they may confidently from his presence expect de∣liverance. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, they had swallowed us up quicke &c. but blessed be the Lord,Psal. 1. 6. who hath not given us, as a prey to their teeth. God and his people make one side; and because their helpe standeth in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth; therefore they have aboundant cause to be o good courage. Secondly, make sure, that the cause you appeare in, is the cause of God. If a man marching to looke his enemies in the face, and being about to begin the battail, should feele the earth to shake under him, and the ground to sink, every foot hee set forward: O how would this daunt him, and how would his heart recoyle, and give in within him? O beloved, I beseech you, be you well confirmed in your owne hearts, that you doe serve for God. It is that
which was added to give Courage to them in Iehosaphats time, when they were surrounded, with Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, as if wee should say, with Den∣marke and France, and Papists at home. Well, saith the man of God, Hearken yee all Iudah, and yee Inhabitants of2 Chron. 20. 15. &c. Ierusalem, and thou King Iehosaphat; Thus saith the Lord unto you: Bee not afraid nor dsmad, by reson of the great multitude for the battaile is not yours but Gods. Beloved, hee that hath a ad conscience, and a bad cause, ever fights as a Coward, and is ready at every stroke to lay downe his weapons and runne away. A true man will stand to it, come who may come, for his cause is justifia∣ble, and hee may with boldnesse owne it; but theives, if they heare any noise, any whispering, they cry one to ano∣ther, let us hast and bee gone, for they know, their adven∣ture's unwarrantable. When a man thus thinkes with himselfe, being beset with dangers and difficulties, what if I should dye in this businesse? could I with confidence owne it, at the Barre of IESUS CHRIST? The incourage∣ment of his owne conscience, will much embolden him. But if a mans owne heart tell him; that adventuring and dying in a such cause, e shall sinck into Hell, because he opposeth the Commands and Government of IESUS CHRIST; the liberties, the comforts, the prayers of Gods people, how is it possible, that hee should play the man, and bee truly couragious? Thirdly, Consider seriously, the many weighty con∣sequences of the good cause, which from good grounds, you undertake to maintaine. Sit downe and sadly thinke what will the issue bee, if you desert your Protestation, whereby you bound your selves, to stand for the true Pro∣testant Religion, the honour of our King, the Priviledges of Parliament, the Lawes of the Land, and welfare of the Kingdome. Here it is notable, how the Philistines hearte∣ned one another, in the day of their deepe danger, 1 Sam. 4. 9. Be strong, quit your selves like men ô Philistins that
you bee not Servants to the Hebrewes; Quit your selves like men and sight; Either pluck up your hearts, and fight now, or bee slaves for ever; that is the argument. And I pray you, observe how Ioab pleads, When hee saw the battell before and behind. 2 Sam. 10. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our God. And that passage, Nehem. 4. 14. It is considerable, as either of the former; Bee not afraid remem∣ber the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your Brethn, for your Sons, for your Daughters, for your Wives, and for your Houses. Marke it, my beloved, and make application, what if the Papists should get the upper hand? What if the Par∣liament should bee dissolved? What if the malignant par∣ty should effect their mischievous desires? Oh how darke and dolefull, how black and bloudy, would our times prove, we are all, many wayes obliged to stand for the go∣vernment and worship of the Lord Christ: for the safety, and honour of our King, for the welfare of his three King∣domes, for the Priviledges of our Parliament, and for our rights by Law; All these are to bee prized at an exceeding high rate: our happinesse will bee great in the enjoying of them, and our misery not small, in the want of them. Eve∣ry man according to his Relations and engagements, should reason the case with himselfe. What adventures should I make, and what hazard should I runne, that my selfe may not bee enslaved, that my Wife may not bee abu∣sed, my Children massacred, and (which is above all,) that Christs holy Religion may not bee corrupted, and that Popery may not bee introduced and established in Eng∣land. Thus meditation upon the worth of the things to bee maintained, will bee a speciall meanes to quicken and to augment Courage. Fourthly, Keepe Christ your Captaine in your eye. For true valour, there never was, nor ever shall bee any like unto him. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, ô most mighty, with
thy glory and Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride prosperously, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things; Psalme 45. 3 4 How valiant a Champion was the Lord IESUS!Heb. 12. 2. Hee endured the Crosse, and despised the shame; Hee went on, though dogges did barke, and Lyons did roare, though men reproachfully reviled him, and the Devils endeavou∣red to devoure him; though the earth (as it were) did shake under his feete, and the Heavens were black and thundring over his head. Although when his professed enemies had conspired his death, Iudas did betray him, and his other Disciples did forsake him, yea although his God and Father did hide his face from him, when hee answe∣red Divine Iustice for our sinnes, yet hee shrunke not, hee drew not back, from the glorious worke underta∣ken. When outward dangers encompassed him, and the sorrowes of Hell tooke hold upon his Soule, though hee was apprehensive, and sensible of all, unto the utmost, and therefore both complained and prayed to his Father, yet was he not discouraged. Hee did not sound, when hee saw his own bloud, yea although his body was wet all over with a bloudy sweat, but he worthily did wade through the floud of his appointed passions. Consider him, consider him, (beloved,) that you may not faint in your minds; when a souldier sees his Cap∣taine content to take up with poore provisions and un∣daunted, though hee meet with hard services, harsh usages, sore affronts, hee thereupon growes the more resolute. For thus bee reasons within himselfe. My worthy Com∣mander, for his diet, takes up with a crust of course bread and a little water, hee hath not beene in bed these many nights, but still, either watcheth, or else, hee lies upon the ground, the cold ground no wayes, no weather discourages him, Winter, Summer, wet, or dry, scorching heate, the pinching frost, are alike unto him: Bullets, blowes wounds, bruises, broken bones, doe not cause him to sound a retreat, to give back, and shall I shrinke? Beloved, if
Christ had shrunke when Heaven frowned, and men de∣serted, and Devils opposed him, what had become of you, and mee? Is this Christ my Captaine? and hath hee Cap∣taine-like, Champion-like for mee both done and suffered thus worthily, thus incomparably, and shall not I put on Courage, and shew my selfe a man, a valiant man for him? I beseech you, consider this frequently and affectionate∣ly. Fiftly, I commend unto you, mutuall Christian com∣munion, as a speciall meanes of Christian Courage. In the Prophet Malachy his times, when wickednesse wasMal. 3. 16. growen to a great head, and the power of godlinesse was discountenanced in them, then those that feared God, spake often one to another. When Paul after shiprack, saw the brethren, who cameAct. 28. 15. to meete him, hee tooke Courage. And also, upon a strongAct. 18. 5. dispute with some who opposed Christ, when Silas and Timotheus were come, Paul was pressed in Spirit. God bee thanked for that unity and love which is amongst you, amongst you, the Aldermen and Commons of this City, unto whom the Militia is committed; God continue it, God knit your hearts together more fast, and firme from day to day: God give you when you meete to consider seriously what may heat, and hearten your Spirits in the way of Christian valour, according to that which this day I have preached, and according to that, which this day wee all need. Wee read in Isay 41. 6. of a Company of Idolaters, ani∣mating each other, in promoting Idoll worship. They helped every one his Neighbour, and every one sayd to his brother, Bee of good Courage. So the Carpenter encouraged the Gold smith, and hee that smootheth with the hammer, him that smiteth with the anvill, &c. Doubtlesse, at this day, those who envy our hopes, and oppose our peace, doe meete and hearten one another, both by words and actions. God forbid therefore, that wee
should bee more regardlesse of one another, having a bet∣ter cause, and more incouragements. Sixtly, set faith on worke in the promises of the Gos∣pell. The worthies in the primitive times, waxed va∣liant by meanes of faith; Hebr. 11. 34. You may doe well to informe your selves, what the Lord is pleased to speake in the word of truth for your comfort. By the bond of his owne rich unchangeable grace, he is become your deb∣tour to doe more then I can possibly expresse. Three things I thought to have spoken unto, under this dire∣ction. First, The promise of Gods assistance, Bee of good Cou∣rage, and hee will strengthen thine heart. The sweet Psalmist saw much sweetnesse in this, and therefore doth mention it, once and againe when the Soule saith, I am ready toPsal. 27. 14. fall downe, yet taking courage, to march forward, it shall renew strength, it shall receive an addition of new strength, Esa 40. 31. And that speech of Solomon, Prov. 10. 29. is very remarkeable. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright. They goe on and gather strength in going, they walke from strength to stregth, Psalm. 84. 7. Truly this is an heartening consideration. Secondly, The promise of good successe. Beloved, Christians maintaining the cause and minding the glory of God, are as sure of victory as if now they were singing the triumph, and going away as Conquerours. This is most certaine, for truth it selfe hath spoken it; In the WorldIoh. 16. 33. yee shall have affliction, bee of good cheere, or bee bold, I have overcome the World. The Devill hath his deaths wound, Corruption hath (as it were) the knife at the heart of it and the power of wicked men is broken, they are but sprun∣ting and striving for life. By this argument, the Lord heartened his servant Ioshua; Bee strong and of a good Courage, for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance, the land which I sware unto their Fathers to give them; Josh. 1. 6 As
though the Lord had thus spoken; although thou mayest fight many battailes, receive many foyles, loose many of thy souldiers, yet bee not dismayed, for certainely as a Conquerour, thou shalt bring the people to Canaan. Thirdly, Then the recompence assured upon all them, who stoutly stand to the cause of God, is more rich and large, then I can relate. To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit with mee in my Throne. And from this assurance,Rev. 3. 21. the Apostle Paul incourageth the Corinthians. Therefore my beloved Brethren, Bee yee stedfast, and unmoveable al∣wayes abounding in the worke of the Lord, for as much, as yee know that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. God1 Cor. 15 58. will requite all paines taken, all sorrowes suffered, and you that have lost houses, or land, or father, or mother, or wife, orMah. 19. 29. children, for Christ, and his cause, besides that inward peace, and tranquilitie and ioy, which an hundred fold exceed all sublunary contents, to bee enioyed here, you shall inherit hereafter everlasting life. And againe, feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer. Behold the Devill shall cast some of you into prison, &c. Be thou faithfull unto death, and I will give thee a Crowne of life. Feed on these promises, for Cordials flow from them to cheere your drooping hearts, and to strengthen courage. Seventhly in large your loue. If those hearts which now doe but drop love, might flow forth streames of love upon Gods cause, our Kings honour, and the Kingdomes welfare how wonderfully would our courage be increased. Both reason and religion, wil give in manifold strong arguments to augment our love to our Prince, our Parliament, our peace, our priviledges, our posterity: and doubtlesse our love and valour, will grow together. Love will adventure farre: Women are the more feeble, the more fearefull Sexe, and yet love in a tender mother will produce bold adventures to save the babe of her wombe. The timorous mother, who is wont to trem∣ble at the report of a Musket, will almost come to a Can∣nons
mouth to save her Child from being broken in pee∣ces: Love doth it. Have you not in the countrey sometimes seene an Ewe, in defence of her lambe, to turne head upon a mastive dog, and to stampe, although at other times, the barking of a little whelpe, will make a whole flocke of them to runne away. O, love doth it. And the poore Hen, shee will fly at the Kite to save her brood; Love doth it. O that you and I had this Love; Love to Zion, to the Gospel of peace, Love to Christ, and the pure ordinances of grace: Love will make brave and bold adventures. And as it will adventure farre, so it will endure much, and long. The Apostle saith, Charity beareth all things, endureth all things, Iacob though he had tedious dayes, and1 Cor. 13. 7. weary nights, a fore service under a sowre Vncle, a chur∣lish Master, yet he served seven yeares for Rachell, and they seemed unto him, but a few dayes, for the love hee had to herGen. 29. 20. Love is strong as death, many waters cannot quenh love, neither can the flouds drowne it; if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned.Cant. 8. 6. 7. What f one should come to a woman, and make this mo∣tion, be content that your child be torne in peices, and here is a thousand pounds for you. Her answer would be ready. Not for a thousand worlds: yea, shee would almost spit in his face, who should presse such a proposition, what rend my child in peices? There is nothing can conquer love: so it would be with us, in reference to Gods com∣mandements, the liberty of Gospel ordinances: No pro∣mises, no threats, no means, fayre, or fowle would take us off from appearing in the defence of them, if our hearts were more enflamed with love. Eightly, Walke exactly, keepe your consciences cleare. Notable is that direction of the Lord, Deut. 13. 8. Ye shal keep all the commandements which I command you this day, that you may be strong: Suppose a man, who hath a wound, or
an impostu mated swelling on his body, should goe into the Campe, if any touch him, hee skritcheth, and he cries, come not neare me, you know the reason, and the appli∣cation is familiar and easie to the point in hand, wounds in our consciences, will make us timerous and cowardly; but The Righteous is as bold as a lyon: He that walkes up∣rightly,Pro. 28. 1. walkes boldly: Take a man who hath no broken∣nesse, no boyles, no lanes, no bruises, handle him, shake him, crush him, crowde him, thrust him, cast him: not∣withstanding he can better beare all this rugged usage, then another can a fillip with the finger. I beseech you mind the application of this, for the Lords sake take heed, make not inroads, and breaches upon your consciences, goe not against your light, for guilt will make you cowardly. Adam as soone as hee had sinned he runs and puts his head in a bush, what was the matter? hee heard a whistling wind, and hee runs away: What hast thou sinned, faith God? I, that is the matter. For if Adam had kept his heart sound, if hee had not sinned, hee would with boldnesse have en∣countred with any approaches, either of the creatures, or his Creator. Ninthly, Improve your experiences. It would bee of singular use to us, to bestow many houres, both together, and asunder, in recounting the many great things which the Lord hath done for us, both in former times, & of later; we have nationall deliverances Citie deliverances, Family mercies & personal mercies to improve providence: Give me leave to cal to mind two most seasonable now to be re∣membred, considering the end of our assembling at this time: I am credibly informed that your selvs who are here to ho∣nour God for your health continued, peace maintained, lives lengthened, had that day when you were abroad, two no∣table experiences of Gods providence for your preserva∣tion; 1. There were muskets broken in the field; and yet nei∣ther the Muskettiers, nor any neare them received the least harme, although the throng of people was very great.
Might not some mens eyes, limbs, or lives have been lost, by such accidents; if the all-ordering hand of the Al∣mighty had not prevented such like dangers. The other passage of divine providence is more remarkeable. 2 Gods hand turned aside graciously, and strangely, a kindled match which was cast towards a basket full of Gunpowder, which stood in the field for that dayes ser∣vice. From what malicious heart, and by what mischie∣vous hand this match was cast, the Lord hee knoweth, whom we this day magnifie, as the God of our salvations. Beloved, the remembrance of such like providences, should incourage our adventures for the Lord, whose hand hath diverted many unseen, & unexpected dangers. But I had almost forgot to give in my proof, that the improve∣ment of experiences, increaseth courage. I pray you observe it in Ios. 10. 25. And I shua said unto them feare not, nor bee dismayed, be strong and of good courage; for thus shall the Lord doe to all your enemies, against whom yee sight. Our God hath many times disappointed the designes of our enemies: many of them who hated us, and endeavou∣red our undoing, and desolation, have beene discovered and brought to shame, the Lord hath trampled upon them gloriously. These meditations enlarged by particular preg∣nant instances, I commend unto you, as meanes to increase your courage. Lastly, when ever you have occasion to shew your cou∣rage, goe out selfe denyingly in the strength of your God, Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Ephes 6. 10. Through God we shall doe valiant y. Psal. 60 12. David was a man, as in other kinds, so in this imitable; when hee came against Goliah (who threatned to pluck him in pei∣ces, as a Faulkoner doth a bird) his words are very obser∣vable.1 Sam. 17. 45. Thou commest to me with a sword, and with a speare, and with a shield but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of host, the God of the Armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied. Let these be the breathing of your seules. Some trust in Cha∣riots, and some in horses, but wee will remember the name of
the Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen, but neare risen an stand upright. Save Lord, let the King heare us when we cll. Thus be carefull to make addition of prayer, unto all the other meanes of Christian courage. Pray heartily, selfe∣denyingly, and believingly. Advance God, and plead his promise; and expect assistance according to his promise. B of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all yee that hope in the Lord. FINIS. It is ordered by the Committee, of the House of Commons in Par∣liament concerning printing, that this Booke intituled, Good Courage discovered, and incoura∣red, be printed. Iohn White. 26. May, 1642.
