a600aa 99895440 152791
A DESCRIPTION AND EXPLANATION Of 268. Places in JERUSALEM And in the Suburbs thereof, as it flourished in the time of JESUS CHRIST. Answerable to each of the 268. Figures that are in its large, and most exact Description in the MAP; Shewing the several places of the Acts and Sufferings of Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles. As also of the Kings, Prophets, &c. Very useful for the more clear and fuller opening of very many places in the Prophets (as also in Josephus, and other Histories) especially in the GOSPELS, and the Acts of the Apostles. Translated by T.T. Reviewed, and in many places rectified according to the Holy SCRIPTƲRES, and some things further cleared: With Additions of many Scripture proofs: By H. Jessey. Imprimatur Joseph Caryl. London, Printed for R I. and P.S. and are to be sold by Tho. Brewster at the Three Bibles in Pauls Church-yard, near the West-end. 1653.
To the sincere lover of the peace of JERUSALEM, The Translator hereof wisheth increase of knowledge, and an improvement of that Talent here, to Gods glory, and perpetual felicity in the world to come. FOrasmuch as (Noble Reader) Jerusa∣lem,Act. 17.2. the City of our God, even upon his holy mountain the joy of the whole earth, and the City of the great King, that fair and most ancient City, by a special Prerogative is by God himselfe beautified above all other Cities, and was therefore the chief, most noble and famous City of the world: Many Travellers and Pilgrims, have at sundry times, both in Maps and Histories, described the same. By the advantage of whose labours therein, now of late years, one Christian Adrichom, [Anno 1585.] hath performed a most lively description, and in the Latine tongue, enriched with divers Antiquities. The profit that might come hereby to my Country-men of the vulgar sort, both for the better understanding of the story of the Bible, where Jerusalem, and the parts thereof are oftentimes mentioned, and also for the ready conceiving of Josephus his history, moved me to translate it into the English tongue: And the book thus translated, with the charts expressed in natural colours, I have presumed to present unto your view. And because
the Master-workman in this new plat of old decayed Jeru∣salem, hath left behind him some rubbish and relicks of the Romish superstition; I have in some measure purged and swept the streets and corners of the same, with the broom of truth, and carrying them out by the Scoure-gate, or Dung-gate, have laid them on the Leystall of oblivion [and as for some that do yet remain, here is now left a purgation, by addition of Annotations.] My pains herein taken, though not so great, as the laying of Jerusalems founda∣tion, or the raising of a chief corner stone, or the squaring and finishing any part of this exquisite plat: yet such it is, as even in the meanest degree of a poor labourer, that doth but sweep the streets, I beseech you to accept as a small mite of my good will. The which I gladly offer, to the end that amidst the burdens and snares of your worldly affairs, you beholding this most brave City, adorned with so glorious a Temple, and contemplating the Passion of our Saviour Christ therein, may be delighted and recreated: And fur∣ther, that viewing this terrestrial City, whose glory is now vanished, you may think still as the Apostle did say, Non habe∣mus hic manentem civitatem [We have not here an abiding City, Heb. 13.14.] and so aspire to that heaven∣ly Jerusalem, garnished, and full stored with all manner of delights, which abideth for ever; Wherein I do most humbly and heartily wish you a most happy residence, after you have performed your short course in this life, in the service of your God, and of your friends and Country, and the general benefit, and comfort of your own soule.
THE PREFACE. By the Author Chri. Andric. FOrsomuch as the truth of History, is the foundation of faith, and of spiritual un∣derstanding (Christian Reader) and the history of things done, blind,Hieron. Tom. 3. Epis. 27. ad Dard. and imper∣fect, without the knowledge of places, the which knowledge giveth much light, both to the truth of History, and also to the spirituall interpretation there∣of;The scope of this Book. therefore I have thought good to observe two things with great diligence in this work. First, that I might portray and set forth the true and lively Image of Jerusalem, of all other Cities the most glorious and famous throughout the whole world, whereof mention is made in sacred and in prophane histories, as it flourished in Christ his time; and also the forme of the Temple (the fame whereof hath been extolled above the heavens, and was worthy of eternal me∣mory) by the sacred Scriptures, by approved Writers, and by ancient tradition of faithful and trusty men, in a lively plot, or Map, most exquisitly drawn, together with the names, originals, situations, and forms of every place, and the most worthy Histories concerning the same, with all brevity. Secondly, that I might rightly dispose the places of Christ his Passion, and represent every thing which he suffered in every place, even as if they were now done before our eyes, and so represented, that I might explain it with plainness and brevity. For hereby all those things which he suffer∣ed
for our sakes, will be both more plainly understood, and also more profitably remembred. But peradventure there will be some which will mislike this our endea∣vour, and the rather because we have many things by tradition of Elders; to whom I answer out of Hierom, where he saith, That Ecclesiastical traditions, which are no hindrance to faith, are so to be kept, as they were delivered by the Ancients. In the mean time I will not say, that they are too rash, and too too wicked, which will de∣ny that thing,Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 28. ad Lcinium. which hath been godly received at all times, and of all men. So many of us therefore as are washed with the bloud of Christ, doe bear his name, and are called Christians, if our faith the answering to our name, and our life, not disagreeing from the truth, hoping to be saved by the merits and grace of Christ our Saviour, let us beleeve that, which incorrupt and reverend Antiquity hath left, let us in no wise depart from those things [which our Ancestors have celebrated without any superstition, &] wch by the consent of the whole world, are come even from them to our hands, and with thankfull godlinesse, and godly thankfulness, let us call to minde those places oftentimes, which may put us in remembrance of the Passion of Christ; to which places this Map will lead us, as it were by the hand; and with the eyes of faith, and of our minde, let us look upon the same Sonne of God, and inwardly behold him, who being urged with the great love of our salvation, having finished his last Supper in the Parlour of Sion,[The summe of Christs Passion.] and being come into the Garden of Olivet, prayed and swet blood, through the anguish and grievous consideration of the immi∣nent afflictions. Immediately he was betrayed by the most wicked Judas; he was taken, bound, and thrust
forward by the Jews, even as a Lamb by the Wolves, most cruelly amidst the noise of clamors and weapons, and then was lead to the house of Anna the high Priest; There he was stricken; from thence hee was drawn to the Pallace of Caiphas; in the same hee was falsely accused, condemned, spit upon, blindfolded, buffeted with fists, and sundry wayes all the night scorned and afflicted. In the morning he was violently carried through the midst of the City to the house of Pilate. From thence he was lead to the Pallace of Herod, and accused again, despised of him, mocked, and apparrelled like a fool in a white garment, and brought back again by another way of the City to Pilate. There again he was accused of many faults, stripped, and grievously whipped, cloathed with purple, crowned with thorns, diversly derided, spit upon, buf∣feted with fists, and stricken with a reed, and be∣ing thus misused, was made a gazing stock to the peo∣ple, and adjudged to death. Then he was loaden with a heavy Crosse, and in the sight of all the people, with grievous and bloody steps he was drawn, punched, and urged by the furious violence of the souldiers, through a great part of the City, and by the gate of Judge∣ment out of the City, by a hard and stony way, even unto mount Calvary. And being come thither he was stripped again, and being both faint and weary, was refreshed with gall instead of drinke; and about high∣noon he was fastened to the Crosse, and so lifted up on high; and hanging on the crosse by the space of three hours, was derided with taunts and reproachful words; being thirsty, they gave him vineger to drink. Finally, he which could save the world with one drop of his blood, would needs bestow upon us by the five rivers
of his wounds, his life, with all his blood. A figure hereof was that Brazen-serpent,Num. 21.3. Ioh. 3.14. which Moses caused to be exalted in the wilderness. To this spectacle also our heavenly Father calleth every faithful soul,Cant. 3.11. Come forth (saith he) ye daughters of Sion, and see King Solo∣mon; Nay one far greater then Solomon. In like manner Christ hanging on the Crosse cryeth out,Lam. of Ier. 1.12 O all ye which passe by the way, behold, and see, if there be any sorrow and grief like mine. And not only to the consideration and meditation of these things, but also to the imitation, God in the holy Scripture exhorteth us in these words (spiritually in∣terpreted) saying, Look, and make all things according to the example or fashion which was shewed thee in the Mount.Exod 25.40. Heb. 8.5. For all the precepts of life, which our Saviour taught all the time of his preaching,The best book is Chirsts pattern. as well by word, as by example, the same he expressed in himself in one day of his passion; wherefore if we would follow Christ, not only in word, but also in work; we may, by his lively crucifying on mount Calvary, as it were out of a gol∣den book,Latine, Greek, and Hebrew. Ioh. 19.20. intituled with the noble title of Three most principal languages, written with the quils of the spear, of the nails, of the thorns, and of the whips, in the most pure parchment of the Immaculate Lamb, and with the purple blood of the same, both learned and unlearned, learn easily and briefly perfect Theology, the most wholesome remedies of Physicke, the full knowledge of Law, and of Justice, the science of li∣beral Arts, of true humility, of obedience, of piety, of charity, of patience; finally of all manner of vertues, and of things most perfect; and may also be inflamed and drawn to love and follow Christ. Thus the bles∣sed Virgin, standing neer to the Cross of Christ, did
not onely with bodily eyes, but also in heart, through faith (which wavered not in her) behold the wounds of her Son, and seriously thinking thereon, was so comforted,Ambros. in Luc. cap. 23. Iohn 19. that now (as Ambrose saith) she was pre∣pared also to dye for the good of mankinde. So S. John both seeing the side of Christ opened with a spear, bloud with water coming forth of the same, and so giving testimony thereunto, did by the medi∣tation thereof so greatly profit,Luk. 23. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 13. ad Paulinum. Mar. 15. that at the last he be∣came a most perfect divine, and a soaring Eagle to be∣hold the most holy, and blessed God the Father in the Son. So the Theef, when he saw and heard Christ Jesus crucified, incontinently turned unto Christ, and con∣fessing him, he made the punishment of murder, Mar∣tyrdome, and changed the Cross for Paradise. So also the Centurion by this spectacle, received so great strength of faith, that under the Cross he was made a famous Confessor of Christ; and further (as Chry∣sostome saith) was afterward crowned with Martyrdome: Moreover Thomas beholding and touching the wounds of Christ crucified, was so illuminated with faith,Chrys. in Mat. c. 27. that he plainly and openly professed Christ,Iohn 30.27.2 to be both his Lord, and his God. This being so, and love procuring love, even as the Loadstone draweth Iron; who is he, I pray you, whom so vehement love of Christ, nay rather a heat and flame will not affect, kindle, and set on fire? Who is he, when at the death of Christ all creatures doe suffer with him, the Sun darkned,Mat. 27.45.5. the vail of the Temple rent in sunder, the earth quaking, Rockes break∣ing, graves opening, and the dead arising; Who, and what is hee (I say) that will not wonder, and that will not bee abashed? Onely Adams
children, for whose cause he dyed, are not moved with this so great a benefit. The Adamant, that most hard stone, is mollified with the blood of a Goat; Iron with the heat of fire is made soft;Heb. 8.10. but the hearts of Christians, more hard then Adamant or Iron, are not mollified with the blood and fire of Christ, but do crucifie a fresh unto themselves the Son of God, and do tread under their feet the bloud of the Testament. What I pray you can be more beseeming, more meet, more just, and more profitable for us, then to love again him that so loveth us; and imitate him whom we love? For if any thing herein seem hard, if any thing grievous, that thing, love (the sweet yoke of the Lord) maketh light and easie;1 Joh. 5.3. for all labour is light, to him that loveth, according to that notable sentence of that ancient Gregory,Greg. Epist. Nihil adeo grave est, quod non aequanimiter toleretur, si Christi passio ad memo∣riam reducatur. There is nothing so heavy and burthen∣some, but the same is willingly born, if so be the Pas∣sion of Christ be remembred. For we will indure all things with patience as light and easie,Heb. 12.2, 3▪ if we call to minde what hard words, harder stripes, and most hard pains and afflictions he suffered for us, whose head was crowned with thorns, his eyes blind-folded, his ears filled with reproaches, his mouth with gall and vineger, his face polluted with spitting, his cheeks bruised with buffeting, his knees shaking, his shoulders laden with the Cross, his heart replenish∣ed with sorrow, his body torn with whips, his mem∣bers racked, his hands and feet bored; to be briefe, from the crown of the head, to the soals of the foot, he sustained an innumerable sort of wounds and sor∣rows.
Wherefore as the waters of Mara, being some∣times bitter, were made sweet by Moses,Exod. 15.25. at what time he cast wood into them; even so all our tribulation, if we patiently indure the Crosse of Christ, will waxe sweet, and the gall thereof will turn into honey. For by the meditations of these afflictions of our Saviour, faith is illuminated, hope strengthned, charity infla∣med, and all vertue increased. Wherefore holy Au∣gustine, a light of the Church, no lesse truly then godly, provoking us by very forceable words thereunto; saith thus, Behold the wounds of him that hangeth,August. in lib. de virginitate the blood of him that dyeth, the price of the redeemer, the scars of him that riseth; His head boweth to kisse thee, his heart is opened to love thee, his armes stretched abroad to imbrace thee, his whole body set forth to redeem thee. Consider what, and how great these things be, weigh them in the ballance of your hearts, that hee may bee wholy fastened in your hearts, who for us was wholly fastened on the Crosse. Thus far Augustine. So that it is not enough to me∣ditate of these things once, but it is profitable to thinke upon them often; yea the oftner, the more they avail and profit. In the wholesome contemplation of whose Passion, although we profit much, yet we shall never attain to the perfect knowledge thereof, but there will remain still somewhat that we may seek for, the full knowledge whereof is reserved to our hea∣venly Country. In the mean time, let us contemplate in these things day and night; in these things let us recreate and busie our selves. In these let us watch, in these let us sleep, yea to dye in the meditation of these things, is most Christian, and available to everlasting salvation.
Places of holy Scripture to the praise of Jerusalem. [Psal. 48.2. Beautiful for scituation the joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion, in the sides of the North, it is the City of the great King.] Lam. 11.15. Is this the City of perfect beauty, the joy of the whole earth. Ezech. 5.5. This is Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the Nations and Countries, that are round about her. 2 Cor. 7.12. I have chosen this place for my selfe, to be a house of sacrifice. Isa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2. The Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Apoc. 21.9. I saw the holy City, New Jerusalem, come down from God out of Heaven prepared as a bride trim∣med for her husband. To these agreeth Tobit 13. v. 9, 10.18. O Jerusalem the holy City, many Nations, shall come from far to the name of the Lord God, with gifts in their hands, even gifts to the King of heaven; all Generations shall praise thee, and give signs of joy. Cursed are all they which hate thee, but blessed are they for ever which love thee. Rejoyce and be glad for the children of the just, for they shall be gathered, and shall blesse the Lord for the just. Blessed are they which love thee, for they shall rejoyce in thy peace. Blessed are they which have been sorrowful for all thy scourges; for they shall rejoyce for thee, when they shall see all thy glory, and shall rejoyce for ever. Let my soul blesse God the great King; for Jerusa∣lem shall be built up with Saphires and Emeraulds, and thy walls with precious stones, and thy Towers, and thy Bulwarks with pure gold. And the streets of Jerusalem shall bee paved with Beril, and Carbuncle, and stones of Ophir. And all her streets shall say, Hallelujah, and they shall praise him saying, Blessed be God which hath extolled it for ever.
SEVEN GENERAL RULES For Expounding Scriptures that speak of Christs coming, and King∣dom, and Judging, and of destroy∣ing Babylon; and of the calling of the Jews, and Israel. I. AS the Truth of God is fulfilled, both by the outward work, by which he appears in the World, and by the secret Mystery by which he reveals himself in, and to the Spirits of his Saints, (which two answer one another:) So in the Testimony of the Scripture, there is frequently, not onely the History in the Letter, but a Spiri∣tual Mystery in the sense thereof, as is clear in that of Hagar and Sarah, Gal. 4. And of the Rock and Manna, and of Mel∣chisedech, &c. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Heb. 7.1, 2. II. In all Scriptural Interpretations, the Analogy of Faith is to be respected, Rom. 12.5. That is, Undeniable principles of Truth clearly held out in other Scriptures, which have a special proportion to the place which is to be interpreted, ac∣cording to which, the sense thereof must needs be. III. And hence, as Christs coming and judging imply sometimes some special manifestation of him, and sometimes his personal coming at his Incarnation, or that second coming that shall be at the restoring of all things, (Heb. 9.28. Acts 3.19, 20, 21. with Rom. 11.26. and Isa. 59.29. So some of such Prophecies are appliable to both his comings, and to several times of his manifestation, Mal. 3.1, 2, 6. Matth. 16.20. with
Mark 9.1, 2. Joh. 6.18. Zach. 14.1, 4. Psal. 97.98, last verses. IV. As there is Babylon and Egypt Mystical▪ as well as Literal, (Revel. 17.4. & 11.8.) So some Prophesies (as Psal. 137. Jer. 50. & 51.) seem appliable to the sin and ruine of both those Babylons. V. As there are Jews and Israel, seed of Abraham, as well spiritual as natural, Rom. 2.3 last verses, Gal. 6.17. Rom 9.6. So some Prophesies of Israels sins, punishments, and merciful restorings, are applyable to both Zion and Jerusalem, Gal. 4. ult. Isa. 54. with Isa. 51.52. & 53 chapters. VI. As both of Natural and Spiritual Israel, there was a First-fruits to God in the Apostles days; and there is a Harvest that is to come (Rom. 11.16. Jam. 1.18. Revel. 14.4.) So some Prophesies of glorious Blessings are applyable to both times, and are fulfilled already to the First-fruits, in a less de∣gree, that are to be fulfilled at the Harvest plenteously, and very gloriously, Rom. 15.4. 2 Tim. 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. from Isa. 43.18, 19. with Revel. 21.1, 5. Jer. 31.31. with Heb. 8.8. and 1 Cor. 11.25. and Rom. 11.12, 15, 26, 27. Luke 1.31, 32. Hos. 3.4 5. Ezek. 37.24, 28. VII. All Holy Scriptures (and therefore all those Scrip∣tures that foretel the calling of the Jews, the fall of Babylon and Antichrist, and the comings of Christ) are inspired of God, and are profitable in all Ages, for Instruction, for Conviction, for Reformation, and for leading on in Righteousness, 2 Tim. 3.16. Rom. 15.4 1 Cor. 10.6, 11. A Preparation to a more full Explanation of the EmblemePage 4. of the Lyon Couchant, over the Earths Globe, under Two Crowns, become one, &c. By Seven Propositions. 1. ALL the Posterity of Jacobs Twelve Sons, are often cal∣led Israel:2 Sam. 5.5. 1 King. 11.26, 42. The Judges, Saul, David, and Solomon, ruled over all; they then being but one Kingdom.
2. Under Rehoboam, Solomons Son,1 Kings 12.20 2 Chro. 13.4, 15. Isa. 7.1, 9. Hos. 5.13, 14. & 6.4. & 7.1, 8, 11. Ten Tribes rent from him under Jeroboam (who was of Ephraim, which was the greatest of the Ten Tribes.) Thus the Kings that succeeded Jeroboam were called Kings of Israel, and reigned (for most part) in Samaria, and that people are oft called Ephraim, from the principal Tribe: The successors of Davids seed, were called Kings of Judah, and they reigned in Jerusalem. 3. Before Ezekiels prophesie, Israel were carried captive by the Assyrians, into Assyria, and Media, and other Eastern Countreys, 2 Kings 17.6. with Ezek 1.2. & 40.1. 4. In Ezekiels days, Judah was captived by the Chaldeans, or Babylonians, for seventy yeers, Jer. 25.11. and then returned from their captivity, Dan. 9.1, 23, 24. Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. 5. Babylon being vanquished by Medes and Persians, and these by the Grecians under Alexander (whose Kingdom was divided amongst his four Grand Captains, of which, the South and North obtained all at the last) The Grecians were van∣quished by the Romans above forty yeers before Christs Nati∣vity. 6. Hence after the Jews returned from the captivity of Baby∣lon,Dan. 2.32, 33, 38. to 46. (that Head of Gold, in Daniels Image;) they remained (as in captivity) under the Medes and Persians, (the Brest and Arms of Silver.) Nehe. 9.32, 36, 37. And then under the Grecians (that Belly and Thighs of Brass;) and lastly, under the Romans, [those Legs of Iron (the Eastern and Western Empires,) and Feet of Iron and Clay,] which end in Ten Toes, so in Ten Kings, Revel. 17.12, 13. 7. Under this last (and longest) captivity, they are (and so they account of it) still, unto this day. From this Fourth Monar∣chy that captived them, they shall shortly be restored by Jesus the Messias, who will destroy all their enemies, and will set up the Fift Monarchy, that is held forth in the Embleme, which shall never be destroyed; but it shall break in pieces and con∣sume all these Kingdoms, and it (as a Mountain) shall stand for ever, Dan. 2.34, 45.
The Explanation it self, according to the Letters A B C D E F G H I that are in the Embleme at the top of the Map of Jerusalem. TWo Sticks;A B (A) for Judah; (B) for Israel; These two Kingdoms,C (C) shall become one Kingdom under Christ,Ezek. 37.15, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22. as in Ezek. 37.15, 16, 17. The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, Take thee one stick, and write upon it;A For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions.B Then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph the stick of Ephraim (Josephs son) and for all the house of Israel his companions.C And joyn them one to another into one stick, and they shall become one in thine hand. Vers. 19. I will put Israels stick with the stick of Judah, they shall be one in mine hand. Vers. 21. And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the Heathen whether they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own Land. And I will make them one Nation in the Land; and they shall not be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all: Vers. 23. Nor shall they defile themselves any more with Idols. Vers. 24: And David my servant shall be King over them, and they shall all have one Shepherd. Vers. 25. For ever. This is meant of the Reign of Christ, who is called The Lyon of the Tribe of Judah,D the Root of David, (Revel. 5.5.) Of whom Jacob foretold; saying, Judah is a Lyons whelp; he couched as a Lyon, and as an old Lyon; who shall rouse him up? Gen 49.9. He is called a Rod out of the stem of Jessei,E and a Branch growing out of his root, Isa. 11.1. Also a Star out of Jacob,F and a Scepter that should rise out Of Israel;G who shall smite thorow the corners of Moab (typing
Antichrist) and shall unwal all the children of Sheth, (that is, All Nations; For all came of Noah, and he of Adam, Sheth,H Aenosh, &c.) Numb. 24.17. He shall strike thorow Kings: He shall wound the head over many Countreys (Antichrist.) Psal. 110.5, 6. Revel. 19.15, 20. He shall break in pieces the Oppressor. All Kings shall worship him, all Nations shall serve him; Men shall be blessed in him. Psal. 72.4, 11, 17. Yea all Nations, all the Families of the Earth, even to the ends of the Earth, shall be blessed in him, and shall call him blessed. Gen 22 18. & 28.14. Acts 3.25. Psal. 2.8. & 67.47. All, that is, The generality of those that survive, after the great slaughters that shall be in the Earth; many of each of those se∣venty Families of Noah, that became of seventy Languages, Gen. 10.1, 5, 31. & 11.1, 9. Zach. 13.8, 9. Psal. 46.8, 9. Mal. 4.1, 2, 3. Zeph. 3.8. Isa. 24.3, 18, 21. & 26.21. & 27.1, 7. & 34.6. Then shall all worship the Lord, with one consent, Zeph. 3.9. Then swords shall be turned into plough∣shares, and wars shall all cease, Micah 4 3. Isa. 2 4. Psal. 46.9. Then Jerusalem shall have peace, and be the praise of the Earth, Psal. 128.5. Isa. 62.7. And both it, and all Cities shall be with∣out walls, Ezek. 38.11. Num. 24.17. Then the great Dragon, the old Serpent, called the Devil,H and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world, shall be bruised under the feet of his people, and shall be cast out, Rom. 16.20. (Revel. 12.9.) That he may deceive the Nations no more, till a thousand yeers shall be fulfilled; and after that, he must be loosed a little season, Revel. 20.1, 2, 3. And the Martyrs, or Witnesses of Christ against Antichristianism, being raised, shall reign with Christ those thousand yeers. But the rest of the dead live not again, until those thousand yeers shall be finished, that is, the first Resurrection. Blessed and holy are all such unto days of eternity, Rev 4.5, 6. See that place. The Spirit, and the Bride say, Come; and let him that heareth say, Come. He that testifieth these things, saith, Surely, I come quickly; Amen, Even so, come Lord Jesus.
An Explanation of the Authors names that are abbre∣viated in the Margent of this Book; for help to the weak. Breid. Julii 12. Breidenbach, on July 12. Broc. Itin. Brocard his Iti∣nerary or Jour∣nal. Euseb. Eccles. hist. Eusebius Eccle∣siast. History. Jerom. Tom 1. Jerom, Tome 1. Jacob. Vitr. Jacob us Vitriac. Pas. Die 197. Pasch on 197 day, &c. Saligniac, Tome 6, &c. Salig. Tom. 6. &c. Will. Tyrens 8th Book of the Holy War. Will. Tyr. lib. 8. Bel. Sac. Joseph▪ 15 Book of Antiquities, 14 Chapter, and of the Jews Wars, 6 Book, 6 Chap. &c. Joseph. 15 Ant: 14.6. Bel. 6. The other Abbreviations are more easie; of which, and of all these, you may see more fully at the end of the Book, after Number 268, at Sect. 10. Sect. 6. & 23. Sect. 4. & 14, 15, 16, &c. The Reasons why some Traditions of Reliques are forborn in the Translation; and why some are published. IT is to be granted, that this Breidenbach, Brocard, Pasch, Saligniac, (as also Tyren) were Roman Catho∣licks, and that they desired the promoting of their Religion; a great part whereof, is, in visiting of Saints Reliques; and they received from their An∣cestors many Traditions, which they respect and up∣hold as much, as, yea, more then the Word of God it self. Hence several such Passages that were in the Latin, are left out by the Translator; as that of Veronica's Neckerchere,Or Section 42. of the Book. Numb. 42 and of Pelagia's House: So also this about Helen's finding the Cross, by the wonder∣ful smell or odor of the Spices and Oyntments, which the Earth sent forth: By which miracle, that venerable
Empress was confirmed, say those Popish Authors (in Number 240.) Which argues. That the Women an∣ointed Christs Body with that precious Ointment or Odors upon the Cross: For that anointing of Christs feet, was six or seven days before Christs death, Joh. 12.1, 2. Whereas the Scriptures shew most plainly, That the Women bought not those Spices for Ointments and Odors to Christs Body, until Christ was taken from the Cross, and buried: Which Odors they brought, not to the empty Cross, but to the Garden where Christ was buried, some way distant from the Cross; and there they would have anointed him, but did not, because Christ was risen before they came, Luke 23.53, 56. & 24.1. Matth. 27.57. & 28.1, 2. Mark 16.1, 2, 6. Hence the Translator forbears this, and divers of such vain Traditions, as tend to make the Word of God of none effect (Matth. 15.6, 9.) some of them remain, that the Reader may know, in what place the Relick∣mongers will shew such and such things, which never were there; as the Note added from Holy Scriptures, makes evident. Which Note being observed in love to the truth, may tend to prevent that dreadful doom of the damnable deceivers and deceived, denounced in 2 Thes. 2.10, 12. With all deceivableness of unrighte∣ousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. I could name one whom I knew, noted for miserable cove∣tousness, when in sickness he prevailed not to be ab∣solved by a Minister, was prevailed with by a Priest
that (it Ieems) absolved him, to visit Saint Anne of Buxtons Well; which he did, and returned a con∣firmed Papist, by this lying strong delusion; which he (poor wretch) believed, viz. That he was shewed, and saw the very Well it self, into which Saint Annes head fell, being cut off by a villain that would have abused ber. Her Brother hearing of it, came after Mass was ended, took his sisters head, and put it right upon her neck and presently she revived. I saw the Well it self, where this was done, said he. This warning is premised, That by being forewarn∣ed, thou maist be fore-armed against the poyson of such Basilisks, and maist tread such Serpents under thy feet. Remembring 2 Thes. 2.10. Many things are here truly recorded from Holy Scriptures, and Josephus, and Jerom, and others, cited by those men. But can any good come out of Galilee; or shall we receive truth from Papists? Answ. Truth is more precious then Silver, or Gold, or Rubies. Can you be content to take up Silver, or Gold, or precious Pearls, though you espie then on a Dunghil, or in the Kennel? Then disdain not to own Truth, which is far more excellent, wheresoever you can espie it: Onely look up to the God of all grace, who hath given us his own Son, to be our Way, Truth, and Life; that he would reveal his Son to us, and in us; that by him we may savingly know, and love the truth, as it is in Jesus; and may by his light, discern and abhor every false way. Try all things (that are held out for truths) hold fast that which is good; (as the noble Bereans did, to their souls everlasting benefit, Acts 17.11.) and abstain from all appearance of evil. And the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly, 1 Thes. 5.21, 22, 23. This is the humble request of Thy souls wel-wishing Friend, H. Jessey.
T. N. To the Christian loving Reader, of the Use and Benefit of this Pithy Treatise. THat Stately place, that Princely bowre, that Seat of mighty King:Psal 48.2. Iosh. 18.28. That flower of Be njamin his Tribe, whose fame through World did ring. Ennobled with such Royal stiles, and titles of renown; And over worldly Cities all most meet to wear the Crown, Lo, here presented is to view in such good currant sort, As no Pen heretofore perform'd, or made thereof report. So that we need not now to run, or gad from place to place, In dangers great, through Countreys strange, to try or know this case. That brave estate which earst it had, is now (alas) defac'd. King Davids house,1 Chro. 11.4, 7 and Temple now is quite and clean disgrac'd. Yet here with Book and Map in hand, we now may plain behold The state of each thing as it was, in times that were of old. Where Christ did preach, where Christ did sup, where Christ did fast and pray, Where Christ was caught where Christ was whipt, where thieves did him betray.Matth. 26.27. Where he a precious ransom paid for man, who had offended;
Where he was Buried, where he Rose, and eke where he Ascended; Where Annas kept his pompous Court, where Caiph as Pallace stood; Where wicked Pilate dwelt, that did condemn most guiltless blood. This and much more is here discourst from some, that both had read, And seen with eye, the City rare, that's here deciphered. This work and pains, as they deserve, much thanks and hearty praife. So such their Guerdon well may reap, of all men in these days. Who like to Candles waste themselves, in giving light to others: Moe such, God grant to take like care, to help their Christian Brothers.
A brief Description and Explanation of Two hundred sixty and eight places of Jerusalem, and the Suburbs thereof, as it flourished in the time of CHRIST. Answerable to the same Figures that are Engraven in the Map thereof. I. Erusalem, the choice City of God,The Original places from whence this Commentary is taken, and where more is to be read. Psalm 48.2. & 87.1, 2, 3. Matth 4.5. Psal. 74.27. holy and most glorious, built upon the holy Mountains, excelling all the Cities of the World; as well by the loftiness of the Seat, as by the moderation and tempera∣ture of the Heavens, and fruitfulness of Soil, was situated in the midst of the whole World, and of Judea, as it were in the very Centre and Heart of the Earth; and being as a Queen amongst all other Neighbor Cities, had the preheminence as the Head over the Body,Ezek. 5.5. and shined as the Sun above others in sumptuous and glorious Buildings: Having such surpassing ex∣cellency,
she was by a certain singular priviledge in time past,Joseph. Lib. 3. de Bello Iu∣daico. cap. 2. Deut. 16.17. Psal. 48.2. Lam. 2.5. the onely place which God had chosen to himself; and was a figure not onely of every faithful mans soul, but also of the Elect Church of Christ Militant upon Earth, and of that blessed Triumphant Church in Heaven. A City of perfect Beauty, the Virgin of the World, the Paragon of all the East, and the joy and rejoycing of the whole Earth. This City was builded (as some judge) about the year from the Creation of the World, Two thousand twenty and three, in the time of Abraham,Gen 14.18. Joseph. 7. An∣tiq. Iud. cap 7. & l. 7. Belli Iud. c. 18, 28. Gen. 10. Iosh. 15.8. Judg. 1.19. 2 Sam. 5.5. 1 Chron. 11.4, 7. by Melchisedec the King: In Hebrew it was called Salem, and in Greek Solyma; and it seemeth, that he possessed the same Fifty years. The which afterwards the Jebusites enjoyed, who sprang from Jebusi, the Son of Canaan; of whom it was called for a time Jebus, and Jebu∣saeum, at what time Joshua slew the King thereof. And the Jebusites held the same, Eight hundred twenty and four years, who trusted so much to the strength of their City, that when King David assailed the same, in contemp tof him, and of his Army, they placed upon their Walls, the blinde, the halt, and the maim∣ed, saying, That these were sufficient to beat back the Enemy. But when David, through Gods help, enjoyed the City; the Jebusites being expulsed,Joseph. l. 7. An∣tiq. cap. 3. Jerom. Tom. 3. de loc. Hebr. lit. i. Euseb. Evang Praep. l. 9. 1 King. 3.5, 6, 9, 10, &c. See Number CXXIV. Joseph. lib. 8. Antiq. cap. 2. & 5. he re-edified the same round, fortified it with a Castle, dwelt therein, and made it the Metropolitan City of the whole Province of Judea, and the Head of all the Kingdom; and from thenceforth, called it Jerusalem, as it were, Jebussalem the letter B (to make the better sound) turned into R. [Or rather from Jireh and Salem, Gen. 18.2, 14. with 2 Chro. 3.1.] Notwithstanding, there are some which write, That it is called Jerusalem, of the magnificent Temple which Solomon built therein, as it were, Hieron Solomonis. For the Greeks call a Temple , Hieron. In continuance of time, Solomon and other Kings of Judea, greatly enlarged the same, and so fortified it with most strong Gates, Towers, Walls, and Trenches, and so adorned it with a Temple, with Pallaces, and with most exquisit Buildings; that among other Cities, it was a miracle of the whole World, and is therefore more honored with silence, then with all that can be said concerning the same. It stood in the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18.28. Some borders of it were in
Judah, Josh. 15.8. In this glory and excellency, Jerusalem flourished Four hundred seventy and seven years,Ioseph. con. Appion. lib. 1. Strabo Geo∣graph. l. 16. as if it had been an Earthly Paradise, being in compass round about, Six miles and two hundred and fifty paces. And by the Wall and circuit of the City, there was a Stony Trench or Vault Threescore foot deep, and in bredth Two hundred and fifty, wherein was abiding about One hundred and fifty thousand men. But when the wickedness of the Princes and People, not onely had profaned the Temple,2 Kings 16.21, 24, 25. 2 Chro. 28.33, 36. with the abominations of Idols, but also had filled the City even to the full with innocent blood, most cruelly shed; the City together with the Temple, Princes, and people by the just ven∣geance of God, was by Nabuchodonozer,Micah 3. Jere. 25.26, 29, & 52. King of Babylon (but Gods whip) so utterly overthrown, and desolated Threescore and ten years, that Sion was ploughed up like a field, and Jeru∣salem was become as a heap of stones, and the Mountain of the Temple, as it were the height and top of Woods; so as in the mean time (as Jerom witnesseth) that neither so much as a Bird,Hier. Tom. 3. Trad. Heb. in 2 Chro. 15. nor a Beast, could flie, or pass through the same. Afterwards the Temple onely being with much a do, and very hardly builded, wanting Gates, Towers, and Walls, was in∣habited again by the Jews (returning out of the captivity of Ba∣bylon) Threescore years. Moreover, within the space of Two and fifty days,Esdr. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Nehe. 1.2, 3, 4.5, 6, 7, &c. 1 Mac. 12.13. & 14. Ioseph. 6. Bel. 6. Ioseph. 1. Bel. 13. &c. Nehe∣miah inclosed it in compass Three miles and seven hundred and fifty paces, with Gates, Towers, and a strong Wall; and after∣ward, the same being beautified by the Maccabees, by Herod, and by others very stately, with publick and private Buildings, recovered the former dignity, being very famous and populous by the space of Five hundred four and twenty years; having in it many narrow Streets, by reason of the exceeding number of Houses therein: At what time there, as in a Theatre, Jesus Christ wrought our Salvation; and from thence,Isa. 2.4. Micah 4. Acts 2.1. Mark 16. Psal. 18. Ioseph. 6. Bel. 13. & 7. Bel. 14.17. & 18. as from a Cen∣ter, the Apostles spread forth the Evangelical Doctrine through∣out the World. But Titus, Emperor of Rome, being brought by the just judgement of God, to take vengeance for the death of Christ, the Thirty and eighth year after his Passion, besieged it round, casting a bank about it; and shut up the Jews in the City, as in a
prison, which came out of every Tribe to celebrate the Feast of Passover there. Whereupon that City, the wonder of the World, was made a Den of theeves, and a Sepulchre of dead men: For by reason of civil murders, famine, pestilence, and sword, there perished in the same Eleven hundred thousand Jews. And as for the City it self, Titus did so utterly subvert it, that men which came unto it, would scarce believe that ever it had been inhabited. Nevertheless, he left three principal Herodian Towers, that is to say, Hippic, Mariam, and Phasel, which were more notable then the rest, as well for greatness, as for beauty; and that part of the Cities Wall, which compassed them from the West, un∣shaken; to the end, that both it might be a Castle for the Roman Souldiers, which should be left there for a Garrison, and also to shew unto posterity what manner of City,Luke 19.41. Euseb. in Chro. & Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 6. and how well forti∣fied, the force of the Romans had subdued. But after threescore and five years, the Jews rebelling again, Aelius Adrianus the Emperor slew many thousands of them, and utterly subverted those Towers, with the remainder of the VVall, and commanded the City to be strewed with Salt;Hier. in loc. Act. Apost. lib. H. Niceph. 3. Hist. Eccles. 14. Broca. in De∣scrip. locorum terrae sanctae, itinere. 6. whereby it came to pass ac∣cording to the prophesie of Christ, That there was not left one stone of the City upon a stone. And building the City again in less compass, he excluded Mount Sion, with the Palace of So∣lomon, and that of the Queen, and the House of the Forest of Libanus; also the Gate of the North corner, and the Tents of the Assyrians; and all the North part, even to the Dung Gate, and to the Gate of Ephraim: But the Mount of Calvary, and the Sepulchre of the Lord, which were aforetime without the Walls, he inclosed with the North Walls of the City; and set the Picture of a Sowe cut in Marble upon the forefront of that Gate, by which men go to Bethleem; thereby giving to under∣stand, That the Jews subject to that Law of Swines flesh, were under the power of the Romans;Will. Tyr. Hist. Bel. Sacri. lib. 4. c. 12. Iob. Vitriac. .55. whom by an Edict he forbad never more to enter into that City, or look into the same from the top of any higher place, and from thenceforth commanded it to be called Aelia Capitolia, after his own name. But after this, being inhabited of the Christians, and dignified with a Patriarchal Seat, receiving again in continuance of time, the name of Jerusa∣lem, flourished five hundred years in Christian Religion.
And in the year after the Birth of Christ,Onuphr. in Chro. Eccles. Six hundred thirty and six, it was taken by the Saracens which reigned in Egypt, and so possessed Four hundred threescore and three years. After this, in the year of Christ One thousand ninety and nine,Wilbelm. Tyri Arch. Hist. Bel. Sacri. l. 8. c. 5, 18, 19, 20, 21. & l. 9. c. 1, 2, 9. the City Jerusalem was recovered by the Christians, having for their Captain Godfrey of Bullion, who was the first that entred upon the Wall of the City with great courage and most fierce assault, the Ides of July, the very same day and hour whereinSo I the Au∣thor try this. Christ died. And so great slaughter was made, throughout all the Streets, Lanes, and corners of the City, that no man could pass but over the dead bodies of the slain: And so exceeding was the effusion of blood,Iacob. de Vitri∣ac. c. 20. B. Salig. in E∣pist. ad Joan. a Lotharing, Cardin. that men went over their shooes in the blood of the dead; insomuch, That the Conquerors themselves were from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, imbrued with blood. Who when they enjoyed the City, putting off their Ar∣mor, and cleansing themselves from their blood, visited the places of Christs Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension (which the faith∣ful that dwelt in Jerusalem shewed unto them) and beheld them with reverence. The eight day after, with one consent, they elect∣ed Duke Godfrey, and created him the King of Jerusalem; but the man being full of godliness and humility, would not be crowned with a Crown of Gold, after the manner of Kings, in the holy City; but contented himself, and reverenced the like Crown of Thorns, with the which, the Emperor of Mankinde was crowned in the same place, when he went to be Crucified for our Salvation. Jerusalem therefore being recovered by the Christians,Bas. Hero. Bel. Sacri. cont. l. 1. c. 7. & l. 6. c. 10. was so held and enjoyed by them Fourscore and eight years: Afterward, namely in the year One thousand one hundred eighty and seven, the second day of October, the Christian Princes (wo and alas) disagreeing among themselves,Matth. Palme∣rius in Chron. Jerusalem was delivered up to Saladine the Soldan of Egypt, upon this condition, That it should be lawful for the Christians to depart with bag and bag∣gage; the which Saladine held it Three hundred and thirty years. But in the year of our Lord,Mossaeus in Chron. One thousand-five hundred and seventeen, it was invaded by Selimo, the Emperor of Turks, and is at this day in the same compass of Walls possessed by the Turks; who name it Cusumobarech or Codsbarich,Onuphr. in Chron. that is to
say, A Holy City. So that from the first Foundation thereof, un∣to this present year One thousand five hundred ninety and four, are passed Three thousand five hundred thirty and one years. The places within the City. The first part of the City. II. MOunt Sion,Psal. 2.6. & 15.1. Joel 2.15. & 3.17. Ioseph. 6. Bell. 6. & 15. An∣tiq. 14. Niceph. 8. Hist. Eccles. 30. Brocard. Itiner. 6. which is called The Mount of the Lord, and the Holy Mountain, is much more higher then other Mountains, and larger; after the fashion of a Theatre, in the form of a half Circle, compassing the City on the South part: And being set as a Looking-Glass on a high place, founded by God upon a firm Rock, on every side broken off, had a Plainness thereon like to a Town; and being very pleasant and recreative, it represented the excellency and delights of Heaven. Whose top the Jebusites first of all fortified with a strong Castle, and the compass thereof with firm and lofty Walls, with Gates, and with Towers:Salig. Tom. 6. cap. 6. Isa. 14. & 20. Whom when David the King had expulsed, he made the Castle and the Walls round about, the Gates and the Towers, much more defensible, and made the top and plainness of the Hill,Bas. Hero. Bel. Sacri. conin. lib. 1. cap. 8. 2 Sam. 5.6, 7. 1 Chro. 11▪ 5, 7. & 15.1. into Streets and Lanes; and builded there for him∣self, for his Nobles and Worthies, Houses, and called it The City of David; which also Josephus calleth The Higher City, and The Holy Part. The Maccabees reedifying the same Mountain in compass, made it most strong with many Walls, and lofty Towers, in such wise, as notwithstanding any force, it was invin∣sible, onely by Famine it might be surprized: Where were many straight and narrow passages, and many houses of Citizens placed. From this Mountain,Psal. 48.2. & 87.1, 2. Ioseph. 6. Bel. 6. & 1. Bel. 1. 1 Mac. 4. Ioseph. Bel. 15. & 16. according to the foretelling of the Pro∣phets, a Law, and an Evangelical Light came forth, and as it were from the Head it self, it was spred forth into the whole Body of the World for the saving health of all Nations. The which, when the Romans by the judgement and will of God, against all hope of man, and without blood-shed had taken (the seditious within the City, being stricken with a sudden fear, and roaming
here and there from the wall, and hiding themselves in their sinkes) being dispersed in all corners and streets with their naked swords, slew all that they met with all, having no regard of per∣sons or sex, and set fire on the houses, burning them,Actor. 13. Ioseph. 7. & Bel. 16. and all those that were fled into them, and destroying many houses whereinto they entred for pillage sake, where finding whole families dead (whom the famine had consumed) they so abhorred the sight thereof that they returned back again empty, running thorough with their swords all that they met, and so filling the streets with dead bodies, that the whole City flowed with blood in such abundance, that (as Josephus witnesseth) many things burn∣ing, were quenched with the plentiful blood of the slaine. But night coming on the slaughter began to cease, but the burning increased. The next day following, Titus being entred into the City, wondred at the fortifications of the City, and at the Rocks of the Towers, which the Tyrants through folly had willingly forsaken. To be briefe, when he had seen their substantial altitude, and invincible force, we have fought (saith he) by the manifest helpe of God, and it was God which drave out the Jews from these holds. For what hands of men, or what engines of war might have prevailed against these? Many such words spake hee to his friends. This mountaine though it were excluded out of the City, yet afterward it was builded again and inhabited. But now being in the Suburbs most ruinous, it lyeth waste. The places of Mount Sion. III. THe Castle of Sion being ancient and strong, was set on the very top of Mount Sion, round like a Crowne, and was a sure defence and beauty both of the City and Temple, and was as the capital or chiefe place of so great a City.2 King. 19.31. 2 Sam. 5, 6, 7. vers. 11. Herein the Jebusites dwelt at the first, whom David casting out by force, en∣joyed the Castle, and receiving from Hiram King of Tyrus, stones, wood, and Artificers, builded out of the same a strong Pal∣lace for himselfe, and a house of Cedar,1 Kin. 5.1.10. 1 Chron. 11.3.7. with a Kingly Throne.
In the which Castle afterward, David himselfe, and other Kings of Juda inhabited,s. 6. Bel. 6. and used the same for the Kings seat. And for this cause it was continually kept with a strait guard of soul∣diers. And in processe of time it was called the Kings Castle, and the house of David, the seat and Throne of David, also the Court and Kings house.Arista l. de 72. interpr. 1 Mach. 1. 1 Mach. 13, 14. chap. In this Castle the most cruell of all Ty∣rants Antiochus King of Syria, which in Greek was called  Epiphanes, that is to say, Renowned (but more truly  Epimanes, that is, Mad, he deserved to be called) pla∣ced a Garrison of Gentiles, whereby in the time of the Ma∣chabees hee afflicted the Jews very much a long time. The which when Simon Machabaus had inforced to yeeld through famine, and had cleansed the Castle from the pollution of Idols, they entred there-into with palms in their hands, with Cymbals, with Psalterions, with hymnes and songs; and he placed therein men of the Jewes to defend the City and Country. Yet now there is nothing to be seen but the ruines thereof. IV. The Kings Prison with a lofty Tower, which overlooked the Kings house.Nehem. 3.25. Jer. 33.1. ch. 39.14.15. Into this prison Jeremy was cast, because he pro∣phesied that the City should be taken, and at the last was deliver∣ed out of the same by Nebuchadnezzar, when the City was taken. V. Caesars and Agrippas Hall,Jos. 15. Antiq. 11. & 1 Bel. 16▪ & 6. Bel. 6. was the Kings house, which Herod the Ascalonite builded for himselfe in the uppermost City: for he builded in his Pallace two great and fair houses of polished marble, and fine gold, whereunto the Temple it selfe was not comparable, and calling them after the names of Caesar Augustus, and of Agrippa his son in law, his friends, he named the one Caesars, and the other Agrippas. VI. The upper Chamber of Sion (as some writ) was scituate about the middest of Mount Sion,Mat. 26.18. Mark 14.14. Luk. 22.11. Ioh. 13, 1. being large, paved, and very faire, wherein Christ in his last supper did eat the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples,Luke 24. Ioh. 20. washed their feet, and instituted the Sacrament of his most blessed body and blood. In the same (say some) on the day of his Resurrection (when he was entred, the doors being shut)
standing in the middest of his Disciples, he shewed unto them the wounds of his side, of his hands and feet, and did eat before them; after that, breathing upon them, he gave them the Holy Ghost, and therewithall power to remit,Ioh. 20. and retain the sinnes of all manner of persons: That the eighth day after this, here he offered unto Thomas the Apostle the prints and scars of the spear and nails to see and feel.Act. 1.2. Hier. tom. 1. Ep. 27. ad Estoc. vir. & tom. 3. Epist. 1. ad Pau∣lin. Niceph. l. 2. hist. Eccl. cap. 3. Act. 6.5. Here (as some conjecture) after the Lords ascen∣sion, Matthias was by lot chosen into the Apostleship of Judas the Traytor. And that here on the day of Pentecost, the Holy Ghost came down in a great sound, and in the form of fiery tongues, lighted upon one hundred and twenty believers; and at the first Sermon of Peter three thousand Jewes were converted and baptized. In this place (as some guesse) James the Lords bother, firnamed Just, was by the Apostles desired to preside with the Church in Jerusalem; and Stephen with six more, were ordained Deacons.Act. 15. And that here the Apostles entred into the first consultation, or councel, and set downe the Rules of Christian peace, for the good of Jews and Gentiles. VII. The Cypress Trees of Mount Sion, which were very excellent,Eccles. 24.13. whereof the Book called Ecclesiasticus, maketh mention. VIII. The House of Annas, the chief Priest, the Father-in-law of Caiaphas; wherein Christ was examined of Annas,Ioh. 18.13.24. concerning his Disciples, and his Doctrine; at what time he answered, That he had taught openly before all men; for the which, he received a blow on the cheek by a servant. IX. The House of the Worthies,Nehem. 3. wherein (as some say) the strong men, and valiant Peers of King David dwelt; where also as in a wrestling place, the chief Wrestlers and Champions, for exer∣cise sake, used to try masteries. X. The House of the Virgin Mary, wherein after the death of her Son, she dwelt with John the Apostle,Niceph. 2. hist. Eccles. 3. & 21 [as Nicephorus saith.] XI. The House of Uria,2 Sam. 11. & 23 one of the most valiant Souldiers of Da∣vid,
whose wife Bethsheba, bathing her self in a Fountain of her Garden (which also is to be seen in the Map) by her beauty allu∣red David to adultery; beholding her from a Gallery of the Kings House. XII. The upper Market, by reason whereof, the upper City also, was called sometimes the upper Market.Ios. 6 Bel. 6. XIII. The stairs of the Castle,Acts 21. last, & 22.1. or prison, whereon the Apostle Paul stood, when he made answer for himself. XIV. The stairs of Sion,Nehem 3.15. and 12.37. Ios. 15. Antiq. 14. by which men went up to the City of David. XV. The Kings Garden,Nehem. 3.15. 2 King. 23.18.26. the which also was called the Garden of Oza, wherein Manasses and Amon, Kings of Judah, were buried. XVI. Mello, a Valley or Dale, very deep and wide, which lay between Mount Sion, and the lower City, and extended it self from the Water-Gate to the Fish-Gate. David builded and compassed Mount Sion round about from this Valley;Bas. Hero. 1. Bel sac S. Bro itin. 6 2 Sam. 5.9. 1 Chron. 11.8. 1 King. 9.15. & 11.27. Nehem. 8.1.3.16. & 3.26. & 12.37. 2 Chron. 32.5. 2 King. 12.20. Ioseph. 6. Bel. 6. Bocord. itin. 6. the con∣cavity and bottome whereof Solomon did make levell and plaine, that it might be a convenient street; and from thenceforth it was called the street of the Water-gate. He also beautified the same with buildings, which being decayed, was repaired by Eze∣kias. In this place it was that Joaz King of Juda was slaine by his servants in the way down to Sela. But in Josephus time, this valley was called Tyropoeon, and was very large and full of dwel∣ling houses. At this day this valley is so filled up with earth and stones, that there remaineth onely a small shew of the former con∣cavity and deepnesse. XVII. The Pallace of Caiphas, belonging to every high Priest, large and square,Nehem. 3.20. Mat. 26.3.57. & 27. Mar. 14.15. Luk. 22 & 23. Ioan. 18.24.28 wherein sometime dwelled Eliasib the chiefe Priest. In this Pallace the Princes of the people being gathered together, consulted among themselves what pollicy they might use to catch Jesus, and to kill him, to whom he was there sold by Judas for thirty peeces of silver. Afterwards also he was thrice denied by
Peter, and was by false witnesses of the Jewes, accused before Caiphas in the counsel of the Priests and Elders, to whom when he answered nothing, being streightly charged by the high Priest, to tell whether hee were christ the Son of God. The which when hee confessed, hee was accused of blasphemy; the chief Priest calling for the sentence of the counsel, threescore and ten Elders condemned him to be worthy of death, saying He is worthy to dye; Whereupon the servants and souldiers did presently spit in his face, they blinde-folded him, buffeted him with their fists, commanding him to prophesie, scorned him all the night with sundry mocks, and vexed him with many blasphemies. And that I may speake much in few words, no mortal man in this life is able to expresse, what, and how much he endured this night. And inMat. 27.1. Mar. 15.1. Luk. 22 66. Io. 18.28. the morning following, the Rulers of the Jewes assembled to∣gether in this place again, to deliver him up to death; and leading him bound, they delivered him to Pilate the Deputy. XVIII. The Fountain of Sion,Nehem. 3. the which was made with great labour and cost. XIX. The Bridge of Sion, by which men went through the valley out of the upper City unto the Temple.Ios. 15. Antiq 1. & 7. Bel. 13, 15. XX. The Gates of Sion which the Lord loveth more then all the Tabernacles of Jacob.Psal. 87.2. XXI. The upper Gate by which Joas when he was crowned King of Juda in the Temple,2 Chron. 23.5.13. and guarded with the Princes of the Jews, was lead into the Pallace of the Kings of Juda. XXII. The Sepulchre of David, together with the field wherein the Kings were buried,1 King. 2, 10. & 11.43. 2 Chron. 21, 20 & 24, 25. & 28, 27 Nehem. 2.3.5. & 3.6. Ios .7 Antiq. 16 & 3. Ant. 15 & 16 Ant 7. Act. 2.29. Niceph. hist. Eccl. 30. Breid. 12. Jul. Sal. tom. 7. cap 2 Pasch. day 1846, the which very stately was placed aloft in the City of David, wherein David himselfe, So∣lomon, and other Kings of Juda, also Jehoida the chiefe Priest were buried. Into this Monument of Davids Sepulchre▪ Solo∣mon brought great treasure at his burial; the which Hircanus the high Priest, and Captaine opening brought from hence thirty thousand talents of silver. Not long after this, Herod the Asca∣lonit
King of Jews, went about also to bring much treasure out from thence, but a flame of fire breaking forth and consuming two of his souldiers, he left off his enterprise, and to make satis∣faction for himselfe, he adorned the same Monument with faire shining Marble, which continued there a long time after: where the Saracens afterward builded a Church for themselves, which standeth as yet, which place they greatly reverence, and suffer not any Christian to enter into the same. XXIII. The Sepulchre of Stephen the first Martyr,Acts 8.2.5.34.22 3. 2 Sam. 6.17. of Nicodemus, and of Gamaliel, Pauls Schoolmaster, [removing their bodies by a miracle from the valley of Josaphat hither, after three hundred and sixty yeers, say Relick-mungers.] XXIV. The Tabernacle of Sion,Exo. 26.1.7.14. 2 Chron. 1.3. 2 Sam. 6.17. 2 Chron 5.2. 1 Chro. 16.1.39 vers. 37. Josep. Ant. 4. 2 Chron. 1.3, 4. ch. 5.2.7. Breid. 12. Jul. pasch. day. 184. Zach. 14.10. not that covered with skins, which Moses caused to be made; King David placed the same in this City in Sion Gibeon, and with great reverence put the Arke of God therein, and appointed Priests and Levites continually to minister from day to day by turne, which remained there about foure and twenty yeers, untill it was carried by Solomon into the Temple. In the same (saith Breid.) David sorrowing for his adul∣tery with Bethsheba, and murder of Urias, made certain Psalms of repentance. XXV. The Kings Presses, wherein the Kings wine was pressed. The Second part of the City. XXVI. THe Daughter of Sion,Psal. 9.16. Zach. 9.9. Matth. 21.5. Jos. 6. Bel. 6. &c so called becaused it seemed to grow from Mount Sion, the which was also called the lower City, being another part of the City, whereof there is often mention made in the holy Scriptures, and in Josephus.
The places of the Daughter of Sion. XXVII. THe Mountain of Acra was sometime in the lower City very lofty and steep,Jos. 13. Ant. 9. & 6. Bel. 6.7. & Bel. 13.16. the height whereof afterward Simon Ma∣chabaeus abated, and made plaine by the continual labour of the people, which he imployed herein by the space of three yeers day and night, that the Temple alone might be higher then all other places of the City. XXVIII. The Amphitheater,Ios. 15. Ant. 10. that is a place invironed with Scaffolds and Stages, capable of fourscore thousand men, where the people were wont to behold their Games, which Herod the elder first of all other builded in the field at Jerusalem with great labour and cost. Wherein, to recreat the beholders, wrastlers, and sword players, shewed many feats of activity; and sometimes, Lions, Leopards, Buls, Bears, Bores, Wolves, and other exceeding wild & fierce beasts, fought one with another, and sometime condemned men were cast unto these to be devoured, and captives taken in war. At which time of their Games, the place beneath was strowed with sand, to the end that neither the Sword-players should faile in their footing, nor the fighters might be defiled with the blood of the slain, nor yet that the sprinkling of the blood should bring horror to the lookers on. XXIX. The Castle Antonia,Jos. 15. Antiq. 14 & 18 Ant. 8 Item. 1. Bel. 3. & 4, 16. & 6. Bel. 6. & alias saee. strong, and well fortified, lying near to the North-side of the Temple, which was builded in time past on a high rock fifty cubits high, and very steep round about, and the Tower was called Baris. In this the chiefe Priests which came of the Machabees even till Herods time inhabited▪ where, in a Cell made for that purpose, the sacred stool of the chiefe Priest was kept, the Governour of the Tower lighting a candle there every day. Herod the greater having gotten the Kingdome, and seeing that this Castle was conveniently scituate to command the Citizens that they might not seek innovation through sedition, repaired the same to his great cost, and fortified it within with a Royal Pallace, even like a City, and with foure lofty Towers at each corner,
whereof three were fifty cubits high, and the fourth threescore and ten, from whence the whole Temple might be seen; and for the favour which he bare to Marcus Antonius his friend, he called it Antonia. In this Castle the Roman souldiers, kept alwayes watch with their souldiers, having an eye and principal care lest the people should work any innovation in the Temple on the feast dayes. And so the Temple belonged to the City, and the Castle Antonia to the Temple. XXX. The Court of Records which we commonly call the Court of Chancery, or of the Rouls, that is to say, a house wherein the Acts of the City, and of the Citizens, and also their publick Records, and the account of Creditors were kept; the which the sediti∣ous burned,Ios. 2. Bel. 17. & 7. Bel. 13. the keepers thereof flying from thence, to the end they might destroy all the evidences of the Creditors, and joyne unto them all the Debters. XXXI. The Castle of Antiochus Epiphanes,Ios. 12. Ant. 6. 1 Mac. 1. Dan. 8.11.12. both high and strong, the which, after the slaughter of many Citizens, the spoyl of the City and Temple, and the burning of most fair houses, he builded upon the mountaine Acra, and fortified it with strong wals and towers, and placed a Garrison of Macedonian souldiers there, mingling with them certaine of the most rascal fugitive Jews, by whom the continual sacrifice was taken away by the space of three years,Ios. 13. Antiq. 9. and the City it selfe vexed more then six and twenty years. But after this Simon Machaeus won, and destroyed this Castle. XXXII. The common Prison of the City wherein the Apostles being shut up by the Rulers of the Jews,Act. 5 18.19. Iose. 6. Bel. 6. were in the night time brought forth by the Angel. Josephus seemeth to call this Prison Betiso. XXXIII. The Corner Parlour belonging to the corner house,Nehem. 3.24. where the publick Suppers were kept. XXXIV. The Vaulted Cave,Ios. 19. Ant. 14. B reid. 14. Iul. leading from the Castle Antonia into the Temple, which Herod the elder made, setting a Tower thereon,
that by the same he might passe privily into the Temple, if so bee the people intended to make any insurrection against the King; which remaineth as yet very wonderful and large, insomuch that six hundred horses may very conveniently be placed there∣in. XXXV. The Court in Hebrew called Gasith;Joseph. 6. Bel. 6, 7. Bel. 13. Num. 11.24. Act. 22, 30. Mar. 13.9. Act. 5.2. Hier. Tom. 3. Epist. 25. ad Fa∣biol. mans. 11. Which in the inner City was joyned to an old wall thereof: Wherein were threescore and ten Senators and ordinary Judges, which were called of the Jews Sanhedrim, in Greek Synedron, that is to say, in English the Councel of the Elders and Seniors of the people. These dealt in the affairs of the Commonwealth, gave Laws, and determined the doubtfull and weighty causes, yea even of other Cities also; they ended strifes and controversies, and gave the sentence of death, generally they dealt in all capital causes, except onely in the diffi∣culties and mysteries of Gods Law and of the Jews Religion,Deut. 17. the which the Priests onely determined. In this confistory the Apo∣stles were examined, whipped, and forbidden to preach,Act. 4, 5, & 5.27. and yet went rejoycing from the Councel, because they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Jesus. Here it was that St. Stephen standing before the Councel,Act 6.12, 15. and his countenance shining like an Angel, lifting up his eyes, saw the Heavens open, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, from thence, he being cast with violence out of the City, was stoned. XXXVI. The house of Ananias the high Priest,Ios. 2. Bel. 1.7. which the seditious at the length fiered. XXXVII. The house of holy Anne (as some write) the Grandame of Christ,Breid. 26. Iul. Sal. Tom 8. cap. 6. Iac. Vitri. cap. 58. Luke 1.26. wherein she with Joacim her husband abode when the feast was at Jerusalem, where they both dyed. Here the blessed Virgine Mary (as some conjecture) abroad during the passion of Christ [That there she was conceived, some vainly record; for this was at Nazareth in Galilee.] The house of the rich Glutton (saith Breid,Luke 6. Breid 14. Iul. Sal. Tom. 8.62.6 &c.) which burned in hell according to the Evangelical story (or Paable.) In the which house that he dwelt, it is reported by some Antiquities, a
high wall whereof is shewed at this day to Christian Travellers. XXXIX. The house of Massa, whereof mention is made in the second Book of Kings. [The house of withdrawing, or of guard, that should not be broken into.2 King. 11.6.] XL. The house of the Nathinaeans or Nethinims that is Given, which carried wood and water into the Temple. (These seem to be the remnant of the Gibeonites whom David gave to such service,Neh. 3.26.31. Ezra 8.20. with Ezra 2.70.) XLI. The house of the Rulers of the Pharises, in the which Christ touched the man sick of the dropsie,Luke 14.1. and healed him. LXII. The house of the Forrest of Libanus,1 King. 7 2. & 10.17.21. 2 Chron. 9.16.20. Jer. 22, 23. Iosep. 18. Aut. 5, 6, 7. in length one hundred cubits, in breadth fifty, and in height thirty cubits, the which So∣lomon builded most brave and glorious of polished Marble, of Cedar trees, garnished with silver and gold, having a flat roof with Walks and Galleries (according to the fashion of Palestine) and within lively counterfeits of sundry trees and plants most arti∣ficially made, that the leaves thereof seemed in some sort to shake. And neer unto the same he planted a grove and a green arbor made of all manner of trees, and watered with fountaines; also he made Parks and Fish-pools,Mier. tem. 3. Epist. 33. ad Suniam. Eccles. 2.5, 6. wherein it is like were all man∣ner of wilde beasts, birds, and fishes. This house was a store∣house of meat, an Armory for weapons of war, a house wherein oyntments, paintings, and sweet perfumes were laid up, and pre∣served. Beside these, two hundred shields of gold for horse-men, and three hundred large targets of gold for foot-men which Solo∣mon made, were in this house by him laid up. All other vessels also of this House were of gold. To this house the King and his Peers came when the weighty affairs of the Commonwealth were ended, and recreated their minds, with banquets, with sports, and with pleasant walks. XLIII. The House (as some say) of Simon (the Leaper) the Pharisee,Mat. 26.6. Luke 7.36.44. Job 22.3. which is at this day to be seen, wherein Christ sitting at the Table forgave unto Magdalen the sinful woman (bewayling her sins, and
washing his feet with her tears, wiping them with her hair, kissing them, anointing him, and much loving him) many sinnes. (Ac∣cording to Matth. 26.6. and Joh. 12.3. this house was in Be∣thanie, and not in Jerusalem. If it be the same Simon that is spoken of in Luke 7.44. and Mat. 26. [The XLIV. in Latine, was thus, Domus Veronic 2 Ang. the corner house of Veronica. This Veronica gave the linnen Kercief of her head to Christ, that he might wipe his (sweaty) face with it. To it the Lord imprinted the image of his face (say some) and restored it to her, as a pledge of his love; which to this very day being notoriously marked with the face of Christ. At Rome in the Royall-Temple of S. Peter built in Vatican-mount by Constantine the Great, with grand honour it is preserved, and on set dayes it is shewed un∣to the people. So the Latine book tels us from the Tradition of John Pasch a Friar Carmelite, writ Anno 1527. and of Dr. Bethlem a Priest, and Bredenbach, Dean of Mentz, Anno 1483. Why did the English omit this Relick? Ans. It seems, because not one word of it is in the holy Scripture; no, nor in Polycarpus, nor Ignatius, nor Justin Martyr, nor of any ancient approved Au∣thority, but forged afterwards to delude such as prefer mens Traditions before Gods word, so making it of none effect, as Jesus Christ said, Mat. 15.6.9.) One questions of what cloath that Handkerchief of Veronica was made, that is so durable after sixteen hundred yeers? that they may have some of that durable Cloath?] SLIV. or XLV. The House of the common people, wherein they exercised themselves with dartings, and other exercises of the arme,Ier. 39. and with feasts, with other playes and walksrefreshed their minds. SLV. or XLVI. The Great Market which was in the midst of the City, and near adjoyning to the Castle Antonia,Ios. 13. Ant. 20. & 1. Bel 3. Ios. 14. Aut. 22. item. 1. Bel. 7. & 11. wherein Alexander the King of the Jews, and the chief Priest, crucified eight hundred Iews, killing also the Wives in the presence of their Husbands, and the children in the sight of their Mothers; the which spectacle himselfe with his Concubines beheld, at what they were ban∣queting in the Castle Antonia. For the which cruelty he was
sirnamed Crucida. In the same Market place, Herod the greater fought a great battel with the Parthians, which went about to bring again Antigonus into the Kingdome. Furthermore when the famine through the Roman siege was exceeding great in Jeru∣salem,Is. 6. Bel. 14. & 7. Bel. 7. & 8. in such wise that it consumed whole families, and replenish∣ed the tops of houses with fainting women and children, and the wayes of the dead carcasses of old men, (in which extremity they did eat Leather; their Girdles, their Shoos, Hay, and Mothers their own children:) Then a man might have seen lusty young men, which afore time were most flourishing, passe through this Market place, like shadows of dead men. And when those which remained alive, were not able to bury the dead, by reason of their exceeding multitude, and could not endure the stinke of the bo∣dies unburied, they cast them over the wall into the vallies of the City. The which when Titus saw, as he went about the wals, full of dead bodies much putrified, he fetched a great sigh, and hold∣ing up his hands to God, protested, that it was not his deed; for the obstinate Jewes refused peace, to them oftentimes offered. XLVI. or XLVII. The Market place of Wares,Act. 12.2. Euseb. 2 Hist. Eccl. 9. Niceph. 2. the which was in the upper part of the lower City, in the which, Fish, and sundry other things were sold. In this Market S. James the greater, [or elder] the brother of John, suffered his martyrdome by the tyranny of Herod Agrippa [as Euseb. records] XLVII. or XLVIII. The Ʋpholsters Market, wherein all manner of old gar∣ments that had been worn aforetime of others were to be sold. XLVIII. or XLIX. The School of Gentility, which Jesus the false high Priest of the Jews (who after the manner of the Gentiles would be cal∣led Jason) and other Jewes apostatas (by the permission of An∣tiochus Epiphan.Hist. Eccl. 2. Mach. 1, & 2. of Mac. 4.) set up, even under his Castle over against the Temple; wherein the people were taught the laws and fashions of the Gentiles, and the youth instructed in the studies and disputa∣tions of the Greek Philosophers. Where they being naked and anointed with oyle, exercised themselves in feats of activity, in martial actions, and in enterludes. Furthermore in same place,
the said Apostatas set up EPHEBIAM, that is to say a Stewe of fair young boyes,Sodomy. wherein they committed most filthy things against nature; by reason thereof many fell from the Law of God, to the manners and abominations of the Gentiles, being as it were sold to commit monstrous wickednesse, insomuch that some of the Priests forsaking the Temple and worship of God, gave themselves to the exercise of feats of activity; here hence also there sprang up among the Jewes divers Sects, namely the Pharisees, the Sadduces, the Essenes, &c. XLIX. or L. The Houses of the Priests,Lyra in Neh. 3 and of the Levites whose houses were shut up by the outward part of the wall; but from the former part they had a prospect toward the Temple. L. or LI. &c. The Habitation of the Target (or Shield) Bearers,2 Chron. 12.11 2 King. 11.6. Ioseph. 20. Ant. 15: was builded before the West-gate of the Temple; where first the Jewes, then the Roman souldiers upon the solemne feast dayes had the stations for the guard of the Temple. LI. The Lysts or Tylt, which was placed over against the South part of the Temple, wherein horses by running,Io. 15 An. 10. & 17. Ant. 9, 10 13.14. It. Bel. 21. & 2. Bel. 2. agillity and swiftnesse were exercised. And the Wrastlers and Champions did contend before the people who should run swiftest on foot with Chariots diversly drawn, who should break most spears, and in other ma∣steries, and feats of valiency. Where Herod the King for the honour of Augustus Caesar ordained the game and prise of five years continuance, appointing unto the Victors great rewards. The same Herod when he should dye, called all the more noble sort of the, Jewes of all places within his dominion, by an Edict threatning death to such as should not obey, and caused them to be shut up in the Lysts, to the end that after his death they all be∣being there slain, every house might have cause to waile even in despight of all Judaea. LII. The Mountain Moria,Gen. 22.2. Mich. 3.12. 1 Mach. 13. & 16. chap Isa. 10.16. Ioseph. 15. Ant. 14. & 6. Bel. 6. the which in another place is called the land of Vision, and the Mountaine of the Temple, and the Mountaine of the Daughter of Sion, lying neer unto the East-wall of the City, being very high, stony, and very steep round
about. In this Mountain Abraham being ready to offer up his son Isaac, instead of him offered up a Ram which was taken by the hornes in a thicket. This was the very same Mountain which David bought of Streuna or Ornan the Jebusite for six hundred shekels of Gold, and erecting an Altar in his threshing flower, he offered a burnt offering unto the Lord,1 Chron. 21. Jos. 7. Ant. 13. 2 Chr. 3.1.36. which the fire from heaven consumed. Afterward in the same Mountaine Solomon builded unto the Lord a most excellent Temple both for largenesse and beauty, whereof mention shall be made hereafter. LIII. The first Wall, the which was called the old Wall, both in re∣gard of the vallies,Jos. 6. Bel 6, 7, &c. and a hill which was aloft above them, and also in regard of threescore Towers whereinto it was divided, the which made it very defensible and strong. LIV. Ophel, which Josephus calleth Ophlam, was a Tower of an exceeding height, whose top seemed to reach unto the Clouds; it was fortified with a Castle,2 Chr. 27.3. & 23, 14, Neh. 3.26, 27 Neh. 11.21. Jos. 2. Bel. 18. & 6. Bel. 6, 7. & 7 Bel. 13. and compassed about with a firm wall near unto the Temple, notwithstanding it was without the wall, which shut off the habitation of the Priests. Herein dwelt the Nethinims. Into this Manahemus the Tyrant flying, was taken and slaine. This same was at the last burned by the Souldiers of Titus. LV. The Pallace of the Machabees,1 Mac. 13. builded by them on a very lofty place on the West side of the Temple, from whence they which would behold the City, and those things which were done therein,Jos. 17. Ant. 14. & 20. Ant. 15. had a most pleasant and delectable prospect. The which King Agrippa afterward exceedingly inlarged, and made it a Court for himself; from whence out of his Parlour he might be∣hold whatsoever was done in the Temple.2 Bel. 2 & 16, 17 & 7. Bel. 15. For the which cause the Rulers of the Jewes builded a very high Gate between that and the West part of the inner Temple to hinder the Kings pro∣spect. This thing both King Agrippa, and Festus also the Lieu∣tenant of the Country took in very evill part, who also command∣ed them to pull downe the said Gate. But the Rulers intreated▪ that they might have leave to send Ambassadors to Nero the Em∣perour concerning this matter, saying, that they could not live if
any thing were cast down of the buildings of the Temple. The which liberty when they had obtained, they sent Ishmael the chief Priest, and Helchia the Treasurer, and with them ten of their chief Rulers. And Nero at the earnest suit of Poppea his wife, a godly woman, which shee made for the Jewes, pardoned the building of the said Gate, and permitted the same to stand. LVI. The Pallace of Pilate, and of the Lieutenants of Rome,Mat. 27.1. Isa. 50. & 53, 63 Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 23.3. Io. 18. Ioh. 19. ad∣joyning to the Gallery which lyeth on the North side of the Castle Antonia; which Pallace was much more large, lofty, and fayrer, then all the buildings of the City, and had an ascent or mounting of eight and twenty steps of Marble. Here when Christ was falsely accused, and required to be cruci∣fied by the Princes and people of the Jews, for (that as they said) he perverted the people, forbad tribute to be given to Caesar, said that he was Christ a King, and therefore approved himselfe a seditious person, Pilate condemned him to be whipped under the form of this sentence, which was found in a most ancient Chronicle, as followeth; Jesum Nazarenum virum seditiosum, & Mosaicae legis contemptorem, per pontifices & principes sua gentis accusatum, expoliate, ligate, & virgis caedite;Breid. 21. Jul. Sal. Tom. 8. cap. 7. Pasch. day 108 that is to say, Take ye Jesus of Nazareth accused by the chiefe Peiests and Rulers of his own Nation to be a man seditious, and a contemner of Moses Law strip him bind him, and whip him. Whereupon the souldiers of Pilate led him into the Judgement hall, stript him before the whole band of souldiers, and other people, tyed him to a pillar, beat him most cruelly with rods,Mat. 27. Io. 19. and rent and tare his most tender body. After this, they put on him a purple Robe, platted, and in forcible manner broided on his head a crowne of sharp thorns, delivered into his right hand a reed, and in scorn saluted him as a King bending the knee before him, many wayes mocked him, they did spit on him, they did buf∣fet him, and strike him upon the wounded head with a Cane. LVII. The Queens Pallace,1 Reg. 7. & 9. 2 Chro. 8. Jos. 8. Ant. 5. which Solomon most royally builded of precious and polished stones for the habitation of his wife, which was Pharaohs daugher.
LVIII. Solomons Pallace, exceeding great and fair, the which he build∣ed in thirteen years magnificently, and most sumptuously on the South part of the Mount Moria,1 King. 7. & 0 of bright marble, and Cedar trees, supported with many pillars for his own habitation; this he wonderfully garnished with gold and silver round about, and made all the vessels thereof of gold. In the same place afterward, the Christian Kings of Jerusalem had their Pallace, where first be∣gan the order of the Templers. LIX. The Castle Pisan,Sal. Tom. 7. cap. 1. compassed about with deep Trenches and Towers; the which was builded on the West part of the City, by the Christian inhabitants of a Town in Italy belonging to the Pisans, at what time they had the Dominion of the Holy-Land. Where first the Pisans, after them the Saracens, and now the Turkes, doe exact of the Pilgrims of the Holy-Land sacrile∣gious tribute. LX. The inner Fountain,2 Sam. 20. 2 Chron. 32. Eccles. 48. Brocar. Itin. 6. which King Hezekias made in the midst of the City at the North side of the Temple. For hee brought into the City the waters of this Fountain, from the higher Fountain of Gition, by conduct pipes which were under the earth, and made them to issue forth in this Fountain. This Fountaine hee compassed about with a Well to water the whole City, that the people in time of siege might not be distressed with the want of water. LXI. The Pool Probatica,Ioh. 5.1.2. that is to say, the Sheep-pool, wherein the sheep, and other beasts were washed that were appointed for sacrifice. In Hebrew it is called Bethesda (and corruptly Beth∣saida) that is to say, the house of effusion, because the rain waters ran into the same [or rather Beth-chasda;Sol. Tom. 8. cap. 5. that is, The house of Kind-mercy, so the Syriack] It was situate between the Gate of the Valley and the Temple. It was the most principal Pool, or water of the whole City, having five Porches, which King Solo∣mon made for the service of the Temple.Pasch. day 192 And this Josephus cal∣led Solomons Lake or Pool. For in this Pool the Nathenims washed the oblations which they delivered unto the Priests to bee
offered in the Temple. The Water hereof was moved at certaine times by the Angel of the Lord, and who so after the stirring there∣of went first into the water, he was healed, whatsoever disease hee had.Jo. 5.4, 5. And therefore there lay a great multitude of lan∣guishing people in the Porches thereof, as blind, lame, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. Among which number Christ healed a man which had languished eight and thirty years. [The Figures in this Book should resemble the Figures that are in the MAP OF JERUSALEM, which are not Roman Fi∣gures, but such as these that follow.] 62. The Old Fountain, together with a River,Isa. 22. Jos 7. Bel. 24. which issuing out of the same runneth through the whole City into the brook Cedron. 63. The Bridge, and Porch with Gates,Jos. 14. Ant. 8. & 15. Ant. 14. & 1. Bel. 5. Item. 2 Bel. 15, 16. & 7. Bel. 6.13 by which men went from the Gallery, and from the Castle Antonia, over the valley of Cedron into the Temple, the which at the first the favourites of Aristobulus against Pompey, and afterward the seditious against Florus, cut off, lest by the means of the Castle Antonia, the Temple should be gotten. 64. The Warders [or Prison] Gate so called,Neh. 12.39. because certain of the Kings guard warded there, at such time as the King entred into the Temple. 65. The Horse-Gate, so named,Lyr. in Neh. 3. because men might ride so far as that place; but then leaving their horses, they went on foot into the Temple. At the which place began the habitations of the Priests. 66. The Gate of the Essens was scituate in the old wall of the City.Jos. 6. Bel. 6. 67. The first Gate, whereof the Prophet Zachariah maketh mention.Zach. 14.10. 68. The Porch of Pillars, scituate before Solomons Pallace, the which was fifty cubits long, and thirty cubits broad,1 King. 7.15.21 and supported with strong Pillars.
69. The Beast-Market, called Probatica, where Sheep, Oxen, and other beasts for sacrifice were sold in the open Market. 70. The Pallace of Queen Bernice,Act. 25. & 26. Jos. 2. Bel. 15, 16. & 17. sister of King Agrippa, who with her brother at Caesaria heard Pauls supplication before Festus. And afterwards paying her vows to God at Jerusalem, she came bare-foot before Florus sitting in his judgement seat, ty∣rannizing against the Citizens, whom shee beseeched in vaine as concerning them. 71. The Pallace of Grapta,Jos. 5 Bel. 9. the Neece of Izata King of the Adia∣bens, which she built for her selfe: Wherein afterward, Iohn the Captain of the seditious, abiding, left there his money, and spoils of Tyranny. 72. The Pallace of Helen,Ios. 20. Ant. 2. & 6. Bel. 7. & 7. Bel. 13. Ease 2 Hist. Eccles. 12. Act. 11.28. which exalted it selfe in the middest of the mountain Acra. Shee, being the Queen of the Adiabens which dwelt beyond Euphrates, was converted from Gentilisme▪ to the Religion of the Jews, and came to Jerusalem to dwell; where she being become a Christian, at what time that great fa∣mine (whereof Agabus prophesied) in the dayes of the Em∣perour Claudius, pinched the whole world, but specially the land of Judea; this good Queen (I say) at her proper costs and charge sent for great store of corne out of Aegypt, which she distributed among the poor and needy at Jerusalem. 73. The Pallace of Monobaz, King of the Adiabens, the son of He∣len, which was scituate in the East part of the City.Ios. 6. Bel. 7. 74. The Temple of the Lord, otherwise called the Lord house, and the Sanctuary:1 King. 5, 6 7.8, 9 chap. Joseph. 8. Ant. 3 2 Chron. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, & 7 cha. The which Solomon the peaceable King builded of the matter prepared by David his father, and of elect, hewn, and pollished stones, and of timber cut from Mount Libanus, by the labour of more then a hundred fifty three thousand men in the mount Moria, without any sound of Axe or Ham∣mer in seven years,Arist. lib. 72. in∣terpret. so sumptuous and magnificent both within and without with shining gold, that it was counted the miracle of the
world. Concerning the wonderfull excellency whereof, nothing can be sufficiently spoken. When Solomon dedicated this Temple, the cloud and glory of the Lord filled it, and the fire which came from heaven consumed the sacrifices which were offered there∣in. As concerning the entrance of this Temple, the same was con∣trary to the fashion now used, being East-ward, and the back part tended West; whereupon the Priests and people prayed turning to the West, and worshipped God herein with great reverence, untill through the impiety of the Kings and people of the Jews, it was prophaned with the pollutions of Idols oftentimes: Therefore[Some com∣pute the years about foure hundred and thirty.] 2 King. 25. 2 Chron. 36. 1 Es. 3.5, 6. 2 Mac. 3. Ios. 2. Bel. 17, & 10. 1 Mach. 4, 6, 13 chap. four hundred forty and one years after the first foundation thereof, by the just judgement of God, Nabuchodonozer King of Babylon burnt the same, and so destroyed it, that it lay desolate threescore and ten years. But after that, Zorobabel repaired the Temple again in excellent sort with squared stones, and the best timber in the same Mountain, within the space of forty and six years. And this also was of so great estimation that it was honoured through∣out the whole world, and was from all parts enriched and beauti∣fied with the greatest gifts and honours of Kings and Princes. The which after three hundred fifty and four years, was spoyled by Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria, and polluted with Idols. In the third year of the contamination thereof, the most valiant Captaine of the Jews, Judas Machabaeus, purged it, and restored to the same again the golden vessels, and the worship of God. And that it might never more be defiled, he did wal it about in manner of a Castle with deep Trenches, with strong and high walls, and with Gates and Towers both forcible and fair.Ios. 14. Ant. 8. & 7. Bel. 4.9. Wherein hee being besieged a long time with one hundred and twenty thousand Gentiles, could not be commanded. But about one hundred years after this, when that famous Cap∣tain of the Romans, Pompey the Great fought against it, he won it with main force, and in the entring thereof he slew therein twelve thousand Jews;Strabo. Geogra. l. 16. 1 Mach. 6. and Pompey himselfe with his Peers entring into the most holy place, and beholding the Temple, the Candlesticke, and other things there of shining gold, and finding also two thou∣sand talents of the holy Treasure this heathen Prince moved as it were with a certaine godlinesse, would not so much as touch any of
them; but the next day after the siege commanded the keepers of the Temple to cleanse the fame, and to celebrate their lawfull and solemne sacrifices. This selfe and same Temple being after∣wards decayed, Herod the Acalonit King of the Jewes, by the space of nine years and a halfe, repaired and beautified it, with sumptuous buildings. And according to the Prophesie of the Prophet Haggai (even as the Church is preferred before a Synagogue, and the blood of the Gospel is more precious then the gold of the Law) greater was the glory of the second Temple, Agg. 2, 3, 7.9. Luk. 2. Matth. 4. Johan. 7.8. ch. 10. &c. then was that of the first; because Christ with his presence, doctrine, and miracles, glorified this. For in this, when he was a childe he was offered. In this he sate in the middest of the Doctors; In the pinnacle of this Temple he was tempted of the Devill, when he fasted forty dayes, and forty nights. In this likewise he preached oftentimes, and was vexed by the Jews. All which things, as they make much for the glory of the Temple, so they did nothing availe, but that the very same Temple, in the year from the Foundation thereof under Zorobabel five hundred eighty and six, An. Dom. 72. by the Army of Titus Caesar, after a doubtfull and bloody battel, was won with great force and violence, and so great a slaughter of Jewes made about the altar for burnt offerings, that the blood of the slain ran like a River by the stairs of the Temple; Jos. 7. Bel. 9, 10.18. and the Temple it selfe in the first brunt and fury of the battel was set on fire by a certaine souldier moved by divine motion, not attending to the command of any, even without the Emperours consent: And by this burn∣ing, a worke of all that ever was seen or heard of the most wonder∣full, and the ornament of the whole world, the tenth day of the Month of August, was consumed into ashes; to wit, even the very same day and month, whereon aforetime the Temple was burnt by the Babylonians.Euseb. in Ch. & 4. hist. Eccl. Yet for all this after threescore and five years, the Jewes re∣belling againe, and going about to restore the Temple in the same place where it was afore, Aelius Adrian the Emperour, slew of them in one day five hundred and fourscore thousand, Niceph. 3. hist. Eccl. 24. and utterly rased the rest of the buildings of Jerusalem, and levelled the mountaine Moria, whereon the Temple was builded, and made it even, casting the rubbish and earth thereof into the vale
Jehoshapat, and into the Brook Cedron, lest the City, trusting to the defence of the Mountaine and Temple, should rise up, and re∣bell any more against the Romans. Hee wasted also with fire and sword nine hundred and fourscore Villages. But the Emperour Julian the Apostata,Ruffin. in Eus. hist. Eccl. l. 10. c. 37, 38, 39. Theod. 3 hist. Eccl. 17. Zzo. 5. hist. Eccl. 21. Niceph. 10. ist. Eccl. 32, 33. after two hundred and seven and twenty years, to make the Oracle of Christ false, which he had prophe∣sied concerning the Temple that there should not be left one stone upon another, gave unto the Jewes money out of the common Treasury, and commanded them to build anew the Temple, and to sacrifice there according to the Law of Moses. The Jewes glad of this, came from all parts of the world to Jerusalem, and threatning grievous things against the Christians, they prepared and got unto them skilfull work-men, stones, tim∣ber, morter, and all other things necessary for the building; also they caused to be made silver mattocks, spades, and baskets, and throughly purged the place where the Temple stood, with such speed and willingnesse, that their women also bestowed all their ouches, taches, bruches, and other Jewels for the building, and carried out from that place all the rubbish in their laps. And when the Foundations were opened and cleansed, the day follow∣ing they should have begun their Foundation, but the same night there came such an exceeding and vehement tempest, that it carri∣ed away and scattered abroad their stone, timber, and morter, with other their necessaries. Over, and besides this, a great Earthquake shook all the stones of the old foundations of the Temple, and dispersed them, disordered the houses next adjoyning to the Temple by a down-fall and killed many Jews. And when they which remained, in the morning enterprised again to build, a fire falling from heaven, a flame also breaking forth from the foundations of the Temple, destroyed more Jewes then before, which either were busie about the work, or which came thither to see and look on; and all that day burnt, and con∣sumed into ashes, their Mauls, Hammers, Axcs, Spades, and all other working Tools, that nothing was left. The Jews being yet obstinately bent, the next night following, a bright signe of the crosse appeared in heaven, and the garments of all the Jews were marked as it were from heaven with figures of the crosse, and re∣plenished therewith as the Firmament with stars, which when the
day appeared, they seeking to put out, could not by any manner of means do it. And thus being astonished and confounded, they left off both their vaine enterprise, and also the place. So that by their wicked endeavour, the divine Oracle was not onely not made frustrate, but also more fulfilled and confirmed. The Jewes being in this sort beaten from their enterprise, the Christians neverthelesse were not afraid to build in the same place; for they erected a Temple there in a round form, made of great hewne, VVith. Tyren. lib. 8. Hist. Bel. facri c. 20 & lib 9 c. 9. Broc. ii. 6. Brci. 14 Iul. and pollished stones, covered with a leaden roof, very large, high, and beautifull to behold. The which in processe of time, was honoured with the Patriarchal seat, and became famous by reason of the true and pure worship of God which was therein maintained. At the length being invaded by the Saracens, it was contaminated four hundred threescore and three yeares, with the filthy worship of Mahomet. Finally, in the year of Christ 1099. the very same Temple, though it was fortified with a wall, with Towers, and strong gates by the Christians, yet was it violently won by Godfrey of Boloigne, a valiant man, who killed within the circuit of the Temple ten thousand Saracens, in such wise that the upper face of the earth was covered with the blood of the slaine. In the which place the said Godfrey erected a Colledge of divine service, giving con∣tinuall maintenance to the same, furnishing it with necessary habi∣tations, which so continued by the space of fourscore and eight yeers. The which expired, the same was possessed again by the Saracens, through the pernicious discord of Christian Princes; who in the top thereof (according to their manner) set up the figure of the Half-moon; and in the Courts thereof they planted Figs, and olive Trees. The same being now possessed of the Turkes, is defiled with the detestable worship of Mahomet. And all Christians are commanded by an Edict, not to enter thereinto upon pain of death. For it any Christian be known to have entred therein, he is by and by either compelled solemnly to deny the faith of Christ, or else publickly to lose his head.
The first Part of the Temple. 75. THe Holy of Holies [called the Holy place,Exod. 26.23. Lev. 16.2.17.27. Heb. 9.22.25.3.7. 1 King. 6.19.20. 2 Chro. 4.20. & 5 7. and the most Holy] which is so called, because of the singular holinesse of that place. It is also named the Oracle, and the inner house. For it was the secretest part of the Temple, [whereinto the high Priest came onely once a year] it being twenty cubits long, and as many in breadth; the height whereof was twenty cubits, [not a hundred and twenty cubits.] Whose floor was laid over with firre boards, covered with plate of Gold, and paved with Marble [as some write] The gates were made of polished stones inwardly framed with bords of Cedar, and covered with golden plates; the which being fastened with nails of gold, shined most gloriously, as if it had been a divine worke; whereon were graven Cherubins, 1 King. 6.30.] Ios. 6. Bel. 6. 1 Chro. 29.2 precious stones, palmes, flowers, imbossements, and pictures of divers sorts, representing the celestiall beauty. The roof also was co∣vered with golden plate, the very top whereof was set full of golden prickets, or sharp spits to fray away birds, lest by sitting thereon, it might be polluted. Into this sacred Holy of Holiest, Heb. 9.3.7.13. Lev. 16.3. the chiefe Priest for the divine Majesty thereof, entred but once every year alone in the feast of purgation; on which day the Jewes did fast and afflict themselves. And then that great and chiefe Priest of God, prefiguring the person of Christ, offered the blood of a calfe burnt without the hoast, for his own sinnes, Deut. 23.10. and for the sinnes of the people. Who if he were legally polluted, but so much as in sleep entred not in his owne person, but by his substitute. The Parts of the most holy Place. 76. THe Arke of the Covenant,Exo. 25.10. el. 37.1. & 40.3.20. Num. 17. Deut. 31. Ios. 3. aut. 83. the which by the commandement of God was made of Set him [or Sittim] wood, which cor∣rupteth not, by Moses in the desart covered within and without with plate of pure gold, being set in the middest of the Holy of Holiest, shining like the Sun with the glittering brightnesse of gold; whose surpassing beauty is rather to bee wondred at, then with
words to be expressed. In this Arke the two Tables of stone, containing the ten Commandements written with the finger of God,1 King 8 9. Deut. 16.5. Exod. 25.10. Ex. 16 34. Num. 17.10. 2 Mach 5.2. were kept with a singular care and holinesse. The Pot wherein was Manna, and Aarons flourishing Rod were put [be∣fore it, and not into it.] The Ark abode in this place about foure hundred and thirty years. It is written in the (Apocryphal) book of the Machabees, that in the time of the Captivity of Babylon, the Prophet Jeremy,[See 2 King. 25 9. and be∣low here at *] by the Commandement of God, hid the same privily together with the Altar of Incense, and the perpetuall fire in a cave of the mount Nebo. But the He∣brews conjecture, that it was carried by Nebuchodonozer into Babylon, and that it never returned again; but ano∣ther made by the Jews instead thereof,2 Chro. 36. Dan. 1.3. Esd. 1. Esd. 1 Hier. in Jol c. 3 Jos. 10. au. 13.7 Pel. 24. Suo in vit. Vespasi. Rodolph. Langius de ur∣bis Hirosol. Templique cri∣gine, & excidio l. 2 c 15. after the returne from the Captivity. Othersome thinke that Nebuchadonozer carried away the same with five thousand and four hundred vessels of silver and gold which belonged to the Temple of Jerusalem, and put them into the Temple of Bel his god, but preserved by Gods providence (as it was sometime in Philistaea) after threescore and ten years of the Captivity, they thinke (I say) it was restored again to the Jews at their return by Cyrus, together with the said vessels. But after the besieging of Jerusalem, Titus, and Ves∣paesian, carrying out of the Temple to Rome (as someSee Number 84. at the end. 2 King. 25.9. 2 Chron. 36.19 2 Chro 3.15. Jer. 5.21. Relick∣mungers say) the Arke of the Covenant, the two Tables of the Law, with both the rods of Moses and Aaron; also the golden Table, and some of the shew-bread; the golden Candlestick, and the four (or two Pillars) made these to be carried among other spoyls, by the Jews themselves, round about the City in an open triumph, wherein with great pompe they triumphed over that Nation: Simon Giora Captain of the seditious, and seven hundred Jews Captives (which were selected from among the rest for youth and come linesse) going before the Triumpher halfe naked, with their hands bound. This triumph being ended, Vespasian laid up all the vessels of Jerusalem in the Temple of Peace at Rome, which he in most sumptuous manner had builded; But the Law of the Jews, and the purple vailes of the most secret places, he commanded to be safely laid up in his Pallace.)
77. The two Cherubims of glory,Exo. 25.18.20. & 37.9. 1 King. 6.23.28. & 8.7. Heb. 9.4, 5. Josep. Ant. 3. the which as it appeareth by the Hebrew text of Paralipomenon, are like unto young boyes, made of the wood of the olive-tree, ten cubits high, and covered with plates of gold, and shining with Angelical brightnesse, stood at each end of the Arke with their wings spread, covering the pro∣pitiatory [or Mercy-seat.] [and not with the other couple touch∣ing the gate on both sides] whose faces were directed toward the Mercy-seat, and looking one towards the other, they beheld both themselves, and also the propitiatory. 78. The Propitiatory (or Mercy-seat) otherwise also called the Oracle, the which being above the Arke,See Proofs at 77. next before between the wings of the two Cherubims, and shining with most pure gold in bright∣nesse above the Sun, representing the divine Majesty, was as it were the seat of God speaking; from whence he gave Oracles and answers [to the High Priest; so doth Christ Jesus our great High Priest from God the Father, Joh. 12.50. Matth. 17.5.] The second part of the Temple. 79. THe holy place called the Sanctuary,Exod. 25.8. Levit. 10.4. 1 King 6. 1 Chron. 22.1 & 24.5. 2 Chro. 3. Ezek. 44.17. Luke 1. Heb. 9. Jos. 8. Ant. 3. & 15. Ant. 14. & 6. Bel. 6. & 7. Bel. 10. the outward house of the Lord, and the Priests Court. This is the other part of the Temple, forty Cubits long, and twenty broad, in height one hundred and twenty Cubits. The doors hereof were of gold. The floor, made of firre boards, was covered with plate of gold. The gates were made of pollished stones, and being within lined with boards of Cedar, were covered outwardly with plates of gold; whereon was graved Cherubims, precious stones, palmes, flowers, and sundry carved works, and pictures, which wonderfully delighted men to behold. Above it was covered with a fair roof, shining as if it had been fire. From the entrance hereinto, such as were not clean, were for∣bidden by the Law.2 Chr. 23.19. 1 Chr. 23.3.5. Onely the Priests [and Levites] (which King David reckoned to the number of eight and thirty thousand, and distinguished the Priests by Lot into
four and twenty orders) entred daily thereinto.1 Chron. 24.1. ch. 25 31. chap. 27 1.4. Lev. 10 9. Ezek. 44.21. Exod. 28.42. Lev. 6.10. Rev. 3 18. Rev. 1.5, 6. Rv. 9.9. Pi 3.9. All which being without spot, according to Davids Ordinance, weekly by turn from Sabbath to Sabbath, abstaining (as elsewhere) from wine, and from all other strong drinke, their privities covered with linnen breeches, outwardly cloathed and girded with a linnen garment, in due order, and with great reverence, they worship∣ped God, they offered sacrifices, and made their prayers, [yping Jesus Christ our High Priest, who cloaths his Saints (who are all Priests to God) with fine linnen, that is their Righteousnesse.] 80. The Altar of Incense of gold,Exo 30.37. Levit 2. 1 Mac 4. Luk. 1.8, 9.19. which by Gods Commande∣ment was placed over against the vaile hanging before the most holy place, (called the Holy of Holies) whereon the Priests, every day, morning and evening offered unto God, for a sweet savour, Frankincense, and sweet perfumes. The Angel Gabriel stand∣ing sometime at the right hand of this Altar, told unto Zachary, as he was offering Incense, the conception of John Baptist. 81. The Golden Candlesticke,Exo. 25.26.27, 37. Chapters. Levit. 24. Jos. 3. An. 10. Exod. 26.7.14. the which having seven branches, and so many Candles, was placed on the South side of the Temple; the which being lamps of most pure oyle, burned continually, and gave light as well by day as by night, to all the holy place [which was covered with vails, and had no other light. This is no warrant for burning Candles, or Torches where no need is in the day time.] 82. The Fountaine of water,Ezek. 47. Joel 3. Aristea lide 72 interpret. Corn. Tac. l. 21. which issued forth on the right side of the Temple, the water whereof Solomon derived into the sea of brasse, and into the Copper Laver; the which being carried from thence by Conduit pipes under the earth, breaking forth half a mile from the East side of the City, ran into the Brook Cedron, (or Kidron.) 83. The Golden Table,Exod. 25.26.37. Chap. Levit. 4. . Sam. 21. Mar. 2. s. 3. Ant. 9. the which stood on the North side of the Temple, whereon were set twelve loaves made of the most pure and fine flower of Wheat. The which being stale, remained to the use of the Priests, and then new were supplied againe every
bath day: upon the which were laid two golden Cups full of Frankincense. 84. The chiefe Priest his Image, and holy apparrel,Exod 28, 39. chap. Lev. 8.1 every part whereof shew forth unto us a divine and heavenly magnifi∣cence. For when he went to offer sacrifice, or to enter into the most holy place, he put on not onely the under garments, spoken of before under the number seventy nine, but also above upon them a Tunicle (or little coat) of Jacinth [sleeves down to the Ankles was mans device] at the lower hem wherof there did hang threescore and two golden bels, and in another border as many Pomegranats. The Tunicle was girt with a girdle foure fingers broad woven with silke, gold, precious stones, and flowers of sundry colours. Aloft above this, he did wear an Ephod or Superhumeral that is to say, a most fair cloake, made of gold, of Jacinth of purple, scarlet, and fine silke most curiously woven to∣gether, dazeling of the eyes by reason of the variety and glitte∣ring brightnesse of the colours and flowers.Exod. 28.9, 10. Upon each shoulder whereof there was a Beryl, or Onyx stone included in gold (which Josephus called Sardonix) in either of which stones, six names of the children of Israel were graven. Beside these,Vers. 15. he had the Reasonable (or Breast-plate) of Judge∣ment, which he carried upon his breast, wherein was doctrine and truth. The [Breast-plate of Urim] was a square thing about the breadth of a mans hand, woven and made of gold, Jacinth, purple, scarlet, and fine silke, whereto were fastened twelve precious stones of divers sorts, having ingraven in them the names of the twelve sons of Israel according to the order of their nativity. Moreover, on his head he wore a long round Cap [in form of a Miter] made of Jacinth and fine silke; upon the front whereof was set a brooch of gold in forme of a halfe globe, which figured the ineffable name of God, Tetragrammaton, with these four Hebrew letters  that is,Exod. 28.36. Holinesse to the Lord] thereon ingraven, setting forth by the wonderfull brightnesse thereof the excellency of the divine Majesty. Also the golden Censer in his hand, by which he offered unto God the most fragrant odour of Frankincense, is a part of his ornaments. All which things as they are full of mysteries, so some of them
excelled the rest: For [some boldly say, that stone which the high Priest did bear on his right shoulder, so often as he had pleased God with sacrifices, did so wonderfully shine, that they which stood a great way off might perceive it.Heb. 7.25.26. Heb. 2.17. & 5 2. Jer. 31.20.32. Luke 15.20.21 And (which is no lesse wonderfull) the twelve stones which were on the Breast-plate did foreshew unto them which went to the war, victory.] [But this is more clear and profitable; Here was typed out, how our great High Priest, bears up all his Israel by his mighty power, and bears them all in his heart before the Lord, who seeing them there, hath bowels of compassion on them, and remembers them continually.] Both the Reasonable,Jer 52.13. Neh 7.65. Dan 9.24, 25. and the Onyx also have ceased (one hun∣dred and five years, say some, yea above five hundred years before the Nativity of Christ to give their wonted shine and brightnesse. [Yea they were no more in use after the Babylonians burned the Temple.] 85. The Vaile was woven of Jacinth,Exo. 26.31.33 & 36.35: 2 Chron. 3.14. Matth. 27.51. Mar. 15.38. Luke 23.45. purple, scarlet, and fine silke, in most beautifull variety, and was adorned with Che∣rubims, and all manner of flowers imbroydered thereon, which hung at the gate before the most holy place, and at the death of Christ was rent from the top to the bottome, even in the midst. The third Part of the Temple. 86. THe Jewes Ile,1 King. 6.3. 2 Chron 3.4. Ezek. 40.7.48. Heb. 9.3. Joseph. 8. Ant. 3. & 15.14. &. 6 el. & 7. Bel. 4.16. & l. 2. cout. Appionem. which also is called the Entry, the Hall, the Holy Secular, and Solomons Porch, being the third part of the Temple. Into the which men went up by soure steps, whose pavement checkered with marble of sundry forts, was open to the aire, and uncovered, and was compassed about with a wall made with three degrees of stones of sundry colours. To the which were annexed great Porches broad, and above threescore and ten cubits high, borne up with marble pillars of fingle stones which were five and twenty cubits high, the roof covered with Cedar. The inst gates covered with gold, shined most gloriously: And it had three high gates; whereof the first tended toward the
East, the second toward the South, and the third toward the North; every one of the which gates were shut with two silver doors thirty cubits high, and fifteen broad; but the West part had no gate, but was inclosed with a whole wall. And this was called the Jews Isle or Hall because only the Jews being clean, and not polluted,Luke 1.8, 9. Joh. 10. Act 3, 4, 5. Jos. 15. Ant. 14. & 2 Bel. Jud. 16. & 6 Bel 6. & 7. Bel. 4. prayed there, and heard the words of the Law. In the which place, Christ taught the people oftentimes, and where the Jewes would have stoned him; and Peter when he bad healed the lame man spake unto the people, and converted five thousand men. Be∣fore this Hall inclosed with a lattice, there was a Table set, con∣taining this Law ingraven with letters of Greek and Latine, Every stranger that shall enter into the holy place shall dye. And the Romans had given authority to the Jews to put to death as well Romans as Jews, which transgresse this Law. The parts of the Jews Ile. 87. THe Altar of burnt offering of brasse which stood in the midst of the Ile open to the aire and uncovered,Ex. 27.1.8.38.1. 2 Chron. 4.1. Lev. 1.15. & 6.9. & 9, 7.8 Ex. 40.10. where∣in that perpetual fire was daily maintained by the putting to of wood, which fire in old time the Lord sent down from hea∣ven, when Aaron at the first time offered sacrifice in the Desart. On the which Altar, the Priests every day morning and evening, burnt sundry sort of Male-beasts, &c. which were clean, and without blemish, as Sheep, Oxen, and Goats, Turtles, Pigeons, and such like; which were consumed with this holy and perpetuall fire, for a burnt offering and odor of sweet savor unto the Lord. But (Apocry∣pha fabulously saith) how in the time of the Captivity of Babylon, this perpetual fire was hidden by the Priests in a dry Pit or Well,2 Mac. 1.18.3. and being sought for by Nehemiah the Priest threescore and ten years after the same, there could be no fire found in that place, but a certaine thick water, which by divine power at the prayer of Ne∣hemiah was set on fire. [So saith Apocripha,Neh. 8.8.9. Neh 12.26. in holy Scripture i no word of this; but Nehemia is called Tirshata, or Governour, and Ezra the Priest]
88. Boaz and Jochin (signifying strength, and establishing) two pillars of brasse of wonderful beauty,1 King. 7.2. 2 Chron. 3.15. two and thirty cubits high, whose circumference or circuit comprehended twelve cubits, which Solomon caused to bee made artificially, and placed them in the porch of the Temple, one at the right hand, which hee named Jachin, and the other at the left hand, which he called Boaz. 89. The Laver of brasse, a vessell of great capacity, full of water, placed by Solomon on the North side of the Temple,1 King. 7.23. 2 Chron. 4.2. Ios. 8. Ant. 3. whereon were carved the pictures of Cherubims, Lions, and Oxen. In this the Priests washed the beasts which should serve for burnt offer∣ings, which neverthelesse were first washed in the Sheep-pool, cal∣led Probatica. 90. The house of Councel,Mat. 26.3.27.1 Luke 22.66. at the South side of the Temple, where was the assembly of the Elders of the people. 91. The Closets,1 King 6.5.10. 1 Chro. 9.26. Jer. 35.2. Ezek. 92.13. 1 Mac. 4.— Ios. 5. Bel. 9.6. Bel. 6. or Treasuries, were side houses, long, broad, and high, like towers; In the which, the Priests when they should enter into the holy place, did put off their wollen garments, laying them up till their service was ended; wherein also they did eat the parts of the peace-offerings. 92. The Sea of brasse, containing very great store of water, which Solomon made,Exo. 30.18. & 38.8. 1 King. 7.23. 2 Chron. 4.2. containing very great store of water, which Solomon made, and placed on the South side of the Temple upon twelve Oxen brasse, wherein the Priests entring into the Temple to serve at the Altar, washed their hands and their feet. 93. The new Gate,Jer. 26.20. & 36.10. which was in the Ile of the Temple toward the South, where Jeremy fore-shewing that the City and Temple should be destroyed, was taken. And where Baruch read be∣fore the people the Prophesie of Jeremih. 94. The holy Gate,1 Esd. 9.38. otherwise called the brazen Gate, which be∣ing in the In-set part of the Temple, opened toward the East; be∣fore the which Esdras read the Law of God before the people;
and where the Rulers of the Jews, a long time after that, exhorted the seditious unto peace. 95. The Porch of the Temple,1 King 6.3. & 7.6. 2 Chr. 3.4. builded by Solomon before the Sanctuary, the which was twenty cubits long, and ten broad. 96. The Kings Seat which was very lofty,2 Chron. 9.17. Hier. in 2 Chro. 3. which Solomon prepa∣red for the Kings. 97. The Loft (or Chambers) of the Singers [where divine pray∣ses were sung with voice and with divers Instruments. So some say,Ezek 40 44. but no word of this in Ezek. 40. which points at a time not past, and legal, but to come, and Evangelical.] 98. The place of Zacharias,2 Chron. 24.20 Mat. 23.35. where he was stoned between the Temple, and the Altar. 99. The place where the Jews would have stoned Christ.Joh. 10.3 The fourth part of the Temple. 100. THe Ile which belonged to the Gentiles, being also called the out-set Court, which is the fourth part of the Temple,[Ezek. 40. See Number 97.] Jos. 15. Ant. 14. & 6. Bello. 6. & 7 Bel. 10. & lib. 2. contra Ap∣pionem. Ezek. 10.5. 2 King. 21, 5. into the which men ascended by many staires, whose in-set space open to the aire paved with all manner of beautifull stones, had foure excellent gates opening towards the foure parts of the world, which were shut with doors of brasse. This being a square porch much like a Cloyster, upholden with pillars of Marble, and seeled over with Cedar, was thirty cubits broad. The whole circuit and compasse of which porch, was five hundred paces. Into this Court or porch all sorts of Jews and Gentiles might enter, both clean and unclean; whereupon it was called the Court of the Gentiles. [Here hence it was that Christ did cast out twice the buyers and sellers, and suffered not any man to carry so much as a vessell through the same. So say some, but we finde it was the Temple it selfe, Joh 2 16. Mat. 21.12 Luke 19.45. Mark. 11.7.Joh. 1. See Number 110.] Here hee discharged the
woman taken in adultery. Here he taught oftentimes. Here also the Jews would have stoned him. Finally here it was that he was glorified before the Gentiles with a voice from heaven. The parts of the Court of the Gentiles. 101. THe Golden Eagle was of great weight set up by Herod the greater,Ios. 17. Antiq. 8. & 12. chap. Also 1 Belli Iud. 21. & 2 Bel. 1. over the greatest gate of the Temple; and was at the last pulled downe by the Jewes, and cut in peeces, whereupon arose a great tumult, and many were slain. 102. The Treasury of the Temple, in Hebrew called Corban, a chest wherein was offered, and kept such money, as served for the necessaries of the sacrifices for the sustentation of the poor,Mar. 7.7. Mat. 27.6. 2 King. 12.9. and for the repairing of the Temple. When Helidore, who was sent by the King of the Syrians, sought to take the spoyl of this treasury [it is said] he was scourged by Angels from heaven: And when Pilate by the like temerity would have bestowed this holy treasure for the bringing in of waters;2 Chron. 24. 2 Mac. 3. Ios. 18. Ant. 5. Ios. 17. Bel. 11. 2 Mac. 4. Joan. 8. Mar. 12 Luke 21. Ios. 18. Ant. 13. & 19. Mat. 20.19. Mar. 10.33. Lu. 18.32. Mar. 12.41. he was let and hindred by a general uproar of the people, the which neverthelesse the Ro∣mans, when they had won the City, took, and carried away. Also we read [in 2 Maccab.] that Lysimachus was slain near unto this place: Here it was that Christ taught himselfe to be the light of the world, and said that he should be lifted up upon the Crosse by the Jewes (or the Romans rather.) Christ sitting here, pronounced that the poore widow, offering two mites, had given more then all the rich. Over this treasury, for a monument of his adverse fortune turned into prosperity, King Agrippa hanged up that golden chaine, which the Emperour Cajus gave unto him, being equall in weight to that iron chaine with which his hands were bound by the command of the Emperour Tiberius. 103. Achas (or Ahaz his) Dial,2 King. 20.11. Isa. 38.8. the King, which he made, wherein the King Ezekias being sicke, for a signe of recovering his health, the shadow of the Sun, by divine miracle, went backwards ten degrees.
104. The North Gate,1 Chro. 26. [Ezek. 40.23] whereof mention is oftentimes made in the Scripture, and in Josephus. 105. The South Gate mentioned oftentimes in Scripture,1 Chro. 26.13. and in Josephus. 106. The West Gate,1 Chro. 26.13 1 Chro. 23. the which also in the book of * Chronicles is called the gate of foundation. [* Qu. If meant of the gate of the fountain, Neh. 3.15.] 107. The East Gate, which also is called the gate Sur, other∣wise Seir; also the Kings gate, and the Beautiful gate,1 Chon 9.26. Nehem. 3. 2 King. 11.15. chap. 2 Chron. 27. Acts 3.1, 2. because of all the rest it was the greatest, highest and fairest, by which also there was the principall entrance into the Temple. This being de∣cayed was repaired by King Joatham. And neer unto this gate the Apostle Peter with his word (in the name of Jesus Christ) healed the man which was lame from his mother womb, and sate there begging of alms. 108. The Towers of Trumpeters,Num. 10. Jos. 5. Bel. 9. which were erected aloft in the west corners of the Temple. In the tops whereof, the Priests, wanting the use of bells, with two silver Trumpets,Num. 28. called the people unto the Temple. From thence also they told the people of Festival dayes, of Sabbaths, of Fasts, and of solemne Feasts. 109. Here Christ writing with his finger on the ground made the accusers of the women taken in adultery ashamed,John 8.2, 3. and set her free. 110. Here Christ making a whip of cords,[See Number 100] Joh. 2.16. Mat. 21.12. Mar. 11.17. cast out the buyers and sellers, together with their Merchandise.
Thus far we have spoken of the Temple, and of the parts there∣of, and now we will prosecute the other parts of the Daugh∣ter of Sion. 111. The Theater which was builded in form of a halfe circle, by Herod the Ascalonite King of the Jews,Jos. 15. & Ant. 9. & 20. Ant. 15 near unto the Pallace of the Macchabees. In the circuit whereof in Imagery was set forth the Titles, the Victories, and Spoyls of Augustus Caesar, shining with silver and gold; where the better, and more worthy sort sitting upon stairs and seats made round in compasse, and the rest standing therein, beheld the players, and actors, and Mu∣sitians playing their Comedies and Tragedies, and other Playes. The Places of the Daughter of Sion. 112. THe Throne of Solomon.1 King. 10. 2 Chron 9.17. Jos. 8. Ant. 5. It was a very great Throne of Ivory, covered over with shining gold, close and round in the top like a Judgement seat, having six steps or stairs, at each end whereof were twelve Lions set. In this Throne King Solomon sate, when he heard the controversies of the people, and pronoun∣ced Judgement, and capital sentences, appointing Laws and Sta∣tutes.Lyra in 3. King 7. Herein also he sate, when in royall manner he would shew forth his pompe, glory, and riches, and when he intended to be∣stow upon his faithfull servants rewards. 113. The Passage which King Solomon made of strong timber, to go from his Pallace into the Temple.2 Chron. 9. 114. The Tribunal, was a publicke place, set before the house of Pilate,John 19.13. Mat. 27.19. Mar. 15. and appointed for Judgement, where the Lieutenants of Rome were wont to give sentence, which in Greek was called LI∣THOSTROTOS, that is, a place of pavement, and in Hebrew GABATHA, because it was high and lofty. Pilate sitting in this judgement seat, and having good will to free Jesus standing before him, took water and washed his hands before the people,
saying, I am innocent from the blood of this just man: But all the people crying out, Crucifie him, Crucifie him, his blood be on us, and on our children: And further laying treason to his charge in that he made himselfe a King, he condemned Christ to the death of the Crosse in this forme of words: wee may finde them in a certaine Author, from whence we faithfully report them. Jesum Nazarenum subversorem Gentis, contemptorem Cae∣saris, & falsum Messiam, ut majorum suorum testimonio pro∣batum est, ducite ad communis supplicii locum;Salig. Tom. 8. cap. 7. & cum ludi∣brio Regiae Majestatis, in medio duorum latronum cruci affi∣gite. I lictor, expedi cruces; that is to say, Carry ye to the place of common execution Jesus of Nazareth, a subverter of his Nation, a coutemner of Caesar, and[This seems to crosse that in Joh. 19.19, 20.22.] a false Messias, as is pro∣ved by the testimony of the Elders of his own people, and cruci∣fie him between two theeves in reproach and scorne of his Kingly Majesty; Go Hangman, and make ready with speed the crosses. The which sentence being pronounced, he delivered him to the Souldiers to be crucified: Who brought forth Jesus, deprived of all beauty and comelinesse, and more like a Leaper,Isa. 53, 2.3. then to himselfe, by reason of the paines which they had laid on him; but that he might be known unto the people, they put on him again his own garments, and carrying his crosse, with two theeves through the Gate of Judgement, to bee crucified in Mount Calvary. Pilate sitting in this Tribunal seat in time of an Insurrection for bestowing the holy treasures of the Temple,Jos 18. Ant. 5. & 2 Bel. 8. Euseb. 2. Hist. Bel. 6. Niceph. 2 Hist. Ec. 10. which were called Corban, gave a secret signe to the Souldiers which were privily armed under their cloaths, that they should not use swords, but clubs, to beat down the tumultuous Jews; By which means many of them were slaine, many sore wounded, and very many trodden under foot, even to death, by their owne company in the tu∣mult. After this Florus the Lieutenant sitting in the same judgement seat, caused many of the Noblemen,Jos. 2. Bel. 14.15. and Gentlemen of the Jewes, to be beaten and torn with rods and whips and to be faste∣ned on crosses, who also caused many other massacres about the City, nothing sparing neither women, children, nor sucking babes.
The which were certain beginnings of vengeance taken by Al∣mighty God upon the obstinate Jews for the shedding of the innocent blood of Christ. 115. The Tower of Strato,Jos. 13. Ant. 18. Bel. 3. in Greek called Pyrgus Sratonis, scituate between the Castle Antonia and the Temple, it was a hollow and an obscure passage where Antigonus was slain by the souldiers of his brother. 116. The Valley of Cedron,2 King. 23.4.6.12. Sopho. 1. Ios. 14. Ant. 8 & 15. Ant. 14. Item 1. Bel 5. & 6. Bel. 6, 7. & 6. Ios. 20. Ant, 16. Eus. 2. Hist. Ec. 23▪ [or Kidron] broad, deep, and darke, which in manner of a ditch or trench compassed the Temple round about. And because it was disposed after the fashion of a Morter, it was called in Hebrew Macthes, and in Latine Pila. This was so exceeding deep, that men could not look down from the roof of the Temple into the bottome thereof, but their eyes would dazle, and their heads seem to turn with giddinesse. Herein Mer∣chants, and all sorts of Chapmen dwelled. Into this Valley James the brother of the Lord, first Bishop of Jerusalem (say Roman Writers) for professing Jesus the Son of God on the feast of Passe∣over, was cast down headlong from the battlements of the Tem∣ple at the command of Anani a Saduce, chief Priest, and was immediately knocked on the head with a Fullers club, and was there buried near unto the Temple; his Monument remaining there a long time after (as some write.) 117. The Wall of the Crosse [as some note it] by which Christ having received his judgement to be cruicified, went forward with painfull and bloody steps to mount Calvary.D. Petrus Po∣teus, & M. Mat∣thaeus Stenberch did measure the City of Jerusalem long since, by whose report this Descripti∣on is made [many hun∣dred years af∣ter.] Sect. 2. For [thus * some Romanists write of it] beginning at the Pallace of Pilate, he made six and twenty steps (which make threescore and five foot) unto the place where the crosse was laid upon him. Sect. 3. From whence (all the City gazing on him) carrying his crosse on his sore shoulders, he came towards the West, or ra∣ther North-west fourscore steps, which make two hundred foot, to the place, where men say, that he fell downe under his Crosse. Sect. 4. From thence going forward by threescore steps, and
three foot (which make a hundred fifty, and three foot) he came to the place where (they say) the blessed Virgin Mary,Also Petrus Calentinus in his book entituled, The way of the Crosse. See Number 123. with John the Apostle, met with him. And proceeding from hence by threescore and eleven steps, and one foot, and a half (which make a hundred seventy and nine foot) he came to a certain crosse-way, where Simon of Cyren was compelled to bear the hinder part of the Crosse with Christ. [Is not this a notable proof with Scripture for saying on beads Latin prayers at crosse-wayes.] Sect. 5. Taking his way hence by one hundred ninety, and one step, and halfe a foot (which cometh to four hundred and seventy foot) [How punctually did some thus measure the feet some hundred years after] he came to the place where [they write Veronica] met with him. And from thence going three hundred thirty six steps, and two feet (which amount to eight hundred forty and two feet) he came to the Judiciary gate, where once again he fell with his Crosse. Sect. 6. From thence he ascending faintly a very hard and stony way towards the North, he gained three hundred forty and eight steps, and two foot (the summe eight hundred seventy and two foot) which brought him unto a two-fold way, where certaine women weeping spake unto him: And from hence labouring for∣ward threescore steps and one, and halfe a foot (which make foure hundred and foure foot) he fell downe the last time, at the foot of the Mount Calvary. From thence he wearily, and faintingly went forward eighteen steps, or forty five foot to the place where the Hang-men drew off his cloaths, where they gave him to drink wine mixed with mirrh and gall. Sect. 7. Then he went on twelve steps, or thirty foot, even to the place where he was nayled on the Crosse on mount Calvary. So that from the Pallace of Pilate, unto the place where Iesus was crucified, the distance is a thousand three hundred and seven steps, or by another account, three thousand two hundred sixty and eight foot. We have made such exact description (saith the P. P. Author) and demonstration of the Way of the Crosse (as also the Way of the Captivity hereafter expressed under the Number of two hundred and five) to the end that every Christian man, in all places,
even in the doors of his house, or walking oftentimes in his Gar∣den, or being in a journey, or in the Temple, either lying in his bed, may by the imagination of his minde conceive the like way, and with godly affection of the heart may meditate upon the pas∣sion of Christ; the which no doubt, is both acceptable unto God, and for our own souls health most profitable, as the writings of good men by their often exhortation do testifie. [But a far bet∣ter helpe is appointed and afforded of God, even the holy Scriptures themselves, that doe best and most affectingly set forth Christs Passion, as Isa. 53.1, 2. Mat. 26.20. to the end of Mat. 27. Mar. 14. Joh. 18. & 19.] 118. The way of entrance for the Horses,Neh. 3.28. 2 King. 11.19. 2 Chron 23. Jos. 9. Ant 7. which was between the Pallaces of Solomon, and of the Queen. By which Athalia the Queen being brought out of the horse-gate, was slaine in the valley of the brook Cedron (or Kidron) 119. The Gallery, made in form of a stone bridge, with many arches, extending it selfe with ample largenesse over the common street, adorned with open walks upon the same. From the which there was a passage from the Pallace of Pilate into the Castle of An∣tonia, and so from thence into the Temple. From this place, being very safe,Joan. 19. the Lieutenants of Rome were wont to speak unto the people; whereon Pilate standing, exhibited Jesus to the Princes and people of the Jews to be looked on, being very sore scourged, spit on,Breid. 14. Jul. Salig. 8. cap. 7. cloathed with a purple cloak, and wearing a sharp crown of thorns upon his head, saying unto them, Behold the man, that he being thus afflicted, they might have compassion on him: But they with confused voyces cryed, Crucifie him, Crucifie him. Whereas yet an arch of stone is to be seen,Ios. 2. Belli Iud. 6. & 5. Bel. 9. and is shewed unto strangers (written by Relick-mungers some hundred years after) with this Inscription, Tolle, Tolle, crucifig— the rest cannot be read by reason Antiquity hath worn it out. From this Gallery King Agrippa pronounced an eloquent Oration to pacifie the seditious people exhorting them to obey the Romans. Josephus maketh mention many times of this Gallery. 120. The Crosse of Christ,Pasch. Descrip. Ierus. 207. which was laid on his shoulder, was fifteen
foot long, and eight foot over, as we have received by Tradition of the Elders. 121. Here it is said that Christ fell the first time under his Crosse.Pasch. d. 207. 122. Here also by Tradition of some Fathers, it is said, that the bles∣sed Virgin Mary with John, and certaine godly women stood, as Christ passed by with his Crosse. 123. Christ being come to these two wayes (of which in Number 117. Sect. 4.) and being wearied with the heavy burden of his Crosse, is said to have fallen. For the which cause,Mat. 27.32. Mar. 15.21. Luke 23.26. Breid. 14. Iul. Sa. 1.8. c. 7. Pas. d. 208. the souldiers and Jews, fearing that he would faint before he could be crucified, took a certain man coming out of the Country, named, Simon of Cyren, and compelled him to carry the Crosse after Jesus; (or to helpe him to carry it.) The third Part of the City. 124. The second City, this is, the third part of the City,2 King. 22. 2 Chron. 34, 8. Sopho. 1. Hier. in 2. Chron. 34.8. Ios. 6. Bel. 10. See page 2. the which also had many narrow wayes whereof mention is made sometime in the Scripture; wherein, among others, many Prophets and Noble-men dwelt. This when the Romans had gotten, they were by the seditious again driven out of the City. [The name of it in Hebrew is Jerushalajim of the dual number, implying, (it seems) two Cities, the higher above the lower, to which the Apostle seems to allude, Gal. 4.25, 26.] The places of the second City. 125. The Lake Amigdalon,Ios. 6. Bel. 12. neer unto which Titus erected a Bul∣warke. 126. The house of Mary, the Mother of John, and of Marke, one of the seventy and two Disciples of Christ,Acts 12.12.4. wherein the faithfull of the Primitive Church were wont to assemble themselves, and to pray. Where also after the Martyrdome of James the
Apostle, when Peter was cast into prison by Herod Agrippa, they prayed without ceasing for his deliverance:Sal. Tom. 8. c. 4. Who at the last being brought out of prison by the Angel, and knocking at the door of this house, was by a Damsel brought into the same. In the which place afterward a Church-house was builded, which was the first of the Christian Greeks. And is an Episco∣pall Seat, which the Syrians hold unto this day; [said the Author.] 127. The house of Olda [or Hulda the Prophetesse,2 King. 22.14. 2 Chro. 34.22. [not a Nun, but] the wife of Sellum [a famous Noble-man, the great Uncle (say some) of the Prophet Jeremy] whose counsell being asked by the King Josias, she foretold him of the destruction of Jeru∣salem. 128. A Conduit,Ios. 2. Bel. Iul. 18. & 6. Bel. 6. and Fountaine, which by Pipes sent forth water aloft, and by the like Pipes derived water into Herods Pallace, and about the same, filling the Cisterns thereof. 129. The Wood market,Ios. 2. Bel. 24. which Cestius set on fire. 130. The habitation of the Rechabites;Jer. 35.2, 3. (say some) who living Re∣ligiously according to the Commandement of their Father, pos∣sessed neither fields nor vineyards; and like pilgrims of this world, dwelt not in houses, but in tents, and wholly abstained from wine. Wherefore when through the necessity of war they were com∣pelled to come into the City, Jeremy [not drinking wine unto them, but] by the Commandement of God, bidding them drink wine, they would drink no wine. By which example of their obedi∣ence, the same Prophet reprehended the disobedience of the obsti∣nate Jews, neglecting the Commandement of God, and therefore he did set before the one a punishment, and before the other a re∣ward. 131. A Lake (or a Ditch) which was scituate between two walls of the City,Isa. 22.11. whereof mention is made in Isaiah the Prophet. 132. The middle Tower,Ios. 6. Bel. 9. which was in the middle wall.
133. A Monument of Alexander Jannaeus the high Priest and King,Ios. 13 Ant 21. & 6 Bel. wherein he was buried by the authority of the Pharisees, very sumptuously. 134. A Monument of Johannes Hircanus, high Priest and Cap∣taine, of whom mention is often made in Josephus.Ios. 6. Bel. 7. 135. The second Wall, the which is also called the Middle-wall,2 Chron 32. Neh. 3.8 & 12 Ios. 6. Bel. 6. beautified with many gates, and divided with fourteen Towers; the which wall Hezekias the King repaired, and made more strong and higher. 136. The Pallace of Herod, which was builded by Herod the Ascalonite King of the Jews (who killed the Innocents) with sundry sorts of pollished marble stones near unto the West-wall of the City, from the old wall, even to the middle wall,Mat. 2. Ios. 6 Bel. 6. being most singularly beautified with silver and gold, most strongly for∣tified with an iron gate, and three most excellent Towers, to wit, Hippic, Mariam, and Phasel, which in greatnesse, strength,Ios. 2 Bel. 17. Ios. 6. Bel. 6. and beauty, excelled all the Towers of the whole world. Within was the Kings Hall, which being builded on high, and very lofty with unspeakable magnificence, was wholly compassed about with most beautifull Towers, Parlors, Chambers, Galleries, Porches, and with Pillars, with which there was an inclosed Court, open to the aire. In this Hall Christ was presented to Herod Antipas, Te∣trarch of Galilee (who had killed John the Baptist;) This He∣rod asked Christ many questions,Luke 23.8. Mat. 14.1. Vers 10. Luke 23.9, 10. Vers. 11. Mat. 27.28. Breid. 14. Iul. who was there constantly ac∣cused by the Jewes; whom when he answered nothing, the same Herod, and his whole rout, despised, and scorned, and so sent him to Pilate clad in white, and in scarlet, as if he had been a fool, or a Kingly Jester [No wonder therefore if Christs members be scornfully used. Then they should look unto Jesus, and follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Heb. 12.2.] Now that Hall, or Pallace, is a School for children of the Infidels.
137. The Middle Gate of the second wall wherein the outward∣most walls being broken,Jer. 39.3. & 52. the Princes of the King of Babylon did sit. 138. The outwardmost Court, compassing the Hall of Herod round about,Jos. 2. Bel. 1.7. where the Kings souldiers did watch and ward; Wherein was the Kings prison whereinto malefactors were put. In this prison Saint Peter was shut up by King Herod Agrippa, who had slaine James the greater. Which Peter being bound with two chaines,Act. 12.1, 2. and most safely kept by four quaternions of souldiers all the daies of sweet, (or unleavened) bread: But in the night before the day whereon he should have been put to death, he was by the Angel of the Lord loosed from his chaines, and by him brought forth through an iron gate, by the first and second watch into the City. (As in Act. 12.) 139. The Lake called Strutium,Jos. 6. Bel. Jud. 12. which was the middle Lake. Here also Titus caused a Bulwark to be made. 140. The Tower Hippic, which being four square, was builded in the second wall upon a high hill.Ios. 6. Bel. 5, 6, 7. which being four square, was builded in the second wall upon a high hill. It was fourscore and five cubits high; and having two tops, was to be seene afarre off. It was marvelous strong, builded by Herod the elder, who having in the war lost his friends the Hippicks, called this Tower after their name, Hippic. 141. The Tower Mariamne, which being fifty cubits high, stood aloft in most beautiful manner,Ios. 15. Ant. 9. & Bel. 16. & 6 Bel. 6. upon a high hill of the old wall, which Herod builded for a memorial of Mariamne his best be∣loved wife, whom hee had slaine, and called it after her name Mariamne. And because it carried the name of a Queen, there∣fore it was more beautifull in shew then the other. 142. The Tower Phaselus,Ios. 14. Ant. 22. & 16. Ant. 5. which being fourscore and ten cubits high, set upon a high place of the old wall, and made aloft in form of a ball, was of wonderfull height and exceeding strong; Which Herod builded after the fashion of the Tower Pharus in Alex∣andria.
And in the honour of his brother Phaselus called it Phaselus, who being taken prisoner by the Parthians,Ios. 17. Ant. 14. & 1. Bel. 11. & 6 Bel. 6. & 7. Bel. 18. and having no liberty to use neither weapon nor hands, ran his head against a stone, and so killed himselfe. How this, and the other two Towers were left standing after the destruction of Jerusalem, read under the number of (1) going before. 143. Herods Parke, which had in it an Orchard and a Garden, wa∣tred with Ponds, Rivers, and Fountains,Jos. 6. Bel. 6. replenished with sundry wild beasts, Fishes and Fouls, having many large Walks, and round about the same, many towers of tame Doves. 144. The Hospital,Jos. 13. Ant. 15. Egesi. 1. Hist. Jud. 1. which Hircanus the high Priest founded with the money which he got out of the Sepulchre of David, wherein pilgrims, poor men, and such as were impotent, were sustained and kept. 145. The wrestling place,Ios. 6. Bel. 6. the which was placed in Herods Pallace. It was large, serving in the Winter time for Wrestlers, and for other exercises, and pastimes, wherewith men recreated themselves. The fourth part of the City. 146. THe new City, called in Greek Kaenopolis,Jos. 19. Ant. 7. & 2. Bel. 15. & 6. Bel. 6.7.9.13 the fourth part of the City, the which was severed as the other parts of the City were with walls, and many narrow wayes, which went crosse, extending to the walls of the City; wherein dwelt Wool∣sellers, Carpenters, Smiths, and other Workmen and Artificers. Latine Baze∣tha.The places of the new City. 147. Bezetha, a Mountain,Jos. 6. Bel. 6. the which having many houses built thereon, was inhabited by the common sort of people. 148. The Castle of the Assyrians,Ios. 6. Bel. 8. & 13. neer unto the which Titus pitch∣ed
his Tents at such time as hee had gotten the wall of the City. This Castle stood more then an arrow-shoot from the second wall. 149. The third Wall, the which also is called the out set wall, which King Agrippa made upon the common charge of the Citizens,Ios. 19. Ant. 7. & 2 Bel. 10. & 6. Bel. 6. extending it more broad and high then it was before. This wall was very firme and strong, five and twenty cubits high. It had fourscore and ten square and lofty Towers which were of great force, distant one from the other two hundred cubits, whose building and beauty in stone work, was nothing inferior to that of the Temple. 150. The broad Street,Neh. 8.16. Neh 12.39. the which also was called the street of the gate of Ephraim. 151. The Kings Caves,Ios. 6. Bel. 6. upon the which the third wall of the City was builded in length. The Gates and Towers about the City. 152. Caphenetha,1 Mach. 12.37. the East wall of the City upon the brook Cedron, which Jonathas Machabees repaired. 153. The corner stone,Isa. 28.16. Psal. 87.1. Ps. 118.22. 1 Cor. 3.11. Acts 4.11. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. which was most hard, being the firme foun∣dation of mount Sion. This was a figure of Christ, who is the strong and stable foundation of his Church. 154. The Gate of the Corner, so called because it was scituate in the North-east corner of the City,2 King. 14.13. 2 Chron 25.23 Jer 31.38. Zah. 14.10. Broc. itin 6 Sal. Tom. 8. cap. 5. next unto the brook Cedron. The which also was called the gate of Benjamin, because the way lead through the same unto the tribe of Benjamin. By this gate, wood was brought into the City out of the Desart. In this gate also Jeremy the Prophet was apprehended, whose ruines are now to be seen a great way out of the City. 155. The golden Gate, scituate between the gate of the valley, and
the gate of the Fountain, so called, because it was gilded with gold; It was also called the East-gate,Ezek. 43.4. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 9. cap. 4 Breid. 14. Pasch. die. 184. Mat. 21. Joh. 12 because it was builded on the East-side of the Temple: And because it lead by a very short way, from the Temple to mount Olivet, it was rather a gate of the Temple then of the City; and therefore Nehemias made no mention thereof. By this gate Christ came riding upon an Asse into the City of Jerusalem, at what time men cut down palms and strowed them in his way, crying, Hosanna before him. 156. The Gate of Ephraim, which now of some is called S. Stephens gate,2 King. 14.15. 2 Chron. 25 23 Neh. 8.16. & 12.39. Jos. 9. Ant. 10. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 8. cap. 5 scituate on the North part tending toward the way which leadeth unto the tribe of Ephraim, whereupon it was called the Gate of Ephraim. From this gate unto the gate of the corner, Joaz King of Israel, beat down the wall of Jerusalem by the space of four hundred cubits, and in triumphant manner he being carried into the City in his chariot through that breach, became Lord of the City. Which wall, together with the Towers thereof, Uzziah King of Juda afterward restored again. 157. The Water-gate,Neh. 3, 15.26.28. Ne. 8.1.16. 2 Chron. 23. Ier. 19.31. Broc. itin. 6. Salig Tom. 8. cap. 5. the which was scituate between mount Sion and the mount Moria in the valley called Mello, toward the East. It was called the Water-gate, because it opened a passage unto the Fountain of the water of Siloe; and because horses were carried through the same to be watred in the brook Cedron. And for this cause it was called the East horse-gate, and it tended toward the the valley Gehennom. 158. The Gate Genath, or the Gate of King Herods Garden, which was not far from the second wall of the City,Jos. 6 Bel. 6, 7, 8 by which water was brought up into the Tower Hippic. By this gate the seditious privily sallied out many times upon the Romans. 159. The Gate of the Kings Garden,2 King. 25.4 which in mount Sion was placed between two walls of the castle, by which King Zedechias fled in the night. 160. The Gate of the high Priests Pallace,Neh. 3.26.28. at the South side of the City.
161. The Fish-Gate,Neh. 12.39. 2 Chro. 33.14 Sopho. l. 10. Nehem. 3.3. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. tom. 8. cap. 1, 5. the which was scituate next to the Tower of David in the valley of Mello, between mount Sion, and the lower City, towards the West; and by the vault adjoyning to the same, it gave a convenient passage to and from the City to every man. And it was called the Fish-gate, because through the same Fishes were brought into the City from Joppe, & from other Towns of the Seacoast. This also had other names, as the gate of David, and the Merchants gate. Davids gate, because it was next to Davids Tower; and the Merchants Gate, because by the same much Merchandize were carried into the City from Bethelem, Hebron, Gaza, from Aegypt, and from Aethiopia. By this Gate strangers that came from the West, were wont to enter into the City. 162. The Dung-gate, on the East-side of the City, toward the Comer-gate,Neh. 3.14. & 12.31. on the North-east, carried all the dung and filth of the City which the rain▪ gathered together, into the brook Cedron, whereupon it was rightly called the Dung-gate. 163. The Gates of Womens Towers.Broc. iti. 6. Sa. tom. 8. c. 5. Ios. 6. Bel. 2. & 5. On the North end of the City, by which the seditious brake forth upon the Romans, when they besieged the City. 164. The Valley Gate,2 Chron. 26.9: Neh. 2.13.15. Neh. 3.13. Broc. itin. 6. Breid. 14. Iul. Sal. tom. 8.6.5. so named, because it made way into the Valley of Jehosaphat, scituate in the midst between the Dung-gate, and the Golden-gate, and not far distant from the Sheep-market, and the Pool called Probatica. The which also for this cause deserved to be called the Drove-gate, because the flocks of Cattel which were sold in the Sheep-market, and were to bee offered for sacrifice in the Temple, were brought in by this gate. But now it is called S. Stephens gate, of the first Martyr Stephen, which was stoned to death not far from the same. 165. The old Gate,Neh. 3.6. & 12.39. Deut. 22.24. Ruth 4.1. Heb. 13.12. which being on the West-part of the City, was called in time past by the Jebusites the Gate Jebus. It was also called the Judgement gate, because in old time, the Judges did fit there in Judgement. For then the Seniors did exercise Justice
and Judgement in the Gates of their Cities; and such as were condemned to dye, went out at this Gate.Broc. itin. 6. Sal. tom. 8. cap. 7. Whereupon Christ was lead out of the same to be crucified. Of this Gate there are at this day some old remainders and ruines to be seen. 166. The Rock, which was very high, going along from the Tower Psephina unto Mount Sion,Broc. itin. 6. upon the which the whole West-wall of the City stood. 167. The Tower Hananeel, the which being not far distant from the Corner-gate, towards the East, and by North,Jer. 31.38. Zach. 14.10. Neh. 3.1. & 12 39. was very strong and notable, whereof the holy Scripture maketh mention often∣times. 168. The Corner Tower, standing aloft upon the Corner gate,2 Chron. 26.9. which King Ozias did strongly repair, and made it one hundred and fifty cubits high. 169. The Tower of David, strong and lofty,2 Sam. 5.9. Vuil. Tyr. 9. be, sac. 3. Broc. itin. 6. the which was builded by King David in a corner of two deep Valleys, on the top of a broken rocke, with four square stones most firmly joyned together with Iron and Lead, whose singular fortitude, and notable beauty, for the commendation of Christs Spouse (which is the Church) is spoken of by Solomon, when he saith, Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded with Bulwarks, whereupon there hang a thousand shields, yea all the weapons of the Giants.Cant. 4.4. 170. The high Tower,2 Chron. 26.9. Ios. 9. Ant. 11. which was builded upon the gate of the Valley. The which also King Ozias repaired; and that it might be seen beyond mount Olivet, he made it one hundred and fifty cubits high. 171. The Lantern Tower [or Tower of Furnaces] scituate on the North-end of the City, which men thinke was so called,Neh 3.11. . 12.38. because fire was continually kept there, to serve as a Marke both for Land and Seafaring men, to direct them in the right way.
172. The great Tower,Neh. 3.27. which standing near the wall of the Tem∣ple, was higher then the rest. 173. The Tower Meah,Neh. 3.1. & 12.39. otherwise Emat, that is say, of one hundred cubits, which was not far from the Temple. 174. The Tower Psephina,Jos. 6 Bel. 2.5, 6 Broc. itin. 6. which was eight square, of seventy cu∣bits high, founded at the North-west corner of the City upon a very high rock, being like a strong Tower, which by reason of the exceeding height thereof, was fearfull, from whence on a clear day, men might behold Arabia, the Sea, and the uttermost borders of the Hebrews. The ruines whereof are as yet to be seen. 175. The Tower of Siloe, which falling in Christs time, slew eighteen men.Luke 13.4. 176. The deep valley,Broc. itin. 6. which compassing mount Sion on the North and South part, went all along the West side of the City, even to the gate of Ephraim, making a fit and convenient ditch for the City. The places without the City. The places at the East part of the City. 177. The Water which was brought out of the Temple by Con∣duit pipes under the earth,Arist. lib. de 72. interpret. Jo. 18.1. issued forth here with great noise, and so ran into the brook Cedron. 178. Bethania, the Noble Castle of Mary and of Martha the sisters of Lazarus,Mat. 21.17. ch. 26.6. Mar. 11.1. Luke 10.29. Ioh. 11.1. & 12.1. having many houses, the which was scituate beyond mount Olivet, distant from Jerusalem fifteen furlongs, that is, two Italian miles. From which place, though it were but a little way off, yet by reason that mount Olivet ay between the City Jerusalem could not be seen, except from a little hill, from whence part of mount Sion might bee seen. Christ oftentimes
lodged in this house of Martha, where he preached the word of God to Mary sitting at his feet. Here he raised up Lazarus to life, after he had been buried four dayes, and began to stinke. Here, he sitting in the house of Simon the Leper, at the table to∣gether with Lazarus, Martha serving them, Mary anointed him with a most precious ointment. 179. Bethphage, a little village, belonging to the Priests, seituate at the East foot at the mount Olivet,Mat. 21.1. Mark 11.1. Luke 19.22. Ioh. 12.1. Luke 19.41, 42 from whence Christ sent two of his Disciples unto the Castle Opposite, or over against them, to fetch the Asse and the Colt; which being brought, and the peo∣ples cloaths laid on the Colt, he road on the same into Jerusalem; But coming down from mount Olivet, and seeing the City, hee wept on her, and prophesied her utter ruine, because she knew not the day of her Visitation. 180 The Castle [or Village] Opposite,Mat. 26.6, 7. Mat. 11.3. Luke 19.23. or which lyeth over against you (to use the words of Christ) when he sent his Disciples to fetch him the Asse. It was a Village right over against Bethphage. [It seems to be Bethany.] 181. The Well, neer unto Bethany, where when the Lord came to raise up Lazarus, Martha first met with him,Ioh. 11.30. and afterward cal∣led forth her sister Mary. [The Scripture hath not one word of any Well in that place.] 182. The Little Hill, at the foot of mount Olivet,Jos. 6. Bel. 13. neer unto the Dove-house a little above the valley of Siloe. 183. The withered Fig-tree, planted beside the way of Bethany,Mat. 21.19. Mar. 11.15. which for bearing no fruit, but being garnished onely with leaves, was cursed of Christ, and so presently withered. 184. The Dragon Fountaine, which doth spring even at this day, which was between the Valley and the Dung-gate.Jos. 15.8. & 18.16. 2 King. 23.10. 2 Chr. 28.3 & 33.6. & 19.2 & 32 35. 185. Gehennom, the which also was called Benhinnom, that is to say, the Valley of the sons of Ennom, (or Hinnon.) It was a place
which was scituate in the Suburbs of the City of Jerusa∣lem toward the South-east. In which place of Benhinnom was the Tabernacle, and the Idoll Moloch: the which Idoll as it was chiefe and principal among all the other Idols, so the same being the greatest abomination, and most hated unto God, he oftentimes forbad the same in the Scriptures. It was an Idol, the matter whereof was brasse, made in the likenesse and smilitude of a King, (of which some write thus.) It was hollow within, and had a head like to the head of a Calfe, the other parts or members of the body having the shape and fashion of a man, the armes whereof were stretched out, whereto the children that should be offered were made fast, and with the vehement and ex∣treme heat of the Idoll were burned, and utterly consumed, being so holden as it were of the same between his armes. For when the Idoll was made red hot with the fire which they had put into the hollownesse of the same, then the most wicked parents of these children in most cruel and barbarous manner,Lev. 18.21. & 20 2, 3. 1 King. 11.7. delivered up their sonnes and their daughters to (and into) these detestable and de∣velish imbracings of the Idoll, that so they might be burnt. And this they did of a certain divelish devotion, offering them up to the devill Moloch for a burnt offering of most filthy savour. Amidst these horrible torments wherewith they were thus tormented, the miserable Clamor of the children could in no wise be heard,Act 7.43. 2 King. 16. & 21. whereby the parents might in any sort be moved to pity or com∣passion, for that the Priests of this Idoll Moloch, during the whole time of the sacrifice, did usually make an exceeding great noise both with the Trumpets, and Drums, or Tabrets. Where∣upon that place was called also Tophet. In this abominable manner,2 Chron. 28.33. 2 King. 23.10. Achaz, and Manasses also, Kings of Juda, being even as mad as the common people, offered up their Sonnes to the Devill Moloch. The which de∣testable madnesse, the godly King Josias seeking at the length to redresse, brake in peeces the Image of Moloch, cut downe his Groves, and defiled the place thereof with the filthinesse of dead Carcasse, of bones, and of other unclean things, and appointed it to be a perpetual dunghil for ever.Jer. 7.5. & 19.7.32.35. Isa. 30. In this Valley Jeremy at the Commandement of God, break∣ing an earthen pot in peeces against the ground before the Elders
of Juda; prophesied that God would after the selfe-same man∣ner, break and destroy both the City, and the people. According to which Prophesie, there was so great and mighty a multitude of people slaine there, because they had filled this place with the blood of innocent children, that this place was called no more the valley of Tophet, but Poly and ron, that is to say, a heap of many dead bodies, whose carcases lying there unburied, became meat for the birds of the aire, and for the beasts of the fields. 186. Gethsemani, a firm place at the foot of mount Olivet.Matth. 26.26. Mar. 14.32. This had many fruitful Olive trees. When Christ intended to go unto the Garden that was in mount Olivet, he came from his last Supper into this place, heavy and sorrowfull unto the death. 187. The Garden of Olivet,Mat 26.39. Mar. 14.35. Luke 22.41. John 18.1. Hier. in loc. Heb lit. G. Broc. it in 6. Bre. 14. Jul. in the mount of Olivet, where Christ pray∣ed unto his Father three times, that the cup of his Passion might passe from him. And being in an agony as he continued in prayer, he swet blood which fell drop by drop unto the earth, at what time he was comforted by an Angel from heaven. In Hieroms time, there was a Church builded on this place, which is as yet to be seen. 188. The Kings Garden,2 King. 25.4. Cant. 4. Jer. 39.4. & 52 Jos. 7. Aut. 15. & 9. Aut. 11. the which also was called the inclosed Garden. It was in the Suburbs of Jerusalem, walled round about. And like to a Paradise it was planted with trees, of all sorts of fruits, with herbs, with flowers of most sweet savour, and what soever else that might delight the senses. It had also most pleasant and convenient walks. In this was that famous fountain Rogel, and the stone Zoeleth, of both which there is often mention made in the Scripture, where Adonias when hee purposed to reigne, offered oblations, and with his followers made a feast. 189. The Grove of Moloch, consecrated to the Idoll Moloch, where the worshippers thereof, after they had ended their sacrifice,2 King 23.10. Hier. in Jer. 1.19. & in Mat. 10. committed fornication under the shadow of the trees. 190. The Mount of offence, it was a very high mountain,1 King. 11.7. 2 King. 23.10. scituate on the South-side of the Kings Garden; where the most wise Solo∣mon being now old, was seduced and made foolish by his strange
wives, building a Temple to Melchom the Idol of the Ammo∣nites, which also he worshipped. 191. The Mount Olivet,Dan. 11.45. Psal. 87.1. Dan. 9.16.20. Zach. 8.3. Act. 1.12. See Number 178. Broch. itin 6. Breid. 14. Iul. or Mount of Olives, so called by reason of the great plenty of Olives which grew there, called also in Greek Elaeon, which otherwise also is named the famous [or glo∣rious] and holy Mountaine. It was scituate on the East side of Jerusalem. It was separated from the high City, the valley of Cedron lying between, distant from the City a Sabbath dayes journey, according to the Scripture; but according to Josephus, it was distant five furlongs, who also addeth that the top of the hill was six, furlongs from the City; for it was of so great height, that from the same, not onely almost all the streets of Jerusalem, but also the dead Sea might easily be seen. And besides the Olives, it abounded with Palmes, Pines, Mirtels, and other fruitfull Trees. In the top of this hill,2 Sam. 15. the holy King David flying from the face of his son Absolom, weeping, and barefooted worshipped God. In this Mountaine also his Son Solomon forgetting all godlinesse, erected a Temple to Astaroth the Idol of the Sidonians, right over against the Temple of Ierusalem (from whence every one that committed Idolatry might be seen.)1 King. 11 7. 2 King. 23.3. The which also with all other places dedicated to Idols, Iosias utterly destroyed. Christ oftentimes came up into this Mountaine, both for quiet∣nesse sake,Luke 19.29.41. Luke 22.2. Mat. 21.1. John 18.8. Act 1.12. and also to pray, tarrying there all the night. Also from the top of this Mount he ascended into heaven in the presence of his Disciples standing there, and beholding him, after hee had blessed them. 192. The Mount of Offence, a high Mountaine, on the other side of the brook Cedron,1 King. 11.7. 2 King. 23.8. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. 6. cap. 5. and on the North side of the mount Olivet, distant from Jerusalem four furlongs; whereon Solomon by the motion of his heathenish wives, builded a Temple to Chumosh the Idol of the Mobites. This also Josias brake down. In the time of the Machabees a Castle was builded on this Mount, some tokens whereof are to be seen at this day. 193. The Fullers Monument;Jos. 6. Bel. 6. the which was not far from the Cor∣ner gate, in the North-east.
194. The Palme Trees, whereof mention is made in Nehemiah,Neh. 8.15. Joh. 12.13. and in St. Johns Gospel. 195. The Dove-house, on the South end of the Mount Olivet;Jos. 6. Bel. 13. It was made of stone, round, lofty, and fashioned like a Tower, wherein were store of Doves to the number of foure or five thousand. 196. The Bridge of Cedron, made of stone,Breid. 14. Jul. with one arch erected over the brook Cedron, which Helena the Emperesse cau∣sed to be made in that place. 197. The Sepulchre of the Virgin Mary,Joan Damas. de dormitione. Deipar. which was in the valley of Jehoshaphat near unto the firme place of Gethseman, at the foot of Mount Olivet wherein the body of the most holy, and blessed Virgin, was decently buried by the Apostles. [From this Traditional Relicke, not once mentioned in Scripture, is sucked no small advantage.] 198. The Common place of burial,2 King. 23.32. Ier. 26. which was in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, where the common sort of people were buried. 199. The Fountain of Siloe, whereto was joyned the Pool of Siloe,Isa. 8. & 22. Neh. 3.15. the which also is called the lower Pool, lying on the West-side of the valley of Jehoshaphat, and springing from the root of Mount Sion. The water thereof being cleer, sweet, and plentifull, ran with a still and calm stream into the brook Cedron. This Fountaine King Hezekias repaired.Jh 9.7.11. Broc. itin. 6. Breid. 14 Iul. Pasch. die. 197. Io. 6. Bel. 11. In the Pool of this Fountaine the man which was borne blind washing his eyes which Christ had anointed with clay, and his spittle, received his sight. Josephus testifieth that Siloe, & all other waters which were with∣out the City, did so fail and vanish away before the comming of Titus Caesar, that water was sold neer unto them. And after his comming, they did so abound to him and his host,Salig. Tom. 10▪ cap. 1. that they had water enough for them and for their cattell. Concerning the vertue of this water, the most diligent Surveyer of this place Salignia∣cus writeth in this sort, The water of this Fountaine is of
great price at this day, even among the Saracens themselves. For where as naturally they be rammage and stinke like Goats, they washing themselves and their children therein, doe miti∣gate the evill savour thereof. The Turks also make great ac∣count thereof, for that they finde by experience, that the use thereof is good for the sight of their eyes. 200. or 201. (See before Number 44.) Stephen the Deacon,Act 7.58. with Act. 6 5. in the very flower of his youth, was stoned to death, praying to God for them that stoned him, whose garments the young man Paul kept. This man was the first that triumphed with the palme of martyrdome. 201. or 202. The Brook Cedron,2 King. 23.4, 6.12. Jer 31. Jos. 8. Ant. 1▪ & 6. Bel. 13. Ezek. 47.8. [or Kidron] is a River on the East side of Jerusalem between the same and Mount Olivet, which being in∣creased with divers springs issuing from all parts out of the Mountaine, and Pooles, ran through the valley of Jehoshaphat, and Gehennom with a silver stream, and so passed through the plaines of the wildernesse into the dead Sea. On the bankes of both sides this River, there grew many fruit∣full Trees,Broc. itin. 6. Sa. Tom. 9. cap. 1 2 Sam. 15.30. the pleasant shew whereof, together with the Gardens neer adjoyning, which were watered with the Christal streams of Cedron, greatly delighted the eyes and minds of such as walked by the same. King David passed over this River bare footed, bare headed, and with watery eyes, accompanied with his most trusty friends, flying from the face of his son Absolom. Christ also went over the same,Joh. 18.1. with his Disciples, when he went to the Garden of Mount Olivet. [203. In Latine was Tugu∣rium S. Pelagia. As the 44. Number, so this of Number, 203. was not judged worthy the Translating by T. T. nor by H. J.) 202. in Latine 204. The Valley of Jehoshaphat,Jos. 6. Bel. 3. Her. in loc. Heb. l. t. C. Zach. 14. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 8. c 8. 1 King. 15. 2 King. 23.6.12. the which also is called the Valley of Cedron, and the Valley of Mountains. It is a wide and deep Valley between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, com∣passing the City on the East part, which is made very fruitful by the passage of the brook Cedron. The great deepnesse of this Valley was much filled by Titus and Adrian the Roman Emperours, casting into the same great store of earth with the ruines of the
Temple and City, yet it was not therewith any thing neer levelled.2 Chron. 15.2.9.30. In this Valley, the godly and religious Kings of Juda, Asa, Ezechias and Josias burned the Idols of the Temple, and cast their ashes into the brook Cedron. This Valley was the common place of burial for the whole City, where all the common sort of people were buried.Joel 3.2.12. Sal. Tom 9. c. 2. For it was the manner of the Jews to bury their dead Coarses out of the City. And in the same place, the Turks are now buried. 203. or 205. &c. See before Number 44. The Valley of Siloe, so named of the Fountaine of Siloe,Jos. 6. Bel. 13. Salig. tom. 8. c. 2. Jo. 9.7. wherein the Jews which at this day dwell at Jerusalem, are buried. 204. The Wall of the Fullers Field, lying between the water of Siloe, and the South-east corner of the City.2 King. 25. Isa. 7 3.14. Here the Prophet Isaias foretold King Achaz, that Christ should be borne of a Virgin. 205. The way of the Captivity.Joan. Pasc. in pereg. s. die. 190.193.194.197.200. & 207. Ioh. 18.1. Isa. 53.10, 11. Mar. 14.32.43.53. Mat. 26.36.47.57. Luke 22.39.47 54. Ioh. 18.1.3.13. These small pricks traced forth in length (as you see) doe demonstrate the way, by which Christ was lead captive for the redemption of mankinde. For being come into the Garden of Mount Olivet to pray after his last Supper in the Parlor of Mount Sion; and having offered to God his Father the holy sacrifice of prayers, returning from thence he met with his enemies which came to take him, to whom he yeelded him∣selfe; who had scarce gone forty steps from the place where he prayed, but the Souldiers which were sent from the high Priests and rulers of the people, laid hands on him, took him, and bound him. From whence he was presently carried as a meek Lamb by those ravening Wolves, armed with weapons, over the brook Cedron, to the house of Annas [which was distant from the place where he was taken,Mat. 27.2. Mar. 15.1. Luke 22.66. Ioh. 18.28. two thousand three hundred and sixty paces.] And from hence he was carried to the Pallace of Caiphas [three hundred and thirty paces.] And so afterward hee was con∣ducted by the Souldiers, and by the people to the Pallace of Pilate [which was distant from that of Caiphas a thousand paces.]Luke 23.7.11. And from thence to the Pallace of Herod [which was
distant three hundred and fifty paces.] Lastly, from thence againe to the Pallace of Pilate he was carried [by another way then that which he came, the distance of six hundred elles, which make about the length of halfe a mile and more.] The paces whereof we speak here, containe two foot and a halfe.] 206. The way to Anathoth,Broc. it in 6. Jer. 1. Luke 10.30. & 18.35. Mar. 10, 46. Mar. 26.36. Mar. 14.32. Luke 22 39. to Bethel, and to the wildernesse. 207. The way to Jericho, [and to Gilgal] of the which there is men∣tion made in some of the Evangelists. Matth. 20.29. 208. Here the three Apostles, Peter, James, and John, sate, while Christ prayed in the Garden, being about a stones cast from the selfe-same place.Mat. 26.36. 209. Here the other eight Apostles tarried, being distant about a quarter of a mile from the other three places. 210.Mat. 26.47. Mar. 14 43. Ioh. 18.3. Luke 22.47. Here Christ, to make us free, was betrayed with a kisse by the Traytor Judas, and bound with hard and streight bands (as if he had been an evill doer) by the Jews, whom he beat downe backward to the ground by the word of his mouth. There Simon Peter moved suddenly with great fervency, struck the servant of the high Priest, whose name was Malchus, and cut off his right ear, which Christ immediately restored again. But the rest of the Apostles being afraid, left the Lord and fled. 211.Mat. 23. & 24. & 25. Mar. 13. chap. Luke 21. chap. In this place of Mount Olivet [a few dayes before that before∣said] right over against the Temple neer to a certaine water, Christ sate with his Disciples, making a long Sermon concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, the afflictions of the godly to come, the comming of false Prophets, the signes of the end of the world, and concerning the manner of the last judgement. In the which place, there was afterward builded a Temple which is now desolate. 212.Mat. 21.1. Mat. 11.1. Luke 19 29. Ioh. 12.15. This Way [a little before that] Christ came to Jerusalem, sitting upon the Asses colt, waited on with a great company of
men, some going before, and other some following after them; whereunto also a great number which came out of the City joyn∣ed themselves.Matth. 21.9. [Ps. 118.25 26 So that he seemed to be received of all men with so great favour, that many spred their cloaths in the way; some cutting down the bows of Palms, Olives, and other Trees, to honour him therewithall, strowed them in the way. And the voyces of such as rejoyced were heard in every place as he went resounding with these cries,that is, Save now. Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord. With this pomp and triumph the true King, and humble Triumpher, entred in at the golden Gate, and rode about the Temple, and the greatest part of the City. With this new spectacle, the whole City was moved, saying Who is this? The multitude which followed him, answered, This is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth a City of Galilee. Then the cry of those that rejoyced, and were glad, increased more and more, and men and women, young, and old, yea (which is wonderfull) the very Infants which came from all parts, cryed out together, Hosanna to the Sonne of David, Blessed be the King of Israel, which commeth a King in the name of the Lord. Blessed be the Kingdome that commeth in the name of him that is Lord of our Father David: Peace in Heaven, and glory in the highest; Hosanna in the highest. With these joyfull voyces and cryes, they proclaiming their Messias, followed him even into the Temple: Where this new King happily beginning his King∣dome, presently healed the blinde and the lame. In the mean time the wicked and envious Pharises, the chiefe Priests and Scribes do fret and fume, who seeing the great marvels which hee did, and the children crying in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David, said among themselves, Do yee not see how we profit nothing? Behold the whole world goeth after him. Where∣upon they begin with Jesus himselfe, saying, Master, dost thou bear what these say? Rebuke thy Disciples. To whom hee shewing that this was long before prophesied of by the Prophet, answereth, Why should they not? Have ye not read,Psal. 8.2. Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings thou hast ordain∣ed praise? I say unto you, if these hold their peace, the stones shall presently cry.
The places on the South part of the City. 213. HAbbacuc.Apoc. Dn. 14. [For true Daniel hath only 12. chap.] Breid. 14 Iul. Salig. tom. 10. cap. 2. Here [as Apocrypha saith, but not a word of it is in the holy Scripture] the Angel of Lord taketh up the Prophet Habbacuc by the hair of the head, as he was car∣rying to the Reapers in the field their dinner, and carried him with the same meat into Babylon to feed Daniel, being shut up in the Lions den: Who being fed, he brought Habbacuc hither againe. [Thus far from Apocrypha.] 214. Aceldema, or Haceldemach, that is to say, the Field of bloud. It was a Potters field,Zach. 11.13. Mat. 27.8.6. Act. 1.19. Niceph. 8. Hist. Ec. 13. Broc. it in. 6. Breid. 14. Iul. scituate at the South part of Mount Sion, having behinde it a hill of the same name. This field by the counsell of the Jews, was bought with the thirty peeces of silver for which Judas sold Christ, that it might serve to bury strangers in; the middle part whereof the Emperesse Helen caused to be inclosed with a foure square wall, in length seventy and two foot, and in breadth fifty; And the same to be covered over with a roof, having seven loop holes,Silig. Tom. 6. cap. 5 & tom. 10. cap. 1. Pas. d 197. by which the dead bodies of Christians might be let down. The vertue of this earth is reported [fabulously] to bee won∣derfull, and almost incredible; to wit, that it bringeth and con∣sumeth into dust the bodies of the dead men within the space of foure and twenty houres, leaving nothing but the bones. 215. The Fullers Field, which lay all along at the South end of the City,2 King. 18.17. Isa. 7.3. & 36 2 even from the Valley of Siloe Eastward unto mount Gihon, towards the West, and between the wall of the City, and the water. In this Field the Fullers did scoure their cloathes in the Brook next adjoyning, and did set them on Tainters, and so dry them. 216. The Den,Hier. Tom. 1. in catal. script. Ec. 1 Cor. 15.7. or Cave of James the lesse, wherein he is said [by Relick-mungers] to have hid himselfe by the space of three dayes, having vowed not to eat bread untill Christ was risen again. The Lord appeared to him apart after his Resurrection. [But
(not) for this cause] For none of the Apostles then beleeved that he would rise the third day, nor would they beleeve it when others told them he was risen. 217. The Cave of Peter the Apostle,Breid. 18. Jul. wherein after he had denied the Lord thrice, he repented him, and mourned with many tears. [Relick-mungers can shew a Cave, and say, Peter and the Apostles were in it, to get money. But not a word of it in any of the foure Evangelists, or other Scriptures, no nor that he, nor James, nor Jeremy were in any Cave at all.] [See Number 222.] 118. The Tents of the Assyrians,2 King. 18.17.35. & 19.12.35 2 Chron. 32. August. tom. 18. ad fratres in ere. serm. 25. of whom for a revenge of their blasphemy, the most strong to the number of one hundred four∣score and five thousand, in the very first night of the besieging Jerusalem, were slaine by the Angel of Lord, and (as Au∣gustine, (not the Scripture) reporteth their bodies were brought into dust, that they might not infect the aire, their gar∣ments, armour, and weapons notwithstanding remaining whole and sound, that the people of Jerusalem might have the spoyle. 219. The house of Elias,Breid. 4. Iul. 1 Kin. 17.1.9 & 18.20. & 21.1. wherein it is said (by Papist Breidenbach) that the Prophet Elias sometime dwel; where afterward also a Church was builded. (But the holy Scriptures shew that he was a Prophet to them of Israel, and dwelt near Gilead, Zidon, Samaria, or Carmel, farre from Jerusalem, which was in Judea.) 220. The Mountaine Eroge,Josua. 15.8. & 18 12.16. 2 Chro. 26.16. Amos 1.1. Zach. 14.4, 5. Ios. 9. Aut. 11. otherwise called the South Moun∣taine, being very high and lofty, bowing a little toward the West. Coucerning this Mountain, it is noted (by some) That when Ozias King of Juda presumed to put on him the Priests attire, entred into the Sanctuary of the Temple, and offered upon the golden Altar, the incense of sweet savour unto God; by and by there came a great Earth-quake (whereof also Amos and Zacharias the Prophets make mention (whereby the upper part of the Temple was sha∣ken,Adam Reisnerus & Joan. Her∣denus inde. scrip. urbis Hi. rosol. l. 7 c. 2. and this Mountaine cleft in the midst, with so great and ter∣rible violence, that one part thereof falling and tumbling downe
was rolled and carried by the space of foure furlongs even right over against the East Mountaine (which is called the Mount of offence) were at the length it stayed. King Ozias himselfe, in the mean time blasted and terrified with lightning, was stricken in the forehead with a Leprosie. For the which cause he being pre∣sently cast out of the Temple and City, languished all his life long, and was shut up in his house, and separated even till the day of his death. 221. A Fountain.Mt. 2 9.10. Breid 14. Iul. Sal. Tom. 10 c. 2 At this Fountaine (Papist Bredenbach saith) the Star which vanished away when the three wise men, which came from the East, were entred Jerusalem, appeared unto them againe, and lead them unto Bethlehem. [Neither Matthew, nor any Scriptures shew any word of any Well or Fountain to have been in that place.] 222. The Cave of the Prophet Jeremy,Lam. 1.2, 3, 4, 5 Nicep. 8. Hist Ec. 30. [See before Number 217] wherein he sitting with a grieved and sorrowful mind, wept, mourned, and bewayled the destruction of Jerusalem with sobs and sighs; Where Helena the Empresse (as Nicephorus testifieth) builded a notable Monu∣ment. 223. Isaias.Argum in Isai∣am. Hier. tradit. Heb. ju. c. 2. Pa. 33 Broc. it in. 6. Breid. 14 Iul. Here that notable Prophet Isai, when he Prophesied in Jerusalem about threescore and ten years, by the Commande∣ment of King Manasses, was sawne through the body with a Saw, and was buried under an Oake, whose Sepulchre is to bee seen at this day. [saith Bredan &c.] 224. The Caves of the Apostles. There are many Caves, wherein eight of the Apostles (as it is reported) [but not in Scriptures] hid themselves, during the time of the Lords Passion. (See Number 217.) 225. The Monument Absolom, is a Marble Pillar, with an In∣scription on the same,2 Sam. 18.18. Is 7. Au. 1.10. distant from Jerusalem two furlongs; which Absolom being alive set up to himselfe for a Monument in the Kings valley, where there is yet to be seen a great heap of stones, which daily is increased more and more. For the Pagans and
strangers passing by that way, use this for a custome, that every man cast a stone at the Piller, and challenging as it were, accord∣ing to the Law, his rebellion against his Father David, they curse him with this malediction, Cursed be the Parricide Absolom,Brid. 14. Jul. Pasc. d. 191. and accursed be all they for ever, which unjustly doe persecute their Parents. 226.2 King 18.17. & 20.20. 2 Chron. 32.30 Isa. 7.3. & 36.2. Hier. in loc. Heb. lit. T. The River of the upper Fountaine, scituate on the South part of Mount Sion (which Hierom calleth the Fullers Fountaine) the which the noble King Hezekias repaired with the conduit thereof also. This hee choaked with earth, at what time the Assyrians besieged Jerusalem. 227. The Sepulchre (as some say) of Zacharias, the Son of Ba∣rachias, whom the Jews slew between the Temple and the Altar. The places of the West side of the City. 228. BAalparazim, is a field in the valley of Raphaim, wherein David the King, at the first time, overthrew the Philistians,2 Sam. 5.20. 1 Chron. 14.11 and buried their gods which he found in their Tents. 229. Herods Tents, which as Josephus witnesseth,Jos. 14 Ant. 24. & 1 Bel. 12. hee pitched on the West part of the City. 230. The Fountaine Gihon the lower, which sprang up in the end of the Fullers field,2 Chr. 32.30. & 33.14. Broc. itin. 6. the waters whereof Hezechias brought unto the upper Fountain. 231. The Fountain Gihon the higher,2 King. 20.20. 2 Cho. 32.30. Eecles. 48. Broc. itin. 6. springing from the Mount Gihon, which afterwards Hezekias stopped up, and cutting deeper into the rock, he brought the waters thereof unto the West part of the City of David, by Conduit pipes under the earth, by which he brought it through the midst of the City, into the inner∣most Fountaine, lest when the City should bee besiedged the people might want water.
232. Judas, who of an Apostle being become a Traytor hanged himsefe (upon a wild fig-tree,Mat. 27.5. Act. 1.18. there are some say, an Elder tree) and being hanged, burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. 233. The Mount of Calvary,Jer. 31.40. Mat, 27.33. Mar. 15.22. Luke 23.33. Joh. 19.17. a rocky Mountain of mean height, called in the Hebrew tongue Golgotha, which was next to the North-west part of the City. In the which place offenders, con∣demned in open judgement, were put to death: Where at all times, a man might see the bones and bowels of men hanged, or otherwise put to death. Here, Christ Jesus our Saviour, which knew no sin, became (as he Apostle saith) sinne for us (that is to say, was made sacrifice for our sinnes) and, as if he had been an evill doer,2 Cor 5.21. was hanged between two Theeves, and for our salva∣tion crucified. So that now Mount Calvary, which aforetime was a place most infamous, by the passion and blood of Christ, is now mode famous, and honourable. 234. Mount Gihon,Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 6. cap. 5. a Mountaine full of stones, high and long, which running along by the West part of the City, growing lesse and lesse towards the gate of judgement, is severed from the City by a deep Valley. In this Mountaine, at the commandement of David,1 King. 1.33.38 Solomon was Anointed King, by Sadoc the chiefe Priest, and by Nathan the Prophet, with the holy Oyle. To whom immediately all the people cryed, God save King So∣lomon. 235. The Monument of Anani the chief Priest, of which Jose∣phus maketh mention,Ios. 6. Bel. 13. in his sixth Book, and thirteenth Chapter of the Jewes War. 236. The Pear-Trees (or Mulbery-Trees) of the Valley Raphaim,2 Sam. 5.18.24 1 Chron. 14. the which Josephus calleth the wood of weeping; neer unto the which David, assisted by God from Heaven, gave a second over∣throw to the Philistins, pursuing them a great way.
237. The Sepulchre of Christ, was a new Monument,Mat. 27.60. Mat. 15.46. Luke 23.53. Joh. 19.41. Niceph. 8. Hist. Eceles. 30. Beda in Mar. 6.16 Broc. itin. 6. Breid. 12. Iul. eight foot long, distant from Mount Calvary one hundred and eight foot, and from Moun-Sion about a mile, which Joseph of Arima∣thea, a noble Senator, had hewne out in the Rocke for him∣selfe, in the Garden neere unto Mount Calvary. In the which Sepulchre hee, together with Nicodemus, and the Virgin Mary, with other godly women, buried the body of Jesus, be∣ing with the consent of Pilate taken from the Crosse, and then trimmed with Mirrh and Aloes, and wrapt in a fine linnen cloath,Sal. Tom. 7. c. 3. & 6. was put honourably into the same [the head laid toward the West, faith Bredan.] and rolling a stone of exceeding weight to the mouth of the Monument, hee went his way.Mat. 27.64. Mar. 16▪ 46. But in the meane time, the Chiefe Priests, and Pharisiees, going about to hinder the Resurrection of Christ,Pasc. d. 25. taking unto them a strong guard of Souldiers watched the Sepulchre, and sealed the stone which shut up the mouth of the Sepulchre, lest the keepers and watchmen being corrupted with money should deal deceitfully. But this diligence of the Jewes, by which they went about to hold Christ in the grave from rising againe, increased the Miracle, and confirmed the faith of the Resurrection. And there hee first of all appeared to Mary Magdalen, at the Monument, as shee was weeping,Mar. 16. Joh. 20.14.16. in the likenesse of a Gardener; [or, as John saith rather; shee turned her selfe backe, and saw him; and hee asking, Whom seekest thou? She supposing him to bee the Gardener, said, Sir, If thou hast borne him hence, tell mee.] 238 A Wood, neer unto the City,[Jos. Bel. Jud. li 6.6. c. 14.] as is to bee gathered by Jose∣phus in his Booke and fourteenth fixt Chapter of the Jewes Warre. 239. The Brooke, or River Gihon, at the South-west corner of the City;2 Cron. 32.30. Neh. 2. Broc. intin. 6. which King Achas had begun to bring from the lower Fountaine Gihon into the upper Fountaine, the which King Heze∣kias at the last finished.
240. The Valley of dead Carcasses,Jer. 31.40. Lyra ibid. which lay between Mount Calvary, and the walls of Jerusalem, so called, because the dead Carcasses, bones, and ashes, of such as were put to death, or burnt on mount Calvary were cast thereinto. [Divers vaine Traditions of men herein opposing the plaine Divine Scriptures, were not judged worthy the Translation.] 241. The Valley of the Fountaine Gihon,2 Chro. 33.14. Jo. 6. Bel. 13. & 15. Ant. 18. whereof mention is made in the book of the Chronicles, and in Josephus. 242. The Valley Raphaim,2 Sam. 5.18.22 & 23.13. 1 Chro. 11.15. & 14.9. Isa. 17.5. that is to say, of Gyants. It is a Valley on the West side of the City, very large and great, which beginneth at the North part, and extendeth unto the South, bringing forth most plentifully in time past ex∣cellent Wheat, Wine, Oyle, and all other fruits. In this Valley David by the helpe of God, twice overcame the Philistines which sought to invade him with a great Army. 243. The Wayes to Bethlehem,Act 8. Broc. itin. 6. Emaus, to Gaza, and to Joppa, which Solomon made with flint and stone; even as he did other wayes, which lead to Jerusalem, both to make the passage more easie, and also to shew forth the magnificence of his Kingdome in this point. 244. The way to Siloe, and to Gabaon, whereof Brocardus in his sixt book of his Travell, maketh mention. 245. Here Christ fell again,Pas d. 10. according to the Tradition of the Fathers of old. 246. Here Jesus turning himselfe about to the women that mourn∣ed and wept,Luke 23. Bried. 14. Iul. Salig. To. 8. c. 7. said, Yee daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children, because the day shall come, &c. 247. Here Christ fell downe the third time under his
Crosse,Breid. 13. Jul. as the Fathers of old time have affirmed.Pas. d. 181. & 2.2. 248. Here Christ was stript out of his garments, whose body be∣ing all to be torne with whips, could not but be very sore,Psal. 22.18. & 69.21. Isa. 13.4, 5. Mar. 27.26.28, 35. Mar. 15.23. Breid. 12 Jul. Pas. d. 213. where∣unto his bloody garments cleaving, gave new occasion of paine, when they were violently pulled off. And standing there naked all the while that the Crosse was a preparing in the cold and wind, he sate downe at the length upon a stone, where he drank wine mixed with gall and mirrh. 249. Here Christ being laid on his back on the Crosse and stretched out upon the same,Psal. 22.1.17. Zach. 12 10. Joh. 20.37. Salig. Tom. 7. cap. 4. Pas. d. 21.4. his hands and feet was nayled thereunto with Iron nailes, and his tender members were with such force strayned and racked upon the Crosse, that the very arteries and sinewes were loosened, and all his bones might be told. 250. This is, the most notable & memorable place of the whole world,Mat. 27.35. Mar. 15.25. Luke 23.33. Joh. 19.18. Lev. 23 5.6. Num. 28.16 17 Exod. 12.18. even the clift of the Rocke of Mount Calvary, wherein the Crosse bearing the body of Christ was fastned about high noon of the feast day of Passeover, being the day after the Passeover. Upon the top of which Crosse, a white table was fastened expressing the cause of his death, written with Pilates own hand (or by his appointment) in these words of Hebrew, Greeke and Latine; JESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWES. Further it is [written by some] that the Jews did in such manner erect and set Christ upon his Crosse, that his back parts might be towards Jerusalem, and his face towards the West. For they deemed him unworthy to have his face toward the holy City. But we must thinke that this was not done altogether by for∣tune, or without a mystery, but rather by the singular dis∣pensation of God.Jer. 18.17. Beda in Luke cap. 23. Breid. 12. Iul. His miseries seem to be no false Prophets of our felicity, by this means and by this deed fore-warning them of that which the Prophet Jeremy had Prophesied should come to passe, saying. I will scatter them with an East wind before the Enemy, I will shew them the backe, and not the face,Salig. Tom. 7. car. 5. in the day of their destruction. For as St. Ierome saith, seeing they are dispersed throughout the whole world, and do call upon God ight and day in the synagogues of Sathan, God sheweth unto them
his back, and not his face, that they may know that he is alwayes going from them,Hiern. in Jer. cap. 18. Psal. 5.9. Isa. 10.27. and not coming towards them: And that even in the day of their destruction (that is to say, during all the time after the passion of our Saviour unto the very end of the world) that when the fulnesse of the Gentiles is come in, the remnant of the people of Israel may bee converted at the last,Ro. 9. & 11.25 and be saved. And I verily conjecture, that by this their cruelty, they were fore∣tellers of our felicity. For in that they did set the most sweet and amiable face of our Saviour toward the West, it seemeth unto me to note no other thing, but the very same which the Kingly Pro∣phet long before him had told should come to passe,Psal. 66.7. saying, His eyes behold the (Nations or) Gentiles: For he having the eyes of his mercy opened and fixed upon us, from the time of his pas∣sion, will not cease to looke upon us with a favourable counte∣nance even unto the end of the world. Therefore, Christ being on this manner hanged on the Crosse, three houres (from the sixth to the ninth houre, that is from noon three hours) naked, bloody, wounded, crowned with thorns, did hang between two theeves in most grievous torments, partaker with them of the paine and punishment, as if he had been a companion with them in their wickednesse. The which thing the Prophet Isaias fore-shewed should come to passe,Isa. 53. saying, He was reputed among the wicked. Whom in the meane time, the Jews, the high Priests, together with the Scribes and Elders of the people passing by, yea the common souldiers also, and the thiefe that was crucified with him, instead of consolation (which belongeth to all that are afflicted) in most reproachfull manner scorned him, shaking their heads, and saying, Thou which de∣stroyest the Temple of God,Mat. 27.39. to 46. and buildest the same again in three dayes, save thy selfe; if thou beest the Sonne of God, come down from the Crosse; He saved others, himselfe he cannot save. If he be Christ the King of Israel, let him come down now from the Crosse, and we will beleeve him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God. Jesus most patiently suffering all these things, more bitter then the Crosse, was so far from revenging them, that he prayed for them that mocked him, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. And to the other of the Theeves requiring mercy, he promised Paradise, saying, Verily I say unto thee, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.Joh. 19.26, 27. And then beholding his well∣beloved mother, and the Disciple also whom he loved, and com∣mending a Virgin to a Virgin, said unto his mother. Behold thy Son. And then he said to his Disciple, Behold thy Mother, who from that houre forward took her for his own. While these things thus proceeded, the Sun abashed at those passions, which the Creator of all the world suffered on the Crosse, as it were mourning hid his face;Joh. 11.9. and was darkned from the sixth houre (that is the mid day) at what time it shineth in greatest glory) untill the ninth houre: (That is, untill the midst of the afternoon.) Then Jesus complaining that he is forsaken of his Father,Psal. 22.1. cryed out with a strong voyce, saying, My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me? This done, to the end all things that were spoken of by the Prophets might be fulfilled, he said, I thirst; Streight∣way one running, as though he would doe him some good,Psal. 69. when he had taken a Sponge, and filled it with Vinegar, he put it upon a reed, and gave him to drinke. Jesus wonderfully thirsted for the salvation of men, but the Jews offered him nothing but gal and vinegar. And so soon as Jesus had tasted the vinegar, he said,Heb. 5.8. It is finished, giving thereby to understand, that the Sacrifice was truly ended according to the will of his Father. And once againe crying out with a loud voice, and with shedding of tears,Psal. 31. hee saith, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; and so bow∣ing downe his head (a man of florishing age) he yeelded up his spirit and) breath, the ninth houre of the (fifteenth day of the first mouth) being the five and twentieth day of March, and in the three and thirtieth year of his age, in the year from his Incarna∣tion the thirty and foure; (or rather two and thirty, and a half.) By this Sacrifice, the most high and everlasting Priest,Heb. 4.14. inflamed with most singular and unspeakable love, offered himselfe a Sacri∣fice, and a Peace-offering to God his Father,Heb. 2.14, 15. Col. 2.15. Eph. 2.15. and by his death de∣stroyed death, overcame Sathan, brake asunder Hell gates, re∣stored life, and opened unto all beleevers the everlasting King∣dome of Heaven. For this cause (some say) the Fathers of old time ingraved in silver these words of the Psalme in Greek, and set it in the circumference of the hole which was made on the top of
Mount Calvary, wherein the Crosse of Christ was fastened, but now they are ingraven in Copper thus:Pas. d. 223. & 224. that is to say, Here God our King before worlds wrought sal∣vation in the middest of the earth. The which one, and onely bloody Sacrifice most truly and lawfully made,Heb 10.1.2.12. & cap. 9.26 he would not by and by so soon as he was dead be taken from the Crosse, but even as when he was alive, so when hee was dead, by the space of three houres, he hung as a spectacle to all men. And as he spared no one member from torment, so his will was to shed all his blood, even to the very last drop of his most precious heart,Zach. 13.1. Isa. 12.1, 2, 3. Zach 12.10.12 and to open the Fountaine for the washing away of our sinnes, the which we may use to our endlefle com∣fort: Therefore one of the Souldiers perceiving, and opening his side and heart, presently there issued forth blood and water as from a most lively spring, to the sanctifying and salvation of his Church. In the meane season all things gave testimony to their Lord,Mat. 27.52.53. and makers death. The vaile of the Temple rent asunder in two parts, the earth was shaken and quaked, the graves opened, the dead bodies of men arose againe, and the stony Rocks (to the shame and reproach of the Jews for the hardnesse of their hearts) clave a sunder, and burst in peeces. 251. Here the blessed Virgin Mary,Ioh. 19. Luke 2.31. Breid. 12. Jul. salig. To. 7.0.5. Pas. d. 225. accompained with John, with Mary Magdalen, and with other women, stood with a firme minde, and constant faith, where according to the Prophesie of Simeon, The sword of sorrow pierced her soule. 252. Here the Souldiers which crucified Christ, parted his gar∣ments among them,Joh. 19. Psal. 22. Breid. 12. Iul. Sal. 7. cap. 3. and cast lots for his seamlesse coat who should have it, that the saying of the Prophet might be fulfilled, They parted my garments among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. 253. Here the dead Corps of Christ, being taken downe from the Crosse,Breid. 12. Based. 225. was delivered to the blessed Virgin Mary to be buried, [saith Bredan. Matthew saith, to Joseph of Arimathea, and not to her.]
254. Here Christ meeteth with the women,Matth. 28.9. which returned from his Sepulchre toward Jerusalem, and saluteth them, who im∣bracing and kissing his feet worshipped him. 255. Here Christ in the forme of a stranger,Luke 24 13. Mar. 16.12. went with the two Disciples toward Emaus, and in the way as they went together, he interpreted Moses, and the Scriptures of all the Prophets, which he proved to be fulfilled in him. The places on the North side of the City. 256. THe Tents of the Chaldeans.2 King. 25.4. Jer. 39.2. & 52.4.7. On this North part of the City, Nebuchadonozer King of Babylon, and the Chal∣deans, scaled the wals of Jerusalem, and wan it. 257. The Tents of the Romans which were pitched between the Womans Towers,Jos. Bel. 2.3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 & 7. Bel. 1.2.4.9, 10 15, 16. and the Tower Psephina. On this part, al∣though inclosed, and fortified with a triple wall, Titus and the Romans assayled Jerusalem. For on this part onely, the City was assailable. And albeit the other parts were compassed round about with one single wall onely; yet the same being very strong, and set upon stony and cragged rocks, and having also deep Val∣lies or Trenches impassable, were inexpugnable: Therefore they began to scale the first wall, which was the outermost and third wall of the City. After that they tooke in hand the second wall: And then the third wall of the City, which was also called the old wall. Next they took the Castle Antonia: And so the Temple, which was fortified like a Castle; and last of all they en∣tred Mount Sion, of all the rest the most strong. At what time also the Christians (Anno 1099) took this City in hand to win it, they began their enterprise on this part,Wil. Tyr. Bel. Iac. lib. 8. cap. 5, 18. among whom Godfrey of Bullion was the first that entred the wall, near unto the Gate of Ephraim, whose Souldiers following the assault like men, opened immediately the said Gate, and so wan the City. The which also the Saracens besieging on the same part, wan from the Christians.
258. The Hill Gar,Jer. 31.39. the which was neer to Jerusalem on the North. 259. Erebinth,Jos. 6. Bel. 13. was a little village on the North. 260. Gardens and Farms,Jos. 6. Bel. 2.4.7. inclosed with wals and hedges; where Titus taking a view of the City was in danger. 261. The Sepulehre of Helene Queen of the Adiabens (who victu∣alled Jerusalem in the time of the Famine with wheat) which she most sumptuously builded with three pinnacles,Jos. 20. Ant. 2, 3 & 6. Bel. 2.5, 6. Euseb. 2. Hist. 12. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 23. ad Eustoch. about three fur∣longs distant from the City; Wherein she was buried with her Son Isates, which also was standing in the time of Eusebius and Hierom. 262. The North Mountaine,Ios. 6. Bel. 13. where Pompey pitched his Tents. 263. The Monument of Herod Agrippa,Act. 12.1.21.23 Ios. 19. Ant. 8. & 6 Bel. 3.4. who for his intollerable pride being stricken by the Angel of the Lord, and consumed of worms, dyed. 264. Sapha,Ios. 11. Ant. 8. & 2 Bel. 24. & 6. Bel. 3.4. in Greek called Scopos, that is to say, A place of espial, scituate toward the North, distant from the City about 7 furlongs. It was so named, because from thence, both the City and Temple might be seen.Or Jaddua. Here Jaddus the chiefe Priest, and the rest of the Priests, in their Priestly attire, and all the people clad in white gar∣ments, went forth to meet Alexander the Great, King of the Ma∣cedonians, when hee came with his Army to destroy Jerusalem; Whom when Alexander saw, by and by suppressing his fury, in humble sort worshipped the name of God, which shined in golden Letters in the Reasonable (or Breast plate of judgement) of the high Priest, and gave reverence to the high Priest. Then entring into the City and Temple, he offered sacrifice to God, and granted great priviledges unto the Jews. 265. The Fruitful Wood,Ios. 6. Bel. 4 & 7 which Titus caused to be cut down. 266. The Lake of Serpents,Ios. 6. Bel. 4. which in old time was called Bethara.
267. The Way, by which men went into Samaria and Galilee.Broc. it in. 6. 268. The Village noer to Jerusalem,Neh. 3. whereof Nehemiah maketh mention. THese (Christian Reader) are the most notable and famous places of the City and Temple of Jerusalem. By the placing whereof, the scituation of the rest may easily bee knowne. Therefore if we have made a true Description, let the praise be given to God, the giver of all good gifts. But if other∣wise there be any defect, impute that to my want of skill, and not to my ill will; who for that I was not able to give towards the furnishing of the Temple gold, silver or precious stones, have notwithstanding offered a little oyle to lighten the Church; trusting that the same will be acceptable, both to Christ, who allowed the two mites which the poor Widow offered; and also to those that be good Christians, whom it becommeth well to be like unto their Head, JESUS CHRIST. [Try all things. Hold fast that which is good, I Thes. 5.21. Embrace what is sound, though somewhat is rotten. Embrace not the rotten, because much here is sound. Jer 23.28, 29. The Prophet, to whom is a dream, let him tell it as a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaffe to the wheat, saith Jehovah? Is not my word like a fire, saith Jehovah? and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in peeces?]
The names of the Authors out of whose Works and Travels this De∣scription of Jerusalem is taken and made. [The most of them were Romanists Superstitious: Yet as the Bee can gather Honey from some noysome flowers; So God and his people, can make good use of such Authors.] Sect. 1. THe holy Bible, of the Old and New Testament. 2. Flav. Josephus, a Priest of the Jewes, who flourishing in the seventieth year of Christ exactly described the scituation, the forme, and the besieging of the City of Jerusalem. 3. Exemplars of the famous Doctor of the Church Hierom, as well Printed as written; Who lived in the Year of Christ, 380. Sect. 4. James of Vitriac, who travelled into theZach. 2.12. Mat 4 5. 2 Pet. 1.18. Dan. 9.16.20. Holy Land, and returning, was made Bishop of Acon, who wrote a book concerning the Holy Land, and the wonders which he saw there. He flourished in the year of our Lord, 1231. Sect. 5. James Pantaleon, a French-man, Patriarch of Jeru∣salem, his book concerning the Holy Land. Who was famous in the year of Christ, 1247. Sect. 6. The exact Description of Jerusalem, and of the places of the Holy Land, made by Brocardus a Monk, published at Basil by Hervage, and at Antwerp by Stelsius; Who in the year of Christ 1283. after great search, and diligent survey of that City and Land, and the view of the ancient ruines thereof, de∣scribed the same most carefully. Sect. 7. The Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places, by John Mandeville English-man, who finished his peregrinati∣on
in the year of our Lord, 1322. and diligently described the same: Printed at Antwerp by Nicol. Wouver in Anno, 1564. Sect. 8. A Table of the City Jerusalem, a very ancient de∣scription of all the Holy Land, portraied one hundred & fifty years since, and more in parchment, which John Huls procured from the Library of the Colledge of S. Hierom at Delph in Holland. Sect. 9. The Original of the City of Jerusalem, and of the Temple in the same, described by Rodulph Langius, Anno 1476. and Printed at Colen, Anno 1517. Sect. 10. The Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and to Mount Sinai, of Bernard Breidenbach, Dean of the Church of Mentz, which he accompanied with others moe, finished Anno 1483. and most diligently described the same: Adding thereunto a Portraiture of the most principal places of the Holy Land, and of his travel, which he caused a cunning Painter to make upon the view of every place, whom he had in his company for that purpose; Printed at Mentz, An. 1486. Sect. 11. A Description of the voyage to Jerusalem, published in the year 1520. by M. Gerard Kuynretorff and others. Sect. 12. A Delineation of the City of Jerusalem, which Mr. John Scorrel, with the help of a skilful Painter drew forth by the view of the eye, sitting on Mount Olivet, 1521. Sect. 13. The Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy pla∣ces, by Joan. Heuterus, Pretor of Delph, which he set forth in An. 1521. Sect. 14 The like Description mas wade by Bartholmew of Saligniac Knight, and Professor of both Laws, 1525. Sect. 15. A Peregrination, with an exact Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places made by John Pasch Doctor of Divinity; Printed at Lovane in the year, 1563. Sect. 16. The Histories of the Holy War, whereof there were three and twenty books; shewing how in the year 1099. Jerusalem, and the whole Land of promise, was recovered again by the Christians, and so possessed of them fourscore and foure years by William Archbishop of Tyren, Chancellor of Jerusalem, Printed at Basil in the year 1564.
17. Six Books of History concerning the Holy War, set forth by John Herold; Printed at Basil in the year, 1560. 18. A Delineation, or Map of the City Jerusalem, and of the holy places of all the Land of Palestine, by Herman Broculoo; Printed at Utrict in the year 1538. 19. Bonaventure of Mirica his Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places thereof, who made three voyages thither, and dwelt there a long time, in the years 1538. and 39. 20 The universal Cosmography of Sebastian Munster. 21. The Description of the City of Jerusalem, and of Pa∣lestine by Wolfgang Weyssenburch: Printed in the year 1542. 22. A diligent Description of the places of the old and new Testament gathered out of many Authors; as out of Ptolomy, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, Strabo, Herodotus, Hieron. Josephus, Egesippus, Stephanus, Raphael Volateran, Lyra, Bocas. And out of the more later, as James Ziegler, Wolfang, Wessyenburg, and Andrew Althamer, men that herein have taken great pains; and Printed at Paris. 23. A Delineation and Description of the City Jerusalem, and of the Land of Promise, most exquisitly done by Bonaven∣ture Broccard, in the year 1544. 24. A Description of Jerusalem, and of the places thereof, by Mr. Gerard, Joan of Leiden, in the year 1556. 25. A Map of the City of Jerusalem, and of the whole land of Promise, made by Tilmannus Stella, in the year 1557. and Printed at Antwerp. 26. A Topographical Description of the City of Jerusalem, by Fabian Licinius a Venetian; Printed at Venice in the yeare 1560. 27. A map of Jerusalem set forth by Adam Reiszner, ex∣hibited to the Emperour Ferdinando in the year, 1559. 28 The way of Calvary, written in Latine, by Laurence Surius. 29. The way of the Crosse, from Pilates house to Mount Calvary; published by Peter Calentine; and Printed at Lovane in in the year, 1561. 30. The Itinerary of John Godscalci of Delph, which he fi∣nished in the year, 1561.
31. A description of Jerusalem, and of the places there∣about by Isbrand Godfrey, which he finished in the year, 1563. 32. The voyage of the noble Knight Baptist van der Muelen of Mechlin, who by word of mouth described unto me often∣times Jerusalem, and all the places thereof, which he surveyed in the year, 1567. 33. The Description of the Old and new Jerusalem made by Peter Lackstein, and painted in a Map by Christian Sgrothen in the year, 1570. 34. A Topographical delineation of the City of Jerusalem made by Antony de Angelis, a Minorite, who dwelt a long time at Jerusalem, set forth in the year 1578. 35. A very large Map of the City of Jerusalem, and of all the Holy Land, drawn in Parchment with the hand of Biron a French-man, with lively colours, and beautified with gold, and described in the French-tongue: which Map Michael Eyzinger of Austria, a most diligent Historiographer, delivered unto me. THese are for the most part the chiefe Authors among them, which of set purpose have handled this Argument, and of whom I make special mention. I have used many, of whom I have nothing spoken: And to make mention of all such Writers, which having another purpose, and yet given me matter to write of, were to make a tedious Catalogue.
A Table Alphabetical, whereby the Reader may finde the principal matters contained in this Book. [The Figures annexed, shew not the Page, but the Number.] A. A Arons rod Number 76 Abacuc to Daniel Number 213 Abrams offering Isaac Number 52 Aceldema Number 214 Absoloms Pillar Number 225 Anani his Monument Number 235 Ahaz Dall Number 103 Acra Number 27 Annas his house Number 8 Adultresse freed, Joh. 8. Number 109 Amphitheater Number 28 King Amon, and Manas. Sepul. Number 15. Antonia Castle Number 29 Ark of the Covenant Number 76 Altar of Incense Number 80 Altar of burnt offering Number 87 Angel slayes Assyrians Number 208 Appears to Zachary Number 80 S. Annes house Number 37 B. Baalpharazim Number 228 Ba reading Number 93 Betbania Number 178 Benhinnon Number 185 Bethphge Number 179 Bethsheba Number 1 Broad-street Number 150 Bethesda Number 61 Bridge of Cedron Number 196 Bridge of Sion Number 19 Bridge from the Castle Antonia Number 63 Brook of Cedron Number 201 Brook Gihon Number 239 Booz and Jakin, Pillars Number 88 Bignesse of Christ his Crosse Number 120 C. Caesar and Agrippas hall Number 5 Caiphas Pallace Number 17 Calvary mount Number 233 Castle Antonia Number 29 Castle of Antiochus Number 31 Castle Psan Number 59 Castle of the Assyrians Number 148 Caves, called the Kings Caves Number 151 Castle opposite Number 180 Cave of James Number 136 Cave of the Apostles Number 224 Cave of Peter Number 117 Cave of Jeremy Number 212 Capheteta Number 152 Cherubims Number 77 Candlestick of Gold Number 81 Christs his Crosse before Num. I. & 120 Christ rideth to Jerusalem Number 211 Christ falleth down under his Crosse Number 245, 247, 1.21 Christ speaketh to the mourners Number 246 Christ stript out of his cloaths, Number 248 Christ racked and nailed on the Crosse Number 249 Christ delivered to the Virgin Mary Number 253
Christs garment parted by lot Number 252 Christ speaketh to the women after his resurrection Number 254 Christ talketh with his two Disciples going to Emaus Number 255 City Lower Number 26 The Court Number 35 Court of Records Number 30 Corner parlor Number 33 Corner stone Number 153 Court of Herods Pallace Number 138 Conduit, or Fountain Number 128 Closers Number 91 Common place of buriall Number 198 Cypresse Trees of Zion Number 7 Crosse. See before. Number 1 D Daniel fed Number 213 Davids City and Tower Number 2 Dial of Achas Number 103 Dove-house Number 195 Dragon Fountain Number 184 E. Eliasib's house Number 17 Essens Gate Number 66 Eagle of gold Number 101 Erebynth a village Number 359 Ephraims Gate Number 156 F. Face of Christ Number 44 Fountain of Sion Number 18 Fountaine the innermost Number 60 Fountain old Number 62 Fountain in the Temple Number 82 Fountain Number 128 Fountain Dragon Number 18.4 121 Fountaine of Silo Number 199 Fountain Gibon the lower Number 230 Fountain Gihon the higher Number 231 Fruitful wood Number 265 Fullers field Number 115 Fig tree withered Number 183 G. Gamaliel and Nicod Sepulchre Number 23 Gabaon hill Number 24 Gabriels appearing Number 80 Garden belonging to the King Number 15 and 188 Gareb-hill Number 258 Gardens inclosed Number 260 Garden on mount Olivet Number 187 Garments of Christ parted by lot, Number 252 Gates of Sion Number 20 Gate called the Upper-gate Number 21 Gate of Warders Number 64 Gate called the Horse-gate Number 65. Gate belonging to the Essenes Number 66 Gate the first Number 67 Gate called the New-gate Number 93 Gate called the middle-Gate Number 137 Gate called Holy-Gate Number 94 North Gate Number 104 Gate South Number 105 Gate in the West Number 106 Gate of the corner Number 154 Golden Gate Number 155 Gate of Ephraim Number 156 Gate called the Water-gate Number 157 Gate Genath Number 158 Gate of the Kings Garden Number 159 Gate of the high Priests Pallace Number 160 Gate called the Fish-Gate Number 161 Gate called the Dung-Gate Number 162 Gate of womens Towers Number 163 Gate called the Valley-Gate Number 164 Gate called the Old-Gate Number 165 Grove of Moloch Number 189 Gehennom Number 86 184 Golgotha Number 213 Godfrey of Bulloigns victory Number 1 H. Hellen Adiaben Number 72 House of Annas Number 8 House of the Worthies Number 9 House of the Virgin Mary Number 10 House of Uria Number 11 House of Ananias Number 30 House of S. Anne Number 37 House of the Rich Glutton Number 38 House of Mesa Number 39 Houses of the Nathineans Number 40
House of the Prince of Phariseis Number 41 House of the Forrest of Lybanus Number 42 House of Simon the Pharisee Number 43 House of the common people Number 44 Houses of the Priests Number 49 Houses of the Target-bearers Number 50 House of Councel Number 90 House of Mary the mother of John Number 126 House of Olda the Prophetesse Number 127 House of Elias Number 19 Helens Crosse. See before Number 1 Hill Garee Number 258 Hole where the Crosse stood Number 250 Hill which is little Number 182 Herods Park Number 143 Hinnom Valley Number 184 Hospital Number 144 Holy place Number 79 Holy of holiest Number 75 I. Jerusalem Number 1 Jaddua's meeting Alexander Number 164 Iebusites in Ierusalem Number 2.7.9 Ile of the Iews Number 86 Isle of the Gentiles Number 100 Ioseph Arim. Number 237 Ieremy Number 130.222 Isaias martyred Number 223 Judas hanged on a Tree Number 232 Iulian Number 24 K. Ioash Number 16.162 K. Kidron Brook Number 201 Valley Number 202 L. Lists or Tiltyard Number 51 Laver of brasse Number 89 Lofts of the singers Number 97 Lake, or Ditch between two walls Number 131 Lake Amigdalon Number 125 Lake of Serpents Number 266 M. Maccabees Towers Number 29 192. Market place Number 12▪ 45, 46, 47, 69, 129 Mary and Iohn behold Christ as he passeth by with his Crosse Number 122 Their house Number 126 A deep vale or dale Number 178 Mello Number 16 Moloch his Grove Number 189 Mount Sion Number 3 Mount Moria Number 52 Mountaine Bezetha Number 147 Mount of offence Number 190, 192 Mount Olivet Number 191 Mountain Eroge Number 220 Mount of Calvary Number 233 Mount Gihon Number 234 Mountain in the North part Number 262 Monument of Alexander Number 133 Monument of Iohn Number 134 Monument of the Fuller. Number 193 Monument of Absolom Number 225 Monument of Anani Number 235 Monument of Herod Number 263 N. Nethinims house Number 40 North mountain Number 262 North gate Number 104 New City Number 146 O. Olda or Hulda's house Number 120 Oke Rogel Number 224 Ophel Number 54 Olivet mount Number 191 P Parlour of Sion Number 6 Parlour in the corner Number 33 Pallace of Caiphas Number 17 Of Agrippa Number 55 Of David Number 3 Pallace of the Maccabees Number 55 Pallace of Pilate Number 56 Pallace of the Queen Number 57 Pallace of Solomon Number 58 Pallace of Queen Bernice Number 70 Pallace of Grapte Number 71 Pallace of Helen Number 72 Pallace of Herod Number 136
Pallace of Monobaz Number 73 Passage of the Temple from Solo∣mon Pallace Number 113 Palm trees Number 194 Palm trees Number 236 Place of Zcharias death being slain Number 98 Place where the Iews would have stoned Christ Number 99 Place where the woman taken in a∣dultery, was absolved Number 109 Places of Christs fall Number 121 Place where the three Apostles sate whle Christ prayed Number 208 Place where the eight Apostles tar∣ried Number 209 Place where Iudas betraied Christ with a kisse Number 210 Place where Christ preached of the destruction of Ierusalem Number 211 Place where Mary, with others stood at Christ his death Number 251 Porch of Pillars Number 68 Porch of the Temple Number 95 Potters field Number 214 Prison, called the Kings prison Number 4 Prison common, belonging to the City Number 32 Pool, called Probatica Number 61 Priest, called the high Priest Number 84 Propitiatory, or mercy-seat Number 78 R. Rephaim Number 242 Rechabires habitation Number 130 Rock of the West wall Number 166 River of the upper Fountain Number 226 S. Solomons buildings Number 16.42.53.56 58 &c. Sedduces Number 48 Seir Gate Number 106 Sion Number 32.6.27 Sepulchre of David Number 22 Sepulchre of Stephen, Gama. Nico. Number 23 Sepulchre of Christ Number 237 Sepulchre of Helen Number 261 Sepulchre of the Virgin Mary Number 197 Of Zacharias Number 227 Stairs of the Castle Number 13 Stairs of Sion Number 14 School of Gentility Number 48 Sea of brasse Number 92 Seat appeartaining to the King Number 96 Singers seats aloft Number 97 Solomons Throne Number 112 Simon of Cyren beareth the Crosse Number 123 Second City Number 124 Sodom Number 48 Stephen stoned Number 200 T. Tabernacle of Sion Number 24 Of Moloch Number 185 Temple of the Lord Number 72 Table of gold Number 83 Temple Number 74 Tents of the Assyrians Number 218 Tents of Herod Number 229 Tents of the Chaldeans Number 256 Tents of the Romans Number 257 Theatre Number 111 Throne of Solomon Number 122 Tribunal Number 114 Towers of the Trumpetters Number 108 Tower Strato Number 115 Tower in the middle Number 132 Tower Hippie Number 140 Tower Mariamne Number 141 Tower Phaselus Number 142 Tower Ananiel Number 167 Tower in the corner Number 168 Tower of David Number 169 Tower called the high Tower Number 170 Tower called the Lanthorn Number 171 Tower called the great Tower Number 172 Tower Meah Number 173 Tower Psephina Number 174 Tower of Siloe Number 175 Treasury of the Temple Number 102.
V. Valley called the deep Valley Number 176 Valley Iehosaphat 202 Valley of Siloe 203 Valley of dead carcases 240 Valley of the River Gihon 241 Valley of Cedron 116 Valley of Raphaim 242 Vaulted Cave 34 Vail of the Temple rent 85 Village near to Ierusalem 208 Uria his house 11 Veronica, before 44 W. Winepresse belonging to the King 25 Walls first 53, Second 135, Third 149 Way of the Crosse 117 Way of entrance for the horses 118 Water issuing forth of the Temple 177 Way of the Fullers field 104 Way of the Captivity 205 Way to Anathoth 206 Way to Iericho 207 Way to Siloe 244 And to Bethlem 243 Way to Samaria and Galilee 267 Well 181 Whipping of the buyers and sellers 110 A Wood 138 Z Zacharias place where he was slaine between the Temple, & the Altar. 98 FINIS.
IERVSALEM with her suburbes, and the most principall places thereof, as it florished in CHRIST his tyme, most trewly described
To the courtrouse behoulder. Those thinges which the Grauer by his Arte could not possibly explain in this Figure thou shalt fynde at large in the booke conformed to the nombers herein ressed: Farewell. Thy Frende. T. Tymine. LONDON. Anno. 1697
